P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Stephen M . Vogel 1 and Asrar B . Malik * 1 ABSTRACT This article examines the role of the endothelial cytoskeleton in the lung’s ability to restrict ﬂuid and protein to vascular space at normal vascular pressures and thereby to protect lung alve - oli from lethal ﬂooding . The barrier properties of microvascular endothelium are dependent on endothelial cell contact with other vessel - wall lining cells and with the underlying extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . Focal adhesion complexes are essential for attachment of endothelium to ECM . In quiescent endothelial cells , the thick cortical actin rim helps determine cell shape and stabilize endothelial adherens junctions and focal adhesions through protein bridges to actin cytoskeleton . Permeability - increasing agonists signal activation of “small GTPases” of the Rho family to reorga - nize the actin cytoskeleton , leading to endothelial cell shape change , disassembly of cortical actin rim , and redistribution of actin into cytoplasmic stress ﬁbers . In association with calcium - and Src - regulated myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) , stress ﬁbers become actinomyosin - mediated contractile units . Permeability - increasing agonists stimulate calcium entry and induce tyrosine phosphorylation of VE - cadherin ( vascular endothelial cadherin ) and β - catenins to weaken or pull apart endothelial adherens junctions . Some permeability agonists cause latent activation of the small GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac1 , which facilitate endothelial barrier recovery and eliminate interendothelial gaps . Under the inﬂuence of Cdc42 and Rac1 , ﬁlopodia and lamellipodia are generated by rearrangements of actin cytoskeleton . These motile evaginations extend endothelial cell borders across interendothelial gaps , and may initiate reannealing of endothelial junctions . Endogenous barrier protective substances , such as sphingosine - 1 - phosphate , play an important role in maintaining a restrictive endothelial barrier and counteracting the effects of permeability - increasing agonists . C (cid:2) 2012 American Physiological Society . Compr Physiol 2 : 449 - 478 , 2012 . Introduction The conﬂuent monolayer of endothelial cells lining the lu - minal surface of pulmonary microvessels is vital to efﬁcient gas exchange in the lung . An important physiologic func - tion of this vascular barrier is to minimize leakage of plasma proteins and blood cells into pulmonary interstitium and to prevent life - threatening alveolar ﬂooding at normal vascular pressures . Stability of the barrier is , in turn , highly dependent on adhesion between endothelial cells , on ﬁrm attachment of endothelial cells to the underlying basement membrane , and on shape of the endothelial cells , all of which are dependent on the cell cytoskeleton . The endothelium also controls another vital function , the transvascular exchange of liquid , dissolved salts , and nutri - ents through exchange - vessel walls . The liquid ﬁltration rate across the microvascular wall is a function of both vessel wall permeability and the transmural driving pressure . The pulmonary transmural driving pressure ( algebraic sum of hy - drostatic and osmotic pressures across the vessel wall ) has a positive value , resulting in continuous net ﬂuid ﬁltration . The pulmonary lymphatic system draws off the excess ﬂuid accumulated in interstitial compartment to achieve lung ﬂuid balance . Vessel wall permeability is largely a function of the interendothelial space due to the narrow clefts between the lining endothelial cells . Collectively , these paracellular chan - nels as observed with the aid of electron microscopy ( see below ) make up about 0 . 04 % of the capillary surface area ( 174 ) . The endothelium controls delivery of dissolved nutri - ents to extravascular tissues through alterations in its liquid permeability , which is achieved by enlargement or reduction of the interendothelial space . Permeability - increasing ago - nists , such as thrombin , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , and histamine widen the interendothelial cleft . Per - meability enhancement requires reorganization of endothe - lial actin cytoskeleton , which is known to take place within minutes of agonist contact . Profound alterations in cell cy - toskeleton are evident by the ﬂattened geometry of quies - cent endothelial cells that becomes rounded in active cells . Transition from the quiescent to active endothelial pheno - type entails a redistribution of polymerized actin from the cell periphery to numerous actin stress ﬁbers in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 1 ) . In association with myosin , the stress ﬁbers become contractile units that exert centripetal force on interendothe - lial junctions , thereby increasing vascular permeability . In * Correspondence to vogel @ uic . edu 1 Department of Pharmacology , University of Illinois College of Medicine , Chicago , Illinois Published online , January 2012 ( comprehensivephysiology . com ) DOI : 10 . 1002 / cphy . c100006 Copyright C (cid:2) American Physiological Society Volume 2 , January 2012 449 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology Actin / myosin contraction Cellular adhesion PAR - 1 Actin stress fibers Ca 2 + P SRC Myosin Ca 2 + – CaM Contractile forces Barrier dysfunction P p38 hsp27 Gelsolin Cofilin Rhokinase Occludin ZO - 1 SHP2 α – cat β / γ cat Cadherin MLC phosphatase MLCK Thrombin Sph 1 - P EDG Cortical actin Zonaoccludins Adherensjunction Focaladhesionplaque α A α β Vin talinPax FAK Integrin PECAM - 1 Tethering forces Barrier integrity Figure 1 Transition between quiescent and active endothelial phenotypes . Left : Endothelial cell activation by permeability - increasing agonist . Binding of thrombin to its receptor increases intracellular Ca 2 + , which forms a complex with calmodulin ( CaM ) that can activate myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) . Phosphorylated form of myosin light chain ( MLC ) stimulates actinomyosin - based endothelial contractility , which leads to the formation of interendothelial gaps . Examples of regulatory molecules that increase or decrease endothelial contractility are depicted in green or white , respectively : Src kinases ( pp60src ) increase MLCK activity by tyrosine phosphorylation ; rho kinase augments EC contractility by inhibiting both MLC phosphatase and the actin - depolymerizing protein , coﬁlin ; p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) inhibits heat shock protein ( HSP ) 27 activity to promote actin stress ﬁber formation , as does the actin - associated capping / severing protein gelsolin . Right : Quiescent endothelial cells possess a thick cortical actin rim , and adhere tightly to each other via interendothelial junctional complexes ( tight junctions and adherens junctions ) and to the underlying ECM via focal adhesions . Tight junctions consist of transmembrane occludin proteins linked to the endothelial actin cytoskeleton by proteins of the zona occludins family ( ZO - 1 ) . Adherens junctions mediate cell - cell contact through homotypic binding between the extracellular domains of endothelial - speciﬁc VE - cadherin , and are stabilized by protein bridges between the cytoplasmic tail of VE - cadherin and cortical actin rim that include , among other components , β / γ - catenins ( plakoglobin ) and α - catenin . The tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 may contribute to stability of adherens junctions by decreasing tyrosine phosphorylation of catenins . Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule - 1 ( PECAM - 1 ) is concentrated in intercellular clefts , but it is not associated speciﬁcally with adherens or tight junctions ; PECAM - 1 can mediate homotypic or heterotypic binding to an adjacent cell , and is internally tethered to cortical actin rim ( 17 , 187 ) . Focal adhesion plaques consisting of talin , paxillin ( Pax ) , vinculin ( Vin ) , α - actinin ( A ) , and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) link endothelial integrins to cortical actin rim to stabilize focal adhesions . Sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( S - 1 - P ) binding to its receptor promotes quiescent endothelial phenotype and counteracts the effects of permeability - increasing agonists such as thrombin . PAR - 1 , protein - activated receptor - 1 ; EDG receptor , endothelial differentiation gene receptor . American Physiological Society , used with permission ( 61 ) . addition , adhesion of adjacent cells to each other and to their substratum is temporarily weakened . Borders of adjacent en - dothelial cells retract , forming interendothelial gaps . By con - trast , permeability - diminishing agents such as sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( S - 1 - P ) tend to reverse the high - permeability state of the lining endothelial cells through effects on the actin cytoskeleton , which redistributes actin from stress ﬁbers to the cell periphery and restores the morphology of the qui - escent endothelium . Thus , endothelial cytoskeleton plays a fundamental role in formation of the endothelial barrier and in modiﬁcation of its permeability properties . This article describes the role of the endothelial cytoskeleton in the regu - lation of lung ﬂuid balance . Lung Fluid Balance The Starling forces Lung ﬂuid balance is achieved when there is no net ﬂuid ﬁltra - tion into pulmonary interstitium . Since capillary hydrostatic pressure is generated by the pumping action of the heart , ﬂuid equilibrium across the vessel wall requires a counter - balancing force . The nature of the opposing force that could account for ﬂuid equilibrium across microvessels , and hence the complete absence of pulmonary edema in normal individ - uals , was a mystery before the time of E . H . Starling . Because water molecules and most solutes smaller than plasma pro - teins were thought to exchange freely through the vessel wall , 450 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Starling postulated that differences in protein concentration across the vessel wall could generate an opposing osmotic force that could drive reabsorption of interstitial ﬂuid into capillaries and venules ( 254 ) . Starling’s well known equation expressed the relationship between net ﬂuid ﬁltration per unit of vascular surface area ( J v / S ) and various known transmu - ral osmotic and hydrostatic pressures across vessels under equilibrium conditions as follows : J v / S = L p [ ( P c − P i ) − σ ( π c − π i ) ] , where σ is the osmotic reﬂection coefﬁcient , S the vessel surface area , L p the hydraulic conductivity , P the capillary hydrostatic pressure in cmH 2 O , π the oncotic pressure in cmH 2 O , and the subscripts c and i , capillary and interstitial ﬂuid compartments . The osmotic reﬂection coefﬁcient , a di - mensionless number between 0 and 1 , measures the tendency of the barrier to exclude protein , a value of 1 . 0 signifying that a solute is impermeable and thus restricted to plasma . Plasma electrolytes have a value of zero , whereas albumin , the most abundant plasma protein , has an observed value of at least 0 . 65 in the pulmonary circulation , [ see ( 217 ) and ( 65 ) ] , depending on species and methodology used for the determi - nation . As protein concentration in pulmonary interstitium is about 0 . 6 times that of blood plasma ( 192 ) , the effective on - cotic pressure difference σ ( π c − π i ) is positive ( 190 , 266 ) and therefore counteracts ﬂuid ﬁltration under physiological con - ditions . The main determinant of ﬁltration in the intact lung is the transmural hydrostatic pressure difference , ( P c – P i ) . The interstitial pressure P i in most systemic vascular beds is nega - tive ( 10 ) and in the pulmonary vascular bed , it measures about – 10 cmH 2 O under physiological conditions ( 180 , 181 , 266 ) . The negative P i value adds to P c and thus increases the net hydrostatic pressure gradient ( i . e . , P c − P i ) acting across lung microvasculature . The difference between the terms ( P c – P i ) and σ ( π c − π i ) gives the net “driving pressure” (cid:4) P for ﬂuid ﬁltration through pulmonary microvessel walls , which has a slightly positive value in the normal mammalian lung circula - tion ( ∼ 8 cmH 2 O ) ( 191 ) . Analysis of the Starling forces in the intact pulmonary circulation thus leads to the conclusion that there is a continuous net outward ﬂux of ﬂuid in the normal lung that crosses the vessel wall into interstitium and thereby keeps the lung hydrated . Unlike systemic capillaries , normal pulmonary capillaries lack an “absorptive end” and extrude ﬂuid along their entire length . Any increase in the transmural hydrostatic pressure elevates (cid:4) P and promotes ﬂuid ﬁltration ( increased J v ) , whereas higher effective oncotic pressure dif - ference reduces (cid:4) P and blunts ﬂuid ﬁltration . The lymphatic system in the lung continuously withdraws excess ﬂuid and protein entering pulmonary perivascular space and recircu - lates them back to the pulmonary vascular system . The permeability coefﬁcient ( L p ) in the Starling equation is a constant term relating net driving pressure to J v / S . The amount of ﬂuid ﬁltered at a given driving pressure thereby depends on the leakiness of the endothelial barrier , quantiﬁed in the L p term . Liquid permeability is difﬁcult to resolve at the organ level , that is , in the intact lung circulation . The Starling equation is directly applicable to isolated , single microves - sels , where the vascular surface area S is easily measurable . However , in the lung , the vascular exchange surface ( implicit in the term S ) encompasses all ﬁltering vessels , including the enormous numbers of patent alveolar capillaries , and lesser populations of small arteries with thin walls , venules , and extraalveolar capillaries . Since the total vascular surface area is generally not known , lung liquid permeability values are reported as the vessel - wall ﬁltration coefﬁcient K f , which is equal to the product L p S . The working form of the above equation for organs is thus J v = K f [ ( P c − P i ) − σ ( π c − π i ) ] . K f is generally determined in isolated lung preparations by in - creasing P c through elevation of venous pressure or perfusate ﬂow ( 7 ) and measuring the resulting increase in ﬁltration rate , J v . A caveat in K f determinations is that the number of patent capillaries is itself a function of the hydrostatic pressure dif - ference acting across the vessel wall . Increased P c thereby affects not only (cid:4) P ( see above ) , but also potentially the S term in L p S , depending on extent of capillary recruitment . Consequently , it is a common practice to perfuse lung prepa - rations in Zone 3 ( fully recruited ) conditions ( P pa > P pv > airway pressure ) when extracting K f values . The rate of leakage of proteins and other solutes across vessel walls depends on their molecular radii , on blood pres - sure ( i . e . , capillary hydrostatic pressure ) , on solute concen - tration , and on solute convection ( i . e . , the movement of solute molecules within liquids ) . The linear ﬂux equation of Kedem and Katchalsky ( 126 ) predicts solute ﬂux across capillary membranes in terms of its hydrostatic and chemical driving forces : J s = ( 1 − σ f ) C avg J v + PS ( C p − C i ) , where J v is microvessel ﬁltration rate , σ f is the solvent drag coefﬁcient , C avg is the average of interstitial ( C i ) and plasma solute concentrations ( C p ) , and PS is the permeability - surface area product . With the aid of the Kedem - Katchalsky equation , albumin leakage through exchange - vessel walls can be ana - lyzed as the sum of a convective term ( before “plus” sign ) and a diffusive term ( after “plus” sign ) . When the lung is in ﬂuid balance ( J v = 0 ) , the convective term in the Kedem - Katchalsky equation drops out , permitting calculation of PS from tissue uptake of vascular solutes , such as iodinated al - bumin . The solute ﬂux of albumin for a given concentration gradient depends on barrier integrity , and albumin PS is often used as a sensitive index of barrier function . PS and K f measurements reﬂect overall permeability of lung vasculature , but there are several independent lines of ev - idence for heterogeneity in the permeability properties of pul - monary vessels ( 65 ) . Unequal “segmental” K f values have been reported for arteries , veins , and capillaries in the rat lung circulation , indicating that organ K f is the sum of divergent Volume 2 , January 2012 451 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology L p S products that differ by vessel type ( 203 ) . For example , the segmental K f value for extraalveolar vessels is 59 % of overall K f and the corresponding value for alveolar capillaries with a far more expansive total surface area is only 41 % of the over - all value . When the S term is estimated ( from vascular casts of the lung ) , a rough value for L p may be deduced for each vascular segment : on this basis , L p for pulmonary capillaries is at most a few percent of the value in arteries or veins ( 202 ) . Stop - ﬂow studies also demonstrated equivalent ﬁltration from pulmonary microvessels and pulmonary macrovessels despite the vast difference in their ﬁltration surface areas ( 66 , 203 ) . In vitro observations in cultured pulmonary endothelial cells suggested the underlying cause for this phenomenon . Mono - layers of arterial endothelial cells were more permeable to liquid by a factor of 22 than monolayers of microvascular en - dothelial cells ( 202 ) . There is also indirect evidence for lower solute permeability in lung capillaries than in other pulmonary vessel types . Challenge of lung preparations by hypertonic so - lutions was shown to drive extremely hypotonic liquid from lung tissue into the pulmonary circulation , consistent with the unusually low solute permeability of pulmonary capillaries ( 64 ) . Subsequent in vitro studies supported a similar conclu - sion : permeability to both small ( 58 ) and large solutes ( 127 ) was relatively low in monolayers of microvascular endothelial cells compared to monolayers of arterial or venous endothelial cells . Permeation routes The endothelium is the primary barrier within the microves - sel wall to passage of liquid and solutes ( 185 , 221 ) . Transport of solutes occurs by the paracellular ( 174 , 226 , 249 ) or tran - scellular route ( 63 , 73 , 256 , 275 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . The concept of the paracellular pathway originated from the knowledge that the endothelial cell plasma membrane is nearly impermeable to small , ionized solutes , which therefore should be freely exchangeable only through the narrow , ﬂuid - ﬁlled clefts be - Figure 2 Separate ﬂuid and protein transport pathways through mi - crovessel endothelium . Fluid moves through paracellular pathway ac - cording to Starling forces . Protein is transported through endothelial cells via vesicles or transendothelial channels . Because the protein and ﬂuid pathways are separated , local protein gradients can theoretically develop in the interstitium . American Physiological Society , used with permission ( 174 ) . tween endothelial cells ( 65 ) . Liquid and most solutes are gen - erally believed to take the paracellular pathway through the pulmonary microvessel wall . The transport pathway for rela - tively large solutes , such as macromolecules , is more contro - versial . Based on an analysis of transendothelial solute ﬂux , Rippe and Haraldsson ( 225 ) showed that the majority of con - tinuous endothelia exhibit bimodal size selectivity that can be accurately modeled by treating the endothelium as a sieving membrane containing populations of large ( r p 200 - 300 ˚A ) and small ( r p 40 ˚A ) ﬂuid - ﬁlled pores in which the propor - tion of larger pores is minute by comparison with the total ( e . g . , 0 . 003 % - 0 . 1 % ) [ see ( 173 ) ] . The applicability of 2 - pore theory to the vessel wall suggests that there are independent pathways for permeation of small and large solute molecules . The idea of independent permeation pathways is supported by observations that permeability of small solutes varies in - versely with M r ( molecular radius ) in the range 0 . 1 to 3 . 6 nm , whereas permeability of larger solutes becomes independent of M r in the range 3 . 6 to 6 nm ( 201 , 248 ) . The interendothelial dimension accommodates solutes less than 3 nm in molecular radius ( 168 ) , roughly corresponding to the dimensions of the postulated small pores . The total area of interendothelial clefts less than 3 nm in diameter can account for the permeability of water , and low molecular weight solutes such as glucose , amino acids , and urea ( 174 ) . The existence of large pores was postulated to account for the limited amount of plasma protein leakage that occurs through continuous microvascu - lar endothelia ( 97 , 173 , 201 ) . Whether the actual diffusive and convective pathways used by plasma proteins such as albumin are transcellular or paracellular has been debated . The large pore in systemic microvessels has been argued to correspond to endothelial glycocalyx in series with known submicroscopic discontinuities in interendothelial junctional strands ( 174 ) , which have been reconstructed in three di - mensions by tracking the diffusion of electron - opaque tracers in serial ultrathin sections . In lung microvascular endothelial cells , the identity of the “large pore” is suggested to be a vesicular carrier , because of the abundance of vesicles in this cell type ( 178 , 217 , 240 , 241 , 270 , 272 ) . The dominant vesi - cle population ( plasmalemmal vesicles or caveolae ) , which occupies around 15 % of cytoplasm by volume ( 32 , 121 , 168 , 249 ) , is rich in the membrane - spanning protein caveolin - 1 . The caveola is a ﬂask - shaped structure open to vascular space via a narrow neck region with a radius of about 25 nm ( 199 ) . The neck dimension accommodates solutes of large M r , such as albumin . Electron microscopy demonstrates a vesicular transport pathway in pulmonary endothelial cells ( Fig . 3 ) that extravasates electron - opaque forms of albumin , and unmodi - ﬁed or modiﬁed albumins immunostained by electron - opaque antibodies ( 214 - 216 , 219 ) . The vesicles acquire cargo from vascular space by endocytosis and deposit their contents into pulmonary interstitium by exocytosis ( 218 ) . The cycle of en - docytosis and coupled exocytosis permits vesicles to act as transcellular carriers . Some evidence obtained with the aid of serial electron - microscopy indicates that fusion of endothe - lial vesicles to form transendothelial channels can create a 452 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance lumen pvs lumen pvs Figure 3 The vesicular protein - transport pathway in pulmonary mi - crovascular endothelium . Main electron micrograph shows labeling of endothelial vesicles with the vascular tracer dinitrophenol - conjugated albumin ( A - DNP ) in a murine postcapillary venule . Inset image is sim - ilar except that it depicts albumin transport in a murine lung capillary . Albumin detection was with an electron opaque anti - DNP antibody . Note abundant labeling of endothelial caveolae in both microvessels at various stages of albumin transcytosis and absence of the tracer molecule ( diameter 12 nm ) from interendothelial space ( see inset ) . Calibration bars are 100 nm ( main image ) and 80 nm ( inset ) . PVS , perivascular space . American Physiological Society , used with permis - sion ( 217 ) . transcellular transport pathway permitting passage of test solutes such as ferritin to subendothelial space ( 63 , 73 ) . Vesiculo - vacuolar organelles , an agglomeration of numerous transport vesicles and vacuoles , can organize into transcellu - lar channels , particularly under conditions of inﬂammation , allowing leukocytes and solutes to pass through individual endothelial cells ( 38 , 68 , 154 , 176 ) . Edema formation Pulmonary edema occurs when ﬂuid is ﬁltered across pul - monary microvessels faster than lymphatic vessels can re - move it . Rate of edema formation is determined by ﬁltration rate and lymph ﬂow as follows : Q net = Q ﬁltr − Q lymph , where Q net is the rate of edema formation , Q ﬁltr represents ﬁltration rate ( equivalent to J v in Starling’s equation ) , and Q lymph is the lymph ﬂow ( 90 ) . Lymph ﬂow normally tracks the ﬁltration rate across vessel walls , thus preserving lung ﬂuid balance ( 158 ) . The Starling equation predicts the two underlying causes of edema . First , an increased driving pres - sure in the absence of change in liquid permeability ( K f ) can cause “pressure edema” ( Fig . 4 ) . The lymphatic system can prevent edema formation by increasing Q lymph by up to 25 - fold until its capacity to compensate is exceeded ( 231 ) . The threshold capillary pressure for hydrostatic edema is above ∼ 25 mmHg , but compromised lymph ﬂow can lower that ﬁgure ( 158 ) . In addition , reduced oncotic pressure difference can precipitate edema ( at normal hydrostatic pressure ) by increasing net driving pressure ( Fig . 4 ) . In this case , the crit - ical capillary pressure at which lungs begin to gain water decreases in proportion to the reduction in plasma oncotic pressure ( 158 ) . There are numerous clinical circumstances when either condition arises , such as congestive heart fail - ure ( higher P c ) and hypoalbuminemia ( lower π c ) . In each instance , if the increased ﬁltration rate exceeds the capacity of the pulmonary lymphatic system , edema ensues with the attendant risks of alveolar ﬂooding and respiratory incompe - tence . Extravasated ﬂuid in “pressure edemas” generally has a normal ratio of interstitial to plasma protein concentration ( ∼ 0 . 6 ) , as long as the vessel - wall endothelial barrier remains intact . The low relative permeability of pulmonary capillaries to liquid and solutes compared to that of extraalveolar ves - sels ( see above ) may explain why early edema ﬂuid tends to accumulate around extraalveolar vessels , where the liquid is less likely to interfere with pulmonary gas exchange ( 88 , 202 , 255 ) . Second , “high - permeability edema” can arise in the com - plete absence of any change in hydrostatic pressure when K f increases markedly or with frank barrier breakdown ( Fig . 5 ) . The hallmark of permeability edema is protein - rich alveo - lar ﬂuid , which is characteristic of acute lung injury ( ALI ) ( 160 ) . Barrier hyperpermeability or outright rupture creates a protein - rich ﬂuid because of the loss of normal protein - excluding properties of microvascular endothelium . Lung vascular permeability can increase as a result of direct in - jury of endothelial cells , alterations in the dimensions of interendothelial junctions ( i . e . , paracellular pathways ) , or a No edema 1028 ( 0 . 8 ) – 1013 P π ( σ ) Δ P 8 cap int Hydrostatic edema 20 28 ( 0 . 8 ) – 10 13 P π ( σ ) 18 cap int Hypoproteinemia 10 20 ( 0 . 8 ) – 10 13 P π ( σ ) 14 . 4 cap int Figure 4 Starling forces acting on lung microvessel walls . P , π , and σ denote hydrostatic pressure , oncotic pressure , and osmotic reﬂection coefﬁcient , respectively . (cid:4) P is the net pulmonary driving pressure , which is normally outward . In mild hydrostatic edema , capillary pressure is elevated , leading to an intertstitial edema . In hypoproteinemia , oncotic pressure difference is reduced causing an interstitial edema . Int , interstitium ; cap , capillary . Volume 2 , January 2012 453 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology Figure 5 Formation of protein - rich pulmonary edema ﬂuid . Normal and injured alveolar - capillary barriers are illustrated in left and right panels . In the acute phase of ARDS ( acute respiratory distress syndrome ) , capillary endothelium is damaged and neutrophils adherent to injured capillary endothelium migrate through vessel wall and into alveolar space . Endothelial swelling and blebbing takes place and prominent interendothelial gaps form , thereby compromising the endothelial barrier to blood cells and plasma . Platelets aggregate on damaged vessel wall . Pulmonary interstitium is dilated due to ﬂuid accumulation . Alveolar macrophages release interleukins ( IL - 1 , 6 , 8 , and 10 ) and TNF α , further stimulating neutrophil margination and migration . IL - 1 can also stimulate interstitial ﬁbroblasts to generate ECM proteins . Neutrophils release oxidants , proteases , leukotrienes , and platelet - activating factor . Damaged epithelial cells become detached from basement membrane and are replaced with proteinaceous hyaline “membranes . ” As the alveolar - capillary barrier deteriorates , increasing numbers of alveoli become ﬂooded with ﬂuid rich in plasma proteins , which inactivates surfactant . Hence , loss of alveolar - epithelial barrier function leads to protein - rich edema . MIF , macrophage inhibitory factor . Reprinted with permission of the American Thoracic Society . Copyright © American Thoracic Society ( 160 ) . 454 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance combination of these factors ( 155 ) . In high - permeability pul - monary edema , the alveolar ﬂuid protein concentration ap - proximates the plasma protein concentration ( 160 ) . The in - crease in lung vascular permeability shifts the relationship between left atrial pressure and pulmonary extravascular wa - ter content toward lower pressures , indicating that edema will occur at a reduced driving pressure in the face of an increased vascular permeability ( 158 ) . Gas exchange is extremely sen - sitive to thickness of alveolar - capillary barrier , which mea - sures less than 1 μ m . The rate of gas diffusion through the alveolo - capillary barrier is inversely proportional to barrier thickness ( 191 ) . Dilation of interstitium due to ﬂuid extrava - sation increases barrier thickness and thereby interferes with gas exchange . Extensive pulmonary edema becomes a life - threatening condition when it reduces gas exchange across the alveolar - capillary barrier to the extent that arterial P O2 falls . If edema ﬂuid begins to ﬂood alveoli ( typical of ARDS , or acute respiratory distress syndrome , and ALI ) , the effective barrier thickness increases further and efﬁcient gas exchange ceases . Cellular Basis of Endothelial Barrier Function Microvascular endothelial cells are the building blocks of the vessel - wall barrier . “Barrier properties” emerge when en - dothelial cells form junctional contacts with each other and punctate adhesions to the vessel - wall , both of which are inter - nally linked to and stabilized by endothelial cytoskeleton ( see Fig . 1 ) . The cell - cell and cell - matrix interactions giving rise to the endothelial barrier have been studied primarily in vitro . The importance of endothelial cytoskeleton in the cellular physiology of the endothelial barrier will be explored herein . The in vivo relevance of the experimental observations will be discussed . Endothelial cytoskeleton The endothelial cytoskeleton is made up of three intercom - municating networks of actin microﬁlaments , intermediate ﬁlaments , and microtubules ( 41 , 147 , 205 , 213 , 258 ) . Actin cytoskeleton is an important determinant of cell shape , which in turn is critical to the permeability properties of the en - dothelial barrier and hence lung ﬂuid balance ( 61 , 223 ) . The cortical rim , a rigid band of actin in close association with the cell membrane , cell - cell junctions , and cell - matrix con - tacts , determines the shape of quiescent endothelial cells ( 29 , 61 ) . Cell borders of all adjacent vascular endothelial cells are in close apposition to one another and each endothelial cell makes thousands of junctional contacts with its neighbors , a property that is responsible for the normally low paracellular permeability of the pulmonary endothelium . Without restric - tive endothelial junctions , the lung could not maintain the strict separation of alveolar gas and capillary blood necessary for normal gas - exchange . The stability and strength of interen - dothelial junctions therefore becomes important . Anchoring mechanisms linking endothelial junctional and cell - matrix complexes to actin cytoskeleton are essential to barrier stabil - ity ( 61 , 149 ) . Disruption of actin cytoskeleton with cytocha - lasin D predictably induced marked increases in vessel wall permeability , whereas phallacidin - prevented permeability in - crease because it stabilizes actin ( 207 , 245 ) . Interestingly , permeability - increasing substances are known to modify the organization of actin cytoskeleton and induce permeability increase of the vessel wall ( 55 ) . Thus stimulation of endothe - lium with thrombin leads to formation of actin stress ﬁbers that mediate cellular contraction and disruption of VE cadherin homotypic interaction . Other mediators , such as histamine ( 244 ) and VEGF ( 70 ) , induce tyrosine - phosphorylation of VE - cadherin and associated catenins , which weakens cell - cell adhesion and increases vessel wall permeability . VE cadherin antibodies that disrupt adherens junctions ( see below ) mimic many aspects of the permeability response to agonists and their effects on endothelial cell ultrastructure ( 49 ) . The details of how the actin and cadherin complexes interact to stabilize each other are an important direction for future investigations ( 243 ) . Actin and microﬁlaments Actin is one of the most abundant proteins in endothelial cells , representing about 10 % of total cellular protein ( 204 ) . In its monomeric ( disassembled ) form , actin is a globular protein ( i . e . , G - actin ) consisting of a mixture of the free subunits , β - and γ - actin . In ﬁlamentous actin ( i . e . , F - actin ) , these sub - units are built up alternately to generate the actin polymer ( 60 ) . Microﬁlaments composed of F - actin have a diameter of 7 nm . Polymerization of actin in vitro begins with the self - association of three G - actin monomers . Short actin mi - croﬁlaments elongate by adding actin monomers to either end ( Fig . 6 ) . Elongation of the ﬁlament occurs when ATP - bound G - actin is added to nucleation sites . The ATP is subsequently hydrolyzed with a half time of about 2 s , whereas phosphate is released with a half - time of about 6 min . The latter event reduces the binding strength between neighboring subunits and destabilizes the ﬁlament . Both ends polymerize in vitro , although one end ( designated “plus” or “barbed” ) elongates faster than the other ( referred to as “minus” or “pointed” ) . Dissociation of ADP - actin from the pointed end is greatly ac - celerated by ADP - coﬁlin , an actin severing protein ( 47 , 284 ) . ADP - actin upon release from the pointed end undergoes ex - change of its bound ADP for free ATP and is used for the barbed - end ﬁlament elongation . The in vivo steady - state dy - namics of the actin ﬁlament is known as “treadmilling , ” that is , addition of ATP - actin to the barbed end and the release of ADP - actin from the pointed ends ( 141 , 301 ) . Actin - related protein ( ARP2 / 3 complex ) binds along the length of existing ﬁlaments and nucleates new actin ﬁlaments resulting in forma - tion of branched ﬁlament network ( 177 , 299 ) . Cross - linking between adjacent F - actin ﬁlaments gives added strength and Volume 2 , January 2012 455 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology ( A ) ( B ) EM Pointed Barbed end end Elongation rate constants ATP ATP ADP 1 . 3 0 . 3 0 . 16 K = 0 . 5 K = 0 . 6 D e c o r a t ed s eed 0 . 8 12 1 . 4 8 K = 0 . 5 ADP ATP ATP K = 0 . 12 4 Figure 6 Actin microﬁlaments . ( A ) Electron micrograph of an actin microﬁlament decorated with myosin heads . ( B ) Model of elongation of microﬁlament . Ratio of dissociation rate constant ( s − 1 ) to association rate constant ( μ M − 1 s − 1 ) gives K , the equilibrium dissociation con - stant ( μ M ) . ATP - bound actin monomer has a higher afﬁnity for barbed end than for pointed end . Reprinted , with permission , from reference ( 212 ) . stability to the actin cytoskeleton and inﬂuences its geom - etry . Several actin associated proteins , such as ﬁlamin and spectrin , function in the cross - linking of adjacent or orthogo - nal microﬁlaments ( 116 , 153 , 242 ) . The actin cytoskeleton is thus a highly dynamic structure . Many physiologic processes depend on a unique cellular distribution of F - actin ( vessel wall permeability changes , proliferation , migration , intracel - lular motility of lipid vesicles , adaptation to sheer stresses in the blood stream , and barrier recovery involving forma - tion of ﬁllipodia and lamellipodia ) . Over 200 proteins asso - ciate with the actin cytoskeleton regulating ( i ) microﬁlament nucleation , elongation , cross - linking , and severing ; ( ii ) bind - ing of actin cytoskeleton to cell - cell and cell - matrix adhe - sion complexes ; and ( iii ) the binding between elements of the actin cytoskeleton , microtubule networks , and membrane cytoskeleton . The membrane cytoskeleton is a submembranous scaf - fold , with a high content of the rod - shaped protein spec - trin , whose function is to support the plasmalemma and determine its response to mechanical perturbations ( 213 ) . In this scaffold , short F - actin chains associate with β - spectrin ( 51 ) . F - actin and several spectrin - associated adaptor proteins ( e . g . , ankrin , protein 4 . 1 , adducin and α - catenin ) link spec - trin to various transmembrane proteins , such as the ionic channel TRPC4 , a putative constituent of the endothelial store - operated channel complex ( 45 ) . The close association of plasmalemma with membrane cytoskeletion is an important determinant of the distensibility of the endothelial cell mem - brane ( 213 ) . Subjacent to the membrane cytoskeleton is the cortical actin rim , which is stabilized by several F - actin - associated cross - linking ( spectrin , ﬁlamin ) and binding molecules that regulate actin polymerization ( e . g . , cortactin , gelsolin , coﬁlin , ezrin - radixin - moesin , heat shock protein 27 ) ( 18 , 21 , 117 , 143 , 177 , 179 , 196 , 250 , 263 , 298 , 300 , 313 , 314 ) . Besides regulating cell shape in unstimulated endothelial cells , the cortical actin rim , in conjunction with cell - cell adhesion com - plexes , maintains juxtaposition of endothelial cell borders by generating centrifugal force ( in the outward direction ) , and is undoubtedly a key cytoskeletal structure orchestrating barrier recovery from the effects of permeability - increasing agents . An important aspect of the barrier - recovery process is reassembly of the cortical actin rim . A recently - described biophysical correlate of this process is altered elasticity of the endothelial cell periphery , which was studied by atomic force microscopy ( 9 ) . Thrombin reduced the elastic modulus of the cells ( corresponding to disassembly of the cortical actin ring ) , and S1P , a barrier - protective agent , restored the elas - tic modulus to normal values ( corresponding to reassembly of the cortical actin ring ) : cortactin expression was vital to the restorative effects of S1P . This interesting study leaves little doubt that assembly and disassembly of cortical actin is an important physiological process correlated with marked changes in barrier structure and function . Actin - based molecular motors such as myosin II ( 59 ) add another dynamic feature to the endothelial actin cytoskele - ton , as illustrated in Figure 1 . These motors associate with the actin cytoskeleton and generate force by “sliding along” stress ﬁbers that consist of short , nonbranching microﬁla - ments crosslinked by certain actin binding proteins ( e . g . , α - actinin ) ( 107 ) . Under the inﬂuence of permeability - increasing agonists , the cortical actin rim rapidly disintegrates , thereby causing loss of centrifugal tension that produces immediate retraction of cell borders . Force generated by stress ﬁbers in the cytoplasm ampliﬁes the rate and extent of retraction , thus widening interendothelial gaps ( 204 ) . The ends of the actin stress ﬁbers bind to adherens junctions , tight junctions , or focal ( cell - to - matrix ) adhesions via chains of intermediary proteins ( 61 , 107 ) . The stress ﬁbers thus “focus” contractile force to transmembrane proteins in cell - cell and cell - matrix contacts . Tubulin and microtubules Microtubules are hollow , cylindrical structures of 25 nm in diameter and 0 . 2 to 25 μ m in length ( 291 ) , radiating from a paranuclear microtubule - organizing center ( MTOC ) ( Fig . 7 ) . Microtulular cytoskeleton has been argued to provide cells 456 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance ( A ) ( B ) Figure 7 Organization of microtubule cytoskeleton in monolayer of human lung microvascular endothelial cells ( HLMVECs ) . ( A ) Micro - tubules ( yellow ) extend from the microtubule - organizing center ( MTOC ) to cell periphery ; nuclei are stained in blue ( Image courtesy of Dr . Yulia Komarova ) . ( B ) Schematic diagram of the microtubule ( MT ) cytoskele - ton . Minus ends of MTs attach to centrosome ( yellow ) and plus ends grow radially toward cell periphery . MTs serve as tracks for mobile vesicles , which move from centrosome to cell periphery ( red circles ) or backwards toward the centrosome ( green circles ) . Reprinted , with permission , from reference ( 108 ) . with a defense against compression forces and to counterbal - ance actinomyosin - mediated contractility in endothelial cells ( 114 , 115 ) . Each individual microtubule consists of a circum - ferential , parallel array of 13 tubulin polymers , which in turn , are assembled from alternating heterodimers of α - and β - tubulin ( 291 ) . Microtubule nucleation begins in the MTOC . The nucleation complex contains γ - tubulin and other associ - ated proteins that form the circular “ γ - tubulin ring complex” ( 184 ) with dual functions to act as a scaffold for α - and β - tubulin and to cap the minus ( nongrowing ) end . By analogy to microﬁlaments , microtubule elongation proceeds in the plus direction by the addition of α - tubulin and ATP - bound β - tubulin monomers ( Fig . 8 ) . The primary role of the micro - tubule network is for support , transport , and positioning of intracellular organelles . Tubulin - based molecular motors of the kinesin family carry cargos , such as mitochondria or vesi - ( – ) End ( + ) End Growth Catastrophe Rescue Shrinkage GTP – α , β - tubulin GDP – α , β - tubulin Figure 8 Growth and shrinkage of microtubules ( MT ) . Presence of GTP – ( α , β ) - tubulin ( pink ) at the plus end stabilizes the growth phase of MT . GTP hydrolysis results in rapid MT shrinkage , with individual protoﬁlaments bending away from the microtubule axis . The transition from growth to shrinkage is referred to as catastrophe ; transition from shrinkage to growth is known as rescue . Reprinted , with permission , from reference ( 109 ) . cles ( Figures 7 and 8 ) , toward the plus end of microtubules that extend to the cell periphery . By contrast , the dynein fam - ily of molecular motors carries cargo toward minus ends of microtubules , that is , in the direction of MTOC ( Fig . 7 ) . Some investigators believe that microtubules have an indirect , but important role in maintenance of the endothelial barrier and in elevation of barrier permeability secondary to the effects of inﬂammatory mediators . Microtubule disruption by such agents as nocodazole or vinblastine ( 132 , 280 ) destabilizes the barrier formed by quiescent endothelial cells and enables the formation of actin stress ﬁbers that contribute to barrier leakiness ( 285 ) . Two recent studies investigating the regula - tory inﬂuence of microtubules on actin cytoskeleton showed that microtubules sequester molecules that regulate actin cy - toskeleton . First , microtubules bindcertainGEFs ( guaninenu - cleotide exchange factors ) , such as GEF - H1 , that speciﬁcally activate RhoA , an actin - cytoskeleton - associated protein stim - ulating stress ﬁber formation , thereby markedly increasing the activity of myosin - based molecular motors , and raising para - cellular permeability of vascular endothelium ( 25 ) . Second , LIM kinase 1 ( LIMK1 ) is a tubulin - associated molecule capa - ble of degrading the cortical actin rim and redistributing actin into stress ﬁbers ( 92 ) . The function of LIMK1 is to inhibit coﬁlin , the actin binding protein that stimulates degradation of actin ( 22 ) . Constitutively active coﬁlin induces actin de - polymerization through severing interactions with F - actin and binding interactions with G - actin that prevent extension of the minus ends of microﬁlaments . The microtubule cytoskeleton binds LIMK1 ( 94 ) , which thus “steals” the kinase from cy - tosol and effectively conﬁnes LIMK and its substrate coﬁlin to separate cellular compartments . Permeability - increasing Volume 2 , January 2012 457 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology limk1 + / + Control ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) PAR - 1 Control 50 nm 100 nm 100 nm 50 nm 30 15 0 – + – + PAR - 1 PAR - 1 % o f op e n i n t e r - e ndo t h e li a l j un c t i on s limk1 – / – limk1 + / + limk1 – / – Figure 9 Activation of LIM kinase 1 ( LIMK1 ) destabilizes pulmonary interendothelial junctions . ( A and B ) Electron micrographs of interen - dothelial junctions ( arrows ) in WT ( A ) and limk1 – / – mice ( B ) without and with PAR - 1 peptide agonist as indicated . Magniﬁcation , 60 , 000 . ( C ) Morphometric analysis of open interendothelial junctions induced by exposure of mouse lungs to PAR - 1 agonist . Each bar shows per - centage of open junctions out of 50 observations made . PAR - 1 agonist induced signiﬁcantly more open junctions in WT lungs ( P = 0 . 010197 ) . Error bars represent SEM . Reprinted , with permission , from reference ( 92 ) . agents release LIMK from the microtubule network into cy - tosol , where the kinase is free to phosphorylate and inactivate coﬁlin . Inhibition of coﬁlin suppresses actin degradation , thus causing accumulation of actin polymers and appearance of cy - toplasmic stress ﬁbers at the expense of cortical actin . The catalytic activity of LIMK1 thereby increases barrier perme - ability through its effector coﬁlin . Importantly , genetic dele - tion of LIMK1 reduces basal liquid permeability in the intact , isolated lung preparation ( Fig . 9 ) , indicative of the poten - tial physiological relevance of the microtubules as regula - tors of the actin cytoskeleton . The LIMK - deﬁcient mouse - lung preparation also demonstrated diminished effects of the permeability - increasing PAR - 1 agonist TFLLRNPNDK on K f , . a widely used measure of liquid permeability in exchange vessel walls ( 92 ) . Endothelial junctions and their relationship to actin cytoskeleton Firm cell - cell adhesion is an attribute of the quiescent en - dothelial barrier . Two important junctional complexes respon - sible for adhesion between adjacent endothelial cell borders are adherens and tight junctions ( Fig . 10 ) . Their molecular organization and the cross - talk between junction types has been studied and reviewed extensively ( 17 , 187 , 286 , 293 ) . Adherens junctions Adherens junctions play a pivotal role in regulation of ves - sel wall permeability . Ultrastructurally , endothelial adherens junctions are recognized as areas of closely apposed en - dothelial membranes ( 289 , 306 ) . The chief structural pro - tein of adherens junctions is VE - cadherin ( 57 ) ( also see Figure 10 ) , an endothelial - speciﬁc ( 54 , 95 ) membrane span - ning protein consisting of extracellular , juxtamembrane , and carboxy - terminal domains . The extracellular domain ( EXD ) mediates the calcium - dependent homotypic binding of VE - cadherin molecules to those extending from the neighboring cell’s plasma membrane ( 145 , 152 ) . VE - cadherin must be anchored to the actin cytoskeleton to create stable adherens junctions . Tyrosine phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic tail of VE - cadherin , which inﬂammatory mediators character - istically stimulate , destabilizes the protein bridge connect - ing adherens junctions and actin cytoskeleton , thus leading to internalization of the junctions ( 55 ) . Immunohistochem - ical studies of quiescent , conﬂuent endothelial monolayers show extensive overlap of cortical - actin and VE - cadherin im - munostaining , in the region of the cell membrane , suggesting close association of actin cytoskeleton with endothelial ad - herens junctions ( Fig . 11 ) . Actin polymerization is necessary for the biogenesis of adherens junctions , since genetic deletion of junction - associated molecules ( e . g . , formin ) that stimulate actin polymerization prevents formation of stable junctions and increases permeability of endothelial monolayers ( 113 , 137 , 287 ) . Cytoskeletal anchoring is the main function of the carboxy - terminal region of VE - cadherin , which binds both β - and γ - catenin ( i . e . , plakoglobin ) . β - and γ - Catenins bind ( in a competitive manner ) to α - catenin , which , in turn , binds to F - actin ( 20 , 288 ) . α - Catenin associates with additional actin - binding proteins ( actinin and vinculin ) that reinforce the an - choring of adherens junctions to cytoskeleton ( 136 , 193 , 297 ) . The α - , β - , and γ - catenins therefore make up a vital pro - tein bridge linking adherens junctions and actin cytoskeleton . VE - cadherin’s juxtamembrane domain binds the important regulatory molecule , p120 - catenin , a src substrate regulating the stability of adherens junctions and possibly internaliza - tion of junctional proteins by clathrin - coated vesicles ( 3 , 4 , 42 , 267 , 287 , 312 ) . p120 - catenin associates with the micro - tubule molecular motor kinesin ( at least in nonendothelial cell types ) , which is involved in vesicle trafﬁcking ( 14 , 42 , 312 ) . In addition , p120 is a negative regulator of RhoA GTPase ( which induces the contractile state of endothelial cells ) and , when bound to juxtamembrane domain of VE - cadherin , 458 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Figure 10 Interendothelial junctions in quiescent cells . ( A ) Diagram of endothelial adherens junctions and their relationship to actin cytoskeleton . Homotypic adhesion between extracellular domains ( EXDS ) of VE - cadherin molecules joins adjacent cells . The juxtramembrane domain ( JMD ) of VE - cadherin binds p120 ( aqua ) , a protein regulating the stability of adherens junctions . The carboxyl - terminal domain ( CTD ) binds exclusively to either β - catenin or γ - catenin ( plakoglobin ; green ) , which in turn binds to α - catenin ( dark blue ) . α - Catenin interacts with F - actin directly and indirectly through binding to α - actinin ( light orange ) to create a strong link between VE - cadherin and actin cytoskeleton . Vinculin , another actin - associated protein , is also depicted ( violet ) . ( B ) Diagram illustrating endothelial tight junctions . Homotypic adhesion between EXDs of occludin molecules ( green ) creates the tight junctional contact . The cytoplasmic carboxyl domain of occludin binds to ZO - 1 ( red ) , which is indirectly linked to actin cytoskeleton via α - catenin ( dark blue ) . Reprinted , with permission , from reference ( 213 ) . protects VE - cadherin from degradation ( 96 , 118 , 195 ) . p120 ( in its nonphosphorylated state ) thereby stabilizes endothe - lial adherens junctions . Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues of VE - cadherin , β - catenin , plakoglobin , and p120 disorga - nizes and weakens adherens junctions , reducing intercellular adhesion ( 55 ) . Evidence indicates that phosphorylation of β - catenin on Tyr - 654 markedly reduces afﬁnity of β - catenin for the cytoplasmic tail of several cadherins ( 110 , 230 ) . Phospho - rylation of VE - cadherin at Ser665 has also been reported ( 55 ) . This process is thought to mediate VE - cadherin internaliza - tion and increase vascular permeability ( see also Fig . 3 ) . The homotypic binding between VE - cadherin molecules has clear physiologic relevance in the intact lung . Disrup - tion of junctions by VE - cadherin antibodies recognizing the EXD markedly increased lung liquid permeability in vivo ( 48 ) . Extracellular calcium chelation rapidly and reversibly increased liquid permeability in isolated perfused lung prepa - rations ( 82 , 128 ) . Moreover , the usual recovery after calcium repletion was prevented when the VE - cadherin antibody was supplied to open interendothelial junctions during the cal - cium chelation period . Using cationic liposomes , lung expres - sion of a mutant VE - cadherin lacking the EXD also induced Volume 2 , January 2012 459 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology Figure 11 Organization of actin and microtubule cytoskeletons and their relationship to adherens junctions . Monolayer of quiescent human lung microvascular endothelial cells was stained for VE - cadherin ( red ) , α - tubulin and actin ( green , as indicated ) , and DNA ( blue ) . Actin or - ganizes into peripheral actin bundles along the VE - cadherin - mediated adhesions . Microtubules extend from the centrosome throughout the cell . Image courtesy of Dr . Yulia Komarova . signiﬁcant vascular leak ( 197 ) . It is noteworthy that interrup - tion of the protein bridge connecting adherens junctions to actin cytoskeleton leads to an increase in liquid permeabil - ity . Conditional expression of a mutant form of VE - cadherin lacking the β - catenin binding domain caused loss of barrier function without loss of adherens junctions ( 40 ) , indicating the prime importance of the linkage between junctions and the actin cytoskeleton . Mutation of the β - catenin binding sites of VE - cadherin prevented the binding of actin ﬁlaments to ad - herens junctions and weakened cell - cell adhesion ( 138 , 189 , 198 ) . Disruption of pre - existing actin microﬁlaments by C2 toxin ( 69 ) or cytochalasin ( 295 , 296 ) provoked interendothe - lial gaps and markedly increased endothelial permeability in intact microvessels and cultured cells because stable interen - dothelial junctions cannot form without the ability to associate with actin cytoskeleton ( 39 ) . Tight junctions Tight junctions are prominent both in endothelial and in ep - ithelial cells , but epithelial systems are more thoroughly stud - ied . Endothelial tight junctions are either distinct apical struc - tures or overlap with adherens junctions ( 56 ) . The stability of endothelial tight junctions may derive to some extent from the organization of adherens junctions in that speciﬁc disruption of adherens complexes causes loss of tight junctions from cell - to - cell contact regions ( 17 ) . The tight junctions observed in endothelial cells create cell - cell contacts that appear fused when viewed in thin sections , but which are in fact closely ap - posed , but not fused , when examined at higher magniﬁcations ( 34 , 215 , 306 ) . Tight junctional contacts divide the interen - dothelial space into apical and basolateral subcompartments that face blood and interstitium , respectively . In freeze frac - ture , endothelial tight junctions appeared to consist of rows of intramembranous strands contacting other similar strands at points in the apposed cell ( 238 ) . The organization of en - dothelial tight junctions varies with the pulmonary vascular segment ( 238 ) . Tight junctions are better organized and more numerous in small and large arteries and in pulmonary cap - illaries than in the relatively permeable venules , where there are fewer tight junction particles and the junctional strands have discontinuities ( 129 ) . Strands in tight junctions contain membrane - spanning proteins that mediate cell - cell contact and that internally asso - ciate with cytoplasmic proteins that link the tight junction to endothelial cytoskeleton ( see Fig . 10 ) . There are three types of membrane spanning molecules in tight junctions , that is , oc - cludins , claudins , and junctional adhesion molecules ( JAM’s ) . Occludin is localized strictly in tight junctions in epithelial and endothelial cells ( 5 , 78 ) . Nonneural endothelial cells ex - press occludin at much lower levels and in a less continuous fashion than brain endothelial cells ( 102 ) . Occludin acquires adhesive properties in the presence of ZO - 1 ( zonula occlu - dens - 1 ) expressed on the cell surface ( 79 ) . The cytoplasmic tail region of occludin is known to associate with ZO - 1 , which binds with α - catenin and actin - polymerizing proteins such as spectrin , thereby anchoring the tight junction to actin cy - toskeleton ( 186 , 237 ) . Genetic deletion of occludin did not affect transepithelial electrical resistance ( TER ) , a measure of gap formation in between cells , and produced no perme - ability phenotype in endothelial cells ( 232 ) . Tight junctions between neighboring cells can also be generated by means of the claudins comprising a 24 mem - ber family of membrane - spanning adhesion molecules . They are the major transmembrane component of tight junctions in endothelial cells ( 273 ) . Claudin - 5 is the endothelial - speciﬁc isoform that stimulates formation of intramembranous strands in expression systems ( 183 , 194 ) . Claudin - 1 is also found in brain endothelial cells . In forming tight junctions claudin iso - forms expressed on adjacent endothelial cell borders bind homophilically or heterophilically ( 80 , 273 ) . Claudin - 5 ex - pression in endothelial cells is dependent on VE - cadherin expression ( 262 ) , potentially explaining the stabilizing effect of adherens junctions on tight junctions . The cytoplasmic tail of VE - cadherin normally sequesters nonphosphorylated β - catenin . When adherens junctions are disassembled , free β - catenin enters the nucleus and becomes a negative regu - lator of claudin - 5 expression [ see ( 17 ) ] . β - Catenin forms a repressor complex with Tcf and Fox01 , and binding of the tri - partite complex in the promoter region of the claudin - 5 gene blocks transcription ( 17 ) . When adherens junctions are re - assembled , VE - cadherin expression and clustering at the cell surface lead to sequestration of β - catenin , and stimulate AKT - dependent phosphorylation of Fox01 , which consequently be - comes trapped in the cytoplasm . The claudin - 5 gene promo - tor thus becomes de - repressed which permits restoration of claudin - 5 expression . JAM is another membrane - spanning protein that can form tight junctions ( 56 , 168 ) . JAM molecules in solution bind homophilically via their EXDs . Overexpression of JAM in cells has the capacity to reduce paracellular ﬂuid convection , a ﬁnding consistent with an ability to form restrictive junctions between apposed cell borders . There are three species of JAM molecules , JAM1 - 3 . JAM 2 and 3 are endothelial - speciﬁc proteins ; JAM - 2 expression is copious in venular endothelium ( 11 , 12 ) . 460 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance The membrane - spanning proteins claudin - 1 and - 5 and the JAM’s in endothelial tight junctions also associate with an array of intracellular binding partners that link them to endothelial cytoskeleton ( 17 ) . The cytoplasmic - tail domains ( carboxy terminus ) of these transmembrane proteins recruit ZO - 1 that binds α - catenin , which in turn associates with F - actin . Spectrin , the F - actin - crosslinking molecule , may also bind to α - catenin . ZO - 1 may have the capacity to stimulate actin polymerization by recruiting stimulatory substances for actin polymerization , such as vasodilator - stimulated phos - phoprotein ( VASP ) , which builds up the cortical actin rim ( 168 ) . By associating with the cortical actin rim , tight junc - tions achieve increased stability . The physiological signiﬁcance of endothelial tight junc - tion proteins has been difﬁcult to establish in vivo , with the exception of brain endothelium . Genetic deletion ( “knock - out” ) of claudin - 5 , the principle membrane - spanning protein in endothelial tight junctions , did not produce a permeability phenotype in lung vessels and other nonneural vasculatures ( 168 ) . Interestingly in the central nervous system a modest increase of vessel wall permeability to low molecular weight solutes has been described in the claudin - 5 knockout mouse ( 194 ) . Relationship between actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesion complexes Endothelial cells adhere to the ECM of the inner vessel - wall at punctate foci ( 35 ) organized on the abluminal cell surface ( Fig . 12 ) . “Focal adhesions” have an important function in regulating barrier permeability and in maintaining nonpro - liferative endothelial phenotype ( 76 ) . Membrane - spanning , adhesive molecules in endothelial focal adhesions known as integrins recognize and bind to ECM protein constituents , such as ﬁbronectin , ﬁbrinogen , vitronectin , and collagen . All integrins are heterodimers containing an α - and β - subunit each named with a numerical subscript ( 2 , 43 , 46 , 52 , 53 , 165 , 264 ) . Endothelial cells express α subunits 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , or V , and β subunits 1 , 3 , or 5 . The α and β subunits are all type 1 membrane - spanning glycoproteins ( 112 , 227 ) . As an example , α 5 β 1 is the endothelial receptor for ﬁbronectin , one of the most abundant ECM constituents . The integrins recognize ECM proteins that have the Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) sequence ( 43 , 46 , 144 , 146 , 253 ) , and are linked internally to the actin cytoskeleton by protein bridges . Numerous actin - binding proteins , including talin , ﬁlamin , vinculin , paxillin , zyxin , tensin , and α - Actinin , associate with cytoplasmic as - pect of the focal adhesion complex ( 89 , 213 ) . α - actinin di - rectly links cytoplasmic tail of integrin β - subunits to actin acytoskeleton . In addition to actin - binding proteins , focal ad - hesion complexes also contain the nonreceptor protein ty - rosine kinase , focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) . Integrin activa - tion induced by endothelial cell adhesion to ECM proteins or by several permeability - increasing agonists ( thrombin , his - tamine , VEGF ) ( 1 , 170 , 236 , 309 ) leads to tyrosine phos - phorylation of FAK , which consequently increases its kinase activity and is recruited to the focal adhesions in endothe - lial cells . The function of FAK is critical for formation and turnover of focal adhesions . Phosphorylation of FAK at var - ious tyrosine residues regulates focal adhesion turnover by mechanisms that are not well understood ( 100 ) . Inﬂamma - tory mediators , such as thrombin , that increase permeability of endothelial barrier cause a redistribution of focal adhesion complexes with strengthened adherence to ECM ( 170 ) . Actin stress ﬁbers anchor to focal adhesion complexes , which act as ﬁxed points against which tension may be developed down - stream of RhoA signaling ( 85 ) . Evidence indicates that FAK may have a signiﬁcant role in barrier recovery in that FAK induces disassembly of focal adhesions ( 105 , 135 ) . A number of experimental studies point to an important physiological role of the focal adhesion complex in regulating endothelial barrier function . Competitive peptide inhibitor of RDG sequence - integrin binding ( i . e . , GRGDS ) resulted in en - dothelial cell - shape change and increased endothelial liquid ( A ) ( B ) Extracellular space Actin filament Plasmamembrane 10 μ m Integrinsubunits Extracellular matrix protein Vinculin Cytoplasm α - Actinin , talin , or filamin α β Figure 12 Organization of focal adhesions . ( A ) Immunostaining of endothelial monolayer for actin ( green ) and focal - adhesion protein , vinculin ( red ) . ( B ) Diagram of the focal adhesion complex , showing integrin bound to ECM protein and its intracellular linkage to F - actin . Image courtesy of Dr . Richard Minshall . Volume 2 , January 2012 461 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology permeability ( 50 , 221 , 229 , 257 ) . Antibodies against the in - tegrin α 5 β 1 ( the ﬁbronectin receptor ) inhibited endothelial cell adhesion to ECM and thus increased monolayer pro - tein permeability ( 53 , 144 ) . Importantly these observations were conﬁrmed in intact venules using competitive peptide inhibitors of the same receptor ( 310 ) . In these experiments , theinhibitorcausedamarkedincreaseinvenularpermeability , as expected . Addition of ﬁbronectin displaced the inhibitory peptide from the competitive - binding site , thereby blocking the permeability increase . The role of FAK in regulating the endothelial barrier may not be limited to its effect on focal adhesion turnover . It was recently shown that FAK localizes at the sites of cell - cell adhesions ( 135 ) . Here , at the sites of cell - cell adhesion , FAK might exert its effect on endothelial barrier by phospho - rylating WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) , which in its phosphorylated form induces actin polymerization and thereby improves barrier function ( 311 ) . Endothelial - speciﬁc deletion of FAK leads to embryonic lethality due to vas - cular defects ( 246 , 316 ) . Until recently , the role of FAK in regulating permeability of lung vessels has been studied by expression of dominant - negative mutants of FAK ( 105 ) . The animals transiently expressing FAK mutant FRNK in lung vasculature display a marked increase in liquid perme - ability . The use of endothelial - speciﬁc and conditional dele - tion of FAK might provide a better model for probing FAK function . Regulation of cytoskeleton dynamics in endothelium by Rho GTPases Many of the permeability - increasing agonists produce marked changes in endothelial cytoskeleton by means of a class of sig - naling molecules known as Rho GTPases . These molecules interact with actin cytoskeleton to reorganize actin in the cytoplasm and along the cell periphery . Rho GTPases be - long to the Ras superfamily of “small GTPases . ” The small GTPase RhoA is responsible for stimulating formation of actin stress ﬁbers and increasing contraction in endothelial cells ( Fig . 13 ) . Permeability - increasing substances that couple via G - protein subunit G α q increase intracellular calcium and activate phospholipase C , thereby generating inositol ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) - tris - phosphate ( IP3 ) and diacylglycerol . Calcium and diacyl - glycerol activate protein kinase C α ( PKC α ) , whose substrates include p115 - Rho - GEF ( guanine nucleotide exchange factor ) and Rho - GDI [ guanosine diphosphate ( GDP ) dissociation in - hibitor ] . Phosphorylation of GDI - 1 at Ser 96 reduces its afﬁn - ity for RhoA ( 134 ) , thus permitting p115 - Rho - GEF - mediated Figure 13 Receptor control of microvessel permeability . Permeability - increasing agonist such as thrombin , ligates proteinase - activated receptor - 1 ( PAR - 1 ) , stimulating G α q and G α 12 / 13 . G α q triggers increased intracellular Ca 2 + , which activates EC MLCK ( endothelial - cell myosin light chain kinase ) and hence elevates the phosphorylation level of MLC ( MLC - P ) . Increased intracellular Ca 2 + also activates protein kinases , such as PKC α ( not shown ) , which phosphorylate GDI - 1 ( GDP - dissociation inhibitor ) and p115RhoGEF ( guanine nucleotide exchange factor ) , thereby increasing the activity of RhoA GTPase . RhoA activates ROCK ( rho kinase ) and LIMK1 ( LIM kinase - 1 ) , which regulates actin binding proteins ( coﬁlin ) and thus the state of actin polymerization . ROCK by phosphorylating MLC phosphatase ( Ppase ) inhibits Ppase and thus increases MLC - P . Together , these events lead to increased actin - myosin cross - bridging , resulting in increased endothelial contraction . Image courtesy of Dr . Dolly Mehta . 462 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance exchange of GDP for guanosine - 5 (cid:4) - triphosphate ( GTP ) ( 106 , 140 ) . GTP - bound RhoA in turn activates its downstream ef - fectors mDia ( mammalian diaphanous analog ) and Rho ki - nase ( ROCK ) , which phosphorylate a series of target proteins that directly or indirectly inﬂuence actin cytoskeleton and its associated molecular motors ( 213 ) . Among ROCK’s sub - strates are myosin light chain ( MLC ) phosphatase , and actin - regulatory molecules such as LIMK , gelsolin , and coﬁlin . LIMK by inhibiting coﬁlin , stimulates actin stress ﬁber for - mation ( 156 ) ( see above ) . RhoA - induced inhibition of the actin - binding protein gelsolin suppresses F - actin degrada - tion and potently stimulates actin stress - ﬁber formation . Ge - netic deletion of gelsolin in mice causes marked increase in pulmonary microvascular permeability ( 18 ) implying that Rho - induced inhibition of gelsolin should augment vessel - wall permeability in vivo . The recent ﬁnding of posttrans - lational arginylation of beta - actin by the arginyltransferase Ate1 might be interesting in this respect . Actin arginyla - tion regulates the binding afﬁnities of gelsolin and another capping protein , twinﬁlin , to actin microﬁlaments and might control the level of actin polymerization in cells ( 125 ) . Ate1 regulates the motility of endothelial cells during angiogene - sis and embryogenesis , and may also be essential for other cytoskeleton - dependent processes in development ( 151 ) . Al - though the effect of Ate1 knockout on endothelial barrier function remains to be addressed , downregulation of gelsolin as well as Ate1 in ﬁbroblasts was shown to impair lamellar activity ( 305 ) . MLC phosphorylation controls endothelial cell contrac - tion . Myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) , which is directly regulated by calcium - calmodulin binding , phosphorylates MLC and promotes contraction , whereas MLC phosphatase , a RhoA substrate , dephosphorylates MLC and opposes con - traction ( 61 ) . Activated ROCK phosphorylates the myosin - binding site of MLC phosphatase , which inhibits the phos - phatase by preventing the binding of substrate and leaves MLCK unopposed to phosphorylate MLC ( 26 , 27 , 71 , 72 , 285 , 307 ) . The net result is increased contraction induced by stim - ulation of actinomyosin cross - bridging and elevated perme - ability of the endothelial monolayer . There is clear evidence for the physiological importance of RhoA activity in regulating microvascular permeability ( 101 ) . In cultured pulmonary vascular endothelial cells , clostridium botulinum toxin C3 , a speciﬁc RhoA inhibitor , abrogated the effects of thrombin on MLC phosphorylation , stress ﬁber for - mation , and TER ( 166 ) . A decrease in TER is a measure of the formation of interendothelial gaps typically seen within minutes of the application of thrombin . In the in vivo setting , genetic deletion of RhoGDI - 1 increased the activity of RhoA ( but not of Rac1 or Cdc42 ) in murine lungs ( 93 ) . Basal liquid permeability rose signiﬁcantly in isolated lung preparations of the knockout mouse . On examination by electron microscopy , open interendothelial junctions that are absent in normal pul - monary microvessels were found in those of RhoGDI - null mice ( 93 ) . The observations in this important study point to the causal relationship between increased RhoA activ - ity and elevated paracellular permeability in lung capillaries in vivo . By contrast with RhoA , some members of the Rho GTPase family have a role in the reannealing of open en - dothelial cell - cell junctions induced by inﬂammatory media - tors . The recovery process probably begins soon after interen - dothelial gaps form . Rac and Cdc42 are thought to orchestrate reorganization of actin cytoskeleton during recovery of the endothelial barrier ( 31 ) . Free endothelial - cell borders mani - fest several forms of motility driven by actin polymerization . Motile structures observed in vitro include membrane rufﬂes , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia , all reﬂecting actin reorganization ( 224 ) . Membrane rufﬂing describes wavelike motion of mem - brane along the cell border . The internal actin network deter - mines shape and dynamic properties of rufﬂes . Rac is the prin - ciple regulator of membrane rufﬂing in endothelial cells ( 224 ) . Cdc42 and Rac regulate the growth of endothelial lamellipo - dia and ﬁlopodia , plasma - membrane protrusions formed by dynamic actin polymerization and branching ( Fig . 14 ) . Cdc42 recruits cortactin and WASP , both of which are activators of ARP2 / 3 , to the cell periphery , resulting in increased cortical actin polymerization ( 131 ) . Elongation of F - actin polymer exerts force on the plasma membrane that subsequently de - forms into broad , convex lamellipodia . Lamellipodia contain branched actin and have tiny microspikes on their surface , which are formed from short unbranched actin bundles ( 252 ) . Growth of lamellipodia occurs by extension of the plus ends of actin microﬁlaments . Rac controls actin polymerization during lamellipodium formation by recruiting WASP - family verprolin - homologous protein ( WAVE ) complex , another ac - tivator of ARP2 / 3 ( 224 ) . Microspikes on lamellipodia that grow beyond the leading front become ﬁlopodia ( 252 ) . The actin - rich ﬁlopodia sense the local environment and adjacent cells , and are thought to play a role in re - establishing cell - cell adhesive contact ( 200 ) . In the early stages of this process , ﬁlopodia and lamel - lipodia extending from nearby endothelial cells may contact one another and reassemble endothelial adherens junctions . Only a few studies characterize the reassembly of cell - cell junctions in vivo . McDonald and colleagues used electron mi - croscopy to examine changes in the ultrastructure of venular microvessels of rat trachea after exposure to the permeability - increasing agonist Substance P ( 161 ) . In this inﬂammatory model , reconstructions from serial sections showed that Sub - stance P induced predominantly interendothelial gaps and rare occurrences of transcellular pores . In some instances , ﬁngerlike processes ( lamellipodia ) protruded into the gaps , clearly indicating profound reorganization of the endothelial cytoskeleton in the vicinity of open endothelial junctions . The observed projections could have the function of ﬁlling or closing gaps . Barrier recovery is thought to occur after cessation of the contractile state of endothelial cells ( 31 ) . Evidence suggests that Cdc42 has an active role in the suppression of contrac - tility . Cell culture studies show that latent activation of cdc42 Volume 2 , January 2012 463 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) F il opod i u m La m e lli pod i u m capping protein Ena / VASP G - actin Arp2 / 3 fascin ( E ) ( D ) Figure 14 Mechanism of lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation . ( A ) Organization of actin cytoskeleton in lamellipodia of ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes . Reproduced , with permission , from reference ( 235 ) . ( B and C ) Organization of actin cytoskeleton in ﬁlopodia embedded in lamellipodium in B16F1 melanoma cell . ( B ) Fluorescent image . Re - gion enclosed by rectangle is enlarged in insets . Reproduced , with permission , from reference ( 171 ) . ( C ) Platinum replica EM . Filopodium contains a tight bundle of actin ﬁlaments . Inset shows branched actin on surface of lamellipodium . Reproduced , with permission , from ref - erence ( 261 ) . ( D and E ) Model for mechanism of lamellipodial ( top ) and ﬁlopodial ( bottom ) protrusion depending on capping activity in cells . Top : When capping activity dominates either by activation of CP ( capping protein ) or inhibition of capping antagonists such as Ena / VASP - like protein ( enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphopro - tein ) , ﬁlaments elongate for a brief period before becoming capped and , as a consequence , these ﬁlaments are relatively short . To main - tain protrusion , capped ﬁlaments are replaced by newly nucleated side branches produced by Arp2 / 3 complex , favoring the formation of a branching , lamellipodial network . Bottom : Low - capping activity result - ing either from inhibition of CP or activation of proteins that promote anticapping and antibranching such as Ena / VASP , favor ﬁlament elon - gation leading to long and unbranched ﬁlaments , which converge and subsequently become bundled by actin cross - linking molecule , fascin . Filopodia formation is therefore predominant . Modiﬁed , with permis - sion , from reference ( 171 ) . by permeability - increasing agonists suppresses agonist - mediated endothelial contractility and agonist - induced per - meability increase ( 31 ) . In vivo studies also support the role of cdc42 in limiting or reversing permeability increase . Ramchandran et al . ( 222 ) examined the role of Cdc42 activity in mediating endothelial barrier protection in lungs by gener - ating mice expressing the dominant active mutant V12Cdc42 protein in vascular endothelial cells ( targeted via the VE - cadherin promoter ) . These mice exhibited constitutively ac - tive GTP - bound Cdc42 without change in RhoA activity . The increase in lung vascular permeability and gain in tissue wa - ter content in response to intraperitoneal lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) challenge were markedly attenuated in the transgenic mice ( 222 ) . Some investigators envision a direct role of Cdc42 in the reannealing of endothelial cell - cell junctions . In isolated perfused murine lung preparations , Kouklis et al . ( 139 ) stud - ied the effects of transduction of a dominant - negative form of cdc42 ( N17Cdc42 ) on the kinetics of endothelial barrier recovery using cationic liposomes . The construct was proven to express protein in pulmonary endothelial cells within 24 h . Lung preparations were challenged by a thrombin - mimetic peptide , and barrier recovery was tracked by studying liquid permeability at various postchallenge times . Results showed that effective knockdown of Cdc42 delayed barrier recovery in the intact lung , suggesting that junctions did not reanneal normally . Whereas the immediate upstream activator of cdc42 is unknown , it was observed that expression of a mutant VE - cadherin construct lacking the (cid:4) EXD disrupted endothelial adherens junctions in vivo and stimulated cdc42 activity in in - tact lung ( 31 ) . These experimental observations suggest that dissociation of homotypic binding of VE - cadherin activates cdc42 and thereby triggers the barrier recovery process . Evidence obtained by in vivo and in vitro approaches also indicates Rac - 1 to have a clear cut role in barrier recovery . Activation of Rac1 by CNF - 1 ( cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 ) in vitro recruited actin - binding proteins cortactin and VASP to the junction - associated actin band , which accelerated actin polymerization at cell junctions , increased the mechanical strength of VE - cadheren - mediated contacts ( as studied by laser tweezers ) , and improved endothelial barrier function ( 294 ) . Importantly , on single , rat mesenteric microvessels cannulated for L p measurements , CNF - 1 had no effect on basal permeability values , but suppressed the permeability - increasing effects of platelet - activating factor ( PAF ) ( 294 ) . An earlier study by the same group used a complemen - tary approach to inhibit Rac - 1 using Clostridium sordellii Lethal Toxin . Results demonstrated that inhibition of Rac - 1 increased microvessel hydraulic conductivity and induced formation of intercellular gaps in cultured microvascular en - dothelial cells ( 296 ) . Agonist regulation of endothelial permeability Assessments of barrier structure and function in relatively pure populations of endothelial cells have yielded much infor - mation on endothelial mechanisms of increased permeability 464 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance 0 10 Time ( min ) after thrombin 30 45 Figure 15 Thrombin - induced stress ﬁber formation in endothelial cells ( murine lung ) . Actin is stained in green and nuclei , in blue . Image courtesy of Dr . C . Tiruppathi . ( 61 , 70 , 168 , 239 , 281 , 303 ) . Although signaling pathways vary , all inﬂammatory mediators alter endothelial cytoskele - ton and interendothelial junctional complexes . In some in - stances , the in vivo mechanism of increased permeability has been studied . The cellular basis for the permeability - increasing effects of speciﬁc agents and conditions in en - dothelial cells is described , focusing on the role of endothelial cytoskeleton . Thrombin The serine protease thrombin or the thrombin - mimetic pep - tide TFLLRNPNDK - NH 2 binds to and activates proteinase - activated receptor - 1 ( PAR - 1 ) that couples to heterotrimeric G - proteins G q , G 12 / 13 , and G i ( 283 ) . Through PAR - 1 - G q coupling , thrombin activates phospholipase C - β , generating second messengers IP3 and diacylglycerol . IP3 causes cal - cium depletion of endoplasmic reticulum , which triggers cal - cium entry through store - operated plasma - membrane cation channels , and diacylglycerol directly activates additional cal - cium entry through receptor - operated membrane ionic chan - nel TRPC6 ( 104 , 150 ) . Elevated intracellular calcium to - gether with diacylglycerol activate PKC α , which in turn rapidly activates RhoA through phosphorylation of its im - mediate upstream regulators , GDI - 1 ( 169 ) and p115RhoGEF ( 106 ) . G α 12 / 13 binds to the guanine nucleotide exchange fac - tor p115RhoGEF and increases its GEF activity ( 140 ) . GTP - bound RhoA causes ROCK - dependent phosphorylation of actin - depolymerizing proteins coﬁlin and gelsolin , thus pro - moting formation of actin stress ﬁbers , as experimentally observed ( see Fig . 15 ) . Rho - mediated inhibition of MLC phosphatase together with calcium - dependent activation of MLCK causes increased phosphorylation of MLC . Throm - bin thus stimulates endothelial - cell actinomyosin contractil - ity , inducing formation of interendothelial gaps that interrupt the continuity of adherens junctions ( Fig . 16 ) . Interendothe - lial gaps are the underlying cause of increased permeability in endothelial monolayers ( 61 ) . Treatment with inhibitors of RhoA or MLCK attenuate thrombin - induced MLC phospho - rylation , actomyosin interaction , and endothelial permeability ( 83 , 282 ) . In vivo , activation of PAR - 1 receptors dilates the pulmonary interendothelial space and increases the number of patent interendothelial junctions ( see Fig . 9 ) . Histamine The vasoactive amine histamine is released into interstitial space from mast cells resident in lung and other tissues ( 208 ) . Mast cells surrounding small blood vessels and nerves have an important role in the acute inﬂammatory response to allergens ( 220 ) . The permeability - increasing and edemagenic effects of histamine , which acts on vessel walls via the H1 recep - tor , are well known ( 208 ) . A classical ultrastructural analysis demonstrated that histamine increased solute permeability in systemic venules in vivo through induction of interendothelial gaps of 0 . 1 to 0 . 8 μ m ( 157 ) . In lung vascular endothelial cells , histamine transiently increased monolayer permeability ( due Figure 16 Intracellular distribution of VE - cadherin in resting en - dothelial cells and in cells challenged with pro - inﬂammatory medi - ator , thrombin . Conﬂuent monolayers of HLMVECs , either untreated or treated with 50 nM human α - thrombin for 30 min , were stained for VE - cadherin ( yellow ) and DNA ( blue ) . Thrombin induces disruption of VE - cadherin - mediated adhesions and formation of gaps between cells . ( Images courtesy of Emily Vandenbroucke ) . Volume 2 , January 2012 465 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology again to interendothelial gap formation ) ; restoration of barrier function was characterized by an initial increase in cell - matrix adhesion followed by an increase in cell - cell adhesion ( 304 ) . Histaminehasbeenshowntomediatecapacitivecalciumentryinvascularendothelialcells ( 304 ) and to reorganize endothe - lial cytoskeleton by a RhoA and Rac1 - dependent mechanism , involving redistribution of cortical actin , rapid appearance of cytoplasmic stress ﬁbers , and formation of interendothe - lial gaps ( 306 ) . Histamine also is known to destabilize en - dothelial adherens junctions by Src - dependent phosphoryla - tion of tyrosine residues in VE - cadherin and β - and γ - catenin ( 6 , 98 , 244 ) . Thus histamine increases vascular permeabil - ity by weakening endothelial junctions and through increased endothelial contractility . VEGF The lung is the principle organ expressing the vascular en - dothelial growth factor gene ( 23 , 182 ) . mRNA analysis fur - ther indicates the alveolar type 2 epithelial cell to be the major pulmonary locus of VEGF synthesis ( 24 , 159 , 274 , 315 ) . Most VEGF in the lung is compartmentalized in alveoli , but overex - pression of VEGF - 165 in distal epithelium releases the medi - ator in sufﬁcient quantities ( within 1 - 10 days of transfection ) to provoke alveolar ﬂooding accompanied by brisk increases in pulmonary capillary permeability to both protein and liquid ( 123 , 124 ) . Many studies on the permeability mechanism of VEGF have been performed in cultured endothelial cells and in superfused mesenteric microvessels , which are amenable to light and ﬂuorescent microscopy and to micro - cannulation to control vascular pressure . VEGF induces almost imme - diate calcium entry in intact venules and transient increases in hydraulic conductivity ( 15 , 16 , 209 , 211 ) . Evidence indi - cates that VEGF has profound effects on actin cytoskeleton in vitro and in vivo . On binding to the receptor tyrosine kinase , VEGFR2 ( ﬂt / KDR ) , VEGF activates MEK - 1 / 2 , PI3K / Akt , eNOS , and several PKC isoforms , including PKC α ( 8 , 19 , 30 , 77 , 130 , 142 , 308 ) . Sun et al . ( 259 ) studied some of the down - stream effectors of VEGFR2 in cultured porcine endothelial cells . VEGF - 165 rapidly ( within 1 min ) increased MLC phos - phorylation and activated RhoA . Stress ﬁber formation and endothelial contraction also began in the same time period . Exoenzyme C3 inhibited all of these events , indicating the im - portance of RhoA . Rho - dependent permeability increase was also observed in isolated porcine venules , reaching a maxi - mum within 5 min of VEGF application and gradually coming to an end about 20 min later ( 259 ) . Y27632 , blocker of ROCK , inhibited the VEGF - induced permeability increase . These re - sults imply the involvement of endothelial actin cytoskeleton in permeability increase downstream of RhoA in vivo . There is also evidence that VEGF activates the tyrosine kinase Src , known to associate with VE cadherin ( 303 ) . Tyrosine phos - phorylation of VE - cadherens and its associated catenins are thought to weaken adherens junctions and increase vascular leak ( 55 ) . VEGF was shown to induce the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues Y685 and Y658 on VE - cadherin ( 55 , 292 ) . Much like thrombin , VEGF also facilitates the barrier recov - ery process through latent activation of the “small GTPases , ” Cdc42 and Rac - 1 ( 33 ) . This observation may help to explain the transient nature of the acute VEGF permeability response , which rapidly recovers to basal levels even in the continued presence of VEGF . Evidence for transient formation of transendothelial gaps or channels induced by VEGF comes from ultrastructual analysis of the permeability pathway . In a series of ele - gant electron - microscopy studies in frog mesenteric venules , Michel and colleagues observed transient openings near the endothelial cell borders that correlated with the measured VEGF - induced permeability increase ( 175 ) . Reconstruction of the openings from serial ultrathin sections demonstrated a transcellular pore passing through endothelial - cell cytoplasm quite close to intact interendothelial junctions ( i . e . , within 1 μ m ) . No true interendothelial gaps were found in mesenteric microvessels . Similar results were obtained in rat mesenteric venules treated with VEGF ( 74 ) . Michel and Neal ( 175 ) advanced the hypothesis that tran - scellular pores are formed through reorganization of cyto - plasmic vesicles and vacuoles . In support of this concept , vacuoles were observed in untreated vessels but they were not organized into transendothelial channels . VEGF induced fusion of vacuoles to both luminal and abluminal membranes forming transcellular channels from a chain of at least two vacuoles . Contraction of the cytoskeleton around the vacuoles was postulated to lead to formation of wider transendothelial pores . Platelet - activating factor PAF ( 1 - O - alkyl - 2 - acetyl - sn - glyceryl - 3 - phosphorylcholine ) is a proinﬂammatory lipid mediator with potent edematogenic actions on the lung . Platelets , neutrophils , lymphocytes , ker - atinocytes , and endothelial cells store and release PAF , which acts in an autocrine fashion ( 172 ) . In endothelial cells , growth factors and cytokines release PAF ( 13 ) . Expression of PAF receptor , PAFR , is regulated by transcription factors NF κ B , SP - 1 , and TGF - β . PAFR is a G - protein - coupled receptor ( 28 , 188 ) , which , in endothelial cells , signals through c Src and through G α q to activate phospholipase C ( PLC β 3 and PLC γ 1 ) downstream ( 13 , 37 ) . Much like many other permeability - increasing agonists , PAF induces tyrosine phosphorylation of VE - cadherin and of its binding partners , the β - and γ - catenins ( 111 ) . PAF induces a reorganization of actin cytoskeleton in endothelial cells ( 36 ) , and respiratory and circulatory distress in intact lungs ( 99 ) . The edemagenic effects of PAF ( < 10 nM ) are well docu - mented in lung preparations . Edema induced by PAF results from increased paracellular leak , which has been supported by functional and ultrastructural approaches in rat and mouse lungs and in nonpulmonary vascular beds . PAF - stimulated mesenteric microvessels accumulated signiﬁcant amounts of ﬂuorescent microspheres ( utilized as leakage markers ) at endothelial - cell junctions ( 120 ) , indicative of paracellular 466 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance leak . Uhlig and colleagues ( 277 ) have shown rapid edema development after a 5 nM bolus of PAF in the perfused rat lung . Lung wet weight increased within minutes of applica - tion of the mediator . As the experiments were conducted at constant perfusion pressure , edema formation could not have been the result of changing vascular pressure and therefore probably occurred without change in vascular surface area . PAF increased microvessel ﬁltration coefﬁcient , K f , indicat - ing that increased liquid permeability was the likely cause of pulmonary edema observed under the same experimental conditions ( 278 , 279 ) . Pharmacologic blockade of MLCK , the molecular motor required for endothelial contraction , reduced the effect of PAF ( 91 ) . Knezevic et al . ( 133 ) inquired into the ultrastructural basis for the permeability - increasing effect of PAF . These investigators treated murine lungs with 100 nM PAF and then rapidly ﬁxed the tissue for electron microscopy . The lung sections obtained showed numerous examples of re - markably large interendothelial gaps in pulmonary capillaries and venules wide enough ( 1 - 2 μ m ) to allow escape of blood cells . Open junctions are normal structures in postcapillary venules but PAF increased their numbers by a factor of 3 . Fingerlike projections extending into the gaps and often in contact with the neighboring cell were identiﬁed as ﬁlopodia , and lamellipodia were observed in some instances , indicating that PAF induced cytoskeletal rearrangement of pulmonary endothelial cells . It is possible that shortly after interendothe - lial gaps form , recovery processes ensue to close the gaps , as observed with other mediators such as thrombin . Physiological antagonists of increased permeability Sphingosine - 1 - phosphate S - 1 - P , a lipid mediator released from activated platelets and also synthesized by endothelial cells , is known for its barrier stabilizing properties , its ability to counteract permeability - increasing effects of agonists , and its barrier - restorative ac - tion through acceleration of junctional reannealing . S - 1 - P is the product of the enzymatic breakdown of the membrane phospholipid , sphingomyelin , to sphingosine , and the subse - quent phosphorylation of sphingosine to S - 1 - P by sphingo - sine kinases ( 103 , 228 ) . Pulmonary endothelial cells express EDG ( endothelial differentiation gene ) receptors - 1 , - 3 , and - 5 ( 44 ) , but the effects of S - 1 - P depend primarily on ligation of EDG - 1 , also known as S1P 1 ( 206 , 265 ) , which couples to heterotrimeric G protein G i , and activates Rac1 - dependent adherens junction assembly and cytoskeletal remodeling in - volving restitution of the cortical actin rim ( 62 , 84 , 119 , 163 , 167 , 247 , 290 ) . Rac1 activation through the Rac1 GEF , tiam - 1 ( 251 ) , is responsible for translocation of the cortico - actin regulatory molecule cortactin to the endothelial cell periphery ( 61 ) . Numerous studies have demonstrated the relevance of S - 1 - P to the cell and organ physiology of the vascular barrier as studied in isolated lung endothelial cells ( 62 , 84 , 148 , 233 , 234 ) and in intact lung microvessels ( 162 , 164 , 206 ) . In cell monolayers , application of S - 1 - P produces a rapid and sus - tained , concentration - dependent increase in transendothelial monolayer resistance ( 61 , 84 , 234 ) , which is indicative of a reduction in the composite interendothelial area of the mono - layer ( 271 ) . In a murine model of LPS - induced lung injury , S - 1 - P had a signiﬁcant protective effect against pulmonary vascular leakage and inﬂammation ( 206 ) . Tauseef et al . ( 265 ) showed that LPS treatment and PAR - 1 - agonist peptide admin - istration in vivo increased mouse lung microvascular perme - ability and caused delayed activation of SPHK1 ( sphingosine kinase - 1 ) that was coupled to the onset of restoration of low permeability . In contrast to wild - type mice , Sphk1 − / − mice showed markedly enhanced pulmonary edema formation in response to LPS and PAR - 1 activation . These ﬁndings indi - cate that in some instances permeability - increasing mediators can become self - limiting by inducing the production of S - 1 - P . Angiopoietin Along with VEGF , angiopoietin is an essential cytokine in normal angiogenesis , which takes place during embryogen - esis . Whereas VEGF is responsible for triggering the early stages of angiogenesis and for causing vascular leak ( 75 ) , angiopoietin becomes important in vessel maturation by an - tagonizing the permeability effects of VEGF , stabilizing the vessel wall , and promoting endothelial barrier function ( 260 ) . Angiopoietin also plays a role in permeability regulation in adult vascular beds . By analogy with S - 1 - P , angiopoietin via the endothelial - speciﬁc , receptor tyrosine kinase , Tie - 2 , is a physiological antagonist of permeability - increasing medi - ators such as thrombin , histamine , bradykinin , and VEGF ( 122 , 268 , 269 ) , and may also inhibit platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule ( PECAM ) localization to adherens junc - tions and neutrophil trafﬁcking through vessel walls induced by inﬂammatory mediators ( 81 ) . Angiopoietin prevented the ability of VEGF to cause the redistribution of VE - cadherin away from adherens junctions , an action that destabilizes the junctions and increases vessel wall permeability ( 87 ) . VE - cadherin redistribution under the inﬂuence of VEGF is effected by Src - dependent phosphorylation of VE - cadherin ( 67 , 86 , 302 ) , which angiopoietin inhibits . Interestingly , an - giopoietin was shown to activate mDia via RhoA , which se - questers Src and thereby prevents Src - dependent VE - cadherin phosphorylation ( 87 ) . Thus , the inhibitory mechanism of an - giopoietin evidently depends on actin cytoskeleton - associated molecules . VEGF - induced cationic current via TRPC chan - nels and resultant calcium entry ( 210 ) are inhibited by an - giopoietin ( 119 ) , which further demonstrates the functional antagonism between VEGF and angiopoietin . Conclusion This article emphasizes the importance of endothelial cy - toskeleton in lung ﬂuid balance . The lung has an extremely low tolerance for edema . Vascular endothelium is vital to Volume 2 , January 2012 467 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology lung’s ability to maintain a strict separation between alveo - lar gas and capillary blood as required for efﬁcient gas ex - change . For prevention of pulmonary edema at normal and even elevated vascular pressures , endothelial barrier integrity and strength become highly signiﬁcant . Moreover , the actin cytoskeleton is intricately involved in every aspect of en - dothelial barrier function . In quiescent endothelium , cortical actin rim is known to stabilize adherens and tight cell - cell junctions and focal adhesion complexes . All permeability - increasing mediators inﬂuence endothelial actin cytoskeleton and its relationship to these fundamental cellular structures . Agonist - induced loss of cortical actin results in cell shape change and weakening of cell - cell adhesion , and in many cases , in formation of interendothelial gaps . The endothelial cell contractile apparatus , which is responsible for appear - ance of interendothelial gaps , derives from actin cytoskeleton through formation of stress ﬁbers . Endogenous permeability - increasing mediators normally increase vascular permeability transiently and within safe limits . Many such agonists cause latent activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 , which target endothe - lial cytoskeleton , increasing cortical actin and reducing actin stress ﬁbers . The process of recovery of endothelial barrier function is facilitated by permeability - decreasing substance S - 1 - P , which restores the cortical actin rim , reduces endothe - lial contractile units , and stimulates junctional reannealing . The permeability of lung microvessels represents a balance between permeability increasing and permeability - decreasing processes . DIDACTIC SUMMARY Lung ﬂuid balance . Lung ﬂuid balance is achieved when there is no net ﬂuid ﬁltration into pulmonary interstitium . As postulated by Starling ( 254 ) , the oncotic pressure difference across vessel walls acts to balance capillary hydrostatic pres - sure and prevent lung edema . Starling’s equation expresses the relationship between ﬂuid ﬁltration per unit of vascu - lar surface area ( J v / S ) and the transmural osmotic pressure , σ ( π c − π i ) , and hydrostatic pressure , P c − P i , across mi - crovessels as follows : J v / S = L p [ ( P c − P i ) − σ ( π c − π i ) ] , The main determinant of ﬂuid ﬁltration in the intact lung is the transmural hydrostatic pressure difference . The inter - stitial pressure P i in pulmonary vascular bed is negative ( 10 ) . The permeability coefﬁcient L p is a constant term . In the lung , the vascular exchange surface ( implicit in the term S ) encompasses all ﬁltering vessels . Liquid - permeability for ex - traalveolar capillaries is 20 times higher than that of alveolar capillaries ( 202 ) . Analysis of the Starling forces in the intact pulmonary circulation leads to the conclusion that there is a continuous net outward ﬂux of ﬂuid in the normal lung that crosses the vessel wall into interstitium and thereby keeps the lung hydrated . The lymphatic system in the lung continuously withdraws excess ﬂuid and protein entering pulmonary inter - stitial space and re - circulates them back to the pulmonary vascular system . The linear ﬂux equation of Kedem and Katchalsky ( 126 ) predicts solute ﬂux across capillary membranes in terms of its hydrostatic and chemical driving forces : J s = ( 1 − σ f ) C avg J v + PS ( C p − C i ) , where J v is microvessel ﬁltration rate , σ f is the solvent drag coefﬁcient , C avg is the average of interstitial ( C i ) and plasma solute concentrations ( C p ) , and PS is the permeability - surface area product . With the aid of the Kedem - Katchalsky equation , albumin leakage through exchange - vessel walls can be ana - lyzed as the sum of a convective term ( before “plus” sign ) and a diffusive term ( after “plus” sign ) . The solute ﬂux of albumin for a given albumin concentration gradient reﬂects barrier integrity . The endothelium is the primary barrier within the mi - crovessel wall for passage of liquid and solutes ( 185 , 221 ) . Transport of solutes occurs by the paracellular ( 174 , 226 , 249 ) or transcellular route ( 63 , 73 , 256 , 275 ) . Liquid and most so - lutes take the paracellular pathway through the pulmonary microvessel wall . The applicability of 2 - pore theory to the vessel wall suggests that there are independent pathways for permeation of small and large solute molecules . The interen - dothelial dimension accommodates solutes less than 3 nm in molecular radius ( 168 ) , roughly corresponding to the postu - lated dimensions of small pores . The total area of interen - dothelial clefts less than 3 nm in diameter can account for the permeability of water , and low molecular weight solutes such as glucose , amino acids , and urea ( 174 ) . The existence of large pores was postulated to account for the limited amount of plasma protein leakage through continuous microvascular endothelia ( 97 , 173 , 201 ) . In lung microvascular endothe - lial cells , the identity of the “large pore” may be a vesicular carrier for macromolecules ( 178 , 217 , 240 , 241 , 270 , 272 ) . The dominant vesicle population consists of plasmalemmal vesicles or caveolae ( 32 , 121 , 168 , 249 ) . The caveola is a ﬂask - shaped structure open to vascular space via a narrow neck region with a radius of about 25 nm ( 199 ) . The neck di - mension accommodates solutes of large M r , such as albumin . Electron microscopy demonstrates a robust vesicular trans - port pathway in pulmonary endothelial cells that extravasates albumin ( 214 - 216 , 219 ) . The vesicles acquire cargo from vas - cular space by endocytosis and deposit their contents into pul - monary interstitium by exocytosis ( 218 ) . Fusion of endothe - lial vesicles to form transendothelial channels may create a transcellular transport pathway ( 38 , 63 , 68 , 73 , 154 , 176 ) . Pulmonary edema occurs when ﬂuid is ﬁltered across pul - monary microvessels faster than lymphatic vessels can re - move it ( 90 ) . Lymph ﬂow normally tracks the ﬁltration rate across vessel walls , thus preserving lung ﬂuid balance ( 158 ) . The Starling equation predicts the two underlying causes of edema . First , increased hydrostatic pressure in the absence of change in liquid permeability can cause “pressure edema . ” 468 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance In addition reduced oncotic pressure difference can precip - itate edema ( at normal hydrostatic pressure ) by increasing net driving pressure . Congestive heart failure ( higher P c ) and hypoalbuminemia ( lower π c ) can cause pulmonary edema . Second , “high - permeability edema” can arise in the complete absence of any change in hydrostatic pressure . The hallmark of permeability edema is protein rich alveolar ﬂuid , which is characteristic of ALI ( 160 ) . Barrier hyperpermeability or outright rupture creates a protein - rich ﬂuid . Lung vascular per - meability can increase as a result of direct injury of endothelial cells , alterations in the dimensions of interendothelial junc - tions ( i . e . , paracellular pathways ) , or a combination of these factors ( 155 ) . Gas exchange is extremely sensitive to thick - ness of alveolar - capillary barrier . The rate of gas diffusion through the alveolo - capillary barrier is inversely proportional to barrier thickness ( 191 ) , which is increased by dilation of interstitium due to edema ﬂuid . Endothelial cytoskeleton . The endothelial cytoskeleton is made up of three intercommunicating networks of actin microﬁlaments , intermediate ﬁlaments , and microtubules ( 41 , 147 , 205 , 213 , 258 ) . The cortical rim , a rigid band of actin in close association with the cell membrane , cell - cell junctions , and cell - matrix contacts , determines the shape of quiescent endothelial cells ( 29 , 61 ) . Cell borders of all adjacent vascular endothelial cells are in close apposition to one another and each endothelial cell makes thousands of junctional contacts with its neighbors . Anchoring mechanisms linking endothe - lial junctional and cell - matrix complexes to actin cytoskele - ton are essential to barrier stability ( 61 , 149 ) . Disruption of actin cytoskeleton with cytochalasin D predictably induced marked increases in vessel wall permeability , whereas phal - lacidin prevented permeability increase because it stabilizes actin ( 207 , 245 ) . Permeability - increasing mediators such as histamine ( 244 ) and VEGF ( vascular endothelial growth fac - tor ) ( 70 ) destabilize protein bridges between actin cytoskele - ton and endothelial junctions , which weakens cell - cell adhe - sion and increases vessel wall permeability . Sheer stresses on vessel walls rapidly modify and reorient the actin cytoskeleton ( 276 ) . Underlying this plasticity is actin’s ability to rapidly polymerize and depolymerize . Actin represents about 10 % of total cellular protein in en - dothelial cells ( 204 ) . In its monomeric ( disassembled ) form , actin is a globular protein ( i . e . , G - actin ) consisting of a mix - ture of the free subunits , β - and γ - actin . In ﬁlamentous actin ( i . e . , F - actin ) , these subunits are built up alternately to gen - erate the actin polymer ( 60 ) . Microﬁlaments composed of F - actin have a diameter of 7 nm . Short - actin microﬁlaments elongate by adding actin monomers to “nucleation sites” composed of a spontaneously - formed actin trimer . Elonga - tion of the chain occurs when ATP - bound G - actin is added to nucleation sites : one end ( designated “plus” or “barbed” ) elongates faster than the other ( referred to as “minus” or “pointed” ) . In the steady state , there is a dynamic equilib - rium between polymerization and depolymerization of F - actin ( 141 , 301 ) . An alternative elongation process results from the severing of pre - existing actin ﬁlaments ; after severing , the described nucleation and elongation processes take place ( 47 , 284 ) . ARP2 / 3 stimulates nucleation of preexisting actin ﬁl - aments ( 177 , 299 ) . Cross - linking between adjacent F - actin ﬁlaments gives added strength and stability to the actin cy - toskeleton . Several actin - associated proteins , such as ﬁlamin and spectrin , cross - link adjacent or orthogonal microﬁlaments ( 116 , 153 , 242 ) . The membrane cytoskeleton is a submembranous scaf - fold , containing β - spectrin ( 213 ) , which associates with short F - actin chains ( 51 ) . F - actin and several spectrin - associated adaptor proteins ( e . g . , ankrin , protein 4 . 1 , adducin and α - catenin ) link spectrin to transmembrane proteins . The close association of plasmalemma with membrane cytoskeleton is an important determinant of distensibility and other mechan - ical properties of the endothelial cell membrane ( 213 ) . Subjacent to the membrane cytoskeleton is the cortical actin rim , which is stabilized by several F - actin - associated cross - linking ( spectrin , ﬁlamin ) and binding molecules that regulate actin polymerization ( e . g . , cortactin , gelsolin , coﬁlin , ezrin - radixin - moesin , heat shock protein 27 ) ( 18 , 21 , 117 , 143 , 177 , 179 , 196 , 250 , 263 , 298 , 300 , 313 , 314 ) . Besides regulating cell shape in unstimulated endothelial cells , the cortical actin rim , in conjunction with cell - cell adhesion com - plexes , maintains juxtaposition of endothelial cell borders by generating centrifugal force ( in the outward direction ) , and is a key cytoskeletal element in endothelial barrier recov - ery from the effects of permeability - increasing agents . The barrier - recovery process includes reassembly of the cortical actin rim . Actin - based molecular motors such as myosin II ( 59 ) associate with the actin cytoskeleton and generate force by “sliding along” stress ﬁbers that consist of short , nonbranching microﬁlaments crosslinked by α - actinin and other actin - associated proteins ( 107 ) . Under the inﬂuence of permeability - increasing agonists , the cortical actin rim rapidly disassembles , thereby causing loss of centrifugal ten - sion that produces immediate retraction of cell borders . Force generated by stress ﬁbers in the cytoplasm ampliﬁes the rate and extent of retraction , thus widening interendothelial gaps ( 204 ) . The ends of the actin stress ﬁbers bind to adherens junctions , tight junctions , or focal ( cell - to - matrix ) adhesions via chains of intermediary proteins ( 61 , 107 ) . The stress ﬁbers thus “focus” contractile force to transmembrane proteins in cell - cell and cell - matrix contacts . Microtubules are hollow , cylindrical structures of 25 nm in diameter and 0 . 2 to 25 μ m in length ( 291 ) , radiating from a paranuclear MTOC . Microtulular cytoskeleton has been ar - gued to provide cells with a defense against compression forces and to counterbalance actinomyosin - mediated con - tractility in endothelial cells ( 114 , 115 ) . Each individual mi - crotubule consists of a circumferential , parallel array of 13 tubulin polymers , which in turn , are assembled from alter - nating heterodimers of α - and β - tubulin ( 291 ) . Microtubule nucleation begins in the MTOC . The nucleation complex con - tains γ - tubulin and other associated proteins ( 184 ) which act as a scaffold for α - and β - tubulin . Microtubule elongation Volume 2 , January 2012 469 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology proceeds in the plus direction by the addition of α - tubulin and ATP - bound β - tubulin monomers . The primary role of the microtubule network is for support , transport , and positioning of intracellular organelles . Tubulin - based molecular motors of the kinesin family carry cargos , such as mitochondria or vesi - cles , toward the plus end of microtubules . By contrast , the dynein family of molecular motors carries cargo toward mi - nus ends of microtubules , that is , in the direction of MTOC . Microtubules may have an indirect role in maintenance of the endothelial barrier and in elevation of barrier permeability secondary to the effects of inﬂammatory mediators . First , mi - crotubules bind certain GEFs ( guanine nucleotide exchange factors ) , such as GEF - H1 , that speciﬁcally activate RhoA and stimulate stress ﬁber formation ( 25 ) . Second , LIMK1 is a tubulin - associated enzyme capable of degrading the cortical actin rim and redistributing actin into stress ﬁbers ( 92 ) . The microtubule cytoskeleton binds LIMK1 ( 94 ) . Permeability - increasing agents release LIMK from the microtubule net - work into cytosol , where the kinase is free to phosphorylate and inactivate coﬁlin . Inhibition of coﬁlin suppresses actin degradation , thus causing accumulation of actin polymers and appearance of cytoplasmic stress ﬁbers at the expense of cortical actin . Genetic deletion of LIMK1 reduces basal liq - uid permeability in the intact , isolated lung preparation . The LIMK - deﬁcient mouse - lung preparation also demonstrates diminished effects of the permeability - increasing PAR - 1 ag - onist TFLLRNPNDK on K f ( 92 ) . Endothelial cell - to - cell junctions . Firm cell - cell adhe - sion is an attribute of the quiescent endothelial barrier . Two important junctional complexes responsible for adhesion be - tween adjacent endothelial cell borders are adherens and tight junctions . Ultrastructurally , endothelial adherens junctions are recognized as areas of closely apposed endothelial mem - branes ( 289 , 306 ) . Adherens junctions play a pivotal role in regulation of vessel wall permeability . The chief struc - tural protein in adherens junctions is VE - cadherin ( 57 ) , an endothelial - speciﬁc ( 54 , 95 ) membrane spanning protein con - sisting of extracellular , juxtamembrane , and carboxy - terminal domains . The EXD mediates the calcium - dependent homo - typic binding of VE - cadherin molecules to those extending from the neighboring cell membrane ( 145 , 152 ) . VE - cadherin must be anchored to the actin cytoskeleton to create stable adherens junctions . Actin polymerization is necessary for the biogenesis of adherens junctions ( 113 , 137 , 287 ) . Cytoskele - tal anchoring is the main function of the carboxy - terminal region of VE - cadherin , which binds both β - and γ - catenin ( i . e . , plakoglobin ) . β - and γ - Catenins bind ( in a competi - tive manner ) to α - catenin , which , in turn , binds to F - actin ( 20 , 288 ) . α - Catenin associates with additional actin - binding proteins ( actinin and vinculin ) that reinforce the anchoring of adherens junctions to cytoskeleton ( 136 , 193 , 297 ) . VE - cadherin’s juxtamembrane domain binds the important reg - ulatory molecule , p120 - catenin , a src substrate regulating the stability of adherens junctions and possibly internaliza - tion of junctional proteins by clathrin - coated vesicles ( 3 , 4 , 42 , 267 , 287 , 312 ) . Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues of VE - cadherin , β - catenin , plakoglobin , and p120 disorganizes and weakens adherens junctions ( 55 ) . Evidence is clear that the homotypic binding between VE - cadherin molecules has physiologic relevance in the intact lung . Disruption of pre - existing actin microﬁlaments by C2 toxin ( 69 ) or cytocha - lasin ( 295 , 296 ) provoked interendothelial gaps and markedly increased endothelial permeability in intact microvessels , be - cause stable interendothelial junctions cannot form without the ability to associate with actin cytoskeleton ( 39 ) . Endothelial tight junctions are either distinct apical struc - tures or overlap with adherens junctions ( 56 ) . The stability of endothelial tight junctions may derive to some extent from the organization of adherens junctions ( 17 ) . In freeze frac - ture , endothelial tight junctions appeared to consist of rows of intramembranous strands contacting other similar strands at points on the apposed cell ( 238 ) . The organization of en - dothelial tight junctions varies with the pulmonary vascu - lar segment ( 238 ) . Tight junctions are better organized and more numerous in small and large arteries and in pulmonary capillaries than in venules , where there are fewer tight junc - tion particles and the junctional strands have discontinuities ( 129 ) . There are three types of membrane spanning molecules in tight junctions , that is , occludins , claudins , and JAM’s . Oc - cludin is localized strictly in tight junctions in epithelial and endothelial cells ( 5 , 78 ) . Nonneural endothelial cells express occludin at much lower levels and in a less continuous fashion than brain endothelial cells ( 102 ) . Occludin acquires adhesive properties in the presence of ZO - 1 ( zonula occludens - 1 ) ex - pressed on the cell surface ( 79 ) . The cytoplasmic tail region of occludin is known to associate with ZO - 1 , which binds with α - catenin and actin - polymerizing proteins such as spec - trin , thereby anchoring the tight junction to actin cytoskeleton ( 186 , 237 ) . Genetic deletion of occludin produced no perme - ability phenotype in endothelial cells ( 232 ) . Tight junctions between neighboring cells can also be generated by means of the claudins comprising a 24 member family of membrane - spanning adhesion molecules . They are the major transmembrane component of tight junctions in endothelial cells ( 273 ) . Claudin - 5 is the endothelial - speciﬁc isoform ( 183 , 194 ) . Claudin - 5 expression in endothelial cells is dependent on VE - cadherin expression ( 262 ) , potentially explaining the stabilizing effect of adherens junctions on tight junctions . JAM is another membrane - spanning protein that can form tight junctions ( 56 , 168 ) . JAM molecules in solution bind homophilically via their EXDs . Overexpression of JAM in cells has the capacity to reduce paracellular ﬂuid convection . There are three species of JAM molecules , JAM 1 - 3 . JAM 2 and 3 are endothelial - speciﬁc proteins ; JAM - 2 expression is copious in venular endothelium ( 11 , 12 ) . The membrane - spanning proteins claudin - 1 and - 5 and the JAM’s in endothelial tight junctions also associate with an array of intracellular binding partners that link them to endothelial cytoskeleton ( 17 ) . The cytoplasmic - tail domains ( carboxy terminus ) of these transmembrane proteins recruit 470 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance ZO - 1 that binds α - catenin , which in turn associates with F - actin . Spectrin , the F - actin - crosslinking molecule , may also bind to α - catenin . ZO - 1 may have the capacity to stimulate actin polymerization by recruiting substances such as VASP , which builds up the cortical actin rim ( 168 ) . Genetic deletion ( “knockout” ) of claudin - 5 the principle membrane - spanning protein in endothelial tight junctions did not produce a permeability phenotype in lung vessels and other nonneural vasculatures ( 168 ) . A modest increase of ves - sel wall permeability to low molecular weight solutes has been described in brains of claudin - 5 knockout mice ( 194 ) . Focal adhesion complexes . “Focal adhesions” have an important function in regulating barrier permeability and in maintaining nonproliferative endothelial phenotype ( 76 ) . The integrins in endothelial focal adhesions recognize and bind to ECM protein constituents , such as ﬁbronectin , ﬁbrinogen , vitronectin , and collagen . All integrins are heterodimers con - taining an α - and β - subunit each named with a numerical subscript ( 2 , 43 , 46 , 52 , 53 , 165 , 264 ) . Endothelial cells ex - press α - subunits 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , or V , and β - subunits 1 , 3 , or 5 . The α - and β - subunits are all type 1 membrane - spanning gly - coproteins ( 112 , 227 ) . The integrins recognize ECM proteins that have the Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) sequence ( 43 , 46 , 144 , 146 , 253 ) , and are linked internally to the actin cytoskeleton by protein bridges . Numerous actin - binding proteins , including talin , ﬁlamin , vinculin , paxillin , zyxin , tensin , and α - actinin , associate with cytoplasmic aspect of the focal adhesion com - plex ( 89 , 213 ) . α - Actinin directly links cytoplasmic tail of integrin β - subunits to actin cytoskeleton . In addition to actin - binding proteins , focal adhesion complexes also contain the nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase , FAK . Integrin activa - tion induced by endothelial cell adhesion to ECM proteins or by several permeability - increasing agonists ( thrombin , his - tamine , VEGF ) ( 1 , 170 , 236 , 309 ) leads to tyrosine phos - phorylation of FAK , which consequently increases its kinase activity and recruits focal adhesions in the endothelial cells . Inﬂammatory mediators such as thrombin cause a redistribu - tion of focal adhesion complexes with strengthened adherence to ECM ( 170 ) . Thus , FAK may strengthen and stabilize at - tachment of endothelial cell to ECM . Competitive peptide inhibitor of RDG sequence - integrin binding ( i . e . , GRGDS ) resulted in endothelial cell - shape change and increased en - dothelial liquid permeability ( 50 , 221 , 229 , 257 ) . Antibodies against the integrin α 5 β 1 ( the ﬁbronectin receptor ) inhibited endothelial cell adhesion to ECM and thus increased mono - layer protein permeability ( 53 , 144 ) . Importantly , these ob - servations were conﬁrmed in intact venules , supporting the physiological signiﬁcance of focal adhesions ( 310 ) . Rho GTPases . Many of the permeability - increasing ag - onists produce marked changes in endothelial cytoskeleton by means of a class of signaling molecules known as Rho GTPases . These molecules interact with actin cytoskeleton to reorganize actin in the cytoplasm and along the cell periph - ery . Rho GTPases belong to the Ras superfamily of “small GTPases . ” The small GTPase RhoA is responsible for stimu - lating formation of actin - stress ﬁbers and increasing contrac - tion in endothelial cells . Permeability - increasing substances that couple via G - protein subunit G α q increase intracellu - lar calcium and activate phospholipase C , thereby generat - ing IP3 and diacylglycerol . Calcium and diacylglycerol ac - tivate protein kinase Calpha ( PKCa ) , whose substrates in - clude p115 - Rho - GEF ( guanine nucleotide exchange factor ) and Rho - GDI ( GDP dissociation inhibitor ) . These regulatory substances , when phosphorylated , stimulate the dissociation of GDP from , and binding of GTP to RhoA ( 168 ) . GTP - bound RhoA in turn activates its downstream effectors mDia ( mam - malian diaphanous analog ) and Rho kinase ( ROCK ) ( 213 ) . Among ROCK’s substrates are MLC phosphatase , and actin - regulatory molecules such as LIMK . ROCK inhibits MLC phosphatase in endothelial cells , promoting MLC phosphory - lation , which thus increases actinomyosin - based contractility . LIMK by inhibiting coﬁlin , stimulates actin stress ﬁber for - mation ( 156 ) . RhoA - induced inhibition of the actin - binding protein gelsolin suppresses F - actin degradation and potently stimulates actin stress - ﬁber formation . Genetic deletion of gelsolin in mice causes marked increase in pulmonary mi - crovascular permeability ( 18 ) implying that Rho - induced in - hibition of gelsolin should augment vessel - wall permeability in vivo . There is clear evidence for the physiological importance of RhoA activity in regulating microvascular permeability ( 101 ) . In cultured pulmonary vascular endothelial cells , clostridium botulinum toxin C3 , a speciﬁc RhoA inhibitor , abrogated the effects of thrombin on MLC phosphorylation , stress ﬁber for - mation , and TER ( 166 ) . In the in vivo setting , genetic deletion of RhoGDI - 1 increased the activity of RhoA ( but not of Rac1 or Cdc42 ) in murine lungs ( 93 ) . Basal liquid permeability rose signiﬁcantly in isolated lung preparations of the knockout mouse . On examination by electron microscopy , open interen - dothelial junctions that are absent in normal pulmonary cap - illaries were found in lung capillaries of RhoGDI - null mice ( 93 ) . This study points to the causal relationship between in - creased RhoA activity and elevated paracellular permeability in lung capillaries in vivo . By contrast with RhoA , some members of the Rho GTPase family have a role in the reannealing of open endothe - lial cell - cell junctions induced by inﬂammatory mediators . The recovery process probably begins soon after interendothe - lial gaps form . Rac and Cdc42 are thought to orchestrate reorganization of actin cytoskeleton during recovery of the endothelial barrier ( 31 ) . Free endothelial - cell borders man - ifest several forms of motility driven by actin polymeriza - tion . Motile structures observed in vitro include membrane rufﬂes , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia , all reﬂecting actin reor - ganization ( 224 ) . Rac is the principle regulator of membrane rufﬂing in endothelial cells ( 224 ) . Cdc42 and Rac regulate the growth of endothelial lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia , plasma - membrane protrusions formed by dynamic actin polymer - ization and branching . Cdc42 recruits cortactin and WASP , both of which are activators of ARP2 / 3 , to the cell periph - ery , resulting in increased cortical actin polymerization ( 131 ) . Elongation of F - actin polymer exerts force on the plasma Volume 2 , January 2012 471 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology membrane that subsequently deforms into broad , convex lamellipodia . Lamellipodia contain branched actin and have tiny microspikes on their surface , which are formed from short unbranched actin bundles ( 252 ) . Growth of lamellipodia oc - curs by extension of the plus ends of actin microﬁlaments . Rac controls actin polymerization during lamellipodium forma - tion by recruiting WASP - family verprolin - homologous pro - tein ( WAVE ) complex , another activator of ARP2 / 3 ( 224 ) . Microspikes on lamellipodia that grow beyond the leading front become ﬁlopodia ( 252 ) . The actin - rich ﬁlopodia sense the local environment and adjacent cells , and are thought to play a role in re - establishing cell - cell adhesive contact ( 200 ) . Filopodia and lamellipodia protrude into interendothelial gaps induced by inﬂammatory mediators and may participate in re - assembly of endothelial junctions in vivo ( 161 ) . Barrier recovery from permeability - increasing agonists is thought to occur after cessation of the contractile state of endothelial cells ( 31 ) . Evidence suggests that activation of Cdc42 has a role in the suppression of contractility both in vitro and in vivo ( 222 ) . Some investigators envision a di - rect role of Cdc42 in the reannealing of endothelial cell - cell junctions ( 139 ) . Dissociation of homotypic binding of VE - cadherin activates cdc42 and could thereby trigger the barrier recovery process ( 31 ) . Activation of Rac1 recruited actin - binding proteins , cortactin and VASP , to the junction - associated actin band , which accelerated actin polymerization at cell junctions , increased the mechanical strength of VE - cadheren - mediated contacts ( as studied by laser tweezers ) , and improved endothelial barrier function ( 294 ) . Importantly , on single , rat mesenteric microvessels cannulated for L p mea - surements , Rac activation had no effect on basal permeability values , but suppressed the permeability - increasing effects of PAF ( 294 ) . Agonist regulation of endothelial barrier function . The common permeability - increasing agonists ( e . g . , thrombin , VEGF , histamine , and PAF ) elevate lung vascular permeabil - ity by two basic mechanisms : through phosphorylation of adherens - junction protein constituents , which weakens and destabilizes the junctions , and through increased endothelial contractility , which encourages formation of interendothelial gaps . Permeability enhancement requires reorganization of endothelial actin cytoskeleton . Profound alterations in cell cytoskeleton are evident by the ﬂattened geometry of quies - cent endothelial cells that becomes rounded in active cells . Transition from the quiescent to active endothelial pheno - type entails a redistribution of polymerized actin from the cell periphery to numerous actin stress ﬁbers in the cyto - plasm . In association with myosin , the stress ﬁbers become contractile units that exert centripetal force on interendothe - lial junctions , thereby increasing vascular permeability . By contrast , permeability - diminishing agents such as S - 1 - P and angiopoietin tend to reverse the high - permeability state of the lining endothelial cells through effects on the actin cytoskele - ton , which redistributes actin from stress ﬁbers back to the cell periphery and restores the morphology of the quiescent endothelium . References 1 . Abedi H , Zachary I . Vascular endothelial growth factor stimulates ty - rosine phosphorylation and recruitment to new focal adhesions of focal adhesion kinase and paxillin in endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 272 : 15442 - 15451 , 1997 . 2 . Albelda SM , Daise M , Levine EM , Buck CA . Identiﬁcation and char - acterization of cell - substratum adhesion receptors on cultured human endothelial cells . J Clin Invest 83 : 1992 - 2002 , 1989 . 3 . Anastasiadis PZ , Reynolds AB . The p120 catenin family : Complex roles in adhesion , signaling and cancer . J Cell Sci 113 ( Pt 8 ) : 1319 - 1334 , 2000 . 4 . Anastasiadis PZ , Reynolds AB . Regulation of Rho GTPases by p120 - catenin . Curr Opin Cell Biol 13 : 604 - 610 , 2001 . 5 . Ando - Akatsuka Y , Saitou M , Hirase T , Kishi M , Sakakibara A , Itoh M , Yonemura S , Furuse M , Tsukita S . Interspecies diversity of the occludin sequence : cDNA cloning of human , mouse , dog , and rat - kangaroo homologues . J Cell Biol 133 : 43 - 47 , 1996 . 6 . AndriopoulouP , NavarroP , ZanettiA , LampugnaniMG , DejanaE . His - tamine induces tyrosine phosphorylation of endothelial cell - to - cell ad - herens junctions . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 19 : 2286 - 2297 , 1999 . 7 . Anglade D , Corboz M , Menaouar A , Parker JC , Sanou S , Bayat S , Benchetrit G , Grimbert FA . Blood ﬂow vs . venous pressure effects on ﬁltration coefﬁcient in oleic acid - injured lung . J Appl Physiol 84 : 1011 - 1023 , 1998 . 8 . Aramoto H , Breslin JW , Pappas PJ , Hobson RW , 2nd , Duran WN . Vas - cular endothelial growth factor stimulates differential signaling path - ways in in vivo microcirculation . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 287 : H1590 - H1598 , 2004 . 9 . ArceFT , WhitlockJL , BirukovaAA , BirukovKG , ArnsdorfMF , LalR , Garcia JG , Dudek SM . Regulation of the micromechanical properties of pulmonary endothelium by S1P and thrombin : Role of cortactin . Biophys J 95 : 886 - 894 , 2008 . 10 . Aukland K , Reed RK . Interstitial - lymphatic mechanisms in the control of extracellular ﬂuid volume . Physiol Rev 73 : 1 - 78 , 1993 . 11 . Aurrand - Lions M , Johnson - Leger C , Wong C , Du Pasquier L , Imhof BA . Heterogeneity of endothelial junctions is reﬂected by differential expression and speciﬁc subcellular localization of the three JAM family members . Blood 98 : 3699 - 3707 , 2001 . 12 . Aurrand - Lions MA , Duncan L , Du Pasquier L , Imhof BA . Cloning of JAM - 2andJAM - 3 : Anemergingjunctionaladhesionmolecularfamily ? Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 251 : 91 - 98 , 2000 . 13 . Axelrad TW , Deo DD , Ottino P , Van Kirk J , Bazan NG , Bazan HE , Hunt JD . Platelet - activating factor ( PAF ) induces activation of matrix metalloproteinase 2 activity and vascular endothelial cell invasion and migration . Faseb J 18 : 568 - 570 , 2004 . 14 . Bananis E , Murray JW , Stockert RJ , Satir P , Wolkoff AW . Microtubule and motor - dependent endocytic vesicle sorting in vitro . J Cell Biol 151 : 179 - 186 , 2000 . 15 . Bates DO , Curry FE . Vascular endothelial growth factor increases hy - draulic conductivity of isolated perfused microvessels . Am J Physiol 271 : H2520 - H2528 , 1996 . 16 . Bates DO , Curry FE . Vascular endothelial growth factor increases mi - crovascular permeability via a Ca ( 2 + ) - dependent pathway . Am J Phys - iol 273 : H687 - H694 , 1997 . 17 . Bazzoni G , Dejana E . Endothelial cell - to - cell junctions : Molecular or - ganization and role in vascular homeostasis . Physiol Rev 84 : 869 - 901 , 2004 . 18 . Becker PM , Kazi AA , Wadgaonkar R , Pearse DB , Kwiatkowski D , Garcia JG . Pulmonary vascular permeability and ischemic injury in gelsolin - deﬁcient mice . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 28 : 478 - 484 , 2003 . 19 . Becker PM , Verin AD , Booth MA , Liu F , Birukova A , Garcia JG . Differential regulation of diverse physiological responses to VEGF in pulmonary endothelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 281 : L1500 - L1511 , 2001 . 20 . Ben - Ze’ev A , Geiger B . Differential molecular interactions of beta - catenin and plakoglobin in adhesion , signaling and cancer . Curr Opin Cell Biol 10 : 629 - 639 , 1998 . 21 . Ben - Ze’ev A , Shtutman M , Zhurinsky J . The integration of cell adhe - sion with gene expression : The role of beta - catenin . Exp Cell Res 261 : 75 - 82 , 2000 . 22 . Bernard O . Lim kinases , regulators of actin dynamics . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 39 : 1071 - 1076 , 2007 . 23 . Berse B , Brown LF , Van de Water L , Dvorak HF , Senger DR . Vas - cular permeability factor ( vascular endothelial growth factor ) gene is expressed differentially in normal tissues , macrophages , and tumors . Mol Biol Cell 3 : 211 - 220 , 1992 . 24 . Bhatt AJ , Amin SB , Chess PR , Watkins RH , Maniscalco WM . Expres - sion of vascular endothelial growth factor and Flk - 1 in developing and glucocorticoid - treated mouse lung . Pediatr Res 47 : 606 - 613 , 2000 . 25 . Birkenfeld J , Nalbant P , Yoon SH , Bokoch GM . Cellular functions of GEF - H1 , amicrotubule - regulatedRho - GEF : IsalteredGEF - H1activity 472 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance acrucialdeterminantofdiseasepathogenesis ? TrendsCellBiol 18 : 210 - 219 , 2008 . 26 . BirukovaAA , BirukovKG , SmurovaK , AdyshevD , KaibuchiK , Alieva I , GarciaJG , VerinAD . Novelroleofmicrotubulesinthrombin - induced endothelial barrier dysfunction . Faseb J 18 : 1879 - 1890 , 2004 . 27 . Birukova AA , Smurova K , Birukov KG , Usatyuk P , Liu F , Kaibuchi K , Ricks - CordA , NatarajanV , AlievaI , GarciaJG , VerinAD . Microtubule disassembly induces cytoskeletal remodeling and lung vascular barrier dysfunction : Role of Rho - dependent mechanisms . J Cell Physiol 201 : 55 - 70 , 2004 . 28 . Bito H , Honda Z , Nakamura M , Shimizu T . Cloning , expression and tissue distribution of rat platelet - activating - factor - receptor cDNA . Eur J Biochem 221 : 211 - 218 , 1994 . 29 . Bogatcheva NV , Verin AD . The role of cytoskeleton in the regulation of vascular endothelial barrier function . Microvasc Res 76 : 202 - 207 , 2008 . 30 . Breslin JW , Pappas PJ , Cerveira JJ , Hobson RW , 2nd , Duran WN . VEGF increases endothelial permeability by separate signaling path - ways involving ERK - 1 / 2 and nitric oxide . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 284 : H92 - H100 , 2003 . 31 . Broman MT , Kouklis P , Gao X , Ramchandran R , Neamu RF , Min - shall RD , Malik AB . Cdc42 regulates adherens junction stability and endothelial permeability by inducing alpha - catenin interaction with the vascular endothelial cadherin complex . Circ Res 98 : 73 - 80 , 2006 . 32 . Bruns RR , Palade GE . Studies on blood capillaries . I . General organi - zation of blood capillaries in muscle . J Cell Biol 37 : 244 - 276 , 1968 . 33 . Bryan BA , D’Amore PA . What tangled webs they weave : Rho - GTPase control of angiogenesis . Cell Mol Life Sci 64 : 2053 - 2065 , 2007 . 34 . Burns AR , Walker DC , Brown ES , Thurmon LT , Bowden RA , Keese CR , Simon SI , Entman ML , Smith CW . Neutrophil transendothelial migration is independent of tight junctions and occurs preferentially at tricellular corners . J Immunol 159 : 2893 - 2903 , 1997 . 35 . Burridge K , Fath K , Kelly T , Nuckolls G , Turner C . Focal adhesions : Transmembrane junctions between the extracellular matrix and the cy - toskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Biol 4 : 487 - 525 , 1988 . 36 . Bussolino F , Camussi G , Aglietta M , Braquet P , Bosia A , Pescarmona G , Sanavio F , D’Urso N , Marchisio PC . Human endothelial cells are target for platelet - activating factor . I . Platelet - activating factor induces changes in cytoskeleton structures . J Immunol 139 : 2439 - 2446 , 1987 . 37 . BussolinoF , SilvagnoF , GarbarinoG , CostamagnaC , SanavioF , Arese M , Soldi R , Aglietta M , Pescarmona G , Camussi G , and et al . Human endothelial cells are targets for platelet - activating factor ( PAF ) . Acti - vation of alpha and beta protein kinase C isozymes in endothelial cells stimulated by PAF . J Biol Chem 269 : 2877 - 2886 , 1994 . 38 . Carman CV , Sage PT , Sciuto TE , de la Fuente MA , Geha RS , Ochs HD , Dvorak HF , Dvorak AM , Springer TA . Transcellular diapedesis is initiated by invasive podosomes . Immunity 26 : 784 - 797 , 2007 . 39 . Carmeliet P , Lampugnani MG , Moons L , Breviario F , Compernolle V , Bono F , Balconi G , Spagnuolo R , Oosthuyse B , Dewerchin M , Zanetti A , Angellilo A , Mattot V , Nuyens D , Lutgens E , Clotman F , de Ruiter MC , Gittenberger - de Groot A , Poelmann R , Lupu F , Herbert JM , Collen D , Dejana E . Targeted deﬁciency or cytosolic truncation of the VE - cadherin gene in mice impairs VEGF - mediated endothelial survival and angiogenesis . Cell 98 : 147 - 157 , 1999 . 40 . Cattelino A , Liebner S , Gallini R , Zanetti A , Balconi G , Corsi A , Bianco P , Wolburg H , Moore R , Oreda B , Kemler R , Dejana E . The conditional inactivation of the beta - catenin gene in endothelial cells causes a defective vascular pattern and increased vascular fragility . J Cell Biol 162 : 1111 - 1122 , 2003 . 41 . Chang L , Goldman RD . Intermediate ﬁlaments mediate cytoskeletal crosstalk . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 : 601 - 613 , 2004 . 42 . Chen X , Kojima S , Borisy GG , Green KJ . p120 catenin associates with kinesin and facilitates the transport of cadherin - catenin complexes to intercellular junctions . J Cell Biol 163 : 547 - 557 , 2003 . 43 . ChengYF , KramerRH . Humanmicrovascularendothelialcellsexpress integrin - related complexes that mediate adhesion to the extracellular matrix . J Cell Physiol 139 : 275 - 286 , 1989 . 44 . Chun J , Goetzl EJ , Hla T , Igarashi Y , Lynch KR , Moolenaar W , Pyne S , Tigyi G . International Union of Pharmacology . XXXIV . Lysophos - pholipid receptor nomenclature . Pharmacol Rev 54 : 265 - 269 , 2002 . 45 . Ciofﬁ DL , Wu S , Alexeyev M , Goodman SR , Zhu MX , Stevens T . Ac - tivation of the endothelial store - operated ISOC Ca2 + channel requires interaction of protein 4 . 1 with TRPC4 . Circ Res 97 : 1164 - 1172 , 2005 . 46 . Conforti G , Zanetti A , Colella S , Abbadini M , Marchisio PC , Pytela R , Giancotti F , Tarone G , Languino LR , Dejana E . Interaction of ﬁ - bronectin with cultured human endothelial cells : Characterization of the speciﬁc receptor . Blood 73 : 1576 - 1585 , 1989 . 47 . Cooper JA , Schafer DA . Control of actin assembly and disassembly at ﬁlament ends . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 97 - 103 , 2000 . 48 . Corada M , Liao F , Lindgren M , Lampugnani MG , Breviario F , Frank R , Muller WA , Hicklin DJ , Bohlen P , Dejana E . Monoclonal antibodies directed to different regions of vascular endothelial cadherin extracel - lular domain affect adhesion and clustering of the protein and modulate endothelial permeability . Blood 97 : 1679 - 1684 , 2001 . 49 . Corada M , Mariotti M , Thurston G , Smith K , Kunkel R , Brockhaus M , LampugnaniMG , Martin - PaduraI , StoppacciaroA , RucoL , McDonald DM , Ward PA , Dejana E . Vascular endothelial - cadherin is an important determinant of microvascular integrity in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 9815 - 9820 , 1999 . 50 . Curtis TM , McKeown - Longo PJ , Vincent PA , Homan SM , Wheatley EM , Saba TM . Fibronectin attenuates increased endothelial monolayer permeability after RGD peptide , anti - alpha 5 beta 1 , or TNF - alpha exposure . Am J Physiol 269 : L248 - L260 , 1995 . 51 . De Matteis MA , Morrow JS . Spectrin tethers and mesh in the biosyn - thetic pathway . J Cell Sci 113 ( Pt 13 ) : 2331 - 2343 , 2000 . 52 . Deﬁlippi P , van Hinsbergh V , Bertolotto A , Rossino P , Silengo L , Tarone G . Differential distribution and modulation of expression of alpha 1 / beta 1 integrin on human endothelial cells . J Cell Biol 114 : 855 - 863 , 1991 . 53 . Dejana E , Colella S , Conforti G , Abbadini M , Gaboli M , Marchisio PC . Fibronectin and vitronectin regulate the organization of their respective Arg - Gly - Asp adhesion receptors in cultured human endothelial cells . J Cell Biol 107 : 1215 - 1223 , 1988 . 54 . Dejana E , Corada M , Lampugnani MG . Endothelial cell - to - cell junc - tions . Faseb J 9 : 910 - 918 , 1995 . 55 . Dejana E , Orsenigo F , LampugnaniMG . The roleof adherensjunctions and VE - cadherin in the control of vascular permeability . J Cell Sci 121 : 2115 - 2122 , 2008 . 56 . Dejana E , Orsenigo F , Molendini C , Baluk P , McDonald DM . Orga - nization and signaling of endothelial cell - to - cell junctions in various regions of the blood and lymphatic vascular trees . Cell Tissue Res 335 : 17 - 25 , 2009 . 57 . Dejana E , Spagnuolo R , Bazzoni G . Interendothelial junctions and their role in the control of angiogenesis , vascular permeability and leukocyte transmigration . Thromb Haemost 86 : 308 - 315 , 2001 . 58 . Del Vecchio PJ , Siﬂinger - Birnboim A , Belloni PN , Holleran LA , Lum H , Malik AB . Culture andcharacterization ofpulmonarymicrovascular endothelial cells . In Vitro Cell Dev Biol 28A : 711 - 715 , 1992 . 59 . Dickinson RB . Models for actin polymerization motors . J Math Biol 58 : 81 - 103 , 2009 . 60 . dos Remedios CG , Chhabra D , Kekic M , Dedova IV , Tsubakihara M , Berry DA , Nosworthy NJ . Actin binding proteins : Regulation of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol Rev 83 : 433 - 473 , 2003 . 61 . Dudek SM , Garcia JG . Cytoskeletal regulation of pulmonary vascular permeability . J Appl Physiol 91 : 1487 - 1500 , 2001 . 62 . Dudek SM , Jacobson JR , Chiang ET , Birukov KG , Wang P , Zhan X , Garcia JG . Pulmonary endothelial cell barrier enhancement by sphin - gosine 1 - phosphate : Roles for cortactin and myosin light chain kinase . J Biol Chem 279 : 24692 - 24700 , 2004 . 63 . Dvorak AM , Kohn S , Morgan ES , Fox P , Nagy JA , Dvorak HF . The vesiculo - vacuolarorganelle ( VVO ) : Adistinctendothelialcellstructure thatprovidesatranscellularpathwayformacromolecularextravasation . J Leukoc Biol 59 : 100 - 115 , 1996 . 64 . EffrosRM . Osmotic extractionofhypotonicﬂuidfromthelungs . JClin Invest 54 : 935 - 947 , 1974 . 65 . Effros RM , Parker JC . Pulmonary vascular heterogeneity and the Star - ling hypothesis . Microvasc Res 78 : 71 - 77 , 2009 . 66 . Effros RM , Schapira R , Presberg K , Ozker K , Jacobs ER . Stop - ﬂow studies of solute uptake in rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 85 : 986 - 992 , 1998 . 67 . Eliceiri BP , Paul R , Schwartzberg PL , Hood JD , Leng J , Cheresh DA . Selective requirement for Src kinases during VEGF - induced angiogen - esis and vascular permeability . Mol Cell 4 : 915 - 924 , 1999 . 68 . Engelhardt B , Wolburg H . Mini - review : Transendothelial migration of leukocytes : Through the front door or around the side of the house ? Eur J Immunol 34 : 2955 - 2963 , 2004 . 69 . ErmertL , BrucknerH , WalmrathD , GrimmingerF , AktoriesK , Suttorp N , Duncker HR , Seeger W . Role of endothelial cytoskeleton in high - permeability edema due to botulinum C2 toxin in perfused rabbit lungs . Am J Physiol 268 : L753 - L761 , 1995 . 70 . Esser S , Lampugnani MG , Corada M , Dejana E , Risau W . Vascular en - dothelial growth factor induces VE - cadherin tyrosine phosphorylation in endothelial cells . J Cell Sci 111 ( Pt 13 ) : 1853 - 1865 , 1998 . 71 . Essler M , Amano M , Kruse HJ , Kaibuchi K , Weber PC , Aepfelbacher M . Thrombin inactivates myosin light chain phosphatase via Rho and its target Rho kinase in human endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 273 : 21867 - 21874 , 1998 . 72 . Essler M , Retzer M , Bauer M , Heemskerk JW , Aepfelbacher M , Siess W . Mildly oxidized low density lipoprotein induces contraction of hu - man endothelial cells through activation of Rho / Rho kinase and inhibi - tionofmyosinlightchainphosphatase . JBiolChem 274 : 30361 - 30364 , 1999 . 73 . Feng D , Nagy JA , Hipp J , Dvorak HF , Dvorak AM . Vesiculo - vacuolar organellesandtheregulationofvenulepermeabilitytomacromoleculesbyvascularpermeabilityfactor , histamine , and serotonin . J Exp Med 183 : 1981 - 1986 , 1996 . Volume 2 , January 2012 473 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology 74 . Feng D , Nagy JA , Hipp J , Pyne K , Dvorak HF , Dvorak AM . Reinter - pretation of endothelial cell gaps induced by vasoactive mediators in guinea - pig , mouse and rat : Many are transcellular pores . J Physiol 504 ( Pt 3 ) : 747 - 761 , 1997 . 75 . Ferrara N , Carver - Moore K , Chen H , Dowd M , Lu L , O’Shea KS , Powell - Braxton L , Hillan KJ , Moore MW . Heterozygous embryonic lethality induced by targeted inactivation of the VEGF gene . Nature 380 : 439 - 442 , 1996 . 76 . Form DM , Pratt BM , Madri JA . Endothelial cell proliferation during angiogenesis . In vitro modulation by basement membrane components . Lab Invest 55 : 521 - 530 , 1986 . 77 . Fukumura D , Gohongi T , Kadambi A , Izumi Y , Ang J , Yun CO , Buerk DG , Huang PL , Jain RK . Predominant role of endothelial nitric oxide synthase in vascular endothelial growth factor - induced angiogenesis and vascular permeability . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 : 2604 - 2609 , 2001 . 78 . Furuse M , Hirase T , Itoh M , Nagafuchi A , Yonemura S , Tsukita S , Tsukita S . Occludin : A novel integral membrane protein localizing at tight junctions . J Cell Biol 123 : 1777 - 1788 , 1993 . 79 . Furuse M , Itoh M , Hirase T , Nagafuchi A , Yonemura S , Tsukita S , Tsukita S . Direct association of occludin with ZO - 1 and its possible involvement in the localization of occludin at tight junctions . J Cell Biol 127 : 1617 - 1626 , 1994 . 80 . Furuse M , Sasaki H , Tsukita S . Manner of interaction of heterogeneous claudin species within and between tight junction strands . J Cell Biol 147 : 891 - 903 , 1999 . 81 . GambleJR , DrewJ , TreziseL , UnderwoodA , ParsonsM , KasminkasL , Rudge J , Yancopoulos G , Vadas MA . Angiopoietin - 1 is an antiperme - ability and anti - inﬂammatory agent in vitro and targets cell junctions . Circ Res 87 : 603 - 607 , 2000 . 82 . Gao X , Kouklis P , Xu N , Minshall RD , Sandoval R , Vogel SM , Malik AB . Reversibility of increased microvessel permeability in response to VE - cadherin disassembly . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 279 : L1218 - L1225 , 2000 . 83 . Garcia JG , Davis HW , Patterson CE . Regulation of endothelial cell gap formation and barrier dysfunction : Role of myosin light chain phosphorylation . J Cell Physiol 163 : 510 - 522 , 1995 . 84 . Garcia JG , Liu F , Verin AD , Birukova A , Dechert MA , Gerthoffer WT , BambergJR , EnglishD . Sphingosine1 - phosphatepromotesendothelial cell barrier integrity by Edg - dependent cytoskeletal rearrangement . J Clin Invest 108 : 689 - 701 , 2001 . 85 . GarciaJG , SchaphorstKL . Regulationofendothelialcellgapformation and paracellular permeability . J Investig Med 43 : 117 - 126 , 1995 . 86 . Gavard J , Gutkind JS . VEGF controls endothelial - cell permeability by promoting the beta - arrestin - dependent endocytosis of VE - cadherin . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 1223 - 1234 , 2006 . 87 . Gavard J , Patel V , Gutkind JS . Angiopoietin - 1 prevents VEGF - induced endothelial permeability by sequestering Src through mDia . Dev Cell 14 : 25 - 36 , 2008 . 88 . Gee MH , Williams DO . Effect of lung inﬂation on perivascular cuff ﬂuid volume in isolated dog lung lobes . Microvasc Res 17 : 192 - 201 , 1979 . 89 . Geiger B , Bershadsky A , Pankov R , Yamada KM . Transmembrane crosstalk between the extracellular matrix—cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 793 - 805 , 2001 . 90 . GlueckerT , CapassoP , SchnyderP , GudinchetF , SchallerMD , Revelly JP , Chiolero R , Vock P , Wicky S . Clinical and radiologic features of pulmonary edema . Radiographics 19 : 1507 - 1531 ; discussion 1532 - 1503 , 1999 . 91 . Goggel R , Uhlig S . The inositol trisphosphate pathway mediates platelet - activating - factor - induced pulmonary oedema . Eur Respir J 25 : 849 - 857 , 2005 . 92 . Gorovoy M , Han J , Pan H , Welch E , Neamu R , Jia Z , Predescu D , Vogel S , MinshallRD , YeRD , MalikAB , Voyno - YasenetskayaT . LIMkinase 1 promotes endothelial barrier disruption and neutrophil inﬁltration in mouse lungs . Circ Res 105 : 549 - 556 , 2009 . 93 . Gorovoy M , Neamu R , Niu J , Vogel S , Predescu D , Miyoshi J , Takai Y , Kini V , Mehta D , Malik AB , Voyno - Yasenetskaya T . RhoGDI - 1 modulation of the activity of monomeric RhoGTPase RhoA regulates endothelial barrier function in mouse lungs . Circ Res 101 : 50 - 58 , 2007 . 94 . Gorovoy M , Niu J , Bernard O , Proﬁrovic J , Minshall R , Neamu R , Voyno - Yasenetskaya T . LIM kinase 1 coordinates microtubule stability and actin polymerization in human endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 280 : 26533 - 26542 , 2005 . 95 . Gory S , Vernet M , Laurent M , Dejana E , Dalmon J , Huber P . The vascular endothelial - cadherin promoter directs endothelial - speciﬁc ex - pression in transgenic mice . Blood 93 : 184 - 192 , 1999 . 96 . Grosheva I , Shtutman M , Elbaum M , Bershadsky AD . p120 catenin affects cell motility via modulation of activity of Rho - family GTPases : A link between cell - cell contact formation and regulation of cell loco - motion . J Cell Sci 114 : 695 - 707 , 2001 . 97 . Grotte G . Passage of dextran molecules across the blood - lymph barrier . Acta Chir Scand Suppl 211 : 1 - 84 , 1956 . 98 . Guo M , Breslin JW , Wu MH , Gottardi CJ , Yuan SY . VE - cadherin and beta - catenin binding dynamics during histamine - induced endothelial hyperpermeability . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 294 : C977 - C984 , 2008 . 99 . Halonen M , Palmer JD , Lohman IC , McManus LM , Pinckard RN . Respiratory and circulatory alterations induced by acetyl glyceryl ether phosphorylcholine , a mediator of IgE anaphylaxis in the rabbit . Am Rev Respir Dis 122 : 915 - 924 , 1980 . 100 . Hamadi A , Bouali M , Dontenwill M , Stoeckel H , Takeda K , Ronde P . Regulation of focal adhesion dynamics and disassembly by phospho - rylation of FAK at tyrosine 397 . J Cell Sci 118 : 4415 - 4425 , 2005 . 101 . Heasman SJ , Ridley AJ . Mammalian Rho GTPases : New insights into their functions from in vivo studies . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 690 - 701 , 2008 . 102 . Hirase T , Staddon JM , Saitou M , Ando - Akatsuka Y , Itoh M , Furuse M , Fujimoto K , Tsukita S , Rubin LL . Occludin as a possible determinant of tight junction permeability in endothelial cells . J Cell Sci 110 ( Pt 14 ) : 1603 - 1613 , 1997 . 103 . Hla T . Signaling and biological actions of sphingosine 1 - phosphate . Pharmacol Res 47 : 401 - 407 , 2003 . 104 . Hofmann T , Obukhov AG , Schaefer M , Harteneck C , Gudermann T , Schultz G . Direct activation of human TRPC6 and TRPC3 channels by diacylglycerol . Nature 397 : 259 - 263 , 1999 . 105 . Holinstat M , Knezevic N , Broman M , Samarel AM , Malik AB , Mehta D . SuppressionofRhoAactivitybyfocaladhesionkinase - inducedacti - vation of p190RhoGAP : Role in regulation of endothelial permeability . J Biol Chem 281 : 2296 - 2305 , 2006 . 106 . Holinstat M , Mehta D , Kozasa T , Minshall RD , Malik AB . Pro - tein kinase Calpha - induced p115RhoGEF phosphorylation signals en - dothelial cytoskeletal rearrangement . J Biol Chem 278 : 28793 - 28798 , 2003 . 107 . Hotulainen P , Lappalainen P . Stress ﬁbers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J Cell Biol 173 : 383 - 394 , 2006 . 108 . Howard J , Hyman AA . Dynamics and mechanics of the microtubule plus end . Nature 422 : 753 - 758 , 2003 . 109 . Howard J , Hyman AA . Growth , ﬂuctuation and switching at micro - tubule plus ends . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 569 - 574 , 2009 . 110 . Huber AH , Weis WI . The structure of the beta - catenin / E - cadherin com - plex and the molecular basis of diverse ligand recognition by beta - catenin . Cell 105 : 391 - 402 , 2001 . 111 . Hudry - Clergeon H , Stengel D , Ninio E , Vilgrain I . Platelet - activating factor increases VE - cadherin tyrosine phosphorylation in mouse en - dothelial cells and its association with the PtdIns3’ - kinase . Faseb J 19 : 512 - 520 , 2005 . 112 . Hynes RO . Integrins : Versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell ad - hesion . Cell 69 : 11 - 25 , 1992 . 113 . Imamura Y , Itoh M , Maeno Y , Tsukita S , Nagafuchi A . Functional domainsofalpha - cateninrequiredforthestrongstateofcadherin - based cell adhesion . J Cell Biol 144 : 1311 - 1322 , 1999 . 114 . Ingber DE . Cellular tensegrity : Deﬁning new rules of biological design that govern the cytoskeleton . J Cell Sci 104 ( Pt 3 ) : 613 - 627 , 1993 . 115 . IngberDE . TensegrityI . Cellstructureandhierarchicalsystemsbiology . J Cell Sci 116 : 1157 - 1173 , 2003 . 116 . Itoh M , Nagafuchi A , Yonemura S , Kitani - Yasuda T , Tsukita S , Tsukita S . The 220 - kD protein colocalizing with cadherins in non - epithelial cellsisidenticaltoZO - 1 , atightjunction - associatedproteininepithelial cells : cDNA cloning and immunoelectron microscopy . J Cell Biol 121 : 491 - 502 , 1993 . 117 . Ivetic A , Ridley AJ . Ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins and Rho GTPase signalling in leucocytes . Immunology 112 : 165 - 176 , 2004 . 118 . Iyer S , Ferreri DM , DeCocco NC , Minnear FL , Vincent PA . VE - cadherin - p120 interaction is required for maintenance of endothelial barrier function . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 286 : L1143 - L1153 , 2004 . 119 . Jho D , Mehta D , Ahmmed G , Gao XP , Tiruppathi C , Broman M , Malik AB . Angiopoietin - 1 opposes VEGF - induced increase in endothelial permeability by inhibiting TRPC1 - dependent Ca2 inﬂux . Circ Res 96 : 1282 - 1290 , 2005 . 120 . Jiang Y , Wen K , Zhou X , Schwegler - Berry D , Castranova V , He P . Three - dimensional localization and quantiﬁcation of PAF - induced gap formation in intact venular microvessels . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 295 : H898 - H906 , 2008 . 121 . Johansson BR . Size and distribution of endothelial plasmalemmal vesi - cles in consecutive segments of the microvasculature in cat skeletal muscle . Microvasc Res 17 : 107 - 117 , 1979 . 122 . Jones N , Iljin K , Dumont DJ , Alitalo K . Tie receptors : New modulators of angiogenic and lymphangiogenic responses . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 257 - 267 , 2001 . 123 . Kaner RJ , Crystal RG . Compartmentalization of vascular endothelial growth factor to the epithelial surface of the human lung . Mol Med 7 : 240 - 246 , 2001 . 124 . Kaner RJ , Ladetto JV , Singh R , Fukuda N , Matthay MA , Crystal RG . Lung overexpression of the vascular endothelial growth factor gene 474 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance induces pulmonary edema . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 22 : 657 - 664 , 2000 . 125 . Karakozova M , Kozak M , Wong CC , Bailey AO , Yates JR , 3rd , Mogilner A , Zebroski H , Kashina A . Arginylation of beta - actin reg - ulates actin cytoskeleton and cell motility . Science 313 : 192 - 196 , 2006 . 126 . Kedem O , Katchalsky A . Thermodynamic analysis of the permeability of biological membranes to non - electrolytes . Biochim Biophys Acta 27 : 229 - 246 , 1958 . 127 . Kelly JJ , Moore TM , Babal P , Diwan AH , Stevens T , Thompson WJ . Pulmonary microvascular and macrovascular endothelial cells : Differ - ential regulation of Ca2 + and permeability . Am J Physiol 274 : L810 - L819 , 1998 . 128 . Kern DF , Malik AB . Microvascular albumin permeability in isolated perfused lung : Effects of EDTA . J Appl Physiol 58 : 372 - 375 , 1985 . 129 . Kevil CG , Okayama N , Trocha SD , Kalogeris TJ , Coe LL , Specian RD , Davis CP , Alexander JS . Expression of zonula occludens and adherens junctional proteins in human venous and arterial endothelial cells : Role of occludin in endothelial solute barriers . Microcirculation 5 : 197 - 210 , 1998 . 130 . Kevil CG , Payne DK , Mire E , Alexander JS . Vascular permeability factor / vascular endothelial cell growth factor - mediated permeability occurs through disorganization of endothelial junctional proteins . J Biol Chem 273 : 15099 - 15103 , 1998 . 131 . Klein IK , Predescu DN , Sharma T , Knezevic I , Malik AB , Predescu S . Intersectin - 2L regulates caveola endocytosis secondary to Cdc42 - mediated actin polymerization . J Biol Chem 284 : 25953 - 25961 , 2009 . 132 . Klement G , Baruchel S , Rak J , Man S , Clark K , Hicklin DJ , Bohlen P , Kerbel RS . Continuous low - dose therapy with vinblastine and VEGF receptor - 2 antibody induces sustained tumor regression without overt toxicity . J Clin Invest 105 : R15 - R24 , 2000 . 133 . Knezevic , II , Predescu SA , Neamu RF , Gorovoy MS , Knezevic NM , Easington C , Malik AB , Predescu DN . Tiam1 and Rac1 are required for platelet - activating factor - induced endothelial junctional disassem - bly and increase in vascular permeability . J Biol Chem 284 : 5381 - 5394 , 2009 . 134 . Knezevic N , Roy A , Timblin B , Konstantoulaki M , Sharma T , Malik AB , MehtaD . GDI - 1phosphorylationswitchatserine96inducesRhoA activation and increased endothelial permeability . Mol Cell Biol 27 : 6323 - 6333 , 2007 . 135 . KnezevicN , TauseefM , ThennesT , MehtaD . TheGproteinbetagamma subunit mediates reannealing of adherens junctions to reverse endothe - lial permeability increase by thrombin . J Exp Med 206 : 2761 - 2777 , 2009 . 136 . Knudsen KA , Soler AP , Johnson KR , Wheelock MJ . Interaction of alpha - actinin with the cadherin / catenin cell - cell adhesion complex via alpha - catenin . J Cell Biol 130 : 67 - 77 , 1995 . 137 . Kobielak A , Pasolli HA , Fuchs E . Mammalian formin - 1 participates in adherens junctions and polymerization of linear actin cables . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 21 - 30 , 2004 . 138 . Kouklis P , Konstantoulaki M , Malik AB . VE - cadherin - induced Cdc42 signaling regulates formation of membrane protrusions in endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 278 : 16230 - 16236 , 2003 . 139 . Kouklis P , Konstantoulaki M , Vogel S , Broman M , Malik AB . Cdc42 regulates the restoration of endothelial barrier function . Circ Res 94 : 159 - 166 , 2004 . 140 . Kozasa T , Jiang X , Hart MJ , Sternweis PM , Singer WD , Gilman AG , Bollag G , Sternweis PC . p115 RhoGEF , a GTPase activating protein for Galpha12 and Galpha13 . Science 280 : 2109 - 2111 , 1998 . 141 . Kueh HY , Mitchison TJ . Structural plasticity in actin and tubulin poly - mer dynamics . Science 325 : 960 - 963 , 2009 . 142 . Lal BK , Varma S , Pappas PJ , Hobson RW , 2nd , Duran WN . VEGF increasespermeabilityoftheendothelialcellmonolayerbyactivationofPKB / akt , endothelial nitric - oxide synthase , and MAP kinase pathways . Microvasc Res 62 : 252 - 262 , 2001 . 143 . Lamb JA , Allen PG , Tuan BY , Janmey PA . Modulation of gelsolin function . Activation at low pH overrides Ca2 + requirement . J Biol Chem 268 : 8999 - 9004 , 1993 . 144 . Lampugnani MG , Resnati M , Dejana E , Marchisio PC . The role of integrins in the maintenance of endothelial monolayer integrity . J Cell Biol 112 : 479 - 490 , 1991 . 145 . Lampugnani MG , Resnati M , Raiteri M , Pigott R , Pisacane A , Houen G , Ruco LP , Dejana E . A novel endothelial - speciﬁc membrane protein is a marker of cell - cell contacts . J Cell Biol 118 : 1511 - 1522 , 1992 . 146 . Lawler J , Hynes RO . An integrin receptor on normal and thrombas - thenicplateletsthatbindsthrombospondin . Blood 74 : 2022 - 2027 , 1989 . 147 . Lee JS , Gotlieb AI . Microtubule - actin interactions may regulate en - dothelial integrity and repair . Cardiovasc Pathol 11 : 135 - 140 , 2002 . 148 . LeeMJ , ThangadaS , ClaffeyKP , AncellinN , LiuCH , KlukM , VolpiM , Sha’aﬁ RI , Hla T . Vascular endothelial cell adherens junction assembly and morphogenesis induced by sphingosine - 1 - phosphate . Cell 99 : 301 - 312 , 1999 . 149 . Lee TY , Gotlieb AI . Microﬁlaments and microtubules maintain en - dothelial integrity . Microsc Res Tech 60 : 115 - 127 , 2003 . 150 . Lemonnier L , Trebak M , Putney JW , Jr . Complex regulation of the TRPC3 , 6 and 7 channel subfamily by diacylglycerol and phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Cell Calcium 43 : 506 - 514 , 2008 . 151 . Leu NA , Kurosaka S , Kashina A . Conditional Tek promoter - driven deletion of arginyltransferase in the germ line causes defects in game - togenesis and early embryonic lethality in mice . PLoS One 4 : e7734 , 2009 . 152 . Liaw CW , Cannon C , Power MD , Kiboneka PK , Rubin LL . Identiﬁca - tion and cloning of two species of cadherins in bovine endothelial cells . Embo J 9 : 2701 - 2708 , 1990 . 153 . LooDT , KannerSB , AruffoA . Filaminbindstothecytoplasmicdomain of the beta1 - integrin . Identiﬁcation of amino acids responsible for this interaction . J Biol Chem 273 : 23304 - 23312 , 1998 . 154 . Lossinsky AS , Shivers RR . Structural pathways for macromolecular and cellular transport across the blood - brain barrier during inﬂamma - tory conditions . Review . Histol Histopathol 19 : 535 - 564 , 2004 . 155 . Lum H , Malik AB . Regulation of vascular endothelial barrier function . Am J Physiol 267 : L223 - L241 , 1994 . 156 . Maekawa M , Ishizaki T , Boku S , Watanabe N , Fujita A , Iwamatsu A , Obinata T , Ohashi K , Mizuno K , Narumiya S . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 : 895 - 898 , 1999 . 157 . Majno G , Palade GE . Studies on inﬂammation . 1 . The effect of his - tamineandserotoninonvascularpermeability : Anelectronmicroscopic study . J Biophys Biochem Cytol 11 : 571 - 605 , 1961 . 158 . Malik AB , Vogel , SM , Minshall , RD , Tiruppathi , C . Pulmonary Circu - lation and Regulation of Fluid Balance . In : Murray JFaN , JA , editor . Textbook of Respiratory Medicine . Philadelphia , PA : W . B . Saunders Co . , 2000 , p . 119 - 154 . 159 . Maniscalco WM , Watkins RH , Finkelstein JN , Campbell MH . Vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA increases in alveolar epithelial cells during recovery from oxygen injury . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 13 : 377 - 386 , 1995 . 160 . Matthay MA , Zimmerman GA . Acute lung injury and the acute respira - tory distress syndrome : Four decades of inquiry into pathogenesis and rational management . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 33 : 319 - 327 , 2005 . 161 . McDonald DM . Endothelial gaps and permeability of venules in rat tracheas exposed to inﬂammatory stimuli . Am J Physiol 266 : L61 - L83 , 1994 . 162 . McVerry BJ , Garcia JG . Endothelial cell barrier regulation by sphingo - sine 1 - phosphate . J Cell Biochem 92 : 1075 - 1085 , 2004 . 163 . McVerry BJ , Garcia JG . In vitro and in vivo modulation of vascular barrierintegritybysphingosine1 - phosphate : Mechanisticinsights . Cell Signal 17 : 131 - 139 , 2005 . 164 . McVerry BJ , Peng X , Hassoun PM , Sammani S , Simon BA , Garcia JG . Sphingosine 1 - phosphate reduces vascular leak in murine and canine models of acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 170 : 987 - 993 , 2004 . 165 . Mechtersheimer G , Barth T , Quentmeier A , Moller P . Differential ex - pression of beta 1 , beta 3 , and beta 4 integrin subunits in nonneoplastic neural cells of the peripheral and autonomic nervous system and in tumors derived from these cells . Lab Invest 70 : 740 - 752 , 1994 . 166 . MehtaD , AhmmedGU , PariaBC , HolinstatM , Voyno - YasenetskayaT , Tiruppathi C , Minshall RD , Malik AB . RhoA interaction with inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate receptor and transient receptor potential channel - 1 regulates Ca2 + entry . Role in signaling increased endothelial perme - ability . J Biol Chem 278 : 33492 - 33500 , 2003 . 167 . Mehta D , Konstantoulaki M , Ahmmed GU , Malik AB . Sphingosine 1 - phosphate - induced mobilization of intracellular Ca2 + mediates rac activation and adherens junction assembly in endothelial cells . J Biol Chem 280 : 17320 - 17328 , 2005 . 168 . Mehta D , Malik AB . Signaling mechanisms regulating endothelial per - meability . Physiol Rev 86 : 279 - 367 , 2006 . 169 . Mehta D , Rahman A , Malik AB . Protein kinase C - alpha signals rho - guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor phosphorylation and rho ac - tivation and regulates the endothelial cell barrier function . J Biol Chem 276 : 22614 - 22620 , 2001 . 170 . Mehta D , Tiruppathi C , Sandoval R , Minshall RD , Holinstat M , Malik AB . Modulatory role of focal adhesion kinase in regulating human pulmonary arterial endothelial barrier function . J Physiol 539 : 779 - 789 , 2002 . 171 . Mejillano MR , Kojima S , Applewhite DA , Gertler FB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . Lamellipodial versus ﬁlopodial mode of the actin nanoma - chinery : Pivotal role of the ﬁlament barbed end . Cell 118 : 363 - 373 , 2004 . 172 . Melnikova V , Bar - Eli M . Inﬂammation and melanoma growth and metastasis : The role of platelet - activating factor ( PAF ) and its receptor . Cancer Metastasis Rev 26 : 359 - 371 , 2007 . 173 . Michel CC . Transport of macromolecules through microvascular walls . Cardiovasc Res 32 : 644 - 653 , 1996 . 174 . Michel CC , Curry FE . Microvascular permeability . Physiol Rev 79 : 703 - 761 , 1999 . Volume 2 , January 2012 475 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology 175 . Michel CC , Neal CR . Openings through endothelial cells associated with increased microvascular permeability . Microcirculation 6 : 45 - 54 , 1999 . 176 . Millan J , Hewlett L , Glyn M , Toomre D , Clark P , Ridley AJ . Lympho - cyte transcellular migration occurs through recruitment of endothelial ICAM - 1tocaveola - andF - actin - richdomains . NatCellBiol 8 : 113 - 123 , 2006 . 177 . Millard TH , Sharp SJ , Machesky LM . Signalling to actin assembly via the WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) - family proteins and the Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochem J 380 : 1 - 17 , 2004 . 178 . Minshall RD , Tiruppathi C , Vogel SM , Malik AB . Vesicle formation and trafﬁcking in endothelial cells and regulation of endothelial barrier function . Histochem Cell Biol 117 : 105 - 112 , 2002 . 179 . Miron T , Vancompernolle K , Vandekerckhove J , Wilchek M , Geiger B . A 25 - kD inhibitor of actin polymerization is a low molecular mass heat shock protein . J Cell Biol 114 : 255 - 261 , 1991 . 180 . Miserocchi G , Negrini D , Gonano C . Direct measurement of interstitial pulmonary pressure in in situ lung with intact pleural space . J Appl Physiol 69 : 2168 - 2174 , 1990 . 181 . MiserocchiG , NegriniD , GonanoC . Parenchymalstressaffectsintersti - tial and pleural pressures in in situ lung . J Appl Physiol 71 : 1967 - 1972 , 1991 . 182 . Monacci WT , Merrill MJ , Oldﬁeld EH . Expression of vascular perme - ability factor / vascular endothelial growth factor in normal rat tissues . Am J Physiol 264 : C995 - C1002 , 1993 . 183 . MoritaK , SasakiH , FuruseM , TsukitaS . Endothelialclaudin : Claudin - 5 / TMVCF constitutes tight junction strands in endothelial cells . J Cell Biol 147 : 185 - 194 , 1999 . 184 . Moritz M , Braunfeld MB , Guenebaut V , Heuser J , Agard DA . Struc - ture of the gamma - tubulin ring complex : A template for microtubule nucleation . Nat Cell Biol 2 : 365 - 370 , 2000 . 185 . Moy AB , Winter M , Kamath A , Blackwell K , Reyes G , Giaever I , Keese C , Shasby DM . Histamine alters endothelial barrier function at cell - cell and cell - matrix sites . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 278 : L888 - L898 , 2000 . 186 . Muller SL , Portwich M , Schmidt A , Utepbergenov DI , Huber O , Blasig IE , Krause G . The tight junction protein occludin and the adherens junction protein alpha - catenin share a common interaction mechanism with ZO - 1 . J Biol Chem 280 : 3747 - 3756 , 2005 . 187 . Muller WA . Leukocyte - endothelial - cell interactions in leukocyte trans - migrationandtheinﬂammatoryresponse . TrendsImmunol 24 : 327 - 334 , 2003 . 188 . Nakamura M , Honda Z , Izumi T , Sakanaka C , Mutoh H , Minami M , BitoH , SeyamaY , MatsumotoT , NomaM , andetal . Molecularcloning and expression of platelet - activating factor receptor from human leuko - cytes . J Biol Chem 266 : 20400 - 20405 , 1991 . 189 . Navarro P , Caveda L , Breviario F , Mandoteanu I , Lampugnani MG , Dejana E . Catenin - dependent and - independent functions of vascular endothelial cadherin . J Biol Chem 270 : 30965 - 30972 , 1995 . 190 . Negrini D , Gonano C , Miserocchi G . Microvascular pressure proﬁle in intact in situ lung . J Appl Physiol 72 : 332 - 339 , 1992 . 191 . Negrini D , Passi A . Interstitial matrix and transendothelial ﬂuxes in normal lung . Respir Physiol Neurobiol 159 : 301 - 310 , 2007 . 192 . Negrini D , Passi A , Bertin K , Bosi F , Wiig H . Isolation of pulmonary interstitial ﬂuid in rabbits by a modiﬁed wick technique . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L1057 - L1065 , 2001 . 193 . Nieset JE , Redﬁeld AR , Jin F , Knudsen KA , Johnson KR , Wheelock MJ . Characterization of the interactions of alpha - catenin with alpha - actinin and beta - catenin / plakoglobin . J Cell Sci 110 ( Pt 8 ) : 1013 - 1022 , 1997 . 194 . Nitta T , Hata M , Gotoh S , Seo Y , Sasaki H , Hashimoto N , Furuse M , Tsukita S . Size - selective loosening of the blood - brain barrier in claudin - 5 - deﬁcient mice . J Cell Biol 161 : 653 - 660 , 2003 . 195 . Noren NK , Liu BP , Burridge K , Kreft B . p120 catenin regulates the actin cytoskeleton via Rho family GTPases . J Cell Biol 150 : 567 - 580 , 2000 . 196 . Ohashi K , Nagata K , Maekawa M , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S , Mizuno K . Rho - associated kinase ROCK activates LIM - kinase 1 by phospho - rylation at threonine 508 within the activation loop . J Biol Chem 275 : 3577 - 3582 , 2000 . 197 . Orrington - Myers J , Gao X , Kouklis P , Broman M , Rahman A , Vogel SM , Malik AB . Regulation of lung neutrophil recruitment by VE - cadherin . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 291 : L764 - L771 , 2006 . 198 . Ozawa M , Ringwald M , Kemler R . Uvomorulin - catenin complex for - mation is regulated by a speciﬁc domain in the cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87 : 4246 - 4250 , 1990 . 199 . Palade GE . An electron microscope study of the mitochondrial struc - ture . J Histochem Cytochem 1 : 188 - 211 , 1953 . 200 . Papadopoulos MC , Saadoun S , Verkman AS . Aquaporins and cell mi - gration . Pﬂugers Arch 456 : 693 - 700 , 2008 . 201 . Pappenheimer JR , Renkin EM , Borrero LM . Filtration , diffusion and molecular sieving through peripheral capillary membranes ; a contri - bution to the pore theory of capillary permeability . Am J Physiol 167 : 13 - 46 , 1951 . 202 . Parker JC . Hydraulic conductance of lung endothelial phenotypes and Starling safety factors against edema . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 292 : L378 - L380 , 2007 . 203 . Parker JC , Yoshikawa S . Vascular segmental permeabilities at high peak inﬂation pressure in isolated rat lungs . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 283 : L1203 - L1209 , 2002 . 204 . Patterson CE , Lum H . Update on pulmonary edema : The role and regulation of endothelial barrier function . Endothelium 8 : 75 - 105 , 2001 . 205 . Patton WF , Yoon MU , Alexander JS , Chung - Welch N , Hechtman HB , Shepro D . Expression of simple epithelial cytokeratins in bovine pul - monary microvascular endothelial cells . J Cell Physiol 143 : 140 - 149 , 1990 . 206 . Peng X , Hassoun PM , Sammani S , McVerry BJ , Burne MJ , Rabb H , Pearse D , Tuder RM , Garcia JG . Protective effects of sphingosine 1 - phosphate in murine endotoxin - induced inﬂammatory lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 169 : 1245 - 1251 , 2004 . 207 . Phillips PG , Lum H , Malik AB , Tsan MF . Phallacidin prevents thrombin - induced increases in endothelial permeability to albumin . Am J Physiol 257 : C562 - C567 , 1989 . 208 . Pober JS , Sessa WC . Evolving functions of endothelial cells in inﬂam - mation . Nat Rev Immunol 7 : 803 - 815 , 2007 . 209 . Pocock TM , Bates DO . In vivo mechanisms of vascular endothelial growth factor - mediated increased hydraulic conductivity of Rana cap - illaries . J Physiol 534 : 479 - 488 , 2001 . 210 . Pocock TM , Foster RR , Bates DO . Evidence of a role for TRPC chan - nels in VEGF - mediated increased vascular permeability in vivo . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 286 : H1015 - H1026 , 2004 . 211 . Pocock TM , Williams B , Curry FE , Bates DO . VEGF and ATP act by different mechanisms to increase microvascular permeability and endothelial [ Ca ( 2 + ) ] ( i ) . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 279 : H1625 - H1634 , 2000 . 212 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG . Cellular motility driven by assembly and dis - assembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 : 453 - 465 , 2003 . 213 . Prasain N , Stevens T . The actin cytoskeleton in endothelial cell pheno - types . Microvasc Res 77 : 53 - 63 , 2009 . 214 . Predescu D , Horvat R , Predescu S , Palade GE . Transcytosis in the continuousendotheliumofthemyocardialmicrovasculatureisinhibitedbyN - ethylmaleimide . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 : 3014 - 3018 , 1994 . 215 . PredescuD , PaladeGE . Plasmalemmalvesiclesrepresentthelargepore system of continuous microvascular endothelium . Am J Physiol 265 : H725 - H733 , 1993 . 216 . Predescu D , Predescu S , McQuistan T , Palade GE . Transcytosis of alpha1 - acidic glycoprotein in the continuous microvascular endothe - lium . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 : 6175 - 6180 , 1998 . 217 . Predescu D , Vogel SM , Malik AB . Functional and morphological stud - ies of protein transcytosis in continuous endothelia . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 : L895 - L901 , 2004 . 218 . Predescu SA , Predescu DN , Malik AB . Molecular determinants of endothelial transcytosis and their role in endothelial permeability . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L823 - L842 , 2007 . 219 . Predescu SA , Predescu DN , Palade GE . Plasmalemmal vesicles func - tion as transcytotic carriers for small proteins in the continuous en - dothelium . Am J Physiol 272 : H937 - H949 , 1997 . 220 . Prussin C , Metcalfe DD . 4 . IgE , mast cells , basophils , and eosinophils . J Allergy Clin Immunol 111 : S486 - S494 , 2003 . 221 . Qiao RL , Wang HS , Yan W , Odekon LE , Del Vecchio PJ , Smith TJ , Malik AB . Extracellular matrix hyaluronan is a determinant of the endothelial barrier . Am J Physiol 269 : C103 - C109 , 1995 . 222 . Ramchandran R , Mehta D , Vogel SM , Mirza MK , Kouklis P , Malik AB . Critical role of Cdc42 in mediating endothelial barrier protection in vivo . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L363 - L369 , 2008 . 223 . Revenu C , Athman R , Robine S , Louvard D . The co - workers of actin ﬁlaments : From cell structures to signals . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 : 635 - 646 , 2004 . 224 . Ridley AJ . Rho GTPases and actin dynamics in membrane protrusions and vesicle trafﬁcking . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 522 - 529 , 2006 . 225 . Rippe B , Haraldsson B . Transport of macromolecules across microvas - cular walls : The two - pore theory . Physiol Rev 74 : 163 - 219 , 1994 . 226 . Roberts WG , Palade GE . Endothelial fenestrae and fenestral di - aphragms . In : Risau W , Rubanyi GM , editors . Morphogenesis of En - dothelium . Amsterdam : Harwood Academic , 2000 , p . 23 - 41 . 227 . Rosales C , Gresham HD , Brown EJ . Expression of the 50 - kDa integrin - associated protein on myeloid cells and erythrocytes . J Immunol 149 : 2759 - 2764 , 1992 . 228 . Rosen H , Gonzalez - Cabrera PJ , Sanna MG , Brown S . Sphingosine 1 - phosphate receptor signaling . Annu Rev Biochem 78 : 743 - 768 , 2009 . 229 . Rotundo RF , Curtis TM , Shah MD , Gao B , Mastrangelo A , LaFlamme SE , Saba TM . TNF - alpha disruption of lung endothelial integrity : Re - duced integrin mediated adhesion to ﬁbronectin . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 282 : L316 - L329 , 2002 . 476 Volume 2 , January 2012 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Comprehensive Physiology Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance 230 . Roura S , Miravet S , Piedra J , Garcia de Herreros A , Dunach M . Regu - lation of E - cadherin / Catenin association by tyrosine phosphorylation . J Biol Chem 274 : 36734 - 36740 , 1999 . 231 . Rutili G , Kvietys P , Martin D , Parker JC , Taylor AE . In - creased pulmonary microvasuclar permeability induced by alpha - naphthylthiourea . J Appl Physiol 52 : 1316 - 1323 , 1982 . 232 . Saitou M , Furuse M , Sasaki H , Schulzke JD , Fromm M , Takano H , Noda T , Tsukita S . Complex phenotype of mice lacking occludin , a component of tight junction strands . Mol Biol Cell 11 : 4131 - 4142 , 2000 . 233 . Sanchez T , Estrada - Hernandez T , Paik JH , Wu MT , Venkataraman K , Brinkmann V , Claffey K , Hla T . Phosphorylation and action of the immunomodulator FTY720 inhibits vascular endothelial cell growth factor - induced vascular permeability . J Biol Chem 278 : 47281 - 47290 , 2003 . 234 . Schaphorst KL , Chiang E , Jacobs KN , Zaiman A , Natarajan V , Wigley F , Garcia JG . Role of sphingosine - 1 phosphate in the enhancement of endothelial barrier integrity by platelet - released products . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 285 : L258 - L267 , 2003 . 235 . Schaub S , Bohnet S , Laurent VM , Meister JJ , Verkhovsky AB . Com - parative maps of motion and assembly of ﬁlamentous actin and myosin II in migrating cells . Mol Biol Cell 18 : 3723 - 3732 , 2007 . 236 . Schlaepfer DD , Mitra SK . Multiple connections link FAK to cell motil - ity and invasion . Curr Opin Genet Dev 14 : 92 - 101 , 2004 . 237 . Schmidt A , Utepbergenov DI , Mueller SL , Beyermann M , Schneider - Mergener J , Krause G , Blasig IE . Occludin binds to the SH3 - hinge - GuK unit of zonula occludens protein 1 : Potential mechanism of tight junction regulation . Cell Mol Life Sci 61 : 1354 - 1365 , 2004 . 238 . Schneeberger EE . Structure of intercellular junctions in different seg - ments of the intrapulmonary vasculature . Ann N Y Acad Sci 384 : 54 - 63 , 1982 . 239 . Schnittler HJ . Structural and functional aspects of intercellular junc - tions in vascular endothelium . Basic Res Cardiol 93 Suppl 3 : 30 - 39 , 1998 . 240 . Schnitzer JE . gp60 is an albumin - binding glycoprotein expressed by continuous endothelium involved in albumin transcytosis . Am J Physiol 262 : H246 - H254 , 1992 . 241 . Schnitzer JE , Oh P . Albondin - mediated capillary permeability to al - bumin . Differential role of receptors in endothelial transcytosis and endocytosis of native and modiﬁed albumins . J Biol Chem 269 : 6072 - 6082 , 1994 . 242 . Sharma CP , Ezzell RM , Arnaout MA . Direct interaction of ﬁlamin ( ABP - 280 ) with the beta 2 - integrin subunit CD18 . J Immunol 154 : 3461 - 3470 , 1995 . 243 . ShasbyDM . Cell - celladhesioninlungendothelium . AmJPhysiolLung Cell Mol Physiol 292 : L593 - L607 , 2007 . 244 . Shasby DM , Ries DR , Shasby SS , Winter MC . Histamine stimulates phosphorylation of adherens junction proteins and alters their link to vimentin . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 282 : L1330 - L1338 , 2002 . 245 . Shasby DM , Shasby SS , Sullivan JM , Peach MJ . Role of endothelial cell cytoskeleton in control of endothelial permeability . Circ Res 51 : 657 - 661 , 1982 . 246 . ShenTL , ParkAY , AlcarazA , PengX , JangI , KoniP , FlavellRA , GuH , Guan JL . Conditional knockout of focal adhesion kinase in endothelial cells reveals its role in angiogenesis and vascular development in late embryogenesis . J Cell Biol 169 : 941 - 952 , 2005 . 247 . ShikataY , BirukovKG , BirukovaAA , VerinA , GarciaJG . Involvement of site - speciﬁc FAK phosphorylation in sphingosine - 1 phosphate - and thrombin - induced focal adhesion remodeling : Role of Src and GIT . Faseb J 17 : 2240 - 2249 , 2003 . 248 . Siﬂinger - Birnboim A , Cooper JA , del Vecchio PJ , Lum H , Malik AB . Selectivity of the endothelial monolayer : Effects of increased perme - ability . Microvasc Res 36 : 216 - 227 , 1988 . 249 . Simionescu M . Structural , biochemical and functional differentiation of the vascular endothelium . In : Risau W , Rubanyi GM , editors , Mor - phogenesis of Endothelium . Amsterdam : Harwood Academic , 2000 , p . 1 - 21 . 250 . Simons PC , Pietromonaco SF , Reczek D , Bretscher A , Elias L . C - terminal threonine phosphorylation activates ERM proteins to link the cell’s cortical lipid bilayer to the cytoskeleton . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 253 : 561 - 565 , 1998 . 251 . Singleton PA , Dudek SM , Chiang ET , Garcia JG . Regulation of sph - ingosine 1 - phosphate - induced endothelial cytoskeletal rearrangement and barrier enhancement by S1P1 receptor , PI3 kinase , Tiam1 / Rac1 , and alpha - actinin . Faseb J 19 : 1646 - 1656 , 2005 . 252 . Small JV , Stradal T , Vignal E , Rottner K . The lamellipodium : Where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol 12 : 112 - 120 , 2002 . 253 . Smith JW , Cheresh DA . Integrin ( alpha v beta 3 ) - ligand interaction . Identiﬁcation of a heterodimeric RGD binding site on the vitronectin receptor . J Biol Chem 265 : 2168 - 2172 , 1990 . 254 . Starling EH . On the absorption of ﬂuids from the connective tissue spaces . J Physiol 19 : 312 - 326 , 1896 . 255 . Staub NC , Gee M , Vreim C . Mechanism of alveolar ﬂooding in acute pulmonary oedema . Ciba Found Symp 255 - 272 , 1976 . 256 . Stevens T , Garcia JG , Shasby DM , Bhattacharya J , Malik AB . Mech - anisms regulating endothelial cell barrier function . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 279 : L419 - L422 , 2000 . 257 . Stickel SK , Wang YL . Synthetic peptide GRGDS induces dissociation of alpha - actinin and vinculin from the sites of focal contacts . J Cell Biol 107 : 1231 - 1239 , 1988 . 258 . Strelkov SV , Herrmann H , Aebi U . Molecular architecture of interme - diate ﬁlaments . Bioessays 25 : 243 - 251 , 2003 . 259 . Sun H , Breslin JW , Zhu J , Yuan SY , Wu MH . Rho and ROCK sig - naling in VEGF - induced microvascular endothelial hyperpermeability . Microcirculation 13 : 237 - 247 , 2006 . 260 . Suri C , Jones PF , Patan S , Bartunkova S , Maisonpierre PC , Davis S , Sato TN , Yancopoulos GD . Requisite role of angiopoietin - 1 , a ligand for the TIE2 receptor , during embryonic angiogenesis . Cell 87 : 1171 - 1180 , 1996 . 261 . Svitkina TM , Bulanova EA , Chaga OY , Vignjevic DM , Kojima S , Vasiliev JM , Borisy GG . Mechanism of ﬁlopodia initiation by reorga - nization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 : 409 - 421 , 2003 . 262 . Taddei A , Giampietro C , Conti A , Orsenigo F , Breviario F , Pirazzoli V , Potente M , Daly C , Dimmeler S , Dejana E . Endothelial adherens junctionscontroltightjunctionsbyVE - cadherin - mediatedupregulation of claudin - 5 . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 923 - 934 , 2008 . 263 . TakahashiK , SasakiT , MammotoA , TakaishiK , KameyamaT , Tsukita S , Takai Y . Direct interaction of the Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor with ezrin / radixin / moesin initiates the activation of the Rho small G protein . J Biol Chem 272 : 23371 - 23375 , 1997 . 264 . Tarone G , Stefanuto G , Mascarello P , Deﬁlippi P , Altruda F , Silengo L . Expression of receptors for extracellular matrix proteins in human endothelial cells . J Lipid Mediat 2 Suppl : S45 - S53 , 1990 . 265 . Tauseef M , Kini V , Knezevic N , Brannan M , Ramchandaran R , Fyrst H , Saba J , Vogel SM , Malik AB , Mehta D . Activation of sphingosine kinase - 1 reverses the increase in lung vascular permeability through sphingosine - 1 - phosphate receptor signaling in endothelial cells . Circ Res 103 : 1164 - 1172 , 2008 . 266 . Taylor AE , Parker JC . Pulmonary interstitial space and lymphat - ics . In : Fishman AP , Fisher AB , editors . Handbook of Physiology The Respiratory System Circulations and Non - respiratory Functions , Bethesda , MD : The American Physiological Society , 1985 , chapt 4 , p . 167 - 230 . 267 . Thoreson MA , Anastasiadis PZ , Daniel JM , Ireton RC , Wheelock MJ , Johnson KR , Hummingbird DK , Reynolds AB . Selective uncoupling of p120 ( ctn ) from E - cadherin disrupts strong adhesion . J Cell Biol 148 : 189 - 202 , 2000 . 268 . Thurston G , Rudge JS , Ioffe E , Zhou H , Ross L , Croll SD , Glazer N , Holash J , McDonald DM , Yancopoulos GD . Angiopoietin - 1 protects the adult vasculature against plasma leakage . Nat Med 6 : 460 - 463 , 2000 . 269 . Thurston G , Suri C , Smith K , McClain J , Sato TN , Yancopoulos GD , McDonald DM . Leakage - resistant blood vessels in mice transgenically overexpressing angiopoietin - 1 . Science 286 : 2511 - 2514 , 1999 . 270 . Tiruppathi C , Finnegan A , Malik AB . Isolation and characterization of a cell surface albumin - binding protein from vascular endothelial cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 : 250 - 254 , 1996 . 271 . Tiruppathi C , Malik AB , Del Vecchio PJ , Keese CR , Giaever I . Electri - cal method for detection of endothelial cell shape change in real time : Assessment of endothelial barrier function . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89 : 7919 - 7923 , 1992 . 272 . Tiruppathi C , Song W , Bergenfeldt M , Sass P , Malik AB . Gp60 activation mediates albumin transcytosis in endothelial cells by ty - rosine kinase - dependent pathway . J Biol Chem 272 : 25968 - 25975 , 1997 . 273 . Tsukita S , Furuse M . The structure and function of claudins , cell ad - hesion molecules at tight junctions . Ann N Y Acad Sci 915 : 129 - 135 , 2000 . 274 . TuderRM , FlookBE , VoelkelNF . IncreasedgeneexpressionforVEGF and the VEGF receptors KDR / Flk and Flt in lungs exposed to acute or to chronic hypoxia . Modulation of gene expression by nitric oxide . J Clin Invest 95 : 1798 - 1807 , 1995 . 275 . Tuma PL , Hubbard AL . Transcytosis : Crossing cellular barriers . Phys - iol Rev 83 : 871 - 932 , 2003 . 276 . Tzima E . Role of small GTPases in endothelial cytoskeletal dynamics and the shear stress response . Circ Res 98 : 176 - 185 , 2006 . 277 . Uhlig S , Heiny O . Measuring the weight of the isolated perfused rat lungduringnegativepressureventilation . JPharmacolToxicolMethods 33 : 147 - 152 , 1995 . 278 . Uhlig S , von Bethmann AN . Determination of vascular compliance , interstitial compliance , and capillary ﬁltration coefﬁcient in rat isolated perfused lungs . J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods 37 : 119 - 127 , 1997 . 279 . Uhlig S , Wollin L , Wendel A . Contributions of thromboxane and leukotrienes to PAF - induced impairment of lung function in the rat . J Appl Physiol 77 : 262 - 269 , 1994 . Volume 2 , January 2012 477 P1 : OTA / XYZ P2 : ABC JWBT335 - c100006 JWBT335 / Comprehensive Physiology November 3 , 2011 8 : 19 Printer Name : Yet to Come Cytoskeletal Dynamics and Lung Fluid Balance Comprehensive Physiology 280 . Vacca A , IurlaroM , RibattiD , Minischetti M , Nico B , Ria R , Pellegrino A , Dammacco F . Antiangiogenesis is produced by nontoxic doses of vinblastine . Blood 94 : 4143 - 4155 , 1999 . 281 . van Hinsbergh VW , van Nieuw Amerongen GP . Endothelial hyperper - meability in vascular leakage . Vascul Pharmacol 39 : 171 - 172 , 2002 . 282 . van Nieuw Amerongen GP , Draijer R , Vermeer MA , van Hinsbergh VW . Transient and prolonged increase in endothelial permeability in - duced by histamine and thrombin : Role of protein kinases , calcium , and RhoA . Circ Res 83 : 1115 - 1123 , 1998 . 283 . Vandenbroucke E , Mehta D , Minshall R , Malik AB . Regulation of endothelial junctional permeability . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1123 : 134 - 145 , 2008 . 284 . Vasioukhin V , Fuchs E . Actin dynamics and cell - cell adhesion in ep - ithelia . Curr Opin Cell Biol 13 : 76 - 84 , 2001 . 285 . VerinAD , BirukovaA , WangP , LiuF , BeckerP , BirukovK , Garcia JG . Microtubuledisassemblyincreasesendothelialcellbarrierdysfunction : Role of MLC phosphorylation . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 281 : L565 - L574 , 2001 . 286 . Vestweber D . VE - cadherin : The major endothelial adhesion molecule controlling cellular junctions and blood vessel formation . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 28 : 223 - 232 , 2008 . 287 . Vincent PA , Xiao K , Buckley KM , Kowalczyk AP . VE - cadherin : Ad - hesion at arm’s length . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 286 : C987 - C997 , 2004 . 288 . Vleminckx K , Kemler R . Cadherins and tissue formation : Integrating adhesion and signaling . Bioessays 21 : 211 - 220 , 1999 . 289 . VolbergT , GeigerB , KartenbeckJ , FrankeWW . Changesinmembrane - microﬁlament interaction in intercellular adherens junctions upon re - moval of extracellular Ca2 + ions . J Cell Biol 102 : 1832 - 1842 , 1986 . 290 . Vouret - Craviari V , Bourcier C , Boulter E , van Obberghen - Schilling E . Distinct signals via Rho GTPases and Src drive shape changes by thrombin and sphingosine - 1 - phosphate in endothelial cells . J Cell Sci 115 : 2475 - 2484 , 2002 . 291 . Wade RH , Hyman AA . Microtubule structure and dynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol 9 : 12 - 17 , 1997 . 292 . Wallez Y , Cand F , Cruzalegui F , Wernstedt C , Souchelnytskyi S , Vilgrain I , Huber P . Src kinase phosphorylates vascular endothelial - cadherin in response to vascular endothelial growth factor : Identiﬁca - tion of tyrosine 685 as the unique target site . Oncogene 26 : 1067 - 1077 , 2007 . 293 . Wallez Y , Huber P . Endothelial adherens and tight junctions in vascular homeostasis , inﬂammation and angiogenesis . Biochim Biophys Acta 1778 : 794 - 809 , 2008 . 294 . Waschke J , Burger S , Curry FR , Drenckhahn D , Adamson RH . Ac - tivation of Rac - 1 and Cdc42 stabilizes the microvascular endothelial barrier . Histochem Cell Biol 125 : 397 - 406 , 2006 . 295 . Waschke J , Curry FE , Adamson RH , Drenckhahn D . Regulation of actin dynamicsiscritical forendothelial barrier functions . AmJ Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 288 : H1296 - H1305 , 2005 . 296 . Waschke J , Drenckhahn D , Adamson RH , Barth H , Curry FE . cAMP protects endothelial barrier functions by preventing Rac - 1 inhibition . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 287 : H2427 - H2433 , 2004 . 297 . Watabe - Uchida M , Uchida N , Imamura Y , Nagafuchi A , Fujimoto K , Uemura T , Vermeulen S , van Roy F , Adamson ED , Takeichi M . alpha - Catenin - vinculin interaction functions to organize the apical junctional complex in epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 142 : 847 - 857 , 1998 . 298 . Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Kinley AW , Weed SA , Li Y , Parsons JT , Cooper JA . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr Biol 11 : 370 - 374 , 2001 . 299 . Weaver AM , Young ME , Lee WL , Cooper JA . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Opin Cell Biol 15 : 23 - 30 , 2003 . 300 . Weed SA , Parsons JT . Cortactin : Coupling membrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 20 : 6418 - 6434 , 2001 . 301 . Wegner A . Head to tail polymerization of actin . J Mol Biol 108 : 139 - 150 , 1976 . 302 . Weis S , Shintani S , Weber A , Kirchmair R , Wood M , Cravens A , Mc - Sharry H , Iwakura A , Yoon YS , Himes N , Burstein D , Doukas J , Soll R , Losordo D , Cheresh D . Src blockade stabilizes a Flk / cadherin com - plex , reducingedemaandtissueinjuryfollowingmyocardialinfarction . J Clin Invest 113 : 885 - 894 , 2004 . 303 . Weis SM , Cheresh DA . Pathophysiological consequences of VEGF - induced vascular permeability . Nature 437 : 497 - 504 , 2005 . 304 . Winter MC , Shasby SS , Ries DR , Shasby DM . Histamine selectively interrupts VE - cadherin adhesion independently of capacitive calcium entry . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 : L816 - L823 , 2004 . 305 . Witke W , Sharpe AH , Hartwig JH , Azuma T , Stossel TP , Kwiatkowski DJ . Hemostatic , inﬂammatory , and ﬁbroblast responses are blunted in mice lacking gelsolin . Cell 81 : 41 - 51 , 1995 . 306 . Wojciak - Stothard B , Potempa S , Eichholtz T , Ridley AJ . Rho and Rac but not Cdc42 regulate endothelial cell permeability . J Cell Sci 114 : 1343 - 1355 , 2001 . 307 . Wojciak - Stothard B , Ridley AJ . Rho GTPases and the regulation of endothelial permeability . Vascul Pharmacol 39 : 187 - 199 , 2002 . 308 . Wu HM , Yuan Y , Zawieja DC , Tinsley J , Granger HJ . Role of phos - pholipase C , protein kinase C , and calcium in VEGF - induced venular hyperpermeability . Am J Physiol 276 : H535 - H542 , 1999 . 309 . Wu MH , Guo M , Yuan SY , Granger HJ . Focal adhesion kinase medi - ates porcine venular hyperpermeability elicited by vascular endothelial growth factor . J Physiol 552 : 691 - 699 , 2003 . 310 . Wu MH , Ustinova E , Granger HJ . Integrin binding to ﬁbronectin and vitronectin maintains the barrier function of isolated porcine coronary venules . J Physiol 532 : 785 - 791 , 2001 . 311 . Wu X , Suetsugu S , Cooper LA , Takenawa T , Guan JL . Focal adhesion kinase regulation of N - WASP subcellular localization and function . J Biol Chem 279 : 9565 - 9576 , 2004 . 312 . Yanagisawa M , Kaverina IN , Wang A , Fujita Y , Reynolds AB , Anas - tasiadis PZ . A novel interaction between kinesin and p120 modu - lates p120 localization and function . J Biol Chem 279 : 9512 - 9521 , 2004 . 313 . Yin HL , Albrecht JH , Fattoum A . Identiﬁcation of gelsolin , a Ca2 + - dependent regulatory protein of actin gel - sol transformation , and its intracellular distribution in a variety of cells and tissues . J Cell Biol 91 : 901 - 906 , 1981 . 314 . YinHL , StosselTP . Controlofcytoplasmicactingel - soltransformation by gelsolin , a calcium - dependent regulatory protein . Nature 281 : 583 - 586 , 1979 . 315 . Zeng X , Wert SE , Federici R , Peters KG , Whitsett JA . VEGF enhances pulmonary vasculogenesis and disrupts lung morphogenesis in vivo . Dev Dyn 211 : 215 - 227 , 1998 . 316 . Zhao X , Peng X , Sun S , Park AY , Guan JL . Role of kinase - independent and - dependent functions of FAK in endothelial cell survival and barrier function during embryonic development . J Cell Biol 189 : 955 - 965 . Further Reading 1 . Prasain N , Stevens T . The actin cytoskeleton in endothelial cell pheno - types . Microvasc Res 77 : 53 - 63 , 2009 . 2 . Romer LH , Birukov KG , Garcia JG . Focal adhesions : Paradigm for a signaling nexus . Circ Res 98 : 606 - 616 , 2006 . 3 . Wang L , Dudek SM . Regulation of vascular permeability by sphingo - sine 1 - phosphate Microvasc Res 77 : 39 - 45 , 2009 . 4 . Dejana E , Orsenigo F , LampugnaniMG . The role ofadherensjunctions and VE - cadherin in the control of vascular permeability . J Cell Sci 121 ( Pt 13 ) : 2115 - 2122 , 2008 . 5 . Mehta D , Malik AB . Signaling mechanisms regulating endothelial per - meability . Physiol Rev 86 : 279 - 367 , 2006 . 6 . Bazzoni G , Dejana E . Endothelial cell - to - cell junctions : molecular or - ganization and role in vascular homeostasis . Physiol Rev 84 : 869 - 901 , 2004 . 7 . Csortos C , Kolosova I , Verin AD . Regulation of vascular endothelial cell barrier function and cytoskeleton structure by protein phosphatases of the PPP family . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L843 - L854 , 2007 . 8 . Komarova YA , Mehta D , Malik AB . Dual regulation of endothelial junctional permeability . Sci STKE . 2007 : re8 , 2007 . 478 Volume 2 , January 2012