Trade - offs in the Design of Multimodal Interaction for Older Adults Gianluca Schiavo , Michela Ferron , Ornella Mich and Nadia Mana FBK - Fondazione Bruno Kessler , Trento , Italy { gschiavo , ferron , mich , mana } @ fbk . eu Abstract . This position paper presents key aspects and trade - offs that designers , ICT and HCD practitioners might encounter when designing multimodal interaction for a specific target group : older adults . The paper draws together literature on multimodal interaction and assistive technology and presents a set of specific findings for older users . Building on these findings , we describe a number of challenges that should be taken into account when designing multimodal technology for this target group . Further reflections highlight the design trade - offs that such considerations might bring , presenting an overview of the design choices and their potential effects . Keywords : Multimodality , older adults , design trade - offs . 1 Introduction Multimodal interfaces seek to combine multiple sensory input and output channels in similar ways as in natural interaction . This similarity has led to the expectation that multimodality in human - computer interaction can provide a more natural , robust and flexible form of interaction with respect to more traditional input modalities such as mouse and keyboard . [ 1 , 2 ] . In this respect , multimodal human – computer interaction has sought to provide not only more powerful and compelling interactive experiences , but also more accessible interfaces to technological devices . Moreover , following the principle of “design for all” and “inclusive design” , multimodal technology has been proposed as a possible solution that allows users to use the modality matching their preferences and / or needs , thus making the interaction more flexible [ 3 ] . However , despite these potential advantages of multimodal interfaces , the literature reports significant disadvantages . For example , different modalities may interfere with each other and a synchronization problem might arise . Additionally , combining and coordinating more than one modality might also require more effort for the users [ 4 , 5 ] and a higher cognitive load [ 4 ] . Current research provides findings supporting both assumptions reporting advantages [ 1 , 2 ] as well as disadvantages [ 4 , 5 ] . This position paper has the goal to further advance the discussion on this topic by presenting design trade - offs in multimodal technology when designing technology for older adults , a large and heterogeneous user population . 15 Proc . of Fifth International Workshop on Cultures of Participation in the Digital Age - CoPDA 2018 Castiglione della Pescaia , Italy , May 29 , 2018 ( published at http : / / ceur - ws . org ) . Copyright © 2018 for the individual papers by the papers ' authors . Copying permitted for private and academic purposes . This volume is published and copyrighted by its editors . 2 Multimodal Interaction for Older Users Multimodal interfaces have been considered to improve accessibility for a number of users and usage contexts [ 3 ] , including the diverse needs of older users [ 6 , 7 ] . Multimodal systems can integrate a wider range of modalities ( such as speech , writing , gaze , touch or mid - air gestures ) and better accommodate users’ preferences with respect to unimodal interfaces . Furthermore , multimodal interfaces can be more user - friendly for people who have little or no experience with common computer devices , since they offer the possibility to use multiple interaction channels without relying on a single source of input [ 3 ] . However , other studies point out that multimodality must be carefully introduced since it might require more cognitive effort to coordinate different input modalities ( especially when more than two modalities are involved ) and additional physical demand [ 4 ] . This may become particularly relevant when considering the cognitive and physical characteristics of older users [ 8 ] . Numerous examples of multimodal technology for older adults can be found in the research and on the market . For instance , social robots or telepresence technology are two representative examples of multimodal systems believed to support older users [ 7 ] . Before listing the design trade - offs that these or similar interaction modalities might bring in the technology , we summarize a list of design considerations . 3 Design Challenges and Recommendations Different recommendations for the design of multimodal interfaces for older adults have been discussed in the literature ( see for example , [ 4 , 7 , 9 ] ) and are summarized below . Diverse abilities . Multimodal systems provide users with the choice of using the most efficient interaction modality among those proposed by the system . Moreover , users can switch to another interaction modality after a recognition error has occurred in the previous one [ 2 ] . However , this requires that the user knows which is the best modality for her / him , or at least “intuitively” uses the best set of multimodal inputs . Personalization . One - solution - fits - all models are inadequate as they do not consider individual characteristics . The interaction and the interface should be made adaptable and personalized to user preferences and device characteristics . Users should be able to customize the multimodal channels they want to use for a given task in an application . Interaction patterns . There are large individual differences in users’ multimodal interaction patterns [ 10 ] : some individuals tend to integrate different modalities in a simultaneous manner and overlap them temporally ( simultaneous integrators ) , whereas others tend to finish one mode before beginning the second ( sequential integrators ) . Older adults demonstrate either a simultaneous or sequential dominant integration pattern [ 10 , 11 ] , however designers should be aware of such differences and multimodal interfaces should accommodate individual interaction patterns . 16 Proc . of Fifth International Workshop on Cultures of Participation in the Digital Age - CoPDA 2018 Castiglione della Pescaia , Italy , May 29 , 2018 ( published at http : / / ceur - ws . org ) . Copyright © 2018 for the individual papers by the papers ' authors . Copying permitted for private and academic purposes . This volume is published and copyrighted by its editors . Independence . Multimodal interfaces should empower older users to independently interact with the technology , even when there is a specific impairment ( for example hearing loss or reduced sight ) . Multimodal interfaces can also contribute to seniors’ perceived independence [ 7 ] , if they can empower the user to function independently . Technology reliability . Users should be able to rely on the multimodal technology , especially in the case of assistive technology . For this reason , multimodal processing should be accurate and robust . However , since recognition algorithms are mainly trained on data from non - older population , this might pose limitations on the performance ( e . g . , due to vocal features characteristics of older adults for speech recognition [ 12 ] , or slower gesture speed for gesture recognition ) . Privacy and context of use . Context of use should be carefully considered when designing multimodal technology [ 13 , 14 ] : older people have privacy and social acceptability concerns about using some modalities in public spaces ( as in the case of speech commands or mid - air gestures [ 14 ] ) . However , one of the advantages of multimodal interaction is the possibility of using one modality rather than the other according to the specific context ( e . g . , gestures instead of speech commands in noisy environments ) . 4 Design Trade - offs When considering the recommendations mentioned above , practitioners and designers might experience a number of design trade - offs , which are situations that involve losing one quality or aspect of the design in return for gaining another quality or aspect . Table 1 presents a summary of design challenges and design trade - offs . Complexity vs Simplicity . Providing the user with the possibility to interact with more than one modality might increase the interaction complexity . For example , it has been showed that the oldest of older adults ( 80 + ) found some modalities or combination of modalities too complex to use when using a multimodal tablet - based application [ 13 ] . This trade - off might also affect the system usability : a technology that supports many different modalities might increase in complexity and thus be less usable . Personalization vs Customization . Multimodal interaction can be tailored to the specific preferences or needs of the user . This process might end up in an over - personalization of the interaction , making it difficult to the user to discover or experiment with alternative interaction modalities . There is indeed a trade - off between personalization , where the system personalizes the interaction to the user , and customization , where the user is in control of the customization process . The latter allows the users to control the interaction , assuming that they know how and what feature to control . The former gives control to the system without requiring an effort from the user , but it heavily relies on system reliability and performance . Independency vs Assistance . The cognitive effort required to older users for the personalization and customization of system interaction may be avoided by allowing 17 Proc . of Fifth International Workshop on Cultures of Participation in the Digital Age - CoPDA 2018 Castiglione della Pescaia , Italy , May 29 , 2018 ( published at http : / / ceur - ws . org ) . Copyright © 2018 for the individual papers by the papers ' authors . Copying permitted for private and academic purposes . This volume is published and copyrighted by its editors . other users to take care of the process . For instance , a multimodal technology could be designed to be personalized by caregivers or therapists even though the final user is an Table 1 . Table captions should be placed above the tables . Design challenges Interaction context Multimodal design recommendation Design Trade - off Diverse abilities Need to use the most suitable modality Give the user or caregiver the choice on the interaction modality or combination of modalities • Independency vs Assistance Personalization Need to leverage user’s strongest or preferred modality Dynamically adapted multimodal interfaces • Automation vs Control • Personalization vs Customization Interaction pattern Need to support user’s interaction pattern Consider individual differences in multimodal interaction patterns • Complexity vs Simplicity • Automation vs Control • Personalization vs Customization Independence Support user’s need for self - reliance and independence User - initiated interaction with multimodal inputs • Complexity vs Simplicity • Independency vs Assistance Technology reliability Users need to be able to rely on their assistive technologies for critical support Employ well - developed components and rely on complementary modalities to reduce error rates and to increase usability • Automation vs Control • Complexity vs Simplicity • Independency vs Assistance Privacy and context of use Multimodality requires specific privacy and contextual requirements Personalization of input / output modalities to better suit the context of use • Automation vs Control older adult ( assistance ) . However , delegating actions to these users might further increase the caregiver load and could be perceived as an additional demand or burden . This might also decrease older adults independent use of the technology . Automation vs Control . Multimodal sensors can be used as background controls , to which the interface automatically adapts without any intentional and direct user engagement . In this sense , a proactive system might come forward with suggestions , or 18 Proc . of Fifth International Workshop on Cultures of Participation in the Digital Age - CoPDA 2018 Castiglione della Pescaia , Italy , May 29 , 2018 ( published at http : / / ceur - ws . org ) . Copyright © 2018 for the individual papers by the papers ' authors . Copying permitted for private and academic purposes . This volume is published and copyrighted by its editors . automatic responses , based on the sensed context and without engaging the user ( automation ) . On the other hand , a reactive system requires the user to initiate action ( control ) , which implies direct attention and control on the activity . 5 Conclusions This position paper has briefly presented some of the challenges and trade - offs that designers , ICT and HCD practitioners might encounter when designing multimodal interfaces . Even though the analysis focuses on older adults as target user group , most of these challenges hold also for the wider user population . On one side , this paper presents a reflection on how to identify the design trade - offs for multimodal interaction for older adults . On the other side , further discussion is needed to provide practitioners with methods and processes for dealing with such trade - offs . In this direction , participatory design , co - design and value - centered design approaches [ 15 ] can help designers to balance different ( and sometime competing ) design choices . We think that further discussion on this topic can emerge from the discussion during the workshop . Acknowledgments This work is supported by the EU HORIZON project ECOMODE - Event - Driven Compressive Vision for Multimodal Interaction with Mobile Devices ( http : / / www . ecomode - project . eu / ) , under Grant Agreement 644096 . References 1 . Oviatt , S . , Cohen , P . : Perceptual User Interfaces : Multimodal Interfaces That Process What Comes Naturally . Commun . ACM . 43 , 45 – 53 ( 2000 ) . 2 . Turk , M . : Multimodal interaction : A review . Pattern Recognition Letters . 36 , 189 – 195 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Obrenovic , Z . , Abascal , J . , Starcevic , D . : Universal Accessibility As a Multimodal Design Issue . Commun . ACM . 50 , 83 – 88 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Naumann , A . B . , Wechsung , I . , Hurtienne , J . : Multimodal Interaction : A Suitable Strategy for Including Older Users ? Interact . Comput . 22 , 465 – 474 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Wechsung , I . , Naumann , A . B . : Evaluation Methods for Multimodal Systems : A Comparison of Standardized Usability Questionnaires . In : André , E . , Dybkjær , L . , Minker , W . , Neumann , H . , Pieraccini , R . , and Weber , M . ( eds . ) Perception in Multimodal Dialogue Systems . pp . 276 – 284 . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg ( 2008 ) . 6 . Himmelsbach , J . , Garschall , M . , Egger , S . , Steffek , S . , Tscheligi , M . : Enabling Accessibility Through Multimodality ? : Interaction Modality Choices of Older Adults . In : Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia . pp . 195 – 199 . ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2015 ) . 19 Proc . of Fifth International Workshop on Cultures of Participation in the Digital Age - CoPDA 2018 Castiglione della Pescaia , Italy , May 29 , 2018 ( published at http : / / ceur - ws . org ) . Copyright © 2018 for the individual papers by the papers ' authors . Copying permitted for private and academic purposes . This volume is published and copyrighted by its editors . 7 . Munteanu , C . , Salah , A . A . : Multimodal technologies for seniors : challenges and opportunities . In : Oviatt , S . , Schuller , B . , Cohen , P . R . , Sonntag , D . , Potamianos , G . , and Krüger , A . ( eds . ) The Handbook of Multimodal - Multisensor Interfaces . pp . 319 – 362 . Association for Computing Machinery and Morgan & Claypool , New York , NY , USA ( 2017 ) . 8 . Fisk , A . D . , Rogers , W . A . , Charness , N . , Czaja , S . J . , Sharit , J . : Designing for Older Adults : Principles and Creative Human Factors Approaches , Second Edition . CRC Press ( 2009 ) . 9 . McGee - Lennon , M . R . , Wolters , M . K . , Brewster , S . : User - centred Multimodal Reminders for Assistive Living . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 2105 – 2114 . ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2011 ) . 10 . Xiao , B . , Lunsford , R . , Coulston , R . , Wesson , M . , Oviatt , S . : Modeling Multimodal Integration Patterns and Performance in Seniors : Toward Adaptive Processing of Individual Differences . In : Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces . pp . 265 – 272 . ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2003 ) . 11 . Schiavo , G . , Mich , O . , Ferron , M . , Mana , N . : Mobile Multimodal Interaction for Older and Younger Users : Exploring Differences and Similarities . In : Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia . pp . 407 – 414 . ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2017 ) . 12 . Vacher , M . , Portet , F . , Rossato , S . , Aman , F . , Golanski , C . , Dugheanu , R . : Speech - based interaction in an AAL - context . 1 – 7 ( 2012 ) . 13 . Neves , B . B . , Franz , R . L . , Munteanu , C . , Baecker , R . , Ngo , M . : “My Hand Doesn’T Listen to Me ! ” : Adoption and Evaluation of a Communication Technology for the ‘Oldest Old . ’ In : Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 1593 – 1602 . ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2015 ) . 14 . Rico , J . , Brewster , S . : Gesture and Voice Prototyping for Early Evaluations of Social Acceptability in Multimodal Interfaces . In : International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces and the Workshop on Machine Learning for Multimodal Interaction . pp . 16 : 1 – 16 : 9 . ACM , New York , NY , USA ( 2010 ) . 15 . Fischer , G . : Exploring design trade - offs for quality of life in human - centered design . interactions . 25 , 26 – 33 ( 2017 ) . 20 Proc . of Fifth International Workshop on Cultures of Participation in the Digital Age - CoPDA 2018 Castiglione della Pescaia , Italy , May 29 , 2018 ( published at http : / / ceur - ws . org ) . Copyright © 2018 for the individual papers by the papers ' authors . Copying permitted for private and academic purposes . This volume is published and copyrighted by its editors .