Published on The Grigorieff Lab ( http : / / grigoriefflab . janelia . org ) Home > Publications > Printer - friendly PDF Frealix : model - based refinement of helical filament structures from electron micrographs Title Frealix : model - based refinement of helical filament structures from electron micrographs PublicationType Journal Article Year of Publication 2014 Authors Rohou , A , Grigorieff N RefereedDesignation Refereed Journal J Struct Biol Volume 186 Pagination 234 – 244 ISSN 1047 - 8477 Keywords Amyloid , Cryo - EM , Curvature , Filament , Helical , Structure Abstract The structures of many helical protein filaments can be derived from electron micrographs of their suspensions in thin films of vitrified aqueous solutions . The most successful and generally - applicable approach treats short segments of these filaments as independent “single particles” , yielding near - atomic resolution for rigid and well - ordered filaments . The single - particle approach can also accommodate filament deformations , yielding sub - nanometer resolution for more flexible filaments . However , in the case of thin and flexible filaments , such as some amyloid - β ( Aβ ) fibrils , the single - particle approach may fail because helical segments can be curved or otherwise distorted and their alignment can be inaccurate due to low contrast in the micrographs . We developed new software called Frealix that allows the use of arbitrarily short filament segments during alignment to approximate even high curvatures . All segments in a filament are aligned simultaneously with constraints that ensure that they connect to each other in space to form a continuous helical structure . In this paper , we describe the algorithm and benchmark it against datasets of Aβ ( 1 - 40 ) fibrils and tobacco mosaic virus ( TMV ) , both analyzed in earlier work . In the case of TMV , our algorithm achieves similar results to single - particle analysis . In the case of Aβ ( 1 - 40 ) fibrils , we match the previously - obtained resolution but we are also able to obtain reliable alignments and ∼ 8 - Å reconstructions from curved filaments . Our algorithm also offers a detailed characterization of filament deformations in three dimensions and enables a critical evaluation of the worm - like chain model for biological filaments . URL http : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S1047847714000653 DOI http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2014 . 03 . 012 Rohou _ JSB2014 . pdf 1 . 53 MB Source URL : http : / / grigoriefflab . janelia . org / node / 4402 1