PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE This article was downloaded by : [ Texas A & M University ] On : 3 February 2010 Access details : Access Details : [ subscription number 915031387 ] Publisher Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Creativity Research Journal Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . informaworld . com / smpp / title ~ content = t775653635 Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Bo T . Christensen a ; Christian D . Schunn b a University of Aarhus . b University of Pittsburgh . To cite this Article Christensen , Bo T . and Schunn , Christian D . ( 2005 ) ' Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects ' , Creativity Research Journal , 17 : 2 , 207 — 220 To link to this Article : DOI : 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1702 & 3 _ 7 URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1702 & 3 _ 7 Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . informaworld . com / terms - and - conditions - of - access . pdf This article may be used for research , teaching and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , re - distribution , re - selling , loan or sub - licensing , systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Bo T . Christensen University of Aarhus Christian D . Schunn University of Pittsburgh ABSTRACT : Incubation often plays a role in creative problem solving . Theories of analogical problem solv - ing and Opportunistic Assimilation ( OA ) theory ( Seifert , Meyer , Davidson , Patalano , & Yaniv , 1995 ) of incubation in creative problem solving were tested . OA theory predicts that a previously encoded unsolved problem will be spontaneously accessed and mapped by a later encounter with an analogous prob - lem - with - solution . This study tested the OA predictions on insight problems and found spontaneous access ef - fects for uninformed participants . Spontaneous access was compared to a baseline derived from the same par - ticipant’s typical problem - solving behavior following distracter tasks . Following access of the analogous cue , participants increased their performance , demon - strating incubation effects . These results support the theory that at least some incubation effects are caused by previously unsolved problems being solved on later chance encounters with relevant information in the en - vironment . Since Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , 1983 ) conducted their classic studies of Duncker’s ( 1945 ) radiation problem , the standard way of studying analogical problem solv - ing has consisted of first letting participants encode a problem - with - solution ( source ) , and then afterward presenting the participants with an analogous problem to solve ( target ) . This task structure is mirrored in pre - vailing models of reasoning by analogy and similarity such as MAC / FAC ( Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1994 ) , LISA ( Hummel & Holyoak , 1997 ) , and ARCS ( Thagard , Holyoak , Nelson , & Gochfeld , 1990 ) . The canonical model divides analogical problem - solving into at least three phases : First , the source is encoded ; second , a target induces access of a source relevant to the solution of the target ; and third , the source is mapped unto the target to draw a solution ( e . g . , Anolli , Antonietti , Crisafulli , & Cantoia , 2001 ) . However , experiment V of Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , experiment V ) also included a variation of this analogical problem solving ordering . The experimen - tal variation consisted of changing the order of the source and target , by first allowing the participants time to work on the radiation problem ( target ) , fol - lowed by reading and recall of an analogous story ( source—the Attack - Dispersion story ) , again followed by work on the radiation problem . This “target source” condition was compared to the standard way of doing analogical problem solving ( i . e . , source before target ) , and to a control receiving no analogous story , but with incubation time away from the problem . There was no indication that the target - source condition increased performance over the source - target condition , but re - ceiving the analogous story did improve performance over the incubation control condition . This variation of the standard analogical problem solving paradigm has only been used a few times in the analogical problem solving literature . Another study using this “reverse” ( i . e . , tar - get - source ) analogical problem - solving design was by Keane ( 1985 ) . That study tested whether presenting Creativity Research Journal 2005 , Vol . 17 , No . 2 & 3 , 207 – 220 Copyright © 2005 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Creativity Research Journal 207 The authors would like to thank Kwangsu Cho , Anthony Harrison , Xiaohui Kong , and Mark McGregor for helpful comments on an ear - lier draft . This work was supported by Grant N00014 - 01 – 1 - 0321 from the U . S . Office of Naval Research to the second author . Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Bo T . Christensen , Department of Psychology , University of Aarhus , Jens Chr . SkousVej4 , 8000AarhusC , Denmark . E - mail : botc @ psy . au . dk Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 merely the solutions to analogous problems was enough to improve performance over an incubation control group , again using the radiation problem , but this time using distracter tasks . Participants were in - structed that the solutions might be useful . This hy - pothesis was supported . Although the dominant theories of analogical ac - cess would not predict any difference for these two dif - ferent directions of analogical retrieval , it is especially interesting for studies of creativity to examine this “re - verse” direction further . For creative problems , where the solution can be surprising and may restructure the entire problem representation ( Dominowski & Dallob , 1995 ; Kaplan & Simon , 1990 ) , this ordering may be important because a restructured problem space may analogically trigger access to different source analogs . This study was a careful time - course analysis of “re - verse” analogical problem solving using video record - ings of the problem - solving process . By using this non - standard “reverse” analogical problem - solving design we were able to code for impasse , incubation , sponta - neous access , and mapping in the same design . In the sections that follow , we will briefly review the relevant pieces of the analogical transfer literature and then the incubation literature . Analogical Transfer : Access , Retrieval , and Noticing A number of factors have been found to influence spontaneous analogical access . Access is improved when the source is presented as a problem rather than as declarative knowledge ( Adams , Kasserman , Yearwood , & Perfetto , 1988 ; Lockhart , Lamon , & Gick , 1988 ) , if explicitness of the cross - domain rela - tional similarity is increased ( Clement , Mawby , & Giles , 1994 ) , or if experimental conditions stress a rich encoding and structural information at retrieval ( Dunbar , 2001 ) . Furthermore , it has been found that the presence of salient superficial similarity increases spontaneous access ( e . g . , Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ; Gentner , Rattermann , & Forbus , 1993 ) . A large number of studies have found that provid - ing participants with an analogous source prior to showing the target rarely leads to significant access ( or mapping ) of the source , unless explicit instruc - tions are provided to make use of previous informa - tion ( i . e . , participants are informed of the potential relevance of previous problems during the instruc - tions ) , or if the source is very similar to the target ( see , e . g . , Anolli et al . , 2001 , for a brief review ) . Anolli et al . ( 2001 ) argued that these findings sug - gested that analogical access is not a spontaneous process . However , as Ross , Ryan , and Tenpenny ( 1989 ) noted , studies have not shown that people never spontaneously access relevant information , but only that , in cases where they are expected to do so , they often do not . Trying to measure spontaneous ac - cess on uninformed participants is a methodological problem that previous studies have struggled with . Typically either informed participants are used in a paradigm where the participants are asked to write down any previous problems they access ( e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1993 ) , or performance measures are used ( i . e . , correct or incorrect solution ) , which is a less optimal measure of access because some partici - pants may have accessed the source without being able to map between source and target ( e . g . , Gick & Holyoak , 1980 ) . An exception was Ross ( 1987 ) , who used correct – incorrect performance to measure map - ping , but used a different score ( whether the partici - pant appeared to be making use of a source formula on the answer sheet ) to measure access . This measure enables a separation of access and mapping in the same design , but still runs the risk of underestimating access . For example , participants may access a source without making use of it on the answer sheet , because they do not consider it relevant . As Ross et al . ( 1989 ) argued , an important aspect of measuring spontaneous access in a within - subject de - sign is that the participant should not be aware of the relevance of the source analogues ( i . e . , be informed ) . When measuring spontaneous access in a within - sub - ject design it is thus necessary for the researcher to demonstrate that participants did not become aware of the relevance ( i . e . , catch on , thus becoming informed ) after they had accessed relevant sources . This result led Ross et al . ( 1989 ) to conclude that , to avoid having to deal with an unknown mixture of informed and unin - formed cases , access issues need to be studied with in - formed participants . Efforts were made in this study to design a novel way of measuring spontaneous access on uninformed participants , while avoiding the above pitfalls , by sepa - rating access and mapping measures in a within - sub - ject design while controlling for whether the partici - pants had caught on . 208 Creativity Research Journal B . T . Christensen and C . D . Schunn Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 A note on terminology : Ross ( 1989 ) has made a dis - tinction between access , noticing , and retrieval of a source . Access involves both noticing and retrieving a source . Where the noticing involves recognizing or se - lecting a particular earlier example , retrieval concerns the actual remembrance of this earlier example . Fur - ther , the analogical access literature have used terms like spontaneous ( e . g . , Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ) and au - tomatic ( e . g . , Anolli et al . , 2001 ) for experimental con - ditions where the participant is uninformed about rele - vance of the source information . In this study , the term immediate access refers to access of the relevant un - solved target problem immediately following presenta - tion of an analogous source problem . The term sponta - neous immediate access is used to refer to immediate access where the participants are also uninformed about the relevance of the source information for solv - ing the problem , and where they have not yet caught on to this fact . The term automatic is not used in order to avoid suggesting a constant law or high frequency of access because this suggestion seems unwarranted given the hard time researchers have had finding evi - dence for this phenomenon . Incubation as Reversed Analogical Transfer The “reversed” analogical problem solving design ( i . e . , target source ) is identical with incubation effect study designs , and thus allows for testing of incubation effect hypotheses . The incubation effect refers to the phenomenon that spending time away from a problem may be beneficial to performance , compared to contin - uous problem solving . Incubation starts off with an in - dividual who , having reached an impasse on a prob - lem , sets the problem aside . During incubation , no conscious problem solving appears to be going on , and individuals go about their other unrelated business . At some point the individual will return to problem solv - ing , often described as occurring suddenly and surpris - ingly , in a flash of “insight , ” where the solution is readily evident . Experimental studies of this phenome - non have received mixed results . An early review ( Olton , 1979 ) questioned the existence of the incuba - tion phenomenon , but a more recent review ( Dodds , Ward , & Smith , in press ) argued that recent studies show more promise . Incubation theories can be divided into two groups : Autonomous incubation refers to theories hypothesiz - ing that the effect is due to some phenomenon relying only on the passage of time , whereas interactive incu - bation theories require that new relevant information must be available in the environment ( Dorfman , Shames , & Kihlstrom , 1996 ) . Autonomous theories of incubation have , for example , attributed the phenome - non to unconscious idea generation ( e . g . , Campbell , 1960 ) , selective forgetting ( Simon , 1966 ) , and forget - ting of fixating elements ( Smith , 1995 ; Smith & Blankenship , 1991 ) . However , the interactive theory of Opportunistic Assimilation ( OA ; Seifert et al . , 1995 ; Patalano & Seifert , 1994 ) tries to explain incubation ef - fects with chance ( e . g . , analogical ) cuing from the en - vironment . The theory states that reaching an impasse on a creative problem will encode “failure indices” in memory , which will be activated through automatic spreading of activation by standard perception and comprehension processes if the participant later en - counters an analogous solution or solution element in the environment , thus bringing the previously un - solved problem back into awareness for new solution attempts . These failure indices constitute a form of pre - dictive encoding that allows the individual to recognize later opportunities to achieve pending goals ( Patalano & Seifert , 1997 ; Seifert , 1994 ) , much like it occurs in everyday planning . In this way , the theory ties in with the Zeigarnik ( 1927 ) effect in that it hypothesizes that memory for unsolved problems is better than for solved problems , and with Louis Pasteur’s notion that “chance favors the prepared mind” ( e . g . , Posner , 1973 ) . OA thus predicts that seeing relevant informa - tion in the environment will trigger spontaneous access to previously unsolved analogous problems . Further - more , this access is predicted to increase performance on the previously unsolved problem . Both of these hy - potheses can be tested using the “reverse” analogical problem solving paradigm . On testing the importance of impasses in OA the - ory , Seifert et al . ( 1995 ) found that only when partici - pants had previously reached an impasse in answer - ing difficult factual questions , and when they were later followed by incidental relevant information , did participants improve performance . Patalano and Seifert ( 1994 ) investigated the memorability of solved and unsolved problems following impasse , and found this effect depended on set size . Only when impasses are infrequent ( i . e . , when set size is small ) , are unsolved problems more available in memory than solved problems . Creativity Research Journal 209 Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 Few studies have tested for interactive incubation effects , and with mixed results . An early study by Dreistadt ( 1969 ) showed that the presentation of vi - sual analogical cues during incubation on insight problems had a significant effect on performance when compared to participants working continuously on the problem . However , Olton and Johnson ( 1976 ) failed to replicate this result , and Browne and Cruse ( 1988 ) using one of Dreistadt’s insight problems found incubation effects for the experimental group receiving cues in only one of their two experiments . Dominowski and Jenrick ( 1972 ) found incubation ef - fects for providing verbal cues on the hat - rack prob - lem . Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) items ( Mednick , 1962 ) have been used in several studies ; Mednick et al . ( 1964 , exp II ) found that participants performed better on items where they were primed with cues during incubation than when they were not . Using a variation of RAT items , Dorfman ( 1990 ) found mixed results depending on whether the incubation task con - sisted of working on other similar problems ( yielding an interactive incubation effect ) or working on an un - related arithmetic task ( yielding an autonomous incu - bation effect ) . In a large study , Dodds , Smith , and Ward ( 2002 ) tested whether the presentation of asso - ciates of the answer would automatically lead to per - formance increases following initial solution attempts on RAT items , but no significant effect was found . It should be noted that , in all RAT studies , associates were used as cues , which is not the same as ana - logues . In conclusion , studies testing for interactive incuba - tion effects have yielded mixed results when using vi - sual analogies for insight problems and RAT items . However , as noted earlier , two studies have found incu - bation effects when providing analogous stories ( Gick & Holyoak , 1980 , exp V ) or solutions to analogous problems ( Keane , 1985 ) during incubation . But both these studies suffer from shortcomings . Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , exp V ) did not provide distracter tasks ( only the Attack - Dispersion story was read during in - cubation ) . Adding distracter tasks could potentially have influenced spontaneous transfer , as indicated by their experiment IV , and possibly reduced spontaneous transfer to insignificant amounts given the small sam - ple size used ( 10 participants in the control group , and 20 participants in the incubation condition ) . Keane ( 1985 ) did provide distracter tasks , but he also in - structed participants that the stories they read might be relevant in solving the problem , thereby informing par - ticipants of the relevance of the cue . In summary , it has yet to be established what ( if any ) kinds of creative problems and cues will show reliable interactive incu - bation effects for uninformed participants . Moreover , none of these reverse analogy studies ( nor in fact the majority of traditional analogy studies ) have looked at the process of spontaneous access and success of ana - logical transfer in the same design . By using video in a careful time - course analysis this study measured im - passe , incubation , analogical access , and analogical mapping separately in the same design . The study tested whether encountering analogous solutions to previously unsolved problems would lead to spontane - ous immediate access of the unsolved problem , and performance increase through analogical mapping on insight problems ( see Figure 1 ) . Further , it was tested whether initial encoding time of the problem or incu - bation time predicted immediate retrieval of the un - 210 Creativity Research Journal B . T . Christensen and C . D . Schunn Figure 1 . Problem - solving timeline on individual problems . Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 solved problem on seeing the relevant analogue . Finally , categories that are typically not measurable in standard analogical problem - solving designs were ex - amined ; in particular we examined problems that are immediately accessed , but where no performance in - crease is found , and problems that are not immediately accessed , but where performance is nonetheless in - creased once the participant returns to the problem . These categories are typically not measurable because they require a separation of access and mapping mea - sures in the same design . In sum , we examined whether analogous cues do produce immediate access to related unsolved prob - lems , and then whether access produce successful ana - logical mappings ( thereby accounting for at least one source of incubation effects ) . It is possible that analo - gous cues do not produce immediate access , but in - stead produce analogical mappings only when people happen to return to the unsolved problem later . For cases with low surface similarity , this result could be expected from the frequent failures to find spontaneous analogical access with low surface similarity . It is also possible that analogous cues do produce immediate ac - cess of related unsolved problems , but that analogical mappings are not successfully made with high fre - quency ( in which case OA is a poor account of incuba - tion effects ) . Methods Participants Forty undergraduates ( 12 female ) from the Univer - sity of Pittsburgh participant pool participated for course credits . Materials Participants worked on eight insight problems adapted from the literature ( see Appendix A ) . Each problem was presented on a separate page . Eight anal - ogous insight problems were constructed as cues ( anal - ogous cues ) , along with four unrelated insight prob - lems ( distracter tasks ) . These were presented as rating tasks , where the participants had to rate the problem for difficulty on a scale from 1 to 5 . These rating tasks were constructed so the problem was presented on the front , and the solution to the problem and the rating scale on the back of a sheet of paper . Rating tasks and problem order were varied across participants . Each participant received four analogous and four distracter rating tasks . These experimental materials were constructed to minimize superficial similarity between source and target as much as possible . However , in designing the materials we found that the distinction between super - ficial similarity and structural similarity is somewhat subjective and may be a continuum rather than a di - chotomy . We found that it is always possible for a moti - vated person to find some superficial similarity be - tween problems that are supposed to contain “only” structural similarity . For example , in the present mate - rials , the analogue we constructed to the Tennis Tour - nament problem was a Viking battle where Vikings fight each other to go to Valhalla ( see Appendix A ) . This analogue was constructed to minimize story line similarity , leaving mainly structural similarity . How - ever , some of the concepts used are somewhat inter - changeable , although different words are applied ; for example , the words match ( as in tennis match ) and fight ( in the Viking story ) basically point to the same underlying construct even though different words are applied . In some cases , these words can be used inter - changeably , as in boxing match and boxing fight . Does this correspondence mean that the presence of match in the tennis story and the presence of fight in the Viking story constitute structural or superficial similarity ? We suggest it has elements of both ; the match – fight con - struct serves to secure a structurally relevant mapping , but insofar as the match – fight concepts are inter - changeable ( in a given problem context ) , they can also be characterized as somewhat superficially similar . To take another example from the Viking story , the words tournament and battle are again used as analogous concepts . In this case , however , the tournament ( in the context of a tennis match ) has additional constraints at - tached to it , compared to the “battle” concept . Tourna - ments involve a strict hierarchical structure , where the winner from one match moves to the next “level” in the tournament . This strict hierarchy is not an essential part of the “battle” concept , and thus this constraint had to be added to the Viking story to make the analogy a tight one . Thus , in this case , it has to be inferred by the problem solver that battle is analogous to tournament if this constraint is added . In this case , we argue the similarity between battle and tournament is more structural than superficial . Creativity Research Journal 211 Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 Our materials appear to sit somewhere in the middle of the continuum between superficial and structural similarity . However , even though some amount of su - perficial similarity may be present in our materials , this does not make our results uninteresting to the “analogi - cal access” literature . As Hammond , Seifert , and Gray ( 1991 ) argued , memory serves a function , and theories and experiments on memory should include ( rather than exclude ) those sets of useful features that are al - ready part of the tasks that memory serves . Superficial similarity is one such feature . Furthermore , as briefly reviewed in the introduction , interactive incubation studies have had problems finding reliable results , which would make any positive incubation effect inter - esting—regardless of whether it is triggered in part by superficial similarity . Finally , problem – cue pairs were designed to minimize superficial similarity , and our stimuli were more typical of the “structural - only” sim - ilarity found in source - target conditions that fail to find spontaneous analogical transfer than typical of the “su - perficial” similarity conditions that find spontaneous analogical transfer . Procedure Participants read instructions with a cover story about being the editor of Puzzle Magazine to prevent participants from expecting a relationship between source and target problems . They were informed that they would be working on eight puzzles , but that they would have to rate other puzzles for difficulty ( on a scale from 1 to 5 ) as well . Their secretary ( the experi - menter ) would from time to time put a puzzle ( i . e . , ei - ther an analogous cue or distracter cue ) on their desk , and they should immediately read through it ( including the answer on the back ) , rate it for difficulty , and hand it back . It was stressed that they should work fast , and that they could return to previous puzzles at any time . The experiment was carried out on one participant at a time . Participants were given 45 min to solve all eight problems . During this time they could freely move between problems . Progress on the problems was videotaped . Every 5 min the participants were handed an analogous or distracter rating task . These tasks were handed to the participants at a time when they had already worked on the relevant problem , and moved on ( i . e . , after reaching a self - generated im - passe ) . Through a computer linked to the video cam - era , the experimenter kept track of which problems had been worked on and left ( i . e . , where the participant had reached an impasse on the problem ) and which prob - lem the participant was currently working on . This pro - cedure made it possible to constantly update a pool of available tasks , wherefrom a task was randomly se - lected ( using random number tables ) and handed to the participant every 5 min . When the 45 min had elapsed , the participant was asked to fill out questionnaires about memory for the problems and awareness of the rating task / problem relationship . Impasse was coded as the time when a participant left a problem after hav - ing first worked on it , without a correct solution . Ac - cess was coded based on which page was turned to next in the booklet . A correct access was defined as return - ing to the relevant previously unsolved problem as the very next problem following the analogous rating task . Mapping was coded by performance ( i . e . , correct or in - correct solution ) . Time spent working on individual problems , both before and after reaching an impasse , was also measured . See Figure 2 for an example of typ - ical problem solving behavior . Results Successful Analogical Mapping Participants solved 44 % of the problems . Of the solved problems , 39 % were solved prior to impasse and the remaining 61 % were solved after returning to the problem . Problems solved prior to impasse were excluded from further analysis . A resolution score ( e . g . , Smith & Blankenship , 1991—see Appendix B ) was calculated for each participant for the analo - gous - cued problems and the distracter - cued problems , respectively . The resolution score calculates the pro - portion of impassed problems that were eventually solved . Mean per participant resolution scores were . 53 and . 17 for the analogous - cued and distracter - cued problems , respectively ( standard errors were . 05 and . 04 , respectively ) . Analogous cues produced notice - ably higher resolution scores , t ( 39 ) = 5 . 62 , p < . 001 , showing that the cues were highly effective and pro - duced a large effect over a control of the distracter - cued problems that were initially unsolved and left . It could be argued that this comparison does not directly measure a traditional incubation effect as such because no control group working continuously was included ; perhaps the distracter - cued problems 212 Creativity Research Journal B . T . Christensen and C . D . Schunn Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 would also have an incubation effect ( of the autono - mous rather than interactive kind ) had they been com - pared to a control group working continuously . What it does demonstrate , however , is that an incubation effect based on new relevant information from the environ - ment is significantly larger than any potential incuba - tion effects based on autonomous cognitive processes alone ( . 36 vs . . 17 at most ) . Our apparent interactive in - cubation effect could still potentially be explained away if the participants spent more time on the analo - gous - cued problems after returning to the problems . Bowden ( 1985 ) had similar objections to the original Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 ) study . To test for this possi - bility , we measured how much time participants spent working on distracter - cued and analogous - cued prob - lems after having first reached an impasse on the prob - Creativity Research Journal 213 Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Figure 2 . Example of problem solving behavior : Participant 35 . Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 lem ( i . e . , after leaving the problem when having first worked on it ) . Participants spent almost 40 % longer ( not shorter ) after impasse on distracter - cued problems than analogous - cued problems , t ( 39 ) = 2 . 17 , p < . 04 , thus ruling out the possibility that participants had sim - ply worked longer on the analogous - cued problems af - ter impasse . Analogical Access Immediate analogical access was measured by ex - amining ( using video ) which problem the participant would turn to in the booklet as the next problem fol - lowing the presentation of an analogous cue . On aver - age , participants returned immediately 50 % of the time to the relevant problem . It could be argued that this 50 % should be compared to a theoretical one - seventh chance of going to any particular problem next . How - ever , we used a more accurate baseline based on typical page - turning behavior following the distracter tasks . Two strategies were identified in participants’ page turning . Before the participants had seen all problems , a dominant strategy was simply to turn to the next un - seen problem in the booklet . This strategy occurred 96 % of the time . The time until participants had seen all problems in the booklet and moved onto other prob - lems was on average 21 min and 31 sec . After the par - ticipants had seen all the problems , they appeared to be employing a strategy of locating a previously unan - swered problem ( i . e . , a problem where they had not yet indicated any solution in the answer section of the page ) to work on . Following any given distracter task after seeing all problems , participants would on aver - age have 33 % unanswered problems in the book - let—but they would return to these 68 % of the time . This information was used to test whether the partici - pants were returning to the relevant previously un - solved problems significantly more often than their usual behavior on the distracter tasks would predict . For each participant , an immediate access rate and baseline was calculated ( see Appendix B ) BEFORE and AFTER all problems had been seen ( see Table 1 ) . In both cases , access rates were significantly above baseline . This immediate access measure does not take into account that the participants may become informed ( i . e . , catch onto the relevance of the analogous cues during problem solving ) . Being informed should be taken into account when trying to estimate spontane - ous immediate access . Immediate access rates were higher after seeing all problems than before , t ( 23 ) = 3 . 49 , p < . 003 , which could suggest that the initial dominant strategy of turning to the next unseen prob - lem depressed the access rates . But it may also indi - cate that participants caught on during problem solv - ing . To examine this issue further , access rates were divided into a 2 × 2 depending on whether partici - pants were expected to have become informed , and whether they had seen all problems ( see Table 2 ) . Participants were scored as “informed” if they had re - turned immediately to a relevant problem at least once before . Problems that were solved before im - passe were once again excluded from this analysis . A small number of problems where the participant had not yet immediately accessed a relevant problem , but where it was indeterminable whether the participants had caught on , because they had received analogous cues to problems they had already solved , were ex - cluded from this analysis . Comparing rows in Table 2 illustrates that there is an effect of being informed , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 16 . 64 , p < . 001 . Comparing columns in Table 2 shows that there is an effect of page - turning strategy ( lower retrieval rates prior to seeing all problems ) , χ 2 ( 1 ) = 13 . 62 , p < . 001 . 214 Creativity Research Journal B . T . Christensen and C . D . Schunn Table 1 . Mean Immediate Access Rates and Baseline Calculations Before and After Seeing All Problems N M SE t p Access rate BEFORE seeing all problems 25 . 26 . 08 3 . 04 < . 007 Baseline BEFORE seeing all problems 25 . 01 . 00 Access rate AFTER seeing all problems 39 . 64 . 06 7 . 56 < . 001 Baseline AFTER seeing all problems 39 . 17 . 01 Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 To estimate spontaneous immediate retrieval , we excluded all problems where the participant was ex - pected to have caught on , and calculated a mean access rate and baseline per participant following the same procedure as for immediate access measures . The re - sults were still highly significant for both before , t ( 24 ) = 3 . 10 , p < . 006 , and after , t ( 23 ) = 5 . 78 , p < . 001 , seeing all problems in the booklet . Means before seeing all problems were . 28 and . 01 for the baseline ; means after seeing all problems were . 66 and . 16 for the baseline . Note that these means are within - subject , and therefore differ from the means presented in Table 2 , which are across - subjects . These results indicate that when spon - taneous immediate access to analogous unsolved prob - lems is measured against a control of the same person’s problem - solving behavior following distracter tasks , a large effect is found when controlling for participants who become informed during the experiment . The results show that , when participants were given relevant cues , they deviated from their typical page - turning strategies to return to the relevant prob - lem to try to utilize the new information to solve that problem . They did not randomly look through the booklet to try to find a match for the cue , but rather they went straight to the relevant problem , suggesting that becoming informed did not change behavior in the ab - sence of access . Using the same participants’ typical page - turning behavior following distracter tasks as a control measure , and controlling for participants who become informed , thus revealed an immediate access effect . It was also found , as it has been many times in the literature , that the immediate access rate was larger for informed participants than for uninformed partici - pants . What Factors Predict Immediate Retrieval ? Analogous cues did not lead to 100 % immediate re - trieval . Examining what factors predicted immediate retrievals can provide further information on the mech - anisms of analogical retrieval in insight problems . From a simple memory perspective , one would predict that encoding time on the impassed problems would predict how easily they are retrieved on cuing . To test whether encoding time predicted immediate access , we measured time spent working on each problem for each participant ( i . e . , how much time was spent work - ing on each individual page in the booklet ) prior to re - ceiving the analogous cue . Then we conducted a within - subject t test comparing encoding time for problems that were immediately accessed , with those that were not . The result was significant , t ( 26 ) = 3 . 81 , p < . 002 , showing that encoding time did predict imme - diate retrieval . Means for immediate access and non - immediate access were 3 min 49 sec and 2 min 12 sec , respectively . From the perspective of autonomous incubation ef - fects , time away from the impassed problem might pre - dict degree of immediate access . We tested whether time away from the problem ( incubation time ) pre - dicted immediate access , by measuring the time from last leaving the problem to presentation of the analo - gous cue . Similar to the encoding time analysis , we then compared incubation time for problems that were immediately accessed , with those that were not . This comparison was not significant , t ( 26 ) = – . 57 , p > . 57 . Means for immediate access and nonimmediate access were 5 min 49 sec and 6 min 35 sec , respectively . Is Immediate Analogical Mapping Different From Later Returns ? Because both access and mapping were measured separately in the same design , it was possible to calcu - Creativity Research Journal 215 Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Table 2 . Access Rates by Being Informed and Page - Turning Strategy ( Whether Participant Had Seen All Problems in the Booklet ) Not Seen All Seen All Not caught on . 24 ( n = 34 ) . 46 ( n = 41 ) Caught on . 60 ( n = 5 ) . 78 ( n = 36 ) Note . Inthefigure , n referstonumberofproblemsineachcategory across participants . Excluded are problems where it was indetermin - able whether the participant had caught on and problems solved preimpasse . Table 3 . Mean per Category Resolution Scores by Whether Participant Did or Did Not Immediately Return to the Relevant Problem on Seeing an Analogous Cue Analogous Cue ImmediateReturn NonimmediateReturn Distractor Task Resolutionscore . 67 ( n = 64 ) . 32 ( n = 62 ) . 16 ( n = 135 ) Note . n refers to number of problems in each category . All means differed significantly pairwise ( . 001 < p < . 012 ) . Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 late whether resolution scores for the immediate and nonimmediate returns differed , and differed from reso - lution scores for the problems receiving only distracter tasks ( see Table 3 ) . For problems where the participants accessed the relevant problem immediately there was a higher reso - lution score than for either the nonimmediate returns or the problems receiving only distracter tasks . But on problems where the participant did not immediately access the relevant problem , they still had a significant effect of relevant cuing on performance compared to the problems receiving distracter task . This result could potentially be accounted for if the nonimmediate returns benefitted performance by a process similar to semantic priming ( see , e . g . , Schunn & Dunbar , 1996 , for another analogical transfer study finding a priming effect ) . In semantic priming participants are unaware that their performance is increased by relevant infor - mation . Because we measured awareness of each prob - lem – cue relationship after the experiment , we were able to test for this possibility . In the nonimmediate re - turn category participants reported being aware of the relationship between the problem and the cue for 17 of the 20 ( i . e . , 85 % ) problems that were solved . This re - sult gives a clear indication that once mapping took place , participants were explicitly aware of the prob - lem – cue relationship . So semantic priming without ex - plicit awareness appeared not to be the cause . Discussion The novel design developed in this experiment showed it was possible to separate a number of con - structs for each problem in a within - subject design using video . These constructs , which are typically only manipulated across experimental conditions , in - clude encoding time , impasse , incubation time , ana - logical access , and analogical transfer , along with measures of becoming informed and problem solving strategies . The careful time - course analysis used here thus has the potential for informing a number of theo - ries in the analogical problem solving and incuba - tion – insight literature This experiment was able to show that analogical cuing led to immediate access , when controlling for becoming informed , by using the participants’ typical problem - solving behavior following distracter prob - lems as a control . The results suggest that perhaps the failure of much of the previous analogical transfer literature to find such a spontaneous transfer effect may in part be attrib - utable to their use of comparison groups . Previous studies have often showed that , when comparing in - formed and uninformed participants , the informed par - ticipants accessed and transferred more frequently than the uninformed . But perhaps this comparison is unfair when trying to establish whether and how frequently spontaneous immediate access occurs . A large effect of analogous cuing on spontaneous immediate access was thus found when using the same participants’ typical problem solving behavior following distracter tasks as a baseline . This experiment also showed , as has often been noted , that when participants become informed ( i . e . , caught on ) they accessed more frequently . Thus , there appears to be a spontaneous immediate access ef - fect of receiving analogous cues , but an even larger ef - fect of being informed . This latter effect of being in - formed should not , however , lead one to assume that no spontaneous access effect is present even though it may appear small in comparison to the effect of being informed ( as , e . g . , Anolli et al . , 2001 , seems to do ) . Encoding time predicted immediate access , thus supporting Dunbar’s ( 2001 ) hypothesis that encoding time of the analogue to be accessed is extremely im - portant , and may help explain why some researchers have failed to find transfer effects . Incubation time , however , did not predict immediate access suggesting that autonomous incubation effects played little role in this study . The Opportunistic Assimilation ( Seifert et al . , 1995 ) theory of incubation was also supported by this spontaneous immediate access effect , and OA was fur - ther supported by the result that receiving an analogous problem during incubation ( after impasse ) increased performance through analogical mapping . These re - sults lend support to the OA theory that—following impasse on creative problems—a chance encounter with analogous relevant new information in the envi - ronment will ( at least in some cases ) spontaneously trigger access and mapping to the previously unsolved problem . Thus , presenting analogous problems during incubation is at least one reliable way of demonstrating incubation effects , unlike visual analogies and associ - ates in RAT problems , which , as noted in the introduc - 216 Creativity Research Journal B . T . Christensen and C . D . Schunn Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 tion , have shown mixed results . On at least some ana - logical problems , chance does appear to favor the prepared mind . Several more experiments should be conducted to further test OA theory . For example , the theory would predict that spontaneous immediate access rates should increase after impasse . This prediction could potentially be tested by presenting cues after impasse ( as it is done in this experiment ) and comparing them with other problems where the cue is presented before impasse ( possibly before seeing the target as it is done in standard analogical problem solving ) . This design is essentially the same variation that was done in the orig - inal Gick and Holyoak ( 1980 , exp V ) study . They found no significant difference , but this result should be retested using a variation of this design in a larger study . From the retrospective reports , participants were in most cases explicitly aware of the problem – cue re - lationship . This result means that a limitation of this study is that it cannot purport to explain incubation phenomena where participants are unaware of how they solved the problem . Much anecdotal evidence concerns individuals who later reported that an idea just simply occurred to them when they for example were in the bath or sitting on a bus . Unless a mecha - nism can be identified that would explain why people later often do not report that they used cues from the environment in their solution of the problem , OA may not be able to explain these cases . However , it could be accounted for by the standard memory mechanism of differential rehearsal or retrieval prac - tice ( e . g . , Bjork , 1988 ) . Perhaps when a creative dis - covery or invention is rehearsed over the years through repeated retelling of the problem and solu - tion by its creator , memory of how the problem was originally solved is not rehearsed as frequently . In this case , standard forgetting processes in addition to OA may account for the phenomenon . Finally , this experiment may seem to lack ecologi - cal validity and may appear somewhat contrived and artificial . As other studies on analogy have shown ( e . g . , Dunbar , 2001 ; Blanchette & Dunbar , 2001 ) , this differ - ence between experimental settings and real - world context is sometimes very important and may lead to different results . Therefore it remains to be seen whether more naturalistic research will be able to find evidence of these spontaneous access and incubation effects . We are presently collecting data on design problem solving using Dunbar’s ( 1995 , 1997 ) in vivo methodology to answer this question . References Adams , L . T . , Kasserman , J . E . , Yearwood , A . A . , & Perfetto , G . A . ( 1988 ) . Memory access : The effects of fact - oriented versus problem - oriented acquisition . Memory and Cognition , 16 , 167 – 175 . Anolli , L . , Antonietti , A . , Crisafulli , L . , & Cantoia , M . ( 2001 ) . Ac - cessing source information in analogical problem - solving . Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Exper - imental Psychology , 54A , 237 – 261 . Bjork , R . A . ( 1988 ) . Retrieval practice and the maintenance of knowledge . In M . M . Gruneberg , P . E . Morris , & R . N . Sykes ( Eds . ) , Practical aspects of memory : Current research and is - sues ( pp . 396 – 401 ) . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Blanchette , I . , & Dunbar , K . ( 2001 ) . Analogy use in naturalistic set - tings : The influence of audience , emotion , and goals . Memory and Cognition , 29 , 730 – 735 . Bowden , E . M . ( 1985 ) . Accessing relevant information during prob - lem solving : Time constraints on search in the problem space . Memory & Cognition , 13 , 280 – 286 . Browne , B . A . , & Cruse , D . F . ( 1988 ) . The incubation effect : Illusion or illumination ? Human Performance , 1 , 177 – 185 . Campbell , D . T . ( 1960 ) . Blind variation and selective retentions in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychologi - cal Review , 67 , 380 – 400 . Chen , Z . ( 1995 ) . Analogical transfer : From schematic pictures to problem solving . Memory and Cognition , 23 , 255 – 269 . Clement , C . A . , Mawby , R . , & Giles , D . E . ( 1994 ) . The effects of manifest relational similarity on analog retrieval . Journal of Memory and Language , 33 , 396 – 420 . Dodds , R . A . , Smith , S . M . , & Ward , T . B . ( 2002 ) . The use of envi - ronmental clues during incubation . Creativity Research Jour - nal , 14 , 287 – 304 . Dodds , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( in press ) . A review of the experimental literature on incubation in problem solving and creativity . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Creativity research handbook ( 3rd ed . ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton . Dominowski , R . L . & Dallob , P . ( 1995 ) . Insight and problem solv - ing . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of in - sight ( pp . 33 – 62 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dominowski , R . L . , & Jenrick , R . ( 1972 ) . Effects of hints and inter - polatedactivityonsolutionofaninsightproblem . Psychonomic Science , Mar - 338 . Dorfman , J . ( 1990 ) . Metacognitions and incubation effects in insight problem solving . Unpublished dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy University of California , San Diego . Dorfman , J . , Shames , V . A . , & Kihlstrom , J . F . ( 1996 ) . Intuition , in - cubation , and insight : Implicit cognition in problem solving . In G . D . M . Underwood ( Ed . ) , Implicit cognition ( pp . 257 – 296 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Creativity Research Journal 217 Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 Dreistadt , R . ( 1969 ) . The use of analogies and incubation in obtain - ing insights in creative problem solving . Journal of Psychology , 71 , 159 – 175 . Dunbar , K . ( 1995 ) . Howscientistsreallyreason : Scientificreasoning in real - world laboratories . In R . J . Sternberg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 365 – 395 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Dunbar , K . ( 1997 ) . How scientists think : On - line creativity and con - ceptual change in science . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual struc - tures and processes ( pp . 461 – 493 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Dunbar , K . ( 2001 ) . The analogical paradox : Why analogy is so easy in naturalistic settings yet so difficult in the psychological labo - ratory . In D . Gentner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science . ( pp . 313 – 334 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . Onproblem - solving . Westport , CT : Greenwood . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1994 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 141 – 205 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential soundness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 524 – 575 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cognitive Psychology , 12 , 306 – 355 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analog - ical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Hammond , K . J . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gray , K . C . ( 1991 ) . Functionality in analogical transfer : A hard match is good to find . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 1 , 111 – 152 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surfaceandstructuralsimilarityin analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 332 – 340 . Hummel , J . E . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) . Distributed representations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psy - chological Review , 104 , 427 – 466 . Kaplan , C . A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1990 ) . Insearchofinsight . Cognitive Psychology , 22 , 374 – 419 . Keane , M . ( 1985 ) . On drawing analogies when solving problems : A theory and test of solution generation in an analogical prob - lem - solving task . British Journal of Psychology , 76 , 449 – 458 . Lockhart , R . S . , Lamon , M . , & Gick , M . L . ( 1988 ) . Conceptualtrans - fer in simple insight problems . Memory and Cognition , 16 , 36 – 44 . Mednick , M . T . , Mednick , S . A . , & Mednick , E . V . ( 1964 ) . Incuba - tion of creative performance and specific associative priming . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 69 – 88 . Mednick , S . A . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 , 220 – 232 . Ohlsson , S . ( 1984 ) . Restructuring revisited : I . Summary and critique of the Gestalt theory of problem solving . Scandinavian Journal of Psychology , 25 , 65 – 78 . Olton , R . M . ( 1979 ) . Experimental studies of incubation : Searching for the elusive . Journal of Creative Behavior , 13 , 9 – 22 . Olton , R . M . , & Johnson , D . M . ( 1976 ) . Mechanismsofincubationin creative problem solving . American Journal of Psychology , 89 , 617 – 630 . Patalano , A . L . , & Seifert , C . M . ( 1994 ) . Memory for impasses dur - ing problem solving . Memory and Cognition , 22 , 234 – 242 . Patalano , A . L . , & Seifert , C . M . ( 1997 ) . Opportunisticplanning : Be - ing reminded of pending goals . Cognitive Psychology , 34 , 1 – 36 . Perkins , D . N . ( 2000 ) . Archimedes’ bathtub The art and logic of Breakthrough Thinking . New York : WW Norton . Posner , M . I . ( 1973 ) . Cognition : An introduction . Glenview , IL : Scott . Ross , B . H . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the separation of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 13 , 629 – 639 . Ross , B . H . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superficial similarities : Different effects on the access and use of earlier problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 15 , 456 – 468 . Ross , B . H . , Ryan , W . J . , & Tenpenny , P . L . ( 1989 ) . The access of rel - evant information for solving problems . Memory & Cognition , 17 , 639 – 651 . Schunn , C . D . , & Dunbar , K . ( 1996 ) . Priming , Analogy , & Aware - ness in complex reasoning . Memory and Cognition , 24 , 271 – 284 . Seifert , C . ( 1994 ) . The role of goals in retrieving analogical cases . In J . A . Barnden & K . J . Holyoak ( Eds . ) , Analogy , metaphor , and reminding ( pp . 95 – 168 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Seifert , C . M . , Meyer , D . E . , Davidson , N . , Patalano , A . L . , & Yaniv , I . ( 1995 ) . Demystification of cognitive insight : Opportunistic assimilation and the prepared - mind perspective . In R . J . Stern - berg & J . E . Davidson ( Eds . ) , The nature of insight ( pp . 65 – 124 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Silveira , J . M . ( 1971 ) . Incubation : The effect of interruption timing and length on problem solution and quality of problem process - ing . Unpublished doctoral dissertation University of Oregon . Simon , H . A . ( 1966 ) . Scientific discovery and the psychology of problem solving . In R . G . Colodny ( Ed . ) , Mind and cosmos ( pp . 22 – 41 ) . Pittsburgh , PA : University of Pittsburgh Press . Smith , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Fixation , incubation , and insight in memory andcreativethinking . InS . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 135 – 156 ) . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Smith , S . M . , & Blankenship , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Incubationandthepersis - tence of fixation in problem solving . American Journal of Psy - chology , 104 , 61 – 87 . Thagard , P . , Holyoak , K . J . , Nelson , G . , & Gochfeld , D . ( 1990 ) . Ana - logical retrieval by constraint satisfaction . Artificial Intelli - gence , 46 , 259 – 310 . Zeigarnik , B . ( 1927 ) . Das Behalten von erledigten und unerledigten Handlungen . Psychologie Forschung , 9 , 1 – 85 . Appendix A : Problems Used The insight problems used included slightly changed versions of the elephant problem ( Chen , 1995 ) , the 10 trees problem ( Dreistadt , 1969 ) , the ten - 218 Creativity Research Journal B . T . Christensen and C . D . Schunn Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 nis tournament problem ( Ohlsson , 1984 ) , the sports car racers , 10 matches , shot , and fly problems ( all Perkins , 2000 ) , the bracelet problem ( Silveira , 1971 ) , as well as other analogical insight puzzles that were generated with elements taken from puzzle books and puzzle sites on the internet . Two detailed examples of a prob - lem and cue are presented below . PROBLEM : TENNIS TOURNAMENT A singles tennis tournament is being planned that will involve 88 players . The tournament will be single elimination , so any player who loses a match is out of the tournament and the winner will be the person who doesn’t lose at all . The organizers of the tournament need to know how many matches will be played so they can budget for court time and balls . How many matches will be played in all during the tournament ? CUE : THE VIKINGS The Vikings believed that by dying on the battle - field they would be allowed a place in Viking heaven ( Valhalla ) . Forty - four Vikings are assem - bled to battle each other until only one is left standing . However , even Vikings have rules ; the Vikings fight one - on - one at a time , until one of them is dead . Once the battle begins all Vikings will start fighting with the nearest other Viking . The Viking who is still alive then moves on to find a new Viking to fight , while the loser goes to Valhalla . And so on . What is the number of one - on - one Viking fights there will be in this battle ? Answer : The number of one - on - one Viking fights will necessarily equal the number of dead Vikings ( i . e . , Vikings that go to Valhalla ) . There - fore there will be 43 one - on - one Viking fights before the battle is over and only one is left standing . PROBLEM : MARY AND ELIZA Mary and Eliza were ardent rivals in sports car rac - ing , socializing , and the game of life in general . Mary’s husband got sick of their competitiveness and decided to teach them a lesson . He asked them to meet him at a deserted racetrack one day with their sports cars . He announced , “The winner of the race will get a brand new sports car . But this is a race with a difference . The one whose car crosses the finish line last wins . ” Mary and Eliza hopped into the cars and roared off around the track as fast as they could go . Why ? CUE : THE ESTATE On his deathbed , a rancher came up with a scheme to pass on his estate . He called in his two sons , and told them to each take their horse and race to the nearest town and back . The horse that came second would win the estate for its owner . The young cowboys set out but were obviously trying to go as slow as possible to finish second . They were stopped by a knowledgeable villager and asked what they were doing . The sons ex - plained the situation to the villager . The villager thought for a minute then came up with an idea that had the sons hurtling off at breakneck speed . What did the villager propose ? Answer : “Take the other’s horse” Appendix B : Calculation Methods Calculation Methods for Resolution Scores Resolution scores by participant were calculated by applying the following equation : X Y Y i i i (cid:1) (cid:1) 4 In the equation , X refers to number of problems solved ultimately , Y refers to number of problems solved be - fore impasse ( i . e . , before leaving problem the first time ) , and i refers to i th participant . This was done for both the analogous cues , and the distracter cues . Creativity Research Journal 219 Spontaneous Access and Analogical Incubation Effects Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010 Calculation Methods for Immediate Access and Spontaneous Immediate Access Rates , Before and After Seeing All Problems Access rates were calculated by applying the fol - lowing equations : X p ij j p i (cid:2) (cid:3) 1 In the equation , X refers to whether participant did ( 1 ) or did not ( 0 ) immediately turn to the relevant page in the booklet following cue ; p refers to number of analo - gous - cued problems that were unsolved prior to cuing ; i refers to i th participant , and j to j th cued problem . The problem sample size of p i varied depending on condi - tion : before / after seeing all problems in the booklet ; and before / after catching on . Calculation Methods for the Baseline for Immediate Access and Spontaneous Immediate Access Rates , Before and After Seeing All Problems Baselines for access rates were calculated by exam - ining typical problem - solving behavior following the distracter cues . Following distracter cues and before seeing all problems , participants would simply turn to the next unseen problem 96 % of the time . After seeing all problems , participants would return to previously unanswered problems 68 % of the time , and to an - swered problems 32 % of the time . Baselines were thus calculated by applying the equations : Baseline before seeing all problems : 0 04 1 . k p ij j p i (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9) (cid:2) (cid:3) Baseline after seeing all problems : m u u p ij ij ij j p i . . ( ) 68 32 7 1 (cid:10) (cid:1) (cid:4) (cid:5) (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:9) (cid:2) (cid:3) In the equations , k refers to number of seen problems at cue time ; u to number of unanswered problems at cue time ( excluding the problem the participant is currently working on ) , the value of m is . 32 if the cued problem has already been answered whereas it is . 68 if it has not , p refers to number of distracter - cued problems that were unsolved prior to cuing , i refers to i th participant , and j to j th cued problem . The problem sample size of p i varied depending on condition : before / after seeing all problems in the booklet ; and before / after catching on . 220 Creativity Research Journal B . T . Christensen and C . D . Schunn Downloaded By : [ Texas A & M University ] At : 15 : 01 3 February 2010