CORONAVIRUS Macrophage ACE2 is necessary for SARS - CoV - 2 replication and subsequent cytokine responses that restrict continued virion release Larisa I . Labzin 1 , 2 , 3 * , Keng Yih Chew 4 , Kathrin Eschke 1 , Xiaohui Wang 1 , 2 , Tyron Esposito 1 , 2 , Claudia J . Stocks 1 , 2 , James Rae 1 , 5 , Ralph Patrick 1 , Helen Mostafavi 1 , Brittany Hill 1 , Teodor E . Yordanov 1 , Caroline L . Holley 1 , 2 , Stefan Emming 1 , 2 , Svenja Fritzlar 6 , Francesca L . Mordant 6 , Daniel P . Steinfort 7 , 8 , Kanta Subbarao 6 , 9 , Christian M . Nefzger 1 , Anne K . Lagendijk 1 , Emma J . Gordon 1 , Robert G . Parton 1 , 5 , Kirsty R . Short 3 , 4 , Sarah L . Londrigan 6 † , Kate Schroder 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 † Macrophages are key cellular contributors to the pathogenesis of COVID - 19 , the disease caused by the virus SARS - CoV - 2 . The SARS - CoV - 2 entry receptor ACE2 is present only on a subset of macrophages at sites of SARS - CoV - 2 infection in humans . Here , we investigated whether SARS - CoV - 2 can enter macrophages , replicate , and release new viral progeny ; whether macrophages need to sense a replicating virus to drive cytokine release ; and , if so , whether ACE2 is involved in these mechanisms . We found that SARS - CoV - 2 could enter , but did not replicate within , ACE2 - deficient human primary macrophages and did not induce proinflammatory cytokine ex - pression . By contrast , ACE2 overexpression in human THP - 1 – derived macrophages permitted SARS - CoV - 2 entry , processing and replication , and virion release . ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages sensed active viral rep - lication and triggered proinflammatory , antiviral programs mediated by the kinase TBK - 1 that limited prolonged viral replication and release . These findings help elucidate the role of ACE2 and its absence in macrophage re - sponses to SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Copyright © 2023 The Authors , some rights reserved ; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science . No claim to original U . S . Government Works INTRODUCTION Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) , belonging to the Coronaviridae family , is an enveloped , single - stranded RNAvirus with a positive - sense genome . Many human re - spiratory viruses , including SARS - CoV - 2 , infect epithelial cells lining the upper and lower airways , resulting in productive replica - tion and the release of newly synthesized infectious viral particles . The viral Spike ( S ) glycoprotein facilitates entry into target epithelial cells by binding to the surface protein ACE2 ( angiotensin - convert - ing enzyme 2 ) ( 1 ) . The well - characterized ACE2 - S interaction exposes a critical S cleavage site ( S2 ) that can be cleaved by the host serine protease TMPRSS2 ( transmembrane protease serine 2 ) , also expressed on the plasma membrane . This enables the fusion of the viral and cellular membranes , followed by the release of viral RNA directly into the cytoplasm [ reviewed in ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) ] . SARS - CoV - 2 , particularly Omicron variants , can also attach to ACE2 and enter cells through the endocytic pathway . Here , the S protein is cleaved by endosomal proteases to allow fusion between the viral and endosomal membranes ( 4 ) . Host cell ribosomes immediately translate the infecting , positive - sense RNA genome into two large polyproteins . These polyproteins are proteo - lytically processed to generate the individual viral proteins required for replication . New virions are assembled in the endoplasmic retic - ulum and Golgi of the host cell before secretion from the cell through either exocytosis or a lysosomal egress pathway ( 3 ) . Our understanding of the SARS - CoV - 2 replication cycle comes from studies in primary epithelial cells or epithelial cell lines . How this may differ in other potentially susceptible cell types , including dis - tinct macrophage populations , is less clear . Effective host defense against infection relies on accurate and timely immune detection . Accumulating evidence suggests that severe coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) results from a failure of early host - interferon signaling to control SARS - CoV - 2 , followed by exacerbated proinflammatory responses driving tissue damage . Airway epithelial cells , the primary target for SARS - CoV - 2 infection ( 5 ) , respond by releasing antiviral and proinflammatory cytokines ( 6 , 7 ) . Airway - resident or newly recruited macrophages also appear to be a key source of proinflammatory cytokines in severe COVID - 19 ( 8 – 13 ) . Macrophages are sentinel innate immune cells that defend the airways during respiratory viral infection . However , in contrast to epithelial cells , infection of human macrophages results in an abor - tive replication cycle for many respiratory viruses [ including sea - sonal influenza A viruses ( 14 ) and rhinovirus ( 15 ) ] , despite macrophages supporting the early stages of infection ( entry and synthesis of new viral RNA and protein ) . Therefore , macrophages 1 Institute for Molecular Bioscience ( IMB ) , University of Queensland , Brisbane , QLD 4072 , Australia . 2 IMB Centre for Inflammation and Disease Research , University of Queensland , Brisbane , QLD 4072 , Australia . 3 Australian Infectious Diseases Re - search Centre , University of Queensland , Brisbane , QLD 4072 , Australia . 4 School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences , University of Queensland , Brisbane , QLD 4072 , Australia . 5 Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , University of Queensland , Brisbane , QLD 4072 , Australia . 6 Department of Microbiology and Im - munology , Universityof Melbourne at the PeterDoherty Institute for Infection and Immunity , Melbourne , VIC 3000 , Australia . 7 Department of Medicine , University of Melbourne , Parkville , VIC 3010 , Australia . 8 Department of Respiratory Medicine , Royal Melbourne Hospital , Parkville , VIC 3052 , Australia . 9 WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza , Victorian Infectious Diseases Ref - erence Laboratory at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity , Mel - bourne , VIC 3000 , Australia . † These authors contributed equally to this work . * Corresponding author . Email : l . labzin @ uq . edu . au Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 1 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E can function as a viral “ dead end ” to limit viral dissemination ( 16 ) and can sense infectious viral particles , infected cells , and tissue damage to orchestrate antiviral and proinflammatory programs ( 17 – 19 ) . Single - cell RNA sequencing ( scRNA - seq ) has revealed viral RNA within macrophage populations in both bronchoalveolar lavage ( BAL ) fluid and lung tissue from COVID - 19 patients ( 8 , 20 ) and ex vivo lung explants ( 21 ) . Similarly , immunostaining of autopsied lungs from COVID - 19 patients showed macrophages containing viral antigens ( S and the RNA - dependent RNA polymerase RdRp ) in situ ( 22 ) . It is unclear whether SARS - CoV - 2 enters these macrophages through interac - tion with ACE2 , as is the fate of intramacrophage SARS - CoV - 2 . These in vivo studies did not ascertain whether SARS - CoV - 2 pro - ductively replicates within macrophages to produce new viral RNA and protein , leading to new virion assembly , or whether macro - phages release newly synthesized infectious virions . Furthermore , previous studies did not elucidate whether SARS - CoV - 2 needs to enter and actively replicate in macrophages to trigger macrophage antiviral and proinflammatory responses . Cell culture models of SARS - CoV - 2 interactions with macro - phages have focused on human monocyte – derived macrophages ( HMDMs ) . Whereas there is consensus that HMDMs exposed to SARS - CoV - 2 do not release newly synthesized infectious virions ( 7 , 12 , 13 , 23 – 25 ) , some studies report that HMDMs support the early stages of infection that include viral entry , RNA replication , and protein synthesis ( 12 , 13 , 23 ) . In contrast , others report that HMDMs are refractory to SARS - CoV - 2 entry ( 7 , 25 ) . Accordingly , whether SARS - CoV - 2 exposure induces proinflammatory and anti - viral signaling in HMDMs or whether this requires active viral entry and replication is also controversial . Multiple reports suggest that challenging macrophages with SARS - CoV - 2 triggers proinflamma - tory responses ( 12 , 13 , 26 ) . In contrast , others report that SARS - CoV - 2 challenge does not activate macrophage inflammatory func - tions , consistent with a lack of viral entry and the early stages of viral replication ( 7 , 25 ) . Therefore , we investigated whether macrophage ACE2 expres - sion dictates macrophage susceptibility to SARS - CoV - 2 entry and replication and how this shapes macrophage inflammatory responses . We found that SARS - CoV - 2 did not enter or replicate within ACE2 - negative macrophages , and these cells did not produce proinflammatory cytokines in response to viral challenge . In contrast , THP - 1 macrophages engineered to ectopically express ACE2 supported SARS - CoV - 2 entry , replication , and new virion release . ACE2 - expressing THP - 1 macrophages sensed newly syn - thesized viral RNA and induced proinflammatory and antiviral me - diator expression . This rapid induction of antiviral programs in ACE2 - expressing THP - 1 macrophages limited ongoing virion release . Thus , we identified two blocks to SARS - CoV - 2 infection and replication in ACE2 - negative and ACE2 - positive macrophages . ACE2 - negative macrophages were refractory to SARS - CoV - 2 infec - tious entry and did not support the early stages of replication . In contrast , ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages were suscepti - ble to the early stages of infection and replication but mounted a secondary , post - entry block that constrained the production and release of newly synthesized infectious virions . RESULTS In vitro models of ACE2 - positive and ACE2 - negative macrophages Given that ACE2 is the primary receptor for SARS - CoV - 2 , we an - ticipated that ACE2 expression would determine the susceptibility and permissivity of macrophages to SARS - CoV - 2 infection and rep - lication . We reanalyzed previously published scRNA - seq data from postmortem lungs ( 20 , 27 , 28 ) , representing two sets of control and two sets of SARS - CoV - 2 – infected individuals . We aligned the data - sets to a common cell type reference to study ACE2 mRNA expres - sion among myeloid cell types ( such as infiltrating monocytes , monocyte - derived macrophages , and resident alveolar macrophag - es ) . Less than 2 % of all cell types expressed ACE2 mRNA , including alveolar epithelial AT1 and AT2 cells targeted by SARS - CoV - 2 ( fig . S1 ) . In control and SARS - CoV - 2 – infected lungs , a small proportion ( < 0 . 05 % ) of monocyte - derived macrophages expressed ACE2 mRNA . Very few tissue - resident macrophages and transitioning monocyte - derived macrophages expressed ACE2 mRNA in control lungs , although this proportion increased in SARS - CoV - Fig . 1 . ACE2 is not expressed on HMDMs or BAL macrophages but can be ectopicallyexpressed in THP - 1 cells . ( A ) HMDMs and THP - 1 cells were analyzed by qPCR for ACE2 mRNA expression , with each data point representing an independent donororexperiment , respectively ( each n = 3 ) . ( B ) HMDMs were stimulated with IFN - β ( 10 ng / ml ) for 6 hours , and protein extracts were analyzed by immunoblotting alongside extracts from THP - 1 cells ( WT , THP - 1 – ACE2 , and THP - 1 – mSc ) . ( C ) BAL macrophages from three donors were adhered overnight and lysed . The expression of ACE2 in BAL macrophages was analyzed by immunoblotting and quantified relative to a loading control ( calnexin ) . Lysate from A549 cells overexpressing ACE2 was used as a positive control . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 2 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 2 – infected lungs . Monocytes did not express ACE2 mRNA in either condition ( fig . S1 ) . These results are consistent with published scRNA - seq analyses on ACE2 mRNA expression across cell types ( 20 , 27 – 29 ) . A preprint study reported the presence of ACE2 - posi - tive macrophages in lung explants infected ex vivo , as determined by immunofluorescence ( 30 ) . These data suggest that both ACE2 - positive and ACE2 - negative macrophages are present in SARS - CoV - 2 – infected lungs . We next assessed ACE2 expression in HMDMs cultured from blood monocytes to determine their suitability as an in vitro cell model for ACE2 - positive or ACE2 - negative macrophages . Monitor - ing ACE2 mRNA and protein revealed low ACE2 mRNA expression in HMDMs and undetectable levels of ACE2 protein ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) , even when HMDMs were treated with interferon - β ( IFN - β ; Fig . 1B ) . HMDMs thus resembled ACE2 - negative macrophages in lungs from individuals with COVID - 19 . The lung - resident macrophage populations are immune senti - nels of the airways , with distinct origins and properties compared with HMDMs ( 31 ) . Along with airway epithelial cells , airway mac - rophages are prime targets for infection by many respiratory viruses . We thus investigated the ACE2 expression status of this lung - resident macrophage population . We used airway macrophag - es from BAL as representative resident lung macrophages and ob - served that their ACE2 protein expression was below detection levels ( Fig . 1C ) . Together , these data indicate that HMDMs and BAL macrophages cultured ex vivo model ACE2 - negative macro - phage populations in vivo . To model ACE2 - positive cells , we used lentiviral transduction to ectopically express either ACE2 ( untagged ) or a control protein [ mScarlet ( mSc ) ] in the THP - 1 monocytic cell line before their dif - ferentiation into macrophage - like cells using phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( PMA ) , hereafter called THP - 1 – ACE2 and THP - 1 – mSc cells , respectively . We confirmed that ectopic ACE2 expression in the THP - 1 – derived macrophages yielded readily detectable ACE2 at both the mRNA and protein levels ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . The cell surface protease TMPRSS2 , which is required for S protein cleavage , was also readily detected at the protein level in HMDM , THP - 1 – ACE2 , and THP - 1 – mSc cells ( Fig . 1B ) , indicating its presence in both ACE2 - positive and ACE2 - negative macrophages . ACE2 - negative macrophages do not support SARS - CoV - 2 entry and replication Despite the small proportion of ACE2 - positive macrophages at sites of human SARS - CoV - 2 infection ( fig S1 ) ( 20 , 27 ) , many macro - phages are positive for SARS - CoV - 2 RNA or protein in vivo ( 8 , 20 , 22 ) , potentially reflecting an ACE2 - independent mechanism of viral entry into macrophages . We thus investigated whether SARS - CoV - 2 can enter HMDMs , which do not express ACE2 ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . We left the viral inoculum on HMDM to maxi - mize the uptake of SARS - CoV - 2 virions . For these experiments , we included SARS - CoV - 2 – permissive Calu - 3 epithelial cells as a posi - tive control for viral infection and replication . Calu - 3 cells were sus - ceptible to infection at high and low multiplicities of infection ( MOIs ; 5 and 0 . 5 , respectively ) . We detected an increase in cell - as - sociated viral RNA between 2 hours ( indicative of input virus ) and 24 hours after infection , indicating newly synthesized viral RNA and active replication ( Fig . 2A ) . Consistent with productive infec - tion in Calu - 3 cells , we also detected viral subgenomic RNA ( indi - cating new viral RNA synthesis ; fig . S2A ) and newly synthesized viral nucleoprotein ( NP ; increased from 2 to 72 hours ; Fig . 2B ) . In contrast , cell - associated viral RNA levels did not rise over the same time course in HMDMs infected at either MOI ( Fig . 2C ) . Viral subgenomic RNA was barely detected in HMDMs ( fig . S2B ) , and although we observed NP expression in HMDMs 2 hours after infection , NP levels were barely detectable by 24 hours ( Fig . 2D ) . These data indicate that HMDMs are not susceptible to SARS - CoV - 2 infection and do not support the early stages of viral replication , including the production of newly synthesized viral RNA and protein . We next tested whether BAL macrophages support ACE2 - inde - pendent viral entry and replication by challenging these cells with SARS - CoV - 2 at a moderate MOI of 1 . SARS - CoV - 2 – challenged BAL macrophages showed no increase in cell - associated viral RNA ( which would be indicative of the early stages of virus replica - tion ) between 2 and 48 hours after infection , in contrast to the SARS - CoV - 2 – susceptible control cell line , VERO E6 ( Fig . 2E ) . An increase in viral RNA isolated from cell - free VERO E6 supernatants between 2 and 48 hours after infection indicated productive viral replication , whereas no such increase was observed in supernatants from SARS - CoV - 2 – infected BAL macrophages ( Fig . 2F ) . These data indicate that , as seen for HMDMs , ACE2 - negative BAL macrophag - es are not permissive to the early stages of SARS - CoV - 2 infection and replication . ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages support viral entry , replication , and new virion release We next investigated whether ACE2 overexpression could support SARS - CoV - 2 entry and replication in the THP - 1 – derived cells . We thus challenged THP - 1 – ACE2 cells ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) with SARS - CoV - 2 at an MOI of 0 . 5 or 5 and compared viral replication and release with that seen in cultures of THP - 1 – mSc ( ACE2 - negative ) and Calu - 3 control cells . Cell - associated viral RNA significantly in - creased over the first 24 hours after infection at both MOIs in THP - 1 – ACE2 cells before plateauing over the subsequent 48 hours ( from 24 to 72 hours after infection ; Fig . 3 , A and B ) , indicating cell sus - ceptibility and early - stage viral RNA replication . By contrast , viral RNA levels did not increase in the THP - 1 – mSc control cells at any time ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) , consistent with our observations in other ACE2 - negative macrophages ( HMDM and BAL ; Fig . 2 , C , E , and F ) . Consistently , THP - 1 – ACE2 cells had significantly more viral RNA at 24 hours after infection compared with THP - 1 – mSC cells at both MOIs . Calu - 3 cells support viral replication and virion release ( 32 ) ; accordingly , SARS - CoV - 2 RNA levels continued to rise over time ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . Consistent with new viral protein synthesis , we observed robust NP staining at 24 hours after infection in THP - 1 – ACE2 but not THP - 1 – mSc cells ( Fig . 3C ) . Only 16 % of THP - 1 – ACE2 cells were NP positive at 24 hours after infection ( Fig . 3D ) , indicating heterogeneity in the cellular response to SARS - CoV - 2 . To determine whether the increase in cell - associated viral RNA levels in THP - 1 – ACE2 cells was coupled to the release of infectious virus , we performed plaque assays on cell - free supernatants between 0 and 72 hours after infection . Control epithelial cells [ Calu - 3 , Fig . 3 ( E and F ) , and A549 - ACE2 cells , fig . S3 ] supported productive virus release . At the low MOI of 0 . 5 , we observed a significant increase in infectious viral particles in the THP - 1 – ACE2 cell - free supernatants at 24 hours after infection compared with the levels of residual virus at the time of input , which is consistent with productive infection Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 3 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E ( Fig . 3E ) . We observed a similar increase in THP - 1 – ACE2 cells 24 hours after infection at the higher MOI of 5 ( Fig . 3F ) . Consistently , THP - 1 – ACE2 cells released significantly more infectious viral par - ticles than THP - 1 – mSC cells at 24 hours after infection at both MOIs ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . As expected , there was no evidence of pro - ductive replication in control THP - 1 – mSc cells at either MOI ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) , which is consistent with a lack of susceptibility to infection ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . This shows that ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages support the initial stages of infection , new viral RNA synthesis , and assembly and release of newly synthesized , in - fectious viral particles . Macrophages can internalize SARS - CoV - 2 independently of ACE2 SARS - CoV - 2 entry receptors other than ACE2 are reported , includ - ing the C - type lectin receptors ( 26 ) and CD169 ( 33 ) . Because the assays that we used to measure viral protein and RNA could not dis - tinguish whether the virus was intracellular or extracellular ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) , we next determined whether SARS - CoV - 2 can still bind and enter HMDMs despite the lack of ACE2 expression . We used transmission electron microscopy to determine the subcellular lo - cation of incoming virions using a high MOI of 20 . HMDMs ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) and THP - 1 – ACE2 cells ( Fig . 4C ) displayed internalized , intact virions within the phagosomal system after 1 hour of infec - tion . The THP - 1 – ACE2 cells also showed virions bound to the plasma membrane and possibly undergoing fusion ( Fig . 4 , D and E ) . These virions were morphologically similar to the new structures released from Calu - 3 72 hours after infection ( Fig . 4F ) . Given that THP - 1 – ACE2 cells endogenously express TMPRSS2 ( Fig . 1B ) , this suggests that THP - 1 – ACE2 cells support viral fusion at the plasma membrane to deliver the viral genome and NP directly into the cy - toplasm . Together , these results indicate that although HMDMs take up SARS - CoV - 2 into phagosomal compartments , low ACE2 expression will preclude the processing of SARS - CoV - 2 S protein and virus - cell membrane fusion , which are necessary steps for this virus to enter the cytoplasm . ACE2 - negative macrophages do not release proinflammatory cytokines or antiviral mediators upon exposure to SARS - CoV - 2 Macrophages express a suite of pattern recognition receptors ( PRRs ) at strategic subcellular locations to detect microbial chal - lenges . PRRs can sense viral RNA and proteins incorporated in in - coming virions and RNA and proteins synthesized during viral replication ( 34 – 36 ) . We detected viral particles in phagosomal com - partments in HMDMs 1 hour after infection ( Fig . 4B ) , so we next assessed whether ACE2 - negative macrophages could sense incom - ing virions from these compartments . We challenged HMDMs with a high load of SARS - CoV - 2 ( MOI of 5 ) for 24 hours without sub - sequently removing the virus to allow maximal macrophage re - sponses . SARS - CoV - 2 did not trigger the release of cytokines [ C - X - C motif chemokine ligand 10 ( CXCL10 ) , interleukin - 6 ( IL - 6 ) , and tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) ] in culture ( Fig . 5A ) despite reports of high circulating levels of these cytokines in humans during SARS - CoV - 2 infection ( 37 , 38 ) . By contrast , HMDMs showed a robust cytokine - secretory response to synthetic viral mim - etics ; TNF and IL - 6 secretion was induced by the Toll - like receptor 7 / 8 agonist R848 , and CXCL10 secretion was induced by polyino - sinic : polycytidylic acid ( poly I : C ) , the ligand for the retinoic acid – inducible gene - 1 ( RIG - I ) – like receptor melanoma differentiation – associated protein 5 ( MDA5 ; Fig . 5A ) . mRNA analyses revealed that SARS - CoV - 2 did not provoke expression of IFNB1 , IFNL1 , CXCL10 , IL6 , TNF , or IL1B in HMDMs 2 or 24 hours after infection at either low ( 0 . 5 ) or high ( 5 ) MOI ( Fig . 5B ) . R848 and poly I : C stimulation robustly induced these genes , indicating that the HMDMs were signaling competent ( Fig . 5B ) . Thus , HMDMs do not respond to SARS - CoV - 2 exposure in culture , even at the high MOI of 5 or when virions are present in the phagosomal system . Fig . 2 . ACE2 - negative HMDM and BAL do not support SARS - CoV - 2 entry or early - stage replication . ( A to D ) Calu - 3 cells ( A and B ) or HMDMs ( C and D ) were infected as indicated , and the virus was left on the cells . Viral RNA isolated from cells was measured by qPCR ( A and C ) , and viral protein was measured by immunoblot ( B and D ) . Blots are representative of three independent experiments ( Calu - 3 ) or three independent donors ( HMDMs ) . ( E and F ) BAL macrophages or VERO cells were infected at an MOI of 1 or 0 . 5 , respectively , with SARS - CoV - 2 for 1 hour before the virus was removed , and the abundance of SARS - CoV - 2 E gene expression that was either cell associated ( E ) or released ( in cell - free supernatants ) ( F ) at 2 and 48 hours after infection was analyzed by qPCR . Data are means + SEM , with each point representing an individual donor ( for HMDMs and BAL macro - phages , n = 5 ) or independent experiments ( for Calu - 3 and VERO cells , n = 2 or 3 ) . * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 by one - way ( A ) or repeated measures ( C , E , and F ) ANOVA followed by Tukey ’ s post hoc multiple comparison test . ns , not significant . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 4 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Fig . 3 . ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages support SARS - CoV - 2 entry , early - stage replication , and productive virion release . ( A to F ) Cells were infected with SARS - CoV - 2 at an MOI of 0 . 5 or 5 , as indicated . After 1 hour , the virus inoculum was removed , cells were washed , and cells or supernatants were harvested at the indicated times ( 0 h , immediately after the virus inoculum was removed ) . Intracellular viral mRNA was analyzed by qPCR ( A and B ) . Abundance of viral N protein at 24 hours was assessed by immunofluorescence staining ( scale bars , 30 μ m ) ( C ) and quantified relative to the total number of cells ( D ) . Infectious virions released into cell supernatants were measured by plaque assay ( E and F ) . Data show means + SEM of three to eight independent experiments , represented by each data point . * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 by ( A , B , E , and F ) two - way ANOVA followed by Tukey ’ s post hoc multiple comparison test or ( D ) unpaired t test . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 5 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages sense replicating SARS - CoV - 2 to trigger proinflammatory and antiviral responses Because ectopic ACE2 expression in THP - 1 macrophages permitted efficient SARS - CoV - 2 entry and early - stage viral replication , we ex - amined whether THP - 1 – ACE2 cells produced proinflammatory and antiviral mediators upon SARS - CoV - 2 challenge . THP - 1 – ACE2 cells exhibited up - regulated IFNB1 , IFNL1 , CXCL10 , and IL6 mRNA expression after infection with SARS - CoV - 2 for 24 hours ( at an MOI of 5 , Fig . 6A , or an MOI of 0 . 5 , fig . S4A ) , corre - lating with increased SARS - CoV - 2 viral RNA levels ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . In contrast , THP - 1 – mSc cells did not respond to SARS - CoV - 2 challenge at either MOI ( Fig . 6A and fig . S4A ) , as we observed for HMDMs ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . SARS - CoV - 2 infection down - regulated IL1B mRNA levels in THP - 1 – ACE2 cells but not in THP - 1 – mSc cells ( Fig . 6B and fig . S4A ) , likely because of negative regulation of IL1B mRNA transcription by IFN signaling ( 39 ) . Virus - sensing pathways were operational in THP - 1 – ACE2 and THP - 1 – mSc cells , because both cell types responded equally to MDA5 stimulation with poly I : C transfection and robustly down - regulated IL1B mRNA expression ( fig . S4B ) . In Calu - 3 cells , antiviral ( IFNB1 , IFNL1 , and CXCL10 ) and proinflammatory ( TNF and IL6 ) gene in - duction peaked at 72 hours after infection ( at an MOI of 5 , Fig . 6C , and an MOI of 0 . 5 , fig . S4C ) , consistent with previously published observations ( 7 ) and the rise in SARS - CoV - 2 viral RNA expression ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) and productive virus release ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . To determine whether THP - 1 – ACE2 cells responded to incoming versus replicating virus , we treated cells with the RdRp inhibitor re - mdesivir ( 40 ) . Remdesivir ablated viral replication ( Fig . 6D ) and the ensuing induction of IFNB1 , IFNL1 , and IL6 ( Fig . 6E ) . Remdesivir did not modulate CXCL10 expression during infection at an MOI of 5 ( Fig . 6E ) , suggesting that incoming virions may also be sensed and trigger distinct inflammatory responses compared with replicating virions . Collectively , these data indicate that ACE2 - positive THP - 1 macrophages are poised to sense entry and early - stage viral replica - tion and respond by mounting potent antiviral programs . Blocking cytokine signaling in ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages prolongs productive virion release Studies suggest that host cell death curbs the release of SARS - CoV - 2 infectious virions ( 41 ) . We next explored whether the death of THP - 1 – ACE2 cells was responsible for the decline in viral titers at 48 and 72 hours after infection ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . Virus - challenged THP - 1 – ACE2 cells showed a modest but statistically significant decrease ( ~ 20 % ) in viability compared with THP - 1 – mSc cells at 72 hours after infection ( Fig . 7A ) . Thus , cell death may limit virus release from THP - 1 – ACE2 challenged with high viral loads . We also noted that the rapid and robust induction of type I and III IFNs in THP - 1 – ACE2 cells peaked at 24 hours after infection , much earlier than in Calu - 3 cells ( Fig . 6 , A and B ) . IFNs provide autocrine and paracrine signals to activate an antiviral state through the induction of IFN - stimulated genes , which act as Fig . 4 . Macrophages can take up SARS - CoV - 2 independentlyof ACE2 . ( A to F ) Transmission electron microscopyof the indicatedcells infected with SARS - CoV - 2 ( MOI of 20 ) at the indicated time points . For low - magnification images ( A and D ) , scale bars , 10 μ m ; for all other images ( B , C , E , and F ) , scale bars , 500 nm . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 6 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Fig . 5 . SARS - CoV - 2 does not trigger inflammatory responses in ACE2 - negative HMDMs . ( A ) HMDMs were infected with SARS - CoV - 2 ( MOI of 5 ) or stimulated with R848 or transfected poly I : C for 24 hours . Cytokines in cell supernatants were analyzed by AlphaLISA . Graphs show means + SEM , wherein each data point represents an individualdonor ; n = 6to15 . ( B ) HMDMswerechallengedwithSARS - CoV - 2 ( atanMOIof0 . 5or5 ) orpolyI : C , andgeneexpressionat2and24hourswasanalyzedbyqPCR . Graphsshowmeans + SEM , whereeachdatapointrepresentsanindividualdonor ; n = 3 . * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001byrepeatedmeasuresANOVA , followed by Tukey ’ s post hoc multiple comparison test . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 7 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E restriction factors to limit viral infection ( 42 ) . Type I IFN aborts in - fluenza A virus infection in murine macrophages ( 16 ) . We thus hy - pothesized that IFN signaling in THP - 1 – ACE2 cells induces host factors that impede viral replication , limiting the release of new in - fectious virions . In contrast , the delayed induction of IFNB1 and IFNL1 in Calu - 3 cells , potentially through viral antagonism , may contribute to ongoing viral replication and release at 48 and 72 hours after infection ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . We tested this hypothesis using a TANK - binding kinase 1 ( TBK1 ) inhibitor ( BX - 795 ) to block virus - induced IFN induction and signaling ( 43 ) in THP - 1 – ACE2 cells ( Fig . 7B ) . As expected , BX - 795 suppressed poly I : C – induced expression of IFNB1 , IFNL1 , and the IFN - stimulated gene CXCL10 ( fig . S5 ) . We next challenged THP - 1 – ACE2 and Calu - 3 cells with SARS - CoV - 2 for 72 hours in the presence and absence of BX - 795 . BX - 795 suppressed SARS - CoV - 2 – induced CXCL10 production from THP - 1 – ACE2 cells ( Fig . 7C ) and increased new Fig . 6 . ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages sense entering or replicating SARS - CoV - 2 to drive proinflammatory and antiviral responses . ( A to C ) THP - 1 – ACE - 2 and THP - 1 – mSc cells ( A and B ) or Calu - 3 cells ( C ) were infected with SARS - CoV - 2 at an MOI of 5 . Cells were harvested at the indicated times ( 0 h , immediately afterthevirusinoculumwasremoved ) , andgeneexpressionwasquantifiedbyqPCR . Geneexpressionateachtimepointispresentedrelativetothemockcontroltoshow fold - gene induction . Data are means + SEM of three or four independent experiments ( indicated by individual data points ) , and significance is indicated by asterisks : * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 by two - way ( A and B ) orone - way ( C ) ANOVA followed by Tukey ’ s post hoc multiple comparison test . ( D and E ) THP - 1 – ACE2 cells were infected with SARS - CoV - 2 at an MOI of 5 in the presence of 10 μ M remdesivir , and viral RNA ( D ) or inflammatory cytokines ( E ) were measured at 24 hours after infection ( p . i . ) . Data show means + SEM of three independent experiments , indicated by individual data points . * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 by unpaired t tests . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 8 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E virion release at 72 hours after infection ( Fig . 7D ) . BX - 795 did not boost the release of newly synthesized virions from Calu - 3 cells ( Fig . 7E ) , consistent with previously published observations ( 7 ) . These findings indicate that although SARS - CoV - 2 can enter ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages , rapid antiviral signal - ing limits viral replication and release . DISCUSSION A key question in SARS - CoV - 2 pathogenesis is which type of host cells efficiently senses SARS - CoV - 2 to trigger inflammatory cyto - kine and antiviral mediator release . Because macrophages are prime candidates for sensing and responding to SARS - CoV - 2 ( 11 ) , a second unresolved question is whether SARS - CoV - 2 can infect and productively replicate in human macrophages . This study identified ACE2 as a critical determinant of macrophage sus - ceptibility to infection and sensing of infectious SARS - CoV - 2 . We found here that HMDMs do not express ACE2 and are thus suitable in vitro models for ACE2 - negative macrophages . Although HMDMs phagocytosed the virus , they did not permit early - stage viral replication or protein synthesis and did not sense phagocy - tosed virus to trigger inflammatory responses . Our observation that SARS - CoV - 2 did not replicate in HMDM or BAL macrophages is consistent with multiple reports of lack of SARS - CoV - 2 infection in macrophages in vitro ( 12 , 13 , 23 , 24 ) . Whereas these studies dem - onstrate that macrophage viral challenge results in decreasing viral RNA ( 12 , 13 , 23 ) and viral protein ( 24 ) levels , and macrophages fail to produce new infectious virus ( 12 , 23 ) , these reports nevertheless observe virus entry into macrophages through quantification of SARS - CoV - 2 NP – positive cells . This contrasts with studies report - ing no viral entry into HMDMs ( 7 , 25 ) . We observed virions within phagosomes , indicating that SARS - CoV - 2 virions can enter the macrophage phagolysosomal system . Despite this , we propose that the virus does not enter the HMDM cytoplasm , likely because , without ACE2 , the S protein does not undergo the necessary con - formational changes for membrane fusion . ACE2 expression analysis across cell types in lungs from COVID - 19 patients and control donors showed that a small propor - tion of macrophages express ACE2 , corroborating new reports that both ACE2 - positive and ACE2 - negative macrophages are likely to be present at sites of infection in vivo ( 20 , 27 , 29 ) . Age , sex , and co - morbidities may influence cellular ACE2 expression ( 44 ) , as well as environmental cues such as hypoxia within tissues ( 45 , 46 ) . How macrophage ACE2 expression is regulated has yet to be elucidated . Although we did not detect ACE2 expression or SARS - CoV - 2 infec - tion of BAL macrophages ex vivo , this may not reflect the status of BAL macrophages from individuals with diverse genetic polymor - phisms or disease statuses . A major limitation of our study is that we have characterized how ACE2 - positive macrophages sense SARS - CoV - 2 by ectopically expressing ACE2 in the THP - 1 macrophage cell line . Future studies uncovering the macrophage - specific cues and pathways regulating ACE2 expression and function will enable cell culture – based investigations into viral interactions with macrophages that endogenously express ACE2 . Such studies are likely to yield further insight into how ACE2 - positive macro - phages can be detected and potentially targeted . In line with our findings here , other non - epithelial cells that do not usually express ACE2 , such as endothelial cells , are rendered susceptible and permissive to productive SARS - CoV - 2 infection by ectopic ACE2 expression ( 32 ) . In THP - 1 cells , ectopic ACE2 ex - pression facilitated SARS - CoV - 2 entry and early - stage replication , but , in response , these cells initiated an IFN signaling program that limited new virion release after 24 hours of infection . This limit could reflect the death of infected macrophages , as observed for antibody - dependent monocyte infection ( 41 ) , or restriction by macrophage antiviral programs . Although we observed some virus - induced cell death in ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages , our TBK1 inhibitor experiments indicated that a potent macro - phage antiviral response interrupts the viral replication cycle . Future studies should aim to elucidate the precise antiviral pro - grams underpinning macrophage restriction of SARS - CoV - 2 . Nev - ertheless , our findings suggest that ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages induce a sufficiently robust antiviral response to prevent them from acting as “ Trojan horses ” to disseminate SARS - CoV - 2 to extrarespiratory tissues . If these antiviral signaling programs are compromised , such as in patients with inborn errors Fig . 7 . Blocking cytokine signaling in ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macro - phages prolongs infectious virion release . ( A ) THP - 1 – ACE2 and THP - 1 – mSc cells were infected with SARS - CoV - 2 ( MOI of 5 ) . Cell death was analyzed by ATPlite assay at 72 hours . Data are presented as cell viability relative to mock in - fection and are mean + SEM of three independent experiments . Asterisks indicate significance : * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001bytwo - wayANOVA , followed by Tukey ’ s post hoc multiple comparison test . ( B ) Schematic of BX - 795 – mediated inhibition of TBK1 within RIG - I / MAVS antiviral signaling . ( C to E ) THP - 1 – ACE2 or Calu - 3 cells were stimulated with SARS - CoV - 2 at an MOI of 5 . After 1 hour , the viral inoculum was removed , and BX - 795 was added . Supernatants were harvested at 72 hours ; CXCL10 was analyzed by AlphaLISA ( C ) , and viral titers were analyzed by plaque assay ( D and E ) . Data show means + SEM of at least three independent experiments , with each data point representing a different experiment . * P ≤ 0 . 05 , * * P ≤ 0 . 001 , and * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001by ( C ) one - wayANOVAfollowedbyTukey ’ sposthoc multiple comparison test or ( D and E ) unpaired t test . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 9 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E of immunity or circulating IFN autoantibodies ( 47 , 48 ) , then ACE2 - positive macrophages may substantially contribute to increased viral loads and viral dissemination . In lung tissue or BAL from COVID - 19 patients , the proportion of macrophages positive for viral RNA is much higher than that of macrophages positive for ACE2 ( 8 , 20 , 49 ) . Our data suggest that this is not because of ACE2 - independent SARS - CoV - 2 entry into and replication within macrophages , in contrast to a study that re - ported CD169 - dependent , ACE2 - independent macrophage infec - tion ( 33 ) . Instead , we expect that macrophages positive for viral RNA may be ACE2 - negative macrophages with phagocytosed virions ( as observed here in culture ) , extracellular viral RNA , or virus - infected cells ( 50 ) . Alternatively , ACE2 - negative macrophages might be infected through an antibody - dependent uptake route , as shown for SARS - CoV - 2 – infected human monocytes ( 47 ) . Our data show that the small proportion of macrophages that are positive for ACE2 can be directly infected and trigger an inflammatory response that is distinct from that of ACE2 - negative macrophages encounter - ing SARS - CoV - 2 virions . For ACE2 - positive macrophages , our data suggest that the viral RNA present in macrophages in vivo also re - flects limited productive infection . A direct comparison of macro - phage responses to these distinct routes of viral uptake would elucidate whether targeting one subset could maintain protective antiviral responses while potentially limiting pathology . The observed failure of primary HMDMs to respond to SARS - CoV - 2 exposure contrasts with previous reports wherein SARS - CoV - 2 induced the expression of cytokine - encoding mRNAs ( in - cluding IL6 , CXCL10 , and TNF ) in HMDMs ( 12 , 13 , 26 , 51 ) . Typ - ically , a virus must enter and replicate within a cell to activate cytosolic PRRs ( so - called cell - intrinsic sensing ) , concomitant with a high threat to that cell . Our data indicate that ACE2 - negative mac - rophages do not respond directly to SARS - CoV - 2 exposure with cy - tokine production because lack of virus entry into the cytoplasm precludes cell - intrinsic sensing . Our results thus agree with pub - lished observations that SARS - CoV - 2 does not trigger cytokine pro - duction from HMDMs ( 25 ) and that SARS - CoV - 2 also fails to trigger the IFN system in human alveolar macrophages ( 24 ) . In con - trast , ACE2 - overexpressing THP - 1 macrophages detected actively replicating SARS - CoV - 2 to trigger potent IFNB1 and IFNL1 induc - tion . We hypothesize that the cytosolic viral sensors RIG - I and MDA5 , which detect replicating SARS - CoV - 2 RNA in epithelial cells ( 7 , 52 , 53 ) , drive macrophage antiviral responses . Macro - phage - derived IFN critically orchestrates the antiviral immune re - sponse to limit disease in other respiratory viral infections ( for example , with Newcastle disease virus and respiratory syncytial virus ) ( 17 , 18 ) . We speculate that IFN produced by ACE2 - positive macrophages through cell - intrinsic sensing may also contribute to early control of SARS - CoV - 2 infection in the lung . Alternatively , this same macrophage - derived IFN could contribute to disease pa - thology ( 54 , 55 ) . In addition to cytosolic PRRs that detect serious threats , macro - phages are also equipped with PRRs at other subcellular locations ( such as the cell surface and endosomes ) to detect moderate threats . This cell - extrinsic sensing detects neighboring infected cells , viral pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) , or host danger - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) in the extracellular milieu ( 56 ) . We and others ( 24 , 25 ) found that HMDMs do not sense SARS - CoV - 2 , either at the cell surface or in endosomes , to trigger proinflammatory responses ( Fig . 5 ) , which contradicts reports that SARS - CoV - 2 selectively induces a proinflammatory response ( such as TNF , IL - 6 , and CXCL10 secretion ) from HMDMs ( 12 , 13 , 23 ) . Differences in viral stock preparation or quantification could un - derpin these divergent observations . SARS - CoV - 2 is usually cul - tured in cell lines [ particularly VERO E6 or Calu - 3 cells ( 12 ) ] that inherently respond to infection by producing cytokines or undergo - ing cell death . Virus is often harvested at a time point when a visible cytopathic effect emerges . Individual viral preparations quantified for intact virions by the median tissue culture infectious dose ( TCID 50 ) or plaque assays may also contain free viral RNA , viral proteins , noninfectious virions , and parental cell line – derived DAMPs and cytokines ( 57 ) . Thus , published macrophage responses to viral preparations could represent an indirect response to epithe - lial DAMPs or free viral PAMPs . Nevertheless , our viral stocks did not trigger cytokine release from HMDMs or THP - 1 cells in the absence of ACE2 , indicating that ACE - dependent entry and early - stage replication are necessary for macrophage sensing . We antici - pate that this observation will also apply to ACE2 - dependent SARS - CoV - 2 variants , including Omicron ( the BA . 4 and BA . 5 lineages ) and any β - coronaviruses that use ACE2 . Consistent with this , SARS - CoV - 1 , which also requires ACE2 for entry , does not trigger macrophage cytokine responses ( 58 ) . This study reveals that human macrophages do not sense SARS - CoV - 2 unless they express ACE2 and support new viral synthesis . Our findings give new insight into SARS - CoV - 2 cell tropism and the influence therein of macrophage innate immune pathways . Such studies of innate immune cell - intrinsic and cell - extrinsic SARS - CoV - 2 recognition and response will help reveal therapeutic targets for new drugs that dampen pathogenic proinflammatory sig - naling in virulent viral infections without impeding the host ' s anti - viral defense . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reanalysis of human lung scRNA - seq We reanalyzed three lung scRNA - seq datasets representing samples from control individuals ( 28 ) , COVID - 19 patients ( 20 ) , or both ( 27 ) . To compare matched cell types across datasets , we used Seurat version 4 . 1 . 1 ( 59 ) integration and label transfer analysis to impose the “ fine level ” cell identities defined by Melms et al . ( 27 ) onto the remaining datasets . We first applied the Seurat CCA inte - gration pipeline to integrate the individuals from Melms et al . before label transfer analysis . Functions NormalizeData and Find - VariableFeatures were run on each individual , and SelectIntegra - tionFeatures was run with nfeatures set to 1000 . FindIntegrationAnchors and IntegrateData , followed by ScaleData and RunPCA , were all run with default parameters . We then trans - ferred the cell type identities from Melms et al . to the remaining datasets using the FindTransferAnchors and TransferData func - tions with dims = 1 : 50 . Reagents and inhibitors Low – molecular weight poly I : C ( InvivoGen , tlrl - picw ) was trans - fected into cells with Lipofectamine LTX ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , A12621 ) at 0 . 5 μg of poly I : C per well , whereas R848 Resiquimod ( Miltenyi Biotech , 130 - 109 - 376 ) was used at a final concentration of 250 ng / ml . The TBK1 inhibitor BX - 795 ( Sigma - Aldrich , SML0694 ) was used at a final concentration of 5 μM . Remdesivir ( Gilead ) was used at a final concentration of 10 μM . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 10 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Cells Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from buffy coats by density centrifugation using Ficoll - Paque PLUS ( GE Health - care ) . CD14 + monocytes were subsequently isolated using magnet - ic - activated cell sorting ( Miltenyi Biotech ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . Human macrophages were differenti - ated from human CD14 + monocytes as previously described ( 60 ) and then used for experiments on day 7 of differentiation . HMDMs were cultured in media consisting of RPMI 1640 ( Life Technologies ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 2 mM GlutaMAX ( Life Technologies ) , penicil - lin - streptomycin ( 50 U / ml ; Life Technologies ) , and recombinant human macrophage colony - stimulating factor ( CSF - 1 ; 150 ng / ml ; endotoxin - free , expressed and purified by the University of Queens - land Protein Expression Facility ) . HMDMs were seeded 16 hours before experiments at 500 , 000 cells per well in 12 - well plates or 200 , 000 cells per well in 24 - well plates . Studies using primary human cells were approved by the University of Queensland Human Medical Research Ethics Committee ( 2016 / HE001044 and 2022 / HE00658 ) . THP - 1 cells [ TIB - 202 ; RRID : CVCL _ 0006 ; American Type Culture Collection ( ATCC ) ] were maintained in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated FBS , 2 mM GlutaMAX ( Life Technologies ) , and penicillin - streptomycin ( 50 U / ml ) . For experiments , THP - 1 cells were seeded at 500 , 000 cells per well of a 12 - well plate and differentiated for 48 hours with PMA ( 30 ng / ml ) . Calu - 3 cells purchased from ATCC ( HTB - 55 ; RRID : CVCL _ 0609 ) were maintained in minimal essential medium ( Invitrogen ) containing 10 % heat - inactivated FBS ( Cytiva ) , penicillin ( 50 U / ml ) , and streptomycin ( Life Technologies Australia ) and then seeded at 300 , 000 cells per well in 12 - well plates 48 hours before experiments . A549 cells ( provided by C . Macmillan , School of Chemistry and Molecular Biology , University of Queens - land ) were maintained in Dulbecco ’ s modified essential medium ( DMEM ; Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated FBS and penicillin - streptomycin ( 50 U / ml ) . Patient BAL was collected electively from patients without diffuse or chronic lung disease who were undergoing diagnostic bronchoscopy for investigation of pulmonary lesions . BAL was col - lected from the contralateral lung opposite to the pulmonary lesion to ensure sampling was performed from normal parenchyma as de - scribed previously ( 61 ) . Briefly , the bronchoscope was wedged into a nondependent subsegmental bronchus ( 62 ) of a radiologically normal segment of the lung , and 20 ml of normal saline were in - stilled , retrieved , and then discarded to clear the bronchoscope of bronchial secretions . A further 80 to 100 ml were instilled in 20 - ml aliquots and retrieved via hand aspiration of the syringe . Studies using primary human cells were approved by the Royal Mel - bourne Hospital and the University of Melbourne Human Research Ethics Committees . BAL was filtered , and cells were washed and seeded at 1 × 10 6 cells per ml overnight in 48 - well tissue culture plates in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated FBS , 2 mM GlutaMAX ( Life Technologies ) , and penicillin - strepto - mycin ( 50 U / ml ; Life Technologies ) . Nonadherent cells were removed via medium change 4 hours after seeding , resulting in a > 90 % macrophage population as described previously ( 63 ) . Lentiviral transduction A lentiviral construct containing human ACE2 ( Addgene , 155295 ) or mSc ( Addgene , 85044 ) was cloned into pLV - CMV - MCS - IRES - Puro - Sin ( 64 ) and packaged into lentivirus in human embryonic kidney ( HEK ) 293T cells using third - generation lentiviral packag - ing plasmids ( 65 ) . Lentivirus - containing supernatant was harvested on days 2 and 3 after transfection and then concentrated using a Lenti - X concentrator ( Clontech , 631232 ) . HEK - 293T cells were transfected with the expression vectors according to the manufac - turer ’ s protocol with PEI 2500 ( BioScientific ) ; then , transduced target THP - 1 cells were selected with puromycin ( 1 μg / ml ) after 24 hours and used for assays after 72 hours . Viruses and cell infections SARS - CoV - 2 isolate hCoV - 19 / Australia / QLD02 / 2020 was provided by Queensland Health Forensic and Scientific Services , Queensland Department of Health . Virus was grown on VERO E6 TMPRSS2 cells for 48 hours in DMEM with 2 % FBS , and cell debris was cleared by centrifugation at 500 g for 5 min at room temperature . Virus was titered as described previously by plaque assay ( 32 ) . Sanger sequencing was used to confirm that no mutations occurred in the S gene relative to the original clinical isolate . Cells ( HMDM , THP - 1 , and Calu - 3 ) in 12 - well plates ( 500 , 000 cells per well ) were challenged for 1 hour at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 with 2 . 5 × 10 6 plaque - forming units ( PFUs ) for an MOI of 5 or 2 . 5 × 10 5 PFUs for an MOI of 0 . 5 . For Calu - 3 cells , virus was added to cells for a total volume of 500 μl of RPMI 1640 with 2 % FBS ( HMDM and THP - 1 ) or MEM with 2 % FBS ( Calu - 3 ) per well . The viral inoculum was removed , and the medium was replaced with DMEM ( Invitrogen ) or MEM ( Invitrogen ) containing 2 % FBS . Alternatively , virus was not removed from the cells . All studies with SARS - CoV - 2 were per - formed under physical containment 3 ( PC3 ) conditions and were approved by the University of Queensland Biosafety Committee ( IBC / 374B / SCMB / 2020 and IBC / 518B / IMB / SCMB / 2022 ) and the University of Melbourne Institutional Biosafety Committee in con - sultation with the Doherty Institute High Containment Facility Management Group . For studies involving SARS - CoV - 2 infection of BAL macrophag - es , the SARS - CoV - 2 isolate hCoV - 19 / Australia / VIC01 / 2020 ( pro - vided by the Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory ) was grown in VERO cells for 72 hours in serum - free MEM with TPCK trypsin ( 1 μg / ml ) . The median tissue culture infectious dose was calculated using the Reed - Muench method . BAL macro - phages ( about 2 . 5 × 10 5 cells ) were seeded overnight in 48 - well plates . Macrophages were infected with SARS - CoV - 2 ( MOI of 1 ) in serum - free media ( RPMI 1640 supplemented as described above ) for 1 hour . The inoculum was removed , and cells were washed before the medium was replaced with 400 μl of serum - free medium for a further 2 to 48 hours . VERO control cells were infected at an MOI of 0 . 5 , and maintenance media included TPCK trypsin ( 1 μg / ml ) . RNA from cell - free supernatant was collected and extracted using a QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit ( QIAGEN ) , whereas RNA from cell monolayers was extracted using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit ( QIAGEN ) . Cell death THP - 1 were seeded at 50 , 000 cells per well in a black - walled , clear - bottomed 96 - well plate ( CLS3916 , Corning ) . After 48 hours of dif - ferentiation with PMA , cells were inoculated with virus at an MOI of 5 and incubated for 1 hour before the medium was replaced with 100 μl of fresh RPMI 1640 with 2 % FBS . After 72 hours , ~ 60 μl of medium were removed per well , and 30 μl of ATPlite substrate Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 11 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E solution ( PerkinElmer ) were added to the remaining 30 μl . After 10 min of incubation at room temperature , plates were sealed with Optical Adhesive Film ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , and lumines - cence was read on a Victor Nivo Plate Reader ( PerkinElmer ) . RNA extraction and quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis Cells were lysed in Buffer RLT plus β - mercaptoethanol , and the RNA was directly processed using an RNeasy Mini Kit ( QIAGEN ) with on - column DNase digestion according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . RNA concentration was measured using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer , with equal starting concentrations of RNA for each sample used for reverse transcription . Reverse transcription was performed using Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) with random hexamer priming . Quanti - tative polymerase chain reaction ( qPCR ) was performed using SYBR green reagent ( Applied Biosystems ) on a QuantStudio 7 Flex Real - Time PCR System ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) in 384 - well plates ( Applied Biosystems ) , and relative gene expression was determined using the change - in - threshold ( 2 - ΔΔCT ) method with hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1 ( HPRT ) as an endoge - nous control . Alternatively , gene expression was determined relative to a standard curve generated from plasmids containing SARS - CoV - 2 Main Protease ( Mpro ) . Primers are as follows : HPRT forward , TCAGGCAGTATAATCCAAAGATGGT , and reverse , A GTCTGGCTTATATCCAACACTTCG ; ACE2 forward , TCACGAT TGTTGGGACTCTGC , and reverse , TC GCTTCATCTCCCACCACT ; IL6 forward , CTCAGCCCTGAGAA AGGAGACAT , and reverse , TCAGCCATCTTTGGAAGGTTCA ; TNF forward , TGCCTGCTGCACTTTGGAGTGA , and reverse , A GATGATCTGACTGCCTGGGCCAG ; IL1B forward , GAAGCTG ATGGCCCTAAACA , and reverse , AAGCCCTTGCTGTAGT GGTG ; IFNB1 forward , CAGTCCTGGAAGAAAAACTGGAGA , and reverse , TTGGCCTTCAGGTAATGCAGAA ; CXCL10 forward , TGAAAGCAGTTAGCAAGGAAAGGT , and reverse , A GCCTCTGTGTGGTCCATCC ; IFNL1 forward : CGCCTTGGAA GAGTCACTCA , and reverse , GAAGCCTCAGGTCCCAATTC ; SARS - CoV - 2 Mpro forward , GAGACAGGTGGTTTCTCAATCG , and reverse , ACGGCAATTCCAGTTTGAGC ; SARS - CoV - 2 E gene forward , ACAGGTACGTTAATAGTTAATAGCGT , and reverse , ATATTGCAGCAGTACGCACACA ; and subgenomic E gene forward , AATATTGCAGCAGTACGCACACA , and reverse , CGATCTCTTGTAGATCTGTTCTC . Copy number of the SARS - CoV - 2 E gene was measured in BAL or VERO cellular RNA ( equal starting concentration of RNA ) and in RNA from cell culture media ( equal starting volume ) . SensiFAST Probe Lo - ROX One - Step Kit with E - specific probe ( FAM - ACACTA GCCATCCTTACTGCGCTTCG - QQA ) was used to detect the E gene , and a plasmid - based standard curve was used to quantify the number of E copies . The following primers were used to amplify the Mpro sequence from cDNA with the Phusion polymer - ase kit ( New England Biolabs ) : forward , AATAAGGTACCAGTG GTTTTAGAAAAATGG , and reverse , TTATTGCGGCC GCTCATTGGAAAGTAACACC . The Mpro expression vector was generated by cloning the Mpro PCR product into a modified pEF6 plasmid , with a hemagglutinin - tag N - terminal of the multiple cloning site , by standard restriction digest cloning techniques . The vector and correct insertion of Mpro were verified by Sanger sequencing . Cytokine analysis Cytokine titers were determined using an AlphaLISA Immunoassay kit ( PerkinElmer ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions and analyzed on a VICTOR Nivo Plate Reader ( PerkinElmer ) . Immunofluorescence Cells were cultured on 12 - mm glass coverslips and washed with PBS + / + ( phosphate - buffered saline supplemented with 1 mM CaCl 2 and 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 ) , fixed for 30 min in 4 % paraformalde - hyde ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and blocked and permeabilized for 30 min with 3 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) and 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at room temperature . Primary antibodies were in - cubated in 1 . 5 % BSA for 1 . 5 hours at room temperature , and sec - ondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa fluorophores ( Invitrogen ) were incubated in 1 . 5 % BSA for 60 min in the dark at room temper - ature . Cells were stained with phalloidin ( PHDN1 - A ; Jomar Life Re - search ) and NP primary nanobody . NP primary nanobody was supplied by A . Isaacs , Watterson Laboratory , School of Chemistry and Molecular Biology , University of Queensland . After each incu - bation , cells were washed 3× with PBS + / + and mounted with ProLong Gold + 4 ′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) solution ( Cell Signaling Technology ) onto glass slides . Z - stack image acqui - sition was performed on a confocal laser scanning microscope ( Zeiss LSM880 ) using a 40× NA ( numerical aperture ) 1 . 3 water im - mersion objective or 20× NA 0 . 8 objective . Raw images were pro - cessed and analyzed using Fiji ( v1 . 53q ) . Images were batch - processed using a custom - made FIJI script ( 66 ) . The image process - ing included background subtraction and median filtering ; then , the threshold was determined using the MinError filter . The holes were filled in the binary image , and Analyze Particles was used to detect and count nuclei and infected cells . Figures were prepared using Adobe Illustrator . For quantification analysis , five random regions of interest per group were acquired . Electron microscopy Electron microscopy samples were processed using a method adapted from a previous study ( 67 ) . Briefly , cells were fixed in 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Services ) in PBS for 24 hours , then postfixed in 1 % osmium ( ProSciTech ) for 1 hour , and contrasted with 1 % aqueous uranyl acetate ( Electron Microscopy Services ) for 1 hour . Samples were then serially dehydrated in in - creasing percentages of ethanol before serial infiltration with LX - 112 resin ( Ladd Research ) in a BioWave microwave ( PELCO ) . Ul - trathin sections were obtained using an ultramicrotome ( UC6 : Leica ) and further contrasted using Reynolds lead post - stain . Micrographs were acquired using a JEOL 1011 transmission electron microscope at 80 kV , with a Morada charge - coupled device camera ( Olympus ) using iTEM software . Immunoblotting For total cell lysates , cells were washed once with PBS and lysed with RIPA buffer [ 50 mM tris , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 % sodium deoxycholate , and protease inhibitor ( pH 8 . 0 ) ] . A Pierce BCA protein assay kit ( Thermo Scientific ) was used to equalize protein amounts , wherein SDS sample buffer con - taining 100 mM dithiothreitol ( Astral Scientific ) was added , and samples were boiled at 95°C for 10 min to denature proteins . Pro - teins were then separated on 4 to 15 % mini protean TGX precast gels ( Bio - Rad ) in running buffer [ 200 mM glycine , 25 mM tris , Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 12 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E and 0 . 1 % SDS ( pH8 . 6 ) ] , transferred to PVDF or nitrocellulose membrane ( Bio - Rad 1620112 ) in blot buffer ( 48 nM tris , 39 nM glycine , 0 . 04 % SDS , and 20 % MeOH ) and subsequently blocked with 5 % ( w / v ) milk powder or BSA in tris - buffered saline with Tween 20 ( TBST ) for 30 min . Primary antibodies were incubated overnight at 4°C , followed by secondary antibodies linked to horse - radish peroxidase ( HRP ; Cell Signaling Technology ) or Alexa Fluor 647 ( Invitrogen ) , and after each step , immunoblots were washed 3× with TBST . HRP signals were visualized by enhanced chemilumi - nescence ( Bio - Rad ) and imaged with a Vilber Fusion Imaging system ( Vilber ) . The fluorescence signal was detected using the AI600 imager ( Amersham ) . The following antibodies were used : SARS - CoV - 2 NP ( RRID : AB _ 2827976 ; Sino Biological ) , β - tubulin ( 9F3 ; RRID : AB _ 823664 ; Cell Signaling Technology ) , ACE2 ( AF933 ; RRID : AB _ 355722 , R & D Systems ; used for HMDM and THP - 1 blots ) , TMPRSS2 ( RRID : AB _ 10585592 ; Abcam ) , β - actin ( 8H10D10 ; RRID : AB _ 2242334 ; Cell Signaling Technology ) , ACE2 ( MA532307 , Invitrogen ; used for BAL macrophage blots ) , and cal - nexin ( ab22595 ; RRID : AB _ 2069006 ; Abcam ) . Statistical analysis Statistics were calculated using GraphPad Prism . For experiments with cell lines ( e . g . , Calu - 3 , THP - 1 – ACE2 , and THP - 1 – mSc ) , we used one - or two - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with Tukey ’ s post hoc test for multiple comparisons . For experiments with HMDMs , we used repeated measures ANOVA with Tukey ’ s post hoc test for multiple comparisons . When only comparing two con - ditions , we used a one - tailed t test . Supplementary Materials This PDF file includes : Figs . S1 to S5 Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following : MDAR Reproducibility Checklist View / request a protocol for this paper from Bio - protocol . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . M . Hoffmann , H . Kleine - Weber , S . Schroeder , N . Krüger , T . Herrler , S . Erichsen , T . S . Schiergens , G . Herrler , N . - H . Wu , A . Nitsche , M . A . Müller , C . Drosten , S . Pöhlmann , SARS - CoV - 2cellentrydependsonACE2andTMPRSS2andisblockedbyaclinicallyproven protease inhibitor . Cell 181 , 271 – 280 . e8 ( 2020 ) . 2 . C . B . Jackson , M . Farzan , B . Chen , H . Choe , MechanismsofSARS - CoV - 2entryintocells . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 3 – 20 ( 2022 ) . 3 . P . V ’ kovski , A . Kratzel , S . Steiner , H . Stalder , V . Thiel , Coronavirus biology and replication : Implications for SARS - CoV - 2 . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 19 , 155 – 170 ( 2021 ) . 4 . B . Meng , A . Abdullahi , I . A . T . M . Ferreira , N . Goonawardane , A . Saito , I . Kimura , D . Yamasoba , P . P . Gerber , S . Fatihi , S . Rathore , S . K . Zepeda , G . Papa , S . A . Kemp , T . Ikeda , M . Toyoda , T . S . Tan , J . Kuramochi , S . Mitsunaga , T . Ueno , K . Shirakawa , A . Takaori - Kondo , T . Brevini , D . L . Mallery , O . J . Charles ; CITIID - NIHR BioResource COVID - 19 Collaboration ; Genotype to Phenotype Japan ( G2P - Japan ) Consortium ; Ecuador - COVID19 Consortium , J . E . Bowen , A . Joshi , A . C . Walls , L . Jackson , D . Martin , K . G . C . Smith , J . Bradley , J . A . G . Briggs , J . Choi , E . Madissoon , K . Meyer , P . Mlcochova , L . Ceron - Gutierrez , R . Doffinger , S . A . Teichmann , A . J . Fisher , M . S . Pizzuto , A . deMarco , D . Corti , M . Hosmillo , J . H . Lee , L . C . James , L . Thukral , D . Veesler , A . Sigal , F . Sampaziotis , I . G . Goodfellow , N . J . Matheson , K . Sato , R . K . Gupta , Altered TMPRSS2 usage by SARS - CoV - 2 Omicron impacts infectivity and fusogenicity . Nature 603 , 706 – 714 ( 2022 ) . 5 . Y . J . Hou , K . Okuda , C . E . Edwards , D . R . Martinez , K . H . DinnonIII , T . Kato , R . E . Lee , B . L . Yount , T . M . Mascenik , G . Chen , K . N . Olivier , A . Ghio , V . Longping , S . R . Leist , L . E . Gralinski , A . Schäfer , H . Dang , S . Nakano , L . Sun , M . L . Fulcher , A . Livraghi - butrico , N . I . Nicely , M . Cameron , C . Cameron , D . J . Kelvin , A . de Silva , D . M . Margolis , A . Markmann , L . Bartelt , R . Zumwalt , J . Martinez , S . P . Salvatore , A . Borczuk , P . R . Tata , A . Kimple , I . Jaspers , W . K . O ’ Neal , S . H . Randell , R . C . Boucher , R . S . Baric , SARS - CoV - 2 reverse genetics reveals a variable infection gradient in the respiratory tract . Cell 182 , 429 – 446 . e14 ( 2020 ) . 6 . D . Blanco - Melo , B . E . Nilsson - Payant , W . - C . Liu , S . Uhl , D . Hoagland , R . Møller , T . X . Jordan , K . Oishi , M . Panis , D . Sachs , T . T . Wang , R . E . Schwartz , J . K . Lim , R . A . Albrecht , B . R . Tenoever , Imbalanced host response to SARS - CoV - 2 drives development of COVID - 19 . Cell 181 , 1036 – 1045 . e9 ( 2020 ) . 7 . L . G . Thorne , A . - K . Reuschl , L . Zuliani - Alvarez , M . V . X . Whelan , J . Turner , M . Noursadeghi , C . Jolly , G . J . Towers , SARS - CoV - 2 sensing by RIG - I and MDA5 links epithelial infection to macrophage inflammation . EMBO J . 40 , e107826 ( 2021 ) . 8 . P . Bost , A . Giladi , Y . Liu , Y . Bendjelal , G . Xu , E . David , R . Blecher - Gonen , M . Cohen , C . Medaglia , H . Li , A . Deczkowska , S . Zhang , B . Schwikowski , Z . Zhang , I . Amit , Host - viral infection maps reveal signatures of severe COVID - 19 patients . Cell 181 , 1475 – 1488 . e12 ( 2020 ) . 9 . R . L . Chua , S . Lukassen , S . Trump , B . P . Hennig , D . Wendisch , F . Pott , O . Debnath , L . Thürmann , F . Kurth , M . T . Völker , J . Kazmierski , B . Timmermann , S . Twardziok , S . Schneider , F . Machleidt , H . Müller - Redetzky , M . Maier , A . Krannich , S . Schmidt , F . Balzer , J . Liebig , J . Loske , N . Suttorp , J . Eils , N . Ishaque , U . G . Liebert , C . von Kalle , A . Hocke , M . Witzenrath , C . Goffinet , C . Drosten , S . Laudi , I . Lehmann , C . Conrad , L . - E . Sander , R . Eils , COVID - 19 severity correlates with airway epithelium – immune cell interactions identified by single - cell analysis . Nat . Biotechnol . 38 , 970 – 979 ( 2020 ) . 10 . R . Knoll , J . L . Schultze , J . Schulte - Schrepping , Monocytes and macrophages in COVID - 19 . Front . Immunol . 12 , 720109 ( 2021 ) . 11 . M . Merad , J . C . Martin , PathologicalinflammationinpatientswithCOVID - 19 : Akeyrole for monocytes and macrophages . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 20 , 355 – 362 ( 2020 ) . 12 . J . Zheng , Y . Wang , K . Li , D . K . Meyerholz , C . Allamargot , S . Perlman , Severeacuterespiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 - induced immune activation and death of monocyte - derived human macrophages and dendritic cells . J Infect Dis 223 , 785 – 795 ( 2021 ) . 13 . D . Yang , H . Chu , Y . Hou , Y . Chai , H . Shuai , A . C . - Y . Lee , X . Zhang , Y . Wang , B . Hu , X . Huang , T . T . - T . Yuen , J . - P . Cai , J . Zhou , S . Yuan , A . J . Zhang , J . F . - W . Chan , K . - Y . Yuen , Attenuated interferonand proinflammatory response in SARS - CoV - 2 - infected human dendritic cells is associated with viral antagonism of STAT1 phosphorylation . J . Infect . Dis . 222 , 734 – 745 ( 2020 ) . 14 . K . R . Short , A . G . Brooks , P . C . Reading , S . L . Londrigan , The fate of influenza Avirus after infection of human macrophages and dendritic cells . J . Gen . Virol . 93 , 2315 – 2325 ( 2012 ) . 15 . J . E . Gern , E . C . Dick , W . M . Lee , S . Murray , K . Meyer , Z . T . Handzel , W . W . Busse , Rhinovirus entersbutdoesnotreplicateinsidemonocytesandairwaymacrophages . J . Immunol . 156 , 621 – 627 ( 1996 ) . 16 . S . L . Londrigan , L . M . Wakim , J . Smith , A . J . Haverkate , A . G . Brooks , P . C . Reading , IFITM3and type I interferons are important for the control of influenza Avirus replication in murine macrophages . Virology 540 , 17 – 22 ( 2020 ) . 17 . M . Goritzka , S . Makris , F . Kausar , L . R . Durant , C . Pereira , Y . Kumagai , F . J . Culley , M . Mack , S . Akira , C . Johansson , Alveolar macrophage - derived type I interferons orchestrate innate immunity to RSV through recruitment of antiviral monocytes . J . Exp . Med . 212 , 699 – 714 ( 2015 ) . 18 . Y . Kumagai , O . Takeuchi , H . Kato , H . Kumar , K . Matsui , E . Morii , K . Aozasa , T . Kawai , S . Akira , Alveolar macrophages are the primary interferon - α producer in pulmonary infection with RNAviruses . Immunity 27 , 240 – 252 ( 2007 ) . 19 . C . Schneider , S . P . Nobs , A . K . Heer , M . Kurrer , G . Klinke , N . van Rooijen , J . Vogel , M . Kopf , Alveolar macrophages are essential for protection from respiratory failure and associated morbidity following influenza virus infection . PLOS Pathog . 10 , e1004053 ( 2014 ) . 20 . T . M . Delorey , C . G . K . Ziegler , G . Heimberg , R . Normand , Y . Yang , Å . Segerstolpe , D . Abbondanza , S . J . Fleming , A . Subramanian , D . T . Montoro , K . A . Jagadeesh , K . K . Dey , P . Sen , M . Slyper , Y . H . Pita - Juárez , D . Phillips , J . Biermann , Z . Bloom - Ackermann , N . Barkas , A . Ganna , J . Gomez , J . C . Melms , I . Katsyv , E . Normandin , P . Naderi , Y . V . Popov , S . S . Raju , S . Niezen , L . T . - Y . Tsai , K . J . Siddle , M . Sud , V . M . Tran , S . K . Vellarikkal , Y . Wang , L . Amir - Zil - berstein , D . S . Atri , J . Beechem , O . R . Brook , J . Chen , P . Divakar , P . Dorceus , J . M . Engreitz , A . Essene , D . M . Fitzgerald , R . Fropf , S . Gazal , J . Gould , J . Grzyb , T . Harvey , J . Hecht , T . Hether , J . Jané - Valbuena , M . Leney - Greene , H . Ma , C . McCabe , D . E . McLoughlin , E . M . Miller , C . Muus , M . Niemi , R . Padera , L . Pan , D . Pant , C . Pe ’ er , J . Pfiffner - Borges , C . J . Pinto , J . Plaisted , J . Reeves , M . Ross , M . Rudy , E . H . Rueckert , M . Siciliano , A . Sturm , E . Todres , A . Waghray , S . Warren , S . Zhang , D . R . Zollinger , L . Cosimi , R . M . Gupta , N . Hacohen , H . Hibshoosh , W . Hide , A . L . Price , J . Rajagopal , P . R . Tata , S . Riedel , G . Szabo , T . L . Tickle , P . T . Ellinor , D . Hung , P . C . Sabeti , R . Novak , R . Rogers , D . E . Ingber , Z . G . Jiang , D . Juric , M . Babadi , S . L . Farhi , B . Izar , J . R . Stone , I . S . Vlachos , I . H . Solomon , O . Ashenberg , C . B . M . Porter , B . Li , A . K . Shalek , A . - C . Villani , O . Rozenblatt - Rosen , A . Regev , COVID - 19 tissue atlases reveal SARS - CoV - 2 pathology and cellular targets . Nature 595 , 107 – 113 ( 2021 ) . Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 13 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 21 . T . T . - H . Wu , K . J . Travaglini , A . Rustagi , D . Xu , Y . Zhang , S . K . Jang , A . Gillich , R . Dehghannasiri , G . Martinez - Colon , A . Beck , A . J . Wilk , M . Morri , W . L . Trope , J . B . Shrager , S . R . Quake , C . S . Kuo , J . Salzman , P . S . Kim , C . A . Blish , M . A . Krasnow , Activatedinterstitialmacrophages areapredominanttargetofviraltakeoverandfocusofinflammationinCOVID - 19initiation inhumanlung . bioRxiv2022 . 05 . 10 . 491266 [ Preprint ] . 2022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 05 . 10 . 491266 . 22 . E . Sefik , R . Qu , C . Junqueira , E . Kaffe , H . Mirza , J . Zhao , J . R . Brewer , A . Han , H . R . Steach , B . Israelow , H . N . Blackburn , S . E . Velazquez , Y . G . Chen , S . Halene , A . Iwasaki , E . Meffre , M . Nussenzweig , J . Lieberman , C . B . Wilen , Y . Kluger , R . A . Flavell , Inflammasomeactivation in infected macrophages drives COVID - 19 pathology . Nature 606 , 585 – 593 ( 2022 ) . 23 . M . M . Abdelmoaty , P . Yeapuri , J . Machhi , K . E . Olson , F . Shahjin , V . Kumar , Y . Zhou , J . Liang , K . Pandey , A . Acharya , S . N . Byrareddy , R . L . Mosley , H . E . Gendelman , Defining the innate immune responses for SARS - CoV - 2 - human macrophage interactions . Front . Immunol . 12 , 741502 ( 2021 ) . 24 . L . Dalskov , M . Møhlenberg , J . Thyrsted , J . Blay - Cadanet , E . T . Poulsen , B . H . Folkersen , S . H . Skaarup , D . Olagnier , L . Reinert , J . J . Enghild , H . J . Hoffmann , C . K . Holm , R . Hartmann , SARS - CoV - 2 evades immune detection in alveolar macrophages . EMBO Rep . 21 , e51252 ( 2020 ) . 25 . M . A . Niles , P . Gogesch , S . Kronhart , S . Ortega Iannazzo , G . Kochs , Z . Waibler , M . Anzaghe , Macrophages and dendritic cells are not the major source of pro - inflammatory cytokines upon SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Front . Immunol . 12 , 647824 ( 2021 ) . 26 . Q . Lu , J . Liu , S . Zhao , M . F . Gomez Castro , M . Laurent - Rolle , J . Dong , X . Ran , P . Damani - Yokota , H . Tang , T . Karakousi , J . Son , M . E . Kaczmarek , Z . Zhang , S . T . Yeung , B . T . McCune , R . E . Chen , F . Tang , X . Ren , X . Chen , J . C . C . Hsu , M . Teplova , B . Huang , H . Deng , Z . Long , T . Mudianto , S . Jin , P . Lin , J . Du , R . Zang , T . T . Su , A . Herrera , M . Zhou , R . Yan , J . Cui , J . Zhu , Q . Zhou , T . Wang , J . Ma , S . B . Koralov , Z . Zhang , I . Aifantis , L . N . Segal , M . S . Diamond , K . M . Khanna , K . A . Stapleford , P . Cresswell , Y . Liu , S . Ding , Q . Xie , J . Wang , SARS - CoV - 2 exacerbates proinflammatory responses in myeloid cells through C - type lectin receptors and Tweety family member 2 . Immunity 54 , 1304 – 1319 . e9 ( 2021 ) . 27 . J . C . Melms , J . Biermann , H . Huang , Y . Wang , A . Nair , S . Tagore , I . Katsyv , A . F . Rendeiro , A . D . Amin , D . Schapiro , C . J . Frangieh , A . M . Luoma , A . Filliol , Y . Fang , H . Ravichandran , M . G . Clausi , G . A . Alba , M . Rogava , S . W . Chen , P . Ho , D . T . Montoro , A . E . Kornberg , A . S . Han , M . F . Bakhoum , N . Anandasabapathy , M . Suárez - Fariñas , S . F . Bakhoum , Y . Bram , A . Borczuk , X . V . Guo , J . H . Lefkowitch , C . Marboe , S . M . Lagana , A . Del Portillo , E . J . Tsai , E . Zorn , G . S . Markowitz , R . F . Schwabe , R . E . Schwartz , O . Elemento , A . Saqi , H . Hibshoosh , J . Que , B . Izar , Amolecular single - celllungatlasof lethal COVID - 19 . Nature 595 , 114 – 119 ( 2021 ) . 28 . E . Madissoon , A . Wilbrey - Clark , R . J . Miragaia , K . Saeb - Parsy , K . T . Mahbubani , N . Georgakopoulos , P . Harding , K . Polanski , N . Huang , K . Nowicki - Osuch , R . C . Fitzgerald , K . W . Loudon , J . R . Ferdinand , M . R . Clatworthy , A . Tsingene , S . vanDongen , M . Dabrowska , M . Patel , M . J . T . Stubbington , S . A . Teichmann , O . Stegle , K . B . Meyer , scRNA - seq assess - ment of the human lung , spleen , and esophagus tissue stability after cold preservation . Genome Biol . 21 , 1 ( 2019 ) . 29 . C . Muus , M . D . Luecken , G . Eraslan , L . Sikkema , A . Waghray , G . Heimberg , Y . Kobayashi , E . D . Vaishnav , A . Subramanian , C . Smillie , K . A . Jagadeesh , E . T . Duong , E . Fiskin , E . T . Triglia , M . Ansari , P . Cai , B . Lin , J . Buchanan , S . Chen , J . Shu , A . L . Haber , H . Chung , D . T . Montoro , T . Adams ; The NHLBI LungMap Consortium & The Human Cell Atlas Lung Biological Network , Single - cell meta - analysis of SARS - CoV - 2 entry genes across tissues and demo - graphics . Nat . Med . 27 , 546 – 559 ( 2021 ) . 30 . M . Magnen , R . You , A . A . Rao , R . T . Davis , L . Rodriguez , C . R . Simoneau , L . Hysenaj , K . H . Hu , T . U . C . Consortium , C . Love , P . G . Woodruff , D . J . Erle , C . M . Hendrickson , C . S . Calfee , M . A . Matthay , J . P . Roose , A . Sil , M . Ott , C . R . Langelier , M . F . Krummel , M . R . Looney , Im - mediate myeloid depot for SARS - CoV - 2 in the human lung . bioRxiv 2022 . 04 . 28 . 489942 [ Preprint ] . 2022 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 04 . 28 . 489942 . 31 . C . Blériot , S . Chakarov , F . Ginhoux , Determinants of resident tissue macrophage identity and function . Immunity 52 , 957 – 970 ( 2020 ) . 32 . L . Schimmel , K . Y . Chew , C . J . Stocks , T . E . Yordanov , P . Essebier , A . Kulasinghe , J . Monkman , A . F . R . Santos Miggiolaro , C . Cooper , L . Noronha , K . Schroder , A . K . Lagendijk , L . I . Labzin , K . R . Short , E . J . Gordon , EndothelialcellsarenotproductivelyinfectedbySARS - CoV - 2 . Clin . Transl . Immunol . 10 , e1350 ( 2021 ) . 33 . S . Jalloh , J . Olejnik , J . Berrigan , A . Nisa , E . L . Suder , H . Akiyama , M . Lei , S . Ramaswamy , S . Tyagi , Y . Bushkin , E . Mühlberger , S . Gummuluru , CD169 - mediatedrestrictiveSARS - CoV - 2 infection of macrophages induces pro - inflammatory responses . PLOS Pathog . 18 , e1010479 ( 2022 ) . 34 . L . I . Labzin , M . Bottermann , P . Rodriguez - Silvestre , S . Foss , J . T . Andersen , M . Vaysburd , D . Clift , L . C . James , Antibody and DNA sensing pathways converge to activate the infl - ammasome during primary human macrophage infection . EMBO J . 38 , e101365 ( 2019 ) . 35 . S . S . Diebold , T . Kaisho , H . Hemmi , S . Akira , C . Reis E Sousa , Innate antiviral responses by means of TLR7 - mediated recognition of single - stranded RNA . Science 303 , 1529 – 1531 ( 2004 ) . 36 . M . Weber , A . Gawanbacht , M . Habjan , A . Rang , C . Borner , A . M . Schmidt , S . Veitinger , R . Jacob , S . Devignot , G . Kochs , A . García - Sastre , F . Weber , Incoming RNAvirus nucleo - capsids containing a 5 ′ - triphosphorylated genome activate RIG - I and antiviral signaling . Cell Host Microbe 13 , 336 – 346 ( 2013 ) . 37 . C . Lucas , P . Wong , J . Klein , T . B . R . Castro , J . Silva , M . Sundaram , M . K . Ellingson , T . Mao , J . E . Oh , B . Israelow , T . Takahashi , M . Tokuyama , P . Lu , A . Venkataraman , A . Park , S . Mohanty , H . Wang , A . L . Wyllie , C . B . F . Vogels , R . Earnest , S . Lapidus , I . M . Ott , A . J . Moore , M . C . Muenker , J . B . Fournier , M . Campbell , C . D . Odio , A . Casanovas - Massana , A . Obaid , A . Lu - Culligan , A . Nelson , A . Brito , A . Nunez , A . Martin , A . Watkins , B . Geng , C . Kalinich , C . Harden , C . Todeasa , C . Jensen , D . Kim , D . McDonald , D . Shepard , E . Courchaine , E . B . White , E . Song , E . Silva , E . Kudo , G . DeIuliis , H . Rahming , H . J . Park , I . Matos , J . Nouws , J . Valdez , J . Fauver , J . Lim , K . A . Rose , K . Anastasio , K . Brower , L . Glick , L . Sharma , L . Sewanan , L . Knaggs , M . Minasyan , M . Batsu , M . Petrone , M . Kuang , M . Nakahata , M . Campbell , M . Linehan , M . H . Askenase , M . Simonov , M . Smolgovsky , N . Sonnert , N . Naushad , P . Vijayakumar , R . Martinello , R . Datta , R . Handoko , S . Bermejo , S . Prophet , S . Bickerton , S . Velazquez , T . Alpert , T . Rice , W . Khoury - Hanold , X . Peng , Y . Yang , Y . Cao , Y . Strong , R . Herbst , A . C . Shaw , R . Medzhitov , W . L . Schulz , N . D . Grubaugh , C . DelaCruz , S . Farhadian , A . I . Ko , S . B . Omer , A . Iwasaki , Longitudinal analyses reveal immunological misfiring in severe COVID - 19 . Nature 584 , 463 – 469 ( 2020 ) . 38 . M . Koutsakos , L . C . Rowntree , L . Hensen , B . Y . Chua , C . E . vandeSandt , J . R . Habel , W . Zhang , X . Jia , L . Kedzierski , T . M . Ashhurst , G . H . Putri , F . Marsh - Wakefield , M . N . Read , D . N . Edwards , E . B . Clemens , C . Y . Wong , F . L . Mordant , J . A . Juno , F . Amanat , J . Audsley , N . E . Holmes , C . L . Gordon , O . C . Smibert , J . A . Trubiano , C . M . Hughes , M . Catton , J . T . Denholm , S . Y . C . Tong , D . L . Doolan , T . C . Kotsimbos , D . C . Jackson , F . Krammer , D . I . Godfrey , A . W . Chung , N . J . C . King , S . R . Lewin , A . K . Wheatley , S . J . Kent , K . Subbarao , J . McMahon , I . Thevarajan , T . H . O . Nguyen , A . C . Cheng , K . Kedzierska , Integrated immune dynamics define correlates of COVID - 19 severity and antibody responses . Cell Rep . Med . 2 , 100208 ( 2021 ) . 39 . L . I . Labzin , M . A . R . Lauterbach , E . Latz , Interferons and inflammasomes : Cooperation and counterregulation in disease . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 138 , 37 – 46 ( 2016 ) . 40 . G . Kokic , H . S . Hillen , D . Tegunov , C . Dienemann , F . Seitz , J . Schmitzova , L . Farnung , A . Siewert , C . Höbartner , P . Cramer , Mechanism of SARS - CoV - 2 polymerase stalling by remdesivir . Nat . Commun . 12 , 279 ( 2021 ) . 41 . C . Junqueira , Â . Crespo , S . Ranjbar , L . B . de Lacerda , M . Lewandrowski , J . Ingber , B . Parry , S . Ravid , S . Clark , M . R . Schrimpf , F . Ho , C . Beakes , J . Margolin , N . Russell , K . Kays , J . Boucau , U . Das Adhikari , S . M . Vora , V . Leger , L . Gehrke , L . A . Henderson , E . Janssen , D . Kwon , C . Sander , J . Abraham , M . B . Goldberg , H . Wu , G . Mehta , S . Bell , A . E . Goldfeld , M . R . Filbin , J . Lieberman , Fc γ R - mediated SARS - CoV - 2 infection of monocytes activates inflammation . Nature 606 , 576 – 584 ( 2022 ) . 42 . J . W . Schoggins , Interferon - stimulated genes : Roles in viralpathogenesis . Curr . Opin . Virol . 6 , 40 – 46 ( 2014 ) . 43 . K . Clark , L . Plater , M . Peggie , P . Cohen , UseofthepharmacologicalinhibitorBX795tostudy the regulation and physiological roles of TBK1 and I κ B Kinase ϵ . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 14136 – 14146 ( 2009 ) . 44 . S . Beyerstedt , E . B . Casaro , É . B . Rangel , COVID - 19 : Angiotensin - convertingenzyme2 ( ACE2 ) expression and tissue susceptibility to SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Eur . J . Clin . Microbiol . Infect . Dis . 40 , 905 – 919 ( 2021 ) . 45 . S . Joshi , H . Wollenzien , E . Leclerc , Y . P . Jarajapu , Hypoxic regulation of angiotensin - con - verting enzyme 2 and Mas receptor in human CD34 + cells . J . Cell . Physiol . 234 , 20420 – 20431 ( 2019 ) . 46 . T . H . Beacon , G . P . Delcuve , J . R . Davie , Epigenetic regulation of ACE2 , the receptor of the SARS - CoV - 2 virus . Genome 64 , 386 – 399 ( 2021 ) . 47 . Q . Zhang , P . Bastard , Z . Liu , J . Le Pen , M . Moncada - Velez , J . Chen , M . Ogishi , I . K . D . Sabli , S . Hodeib , C . Korol , J . Rosain , K . Bilguvar , J . Ye , A . Bolze , B . Bigio , R . Yang , A . A . Arias , Q . Zhou , Y . Zhang , F . Onodi , S . Korniotis , L . Karpf , Q . Philippot , M . Chbihi , L . Bonnet - Madin , K . Dorgham , N . Smith , W . M . Schneider , B . S . Razooky , H . - H . Hoffmann , E . Michailidis , L . Moens , J . E . Han , L . Lorenzo , L . Bizien , P . Meade , A . - L . Neehus , A . C . Ugurbil , A . Corneau , G . Kerner , P . Zhang , F . Rapaport , Y . Seeleuthner , J . Manry , C . Masson , Y . Schmitt , A . Schlüter , T . LeVoyer , T . Khan , J . Li , J . Fellay , L . Roussel , M . Shahrooei , M . F . Alosaimi , D . Mansouri , H . Al - Saud , F . Al - Mulla , F . Almourfi , S . Z . Al - Muhsen , F . Alsohime , S . AlTurki , R . Hasanato , D . vande Beek , A . Biondi , L . R . Bettini , M . D ’ Angio , P . Bonfanti , L . Imberti , A . Sottini , S . Paghera , E . Quiros - Roldan , C . Rossi , A . J . Oler , M . F . Tompkins , C . Alba , I . Vandernoot , J . - C . Goffard , G . Smits , I . Migeotte , F . Haerynck , P . Soler - Palacin , A . Martin - Nalda , R . Colobran , P . - E . Morange , S . Keles , F . Çölkesen , T . Ozcelik , K . K . Yasar , S . Senoglu , Ş . N . Karabela , C . R . Gallego , G . Novelli , S . Hraiech , Y . Tandjaoui - Lambiotte , X . Duval , C . Laouénan , A . L . Snow , C . L . Dalgard , J . Milner , D . C . Vinh , T . H . Mogensen , N . Marr , A . N . Spaan , B . Boisson , S . Boisson - Dupuis , J . Bustamante , A . Puel , M . Ciancanelli , I . Meyts , T . Maniatis , V . Soumelis , A . Amara , M . Nussenzweig , A . García - Sastre , F . Krammer , A . Pujol , D . Duffy , R . Lifton , S . - Y . Zhang , G . Gorochov , V . Béziat , E . Jouanguy , V . Sancho - Shimizu , C . M . Rice , Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 14 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E L . Abel , L . D . Notarangelo , A . Cobat , H . C . Su , J . - L . Casanova , Inborn errors of type I IFN immunity in patients with life - threatening COVID - 19 . Science 370 , eabd4570 ( 2020 ) . 48 . P . Bastard , A . Gervais , T . Le Voyer , J . Rosain , Q . Philippot , J . Manry , E . Michailidis , H . Hoffmann , S . Eto , M . Garcia - Prat , L . Bizien , A . Parra - Martínez , R . Yang , L . Haljasmägi , M . Migaud , K . Särekannu , J . Maslovskaja , N . de Prost , Y . Tandjaoui - Lambiotte , C . - E . Luyt , B . Amador - Borrero , A . Gaudet , J . Poissy , P . Morel , P . Richard , F . Cognasse , J . Troya , S . Trouillet - Assant , A . Belot , K . Saker , P . Garçon , J . G . Rivière , J . - C . Lagier , S . Gentile , L . B . Rosen , E . Shaw , T . Morio , J . Tanaka , D . Dalmau , P . - L . Tharaux , D . Sene , A . Stepanian , B . Megarbane , V . Triantafyllia , A . Fekkar , J . R . Heath , J . L . Franco , J . - M . Anaya , J . Solé - Violán , L . Imberti , A . Biondi , P . Bonfanti , R . Castagnoli , O . M . Delmonte , Y . Zhang , A . L . Snow , S . M . Holland , C . Biggs , M . Moncada - Vélez , A . A . Arias , L . Lorenzo , S . Boucherit , B . Coulibaly , D . Anglicheau , A . M . Planas , F . Haerynck , S . Duvlis , R . L . Nussbaum , T . Ozcelik , S . Keles , A . A . Bousfiha , J . El Bakkouri , C . Ramirez - Santana , S . Paul , Q . Pan - Hammarström , L . Hammarström , A . Dupont , A . Kurolap , C . N . Metz , A . Aiuti , G . Casari , V . Lampasona , F . Ciceri , L . A . Barreiros , E . Dominguez - Garrido , M . Vidigal , M . Zatz , D . van de Beek , S . Sahanic , I . Tancevski , Y . Stepanovskyy , O . Boyarchuk , Y . Nukui , M . Tsumura , L . Vidaur , S . G . Tangye , S . Burrel , D . Duffy , L . Quintana - Murci , A . Klocperk , N . Y . Kann , A . Shcherbina , Y . - L . Lau , D . Leung , M . Coulongeat , J . Marlet , R . Koning , L . F . Reyes , A . Chauvineau - Grenier , F . Venet , G . Monneret , M . C . Nussenzweig , R . Arrestier , I . Boudhabhay , H . Baris - Feldman , D . Hagin , J . Wauters , I . Meyts , A . H . Dyer , S . P . Kennelly , N . M . Bourke , R . Halwani , N . S . Sharif - Askari , K . Dorgham , J . Sallette , S . M . Sedkaoui , S . AlKhater , R . Rigo - Bonnin , F . Morandeira , L . Roussel , D . C . Vinh , S . R . Ostrowski , A . Condino - Neto , C . Prando , A . Bonradenko , A . N . Spaan , L . Gilardin , J . Fellay , S . Lyonnet , K . Bilguvar , R . P . Lifton , S . Mane , M . S . Anderson , B . Boisson , V . Béziat , S . - Y . Zhang , E . Vandreakos , O . Hermine , A . Pujol , P . Peterson , T . H . Mogensen , L . Rowen , J . Mond , S . Debette , X . de Lamballerie , X . Duval , F . Mentré , M . Zins , P . Soler - Palacin , R . Colobran , G . Gorochov , X . Solanich , S . Susen , J . Martinez - Picado , D . Raoult , M . Vasse , P . K . Gregersen , L . Piemonti , C . Rodríguez - Gallego , L . D . Notarangelo , H . C . Su , K . Kisand , S . Okada , A . Puel , E . Jouanguy , C . M . Rice , P . Tiberghien , Q . Zhang , A . Cobat , L . Abel , J . - L . Casanova , Autoantibodies neutralizing type I IFNs are present in ~ 4 % ofuninfectedindividualsover70yearsoldandaccountfor ~ 20 % of COVID - 19deaths . Sci . Immunol . 6 , eabl4340 ( 2021 ) . 49 . R . A . Grant , L . Morales - Nebreda , N . S . Markov , S . Swaminathan , M . Querrey , E . R . Guzman , D . A . Abbott , H . K . Donnelly , A . Donayre , I . A . Goldberg , Z . M . Klug , N . Borkowski , Z . Lu , H . Kihshen , Y . Politanska , L . Sichizya , M . Kang , A . Shilatifard , C . Qi , J . W . Lomasney , A . C . Argento , J . M . Kruser , E . S . Malsin , C . O . Pickens , S . B . Smith , J . M . Walter , A . E . Pawlowski , D . Schneider , P . Nannapaneni , H . Abdala - Valencia , A . Bharat , C . J . Gottardi , G . R . S . Budinger , A . V . Misharin , B . D . Singer , R . G . Wunderink ; The NU SCRIPT Study Investigators , Circuits between infected macrophages and T cells in SARS - CoV - 2 pneumonia . Nature 590 , 635 – 641 ( 2021 ) . 50 . A . C . Salina , D . dos - Santos , T . S . Rodrigues , M . Fortes - Rocha , E . G . Freitas - Filho , D . L . Alzamora - Terrel , I . M . Castro , T . F . Fraga da Silva , M . H . de Lima , D . C . Nascimento , C . M . Silva , J . E . Toller - Kawahisa , A . Becerra , S . Oliveira , D . B . Caetité , L . Almeida , A . Y . Ishimoto , T . M . Lima , R . B . Martins , F . Veras , N . B . do Amaral , M . C . Giannini , L . P . Bonjorno , M . I . Lopes , M . N . Benatti , S . S . Batah , R . C . Santana , F . C . Vilar , M . A . Martins , R . L . Assad , S . C . de Almeida , F . R . de Oliveira , E . A . Neto , T . M . Cunha , J . C . Alves - Filho , V . L . Bonato , F . Q . Cunha , A . T . Fabro , H . I . Nakaya , D . S . Zamboni , P . Louzada - Junior , R . D . Oliveira , L . D . Cunha , Efferocytosis of SARS - CoV - 2 - infected dying cells impairs mac - rophage anti - inflammatory functions and clearance of apoptotic cells . eLife 11 , e74443 ( 2022 ) . 51 . M . Zheng , R . Karki , E . P . Williams , D . Yang , E . Fitzpatrick , P . Vogel , C . B . Jonsson , T . D . Kanneganti , TLR2 sensesthe SARS - CoV - 2envelope protein to produce inflammatory cytokines . Nat . Immunol . 22 , 829 – 838 ( 2021 ) . 52 . A . Rebendenne , A . L . Chaves Valadão , M . Tauziet , G . Maarifi , B . Bonaventure , J . McKellar , R . Planès , S . Nisole , M . Arnaud - Arnould , O . Moncorgé , C . Goujon , SARS - CoV - 2 triggers an MDA - 5 - dependent interferon response which is unable to control replication in lung ep - ithelial cells . J . Virol . 95 , e02415 - 20 ( 2021 ) . 53 . N . G . Sampaio , L . Chauveau , J . Hertzog , A . Bridgeman , G . Fowler , J . P . Moonen , M . Dupont , R . A . Russell , M . Noerenberg , J . Rehwinkel , The RNA sensor MDA5 detects SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Sci . Rep . 11 , 13638 ( 2021 ) . 54 . A . Broggi , S . Ghosh , B . Sposito , R . Spreafico , F . Balzarini , A . Lo Cascio , N . Clementi , M . de Santis , N . Mancini , F . Granucci , I . Zanoni , Type III interferons disrupt the lung epithelial barrier upon viral recognition . Science 369 , 706 – 712 ( 2020 ) . 55 . J . Major , S . Crotta , M . Llorian , T . M . McCabe , H . H . Gad , S . L . Priestnall , R . Hartmann , A . Wack , Type I and III interferons disrupt lung epithelialrepair during recovery from viral infection . Science 369 , 712 – 717 ( 2020 ) . 56 . A . Iwasaki , P . S . Pillai , Innate immunity to influenzavirus infection . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 14 , 315 – 328 ( 2014 ) . 57 . Q . Niu , L . Ma , S . Zhu , L . Li , Q . Zheng , J . Hou , H . Lian , L . Wu , X . Yan , Quantitativeassessment of the physical virustiterand purity by ultrasensitive flowvirometry . Angew . Chem . Int . Ed . 60 , 9351 – 9356 ( 2021 ) . 58 . O . García - Nicolás , P . V ’ kovski , F . Zettl , G . Zimmer , V . Thiel , A . Summerfield , No evidencefor humanmonocyte - derivedmacrophageinfectionandantibody - mediatedenhancementof SARS - CoV - 2 infection . Front . Cell . Infect . Microbiol . 11 , 644574 ( 2021 ) . 59 . Y . Hao , S . Hao , E . Andersen - Nissen , W . M . Mauck , S . Zheng , A . Butler , M . J . Lee , A . J . Wilk , C . Darby , M . Zager , P . Hoffman , M . Stoeckius , E . Papalexi , E . P . Mimitou , J . Jain , A . Srivastava , T . Stuart , L . M . Fleming , B . Yeung , A . J . Rogers , J . M . McElrath , C . A . Blish , R . Gottardo , P . Smibert , R . Satija , Integrated analysis of multimodal single - cell data . Cell 184 , 3573 – 3587 . e29 ( 2021 ) . 60 . R . C . Coll , J . R . Hill , C . J . Day , A . Zamoshnikova , D . Boucher , N . L . Massey , J . L . Chitty , J . A . Fraser , M . P . Jennings , A . A . B . Robertson , K . Schroder , MCC950 directly targets the NLRP3 ATP - hydrolysis motif for inflammasome inhibition . Nat . Chem . Biol . 15 , 556 – 559 ( 2019 ) . 61 . E . Tsantikos , M . Lau , C . M . N . Castelino , M . J . Maxwell , S . L . Passey , M . J . Hansen , N . E . McGregor , N . A . Sims , D . P . Steinfort , L . B . Irving , G . P . Anderson , M . L . Hibbs , Gran - ulocyte - CSF links destructive inflammation and comorbidities in obstructive lung disease . J . Clin . Invest . 128 , 2406 – 2418 ( 2018 ) . 62 . N . Radhakrishna , M . Farmer , D . P . Steinfort , P . King , Acomparisonoftechniquesforoptimal performance of bronchoalveolar lavage . J . Bronchology Interv . Pulmonol . 22 , 300 – 305 ( 2015 ) . 63 . J . Q . Davies , S . Gordon , Isolation and culture of human macrophages , in Basic Cell Culture Protocols , C . D . Helgason , C . L . Miller , Eds . ( Humana Press , 2005 ) , pp . 105 – 116 . 64 . L . Schimmel , M . vanderStoel , C . Rianna , A . M . vanStalborch , A . deLigt , M . Hoogenboezem , S . Tol , J . van Rijssel , R . Szulcek , H . J . Bogaard , P . Hofmann , R . Boon , M . Radmacher , V . de Waard , S . Huveneers , J . D . vanBuul , Stiffness - inducedendothelialDLC - 1expressionforces leukocyte spreading through stabilization of the ICAM - 1 Adhesome . Cell Rep . 24 , 3115 – 3124 ( 2018 ) . 65 . T . Dull , R . Zufferey , M . Kelly , R . J . Mandel , M . Nguyen , D . Trono , L . Naldini , Athird - generation lentivirus vector with a conditional packaging system . J . Virol . 72 , 8463 – 8471 ( 1998 ) . 66 . J . Schindelin , I . Arganda - Carreras , E . Frise , V . Kaynig , M . Longair , T . Pietzsch , S . Preibisch , C . Rueden , S . Saalfeld , B . Schmid , J . - Y . Tinevez , D . J . White , V . Hartenstein , K . Eliceiri , P . Tomancak , A . Cardona , Fiji : An open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 ( 2012 ) . 67 . M . T . Howes , M . Kirkham , J . Riches , K . Cortese , P . J . Walser , F . Simpson , M . M . Hill , A . Jones , R . Lundmark , M . R . Lindsay , D . J . Hernandez - Deviez , G . Hadzic , A . McCluskey , R . Bashir , L . Liu , P . Pilch , H . McMahon , P . J . Robinson , J . F . Hancock , S . Mayor , R . G . Parton , Clathrin - inde - pendent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 675 – 691 ( 2010 ) . Acknowledgments : We gratefullyacknowledge L . Schimmel for producing the ACE2 and mSc expressinglentiviruses , A . Isaacsforproducingtheanti - Nnanobody , C . MacmillanfortheA549 cells , and F . Wylie forcritical reading of this manuscript . Funding : This work wassupported by National Health and Medical Research Council ( NHMRC ) of Australia funding , including fellowships ( 1124612 to L . L . , 1177174 to K . Subbarao , 1156489 to R . G . P . , and 2009075 to K . Schroder ) andgrants ( 2010757toL . L . andE . J . G . , 2013574toC . M . N . , 1140064and1150083to R . G . P . , 2007979 to K . R . S . , 1184532 to S . L . L . , and 2009677 to K . Schroder ) and the Doherty Institute COVID - 19 Agility Fund to S . L . L . , S . F . , K . Subbarao , and D . P . S . E . J . G . is funded by the National Heart Foundation of Australia ( Future Leader Fellowship 104692 ) . The Melbourne WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza is supported by the Australian Government Department of Health . Competing interests : K . R . S . is a consultant for Sanofi , Roche , andNovoNordisk . Theopinionsanddatapresentedinthismanuscriptarethose oftheauthorsandareindependentoftheserelationships . K . Schroderisacoinventoronpatent applications for NLRP3 inhibitors licensed to Inflazome Ltd . , a company headquartered in Dublin , Ireland . InflazomeisdevelopingdrugsthattargettheNLRP3inflammasometoaddress unmet clinical needs in inflammatory disease . K . Schroder served on the Scientific Advisory Board of Inflazome in 2016 – 2017 and serves as aconsultant to Quench Bio , USA , and Novartis , Switzerland . Author contributions : Conception : L . I . L . and S . L . L . Data acquisition and analysis : L . I . L . , K . Y . C . , K . E . , X . W . , T . E . , C . J . S . , J . R . , R . P . , H . M . , B . H . , T . E . Y . , C . L . H . , S . E . , S . F . , F . L . M . , D . P . S . , C . M . N . , A . K . L . , E . J . G . , R . G . P . , and S . L . L . Funding acquisition : L . I . L . , S . L . L . , and K . Schroder . Manuscript original draft : L . I . L . and K . Schroder . Manuscript editing : L . I . L . , K . Subbarao , K . R . S . , S . L . L . , and K . Schroder . Data and materials availability : All data are available in the main text or the Supplementary Materials . Submitted 21 March 2022 Resubmitted 30 November 2022 Accepted 23 March 2023 Published 25 April 2023 10 . 1126 / scisignal . abq1366 Labzin et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabq1366 ( 2023 ) 25 April 2023 15 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E