1 Supporting Information Deciphering the role of substrate stiffness to enhance internalization efficiency of plasmid DNA in stem cells using lipid - based nanocarriers Saman Modaresi , Settimio Pacelli , Jonathan Whitlow and Arghya Paul * Experimental Section : Silicone gel substrates : CytoSoft® 6 - well plates with a thin layer of anhydride - functionalized silicone with different stiffness ( 0 . 5 and 32 kPa ) were purchased from Advanced BioMatrix ( Carlsbad , CA , USA ) . The surface of the gels was pre - coated with a sterile solution of Gelatin type A ( 1 % w / v ) from porcine skin ( Sigma - Aldrich , USA ) in PBS at pH 7 . 4 . The coating step was carried out for 4 hours at room temperature adding 4 mL of gelatin solution in each well to ensure the homogeneous coating of the hydrophobic surfaces . The same procedure was applied to coat CytoSoft ® Imaging wells 24 - well plates ( Advanced BioMatrix , San Diego , CA ) having different stiffness ( 0 . 5 and 32 kPa ) . This type of well plate was used for imaging cells at a higher magnification ( 40X ) . hASCs culture and fluorescence immunostaining : hASCs were purchased from RoosterBio ( RoosterBio , USA ) . Passages 4 – 6 were used for all of the studies . Cells were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium Alpha Modification ( α - MEM ) ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific , USA ) supplemented Electronic Supplementary Material ( ESI ) for Nanoscale . This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 2 with 15 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific , USA ) and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific , USA ) at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 . To study the influence of substrate stiffness on the focal adhesion expression of hASCs , cells were seeded ( 2 x 10 4 cells / well ) on CytoSoft ® Imaging wells with different stiffness ( 0 . 5 and 32 kPa ) following the conditions reported above . After 24 hours , the media was replaced with incomplete α - MEM and cells were cultured in these conditions for 48 hours . Cells were then fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 5 minutes at 37 ⁰C followed by permeabilization with 0 . 1 % Triton - X100 for 10 minutes at room temperature . Normal goat serum ( 5 % ) was applied for 45 minutes at room temperature to block the samples . Mouse anti - human Paxillin antibody ( 1 : 400 with 1 % goat serum , Invitrogen , USA ) was added to cells and incubated overnight at 4 °C . Next , goat anti - mouse AlexaFluor 594 ( Invitrogen USA ) ( 1 : 500 in 1 % goat serum ) was added to the cells for one hour at room temperature . Nuclei and F - actin were counterstained using Diamidino - 2 - phenylindole dilactate ( DAPI , Invitrogen , USA ) and phalloidin - AlexaFluor 488 ( Invitrogen , USA ) , respectively . Immunofluorescence images were taken by EVOS cell imaging system ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific , USA ) and further analyzed in ImageJ for quantification of area occupied by each cell , number of actin fibers , and the total area of adhesion sites . Specifically , cell area was quantified using 7 to 10 cells per image for a total of 10 images per group ( n = 10 ) . Number of actin stress fibers was counted based on a total of 7 images each containing one cell captured at 40 X magnification ( n = 7 ) . Paxillin area was measured using 7 different images per group ( n = 7 ) captured at 40X magnification . A single cell in each image was analyzed for paxillin area quantification . Traction force microscopy : Cell traction was calculated using constrained Fourier transform traction microscopy ( FTTM ) [ 16 ] . 0 . 2 µm amino - modified fluorescence microbeads were 3 conjugated to the substrates due t o presence of anhydride groups on the substrates’ surface . hASCs ( 2x10 3 / well ) were seeded on substrates of varying stiffness and containing microbeads and allowed to grow for 24 hours . Fluorescence images of the microbeads were taken before and after cell detachment from the substrates by trypsinization . The corresponding displacement field was calculated using a customized Matlab code . The traction force was calculated based on the displacement field computed from 7 images for each group ( n = 7 ) . A single cell in each image was analyzed for traction force . Plasmid construct design : The pscAAV - GFP vector ( John T . Gray , Addgene plasmid # 32396 ) harboring the enhanced green fluorescent protein ( EGFP ) gene was digested with BamHI and NotI restriction enzymes ( New England BioLabs , Ipswich , MA ) to excise the EGFP gene . The pCMV6 - XL5 mammalian expression vector ( Origene Technologies , Rockville , MD ) was digested with BamHI and NotI enzymes , and after purification , the linearized EGFP gene was ligated with the pCMV6 - XL5 expression vector using T4 DNA Ligase ( Promega ) . The resulting construct , pCMV - GFP , was transformed in chemically competent DH5α Escherichia coli ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) to amplify the plasmid . Additionally , the expression vector for the human VEGF - 165 gene , pCMV6 - XL5 - VEGF ( Origene Technologies , Rockville , MD ) , was also amplified by transformation of DH5α E . coli . Both plasmids were extracted and purified using QIAPrep Spin Midiprep kits ( QIAGEN Inc . , Germantown , MD ) . Lipofectamine - plasmid DNA complex formation and characterization : Prior to transfection , both plasmid DNA and Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) were diluted in 150 µL of incomplete α - MEM media . Specifically , the lipoplexes were prepared by mixing the two 4 components in equal volumes ( 150 µL ) containing a 1 : 3 ratio of plasmid DNA ( 4 ug ) to Lipofectamine 2000 ( 12 uL ) . The complexes were then incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature before addition to hASCs . The hydrodynamic diameter and the zeta potential of the Lipofectamine 2000 and the lipoplexes were obtained using a ZetaPALS zeta potential analyzer ( Brookhaven Instruments Corporation ) . Samples for DLS analysis were prepared by diluting Lipofectamine and the lipoplexes in Opti - MEM ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific , USA ) . On the contrary , zeta potential measurements were carried out by diluting the samples in KCl 1mM . Transfection of hASCs : hASCs were seeded on the different silicone substrates ( 10 5 cells / well ) and allowed to proliferate for 24 hours prior to transfection . hASCs were cultured in complete α - MEM ( 15 % FBS and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ) at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 . The growth medium was replaced with fresh α - MEM ( 2 mL / well ) without FBS , and the complexes of Lipofectamine and plasmid DNA ( 300 µL / well ) were added dropwise to the cells ( 80 - 90 % confluency ) . After incubation for 1 and 4 hours at 37°C , the media containing the complexes was removed and replaced with complete α - MEM . Cells were cultured for 72 hours prior to changing the media , and further analysis was conducted to evaluate the quantity of VEGF secreted by the cells . Similarly , GFP transfection of hASCs was carried out using Lipofectamine according to the conditions reported above . Cells were cultured for 24 hours prior to fluorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) analysis . Briefly , cells were trypsinized 24 hours post - transfection and suspended in PBS at the cell density of 1x10 5 cells / mL . The percentage of GFP positive hASCs and corresponding mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) values were determined using the Attune NxT flow cytometer ( Thermo - Fischer Scientific , USA ) . Three different samples per group were analyzed and the results were reported as mean ± deviation standard . Additionally , fluorescent 5 and corresponding phase contrast ( 10X ) images were captured by EVOS cell imaging system ( Thermo - Fischer Scientific , USA ) . Assessment of plasmid internalization by qPCR analysis : hASCs seeded on soft and stiff substrates were transfected for 1 hour using the GFP plasmid . Cells were thoroughly washed several times with PBS to remove the excess plasmid . Cells were then trypsinized and counted to obtain a final cell suspension of 1x10 3 / mL . Cells were centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 minutes and the corresponding pellets were resuspended in 100 µL PBS and freeze - thawed to lyse the cell membrane at - 80 °C [ 18 ] . One microliter of this lysate suspension containing the plasmid was mixed with 10 µL KiCqStart SYBR Green Master Mix , 2 µL of the forward and reverse primer for GFP gene and 5 µL of RNAse - free water . All of the reactions were performed using a Mastercycler Realplex ( Eppendorf , Germany ) . The quantity of plasmid internalized by the cells in each group was quantified using a calibration curve obtained in the range of 0 . 9 ng to 30 ng of GFP plasmid ( Figure S1 , Supporting Information ) . Each dilution of the GFP - plasmid was generated using a suspension of non - transfected hASCs lysate ( 1x10 3 / mL ) . Additionally , GFP - plasmid dilutions were also obtained in RNAse - free water to detect undesired contamination . Samples were measured in triplicate for each dilution ( n = 3 ) . Evaluation of plasmid internalization using fluorescent labeled plasmid - Lipofectamine complexes : To visualize the plasmid internalization , the plasmid was labeled with red fluorescent Rhodamine using the Label IT ® Tracker TM intracellular nucleic acid localization Kit CX - Rhodamine ( Mirus , WI , USA ) . The process of labeling was achieved following the established protocol provided by the kit . The labeled plasmid was complexed with Lipofectamine following 6 the procedure reported above . hASCs were transfected for one hour followed by thorough washing with PBS to remove the non - internalized plasmid . Fluorescent and corresponding phase contrast ( 40X ) images were captured by EVOS cell imaging system ( Thermo - Fischer Scientific , USA ) . Cell boundaries were defined based on phase contrast images . The fluorescence intensity was quantified based on the integrated density values of each cell using ImageJ . Results were reported as mean ± standard deviation ( n = 5 ) and normalized to the number of cells . qPCR investigation of caveolin and clathrin genes : Expression of caveolin and clathrin - mediated genes by hASCs was evaluated using qPCR after 1 and 4 hours post - transfection on the soft ( 0 . 5 kPa ) and stiff substrates ( 32 kPa ) . mRNA was extracted from the cells using an RNeasy Mini Kit ( Qiagen , Germany ) and quantified using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer ( Thermo Scientific , USA ) . Next , mRNA samples were converted to cDNA using the High - Capacity cDNA Conversion Kit ( Applied Biosystems , USA ) . Lastly , gene expression was measured using a cocktail of predesigned primers and the KiCqStart SYBR Green Master Mix ( Sigma Aldrich , USA ) . All of the reactions were performed using a Mastercycler RealPlex ( Eppendorf , Germany ) . The fold expression levels were calcul ated using the relative ΔΔCt method . GAPDH was considered as the housekeeping gene , and results were normalized based on the gene expression of hASCs cultured on the softer substrates . VEGF quantification by ELISA : hASCs ( 10 5 cells / well ) were seeded on 6 - well plate silicone hydrogels coated with 1 % w / v of gelatin type A and allowed to grow in α - MEM ( 2 mL ) supplemented with 15 % FBS and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin ( Thermo - Fisher Scientific , USA ) at 37 °C and 5 % CO 2 . Cells at 70 - 80 % confluency were transfected with VEGF - 165 plasmid using 7 Lipofectamine 2000 reagent in incomplete α - MEM . Supernatants were collected 72 hours after transfection . Quantification of VEGF expression was carried out using an enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA , R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ) according to manufacturer ' s protocol . The quantity of VEGF released was quantified by ELISA using a standard calibration curve ranging from 32 pg / mL to 1 ng / mL . Results were normalized based on the concentration of VEGF obtained from the media recovered after 72 hours in the soft substrates ( n = 3 ) . HUVEC migration assay : Human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) ( Lonza , Walkersville , MD ) between passages 6 - 9 were cultured in 24 well plates ( 2 x 10 4 cells / well ) in endothelial growth medium ( 400 µL ) ( EGM - 2 BulletKit , Lonza , Walkersville , MD ) without the addition of VEGF and rhFGF - B . After reaching confluency , scratches were made in cell monolayer using a cell scraper . Cells were washed thoroughly with PBS to remove the floating cells . Media containing VEGF was collected from stiff and soft substrate groups after 72 hours of transfection ( 100 µL ) . Then , HUVECs were allowed to migrate through the scratch for 12 and 24 hours . Cells were stained with calcein and corresponding fluorescent images were taken in the same positions along the scratch at 12 and 24 hours . HUVECs that did not receive any growth factors were considered as control groups . The percentage of area covered by HUVECs during the migration was calculated using ImageJ software . The original scratch area was calculated based on preliminary images taken immediately after the scratch was formed ( n = 3 ) . Statistical analysis : Statistical analysis for area calculation covered by HUVECs in the scratch assay was performed using one - way repeated measured analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test to determine any significant differences between groups at 8 each time point . For all other analyses , a t - test ( non - parametric ) was used to compare two groups . All analyses were carried out with GraphPad Prism . A p - value less than 0 . 05 indicates statistical significance . 9 Table S1 . Main genes regulating the process of caveolin - mediated endocytosis Genes Forward primer Reverse primer Role ( s ) CAV1 ( Caveolin 1 ) GACGTCGTCAAGGTAAGCCA GTAACGTTTCTGCCGACTGC Flask shaped protein essential for caveolae formation CAVIN1 GCAATACGCTGAGCAAGCTG CTGTGGGCTCACCTGGTAGAT Regulator of caveolae formation ABL1 ( Abl tyrosin kinase ) CTCAGACGAAGTGGAAAAG GAGTGAGGCATCTCAGG Responsible for actin polymerization to form stress fibers and organization of CAV1 linked to these fibers FLNA ( Filamin A ) TAAGGTTACTGTGCTCTTTG AAGATCTCAAAGTAGGTGGTC Key factor for the interplay between actin and CAV1 ITGB1 ( β1 integrin ) ATTCCCTTTCCTCAGAAGTC TTTTCTTCCATTTTCCCCTG Mediator of microtubule stabilization and translocation of caveolae within the cytoskeletal system DIAPH1 ( Diaphanous Related Formin 1 ) ATTTCAGTCCAGGTGGTTGC GTGAGGCAGGTGCTTTCTTC Cooperate with ABL1 along with local stabilization of microtubules RHOA ( Ras Homolog Family Member A ) AGGAAGATTATGATCGCCTG TTCTAAACTATCAGGGCTGTC Regulator of the link between caveolae and actin stress fibers 10 Table S2 . Main genes regulating the process of Clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Genes Forward primer Reverse primer Role ( s ) CLTC ( Clathrin ) TAAAGTGTTTCCCCCTGCTGCAC GCTGGTCTCTCAACCAAAGC Main component of clathrin triskelion formation SNX9 GGAATGGAAAACTGGAAAGAG TCTACTAAGTCCAAGTCAGG Involved in clathrin - coated vesicle budding and formation of the clathrin neck EPS15 AAGGTCAACAATGAAGATCC GACCGATGTTTCCTCAAATAC A scaffolding protein , Involved in clathrin recruitment EPN1 ( Epsin ) GTTTACAAGGCCATGACG CTTAGCTTTCTCACGCAC An accessory protein which mediates clathrin binding to cell membrane and cargo receptors 11 Figure S1 . Immunofluorescence staining of hASCs seeded on soft ( 0 . 5 kPa ) and stiff ( 32 kPa ) substrates . Cells were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin to visualize actin stress fibers ( green ) and with Diamidino - 2 - phenylindole dilactate ( DAPI ) to stain the nuclei ( blue ) . In addition , paxillin staining ( red ) was carried out to identify the area of focal adhesion . Scale bar = 60 µm . 12 Figure S2 . C alibration curve for plasmid internalization analyzed by qPCR . This curve was obtained by acquiring the corresponding threshold cycle for different concentration of GFP plasmid ( 0 . 9 ng to 30 ng ) in the cell lysates . 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 - 3 . 5 - 3 - 2 . 5 - 2 - 1 . 5 - 1 Th r es ho l d cyc l e Log concentration ( ng / µl ) 13 Figure S3 . Effect of substrate stiffness on green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) expression on hASCs upon transfection with Lipofectamine . A ) FACs analysis of hASCs seeded on the two different substrates after being transfected with GFP plasmid . The population of GFP positive cells are indicated on the graph ( pink area ) . B ) Quantification of mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of GFP positive hASCs obtained using FACs analysis . C ) Percentage of transfected cells obtained by analyzing FACs data . Results are reported as mean ± standard deviation ( n = 3 ) * = p < 0 . 05 , * * = p < 0 . 01 . D ) Fluorescent images and corresponding phase contrast images of hASCs expressing GFP after 24 hours of transfection . ( Scale bar = 200 µ m ) .