Research - based Practices For Effective Clicker Use C . Keller * , † , N . Finkelstein * , K . Perkins * , S . Pollock * , C . Turpen * , and M . Dubson * * University of Colorado at Boulder Department of Physics , Campus Box 390 Boulder , CO 80309 † i > clicker ( Bedford , Freeman , and Worth Publishing ) 33 Irving Place , 10th Floor New York , NY 10003 Abstract . Adoption of clickers by faculty has spread campus - wide at the University of Colorado at Boulder from one introductory physics course in 2001 to 19 departments , 80 courses , and over 10 , 000 students . We study common pedagogical practices among faculty and attitudes and beliefs among student clicker - users across campus . We report data from online surveys given to both faculty and students in the Spring 2007 semester . Additionally , we report on correlations between student perceptions of clicker use and the ways in which this educational tool is used by faculty . These data suggest practices for effective clicker use that can serve as a guide for faculty who integrate this educational tool into their courses . Keywords : Clickers , Personal Response Systems , Classroom Response Systems PACS : 01 . 40 . gb , 01 . 50 . - i , 01 . 50 . H - , 01 . 40 . Fk INTRODUCTION Since being introduced six years ago in one introductory physics course at the University of Colorado at Boulder , clicker 1 use has spread extensively , with nearly half the undergraduate population using clickers in one semester . Although their use is becoming more prevalent , it is not known how this tool is used by faculty at the campus level , nor do we understand student perceptions and attitudes towards this tool . Research on clickers remains a popular topic within PER and other science and education communities . ( For example , see [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] ; for an extensive literature review , see [ 4 ] . ) The purposes of the present study are to identify common faculty pedagogical practices regarding clicker use across the variety of disciplines at one institution , study student perceptions towards this tool , and look for correlations between faculty practices and student perceptions . We seek to identify effective clicker uses across these varieties of disciplines and environments in which they are employed . An ultimate goal will be to correlate 1 We opt for the term " clicker , " whereas others use " personal response system , " " voting machine , " and a myriad of other terms ( see Reference [ 4 ] ) . faculty practices with student learning—others have already demonstrated correlations between student attitudes and beliefs and content learning gains in other contexts ( e . g . , see [ 5 ] and [ 6 ] ) . However , studying student learning gains is beyond the scope of the present work . In this piece , we present limited results from an extensive study of dozens of faculty and thousands of students . When correlating faculty practices with student attitudes , we find that the students’ perception of the utility of clickers improves as faculty encourage peer - discussion and succeed in getting students to discuss with each other in lecture . Additionally , students find conceptual questions slightly more useful than factual recall or calculation - oriented questions . INSTITUTIONAL USE OF CLICKERS During the Spring 2007 semester at the University of Colorado at Boulder , clickers were used by 70 faculty in 94 lecture sections , with an average enrollment of 144 students in each lecture section . Although this breadth of use represents a tiny fraction of all faculty on campus ( 3 % ) , it represents a significant fraction of the student body due to the high average enrollment of courses using clickers . In this semester , clickers were used by 10 , 011 unique students , which include 9 , 941 undergraduates and 70 graduate students . Students using clickers made up 44 % of all undergraduate students and 1 . 6 % of graduate students . Despite the widespread use among the undergraduate student body , there is still opportunity for clicker use to expand . Only 28 % of departments on campus are using clickers and only 24 % of large lecture sections ( where the enrollment is greater than 100 ) are using clickers . We see some departments that currently use clickers in all large lecture courses that they offer , such as Physics , Astrophysics , and Chemical Engineering . Other large departments , such as Psychology and Sociology , use clickers in 1 and 2 large courses ( out of 16 and 7 , respectively ) . We find the majority of courses using clickers to be in STEM fields . The total number of courses that used clickers in STEM fields was 63 , while there was 10 in Business , 6 in Social Sciences , and 1 in Humanities . Of the 94 lecture sections 2 using clickers , 79 of these are using i > clicker 3 and the remaining 15 are using H - ITT 4 . Of all unique students who used clickers , 70 % used clickers in one course only , while 29 % used clickers in 2 courses , and fewer than 1 % used clickers in either 3 or 4 courses . FACULTY PRACTICES Faculty using clickers were given two different online surveys . The first survey was given at the start of term approximately 3 weeks after the beginning of classes , and 54 faculty responded to 16 multiple - choice and long answer questions . The second online survey was given at the end of term , and 69 responses were collected to 15 multiple - choice and long answer questions . To access both surveys , see [ 4 ] . Questions from both surveys probed how faculty used clickers in their own courses and on their experience and beliefs surrounding clickers . The results presented in this section were collected from both faculty surveys . Observational data of classroom practices demonstrate some similar trends as seen in faculty self - reported data presented here for a subset of physics courses using clickers . [ 7 ] The majority of faculty using clickers has little or no experience using this tool—59 % of the respondents are using clickers for the first time or have only one prior semester of clicker experience . Some slight variation does exist in how frequently faculty use clickers , in terms of the average number of 2 Note that many courses have multiple lecture sections ; hence the difference between 80 courses and 94 lecture sections . 3 http : / / www . iclicker . com 4 http : / / www . h - itt . com questions given per day and the overall percentage of class days when clickers are used throughout the semester ( see Table 1 & 2 ) . However , the majority of faculty asks 3 to 4 questions per day and use clickers 90 – 100 % of class meetings over the semester . TABLE 1 . Average number of questions given per class meeting , reported by faculty Number of Clicker Questions % of Courses [ standard error ] † N = 69 1 to 2 19 [ 5 ] 3 to 4 65 [ 6 ] 5 to 6 13 [ 4 ] 7 or more 3 [ 2 ] † Bracketed numbers in tables are estimated standard error of the mean . TABLE 2 . Percent of all classes days when clickers are used , reported by faculty % of class days % of Courses , N = 69 < 50 % 7 [ 3 ] 50 - 75 % 4 [ 3 ] 75 - 90 % 20 [ 5 ] 90 - 100 % 68 [ 6 ] In addition to reports of frequency of use , we examine how clickers are used . Figure 1 reports the frequency of use of several broad categories of clicker questions . 1 2 3 4 5 CONCEPTUAL FACTUAL RECALL OPINIONS ATTENDANCE CALCULATIONS QUIZZES Question Type A ve r a g e F r e qu e n cy , 1 - 5 ( r a r e l y - o ft e n ) FIGURE 1 . Types of clicker questions used , reported by faculty . We see some variation in the extent to which faculty encourage discussion among their students , and the extent to which students do discuss with their peers in lecture ( according to faculty ) . The majority of faculty claim to encourage discussion and claim to succeed at getting a large fraction of students to discuss in lecture ( see Table 3 ) . TABLE 3 . Extent of peer - discussion , reported by faculty Type of Discussion % of Faculty Do not allow discussion 3 [ 2 ] Do not encourage discussion , & small fraction of students discuss 6 [ 3 ] Do not encourage discussion , & large fraction of students discuss 6 [ 3 ] Encourage discussion , & small fraction of students discuss 22 [ 5 ] Encourage discussion , & l arge fraction of students discuss 63 [ 6 ] STUDENT PERCEPTIONS & PRACTICES Approximately one month prior to the end of term , an online survey was distributed to students in courses where clickers were currently being used . To access the student survey , see [ 4 ] . Of the 10 , 011 students using clickers , 3 , 697 responses were collected . The 11 multiple - choice questions on the survey probed students’ attitudes and beliefs about clickers and asked them to respond to how clickers are currently being used in their courses . Of the 80 courses using clickers , data from students were collected in 51 courses . The data presented in this section are a summary of results from the student survey . Overall , we find students’ experience with clickers to be positive . 56 . 4 % of students responding had a favorable attitude towards the utility of clickers in their respective courses ( compared to 22 . 9 % that were neutral and 20 . 7 % that had unfavorable attitudes ) and 55 . 3 % of students had a favorable attitude towards the enjoyment of clickers ( compared to 24 . 5 % that were neutral and 20 . 2 % that had unfavorable attitudes ) . These favorable results for clickers are noted elsewhere ( for example , see [ 8 ] ) . TABLE 4 . Student discussion practices during clicker questions , reported by students Student Practice % of Students , N = 3 , 697 Usually not allowed to talk with other students 2 [ 0 . 03 ] Rarely use a clicker in this course 1 [ 0 . 01 ] Guess the answer and do not check with other students 2 [ 0 . 03 ] Actively think about the question independently and arrive at an answer without speaking or listening to other students 19 [ 0 . 3 ] Listen to other students ' answers and / or reasoning 18 [ 0 . 2 ] Actively participate in discussions with other students around me 59 [ 0 . 4 ] When asked what they normally do during the delivery of a clicker question , most students claim to be actively participating in discussions with their peers ( see Table 4 ) . The utility of different types of clicker questions was rated . Students found conceptual questions the most useful ( 3 . 92 ± 0 . 02 , on a scale of 1 – 5 , negative to positive ) , followed by factual recall ( 3 . 51 ± 0 . 02 ) , and numerical calculations ( 3 . 32 ± 0 . 02 ) . CORRELATIONS BETWEEN FACULTY PRACTICES & STUDENT ATTITUDES The final goal of the present work is to study what impact faculty practices regarding clickers have on student attitudes . We begin to determine these relations by correlating faculty use of this tool with student perception of clickers . It is commonly argued that encouraging discussion among students is of greater benefit than passively using clickers in lecture [ 2 ] . We find there to be a strong relationship between the extent of peer - discussion in lecture and students’ attitude towards the utility of clickers . Of course , students do not uniformly agree within a single course when asked to what extent their instructor encourages discussion . Taking the mode of student responses to be an accurate representation of how instructors encourage student discussion , the average fraction of students with a favorable attitude towards the utility of clickers is 66 % in courses where instructors encourage discussion and get a large fraction of students to do so ( see Table 5 ) . TABLE 5 . Average percent of students who have favor - able attitudes towards clicker use , listed by classes where plurality of students reported use of clickers in stated fashion . Type of Discussion % Favorable Does not allow discussion 38 [ 5 ] Does not encourage discussion , & small fraction of students discuss 37 [ 8 ] Does not encourage discussion , & large fraction of students discuss 36 [ 22 ] Encourages discussion , & small fraction of students discuss 55 [ 8 ] Encourages discussion , & l arge fraction of students discuss 66 [ 3 ] Similarly , we examine how the role of students during a question correlates with their perceived utility of the clickers . We see a trend toward students finding clickers more useful as they become more active in lecture , with 64 % of the students who claim to be actively participating in discussion having a favorable attitude towards the utility of clickers ( see Table 6 ) . We also see a strong correlation between the instructor’s experience with clickers ( i . e . , the number of prior semesters where an instructors has taught with clickers ) and student perception of utility ( r = 0 . 52 ) , suggesting that faculty become better over time at effectively using this tool and that novice faculty may need more assistance . In addition to students finding conceptual questions more useful than other types of questions , the fraction of students in a course who claim to be actively participating is correlated with the average student rating of utility of conceptual clicker questions within a course ( r = 0 . 43 ) , suggesting that conceptual questions are most useful when students discuss the questions with their peers . TABLE 6 . Percent of students from each student role who have favorable attitudes toward the utility of clickers . Student Role % Favorable Does not apply - - usually not allowed to talk with other students 28 [ 5 ] Rarely use a clicker in this course 16 [ 6 ] Guess the answer and do not check with other students 17 [ 4 ] Actively think about the question independently and arrive at an answer without speaking or listening to other students 51 [ 2 ] Listen to other students ' answers and / or reasoning 45 [ 2 ] Actively participate in discussions with other students around me 64 [ 1 ] CONCLUSION This study presents self - reported faculty pedagogical practices and student perceptions of clicker use at a large research university across many disciplines . In addition to shedding new light on how this tool is being used by faculty and its corresponding perception by students , we wish to use these data to study how faculty practices impact student behaviors and views . Student attitude is strongly impacted by the extent to which faculty encourage and succeed in generating peer - discussion during the administration of clicker questions . Students have a much more positive attitude towards the utility of clickers if faculty encourage discussion and are able to get a large fraction of students discussing . Likewise , student attitude is also improved when students are actively participating in discussions with their peers , as opposed to being passive or working independently . We wish to move beyond providing discipline - specific and / or anecdotal suggestions with regard to the use of clickers . Rather , we seek to provide research - based evidence of their effective use . At this point , we can make two suggestions to faculty that are supported by this work : 1 ) encourage students to discuss with their peers during clicker questions and create environments that get students to discuss ; and 2 ) ask conceptual questions appropriate for most students’ level of knowledge . Other research - based suggestions exist , but this is a topic for future work . For example , how do faculty practices differ between the highest and lowest rated courses , as measured by student perception of the utility of clickers ? How useful to students are clickers compared to other course resources ? How do varying methods of awarding credit for clicker use affect students’ attitudes ? Future work will seek to answer these questions to provide guidelines on the effective use of clickers to the expanding population of novice clicker - using instructors . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work has been supported by the NSF ( DUE - CCLI 0410744 and REC CAREER # 0448176 ) , AAPT / AIP / APS ( Colorado PhysTEC program ) , University of Colorado , and i > clicker ( Bedford , Freeman , and Worth Publishing ) . The authors express their gratitude to the faculty and students who participated in this study , in addition to Shaun Piazza and the rest of the Physics Education Research Group at the University of Colorado at Boulder . REFERENCES 1 . Banks , David A . ( ed . ) Audience response systems in higher education : applications and cases . Information Science Publishing , 2006 . 2 . E . Mazur , Peer Instruction . Prentice Hall , New Jersey , 1997 . 3 . Caldwell , J . CBE—Life Sciences Education , Vol . 6 , Spring 2007 . 4 . http : / / www . colorado . edu / physics / EducationIssues / keller / clicker . html 5 . N . D . Finkelstein and S . J . Pollock , Phys . Rev . ST Phys . Educ . Res . 1 , 010101 ( 2005 ) . 6 . K . K . Perkins , W . K . Adams , N . D . Finkelstein , S . J . Pollock , and C . E . Wieman . “Correlating student attitudes with student learning using the Colorado Learning Attitudes about Science Survey . ” PERC Proceedings , 2004 . 7 . Turpen , C . , Finkelstein , N . , and Keller , C . , “Understanding Faculty Use of Peer Instruction , ” PERC Proceedings 2007 ( this volume ) . 8 . d’Inverno , R . , Davis , H . , and White , S . , “Using a personal response system for promoting student interaction . ” Teach . Math . Appl . 22 ( 4 ) , 163 - 169 .