Rho family proteins and Ras transformation : the RHOad less traveled gets congested Irene M Zohn 1 , Sharon L Campbell 2 , 3 , Roya Khosravi - Far 4 , Kent L Rossman 2 and Channing J Der 1 , 3 , 5 1 Department of Pharmacology , 2 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , 3 Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center , 4 Department of Biology , MIT , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 ; 5 Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 27599 , USA The Rho family of small GTPases has attracted considerable research interest over the past 5 years . During this time , we have witnessed a remarkable increase in our knowledge of the biochemistry and biology of these Ras - related proteins . Thus , Rho family proteins have begun to rival , if not overshadow , interest in their more celebrated cousins , the Ras oncogene proteins . The fascination in Rho family proteins is fueled primarily by two major observations . First , like Ras , Rho family proteins serve as guanine nucleotide - regulated binary switches that control signaling pathways that in turn regulate diverse cellular processes . Rho family proteins are key components in cellular processes that control the organization of the actin cytoskeleton , activate kinase cascades , regulate gene expression , regulate membrane tra(cid:129)cking , promote growth trans - formation and induce apoptosis . Second , at least ﬁve Rho family proteins have been implicated as critical regulators of oncogenic Ras transformation . Thus , it is suspected that Rho family proteins contribute signiﬁ - cantly to the aberrant growth properties of Ras - transformed cells . Rho family proteins are also critical mediators of the transforming actions of other trans - forming proteins and include Dbl family oncogene proteins , G protein - coupled receptors and G protein a subunits . Thus , Rho family proteins may be key components for the transforming actions of diverse oncogene proteins . Major aims of Rho family protein studies are to deﬁne the molecular mechanism by which Rho family proteins regulate such a diverse spectrum of cellular behavior . These e(cid:128)orts may reveal novel targets for the development of anti - Ras and anti - cancer drugs . Keywords : Ras superfamily ; signal transduction ; actin cytoskeleton ; e(cid:128)ectors An important theme that has emerged during the past 5 years is that Ras transformation is mediated by signaling activities that are much more complex than originally envisioned ( Marshall , 1996 ; Khosravi - Far et al . , 1997 ; Campbell et al . , 1998 ) . Considerable biological , biochemical and genetic evidence support the importance of the Raf serine / threonine kinase a key e(cid:128)ector of Ras function . However , the evidence that Ras has a life beyond simply activating Raf is strong and continues to mount . Instead , our current model proposes that Ras employs a spectrum of functionally diverse downstream e(cid:128)ectors to cause its diverse actions on cell proliferation , di(cid:128)erentiation and apoptosis . Among these Raf - independent signaling pathways are those that connect Ras with speciﬁc members of the Rho family of small GTPases . Since Rho family proteins are regulators of actin organiza - tion , gene expression , and cell cycle progression , it is likely that Rho family proteins will contribute signiﬁcantly to the actions of oncogenic Ras . The Rho family of proteins have been the subject of a number of excellent reviews ( Symons , 1996 ; Narumiya , 1996 ; Van Aelst and D’Souza - Schorey , 1997 ) . There - fore , in this review we will emphasize the involvement of Rho family proteins in the regulation of cell proliferation and Ras transformation . Despite our wealth of knowledge on these small GTPases , we are clearly in the early days of comprehending the complex involvement of these small GTPases in regulating normal and neoplastic cell biology . More excitement is certain to follow as we continue to develop and revise , or discard , our current models and concepts . Rho family proteins are members of the Ras superfamily of small GTPases The Ras superfamily of small ( 20 – 25 kDa ) GTPases ( 4 80 mammalian members ) can be categorized into at least nine distinct branches . These include the Ras , Rab , Rho , Ran , Rheb , Rad / Gem , Rin / Rit and Arf families . Rho family proteins constitute one of the three major branches of the Ras superfamily and its members share approximately 30 % amino acid identity with the four Ras proteins ( Chardin , 1993 ) . Presently , at least 14 mammalian Rho family proteins have been identiﬁed : RhoA , RhoB , RhoC , RhoD , RhoE / Rnd3 , Rnd1 / Rho6 , Rnd2 / Rho7 , RhoG , Rac1 , Rac2 , Rac3 , Cdc42 , TC10 and TTF that share signiﬁcant ( ranging from 50 – 90 % ) amino acid identity with each other ( Ridley , 1996 ) ( Figure 1a ) . Two mammalian isoforms of Cdc42 have been identiﬁed from brain ( B ) or placenta ( P ) . Much of our knowledge of Rho family protein function has been derived primarily from the studies of Rac1 , RhoA and Cdc42 and each exhibits distinct cellular functions . A recent report indicates that RhoD possesses functions distinct from these three proteins ( Murphy et al . , 1996 ) . Sequence comparisons suggest that RhoE and TTF may also share functional relationships , whereas TC10 and RhoG are anticipated to be most related in function to Cdc42 and Rac1 , respectively ( Figure 1b ) . Recent observations that Rho / Rnd3 or Rnd1 causes a disruption of stress ﬁbers Correspondence : CJ Der Oncogene ( 1998 ) 17 , 1415 – 1438 ª 1998 Stockton Press All rights reserved 0950 – 9232 / 98 $ 12 . 00 http : / / www . stockton - press . co . uk / onc support a distinct function for RhoE and related proteins ( Nobes et al . , 1998 ; Guasch et al . , 1998 ) . Furthermore , RhoE and related proteins possess substitutions at positions corresponding to Ras residues 12 , 13 , 59 , 61 – 63 and 66 – 67 that inﬂuence both intrinsic and GAP - mediated GTP hydrolysis in Ras , and consequently , they exist in a predominantly GTP - bound state . Thus , sequence and functional di(cid:128)erences allow the deﬁnition of at least six distinct Rho subfamilies : ( 1 ) Cdc42 and TC10 ; ( 2 ) Rac1 , Rac2 , Rac3 and RhoG ; ( 3 ) RhoA , RhoB and RhoC ; ( 4 ) RhoE , Rnd1 / Rho6 and Rnd2 / Rho7 ; and ( 5 ) RhoD and TTF . However , a preliminary report that a dominant negative mutant of RhoG did not impair formation of membrane ru(cid:130)es , ﬁlopodia or stress ﬁbers suggests that RhoG function may be distinct from both Cdc42 and Rac ( Roux et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , further subdivision of the Rho family , as well as the identiﬁcation of additional members , are likely to occur in the future . Finally , although RhoA , RhoB and RhoC are likely to share common functions in regulating stress ﬁber formation ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) , they di(cid:128)er in subcellular location ( Adamson et al . , 1992 ) , regulation of expres - sion ( Jahner and Hunter , 1991 ; Fritz et al . , 1995 ) and posttranslational lipid modiﬁcation ( Adamson et al . , 1992 ; Lebowitz et al . , 1995 ) . Thus , even closely related members are likely to exhibit unique roles as well . Like Ras , Rho family proteins function as GTP / GDP regulated switches that cycle between active GTP - and an inactive GDP - bound forms ( Figure 2 ) ( Ridley , 1996 ) . This cycle is regulated by three distinct classes of regulatory proteins . First , Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ; also referred to as Dbl homology proteins ) serve as activators and stimulate the replacement of GDP by GTP ( Whitehead et al . , 1997 ) . To date , over 20 Dbl homology proteins a Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1416 have been identiﬁed , and the majority were initially discovered as transforming proteins in NIH3T3 focus - formation assays ( e . g . , Dbl , Vav ) ( Figure 3 ) . Second , at least 16 Rho GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) have also been identiﬁed that serve as negative regulators of Rho family protein function by stimulating their intrinsic GTPase activities ( Cerione and Zheng , 1996 ) . Some GAPs show preferential stimulation of speciﬁc Rho family proteins . A third class of Rho regulators are the Rho GDP - dissociation inhibitory factors ( RhoGDIs ) . The ﬁrst RhoGDI was originally identiﬁed as an inhibitor of Rac GDP dissociation ( Ueda et al . , 1990 ) and subsequently , of Cdc42 and Rac as well ( Abo et al . , 1991 ; Leonard et al . , 1992 ) . This ubiquitously expressed , cytosolic protein , was later shown to interfere with both intrinsic and GAP - stimulated GTP hydrolysis of Rac and Cdc42 ( Chuang et al . , 1993 ; Hart et al . , 1992 ) . Thus , RhoGDI can perturb Rho GDP / GTP cycling via two distinct mechanisms . Finally , RhoGDIs also serve an important role in regulating the association of Rho family proteins with membranes ( Takai et al . , 1995 ) . A cytosolic complex with RhoGDI is disrupted during Rho membrane translocation and activation by GEFs . Two additional RhoGDIs include the hematopoietic cell speciﬁc D4 - GDI / LY - GDI ( Lelias et al . , 1993 ; Scherle and Staudt , 1993 ) and RhoGDI g / RhoGDI - 3 , which is preferen - tially expressed in brain , pancreas and other tissues ( Adra et al . , 1997 ; Zalcman et al . , 1996 ) . Several regulators of Rho GDP / GTP cycling appear to function as multifunctional regulators . For example , BCR and ABR each possess distinct catalytic domains that serve as both Rho GEFs and GAPs ( Chuang et al . , 1995 ) ( Figure 3 ) . In addition , some Rho GAPs may also serve as downstream e(cid:128)ectors ( e . g . , N - chimaerin and the p85 subunit of phosphoinositide - 3 - OH kinase ( PI3K ) ) ( Kozma et al . , 1996 ; Zheng et al . , 1994a ) . Although RasGRFs and SOS have been shown to function as Ras GEFs , the presence of tandem DH / PH domains in these molecules suggests that they may possess a Rho family GEF function which is distinct from their Ras GEF function ( Nimnual et al . , 1998 ; Fan et al . , 1998 ) . Finally , one Dbl family protein ( Trio ) possesses two distinct DH domains and each shows distinct GEF activities . Like Ras , Rho family GTPases share high sequence similarity , especially in the core GTP binding sequences , and diverge primarily at their COOH - termini . The x - ray and NMR structures of truncated forms of Rac1 - GMPPNP , Cdc42 - GDP , G14V RhoA - GDP and RhoA - GTP g S have recently been solved ( Hirshberg et al . , 1997 ; Feltham et al . , 1997 ; Ihara et al . , 1998 ; Rittinger et al . , 1997 ; Wei et al . , 1997 ) . Like Ras these Rho family GTPases share a common a / b fold with the core GTP - binding domain as a conserved structural unit . In contrast to Ras , the Rho subfamily contains an insert of 13 amino acids in a region between b 5 and a 4 of H - Ras . One exception , however , is TTF , which contains a smaller insert b Figure 1 Sequence comparison of Rho family proteins . ( a ) To date , at least 14 distinct mammalian Rho family proteins have been described . A multiple sequence alignment of human Rho family proteins and H - Ras was generated using the dynamic algorithm alignment program ClustalW ( Thompson et al . , 1994 ) . A proﬁle alignment of the Rac1 primary sequence containing Rac1 secondary structural elements and the remaining Rho family proteins was initially constructed . The primary sequence of H - Ras was then added before the ﬁnal multiple sequence alignment was produced . All alignments were carried out using PAM series protein weight matrices . The ClustalW multiple sequence alignment was shaded using Boxshade 3 . 2 ( Thompson et al . , 1994 ) . Residues that are conserved in greater than 50 % of sequences at a given sequence position are colored blue , while residues that are similar are colored yellow . ( b ) The sequence alignment described above was used to construct the Rho dendrogram . The branch lengths in the dendrogram are proportional to the estimated divergence along each branch . Rnd3 / Rho8 di(cid:128)ers from RhoE only in having an additional 15 amino acid NH 2 - terminal extension ( Nobes et al . , 1998 ) Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1417 consisting of 7 amino acids . In Rac1 and RhoA , the insert consists of two alpha helices followed by an extended loop . The insert represents a highly charged surface , is mobile and exposed . However , Cdc42 contains only one helix in the insert . Moreover , the insert appears to form a compact loop structure that forms contacts with the loop between b 4 and a 3 . It is not clear whether these di(cid:128)erences represent differ - ences between X - ray and NMR methods or whether the fact that the structure of Rac1 was solved on a F87S mutant that may alter the structure and contacts between the insert and the b 4 / a 3 loop . NMR studies indicate that the conformation of the insert is not sensitive to the binding of GTP versus GDP . Like Ras , the conformation of the switch I and switch II domains is sensitive to the binding of GTP versus GDP and both appear to be dynamic structures . However , in contrast to Rac1 , helix two in the switch II domain of Cdc42 is absent . Interestingly , NMR chemical shift mapping of Cdc42 - GDP and Cdc42 - GMPPCP suggest the existence of an additional switch region comprised of b 4 / a 3 and a 3 ( Feltham et al . , 1997 ) . Rho family proteins are regulators of diverse cellular processes Rho family proteins have been implicated in the regulation of a diverse and extensive spectrum of cellular processes . Most prominent among these are their e(cid:128)ects on the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Rho proteins also initiate signaling cascades that cause activation of a variety of transcription factors . Hence , Rho - mediated changes in the actin organization or in gene expression may regulate many of the cellular processes associated with Rho protein function . These include regulation of cell shape , cell attachment , cell motility and invasion , cell - cell interactions , cell proliferation , di(cid:128)erentiation and apoptosis . Below , we summarize our current knowl - edge regarding the involvement of Rho proteins in controlling speciﬁc cellular processes . Rho proteins are regulators of actin cytoskeletal organization The best characterized function of Rho family proteins involves their regulation of speciﬁc ﬁlamentous F - actin organization . Actin ﬁlaments are components of one of the three major cytoskeletal protein networks that determine cell shape , movement and regulate cellular processes : actin ﬁlaments , microtubules and intermedi - ate ﬁlaments . The actin cytoskeleton is a highly dynamic cytoplasmic structure that is reshaped and reformed in response to diverse extracellular signals . In ﬁbroblasts , polymerized actin is assembled into a variety of distinct structures . Lamellipodia are curtain - like extensions that consist of thin protrusive actin sheets . Membrane ru(cid:130)es represent lamellipodia that have lifted from the substratum at the leading edge of cells . Actin stress ﬁbers consist of actin bundles that traverse the cell and promote cell attachment to the extracellular matrix via focal adhesions . Focal adhe - sions consist of integrins and cytoplasmic proteins such as vinculin and talin . Filopodia are thin , ﬁnger - like cytoplasmic extensions that contain tight actin bundles and may be involved in the recognition of the extracellular environment ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . Speciﬁc Rho family proteins are regulators of distinct changes in these actin - based structures , as well as others ( e . g . , tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells ) ( Nusrat et al . , 1995 ) , in ﬁbroblasts and other cell types . Figure 3 Dbl family proteins are guanine nucleotide exchange factors and activators of Rho family proteins . Presently , at least 22 mammalian Dbl family proteins have been described ( reviewed in Whitehead et al . , 1997 ) ; Fam et al . , 1997 ; Schuebel et al . , 1996 ; Henske et al . , 1995 ; Gebbink et al . , 1997 ; Alam et al . , 1997 ) . All share a Dbl homology ( DH ) followed by a pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain . Beyond the tamdem DH / PH domains , each Dbl family protein possesses distinct catalytic ( Ras GEF , Rho GAP ) or protein - protein or protein - lipid interaction motifs [ Src homology 2 and 3 ( SH2 and SH3 ) , cysteine - rich zinc - binding domains ( CRDs ) ] . A Rho GEF activity has been deﬁned for most , but not all , members of this family . Whereas some exhibit very speciﬁc activity , others serve as activators of multiple Rho family proteins . For example , FGD1 is an activator of Cdc42 , while Vav can activate Rac1 , RhoA and Cdc42 Figure 2 Regulators of Rho family protein GDP / GTP cycling . Like Ras , Rho family proteins function as GDP / GTP - regulated binary switches . A variety of extracellular stimuli regulate Rho family protein GDP / GTP cycling , through modulation of Rho GEF , GAP or GDI function . Activated Rho family proteins exhibit diverse cellular functions that include regulation of actin organization , gene expression and cell cycle progression Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1418 The ﬁrst clues that Rho family proteins regulate actin organization were provided by studies using C3 toxin from Clostridium botulinum , an inhibitor of RhoA , B and C function ( Chardin et al . , 1989 ) and by microinjection analyses using mutant Rho family proteins ( Paterson et al . , 1990 ; Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Ridley and Hall , 1992 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . These studies demonstrated that speciﬁc Rho family proteins are components of signaling pathways that induce unique morphological changes involving rearrange - ments of F - actin . RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 control distinct changes in the actin cytoskeleton and distinct cellular structures . Furthermore , they can act in concert in cascades that link their activities . Constitu - tively activated Cdc42 caused induction of ﬁlopodia in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts as well as the activation of Rac ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ; Kozma et al . , 1995 ) . Activated Rac1 in turn caused the induction of lamellipodia and membrane ru(cid:130)ing , and the activation of Rho ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Activated RhoA caused the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . Both Rac and Cdc42 also regulate formation of focal complexes distinct from those caused by RhoA . A second cascade of small GTPases involves the ability of oncogenic Ras to activate Rac and subsequently Rho ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . GTPase cascades that involve Rho family proteins have also been described in the yeasts S . cerevisiae and S . pombe ( reviewed in Chant and Stowers , 1995 ) . Although a Cdc42 4 Rac 4 Rho cascade has also been seen in other cell types ( Allen et al . , 1997 ) , variations on this theme , involving separate pathways or feedback loops , have also been observed . For example , Cdc42 was shown to inhibit , rather than promote , stress ﬁber formation in other cell types ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Qiu et al . , 1997 ) . Activated Rac did not induce actin stress ﬁber formation in MDCK epithelial cells ( Ridley et al . , 1995 ) . Inactivation of Rho caused activation of Cdc42 and Rac in N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells ( Kozma et al . , 1997 ) . These observations , when taken together with the fact that each Rho family can be activated by distinct signals , reﬂect the versatility of Rho family proteins in orchestrating di(cid:128)erent cellular processes in di(cid:128)erent situations and cell types . Finally , the precise links between these GTPase cascades have not been established . However , based on the involvement of Dbl family - related proteins ( CDC24 ) in the activation of Cdc42 in yeast pathways ( Zheng et al . , 1994b ) , it is logical that Dbl family proteins will serve as intermediates between GTPases . GAPs and GDIs may also facilitate these GTPase cascades . Figure 4 Rho family proteins are regulators of signaling pathways that regulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Cdc42 , Rac1 and RhoA function as downstream components of signaling pathways initiated by ligand - stimulated G protein - coupled serpentine receptors ( SRs ) , receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) or integrin receptors ( IRs ) . Cdc42 , Rac1 and RhoA each modulate distinct changes in actin organization . At least two GTPase cascades have been identiﬁed that regulate actin reorganization . One involves oncogenic Ras activation of Rac1 , then Rac1 activation of RhoA . A second involves Cdc42 activation of Rac1 and RhoA . These hierarchies of small GTPases may vary in di(cid:128)erent cell types Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1419 Like Ras , Rho family proteins also serve as GDP / GTP - regulated relay switches that transmit extra - cellular ligand - mediated signals that promote changes in actin structures ( Figure 4 ) . It had been observed previously that lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) , bombe - sin and bradykinin each bind to GPCRs to activate the formation of ﬁlopodia , membrane ru(cid:130)es and stress ﬁbers . Rho family proteins were subsequently implicated in these processes ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . For example , LPA stimula - tion of actin stress ﬁbers formation and the assembly of focal adhesion complexes in Swiss 3T3 cells was blocked by C3 toxin ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . PDGF stimulation of its receptor , a transmembrane tyrosine kinase , causes membrane ru(cid:130)ing which was blocked by dominant negative Rac ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Dominant negative Cdc42 blocked the forma - tion of ﬁlopodia induced by bradykinin ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . Finally , insulin - or hepatocyte growth factor - induced membrane ru(cid:130)ing in KB human epidermoid carcinoma cells was dependent on Rac or Rho , respectively ( Nishiyama et al . , 1994 ) . There is evidence that PI3K may link PDGF - and insulin - mediated signaling to Rac activation and induction of membrane ru(cid:130)ing ( Kotani et al . , 1994 ; Wennstrom et al . , 1994 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . In general , speciﬁc Rho family proteins show the same e(cid:128)ects on actin organization in di(cid:128)erent cell types . However , some cell type di(cid:128)erences have been observed . For example , Rac and Rho cause distinct membrane ru(cid:130)ing response in KB human epithelial carcinoma cell lines ( Nishiyama et al . , 1994 ) . Whereas Rho causes neurite retraction , Rac causes neurite extension in NIE - 115 neuroblastoma cells . Other members of the Rho family are also regulators of additional actin cytoske - letal rearrangements and cellular processes . For example , transient expression of activated RhoD in a variety of cell types caused rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton and cell surface and involved the forma - tion of long thin F - actin containing membrane processes together with the disassembly of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . These cytoskeletal changes corresponded with regulated endosome motility and distribution ( Murphy et al . , 1996 ) . RhoG has been reported to cause a Rac - dependent membrane ru(cid:130)ing in Swiss 3T3 cells ( Roux et al . , 1997 ) . Finally , activated Rnd1 and RhoE / Rnd3 has been reported to cause a disruption of stress ﬁbers ( Nobes et al . , 1998 ; Guasch et al . , 1998 ) . Figure 5 Rho family proteins are regulators of mitogen - activated protein kinase cascades . At least three distinct MAPK modules have been identiﬁed and involve a cascade of a MAPK kinase kinase ( MAPKKK ; also MEKKs ) , a MAPK kinase ( MAPKK ; also MKKs ) and a MAPK . Rac and Cdc42 have been shown to be activators of pathways that lead to the activation of the JNK and p38 MAPK modules ( reviewed in Vojtek and Cooper , 1995 ; Treisman , 1996 ) . Although several kinases have been implicated as Rac / Cdc42 e(cid:128)ectors ( e . g . , PAKs , MLKs , MEKKs ) , the precise link ( s ) between Rac and Cdc42 and these cascades is presently not known . Ras activates ERKs via a Raf - dependent pathway , and JNKs and p38 MAPKs via a Raf - dependent pathway that involves Rac / Cdc42 . Activated MAPKs in turn regulate a variety of substrates that include nuclear transcription factors ( reviewed in Treisman , 1996 ) ; ( Wang and Ron , 1996 ; Zervos et al . , 1995 ) . Note that common transcription factor targets are shared by the di(cid:128)erent MAPKs Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1420 Rho family proteins are also associated with processes that involve the actin cytoskeleton in other organisms . The regulation of cytoskeletal organization by Rho family members is evident from genetics studies in yeast and Drosophila . Yeast Cdc42 has been demonstrated to coordinate polarization of the actin cytoskeleton during cell division by budding , and involves a cascade of other small GTPases ( BUD1 / RSR1 and RHO proteins ) ( reviewed in Chant and Stowers , 1995 ) . In Drosophila , Drac1 is required to assemble actin at adherens junctions of the wing disc epithelium , while Dcdc42 is involved in the regulation of polarized cell shape during various stages of wing disc development ( Eaton et al . , 1995 ) . Studies have also implicated a requirement for Rho family proteins during cytokinesis in sand dollar ( Mabuchi et al . , 1993 ) Xenopus ( Kishi et al . , 1993 ; Drechsel et al . , 1996 ) , Dictyostelium ( Larochelle et al . , 1996 ) and mammalian cells ( Madaule et al . , 1998 ) . Rho family proteins are regulators of gene expression In addition to their involvement in regulation of cytoskeletal organization , it has been shown that Rho family proteins regulate protein kinase cascades that control the activity of a variety of nuclear transcription factors ( Figure 5 ) . To date , at least three distinct mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) cascades have been identiﬁed in mammalian cells and more are likely to be discovered ( Treisman , 1996 ) . The p42 and p44 extracellular signal regulated kinases ( ERKs ; also called p42 and p44 MAPKs ) , Jun NH 2 - terminal kinases ( JNKs ) and p38 / HOG kinases are distinct kinase cascades activated by distinct small GTPases . ERKs are activated by many mitogenic stimuli , whereas JNK and p38 are more commonly activated by cellular stress ( heat shock , ionizing radiation , etc . ) and inﬂammatory cytokines . These cascades involve kinase modules where a MAPK kinase kinase ( or MEKK ) causes activation of a MAPK kinase ( or MKK ) , which in turn activates a MAPK . The activated MAPKs have a variety of targets and include various Ets domain , bZIP and MADS box containing transcription factors reviewed in Treisman , 1996 ) . Although we have depicted each MAPK module as a separate linear array , there is cross talk between these cascades , as well as branch points and feedback loops within each module emphasizing the complex nature of signaling pathways . Constitutively activated Rac1 and Cdc42 , but not RhoA , are activators of JNKs ( also called stress - activated protein kinases , or SAPKs ) and p38 / HOGs , but not the p42 and p44 ERKs ( Coso et al . , 1995 ; Minden et al . , 1995 ; Olson et al . , 1995 ; Bagrodia et al . , 1995a ; Zhang et al . , 1995 ) . However , RhoA can activate JNK in some cells ( Teramoto et al . , 1996b ) and RhoG is also an activator of JNK , but not ERK ( Roux et al . , 1997 ) . JNK in turn activates the ATF - 2 and Jun nuclear transcription factors . ATF - 2 and Jun can dimerize with other transcription factors to stimulate transcription from promoters containing AP - 1 and related DNA sequences ( e . g . , the c - jun promoter ) ( Figure 6 ) ( Karin , 1995 ) . Although Rac , RhoA and Cdc42 are not activators of ERKs , it has been observed that they can indirectly modulate ERK activity in 293 cells ( Luttrell et al . , 1997 ) . Dominant negative Rac2 was found to impair Ras activation of ERK2 , whereas activated RhoA , Rac2 and Cdc42 Figure 6 Rho family proteins are regulators of genes that control cell growth , di(cid:128)erentiation and apoptosis . Rho family proteins regulate the activity of genes that regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis ( reviewed in Treisman , 1996 ) . RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 activate SRF ( Hill and Treisman , 1995 ) , which forms a complex with ternary complex factors ( e . g . , Elk - 1 ) at the serum response DNA element found in the promoter sequences of c - fos and other early response genes . RhoA and Rac / Cdc42 are believed to activate SRF through distinct pathways . Rac1 / Cdc42 ( and RhoA in some cells ) activate JNK , which in turn can activate the Jun , ATF - 2 and Elk - 1 nuclear transcription factors . Activated c - Jun : ATF - 2 heterodimers stimulate AP - 1 like DNA elements in various promoters that regulate c - jun and other genes . Rac1 activates NF - k B by as yet unknown pathways that involve production of superoxide and phosphorylation and inactivation of I k B ( Perona et al . , 1997 ) . Among these NF - k B - responsive genes are those that have an anti - apoptotic function ( Baichwal and Baeuerle , 1997 ) . Transduced and mutated versions of cellular Fos , Jun and NF - k B sequences were identiﬁed as potent oncogene proteins responsible for the highly oncogenic properties of retroviruses ( Bishop , 1991 ) . Thus , these Rho family mediated changes in gene expression are likely to contribute to the growth promoting actions of these small GTPases Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1421 synergistically enhanced Raf activation of ERK2 . How Rho family proteins may modulate ERK2 activation is not presently known . Furthermore , this crosstalk may not occur in all cell types , since we have not observed this in NIH3T3 cells ( Khosravi - Far et al . , 1995 ) . Oncogenic Ras activates ERKs via Raf and JNK and p38 via a Raf - independent pathway ( s ) ( Minden et al . , 1994 ; Olson et al . , 1995 ; Clark et al . , 1997 ) that are likely to involve Rac / Cdc42 . RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 have been shown to activate the transcription factor SRF ( serum response factor ) by as yet undeﬁned signaling pathways ( Whitmarsh et al . , 1995 ) . SRF cooperates with ternary complex factors ( TCFs ; Elk - 1 and SAP1 / 2 ) and the serum response DNA elements found in certain promoters such as the c - fos promoter and many other growth factor - regulated promoters ( Marais et al . , 1993 ) . TCFs are activated by the Raf 4 MEK 4 MAPK pathway ( Figure 6 ) . Interest - ingly , Rac and Cdc42 activation of SRF is not dependent on Rho indicating that Rho family proteins utilize distinct pathways to activate SRF ( Hill et al . , 1995 ) . Thus , the Cdc42 4 Rac 4 Rho cascade that regulates actin structure is clearly distinct from pathways that regulate SRF . Again , cross - talk at the level of transcription factors is also seen . For example , Elk - 1 can also be activated by JNK and p38 . Rho family proteins have also been implicated in the regulation of NF - k B . NF - k B recognizes DNA elements found in a wide variety of promoters ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1996 ) . In one study , Finkel and colleagues found that activated Rac1 , but not Cdc42 , strongly stimulated NF - k B in HeLa cells ( Sulciner et al . , 1996 ) . Interleukin 1 b - stimulated NF - k B was also dependent on Rac function . However , a second study found that Rac1 , RhoA and Cdc42 stimulated NF - k B by a mechanism that involves phosphorylation of I k B to promote NF - k B translocation to the nucleus ( Perona et al . , 1997 ) . Consistent with this second study , we have found that a variety of Dbl family proteins that are not activators of Rac ( e . g . , Dbl and Dbs ) also activate NF - k B ( Westwick et al . , 1998 ) . Ras activation of JNK and NF - k B has been shown to be mediated , in part , by activation of Rac ( Minden et al . , 1995 ; Sulciner et al . , 1996 ) . Rac1 ( 12V ) activation of NF - k B was found to be independent of JNK activation . Instead , Rac1 stimulated increased produc - tion of superoxides and other reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , and inhibitors of their production also inhibited NF k B activation ( Baeuerle and Baltimore , 1996 ) . Inhibition of either ROS production ( Irani et al . , 1997 ) or NF - k B activation ( Finco et al . , 1997 ) has been shown to block oncogenic Ras transformation . Furthermore , since NF k B inhibition caused Ras - transformed NIH3T3 cells to undergo apoptosis ( Mayo et al . , 1997 ) , the role of NF k B activation in Ras , and possibly Rac , transformation may be to cause upregulation of as yet to be identiﬁed anti - apoptotic genes . An anti - apoptotic role for NF k B has been described for other extracellular stimuli ( reviewed in Baichwal and Baeuerle , 1997 ) . Whether this is the mechanism by which superoxides promote Ras transformation remains to be determined . Rho family proteins regulate cell proliferation Some early indications that Rho family proteins may regulate cell growth include observations that expres - sion of speciﬁc Rho family proteins is regulated by growth factor stimulation . RhoB was identiﬁed as an immediate - early response gene induced by receptor tyrosine kinase activation ( EGF and PDGF stimula - tion ) , by nonreceptor tyrosine kinases ( viral Src and Fps ) , UV irradiation , and by DNA damaging agents ( cisplatin and N - methyl - N - nitrosurea ) ( Jahner and Hunter , 1991 ; Fritz et al . , 1995 ) . RhoB was also transiently induced by EGF or TGF a in human mammary epithelial cells and was overexpressed in human breast cancer tissues and cell lines ( de Cremoux et al . , 1994 ; Linares - Cruz et al . , 1994 ) . RhoG gene expression was also found to be growth - inducible ( Vincent et al . , 1992 ) . The hematopoietic cell - speciﬁc Rac2 was induced in T cells by phytohemagglutinin A growth stimulation ( Reibel et al . , 1991 ) . Rho family proteins have also been implicated in cell cycle regulation . RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 were shown to be requirement for cell cycle progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle ( Yamamoto et al . , 1993 ; Olson et al . , 1995 ) . For example , C3 toxin treatment and inhibition of Rho function caused Swiss 3T3 cells to accumulate in the G1 phase of the cell cycle and growth inhibition ( Yamamoto et al . , 1993 ) . Further - more , microinjection of constitutively activated mu - tants of Ras , RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 caused G1 progression and stimulation of DNA synthesis in quiescent Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts , whereas the dominant Figure 7 Oncogenic Ras causes transformation by activation of Raf - independent pathways that cause activation of speciﬁc Rho family proteins . The ability of dominant negative mutants of RhoA , RhoB , Rac1 , Cdc42 and RhoG to block oncogenic Ras transforming activity demonstrates the requirement for speciﬁc Rho family proteins in mediating , in part , Ras transformation . Prevailing evidence suggests that each Rho family protein may function in distinct pathways and that the Cdc42 4 Rac 4 Rho hierarchy seen for actin reorganization in Swiss 3T3 cells may not occur for Ras transformation of rodent ﬁbroblasts . Rho family proteins contribute to multiple aspects of the transformed and tumorigenic phenotype of Ras - transformed cells Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1422 negative mutant counterparts blocked serum - stimu - lated DNA synthesis ( Olson et al . , 1995 ) . The mechanism by which Ras and Rho proteins regulate cell cycle progression is not yet understood but it is thought to involve stimulation of D - type cyclins which are stimulated by Ras and AP1 proteins ( Albanese et al . , 1995 ) . We recently showed that Rac1 and RhoA stimulated transcription of cyclin D 1 ( Westwick et al . , 1997 ) . Rho proteins have also been implicated in the degradation of the cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor p27 Kip1 , to facilitate entry into S phase ( Hirai A et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , it is possible that Rho family proteins are mediators of Ras - induced cell cycle progression . The involvement of BCR , a bifunctional Rho GAP and GEF , as the translocation partner of the Abl tyrosine kinase in Philadelphia Chromosome - positive chronic myelogenous leukemias implicated deregulated Rho protein function in human leukemias . However , whether the BCR sequences present in the p185 or p210 BCR - Abl chimeric proteins contribute to their function as oncoproteins has not been established . Also , although transcripts of the reciprocal Abl - BCR fusion have been detected , whether it encodes a functional protein has not been described . Finally , one Rho family protein ( TTF ) was rearranged by a t ( 3 : 4 ) chromosome translocation in large cell non - Hodgkin’s lymphomas ( Dallery et al . , 1995 ) . What function the hematopoietic cell - speciﬁc TTF protein may have , and whether its loss of function is important for lymphoma development , has not been addressed . Direct evidence for the importance of Rho family proteins in the regulation of cell growth came from studies to determine if constitutively activated mutants of various Rho family proteins could cause transforma - tion of rodent ﬁbroblasts . The ﬁrst evaluation of this possibility did identify a transforming activity for RhoA ( Avraham and Weinberg , 1989 ) . However , transforma - tion of NIH3T3 cells was associated with wild type , rather than activated , RhoA protein . Lacal and colleagues showed that both wild type and constitu - tively activated Aplysia Rho caused tumorigenic transformation of NIH3T3 cells ( Perona et al . , 1993 ) . Expression of activated mutants of human Rac1 , RhoA or RhoB alone have been shown to cause tumorigenic transformation of NIH3T3 and Rat - 1 rodent ﬁbroblasts ( Qiu et al . , 1995a , b ; Khosravi - Far et al . , 1995 ; Prendergast et al . , 1995 ) . Constitutively activated Cdc42 has been shown to cause partial transformation of Rat - 1 cells ( Qiu et al . , 1997 ) . Cdc42 ( 12V ) - expressing cells formed colonies in soft agar and tumors in nude mice , but did not show reduced requirement for serum or loss of density - dependent growth in culture . We have found that Cdc42 ( 12V ) is growth inhibitory in NIH3T3 cells , but can cooperate with activated Raf to cause focus - formation in NIH3T3 assays ( Whitehead et al . , 1998 ) . Interestingly , Cdc42 , but not RhoA or Rac1 , has been shown to cause G1 arrest by a p38 - dependent mechanism in NIH3T3 cells ( Molna´r et al . , 1997 ) . A recent report also found that overexpression of constitutively activated , GAP - insentive Cdc42 ( 61L ) was growth inhibitory in NIH3T3 cells . In contrast , they showed that a mutant of Cdc42 ( F28L ) , which exhibited enhanced GDP / GTP cycling could cause growth transformation of NIH3T3 cells ( growth in low serum and soft agar ) ( Lin et al . , 1997 ) These observations suggested that increased formation of the active GTP - bound protein , together with accelerated GDP / GTP cycling , may both be required to promote Cdc42 transformation . Enhanced GDP / GTP exchange , rather than impairment in GAP - stimulated GTP hydrolysis , has also been shown to activate the transforming potential of Ras proteins ( Walter et al . , 1986 ; Feig and Cooper , 1988 ; Der et al . , 1988 ; Reinstein et al . , 1991 ) . A growth - regulatory function for other Rho family proteins is also likely . For example , activated RhoG ( 12V ) showed only limited growth transforma - tion of NIH3T3 cells ( Roux et al . , 1997 ) . However , it showed strong synergistic focus - forming activity when co - expressed with activated mutants of RhoA , Cdc42 or Rac1 . Whether the aberrant upregulation of other Rho family proteins also promote growth transforma - tion remains to be determined . Additionally , whether Rho family proteins can cause growth transformation of epithelial and other cell types has not been addressed . Rho family proteins promote cell motility and invasion Rac1 , RhoA and Cdc42 function have also been shown to promote cell motility and invasion . Rho protein function was found to be required for crawling movements of NIH3T3 cells on a ﬂat surface ( Takaishi et al . , 1993 ) and for hepatocyte growth factor induced motility of mouse karatinocytes ( Takaishi et al . , 1994 ) or MDCK epithelial cells ( Ridley et al . , 1995 ) . Similarly , C3 treatment showed that Rho is required for LPA - induced invasion of hepatoma cells through a mesothelial cell monolayer ( Yoshioka et al . , 1995 ; Wang and Ron , 1996 ) . C3 treatment inhibited the invasive of three T cell lymphoma cell lines through a monolayer of C3H10T1 / 2 cells ( BW - O - Lil , BW - 19 and CCRF - CEM ) . Invasion in this in vitro assay was shown to correlate with the ability or a cell line to induce experimental metastasis formation in mice ( Verschue - ren et al . , 1997 ) . Collard and colleagues showed that activated Rac1 ( 12V ) and the Tiam1 Rac GEF , but not activated RhoA ( 14V ) , induced invasion of T lympho - ma cells in the same ﬁbroblast invasion assay ( Habets et al . , 1994 ; Michiels et al . , 1995 ) . Tiam1 also promoted metastasis in nude mice . Finally , aberrant Rac1 or Cdc42 function increased the motility and invasion in vitro of T47D human breast epithelial cells ( Keely et al . , 1997 ) . Both the increased motility and invasion were blocked by inhibitors of PI3K and constitutively activated PI3K alone was su(cid:129)cient to cause these alterations . Thus , PI3K may be a key e(cid:128)ector in mediating Rac - and Cdc42 - mediated invasion . When taken together with the involvement of Rho proteins in mediating cell attachment and cell - cell interactions , Rho regulation of motility and invasion supports the possibility that aberrant func - tion of Rho family proteins promote the invasive and metastatic properties of human tumor cells . Dbl family proteins : Rho family GEFs and transforming proteins Finally , the transforming activities associated with many Dbl family proteins also provide evidence that Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1423 upregulation of Rho family protein function can cause growth deregulation ( reviewed in Whitehead et al . , 1997 ) . Dbl family proteins are presumed to cause transformation by causing constitutive upregulation of Rho protein function . Consistent with this , Dbl family proteins cause the same changes in actin organization and gene expression as seen with Rho family proteins ( Westwick et al . , 1997b ) . All Dbl family proteins share a domain of approximately 180 amino acids that has been designated the Dbl homology ( DH ) domain . In addition , all family members possess a second , shared domain designated the pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain of approximately 100 amino acids ( Figure 3 ) . The PH domain is invariably located immediately COOH - terminal to the DH domain and this invariant topography suggests a functional interdependence between these two structural modules . The DH domain provides the GEF activity and each Dbl family protein may activate a speciﬁc or several Rho family proteins . Whether the DH domains of some family members actually serve as Rho GEFs remains to be determined ( e . g . , SOS , RasGRF , BCR ) . PH domains are also found in many non - Dbl family proteins that comprise a large , diverse group of proteins that are involved in cell signaling or cytoskeletal functions that requires association with cell membranes ( Lemmon et al . , 1996 ) . PH domains can function as protein - protein or protein - lipid interaction motifs and it is generally believed that they serve to recruit proteins to the cell surface by lipid binding . Thus , it is speculated that the PH domain may serve two roles in Dbl family protein function . First , it may promote membrane translocation . This function is supported by the observation of Whitehead and colleagues that addition of a plasma membrane targeting sequence restored the loss of PH function and recreated a transforming version of Lfc ( White - head et al . , 1996 ) . Second , the PH domain may serve as an intramolecular regulator of the DH domain . Thus , upstream signaling pathways that cause activation of beta - gamma subunits of G proteins or upregulation of phosphatidylinositol lipids may regulate Dbl family protein function via interaction with the PH domain . How Dbl family proteins link extracellular signals with Rho family proteins remains a poorly understood area . Three recent studies showing that speciﬁc tyrosine kinases cause phosphorylation of Vav to stimulate its GEF activity deﬁne one mechanism where extracellular signals cause , via a Dbl family protein , activation of Rho family proteins ( Crespo et al . , 1997 ; Han et al . , 1997 ; Teramoto et al . , 1997 ) . Ras activation of a GTPase cascade : an involvement of Rho family proteins in transformation While it is clear that Ras must utilize e(cid:128)ectors other than Raf , the precise nature of these Raf - independent pathways remains to be fully delineated ( Marshall , 1996 ; Khosravi - Far et al . , 1997 ) . However , several lines of evidence have implicated speciﬁc Rho family proteins as key downstream mediators of Ras transformation . In retrospect , the early observations that Ras - transformed cells undergo morphologic alterations , loss of stress ﬁbers and decreased sub - stratum adhesion , and that oncogenic Ras caused increased membrane ru(cid:130)ing and motility ( Bar - Sagi and Feramisco , 1986 ) suggested an involvement of Rho family proteins . In this section , we summarize the evidence for a Ras connection with Rho family proteins and discuss our current understanding of how they may contribute to oncogenic Ras - mediated transformation . One of the ﬁrst suggestions of a link between Ras and Rho proteins was made by the observation that a p120 GAP - associated protein , p190 , is a GAP for RhoA , and to some degree for Cdc42 and Rac ( Settleman et al . , 1992 ) . Thus , p120 GAP may serve as an e(cid:128)ector that facilitates Ras regulation of Rho family protein function . However , at present , whether the association of a p120 GAP : p190 Rho GAP complex with activated Ras leads to upregulation or downregulation of Rho family protein function has not been established . Genetic analysis in S . pombe Ras ( Ras1 ) also identiﬁed a link with Rho family proteins and deﬁned two distinct Ras1 e(cid:128)ector - mediated activities . One involves Ras1 interaction with Byr2 which is a MEK kinase homolog ( Wang et al . , 1991 ; Van Aelst et al . , 1993 ; Masuda et al . , 1995 ) . The other involves Ras1 interaction with the Scd1 Dbl family protein ( Chang et al . , 1994 ) . Scd1 is a putative exchange factor and activator of the S . pombe Cdc42 homolog . Interest - ingly , Scd1 was found to bind directly to activated Ras and possess properties of a Ras e(cid:128)ector , thus directly linking Ras activation to activation of Rho family proteins . Whether a speciﬁc mammalian homolog ( s ) of Scd1 exists and functions as a Ras e(cid:128)ector remains to be determined . Finally , this model is an oversimplifica - tion since Scd1 is likely to promote a multiprotein complex formation , with the SH3 domain - containing Scd2 protein and GTP - complexed Ras1 ( Chang et al . , 1994 ) . Such a role for an e(cid:128)ector emphasizes a theme where e(cid:128)ectors of small GTPases mediate their actions by promoting the formation of signaling complexes rather than activating simply linear cascades . Further evidence for the involvement of Rho family members in mediating oncogenic Ras function came from microinjection studies in serum - starved Swiss 3T3 cells by Hall and colleagues ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . H - Ras ( 12V ) induction of membrane ru(cid:130)ing and stress ﬁbers were blocked by dominant negative Rac1 ( 17N ) and C3 , respectively . These observations established the ability of oncogenic Ras to transiently stimulate a Rac 4 Rho cascade and prompted investigations into the possible involvement of RhoA and Rac1 in Ras transformation . Conse - quently , the morphologic transformation seen in Ras - transformed cells may be caused , in part , by deregulation of Rho and Rac function . Presently , the function of ﬁve Rho family proteins have been shown to be important for oncogenic Ras transforming activity . Three experimental approaches have been applied to support key contributions of RhoA , RhoB , Rac1 , Cdc42 and RhoG to Ras transformation ( Qiu et al . , 1995a ; Khosravi - Far et al . , 1995 ; Prendergast et al . , 1995 ; Qiu et al . , 1995b , 1997 ; Roux et al . , 1997 ; Lebowitz et al . , 1997 ) . First , co - expression of dominant negative mutants [ equiva - lent to the Ras ( 17N ) mutant ] of each Rho family protein caused a signiﬁcant , although incomplete , Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1424 reduction in oncogenic Ras focus - forming activity when analysed in rodent ﬁbroblasts . Second , co - expression of constitutively activated versions of each Rho family GTPase with activated Raf - 1 mutants showed cooperative and synergistic focus - forming activity . Finally , constitutively activated mutants caused growth transformation of NIH3T3 or Rat1 rodent ﬁbroblasts . Taken together , these observations support a model where oncogenic Ras causes consti - tutive activation of speciﬁc Rho family proteins which in turn activate a spectrum of functions that contribute to full Ras transforming activity . However , it should be emphasized that a demonstration that Ras - transformed cells exhibit constitutively elevated GTP - bound levels of a speciﬁc Rho family protein has not been determined . Thus , which , if any , of the known Rho family proteins are clearly targeted by oncogenic Ras remains to be established . The evaluation of e(cid:128)ector domain mutant of oncogenic H - Ras also supports the contribution of Rho family proteins to Ras transformation ( White et al . , 1995 ; Joneson et al . , 1996b ; Khosravi - Far et al . , 1996 ) . Speciﬁcally , two mutants with single amino acid substitutions ( 37G and 40C ) lost the ability to bind and activate Raf and the ERK pathway . Despite this defect , both mutant proteins retained the ability to cause full transformation of NIH3T3 cells ( Khosravi - Far et al . , 1996 ) . However , the transformed phenotype caused by Ras ( 12V , 37G ) or Ras ( 12V , 40C ) was distinct from that caused by activated Ras or Raf , and instead , was indistinguishable from the trans - formed phenotype caused by activated Rac or Rho proteins . These observations lend further support for a Raf - independent connection between Ras and Rho family proteins that contributes to cellular transforma - tion . The evaluation of Ras - transformed rodent fibro - blasts that stably co - expressed either dominant activated or negative Rho family proteins has provided some clues regarding the contribution these small GTPases to the Ras transformed phenotype . For example , coexpression of activated Rac1 or RhoA caused further morphologic transformation and de - creased attachment to the plastic substratum of Ras - transformed NIH3T3 cells ( Khosravi - Far et al . , 1995 ) . These cells also formed colonies in soft agar that suggested increased motility and invasive properties . In contrast , co - expression of dominant negative Rac1 or RhoA caused a morphologic reversion of Ras - transformed NIH3T3 cells ( Khosravi - Far et al . , 1995 ) . Taken together , these observations support the possibility that Ras causes morphologic transforma - tion , in part , by upregulation of Rac1 or RhoA function . However , the observations that Rac1 - and RhoA - transformed NIH3T3 cells do not undergo any signiﬁcant morphologic transformation , and retain well - organized stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , argue that aberrant Rac or Rho function is not responsible for that altered morphology and loss of stress ﬁbers . Instead , since Raf - and MEK - transformed NIH3T3 cells also undergo morphologic transformation , it suggests that the Raf 4 MEK 4 ERK pathway pro - motes morphologic transformation . How the transient changes in actin organization caused by Rho family proteins relate to long term changes is also not clear . Ras - transformed NIH3T3 cells do possess enhanced membrane ru(cid:130)ing and pinocytosis , consistent with persistent Rac activation . However , the loss , rather than enhancement , of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , are not consistent with persistent Rho activation . Several observations suggest that each Rho family protein contributes a distinct aspect of Ras transfor - mation . First , constitutively activated mutants of each Rho family protein caused a distinct transformed phenotype in NIH3T3 cells . Second , co - expression of di(cid:128)erent combinations of activated mutants showed cooperative focus - forming activity , suggesting that they activate distinct pathways ( Roux et al . , 1997 ) . Interestingly , the greatest cooperative focus - forming activity was seen with co - expression of activated Cdc42 ( 12V ) and Rac1 ( 12V ) . Third , the characteriza - tion of Rat1 ﬁbroblasts coexpressing H - Ras ( 12V ) and either dominant negative Rac1 or Cdc42 argued that each Rho family protein played distinct roles in Ras transformation ( Qiu et al . , 1997 ) . Dominant negative Cdc42 ( 17N ) blocked the soft agar growth and cause morphologic reversion of Ras - transformed Rat - 1 cells . However , low serum growth was retained . In contrast , Rac1 ( 17N ) reverted low serum growth and colony formation in soft agar , but not morphologic transformation . Hence , it was proposed that Cdc42 and Rac play distinct roles in Ras transformation , with Cdc42 mediating morphological transformation and Rac1 promoting serum - independent growth . Finally , distinct contributions of each Rho family protein to Ras transformation is also suggested by the observation that dominant negative RhoA and Cdc42 , but not Rac1 , blocked Raf transforming activity . These ﬁndings also suggest that the Cdc42 4 Rac 4 Rho cascade for actin reorganization may not apply for their association with oncogenic Ras transformation . Finally , since dominant negative Rac1 impaired RhoG - mediated transformation , it was proposed that Rac1 functioned downstream of RhoG . A search for the missing link that connects Ras with Rho family proteins Although how Ras may connect with Rho family proteins is not clearly understood at present , the prevailing evidence support the linkage via a Raf - independent pathway . First , dominant negative mu - tants of Rac1 , RhoA , Cdc42 and RhoG showed complete , or preferential , inhibition of Ras versus Raf focus - forming activity . Second , the potent cooperative focus - forming activity seen when activated Raf and Rho family proteins are co - expressed suggests activa - tion of distinct signaling pathways . Third , activated Raf does not cause direct activation of JNK , indicating that Rac , Cdc42 and RhoG are not downstream components of this pathway . The studies presented above clearly establish a critical role for Rho proteins in mediating Ras - induced cytoskeletal alterations , cellular transforma - tion , gene expression and cell cycle progression . However , the components that transmit the signal from activated Ras to Rho proteins remain to be determined . Evidence that support the involvement of known Ras - binding proteins as candidate e(cid:128)ectors that Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1425 link Ras with Rho proteins is summarized in this section . At least ﬁve candidate e(cid:128)ectors of Ras display properties that support their possible role in linking Ras to Rho family proteins . First , similar to S . pombe Ras ( Chang et al . , 1994 ) , a mammalian Rho GEF ( Whitehead et al . , 1997 ) that is analogous to yeast Scd1 may function as an e(cid:128)ector and directly link Ras with speciﬁc Rho family proteins . However , although over 20 candidate mammalian Rho GEFs , or Dbl family proteins , have been identiﬁed , to date none have been implicated as Ras - GTP binding proteins ( Whitehead et al . , 1997 ) . Nevertheless , by analogy to Ras proteins , it is anticipated that a Rho GEF will still be an important intermediate between Ras and Rho proteins . Second , Ras interaction with a p120 GAP : p190 Rho GAP complex may lead to activation or inactivation of Rho family proteins ( Settleman et al . , 1992 ) . Overexpression of p190 GAP has been shown to cause inhibition of stress ﬁber formation ( Ridley et al . , 1993 ) . However , it is not known whether Ras association inﬂuences p190 Rho GAP function . Indirect evidence for such a role is provided by the recent observation that dominant negative mutants of p120 GAP , block Ras activation of JNKs but not MAPKs ( Clark et al . , 1997 ) . Third , three groups recently identiﬁed independently a Ral - binding protein ( RalBP1 / RLIP1 / RIP1 ) that interacted with Ral in a GTP - dependent manner , required an intact Ral e(cid:128)ector domain , and contains a Rho GAP domain ( Cantor et al . , 1995 ; Jullien - Flores et al . , 1995 ; Park and Weinberg , 1996 ) . Thus , this protein may serve as a link between Ras and Rho proteins ( Feig et al . , 1996 ) . Ras association with RalGDS may lead to the activation of Ral . Activated Ral then associates with RalBP1 / RLIP1 / RIP1 and alters the activity of certain Rho family members . This is an intriguing model that remains to be validated . This Ral - binding protein showed strongest GAP activity towards Cdc42 , and to a lesser degree with Rac , but not RhoA . Ral association and regulation of RalBP1 GAP activity also has yet to be demonstrated in vivo . Fourth , Ras interaction and activation of MEKK1 may explain how Ras mediates activation of JNK and p38 , although this pathway would not be expected to involve a Rho family protein . Finally , while PI3K has been shown to be a candidate e(cid:128)ector of Ras by interacting with Ras in a GTP - dependent manner , it is also thought to be required for activation of Rac proteins ( Hu et al . , 1995 ) . Furthermore , constitutive activated mutants of PI3K activate JNK ( Klippel et al . , 1996 ) , although a second study did not see this activation ( Marte et al . , 1997 ) . Despite these ﬁve possibilities , the exact mechanism by which signals from activated Ras proteins are transmitted to cause activation of Rho family of proteins still remains to be characterized . A direct demonstration that speciﬁc Rho family proteins are constitutively activated in Ras - transformed cells also remains to be shown . Finally , Marshall and colleagues showed recently that Rho signaling antagonized Ras - induced increases in p21 / Waf1 / Cip1 levels ( Olson et al . , 1998 ) . This suggests that RhoA does not promote a Ras - mediated signaling event , but instead , negatively modulates a Ras - mediated signaling function . G protein - coupled receptor transformation and Rho family proteins In addition to the involvement of Rho family proteins in Ras and Db1 family protein transformation , speciﬁc Rho family proteins also contribute to the transform - ing actions of other oncogene proteins . For example , a requirement for Rho family protein function has been determined for viral Abl ( Renshaw et al . , 1996 ) . Dominant negative Rac1 ( 17N ) was shown to block v - Abl activation of JNK and cause partial reversion of transformation of NIH3T3 cells ( P - 3T3 subclone ) . Serum - independent growth , but not morphologic transformation or anchorage - independent growth were inhibited . Polyoma virus middle T oncoprotein focus - formation on F111 ﬁbroblasts was inhibited completely by co - expression of dominant negative Rac1 ( 17N ) or Cdc42 ) ( 17N ) ( Urich et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , it will not be surprising if Rho family proteins will be required for the transforming activity of other oncoproteins . In addition to mediating a spectrum of normal physiological responses that include neurotransmission , metabolism , growth and di(cid:128)erentiation ( van Biesen et al . , 1996 ) , there is also emerging and growing evidence for the involvement of aberrant GPCR function in cellular transformation and oncogenesis ( Dhanasekar - an et al . , 1995 ) . As described above , Rho family proteins are components of a number of GPCR receptor signaling pathways . Therefore , it is not surprising that Rho family proteins have been implicated as essential mediators of transformation by some heterotrimeric G proteins ( G 12 and G 13 ) and G protein - coupled receptors ( Mas and XGR ) . The following section summarizes the importance of Rho family proteins in their transforming actions . A number of G protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ; also serpentine receptors , SRs ) have been identiﬁed as oncogenes in ﬁbroblast transformation assays . A determination that the mas oncogene , detected in an NIH3T3 transfection / nude mouse tumorigenicity assay , encoded a novel G protein coupled receptor provided the ﬁrst indication that G protein - mediated signaling pathways could promote cellular transformation ( Young et al . , 1988 ) . Subsequently , other G protein - coupled receptors have been identiﬁed as having transforming properties and include the M 1 - , M 2 - and M 3 - muscarinic acetylcholine receptors ( Gutkind et al . , 1991 ) , the 5HT1b serotonin receptor ( Julius et al . , 1989 ) , and the a 1b - adrenergic receptor ( Allen et al . , 1991 ) . More recently , the thrombin receptor ( White - head et al . , 1995 ) and the XGR novel G protein - coupled receptor ( R Kay , unpublished observation ) were also added to this list by virtue of their detection as transforming proteins in cDNA library screens for transforming proteins in NIH3T3 transformation assays . We recently found that Mas causes transforma - tion by activation of Rac ( Zohn et al . , 1997 ) , whereas XGR causes transformation by activation of Rho ( Zohn et al . , in preparation ) , and it is likely that the transforming activity of other GPCRs will also involve speciﬁc Rho family proteins . What G proteins mediate the transforming actions of these GPCRs ? At present , this is not known . However , observations that constitutively activated mutants of a number of G protein a subunits can cause transformation of rodent ﬁbroblasts suggests Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1426 candidates for this role . In particular , constitutively activated mutants of G a 12 and the related G a 13 have exhibited the strongest transforming potential and can cause tumorigenic transformation of rodent ﬁbroblasts ( Xu et al . , 1993 ; Vara Prasad et al . , 1994 ; Chan et al . , 1993 ; Jiang et al . , 1993 ; Voyno - Yasenetskaya et al . , 1994 ) . Similarly , G a q has been shown to transform NIH3T3 cells ( Kalinec et al . , 1992 ; De Vivo et al . , 1992 ) . However , G a q can also be cytotoxic ( Kalinec et al . , 1992 ; Wu et al . , 1992 ) , and induces apoptosis ( Althoefer et al . , 1997 ) . Since the signaling and transforming activity of G a 12 and G a 13 have been shown to involve Rac or Rho function , they represent logical connectors between transforming GPCRs and Rho family proteins . For example , G a 12 transforming activity was shown to be inhibited by dominant negative RhoA and Rac1 , but not Cdc42 ( Tolkacheva et al . , 1997 ) . Microinjection analyses of activated G a 12 and G a 13 in Swiss 3T3 cells caused the induction of stress ﬁbers ( Buhl et al . , 1995 ; Hooley et al . , 1996 ) and both have been shown to activate JNK ( Prasad et al . , 1995 ; Collins et al . , 1996 ) . Recently , the demonstration that G a 13 can interaction with and activate the Lsc / p115 RhoGEF Dbl family protein , a Rho GEF , deﬁnes at least one possible link between GPCRs and Rho ( Hart et al . , 1998 ) . In summary , the transforming actions of diverse oncoproteins , ranging from Ras to G protein - coupled receptors , require the function of speciﬁc Rho family proteins . Thus , it is likely that speciﬁc Rho family proteins will play key supportive roles in human carcinogenesis . Whether mutational activation , or abberant overexpression , of speciﬁc Rho family proteins alone occur in human cancers will be an important goal of future studies . Rho family proteins mediate their actions through interaction with multiple e(cid:128)ectors Clearly , Rho family protein - mediated changes in actin cytoskeletal organization , gene expression and regula - tin of cell cycle progression are all likely to contribute to the aberrant growth phenotype of Ras - transformed cells . However , what aspects of their function , mediated by which e(cid:128)ectors , contribute to Ras transformation are presently not understood . One approach for addressing this question has been to determine what promotes the transforming activity of speciﬁc Rho family proteins . This process is compli - cated by the multitude of functions attributed to each Rho family protein and the fact that , like Ras , each mediates its actions through a plethora of e(cid:128)ector targets . As with Ras , it is suspected that no one speciﬁc e(cid:128)ector will be important for the growth - promoting actions of a speciﬁc Rho family protein . The roster of candidate e(cid:128)ectors for Rac1 , RhoA and Cdc42 is extensive and continues to expand . Whereas the discovery of binding partners has been rapid , progress in deﬁning their contributions to Rho family protein function has been very limited . In the following section , we provide a brief overview of Rho family binding proteins and possible functions . We also summarize observations from recent studies using e(cid:128)ector domain mutants of Rac1 and Cdc42 that begin to deﬁne the precise function of speciﬁc Rho family GTPase e(cid:128)ectors . Finally , we conclude with a discussion of how a spectrum of structurally and functionally diverse proteins all share the common property of serving as e(cid:128)ectors of a particular Rho family protein . We have categorized Rho family protein binding partners into two general groups based on their binding speciﬁcities : ( 1 ) those that bind Rac and / or Cdc42 , but not Rho and ( 2 ) those that bind Rho . However , exceptions exist and include proteins that bind Rho and Rac / Cdc42 . It should be emphasized that many of these analyses have been limited to the analyses of interaction with Rac1 , RhoA or Cdc42 . Therefore , possible e(cid:128)ector interactions with other Rho family members may complicate these simple classiﬁcations . Many of the binding analyses have been performed in vitro or by using yeast two - hybrid binding analyses . Thus , whether they represent physiologically - relevant interactions remain to be determined for many of these proteins . What properties are required to validate an e(cid:128)ector ? First , the ability of a particular small GTPase to bind to an isolated domain in vitro may be misleading . Therefore , can interaction with the full length protein needs to be established in vivo ? Second , does association lead to regulation , positive or negative , of e(cid:128)ector function ? Third , does overexpres - sion of e(cid:128)ector function mimic any aspect of the function of its corresponding GTPase provides ? A plethora of candidate e(cid:128)ectors of Rac and Cdc42 Unlike the situation with candidate e(cid:128)ectors of Ras , at least three clear consensus binding sequences for Rho family binding proteins have been identiﬁed for at least some of these proteins . Hall and colleagues have described a minimal region of 16 amino acids required for binding of Cdc42 and / or Rac , designated the C dc42 / R ac I nteractive B inding ( CRIB ) motif ( Burbelo et al . , 1995 ) ( Figure 8a ) . Using this motif in a search of the GenBank data base , they identiﬁed more than 25 proteins from a wide variety of eukaryotic species that contain the CRIB motif . This motif is found in known Cdc42 / Rac - binding proteins , such as the three p21 ( Cdc42 / Rac ) activated kinase ( PAKs ) isoforms and the two ACK nonreceptor tyrosine kinases . Other mam - malian CRIB motif - containing proteins include WASP , several mixed lineage kinases ( MLK2 , MLK3 ) , and an uncharacterized human protein MSE55 . Further analyses demonstrated that all showed GTP - depen - dent interaction with Cdc42 and / or Rac1 . Therefore , the CRIB motif may deﬁne a GTP - dependent interaction site found in a subset of Rac and / or Cdc42 e(cid:128)ector molecules . Generally , Rac and Cdc42 share a number of common binding partners which do not bind RhoA , which may be related to the higher sequence homology between Rac and Cdc42 compared to RhoA . However , some Rac - speciﬁc - ( e . g . , p67 phox and POR - 1 ) and some Rac / Cdc42 - binding proteins have been identiﬁed that lack the CRIB motif ( e . g . , pp70 S6 kinase , the p85 subunit of PI3K , IQGAPs ) . Clearly , Rac - binding motifs other than the CRIB motif will be found . Among the Rac / Cdc42 - binding proteins that have been identiﬁed , the three mammalian PAK serine / threonine kinase isoforms ( rat a - PAK / human hPAK - 1 , rat p65 b - PAK / mouse mPAK3 and p62 g - PAK / human Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1427 h - PAK2 ) have attracted the most interest ( Manser et al . , 1994 , 1995 ; Teo et al . , 1995 ; Bagrodia et al . , 1995b ; Martin et al . , 1995 ) . By virtue of their striking homology with the S . cerevisiae protein Ste20 , which is implicated in G protein - associated pheromone signaling to a MAPK cascade , PAKs have been considered likely candidates for e(cid:128)ectors that promote Rac / Cdc42 activation of the JNK MAPK cascade ( Simon et al . , 1995 ; Zhao et al . , 1995 ) . Support for this possibility was provided by experiments using Xenopus oocyte extracts , where Ste20 , a related protein from S . pombe ( Shk1 ) and PAK were shown to activate JNK / SAPK ( Polverino et al . , 1995 ) . Additionally , the intrinsic kinase activity of PAKs was activated by Rac / Cdc42 - binding ( Manser et al . , 1994 ) , and over - expression or constitutive activation of PAK showed enhanced activation of JNK or p38 ( Zhang et al . , 1995 ; Frost et al . , 1996 ) . Furthermore , dominant negative mutants of PAK inhibited Rac1 activation of JNK / p38 ( Zhang et al . , 1995 ) or of the c - Jun - responsive element in the collagenase promoter ( Osada et al . , 1997 ) . However , other evidence argues that PAKs are not e(cid:128)ectors for Rac / Cdc42 activation of JNK . First , Westwick et al . , recently identiﬁed Rac e(cid:128)ector domain mutants that no longer bound to , or activated , PAK , yet they retained the ability to activate JNK and p38 ( Westwick et al . , 1997 ) . This demonstrated that PAK was not required for Rac activation , of JNK . Second , Gutkind and colleagues suggested that MLK3 linked Rac / Cdc42 to JNK ( Teramoto et al . , 1996a ) . MLK3 ( also known as PTK1 or SPRK ) is a member of a family of related kinases ( including MLK1 , MLK2 / MST , and MUK / DLK / ZPK ) of unknown function . MLK3 RNA is expressed in most tissues and cell lines ( Ezoe et al . , 1994 ; Ing et al . , 1994 ) . These investigators found that MLK3 associated with activated Rac1 and Cdc42 , but not RhoA , in vivo , and co - expression of MLK3 ( and not PAK ) caused a synergistic enhance - ment of Rac1 and Cdc42 activation of JNK ( Teramoto et al . , 1996a ) . Overexpression of MLK3 ( or MLK2 ) alone caused activation of JNK , but not p38 or ERK ( Tibbles et al . , 1996 ; Hirai S - I et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , MLK2 / 3 , rather than PAKs , may serve as Rac / Cdc42 e(cid:128)ectors that lead to activation of JNK . However , Hall and colleagues described evidence that MLK2 / MLK3 were not e(cid:128)ectors for Rac activation of JNK ( Nagata et al . , 1998 ) . MEKK1 and MEKK4 represent additional candi - dates for the MAPKKK that links Rac / Cdc42 with JNK ( Gerwins et al . , 1997 ; Fanger et al . , 1997 ) . MEKK1 was found to interact with Rac and Cdc42 , but not RhoA , in a GTP - dependent fashion in vitro . In contrast , MEKK4 associated with both GDP - and GTP - bound Rac1 and Cdc42 in vitro . MEKK4 , but not MEKK1 , contains a modiﬁed CRIB motif . Kinase - inactive mutants of MEKK1 and MEKK4 both blocked Cdc42 and Rac activation of JNK , and both were activators of JNK , but not p38 , in COS cells . In contrast , a second study evaluating a human homolog of MEKK4 suggested that it was not a mediator of Rac or Cdc42 activation of JNK and furthermore , that it was an activator of primarily p38 , rather than JNK ( Takekawa et al . , 1997 ) . The basis for these discrepancies is presently not clear . Rac e(cid:128)ector domain mutant studies also eliminated PAK as the e(cid:128)ector for directing Rac activation of SRF or for transformation of NIH3T3 cells ( Westwick et al . , 1997a ) and well as for induction of lamellipodia ( Lamarche et al . , 1996 ; Joneson et al . , 1996a ; Westwick et al . , 1997 ) . Instead , a correlation was found that implicated PAK as a possible e(cid:128)ector for mediating Rac stimulation of transcription from the cyclin D 1 promoter ( Westwick et al . , 1997 ) . However , Lamarche et al . ( 1996 ) found that PAK was dispensable for Rac - mediated progression through G1 . Thus , Rac upregu - lation of cyclin D 1 alone may not be su(cid:129)cient for its regulation of cell cycle progression . Furthermore , the Rac - induced pathways leading to the regulation of lamellipodia , activation of JNK , SRF and cyclin D 1 appear to be mediated by distinct e(cid:128)ectors ( Westwick et al . , 1997 ) . Which , if any , of the known Rac functions are important for Rac transformation , and hence , Ras transformation , is presently unresolved . Finally , RhoB activation of SRE was retained in a nonprenylated mutant that was impaired in transform - ing activity , indicating that SRE activation alone is not su(cid:129)cient for transformation ( Lebowitz et al . , 1997 ) . E(cid:128)ector mutants of Rac and Cdc42 have also uncoupled JNK activation from regulation of cytoske - letal changes and G1 cell cycle progression . Y40C mutants of Rac and Cdc42 showed impaired binding to PAK and other CRIB motif - containing proteins ( e . g . , WASP ) , but Rac1 ( 40C ) did retain interaction with the non - CRIB motif - containing proteins p67 PHOX or p160 ROCK . However , since the Y40C mutants of Rac1 and Cdc42 retained wild type abilities to induce actin reorganization , CRIB motif - containing e(cid:128)ectors are not likely to be mediators of actin reorganization nor are they involved in linking Cdc42 to Rac or Rac to Rho . Activated PAK can cause changes in actin a Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1428 organization , but in a way distinct from those caused by Rac1 or Cdc42 ( Manser et al . , 1997 ; Sells et al . , 1997 ) . Furthermore , since Y40C mutants of both Rac and Cdc42 also retained the ability to stimulate DNA synthesis , CRIB motif - containing e(cid:128)ectors may not be involved in regulating Rac - or Cdc42 - induced G1 progression . Finally , since a F37A mutant of Rac1 ( 61L ) showed impaired p160 ROCK binding , and lost the ability to stimulate lamellipodia and DNA synthesis , it supports a role for ROCK as an b c Figure 8 Consensus binding sequences deﬁne di(cid:128)erent classes of Rac / Cdc42 and Rho binding proteins . ( a ) The C dc42 / R ac I nteractive B inding ( CRIB ) motif ( Burbelo et al . , 1995 ) is shared by some , but not all , Rac and / or CDC42 - binding proteins . CRIB sequences of MEKK4 ( Gerwins et al . , 1997 ) and Ack - 2 ( Yang and Cerione , 1997 ) and those previously reported by Burbelo et al . ( 1995 ) were aligned using ClustalW and shaded using Boxshade 3 . 2 ( Thompson et al . , 1994 ) . Residues that are conserved in greater than 50 % of sequences at a given sequence position are colored blue , while residues that are similar are colored yellow . R , rat ; M , mouse ; H , human ; Sc , S . cerevisiae , Sp , S . pombe ; C , C . elegans ; B , bovine ; D , Drosophila ; As , Ascaris . The domain structure of several known RhoA - binding proteins can be grouped into two distinct classes that share sequence similarity in their minimal Rho binding sequences . ( b ) The class I Rho e(cid:128)ector binding motif ( REM - 1 ) is shared by the PKN / PRK1 and PRK2 serine / threonine kinases and a novel protein that lack kinase domains ( Rhophilin ) . Shown for PKN / PRK2 are : three predicted homologous coiled - coil ( CC ) domains referred to as homologous regions 1a , 1b and 1c ( HR1a , HR1b , HR1c ) , ( 2 ) a V o / HR2 domain that shows homology between PKN and PRK2 and highly similar to sequences surrounding the NH 2 - terminal V o and pseudosubstrate sites of PCK e and PKC Z and ( 3 ) the COOH - terminal kinase domain . The Rho binding sequence ( shaded region ) is located in the NH 2 - terminal CC domain of PKN / PRK2 and Rhophilin . The multiple sequence alignment of class I REM shows a highly conserved sequence followed by a heptad repeat and are indicated by a solid square ( & ) . The ﬁrst position of the heptad repeat is not predicted to be present in Rhophilin . Strictly conserved residues are indicated with an asterisk ( * ) and positions of very high amino acid similarity are indicated by a period ( . ) ; ( c ) Proteins containing the class II REM - 2 motif include Rho - kinase , p160 ROCK and ROK a / b . These related kinases possess an NH 2 - terminal kinase domain , followed by a predicted large central coiled - coil ( CC ) domain and a pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain that encompasses a cysteine - rich domain ( CRD ) . The Rho binding sequence ( shaded box ) is located COOH - terminus of the central CC domain . The multiple sequence alignment of Rem - 2 motifs contain a region of strict sequence conservation and are indicated by an asterisk ( * ) . Citron shows a similar domain structure to Rho - kinase , p160 ROCK and ROK a / b . The NH 2 - terminal half of the protein contains a large ( * 875 residues ) predicted coiled - coil ( CC ) domain . Like the other class II proteins , the CC domain is followed by CRD and PH domains . Citron also contains a proline - rich site ( PR ) that is a putative SH3 domain binding motif . The putative Rho - binding sequence ( shaded box ; ) is found in the extreme COOH - terminus of the CC domain . Apart from similarities in domain structure , no strong sequence homology was observed between the Citron and the Rem - 1 or Rem - 2 motif - containing proteins Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1429 e(cid:128)ector for these two Rac functions . Further mutagen - esis of Rac and Cdc42 may identify mutants that will deﬁne the contribution of other e(cid:128)ectors to the function of Rac and Cdc42 . A role for PAK in Ras and Rac transformation has been suggested by two di(cid:128)erent groups . First , Field and colleagues showed that kinase - deﬁcient mutants of PAK could block oncogenic Ras transformation ( Tang et al . , 1997 ) . However , since mutation of the CRIB motif did not abolish this inhibition of Ras transforma - tion . The inhibition was not likely to be due to formation of nonproductive complexes with Rac or Cdc42 . Interestingly , this antagonism of Ras was seen in Rat1 , but not NIH3T3 cells . A second study showed that expression of the CRIB motif - containing fragment of PAK could reverse both Ras and Rac1 transforming activity in NIH3T3 cells ( Osada et al . , 1997 ) . Since this mutant PAK also blocked Ras and Rac activation of a c - Jun - responsive promoter element ( TRE ) , it was proposed that titration of Rac and / or Cdc42 was responsible for inhibition of Ras transformation . The 70 kDa S6 kinase ( p70 S6K ) also appears to be an important e(cid:128)ector of Rac and Cdc42 function . p70 S6K is activated by diverse mitogenic stimuli , including growth factors , cytokines and activated oncogenes ( Chou and Blenis , 1995 ) . Present evidence supports an important role for p70 S6K in the progression of cells from the G 1 to S phase of the cell cycle . Chou and Blenis ( 1996 ) showed that catalytically inactive p70 S6K interacted with GTP - complexed Rac1 and Cdc42 , but not RhoA , in vitro ( Chou and Blenis , 1996 ) . Constitutively activated mutants of Rac1 and Cdc42 , but not RhoA , stimulated p70 S6K activity in vivo . E(cid:128)ector domain mutations abolished this activity . Dominant negative Cdc42 ( 17N ) or Rac1 ( 17N ) blocked EGF - and PDGF - induced activation of pp70 S6K . Similar to the Ras : Raf interaction , Cdc42 association with p70 S6K in vitro alone did not activate its kinase activity . Thus , Cdc42 / Rac interaction with p70 S6K must facilitate subsequent events that lead to full kinase activation in vivo . It is presently not known what aspect of Rac function is mediated by p70 S6K . Rac1 and Cdc42 have been shown to complex the p85 subunit of PI3K in vitro and to co - precipitate with PI3K activity in vitro and in vivo ( Zheng et al . , 1994a ; Tolias et al . , 1995 ) . No CRIB motif is present in the p85 subunit . This interaction was found to be GTP - dependent and a Cdc42 ( 35A ) e(cid:128)ector domain mutant showed impaired p85 binding ( Zheng et al . , 1994a ) . Cdc42 stimulated the activity of immunoprecipitated PI3K 2 – 4 - fold . Thus , although the sequence homology of p85 with other Rho GAPs ( e . g . , BCR , N - chimaerin and p190 Rho GAP ) suggested that it acted as a negative regulator of Rho function , no GAP function has been demonstrated for p85 . Instead , this GAP - related domain may serve to promote PI3K association with Rac / Cdc42 as an e(cid:128)ector in regulating reorganiza - tion of the actin cytoskeleton ( Zheng et al . , 1994a ) . Interestingly , another Rho GAP ( N - chimaerin ) has also been shown to exhibit properties of a Rac / Cdc42 e(cid:128)ector that mediates actin cytoskeletal events ( Kozma et al . , 1996 ) . PI3K has also been implicated as an e(cid:128)ector of Ras . However , it is the p110 catalytic subunit that complexes with Ras - GTP ( Rodriguez - Viciana et al . , 1994 , 1996 ) . PI3K functions as a lipid kinase and its phosphorylated phosphoinositides can interact and regulate a wide variety of protein targets , including a number of proteins that regulate actin assembly ( reviewed in Toker and Cantley , 1997 ) . Since the oncogene responsible for the transforming activity of the avian sarcoma virus 16 in chicken embryo ﬁbroblasts encodes the p100 catalytic subunit chicken PI3K ( Chang et al . , 1997 ) , upregulation of PI3K activity may contribute to Ras and Rac growth transformation . Two Rac - binding proteins have been implicated in mediating Rac regulation of the actin cytoskeletal organization . In one study , Van Aelst and colleagues used yeast two - hybrid screening and identiﬁed a partner of Rac1 ( POR1 ) protein that interacted with GTP - complexed Rac1 , but not Cdc42 , RhoA or H - Ras ( Van Aelst et al . , 1996 ) . The 34 kDa POR1 protein showed no signiﬁcant sequence identity with any known proteins and no conserved motifs besides the presence of a putative leucine zipper motif . The Rac1 ( 35A ) e(cid:128)ector domain mutant that is impaired in membrane ru(cid:130)ing also showed impaired binding to POR1 . Truncated POR1 inhibited Rac1 ( 12V ) - induced membrane ru(cid:130)ing , whereas full length POR1 acted to synergistically enhance activated H - Ras ( 12V ) mem - brane ru(cid:130)ing activity . However , no synergistic interaction was seen between Rac1 and POR1 . Finally , POR1 may also serve as an e(cid:128)ector for another small GTPase ARF6 and mediate related changes in actin cytoskeletal organization in CHO cells ( D’Souza - Schorey et al . , 1997 ) . ARF6 also regulates endocytic tra(cid:129)cking . Thus , together with RhoD , it provides further functional links between actin cytoskeleton reorganization and membrane tra(cid:129)cking . In another study , yeast two - hybrid library screening with activated RhoA ( 63L ) isolated a previously identiﬁed RhoA - binding protein , p160 ROCK ( Ishizaki et al . , 1996 ) , that also interacts with activated forms of Rac1 and Cdc42 , but not R - Ras ( Lamarche et al . , 1996 ) . Since the Rac1 ( 37A ) e(cid:128)ector domain mutant no longer interacted with ROCK and failed to induce lamellipodia or G 1 progression , it suggested that ROCK may mediate these two activities of Rac1 . The Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) protein ( WASP ) contains the CRIB motif and was identiﬁed as a Cdc42 - binding protein that bound weakly to Rac1 , but not RhoA ( Symons et al . , 1996 ; Aspenstro¨m et al . , 1996 ; Kolluri et al . , 1996 ) . The WASP gene is mutated in WAS patients . These WAS - a(cid:128)ected patients possess an X - linked recessive disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia , which is characterized by recurrent infections due to T and B cell function and eczema . Abnormalities seen in T and B cells suggested defects in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Kirchhausen and Rosen , 1996 ) . WASP overexpression caused the formation of WASP clusters that were highly enriched in polymerized actin in porcine aortic endothelial cells and clustering was inhibited by dominant negative Cdc42 ( 17N ) , but not Rac1 ( 17N ) ( Symons et al . , 1996 ) . Additionally , co - expression of WASP inhibited Cdc42 ( 12V ) and Rac1 ( 12V ) induced changes in actin cytoskeleton organization . Furthermore , a region of homology between WASP and other proteins ( VASP and Mena ) that are involved in the organization of actin cytoskeleton and control of micro ﬁlament dynamics has been identiﬁed ( Gertler et al . , 1996 ) . Interestingly , Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1430 this domain in VASP and Mena has been shown to interact directly with components of focal adhesions . These results implicate WASP as an e(cid:128)ector that mediates the activity of Cdc42 / Rac in F - actin poly - merization ( Symons et al . , 1996 ) and reduced WASP expression may contribute to the cytoskeletal abnorm - alities seen in WAS a(cid:128)ected males ( Kolluri et al . , 1996 ) . Genetic evidence supporting this link comes from analyses of the yeast counterpart of WASP , designated Bee1p . Bee1p is a component of the cortical actin cytoskeleton and plays an essential role in the organization of actin ﬁlaments ( Li , 1997 ) . Bee1 null cells possess altered actin organization and are defective in budding and cytokinesis . However , since Bee1 lacks a CRIB motif , its functions may be distinct from those of human WASP . Finally , since a Cdc42 e(cid:128)ector mutant that lacked WASP binding still stimulated lamellipodia formation , WASP is clearly not the e(cid:128)ector to mediate this Cdc42 e(cid:128)ect ( Lamarche et al . , 1996 ) . Interestingly , WASP is also recognized by the Nck adaptor protein , via its Src homology 3 domains ( Rivero - Lezcano et al . , 1995 ; Quilliam et al . , 1996 ) , and Nck also complexes with other Rho family binding proteins ( PAK1 , PAK3 and PRK2 ) ( Bagrodia et al . , 1995b ; Quilliam et al . , 1996 ; Bokoch et al . , 1996 ; Galisteo et al . , 1996 ) . Nck associates with activated receptor tyrosine kinases ( Li et al . , 1992 ; Lee et al . , 1993 ) . Therefore , it may serve as an adaptor that links extracellular stimuli to Rho family proteins . IQGAP1 , and the closely - related IQGAP2 ( 62 % identity ) , have been shown to bind Rac1 and Cdc42 , but not RhoA ( Brill et al . , 1996 ; Kuroda et al . , 1996 ) . No CRIB motif is present in these proteins . IQGAP was identiﬁed originally as a human protein that harbored potential calmodulin binding IQ motifs upstream of a sequence related to the catalytic domain of Ras GAPs ( Weissbach et al . , 1994 ) , and was isolated independently by a(cid:129)nity chromatography analyses for GTP - dependent Cdc42 - binding proteins ( Kuroda et al . , 1996 ) . Whereas IQGAP1 RNA was found highly expressed in lung , kidney and placenta , IQGAP2 was observed to be expressed predominantly in the liver ( Brill et al . , 1996 ) . Although both proteins show strong homology with the Ras GAP of S . pombe , no stimulation of Ras , Rac1 or Cdc42 GTPase activity has been detected ( Brill et al . , 1996 ; Kuroda et al . , 1996 ) . Since IQGAPs harbor a potential actin binding domain , and were found to be accumulated at insulin - or Rac1 - induced membrane ru(cid:130)ing areas , it was postulated that IQGAPs may serve as e(cid:128)ectors that mediate the actin cytoskeletal events of Cdc42 and Rac1 ( Kuroda et al . , 1996 ) . Consistent with this possibility , it was found that Cdc42 and IQGAP1 formed a stable complex in vivo along with F - actin ( Erickson et al . , 1997 ) . EGF stimulation also promoted formation of Cdc42 : IQGAP1 complexes in COS cells , suggesting that growth factor stimulation may promote an IQGAP1 - mediated link between Cdc42 and the actin cytoskeleton . Finally , additional modes of IQGAP regulation are suggested by evidence that calmodulin and calcium caused disruption of Cdc42 : IQGAP1 interaction in vitro ( Joyal et al . , 1997 ) . Other candidate e(cid:128)ectors of Rac include ROK a , a previously described RhoA - binding protein ( Leung et al . , 1996b ) , POR - 2 , a protein of unknown function ( Van Aelst et al . , 1996 ) , and tubulin ( Best et al . , 1996 ) . Citron is a protein of unknown function that was identiﬁed as a RhoC - binding protein in a yeast two - hybrid library screen , and found to bind to Rac1 , but not Cdc42 , in vitro ( Madaule et al . , 1995 ) . The interaction of Citron with two functionally distinct small GTPases does not necessarily indicate a common function for Citron . It is possible that interaction with Rac and Rho may cause distinct subcellular locations of Citron , or form distinct , signaling complexes , to cause distinct downstream events . Narumiya and colleagues have recently described a splice variant of Citron that contains an N - terminal Ser / Thr protein kinase domain that has * 50 % sequence identity to the kinase domains of ROCK , ROK and MDK that are discussed below ( Madaule et al . , 1998 ) . Designated Citron - K , this widely expressed form may mediate Rho regulation of cytokinesis . Messenger RNA encoding the previously discovered Citron variant ( designated Citron - N ) was detected only in brain tissue . The 120 kDa ACK tyrosine kinase ( ACK - 1 ) speciﬁcally interacts with Cdc42 and not Rac or RhoA . In addition to its kinase domain , ACK also has an SH3 domain , a CRIB motif , and a proline - rich C - terminus which may represent putative SH3 domain binding sites . To date , little is known regarding the role of ACK - 1 as a Cdc42 e(cid:128)ector . Recently , a 96 kDa ACK - 2 nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that shares the same structural features with ACK and exhibits speciﬁc interaction with GTP - bound Cdc42 was identiﬁed ( Yang and Cerione , 1997 ) . The reduced size of ACK - 2 is due primarily to the absence of sequences related to those present in the N - and C - terminal regions of ACK - 1 . ACK - 2 transcripts were detected in a wide variety of human tissues , with highest levels seen in brain and skeletal muscle tissue . Co - expression of Cdc42 ( 61L ) and ACK - 2 in COS cells caused increased ACK - 2 autophosphorylation . Furthermore , the copre - cipitation of the two proteins supports that possibility that ACK - 2 is a physiologically relevant e(cid:128)ector for Cdc42 . ACK - 2 autophosphorylation was stimulated by attachment as well as by EGF or bradykinin stimulation . Thus , ACK - 2 may mediate the actions of Cdc42 in response to diverse extracellular stimuli . The yeast two - hybrid screening of an Epstein – Barr virus - transformed B - cell library that identiﬁed WASP also identiﬁed a second Cdc42 - binding protein ( Aspenstro¨m , 1997 ) . Designated CIP4 , this 545 amino acid protein lacks a CRIB motif and shows sequence homology with a number of proteins that serve as regulators of actin organization ( e . g . , RhoGAP ) . Binding to Cdc42 was GTP - dependent , and no binding was seen to Rac1 - GTP . Overexpression of CIP4 caused a reduction in stress ﬁber formation and co - expression of Cdc42 ( 61L ) caused a clustering of CIP4 . Thus , CIP4 may interact with Cdc42 in vivo to regulate actin organization although it does not appear to mediate Cdc42 induction of ﬁlopodia . In summary , there exists multiple candidate e(cid:128)ectors of Rac and / or Cdc42 function and more are likely to be identiﬁed . The existence of Rac / Cdc42 - binding proteins that lack the CRIB motif indicates that at least two , if not more , Rac - and / or Cdc42 - binding motifs will be identiﬁed . Currently , it is not clear , which , if any , of these Rac - binding proteins are physiologically relevant e(cid:128)ectors . Furthermore , which e(cid:128)ectors mediate Rac / Cdc42 regulation of actin Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1431 organization , gene expression and regulation of cell proliferation and invasion remain to be characterized . With regards to transformation , our recent evaluation of Rac e(cid:128)ector domain mutants failed to implicate any known Rac1 function with transforming potential ( Westwick et al . , 1997a ) . One interpretation is that multiple pathways promote Rac growth regulation and that no one pathway alone is necessary . Alternatively , it suggests that some as yet undiscovered Rac function is responsible for Rac - mediated transformation . Regardless of which is the correct scenario , it remains to be deﬁned what Rac function ( s ) is required to promote oncogenic Ras transformation . Finally , despite their signiﬁcant number of shared e(cid:128)ectors , it is clear that Rac1 and Cdc42 are functionally distinct proteins . For example , human Cdc42 , but not Rac1 or Rac2 , can restore a Cdc42Sc defect in S . cerevisiae ( Shinjo et al . , 1990 ) . Furthermore , as described above , the transforming functions of Rac1 and Cdc42 are quite distinct . A plethora of candidate e(cid:128)ectors of Rho A growing number of Rho - binding proteins have also been identiﬁed . Two distinct Rho - binding sequence motifs have also been described for a subset of Rho - binding proteins ( Reid et al . , 1996 ; Fujisawa et al . , 1996 ) . Both Rho e(cid:128)ector binding motifs are distinct from the CRIB motif and are associated with proteins that contain predicted coiled - coil ( CC ) domains ( Cohen and Parry , 1994 ) . These CC domains may provide the basis for the multimerization of these proteins with Rho and other signaling molecules in a complex with Rho . Two closely related serine / threonine kinases that show strong sequence similarity to the kinase domain of PKCs ( PKN / PRK1 and PRK2 ) , and two novel proteins lacking kinase domains ( Rhotekin and Rhophilin ) , appear to share a distinct Rho e(cid:128)ector binding motif ( designated class I , REM - 1 ) ( Figure 8b ) . PRK1 and PRK2 ( 58 % amino acid identity ) were identiﬁed originally by a PCR - mediated approach to identify sequences that encoded novel PKC - related human proteins ( Palmer et al . , 1995 ) . The encoded 120 – 130 kDa proteins identiﬁed by this approach contain an NH 2 - terminal basic sequence encompassing GAXN ( a putative pseudosubstrate domain ) , a REM - 1 Rho - binding sequence , followed by amphipathic helix and leucine zipper domains , and a COOH - terminal kinase domain ( Figure 8b ) . Unlike PKC , neither are regulated by phorbol esters or calcium . Both PRK1 and PRK2 show broad tissue expression . The 71 kDa Rhophillin protein also contains an NH 2 - terminal Rem - 1 binding motif . However , it lacks a kinase domain or any other known catalytic sequences . Aside from the NH 2 - terminal Rem - 1 motif , two proline - rich motifs and putative SH3 - binding domains are present in the COOH - terminus . Thus , Rho - binding proteins with class I binding motifs also typically contain other putative protein - protein or protein - lipid binding motifs , suggesting that these e(cid:128)ectors may serve to promote targeting and / or multi - protein complex formation with Rho proteins . PRK1 was identiﬁed independently by a(cid:129)nity chromatography analysis for RhoA - binding proteins and designated protein kinase N ( PKN ) ( Watanabe et al . , 1996 ) . Interestingly , LPA resulted in a Rho - dependent activation of PKN / PRK1 supporting a role for this kinase in mediating Rho function . The observation that staurosporine , a potent inhibitor of PKC ( and possibly PKN / PRK1 ) , blocked formation of focal adhesions suggests that PKN may indeed mediate this action of Rho proteins . Additionally , PKN has been shown to interact with and phosphorylate the head - rod domain of neuroﬁlament proteins suggesting its role in the regulation of neuroﬁlament protein assembly ( Mo¨sch et al . , 1996 ) . Hence , PKN may be a potential mediator of the growth factor - induced stimulation of intermediate ﬁlaments . PRK2 was independently isolated by two groups searching for Nck - or RhoA - interacting proteins . First , Quilliam et al . ( 1996 ) isolated PRK2 using an expression library screen for proteins that bound to the SH3 domains of the Nck SH2 / SH3 adaptor protein ( Quilliam et al . , 1996 ) . It was also shown to bind RhoA , but not Rac1 or Cdc42 . In vitro and co - expression of PRK2 with activated RhoA caused synergistic enhance - ment of RhoA - dependent activation of SRF expression . Vincent and Settleman ( 1997 ) puriﬁed PRK2 ( and PKN ) by a(cid:129)nity chromatography with RhoA from rat liver extracts . However , they found that COS cell - expressed PRK2 interacted with GTP - bound Rac1 , but interacted with , and activated , both RhoA - GTP and RhoA - GDP . They also showed that a kinase - defective mutant of PRK2 caused a disruption in actin stress ﬁbers in NIH3T3 cells . Thus , they suggested that PRK2 may be a common e(cid:128)ector of both Rac and Rho . The reason for the di(cid:128)erences seen in these two studies is not known . Finally , PKN / PRK1 and PRK2 were also identiﬁed independently as liver protease - activated kinases 1 and 2 , respectively ( Yu et al . , 1997 ) . Rhophilin , and to a lesser degree Rhotekin , share NH 2 - terminal sequence homology with the PKN / PRK1 and PRK2 Rem - 1 motif . Rhotekin was identiﬁed by yeast two - hybrid screening for RhoC - binding proteins ( Reid et al . , 1996 ) . It also interacted with GTP - complexed RhoA and RhoB , but not Rac1 or Cdc42 . Rhophilin was isolated by yeast two - hybrid screening of a mouse embryo cDNA library for RhoA - binding proteins ( Watanabe et al . , 1996 ) . Rhophilin showed strong GTP - dependent interaction with RhoA , little with RhoC , and less with RhoB . It also shares a putative NH 2 - terminal CC with PKN / PRK1 and PRK2 . A family of novel serine / threonine kinases share a distinct , second Rho e(cid:128)ector binding motif ( designated class II / REM - 2 ) ( Figure 8c ) . ROK a / Rho - kinase ( Leung et al . , 1996b ) and p160 ROCK / ROK b / ROCK - II ( Leung et al . , 1996a ; Ishizaki et al . , 1996 ) share an NH 2 - terminal kinase domain that has strong sequence identity with the kinase domain of myotonic dystrophy kinase ( MDK ) ( Ishizaki et al . , 1996 ) , a central putative CC domain and a COOH - terminal PH domain ( Mayer et al . , 1993 ) that is split by a cysteine - rich , zinc - dependent folding domain . Interestingly , the Rho / Rac1 binding protein Citron ( Madaule et al . , 1995 ) contains a related NH 2 - terminal CC domain that includes the Rho - binding domain , and a related kinase domain ( Madaule et al . , 1998 ) . However , the Rho - binding sequence exhibits weaker sequence homology to the Rem - 2 motif present in these kinases . Hence , Citron may possess a Rho - binding element distinct from the Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1432 class II motif . Both Citron - K and Citron - N also contain a COOH - terminal cysteine - rich motif , a PH domain and a proline - rich , putative SH3 - binding motif . Thus , like other Ras and Rho family e(cid:128)ectors , Citron may also function as a sca(cid:128)olding protein for Rho . ROK a was identiﬁed in expression screening for RhoA - binding proteins serine / threonine kinase ( Leung et al . , 1996b ) . ROK a showed a cytoplasmic location and co - expression of RhoA ( 14V ) caused an increased association of ROK a with the pellet fraction , suggest - ing that RhoA promoted its translocation to mem - branes . Injection of DNA encoding full length ROK a caused the formation of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions in HeLa cells ( Leung et al . , 1996a ) . A closely related protein with 64 % overall identity to ROK a and 90 % identity to the ROK a kinase domain , was subsequently isolated ( ROK b ; also ROCK - II and p160 ROCK ) . In vitro binding analyses using puriﬁed recombinant proteins showed that both ROK a and ROK b bound RhoA , RhoB and RhoC , but not Rac1 or Cdc42 ( Leung et al . , 1996a ) , although subsequent yeast two - hybrid analysis also showed interaction with Rac1 ( Joneson et al . , 1996a ) and Cdc42 ( Lamarche et al . , 1996 ) . Narumiya and colleagues identiﬁed p160 ROCK ( a Rho - associated CC domain - containing protein kinase ) as a novel RhoA - binding protein serine / threonine kinase that showed 44 % identity with the kinase domain of MDK ( Ishizaki et al . , 1996 ) . RhoA was shown to associate with p160 ROCK in vivo and this association promoted weak enhancement of its autophosphorylat - ing activity . Finally , Kaibuchi and colleagues identiﬁed the p164 Rho - kinase by a(cid:129)nity chromatography analyses for RhoA - GTP binding proteins ( Matsui et al . , 1996 ) . Rho - kinase is likely a splice variant of ROK a , since they di(cid:128)er only at their NH 2 - termini , with Rho - kinase containing an additional nine amino acids . Since the kinase activities of these proteins showed only limited stimulation by association with RhoA in vitro , it is likely that RhoA binding may facilitate other events that lead to full kinase activation . Another RhoA - GTP binding protein , myosin light chain ( MLC ) phosphatase , together with Rho kinase , provides a mechanism for RhoA regulation of stress ﬁber formation ( Kimura et al . , 1996 ) . The myosin binding subunit ( MBS ) of MLC phosphatase was identiﬁed as a RhoA - binding protein by a(cid:129)nity chromatography analysis of bovine brain membrane extracts . RhoA binding and activation of Rho kinase stimulates Rho kinase phosphorylation of MBS . This results in the inactivation of myosin phosphatase activity , leading to activation of myosin through a net increase in MLC phosphorylation by other protein kinases . MLC phosphorylation has been shown to induce a conformational change in myosin , which increases its binding to actin ﬁlaments , causing ultimately the formation of stress ﬁbers ( Chrzanows - ka - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1996 ) . Rho - stimulated contraction of ﬁbroblasts was blocked by the MLC kinase inhibitor ( KT5926 ) , resulting in decreased MLC phosphorylation and loss of stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions . Additionally , Rho kinase can also phos - phorylate MLC at the same sites that are phosphory - lated by MLC kinase ( Amano et al . , 1996 ) . Finally , current evidence indicates that RhoA causes stress ﬁbers and focal adhesion through distinct pathways ( Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1996 ) . The COOH - terminal sequences of MBS that bind to RhoA share structural similarity ( polybasic region followed by leucine zipper - like motif ) with PKN / PRK1 . However no detectable Rem - 2 motif was observed ( Kimura et al . , 1996 ) . Another e(cid:128)ector that may link Rho with the actin cytoskeleton involves members of a formin - related family of proteins that include the S . cerevisiae Bni1p , the Drosophila Diaphanous and Cappuchino proteins , and the mammalian Bnip1 homolog p140mDia ( Castrillon and Wasserman , 1994 ; Emmons et al . , 1995 ; Peterson et al . , 1995 ; Marhoul and Adams , 1995 ) . Bni1p and the related Bnr1p regulate the e(cid:128)ects of Rho proteins on actin organization . p140mDia can interact with mammalian RhoA - GTP and proﬁlin . Furthermore , p140mDia , proﬁlin and RhoA are co - localized in a Rho - dependent structures such as membrane ru(cid:130)es in motile cells , cleavage furrows in mitotic cells , and phagocytic cups induced by ﬁbronectin ( Watanabe et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , p140mDia may mediate actin assembly via a proﬁlin - mediated mechanism . Since Rhotekin and Rhophillin lack known catalytic functions , essentially nothing has been described regarding their functions . At least three possible mechanisms for the function of these proteins can be envisioned . They may either be directly involved in mediating some aspect of Rho function that does not require a catalytic function by promoting their translocation to various components of cytoskeleton , or they may somehow negatively regulate the function of Rho proteins by forming an inactive complex and preventing the accessibility to other downstream e(cid:128)ectors . Another possible function is that they may act as sca(cid:128)olding proteins that regulate the coordinate activities of Rho proteins and their downstream e(cid:128)ectors in a multimeric structure . Observations that stimulation by G protein - coupled receptor agonists that activate Rho ( LPA and thrombin ) , or C3 treatment to block Rho function , of undi(cid:128)erentiated neoronal cells ( N1E - 115 , NG108 - 15 and PC12 cells ) have implicated Rho proteins in causing growth cone collapse , retraction of developing neurites , and transient rounding of the cell body ( Mackay et al . , 1995 ; Luo et al . , 1996 ) . One recently identiﬁed RhoA - binding protein , designated p116 RIP , showed the same activity as C3 or dominant negative RhoA when overexpressed in N1E - 115 cells . Although p116 RIP showed preferential binding to RhoA - GTP in yeast two - hybrid binding analyses , in vitro binding analyses showed equivalent binding to either GDP - or GTP - bound GST - RhoA . p116 RIP is a novel protein that contains a PH domain , two putative SH3 domain - binding sites and a CC region . It was identiﬁed in a yeast two - hybrid screen for RhoA - binding proteins , together with a novel RhoGDI ( RIP1 - RhoGDI2 ) , a novel Db1 family protein ( RhoGEF ) , and another RhoA - GTP binding protein ( RIP4 ) ( Gebbink et al . , 1997 ) . Structural requirements for Rho family protein : e(cid:128)ector interactions The identiﬁcation of multiple binding proteins strongly suggests that Rho family proteins utilize multiple Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1433 e(cid:128)ector - mediated pathways to cause its diverse array of cellular e(cid:128)ects . Like Ras , the regions of Rho family proteins important for e(cid:128)ector interaction also appear to be complex . The regions analogous to the core Ras e(cid:128)ector sequence ( Ras residues 32 – 40 ) , and ﬂanking residues are clearly important for all Rho family protein interactions with e(cid:128)ectors . Mutagenesis and structural analyses ( Hirshberg et al . , 1997 ) suggest at least two additional , distinct , regions are also likely to mediate interaction with e(cid:128)ectors . There is some evidence that the Rho insert domain may be important for interaction with at least some e(cid:128)ectors ( Freeman et al . , 1996 ) . Mutations in the Rac1 caused a marked decrease in superoxide production without perturbing p67 PHOX binding , indicating that it was not involved directly in e(cid:128)ector binding ( Nisimoto et al . , 1997 ) . Instead , it was proposed that it may interact with other components of the NADPH oxidase in neutrophils that was important for activity . In a second study , a Cdc42 mutant protein , where the insert sequence was deleted by replacing it with the corresponding region from H - Ras , retained the ability to activate PAK - 3 in vivo and to bind other CRIB motif - containing proteins in vitro ( ACK and WASP ) ( Wu et al . , 1997 ) . However , a reduced a(cid:129)nity for interaction from IQGAP1 was seen . Furthermore , while neither GEF or GAP activities were altered , RhoGDI inhibition of GDP dissociation was impaired in the insert mutant of Cdc42 . Mutation of the insert domains of Rac1 ( Joneson and Bar - Sagi , 1998 ) , Cdc42 ( Wu et al . , 1998 ) , or RhoA ( Quilliam LA , unpublished observation ) perturb their growth - promoting and / or transforming activites . Thus , deﬁning the e(cid:128)ector targets that interact with their respective insert domains will delineate the signaling pathways that promote cellular transformation . Studies with chimeric proteins between Rac1 and RhoA identiﬁed a second , COOH - terminal region of Rac1 ( residues 143 – 175 ) important for Rac e(cid:128)ector function . Hall and colleagues showed that both amino and carboxyl terminal regions of Rac1 were required for PAK and p67 PHOX binding , as well as for Rac - induced lamellipodia formation ( Diekmann et al . , 1995 ) . In agreement with their observations , we also observed that the Rac 73 Rho chimera did not bind PAK or induce lamellipodia , but instead induced stress ﬁber formation ( Westwick et al . , 1997 ) . Furthermore , we observed a loss of JNK activation , suggesting that the e(cid:128)ector required for JNK activation also requires interaction with COOH terminal Rac sequences . Thus , like Ras , the e(cid:128)ector - interacting sequences of Rho family proteins are also composed of multiple , distinct sequences . The importance of sequences beyond switch I and II in interaction with e(cid:128)ectors underlines an emerging concept that some small GTPase : e(cid:128)ector interactions are not GTP - dependent ( e . g . , PI5K ) . Instead , some may be GDP - dependent , others may associate with either GDP or GTP , yet activation may still be GTP - dependent . Future directions Despite the rapid accumulation of information on Rho family proteins , it is clear that we are only beginning to appreciate the complex nature of their biology and biochemistry . Many questions remain . Will the diversity of cellular processes that involve Rho family proteins continue to increase ? Yes , the already outdated nature of this review veriﬁes that this will be the case . The continued unearthing of yet more Dbl family proteins argues that the diversity of cellular processes that activate Rho family proteins will continue to increase . More Rho family proteins will also be discovered . Thus , the delineation of additional Rho - mediated functions promises to be a major theme for the coming years . Ample evidence from experi - mental cell systems implicate Rho family proteins as critical components of oncogenic Ras transformation . Do Rho family proteins play such a role in human cancer cells ? If so , are Rho - mediated pathways important targets for the development of anti - cancer drugs ? What speciﬁc aspects of Ras transformation are contributed by Rho family proteins ? Understanding the mechanisms of Rho family protein signaling , both upstream and downstream , remains limited . How extracellular signals cause activation of Rho family proteins remains a poorly undestood area . Will Db1 family proteins provide this link ? The roster of Rho family binding proteins will continue to expand . Which are physiologically relevant e(cid:128)ectors ? What is the role of each e(cid:128)ector and how is e(cid:128)ector utilization is controlled ? Our understanding of Rho family signal transduction will continue to evolve . Complex interrelated networks , rather than simply linear pathways , will likely be deﬁned . Cell type di(cid:128)erences will continue to add further complexity . In summary , the only thing that seems certain is that evidence will continue to mount , establishing Rho family proteins as key regulators of many cellular processes in normal and neoplastic cells . Acknowledgements We thank Jennifer Parrish for excellent assistance in the preparation of the text , references and ﬁgures . Our studies are supported by NIH grants to CJD ( CA42978 , CA52072 , CA55008 and CA67771 ) and SC ( CA64569 and CA70308 ) . References Abo A , Pick E , Hall A , Totty N , Teahan CG and Segal AW . ( 1991 ) . Nature , 353 , 668 – 670 . Adamson P , Marshall CJ , Hall A and Tilbrook PA . ( 1992 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 267 , 20033 – 20038 . Adra CN , Manor D , Ko JL , Zhu S , Horiuchi T , Van Aelst L , Cerione RA and Lim B . ( 1997 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 94 , 4279 – 4284 . Alam MR , Johnson RC , Darlington DN , Hand TA , Mains RE and Eipper BA . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 12667 – 12675 . Albanese C , Johnson J , Watanabe G , Eklund N , Vu D , Arnold A and Pestell RG . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 23589 – 23597 . Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1434 Allen LF , Lefkowitz RJ , Caron MG and Cotecchia S . ( 1991 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 88 , 11354 – 11358 . Allen WE , Jones GE , Pollard JW and Ridley AJ . ( 1997 ) . J . Cell Sci . , 110 , 707 – 720 . Althoefer H , Eversole - Cire P and Simon MI . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 24380 – 24386 . Amano M , Ito M , Kimura K , Fukata Y , Chihara K , Nakano T , Matsuura Y and Kaibuchi K . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 20246 – 20249 . Aspenstro¨m , P , Lindberg U and Hall A . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Biol . , 6 , 70 – 75 . Aspenstro¨m P . ( 1997 ) . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 479 – 487 . Avraham H and Weinberg RA . ( 1989 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 9 , 2058 – 2066 . Baeuerle PA and Baltimore D . ( 1996 ) . Cell , 87 , 13 – 20 . Bagrodia S , De´rijard B , Davis RJ and Cerione RA . ( 1995a ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 27995 – 27998 . Bagrodia S , Taylor SJ , Creasy CL , Cherno(cid:128) J and Cerione RA . ( 1995b ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 22731 – 22737 . Baichwal VR and Baeuerle PA . ( 1997 ) . Curr . Biol . , 7 , R94 – R96 . Bar - Sagi D and Feramisco JR . ( 1986 ) . Science , 233 , 1061 – 1068 . Best A , Ahmed S , Kozma R and Lim L . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 3756 – 3762 . Bishop JM . ( 1991 ) . Cell , 64 , 235 – 248 . Bokoch GM , Wang Y , Bohl BP , Sells MA , Quilliam LA and Knaus UG . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 25745 – 25749 . Brill S , Li S , Lyman CW , Church DM , Wasmuth JJ , Weissbach L , Bernards A and Snijders AJ . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 , 4869 – 4878 . Buhl AM , Johnson NL , Dhanasekaran N and Johnson GL . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 24631 – 24634 . Burbelo PD , Drechsel D and Hall A . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 29071 – 29074 . Campbell SL , Khosravi - Far R , Rossman KL , Clark GJ and Der CJ . ( 1998 ) . Oncogene , in press . Cantor SB , Urano T and Feig LA . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 4578 – 4584 . Castrillon DH and Wasserman SA . ( 1994 ) . Development , 120 , 3367 – 3377 . Cerione RA and Zheng Y . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Op . Cell Biol . , 8 , 216 – 222 . Chan AM - L , Fleming TP , McGovern ES , Chedid M , Miki T and Aaronson SA . ( 1993 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 13 , 762 – 768 . Chang EC , Barr M , Wang Y , Jung V , Xu H - P and Wigler MH . ( 1994 ) . Cell , 79 , 131 – 141 . Chang HW , Aoki M , Fruman D , Auger KR , Bellacosa A , Tsichlis PN , Cantley LC , Roberts TM and Vogt PK . ( 1997 ) . Science , 276 , 1848 – 1850 . Chant J and Stowers L . ( 1995 ) . Cell , 81 , 1 – 4 . Chardin P , Boquet P , Madaule P , Popo(cid:128) MR , Rubin EJ and Gill D . ( 1989 ) . EMBO J . , 8 , 1087 – 1092 . Chardin P . ( 1993 ) . GTPases in biology I , Dickey BF and Birnbaumer L ( Eds ) . Springer - Verlag : Heidelberg , pp 159 – 176 . Chou MM and Blenis J . ( 1995 ) . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 7 , 806 – 814 . Chou MM and Blenis J . ( 1996 ) . Cell , 85 , 573 – 583 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M and Burridge K . ( 1996 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 6 , 1403 – 1415 . Chuang T - H , Xu X , Kaartinen V , Heisterkamp N , Gro(cid:128)en J and Bokoch GM . ( 1995 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 92 , 10282 – 10286 . Chuang TH , Xu X , Knaus UG , Hart MJ and Bokoch GM . ( 1993 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 268 , 775 – 778 . Clark GJ , Westwick JK and Der CJ . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 1677 – 1681 . Cohen C and Parry DAD . ( 1994 ) . Science , 263 , 488 – 489 . Collins LR , Minden A , Karin M and Brown JH . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 17349 – 17353 . Coso OA , Chiariello M , Yu J - C , Teramoto H , Crespo P , Xu N , Miki T and Gutkind JS . ( 1995 ) . Cell , 81 , 1137 – 1146 . Crespo P , Schuebel KE , Ostrom AA , Gutkind JS and Bustelo XR . ( 1997 ) . Nature , 385 , 169 – 172 . D’Souza - Schorey C , Boshans R , McDonough M , Stahl PD and Van Aelst L . ( 1997 ) . EMBO J . , in press . Dallery E , Galiegue - Zouitina S , Collyn - d’Hooghe M , Quief S , Denis C , Hildebrand MP , Lantoine D , Deweindt C , Tilly H and Bastard C . ( 1995 ) . Oncogene , 10 , 2171 – 2178 . de Cremoux P , Gauville C , Closson V , Linares G , Calvo F , Tavitian A and Olofsson B . ( 1994 ) . Int . J . Cancer , 59 , 408 – 415 . De Vivo M , Chen J , Codina J and Iyengar R . ( 1992 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 267 , 18263 – 18266 . Der CJ , Weissman B and MacDonald MJ . ( 1988 ) . Oncogene , 3 , 105 – 112 . Dhanasekaran N , Heasley LE and Johnson GL . ( 1995 ) . Endocrine Rev . , 16 , 259 – 270 . Diekmann D , Nobes CD , Burbelo PD , Abo A and Hall A . ( 1995 ) . EMBO J . , 14 , 5338 – 5349 . Drechsel DN , Hyman AA , Hall A and Glotzer M . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 12 – 23 . Eaton S , Auvinen P , Luo L , Jan YN and Simons K . ( 1995 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 131 , 151 – 164 . Emmons S , Phan H , Calley J , Chen W , James B and Manseau L . ( 1995 ) . Genes Dev . , 9 , 2482 – 2494 . Erickson JW , Cerione RA and Hart MJ . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 23443 – 24447 . Ezoe K , Lee S - T , Strunk KM and Spritz RA . ( 1994 ) . Oncogene , 9 , 935 – 938 . Fam NP , Fan W - T , Wang Z , Zhang L - J , Chen H and Moran MF . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 1396 – 1406 . Fan W - T , Koch A , de Hoog CL , Fam NP and Moran MF . ( 1998 ) . Curr . Biol . , 8 , 935 – 938 . Fanger GR , Johnson NL and Johnson GL . ( 1997 ) . EMBO J . , 16 , 4961 – 4972 . Feig LA , Urano T and Cantor S . ( 1996 ) . Trends Biochem . Sci . , 21 , 438 – 441 . Feig LA and Cooper GA . ( 1988 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 8 , 2472 – 2478 . Feltham JL , Dotsch V , Raza S , Manor D , Cerione RA , Sutcli(cid:128)e MJ , Wagner G and Oswald RE . ( 1997 ) . Biochemistry , 36 , 8755 – 8766 . Finco TS , Westwick JK , Norris JL , Beg AA , Der CJ and Baldwin Jr AS . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 24113 – 24116 . Freeman JL , Abo A and Lambeth JD . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 19794 – 19801 . Fritz G , Kaina B and Aktories K . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 25172 – 25177 . Frost JA , Xu S , Hutchison MR , Marcus S and Cobb MH . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 , 3707 – 3713 . Fujisawa K , Fujita A , Ishizaki T , Saito Y and Narumiya S . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 23022 – 23028 . Galisteo ML , Cherno(cid:128) J , Su Y - C , Skolnik EY and Schlessinger J . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 20997 – 21000 . Gebbink MFBG , Kranenburg O , Poland M , vanHorck FPG , Houssa B and Moolenaar WH . ( 1997 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 137 , 1603 – 1613 . Gertler FB , Niebuhr K , Reinhard M , Wehland J and Soriano P . ( 1996 ) . Cell , 87 , 227 – 239 . Gerwins P , Blank JL and Johnson GL . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 8288 – 8295 . Guasch RM , Scambler P , Jones GE and Ridley AJ . ( 1998 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 , 4761 – 4771 . Gutkind JS , Novotny EA , Brann MR and Robbins KC . ( 1991 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 88 , 4703 – 4707 . Habets GGM , Scholtes EHM , Zuydgeest D , van der Kammen RA , Stam JC , Berns A and Collard JG . ( 1994 ) . Cell , 77 , 537 – 549 . Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1435 Han J , Das B , Wei W , Van Aelst L , Mosteller RD , Khosravi - Far R , Westwick JK , Der CJ and Broek D . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 1346 – 1353 . Hart MJ , Maru Y , Leonard D , Witte ON , Evans T and Cerione RA . ( 1992 ) . Science , 258 , 812 – 815 . Hart MJ , Jian X , Kozasa T , Roscoe W , Singer WD , Gilman AG , Sternweiss PC and Bollag G . ( 1998 ) . Science , 280 , 2112 – 2114 . Henske EP , Short MP , Jozwiak S , Bovey CM , Ramlakhan S , Haines JL and Kwiatkowski DJ . ( 1995 ) . Ann . Hum . Genet . , 59 , 25 – 37 . Hill CS , Wynne J and Treisman R . ( 1995 ) . Cell , 81 , 1159 – 1170 . Hill CS and Treisman R . ( 1995 ) . EMBO J . , 14 , 5037 – 5047 . Hirai A , Nakamura S , Noguchi Y , Yasuda T , Kitagawa M , Tatsuno I , Oeda T , Tahara K , Terano T , Narumiya S , Kohn LD and Saito Y . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 13 – 16 . Hirai S - I , Katoh M , Terada M , Kyriakis JM , Zon LI , Rana A , Avruch J and Ohno S . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 15167 – 15173 . Hirshberg M , Stockley RW , Dodson G and Webb MR . ( 1997 ) . Nat . Struct . Biol . , 4 , 147 – 152 . Hooley R , Yu C - Y , Symons M and Barber DL . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 6152 – 6158 . Hu Q , Klippel A , Muslin AJ , Fantl WJ and Williams LT . ( 1995 ) . Science , 268 , 100 – 102 . Ihara K , Muraguchi S , Kato M , Shimizu T , Shirakawa M , Kuroda S , Kaibuchi K and Hakoshima T . ( 1998 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 9656 – 9666 . Ing YL , Leung IWL , Heng HHQ , Tsui L - C and Lassam NJ . ( 1994 ) . Oncogene , 9 , 1745 – 1750 . Irani K , Xia Y , Zweier JL , Sollott SJ , Der CJ , Fearon ER , Sundaresan M , Finkel T and Goldschmidt - Clermont PJ . ( 1997 ) . Science , 275 , 1649 – 1652 . Ishizaki T , Maekawa M , Fujisawa K , Okawa K , Iwamatsu A , Fujita A , Watanabe N , Saito Y , Kakizuka A , Morii N and Narumiya S . ( 1996 ) . EMBO J , 15 , 1885 – 1893 . Jahner D and Hunter T . ( 1991 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 11 , 3682 – 3690 . Jiang H , Wu D and Simon MI . ( 1993 ) . FEBS Lett . , 330 , 319 – 322 . Joneson T , McDonough M , Bar - Sagi D and Van Aelst L . ( 1996a ) . Science , 274 , 1374 – 1377 . Joneson T , White MA , Wigler MH and Bar - Sagi D . ( 1996b ) . Science , 271 , 810 – 812 . Joneson T and Bar - Sagi D . ( 1998 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 17991 – 17994 Joyal JL , Annan RS , Ho Y - D , Huddleston ME , Carr SA , Hart MJ and Sacks DB . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 15419 – 15425 . Julius D , Livelli TJ , Jessell TM and Axel R . ( 1989 ) . Science , 244 , 1057 – 1062 . Jullien - Flores V , Dorseuil O , Romero F , Letourneur F , Saragosti S , Berger R , Tavitian A , Gacon G and Camonis JH . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 22473 – 22477 . Kalinec G , Nazarali AJ , Hermouet S , Xu N and Gutkind JS . ( 1992 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 12 , 4687 – 4693 . Karin M . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 16483 – 16486 . Keely PJ , Westwick JK , Whitehead IP , Der CJ and Parise LV . ( 1997 ) . Nature , 360 , 632 – 636 . Khosravi - Far R , Solski PA , Kinch MS , Burridge K and Der CJ . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 6443 – 6453 . Khosravi - Far R , White MA , Westwick JK , Solski PA , Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M , Van Aelst L , Wigler MH and Der CJ . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 , 3923 – 3933 . Khosravi - Far R , Campbell S , Rossman KL and Der CJ . ( 1997 ) . Adv . Cancer Res . , 72 , 57 – 107 . Kimura K , Ito M , Amano M , Chihara K , Fukata Y , Nakafuku M , Yamamori B , Geng J , Nakano T , Okawa K , Iwamatsu A and Kaibuchi K . ( 1996 ) . Science , 273 , 245 – 248 . Kirchhausen T and Rosen FS . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Biol . , 6 , 676 – 678 . Kishi K , Sasaki T , Kuroda S , Itoh T and Takai Y . ( 1993 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 120 , 1187 – 1195 . Klippel A , Reinhard C , Kavanaugh M , Apell G , Escobedo M - A and Williams LT . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 , 4117 – 4127 . Kolluri R , Tolias KF , Carpenter CL , Rosen RS and Kirchhausen T . ( 1996 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 93 , 5615 – 5618 . Kotani K , Yonezawa K , Hara K , Ueda H , Kitamura Y , Sokaue H , Ando A , Chavanieu A , Calas B and Grigorescu F . ( 1994 ) . EMBO J . , 13 , 2313 – 2321 . Kozma R , Ahmed S , Best A and Lim L . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 1942 – 1952 . Kozma R , Ahmed S , Best A and Lim L . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 , 5069 – 5080 . Kozma R , Sarner S , Ahmed S and Lim L . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 1201 – 1211 . Kuroda S , Fukata M , Kobayashi K , Nakafuku M , Nomura N , Iwamatsu A and Kaibuchi K . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 23363 – 23367 . Lamarche N , Tapon N , Stowers L , Burbelo PD , Aspenstrom P , Bridges T , Chant J and Hall A . ( 1996 ) . Cell , 87 , 519 – 529 . Larochelle DA , Vithalani KK and De Lozanne A . ( 1996 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 133 , 1321 – 1329 . Lebowitz PF , Davide JP and Prendergast GC . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 6613 – 6622 . Lebowitz PF , Du W and Prendergast GC . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 16093 – 16095 . Lee C - H , Li W , Nishimura R , Zhou M , Batzer AG , Myers Jr MG , White MF , Schlessinger J and Skolnik EY . ( 1993 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 11713 – 11717 . Lelias JM , Adra CN , Wulf GM , Guillemot JC , Khagad M , Caput D and Lim B . ( 1993 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 1479 – 1483 . Lemmon MA , Ferguson KM and Schlessinger J . ( 1996 ) . Cell , 85 , 621 – 624 . Leonard D , Hart MJ , Platko JV , Eva A , Henzel W , Evans T and Cerione RA . ( 1992 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 267 , 22860 – 22868 . Leung T , Chen X - Q , Manser E and Lim L . ( 1996a ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 , 5313 – 5327 . Leung T , Manser E , Tan L and Lim L . ( 1996b ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 29051 – 29054 . Li R . ( 1997 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 136 , 649 – 658 . Li W , Hu P , Skolnik EY , Ullrich A and Schlessinger J . ( 1992 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 12 , 5824 – 5833 . Lin R , Bagrodia S , Cerione R and Manor D . ( 1997 ) . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 794 – 797 . Linares - Cruz G , Rigaut JP , Vassy J , De Oliveira TC , de Cremoux P , Olofsson B and Calvo F . ( 1994 ) . J . Microsc . , 173 , 27 – 38 . Luo L , Hensch TK , Ackerman L , Barbel S , Jan LY and Jan YN . ( 1996 ) . Nature , 379 , 837 – 840 . Luttrell LM , Della Rocca GJ , van Biesen T , Luttrell DK and Lefkowitz RJ . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 4637 – 4644 . Mabuchi I , Hamaguchi Y , Fujimoto H , Morii N , Mishima M and Narumiya S . ( 1993 ) . Zygote , 1 , 325 – 331 . Mackay DJ , Nobes CD and Hall A . ( 1995 ) . Trends Neurosci . , 18 , 496 – 501 . Madaule P , Furuyashiki T , Reid T , Watanabe G , Morii N and Narumiya S . ( 1995 ) . FEBS Lett . , 377 , 243 – 248 . Madaule P , Eda M , Watanabe N , Fujisawa K , Matsuoka T , Bito H , Ishzahi T and Narumiya S . ( 1998 ) . Nature , 394 , 491 – 494 . Manser E , Leung T , Salihuddin H , Zhao Z - S and Lim L . ( 1994 ) . Nature , 367 , 40 – 46 . Manser E , Chong C , Zhao Z - S , Leung T , Michael G , Hall C and Lim L . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 25070 – 25078 . Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1436 Manser E , Huang H - Y , Loo T - H , Chen X - Q , Dong J - M , Leung T and Lim L . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 1129 – 1143 . Marais R , Wynne J and Treisman R . ( 1993 ) . Cell , 73 , 381 – 393 . Marhoul JF and Adams TH . ( 1995 ) . Genet . , 139 , 537 – 547 . Marshall CJ . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 8 , 197 – 204 . Marte BM , Rodriguez - Viciana P , Wennstro¨m S , Warne PH and Downward J . ( 1997 ) . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 63 – 71 . Martin GA , Bollag G , McCormick F and Abo A . ( 1995 ) . EMBO J . , 14 , 1970 – 1978 . Masuda T , Kariya K - I , Shinkai M , Okada T and Kataoka T . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 1979 – 1982 . Matsui T , Amano M , Yamamoto T , Chihara K , Nakafuku M , Ito M , Nakano T , Okawa K , Iwamatsu A and Kaibuchi K . ( 1996 ) . EMBO J . , 15 , 2208 – 2216 . Mayer BJ , Ren R , Clark KL and Baltimore D . ( 1993 ) . Cell , 73 , 629 – 630 . Mayo MW , Wang C - Y , Cogswell PC , Rogers - Graham KS , Lowe SW , Der CJ and Baldwin Jr AS . ( 1997 ) . Science , 278 , 1812 – 1815 . Michiels F , Habets GG , Stam JC , van der Kammen RA and Collard JG . ( 1995 ) . Nature , 375 , 338 – 340 . Minden A , Lin A , McMahon M , Lange - Carter C , Derijard B , Davis RJ , Johnson GL and Karin M . ( 1994 ) . Science , 266 , 1719 – 1723 . Minden A , Lin A , Claret F - X , Abo A and Karin M . ( 1995 ) . Cell , 81 , 1147 – 1157 . Molna´r A , Theodoras AM , Zon LI and Kyriakis JM . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 13229 – 13235 . Mo¨sch H - U , Roberts RL and Fink GR . ( 1996 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 93 , 5352 – 5356 . Murphy C , Sa(cid:128)rich R , Grummt M , Gournier H , Rybin V , Rubino M , Auvinen P , Lu¨tcke A , Parton RG and Zerial M . ( 1996 ) . Nature , 384 , 427 – 432 . Narumiya S . ( 1996 ) . J . Biochem . , 120 , 215 – 228 . Nimnual AS , Yatsula BA and Bar - Sagi D . ( 1998 ) . Science , 279 , 560 – 563 . Nishiyama T , Sasaki T , Takaishi K , Kato M , Yaku H , Araki K , Matsuura Y and Takai Y . ( 1994 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 14 , 2447 – 2456 . Nisimoto Y , Freeman JLR , Motalebi SA , Hirshberg M and Lambeth JD . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 18834 – 18841 . Nobes CD and Hall A . ( 1995 ) . Cell , 81 , 53 – 62 . Nobes CD , Lauritzen I , Mattei M - G , Paris S , Hall A and Chardin P . ( 1998 ) . J . Cell . Biol . , 141 , 187 – 197 . Nusrat A , Giry M , Turner JR , Colgan SP , Parkos CA , Carnes D , Lemichez E , Boquet P and Madara JL . ( 1995 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 92 , 10629 – 10633 . Olson MF , Ashworth A and Hall A . ( 1995 ) . Science , 269 , 1270 – 1272 . Osada S - I , Izawa M , Koyama T , Hirai S - I and Ohno S . ( 1997 ) . FEBS Lett . , 404 , 227 – 233 . Palmer RH , Ridden J and Parker PJ . ( 1995 ) . Eur . J . Biochem . , 227 , 344 – 351 . Park S - H and Weinberg RA . ( 1996 ) . Oncogene , 11 , 2349 – 2355 . Paterson HF , Self AJ , Garrett MD , Just I , Aktories K and Hall A . ( 1990 ) . J . Cell Biol . , 111 , 1001 – 1007 . Perona R , Esteve P , Jime´nez B , Ballestero RP , Ramo´n y Cajal S and Lacal JC . ( 1993 ) . Oncogene , 8 , 1285 – 1292 . Perona R , Montaner S , Saniger L , Sa´nchez - Pe´rez I , Bravo R and Lacal JC . ( 1997 ) . Genes Dev . , 11 , 463 – 475 . Peterson J , Weilguny D , Egel R and Nielsen O . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 3697 – 3707 . Polverino A , Frost J , Yang P , Hutchinson M , Neiman AM , Cobb MH and Marcus S . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 26067 – 26070 . Prasad MVVSV , Dermott JM , Heasley LE , Johnson GL and Dhanasekaran N . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 18655 – 18659 . Prendergast GC , Khosravi - Far R , Solski PA , Kurzawa H , Lebowitz PF and Der CJ . ( 1995 ) . Oncogene , 10 , 2289 – 2296 . Qiu R - G , Chen J , Kirn D , McCormick F and Symons M . ( 1995a ) . Nature , 374 , 457 – 459 . Qiu R - G , Chen J , McCormick F and Symons M . ( 1995b ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 92 , 11781 – 11785 . Qiu R - G , Abo A , McCormick F and Symons M . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 3449 – 3458 . Quilliam LA , Lambert QT , Westwick JK , Mickelson - Young LA , Sparks AB , Kay BK , Jenkins NA , Gilbert DJ , Copeland NG and Der CJ . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 28772 – 28776 . Reibel L , Dorseuil O , Stancou R , Bertoglio J and Gacon G . ( 1991 ) . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . , 175 , 451 – 458 . Reid T , Furuyashiki T , Ishizaki T , Watanabe G , Watanabe N , Fujisawa K , Morii N , Madaule P and Narumiya S . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 13556 – 13560 . Reinstein J , Schlichting I , Frech M , Goody RS and Wittinghofer A . ( 1991 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 266 , 17700 – 17706 . Renshaw MW , Lea - Chou E and Wang JY . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Biol . , 6 , 76 – 83 . Ridley AJ , Paterson HF , Johnston CL , Diekmann D and Hall A . ( 1992 ) . Cell , 70 , 401 – 410 . Ridley AJ , Self AJ , Kasmi F , Paterson HF , Hall A , Marshall CJ and Ellis C . ( 1993 ) . EMBO J . , 12 , 5151 – 5160 . Ridley AJ , Comoglio PM and Hall A . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 1110 – 1122 . Ridley AJ . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Biol . , 6 , 1256 – 1264 . Ridley AJ and Hall A . ( 1992 ) . Cell , 70 , 389 – 399 . Rittinger K , Walker PA , Eccleston JF , Smerdon SJ and Gamblin SJ ( 1997 ) . Nature , 389 , 758 – 762 . Rivero - Lezcano OM , Marcilla A , Sameshima JH and Robbins KC . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 5725 – 5731 . Rodriguez - Viciana P , Warne PH , Dhand R , Vanhaesebroeck B , Gout I , Fry MJ , Waterﬁeld MD and Downward J . ( 1994 ) . Nature , 370 , 527 – 532 . Rodriguez - Viciana P , Warne PH , Vanhaesebroeck B , Waterﬁeld MD and Downward J . ( 1996 ) . EMBO J . , 15 , 2442 – 2451 . Roux P , Gauthier - Rouvie ` re C , Doucet - Brutin S and Fort P . ( 1997 ) . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 629 – 637 . Scherle P and Staudt LM . ( 1993 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 7568 – 7572 . Schuebel KE , Bustelo XR , Nielsen DA , Song B - J , Barbacid M , Goldman D and Lee IJ . ( 1996 ) . Oncogene , 13 , 363 – 371 . Sells MA , Knaus UG , Bagrodia S , Ambrose DM , Bokoch GM and Cherno(cid:128) J . ( 1997 ) . Curr . Biol . , 7 , 202 – 210 . Settleman J , Narasimhan V , Foster LC and Weinberg RA . ( 1992 ) . Cell , 69 , 539 – 549 . Shinjo K , Koland JG , Hart MJ , Narasimhan V , Johnson DI , Evans T and Cerione RA . ( 1990 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 87 , 9853 – 9857 . Simon M - N , De Virgilio C , Souza B , Pringle JR , Abo A and Reed SI . ( 1995 ) . Nature , 376 , 702 – 705 . Sulciner DJ , Irani K , Yu Z - X , Ferrans VJ , Goldschmidt - Clermont P and Finkel T . ( 1996 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 , 7115 – 7121 . Symons M . ( 1996 ) . Trends Biochem . Sci . , 21 , 178 – 181 . Symons M , Derry JMJ , Karlak B , Jiang S , Lemahieu V , McCormick F , Francke U and Abo A . ( 1996 ) . Cell , 84 , 723 – 734 . Takai Y , Sasaki T , Tanaka K and Nakanishi H . ( 1995 ) . TIBS , 20 , 227 – 231 . Takaishi K , Kikuchi A , Kuroda S , Kotani K , Sasaki T and Takai Y . ( 1993 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 13 , 72 – 79 . Takaishi K , Sasaki T , Kato M , Yamochi W , Kuroda S , Nakamura T , Takeichi M and Takai Y . ( 1994 ) . Oncogene , 5 , 273 – 278 . Takekawa M , Posas F and Saito H . ( 1997 ) . EMBO J . , 16 , 4973 – 4982 . Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1437 Tang Y , Chen Z , Ambrose D , Liu J , Gibbs JB , Cherno(cid:128) J and Field J . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 4454 – 4464 . Tapon N , Nagata K , Lamarche N and Hall A . ( 1998 ) . EMBO J . , 17 , 1395 – 1404 . Teo M , Manser E and Lim L . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 26690 – 26697 . Teramoto H , Coso OA , Miyata H , Miki T and Gutkind JS . ( 1996a ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 27225 – 27228 . Teramoto H , Crespo P , Coso OA , Igishi T , Xu N and Gutkind JS . ( 1996b ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 25731 – 25734 . Teramoto H , Salem P , Robbins KC , Bustelo XR and Gutkind JS . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 10751 – 10755 . Thompson JD , Higgins DG and Gibson TJ . ( 1994 ) . Nucl . Acids Res . , 22 , 4673 – 4680 . Tibbles LA , Ing YL , Kiefer F , Chan J , Iscove N , Woodgett JR and Lassam NJ . ( 1996 ) . EMBO J . , 15 , 7026 – 7035 . Toker A and Cantley LC . ( 1997 ) . Nature , 387 , 673 – 676 . Tolias KF , Cantley LC and Carpenter CL . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 17656 – 17659 . Tolkacheva T , Feuer B , Lorenzi MV , Saez R and Chan AM . ( 1997 ) . Oncogene , 15 , 727 – 735 . Treisman R . ( 1996 ) . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 8 , 205 – 215 . Ueda T , Kikuchi A , Ohga N , Yamamoto J and Takai Y . ( 1990 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 265 , 9373 – 9380 . Urich M , Senften M , Shaw PE and Ballmer - Hofer K . ( 1997 ) . Oncogene , 14 , 1235 – 1241 . Van Aelst L , Barr M , Marcus S , Polverino A and Wigler M . ( 1993 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 6213 – 6217 . Van Aelst L , Joneson T and Bar - Sagi D . ( 1996 ) . EMBO J . , 15 , 3778 – 3786 . Van Aelst L and D’Souza - Schorey C . ( 1997 ) . Genes Dev . , 11 , 2295 – 2322 . van Biesen T , Luttrell LM , Hawes BE and Lefkowitz RJ . ( 1996 ) . Endocrine Rev . , 17 , 698 – 714 . Vara Prasad MVVS , Shore SK and Dhanasekaran N . ( 1994 ) . Oncogene , 9 , 2425 – 2429 . Verschueren H , De Baetselier P , De Braekeleer J , Dewit J , Aktories K and Just I . ( 1997 ) . Eur . J . Cell Biol . , 73 , 182 – 187 . Vincent S , Jeanteur P and Fort P . ( 1992 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 12 , 3138 – 3148 . Vincent S and Settleman J . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 2247 – 2256 . Vojtek AB and Cooper JA . ( 1995 ) . Cell , 82 , 527 – 529 . Voyno - Yasenetskaya TA , Pace AM and Bourne HR . ( 1994 ) . Oncogene , 9 , 2559 – 2565 . Walter M , Clark SG and Levinson AD . ( 1986 ) . Science , 233 , 649 – 652 . Wang XZ and Ron D . ( 1996 ) . Science , 272 , 1347 – 1349 . Wang Y , Xu H - P , Riggs M , Rodgers L and Wigler M . ( 1991 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 11 , 3554 – 3563 . Watanabe G , Saito Y , Madaule P , Ishizaki T , Fujisawa K , Morii N , Mukai H , Ono Y , Kakizuka A and Narumiya S . ( 1996 ) . Science , 271 , 645 – 648 . Watanabe N , Madaule P , Reid T , Ishizaki T , Watanabe G , Kakizaki T , Saito Y , Nakao K , Jockusch BM and Narumiya S . ( 1997 ) . EMBO J . , 16 , 3044 – 3056 . Wei Y , Zhang Y , Derewenda U , Liu X , Minor W , Nakamoto RK , Somlyo AV , Somlyo AP and Derewenda ZS . ( 1997 ) . Nature Struct . Biol . , 4 , 699 – 703 . Weissbach L , Settleman J , Kalady MF , Snijders AJ , Murthy AE , Yan Y - X and Bernards A . ( 1994 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 20517 – 20521 . Wennstrom S , Hawkins P , Cooke F , Hara K , Yonezawa K , Kasuga M , Jackson T , Claesson WL and Stephens L . ( 1994 ) . Curr . Biol . , 4 , 385 – 393 . Westwick JK , Lambert QT , Clark GJ , Symons M , Van Aelst L , Pestell RG and Der CJ . ( 1997 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 1324 – 1335 . Westwick JK , Lambert QT , Kay R , Der CJ and Whitehead IP . ( 1998 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 16739 – 16747 . White MA , Nicolette C , Minden A , Polverino A , Van Aelst L , Karin M and Wigler MH . ( 1995 ) . Cell , 80 , 533 – 541 . Whitehead I , Kirk H and Kay R . ( 1995 ) . Oncogene , 10 , 713 – 721 . Whitehead IP , Khosravi - Far R , Kirk H , Trigo - Gonzalez G , Der CJ and Kay R . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 18643 – 18650 . Whitehead IP , Campbell S , Rossman KL and Der CJ . ( 1997 ) . Biochem . Biophys . Acta . , 1332 , F1 – F23 . Whitehead IP , Abe K , Gorski JL and Der CJ . ( 1998 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 , 4689 – 4697 . Whitmarsh AJ , Shore P , Sharrocks AD and Davis RJ . ( 1995 ) . Science , 269 , 403 – 407 . Wu D , Lee CH , Rhee SG and Simon MI . ( 1992 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 267 , 1811 – 1817 . Wu W - J , Leonard DA , Cerione RA and Manor D . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 26153 – 26158 . Wu WJ , Lin R , Cerione RA and Manor D . ( 1998 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 16655 – 16558 . Xu N , Bradley L , Ambdukar I and Gutkind JS . ( 1993 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 90 , 6741 – 6745 . Yamamoto M , Marui N , Sakai T , Morii N , Kozaki S , Ikai K , Imamura S and Narumiya S . ( 1993 ) . Oncogene , 8 , 1449 – 1455 . Yang W and Cerione RA . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 24819 – 24824 . Yoshioka K , Imamura F , Shinkai K , Miyoshi J , Ogawa H , Mukai M , Komagome R and Akedo H . ( 1995 ) . FEBS Lett . , 372 , 25 – 28 . Young D , O’Neill K , Jessell T and Wigler M . ( 1988 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 85 , 5339 – 5342 . Yu W , Liu J , Morrice NA and Wettenhall REH . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 , 10030 – 10034 . Zalcman G , Closson V , Camonis J , Honore´ N , Rousseau - Merck M - F , Tavitian A and Olofsson B . ( 1996 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 , 30366 – 30374 . Zervos AS , Faccio L , Gatto JP , Kyriakis JM and Brent R . ( 1995 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 92 , 10531 – 10534 . Zhang S , Han J , Sells MA , Cherno(cid:128) J , Knaus UG , Ulevitch RJ and Bokoch GM . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 23934 – 23936 . Zhao Z - s , Leung T , Manser E and Lim L . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 5246 – 5257 . Zheng Y , Bagrodia S and Cerione RA . ( 1994a ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 18727 – 18730 . Zheng Y , Cerione R and Bender A . ( 1994b ) . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 2369 – 2372 . Zohn IM , Symons M , Chrzanowska - Wodnicka M , West - wick JK and Der CJ . ( 1998 ) . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 , 1225 – 1235 . Rho family of small GTPases and transformation I Zohn et al 1438