Knowledge Management – the Ethics of the Agora or the Mechanisms of the Market ? Antony Bryant Leeds Metropolitan University a . bryant @ leedsmet . ac . uk Abstract Knowledge management [ KM ] first appeared as a distinct phrase in the context of IS in the mid - 1990s , since when it has grown to become the latest item in the IS pantheon . The term itself ought to promote more uneasiness than it appears to do so within the IS academy , and this paper outlines the reasons why the term should be viewed with less enthusiasm and more suspicion . 1 . Introduction ‘Wise men will apply their remedies to vices , not to names ; to the causes of evil which are permanent , not to the occasional organs by which they act , and the transitory modes in which they appear . Otherwise you will be wise historically , a fool in practice . ’ Edmund Burke ( 1729 – 1797 ) . Reflections on the French Revolution , para 242 Generally the introduction of the term knowledge management [ KM ] into IS / MIS discussions can be credited to Nonaka & Takeuchi’s work , notably their publication of The Knowledge Creating Company [ 19 ] . 1 This was followed by Davenport & Prusak’s work on knowledge management [ 10 ] which offered a US - based perspective ; and by the late 1990s KM had completely eclipsed earlier terms such as Business Process Re - engineering [ BPR ] , the Learning Organization and so on . Despite this apparent success , the conceptual deficiencies of KM could not be hidden simply by an accelerating pace of publications on the topic , nor by statements attesting to KM as affording a ‘healthy arena with a good background and clear directions for future work’ [ 3 ] . Already in the late 1990s there was a suspicion that KM might be the latest in a line of management fads , replacing BPR ; another victory of style over substance . 1 Wilson points out that the term appears in a few articles from the mid - 1980s onwards , but really takes off after 1996 . 2 . BPR – precursor to KM With regard to BPR a quick reminder of its prominence and demise might be in order . The term itself was publicized and probably coined by Hammer & Champy in their best - selling book Re - engineering the Corporation [ 14 ] . Hammer in particular was keen to use a Rambo - type terminology to sum up their ‘Manifesto for Business Revolution’ ( the subtitle of the book ) . He advocated that corporations needed to be radically reinvented – using radical , perhaps unintentionally but pertinently , in its literal sense of from the roots . Thus BPR involved ‘tearing down hundreds , even thousands , of functional silos corporations have built . The walls remain standing … but everything inside is nuked … ' ( Hammer in an interview widely quoted in the mid - 1990s ) . The book itself was something of the management equivalent of The Da Vinci Code , selling in vast numbers – far more than any management book before or since – and spawning an entire literature and merchandising industry . The rise to prominence of BPR was meteoric ; but so too was its demise . The emergence of KM in the late 1990s came in the wake of the full , devastating impact of BPR on business and management practice . The reality of re - engineering was that all too often it was simply a euphemism for mass redundancies – previously masked by phrases such as down - sizing or right - sizing . The impact of such exercises had been to strip out layers of management thereby jettisoning mid - career employees , with the result that after a few years there were far fewer experienced people to take on higher management and senior specialist roles in those organizations . Problems of succession and continuity arose – although not in quite the ways it might have done in earlier decades in the 20 th century . Was the emergence of KM then simply accidental , or was part of its allure its being a possible solution to the devastation resulting from BPR ? Adoption of knowledge management being a case of locking the stable door after most of the horses had bolted : BPR having led to the loss of valuable know - how and experience , the leveraging of which the KM advocates now stressed as the key to growth and survival . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 1 0 - 7695 - 2507 - 5 / 06 / $ 20 . 00 ( C ) 2006 IEEE Clearly the sequence was not accidental ; particularly as it was taken up in USA in the late 1990s . KM can be seen as an attempt to remedy the impact and deficiencies of BPR ; if not by design then certainly in effect . As will be argued below KM must also be recognized as an effort to continue BPR by other means . Tom Davenport in particular embodies this trajectory . His book Process Innovation : Reengineering Work Through Information Technology [ 8 ] appeared almost simultaneously with Hammer & Champy’s ; although in terms of renown and sales figures it was eclipsed by the latter . As the harsh reality of BPR became apparent Davenport published a recantation tellingly entitled The Fad That Forgot People [ 9 ] . While firmly castigating all those who had allowed a ‘modest idea’ to ‘become a monster’ , Davenport correctly argued that ‘ [ T ] he most profound lesson of business process reengineering was never reengineering , but business processes . ’ Organizations had to move their attention away from hierarchies and structures , focusing instead on their processes . This was sound advice , although it came too late for those many employees already consigned to the scrapheap . Davenport concluded his tergiversation as follows When the Next Big Thing in management hits , try to remember the lessons of reengineering . Don ' t drop all your ongoing approaches to change in favor of the handsome newcomer . Don ' t listen to the new approach ' s most charismatic advocates , but only to the most reasoned . Talk softly about what you ' re doing and carry a big ruler to measure real results . And start with a question : " Would I like this management approach applied to me and my job ? " If the answer is yes , do it to yourself first . You ' ll set a great example . Ironically by 1997 Davenport was rapidly becoming a target for his own counsel as he became established as a ‘charismatic advocate’ for KM , ‘the handsome newcomer’ , with publication of Working Knowledge with Larry Prusak . Moreover he ignored his own advice , and failed to notice that the development of KM was anything but an antidote to BPR . BPR rose and fell within a period of 4 - 5 years – 1992 - 1996 . Although KM did not achieve the same rapid rise to prominence , 10 years on it has at least as an academic and research topic proved more resilient and long - lasting ; and appears to confirm Baskerville’s [ 3 ] early prognosis of being a ‘healthy arena with a good background and clear directions for future work’ . Whether it still guides commercial and industrial practices and strategies is more uncertain . 3 . KM – Wilson’s Critique There are , however , a few dissenting voices in the academy . One of the most notable and trenchant has been Tom Wilson who put forward an extended critique of KM [ 25 ] ; concluding ‘that knowledge management is an umbrella term for a variety of organizational activities , none of which are ( sic ) concerned with the management of knowledge’ . For Wilson KM is the latest in a long line of management fads , although ‘it would be wrong to assume that , for that reason , they all lacked effectiveness when applied in organizations’ . On the contrary they could prove all too effective , often with the benefits being heavily outweighed by the deficiencies . Moreover Wilson demonstrates that to a large extent knowledge management is simply a case of re - branding or search - and - replace marketing with ‘knowledge’ substituted for ‘information’ . Information management is a perfectly understandable and appropriate term , and we should persevere with it . Wilson notes that one of the key people associated with KM , Karl - Eric Sveiby [ 22 ] , has concluded that ‘ I don ' t believe knowledge can be managed . Knowledge Management is a poor term , but we are stuck with it , I suppose . ’ To which Wilson responds ‘academic researchers and teachers do not need to be stuck with anything that fails to stand up to rigorous analysis , but it is interesting to see that one of the founders of knowledge management is uncomfortable with the term’ . Wilson argues that a fundamental weakness in the entire KM literature is the sustained failure to offer a clear definition of knowledge , particularly one that distinguishes it from information . This conceptual frailty is often alluded to by KM proponents who preface their ideas with a statement along the lines of I can’t offer a clear definition of knowledge , but … . One of the main reasons for this failure is that most of the writers would not be able to substantiate a definition of knowledge as something - to - be - managed without in fact defining information rather than knowledge ; conversely if they actually defined knowledge , the result would undermine any argument about treating it as something - to - be managed . Wilson has no such qualms or problems , for him the distinction between knowledge and information is straightforward . ' Knowledge ' is defined as what we know : knowledge involves the mental processes of comprehension , understanding and learning that go on in the mind and only in the mind … Whenever we wish to express what we know , we can only do so by uttering messages of one kind or another … Such messages do not Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 2 carry ' knowledge ' , they constitute ' information ' , which a knowing mind may assimilate , understand , comprehend and incorporate into its own knowledge structures . … each person ' s knowledge structures are , as Schutz puts it , ' biographically determined ' . Therefore , the knowledge built from the messages can never be exactly the same as the knowledge base from which the messages were uttered . … Collections of messages , composed in various ways , may be considered as ' information resources ' of various kinds … Generally , these are regarded as ' information resources ' . … and information resources may be managed , but knowledge ( i . e . , what we know ) can never be managed , except by the individual knower and , even then , only imperfectly . Wilson’s paper challenges and potentially undermines foundational features of KM as it is currently packaged and presented . Yet few if any of his criticisms have actually been directly dealt with in the burgeoning KM literature . A recent search on Google using the exact phrase nonsense of knowledge management returned around 3770 results , most of them noting Wilson’s paper as a trenchant critique of KM ; but there were few concerted efforts to take issue with his findings and conclusions . Those that at first sight appeared to do so often ended up supporting his stance . Ekbia & Kling [ 12 ] concluded that ‘ [ W ] hile there might be some value in these skeptical assessments , we believe that the practices of sharing and withholding professional knowledge in organizations is of significant managerial importance . ’ This is hardly a novel or particularly challenging conclusion ; it fails to engage with Wilson’s criticisms – having specifically referred to them – and offers a fairly anodyne conclusion with which Wilson would have no argument . A more equivocal position has been taken by Wenger [ 24 ] , and by Brown & Duguid [ 6 ] in their use and explication of the concept of communities of practice . 2 Brown & Duguid in particular seek to steer a path between Wilson’s critique of KM , and those who laud it uncritically . They argue for a ‘balancing act’ that avoids ‘managing knowledge’ by seeking to capture , control and separate it from skilled individuals , but rather promotes interaction , exchange 2 The concept of Communities of Practice might be taken as a challenge to Wilson’s position . But the concept itself runs counter to many of the standard ideas of KM , and has far more in common with Wilson’s position – the issue of the nature of such communities and how they might be established and maintained is of key concern , but cannot be dealt with at this juncture . of ideas . 3 Although this offers an alternative view of KM that might be met with less disdain by Wilson , it does so by evading or under - stating some of the unethical and destructive aspects of KM . Also Brown & Duguid fail to see the continuity from BPR to KM ; arguing instead that the two are ‘profoundly different’ – indeed their ‘balancing act’ is one that seeks to find an equilibrium between BPR and KM . 4 . KM – Taylorism in a New Guise Wilson provides us with a basis to talk about managing information , but denies any meaning or value to the idea of managing knowledge . He implies that the widespread and uncritical use of an ambiguous and downright misleading term such as KM only detracts from the establishment of a clear conceptual basis for key features of our informational age . Indicating these conceptual frailties is however only part of the story . KM may well be the latest academic - management fad ; with its own baggage of jargon , and re - branded practices and products . Yet KM has all - too - real effects and in part these result from its continuation of motivations and rationales that also characterize its precursors ; particularly BPR . Wilson hints at this early on when he states that ‘ [ T ] he growth of knowledge management as a strategy of consultancy companies is one of a series of such strategies dating from Taylor ' s … scientific management of the early part of the last century . ’ But , largely because his concerns lie elsewhere , he fails to develop this line of argument . In fact KM is very much a continuation of Taylorism , emerging from the demise of BPR and taking on the guise of BPR mark II . BPR , shorn of its macho - style language , originated in a concern with organizational operation that eschewed the simple - minded idea that any problem could be solved by throwing computers at it . The basis for this view was that most organizational problems resulted from hierarchical structures and practices . Hammer and Champy were quite clear that this was a cultural phenomenon particularly endemic in the US but not , say , in Japan – hence the need to re - engineer to beat off threats to US economic ascendancy 4 . Perhaps without realizing it , Hammer and Champy were offering a powerful and influential 3 I am grateful to one of my anonymous reviewers for referring me to Brown & Duguid’s paper – I take up some of the issues they raise in a more extended version of this paper currently in preparation . 4 The introductory section to their book clearly states that one of their primary aims is to aid in the re - establishing of US dominance in the face of competition from the Japanese and other Asian economies . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 3 example of structuration at work : Organizational hierarchies or silos were indeed simultaneously structured and structuring , enabling and constraining . Re - engineering was offering a way out of what otherwise might have been a paradox of perpetuation , it was just unfortunate that the resolution had to be couched in such destructive terms , and experienced as such by so many of those being re - engineered out of employment . Whatever its considerable shortcomings , BPR was based on what must now be seen as a well - founded supposition – organizations in the 21 st century would have to exhibit far more flexibility and responsiveness if they were to survive . Reliance on tried - and - tested practices , on reputation , on size and on previous durability were an almost certain recipe for failure and demise . If this was not evident in the early 1990s , then it is blindingly so now . The failure of the re - engineering strategy was that it saw flexibility and responsiveness in a crucially limited way ; largely focusing on the operational activities of an organization , and taking a short - term view . This was not too surprising , after all the full title of Hammer & Champy’s book was Re - engineering the Corporation , not the organization ; and corporations are a peculiar organizational form increasingly reliant on satisfying the – often short - term – demands of its stock - holders . 5 Knowledge Management takes up many of the same themes , albeit with a contrasting tone and prescription . How can organizations respond to the increasingly uncertain times of late 20 th and early 21 st century ? The KM - oriented strategy is that there has to be constant innovation and novelty with regard to products and other support offerings ; but without demanding internal destruction and devastation . Nonaka & Takeuchi stressed the necessity for organizations to take on the role of the knowledge creating company ; encouraging and fostering innovation by nurturing creative ideas amongst employees as they strove for mutually rewarding improvement and enhancement . Yet their ideas of KM were oriented around knowledge sharing in a context of employees working in organizations where there was high job security , with incremental and predictable promotion as one ascended the organizational hierarchy – Japan in the 1980s and early 1990s . Davenport & Prusak’s concept of KM built on Nonaka & Takeuchi’s work , but applied it in the very different corporate context of US companies in the 1990s , where there were few if any reasons for knowledgeable employees to share their expertise . Job insecurity and overall uncertainty do not engender 5 The recent book – and associated film – The Corporation by Joel Bakan [ 2 ] sees the contemporary corporation as ‘pathological’ . relationships between employees and employers based on mutual loyalty and trust . Why share knowledge with people who might very soon displace you or make you redundant ? In fact it rapidly becomes clear that the appeal of KM to large organizations is not really about the possible benefits of sharing and mutual support ; its allure is that it appears to offer a way in which organizations – specifically corporations – can seek to take advantage of the flexibility of the globalized and digitized economy of the 21 st century . As Bauman [ 4 ] has pointed out the mutual , if highly inequitable , reliance that existed between say Henry Ford and the workers in his car assembly factories no longer exists . In the early 20 th century Ford needed people to build his cars , and they had to be in close proximity to his factories ; so although the factory owner held the upper - hand , the workforce could exert some power over him . But this no longer applies ; production of goods and provision of services is increasingly outsourced or off - shored , and even once established in a particular place can fairly easily and cheaply be moved elsewhere . The mutual reliance has gone . 5 . Commodification of Knowledge Marx’s concept of abstract labour as something that confronts the workers as an alien and hostile force is now all too evident . If the cost of labour in one place is too high then it can either be reduced by threatening relocation or by actually re - locating to a cheaper source – or both . This readily applies to manual labour , increasingly de - skilled and centred on the use of cheap and portable technology ; but perhaps this is less evident for more skill - based knowledge work . To what extent is the knowledge worker confronted by some abstract concept of knowledge ? Is KM in practice the latest stage in the alienation of labour ? Is the relevance of KM to the corporate world based on its apparent resolution of the paradox that employees build up experience and knowledge during their employment , but then take it with them when they leave , retire or are dismissed ? The paradox lies at the basis of what might be termed the KM mantra , found in most of the standard texts and papers , usually in the first few pages or opening paragraphs . The mantra avers that knowledge is a process not an object , and that knowledge management is all about people , not technology . However much the authors themselves may actually believe this , it is never sustained beyond these opening sections . Instead there is a swift move to speaking of knowledge as an object , and of knowledge management as a form of resource management ; both undermining and contradicting the mantra . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 4 This disparity also exists in the divergence between the optimistic language prevalent among those writing about KM , and selling KM products and services , and the harsh economic and corporate reality . Nonaka & Takeuchi may have had a glimpse of some real socio - economic basis with regard to Japan in the early 1990s for such a beneficial view of knowledge sharing , but there is little if any basis for extending this roseate orientation beyond such narrow confines . Wilson has commented that organizations tend to ‘make us ill , with overwork , stress and the associated illnesses’ , rather than engender a culture of sharing and mutuality . He contrasts the view of people as ‘knowing , thinking , innovative beings’ with the standard CEO’s view of them as ‘units in the production process . ’ In a globalized , digitized economy Lyotard’s concept of knowledge may well offer a more appropriate analysis and guide to relevant practice 6 than that offered by Nonaka & Takeuchi , Davenport & Prusak or their legions of followers . Lyotard’s extended monograph The Postmodern Condition : A Report on Knowledge [ 17 ] first appeared in 1979 , many years before BPR or KM , and indeed predating the widespread use of the PC and the internet . Yet Lyotard manages to put his finger on precisely the issues that are now so critical . He lists a number of ‘technological transformations’ which we would now recognize as components of the global , digital , internet - connected economy , and then states that these transformations ‘can be expected to have a considerable impact on knowledge’ . The nature of knowledge cannot survive unchanged within this context of general transformation . It can fit into the new channels , and become operational , only if learning is translated into quantities of information . … We may thus expect a thorough exteriorisation of knowledge with respect to the “knower , ” at whatever point he or she may occupy in the knowledge process . The old principle that the acquisition of knowledge is indissociable from the training ( Bildung ) of minds , or even of individuals , is becoming obsolete and will become ever more so . The relationships of the suppliers and users of knowledge to the knowledge they supply and use is now tending , and will increasingly tend , to assume the form already taken by the relationship of commodity producers and consumers to the commodities they produce and consume – that is , the form 6 IS / MIS academics are always worried about relevance of value . Knowledge is and will be produced in order to be sold , it is and will be consumed in order to be valorised in a new production : in both cases , the goal is exchange . Knowledge ceases to be an end in itself , it loses its “use - value” . This was written in the late 1970s , but is if anything more apposite now than it was 25 years ago . Although writing from a narrative - eschewing stance of post - modernism , Lyotard relies on the Marxist categories of commodity , use - value and exchange . For Lyotard knowledge has become a commodity – something with an exchange value as well as use value . 7 Now on closer reading it appears that Lyotard’s knowledge is more akin to Wilson’s information or Varian’s [ 23 ] information goods . ( Lyotard’s phrase ‘quantities of information’ links to a footnote where he explains that ‘the unit of information is the bit’ – i . e . digitally encoded and stored , and so identical with Varian’s idea . ) But the general point he makes about the process of exteriorization of knowledge is a profound and important one . It is exactly this attempt to separate knowers – i . e . knowing subjects – from knowledge that forms the context against which it seems to make sense to talk of knowledge management in its current form . The knowledge / information distinction that Wilson makes – and with which I fully concur – does not quite map on to other languages ; in French there are two words for knowledge – savoir and connaissance . Lyotard uses the term savoir throughout – the subtitle of his monograph is rapport sur le savoir . There are several ways in which the two French words might be distinguished , but a useful guide is provided by Foucault in The Archaeology of Knowledge [ 13 ] where he argues that ‘instead of exploring the consciousness / knowledge [ connaissance ] / science axis ( which cannot escape subjectivity ) , archaeology explores the discursive practice / knowledge [ savoir ] / science axis’ . In the English edition he makes this even more explicit ‘ [ B ] y connaissance I mean the relation of the subject to the object and the formal rules that govern it . Savoir refers to the conditions that are necessary in a particular period for this or that type of object to be given to connaissance and for this or that enunciation to be formulated’ . So Lyotard’s use of the term le savoir may be deemed entirely appropriate since he is pointing to the changes in the conditions that Foucault mentions – and Foucault’s point about ‘the discursive practice / savoir / science axis is very much an 7 His observation that knowledge loses its use - value is misleading if not downright erroneous . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 5 anticipation of Wenger’s concept of community of practice . In English , however , these substantial distinctions are completely lost , 8 and in order to bring them to people’s attention we must revert to the unambiguous dichotomy between knowledge and information presented by Wilson . 9 It is , however , important to understand that Lyotard’s analysis is correct to the extent that under existing informational capitalism there is an overwhelming pressure to separate knowledge from knowing subjects as a necessary condition in making knowledge into a commodity . Yet it is equally important to acknowledge that this objective is ultimately a contradictory and unattainable one . This dialectic of necessity and contradiction can be grasped by consideration of the concepts of use - value and exchange - value in a little more detail . In chapter 1 of Capital [ 18 ] Marx offers the following definition of use - value ; ‘The utility of a thing makes it a use - value’ . ‘Use - values become a reality only by use or consumption : they also constitute the substance of all wealth , whatever may be the social form of that wealth . In the form of society we are about to consider , they are , in addition , the material depositories of exchange - value . ’ Exchange - value ‘at first sight , presents itself as a quantitative relation , as the proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort , a relation constantly changing with time and place . Hence exchange - value appears to be something accidental and purely relative , and consequently an intrinsic value , i . e . , an exchange - value that is inseparably connected with , inherent in commodities , seems a contradiction in terms . … Therefore , the common substance that manifests itself in the exchange - value of commodities , whenever they are exchanged , is their value . The progress of our investigation will show that exchange - value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or be expressed . ’ So for our present purposes knowledge in the traditional sense can only have a use - value , and this can only be self - generated ; that is what is implied by Schutz’s observation that knowledge is 8 In German there are also several terms for knowledge and becoming knowledgeable – e . g . Wissenschaft , Erkentniss , Erleben , Efahrung , Bildung 9 The savoir / connaissance distinction as outlined by Foucault also appears to have some resonance with Polanyi’s [ 20 ] distinction between tacit and explicit knowledge ; but this is a distinction which has been completely mis - used within the KM literature , starting with Nonaka & Takeuchi . There is a good case to be made for expunging all mention of Polanyi’s ideas from KM when they are used via the conceptual lens provided by Nonaka and Takeuchi’s work . ‘biographically determined’ [ 21 ] . But Lyotard’s argument is that in the informational mode of capitalism – to use Castells’ term [ 7 ] – there are pressures on knowledge to assume a commodified form . This can only be accomplished if knowledge is exteriorized – since commodities have to be granted an independent existence from their producers . This exteriorization is the result of a process that Marx characterized as ‘the fetishism of commodities’ ; the process whereby ‘the social character of men’s labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour’ . … the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation , existing not between themselves , but between the products of their labour . This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities , social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses . In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the subjective excitation of our optic nerve , but as the objective form of something outside the eye itself . But , in the act of seeing , there is at all events , an actual passage of light from one thing to another , from the external object to the eye . The consequence of this analysis of KM is that the term itself can now be seen to rest on a critical misconception ; most of the writings on KM assume that knowledge is an exteriorized or potentially exteriorized object : A product and ultimately , or fundamentally , a commodity . The context of informational capitalism forms the backdrop and motive force behind this category mistake , it is not something that has been conjured up – wittingly or unwittingly – by the KM - brigade . Lyotard’s report on knowledge offers an excellent summary of this causal foundation ; and it is crucial that it be understood that this commodification of knowledge can never actually succeed . Fetishism is precisely the phenomenon whereby humans empower the inanimate with an animate nature that is actually ineluctably and indelibly human . Marx gives a succinct example of this tendency when he points to the common misperception that light from an object derives from the object itself rather than originating in ‘the subjective excitation of our optic nerve’ . So too with knowledge : So too with communication . Fetishism is the process whereby that which is in reality a relationship among people , appears as a relation among things . But there is a further profound misconception in the current KM literature , one that is bound up with Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 6 commodity fetishism precisely because it is a misapprehension about the relationships among people . Particularly in the US context , KM is assumed to relate to exteriorized knowledge produced by individuated people . 10 We may all scoff at Margaret Thatcher’s phrase that ‘there is no such thing as society’ ; but much of the KM literature develops from a similar basis and fails to engage with what ought to be the all - too - obvious point that although knowledge is indeed ‘biographically determined’ , none of us learns anything as an isolated , non - social individual . 6 . Cognition as a Social Process The move from consideration of the learning organization to knowledge management is symptomatic of the general move from consideration of knowledge as a social phenomenon to an individual one – the latter being the common assumption and justification underlying many government policies for funding universities , deliberating on the ‘value of education’ and so on . Rejection of the concept of a learning organization itself may have been because people felt uncomfortable with the concept of an organization actually learning – what Mary Douglas has described as people’s nervousness at ‘the crude political analogy between the individual mind and the social influences on cognition’ [ 11 ] . But Douglas is adamant that to understand cognition one must grasp its essentially social nature . She quotes Fleck to the effect that ‘cognition is the most socially - conditioned activity of man ( sic ) , and knowledge is the paramount social creation’ . This is not to undermine the argument that knowledge is individually experienced and biographically determined ; but it is to stress that the process of developing knowledge is a social , supra - individual achievement . Moreover her argument focuses specifically on institutions noting that they are ‘organizers of information’ , and knowledge cannot simply be seen as ‘representing but as intervening’ . ( Organizations are not the same as institutions – particularly in the sense of the term used by Douglas – but in order for organizations to exist at all there must be some existing institutional base . ) Current debates about education are based on the same misapprehension , and with severe social results . Education is no longer seen as a public good , but as something to be bought and consumed privately . The standard KM literature develops from this tacit , but powerful view that the knowing subject is an individuated entity operating as an individual agent in 10 The work developing from the individualization thesis is highly significant in this regard , but reasons of space preclude any further discussion at this point – see Beck & Beck [ 5 ] . a market context . This is an inevitable accompaniment to the presumption that individuals can release their knowledge commodities on to the market for exchange , or that they can be recompensed for their knowledge input to the corporate product . It can then appear that KM is all about recompensing individuated knowers for their expertise in such a way that the organization for which they work – or to which they are briefly sub - contracted – can then leverage this commodity . Hence the current concern with knowledge assets and intellectual capital . Both of these terms clearly point towards market - based exchange . Knowledge management is something in which organizations should expend resources since it will facilitate leveraging , i . e . borrowing people’s expertise with a view to potential gain . The calculation and management practices involved are an extension of Taylorism from manual to intellectual labour . Knowledge becomes something to be measured in terms of output , the value of which can be contrasted with the costs of production . This view must be set against the predominant views of KM which see it either as a neutral term embodying ideas of managing a scarce and valuable resource as efficiently and effectively as possible ; or as positively beneficial , aiming at encouraging sharing of expertise , competencies , skills and experiences . If anything is to be salvaged from KM , particularly in an ethical sense , then it must speedily and widely become admitted that , as with The Force in Star Wars , there is a dark side to KM and it is this side that is very much in the ascendancy at present . Frank Land has been referring to this dark aspect for several years [ 16 ] . But it is crucial to acknowledge that this ascendancy is the result of the context within which KM has emerged , it is not the result of some pan - Galactic corporate conspiracy . 11 A quick and simple contrast between what we might term the dark side and the light side of KM is indicated in table 1 . Although the two sides are presented here in the form of caricatures , it is not stretching credulity too much to caution that much of what is written under the term knowledge management emanates from and embraces the central concepts of the dark rather than the light side . In terms of selling KM to organizations the message is clearly one of make the most of your assets – your assets being not just the tangible and financial ones , but the organizational knowledge and skills all - too - often only realizable through your employees . The dream of somehow being able to tap - 11 Again reasons of space preclude anything more than an indication of the nature of this context – as a start readers should refer to the works by Bauman , Beck & Beck , and Lyotard . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 7 in to that asset without being too dependent on the people themselves is part of the allure of KM – a glance at the ways in which KM is marketed to companies shows this to be the case . ( Conversely at the national level governments have responded to their catastrophic loss of sovereignty by re - inventing themselves as employment agencies , touting their workforce as skilled , flexible ( i . e . easy to dismiss ) , and cheap – particularly their reserve army of intellectual labour : Knowledge Workers R Us ! ) Table 1 – The Two Sides of Knowledge Management Knowledge Management DARK LIGHT Main orientation Technology , particularly ICT People ; learning ; sharing Knowledge seen as Asset and commodity Biographical experience Key processes Leveraging and adding ( share - holder ) value Learning and innovating Professional or expert orientation Consultant ; Chief Knowledge Officer ; Engineer Teacher ; mentor Analytical stance Accountant ; Consultant Anthropologist ; Sociologist Example terms Knowledge products ; Knowledge assets ; Re - usable learning objects ; Leveraging ; Intellectual Capital Books ; Learning Model of development The Market The Agora 7 . The Ethical Dimension – Agora , Oikos , Ecclesia BPR came to be seen as ethically deficient – if not unethical in itself . Perhaps we should have been alerted to its weaknesses and essentially in - human – people - forgetting – nature by the contradiction in its very name and principles . Davenport was in fact too charitable in calling it the ‘fad that forgot people’ ; in reality it often destroyed people or heaped misery upon them . BPR appeared to be focused on business processes , but in operating with an engineering perspective to treat social issues it was always likely to result in mechanistic and non - human strategies – at best metaphorically , and at worst in reality . KM appeared to emerge from the learning of this lesson , after all one of its earliest proponents had gone from BPR advocate to critic precisely because of its lack of human perspective . But again the name itself should alert us to what are endemic problems rather than accidental features . For many within the fields of IS the term knowledge management evokes no specific reaction ; but to those outside these rarefied confines their first response on being confronted with the phrase is to question its meaning and often to wonder whether it is of Orwellian coinage – something from 1984 . The concept of managing knowledge seems to fall under the remit of The Ministry of Truth rather than the Knowledge - Creating Company – i . e . with knowledge equating to propaganda , something that needs to be controlled in the sense of being manipulated and distorted . 12 All of this takes place in the context of a globalized and digitized economy . Globalization can mean many things , but one meaning is the increased mobility of capital ; capital does not simply circulate it can be transported , dispersed , re - located – what is sometimes called fixed capital is now nothing of the sort . The factory owner does not need a particular workforce , only a workforce in some form ; and preferably where the red - tape – i . e . protection of workers’ rights , costs such as healthcare , welfare etc . – are minimal or non - existent . Mannheim’s free - floating intellectuals have been replaced by the free - floating owners . This is where KM enters the scene . Variable capital , i . e . people , is expensive and difficult to manage ; particularly when people do not exist en - masse but rather consist of small groups of people with particular skills or qualifications . When this occurs there is a temptation to replace variable capital as far as possible by fixed capital – through mechanization or automation . KM holds out the promise of both replacing variable capital with fixed , and substituting dependency on particular knowledgeable people with leveraging of expertise in a more abstract form . What are the alternatives ? Unlike Star Wars there might not be a light side of KM . But even if there is not , the IS community has to begin to understand the developing critique of KM and to develop that 12 Although the phrase The Knowledge Creating Company also has something of this resonance , perhaps evoking scenes from the film Brazil or a Kafkaesque novel . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 8 critique within its own confines . The continued failure to do so to date is part of a more prolonged neglect of the human and social aspects of many of the key issues of IS / MIS . One possible corrective to the dominant view of KM is to contrast the concept of the market with that of the agora . The market as has already been indicated is a space of exchange , where everything has to be available as an exchange - value , and agents can buy and sell commodities at whatever is deemed to be the going rate . By definition and design the market is mechanistic – one talks of market mechanisms ; and it is non - human in the sense that it does not operate on the basis of people’s beliefs and priorities unless they can be translated into prices and exchanges . In contrast the agora was that place between the private realm , the oikos , and the public realm of the state , the ecclesia . Bauman defines it as ‘the space neither private nor public , but more exactly private and public at the same time . The space where private problems meet in a meaningful way – that is , not just to draw narcissistic pleasures or in search of some therapy through public display , but to seek collectively managed levers powerful enough to lift individuals from their privately suffered misery ; the space where such ideas may be born and take shape as the ‘public good’ , the ‘just society’ or ‘shared values’ . The history of modern societies has been a long war of attrition ‘launched against the agora from the side of the ecclesia ’ [ 4 ] . Arendt makes the point that this pressure from the ecclesia often took the form of efforts to transform the agora ‘into an assemblage of shops like the bazaars of oriental despotism’ [ 1 ] . In the 21 st century that process has continued to the extent that knowledge itself is for sale in the bazaar , and the sellers are individual merchants crossing in to the agora from the oikos . In such a context knowledge is going to be used cynically rather than clinically – the dual terms are taken from Bourdieu , but used in this context by Bauman . As such cynical KM will be centred around Orwellian machinations , as well as nudges and winks and leaks . It will rely on disinformation , PR and spin ; and its tools and techniques will be , as Land has pointed out , the shredding machine , the locked cabinet , the missing files , the incomplete minutes , the secret memos , the non - disclosure orders , and ultimately the mendacity now associated with Enron and WorldCom . Some might see these as one - offs , but contemporary critiques of global corporations such as those by Bakan [ 2 ] and Korten [ 15 ] paint a picture of corporate practices – including BPR and KM and whatever is the current fad – that sees unethical , destructive and in - human policies and practices as endemic and systematic : The all too tangible victory of the cynical over the clinical . Peter Drucker virtually coined the terms Knowledge Society and Knowledge Economy ; yet Wilson [ 25 ] notes that at Delphi Group ' s Collaborative Commerce Summit in 2001 it was reported that Drucker ‘scoffs at the notion of knowledge management’ “You can ' t manage knowledge , ” he says . “Knowledge is between two ears , and only between two ears . ” To that extent , Drucker says it ' s really about what individual workers do with the knowledge they have . When employees leave a company , he says , their knowledge goes with them , no matter how much they ' ve shared . Coming from Drucker these words are a powerful denigration , offering profound support to Wilson’s position . Drucker is also credited with coining the aphorism that ‘in the knowledge society there are no conscripts , only volunteers’ ; but lacking any evidence to the contrary it appears that the KM project as currently envisioned is precisely to find ways in which organizations can in some fashion conscript knowledge workers and lay proprietorial claim to some of the ‘stuff between their ears’ . Ultimately this cannot be successful , but the result is social and economic havoc . If knowledge is used clinically then it ought to assist in combating ‘what we see as improper , harmful or offending our moral sense’ . So unless we specifically choose to use knowledge in this latter sense we are in danger of using it unethically ; and that is precisely the default position of KM . In recent years ISWORLD has been replete with requests for tools for measuring knowledge , ideas about re - usable learning objects , intellectual capital and the like . There has been a notable absence of requests for ways in which the IS community might develop KM in a more clinical form in order to contribute to the rebirth of the agora and the shaping of ideas about the just society and the public good . [ 1 ] Arendt , H . , The Human Condition , University of Chicago Press , 1998 . [ 2 ] Bakan , J . , The Corporation : The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power , Constable , London , 2004 [ 3 ] Baskerville , R . , “The Theoretical Foundations of Knowledge Management” , unpublished draft 1998 . [ 4 ] Bauman , Z . , In Search of Politics , Polity , Cambridge , 1999 . [ 5 ] Beck , U . , & Beck - Gernsheim , E . , Individualization : Institutionalized Individualism and Its Social and Political Consequences , Sage , London , 2001 . Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 9 [ 6 ] Brown , J . S . , & Duguid , P . , ‘Balancing Act : How to Capture Knowledge without Killing it’ , Harvard Business Review , May - June 2000 , pp73 - 80 . [ 7 ] Castells , M . , The Information Age : Economy , Society and Culture , 3 vols , Blackwell , Oxford , 1998 . [ 8 ] Davenport , T . H . , Process Innovation : Reengineering Work Through Information Technology , Harvard Business School Press , Harvard , 1992 . [ 9 ] Davenport , T . H . , “The Fad That Forgot People” , Fast Company , Issue 01 , November 1995 ; available at http : / / www . fastcompany . com / online / 01 / reengin . html . [ 10 ] Davenport , T . H . , & Prusak , L . , Working Knowledge : How Organizations Manage What They Know , Harvard Business School Press , Harvard , 1997 . [ 11 ] Douglas , M . , How Institutions Think , RKP , London , 1987 . [ 12 ] Ekbia , H . , & Kling , R . , “Power in Knowledge Management in Late Modern Times” , Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Academy of Management , 2003 ; available at http : / / bulldog2 . redlands . edu / fac / hamid _ ekbia / [ 13 ] Foucault , M . , The Archaeology of Knowledge , Tavistock , London , 1972 . [ 14 ] Hammer , M . , & Champy , J . , Reengineering the Corporation : A Manifesto for Business Revolution , Nicolas Brearley , London , 1993 . [ 15 ] Korten , D . C . , The Post - Corporate World , Kumarian , West Hartford CT , 1999 . [ 16 ] Land , F . , “The Darker Side of Knowledge Management” , The Software Practitioner , vol 14 [ 5 ] , Sep - Oct 2004 . [ 17 ] Lyotard , J - F . , The Postmodern Condition : A Report on Knowledge , Manchester University Press , Manchester , 1979 . [ 18 ] Marx , Capital – Volume 1 – chapter 1 , available in electronic from http : / / www . marxists . org / archive / marx / works / 1867 - c1 / ch01 . htm [ 19 ] Nonaka , I . , & Takeuchi , H . , The Knowledge Creating Company , OUP , Oxford , 1975 . [ 20 ] Polanyi , M . , The Tacit Dimension , Gloucester , MA , 1983 . [ 21 ] Schutz , A . , The phenomenology of the social world . Northwestern University Press , Evanston , IL , 1967 [ 22 ] Sveiby , K - E . , ‘What is Information’ ; available at http : / / www . sveiby . com / articles / Information . html # contradict ion ; 1998 [ 23 ] Varian , H . , “Markets for Information Goods” , April 1998 ( revised : October 16 , 1998 ) available at http : / / www . sims . berkeley . edu / ~ hal / Papers / japan / [ 24 ] Wenger , E . , Communities of Practice , CUP , Cambridge , 1998 . [ 25 ] Wilson , T . D . , “The Nonsense of Knowledge Management” , Information Research , Vol . 8 No . 1 , October 2002 ; available at http : / / informationr . net / ir / 8 - 1 / paper144 . html Proceedings of the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2006 10