Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology ( STROBE ) : Explanation and Elaboration Jan P . Vandenbroucke , MD ; Erik von Elm , MD ; Douglas G . Altman , DSc ; Peter C . Gøtzsche , MD ; Cynthia D . Mulrow , MD ; Stuart J . Pocock , PhD ; Charles Poole , ScD ; James J . Schlesselman , PhD ; and Matthias Egger , MD , for the STROBE initiative Much medical research is observational . The reporting of observa - tional studies is often of insufficient quality . Poor reporting hampers the assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of a study and the generalizability of its results . Taking into account empirical evidence and theoretical considerations , a group of methodologists , research - ers , and editors developed the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology ( STROBE ) recommendations to improve the quality of reporting of observational studies . The STROBE Statement consists of a checklist of 22 items , which relate to the title , abstract , introduction , methods , results , and dis - cussion sections of articles . Eighteen items are common to cohort studies , case – control studies , and cross - sectional studies , and 4 are specific to each of the 3 study designs . The STROBE Statement provides guidance to authors about how to improve the reporting of observational studies and facilitates critical appraisal and inter - pretation of studies by reviewers , journal editors , and readers . This explanatory and elaboration document is intended to en - hance the use , understanding , and dissemination of the STROBE Statement . The meaning and rationale for each checklist item are presented . For each item , 1 or several published examples and , where possible , references to relevant empirical studies and meth - odological literature are provided . Examples of useful flow diagrams are also included . The STROBE Statement , this document , and the associated Web site ( www . strobe - statement . org ) should be helpful resources to improve reporting of observational research . Ann Intern Med . 2007 ; 147 : W - 163 – W - 194 . www . annals . org For author affiliations , see end of text . Editor’s Note : In order to encourage dissemination of the STROBE Statement , this article is being published simulta - neously in Annals of Internal Medicine , Epidemiology , and PLoS Medicine . It is freely accessible on the Annals of Inter - nal Medicine Web site ( www . annals . org ) and will also be published on the Web sites of Epidemiology and PLoS Med - icine . The authors jointly hold the copyright of this article . For details on further use , see the STROBE Web site ( www . strobe - statement . org ) . R ational health care practices require knowledge about the etiology and pathogenesis , diagnosis , prognosis , and treatment of diseases . Randomized trials provide valu - able evidence about treatments and other interventions . However , much of clinical or public health knowledge comes from observational research ( 1 ) . About 9 of 10 re - search papers published in clinical specialty journals de - scribe observational research ( 2 , 3 ) . T HE STROBE S TATEMENT Reporting of observational research is often not de - tailed and clear enough to assess the strengths and weak - nesses of the investigation ( 4 , 5 ) . To improve the reporting of observational research , we developed a checklist of items that should be addressed : the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology ( STROBE ) Statement ( Appendix Table ) . Items relate to the title , ab - stract , introduction , methods , results , and discussion sec - tions of articles . The STROBE Statement has recently been published in several journals ( 6 ) . Our aim is to ensure clear presentation of what was planned , done , and found in an observational study . We stress that the recommenda - tions are not prescriptions for setting up or conducting studies , nor do they dictate methodology or mandate a uniform presentation . STROBE provides general reporting recommenda - tions for descriptive observational studies and studies that investigate associations between exposures and health out - comes . STROBE addresses the 3 main types of observa - tional studies : cohort , case – control , and cross - sectional studies . Authors use diverse terminology to describe these study designs . For instance , “follow - up study” and “longi - tudinal study” are used as synonyms for “cohort study , ” and “prevalence study” as a synonym for “cross - sectional study . ” We chose the present terminology because it is in common use . Unfortunately , terminology is often used in - correctly ( 7 ) or imprecisely ( 8 ) . In Box 1 , we describe the hallmarks of the 3 study designs . T HE S COPE OF O BSERVATIONAL R ESEARCH Observational studies serve a wide range of purposes , from reporting a ﬁrst hint of a potential cause of a disease to verifying the magnitude of previously reported associa - tions . Ideas for studies may arise from clinical observations or from biological insight . Ideas may also arise from infor - mal looks at data that lead to further explorations . Like a clinician who has seen thousands of patients and notes 1 that strikes her attention , the researcher may note some - thing special in the data . Adjusting for multiple looks at See also : Print Related article . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 573 Annals of Internal Medicine www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 163 Academia and Clinic Appendix Table . The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology ( STROBE ) Statement : Checklist of Items That Should Be Addressed in Reports of Observational Studies Item ItemNumber Recommendation Title and abstract 1 ( a ) Indicate the study’s design with a commonly used term in the title or the abstract . ( b ) Provide in the abstract an informative and balanced summary of what was done and what was found . Introduction Background / rationale 2 Explain the scientific background and rationale for the investigation being reported . Objectives 3 State specific objectives , including any prespecified hypotheses . Methods Study design 4 Present key elements of study design early in the paper . Setting 5 Describe the setting , locations , and relevant dates , including periods of recruitment , exposure , follow - up , and data collection . Participants 6 ( a ) Cohort study : Give the eligibility criteria , and the sources and methods of selection of participants . Describe methods of follow - up . Case – control study : Give the eligibility criteria , and the sources and methods of case ascertainment and control selection . Give the rationale for the choice of cases and controls . Cross - sectional study : Give the eligibility criteria , and the sources and methods of selection of participants . ( b ) Cohort study : For matched studies , give matching criteria and number of exposed and unexposed . Case – control study : For matched studies , give matching criteria and the number of controls per case . Variables 7 Clearly define all outcomes , exposures , predictors , potential confounders , and effect modifiers . Give diagnostic criteria , if applicable . Data sources / measurement 8 * For each variable of interest , give sources of data and details of methods of assessment ( measurement ) . Describe comparability of assessment methods if there is more than one group . Bias 9 Describe any efforts to address potential sources of bias . Study size 10 Explain how the study size was arrived at . Quantitativevariables 11 Explain how quantitative variables were handled in the analyses . If applicable , describe which groupings were chosen , and why . Statisticalmethods 12 ( a ) Describe all statistical methods , including those used to control for confounding . ( b ) Describe any methods used to examine subgroups and interactions . ( c ) Explain how missing data were addressed . ( d ) Cohort study : If applicable , explain how loss to follow - up was addressed . Case – control study : If applicable , explain how matching of cases and controls was addressed . Cross - sectional study : If applicable , describe analytical methods taking account of sampling strategy . ( e ) Describe any sensitivity analyses . Results Participants 13 * ( a ) Report the numbers of individuals at each stage of the study—e . g . , numbers potentially eligible , examined for eligibility , confirmed eligible , included in the study , completing follow - up , and analyzed . ( b ) Give reasons for nonparticipation at each stage . ( c ) Consider use of a flow diagram . Descriptive data 14 * ( a ) Give characteristics of study participants ( e . g . , demographic , clinical , social ) and information on exposures and potential confounders . ( b ) Indicate the number of participants with missing data for each variable of interest . ( c ) Cohort study : Summarize follow - up time—e . g . , average and total amount . Outcome data 15 * Cohort study : Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures over time . Case – control study : Report numbers in each exposure category or summary measures of exposure . Cross - sectional study : Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures . Main results 16 ( a ) Give unadjusted estimates and , if applicable , confounder - adjusted estimates and their precision ( e . g . , 95 % confidence intervals ) . Make clear which confounders were adjusted for and why they were included . ( b ) Report category boundaries when continuous variables were categorized . ( c ) If relevant , consider translating estimates of relative risk into absolute risk for a meaningful time period . Other analyses 17 Report other analyses done—e . g . , analyses of subgroups and interactions and sensitivity analyses . Discussion Key results 18 Summarize key results with reference to study objectives . Limitations 19 Discuss limitations of the study , taking into account sources of potential bias or imprecision . Discuss both direction and magnitude of any potential bias . Interpretation 20 Give a cautious overall interpretation of results considering objectives , limitations , multiplicity of analyses , results from similar studies , and other relevant evidence . Generalizability 21 Discuss the generalizability ( external validity ) of the study results . Other information Funding 22 Give the source of funding and the role of the funders for the present study and , if applicable , for the original study on which the present article is based . * Give such information separately for cases and controls in case – control studies , and , if applicable , for exposed and unexposed groups in cohort and cross - sectional studies . Separate versions of the checklist for cohort , case – control , and cross - sectional studies are available on the STROBE Web site ( www . strobe - statement . org ) . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 164 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org the data may not be possible or desirable ( 9 ) , but further studies to conﬁrm or refute initial observations are often needed ( 10 ) . Existing data may be used to examine new ideas about potential causal factors , and may be sufﬁcient for rejection or conﬁrmation . In other instances , studies follow that are speciﬁcally designed to overcome potential problems with previous reports . The latter studies will gather new data and will be planned for that purpose , in contrast to analyses of existing data . This leads to diverse viewpoints , for example , on the merits of looking at sub - groups or the importance of a predetermined sample size . STROBE tries to accommodate these diverse uses of ob - servational research—from discovery to refutation or con - ﬁrmation . Where necessary , we will indicate in what cir - cumstances speciﬁc recommendations apply . H OW TO U SE THIS P APER This paper is linked to the shorter STROBE paper that introduced the items of the checklist in several jour - nals ( 6 ) , and forms an integral part of the STROBE State - ment . Our intention is to explain how to report research well , not how research should be done . We offer a detailed explanation for each checklist item . Each explanation is preceded by an example of what we consider transparent reporting . This does not mean that the study from which the example was taken was uniformly well reported or well done ; nor does it mean that its ﬁndings were reliable , in the sense that they were later conﬁrmed by others : It only means that this particular item was well reported in that study . In addition to explanations and examples , we in - cluded boxes with supplementary information . These are intended for readers who want to refresh their memories about some theoretical points or be quickly informed about technical background details . A full understanding of these points may require studying the textbooks or methodological papers that are cited . STROBE recommendations do not speciﬁcally address Box 1 . Main Study Designs Covered by STROBE Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 165 topics , such as genetic linkage studies , infectious disease modeling , or case reports and case series ( 11 , 12 ) . As many of the key elements in STROBE apply to these designs , authors who report such studies may nevertheless ﬁnd our recommendations useful . For authors of observational studies that speciﬁcally address diagnostic tests , tumor markers , and genetic associations , STARD ( 13 ) , REMARK ( 14 ) , and STREGA ( 15 ) recommendations may be partic - ularly useful . T HE I TEMS IN THE STROBE C HECKLIST We now discuss and explain the 22 items in the STROBE checklist ( Appendix Table ) and give published examples for each item . Some examples have been edited by removing citations or spelling out abbreviations . Eigh - teen items apply to all 3 study designs , whereas 4 are de - sign - speciﬁc . Starred items ( for example , item 8 * ) indicate that the information should be given separately for cases and controls in case – control studies , or exposed and unex - posed groups in cohort and cross - sectional studies . We ad - vise authors to address all items somewhere in their paper , but we do not prescribe a precise location or order . For instance , we discuss the reporting of results under a num - ber of separate items , while recognizing that authors might address several items within a single section of text or in a table . Title and Abstract 1 ( a ) Indicate the study’s design with a commonly used term in the title or the abstract . Example “Leukaemia incidence among workers in the shoe and boot manufacturing industry : a case – control study” ( 18 ) . Explanation Readers should be able to easily identify the design that was used from the title or abstract . An explicit , com - monly used term for the study design also helps ensure correct indexing of articles in electronic databases ( 19 , 20 ) . 1 ( b ) Provide in the abstract an informative and balanced summary of what was done and what was found . Example “Background : The expected survival of HIV - infected patients is of major public health interest . Objective : To estimate survival time and age - speciﬁc mortality rates of an HIV - infected population compared with that of the general population . Design : Population - based cohort study . Setting : All HIV - infected persons receiving care in Denmark from 1995 to 2005 . Patients : Each member of the nationwide Danish HIV Cohort Study was matched with as many as 99 persons from the general population according to sex , date of birth , and municipality of residence . Measurements : The authors computed Kaplan – Meier life tables with age as the time scale to estimate survival from age 25 years . Patients with HIV infection and corre - sponding persons from the general population were ob - served from the date of the patient’s HIV diagnosis until death , emigration , or 1 May 2005 . Results : 3990 HIV - infected patients and 379 872 per - sons from the general population were included in the study , yielding 22 744 ( median , 5 . 8 y / person ) and 2 689 287 ( median , 8 . 4 y / person ) person - years of observa - tion . Three percent of participants were lost to follow - up . From age 25 years , the median survival was 19 . 9 years ( 95 % CI , 18 . 5 to 21 . 3 ) among patients with HIV infec - tion and 51 . 1 years ( CI , 50 . 9 to 51 . 5 ) among the general population . For HIV - infected patients , survival increased to 32 . 5 years ( CI , 29 . 4 to 34 . 7 ) during the 2000 to 2005 period . In the subgroup that excluded persons with known hepatitis C coinfection ( 16 % ) , median survival was 38 . 9 years ( CI , 35 . 4 to 40 . 1 ) during this same period . The rel - ative mortality rates for patients with HIV infection com - pared with those for the general population decreased with increasing age , whereas the excess mortality rate increased with increasing age . Limitations : The observed mortality rates are assumed to apply beyond the current maximum observation time of 10 years . Conclusions : The estimated median survival is more than 35 years for a young person diagnosed with HIV infection in the late highly active antiretroviral therapy era . However , an ongoing effort is still needed to further reduce mortality rates for these persons compared with the general population” ( 21 ) . Explanation The abstract provides key information that enables readers to understand a study and decide whether to read the article . Typical components include a statement of the research question , a short description of methods and re - sults , and a conclusion ( 22 ) . Abstracts should summarize key details of studies and should only present information that is provided in the article . We advise presenting key results in a numerical form that includes numbers of par - ticipants , estimates of associations , and appropriate mea - sures of variability and uncertainty ( for example , odds ra - tios with conﬁdence intervals ) . We regard it insufﬁcient to state only that an exposure is or is not signiﬁcantly associ - ated with an outcome . A series of headings pertaining to the background , de - sign , conduct , and analysis of a study may help readers acquire the essential information rapidly ( 23 ) . Many jour - nals require such structured abstracts , which tend to be of higher quality and more readily informative than unstruc - tured summaries ( 24 , 25 ) . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 166 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org Introduction The Introduction section should describe why the study was done and what questions and hypotheses it ad - dresses . It should allow others to understand the study’s context and judge its potential contribution to current knowledge . 2 Background / rationale : Explain the scientiﬁc background and rationale for the investigation being reported . Example “Concerns about the rising prevalence of obesity in children and adolescents have focused on the well - docu - mented associations between childhood obesity and in - creased cardiovascular risk and mortality in adulthood . Childhood obesity has considerable social and psychologi - cal consequences within childhood and adolescence , yet little is known about social , socioeconomic , and psycholog - ical consequences in adult life . A recent systematic review found no longitudinal studies on the outcomes of child - hood obesity other than physical health outcomes and only two longitudinal studies of the socioeconomic effects of obesity in adolescence . Gortmaker et al . found that US women who had been obese in late adolescence in 1981 were less likely to be married and had lower incomes seven years later than women who had not been overweight , while men who had been overweight were less likely to be married . Sargent et al . found that UK women , but not men , who had been obese at 16 years in 1974 earned 7 . 4 % less than their nonobese peers at age 23 . . . . We used longitudinal data from the 1970 British birth cohort to examine the adult socioeconomic , educational , social , and psychological outcomes of childhood obesity” ( 26 ) . Explanation The scientiﬁc background of the study provides im - portant context for readers . It sets the stage for the study and describes its focus . It gives an overview of what is known on a topic and what gaps in current knowledge are addressed by the study . Background material should note recent pertinent studies and any systematic reviews of per - tinent studies . 3 Objectives : State speciﬁc objectives , including any prespeci - ﬁed hypotheses . Example “Our primary objectives were to 1 ) determine the prevalence of domestic violence among female patients pre - senting to four community - based , primary care , adult medicine practices that serve patients of diverse socioeco - nomic background and 2 ) identify demographic and clin - ical differences between currently abused patients and pa - tients not currently being abused” ( 27 ) . Explanation Objectives are the detailed aims of the study . Well - crafted objectives specify populations , exposures and out - comes , and parameters that will be estimated . They may be formulated as speciﬁc hypotheses or as questions that the study was designed to address . In some situations , objec - tives may be less speciﬁc , for example , in early discovery phases . Regardless , the report should clearly reﬂect the in - vestigators’ intentions . For example , if important sub - groups or additional analyses were not the original aim of the study but arose during data analysis , they should be described accordingly ( see items 4 , 17 , and 20 ) . Methods The Methods section should describe what was planned and what was done in sufﬁcient detail to allow others to understand the essential aspects of the study , to judge whether the methods were adequate to provide reli - able and valid answers , and to assess whether any devia - tions from the original plan were reasonable . 4 Study design : Present key elements of study design early in the paper . Example “We used a case - crossover design , a variation of a case – control design that is appropriate when a brief exposure ( driver’s phone use ) causes a transient rise in the risk of a rare outcome ( a crash ) . We compared a driver’s use of a mobile phone at the estimated time of a crash with the same driver’s use during another suitable time period . Be - cause drivers are their own controls , the design controls for characteristics of the driver that may affect the risk of a crash but do not change over a short period of time . As it is important that risks during control periods and crash trips are similar , we compared phone activity during the hazard interval ( time immediately before the crash ) with phone activity during control intervals ( equivalent times during which participants were driving but did not crash ) in the previous week” ( 28 ) . Explanation We advise presenting key elements of study design early in the methods section ( or at the end of the introduc - tion ) so that readers can understand the basics of the study . For example , authors should indicate that the study was a cohort study , which followed people over a particular time period , and describe the group of persons that comprised the cohort and their exposure status . Similarly , if the in - vestigation used a case – control design , the cases and con - trols and their source population should be described . If the study was a cross - sectional survey , the population and the point in time at which the cross - section was taken should be mentioned . When a study is a variant of the 3 main study types , there is an additional need for clarity . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 167 For instance , for a case - crossover study , 1 of the variants of the case – control design , a succinct description of the prin - ciples was given in the example above ( 28 ) . We recommend that authors refrain from simply call - ing a study “prospective” or “retrospective , ” because these terms are ill deﬁned ( 29 ) . One usage sees cohort and pro - spective as synonymous and reserves the word retrospective for case – control studies ( 30 ) . A second usage distinguishes prospective and retrospective cohort studies according to the timing of data collection relative to when the idea for the study was developed ( 31 ) . A third usage distinguishes prospective and retrospective case – control studies depend - ing on whether the data about the exposure of interest existed when cases were selected ( 32 ) . Some advise against using these terms ( 33 ) , or adopting the alternatives “con - current” and “historical” for describing cohort studies ( 34 ) . In STROBE , we do not use the words prospective and retrospective or alternatives , such as concurrent and histor - ical . We recommend that , whenever authors use these words , they deﬁne what they mean . Most importantly , we recommend that authors describe exactly how and when data collection took place . The ﬁrst part of the methods section might also be the place to mention whether the report is 1 of several from a study . If a new report is in line with the original aims of the study , this is usually indicated by referring to an earlier publication and by brieﬂy restating the salient features of the study . However , the aims of a study may also evolve over time . Researchers often use data for purposes for which they were not originally intended , including , for example , ofﬁcial vital statistics that were collected primarily for administrative purposes , items in questionnaires that originally were only included for completeness , or blood samples that were collected for another purpose . For exam - ple , the Physicians’ Health Study , a randomized controlled trial of aspirin and carotene , was later used to demonstrate that a point mutation in the factor V gene was associated with an increased risk of venous thrombosis , but not of myocardial infarction or stroke ( 35 ) . The secondary use of existing data is a creative part of observational research and does not necessarily make results less credible or less im - portant . However , brieﬂy restating the original aims might help readers understand the context of the research and possible limitations in the data . 5 Setting : Describe the setting , locations , and relevant dates , including periods of recruitment , exposure , follow - up , and data collection . Example “The Pasitos Cohort Study recruited pregnant women from Women , Infant , and Child clinics in Socorro and San Elizario , El Paso County , Texas and maternal - child clinics of the Mexican Social Security Institute in Ciudad Juarez , Mexico from April 1998 to October 2000 . At baseline , prior to the birth of the enrolled cohort children , staff interviewed mothers regarding the household environ - ment . In this ongoing cohort study , we target follow - up exams at 6 - month intervals beginning at age 6 months” ( 36 ) . Explanation Readers need information on setting and locations to assess the context and generalizability of a study’s results . Exposures , such as environmental factors and therapies , can change over time . Also , study methods may evolve over time . Knowing when a study took place and over what period participants were recruited and followed up places the study in historical context and is important for the interpretation of results . Information about setting includes recruitment sites or sources ( for example , electoral roll , outpatient clinic , can - cer registry , or tertiary care center ) . Information about lo - cation may refer to the countries , towns , hospitals , or prac - tices where the investigation took place . We advise stating dates rather than only describing the length of time peri - ods . There may be different sets of dates for exposure , disease occurrence , recruitment , beginning and end of fol - low - up , and data collection . Of note , nearly 80 % of 132 reports in oncology journals that used survival analysis in - cluded the starting and ending dates for accrual of patients , but only 24 % also reported the date on which follow - up ended ( 37 ) . 6 Participants : 6 ( a ) Cohort study : Give the eligibility criteria , and the sources and methods of selection of participants . Describe methods of follow - up . Example “Participants in the Iowa Women’s Health Study were a random sample of all women ages 55 to 69 years derived from the state of Iowa automobile driver’s license list in 1985 , which represented approximately 94 % of Iowa women in that age group . . . . Follow - up questionnaires were mailed in October 1987 and August 1989 to assess vital status and address changes . . . . Incident cancers , ex - cept for nonmelanoma skin cancers , were ascertained by the State Health Registry of Iowa . . . . The Iowa Wom - en’s Health Study cohort was matched to the registry with combinations of ﬁrst , last , and maiden names , zip code , birth date , and social security number” ( 38 ) . 6 ( a ) Case – control study : Give the eligibility criteria , and the sources and methods of case ascertainment and control selec - tion . Give the rationale for the choice of cases and controls . Example “Cutaneous melanoma cases diagnosed in 1999 and 2000 were ascertained through the Iowa Cancer Registry Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 168 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org . . . . Controls , also identiﬁed through the Iowa Cancer Registry , were colorectal cancer patients diagnosed during the same time . Colorectal cancer controls were selected because they are common and have a relatively long sur - vival , and because arsenic exposure has not been conclu - sively linked to the incidence of colorectal cancer” ( 39 ) . 6 ( a ) Cross - sectional study : Give the eligibility criteria , and the sources and methods of selection of participants . Example “We retrospectively identiﬁed patients with a principal diagnosis of myocardial infarction ( code 410 ) according to the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases , 9th Revision , Clinical Modiﬁcation , from codes designating discharge di - agnoses , excluding the codes with a ﬁfth digit of 2 , which designates a subsequent episode of care . . . A random sample of the entire Medicare cohort with myocardial in - farction from February 1994 to July 1995 was selected . . . To be eligible , patients had to present to the hospital after at least 30 minutes but less than 12 hours of chest pain and had to have ST - segment elevation of at least 1 mm on 2 contiguous leads on the initial electrocardio - gram” ( 40 ) . Explanation Detailed descriptions of the study participants help readers understand the applicability of the results . Investi - gators usually restrict a study population by deﬁning clin - ical , demographic , and other characteristics of eligible par - ticipants . Typical eligibility criteria relate to age , gender , diagnosis , and comorbid conditions . Despite their impor - tance , eligibility criteria often are not reported adequately . In a survey of observational stroke research , 17 of 49 re - ports ( 35 % ) did not specify eligibility criteria ( 5 ) . Eligibility criteria may be presented as inclusion and exclusion criteria , although this distinction is not always necessary or useful . Regardless , we advise authors to report all eligibility criteria and also to describe the group from which the study population was selected ( for example , the general population of a region or country ) and the method of recruitment ( for example , referral or self - selection through advertisements ) . Knowing details about follow - up procedures , includ - ing whether procedures minimized nonresponse and loss to follow - up and whether the procedures were similar for all participants , informs judgments about the validity of re - sults . For example , in a study that used IgM antibodies to detect acute infections , readers needed to know the interval between blood tests for IgM antibodies so that they could judge whether some infections likely were missed because the interval between blood tests was too long ( 41 ) . In other studies where follow - up procedures differed between ex - posed and unexposed groups , readers might recognize sub - stantial bias due to unequal ascertainment of events or dif - ferences in nonresponse or loss to follow - up ( 42 ) . Accordingly , we advise that researchers describe the meth - ods used for following participants and whether those methods were the same for all participants , and that they describe the completeness of ascertainment of variables ( see also item 14 ) . In case – control studies , the choice of cases and con - trols is crucial to interpreting the results , and the method of their selection has major implications for study validity . In general , controls should reﬂect the population from which the cases arose . Various methods are used to sample controls , all with advantages and disadvantages . For cases that arise from a general population , population roster sampling , random - digit dialing , or neighborhood or friend controls are used . Neighborhood or friend controls may present intrinsic matching on exposure ( 17 ) . Controls with other diseases may have advantages over population - based controls , in particular for hospital - based cases , because they better reﬂect the catchment population of a hospital and have greater comparability of recall and ease of recruit - ment . However , they can present problems if the exposure of interest affects the risk of developing or being hospital - ized for the control condition ( s ) ( 43 , 44 ) . To remedy this problem , often a mixture of the best defensible control diseases is used ( 45 ) . 6 ( b ) Cohort study : For matched studies , give matching criteria and number of exposed and unexposed . Example “For each patient who initially received a statin , we used propensity - based matching to identify 1 control who did not receive a statin according to the following protocol . First , propensity scores were calculated for each patient in the entire cohort on the basis of an extensive list of factors potentially related to the use of statins or the risk of sepsis . Second , each statin user was matched to a smaller pool of nonstatin users by sex , age ( plus or minus 1 year ) , and index date ( plus or minus 3 months ) . Third , we selected the control with the closest propensity score ( within 0 . 2 SD ) to each statin user in a 1 : 1 fashion and discarded the remaining controls” ( 46 ) . 6 ( b ) Case – control study : For matched studies , give matching criteria and the number of controls per case . Example “We aimed to select 5 controls for every case from among individuals in the study population who had no diagnosis of autism or other pervasive developmental dis - orders ( PDD ) recorded in their general practice record and who were alive and registered with a participating practice on the date of the PDD diagnosis in the case . Controls were individually matched to cases by year of birth ( up to 1 year older or younger ) , sex , and general practice . For Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 169 each of 300 cases , 5 controls could be identiﬁed who met all the matching criteria . For the remaining 994 , 1 or more controls was excluded . . . ” ( 47 ) . Explanation Matching is much more common in case – control studies , but occasionally , investigators use matching in co - hort studies to make groups comparable at the start of follow - up . Matching in cohort studies makes groups di - rectly comparable for potential confounders and presents fewer intricacies than with case – control studies . For exam - ple , it is not necessary to take the matching into account for the estimation of the relative risk ( 48 ) . Because match - ing in cohort studies may increase statistical precision , in - vestigators might allow for the matching in their analyses and thus obtain narrower conﬁdence intervals . In case – control studies , matching is done to increase a study’s efﬁciency by ensuring similarity in the distribution of variables between cases and controls , in particular the distribution of potential confounding variables ( 48 , 49 ) . Because matching can be done in various ways , with 1 or more controls per case , the rationale for the choice of matching variables and the details of the method used should be described . Commonly used forms of matching are frequency matching ( also called group matching ) and individual matching . In frequency matching , investigators choose controls so that the distribution of matching vari - ables becomes identical or similar to that of cases . Individ - ual matching involves matching 1 or several controls to each case . Although intuitively appealing and sometimes useful , matching in case – control studies has a number of disadvantages , is not always appropriate , and needs to be taken into account in the analysis ( see Box 2 ) . Even apparently simple matching procedures may be poorly reported . For example , authors may state that con - trols were matched to cases “within 5 years , ” or using “5 - Box 2 . Matching in Case – Control Studies Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 170 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org year age bands . ” Does this mean that , if a case was 54 years old , the respective control needed to be in the 5 - year age band 50 to 54 , or aged 49 to 59 , which is within 5 years of age 54 ? If a wide ( for example , 10 - year ) age band is chosen , there is a danger of residual confounding by age ( see Box 4 ) , for example , because controls may then be younger than cases on average . 7 Variables : Clearly deﬁne all outcomes , exposures , predictors , potential confounders , and effect modiﬁers . Give diagnostic criteria , if applicable . Example “Only major congenital malformations were included in the analyses . Minor anomalies were excluded according to the exclusion list of European Registration of Congeni - tal Anomalies ( EUROCAT ) . If a child had more than 1 major congenital malformation of 1 organ system , those malformations were treated as 1 outcome in the analyses by organ system . . . In the statistical analyses , factors con - sidered potential confounders were maternal age at delivery and number of previous parities . Factors considered poten - tial effect modiﬁers were maternal age at reimbursement for antiepileptic medication and maternal age at delivery” ( 55 ) . Explanation Authors should deﬁne all variables considered for and included in the analysis , including outcomes , exposures , predictors , potential confounders , and potential effect modiﬁers . Disease outcomes require adequately detailed description of the diagnostic criteria . This applies to crite - ria for cases in a case – control study , disease events during follow - up in a cohort study , and prevalent disease in a cross - sectional study . Clear deﬁnitions and steps taken to adhere to them are particularly important for any disease condition of primary interest in the study . For some studies , “determinant” or “predictor” may be appropriate terms for exposure variables and outcomes may be called “end points . ” In multivariable models , authors sometimes use “dependent variable” for an outcome and “independent variable” or “explanatory variable” for expo - sure and confounding variables . The latter is not precise , as it does not distinguish exposures from confounders . If many variables have been measured and included in exploratory analyses in an early discovery phase , consider providing a list with details on each variable in an appen - dix , additional table , or separate publication . Of note , the International Journal of Epidemiology recently launched a new section with “cohort proﬁles , ” that includes detailed information on what was measured at different points in time in particular studies ( 56 , 57 ) . Finally , we advise that authors declare all “candidate variables” considered for sta - tistical analysis , rather than selectively reporting only those included in the ﬁnal models ( see item 16a ) ( 58 , 59 ) . 8 Data sources / measurement : For each variable of interest , give sources of data and details of methods of assessment ( mea - surement ) . Describe comparability of assessment methods if there is more than one group . Example 1 “Total caffeine intake was calculated primarily using U . S . Department of Agriculture food composition sources . In these calculations , it was assumed that the content of caffeine was 137 mg per cup of coffee , 47 mg per cup of tea , 46 mg per can or bottle of cola beverage , and 7 mg per serving of chocolate candy . This method of measuring ( caf - feine ) intake was shown to be valid in both the NHS I cohort and a similar cohort study of male health profes - sionals . . . Self - reported diagnosis of hypertension was found to be reliable in the NHS I cohort” ( 60 ) . Example 2 “Samples pertaining to matched cases and controls were always analyzed together in the same batch and labo - ratory personnel were unable to distinguish among cases and controls” ( 61 ) . Explanation The way in which exposures , confounders , and out - comes were measured affects the reliability and validity of a study . Measurement error and misclassiﬁcation of expo - sures or outcomes can make it more difﬁcult to detect cause – effect relationships , or may produce spurious rela - tionships . Error in measurement of potential confounders can increase the risk of residual confounding ( 62 , 63 ) . It is helpful , therefore , if authors report the ﬁndings of any studies of the validity or reliability of assessments or mea - surements , including details of the reference standard that was used . Rather than simply citing validation studies ( as in the ﬁrst example ) , we advise that authors give the esti - mated validity or reliability , which can then be used for measurement error adjustment or sensitivity analyses ( see items 12e and 17 ) . In addition , it is important to know if groups being compared differed with respect to the way in which the data were collected . This may be important for laboratory examinations ( as in the second example ) and other situa - tions . For instance , if an interviewer ﬁrst questions all the cases and then the controls , or vice versa , bias is possible because of the learning curve ; solutions such as randomiz - ing the order of interviewing may avoid this problem . In - formation bias may also arise if the compared groups are not given the same diagnostic tests or if 1 group receives more tests of the same kind than another ( see item 9 ) . 9 Bias : Describe any efforts to address potential sources of bias . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 171 Example 1 “In most case – control studies of suicide , the control group comprises living individuals , but we decided to have a control group of people who had died of other causes . . . . With a control group of deceased individuals , the sources of information used to assess risk factors are infor - mants who have recently experienced the death of a family member or close associate—and are therefore more com - parable to the sources of information in the suicide group than if living controls were used” ( 64 ) . Example 2 “Detection bias could inﬂuence the association be - tween Type 2 diabetes mellitus ( T2DM ) and primary open - angle glaucoma ( POAG ) if women with T2DM were under closer ophthalmic surveillance than women without this condition . We compared the mean number of eye examinations reported by women with and without diabe - tes . We also recalculated the relative risk for POAG with additional control for covariates associated with more care - ful ocular surveillance ( a self - report of cataract , macular degeneration , number of eye examinations , and number of physical examinations ) ” ( 65 ) . Explanation Biased studies produce results that differ systematically from the truth ( see Box 3 ) . It is important for a reader to know what measures were taken during the conduct of a study to reduce the potential of bias . Ideally , investigators carefully consider potential sources of bias when they plan their study . At the stage of reporting , we recommend that authors always assess the likelihood of relevant biases . Spe - ciﬁcally , the direction and magnitude of bias should be discussed and , if possible , estimated . For instance , in case – control studies , information bias can occur , but may be reduced by selecting an appropriate control group , as in the ﬁrst example ( 64 ) . Differences in the medical surveillance of participants were a problem in the second example ( 65 ) . Consequently , the authors provide more detail about the additional data they collected to tackle this problem . When investigators have set up quality control programs for data collection to counter a possible “drift” in measurements of variables in longitudinal studies , or to keep variability at a minimum when multiple observers are used , these should be described . Unfortunately , authors often do not address important biases when reporting their results . Among 43 case – control Box 3 . Bias Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 172 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org and cohort studies published from 1990 to 1994 that in - vestigated the risk of second cancers in patients with a history of cancer , medical surveillance bias was mentioned in only 5 articles ( 66 ) . A survey of reports of mental health research published during 1998 in 3 psychiatric journals found that only 13 % of 392 articles mentioned response bias ( 67 ) . A survey of cohort studies in stroke research found that 14 of 49 ( 28 % ) articles published from 1999 to 2003 addressed potential selection bias in the recruitment of study participants and 35 ( 71 % ) mentioned the possi - bility that any type of bias may have affected results ( 5 ) . 10 Study size : Explain how the study size was arrived at . Example 1 “The number of cases in the area during the study period determined the sample size” ( 73 ) . Example 2 “A survey of postnatal depression in the region had documented a prevalence of 19 . 8 % . Assuming depression in mothers with normal - weight children to be 20 % and an odds ratio of 3 for depression in mothers with a malnour - ished child , we needed 72 case – control sets ( 1 case to 1 control ) with an 80 % power and 5 % signiﬁcance” ( 74 ) . Explanation A study should be large enough to obtain a point es - timate with a sufﬁciently narrow conﬁdence interval to meaningfully answer a research question . Large samples are needed to distinguish a small association from no associa - tion . Small studies often provide valuable information , but wide conﬁdence intervals may indicate that they contribute less to current knowledge in comparison with studies pro - viding estimates with narrower conﬁdence intervals . Also , small studies that show “interesting” or “statistically signif - icant” associations are published more frequently than small studies that do not have “signiﬁcant” ﬁndings . While these studies may provide an early signal in the context of discovery , readers should be informed of their potential weaknesses . The importance of sample size determination in ob - servational studies depends on the context . If an analysis is performed on data that were already available for other purposes , the main question is whether the analysis of the data will produce results with sufﬁcient statistical precision to contribute substantially to the literature , and sample size considerations will be informal . Formal , a priori calcula - tion of sample size may be useful when planning a new study ( 75 , 76 ) . Such calculations are associated with more uncertainty than is implied by the single number that is generally produced . For example , estimates of the rate of the event of interest or other assumptions central to calcu - lations are commonly imprecise , if not guesswork ( 77 ) . The precision obtained in the ﬁnal analysis can often not be determined beforehand because it will be reduced by inclusion of confounding variables in multivariable analy - ses ( 78 ) , the degree of precision with which key variables can be measured ( 79 ) , and the exclusion of some individ - uals . Few epidemiologic studies explain or report delibera - tions about sample size ( 4 , 5 ) . We encourage investigators to report pertinent formal sample size calculations if they were done . In other situations , they should indicate the considerations that determined the study size ( for example , a ﬁxed available sample , as in the ﬁrst example above ) . If the observational study was stopped early when statistical signiﬁcance was achieved , readers should be told . Do not bother readers with post hoc justiﬁcations for study size or retrospective power calculations ( 77 ) . From the point of view of the reader , conﬁdence intervals indicate the statis - tical precision that was ultimately obtained . It should be realized that conﬁdence intervals reﬂect statistical uncer - tainty only , and not all uncertainty that may be present in a study ( see item 20 ) . 11 Quantitative variables : Explain how quantitative vari - ables were handled in the analyses . If applicable , describe which groupings were chosen , and why . Example “Patients with a Glasgow Coma Scale less than 8 are considered to be seriously injured . A GCS of 9 or more indicates less serious brain injury . We examined the asso - ciation of GCS in these two categories with the occurrence of death within 12 months from injury” ( 80 ) . Explanation Investigators make choices regarding how to collect and analyze quantitative data about exposures , effect mod - iﬁers , and confounders . For example , they may group a continuous exposure variable to create a new categorical variable ( see Box 4 ) . Grouping choices may have important consequences for later analyses ( 81 , 82 ) . We advise that authors explain why and how they grouped quantitative data , including the number of categories , the cut - points , and category mean or median values . Whenever data are reported in tabular form , the counts of cases , controls , per - sons at risk , person - time at risk , etc . , should be given for each category . Tables should not consist solely of effect - measure estimates or results of model ﬁtting . Investigators might model an exposure as continuous in order to retain all the information . In making this choice , one needs to consider the nature of the relationship of the exposure to the outcome . As it may be wrong to assume a linear relation automatically , possible departures from linearity should be investigated . Authors could men - tion alternative models they explored during analyses ( for example , using log transformation , quadratic terms , or spline functions ) . Several methods exist for ﬁtting a non - linear relation between the exposure and outcome ( 82 – Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 173 84 ) . Also , it may be informative to present both continu - ous and grouped analyses for a quantitative exposure of prime interest . In a recent survey , two thirds of epidemiologic publi - cations studied quantitative exposure variables ( 4 ) . In 42 of 50 articles ( 84 % ) , exposures were grouped into several or - dered categories , but often without any stated rationale for the choices made . Fifteen articles used linear associations to model continuous exposure , but only 2 reported checking for linearity . In another survey , of the psychological litera - ture , dichotomization was justiﬁed in only 22 of 110 arti - cles ( 20 % ) ( 85 ) . 12 Statistical methods : 12 ( a ) Describe all statistical methods , including those used to control for confounding . Example “The adjusted relative risk was calculated using the Mantel – Haenszel technique , when evaluating if confound - ing by age or gender was present in the groups compared . The 95 % conﬁdence interval ( CI ) was computed around the adjusted relative risk , using the variance according to Greenland and Robins and Robins et al . ” ( 93 ) . Explanation In general , there is no one correct statistical analysis but , rather , several possibilities that may address the same question but make different assumptions . Regardless , in - vestigators should predetermine analyses at least for the primary study objectives in a study protocol . Often addi - tional analyses are needed , either instead of , or as well as , those originally envisaged , and these may sometimes be motivated by the data . When a study is reported , authors should tell readers whether particular analyses were sug - gested by data inspection . Even though the distinction be - tween prespeciﬁed and exploratory analyses may sometimes be blurred , authors should clarify reasons for particular analyses . If groups being compared are not similar with regard to some characteristics , adjustment should be made for possible confounding variables by stratiﬁcation or by mul - tivariable regression ( see Box 5 ) ( 94 ) . Often , the study design determines which type of regression analysis is cho - sen . For instance , Cox proportional hazard regression is commonly used in cohort studies ( 95 ) , whereas logistic regression is often the method of choice in case – control studies ( 96 , 97 ) . Analysts should fully describe speciﬁc pro - cedures for variable selection and not only present results from the ﬁnal model ( 98 , 99 ) . If model comparisons are made to narrow down a list of potential confounders for inclusion in a ﬁnal model , this process should be described . It is helpful to tell readers if 1 or 2 covariates are respon - sible for a great deal of the apparent confounding in a data analysis . Other statistical analyses , such as imputation pro - Box 4 . Grouping Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 174 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org cedures , data transformation , and calculations of attribut - able risks , should also be described . Nonstandard or novel approaches should be referenced , and the statistical soft - ware used reported . As a guiding principle , we advise sta - tistical methods be described “with enough detail to enable a knowledgeable reader with access to the original data to verify the reported results” ( 100 ) . In an empirical study , only 93 of 169 articles ( 55 % ) reporting adjustment for confounding clearly stated how continuous and multicategory variables were entered into the statistical model ( 101 ) . Another study found that among 67 articles in which statistical analyses were ad - justed for confounders , it was mostly unclear how con - founders were chosen ( 4 ) . 12 ( b ) Describe any methods used to examine subgroups and interactions . Example “Sex differences in susceptibility to the 3 lifestyle - re - lated risk factors studied were explored by testing for bio - logic interaction according to Rothman : a new composite variable with 4 categories ( a (cid:1) b (cid:1) , a (cid:1) b (cid:2) , a (cid:2) b (cid:1) , and a (cid:2) b (cid:2) ) was redeﬁned for sex and a dichotomous exposure of interest , where a (cid:1) and b (cid:1) denote absence of exposure . RR was calculated for each category after adjustment for age . An interaction effect is deﬁned as departure from ad - ditivity of absolute effects , and excess RR caused by inter - action ( RERI ) was calculated : RERI (cid:3) RR (cid:4) a (cid:2) b (cid:1) (cid:5) (cid:2) RR ( a (cid:2) b (cid:1) ) (cid:1) RR ( a (cid:1) b (cid:2) ) (cid:1) 1 where RR ( a (cid:1) b (cid:1) ) denotes RR among those exposed to both factors where RR ( a (cid:2) b (cid:2) ) is used as reference category ( RR (cid:3) 1 . 0 ) . Ninety - ﬁve percent CIs were calculated as proposed by Hosmer and Lemeshow . RERI of 0 means no interaction” ( 103 ) . Explanation As discussed in detail under item 17 , many debate the use and value of analyses restricted to subgroups of the study population ( 4 , 104 ) . Subgroup analyses are neverthe - less often done ( 4 ) . Readers need to know which subgroup analyses were planned in advance , and which arose while analyzing the data . Also , it is important to explain what methods were used to examine whether effects or associa - tions differed across groups ( see item 17 ) . Interaction relates to the situation when one factor modiﬁes the effect of another ( therefore also called “effect modiﬁcation” ) . The joint action of 2 factors can be char - acterized in 2 ways : on an additive scale , in terms of risk differences ; or on a multiplicative scale , in terms of relative risk ( see Box 8 ) . Many authors and readers may have their own preference about the way interactions should be ana - lyzed . Still , they may be interested to know to what extent the joint effect of exposures differs from the separate ef - fects . There is consensus that the additive scale , which uses absolute risks , is more appropriate for public health and clinical decision making ( 105 ) . Whatever view is taken , this should be clearly presented to the reader , as is done in the example above ( 103 ) . A layout presenting separate ef - fects of both exposures as well as their joint effect , each Box 5 . Confounding Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 175 relative to no exposure , might be most informative . It is presented in the example for interaction under item 17 , and the calculations on the different scales are explained in Box 8 . 12 ( c ) Explain how missing data were addressed . Example “Our missing data analysis procedures used missing at random ( MAR ) assumptions . We used the MICE ( multi - variate imputation by chained equations ) method of mul - tiple multivariate imputation in STATA . We indepen - dently analysed 10 copies of the data , each with missing values suitably imputed , in the multivariate logistic regres - sion analyses . We averaged estimates of the variables to give a single mean estimate and adjusted standard errors accord - ing to Rubin’s rules” ( 106 ) . Explanation Missing data are common in observational research . Questionnaires posted to study participants are not always ﬁlled in completely , participants may not attend all fol - low - up visits , and routine data sources and clinical data - bases are often incomplete . Despite its ubiquity and impor - tance , few papers report in detail on the problem of missing data ( 5 , 107 ) . Investigators may use any of several approaches to address missing data . We describe some strengths and limitations of various approaches in Box 6 . We advise that authors report the number of missing val - ues for each variable of interest ( exposures , outcomes , con - founders ) and for each step in the analysis . Authors should give reasons for missing values if possible and indicate how many individuals were excluded because of missing data when describing the ﬂow of participants through the study ( see item 13 ) . For analyses that account for missing data , authors should describe the nature of the analysis ( for ex - ample , multiple imputation ) and the assumptions that were made ( for example , missing at random , see Box 6 ) . 12 ( d ) Cohort study : If applicable , describe how loss to fol - low - up was addressed . Example “In treatment programmes with active follow - up , those lost to follow - up and those followed up at 1 year had similar baseline CD4 cell counts ( median 115 cells per (cid:3) L and 123 cells per (cid:3) L ) , whereas patients lost to follow - up in programmes with no active follow - up procedures had con - siderably lower CD4 cell counts than those followed up ( median 64 cells per (cid:3) L and 123 cells per (cid:3) L ) . . . . Treat - ment programmes with passive follow - up were excluded from subsequent analyses” ( 116 ) . Explanation Cohort studies are analyzed using life table methods or other approaches that are based on the person - time of fol - low - up and time to developing the disease of interest . Among individuals who remain free of the disease at the end of their observation period , the amount of follow - up time is assumed to be unrelated to the probability of de - veloping the outcome . This will be the case if follow - up ends on a ﬁxed date or at a particular age . Loss to fol - low - up occurs when participants withdraw from a study before that date . This may hamper the validity of a study if loss to follow - up occurs selectively in exposed individuals , or in persons at high risk of developing the disease ( “infor - mative censoring” ) . In the example above , patients lost to follow - up in treatment programs with no active follow - up had fewer CD4 helper cells than those remaining under observation and were therefore at higher risk of dying ( 116 ) . It is important to distinguish persons who reach the end of the study from those lost to follow - up . Unfortu - nately , statistical software usually does not distinguish be - tween the 2 situations : in both cases , follow - up time is automatically truncated ( “censored” ) at the end of the ob - servation period . Investigators therefore need to decide , ideally at the stage of planning the study , how they will deal with loss to follow - up . When few patients are lost , investigators may either exclude individuals with incom - plete follow - up , or treat them as if they withdrew alive at either the date of loss to follow - up or the end of the study . We advise authors to report how many patients were lost to follow - up and what censoring strategies they used . 12 ( d ) Case – control study : If applicable , explain how match - ing of cases and controls was addressed . Example “We used McNemar’s test , paired t test , and condi - tional logistic regression analysis to compare dementia pa - tients with their matched controls for cardiovascular risk factors , the occurrence of spontaneous cerebral emboli , ca - rotid disease , and venous to arterial circulation shunt” ( 117 ) . Explanation In individually matched case – control studies , a crude analysis of the odds ratio , ignoring the matching , usually leads to an estimation that is biased toward unity ( see Box 2 ) . A matched analysis is therefore often necessary . This can intuitively be understood as a stratiﬁed analysis : each case is seen as 1 stratum with his or her set of matched controls . The analysis rests on considering whether the case is more often exposed than the controls , despite having made them alike regarding the matching variables . Investi - gators can do such a stratiﬁed analysis using the Mantel – Haenszel method on a “matched” 2 (cid:6) 2 table . In its sim - Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 176 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org plest form , the odds ratio becomes the ratio of pairs that are discordant for the exposure variable . If matching was done for variables like age and sex that are universal at - tributes , the analysis needs not retain the individual , per - son - to - person matching ; a simple analysis in categories of age and sex is sufﬁcient ( 50 ) . For other matching variables , such as neighborhood , sibship , or friendship , however , each matched set should be considered its own stratum . In individually matched studies , the most widely used method of analysis is conditional logistic regression , in which each case and their controls are considered together . The conditional method is necessary when the number of controls varies among cases , and when , in addition to the matching variables , other variables need to be adjusted for . To allow readers to judge whether the matched design was appropriately taken into account in the analysis , we recom - mend that authors describe in detail what statistical meth - ods were used to analyze the data . If taking the matching into account does have little effect on the estimates , au - thors may choose to present an unmatched analysis . 12 ( d ) Cross - sectional study : If applicable , describe analytical methods taking account of sampling strategy . Example “The standard errors ( SE ) were calculated using the Taylor expansion method to estimate the sampling errors of estimators based on the complex sample design . . . . The overall design effect for diastolic blood pressure was found to be 1 . 9 for men and 1 . 8 for women , and for systolic blood pressure , it was 1 . 9 for men and 2 . 0 for women” ( 118 ) . Explanation Most cross - sectional studies use a prespeciﬁed sam - pling strategy to select participants from a source popula - tion . Sampling may be more complex than taking a simple random sample , however . It may include several stages and clustering of participants ( for example , in districts or vil - lages ) . Proportionate stratiﬁcation may ensure that sub - groups with a speciﬁc characteristic are correctly repre - sented . Disproportionate stratiﬁcation may be useful to oversample a subgroup of particular interest . An estimate of association derived from a complex sample may be more or less precise than that derived from a simple random sample . Measures of precision , such as standard error or conﬁdence interval , should be corrected using the design effect , a ratio measure that describes how much precision is gained or lost if a more complex sam - pling strategy is used instead of simple random sampling ( 119 ) . Most complex sampling techniques lead to a de - crease of precision , resulting in a design effect greater than 1 . We advise that authors clearly state the method used to adjust for complex sampling strategies so that readers Box 6 . Missing Data : Problems and Possible Solutions Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 177 may understand how the chosen sampling method inﬂu - enced the precision of the obtained estimates . For instance , with clustered sampling , the implicit trade - off between eas - ier data collection and loss of precision is transparent if the design effect is reported . In the example , the calculated design effect of 1 . 9 for men indicates that the actual sample size would need to be 1 . 9 times greater than with simple random sampling for the resulting estimates to have equal precision . 12 ( e ) Describe any sensitivity analyses . Example “Because we had a relatively higher proportion of ‘missing’ dead patients with insufﬁcient data ( 38 / 148 (cid:3) 25 . 7 % ) as compared to live patients ( 15 / 437 (cid:3) 3 . 4 % ) . . . , it is possible that this might have biased the results . We have , therefore , carried out a sensitivity analysis . We have assumed that the proportion of women using oral contraceptives in the study group applies to the whole ( 19 . 1 % for dead , and 11 . 4 % for live patients ) , and then applied two extreme scenarios : either all the exposed miss - ing patients used second - generation pills or they all used third - generation pills” ( 120 ) . Explanation Sensitivity analyses are useful to investigate whether the main results are consistent with those obtained with alternative analysis strategies or assumptions ( 121 ) . Issues that may be examined include the criteria for inclusion in analyses , the deﬁnitions of exposures or outcomes ( 122 ) , which confounding variables merit adjustment , the han - dling of missing data ( 120 , 123 ) , possible selection bias or bias from inaccurate or inconsistent measurement of expo - sure , disease , and other variables ; and speciﬁc analysis choices , such as the treatment of quantitative variables ( see item 11 ) . Sophisticated methods are increasingly used to simultaneously model the inﬂuence of several biases or as - sumptions ( 124 – 126 ) . In 1959 , Cornﬁeld and colleagues famously showed that a relative risk of 9 for cigarette smoking and lung cancer was extremely unlikely to be due to any conceivable confounder , because the confounder would need to be at least 9 times as prevalent in smokers as in nonsmokers ( 127 ) . This analysis did not rule out the possibility that such a factor was present , but it did identify the prevalence such a factor would need to have . The same approach was recently used to identify plausible confounding factors that could explain the association between childhood leukemia and living near electric power lines ( 128 ) . More generally , sensitivity analyses can be used to identify the degree of confounding , selection bias , or information bias required to distort an association . One important , perhaps under - recognized , use of sensitivity analysis is when a study shows little or no association between an exposure and an out - come and it is plausible that confounding or other biases toward the null are present . Results The Results section should give a factual account of what was found , from the recruitment of study partici - pants , the description of the study population , to the main results and ancillary analyses . It should be free of interpre - tations and discursive text reﬂecting the authors’ views and opinions . 13 Participants : 13 ( a ) Report the numbers of individuals at each stage of the study—e . g . , numbers potentially eligible , examined for eligi - bility , conﬁrmed eligible , included in the study , completing follow - up , and analyzed . Example “Of the 105 freestanding bars and taverns sampled , 13 establishments were no longer in business and 9 were lo - cated in restaurants , leaving 83 eligible businesses . In 22 cases , the owner could not be reached by telephone despite 6 or more attempts . The owners of 36 bars declined study participation . . . . The 25 participating bars and taverns employed 124 bartenders , with 67 bartenders working at least 1 weekly daytime shift . Fifty - four of the daytime bar - tenders ( 81 % ) completed baseline interviews and spirome - try ; 53 of these subjects ( 98 % ) completed follow - up” ( 129 ) . Explanation Detailed information on the process of recruiting study participants is important for several reasons . Those included in a study often differ in relevant ways from the target population to which results are applied . This may result in estimates of prevalence or incidence that do not reﬂect the experience of the target population . For exam - ple , people who agreed to participate in a postal survey of sexual behavior attended church less often , had less conser - vative sexual attitudes and earlier age at ﬁrst sexual inter - course , and were more likely to smoke cigarettes and drink alcohol than people who refused ( 130 ) . These differences suggest that postal surveys may overestimate sexual liberal - ism and activity in the population . Such response bias ( see Box 3 ) can distort exposure – disease associations if associ - ations differ between those eligible for the study and those included in the study . As another example , the association between young maternal age and leukemia in offspring , which has been observed in some case – control studies ( 131 , 132 ) , was explained by differential participation of young women in case and control groups . Young women with healthy children were less likely to participate than those with unhealthy children ( 133 ) . Although low partic - ipation does not necessarily compromise the validity of a study , transparent information on participation and rea - sons for nonparticipation is essential . Also , as there are no Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 178 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org universally agreed deﬁnitions for participation , response , or follow - up rates , readers need to understand how authors calculated such proportions ( 134 ) . Ideally , investigators should give an account of the numbers of individuals considered at each stage of recruit - ing study participants , from the choice of a target popula - tion to the inclusion of participants’ data in the analysis . Depending on the type of study , this may include the number of individuals considered to be potentially eligible , the number assessed for eligibility , the number found to be eligible , the number included in the study , the number examined , the number followed up , and the number in - cluded in the analysis . Information on different sampling units may be required , if sampling of study participants is carried out in 2 or more stages as in the example above ( multistage sampling ) . In case – control studies , we advise that authors describe the ﬂow of participants separately for case and control groups ( 135 ) . Controls can sometimes be selected from several sources , including , for example , hos - pitalized patients and community dwellers . In this case , we recommend a separate account of the numbers of partici - pants for each type of control group . Olson and colleagues proposed useful reporting guidelines for controls recruited through random - digit dialing and other methods ( 136 ) . A recent survey of epidemiologic studies published in 10 general epidemiology , public health , and medical jour - nals found that some information regarding participation was provided in 47 of 107 case – control studies ( 59 % ) , 49 of 154 cohort studies ( 32 % ) , and 51 of 86 cross - sectional studies ( 59 % ) ( 137 ) . Incomplete or absent reporting of participation and nonparticipation in epidemiologic stud - ies was also documented in 2 other surveys of the literature ( 4 , 5 ) . Finally , there is evidence that participation in epi - demiologic studies may have declined in recent decades ( 137 , 138 ) , which underscores the need for transparent reporting ( 139 ) . 13 ( b ) Give reasons for nonparticipation at each stage . Example “The main reasons for nonparticipation were the par - ticipant was too ill or had died before interview ( cases 30 % , controls (cid:7) 1 % ) , nonresponse ( cases 2 % , controls 21 % ) , refusal ( cases 10 % , controls 29 % ) , and other rea - sons ( refusal by consultant or general practitioner , non - English speaking , mental impairment ) ( cases 7 % , controls 5 % ) ” ( 140 ) . Explanation Explaining the reasons why people no longer partici - pated in a study or why they were excluded from statistical analyses helps readers judge whether the study population was representative of the target population and whether bias was possibly introduced . For example , in a cross - sec - tional health survey , nonparticipation due to reasons un - likely to be related to health status ( for example , the letter of invitation was not delivered because of an incorrect ad - dress ) will affect the precision of estimates but will proba - bly not introduce bias . Conversely , if many individuals opt out of the survey because of illness or perceived good health , results may underestimate or overestimate the prev - alence of ill health in the population . 13 ( c ) Consider use of a ﬂow diagram . Example See the Figure . Explanation An informative and well - structured ﬂow diagram can readily and transparently convey information that might otherwise require a lengthy description ( 142 ) , as in the example above . The diagram may usefully include the main results , such as the number of events for the primary outcome . While we recommend the use of a ﬂow diagram , particularly for complex observational studies , we do not propose a speciﬁc format for the diagram . 14 Descriptive data : 14 ( a ) Give characteristics of study participants ( e . g . , demo - graphic , clinical , social ) and information on exposures and potential confounders . Example See Table 1 . Explanation Readers need descriptions of study participants and their exposures to judge the generalizability of the ﬁndings . Information about potential confounders , including whether and how they were measured , inﬂuences judg - ments about study validity . We advise authors to summa - rize continuous variables for each study group by giving the mean and standard deviation , or , when the data have an asymmetrical distribution ( as is often the case ) , the median and percentile range ( for example , 25th and 75th percen - tiles ) . Variables that make up a small number of ordered categories ( such as stages of disease I to IV ) should not be presented as continuous variables ; it is preferable to give numbers and proportions for each category ( see Box 4 ) . In studies that compare groups , the descriptive characteristics and numbers should be given by group , as in the example above . Inferential measures such as standard errors and con - ﬁdence intervals should not be used to describe the vari - ability of characteristics , and signiﬁcance tests should be avoided in descriptive tables . Also , P values are not an appropriate criterion for selecting which confounders to adjust for in analysis ; even small differences in a con - Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 179 Figure . Example of a flow diagram . From reference 141 . Table 1 . Characteristics of the Study Base at Enrollment , Castellana G ( Italy ) , 1985 – 1986 * Characteristic HCV Negative ( n (cid:1) 1458 ) HCV Positive ( n (cid:1) 511 ) Unknown ( n (cid:1) 513 ) Sex , n ( % ) Male 936 ( 64 ) 296 ( 58 ) 197 ( 39 ) Female 522 ( 36 ) 215 ( 42 ) 306 ( 61 ) Mean age at enrollment ( SD ) , y 45 . 7 ( 10 . 5 ) 52 . 0 ( 9 . 7 ) 52 . 5 ( 9 . 8 ) Daily alcohol intake , n ( % ) None 250 ( 17 ) 129 ( 25 ) 119 ( 24 ) Moderate† 853 ( 59 ) 272 ( 53 ) 293 ( 58 ) Excessive‡ 355 ( 24 ) 110 ( 22 ) 91 ( 18 ) * Adapted from reference 143 . HCV (cid:3) hepatitis C virus . † Men , (cid:7) 60 g ethanol / d ; women , (cid:7) 30 g ethanol / d . ‡ Men , (cid:8) 60 g ethanol / d ; women (cid:8) 30 g ethanol / d . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 180 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org founder that has a strong effect on the outcome can be important ( 144 , 145 ) . In cohort studies , it may be useful to document how an exposure relates to other characteristics and potential confounders . Authors could present this information in a table with columns for participants in 2 or more exposure categories , which permits to judge the differences in con - founders between these categories . In case – control studies , potential confounders cannot be judged by comparing cases and controls . Control per - sons represent the source population and will usually be different from the cases in many respects . For example , in a study of oral contraceptives and myocardial infarction , a sample of young women with infarction more often had risk factors for that disease , such as high serum cholesterol , smoking , and a positive family history , than the control group ( 146 ) . This does not inﬂuence the assessment of the effect of oral contraceptives , as long as the prescription of oral contraceptives was not guided by the presence of these risk factors—for example , because the risk factors were only established after the event ( see Box 5 ) . In case – con - trol studies , the equivalent of comparing exposed and non - exposed controls for the presence of potential confounders ( as is done in cohorts ) can be achieved by exploring the source population of the cases : if the control group is large enough and represents the source population , exposed and unexposed controls can be compared for potential con - founders ( 121 , 147 ) . 14 ( b ) Indicate the number of participants with missing data for each variable of interest . Example See Table 2 . Explanation As missing data may bias or affect generalizability of results , authors should tell readers the amounts of missing data for exposures , potential confounders , and other im - portant characteristics of patients ( see item 12c and Box 6 ) . In a cohort study , authors should report the extent of loss to follow - up ( with reasons ) , because incomplete follow - up may bias ﬁndings ( see items 12d and 13 ) ( 148 ) . We advise authors to use their tables and ﬁgures to enumerate amounts of missing data . 14 ( c ) Cohort study : Summarize follow - up time—e . g . , average and total amount . Example “During the 4366 person - years of follow - up ( median 5 . 4 , maximum 8 . 3 years ) , 265 subjects were diagnosed as having dementia , including 202 with Alzheimer’s disease” ( 149 ) . Explanation Readers need to know the duration and extent of fol - low - up for the available outcome data . Authors can present a summary of the average follow - up with either the mean or median follow - up time or both . The mean allows a reader to calculate the total number of person - years by multiplying it with the number of study participants . Au - thors also may present minimum and maximum times or percentiles of the distribution to show readers the spread of follow - up times . They may report total person - years of fol - low - up or some indication of the proportion of potential data that was captured ( 148 ) . All such information may be presented separately for participants in 2 or more exposure categories . Almost one half of 132 articles in cancer jour - nals ( mostly cohort studies ) did not give any summary of length of follow - up ( 37 ) . 15 Outcome data Cohort study : Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures over time . Example See Table 3 . Table 2 . Symptom End Points Used in Survival Analysis * End Point Cough , n ( % ) ShortnessofBreath , n ( % ) Sleeplessness , n ( % ) Symptom resolved 201 ( 79 ) 138 ( 54 ) 171 ( 67 ) Censored 27 ( 10 ) 21 ( 8 ) 24 ( 9 ) Never symptomatic 0 46 ( 18 ) 11 ( 4 ) Data missing 28 ( 11 ) 51 ( 20 ) 50 ( 20 ) Total 256 ( 100 ) 256 ( 100 ) 256 ( 100 ) * Adapted from reference 141 . Table 3 . Rates of HIV - 1 Seroconversion by Selected Sociodemographic Variables , 1990 – 1993 * Variable Person - Years Seroconverted , n Rate / 1000 Person - Years ( 95 % CI ) Calendar year 1990 2197 . 5 18 8 . 2 ( 4 . 4 – 12 . 0 ) 1991 3210 . 7 22 6 . 9 ( 4 . 0 – 9 . 7 ) 1992 3162 . 6 18 5 . 7 ( 3 . 1 – 8 . 3 ) 1993 2912 . 9 26 8 . 9 ( 5 . 5 – 12 . 4 ) 1994 1104 . 5 5 4 . 5 ( 0 . 6 – 8 . 5 ) Tribe Bagandan 8433 . 1 48 5 . 7 ( 4 . 1 – 7 . 3 ) Other Ugandan 578 . 4 9 15 . 6 ( 5 . 4 – 25 . 7 ) Rwandese 2318 . 6 16 6 . 9 ( 3 . 5 – 10 . 3 ) Other tribe 866 . 0 12 13 . 9 ( 6 . 0 – 21 . 7 ) Religion Muslim 3313 . 5 9 2 . 7 ( 0 . 9 – 4 . 5 ) Other 8882 . 7 76 8 . 6 ( 6 . 6 – 10 . 5 ) * Adapted from reference 150 . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 181 events for each outcome of interest . Consider reporting the event rate per person - year of follow - up . If the risk of an event changes over follow - up time , present the numbers and rates of events in appropriate intervals of follow - up or as a Kaplan – Meier life table or plot . It might be preferable to show plots as cumulative incidence that go up from 0 % rather than down from 100 % , especially if the event rate is lower than , say , 30 % ( 153 ) . Consider presenting such in - formation separately for participants in different exposure categories of interest . If a cohort study is investigating other time - related outcomes ( for example , quantitative dis - ease markers such as blood pressure ) , present appropriate summary measures ( for example , means and standard de - viations ) over time , perhaps in a table or ﬁgure . For cross - sectional studies , we recommend presenting the same type of information on prevalent outcome events or summary measures . For case – control studies , the focus will be on reporting exposures separately for cases and con - trols as frequencies or quantitative summaries ( 154 ) . For all designs , it may be helpful also to tabulate continuous out - comes or exposures in categories , even if the data are not analyzed as such . 16 Main results : 16 ( a ) Give unadjusted estimates and , if applicable , con - founder - adjusted estimates and their precision ( e . g . , 95 % con - ﬁdence intervals ) . Make clear which confounders were ad - justed for and why they were included . Example 1 “We initially considered the following variables as po - tential confounders by Mantel – Haenszel stratiﬁed analysis : . . . The variables we included in the ﬁnal logistic regres - sion models were those . . . that produced a 10 % change in the odds ratio after the Mantel – Haenszel adjustment” ( 155 ) . Example 2 See Table 6 . Explanation In many situations , authors may present the results of unadjusted or minimally adjusted analyses and those from fully adjusted analyses . We advise giving the unadjusted analyses together with the main data , for example , the number of cases and controls that were exposed or not . This allows the reader to understand the data behind the measures of association ( see item 15 ) . For adjusted analy - ses , report the number of persons in the analysis , as this number may differ because of missing values in covariates ( see item 12c ) . Estimates should be given with conﬁdence intervals . Readers can compare unadjusted measures of associa - tion with those adjusted for potential confounders and judge by how much , and in what direction , they changed . Table 4 . Exposure among Liver Cirrhosis Cases and Controls * Exposure Cases ( n (cid:1) 40 ) , n ( % ) Controls ( n (cid:1) 139 ) , n ( % ) Vinyl chloride monomer ( cumulative exposure ) (cid:7) 160 ppm 7 ( 18 ) 38 ( 27 ) 160 – 500 ppm 7 ( 18 ) 40 ( 29 ) 500 – 2500 ppm 9 ( 23 ) 37 ( 27 ) (cid:8) 2500 ppm 17 ( 43 ) 24 ( 17 ) Alcohol consumption (cid:7) 30 g / d 1 ( 3 ) 82 ( 59 ) 30 – 60 g / d 7 ( 18 ) 46 ( 33 ) (cid:8) 60 g / d 32 ( 80 ) 11 ( 8 ) HBsAg / HCV status Negative 33 ( 83 ) 136 ( 98 ) Positive 7 ( 18 ) 3 ( 2 ) * Adapted from reference 151 . HBsAG (cid:3) hepatitis B surface antigen ; HCV (cid:3) hepatitis C virus . Table 5 . Prevalence of Current Asthma and Diagnosed Hay Fever , by Average Alternaria alternata Antigen Level in the Household * CategorizedAlternaria Level† Current Asthma Diagnosed Hay Fever Patients , n Prevalence ( 95 % CI ) ‡ Patients , n Prevalence ( 95 % CI ) ‡ 1st tertile 40 4 . 8 ( 3 . 3 – 6 . 9 ) 93 16 . 4 ( 13 . 0 – 20 . 5 ) 2nd tertile 61 7 . 5 ( 5 . 2 – 10 . 6 ) 122 17 . 1 ( 12 . 8 – 22 . 5 ) 3rd tertile 73 8 . 7 ( 6 . 7 – 11 . 3 ) 93 15 . 2 ( 12 . 1 – 18 . 9 ) * Adapted from reference 152 . † First tertile , 3 . 90 g / g ; second tertile , 3 . 906 . 27 g / g ; third tertile , 6 . 28 g / g . ‡ Percentage ( 95 % CI ) weighted for the multistage sampling design of the Na - tional Survey of Lead and Allergens in Housing . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 182 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org Case – control study : Report numbers in each exposure category or summary measures over time . Example See Table 4 . Cross - sectional study : Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures . Example See Table 5 . Explanation Before addressing the possible association between ex - posures ( risk factors ) and outcomes , authors should report relevant descriptive data . It may be possible and meaning - ful to present measures of association in the same table that presents the descriptive data ( see item 14a ) . In a cohort study with events as outcomes , report the numbers of Readers may think that “adjusted” results equal the causal part of the measure of association , but adjusted results are not necessarily free of random sampling error , selection bias , information bias , or residual confounding ( see Box 5 ) . Thus , great care should be exercised when interpreting adjusted results , as the validity of results often depends crucially on complete knowledge of important confound - ers , their precise measurement , and appropriate speciﬁca - tion in the statistical model ( see item 20 ) ( 157 , 158 ) . Authors should explain all potential confounders con - sidered , and the criteria for excluding or including variables in statistical models . Decisions about excluding or includ - ing variables should be guided by knowledge , or explicit assumptions , on causal relations . Inappropriate decisions may introduce bias , for example , by including variables that are in the causal pathway between exposure and dis - ease ( unless the aim is to assess how much of the effect is carried by the intermediary variable ) . If the decision to include a variable in the model was based on the change in the estimate , it is important to report what change was considered sufﬁciently important to justify its inclusion . If a “backward deletion” or “forward inclusion” strategy was used to select confounders , explain that process and give the signiﬁcance level for rejecting the null hypothesis of no confounding . Of note , we and others do not advise select - ing confounders based solely on statistical signiﬁcance test - ing ( 147 , 159 , 160 ) . Recent studies of the quality of reporting of epidemi - ologic studies found that conﬁdence intervals were re - ported in most articles ( 4 ) . However , few authors explained their choice of confounding variables ( 4 , 5 ) . 16 ( b ) Report category boundaries when continuous variables were categorized . Example See Table 7 . Explanation Categorizing continuous data has several important implications for analysis ( see Box 4 ) and also affects the presentation of results . In tables , outcomes should be given for each exposure category , for example , as counts of per - sons at risk , person - time at risk , if relevant separately for each group ( for example , cases and controls ) . Details of the categories used may aid comparison of studies and meta - analysis . If data were grouped using conventional cut - points , such as body mass index thresholds ( 162 ) , group boundaries ( that is , range of values ) can be derived easily , except for the highest and lowest categories . If quantile - derived categories are used , the category boundaries cannot be inferred from the data . As a minimum , authors should report the category boundaries ; it is helpful also to report the range of the data and the mean or median values within categories . 16 ( c ) If relevant , consider translating estimates of relative risk into absolute risk for a meaningful time period . Example “10 years’ use of HRT [ hormone replacement therapy ] is estimated to result in ﬁve ( 95 % CI 3 - 7 ) additional breast cancers per 1000 users of oestrogen - only preparations and 19 ( 15 – 23 ) additional cancers per 1000 users of oestrogen – progestagen combinations” ( 163 ) . Table 6 . Relative Rates of Rehospitalization , by Treatment in Patients in Community Care after First Hospitalization Due to Schizophrenia and Schizoaffective Disorder * Treatment Relapses , n Person - Years Crude Relative Rate ( 95 % CI ) Adjusted Relative Rate ( 95 % CI ) † Fully Adjusted Relative Rate ( 95 % CI ) † Perphenazine 53 187 0 . 41 ( 0 . 29 – 0 . 59 ) 0 . 45 ( 0 . 32 – 0 . 65 ) 0 . 32 ( 0 . 22 – 0 . 49 ) Olanzapine 329 822 0 . 59 ( 0 . 45 – 0 . 75 ) 0 . 55 ( 0 . 43 – 0 . 72 ) 0 . 54 ( 0 . 41 – 0 . 71 ) Clozapine 336 804 0 . 61 ( 0 . 47 – 0 . 79 ) 0 . 53 ( 0 . 41 – 0 . 69 ) 0 . 64 ( 0 . 48 – 0 . 85 ) Chlorprothixene 79 146 0 . 79 ( 0 . 58 – 1 . 09 ) 0 . 83 ( 0 . 61 – 1 . 15 ) 0 . 64 ( 0 . 45 – 0 . 91 ) Thioridazine 115 201 0 . 84 ( 0 . 63 – 1 . 12 ) 0 . 82 ( 0 . 61 – 1 . 10 ) 0 . 70 ( 0 . 51 – 0 . 96 ) Perphenazine 155 327 0 . 69 ( 0 . 58 – 0 . 82 ) 0 . 78 ( 0 . 59 – 1 . 03 ) 0 . 85 ( 0 . 63 – 1 . 13 ) Risperidone 343 651 0 . 77 ( 0 . 60 – 0 . 99 ) 0 . 80 ( 0 . 62 – 1 . 03 ) 0 . 89 ( 0 . 69 – 1 . 16 ) Haloperidol 73 107 1 . 00 1 . 00 1 . 00 Chlorpromazine 82 127 0 . 94 ( 0 . 69 – 1 . 29 ) 0 . 97 ( 0 . 71 – 1 . 33 ) 1 . 06 ( 0 . 76 – 1 . 47 ) Levomepromazine 52 63 1 . 21 ( 0 . 84 – 1 . 73 ) 0 . 82 ( 0 . 58 – 1 . 18 ) 1 . 09 ( 0 . 76 – 1 . 57 ) No antipsychotic drugs 2248 3362 0 . 98 ( 0 . 77 – 1 . 23 ) 1 . 01 ( 0 . 80 – 1 . 27 ) 1 . 16 ( 0 . 91 – 1 . 47 ) * Adapted from reference 156 . † Adjusted for sex , calendar year , age at onset of follow - up , number of previous relapses , duration of ﬁrst hospitalization , and length of follow - up ( adjusted column ) , and additionally for a score of the propensity to start a treatment other than haloperidol ( fully adjusted column ) . Table 7 . Polychlorinated Biphenyls in Cord Serum * Quartile Range , ng / g Number 1 0 . 07 – 0 . 24 180 2 0 . 24 – 0 . 38 181 3 0 . 38 – 0 . 60 181 4 0 . 61 – 18 . 14 180 * Adapted from reference 161 . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 183 Explanation The results from studies examining the association be - tween an exposure and a disease are commonly reported in Relative measures capture the strength of the association between an exposure and disease . If the relative risk is a long way from 1 , it is less likely that the association is due to confounding ( 164 , 165 ) . Relative effects or associations tend to be more consistent across studies and populations than absolute measures , but what often tends to be the case may be irrelevant in a particular instance . For example , similar relative risks were obtained for the classic cardiovas - cular risk factors for men living in Northern Ireland , France , the United States , and Germany , despite the fact that the underlying risk of coronary heart disease varies substantially among these countries ( 166 , 167 ) . In con - trast , in a study of hypertension as a risk factor for cardio - vascular disease mortality , the data were more compatible with a constant rate difference than with a constant rate ratio ( 168 ) . Widely used statistical models , including logistic ( 169 ) and proportional hazards ( Cox ) regression ( 170 ) are based on ratio measures . In these models , only departures from constancy of ratio effect measures are easily discerned . Nevertheless , measures which assess departures from addi - tivity of risk differences , such as the Relative Excess Risk from Interaction ( RERI ; see item 12b and Box 8 ) , can be estimated in models based on ratio measures . In many circumstances , the absolute risk associated with an exposure is of greater interest than the relative risk . For example , if the focus is on adverse effects of a drug , one will want to know the number of additional cases per unit time of use ( for example , days , weeks , or years ) . The ex - ample gives the additional number of breast cancer cases per 1000 women who used hormone - replacement therapy for 10 years ( 163 ) . Measures such as the attributable risk or population attributable fraction may be useful to gauge how much disease can be prevented if the exposure is elim - inated . They should preferably be presented together with a measure of statistical uncertainty ( for example , conﬁ - dence intervals as in the example ) . Authors should be aware of the strong assumptions made in this context , including a causal relationship between a risk factor and disease ( see Box 7 ) ( 171 ) . Because of the semantic ambiguity and com - plexities involved , authors should report in detail what methods were used to calculate attributable risks , ideally giving the formulae used ( 172 ) . A recent survey of abstracts of 222 articles published in leading medical journals found that in 62 % of abstracts of randomized trials including a ratio measure absolute risks were given , but only in 21 % of abstracts of cohort studies ( 173 ) . A free text search of MEDLINE 1966 to 1997 showed that 619 items mentioned attributable risks in the title or abstract , compared to 18 955 using relative risk or odds ratio , for a ratio of 1 to 31 ( 174 ) . 17 Other analyses : Report other analyses done—e . g . , analyses of subgroups and interactions and sensitivity analyses . Example 1 See Table 8 . Example 2 See Table 9 . Explanation In addition to the main analysis , other analyses are often done in observational studies . They may address spe - ciﬁc subgroups , the potential interaction between risk fac - tors , the calculation of attributable risks , or use alternative deﬁnitions of study variables in sensitivity analyses . There is debate about the dangers associated with sub - group analyses , and multiplicity of analyses in general ( 4 , 104 ) . In our opinion , there is too great a tendency to look for evidence of subgroup - speciﬁc associations , or effect - measure modiﬁcation , when overall results appear to sug - gest little or no effect . On the other hand , there is value in exploring whether an overall association appears consistent across several preferably prespeciﬁed subgroups , especially Thromboembolism * Factor V Leiden OralContraceptives Patients , n Controls , n Odds Ratio Yes Yes 25 2 Yes No 10 4 No Yes 84 63 No No 36 1 . 0 ( reference ) * Modiﬁed from reference 182 . Table 9 . Sensitivity of the Rate Ratio for Cardiovascular Outcome to an Unmeasured Confounder * Prevalence of UnmeasuredBinaryConfounderintheExposedGroup , % Prevalence of UnmeasuredBinaryConfounderintheComparatorGroup , % UnmeasuredBinaryConfounderRateRatio High Exposure Rate Ratio ( 95 % CI ) † 90 10 1 . 5 1 . 20 ( 1 . 01 – 1 . 42 ) 90 50 1 . 5 1 . 43 ( 1 . 22 – 1 . 67 ) 50 10 1 . 5 1 . 39 ( 1 . 18 – 1 . 63 ) 90 10 2 0 . 96 ( 0 . 81 – 1 . 13 ) 90 50 2 1 . 27 ( 1 . 11 – 1 . 45 ) 50 10 2 1 . 21 ( 1 . 03 – 1 . 42 ) 90 50 3 1 . 18 ( 1 . 01 – 1 . 38 ) 50 10 3 0 . 99 ( 0 . 85 – 1 . 16 ) 90 50 5 1 . 08 ( 0 . 85 – 1 . 26 ) * Adapted from reference 184 . † Adjusted for age , sex , cardiovascular drug use , and unmeasured binary confounder . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 184 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org Table 8 . Analysis of Oral Contraceptive Use , Presence of 6 . 9 100 Factor V Leiden Allele , and Risk for Venous 3 . 7 34 . 7 relative terms , as ratios of risks , rates , or odds ( see Box 7 ) . when a study is large enough to have sufﬁcient data in each subgroup . A second area of debate is about interesting sub - groups that arose during the data analysis . They might be important ﬁndings , but might also arise by chance . Some argue that it is neither possible nor necessary to inform the reader about all subgroup analyses done , as future analyses of other data will tell to what extent the early exciting ﬁndings stand the test of time ( 9 ) . We advise authors to report which analyses were planned , and which were not ( see items 4 , 12b , and 20 ) . This will allow readers to judge the implications of multiplicity , taking into account the study’s position on the continuum from discovery to veri - ﬁcation or refutation . A third area of debate is how joint effects and interac - tions between risk factors should be evaluated : on additive or multiplicative scales , or should the scale be determined by the statistical model that ﬁts best ? ( See item 12b and Box 8 . ) A sensible approach is to report the separate effect of each exposure as well as the joint effect—if possible in a table , as in the ﬁrst example above ( 183 ) or in the study by Martinelli and associates ( 185 ) . Such a table gives the reader sufﬁcient information to evaluate additive as well as multiplicative interaction ( how these calculations are done is shown in Box 8 ) . Conﬁdence intervals for separate and joint effects may help the reader to judge the strength of the data . In addition , conﬁdence intervals around measures of interaction , such as the Relative Excess Risk from Inter - action ( RERI ) relate to tests of interaction or homogeneity tests . One recurrent problem is that authors use compari - sons of P values across subgroups , which lead to erroneous claims about an effect modiﬁer . For instance , a statistically signiﬁcant association in one category ( for example , men ) but not in the other ( women ) does not in itself provide evidence of effect modiﬁcation . Similarly , the conﬁdence intervals for each point estimate are sometimes inappropri - ately used to infer that there is no interaction when inter - vals overlap . A more valid inference is achieved by directly evaluating whether the magnitude of an association differs across subgroups . Sensitivity analyses are helpful to investigate the inﬂu - Box 7 . Measures of Association , Effect , and Impact Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 185 ence of choices made in the statistical analysis , or to inves - tigate the robustness of the ﬁndings to missing data or possible biases ( see item 12b ) . Judgment is needed regard - ing the level of reporting of such analyses . If many sensi - tivity analyses were performed , it may be impractical to present detailed ﬁndings for them all . It may sometimes be sufﬁcient to report that sensitivity analyses were carried out and that they were consistent with the main results pre - sented . Detailed presentation is more appropriate if the issue investigated is of major concern , or if effect estimates vary considerably ( 59 , 186 ) . Pocock and colleagues found that 43 out of 73 articles reporting observational studies contained subgroup analy - ses . The majority claimed differences across groups but only 8 articles reported a formal evaluation of interaction ( see item 12b ) ( 4 ) . Discussion The Discussion section addresses the central issues of validity and meaning of the study ( 191 ) . Surveys have found that discussion sections are often dominated by in - complete or biased assessments of the study’s results and their implications , and rhetoric supporting the authors’ ﬁndings ( 192 , 193 ) . Structuring the discussion may help authors avoid unwarranted speculation and overinterpreta - tion of results while guiding readers through the text ( 194 , 195 ) . For example , Annals of Internal Medicine ( 196 ) rec - ommends that authors structure the discussion section by presenting the following : 1 ) a brief synopsis of the key ﬁndings ; 2 ) consideration of possible mechanisms and ex - planations ; 3 ) comparison with relevant ﬁndings from other published studies ; 4 ) limitations of the study ; and 5 ) a brief section that summarizes the implications of the work for practice and research . Others have made similar suggestions ( 191 , 194 ) . The section on research recom - mendations and the section on limitations of the study should be closely linked to each other . Investigators should suggest ways in which subsequent research can improve on their studies rather than blandly stating “more research is needed” ( 197 , 198 ) . We recommend that authors structure their discussion sections , perhaps also using suitable sub - headings . 18 Key results : Summarize key results with reference to study objectives . Example “We hypothesized that ethnic minority status would be associated with higher levels of cardiovascular disease ( CVD ) risk factors , but that the associations would be ex - plained substantially by socioeconomic status ( SES ) . Our hypothesis was not conﬁrmed . After adjustment for age and SES , highly signiﬁcant differences in body mass index , blood pressure , diabetes , and physical inactivity remained between white women and both black and Mexican - Amer - ican women . In addition , we found large differences in Box 8 . Interaction ( Effect Modification ) : The Analysis of Joint Effects Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 186 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org CVD risk factors by SES , a ﬁnding that illustrates the high - risk status of both ethnic minority women as well as white women with low SES” ( 199 ) . Explanation It is good practice to begin the discussion with a short summary of the main ﬁndings of the study . The short summary reminds readers of the main ﬁndings and may help them assess whether the subsequent interpretation and implications offered by the authors are supported by the ﬁndings . 19 Limitations : Discuss limitations of the study , taking into account sources of potential bias or imprecision . Discuss both direction and magnitude of any potential bias . Example “Since the prevalence of counseling increases with in - creasing levels of obesity , our estimates may overestimate the true prevalence . Telephone surveys also may overesti - mate the true prevalence of counseling . Although persons without telephones have similar levels of overweight as per - sons with telephones , persons without telephones tend to be less educated , a factor associated with lower levels of counseling in our study . Also of concern is the potential bias caused by those who refused to participate as well as those who refused to respond to questions about weight . Furthermore , because data were collected cross - sectionally , we cannot infer that counseling preceded a patient’s at - tempt to lose weight” ( 200 ) . Explanation The identiﬁcation and discussion of the limitations of a study are an essential part of scientiﬁc reporting . It is important not only to identify the sources of bias and con - founding that could have affected results , but also to dis - cuss the relative importance of different biases , including the likely direction and magnitude of any potential bias ( see Box 3 and item 9 ) . Authors should also discuss any imprecision of the results . Imprecision may arise in connection with several aspects of a study , including the study size ( item 10 ) and the measurement of exposures , confounders , and outcomes ( item 8 ) . The inability to precisely measure true values of an exposure tends to result in bias toward unity : the less precisely a risk factor is measured , the greater the bias . This effect has been described as “attenuation , ” ( 201 , 202 ) or more recently as “regression dilution bias” ( 203 ) . However , when correlated risk factors are measured with different degrees of imprecision , the adjusted relative risk associated with them can be biased toward or away from unity ( 204 – 206 ) . When discussing limitations , authors may compare the study being presented with other studies in the litera - ture in terms of validity , generalizability , and precision . In this approach , each study can be viewed as a contribution to the literature , not as a stand - alone basis for inference and action ( 207 ) . Surprisingly , the discussion of important limitations of a study is sometimes omitted from published reports . A survey of authors who had published original research articles in The Lancet found that important weak - nesses of the study were reported by the investigators in the survey questionnaires , but not in the published article ( 192 ) . 20 Interpretation : Give a cautious overall interpretation con - sidering objectives , limitations , multiplicity of analyses , results from similar studies , and other relevant evidence . Example “Any explanation for an association between death from myocardial infarction and use of second generation oral contraceptives must be conjectural . There is no pub - lished evidence to suggest a direct biologic mechanism , and there are no other epidemiologic studies with relevant re - sults . . . . The increase in absolute risk is very small and probably applies predominantly to smokers . Due to the lack of corroborative evidence , and because the analysis is based on relatively small numbers , more evidence on the subject is needed . We would not recommend any change in prescribing practice on the strength of these results” ( 120 ) . Explanation The heart of the discussion section is the interpreta - tion of a study’s results . Overinterpretation is common and human ; even when we try hard to give an objective assess - ment , reviewers often rightly point out that we went too far in some respects . When interpreting results , authors should consider the nature of the study on the discovery to veriﬁcation continuum and potential sources of bias , in - cluding loss to follow - up and nonparticipation ( see items 9 , 12 , and 19 ) . Due consideration should be given to con - founding ( item 16a ) , the results of relevant sensitivity anal - yses , and the issue of multiplicity and subgroup analyses ( item 17 ) . Authors should also consider residual confound - ing due to unmeasured variables or imprecise measurement of confounders . For example , socioeconomic status ( SES ) is associated with many health outcomes and often differs between groups being compared . Variables used to mea - sure SES ( income , education , or occupation ) are surrogates for other undeﬁned and unmeasured exposures , and the true confounder will by deﬁnition be measured with error ( 208 ) . Authors should address the real range of uncertainty in estimates , which is larger than the statistical uncertainty reﬂected in conﬁdence intervals . The latter do not take into account other uncertainties that arise from a study’s design , implementation , and methods of measurement ( 209 ) . To guide thinking and conclusions about causality , some may ﬁnd criteria proposed by Hill in 1965 helpful Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 187 ( 164 ) . How strong is the association with the exposure ? Did it precede the onset of disease ? Is the association con - sistently observed in different studies and settings ? Is there supporting evidence from experimental studies , including laboratory and animal studies ? How speciﬁc is the expo - sure’s putative effect , and is there a dose – response relation - ship ? Is the association biologically plausible ? These criteria should not , however , be applied mechanically . For exam - ple , some have argued that relative risks below 2 or 3 should be ignored ( 210 , 211 ) . This is a reversal of the point by Cornﬁeld and colleagues about the strength of large relative risks ( see item 12b ) ( 127 ) . Although a causal effect is more likely with a relative risk of 9 , it does not follow that one below 3 is necessarily spurious . For in - stance , the small increase in the risk of childhood leukemia after intrauterine irradiation is credible because it concerns an adverse effect of a medical procedure for which no al - ternative explanations are obvious ( 212 ) . Moreover , the carcinogenic effects of radiation are well established . The doubling in the risk of ovarian cancer associated with eat - ing 2 to 4 eggs per week is not immediately credible , be - cause dietary habits are associated with a large number of lifestyle factors as well as SES ( 213 ) . In contrast , the cred - ibility of much - debated epidemiologic ﬁndings of a differ - ence in thrombosis risk between different types of oral contraceptives was greatly enhanced by the differences in coagulation found in a randomized crossover trial ( 214 ) . A discussion of the existing external evidence from different types of studies should always be included , but may be particularly important for studies reporting small increases in risk . Further , authors should put their results in context with similar studies and explain how the new study affects the existing body of evidence , ideally by referring to a sys - tematic review . 21 Generalizability : Discuss the generalizability ( external va - lidity ) of the study results . Example “How applicable are our estimates to other HIV - 1 - infected patients ? This is an important question because the accuracy of prognostic models tends to be lower when applied to data other than those used to develop them . We addressed this issue by penalizing model complexity , and by choosing models that generalized best to cohorts omit - ted from the estimation procedure . Our database included patients from many countries from Europe and North America who were treated in different settings . The range of patients was broad : men and women from teenagers to elderly people were included , and the major exposure cat - egories were well represented . The severity of immunode - ﬁciency at baseline ranged from not measurable to very severe , and viral load from undetectable to extremely high” ( 215 ) . Explanation Generalizability , also called external validity or appli - cability , is the extent to which the results of a study can be applied to other circumstances ( 216 ) . There is no external validity per se ; the term is meaningful only with regard to clearly speciﬁed conditions ( 217 ) . Can results be applied to an individual , groups , or populations that differ from those enrolled in the study with regard to age , sex , ethnicity , severity of disease , and comorbid conditions ? Are the na - ture and level of exposures comparable , and the deﬁnitions of outcomes relevant to another setting or population ? Are data that were collected in longitudinal studies many years ago still relevant today ? Are results from health services research in one country applicable to health systems in other countries ? The question of whether the results of a study have external validity is often a matter of judgment that depends on the study setting , the characteristics of the participants , the exposures examined , and the outcomes assessed . Thus , it is crucial that authors provide readers with adequate in - formation about the setting and locations , eligibility crite - ria , the exposures and how they were measured , the deﬁ - nition of outcomes , and the period of recruitment and follow - up . The degree of nonparticipation and the propor - tion of unexposed participants in whom the outcome de - velops are also relevant . Knowledge of the absolute risk and prevalence of the exposure , which will often vary across populations , are helpful when applying results to other set - tings and populations ( see Box 7 ) . Other Information 22 Funding : Give the source of funding and the role of the funders for the present study and , if applicable , for the original study on which the present article is based . Explanation Some journals require authors to disclose the presence or absence of ﬁnancial and other conﬂicts of interest ( 100 , 218 ) . Several investigations show strong associations be - tween the source of funding and the conclusions of re - search articles ( 219 – 222 ) . The conclusions in randomized trials recommended the experimental drug as the drug of choice much more often ( odds ratio , 5 . 3 ) if the trial was funded by for - proﬁt organizations , even after adjustment for the effect size ( 223 ) . Other studies document the inﬂu - ence of the tobacco and telecommunication industries on the research they funded ( 224 – 227 ) . There are also exam - ples of undue inﬂuence when the sponsor is governmental or a nonproﬁt organization . Authors or funders may have conﬂicts of interest that inﬂuence any of the following : the design of the study ( 228 ) ; choice of exposures ( 228 , 229 ) , outcomes ( 230 ) , statistical methods ( 231 ) ; and selective publication of out - comes ( 230 ) and studies ( 232 ) . Consequently , the role of the funders should be described in detail : in what part of the study they took direct responsibility ( for example , de - Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 188 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org sign , data collection , analysis , drafting of manuscript , de - cision to publish ) ( 100 ) . Other sources of undue inﬂuence include employers ( for example , university administrators for academic researchers and government supervisors , espe - cially political appointees , for government researchers ) , ad - visory committees , litigants , and special interest groups . C ONCLUDING R EMARKS The STROBE Statement aims to provide helpful rec - ommendations for reporting observational studies in epi - demiology . Good reporting reveals the strengths and weak - nesses of a study and facilitates sound interpretation and application of study results . The STROBE Statement may also aid in planning observational studies , and may guide peer reviewers and editors in their evaluation of manu - scripts . We wrote this explanatory article to discuss the impor - tance of transparent and complete reporting of observa - tional studies , to explain the rationale behind the different items included in the checklist , and to give examples from published articles of what we consider good reporting . We hope that the material presented here will assist authors and editors in using STROBE . We stress that STROBE and other recommendations on the reporting of research ( 13 , 233 , 234 ) should be seen as evolving documents that require continual assessment , reﬁnement , and , if necessary , change ( 235 , 236 ) . For ex - ample , the CONSORT statement for the reporting of par - allel - group randomized trials was ﬁrst developed in the mid - 1990s ( 237 ) . Since then , members of the group have met regularly to review the need to revise the recommen - dations ; a revised version appeared in 2001 ( 233 ) and a further version is in development . Similarly , the principles presented in this article and the STROBE checklist are open to change as new evidence and critical comments accumulate . The STROBE Web site ( www . strobe - state ment . org ) provides a forum for discussion and suggestions for improvements of the checklist , this explanatory docu - ment , and information about the good reporting of epide - miologic studies . Several journals ask authors to follow the STROBE Statement in their instructions to authors ( see Web site for current list ) . We invite other journals to adopt the STROBE Statement and contact us through our Web site to let us know . The journals publishing the STROBE rec - ommendations provide open access . The STROBE State - ment is therefore widely accessible to the biomedical com - munity . From Leiden University Medical Center , Leiden , the Netherlands ; Insti - tute of Social and Preventive Medicine , University of Bern , Bern , Swit - zerland ; University Medical Centre , Freiburg , Germany ; Cancer Re - search UK / NHS Centre for Statistics in Medicine , Oxford , United Kingdom ; Nordic Cochrane Centre , Rigshospitalet , Copenhagen , Den - mark ; University of Texas Health Science Center , San Antonio , Texas ; London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine , London , United Kingdom ; University of North Carolina School of Public Health , Chapel Hill , North Carolina ; University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Pub - lic Health and University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania ; and University of Bristol , Bristol , United Kingdom . Note : The following individuals have contributed to the content and elaboration of the STROBE Statement : Douglas G . Altman , Maria Blettner , Paolo Boffetta , Hermann Brenner , Genevie ` ve Cheˆne , Cyrus Cooper , George Davey - Smith , Erik von Elm , Matthias Egger , France Gagnon , Peter C . Gøtzsche , Philip Greenland , Sander Greenland , Claire Infante - Rivard , John Ioannidis , Astrid James , Giselle Jones , Bruno Led - ergerber , Julian Little , Margaret May , David Moher , Hooman Momen , Alfredo Morabia , Hal Morgenstern , Cynthia D . Mulrow , Fred Paccaud , Stuart J . Pocock , Charles Poole , Martin Ro¨o¨sli , Dietrich Rothenbacher , Kenneth Rothman , Caroline Sabin , Willi Sauerbrei , Lale Say , James J . Schlesselman , Jonathan Sterne , Holly Sydall , Jan P . Vandenbroucke , Ian White , Susan Wieland , Hywel Williams , and Guang Yong Zou . Acknowledgments : The authors thank Gerd Antes , Kay Dickersin , Shah Ebrahim , and Richard Lilford for supporting the STROBE Initia - tive . They also thank the following institutions that have hosted working meetings of the coordinating group : Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine , University of Bern , Bern , Switzerland ; Department of Social Medicine , University of Bristol , Bristol , United Kingdom ; London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine , London , United Kingdom ; Nordic Cochrane Centre , Copenhagen , Denmark ; and Centre for Sta - tistics in Medicine , University of Oxford , Oxford , United Kingdom . Finally , they thank the 4 anonymous reviewers who provided helpful comments on a previous draft of this paper . Grant Support : The workshop was funded by the European Science Foundation . Additional funding was received from the Medical Research Council Health Services Research Collaboration and the National Health Services Research & Development Methodology Programme . The funders had no role in study design , data collection and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . Potential Financial Conflicts of Interest : None disclosed . Requests for Single Reprints : Matthias Egger , MD , Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine , Finkenhubelweg 11 , CH - 3012 Bern , Switzer - land ; e - mail , strobe @ ispm . unibe . ch . Current Author Addresses : Dr . Vandenbroucke : Department of Clini - cal Epidemiology , Leiden University Medical Center , PO Box 9600 , 2300 RC Leiden , the Netherlands . Drs . von Elm and Egger : University of Bern , Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine , Finkenhubelweg 11 , CH - 3012 Bern , Switzerland . Dr . Altman : Centre for Statistics in Medicine , Wolfson College Annexe , Linton Road , Oxford OX2 6UD , United Kingdom . Dr . Gøtzsche : The Nordic Cochrane Centre , Rigshospitalet , Depart - ment 7112 , Blegdamsvej 9 , DK - 2100 Copenhagen Ø , Denmark . Dr . Mulrow : American College of Physicians , 190 N . Independence Mall West , Philadelphia , PA 19106 - 1572 . Dr . Pocock : Medical Statistics Unit , London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine , Keppel Street , London WC1E 7HT , United King - dom . Dr . Poole : Department of Epidemiology , University of North Carolina School of Public Health , Pittsboro Road , Chapel Hill , NC 27599 - 7435 . Dr . Schlesselman : Biostatistics Facility , University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute , Sterling Plaza , Suite 325 , 201 North Craig Street , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 189 References 1 . Glasziou P , Vandenbroucke JP , Chalmers I . Assessing the quality of research . BMJ . 2004 ; 328 : 39 - 41 . [ PMID : 14703546 ] 2 . Funai EF , Rosenbush EJ , Lee MJ , Del Priore G . Distribution of study designs in four major US journals of obstetrics and gynecology . Gynecol Obstet Invest . 2001 ; 51 : 8 - 11 . [ PMID : 11150867 ] 3 . Scales CD Jr , Norris RD , Peterson BL , Preminger GM , Dahm P . Clinical research and statistical methods in the urology literature . J Urol . 2005 ; 174 : 1374 - 9 . [ PMID : 16145441 ] 4 . Pocock SJ , Collier TJ , Dandreo KJ , de Stavola BL , Goldman MB , Kalish LA , et al . Issues in the reporting of epidemiological studies : a survey of recent practice . BMJ . 2004 ; 329 : 883 . [ PMID : 15469946 ] 5 . Tooth L , Ware R , Bain C , Purdie DM , Dobson A . Quality of reporting of observational longitudinal research . Am J Epidemiol . 2005 ; 161 : 280 - 8 . [ PMID : 15671260 ] . 6 . von Elm E , Altman DG , Egger M , Gotzsche PC , Pocock SJ , Vandenbroucke JP ; STROBE Initiative . The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology ( STROBE ) Statement : guidelines for reporting observa - tional studies . Ann Intern Med . 2007 ; 147 : 573 - 7 . 7 . Mihailovic A , Bell CM , Urbach DR . Users’ guide to the surgical literature . Case - control studies in surgical journals . Can J Surg . 2005 ; 48 : 148 - 51 . [ PMID : 15887796 ] 8 . Rushton L . Reporting of occupational and environmental research : use and misuse of statistical and epidemiological methods . Occup Environ Med . 2000 ; 57 : 1 - 9 . [ PMID : 10711263 ] 9 . Rothman KJ . No adjustments are needed for multiple comparisons . Epidemi - ology . 1990 ; 1 : 43 - 6 . [ PMID : 2081237 ] 10 . Moonesinghe R , Khoury MJ , Janssens AC . Most published research ﬁndings are false - but a little replication goes a long way . PLoS Med . 2007 ; 4 : e28 . [ PMID : 17326704 ] 11 . Jenicek M . Clinical Case Reporting . Evidence - Based Medicine . Oxford : But - terworth - Heinemann ; 1999 : 117 . 12 . Vandenbroucke JP . In defense of case reports and case series . Ann Intern Med . 2001 ; 134 : 330 - 4 . [ PMID : 11182844 ] 13 . Bossuyt PM , Reitsma JB , Bruns DE , Gatsonis CA , Glasziou PP , Irwig LM ; Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy . Towards complete and accu - rate reporting of studies of diagnostic accuracy : The STARD Initiative . Ann Intern Med . 2003 ; 138 : 40 - 4 . [ PMID : 12513043 ] 14 . McShane LM , Altman DG , Sauerbrei W , Taube SE , Gion M , Clark GM ; Statistics Subcommittee of the NCI - EORTC Working Group on Cancer Di - agnostics . REporting recommendations for tumour MARKer prognostic studies ( REMARK ) . Br J Cancer . 2005 ; 93 : 387 - 91 . [ PMID : 16106245 ] 15 . Ioannidis JP , Gwinn M , Little J , Higgins JP , Bernstein JL , Boffetta P ; Human Genome Epidemiology Network and the Network of Investigator Net - works . A road map for efﬁcient and reliable human genome epidemiology . Nat Genet . 2006 ; 38 : 3 - 5 . [ PMID : 16468121 ] 16 . Rodrigues L , Kirkwood BR . Case - control designs in the study of common diseases : updates on the demise of the rare disease assumption and the choice of sampling scheme for controls . Int J Epidemiol . 1990 ; 19 : 205 - 13 . [ PMID : 2190942 ] 17 . Rothman KJ , Greenland S . Case - control studies . In : Rothman KJ , Green - land S , ed . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven ; 1998 : 93 - 114 . 18 . Forand SP . Leukaemia incidence among workers in the shoe and boot man - ufacturing industry : a case - control study . Environ Health . 2004 ; 3 : 7 . [ PMID : 15339334 ] 19 . Benson K , Hartz AJ . A comparison of observational studies and randomized , controlled trials . N Engl J Med . 2000 ; 342 : 1878 - 86 . [ PMID : 10861324 ] 20 . Gøtzsche PC , Harden A . Searching for non - randomised studies . Draft chap - ter 3 . Cochrane Non - Randomised Studies Methods Group , 26 July 2002 Ac - cessed at www . cochrane . dk / nrsmg on 10 September 2007 . 21 . Lohse N , Hansen AB , Pedersen G , Kronborg G , Gerstoft J , Sørensen HT , et al . Survival of persons with and without HIV infection in Denmark , 1995 - 2005 . Ann Intern Med . 2007 ; 146 : 87 - 95 . [ PMID : 17227932 ] 22 . American Journal of Epidemiology . Information for authors . Accessed at www . oxfordjournals . org / aje / for _ authors / index . html on 30 August 2007 . 23 . Haynes RB , Mulrow CD , Huth EJ , Altman DG , Gardner MJ . More in - formative abstracts revisited . Ann Intern Med . 1990 ; 113 : 69 - 76 . [ PMID : 2190518 ] 24 . Taddio A , Pain T , Fassos FF , Boon H , Ilersich AL , Einarson TR . Quality of nonstructured and structured abstracts of original research articles in the British Medical Journal , the Canadian Medical Association Journal and the Journal of the American Medical Association . CMAJ . 1994 ; 150 : 1611 - 5 . [ PMID : 8174031 ] 25 . Hartley J , Sydes M . Which layout do you prefer ? An analysis of readers’ preferences for different typographic layouts of structured abstracts . J Inf Sci . 1996 ; 22 : 27 - 37 . 26 . Viner RM , Cole TJ . Adult socioeconomic , educational , social , and psycho - logical outcomes of childhood obesity : a national birth cohort study . BMJ . 2005 ; 330 : 1354 . [ PMID : 15901644 ] 27 . McCauley J , Kern DE , Kolodner K , Dill L , Schroeder AF , DeChant HK , et al . The “battering syndrome” : prevalence and clinical characteristics of domestic violence in primary care internal medicine practices . Ann Intern Med . 1995 ; 123 : 737 - 46 . [ PMID : 7574191 ] 28 . McEvoy SP , Stevenson MR , McCartt AT , Woodward M , Haworth C , Palamara P , et al . Role of mobile phones in motor vehicle crashes resulting in hospital attendance : a case - crossover study . BMJ . 2005 ; 331 : 428 . [ PMID : 16012176 ] 29 . Vandenbroucke JP . Prospective or retrospective : what’s in a name ? [ Edito - rial ] . BMJ . 1991 ; 302 : 249 - 50 . [ PMID : 1998787 ] 30 . Last JM . A Dictionary of Epidemiology . New York : Oxford Univ Pr : 2000 . 31 . Miettinen OS . Theoretical Epidemiology : Principles of Occurrence Research in Medicine . New York : Wiley ; 1985 : 64 - 6 . 32 . Rothman KJ , Greenland S . Types of Epidemiologic Studies . In : Rothman KJ , Greenland S , eds . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven ; 1998 : 74 - 5 . 33 . MacMahon B , Trichopoulos D . Epidemiology , Principles and Methods . 2nd ed . Boston : Little , Brown ; 1996 : 81 . 34 . Lilienfeld AM . Foundations of Epidemiology . New York : Oxford Univ Pr ; 1976 . 35 . Ridker PM , Hennekens CH , Lindpaintner K , Stampfer MJ , Eisenberg PR , Miletich JP . Mutation in the gene coding for coagulation factor V and the risk of myocardial infarction , stroke , and venous thrombosis in apparently healthy men . N Engl J Med . 1995 ; 332 : 912 - 7 . [ PMID : 7877648 ] 36 . Goodman KJ , O’Rourke K , Day RS , Wang C , Nurgalieva Z , Phillips CV , et al . Dynamics of Helicobacter pylori infection in a US - Mexico cohort during the ﬁrst two years of life . Int J Epidemiol . 2005 ; 34 : 1348 - 55 . [ PMID : 16076858 ] 37 . Altman DG , De Stavola BL , Love SB , Stepniewska KA . Review of survival analyses published in cancer journals . Br J Cancer . 1995 ; 72 : 511 - 8 . [ PMID : 7640241 ] 38 . Cerhan JR , Wallace RB , Folsom AR , Potter JD , Munger RG , Prineas RJ . Transfusion history and cancer risk in older women . Ann Intern Med . 1993 ; 119 : 8 - 15 . [ PMID : 8498768 ] 39 . Beane Freeman LE , Dennis LK , Lynch CF , Thorne PS , Just CL . Toenail arsenic content and cutaneous melanoma in Iowa . Am J Epidemiol . 2004 ; 160 : 679 - 87 . [ PMID : 15383412 ] 40 . Canto JG , Allison JJ , Kiefe CI , Fincher C , Farmer R , Sekar P , et al . Relation of race and sex to the use of reperfusion therapy in Medicare beneﬁcia - ries with acute myocardial infarction . N Engl J Med . 2000 ; 342 : 1094 - 100 . [ PMID : 10760310 ] 41 . Metzkor - Cotter E , Kletter Y , Avidor B , Varon M , Golan Y , Ephros M , et al . Long - term serological analysis and clinical follow - up of patients with cat scratch disease . Clin Infect Dis . 2003 ; 37 : 1149 - 54 . [ PMID : 14557957 ] 42 . Johnson ES . Bias on withdrawing lost subjects from the analysis at the time of loss , in cohort mortality studies , and in follow - up methods . J Occup Med . 1990 ; 32 : 250 - 4 . [ PMID : 2319358 ] 43 . Berkson J . Limitations of the application of fourfold table analysis to hospital data . Biometrics Bulletin . 1946 ; 2 : 53 . 44 . Feinstein AR , Walter SD , Horwitz RI . An analysis of Berkson’s bias in case - control studies . J Chronic Dis . 1986 ; 39 : 495 - 504 . [ PMID : 3722313 ] 45 . Jick H , Vessey MP . Case - control studies in the evaluation of drug - induced illness . Am J Epidemiol . 1978 ; 107 : 1 - 7 . [ PMID : 623085 ] 46 . Hackam DG , Mamdani M , Li P , Redelmeier DA . Statins and sepsis in patients with cardiovascular disease : a population - based cohort analysis . Lancet . 2006 ; 367 : 413 - 8 . [ PMID : 16458766 ] 47 . Smeeth L , Cook C , Fombonne E , Heavey L , Rodrigues LC , Smith PG , et al . MMR vaccination and pervasive developmental disorders : a case - control study . Lancet . 2004 ; 364 : 963 - 9 . [ PMID : 15364187 ] 48 . Costanza MC . Matching . Prev Med . 1995 ; 24 : 425 - 33 . [ PMID : 8524715 ] 49 . Stu¨rmer T , Brenner H . Flexible matching strategies to increase power and efﬁciency to detect and estimate gene - environment interactions in case - control Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 190 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org studies . Am J Epidemiol . 2002 ; 155 : 593 - 602 . [ PMID : 11914186 ] 50 . Rothman KJ , Greenland S . Matching . In : Rothman KJ , Greenland S , eds . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven ; 1998 : 147 - 61 . 51 . Szklo MF , Nieto J . Epidemiology , Beyond the Basics . Sudbury , United Kingdom : Jones and Bartlett ; 2000 : 40 - 51 . 52 . Cole P , MacMahon B . Attributable risk percent in case - control studies . Br J Prev Soc Med . 1971 ; 25 : 242 - 4 . [ PMID : 5160433 ] 53 . Gissler M , Hemminki E . The danger of overmatching in studies of the perinatal mortality and birthweight of infants born after assisted conception . Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol . 1996 ; 69 : 73 - 5 . [ PMID : 8902436 ] 54 . Gefeller O , Pfahlberg A , Brenner H , Windeler J . An empirical investigation on matching in published case - control studies . Eur J Epidemiol . 1998 ; 14 : 321 - 5 . [ PMID : 9690747 ] 55 . Artama M , Ritvanen A , Gissler M , Isoja¨rvi J , Auvinen A . Congenital struc - tural anomalies in offspring of women with epilepsy—a population - based cohort study in Finland . Int J Epidemiol . 2006 ; 35 : 280 - 7 . [ PMID : 16280367 ] 56 . Ebrahim S . Cohorts , infants and children . Int J Epidemiol . 2004 ; 33 : 1165 - 1166 . 57 . Walker M , Whincup PH , Shaper AG . The British Regional Heart Study 1975 - 2004 . Int J Epidemiol . 2004 ; 33 : 1185 - 92 . [ PMID : 15319395 ] 58 . Wieland S , Dickersin K . Selective exposure reporting and Medline indexing limited the search sensitivity for observational studies of the adverse effects of oral contraceptives . J Clin Epidemiol . 2005 ; 58 : 560 - 7 . [ PMID : 15878469 ] 59 . Anderson HR , Atkinson RW , Peacock JL , Sweeting MJ , Marston L . Am - bient particulate matter and health effects : publication bias in studies of short - term associations . Epidemiology . 2005 ; 16 : 155 - 63 . [ PMID : 15703529 ] 60 . Winkelmayer WC , Stampfer MJ , Willett WC , Curhan GC . Habitual caf - feine intake and the risk of hypertension in women . JAMA . 2005 ; 294 : 2330 - 5 . [ PMID : 16278361 ] 61 . Lukanova A , So¨derberg S , Kaaks R , Jellum E , Stattin P . Serum adiponectin is not associated with risk of colorectal cancer . Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev . 2006 ; 15 : 401 - 2 . [ PMID : 16492937 ] 62 . Becher H . The concept of residual confounding in regression models and some applications . Stat Med . 1992 ; 11 : 1747 - 58 . [ PMID : 1485057 ] 63 . Brenner H , Blettner M . Controlling for continuous confounders in epide - miologic research . Epidemiology . 1997 ; 8 : 429 - 34 . [ PMID : 9209859 ] 64 . Phillips MR , Yang G , Zhang Y , Wang L , Ji H , Zhou M . Risk factors for suicide in China : a national case - control psychological autopsy study . Lancet . 2002 ; 360 : 1728 - 36 . [ PMID : 12480425 ] 65 . Pasquale LR , Kang JH , Manson JE , Willett WC , Rosner BA , Hankinson SE . Prospective study of type 2 diabetes mellitus and risk of primary open - angle glaucoma in women . Ophthalmology . 2006 ; 113 : 1081 - 6 . [ PMID : 16757028 ] 66 . Craig SL , Feinstein AR . Antecedent therapy versus detection bias as causes of neoplastic multimorbidity . Am J Clin Oncol . 1999 ; 22 : 51 - 6 . [ PMID : 10025381 ] 67 . Rogler LH , Mroczek DK , Fellows M , Loftus ST . The neglect of response bias in mental health research . J Nerv Ment Dis . 2001 ; 189 : 182 - 7 . [ PMID : 11277355 ] 68 . Murphy EA . The logic of medicine . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Univ Pr ; 1976 . 69 . Sackett DL . Bias in analytic research . J Chronic Dis . 1979 ; 32 : 51 - 63 . [ PMID : 447779 ] 70 . Johannes CB , Crawford SL , McKinlay JB . Interviewer effects in a cohort study . Results from the Massachusetts Women’s Health Study . Am J Epidemiol . 1997 ; 146 : 429 - 38 . [ PMID : 9290503 ] 71 . Bloemenkamp KW , Rosendaal FR , Bu¨ller HR , Helmerhorst FM , Colly LP , Vandenbroucke JP . Risk of venous thrombosis with use of current low - dose oral contraceptives is not explained by diagnostic suspicion and referral bias . Arch Intern Med . 1999 ; 159 : 65 - 70 . [ PMID : 9892332 ] 72 . Feinstein AR . Clinical Epidemiology : The Architecture of Clinical Research . Philadelphia : W . B . Saunders : 1985 . 73 . Yadon ZE , Rodrigues LC , Davies CR , Quigley MA . Indoor and peridomes - tic transmission of American cutaneous leishmaniasis in northwestern Argentina : a retrospective case - control study . Am J Trop Med Hyg . 2003 ; 68 : 519 - 26 . [ PMID : 12812336 ] 74 . Anoop S , Saravanan B , Joseph A , Cherian A , Jacob KS . Maternal depression and low maternal intelligence as risk factors for malnutrition in children : a com - munity based case - control study from South India . Arch Dis Child . 2004 ; 89 : 325 - 9 . [ PMID : 15033840 ] 75 . Carlin JB , Doyle LW . Sample size . J Paediatr Child Health . 2002 ; 38 : 300 - 4 . [ PMID : 12047701 ] 76 . Rigby AS , Vail A . Statistical methods in epidemiology . II : A commonsense approach to sample size estimation . Disabil Rehabil . 1998 ; 20 : 405 - 10 . [ PMID : 9846240 ] 77 . Schulz KF , Grimes DA . Sample size calculations in randomised trials : man - datory and mystical . Lancet . 2005 ; 365 : 1348 - 53 . [ PMID : 15823387 ] 78 . Drescher K , Timm J , Jo¨ckel KH . The design of case - control studies : the effect of confounding on sample size requirements . Stat Med . 1990 ; 9 : 765 - 76 . [ PMID : 2218179 ] 79 . Devine OJ , Smith JM . Estimating sample size for epidemiologic studies : the impact of ignoring exposure measurement uncertainty . Stat Med . 1998 ; 17 : 1375 - 89 . [ PMID : 9682326 ] 80 . Linn S , Levi L , Grunau PD , Zaidise I , Zarka S . Effect measure modiﬁcation and confounding of severe head injury mortality by age and multiple organ injury severity . Ann Epidemiol . 2007 ; 17 : 142 - 7 . [ PMID : 17236984 ] 81 . Altman DG , Lausen B , Sauerbrei W , Schumacher M . Dangers of using “optimal” cutpoints in the evaluation of prognostic factors . J Natl Cancer Inst . 1994 ; 86 : 829 - 35 . [ PMID : 8182763 ] 82 . Royston P , Altman DG , Sauerbrei W . Dichotomizing continuous predictors in multiple regression : a bad idea . Stat Med . 2006 ; 25 : 127 - 41 . [ PMID : 16217841 ] 83 . Greenland S . Avoiding power loss associated with categorization and ordinal scores in dose - response and trend analysis . Epidemiology . 1995 ; 6 : 450 - 4 . [ PMID : 7548361 ] 84 . Royston P , Ambler G , Sauerbrei W . The use of fractional polynomials to model continuous risk variables in epidemiology . Int J Epidemiol . 1999 ; 28 : 964 - 74 . [ PMID : 10597998 ] 85 . MacCallum RC , Zhang S , Preacher KJ , Rucker DD . On the practice of dichotomization of quantitative variables . Psychol Methods . 2002 ; 7 : 19 - 40 . [ PMID : 11928888 ] 86 . Altman DG . Categorizing continuous variables . In : Armitage P , Colton T , ed . Encyclopedia of biostatistics , 2nd edition . Chichester , United Kingdom : John Wiley ; 2005 : 708 - 11 . 87 . Cohen J . The cost of dichotomization . Appl Psychol Meas . 1983 ; 7 : 249 - 53 . 88 . Zhao LP , Kolonel LN . Efﬁciency loss from categorizing quantitative expo - sures into qualitative exposures in case - control studies . Am J Epidemiol . 1992 ; 136 : 464 - 74 . [ PMID : 1415166 ] 89 . Cochran WG . The effectiveness of adjustment by subclassiﬁcation in remov - ing bias in observational studies . Biometrics . 1968 ; 24 : 295 - 313 . [ PMID : 5683871 ] 90 . Clayton D , Hills M . Models for dose - response . In : Statistical Models in Epidemiology . Oxford : Oxford Univ Pr 1993 : 249 - 60 . 91 . Cox DR . Note on grouping . J Am Stat Assoc . 1957 ; 52 : 543 - 7 . 92 . Il’yasova D , Hertz - Picciotto I , Peters U , Berlin JA , Poole C . Choice of exposure scores for categorical regression in meta - analysis : a case study of a com - mon problem . Cancer Causes Control . 2005 ; 16 : 383 - 8 . [ PMID : 15953980 ] 93 . Berglund A , Alfredsson L , Cassidy JD , Jensen I , Nygren A . The association between exposure to a rear - end collision and future neck or shoulder pain : a cohort study . J Clin Epidemiol . 2000 ; 53 : 1089 - 94 . [ PMID : 11106881 ] 94 . Slama R , Werwatz A . Controlling for continuous confounding factors : non - and semiparametric approaches . Rev Epidemiol Sante Publique . 2005 ; 53 Spec No 2 : 2S65 - 80 . 95 . Greenland S . Introduction to regression modelling . In : Rothman KJ , Green - land S , eds . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven : 1998 : 401 - 32 . 96 . Thompson WD . Statistical analysis of case - control studies . Epidemiol Rev . 1994 ; 16 : 33 - 50 . [ PMID : 7925726 ] 97 . Schlesselman JJ . Logistic regression for case - control studies . In : Case - Control Studies : Design , Conduct , Analysis . New York : Oxford Univ Pr ; 1982 : 235 - 41 . 98 . Clayton D , Hills M . Choice and interpretation of models . In : Statistical Models in Epidemiology . Oxford : Oxford Univ Pr . 1993 : 271 - 81 . 99 . Altman DG , Gore SM , Gardner MJ , Pocock SJ . Statistical guidelines for contributors to medical journals . Br Med J ( Clin Res Ed ) . 1983 ; 286 : 1489 - 93 . [ PMID : 6405856 ] 100 . Uniform requirements for manuscripts submitted to biomedical journals . International Committee of Medical Journal Editors . N Engl J Med . 1997 ; 336 : 309 - 15 . [ PMID : 8995096 ] 101 . Mu¨llner M , Matthews H , Altman DG . Reporting on statistical methods to adjust for confounding : a cross - sectional survey . Ann Intern Med . 2002 ; 136 : 122 - 6 . [ PMID : 11790063 ] 102 . Olsen J , Basso O . Re : Residual confounding [ Letter ] . Am J Epidemiol . Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 191 1999 ; 149 : 290 . [ PMID : 9927226 ] 103 . Hallan S , de Mutsert R , Carlsen S , Dekker FW , Aasarød K , Holmen J . Obesity , smoking , and physical inactivity as risk factors for CKD : are men more vulnerable ? Am J Kidney Dis . 2006 ; 47 : 396 - 405 . [ PMID : 16490617 ] 104 . Gøtzsche PC . Believability of relative risks and odds ratios in abstracts : cross sectional study . BMJ . 2006 ; 333 : 231 - 4 . [ PMID : 16854948 ] 105 . Szklo MF , Nieto J . Communicating results of epidemiologic studies . In : Epidemiology , Beyond the Basics . Sudbury : Jones and Bartlett . 2000 : 408 - 30 . 106 . Chandola T , Brunner E , Marmot M . Chronic stress at work and the metabolic syndrome : prospective study . BMJ . 2006 ; 332 : 521 - 5 . [ PMID : 16428252 ] 107 . Vach W , Blettner M . Biased estimation of the odds ratio in case - control studies due to the use of ad hoc methods of correcting for missing values for confounding variables . Am J Epidemiol . 1991 ; 134 : 895 - 907 . [ PMID : 1670320 ] 108 . Little RJ , Rubin DB . A taxonomy of missing - data methodsIn : Statistical Analysis with Missing Data . New York : Wiley ; 2002 : 19 - 23 . 109 . Ware JH . Interpreting incomplete data in studies of diet and weight loss [ Editorial ] . N Engl J Med . 2003 ; 348 : 2136 - 7 . [ PMID : 12761370 ] 110 . Rubin DB . Inference and missing data . Biometrika 1976 ; 63 : 581 - 92 . 111 . Schafer JL . Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data . London : Chapman & Hall ; 1997 . 112 . Lipsitz SR , Ibrahim JG , Chen MH , Peterson H . Non - ignorable missing covariates in generalized linear models . Stat Med . 1999 ; 18 : 2435 - 48 . [ PMID : 10474151 ] 113 . Rotnitzky A , Robins J . Analysis of semi - parametric regression models with non - ignorable non - response . Stat Med . 1997 ; 16 : 81 - 102 . [ PMID : 9004385 ] 114 . Rubin DB . Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys . New York : John Wiley ; 1987 . 115 . Barnard J , Meng XL . Applications of multiple imputation in medical stud - ies : from AIDS to NHANES . Stat Methods Med Res . 1999 ; 8 : 17 - 36 . [ PMID : 10347858 ] 116 . Braitstein P , Brinkhof MW , Dabis F , Schechter M , Boulle A , Miotti P ; Antiretroviral Therapy in Lower Income Countries ( ART - LINC ) Collabora - tion . Mortality of HIV - 1 - infected patients in the ﬁrst year of antiretroviral ther - apy : comparison between low - income and high - income countries . Lancet . 2006 ; 367 : 817 - 24 . [ PMID : 16530575 ] 117 . Purandare N , Burns A , Daly KJ , Hardicre J , Morris J , Macfarlane G , et al . Cerebral emboli as a potential cause of Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia : case - control study . BMJ . 2006 ; 332 : 1119 - 24 . [ PMID : 16648133 ] 118 . South African Demographic and Health Coordinating Team . Hypertension in South African adults : results from the Demographic and Health Survey , 1998 . J Hypertens . 2001 ; 19 : 1717 - 25 . [ PMID : 11593090 ] 119 . Lohr SL . Design effects . Sampling : Design and Analysis . Paciﬁc Grove , CA : Duxbury Pr ; 1999 . 120 . Dunn NR , Arscott A , Thorogood M . The relationship between use of oral contraceptives and myocardial infarction in young women with fatal outcome , compared to those who survive : results from the MICA case - control study . Con - traception . 2001 ; 63 : 65 - 9 . [ PMID : 11292469 ] 121 . Rothman KJ , Greenland S . Basic methods for sensitivity analysis and ex - ternal adjustment . In : Rothman KJ , Greenland S , ed . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven ; 1998 : 343 - 57 . 122 . Custer B , Longstreth WT Jr , Phillips LE , Koepsell TD , Van Belle G . Hormonal exposures and the risk of intracranial meningioma in women : a pop - ulation - based case - control study . BMC Cancer . 2006 ; 6 : 152 . [ PMID : 16759391 ] 123 . Wakeﬁeld MA , Chaloupka FJ , Kaufman NJ , Orleans CT , Barker DC , Ruel EE . Effect of restrictions on smoking at home , at school , and in public places on teenage smoking : cross sectional study . BMJ . 2000 ; 321 : 333 - 7 . [ PMID : 10926588 ] 124 . Greenland S . The impact of prior distributions for uncontrolled confound - ing and response bias : a case study of the relation of wire codes and magnetic ﬁelds to childhood leukemia . J Am Stat Assoc . 2003 ; 98 : 47 - 54 . 125 . Lash TL , Fink AK . Semi - automated sensitivity analysis to assess systematic errors in observational data . Epidemiology . 2003 ; 14 : 451 - 8 . [ PMID : 12843771 ] 126 . Phillips CV . Quantifying and reporting uncertainty from systematic errors . Epidemiology . 2003 ; 14 : 459 - 66 . [ PMID : 12843772 ] 127 . Cornﬁeld J , Haenszel W , Hammond EC , Lilienfeld AM , Shimkin MB , Wynder EL . Smoking and lung cancer : recent evidence and a discussion of some questions . J Natl Cancer Inst . 1959 ; 22 : 173 - 203 . [ PMID : 13621204 ] 128 . Langholz B . Factors that explain the power line conﬁguration wiring code - childhood leukemia association : what would they look like ? Bioelectromagnetics . 2001 ; Suppl 5 : S19 - 31 . [ PMID : 11170115 ] 129 . Eisner MD , Smith AK , Blanc PD . Bartenders’ respiratory health after establishment of smoke - free bars and taverns . JAMA . 1998 ; 280 : 1909 - 14 . [ PMID : 9851475 ] 130 . Dunne MP , Martin NG , Bailey JM , Heath AC , Bucholz KK , Madden PA , et al . Participation bias in a sexuality survey : psychological and behavioural characteristics of responders and non - responders . Int J Epidemiol . 1997 ; 26 : 844 - 54 . [ PMID : 9279618 ] 131 . Schu¨z J , Kaatsch P , Kaletsch U , Meinert R , Michaelis J . Association of childhood cancer with factors related to pregnancy and birth . Int J Epidemiol . 1999 ; 28 : 631 - 9 . [ PMID : 10480689 ] 132 . Cnattingius S , Zack M , Ekbom A , Gunnarskog J , Linet M , Adami HO . Prenatal and neonatal risk factors for childhood myeloid leukemia . Cancer Epi - demiol Biomarkers Prev . 1995 ; 4 : 441 - 5 . [ PMID : 7549797 ] 133 . Schu¨z J . Non - response bias as a likely cause of the association between young maternal age at the time of delivery and the risk of cancer in the offspring . Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol . 2003 ; 17 : 106 - 12 . [ PMID : 12562478 ] 134 . Slattery ML , Edwards SL , Caan BJ , Kerber RA , Potter JD . Response rates among control subjects in case - control studies . Ann Epidemiol . 1995 ; 5 : 245 - 9 . [ PMID : 7606315 ] 135 . Schulz KF , Grimes DA . Case - control studies : research in reverse . Lancet . 2002 ; 359 : 431 - 4 . [ PMID : 11844534 ] 136 . Olson SH , Voigt LF , Begg CB , Weiss NS . Reporting participation in case - control studies . Epidemiology . 2002 ; 13 : 123 - 6 . [ PMID : 11880750 ] 137 . Morton LM , Cahill J , Hartge P . Reporting participation in epidemiologic studies : a survey of practice . Am J Epidemiol . 2006 ; 163 : 197 - 203 . [ PMID : 16339049 ] 138 . Olson SH . Reported participation in case - control studies : changes over time . Am J Epidemiol . 2001 ; 154 : 574 - 81 . [ PMID : 11549563 ] 139 . Sandler DP . On revealing what we’d rather hide : the problem of describing study participation [ Editorial ] . Epidemiology . 2002 ; 13 : 117 . [ PMID : 11880747 ] 140 . Hepworth SJ , Schoemaker MJ , Muir KR , Swerdlow AJ , van Tongeren MJ , McKinney PA . Mobile phone use and risk of glioma in adults : case - control study . BMJ . 2006 ; 332 : 883 - 7 . [ PMID : 16428250 ] 141 . Hay AD , Wilson A , Fahey T , Peters TJ . The duration of acute cough in pre - school children presenting to primary care : a prospective cohort study . Fam Pract . 2003 ; 20 : 696 - 705 . [ PMID : 14701895 ] 142 . Egger M , Ju¨ni P , Bartlett C ; CONSORT Group ( Consolidated Standards of Reporting of Trials ) . Value of ﬂow diagrams in reports of randomized con - trolled trials . JAMA . 2001 ; 285 : 1996 - 9 . [ PMID : 11308437 ] 143 . Osella AR , Misciagna G , Guerra VM , Chiloiro M , Cuppone R , Cavallini A , et al . Hepatitis C virus ( HCV ) infection and liver - related mortality : a popu - lation - based cohort study in southern Italy . The Association for the Study of Liver Disease in Puglia . Int J Epidemiol . 2000 ; 29 : 922 - 7 . [ PMID : 11034979 ] 144 . Dales LG , Ury HK . An improper use of statistical signiﬁcance testing in studying covariables . Int J Epidemiol . 1978 ; 7 : 373 - 5 . [ PMID : 744677 ] 145 . Maldonado G , Greenland S . Simulation study of confounder - selection strategies . Am J Epidemiol . 1993 ; 138 : 923 - 36 . [ PMID : 8256780 ] 146 . Tanis BC , van den Bosch MA , Kemmeren JM , Cats VM , Helmerhorst FM , Algra A , et al . Oral contraceptives and the risk of myocardial infarction . N Engl J Med . 2001 ; 345 : 1787 - 93 . [ PMID : 11752354 ] 147 . Rothman KJ , Greenland S . Precision and validity in epidemiologic studies . In : Rothman KJ , Greenland S , ed . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven ; 1998 : 120 - 5 . 148 . Clark TG , Altman DG , De Stavola BL . Quantiﬁcation of the completeness of follow - up . Lancet . 2002 ; 359 : 1309 - 10 . [ PMID : 11965278 ] 149 . Qiu C , Fratiglioni L , Karp A , Winblad B , Bellander T . Occupational exposure to electromagnetic ﬁelds and risk of Alzheimer’s disease . Epidemiology . 2004 ; 15 : 687 - 94 . [ PMID : 15475717 ] 150 . Kengeya - Kayondo JF , Kamali A , Nunn AJ , Ruberantwari A , Wagner HU , Mulder DW . Incidence of HIV - 1 infection in adults and socio - demographic characteristics of seroconverters in a rural population in Uganda : 1990 - 1994 . Int J Epidemiol . 1996 ; 25 : 1077 - 82 . [ PMID : 8921497 ] 151 . Mastrangelo G , Fedeli U , Fadda E , Valentini F , Agnesi R , Magarotto G , et al . Increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma and liver cirrhosis in vinyl chlo - ride workers : synergistic effect of occupational exposure with alcohol intake . En - viron Health Perspect . 2004 ; 112 : 1188 - 92 . [ PMID : 15289165 ] 152 . Salo PM , Arbes SJ Jr , Sever M , Jaramillo R , Cohn RD , London SJ , et al . Exposure to Alternaria alternata in US homes is associated with asthma symp - toms . J Allergy Clin Immunol . 2006 ; 118 : 892 - 8 . [ PMID : 17030243 ] Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 192 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org 153 . Pocock SJ , Clayton TC , Altman DG . Survival plots of time - to - event out - comes in clinical trials : good practice and pitfalls . Lancet . 2002 ; 359 : 1686 - 9 . [ PMID : 12020548 ] 154 . Sasieni P . A note on the presentation of matched case - control data . Stat Med . 1992 ; 11 : 617 - 20 . [ PMID : 1594804 ] 155 . Lee GM , Neutra RR , Hristova L , Yost M , Hiatt RA . A nested case - control study of residential and personal magnetic ﬁeld measures and miscarriages . Epi - demiology . 2002 ; 13 : 21 - 31 . [ PMID : 11805582 ] 156 . Tiihonen J , Walhbeck K , Lo¨nnqvist J , Klaukka T , Ioannidis JP , Volavka J , et al . Effectiveness of antipsychotic treatments in a nationwide cohort of pa - tients in community care after ﬁrst hospitalisation due to schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder : observational follow - up study . BMJ . 2006 ; 333 : 224 . [ PMID : 16825203 ] 157 . Christenfeld NJ , Sloan RP , Carroll D , Greenland S . Risk factors , con - founding , and the illusion of statistical control . Psychosom Med . 2004 ; 66 : 868 - 75 . [ PMID : 15564351 ] 158 . Smith GD , Phillips A . Declaring independence : why we should be cautious [ Editorial ] . J Epidemiol Community Health . 1990 ; 44 : 257 - 8 . [ PMID : 2277244 ] 159 . Greenland S , Neutra R . Control of confounding in the assessment of med - ical technology . Int J Epidemiol . 1980 ; 9 : 361 - 7 . [ PMID : 7203778 ] 160 . Robins JM . Data , design , and background knowledge in etiologic inference . Epidemiology . 2001 ; 12 : 313 - 20 . [ PMID : 11338312 ] 161 . Sagiv SK , Tolbert PE , Altshul LM , Korrick SA . Organochlorine exposures during pregnancy and infant size at birth . Epidemiology . 2007 ; 18 : 120 - 9 . [ PMID : 17179760 ] 162 . World Health Organization . Body Mass Index ( BMI ) . Accessed at www . euro . who . int / nutrition / 20030507 _ 1 on 10 September 2007 . 163 . Beral V ; Million Women Study Collaborators . Breast cancer and hormone - replacement therapy in the Million Women Study . Lancet . 2003 ; 362 : 419 - 27 . [ PMID : 12927427 ] 164 . Hill AB . The environment and disease : association or causation ? Proc R Soc Med . 1965 ; 58 : 295 - 300 . [ PMID : 14283879 ] 165 . Vineis P . Causality in epidemiology . Soz Praventivmed . 2003 ; 48 : 80 - 7 . [ PMID : 12841079 ] 166 . Empana JP , Ducimetie ` re P , Arveiler D , Ferrie ` res J , Evans A , Ruidavets JB ; PRIME Study Group . Are the Framingham and PROCAM coronary heart dis - ease risk functions applicable to different European populations ? The PRIME Study . Eur Heart J . 2003 ; 24 : 1903 - 11 . [ PMID : 14585248 ] 167 . Tunstall - Pedoe H , Kuulasmaa K , Ma¨ho¨nen M , Tolonen H , Ruokokoski E , Amouyel P . Contribution of trends in survival and coronary - event rates to changes in coronary heart disease mortality : 10 - year results from 37 WHO MONICA project populations . Monitoring trends and determinants in cardio - vascular disease . Lancet . 1999 ; 353 : 1547 - 57 . [ PMID : 10334252 ] 168 . Cambien F , Chretien JM , Ducimetiere P , Guize L , Richard JL . Is the relationship between blood pressure and cardiovascular risk dependent on body mass index ? Am J Epidemiol . 1985 ; 122 : 434 - 42 . [ PMID : 4025293 ] 169 . Hosmer DW , Taber S , Lemeshow S . The importance of assessing the ﬁt of logistic regression models : a case study . Am J Public Health . 1991 ; 81 : 1630 - 5 . [ PMID : 1746660 ] 170 . Tibshirani R . A plain man’s guide to the proportional hazards model . Clin Invest Med . 1982 ; 5 : 63 - 8 . [ PMID : 7116716 ] 171 . Rockhill B , Newman B , Weinberg C . Use and misuse of population at - tributable fractions . Am J Public Health . 1998 ; 88 : 15 - 9 . [ PMID : 9584027 ] 172 . Uter W , Pfahlberg A . The application of methods to quantify attributable risk in medical practice . Stat Methods Med Res . 2001 ; 10 : 231 - 7 . [ PMID : 11446150 ] 173 . Schwartz LM , Woloshin S , Dvorin EL , Welch HG . Ratio measures in leading medical journals : structured review of accessibility of underlying absolute risks . BMJ . 2006 ; 333 : 1248 . [ PMID : 17060338 ] 174 . Nakayama T , Zaman MM , Tanaka H . Reporting of attributable and rel - ative risks , 1966 - 97 [ Letter ] . Lancet . 1998 ; 351 : 1179 . [ PMID : 9643696 ] 175 . Cornﬁeld J . A method of estimating comparative rates from clinical data ; applications to cancer of the lung , breast , and cervix . J Natl Cancer Inst . 1951 ; 11 : 1269 - 75 . [ PMID : 14861651 ] 176 . Pearce N . What does the odds ratio estimate in a case - control study ? Int J Epidemiol . 1993 ; 22 : 1189 - 92 . [ PMID : 8144304 ] 177 . Rothman KJ , Greenland S . Measures of disease frequency . In : Rothman KJ , Greenland S , editors . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven ; 1998 : 44 - 5 . 178 . Doll R , Hill AB . The mortality of doctors in relation to their smoking habits : a preliminary report . 1954 . BMJ . 2004 ; 328 : 1529 - 33 ; discussion 1533 . [ PMID : 15217868 ] 179 . Ezzati M , Lopez AD . Estimates of global mortality attributable to smoking in 2000 . Lancet . 2003 ; 362 : 847 - 52 . [ PMID : 13678970 ] 180 . Greenland S . Applications of stratiﬁed analysis methods . In : Rothman KJ , Greenland S , eds . Modern Epidemiology . 2nd ed . Philadelphia : Lippincott Raven ; 1998 : 295 - 7 . 181 . Rose G . Sick individuals and sick populations . Int J Epidemiol . 2001 ; 30 : 427 - 32 ; discussion 433 - 4 . [ PMID : 11416056 ] 182 . Vandenbroucke JP , Koster T , Brie¨t E , Reitsma PH , Bertina RM , Rosen - daal FR . Increased risk of venous thrombosis in oral - contraceptive users who are carriers of factor V Leiden mutation . Lancet . 1994 ; 344 : 1453 - 7 . [ PMID : 7968118 ] 183 . Botto LD , Khoury MJ . Commentary : facing the challenge of gene - environ - ment interaction : the two - by - four table and beyond [ Editorial ] . Am J Epidemiol . 2001 ; 153 : 1016 - 20 . [ PMID : 11384958 ] 184 . Wei L , MacDonald TM , Walker BR . Taking glucocorticoids by prescrip - tion is associated with subsequent cardiovascular disease . Ann Intern Med . 2004 ; 141 : 764 - 70 . [ PMID : 15545676 ] 185 . Martinelli I , Taioli E , Battaglioli T , Podda GM , Passamonti SM , Pedotti P , et al . Risk of venous thromboembolism after air travel : interaction with throm - bophilia and oral contraceptives . Arch Intern Med . 2003 ; 163 : 2771 - 4 . [ PMID : 14662632 ] 186 . Kyzas PA , Loizou KT , Ioannidis JP . Selective reporting biases in cancer prognostic factor studies . J Natl Cancer Inst . 2005 ; 97 : 1043 - 55 . [ PMID : 16030302 ] 187 . Rothman KJ , Greenland S , Walker AM . Concepts of interaction . Am J Epidemiol . 1980 ; 112 : 467 - 70 . [ PMID : 7424895 ] 188 . Saracci R . Interaction and synergism . Am J Epidemiol . 1980 ; 112 : 465 - 6 . [ PMID : 7424894 ] 189 . Rothman KJ . Epidemiology . An Introduction . Oxford : Oxford Univ Pr ; 2002 : 168 - 80 . 190 . Rothman KJ . Interactions between causes . In : Modern Epidemiology . Bos - ton : Little , Brown ; 1986 : 311 - 26 . 191 . Hess DR . How to write an effective discussion . Respir Care . 2004 ; 49 : 1238 - 41 . [ PMID : 15447810 ] 192 . Horton R . The hidden research paper . JAMA . 2002 ; 287 : 2775 - 8 . [ PMID : 12038909 ] 193 . Horton R . The rhetoric of research . BMJ . 1995 ; 310 : 985 - 7 . [ PMID : 7728037 ] 194 . Docherty M , Smith R . The case for structuring the discussion of scientiﬁc papers [ Editorial ] . BMJ . 1999 ; 318 : 1224 - 5 . [ PMID : 10231230 ] 195 . Perneger TV , Hudelson PM . Writing a research article : advice to beginners [ Editorial ] . Int J Qual Health Care . 2004 ; 16 : 191 - 2 . [ PMID : 15150149 ] 196 . Annals of Internal Medicine . Information for authors . Accessed at www . annals . org / shared / author _ info . html on 10 September 2007 . 197 . Maldonado G , Poole C . More research is needed [ Editorial ] . Ann Epide - miol . 1999 ; 9 : 17 - 8 . [ PMID : 9915604 ] 198 . Phillips CV . The economics of ‘more research is needed’ . Int J Epidemiol . 2001 ; 30 : 771 - 6 . [ PMID : 11511601 ] 199 . Winkleby MA , Kraemer HC , Ahn DK , Varady AN . Ethnic and socioeco - nomic differences in cardiovascular disease risk factors : ﬁndings for women from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey , 1988 - 1994 . JAMA . 1998 ; 280 : 356 - 62 . [ PMID : 9686553 ] 200 . Galuska DA , Will JC , Serdula MK , Ford ES . Are health care professionals advising obese patients to lose weight ? JAMA . 1999 ; 282 : 1576 - 8 . [ PMID : 10546698 ] 201 . Spearman C . The proof and measurement of association between two things . Am J Psychol . 1987 ; 100 : 441 - 71 . 202 . Fuller WA , Hidiroglou MA . Regression estimates after correcting for atten - uation . J Am Stat Assoc . 1978 ; 73 : 99 - 104 . 203 . MacMahon S , Peto R , Cutler J , Collins R , Sorlie P , Neaton J , et al . Blood pressure , stroke , and coronary heart disease . Part 1 , Prolonged differences in blood pressure : prospective observational studies corrected for the regression di - lution bias . Lancet . 1990 ; 335 : 765 - 74 . [ PMID : 1969518 ] 204 . Phillips AN , Smith GD . How independent are “independent” effects ? Rel - ative risk estimation when correlated exposures are measured imprecisely . J Clin Epidemiol . 1991 ; 44 : 1223 - 31 . [ PMID : 1941017 ] 205 . Phillips AN , Smith GD . Bias in relative odds estimation owing to imprecise measurement of correlated exposures . Stat Med . 1992 ; 11 : 953 - 61 . [ PMID : Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration www . annals . org 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 W - 193 1604073 ] 206 . Greenland S . The effect of misclassiﬁcation in the presence of covariates . Am J Epidemiol . 1980 ; 112 : 564 - 9 . [ PMID : 7424903 ] 207 . Poole C , Peters U , Il’yasova D , Arab L . Commentary : This study failed ? Int J Epidemiol . 2003 ; 32 : 534 - 5 . [ PMID : 12913024 ] 208 . Kaufman JS , Cooper RS , McGee DL . Socioeconomic status and health in blacks and whites : the problem of residual confounding and the resiliency of race . Epidemiology . 1997 ; 8 : 621 - 8 . [ PMID : 9345660 ] 209 . Greenland S . Randomization , statistics , and causal inference . Epidemiology . 1990 ; 1 : 421 - 9 . [ PMID : 2090279 ] 210 . Taubes G . Epidemiology faces its limits . Science . 1995 ; 269 : 164 - 9 . [ PMID : 7618077 ] 211 . Temple R . Meta - analysis and epidemiologic studies in drug development and postmarketing surveillance . JAMA . 1999 ; 281 : 841 - 4 . [ PMID : 10071007 ] 212 . Greenberg RS , Shuster JL Jr . Epidemiology of cancer in children . Epide - miol Rev . 1985 ; 7 : 22 - 48 . [ PMID : 3902495 ] 213 . Kushi LH , Mink PJ , Folsom AR , Anderson KE , Zheng W , Lazovich D , et al . Prospective study of diet and ovarian cancer . Am J Epidemiol . 1999 ; 149 : 21 - 31 . [ PMID : 9883790 ] 214 . Kemmeren JM , Algra A , Meijers JC , Tans G , Bouma BN , Curvers J , et al . Effect of second - and third - generation oral contraceptives on the protein C sys - tem in the absence or presence of the factor V Leiden mutation : a randomized trial . Blood . 2004 ; 103 : 927 - 33 . [ PMID : 14551147 ] 215 . Egger M , May M , Cheˆne G , Phillips AN , Ledergerber B , Dabis F ; ART Cohort Collaboration . Prognosis of HIV - 1 - infected patients starting highly ac - tive antiretroviral therapy : a collaborative analysis of prospective studies . Lancet . 2002 ; 360 : 119 - 29 . [ PMID : 12126821 ] 216 . Campbell DT . Factors relevant to the validity of experiments in social settings . Psychol Bull . 1957 ; 54 : 297 - 312 . [ PMID : 13465924 ] 217 . Justice AC , Covinsky KE , Berlin JA . Assessing the generalizability of prog - nostic information . Ann Intern Med . 1999 ; 130 : 515 - 24 . [ PMID : 10075620 ] 218 . Krimsky S , Rothenberg LS . Conﬂict of interest policies in science and medical journals : editorial practices and author disclosures . Sci Eng Ethics . 2001 ; 7 : 205 - 18 . [ PMID : 11349360 ] 219 . Bekelman JE , Li Y , Gross CP . Scope and impact of ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest in biomedical research : a systematic review . JAMA . 2003 ; 289 : 454 - 65 . [ PMID : 12533125 ] 220 . Davidson RA . Source of funding and outcome of clinical trials . J Gen Intern Med . 1986 ; 1 : 155 - 8 . [ PMID : 3772583 ] 221 . Stelfox HT , Chua G , O’Rourke K , Detsky AS . Conﬂict of interest in the debate over calcium - channel antagonists . N Engl J Med . 1998 ; 338 : 101 - 6 . [ PMID : 9420342 ] 222 . Lexchin J , Bero LA , Djulbegovic B , Clark O . Pharmaceutical industry sponsorship and research outcome and quality : systematic review . BMJ . 2003 ; 326 : 1167 - 70 . [ PMID : 12775614 ] 223 . Als - Nielsen B , Chen W , Gluud C , Kjaergard LL . Association of funding and conclusions in randomized drug trials : a reﬂection of treatment effect or adverse events ? JAMA . 2003 ; 290 : 921 - 8 . [ PMID : 12928469 ] 224 . Barnes DE , Bero LA . Why review articles on the health effects of passive smoking reach different conclusions . JAMA . 1998 ; 279 : 1566 - 70 . [ PMID : 9605902 ] 225 . Barnes DE , Bero LA . Industry - funded research and conﬂict of interest : an analysis of research sponsored by the tobacco industry through the Center for Indoor Air Research . J Health Polit Policy Law . 1996 ; 21 : 515 - 42 . [ PMID : 8784687 ] 226 . Glantz SA , Barnes DE , Bero L , Hanauer P , Slade J . Looking through a keyhole at the tobacco industry . The Brown and Williamson documents . JAMA . 1995 ; 274 : 219 - 24 . [ PMID : 7609230 ] 227 . Huss A , Egger M , Hug K , Huwiler - Mu¨ntener K , Ro¨o¨sli M . Source of funding and results of studies of health effects of mobile phone use : systematic review of experimental studies . Environ Health Perspect . 2007 ; 115 : 1 - 4 . [ PMID : 17366811 ] 228 . Safer DJ . Design and reporting modiﬁcations in industry - sponsored com - parative psychopharmacology trials . J Nerv Ment Dis . 2002 ; 190 : 583 - 92 . [ PMID : 12357091 ] 229 . Aspinall RL , Goodman NW . Denial of effective treatment and poor quality of clinical information in placebo controlled trials of ondansetron for postopera - tive nausea and vomiting : a review of published trials . BMJ . 1995 ; 311 : 844 - 6 . [ PMID : 7580491 ] 230 . Chan AW , Hro´bjartsson A , Haahr MT , Gøtzsche PC , Altman DG . Em - pirical evidence for selective reporting of outcomes in randomized trials : compar - ison of protocols to published articles . JAMA . 2004 ; 291 : 2457 - 65 . [ PMID : 15161896 ] 231 . Melander H , Ahlqvist - Rastad J , Meijer G , Beermann B . Evidence b ( i ) ased medicine—selective reporting from studies sponsored by pharmaceutical indus - try : review of studies in new drug applications . BMJ . 2003 ; 326 : 1171 - 3 . [ PMID : 12775615 ] 232 . Scherer RW , Langenberg P , von Elm E . Full publication of results initially presented in abstracts . Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2007 : MR000005 . [ PMID : 7443628 ] 233 . Moher D , Schulz KF , Altman DG . The CONSORT statement : revised recommendations for improving the quality of reports of parallel - group random - ised trials . Lancet . 2001 ; 357 : 1191 - 4 . [ PMID : 11323066 ] 234 . Stroup DF , Berlin JA , Morton SC , Olkin I , Williamson GD , Rennie D , et al . Meta - analysis of observational studies in epidemiology : a proposal for re - porting . Meta - analysis Of Observational Studies in Epidemiology ( MOOSE ) group . JAMA . 2000 ; 283 : 2008 - 12 . [ PMID : 10789670 ] 235 . Altman DG , Schulz KF , Moher D , Egger M , Davidoff F , Elbourne D ; CONSORT GROUP ( Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials ) . The re - vised CONSORT statement for reporting randomized trials : explanation and elaboration . Ann Intern Med . 2001 ; 134 : 663 - 94 . [ PMID : 11304107 ] 236 . Moher D . CONSORT : an evolving tool to help improve the quality of reports of randomized controlled trials . Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials . JAMA . 1998 ; 279 : 1489 - 91 . [ PMID : 9600488 ] 237 . Begg C , Cho M , Eastwood S , Horton R , Moher D , Olkin I , et al . Improving the quality of reporting of randomized controlled trials . The CON - SORT statement . JAMA . 1996 ; 276 : 637 - 9 . [ PMID : 8773637 ] Academia and Clinic The STROBE Statement : Explanation and Elaboration W - 194 16 October 2007 Annals of Internal Medicine Volume 147 (cid:127) Number 8 www . annals . org