Article Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting Graphical abstract Highlights d Diffraction - sized transcriptional condensate exists in the proximity of Sox2 gene d Condensate enhances gene burst size and frequency when in proximity d Direct anti - correlation between condensate position and gene burst by live imaging d Condensate’s enhancement depends on local / distal genomic elements and cohesin Authors Manyu Du , Simon Hendrik Stitzinger , Jan - Hendrik Spille , . . . , Mohammed Hijaz , Andrea Quintana , Ibrahim I . Cisse´ Correspondence cisse @ ie - freiburg . mpg . de In brief Transcriptional condensate dynamically interacts with the gene locus , resulting in a burst increase when in proximity and a return to basal bursting when the condensate moves away . Du et al . , 2024 , Cell 187 , 1 – 14 January 18 , 2024 ª 2023 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 ll Article Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting Manyu Du , 1 Simon Hendrik Stitzinger , 1 Jan - Hendrik Spille , 1 , 2 Won - Ki Cho , 1 , 3 Choongman Lee , 1 Mohammed Hijaz , 1 , 4 Andrea Quintana , 1 and Ibrahim I . Cisse´ 1 , 5 , * 1 Department of Biological Physics , Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology and Epigenetics , Freiburg im Breisgau , Baden - Wu¨rttemberg 79108 , Germany 2 Present address : Department of Physics , University of Illinois , Chicago , IL , USA 3 Present address : Department of Biological Sciences , KAIST , Daejeon , Republic of Korea 4 Present address : Department of Biophysics , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI , USA 5 Lead contact * Correspondence : cisse @ ie - freiburg . mpg . de https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 SUMMARY Enhancers are distal DNA elements believed to loop and contact promoters to control gene expression . Recently , we found diffraction - sized transcriptional condensates at genes controlled by clusters of en - hancers ( super - enhancers ) . However , a direct function of endogenous condensates in controlling gene expression remains elusive . Here , we develop live - cell super - resolution and multi - color 3D - imaging ap - proaches to investigate putative roles of endogenous condensates in the regulation of super - enhancer controlled gene Sox2 . In contrast to enhancer distance , we ﬁnd instead that the condensate’s positional dy - namics are a better predictor of gene expression . A basal gene bursting occurs when the condensate is far ( > 1 m m ) , but burst size and frequency are enhanced when the condensate moves in proximity ( < 1 m m ) . Per - turbations of cohesin and local DNA elements do not prevent basal bursting but affect the condensate and its burst enhancement . We propose a three - way kissing model whereby the condensate interacts transiently with gene locus and regulatory DNA elements to control gene bursting . INTRODUCTION Transcription occurs in episodic processes , characterized by pulsatile bursts . 1 – 5 Enhancers are cis - regulatory elements in the genome that enhance transcription from core promoters in a time - and tissue - speciﬁc manner . 6 – 10 Enhancers are enriched in the higher eukaryotic genomes , and importantly , a signiﬁcant fraction of enhancers are located at large linear genomic dis - tances from the gene promoters they regulate . 9 , 11 – 15 Although the role of enhancers in transcription has been observed in many different cases , their mechanism of action is not fully understood . We reported on the existence of diffraction - sized conden - sates of RNA polymerase II ( RNA Pol II ) and Mediator 16 ; howev - er , their function ( if any ) in gene expression regulation remains unclear . Previously , we and others found that RNA Pol II , 16 – 21 Mediator , and other cofactors ( either endogenously , 16 , 22 or when imaged in synthetic systems with inserted cassettes of re - petitive DNA sites 23 , 24 ) form clusters . In stem cells , around 10 % of these clusters are more persistent , and their biophysical properties can be tested 16 and shown to be transcription - dependent condensates . We concluded that this small popula - tion of persistent clusters were condensates 25 that are diffrac - tion sized and with liquid - like properties . 16 Our speciﬁc interest in this study is that these condensates are found near genes that are controlled by clusters of enhancers , so - called super - en - hancers . 16 , 22 In mouse embryonic stem cells , the pluripotency gene Sox2 is one of the top super - enhancer controlled genes . 26 Here , we hypothesize that a condensate may exist near the Sox2 gene . We developed quantitative live - cell imaging ap - proaches to directly correlate the condensate dynamics to super - enhancer controlled gene bursting . We observe that condensate proximity within an arbitrary threshold distance of 1 m m correlates with enhanced gene bursting and larger vari - ability in the nascent mRNA burst size . The gene burst enhance - ment depends on proximal weak enhancers and CTCF ( CCCTC - binding factor ) - binding sites . Genome architectural protein co - hesin functions in regulating condensate gene interactions . Upon depletion , the proximity - based burst enhancement is lost , along with an increase in the distance between the conden - sate and gene locus . Multi - color 3D imaging reveals when the condensate ‘‘kisses’’ the enhancer and the gene locus ( three - way kiss ) , the gene burst size increases ; as the condensate moves away , the bursting decreases . Together , our data reveal a role for the spatiotemporal dynamics of transcriptional condensates in regulating gene bursting and have implications on how genome architecture may help to directly control gene expression . ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 ª 2023 The Authors . Published by Elsevier Inc . 1 This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 4 . 0 / ) . Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 A B C D E F G H I J K L ( legend on next page ) ll 2 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article RESULTS Condensate proximity correlates with gene burst enhancement Condensates manifest as a population of persistent clusters of either RNA Pol II or Mediator in a quantitative live - cell super - res - olution imaging approach . 16 Here , we fuse the catalytic subunit of the endogenous RNA Pol II ( RPB1 , the largest subunit of RNA Pol II ) with a green - to - red photoconvertible protein Den - dra2 , which enables time - correlated photoactivated localization microscopy ( tcPALM ) , the live - cell super - resolution method we developed previously to study the temporal dynamics of sub - dif - fractive spatial protein clusters . 18 To simultaneously label the endogenous nascent mRNA in the same cells , we engineered 24 3 MS2 repeats to the 3 0 UTR of Sox2 gene and stably ex - pressed the SNAP - tagged MS2 coat protein ( MCP - SNAP ) ( Figures 1A – 1C ; STAR Methods ) . This cell line enables dual - color live - cell and super - resolution imaging of RNA Pol II molecules as well as visualizing the Sox2 gene locus ( Figures 1D and 1E ) , all while quantifying cluster dynamics by tcPALM and measuring the brightness of Sox2 mRNA gene burst , which correlates with the number of individual nascent mRNAs synthesized per burst in real time , during gene bursting . 27 , 28 We observed a large cell - to - cell variability with the occurrence of a cluster of RNA Pol II on a bursting Sox2 gene locus : in some cells , RNA Pol II clusters colocalize with Sox2 active transcription site ( Figure 1D ) , whereas in other cells , we observed the occur - rence of a RNA Pol II cluster near Sox2 transcription site , but not co - localizing with Sox2 locus ( Figure 1E ) . We imaged and analyzed 76 cells and plotted the estimated number of nascent mRNAs per burst ( burst size ) as a function of the centroid - to - centroid distance between the gene locus ( as evidenced by the localization of the MS2 signal ; Figures 1D and 1E ) and the nearest persistent / stable RNA Pol II cluster ( Figure 1H ) . We quantiﬁed the Sox2 mRNA burst size as the estimated number of mRNAs by dividing the MS2 intensity at the native transcrip - tion site by the mean intensities of single diffusing mRNAs in the cytoplasm ( Figures S1A – S1C ) . We observed large variability in the burst sizes , and this vari - ability correlates with cluster proximity : beyond an apparent threshold ( > 1 m m ) only a basal burst of 3 ± 0 . 3 mRNAs is observed , whereas in proximity , burst sizes varied from 1 . 5 to 10 mRNAs per cell ( Figure 1H ) . We then applied this arbitrary threshold of 1 m m and grouped the data into proximal and distal bursts ( Figures 1A and 1B ) . We observed gene burst sizes of 4 . 7 ± 0 . 3 mRNAs per cell when the condensate is in proximity to the gene locus ( Figure 1H ) . On average , Sox2 mRNA burst size is 1 . 6 - fold higher in the presence of proximal clusters than distal clusters ( Figure 1I ) . Both the proximal and distal RNA Pol II clusters show stable cluster properties , 16 indicated by the cu - mulative temporal detection traces showing a gradual plateau , and cluster lifetime longer than the total image acquisition time of 2 min ( Figures 1F and 1G ) , similar to the persistent clusters we previously reported . 16 The bursting dynamics of a gene can be modulated by changes in either burst size or burst frequency . We observed an increase in burst size with proximal clusters ( Figures 1H and 1I ) , and we explored whether cluster proximity also regulates Sox2 gene bursting frequency . We found that the frequency of bursting events occurring with a proximal cluster is 2 - fold higher than that of bursts occurring with a distal cluster ( Figure 1J ) , sug - gesting higher bursting frequency for proximal clusters . These results suggest that both the burst size and the bursting frequency are increased with proximity to increase total gene bursting . Consistent with this , when we calculate the integrated mRNA production by proximal vs . distal clusters , we ﬁnd greater than 75 % of the total mRNAs were produced in the presence of a proximal cluster ( Figure 1K ) . Our data suggest that the conden - sate proximity enhances both burst size and bursting frequency to regulate Sox2 mRNA production ( Figure 1L ) . Proximal genomic elements including weak enhancers and CTCF - binding sites are necessary for the condensate’s burst enhancement We were intrigued by the < 1 m m threshold and sought to inves - tigate whether there is any possible functional reason for this . Figure 1 . Condensate proximity correlates with an enhancement in Sox2 gene bursting ( A and B ) Schematic showing a condensate proximal ( A ) or distal ( B ) to the gene locus . ( C ) Zoomed in schematic for mRNA transcripts labeling ( magenta ) and RNA Pol II ( green ) . ( D ) Example of a live - cell , dual color super - resolved image . Two - dimensional super - resolution reconstruction reveals RNA Pol II clusters ( upper left ) and an actively bursting Sox2 gene ( mRNA labeled by 24 3 MS2 , shown in magenta in upper right ) . Merged image is shown in ( bottom ) . RNA Pol II clusters are red - hot color coded in the upper left panel and shown as green in the bottom panel . Centroid - to - centroid distance is 0 . 6 m m in the example shown . ( E ) Two - dimensional live - cell super - resolution image ofaRNA PolIIcluster ( upper left , hotcolor coded ) distal to theactive bursting Sox2 gene ( mRNA labeled by 24 3 MS2 , shown in magenta in upper right ) . Centroid - to - centroid distance is 2 . 6 m m in the example shown . RNA Pol II cluster is shown in green in the merged images ( bottom ) . Scale bars : 5 m m in ( D ) and ( E ) and 2 m m in the insets . ( FandG ) tcPALMtracesshowbothproximal ( F ) anddistal ( G ) RNAPolIIcondensatesasclusterspersistingintime , withagradualplateauinthecumulativecountcurves . ( H ) Plot of Sox2 mRNA burst size vs . the distance between the nearest RNA Pol II condensate to the Sox2 locus . ( I ) Boxplots of Sox2 gene burst size of proximal and distal condensates . N = 76 cells in this analysis . Box edges represent 25 – 75 percentiles , data outside the whisker represents outliers , and a small open square is used to indicate the mean , whereas the line represents the median . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) of mRNA burst size is 4 . 7 ± 0 . 26 for proximal , and 3 ± 0 . 31 for distal . ( J ) Stackcolumnofthemeasuredfrequencyofburstingeventsinproximalanddistalcases . Red ( proximal ) bottomcolumnvalueisfoundtobe66 % ofthebursts , and the blue ( distal ) top column value 34 % . Dashed line is set at 0 . 5 . ( K ) FractionoftotalmRNAproducedbyproximal ( redbar ) anddistalcondensates ( bluebar ) . Meanandstandarderror ( SEM ) is0 . 75 ± 0 . 06forproximaland0 . 25 ± 0 . 06 for distal . ( L ) Schematic summarizing super - resolution data : when condensate is distal a basal gene bursting occurs ( left ) ; when the condensate is proximal there is increased gene burst size and increased frequency ( right ) . See also Figure S1 . ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 3 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article We had previously estimated condensates in general to be diffraction sized ( i . e . , diameter (cid:2) 400 – 500 nm ) in stem cells , but initially wondered whether those associating with Sox2 might perhaps be larger . We performed structured illumination micro - scopy ( SIM ) to measure the diameter of the condensate closest to the Sox2 locus ( Figures S2A – S2D ) and conﬁrmed the conden - sate diameter to be on average 456 ± 201 nm when measured by RNA Pol II or comparably 560 ± 226 nm when measured by Mediator . These results rule out the case that the condensate size alone can account for the 1 m m threshold . We therefore sought to investigate the genomic context proximal to the Sox2 gene locus . Sox2 is reported to be regulated by a series of putative enhancer elements within the same topologically associated domain , 29 characterized by DNase I hypersensitivity , histone acetylation , enhancer identiﬁcation assays ( self - transcribing A B D C E G F H Figure2 . Genomicelementsproximaltothe gene locus including weak enhancers and CTCF sites are necessary for the conden - sate’s burst enhancement ( A ) Schematic of the Sox2 locus and annotation of CTCFsitesandputativeweakenhancers . D CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 : deletion of a region containing three CTCF sites upstream and a weak enhancer 2 kb up - stream of Sox2 TSS . D E + 15 : deletion of a region containing a weak enhancer 15 kb downstream Sox2 . ( B ) D CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 deletion abolishes the proximity - based burst enhancement . N = 54 cells were measured by tcPALM . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) is 3 . 66 ± 0 . 35 for proximal and 3 . 34 ± 0 . 23 for distal . ( C ) D E + 15 deletion abolishes the proximity - based burst enhancement . N = 50 cells were measured bytcPALM . Meanandstandarderror ( SEM ) is2 . 86 ± 0 . 36 for proximal , and 2 . 6 ± 0 . 2 for distal . ( D and E ) Stack column of frequency of bursting events in proximal and distal cases in D CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 ( D ) or D E + 15 ( E ) . Dashed line is set at 0 . 5 . ( F and G ) Fraction of total mRNA produced by proximal ( red bar ) and distal condensates ( blue bar ) in D CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 ( F ) or D E + 15 ( G ) cell lines . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) is 0 . 45 ± 0 . 04 for prox - imal and 0 . 55 ± 0 . 04 for distal in ( F ) . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) is 0 . 42 ± 0 . 02 for proximal and 0 . 58 ± 0 . 02 for distal in ( G ) . ( H ) Schematic summarizing that deletion of the local genomic elements results in the loss of enhancements in burst size or frequency with condensate proximity ( compare to Figure 1L ) . See also Figures S2 and S3 . active regulatory region sequencing , referred to as STARR - seq , and luciferase reporters ) , andgenetic perturbations . 29 – 33 We explored whether putative enhancers are important in regulating the conden - sate’s proximity - based enhancement of Sox2 . We designed CRISPR gRNAs to delete two proximal DNase I hypersensi - tive sites ( D CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 and D E + 15 ) , respec - tively ( Figure 2A ; STAR Methods ) , whose deletion in combination with another putative enhancer E + 3 was shown to reduce Sox2 gene expression . 30 Upon each deletion tested , we observed the proximity - based burst enhancement is lost , and there is no difference in Sox2 gene expression in proximal vs . distal cases ( Figures 2B , 2C , and S3 ) . For both the frequency of bursting events ( Figures 2D and 2E ) and the fraction of total mRNA produced ( Figures 2F and 2G ) , the measured values are comparable ( or even slightly less ) for proximal vs . distal cases after the enhancer deletion , in contrast to the preferential mRNA pro - duction by proximal clusters in the control ( normal / wild type ) cell line ( Figures 1J and 1K ) . Our data suggest that the CTCF - binding sites and proximal ‘‘weak’’ enhancer regions are important for the condensate’s proximal burst enhance - ment ( Figure 2H ) . ll 4 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article A B C D E F G ( legend on next page ) ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 5 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article Real - time observation of an anti - correlation between gene burst intensity and condensate distance We next asked whether the proximal and distal clusters repre - sent two distinct cell populations or two dynamic states in the same cell ( Figure 3A ) . We characterized the long - term diffusional dynamics of RNA Pol II condensates and Sox2 gene locus using lattice light sheet imaging in live stem cells ( Video S1 ) . Sox2 bursts were shown to be short and infrequent , with only 4 % of the time spent as a detectable burst using the MS2 system in a previous study . 34 Similarly , we observe Sox2 bursts in (cid:2) 20 % of cells when imaged longitudinally in time lapse on the lattice light sheet . We observed that RNA Pol II condensates dynami - cally interact with the Sox2 gene locus at the single - cell level ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . There is a direct anti - correlation between burst intensity and the condensate - to - gene distance : Sox2 nascent mRNA burst in - tensity is high when the condensate - to - gene distance is low , and burst intensity decreases when the condensate - to - gene dis - tance increases ( Figures 3D and 3E ) . Similar to RNA Pol II as a marker of the condensate , we also observed the same dynamic interactions between Mediator as the marker of the condensate and Sox2 gene locus at the single - cell level ( Figures 3E and S4A – S4C ) . The distance between the Mediator as a marker of condensate and the gene locus also shows a direct anti - correla - tion with Sox2 burst intensity ( Figure 3E ) . We grouped the imaging traces into ‘‘strictly distal’’ ( conden - sate - to - gene distance stayed above 1 m m throughout the whole imaging time window ) , ‘‘strictly proximal’’ ( condensate - to - gene distance stayed below 1 m m ) , and ‘‘mixed’’ ( condensate - to - gene distance is proximal at some point within the movie ) . The distal traces show lower Sox2 burst intensity than the prox - imal / mixed traces ( Figure 3F ) , corroborating our observation that proximity generally correlates with increased gene bursting ( Figures 1H – 1L ) . In (cid:2) 25 % of the cases , we can observe de novo bursting of Sox2 gene . We therefore align all those traces to time t = 0 when burst starts , and this allows us to ask what happens to the Mediator or RNA Pol II intensities in the condensates after bursting events . We ﬁnd that the average RNA Pol II intensity in - creases after the gene burst while Mediator intensity stays un - changed ( Figure 3G ) . This corroborates our previous report 16 that although RNA Pol II and Mediator clusters colocalize in the condensates , upon treating the cells with the transcription inhib - itor drug DRB ( 5 , 6 - dichlorobenzimidazole ) , RNA Pol II can leave the condensate , whereas Mediator stays , indicating RNA Pol II partitioning into the condensate could be differentially modulated in a transcription - dependent manner . These data suggest to us that upon productive encounter between the condensate and the gene , both entities change : not only does the gene burst in - crease but the condensate also receives positive feedback to up - regulate the partitioning of RNA Pol IIinto the condensate . In sum , our live cell longitudinal imaging data show a direct real - time anti - correlation between gene burst intensity and condensate - to - gene distance : upon successive kissing events , gene burst inten - sity increases and as the condensate moves away gene burst in - tensity decreases . This dynamic process happens at the single - cell level . Moreover , not only does gene burst intensity changes upon condensate kissing but also the condensate composition likely changes with a gradual recruitment of more RNA Pol II . Three - color live imaging reveals a three - way choreography between SCR , condensate dynamics , and Sox2 gene bursting in real time The canonical Sox2 enhancer is a distal super - enhancer region more than 100 kb from the gene locus , the so - called Sox2 control region ( SCR ) . The SCR is essential for proper Sox2 gene expres - sion regulation and stem cell homeostasis . 29 – 31 , 33 The textbook model of distal enhancers would predict that the enhancer dynamically loops to contact the gene locus , such that gene burst intensity would be anti - correlated with the enhancer - to - gene distance . However , previous attempts to correlate the enhancer dynamics with gene bursting failed to capture such anti - correlation . 34 Since our approach revealed an anti - correla - tion between gene burst intensity and condensate - to - gene dis - tance , we sought to capture directly the relative dynamics of all three elements , super - enhancer , bursting gene , and conden - sate in real time . To simultaneously resolve the relationship between Sox2 su - per - enhancer , transcriptional condensate , and the bursting gene , we performed three - color lattice light sheet imaging to monitor the locations and intensities of SCR , condensate ( Medi - ator or RNA Pol II ) , and Sox2 mRNA in real time . We labeled the SCR DNA on Chr 3 : 34809948 – 34816684 ( mm9 ) with a CuO array ( 144 3 ) that is 5 kb downstream , 34 and the CuO array is Figure 3 . Condensate dynamically interacts with the active Sox2 gene locus ( A ) Schematic of dynamic interactions between the transcriptional condensate and the gene locus . ( B ) Live - cell lattice light sheet imaging of condensate and the active Sox2 gene . Condensate ( RNA Pol II ) is shown in green , and Sox2 nascent transcript in magenta . Leftpanelisanimagewith3Dmaximum intensityprojection . Middlepanelistheimage ofthesamecellatthesametimepoint ( t = 11 . 75min ) inasingle plane . Right panel is the image of 3D projection after background subtraction . ( C ) Time course images of the condensate ( RNA Pol II ) and Sox2 nascent mRNA cropped from the white square box in ( B ) . Scale bars : 2 m m in ( B ) and ( C ) . ( D ) Plot of Sox2 mRNA burst intensity ( magenta , left y axis ) and condensate - to - gene distance ( black , right y axis ) from data in ( C ) as a function of time . Arrow indicates where Sox2 bursting starts to be detected . ( E ) Exampletracesshowinganti - correlationbetweenmRNAburstintensity ( leftyaxis , magenta ) andcondensate - to - genedistance ( rightyaxis , black ) . Dottedline represents missing frames . ( F ) Survival probability of mRNA burst intensities in distal only ( blue ) vs . proximal / mixed ( red ) traces . N = 31 bursting traces were analyzed and represented . Survivalprobabilityiscalculatedas1 - probability cumulative andplottedinloglinearscale . Thedistal ( top , n = 10 ) , mixed ( middle , n = 17 ) , andproximal ( bottom , n = 4 ) traces are plotted as inset . Dashed line in the insets is set at 1 m m . ( G ) Plots of RNA Pol II ( top ) and Mediator ( bottom ) intensities over the time course after de novo bursting . n = 18 traces for RNA Pol II and n = 10 for Med were analyzed . Bursts were plotted to start t = 0 . Bold line and error bar represent the average intensity and the standard error of the mean . See also Video S1 and Figure S3 . ll 6 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article A B F G C D E H I J K L Figure 4 . A three - way choreography between Sox2 super - enhancer ( SCR ) , condensate , and Sox2 gene bursting in real time ( A ) Illustration of athree - color RGB ( red , green , blue ) scheme . Super - enhancerDNA ( SCR ) labeled inblue , Sox2 mRNA labeled by MS2is in red , and condensate in green . ( B ) 3D maximum intensity projection ( left ) of a cell imaged using live - cell three - color lattice light sheet shows colocalization of Sox2 super - enhancer ( blue ) , condensate ( Mediator , green ) , and Sox2 mRNA ( red ) . Scale bars , 5 m m . ( C ) Time course images . Scale bars , 2 m m . Images are time courses from the white boxed region in ( B ) . ( D ) Plot of distances of enhancer - to - gene ( magenta ) , condensate - to - gene ( yellow ) , and condensate - to - enhancer ( cyan ) over time from the example in ( C ) . ( E ) Plot of Sox2 mRNA burst intensity ( red ) and condensate - to - gene distance ( black ) as a function of time shows a direct anti - correlation . ( F – H ) Histograms of centroid - to - centroid distances of enhancer - to - gene ( shown in magenta , F ) , condensate - to - gene ( shown in yellow , G ) , and condensate - to - enhancer ( shown in cyan , H ) . The distances ( mean ± standard deviation ) are 0 . 33 ± 0 . 17 , 1 . 28 ± 0 . 85 , and 1 . 30 ± 0 . 83 m m , respectively . Data were collected from time lapse movies taken from N = 58 individual cells . ( legend continued on next page ) ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 7 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article ﬂuorescently labeled by UBCpr - CymR - EGFP ( false - colored blue ) and can be marked as a chromatin dot in the nucleus ( Figures S2E and S2F ; STAR Methods ) . In the same cell line , we tagged Med19 with Halo ( conjugated to Janelia Fluor [ JF ] dyes colored in green ) and Sox2 mRNA with 24 3 MS2 repeats labeled by MCP - SNAP ( colored in red ) as illustrated in Figure 4A . We analyzed 58 cells showing a gene burst with at least 60 % completeness in the track length in all three colors ( STAR Methods ) . Much like in the two - color data in Figure 3 , the major - ity of these unsynchronized cells were in a monotonic state ( mostly after a bursting event had already occurred or a bursting event occurring toward the end of the movie ) . However , there were several cells where we could capture dy - namic changes in the bursting state during the course of our im - aging , and as illustrated in the example ( Figures 4A – 4D and S5A – S5D ) , these data reveal important qualitative insights . They reveal for instance that the Sox2 super - enhancer and gene locus can stay at a distance of around 300 nm ( indicated by the magenta ; Figures 4A – 4C and S5A – S5E ; Video S2 ) , in line with a previous study that employed this enhancer - labeling strategy . 34 Meanwhile , the condensate pairwise distances ( i . e . , condensate - to - gene and condensate - to - enhancer ) change more signiﬁcantly in a manner that correlates with gene bursting . The condensates dynamically interact with both the enhancer and gene locus for just a few frames ( ‘‘three - way kissing’’ indi - cated by the white overlapping signal ; Figures 4A – 4D ) . Upon a kissing event , here too an anti - correlation between gene burst in - tensity and the condensate - to - gene distance exists . Upon condensate kissing with gene locus , Sox2 mRNA burst intensity increases but then dies down when the condensate moves away ( Figures 4E and S4D ; Video S2 ) . To more rigorously quantify some of these observations , we pooled the data from all 58 movies and plotted the histograms of centroid - to - centroid pairwise distances . The average dis - tance between the super - enhancer and gene locus is 0 . 33 ± 0 . 17 m m ( i . e . , (cid:2) 300 nm ) ( Figure 4F ) , comparable with what has been reported for SCR and the Sox2 gene promoter . 34 The average distances for the condensate - to - super - enhancer and condensate - to - gene are 1 . 30 ± 0 . 83 and 1 . 28 ± 0 . 85 m m , respec - tively ( Figures 4G and 4H ) . Similar observations are made when using RNA Pol II as the marker for condensates or using Mediator as the label ( Figures S5A – S5E ; Video S3 ) . RNA Pol II conden - sates also dynamically interact with both the enhancer and gene locus ( Figures S5A – S5E ; Video S3 ) . Furthermore , with the pooled data , we plotted the Sox2 mRNA burst intensity as a function of condensate - to - gene distance for each frame in the three - color labeled cell line , a proxy for measuring of burst intensity as a function of condensate - to - gene distance analogous to what we did for the super - resolution data but with the data from all cells from lattice light sheet instead of the few hand - picked individual examples represented in the Figures 4A – 4D . Here as well , we observed the Sox2 burst inten - sities are signiﬁcantly higher with proximal condensates compared with distal condensates ( Figure S5F ) corroborating our live cell super - resolution conclusions in Figure 1 . Using the same arbitrary threshold of 1 m m used in the super - resolution analysis , the average proximal burst intensity is 2 . 7 - fold higher than distal burst intensity ( Figure S5G ) . Overall , the lattice - light sheet data corroborate our live - cell super - resolution observa - tions in Figure 1 and reveal in addition that the condensate dynamically overlaps with the enhancer and gene locus with a real - time anti - correlation between gene bursting and the con - densate’s distance . Condensate does not remain associated with the super - enhancer ( SCR ) , but the SCR deletion negatively affects condensate size and gene bursting Implicit in the three - color data is the surprise ( to us ) that the condensate does not remain statically associated with the su - per - enhancer ( SCR ) . This is contrary to our prior assumptions that condensates likely formed and remained at super - enhancer . Thus , we aimed to test whether deletion of the SCR had any ef - fect on the condensate and the observed gene burst enhance - ments . We performed a deletion of the SCR similar to that per - formed in a previous study 30 to investigate the effects on our current observations . Brieﬂy , we designed CRISPR gRNAs to delete a 33 kb region including the (cid:2) 14 kb SCR and its neigh - boring region , which also contains the CTCF site at the topolog - ically associating domain ( TAD ) boundary of Sox2 ( Figure 4I ) in both dual - color cell line and the three - color cell line . All the cell lines we got have heterozygous SCR deletion , possibly due to the lethality of homozygous deletion in 2i stem cell growth con - dition . Therefore , we proceed with the caveat that with a hetero - zygous SCR deletion . We cannot rule out that any observed re - maining effect could be due to possible compensation of the surviving Sox2 allele . Nonetheless , these cells could allow us to conclude that the SCR was essential for all our observations on the condensate and gene bursting . Using the lattice light sheet imaging , we ﬁnd that the Sox2 mRNA burst intensity decreases after SCR deletion ( Figure 4J ) . In addition , we observed a decrease in the fraction of total bursting cells by 50 % ( Figure 4L ) . By using SIM to measure the condensate size in live cells , we ﬁnd the median diameter of Mediator cluster proximal to Sox2 gene falls from 516 ± 226 nm normally to 316 ± 136 nm upon SCR deletion , sug - gesting a reduction in the Sox2 - associating condensate from ( I ) Schematicpresentation ofthe Sox2 locus inmESCs . The CuOarraywasinserted5kbdownstream the Sox2 super - enhancer ( SCR ) . D SCR : deletion of a33kb region while preserving the inserted CuO array . ( J ) Survival probability plot of mRNA burst intensities in the control cell line ( black curve ) and D SCR cell line ( red curve ) . N = 58 traces for control and N = 10 bursting traces for D SCR . ( K ) Survival probability plot of Mediator condensate size ( Feret’s diameter ) in control ( black curve ) and D SCR ( red curve ) . Median ± standard deviation is 516 ± 226 nm for the control ( black ) and 316 ± 136 nm for the D SCR ( red ) cell line . N = 114 cells for control and N = 58 cells for D SCR imaged using live - cell SIM . ( L ) Fraction of bursting cells in the control ( black ) and D SCR ( red ) cell lines . Data in ( K ) and ( L ) were collected using live structured illumination microscopy . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) is 0 . 47 ± 0 . 02 for the control cell line and 0 . 25 ± 0 . 04 for SCR deletion cell line . See also Video S2 and Figure S4 . ll 8 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article A B C D E F H G I Figure 5 . Productive condensate - gene locus kissing is likely dependent on cohesin activity ( A ) A three - way kissing model of gene burst enhancement by transcriptional condensates . When the condensate is distal , there is basal gene bursting ; when the condensate kisses the super - enhancer , the gene with proximal cis - regulatory elements , there is a burst enhancement . ( B ) Schematic of rapid cohesin degradation using the dTAG system . ( C ) Schematic predicting bursting dynamics with no enhancement in burst size or frequency with proximal condensates after cohesin depletion . ( D ) Boxplotsof Sox2 burstsizesinthepresenceofproximalRNAPolIIcondensates ( n = 73cells ) anddistalcondensates ( n = 45cells ) . Datawerecollectedunder the control condition without cohesin depletion . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) of mRNA burst size is 4 . 87 ± 0 . 2 for proximal , and 3 . 49 ± 0 . 27 for distal . ( E ) Boxplots of Sox2 burst sizes in the presence of proximal RNA Pol II condensates ( n = 52 cells ) and distal condensates ( n = 46 cells ) with cohesin depletion . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) of mRNA burst size is 3 . 16 ± 0 . 21 for proximal , and 3 . 28 ± 0 . 23 for distal . ( legend continued on next page ) ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 9 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article large persistent cluster to a size nearly undetectable by conven - tional imaging ( Figure 4K ) . Our data suggest that although the condensate does not remain statically associated with the SCR , the SCR is nonetheless critical for the large condensate sizes and the enhanced gene bursting we observed . Productive condensate - gene locus kissing is likely dependent on cohesin activity One possibility is that the mere passive proximity of condensate could result in the sudden enhancement of gene bursting . Another possibility is that when in proximity , an active process , perhaps too transient for us to capture , may be needed to effect gene burst enhancement . Integrating our various observations led us to further explore a possible missing link in how the con - densates induce burst enhancement when in proximity . In a previous study , 17 we found that the dwell time ( i . e . , the life - time directly on the gene locus ) of transient clusters of RNA Pol II that assemble on the b - actin gene locus ( and disassemble a few seconds later ) correlated linearly with the number of mRNAs subsequently produced : every 2 s the cluster stayed co - local - ized on the b - actin gene locus corresponded to an increase of an additional mRNA per burst , such that in 8 s , those clusters could produce 4 messenger RNAs the basal b - actin burst size . 17 If a similar process could be at play in our current Sox2 data , then the enhanced burst size observed in Figure 1H could be accounted for by a transient event that holds the cluster to directly colocalize for 10 – 12 s . Since the condensate manifests as stable / persistent RNA Pol II clusters , tcPALM alone would not discriminate the exact colocalization time in our current study . The lattice light sheet imaging sampled at a rate of 15 – 30 s per frame to allow long - term ( (cid:2) 30 min ) longitudinal movies may also miss a functional kissing event of less than 15 s . There - fore , we could be blind to transient , productive kissing events . Interestingly , several differences exist between the previous study and the current study : notably , no persistent clusters ( only transient clusters ) were present for b - actin , and no fre - quency enhancement ( only burst size enhancement ) occurred with b - actin . Also notable here is that the genomic elements proximal to the Sox2 gene locus ( putative weak enhancers and clusters of CTCF - binding sites ) are important for gene burst enhancement . Without a proximal condensate , the gene locus ( even with a looped SCR at 300 nm ) seems to drive only a basal gene bursting ( no burst size nor frequency enhancement ) ( Fig - ure 5A ) . These results pointedus to look for genome architectural proteins as a possible hidden contributor . Moreover , from the two - and three - color time - lapse movies , it appears that only when the condensate moves in proximity and seemingly kisses the gene locus that the nascent mRNA signal increases suggesting burst enhancement , and when the condensate moves away , the mRNA signal decreases ( Fig - ure 5A ) . We wondered whether the genome architectural protein cohesin—which can dynamically mediate long - range DNA loop - ing—could be an important missing factor . We fused SMC3 ( structural maintainance of chromosome pro - tein 3 ) , a structural subunit of the cohesin complex , with a degrader FKBP12 F36V to study the effect of cohesin degradation using the dTAG system ( Figure 5B ) . The efﬁciency of degradation is evaluated by western blot , and 1 - h treatment of dTAG13 at 500 nM is sufﬁcient to deplete SMC3 in the cells ( Figure S3F ) . The control condition of this new cell line but without treatment with dTAG13 was in good agreement with Figure 1I , as we observed that the average Sox2 burst size with proximal clusters is 4 . 9 ± 0 . 2 mRNAs per burst , and the distal ones 3 . 5 ± 0 . 3 mRNAs per burst ( Figure 5D ) . After acute depletion of SMC3 , notably , we still observed gene bursting as well as the presence of condensates . However , there is no gene burst enhancement of Sox2 by condensate proximity ( Figures 5E , S3H , and S3J ) , although the gene can still produce a basal burst . For both Sox2 bursting that are proximal ( < 1 m m ) and distal ( > 1 m m ) to the condensate , there is no signiﬁcant difference in bursting intensity and both at the basal level , with a burst size of 3 . 2 ± 0 . 2 and 3 . 3 ± 0 . 2 , respectively . The fraction of total mRNA produced by proximal and distal cases becomes compa - rable after cohesin deletion ( Figure 5H ) , in contrast to the prefer - ential mRNA production by proximal clusters in the control con - dition without depletion ( Figure 5F ) . We analyzed the distributions of Sox2 mRNA burst sizes rep - resented by the survival probabilities with and without SMC3 depletion , and we found that cohesin depletion leads to a decrease in mRNA burst sizes ( Figure 5G ) . Accordingly , the dis - tances between the condensate and Sox2 gene locus increase after SMC3 depletion ( Figure 5I ) . Our data suggest that although the condensate can diffuse in proximity to the gene locus , cohe - sin is required for the condensate’s ability to enhance Sox2 gene bursting , including both burst size and burst frequency . Thus , the mere ‘‘proximity’’ of the condensate to the gene lo - cus is not alone driving gene burst enhancement . We propose instead that cohesin , through its proposed looping extrusion , may help bring and hold the condensate to colocalize transiently on the gene with a sufﬁcient dwell time to drive the observed in - creases in gene bursting ( for a purely qualitative illustration of this proposed model , see cartoon depiction in Video S4 ) . DISCUSSION In this study , we investigate the function and dynamics of tran - scriptional condensates in the context of super - enhancer controlled gene Sox2 . Sox2 has a very short gene length of 2 . 4 ( F ) FractionoftotalmRNAproducedbyproximal ( redbar ) anddistalcondensates ( bluebar ) inthecontrolconditionwithoutcohesindepletion . Meanandstandard error ( SEM ) is 0 . 63 ± 0 . 07 for proximal and 0 . 37 ± 0 . 07 for distal . ( G ) Survival probability plots of all MS2 burst sizes under control ( shown in black ) and cohesin depleted ( shown in red ) condition . ( H ) Fraction of total mRNA produced by proximal ( red bar ) and distal ( blue bar ) with cohesin depletion . Mean and standard error ( SEM ) is 0 . 5 ± 0 . 06 for proximal and 0 . 5 ± 0 . 06 for distal . ( I ) Survival probability plots of condensate - to - gene distances under control ( shown in black ) and cohesin depleted ( shown in red ) condition . Data were plotted in log linear scale . See also Figure S3 . ll 10 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article kb ; hence , we hypothesized that if there is a direct function of transcriptional condensates on Sox2 gene bursting , we should be able to resolve the correlation within the timescales of our live imaging capabilities . Indeed , we observed a direct anti - cor - relation between the gene burst intensity and the distance be - tween condensate - to - gene locus ( Figures 3D and 3E ) . The classic , textbook model suggests that an enhancer and gene promoter form physical one - to - one interaction through long - range DNA looping . Evidence for such long - range interac - tions exists by contact - mapping sequencing techniques like HiC ( high - throughput chromosome conformation capture ) , ORCA ( optical reconstruction of chromatin architecture ) , 3D FISH , etc . 35 – 39 However , recent imaging data challenge the notion of an anti - correlation between enhancer - promoter dis - tance and gene expression . For example , in Drosophila , a single enhancer can simultaneously co - regulate the bursting of two genes , 40 thus contradicting the one - to - one interaction model . Anti - correlation of enhancer - promoter distance to gene bursting was observed in labeled eve enhancer and an inserted , exoge - nous PP7 reporter gene , 41 but the enhancer - promoter distance gap when the reporter gene is ON remained larger than 300 nm . In mammalian cells , the distance between the sonic hedgehog ( Ssh ) gene and its enhancer increases up to 1 m m upon gene activation during neuronal differentiation , in contrast to expectation of increased proximity . 42 In fact , for Sox2 , live im - aging of the enhancer and promoter DNA elements showed no difference in enhancer - promoter distance in bursting and non - bursting cells . 34 These results put in question our fundamental understanding of how distal cis - regulatory elements work to dynamically control gene bursting in real time in living cells . We ﬁnd here that there is a persistent condensate of RNA Pol II and Mediator in the proximity of the Sox2 gene . The size of the transcriptional condensate near Sox2 gene , which we measure to have an average Feret’s diameter of 456 ± 201 nm ( for RNA Pol II ) and 560 ± 226 nm ( for Mediator ) , is perfectly appropriate tobridge a gap of (cid:2) 300 nm , if itexists , 43 between super - enhancer and gene locus ( Figures S2A – S2D ) . Our results reveal that the condensate is an important factor missing in prior studies and a better predictor of gene bursting than enhancer DNA distance . Genome architectural proteins such as cohesin are proposed to act by loop extrusion to create TADs . 44 – 46 These TAD struc - tures provide a mechanism to regulate transcription by increasing probabilities of enhancer - gene promoter contacts within a TAD and decreasing probabilities of enhancer - promoter contacts between TADs . However , recent genome - wide studies investigating the depletion of cohesin or cohesin - regulating pro - teins challenge these assumptions at the transcriptionally impor - tant level of enhancer and gene locus interactions , 47 – 49 including speciﬁcally around the Sox2 locus . 29 , 30 , 50 In this context too , our results provide new insights . We ﬁnd that cohesin depletion does not affect basal Sox2 gene bursting but instead prevents the condensate’s gene burst enhancement ( Figures 5D and 5E ) . Our data show that rapid depletion of cohe - sin leads to an increase in condensate - to - gene distance ( Fig - ure 5I ) and a reduction in burst size ( Figure 5G ) . Further dissec - tion of the data shows that these changes in gene bursting result from a loss in the condensate’s ability to enhance gene burst compared with basal bursting ( compare Figure 5E with Fig - ure 5D ) ; and there is no burst frequency changes when conden - sate is in proximity ( compare Figure 5H with Figure 5F ) . These re - sults suggest a likely function for cohesin in mediating the kissing interaction between condensate and gene locus . It was surprising to us that condensate does not remain stably associated with the canonical super - enhancer ( SCR ) as we pre - viously assumed . 22 Previous studies 51 , 52 on nuclear speckles ef - fects on gene expression motivated us to also investigate whether the transcriptional condensates are identical to speckle sites . However , our data rule out that possibility ; the transcrip - tional condensates are distinct from speckles ( Figure S1D ) . Thus , we do not know where the condensate is located . We favor a model where the condensate remains associated with chromatin ( Figure 5A ) , perhaps in other cis - regulatory re - gions , and perhaps even further away than SCR ( given how compact the locus is in chromatin tracing data 39 compared with our observed distances ) . Such a model would account for all our previous observations of the condensates diffusing at the same rate as other chromatin domains , and results of drug treatments , like JQ1 ( a BET bromodomain inhibitor ) , 53 which pre - vent association of BET bromodomains to chromatin and result in the disappearance of all RNA Pol II and Mediator clusters , including persistent condensates . 16 This model can also explain more readily the effect of cohesin in regulating a functional asso - ciation of the condensate with both the gene locus and canonical enhancer . We speculate that the canonical super - enhancer ( SCR ) is still essential in forming and maintaining the condensate even if the condensate does not remain associated ; this idea is supported by our observation that SCR deletion has marked ef - fects on both condensate size ( Figure 4K ) , the burst intensity ( Figure 4J ) , and the fraction of bursting cells ( Figure 4L ) . Howev - er , further investigation is needed to study where the condensate initiates or resides . Nonetheless , our study reveals the spatio - temporal dynamics of condensates as a critical factor in our un - derstanding of gene expression regulation by distal enhancers . Limitations of the study In the proposed kissing model , a kissing event refers to an encounter between the condensate and the gene locus . We sus - pect that productive encounters have rather transient dwell times—likely on the order (cid:2) 12 s based on estimates from our previously published work on the dwell time of colocalization of transient RNA Pol II clusters on a gene locus and its linear corre - lation with gene burst output 17 —before the condensate diffuses away . This could explain why both the super - resolution and the time - lapse light sheet imaging ( 15 – 30 s time intervals ) tend to capture proximity rather than perfect overlap . Another limitation is that we have not directly labeled the pro - moter in this study and use the MS2 ( nascent mRNA signal ) as a proxy for the locus of the bursting gene . This is in part because strategically we chose to have the enhancer DNA and the condensate labeled in the three - color dynamic colocalization . Another reason is that our measurement is in good agreement with a previous study 34 showing that there is no measurable dif - ference between using a promoter label ( 8 kb upstream of the promoter ) or using the MS2 signal as the indicator for the Sox2 gene locus . Therefore , labeling the promoter should not change the conclusions of this study . ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 11 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article This design allows us to address the bursting gene locus , but not the periods when the gene is off . For instance , we can point out that in nearly all cases where we detected a bursting gene , there is condensate in the vicinity : 75 % – 80 % of all Sox2 mRNAs were produced with a condensate within < 1 m m of the bursting gene and the remaining 20 % – 25 % of mRNAs were produced , still , with a condensate that has moved to a distance > 1 m m , sug - gesting that the condensate may have already played a role in facilitating the gene activity . Thus , without synchronizing Sox2 - bursting events , and without labeling the promoter , we stopped short of concluding that almost every bursting event likely started with a condensate . The cartoon illustrations ( Video S4 ) make assumptions about where the condensate is located , which , as discussed above , is unknown . It also makes assumptions about cohesin , which is based on others’ ﬁndings . For instance , it is unclear in the liter - ature where exactly cohesin loads on chromatin . However , the loader of cohesin ( called NIPBL , nipped - B - like protein ) is shown to interact with Mediator 54 , 55 ; hence , it is tempting to propose that cohesin could load at the condensate , given that there is a cluster of Mediator , but this is pure speculation . Then , cohesin is also proposed to bring distal genomic regions through a dy - namic process called loop extrusion 56 , 57 with CTCF acting as a barrier , 58 but we have no direct evidence for this in this study except that deleting CTCF - binding sites or depleting cohesin would both affect the condensate’s ability to enhance gene bursting . Nonetheless , the qualitative aspects of the model are independent of these assumptions on where exactly cohesin is loaded and how cohesin mediates looping in vivo . Further inves - tigations into chromatin architecture could falsify these assump - tions in future studies . Future outlooks It had been difﬁcult to determine a direct , functional association between transcriptional condensates and gene activity endoge - nously . Here , the observations for Sox2 help us understand how distal enhancers can dynamically regulate gene expression in real time . A similar approach may be used to study condensate functions in other contexts . Finally , in the ﬁeld , it is sometimes assumed that varying en - hancers work identically in their mechanisms of regulation of gene expression . In addition to the Sox2 gene locus , the quanti - tative imaging and analysis approaches developed here may help in the future to discern key differences in the mechanisms of action between different enhancer condensates and gene loci . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY B Lead contact B Materials availability B Data and code availability d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS d METHOD DETAILS B Mouse embryonic stem cell ( mESC ) culture B mESC cell line engineering d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS B tcPALM analysis B Quantiﬁcation of burst size , burst frequency , total frac - tion of mRNA B Condensate size measurement B Lattice light sheet imaging analysis SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplementalinformationcanbefoundonlineathttps : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank members of the Cisse ´ Department for critical input and past mem - bers of the lab at MIT & Caltech ( especially J . O . Andrews , F . Pir - Cakmak , M . Zheng , R . Amin , and Z . Ye ) . We thank L . D . Lavis ( HHMI , Janelia ) for gift of JF dyes . We thank Dr . J . O . Andrews and Zitian Ye for assistance with the tcPALM analysis software . We thank B . Ren ( and members of Ren group , UCSD ) , A . Boettiger ( Stanford ) , E . Nora ( UCSF ) , L . Georgetti ( FMI Basel ) , and P . Rocha ( NICHD / NIH ) for helpful discussion about genome architecture and J . Marko ( Northwestern U . ) and R . Young ( MIT ) for helpful discussion about Cohesin recruitment . We thank anonymous reviewers for suggestions that impacted the paper . We also thank the imaging and FACS facilities at MPI - IE Freiburg for their support . This work was supported by core funding from the Max Planck Society to I . I . C . and by NIH grant 5R01GM134734 to I . I . C . I . I . C . is PEW Scholar and Macarthur Fellow , which provided support . I . I . C . is scientiﬁc member and director in the Max Planck Society , which sup - ports all the research in the Department of Biological Physics at MPI - IE Freiburg . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS M . D . and I . I . C . conceived of and designed the study . M . D . and S . H . S . per - formed the microscopy experiments and data analysis . S . H . S . and M . H . helped with the lattice light sheet data analysis . C . L . and A . Q . helped with stem cell culture . M . D . , C . L . , W . - K . C . , and J . - H . S . contributed to cell line gen - eration . M . D . and I . I . C . wrote the manuscript with input from all coauthors . I . I . C . supervised all aspects of the project . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS I . I . C . is on the Advisory Board at Cell . Received : May 9 , 2023 Revised : October 29 , 2023 Accepted : December 4 , 2023 Published : January 8 , 2024 REFERENCES 1 . Chong , S . , Chen , C . , Ge , H . , and Xie , X . S . ( 2014 ) . Mechanism of transcrip - tional bursting in bacteria . Cell 158 , 314 – 326 . 2 . Corrigan , A . M . , Tunnacliffe , E . , Cannon , D . , andChubb , J . R . ( 2016 ) . Acon - tinuum model of transcriptional bursting . eLife 5 , e13051 . 3 . Coulon , A . , Chow , C . C . , Singer , R . H . , and Larson , D . R . ( 2013 ) . Eukaryotic transcriptional dynamics : from single molecules to cell populations . Nat . Rev . Genet . 14 , 572 – 584 . 4 . Miller , O . L . , and McKnight , S . L . ( 1979 ) . Post - replicative nonribosomal transcription units in D . melanogaster embryos . Cell 17 , 551 – 563 . 5 . Sanchez , A . , andGolding , I . ( 2013 ) . Geneticdeterminantsandcellularcon - straints in noisy gene expression . Science 342 , 1188 – 1193 . ll 12 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article 6 . Banerji , J . , Rusconi , S . , and Schaffner , W . ( 1981 ) . Expression of a beta - globin gene is enhanced by remote SV40 DNA sequences . Cell 27 , 299 – 308 . 7 . Bulger , M . , and Groudine , M . ( 2011 ) . Functional and mechanistic diversity of distal transcription enhancers . Cell 144 , 327 – 339 . 8 . Maston , G . A . , Evans , S . K . , and Green , M . R . ( 2006 ) . Transcriptional regu - latory elements in the human genome . Annu . Rev . Genomics Hum . Genet . 7 , 29 – 59 . 9 . Shen , Y . , Yue , F . , McCleary , D . F . , Ye , Z . , Edsall , L . , Kuan , S . , Wagner , U . , Dixon , J . , Lee , L . , Lobanenkov , V . V . , et al . ( 2012 ) . A map of the cis - regula - tory sequences in the mouse genome . Nature 488 , 116 – 120 . 10 . Spitz , F . , and Furlong , E . E . ( 2012 ) . Transcription factors : from enhancer binding to developmental control . Nat . Rev . Genet . 13 , 613 – 626 . 11 . Carey , M . ( 1998 ) . The enhanceosome and transcriptional synergy . Cell 92 , 5 – 8 . 12 . ENCODE Project Consortium ( 2012 ) . An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome . Nature 489 , 57 – 74 . 13 . Levine , M . , and Tjian , R . ( 2003 ) . Transcription regulation and animal diver - sity . Nature 424 , 147 – 151 . 14 . Pombo , A . , and Dillon , N . ( 2015 ) . Three - dimensional genome architecture : players and mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 245 – 257 . 15 . Visel , A . , Rubin , E . M . , and Pennacchio , L . A . ( 2009 ) . Genomic views of distant - acting enhancers . Nature 461 , 199 – 205 . 16 . Cho , W . K . , Spille , J . H . , Hecht , M . , Lee , C . , Li , C . , Grube , V . , and Cisse , I . I . ( 2018 ) . Mediator and RNA polymerase II clusters associate in transcrip - tion - dependent condensates . Science 361 , 412 – 415 . 17 . Cho , W . K . , Jayanth , N . , English , B . P . , Inoue , T . , Andrews , J . O . , Conway , W . , Grimm , J . B . , Spille , J . H . , Lavis , L . D . , Lionnet , T . , et al . ( 2016 ) . RNA po - lymerase II cluster dynamics predict mRNA output in living cells . eLife 5 , e13617 . 18 . Cisse , I . I . , Izeddin , I . , Causse , S . Z . , Boudarene , L . , Senecal , A . , Muresan , L . , Dugast - Darzacq , C . , Hajj , B . , Dahan , M . , and Darzacq , X . ( 2013 ) . Real - timedynamicsofRNApolymeraseIIclusteringinlivehumancells . Science 341 , 664 – 667 . 19 . Iborra , F . J . , Pombo , A . , Jackson , D . A . , and Cook , P . R . ( 1996 ) . Active RNA polymerases are localized within discrete transcription ‘‘factories’ in hu - man nuclei . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 1427 – 1436 . 20 . Li , J . , Dong , A . , Saydaminova , K . , Chang , H . , Wang , G . , Ochiai , H . , Yama - moto , T . , andPertsinidis , A . ( 2019 ) . Single - moleculenanoscopyelucidates RNA polymerase IItranscriptionat single genes inlivecells . Cell 178 , 491 – 506 . e28 . 21 . Wang , H . , Li , B . , Zuo , L . , Wang , B . , Yan , Y . , Tian , K . , Zhou , R . , Wang , C . , Chen , X . , Jiang , Y . , et al . ( 2022 ) . The transcriptional coactivator RUVBL2 regulatesPolIIclusteringwithdiversetranscriptionfactors . Nat . Commun . 13 , 5703 . 22 . Sabari , B . R . , Dall’Agnese , A . , Boija , A . , Klein , I . A . , Coffey , E . L . , Shrinivas , K . , Abraham , B . J . , Hannett , N . M . , Zamudio , A . V . , Manteiga , J . C . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Coactivator condensation at super - enhancers links phase separa - tion and gene control . Science 361 , eaar3958 . 23 . Chong , S . , Dugast - Darzacq , C . , Liu , Z . , Dong , P . , Dailey , G . M . , Cattoglio , C . , Heckert , A . , Banala , S . , Lavis , L . , Darzacq , X . , etal . ( 2018 ) . Imaging dy - namic and selective low - complexity domain interactions that control gene transcription . Science 361 , eaar2555 . 24 . Kawasaki , K . , and Fukaya , T . ( 2023 ) . Functional coordination between transcription factor clustering and gene activity . Mol . Cell 83 , 1605 – 1622 . e9 . 25 . Brangwynne , C . P . , Eckmann , C . R . , Courson , D . S . , Rybarska , A . , Hoege , C . , Gharakhani , J . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Hyman , A . A . ( 2009 ) . Germline P gran - ules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution / condensa - tion . Science 324 , 1729 – 1732 . 26 . Hnisz , D . , Abraham , B . J . , Lee , T . I . , Lau , A . , Saint - Andre´ , V . , Sigova , A . A . , Hoke , H . A . , and Young , R . A . ( 2013 ) . Super - enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease . Cell 155 , 934 – 947 . 27 . Bertrand , E . , Chartrand , P . , Schaefer , M . , Shenoy , S . M . , Singer , R . H . , and Long , R . M . ( 1998 ) . Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol . Cell 2 , 437 – 445 . 28 . Spille , J . H . , Hecht , M . , Grube , V . , Cho , W . K . , Lee , C . , andCisse´ , I . I . ( 2019 ) . A CRISPR / Cas9 platform for MS2 - labelling of single mRNA in live stem cells . Methods 153 , 35 – 45 . 29 . Chakraborty , S . , Kopitchinski , N . , Zuo , Z . , Eraso , A . , Awasthi , P . , Chari , R . , Mitra , A . , Tobias , I . C . , Moorthy , S . D . , Dale , R . K . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Enhancer - promoter interactions can bypass CTCF - mediated boundaries and contribute to phenotypic robustness . Nat . Genet . 55 , 280 – 290 . 30 . Brosh , R . , Coelho , C . , Ribeiro - Dos - Santos , A . M . , Ellis , G . , Hogan , M . S . , Ashe , H . J . , Somogyi , N . , Ordon˜ez , R . , Luther , R . D . , Huang , E . , et al . ( 2023 ) . Synthetic regulatory genomics uncovers enhancer context depen - dence at the Sox2 locus . Mol . Cell 83 , 1140 – 1152 . e7 . 31 . Li , Y . , Rivera , C . M . , Ishii , H . , Jin , F . , Selvaraj , S . , Lee , A . Y . , Dixon , J . R . , and Ren , B . ( 2014 ) . CRISPR reveals a distal super - enhancer required for Sox2 expression in mouse embryonic stem cells . PLoS One 9 , e114485 . 32 . Peng , T . , Zhai , Y . , Atlasi , Y . , TerHuurne , M . , Marks , H . , Stunnenberg , H . G . , and Megchelenbrink , W . ( 2020 ) . STARR - seq identiﬁes active , chromatin - masked , and dormant enhancers in pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells . Genome Biol . 21 , 243 . 33 . Zhou , H . Y . , Katsman , Y . , Dhaliwal , N . K . , Davidson , S . , Macpherson , N . N . , Sakthidevi , M . , Collura , F . , and Mitchell , J . A . ( 2014 ) . A Sox2 distal enhancer cluster regulates embryonic stem cell differentiation potential . Genes Dev . 28 , 2699 – 2711 . 34 . Alexander , J . M . , Guan , J . , Li , B . , Maliskova , L . , Song , M . , Shen , Y . , Huang , B . , Lomvardas , S . , and Weiner , O . D . ( 2019 ) . Live - cell imaging reveals enhancer - dependent Sox2 transcription in the absence of enhancer prox - imity . eLife 8 , e41769 . 35 . Dekker , J . , Rippe , K . , Dekker , M . , andKleckner , N . ( 2002 ) . Capturingchro - mosome conformation . Science 295 , 1306 – 1311 . 36 . Fudenberg , G . , Abdennur , N . , Imakaev , M . , Goloborodko , A . , and Mirny , L . A . ( 2017 ) . Emerging evidence of chromosome folding by loop extrusion . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 82 , 45 – 55 . 37 . Giorgetti , L . , and Heard , E . ( 2016 ) . Closing the loop : 3C versus DNA FISH . Genome Biol . 17 , 215 . 38 . Lieberman - Aiden , E . , van Berkum , N . L . , Williams , L . , Imakaev , M . , Ra - goczy , T . , Telling , A . , Amit , I . , Lajoie , B . R . , Sabo , P . J . , Dorschner , M . O . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Comprehensive mapping of long - range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome . Science 326 , 289 – 293 . 39 . Mateo , L . J . , Murphy , S . E . , Hafner , A . , Cinquini , I . S . , Walker , C . A . , and Boettiger , A . N . ( 2019 ) . Visualizing DNA folding and RNA in embryos at sin - gle - cell resolution . Nature 568 , 49 – 54 . 40 . Fukaya , T . , Lim , B . , and Levine , M . ( 2016 ) . Enhancer control of transcrip - tional bursting . Cell 166 , 358 – 368 . 41 . Chen , H . , Levo , M . , Barinov , L . , Fujioka , M . , Jaynes , J . B . , and Gregor , T . ( 2018 ) . Dynamic interplay between enhancer - promoter topology and gene activity . Nat . Genet . 50 , 1296 – 1303 . 42 . Benabdallah , N . S . , Williamson , I . , Illingworth , R . S . , Kane , L . , Boyle , S . , Sengupta , D . , Grimes , G . R . , Therizols , P . , and Bickmore , W . A . ( 2019 ) . Decreasedenhancer - promoterproximityaccompanying enhanceractiva - tion . Mol . Cell 76 , 473 – 484 . e7 . 43 . Chen , L . F . , Lee , J . , and Boettiger , A . ( 2023 ) . Recent progress and chal - lenges in single - cell imaging of enhancer - promoter interaction . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 79 , 102023 . 44 . Gabriele , M . , Branda˜o , H . B . , Grosse - Holz , S . , Jha , A . , Dailey , G . M . , Catto - glio , C . , Hsieh , T . S . , Mirny , L . , Zechner , C . , and Hansen , A . S . ( 2022 ) . Dy - namics of CTCF - and cohesin - mediated chromatin looping revealed by live - cell imaging . Science 376 , 496 – 501 . ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 13 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article 45 . Ganji , M . , Shaltiel , I . A . , Bisht , S . , Kim , E . , Kalichava , A . , Haering , C . H . , and Dekker , C . ( 2018 ) . Real - timeimaging of DNAloop extrusion bycondensin . Science 360 , 102 – 105 . 46 . Mirny , L . , and Dekker , J . ( 2022 ) . Mechanisms of chromosome folding and nuclear organization : their interplay and open questions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 14 , a040147 . 47 . Hsieh , T . S . , Cattoglio , C . , Slobodyanyuk , E . , Hansen , A . S . , Darzacq , X . , and Tjian , R . ( 2022 ) . Enhancer - promoter interactions and transcription are largely maintained upon acute loss of CTCF , cohesin , WAPL or YY1 . Nat . Genet . 54 , 1919 – 1932 . 48 . Rao , S . S . P . , Huang , S . C . , Glenn St Hilaire , B . , Engreitz , J . M . , Perez , E . M . , Kieffer - Kwon , K . R . , Sanborn , A . L . , Johnstone , S . E . , Bascom , G . D . , Boch - kov , I . D . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Cohesin loss eliminates all loop domains . Cell 171 , 305 – 320 . e24 . 49 . Zuin , J . , Dixon , J . R . , van der Reijden , M . I . , Ye , Z . , Kolovos , P . , Brouwer , R . W . , van de Corput , M . P . , van de Werken , H . J . , Knoch , T . A . , van IJcken , W . F . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Cohesin and CTCF differentially affect chromatin archi - tecture and gene expression in human cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 996 – 1001 . 50 . Aljahani , A . , Hua , P . , Karpinska , M . A . , Quililan , K . , Davies , J . O . J . , and Ou - delaar , A . M . ( 2022 ) . Analysis of sub - kilobase chromatin topology reveals nano - scale regulatory interactions with variable dependence on cohesin and CTCF . Nat . Commun . 13 , 2139 . 51 . Alexander , K . A . , Cote´ , A . , Nguyen , S . C . , Zhang , L . , Gholamalamdari , O . , Agudelo - Garcia , P . , Lin - Shiao , E . , Tanim , K . M . A . , Lim , J . , Biddle , N . , et al . ( 2021 ) . p53 mediates target gene association with nuclear speckles for ampliﬁed RNA expression . Mol . Cell 81 , 1666 – 1681 . e6 . 52 . Kim , J . , Venkata , N . C . , HernandezGonzalez , G . A . H . , Khanna , N . , and Bel - mont , A . S . ( 2020 ) . Geneexpressionampliﬁcationbynuclearspeckleasso - ciation . J . Cell Biol . 219 , e201904046 . 53 . Filippakopoulos , P . , Qi , J . , Picaud , S . , Shen , Y . , Smith , W . B . , Fedorov , O . , Morse , E . M . , Keates , T . , Hickman , T . T . , Felletar , I . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Selective inhibition of BET bromodomains . Nature 468 , 1067 – 1073 . 54 . Kagey , M . H . , Newman , J . J . , Bilodeau , S . , Zhan , Y . , Orlando , D . A . , vanBer - kum , N . L . , Ebmeier , C . C . , Goossens , J . , Rahl , P . B . , Levine , S . S . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin ar - chitecture . Nature 467 , 430 – 435 . 55 . Kagey , M . H . , Newman , J . J . , Bilodeau , S . , Zhan , Y . , Orlando , D . A . , vanBer - kum , N . L . , Ebmeier , C . C . , Goossens , J . , Rahl , P . B . , Levine , S . S . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin ar - chitecture ( vol 467 , pg 430 , 2010 ) . Nature 472 , 247 . 56 . Fudenberg , G . , Imakaev , M . , Lu , C . , Goloborodko , A . , Abdennur , N . , and Mirny , L . A . ( 2016 ) . Formation of chromosomal domains by loop extrusion . Cell Rep . 15 , 2038 – 2049 . 57 . Alipour , E . , and Marko , J . F . ( 2012 ) . Self - organization of domain structures by DNA - loop - extruding enzymes . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 , 11202 – 11212 . 58 . Davidson , I . F . , Barth , R . , Zaczek , M . , van der Torre , J . , Tang , W . , Naga - saka , K . , Janissen , R . , Kerssemakers , J . , Wutz , G . , Dekker , C . , et al . ( 2023 ) . CTCF is a DNA - tension - dependent barrier to cohesin - mediated loop extrusion . Nature 616 , 822 – 827 . 59 . Ilik , I . A . , Malszycki , M . , Lu¨bke , A . K . , Schade , C . , Meierhofer , D . , andAktas x , T . ( 2020 ) . SONandSRRM2areessentialfornuclearspeckleformation . eL - ife 9 , e60579 . 60 . Serge ´ , A . , Bertaux , N . , Rigneault , H . , and Marguet , D . ( 2008 ) . Dynamic multiple - target tracing to probe spatiotemporal cartography of cell mem - branes . Nat . Methods 5 , 687 – 694 . 61 . Andrews , J . O . , Conway , W . , Cho , W . K . , Narayanan , A . , Spille , J . H . , Jayanth , N . , Inoue , T . , Mullen , S . , Thaler , J . , and Cisse´ , I . I . ( 2018 ) . qSR : a quantitative super - resolution analysis tool reveals the cell - cycle depen - dent organization of RNA polymerase I in live human cells . Sci . Rep . 8 , 7424 . 62 . Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Frise , E . , Kaynig , V . , Longair , M . , Pietzsch , T . , Preibisch , S . , Rueden , C . , Saalfeld , S . , Schmid , B . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . 63 . Ershov , D . , Phan , M . S . , Pylva¨na¨inen , J . W . , Rigaud , S . U . , Le Blanc , L . , Charles - Orszag , A . , Conway , J . R . W . , Laine , R . F . , Roy , N . H . , Bonazzi , D . , et al . ( 2022 ) . TrackMate 7 : integrating state - of - the - art segmentation algo - rithms into tracking pipelines . Nat . Methods 19 , 829 – 832 . 64 . Virtanen , P . , Gommers , R . , Oliphant , T . E . , Haberland , M . , Reddy , T . , Cour - napeau , D . , Burovski , E . , Peterson , P . , Weckesser , W . , Bright , J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . SciPy 1 . 0 : fundamental algorithms for scientiﬁc computing in Py - thon . Nat . Methods 17 , 261 – 272 . ll 14 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies Goat Anti - Rabbit IgG H & L ( Alexa Fluor (cid:2) 647 ) preadsorbed Abcam Cat # : ab150083 ; RRID : AB _ 2714032 Rabbit anti - HA Tag Recombinant Monoclonal Antibody Bethyl Cat # : A191 - 102 ; RRID : AB _ 2891412 Recombinant Anti - beta Actin antibody [ SP124 ] 500 uL Abcam Cat # : ab115777 ; RRID : AB _ 10899528 Anti - SMC3 antibody Abcam Cat # : ab9263 ; RRID : AB _ 307122 Goat Anti - Mouse IgG H & L ( Alexa Fluor (cid:2) 647 ) Abcam Cat # : ab150115 ; RRID : AB _ 2687948 Anti - SC35 antibody [ SC - 35 ] - Nuclear Speckle Marker Abcam Cat # : ab11826 ; RRID : AB _ 298608 Bacterial and virus strains NEB (cid:2) 5 - alpha Competent E . coli ( High Efﬁciency ) NEB C2987H MAX Efﬁciency (cid:3) Stbl2 (cid:3) Competent Cells ThermoFisher 10268019 Chemicals , peptides , and recombinant proteins DMEM / F - 12 ThermoFisher 11320033 Neurobasal (cid:3) Medium ThermoFisher 21103049 N - 2 Supplement ( 100X ) ThermoFisher 17502048 B - 27 (cid:3) Supplement ( 50X ) , serum - free ThermoFisher 17504044 Penicillin - Streptomycin ( 10 , 000 U / mL ) ThermoFisher 15140122 AlbuMAX (cid:3) II Lipid - Rich BSA ThermoFisher 11021029 MEM NEAA ( 100X ) ThermoFisher 11140050 Sodium Pyruvate ( 100 mM ) ThermoFisher 11360070 L - Glutamine ( 200 mM ) ThermoFisher 25030081 2 - Mercaptoethanol ThermoFisher 21985023 MEK inhibitor , PD0325910 Merck PZ0162 GS GSK3 b inhibitor , CHIR99021 Merck SML1046 LIF Recombinant Mouse Protein ThermoFisher A35934 Poly - L - ornithine solution Merck P4957 Ultrapure Laminin , Mouse , 1 mg Corning 354239 PBS - phosphate buffered saline ( 10x ) pH 7 . 4 , RNase free ThermoFisher AM9625 NEBuilder (cid:2) HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix NEB E2621 Lipofectamine (cid:3) 3000 Transfection Reagent ThermoFisher L 3000001 Super PiggyBac Transposase Expression Vector System Biosciences PB210PA - 1 Puromycin dihydrochloride from Streptomyces alboniger Merck P8833 FastDigest BpiI ( BbsI ) ThermoFisher FD1014 T7 DNA Ligase NEB M0318 Janelia Fluor (cid:2) HaloTag (cid:2) Ligands , 646nm Promega GA1120 Janelia Fluor (cid:2) HaloTag (cid:2) Ligands , 549nm Luke Lavis Lab N / A Paraformaldehyde 4 % ( w / v ) in aqueous solution , methanol - free VWR 47392 . 9M Halt (cid:3) Protease Inhibitor Cocktail ( 100x ) ThermoFisher 78429 USB Dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 0 . 1M Solution ThermoFisher 707265ML ( Continued on next page ) ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 . e1 – e7 , January 18 , 2024 e1 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Leibovitz’s L - 15 Medium , no phenol red ThermoFisher 21083027 TrypLE (cid:3) Express Enzyme ( 1x ) , phenol red ThermoFisher 12605028 Opti - MEM (cid:3) I Reduced Serum Medium , no phenol red ThermoFisher 11058021 Triton X - 100 Merck T8787 - 250ML BSA Merck A9418 - 50G Deposited data tcPALM data _ Original _ Cell _ Line This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10220085 tcPALM data _ CTCF _ E - 2 _ deletion This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10221545 tcPALM data _ E15 _ deletion This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10222551 tcPALM data _ SCR _ deletion This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10222721 tcPALM data _ Cohesin _ depletion This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10223195 SIM _ data This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10219682 Lattice light sheet data This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10219582 Experimental models : Cell lines R1 mouse embryonic stem cells Eliezer Calo Lab , MIT N / A Dendra2 - Pol II / Halo - Mediator Cho et al . 16 N / A Dendra2 - Pol II / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 This study N / A Dendra2 - Pol II / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / SMC3 - FKBP12F36V This study N / A Dendra2 - Pol II / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / D ( CTCF / E - 2 ) This study N / A Dendra2 - Pol II / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / D E + 15 This study N / A Dendra2 - Mediator / Halo - Pol II / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 This study N / A Sox2 enhancer ( CuO / CymR ) / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 This study N / A Sox2 enhcancer ( CuO / CymR ) / Halo - Pol II / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 This study N / A Sox2 enhancer ( CuO / CymR ) / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / D ( CTCF / E - 2 ) This study N / A Sox2 enhancer ( CuO / CymR ) / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / D E + 15 This study N / A Sox2 enhancer ( CuO / CymR ) / Halo - Mediator / MCP - SNAP / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / D SCR This study N / A Oligonucleotides ssDNA for Bxb1 site insertion IDT N / A Recombinant DNA Plasmid : P162 _ pX459 - Rbp1 _ sgRNA2 Cho et al . 16 N / A Plasmid : P153 _ pX459 - Med19 _ sgRNA1 Cho et al . 16 N / A Plasmid : B00126 ( stable expression for MCP - SNAP ) This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - Sox2gRNA This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - Smc3gRNA This study N / A Plasmid : pX458 - CuOgRNA This study N / A Plasmid : Sox2 - MS2 Repair Template This study N / A Plasmid : SMC3 - FKBP12F36V Repair Template This study N / A Plasmid : Sox2 - MS2 Repair Template This study N / A Plasmid : Sox2 - MS2 Repair Template This study N / A ( Continued on next page ) ll e2 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 . e1 – e7 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact , Ibrahim I . Cisse´ ( cisse @ ie - freiburg . mpg . de ) . Materials availability d All plasmids and cell lines generated in this study are available from the lead contact upon request , and will be distributed with MTA . d This study did not generate new unique chemical reagents . Data and code availability d Microscopy data reported in this paper has been deposited at Zenodo and is publicly available as of the date of publication . DOIs are listed in the key resources table . d All original code has been deposited at Zenodo and is publicly available as of the date of publication . DOIs are listed in the key resources table . d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS All mouse embryonic cell lines used in this study are listed in key resources table . METHOD DETAILS Mouse embryonic stem cell ( mESC ) culture All cell lines used in this study were based on R1 Mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) . Cells were cultured in serum - free 2i media without feeder MEF cells ( 1 : 1 of DMEM / F - 12 and Neurobasal media , supplemented with 1x N - 2 supplement , 1x B - 27 supplement , Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Plasmid : UBCpr - CymR - EGFP This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - gRNA1 - CTCF _ E - 2 This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - gRNA2 - CTCF _ E - 2 This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - gRNA1 - E + 15 This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - gRNA2 - E + 15 This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - gRNA1 - SCR This study N / A Plasmid : pX330 - gRNA2 - SCR This study N / A Plasmid : CTCF _ E - 2 - BSD RT This study N / A Plasmid : E + 15 - BSD RT This study N / A Plasmid : SCR - BSD RT This study N / A Software and algorithms MATLAB MathWorks https : / / www . mathworks . com / products / matlab . html ImageJ NIH https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / Benchling Benchling Inc . https : / / www . benchling . com / GraphPad Prism 9 GraphPad Software , LLC https : / / www . graphpad . com / Python Open source https : / / www . python . org / Lattice light sheet analysis software This study Zenodo data : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 10200779 Other Nalgene (cid:3) Sterile Syringe Filters ( 0 . 45 m m ) ThermoFisher 725 - 2545 35mm Dish , Uncoated , Coverslip No . 1 . 5 , 20mm Glass Diameter MatTek P35G - 1 . 5 - 20 - C 500cm 2 Square TC - treated Culture Dish Corning 431110 Cell Scrapers and Lifters Corning 3008 ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 . e1 – e7 , January 18 , 2024 e3 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article 100 U / ml PenStrep , 3 m g / ml AlbuMAX (cid:3) II , 1x MEM NEAA , 1mM Sodium pyruvate , 1mM L - glutamine ( all from Thermo Fisher Scien - tiﬁc ) , 0 . 1 m M 2 - Mercaptoethanol ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1mM MEK inhibitor ( PD0325910 , Stemgent ) , 3mM GSK3 b inhibitor ( CHIR99021 , Stemgent ) and 100 U / ml LIF ( Leukemia Inhibitory Factor , EMD Millipore ) . All the ﬂasks or petri dishes were coated with 5 m g / ml poly - Lornithine ( PLO , Sigma ) in 1x PBS buffer in 37 (cid:4) C for more than 5 hours , followed by 5 m g / ml Laminin ( VWR ) in 1x PBS buffer with > 5 hours incubation in 37 (cid:4) C to prepare for stem cell culture . The cells were grown in a 37 (cid:4) C incubator maintaining 5 % CO 2 in a water - saturated atmosphere . Cell culture media were exchanged every 24 hours . Pluripotency of mESC was checked period - ically by alkaline phosphatase ( AP ) expression level using Alkaline Phosphatase Live Stain Kit ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ) , and by cell phenotype . mESC cell line engineering Crispr - cas9 editing of endogenous RNA Pol II and Med19 with Dendra2 or Halo sgRNAs targeting + / - 100 bps around the start codons of the Rbp1 and Med19 genes were designed using the benchling CRISPR tool , and cloned into px330 . Repair templates are synthesized through GeneArt services by ThermoFisher . We used the same plas - mids and followed a previously published protocol for endogenous RNA Pol II and Mediator tagging . 16 Generating Sox2 - T2A - PuroR - 24xMS2 Cell Line A repetitive DNA region encoding 24 MS2 stem loop repeats ( 24xMS2 ) was knocked into the 3’ untranslated region ( UTR ) of the endogenous mouse SRY - box 2 ( Sox2 ) using a CRISPR / Cas9 system by cleaving a DNA region after Sox2 exon 1 ( ENSMUSG00000074637 ) . A single - guide RNA ( TGGCCGAATGATTAATAACG ) was inserted to pSpCas9 ( BB ) - 2A - Puro ( PX459 ) V2 . 0 ( a gift from Feng Zhang ( Addgene plasmid # 62988 ; http : / / n2t . net / addgene : 62988 ; RRID : Addgene _ 62988 ) ) . Sox2 - T2A - PuroR - 24xMS2 repair template plasmid was engineered as reported previously . 28 The middle of homology arms of around 800 base - pairs on each side of the cleavage site contains a DNA region encoding T2A - PuroR - 24xMS2 . The circular repair template plasmid and the sgRNA - Cas9 plasmid were co - transfected into mESCs with a ratio of 3 to 2 . Three days after transfection , cells were selected by puromycin ( 2 ug / ml ) incubation for 7 days . Then , single cells were sorted by FACS . One or two weeks after FACS , surviving sorted cells were incubated with 100 nM JF646 - SNAPtag ligand for 10 min and washed for 30 min , and imaged by microscope to select cells showing vivid MS2 foci in nucleus . Stable Expression of NLS - MCP - SNAP in ES cell lines EF1a - NLS - 2xMCP - SNAP plasmid was engineered as reported previously . This plasmid was transfected using Lipofectamin 3000 ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , L3000001 ) into mouse embryonic stem cells with 70 - 80 % conﬂuency in a 6 - well . One day after transfec - tion , half of the cells were transferred to T75 for growth . Three days after transfection , cells were ﬁrstly split using TrypLE ( Thermo Fischer Scientiﬁc , 12605010 ) and centrifuged down at 900 rpm for 2 min . After removing supernatant , cells were incubated with 100 nM JF646 - SNAPtag ligand ( A gift from L . D . Lavis ( HHMI , Janelia ) ) for 10 min and washed for 15 min . Then , single cells with pos - itive JF646 signals were sorted into a 96 - well plate by FACS . One or two weeks after FACS , surviving sorted cells were transferred into glass - bottom imaging dishes ( Mattek , P35 - 1 . 5 - 20 - C ) and incubated with 100 nM JF646 - SNAPtag ligand for 10 min for micro - scope test . Under 642 nm illumination , only cells showing stable JF646 signals were selected for the further experiments . Crispr - cas9 editing of endogenous Smc3 with FKBP12 F36V sgRNA targeting ± 100 bps around the stop codon of the Smc3 gene ( ENSMUST00000025930 ) was designed using the benchling CRISPR tool , and cloned into px330 ( gRNA sequence : GTAGAAGACGATACCACGCA ) . Repair templates are synthesized through GeneArt services by ThermoFisher . Cells were cultured on 6 - well dishes to a conﬂuency of 70 % - 80 % , and the circular repair tem - plate plasmid containing homology arms of Smc3 and FKBP12 F36V - HA - P2A - BFP and the sgRNA - Cas9 plasmid were co - transfected into mESCs with a ratio of 3 to 2 . Three days after transfection , single cells were sorted by FACS on BFP positive signals . One or two weeks after FACS , surviving sorted cells were tested by genomic DNA extraction and PCR , followed by western blot to check the dTAG degradation efﬁciency . Crispr - cas9 editing of deletion of CTCF / E - 2 , E + 15 , and SCR sites sgRNAs targeting CTCF / E - 2 , E + 15 and SCR regions were designed and cloned into px330 . Repair templates are synthesized through GeneArt services by ThermoFisher . Cells were cultured on 6 - well dishes to a conﬂuency of 70 % - 80 % , and the circular repair tem - plate plasmid containing homology arms of sequences ± 800 bps ﬂanking the designed deletion sites and a blasticidin selection marker driven by the EF1alpha promoter , and two sgRNA plasmids targeting the 5’ and 3’ region of the designed deletion site were transfected into the 6 - well . The next day , cells were splitted into T75 ﬂasks and grow for two more days before adding 5ug / ml blasticidin for selection . The clones were under selection for a week and then sorted into monoclones by FACS and subsequently genotyped by PCR . The genomic coordinates for each designed deletion are : D CTCF / E - 2 ( chr3 : 34685603 : 34702495 ) , D E + 15 ( chr3 : 34722279 : 34723439 ) , and D SCR ( chr3 : 34786930 : 34819951 ) . The coordinate annotations are referenced to GRCm39 . Conﬁrmation of deletions of CTCF / E - 2 , E + 15 , and SCR sites We designed primers and performed PCR assays to check whether our deletions are as desired ( Figure S6 ) . In each cell line , we ex - tracted the genomic DNA using standard NEB genomic DNA preparation kit and performed three tests ( left junction PCR , right junc - tion PCR and zygosity test ) . The primer sequences are listed here : P1 ( gaagttcagaggcatcttcag ) , P2 ( gccagctgccgcagcagcagcag ) , P3 ( gggggaccttgtgcagaactcg ) , P4 ( ccttccactctcttgttggaac ) , P5 ( cag tttgtaaggacaatgag ) , P6 ( ccttctgagaacattatcgag ) , P7 ( cggcagtcccctaagctttg ) , P8 ( cgtagtctgttgtcctaagc ) , P9 ( gcccaaactggcttgtacctc ) , P10 ( cccctagtacttccaagtagc ) , P11 ( gataaaccaccccatatata ) . ll e4 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 . e1 – e7 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article For CTCF / E - 2 deletion , P1 / P2 were used for left junction PCR , and P3 / P4 were used for right junction PCR . The expected band lengths are 879bp and 995bp respectively . To test zygosity , we used two sets of primers P1 / P4 and P5 / P4 for PCR . For homozygous deletion , we expect a band of 1 . 8kb in P1 / P4 PCR , and no band in P5 / P4 PCR . For E + 15 deletion , P6 / P2 were used for left junction PCR , and P3 / P7 were used for right junction PCR . The expected band lengths are 827bp and 854bp respectively . To test zygosity , we ﬁrst used primers P6 / P7 for PCR . Since the deleted region is replaced with the blasticidin marker with a very similar length , we carried an additional NdeI digestion to differentiate from the non - deleted allele if it’s heterozygous deletion . For homozygous deletion , we expect a band of 1 . 8kb in P6 / P7 PCR , and the puriﬁed 1 . 8kb band should be digested into 1 . 5kb and 300bp without remaining 1 . 8kb . If heterozygous deletion , there should be digested bands 1 . 5kb and 300bp , and also the remaining 1 . 8kb . For SCR deletion , P8 / P2 were used for left junction PCR , and P3 / P9 were used for right junction PCR . The expected band lengths are 1049bp and 1061bp respectively . To test zygosity , we used two sets of primers P8 / P9 and P10 / P11 for PCR . For homozygous deletion , we expect a band of 1853bp in P8 / P9 PCR , and no band in P10 / P11 PCR . If it’s heterozygous deletion , there is a band of 1853 bp in P8 / P9 PCR and also a band of 285 bp in P10 / 11 PCR . We were only able to get heterozygous deletion for SCR , possibly due to lethality after SCR deletion in 2i culturing condition . CuO array insertion by Bxb1 and PhiC31 integrases For integration of the CuO array 5Kb downstream of Sox2 control region , we followed the strategy by Alexander et al . ( Figure S2E ) . 34 We ﬁrst transfected 1ug of a px458 plasmid containing the gRNA sequence ( GTAAGCTATCTCATTGCCCG ) together with 1 . 5ug of a doner ssDNA repair template containing Bxb1 attp sequence through lipofectamine . After three days of transfection , cells were FACS sorted into monolones in 96 - well plate and later checked by gDNA PCR test . The selected clone was then transfected with 2 . 5 ug of a plasmid bearing the Bxb1 / attB sequence for homologous recombination , the 144X CuO repeats and a puromycin resistance cassette ﬂanked by loxp sites which can be ﬂopped upon expression of Cre protein . The cells were grown for three days and selected under 4ug / ml puromycin for a week before FACS sorting . The monoclones were then checked with PCR as well as imaging after another transfection of UBCpr - CymR - EGFP plasmid ( Figure S2F ) . The correct monoclone which contains the 144X CuO array was then transfected with a plasmid expressing Cre protein to pop out puromycin selection cassette in order to reduce the effect of long insertion next to the Sox2 SCR region . Antibody staining of nuclear speckles Cells were seeded on the Mattek imaging dish a day before , and incubated with 100nM JF549 Halo ligand to stain the Mediator or Pol II clusters for 90 min and washed with 2i media , followed by 30 min incubation in 2i media without ligands . Cells growing on the im - aging dishes were gently washed three times with ice - cold 1x PBS , followed by 4 % PFA for 10 min at room temperature . After three times washing with ice - cold 1x PBS , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 25 % Triton X - 100 in 1x PBS for 5 min at room temperature . After three times washing with ice - cold 1x PBS , cells were incubated with 2 % ( w / v ) BSA in 1x PBS at 4 (cid:4) C for 1 hour , followed by incubation with Anti - SC35 primary antibody ( 1 : 200 dilution ) in 2 % BSA at 4 (cid:4) C overnight . After three times washing with ice - cold 1x PBS , cells were incubated with Goat Anti - Mouse IgG H & L ( Alexa Fluor (cid:2) 647 ) secondary antibody ( 1 : 1000 dilution ) in 2 % BSA 4 (cid:4) C for 1 hour , followed by three times washing with ice - cold 1x PBS for imaging . We note that SRRM2 ( Serine / arginine repetitive matrix protein 2 ) is the primary target of mAb SC35 , 59 which is a marker for nuclear speckles . Live - cell Photoactivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) Live cell PALM imaging was carried out as described before . 16 mESCs used for live cell PALM imaging was derived from R1 back - ground , with Sox2 gene tagged by 24 repeats of MS2 at its 3’ UTR , Rpb1 tagged with Dendra2 at its N terminal , EF1 a - NLS - MCP - SNAP stably expressed in the cell , and both alleles of SMC3 tagged with a degradation sensitive FKBP F36V tag . Cells were simulta - neously illuminated with 1 . 3 W / cm2 near UV light ( 405nm ) for photo - conversion of Dendra2 and 2 . 1 kW / cm2 ( 561nm ) for ﬂuorescence detection with an exposure time of 50ms . We acquired images of Dendra2 - RNA Pol II for 120s ( 2400 frames ) for quantiﬁcation of RNA Pol II clusters . For dual color imaging , cells were incubated with 100nM JF646 SNAP ligand for 90 min and washed with 2i media , followed by 30 min incubation in 2i media without JF646 - SNAPTag ligands , to wash out unbound SNAP ligands before ﬂuorescence imaging in L - 15 medium . We acquired a snapshot of MS2 channel with 642nm excitation with a power intensity of 2 . 5 kW / cm2 and quickly switched to simultaneous 405 / 561 imaging for PALM . For cohesin depletion experiments , DMSO or dTAG13 ( 500nM ) was added together with the dyes during the staining process and kept in L - 15 during imaging to maintain the degradation condition . Considering the staining and image acquisition time , the total treatment time of dTAG13 is four hours . Lattice light sheet imaging Cells were plated on 35mm MatTek imaging dishes ( No . 1 . 5 coverslip , coated with PLO and laminin ) one day before the experiment , and reach the 70 - 80 % conﬂuency next day . Cells were incubated with 100nM JF646 - SNAP dye and JF549 - Halo dye for 90 min and washed with 2i media , followed by 30 min incubation in 2i media without JF646 - HaloTag ligands , to wash out unbound SNAP ligands before ﬂuorescence imaging in L - 15 medium . Directly before imaging , the medium was changed to L - 15 medium . For Cohesin deple - tion experiments , DMSO or dTAG13 ( 500nM ) was added together with the dyes during the staining process and kept in L - 15 during imaging to maintain the degradation condition . Considering the staining and image acquisition time , the total treatment time of dTAG13 is four hours in the cohesin depletion condition . Data were acquired on a ZEISS Lattice Lightsheet 7 microscope , using light - sheet Sinc3 30x1000 . Excitation wavelengths were 561nm and 640nm for two color experiments , and 488nm / 561nm / 640nm for three color experiments . The emission ﬁlter was set to the following wavelengths : 420 – 470 , 503 – 546 , 576 – 617 , 656 – 750 . 3D Im - age stacks were acquired by moving the sample stage through the light sheet with a step size of 0 . 3 m m , and time interval between ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 . e1 – e7 , January 18 , 2024 e5 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article each 3D scan is 30s . Total image acquisition time is 20 - 30min . The laser power was set at 8 % for 488nm illumination , 40 % for 561nm laser , and 40 % for the 642nm . Pixel size is 145nm . Structured illumination microscopy Cells were plated on 35mm MatTek imaging dishes as described above . Cells were incubated with 100nM JF646 - SNAP dye and JF549 - Halo dye for 90 min and washed with 2i media , followed by 30 min incubation in 2i media without JF646 - HaloTag ligands , to washout unbound SNAP ligands before ﬂuorescence imaging in L - 15 medium . Cells were then imaged with the Zeiss Elyra7 lattice SIM , 2 and the laser intensity of 488nm , 561nm , and 642nm are 2 % , 4 % , and 2 % respectively with an exposure time of 100ms . The SIM pattern used is 27 . 5 m m ( 488nm channel ) , 27 . 5 m m ( 561nm channel ) , and 32 m m ( 642nm channel ) with 13 phases . A z - stack of 11 slices with 0 . 3 m m interval was acquired for each region of interest . Images were analyzed using the standard Zeiss SIM processing algorithm and projected in xy with maximum intensity . Objects were then identiﬁed in Fiji and the size of the condensate was calcu - lated as the average Feret’s diameter ( mean diameter between the shortest and longest axis ) . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS tcPALM analysis Super - resolution images were reconstructed and analyzed using MTT 60 and qSR . 61 We generated a rendered super - resolution im - age by placing Gaussian peaks with spread corresponding to the localization accuracy ( 50 nm ) at the position of single molecule localizations . We then identiﬁed clusters in PALM images using qSR . To localize MS2 spots , we subtracted background ( Median ﬁltered original image with 5 pixel radius and subtract Gaussian ﬁltered image with 9 pixel radius ) and adjusted the contrast to remove ﬂuorescence background in the nucleus which is higher than background in the cytoplasm . We resized super - resolution images and merged with Sox2 MS2 channel in Fiji . The distance is calculated as the distance between the centroid of the Sox2 MS2 nascent transcription site and the centroid of the nearest Pol II cluster . Nascent RNA transcript level is quantiﬁed by dividing the integrated intensity of MS2 spot divided by the mean integrated intensity of all the single mRNAs . Quantiﬁcation of burst size , burst frequency , total fraction of mRNA We quantiﬁed the burst size in each single cell as the count of mRNA produced at the time when tcPALM images were taken . We ﬁrst identiﬁed the nascent Sox2 transcription spot ( brightest spot in the nucleus ) , and measured the integrated intensity inside a 7x7 pixel square window centered at the spot . Background intensity per pixel was calculated by subtracting integrated intensity of a larger 9X9 window centered at the spot with the integrated intensity of the 7X7 window and then divided by the number of pixels in the square ring . The spot intensity is then calculated as the total integrated intensity within the 7X7 window minus total background intensity within the 7X7 window . The same quantiﬁcation is done for single mRNAs in the cytoplasm . We averaged all integrated intensity of single RNAs to get a mean integrated intensity . Burst size is then calculated by dividing the integrated intensity of MS2 spot by the mean integrated intensity of single mRNAs . We calculate burst frequency as the fraction of bursting events occurred with a proximal or distal cluster in our tcPALM data . The total fraction of mRNA produced in proximal is calculated as the integrated total number of mRNA from proximal data points ( < 1 m m ) divided by the integrated total number of mRNA from all data points . The total fraction of mRNA produced in distal is calculated as the integrated total number of mRNA from distal data points ( > 1 m m ) divided by the integrated total number of mRNA from all data points . Condensate size measurement In all cell lines , we measured the Mediator condensate sizes in Fiji using the structured illumination microscopy data . We used both CuO labels and bursting Sox2 mRNA signals as indications to identify the nearest condensate to both CuO and Sox2 locus . We manually identiﬁed the nearest Mediator condensate that is within 3 m m from CuO and Sox2 locus , and measured the minimum and maximum Feret’s diameter of that condensate region , and calculated the average between minimum and maximum Feret’s diameter to get the condensate diameter measurement . For the enhancer deletion cell lines , more data were taken since the fraction of bursting cells with a Sox2 mRNA signal is reduced . Lattice light sheet imaging analysis Maximum intensity projections were created in ZEISS Zen Blue software . Regions of interest around individual cells , which were manually identiﬁed to show a burst of MS2 signal , were cropped . The data was then bleach corrected by exponential ﬁtting of inten - sities in each channel in Fiji , 62 and background subtracted , by subtracting a median ﬁltered image ( radius 9 px ) from the bleach cor - rected image in Fiji . To obtain rough position estimates of CuO , Med / RNA Pol II , and MS2 spots , we used TrackMate in Fiji was used for semi - auto - matic tracking , by manually selecting foci and verifying all tracks . 63 These coordinate estimates were used in a Gaussian ﬁtting pro - cedure in Python . A 2D Gaussian i ð x ; y Þ = a exp (cid:3) ð x (cid:3) x 0 Þ 2 2 s 2 x (cid:3) ð y (cid:3) y 0 Þ 2 2 s 2 y ! + c ; ll e6 Cell 187 , 1 – 14 . e1 – e7 , January 18 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article where a is the intensity at the peak and c the background ﬂuorescence , was ﬁtted ( using scipy . optimize . curveﬁt 64 ) to a 15x15 pixel region around the guessed spot position . The maximum intensity pixel in the center third of the 15x15 ROI was used as the initial parameter for the peak position x 0 , y 0 . The maximum and mean intensity inside the ROI were used as initial paramaters for the peak height a and background c , respectively . After ﬁtting , each frame was classiﬁed as to whether a true signal is present or not , according to manually determined thresholds : d Minimum R 2 of the ﬁt : R 2 > 0 : 12 d Maximum x - and y - variance : s 2 x < 25 , s 2 y < 25 d Minimum relative intensity : a = c > 3 : 4 d Minimum signal duration of 4 , meaning that each signal positive frame has to be followed by at least 3 signal positive frames . For each frame that passes these thresholds , we stored a position as the coordinates of the Gaussian peak x 0 , y 0 , and an intensity I as the integral of the Gaussian I = Z N (cid:3) N Z N (cid:3) N ð i ð x ; y Þ (cid:3) c Þ d x d y = a Z N (cid:3) N Z N (cid:3) N exp (cid:3) ð x (cid:3) x 0 Þ 2 2 s 2 x ! exp (cid:3) ð y (cid:3) y 0 Þ 2 2 s 2 y ! d x d y = 2 p a ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ s 2 x s 2 y : q For frames that do not pass the thresholds , or if the ﬁt was unsuccessful , the intensity is set to a background value , as the mean intensity inside the 15x15 ROI . The coordinates and intensities are then used for further analysis . ll Cell 187 , 1 – 14 . e1 – e7 , January 18 , 2024 e7 Please cite this article in press as : Du et al . , Direct observation of a condensate effect on super - enhancer controlled gene bursting , Cell ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2023 . 12 . 005 Article Supplemental ﬁgures Figure S1 . Quantiﬁcation of Sox2 mRNA burst sizes and antibody staining of nuclear speckles and condensates , related to Figure 1 ( A ) Representative image showing single diffusing Sox2 MS2 nascent mRNA ( magenta box ) in the cytoplasm and multiple Sox2 mRNAs associated at the native transcription site ( MS2 spot , indicated by magenta arrow ) . Scale bars , 2 m m . ( B ) Histogram of intensities of single Sox2 mRNAs shows a gaussian distribution . Mean intensity is at 1 , 382 arbitrary unit . ( C ) Measurement of Sox2 burst size at MS2 spots in 30 cells based on normalization to the mean intensity of 83 single Sox2 mRNAs . ( D ) Antibody staining of nuclear speckles shows the transcriptional condensates are not nuclear speckle condensates . Dual color imaging of Halo - Mediator ( Janelia Fluor 549 ) and anti - SC35 ( nuclear speckle marker , stained by Alexa Fluor 646 secondary antibody ) shows no colocalization between condensates ( Mediator as a marker ) and nuclear speckles . Mediator is shown in green ( left ) , SC35 is shown in magenta ( middle ) and merged images are shown in the right panel . Note that anti - SC35 primary antibody was reported to mainly stain against SRRM2 , a marker for nuclear speckles . ll Article Figure S2 . Quantiﬁcation of condensate sizes ( RNA Pol II and Mediator ) by live - cell SIM , related to Figures 2 and 4 and STAR Methods ( A ) Three - color live SIM imaging of Sox2 super - enhancer ( labeled by a CuO array , ﬁrst left ) , condensate ( Halo - Mediator labeled by JF 549 , second left ) and Sox2 mRNA ( second right ) , and merged ( ﬁrstright ) . Arrowindicates where theactively burstinggene islocated . Both Sox2 allelesof thiscellline istagged andbursting in the example shown . ( B ) Three - color live SIM imaging of Sox2 super - enhancer ( ﬁrst left ) , condensate ( Halo - RNA Pol II labeled by JF 549 , second left ) , and Sox2 mRNA ( second right ) , and merged ( ﬁrst right ) . Scale bars , 2 m m . ( C ) Histogram of condensate ( Mediator as a marker ) size . Condensate size is calculated as the average Feret’s diameter ( mean diameter between the shortest axis and longest axis ) . Mean ± standard deviation is 560 ± 226 nm . ( D ) Histogram of condensate ( RNA Pol II as a marker ) size . Mean ± standard deviation is 456 ± 201 nm . ( E ) Schematic for insertion of a 144 3 CuO array at the Sox2 canonical super - enhancer site by using a three - step strategy developed by Alexander et al . 34 An attpL / R site was inserted 5 kb downstream of the canonical Sox2 enhancer site through CRISPR - CAS9 method . A plasmid containing 144 3 CuO sites and expressing Bxb1 integrase was transfected and integrated the CuO array at the attpL / R site through recombination . A second plasmid expressing the Cre re - combinase was transfected and will cut out the selection marker puromycin through loxp sites . ( F ) Validation of successful 144 3 CuO labeling of the Sox2 super - enhancer region by imaging . Cells were transfected with a plasmid expressing CymR - EGFP which binds to CuO sites and will mark the chromatin locus as a dot in the nucleus . Scale bars , 2 m m . ll Article Figure S3 . CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 , E + 15 , and SCR deletions abolish condensate based burst enhancement , related to Figures 2 and 5 ( A ) Plotof Sox2 mRNAburstsizevs . thedistancebetweenthenearestRNAPolIIclustertothe Sox2 locusshowsnoproximity - basedgeneburstingenhancement in CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 deleted cell line . The threshold to deﬁne proximal and distal clusters is set arbitrarily at 1 m m . The distance is calculated as the centroid - to - centroid distance of the MS2 signal and the nearest persistent RNA Pol II cluster in the rendered image . ( B ) Plot of Sox2 mRNA burst size vs the distance between the nearest RNA Pol II cluster to the Sox2 locus in E + 15 deleted cell line . ( C ) Plot of Sox2 mRNA burst size vs . the distance between the nearest RNA Pol II cluster to the Sox2 locus in SCR deleted cell line . ( D ) Survivalprobability plotof distance - to - RNA PolII cluster distributions inwild - type ( black curve ) , D CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 ( red curve ) , D E + 15 ( blue curve ) , and D SCR ( green curve ) cell lines . ( E ) Survivalprobabilityplotofcondensatesizes ( Mediator ) inwild - type ( blackcurve ) , D CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 ( redcurve ) , D E + 15 ( bluecurve ) , and D SCR ( greencurve ) celllines . Both survival probability plots in ( D ) and ( E ) are calculated as 1 - probability cumulative and plotted in log linear scale . ( F ) Western blot data shows a validation of rapid degradation of SMC3 protein . The left 5 lanes beside protein ladder are from the cell line 1 : Dendra2 - RNA Pol II / Halo - Mediator / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / MCP - SNAP / SMC3 - FKBP12 F36V , andtheright5lanesarefromthecellline2 : CuO ( labeling Sox2 enhancer ) / Halo - RNAPolII / Sox2 - 24xMS2 / MCP - SNAP / SMC3 - FKBP12 F36V . The upper panel is HA tagged Smc3 proteins using anti - HA antibody , and the lower panel is anti - b - actin as a loading control . ( legend continued on next page ) ll Article ( G ) Plot of Sox2 mRNA burst size vs . the distance between the nearest RNA Pol II cluster to the Sox2 locus in control condition without cohesin depletion . ( H ) Plot of Sox2 mRNA burst size vs . the distance between the nearest RNA Pol II cluster to the Sox2 locus with cohesin depletion . ( I and J ) Stack column of frequency of bursting events in proximal and distal cases in control condition ( I ) and cohesin depletion condition ( J ) . ( K ) Boxplot of condensate sizes ( Mediator ) in control condition ( black box with all data points , n = 114 ) and cohesin depletion condition ( red box with all data points , n = 76 ) . Mean and standard deviation is 441 ± 173nm for the control condition and 411 ± 133nm for cohesin depleted condition . ll Article ( legend on next page ) ll Article Figure S4 . Condensate ( Mediator ) dynamically interact with the Sox2 gene loci , related to Figures 3 and 4 ( A ) Left : maximum intensity z projection of a cell imaged using live - cell dual - color lattice light sheet showing colocalization of condensate ( Mediator as a marker , labeled by Halo - JF 646 , shown in green ) with actively transcribing Sox2 gene ( shown in magenta ) marked by MS2 - tagged RNA ( white box ) . Middle : single plane from the z stack . Right : maximum intensity projected image after background subtraction . ( B ) Snapshot images of the condensate ( Mediator ) near the actively transcribing Sox2 gene locus . ( C ) Plotof Sox2 mRNAburstintensity ( leftyaxis ) andthecentroid - to - centroiddistanceofcondensate - to - gene ( rightyaxis ) asafunctionoftime . Scalebars , 2 m m . ( D ) Example traces of Sox2 mRNA burst intensity and condensate - to - gene distances . Data were taken in the three - color labeled cell line , and 8 example traces wereshown . Real - time Sox2 mRNAburstintensityisshowninred ( leftyaxis ) , andreal - timecondensate - to - genedistanceisshowninblack ( rightyaxis ) . Mediator is labeled as a marker of condensates . ll Article Figure S5 . Condensate ( RNA Pol II ) dynamically interacts with both Sox2 enhancer and gene while enhancer - to - gene distance stays rela - tively constant , related to Figure 4 ( A and C ) Snapshot images of three color labeled cell line in time lapse imaging . Sox2 super - enhancer DNA ( SCR ) is labeled with CuO array shown in blue , Sox2 nascent mRNA is labeled by MCP - SNAP ( stained by JF 646 ) shown in red , and RNA Pol II condensates are labeled by JF 549 - Halo shown in green . ( BandD ) Quantiﬁcationofcentroid - to - centroiddistancesovertimeinthetwocells . Sox2 super - enhancer - to - genedistanceisshowninmagenta , condensate - to - gene distanceis shown inyellow , and condensate - to - enhancerdistance is shown incyan . Enhancer - to - gene distance stays at (cid:2) 300 nmand relatively constant , while condensate - to - enhancer and condensate - to - gene distances show a much larger variation , ranging from 200 nm to over 1 m m within 20 min of image acquisition . ( E ) Histograms of centroid - to - centroid distancesof enhancer - to - gene ( shown in magenta ) , condensate - to - gene ( shown in yellow ) , and condensate - to - enhancer ( shown in cyan ) . The mean and standard deviations are 0 . 38 ± 0 . 27 , 1 . 34 ± 1 . 11 , and 1 . 37 ± 1 . 16 m m , respectively . Data were collected from time lapse traces of 31 cells . ( legend continued on next page ) ll Article ( F ) Plotof Sox2 mRNAburstintensityvs . condensate - to - genedistancepoolingalldatapointsineachframeinthethree - colorcelllinerecapitulatestheproximity - based enhancement . 494 total data points were collected from three - color lattice light sheet imaging of 15 cells . ( G ) Boxplots of Sox2 burst intensities in the presence of proximal RNA Pol II condensates ( 418 data points ) and distal condensates ( 76 data points ) using an arbitrary threshold of 1 m m . Black dots outside the whiskers are outliers representing the mostly enhanced burst intensities . Mean ± SEM is 12 , 632 ± 417 for proximal and 4 , 676 ± 251 for distal in arbitrary unit . See also Video S3 . ll Article ( legend on next page ) ll Article Figure S6 . Conﬁrmation of cell lines of CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 , E + 15 , and SCR deletions by PCR and agarose gel assays , related to STAR Methods ( A ) Schematic and gel assay results of CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 deletion monoclonals . gDNA from 5 monoclonals were extracted and PCR tested . Upper panel is schematic of CTCF / E (cid:3) 2 deletion , which is replaced by a blasticidin selection marker . P1 and P2 primers were used for left junction PCR , and expected band length is 879 bp . P3andP4primerswereusedforrightjunctionPCR , andexpectedbandlengthis995bp . Totestzygosity , weusedtwosetsofprimersP1 / P4andP5 / P4forPCR . For homozygous deletion , we expect a band of 1 . 8 kb in P1 / P4 PCR , and no band in P5 / P4 PCR . Monoclonal 1 , 3 , and 4 have the right deletions and tested homozygous . ( B ) Schematic and gel assay results of E + 15 deletion monoclonals . gDNA from 12 monoclonals were extracted and PCR tested . P6 / P2 were used for left junction PCR , and P3 / P7 were used for right junction PCR . The expected band lengths are 827 and 854 bp respectively . To test zygosity , we ﬁrst used primers P6 / P7 for PCR . Since the deleted region is replaced with the blasticidin marker with a very similar length , we carried an additional NdeI digestion to differentiate from the non - deleted allele if it is heterozygous deletion . For homozygous deletion , we expect a band of 1 . 8 kb in P6 / P7 PCR , and the puriﬁed 1 . 8 kb band should bedigestedinto 1 . 5 kband 300bp without remaining1 . 8 kb . Ifheterozygous deletion , there should bedigestedbands1 . 5kb and 300bp , and also theremaining 1 . 8 kb . Monoclonal 2 – 5 and 9 – 12 have the right deletions and tested homozygous . ( C ) Schematic and gel assay results of SCR deletion monoclonals . gDNA from 8 monoclonals were extracted and PCR tested . P8 / P2 were used for left junction PCR , and P3 / P9wereused for right junctionPCR . The expected band lengthsare 1 , 049 and 1 , 061 bp respectively . Totest zygosity , we used two sets of primers P8 / P9and P10 / P11 for PCR . For homozygous deletion , we expect a band of 1 , 853 bp in P8 / P9 PCR , and no band in P10 / P11 PCR . Ifit is heterozygous deletion , there is a band of 1 , 853 bp in P8 / P9 PCR and also a band of 285 bp in P10 / 11 PCR . Monoclonal 2 – 5 , and 8 has the right SCR deletion and are all heterozygous deletions . Red arrows in all panels indicate the expected band length . Red boxes indicate the monoclonals with the desired deletion . ll Article