154 Introduction The skeleton is not only a hard framework to which mus - cles and tendons are attached as a basis for our mobility , and a mineral reservoir susceptible to control by calcium - regulating hormones , it is an organ whose activities are influenced by many endocrine and paracrine signals , includ - ing sex hormones , glucocorticoids , cytokines and growth factors . Recently , it has been shown that the adipocyte - derived hormone leptin affects bone formation through hypothalamic and sympathetic nervous system relays 1 - 3 . Even more sensational , the osteoblast - derived extracellular matrix protein osteocalcin can act in a potential feedback hormonal manner to control energy metabolism 4 . In addi - tion , the hypothalamic neuropeptide Y2 receptors are essential for control of bone metabolism by a peripheral mechanism not yet known 5 . The central nervous control of bone remodeling has been suggested by several authors given the reports during last decades that chemical and surgical denervation results in skeletal phenotypes , not only in loaded bones but also in unloaded parts of the skeleton 6 . Immunohistochemical analyses have shown that the skeleton is more widely inner - vated than previously thought and several neuropeptides and other nerve signaling molecules have been shown to be expressed by skeletal nerve fibers . Skeletal nerve fibers are present in the periosteum , cortical bone and bone marrow and are particularly rich at the osteochondral junction of the growth plate 7 - 9 . Hierarchically organized pathways have been described between femoral bone marrow and the brain and the spinal cord by injecting green fluorescent protein and ‚ - galactosidase expressing pseudorabies virus 10 . Further evi - dence pointing to a role of the nervous system in bone remodeling are the findings that both osteoblasts and osteo - clasts express functional receptors for a wide variety of sig - naling molecules in the peripheral nervous system 6 . During skeletal development , skeletal nerve fibers are particularly abundant in areas of bone formation , and in agreement with this observation , sprouting of nerve fibers has been observed during fracture healing 11 . Using an elegant model of angu - lated fracture healing , Li et al . 12 have shown that the pres - ence of newly formed nerve fibers is particularly abundant in areas with a high rate of new bone formation . In some areas of the skeleton , certain skeletal nerve fibers are associated J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2008 ; 8 ( 2 ) : 154 - 165 Osteotropic effects by the neuropeptides calcitonin gene - related peptide , substance P and vasoactive intestinal peptide U . H . Lerner and E . Persson Department of Oral Cell Biology , Ume å University , Ume å , Sweden Abstract Immunohistochemical phenotypic characterization of skeletal nerve fibers has demonstrated the expression of a restricted number of neuropeptides , including calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) , substance P ( SP ) and vasoactive intestinal pep - tide ( VIP ) . According to the neuro - osteological hypothesis , such neuropeptides can be released and exert paracrine biologi - cal effects on bone cells present close to the nerve endings expressing these signaling molecules . The existence of such inter - play is most convincingly shown by the hypothalamic control of bone formation , in the case of leptin stimulation of hypothal - amic nuclei mediated by the sympathetic nervous system and inhibitory ‚ - adrenergic receptors on osteoblasts . In addition to these receptors , osteoblasts and osteoclasts express functional receptors for CGRP , SP and VIP , which can regulate both bone formation and bone resorption . The evidence for these observations is summarized in the present paper . Keywords : CGRP , SP , VIP , Osteoclasts , Osteoblasts Review Article Hylonome The authors have no conflict of interest . Corresponding author : Professor Ulf H . Lerner , Oral Cell Biology , Ume å Uni - versity , 901 87 Ume å , Sweden E - mail : ulf . lerner @ odont . umu . se Accepted 14 January 2008 U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 155 with blood vessels but in other areas no such association can be seen . Associations with blood vessels have been shown to be dependent on the phenotype of the nerve fibers . Skeletal pain is a common clinical finding in several conditions , which severely affects mobility , rehabilitation and quality of life for many patients . The presence of sensory nerve fibers express - ing calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) and substance P ( SP ) in the skeleton provides one explanation to the clinical observations , but how these nerve fibers are activated and how the network of such nerve fibers are distributed and reg - ulated in diseases such as osteoporosis , osteoarthritis , rheumatoid arthritis , cancer and fracture healing is essen - tially unknown . Besides the possibility that skeletal nerve fibers have important roles in skeletal pain , accumulating evidence sug - gests that signaling molecules present in skeletal nerve fibers may also have a role in bone remodeling . In the present review , the osteotropic effects by CGRP , SP and vasoactive intestinal peptide ( VIP ) , three neuropeptides expressed in skeletal nerve fibers , are summarized . Calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) CGRPs belong to the calcitonin ( CT ) superfamily of pep - tides including also CT , amylin , adrenomedullin and the two recently discovered peptides intermedin and calcitonin receptor - stimulating peptide ( CRSP ) 13 . CGRP exists in two different forms , · - CGRP and ‚ - CGRP . Both peptides con - sist of 37 amino acids and differ only by three amino acid residues in humans . · - CGRP is encoded by the same gene as calcitonin ( CT ) and alternate processing of the CT / · - CGRP transcript is the mechanism regulating the cell specific for - mation of either · - CGRP or CT . · - CGRP , which only has some few amino acid homologies with CT in the amino ter - minal moiety , is widely expressed in nerves in both the peripheral and central nervous system , including skeletal nerve fibers . CT is almost exclusively expressed in parafollic - ular C - cells in thyroid glands . ‚ - CGRP is encoded by a gene distinct from the CT / · - CGRP gene and is expressed in nerve fibers in numerous different tissues . It is not known which is the physiological role of · - CGRP versus ‚ - CGRP expression . Amylin is a 37 amino acid peptide expressed in pancreat - ic ‚ - cells and is almost identical with CGRP in the amino ter - minal end . Adrenomedullin is a 52 amino acid peptide expressed in many different cells and tissues , including osteoblasts and macrophages . In contrast to other peptides in the CT family , adrenomedullin does not have a disulphide bridged amino terminal loop but instead an amino terminal linear extension . Intermedin was identified as a peptide with amino acid homologies to the peptides in the CT family using a phylogenetic profiling approach to analyze the GenBank / EBI DataBank . Intermedin has approximately 20 % homology with CGRP and is expressed in the gastroin - testinal tract and in the pituitary gland . CRSP was identified in porcine brain and thyroid glands and was found to have 60 % homology with CGRP although having several struc - tural and pharmacological features distinct from CGRP . So far , three CRSPs have been identified and the expression has been found in porcine , bovine and canine species , but not in humans and rats . The peptides in the CT superfamily can activate target cells through a complex family of receptor proteins made up by the calcitonin receptor ( CTR ) , calcitonin receptor - like receptor ( CRLR ) and three receptor activity - modifying pro - teins ( RAMPs ) 14 . CTR is a seven transmembrane G - protein coupled receptor , which acts as a ligand binding and signal - Neuropeptide Osteoblast receptors a Osteoclast receptors a Bone formation Osteoclast activity Osteoclast formation CGRP + + ↑ b ↓ c ↓ d SP + + ↑↓ e ↑ f ↑ g VIP + + ↑ h ↓ i ↓ j a The presence of receptors has been indicated by mRNA expression , a rise of cyclic AMP / Ca 2 + i in individual cells , or immunohisto - chemistry . b CGRP stimulates osteoblast proliferation and increases bone mass in vivo . c CGRP inhibits bone resorption in vitro and causes hypocalcemia in vivo . d CGRP inhibits osteoclast formation in bone marrow cultures . e SP has been reported to both inhibit and stimulate bone formation in vitro . f SP stimulates rabbit osteoclast pit resorption area . g SP potentiates RANKL - induced osteoclast formation in bone marrow macrophages . h VIP stimulates ALP ; VIP increases calcium accumulation in bone nodules . i VIP causes an initial , transient , " calcitonin - like " inhibition followed by delayed stimulation of rat osteoclasts ; VIP stimulates calcium release from mouse calvariae . j VIP inhibits osteoclast formation in mouse bone marrow cultures . Table 1 . Receptors for CGRP , SP and VIP on bone cells and their effects on osteoblasts and osteoclasts . U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 156 ing transducing receptor when activated by CT or CRSP - 1 . CTR dimerized with RAMP1 - 3 can function as a receptor for amylin . CTR is not expressed by macrophages / early osteoclast progenitor cells but is induced during osteoclasto - genesis by activation of receptor activator of NF - ÎB ( RANK ) by its ligand RANKL and is abundantly expressed in terminally differentiated multinucleated osteoclasts . CTR is not expressed in osteoblasts . CRLR also belongs to the type II family of G protein - cou - pled receptors and has , overall , 55 % homology with CTR and 80 % homology in the transmembrane moiety . It func - tions as a receptor for either CGRP or adrenomedullin , lig - and specificity depending on to which of the RAMPs CRLR heterodimerizes . CRLR mRNA is expressed in primary osteoblasts and osteoblastic cell lines . CRLR mRNA has also been detected in multinucleated osteoclasts 13 . We have found CRLR mRNA and protein to be expressed also in mononucleated osteoclast progenitor cells 15 . Activation of RANK results in a transient enhancement of CRLR mRNA but not of CRLR protein in the osteoclast progenitor cells . RAMPs are type I single transmembrane proteins with a large extracellular amino terminal domain and a short cyto - plasmic moiety 13 . RAMP1 is a 148 amino acid peptide and the three RAMPs have approximately 30 % amino acid homology . RAMPs are important for post - translational gly - cosylation of CRLR and its translocation to the cell mem - brane . RAMPs were initially found to be able to het - erodimerize with CRLR , but later also to CTR and some other cell membrane receptors , including VIP receptors . CRLR / RAMP1 makes up the receptor for CGRP and CRLR / RAMP2 or RAMP3 acts as a receptor for adrenomedullin . CTR can dimerize with all three RAMPs , thus making up receptors for amylin . CRSP1 can activate CTR but CRSP2 and 3 cannot activate CTR , nor CRLR / RAMPs . Intermedin can activate CRLR / RAMP . Primary osteoblasts and osteoblastic cell lines express all the RAMP mRNAs 13 . Multinucleated osteoclasts have been reported to express not only mRNA for CTR and CRLR but also RAMP2 mRNA , but not RAMP 1 or 3 mRNA 16 , a find - ing hard to reconcile with the observation that multinucleat - ed osteoclasts are responsive to CGRP . At variance , we have found all three RAMPs , both at mRNA and protein level , to be expressed in mononucleated osteoclast precursor cells 15 . Stimulation by RANKL transiently decreases RAMP1 mRNA , but does not affect any of the RAMP proteins all of which could be detected also late during osteoclastogenesis in mouse bone marrow macrophages stimulated by M - CSF and RANKL when very many multinucleated osteoclasts were present . The first evidence that CGRP can affect bone cells was the finding that injection of CGRP into either rats or rabbits resulted in a hypocalcemic response , similar to that caused by CT , studies prompted by the amino terminal homologies between CGRP and CT 17 , 18 . The observations that CGRP , also similarly to CT , inhibits bone resorption in organ cul - tured fetal rat long bones and in neonatal mouse calvariae 19 - 21 supported the view proposed in the initial reports that the hypocalcemic response was due to CGRP - induced inhibition of bone resorption . The inhibitory effect by CGRP on bone resorption is transient , also similar to that caused by CT , a phenomenon called " escape from calcitonin - induced inhibi - tion of bone resorption " . This phenomenon is associated with a disappearance of CTR mRNA , which could be the reason for the escape phenomenon . If a similar disappear - ance of CGRP receptors on osteoclasts is the reason for the " escape from CGRP - induced inhibition of bone resorption " is not known . We have , however , been unable to observe any effects by CGRP on the mRNA expression of CRLR nor RAMP1 - 3 during M - CSF / RANKL stimulated osteoclasto - genesis in mouse bone marrow macrophage cultures , neither in the absence nor in the presence of CGRP , in contrast to the complete inhibition by CT of RANKL - induced expres - sion of CTR mRNA 15 . Interestingly , inhibition of bone resorption in neonatal mouse calvarial bone by cyclic AMP analogues and forskolin is also associated with " escape from inhibition " , which suggests that down - regulation of receptors is not the mechanism explaining the escape phenomenon to CT and CGRP . Also amylin can inhibit bone resorption in organ cultures and isolated osteoclasts and also these responses are transient 6 . In contrast , adrenomedullin does not affect bone resorption in organ cultures . The reason for the lack of effect by adrenomedullin is not known , but seems not to be explained by the absence of receptors ( CRLR / RAMP2 or 3 ) . Recently we have observed that also intermedin and CRSP inhibit PTH - stimulated bone resorp - tion in neonatal mouse calvariae , a response also associated with the escape phenomenon 22 . The effect on 45 Ca release in mouse calvariae by CGRP and by CT , amylin , intermedin and CRSP , can be observed at very early time points ( 1 - 3 hours ) in bone pre - stimulated by PTH for 24 hours , which indicates that the escape phenomenon is primarily due to effects on multinucleated osteoclasts ( Granholm et al . in preparation ) . CGRP , similar to CT and amylin , inhibits the bone resorbing activity of isolated rat osteoclasts , effects associat - ed with ceased motility of the osteoclasts . In contrast to CT , however , CGRP does not affect osteoclast retraction , nor does CGRP cause a rise of intracellular Ca 2 + 23 - 25 . These observations indicate that CGRP and CT act on different receptors , in agreement with the view that CT acts via CTR and CGRP via CRLR / RAMP1 . The effects by CGRP on bone resorption and osteoclast activity are observed at con - siderably larger concentrations than CT which has led some authors to speculate that CGRP , at high concentrations , also may have an affinity to CTR . Most studies on the effect by CGRP and CT on hypocal - cemia and bone resorption have been directed to studies on their effects on terminally differentiated multinucleated osteoclasts . However , the rate of bone resorption is depend - ent also on the formation of osteoclasts . Interestingly , it has U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 157 been shown that CGRP can inhibit osteoclast formation in co - cultures of mouse alveolar macrophages and mouse cal - varial osteoblasts stimulated by 1 , 25 ( OH ) 2 - vitamin D 326 and in mouse bone marrow cultures stimulated by 1 , 25 ( OH ) 2 - vitamin D 327 , 28 . Some earlier studies have reported that CT also has a similar action 29 , 30 . We have recently reported that the inhibitory effect by CT and CGRP on osteoclastogenesis can be seen in highly purified osteoclast progenitor cells stim - ulated by M - CSF and RANKL 22 , 31 . These observations are in line with the finding that mononucleated osteoclast progeni - tor cells stimulated by RANKL express CTR , CRLR and RAMP1 mRNA and protein 15 . Interestingly , the inhibitory effect on osteoclast formation was not associated with any effects on the expression of a wide variety of molecules known to be induced by M - CSF and RANKL and found to be important for osteoclast differentiation , fusion and activity 31 . Although CGRP and CT have well - established inhibitory effects on bone resorption in vitro and in vivo , their physio - logical roles in bone remodeling have been questioned . This has particularly been the case for CT , since thyroidectomy seems to have no effect on mineral metabolism or on bone remodeling . The uncertainty of the role of CT and · - CGRP on bone resorption in vivo became even larger when it was found that homozygous knockout of the CT / · - CGRP gene did not result in any obvious effects on bone resorption , besides the fact that the CT / · - CGRP deleted animals were slightly more responsive to an injection of PTH in terms of hypocalcemia and increased excretion of deoxypyridino - line 32 . Surprisingly , the CT / · - CGRP - / - mice did not have any osteoporotic phenotype , as expected , but exhibited enhanced bone mass , because of a robust stimulation of bone formation rate . There is very little evidence to indicate that osteoblasts express CTR and , therefore , the effect by CT on bone formation is not likely due to an effect by the hormone directly on osteoblasts , but by CTR expressing cells outside the skeleton . Since the CT / · - CGRP null mice are deficient not only in CT but also in · - CGRP , the possibility exists that the skeletal phenotype is due to lack of · - CGRP rather than CT , a possibility not unlikely since osteoblasts respond to CGRP ( see below ) . However , since in vitro and in vivo studies have shown CGRP to be a stimulator of bone formation 13 , · - CGRP deficiency is not likely to be the cause of the enhanced bone formation rate in CT / · - CGRP null mice . The subsequent selective deletion of the · - CGRP gene has also further supported this view since these mice display the expected osteopenic phenotype caused by the decreased rate of bone formation 33 . The fact that mice with heterozygous deletion of the CTR gene ( CTR - / - mice die as embryos before skeletogenesis ) also display enhanced bone mass due to an increased rate of bone formation 34 , further supports the view that CT is not prima - rily a physiological regulator of bone resorption but rather a hormone controling bone formation . Recently , however , it was shown that the excessive loss of bone mass ( 24 % ) observed during lactation in wild - type mice was considerably larger ( 54 % ) in CT / · - CGRP null mice , indicating that one important physiological role of CT is to protect the maternal skeleton against enhanced bone resorption during lacta - tion 35 . In summary , the role of CGRP and the other mem - bers of the CT superfamily peptides on bone resorption is complex and to a large extent still elusive . Interestingly , inactivation of the amylin gene results in mice which display an osteoporotic phenotype due to enhanced bone resorption 34 , which is in line with the in vitro observations showing that amylin is an inhibitor of osteo - clastic activity and formation . It was , however , not anticipat - ed that amylin , which is co - stored with insulin in pancreatic ‚ - cells , could be a physiological regulator or bone resorp - tion . The fact that an identical phenotype could be observed in compound heterozygote mice for CTR and amylin - defi - ciency demonstrates that amylin does not act via the CTR , an observation in line with our finding that amylin can enhance cyclic AMP formation in mononucleated osteoclast progenitor cells not expressing the CTR 15 . The amylin defi - cient mice did not display any osteoblastic or bone formation phenotype , in contrast to the in vivo and in vitro studies showing that amylin is a stimulator of bone formation . Osteoblastic cell lines and primary osteoblasts from humans , rats and mice have been shown to exhibit functional CGRP receptors linked to enhanced cyclic AMP formation 36 - 39 . In line with this observation , the rat osteoblastic cell line UMR 106 - 01 , the mouse osteoblastic cell line MC3T3 - E1 , as well as rat and mouse calvarial osteoblasts have been found to express CRLR mRNA and protein 33 , 40 , 41 ( Granholm and Lerner , in prepara - tion ) . Mouse calvarial osteoblasts not only express CRLR mRNA , but also RAMP1 , RAMP2 and RAMP3 mRNA . It is not known if CRLR and RAMPs are regulated during osteoblastic differentiation , but the fact that CGRP - induced cyclic AMP formation is related to enhanced expression of alkaline phosphatase 37 suggests such a possibility . Activation of osteoblastic CGRP receptors results in enhanced osteoblast proliferation in vitro 42 . Transgenic mice expressing CGRP under control of the osteocalcin promoter display enhanced bone mass due to increased bone forma - tion 43 . These observations , together with the finding that selective · - CGRP null mice exhibit decreased bone mass due to reduced bone formation rate 33 , suggest that · - CGRP has a physiological role as a stimulator of bone formation . It is likely that it is · - CGRP expressed in skeletal nerve fibers , which are crucial for its role in bone formation , although this remains to be proven . Sprouting of CGRP - expressing nerve fibers have been demonstrated during fracture healing and suggested to be involved in the anabolic response 12 , a view supported by the observation that capsaicin treatment , destroying CGRP - expressing nerve fibers , is associated with decreased bone mass 44 . Mice with deletion of the · - CGRP gene still express ‚ - CGRP and it will be important to know the skeletal phenotype of ‚ - CGRP knockout mice and also that of · - CGRP - / - / ‚ - CGRP - / - mice to gain more insight into the role of CGRP in bone remodeling . U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 158 Substance P SP is an 11 amino acid peptide which is widely distributed in the peripheral and central nervous system 45 , 46 . SP belongs to the tachykinin family also including neurokinin A ( NKA ) , NKB , neuropeptide K and neuropeptide Á . The tachykinins act via three distinct receptor subtypes , the neurokinin - 1 receptor ( NK 1 - R ) , NK 2 - R and NK 3 - R and SP has the largest affinity for the NK 1 - R . SP is synthesized in dorsal root gan - glions and is expressed in terminal nerve endings where it is released through axon reflexes . Interestingly , SP is often co - expressed with CGRP in sensory nerves . SP is known to be involved in many physiological and pathophysiological processes including vasodilation , extravasation , smooth mus - cle contraction , pain transmission and angiogenesis . Release of SP can result in neurogenic inflammation and , as summa - rized here , SP has also been suggested to be involved in bone remodeling . SP - positive nerve fibers have been demonstrated in vari - ous locations in the skeleton , including the periosteum , bone marrow , epiphyseal growth plate , subchondral bone , ligaments and the synovium , using immunohistochemical analysis 47 . The expression of receptors for SP in osteoblasts is controversial since NK 1 - R has been immunolocalized in rat bone osteoblasts 48 , but it was not possible to demon - strate NK 1 - R in primary human osteoblasts or osteosarco - ma cell lines using RT - PCR 49 . Functional receptors for SP have , however , been demonstrated as assessed by enhanced bone colony formation 50 . Interestingly , Goto et al . 51 , recent - ly reported that rat calvarial osteoblasts , at an early stage of differentiation , do not express NK 1 - R , but that NK 1 - R mRNA and protein could be demonstrated when the osteoblasts were more differentiated along the osteoblastic cell line , similar to what has been shown for the VPAC 1 receptors 52 . The addition of SP to the rat calvarial osteoblasts enhanced mineralized bone noduli formation and the expression of cbfa1 , osteocalcin and type I collagen , effects inhibited by two different NK 1 - R antagonists ( span - tide , FK888 ) . In contrast , Azuma et al . 53 have reported that SP inhibits bone noduli formation in rat calvarial osteoblast cultures and the expression of bone sialoprotein and osteo - calcin . Using rat bone marrow stromal cells , it has been shown that SP causes a small stimulation of thymidine incorporation and a strong inhibition of calcium accumula - tion in bone noduli , associated with a small decrease of alkaline phosphatase activity 54 . Thus , osteoblasts , at least more terminally differentiated cells , seem to express func - tional receptors for SP , although it is still controversial if activation of these leads to enhanced or decreased bone for - mation . In multinucleated rat osteoclasts , NK 1 - R has been demon - strated both on the cell membrane and in the cytoplasm 48 . The fact that SP causes an acute rise of intracellular calcium in isolated rabbit osteoclasts shows that functional SP recep - tors are expressed by terminally differentiated osteoclasts 55 . This view is further supported by the finding that SP enhances the bone resorbing activity of such isolated osteo - clasts . SP can also stimulate bone resorption in cultured neonatal mouse calvarial bones 56 , which may be due either to enhanced osteoclast formation and / or increased osteoclast activity . If the expression of NK 1 - R is regulated during osteo - clastogenesis is not known but the fact that SP has been shown to potentiate the osteoclastogenic response to RANKL 57 , an effect associated with increased translocation of the NF - ÎB subunit p65 from the cytosol to the nuclei in osteoclast progenitor cells 57 , indicate that also mononuclear osteoclast precursor cells express receptors for SP . If SP also may be involved in osteoclast formation by affecting the RANKL / OPG ratio in bone marrow stromal cells or periosteal osteoblasts is not known , but not unlikely since SP can enhance RANKL and decrease OPG expression in rat synovial cells 58 . Interestingly , experimental spinal cord injury in rats results in an osteoporotic phenotype in proximal tibi - ae due to enhanced osteoclastic resorption which is associat - ed with a significant increase of SP - immunoreactive nerve fibers 59 , in line with the in vitro observations that SP can enhance osteoclast activity . Polyethylene particle - induced local osteolysis in mouse calvarial bones in vivo , used as an experimental model of aseptic loosening of joint replacements , results in an increased number of osteoclasts and decreased bone vol - ume . Interestingly , the responses were significantly reduced in SP null mice 60 , suggesting the possibility that SP may have a role in particle - induced inflammatory bone loss in patients with loose joint prosthesis . The presence of SP immunoreac - tive nerve fibers in the interface membrane present in aspet - ically loosened prosthesis in humans 61 is in line with this hypothesis . Vasoactive intestinal peptide Vasoactive intestinal peptide ( VIP ) is a member of the VIP / secretin / glucagon family of neuropeptides , which besides VIP currently also includes pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating peptide ( PACAP ) - 27 and PACAP - 38 , secretin , glucagon , glucagon - like peptide - 1 ( GLP - 1 ) , glucagon - like peptide - 2 ( GLP - 2 ) , growth hormone - releasing hormone ( GHRH ) , glucose - dependent insulinotropic polypeptide ( GIP ) , and peptide histidine isoleucine amide ( PHI ; mouse ) / peptide histidine methionine ( PHM ; human ) . All members are structurally related through a highly con - served amino terminal end and are products of six different genes . Although GIP has not been identified as a neuropep - tide , the family is referred to as a family of neuropeptides . It can also , however , be considered a family of hormones because of the presence and hormonal effects of all family members in the gut and other tissues . In 1969 , the presence of an unidentified , potent vasodila - tor was demonstrated in porcine lung tissue 62 . It was also found in porcine gut , from where it was isolated as a vasore - U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 159 laxant peptide 63 . The isolated peptide was named vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and was later shown to be a 28 amino acid protein related to both secretin and glucagon 64 - 66 . After the first discovery as a vasodilator , the presence of VIP was demonstrated in the central and peripheral nervous sys - tems , as well as several neural cell lines 67 , and it has there - after been identified as a neurotransmitter and neuromod - ulator in many tissues . In the brain , VIP is predominantly found in the cerebral cortex but also to a lesser extent in other structures , and it has been shown to regulate neuronal differentiation and survival in an indirect manner primarily mediated by glial cells 68 , 69 . VIP also affects the function of several other systems , comprising the pulmonary , cardiovas - cular , gastrointestinal , reproductive , immune , and endocrine systems 70 - 77 . Besides the neuromodulatory func - tions in the brain , additional physiological effects of VIP are broncho - and smooth muscle dilation , hormonal secretion , increase of gastric motility , regulation of differentiation and activity of many cell types , and anti - inflammatory and immunosuppressive actions through regulation of immune cell function . After the first pioneering study demonstrating the pres - ence of the neuropeptide SP in bone by Grönblad and co - workers in 1984 , many reports followed on detection in dif - ferent skeletal sites in several species of several neuropep - tides , including VIP . Hohmann and colleagues reported that VIP - containing nerve fibers of post - ganglionic sympa - thetic origin were localized in the periosteum , associated with vascular elements of bones from different species 78 . In a study of neuropeptide expression in rat bone nerve fibers , Bjurholm et al . detected VIP preferentially in the perios - teum and the epiphysis . These VIP - containing nerve fibers of uncertain origin were only occasionally associated with blood vessels 79 . In line with these data , Hill and Elde also demonstrated VIP - containing nerve fibers in rat perios - teum . Treatment of rats with guanethidine resulted in a dra - matically decreased presence of VIP - containing nerves in the bone tissue , indicating a sympathetic origin of these nerves 8 . During the 1990s , three different subtypes of VIP recep - tors were cloned . The receptors for VIP belong to the type II family of G protein - coupled receptors denoted the VIP / secretin / PTH receptor family , which also includes receptors for the related proteins secretin , GHRH , GIP , and glucagon , as well as PTH / PTHrP , calcitonin , and CGRP 80 . All receptor family members have a serpentine , seven trans - membrane structure with a long N - terminal extracellular domain with conserved cysteine residues and a cytoplasmic tail that activates G proteins as a result of ligand binding . VIP and the related peptide PACAP share many biologi - cal functions , which can be explained by the fact that they largely use the same receptors . The three receptors are des - ignated VPAC 1 , VPAC 2 , binding both VIP and PACAP , and the PACAP - preferring PAC 1 receptor 81 . All three receptors are present both in the central and peripheral nervous sys - tems and can be pharmacologically characterized by their affinity for VIP , PACAP , and secretin . PAC 1 preferentially binds PACAP but also VIP , although with a 100 - 1 , 000 times lower affinity . Both VPAC 1 and VPAC 2 bind VIP and PACAP with equal affinity , which is a reason for the compa - rable effects of VIP and PACAP in many tissues and cell types . However , the VPAC 1 receptor also binds secretin , a fact that can be used to distinguish between the involvement of the different receptor subtypes in signaling 81 , 82 . In 1983 , three years before the discovery of VIP - contain - ing nerves in bone , Hohmann et al . provided the first in vitro evidence for the presence of functional neuropeptide recep - tors on bone cells , demonstrating that VIP stimulates calci - um release in neonatal mouse calvariae 83 . In osteoblasts , the presence of functional receptors for VIP , linked to enhanced formation of cyclic AMP , has been demonstrated in cells from the human osteosarcoma cell line Saos - 2 and the rat osteosarcoma cell line UMR 106 - 01 37 , 84 , 85 . In addition , VIP has been found to stimulate cyclic AMP formation in isolat - ed mouse calvarial osteoblasts and in the cloned , non - trans - formed osteoblastic cell line MC3T3 - E1 37 , 85 . Our group has characterized the VIP - binding receptors subtypes in mouse calvarial osteoblasts . By comparing the rank order of response of peptides in the VIP / secretin / glucagon family on cyclic AMP formation , we found that PACAP - 38 was 10 - fold more potent than VIP 52 . A similar 10 - fold difference in potency between PACAP and VIP has also been detected in the rat osteoblast - like tumor cell line UMR 106 - 01 86 and in the murine osteoblastic cell line MC3T3 - E1 87 . By using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , we have demonstrated spe - cific binding of VIP , but not secretin , on neonatal mouse cal - varial osteoblasts 88 . Furthermore , mRNA for VPAC 2 , but not for VPAC 1 or PAC 1 , was also detected in these undiffer - entiated osteoblasts . Interestingly , the expression of VPAC 1 mRNA was shown to be differentiation - induced after 12 days of culture 52 . In contrast to our results , Togari and co - workers demonstrated that human periosteum - derived osteoblastic cells and cells from several human osteosarcoma cell lines express VPAC 1 , but not VPAC 2 or PAC 149 . The observed differences in VIP receptor expression in mouse and human osteoblasts may be a matter of species variations or related to phenotypic differences between tumour cell lines and primary osteoblasts . In addition to studies on osteoblasts , the presence of receptors for VIP and related neuropeptides on osteoclasts has also been reported . By using AFM and measurements of intracellular calcium , specific VIP - binding sites on osteo - clasts were found 52 . Further evidence for the presence of VIP receptors in osteoclasts is our finding of mRNA for VPAC 1 and PAC 1 , but not VPAC 2 , in mouse bone marrow osteoclasts isolated by micromanipulation 89 . The presence of functional receptors for VIP on both osteoblasts and osteoclasts suggests that this neuropeptide , localized in nerves in the bone microenvironment , may play an important role as a local mediator regulating bone cell U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 160 function . In osteoblasts , VIP was found to stimulate both the activity and mRNA expression of the bone mineralization - associated enzyme alkaline phosphatase ( ALP ) 90 . This effect was seen in osteoblasts after 6 days of culture , and this obser - vation , together with the absent effect by secretin , indicated that the increased differentiation of committed osteoblasts and the anabolic effects by VIP in bone are mediated by the VPAC 2 receptor , which is in line with our finding that mouse calvarial osteoblasts , at an early stage of differentiation , express VPAC 2 mRNA 52 . The first documented effect by VIP on bone was that of Tashjian and co - workers demonstrating a catabolic effect by VIP on bone metabolism in calvarial bones in vitro 83 . This stimulatory effect by VIP on calvarial bone resorption may be due either to enhanced activity of osteoclasts or to stimu - lation of osteoclast formation . Our group has , using mor - phological studies of isolated rat bone marrow osteoclasts , revealed that VIP treatment causes a rapid cytoplasmic con - traction of osteoclasts along with an associated decrease in motility 88 . Functional studies using an in vitro resorption assay showed that VIP caused a transient inhibition of osteo - clastic bone resorption in devitalized bone slices . When the osteoclast incubations were extended over time and per - formed in the presence of marrow - derived stromal cells / osteoblasts , the osteoclasts escaped from the initial inhibition and VIP caused a delayed stimulation of osteo - clastic pit formation in bone slices . At variance , CT also causes a transient inhibition of osteoclastic bone resorption , which , however , is not followed by a delayed stimulation . The late stimulatory effect of VIP is probably the basis of the first finding that VIP stimulates resorption in calvarial organ culture 83 . When AFM was used to analyze the presence of VIP receptors in stromal cells / osteoblasts , we found that stromal cells / osteoblasts expressed specific binding sites for VIP 88 . These receptors might mediate the indirect bone - resorbing effect caused by VIP , both in the resorption pit assay and in the calvariae . When osteoclastogenesis was studied in mouse bone marrow cultures , VIP did not enhance the number of osteoclasts 91 . In contrast , VIP caused an inhibition of osteoclast formation induced either by 1 , 25 ( OH ) 2 vitamin D 3 or by PTH . The anti - osteoclastogenic effect of VIP is associated with inhibitory effects of these peptides on the 1 , 25 ( OH ) 2 vitamin D 3 - induced upregulation of receptor activator of NF - ÎB ( RANK ) and RANK ligand ( RANKL ) . In addition , VIP counteracts the decrease of osteoprotegerin ( OPG ) caused by 1 , 25 ( OH ) 2 vitamin D 391 . VIP is not only able to inhibit osteoclastogenesis through VIP receptor expression on stromal cells / osteoblasts , but also through a direct effect mediated by VIP receptors on osteoclast progenitor cells . In ongoing studies , we have found that VIP can inhibit osteoclast formation in M - CSF and RANKL - stimulated purified bone marrow macrophage ( BMM ) cultures ( Mukohyama et al . in preparation ) . Similarly , CT inhibits osteoclastogenesis in M - CSF and RANKL - stimulated BMM cultures 31 . This effect is not asso - ciated with any regulation of the mRNA expression of a wide variety of M - CSF / RANKL - induced osteoclastic genes . If the inhibitory effect by VIP on osteoclast formation is similarly associated , without any effects on gene expression , is cur - rently under investigation . In addition to bone marrow cultures , we have also studied the effects by VIP on the expression of osteoclastogenic fac - tors in isolated calvarial osteoblasts . In previous reports , VIP has been shown to stimulate IL - 6 production in stromal cells 92 and in cells from the rat osteosarcoma cell line UMR 106 - 01 93 . We have confirmed these observations using mouse calvarial osteoblast . VIP was shown to stimulate IL - 6 mRNA and protein expression in both a time - and concentration - dependent manner 94 . Furthermore , VIP caused enhanced IL - 6 promoter activity in cells from the osteoblastic cell line MC3T3 - E1 transfected with an IL - 6 promoter construct cou - pled to a luciferase reporter gene . By using several tech - niques , including electrophoretic mobility shift assay ( EMSA ) , we also showed that treatment of osteoblasts with VIP resulted in activation of the cAMP / PKA pathway and increased DNA binding of the transcription factor C / EBP , whereas the DNA binding of the AP - 1 complex was decreased by VIP . In contrast , the regulation by VIP of IL - 6 synthesis did not require activation of the NF - ÎB pathway 94 . In addition to the effects by VIP , PACAP - 38 also increased IL - 6 synthesis whereas secretin did not have any effect , indi - cating that the effects by VIP and PACAP - 38 are mediated by the VPAC 2 receptor 94 . VIP is a well - known regulator of inflammatory cytokine production in several cell types 95 . After our first study show - ing stimulatory effects by VIP on IL - 6 production in murine osteoblasts , we addressed the question whether VIP may interact with known osteotropic cytokines to regulate the IL - 6 production in these cells . Indeed , VIP was found to increase the stimulatory effect by IL - 1‚ , IL - 11 , IL - 17 , LIF , OSM , and TGF - ‚ on IL - 6 production in a synergistic man - ner 96 . Furthermore , VIP also potentiated the IL - 1‚ - induced stimulation of IL - 6 promoter activity in osteoblastic MC3T3 - E1 cells transfected with the IL - 6 promoter / luciferase con - struct 96 . In addition to the effects by VIP on bone cell function , recent studies have demonstrated that VIP also has a protec - tive effect on bone destruction in experimentally - induced arthritis . Treatment of mice exhibiting collagen - induced arthritis ( CIA ) with VIP resulted in delayed onset , reduced incidence and decreased severity of the arthritis , as well as a dramatic decrease of cartilage damage and bone erosion in arthritic joints 97 . Furthermore , VIP decreased levels of IL - 1‚ , IL - 6 , IL - 11 , IL - 17 , and TNF - · , whereas the levels of IL - 4 and IL - 10 were elevated . VIP also decreased the RANKL / OPG ratio , mainly because of increased levels of circulating OPG 98 . In contrast to the effects of VIP on bone cell function and production of osteotropic cytokines by these cells , the effects seen in the arthritis models are believed to be a result of a neuroimmunomodulatory interaction , where VIP regulates U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 161 the proliferation and differentiation of T lymphocytes , as well as pro - inflammatory cytokine production by T lymphocytes , macrophages , and fibroblasts in the synovial tissue . These findings suggest that VIP , in addition to the effects on bone cell function , may also have a possible role as a therapeutic target for treatment of arthritis . In summary , the findings by our group and others demon - strate that VIP affects both osteoblasts and osteoclasts through regulation of cell activity and expression of osteotrop - ic factors , including IL - 6 and the RANK / RANKL / OPG sys - tem , suggesting that VIP may have a unique role in bone metabolic processes by acting as a fine tuner of bone cell func - tion through a neuro - osteological interplay . Acknowledgements Studies performed in the authors laboratory have been supported by The Swedish Research Council , The Swedish Rheumatism Association , The Royal 80 Year Fund of King Gustav V , The County Council of Västerbot - ten , The Centre for Musculoskeletal Research , The Medical Faculty of Ume å University and SalusAnsvar . References 1 . Ducy P , Amling M , Takeda S , Priemel M , Schilling AF , Beil FT , Shen J , Vinson C , Rueger JM , Karsenty G . Leptin inhibits bone formation through a hypothalamic relay : a central control of bone mass . Cell 2000 ; 100 : 197 - 207 . 2 . Takeda S , Elefteriou F , Lavasseur R , Liu X , Zhao L , Parker KL , Armstrong D , Ducy P , Karsenty G . Leptin regulates bone formation via the sympathetic nervous system . Cell 2002 ; 111 : 305 - 17 . 3 . Elefteriou F , Ahn JD , Takeda S , Starbuck M , Yang X , Liu X , Kondo H , Richards WG , Bannon TW , Noda M , Clement K , Vaisse C , Karsenty G . Leptin regulation of bone resorption by the sympathetic nervous system and CART . Nature 2005 ; 434 : 514 - 20 . 4 . Lee NK , Sowa H , Hinoi E , Ferron M , Ahn JD , Confavreuz C , Dacquin R , Mee PJ , McKee MD , Jung DJ , Zhang Z , Kim JK , Mauvais - Jarvis F , Ducy P , Karsenty G . Endocrine regulation of energy metabo - lism by the skeleton . Cell 2007 ; 130 : 456 - 69 . 5 . Baldock PA , Sainsbury A , Couzens M , Enriquez RF , Thomas GP , Gardiner EM , Herzog H . Hypothalamic Y2 receptors regulate bone formation . J Clin Invest 2002 ; 109 : 915 - 21 . 6 . Lerner UH , Persson E , Lundberg P . Kinins and neuro - osteogenic factors . In : Bilezikian JP , Raisz LG , Rodan GA , editors . Principles of Bone Biology , 3rd edition . San Diego : Academic Press ; 2007 ( in press ) . 7 . Bjurholm A , Kreicbergs A , Brodin E , Schultzberg M . Substance P - and CGRP - immunoreactive nerves in bone . Peptides 1988 ; 9 : 165 - 71 . 8 . Hill EL , Elde R . Distribution of CGRP - , VIP - , D beta H - , SP - , and NPY - immunoreactive nerves in the perios - teum of the rat . Cell Tissue Res 1991 ; 264 : 469 - 80 . 9 . Hukkanen M , Konttinen YT , Rees G , Santavirta S , Terenghi G , Polak JM . Distribution of nerve endings and sensory neuropeptides in rat synovium , meniscus and bone . Int J Tissue React 1992 ; 14 : 1 - 10 . 10 . Dénes A , Boldogkoi Z , Horny á k A , Palkovits M , Kov á cs KJ . Attenuated pseudorabies virus - evoked rapid innate immune response in the rat brain . J Neuroimmunol 2005 ; 180 : 88 - 103 . 11 . Hukkanen M , Konttinen YT , Santavirta S , Paavolainen P , Gu XH , Terenghi G , Polak JM . Rapid proliferation of calcitonin gene - related peptide - immunoreactive nerves during healing of rat tibial fracture suggests neu - ronal involvement in bone growth and remodelling . Neuroscience 1993 ; 54 : 969 - 79 . 12 . Li J , Kreicbergs A , Bergström J , Stark A , Ahmed M . Site - specific CGRP innervation coincides with bone formation during fracture healing and modeling : a study in rat angulated tibia . J Orthop Res 2007 ; 25 : 1204 - 12 . 13 . Lerner UH . Deletions of the genes encoding calci - tonin / a - CGRP , amylin and calcitonin receptor have given new and unexpected insights into the function of calcitonin receptors and calcitonin receptor - like recep - tors in bone . J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2006 ; 6 : 87 - 95 . 14 . Poyner DR , Sexton PM , Marshall I , Smith DM , Quirion R , Born W , Muff R , Fischer JA , Foord SM . International Union of Pharmacology . XXXII . The mammalian calcitonin gene - related peptides , adrenomedullin , amylin and calcitonin receptors . Pharmacol Rev 2002 ; 54 : 233 - 46 . 15 . Granholm S , Lundberg P , Lerner UH . Expression of the calcitonin receptor , calcitonin receptor - like receptor and receptor activity modifying proteins during osteo - clast differentiation . J Cell Biochem 2008 ; 104 : 920 - 33 . 16 . Nakamura M , Morimoto S , Yang Q , Hisamatsu T , Hanai N , Nakamura Y , Mori I , Kakudo K . Osteoclast - like cells express receptor activity modifying protein 2 : application of laser capture microdissection . J Mol Endocrinol 2005 ; 34 : 257 - 61 . 17 . Tippins JR , Morris HR , Panico M , Etienne T , Bevis P , Girgis S , MacIntyre I , Azria M , Attinger M . The myotropic and plasma calcium - modulating effects of cal - citonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) . Neuropeptides 1984 ; 4 : 425 - 34 . 18 . Roos BA , Fischer JA , Pignaat W , Alander CB , Raisz LG . Evaluation of the in vivo and in vitro calcium - regu - lating actions of noncalcitonin peptides produced via calcitonin gene expression . Endocrinology 1986 ; 118 : 45 - 51 . 19 . D’Souza SM , MacIntyre I , Girgis SI , Mundy GR . Human synthetic calcitonin gene - related peptide U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 162 inhibits bone resorption in vitro . Endocrinology 1986 ; 119 : 58 - 66 . 20 . Tamura T , Miyaura C , Owan I , Suda T . Mechanism of action of amylin on bone . J Cell Physiol 1992 ; 153 : 6 - 14 . 21 . Yamamoto I , Kitamura N , Aoki J , Shigeno C , Hino M , Asonuma K , Torizaka K , Fujii N , Otaka A , Yajima H . Human calcitonin gene - related peptide possesses weak inhibitory potency of bone resorption in vitro . Calcif Tissue Int 1986 ; 38 : 339 - 41 . 22 . Granholm S , Lerner UH . The members of the calci - tonin gene family of peptides , including recently discov - ered intermedin and CRSP , inhibit both osteoclast activity and formation . J Bone Miner Res 2006 ; 21 ( Suppl . 1 ) : S364 . 23 . Alam ASMT , Moonga BS , Bevis PJR , Huang CLH , Zaidi M . Selective antagonism of calcitonin - induced osteoclastic quiescence ( Q effect ) by human calcitonin gene - related peptide - ( Val 8 Phe 37 ) . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1991 ; 179 : 134 - 9 . 24 . Alam AS , Moonga BS , Bevis PJ , Huang CL , Zaidi M . Amylin inhibits bone resorption by a direct effect on the motility of rat osteoclasts . Exp Physiol 1992 ; 78 : 183 - 96 . 25 . Alam ASMT , Bax CMR , Shankar VS , Bax BE , Bevis PJR , Huang CLH , Moonga BS , Pazianas M , Zaidi M . Further studies on the mode of action of calcitonin on isolated rat osteoclasts : pharmacological evidence for a second site mediating intracellular Ca 2 + mobilization and cell retraction . J Endocrinol 1992 ; 136 : 7 - 15 . 26 . Owan I , Ibaraki K . The role of calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) in macrophages : the presence of func - tional receptors and effects on proliferation and differ - entiation into osteoclast - like cells . Bone Miner 1994 ; 24 : 151 - 64 . 27 . Akopian A , Demulder A , Ouriaghli F , Corazza F , Fondu P , Bergmann P . Effects of CGRP on human osteoclast - like cell formation : a possible connection with the bone loss in neurological disorders ? Peptides 2000 ; 21 : 559 - 64 . 28 . Cornish J , Callon KE , Bava U , Kamona SA , Cooper GJS , Reid IR . Effects of calcitonin , amylin , and calci - tonin gene - related peptide on osteoclast development . Bone 2001 ; 29 : 162 - 8 . 29 . Ibbotson KJ , Roodman GD , McManus LM , Mundy GR . Identification and characterization of osteoclast - like cells and their progenitors in cultures of feline mononuclear cells . J Cell Biol 1984 ; 99 : 471 - 80 . 30 . Roodman GD , Ibbotson KJ , MacDonald BR , Kuehl TJ , Mundy GR . 1 , 25 - dihydroxyvitamin D3 causes forma - tion of multinucleated cells with several osteoclast char - acteristics in cultures of primate marrow . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985 ; 82 : 8213 - 7 . 31 . Granholm S , Lundberg P , Lerner UH . Calcitonin inhibits osteoclast formation independently on tran - scriptional regulation by RANK and c - Fms . J Endocrinol 2007 ; 195 : 415 - 27 . 32 . Hoff AO , Catala - Lehnen P , Thomas PM , Priemel M , Rueger JM , Nasonkin I , Bradley A , Hughes MR , Ordonez N , Cote GJ , Amling M , Gagel RF . Increased bone mass is an unexpected phenotype associated with deletion of the calcitonin gene . J Clin Invest 2002 ; 110 : 1849 - 57 . 33 . Schinke T , Liese S , Priemel M , Haberland M , Schilling AF , Catala - Lehnen P , Blicharski D , Rueger JM , Gagel RF , Emeson RB , Amling M . Decreased bone formation and osteopenia in mice lacking · - calcitonin gene - relat - ed peptide . J Bone Miner Res 2004 ; 19 : 2049 - 56 . 34 . Dacquin R , Davey RA , Laplace C , Levasseur R , Morris HA , Goldring SR , Gebre - Medhin S , Galson DL , Zajac JD , Karsenty G . Amylin inhibits bone resorption while the calcitonin receptor controls bone formation in vivo . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 164 : 509 - 14 . 35 . Woodrow JP , Sharpe CJ , Fudge NJ , Hoff AO , Gagel RF , Kovacs CS . Calcitonin plays a critical role in regu - lating skeletal mineral metabolism during lactation . Endocrinology 2006 ; 147 : 4010 - 21 . 36 . Michelangeli VP , Findlay DM , Fletcher A , Martin TJ . Calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) acts inde - pendently of calcitonin on cyclic AMP formation in clonal osteogenic sarcoma cells ( UMR 106 - 01 ) . Calcif Tissue Int 1986 ; 39 : 44 - 8 . 37 . Michelangeli VP , Fletcher AE , Allan EH , Nicholson GC , Martin TJ . Effects of calcitonin gene - related pep - tide on cyclic AMP formation in chicken , rat , and mouse bone cells . J Bone Miner Res 1989 ; 4 : 269 - 72 . 38 . Thiebaud D , Akatsu T , Yamashita T , Suda T , Noda T , Martin RE , Fletscher AE , Martin TJ . Stucture - activity relationships in calcitonin gene - related peptide : cyclic AMP response in a preosteoblast cell line ( KS - 4 ) . J Bone Miner Res 1991 ; 6 : 1137 - 42 . 39 . Bjurholm A , Kreicbergs A , Schultzberg M , Lerner UH . Neuroendocrine regulation of cyclic AMP formation in osteoblastic cell lines ( UMR 106 – 01 , ROS 17 / 2 . 8 , MC3T3 - E1 , and Saos - 2 ) and primary bone cells . J Bone Miner Res 1992 ; 7 : 1011 - 9 . 40 . Pondel M . Calcitonin and calcitonin receptors : bone and beyond . Int J Exp Pathol 2000 ; 81 : 405 - 22 . 41 . Uzan B , de Vernejoul MC , Cressent M . RAMPs and CRLR expressions in osteoblastic cells after dexam - ethasone treatment . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2004 ; 321 : 802 - 8 . 42 . Cornish J , Callon KE , Lin CQ , Xiao CL , Gamble GD , Cooper GJ , Reid IR . Comparison of the effects of cal - citonin gene - related peptide and amylin on osteoblasts . J Bone Miner Res 1999 ; 14 : 1302 - 9 . 43 . Ballica R , Valentijn K , Khachatryan A , Guerder S , Kapadia S , Gundberg C , Gilligan J , Flavell RA , Vignery A . Targeted expression of calcitonin gene - related pep - tide to osteoblasts increases bone density in mice . J U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 163 Bone Miner Res 1999 ; 14 : 1067 - 74 . 44 . Offley SC , Guo TZ , Wei T , Clark JD , Vogel H , Lindsey DP , Jacobs CR , Yao W , Lane NE , Kingery WS . Capsaicin - sensitive sensory neurons contribute to the maintenance of trabecular bone integrity . J Bone Miner Res 2005 ; 20 : 257 - 67 . 45 . Imai S , Matsusue Y . Neuronal regulation of bone metabolism and anabolism : calcitonin gene - related peptide - , substance P - , and tyrosine hydroxylase - con - taining nerves and the bone . Microsc Res Tech 2002 ; 58 : 61 - 9 . 46 . Goto T , Tanaka T . Tachykinins and tachykinin recep - tors in bone . Microsc Res Tech 2002 ; 58 : 91 - 7 . 47 . Liu D , Jiang LS , Dai LY . Substance P and its receptors in bone metabolism . Neuropeptides 2007 ; 41 : 271 - 83 . 48 . Goto T , Yamaza T , Kido MA , Tanaka T . Light - and electron - microscopic study of the distribution of axons containing substance P and the localization of the neu - rokinin - 1 receptor in bone . Cell Tissue Res 1998 ; 293 : 87 - 93 . 49 . Togari A , Arai M , Mizutani S , Mizutani S , Koshihara Y , Nagatsu T . Expression of mRNAs for neuropeptide receptors and ‚ - adrenergic receptors in human osteoblasts and human osteogenic sarcoma cells . Neurosci Lett 1997 ; 233 : 125 - 8 . 50 . Shih C , Bernard GW . Neurogenic substance P stimu - lates osteogenesis in vitro . Peptides 1997 ; 18 : 323 - 6 . 51 . Goto T , Nakao K , Gunjigake KK , Kido MA , Kobayashi S , Tanaka T . Substance P stimulates late - stage rat osteoblastic bone formation through neurokinin - 1 receptors . Neuropeptides 2007 ; 41 : 25 - 31 . 52 . Lundberg P , Lundgren I , Mukohyama H , Lehenkari PP , Horton MA , Lerner UH . Vasoactive intestinal pep - tide ( VIP ) / pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating peptide receptor subtype in mouse calvarial steoblasts : presence of VIP - 2 receptors and differentiation - induced expres - sion of VIP - 1 receptors . Endocrinology 2001 ; 142 : 339 - 47 . 53 . Azuma H , Kido J , Ikedo D , Kataoka M , Nagata T . Substance P enhances the inhibition of osteoblastic cell differentiation induced by lipopolysaccharide from Porphyromonas gingivalis . J Periodontol 2004 ; 75 : 974 - 81 . 54 . Adamus MA , Dabrowski ZJ . Effect of the neuropep - tide substance P on the rat bone marrow - derived osteogenic cells in vitro . J Cell Biochem 2001 ; 81 : 499 - 506 . 55 . Mori T , Ogata T , Okumura H , Shibata T , Nakamura Y , Kataoka K . Substance P regulates the function of rabbit cultured osteoclasts ; increase of intracellular free calci - um concentration and enhancement of bone resorption . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999 ; 262 : 418 - 22 . 56 . Sherman BE , Cole RA . A mechanism for sympathecto - my - induced bone resorption in the middle ear . Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995 ; 113 : 569 - 81 . 57 . Sohn SJ . Substance P upregulates osteoclastogenesis by activating nuclear factor kappa B in osteoclast precur - sors . Acta Otolaryngol 2005 ; 125 : 130 - 3 . 58 . Matayoshi T , Goto T , Fukuhara E , Takano H , Kobayashi S , Takahashi T . Neuropeptide substance P stimulates the formation of osteoclasts via synovial fibroblastic cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005 ; 327 : 756 - 64 . 59 . Liu D , Li H , Zhao CQ , Jiang LS , Dai LY . Changes of substance P - immunoreactive nerve fiber innervation density in the sublesional bones in young growing rats at an early stage after spinal cord injury . Osteoporos Int 2007 ; 19 : 559 - 69 . 60 . Wedemeyer C , Neuerburg C , Pfeiffer A , Heckelei A , von Knoch F , Hilken G , Brankamp J , Hensche F , von Koch M , Löer F , Saxler G . Polyethylene particle - induced bone resorption in substance P - deficient mice . Calcif Tissue Int 2007 ; 80 : 268 - 74 . 61 . Ahmed M , Bergström J , Lundblad H , Gillespie WJ , Kreicbergs A . Sensory nerves in the interface mem - brane of aseptic loose hip prosthesis . J Bone Joint Surg Br 1998 ; 80 : 151 - 5 . 62 . Said SI , Mutt V . Long acting vasodilator peptide from lung tissue . Nature 1969 ; 224 : 699 - 700 . 63 . Said SI , Mutt V . Polypeptide with broad biological activity : isolation from small intestine . Science 1970 ; 169 : 1217 - 8 . 64 . Said SI , Mutt V . Isolation from porcine - intestinal wall of a vasoactive octacosapeptide related to secretin and to glucagon . Eur J Biochem 1972 ; 28 : 199 - 204 . 65 . Bodanszky M , Klausner YS , Said SI . Biological activi - ties of synthetic peptides corresponding to fragments of and to the entire sequence of the vasoactive intestinal peptide . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1973 ; 70 : 382 - 4 . 66 . Mutt V , Said SI . Structure of the porcine vasoactive intestinal octacosapeptide . The amino - acid sequence . Use of kallikrein in its determination . Eur J Biochem 1974 ; 42 : 581 - 9 . 67 . Said SI , Rosenberg RN . Vasoactive intestinal polypep - tide : abundant immunoreactivity in neural cell lines and normal nervous tissue . Science 1976 ; 192 : 907 - 8 . 68 . Brenneman DE , Hauser J , Philips TM , Davidson A , Bassan M , Gozes I . Vasoactive intestinal peptide . Link between electrical activity and glial - mediated neu - rotrophism . Ann NY Acad Sci 1999 ; 897 : 17 - 26 . 69 . Blondel O , Collin C , McCarran WJ , Zhu S , Zamostiano R , Gozes I , Brenneman DE , McKay RD . A glia - derived signal regulating neuronal differentiation . J Neurosci 2000 ; 20 : 8012 - 20 . 70 . Groneberg DA , Rabe KF , Fischer A . Novel concepts of neuropeptide - based drug therapy : vasoactive intestinal peptide and its receptors . Eur J Pharmacol 2006 ; 533 : 182 - 94 . 71 . Henning RJ , Sawmiller DR . Vasoactive intestinal peptide : U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 164 cardiovascular effects . Cardiovasc Res 2001 ; 49 : 27 - 37 . 72 . Cooke HJ . Neurotransmitters in neuronal reflexes reg - ulating intestinal secretion . Ann NY Acad Sci 2000 ; 915 : 77 - 80 . 73 . van Geldre LA , Lefebvre RA . Interaction of NO and VIP in gastrointestinal smooth muscle relaxation . Curr Pharm Des 2004 ; 10 : 2483 - 97 . 74 . Fahrenkrug J . Gut / brain peptides in the genital tract : VIP and PACAP . Scand J Clin Lab Invest Suppl 2001 ; 234 : 35 - 9 . 75 . Voice JK , Dorsam G , Chan RC , Grinninger C , Kong Y , Goetzl EJ . Immunoeffector and immunoregulatory activities of vasoactive intestinal peptide . Regul Pept 2002 ; 109 : 199 - 208 . 76 . Delgado M , Pozo D , Ganea D . The significance of vasoactive intestinal peptide in immunomodulation . Pharmacol Rev 2004 ; 56 : 249 - 90 . 77 . Gozes I , Furman S . Clinical endocrinology and metab - olism . Potential clinical applications of vasoactive intes - tinal peptide : a selected update . Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004 ; 18 : 623 - 40 . 78 . Hohmann EL , Elde RP , Rysavy JA , Einzig S , Gebhard RL . Innervation of periosteum and bone by sympathet - ic vasoactive intestinal peptide - containing fibers . Science 1986 ; 232 : 868 - 71 . 79 . Bjurholm A , Kreicbergs A , Terenius L , Goldstein M , Schultzberg M . Neuropeptide Y - , tyrosine hydroxylase , and vasoactive intestinal peptide - immunoreactive nerves in bone and surrounding tissues . J Autonom Nerv Syst 1988 ; 25 : 119 - 25 . 80 . Segre GV , Goldring SR . Receptors for secretin , calci - tonin , parathyroid hormone ( PTH ) / PTH - related pep - tide , vasoactive intestinal peptide , glucagonlike peptide 1 , growth hormone - releasing hormone , and glucagon belong to a newly discovered G - protein - linked receptor family . Trends Endocrinol Metab 1993 ; 4 : 309 - 14 . 81 . Laburthe M , Couvineau A . Molecular pharmacology and structure of VPAC receptors for VIP and PACAP . Regul Pept 2002 ; 108 : 165 - 73 . 82 . Usdin TB , Bonner TI , Mezey E . Two receptors for vasoactive intestinal polypeptide with similar specificity and complementary distributions . Endocrinology 1994 ; 135 : 2662 - 79 . 83 . Hohmann EL , Levine L , Tashjian AH Jr . Vasoactive intestinal peptide stimulates bone resorption via a cyclic adenosine 3’5’ - monophosphate - dependent mechanism . Endocrinology 1983 ; 112 : 1233 - 9 . 84 . Hohmann EL , Tashjian AH Jr . Functional receptors for vasoactive intestinal peptide on human osteosarcoma cells . Endocrinology 1984 ; 114 : 1321 - 7 . 85 . Lerner UH , Lundberg P , Ransjö M , Persson P , H å kanson R . Helodermin , helospectin , and PACAP stimulate cyclic AMP formation in intact bone , isolated osteoblasts , and osteoblastic cell lines . Calcif Tissue Int 1994 ; 54 : 284 - 9 . 86 . Kovacs CS , Chik CL , Li B , Karpinski E , Ho AK . Pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating peptide stimulates cyclic AMP accumulation in UMR 106 osteoblast - like cells . J Endocrinol 1996 ; 149 : 287 - 95 . 87 . Susuki A , Kontoyori J , Oiso Y , Kozawa O . Pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating peptide induces cAMP pro - duction independently from vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in osteoblast - like cells . Cell Signal 1994 ; 6 : 11 - 6 . 88 . Lundberg P , Lie A , Bjurholm A , Lehenkari PP , Horton MA , Lerner UH , Ransjö M . Vasoactive intestinal pep - tide regulates osteoclast activity via specific binding sites on both osteoclasts and osteoblasts . Bone 2000 ; 27 : 803 - 10 . 89 . Ransjö M , Lie A , Mukohyama H , Lundberg P , Lerner UH . Microisolated mouse osteoclasts express VIP - 1 and PACAP receptors . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000 ; 274 : 400 - 4 . 90 . Lundberg P , Boström I , Mukohyama H , Bjurholm A , Smans K , Lerner UH . Neuro - hormonal control of bone metabolism : vasoactive intestinal peptide stimulates alkaline phosphatase activity and mRNA expression in mouse calvarial osteoblasts as well as calcium accumu - lation in mineralised bone nodules . Regul Pept 1999 ; 85 : 47 - 58 . 91 . Mukohyama H , Ransjö M , Taniguchi H , Ohyama T , Lerner UH . The inhibitory effects of vasoactive intes - tinal peptide and pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating polypeptide on osteoclast formation are associated with upregulation of osteoprotegerin and downregulation of RANKL and RANK . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000 ; 271 : 158 - 63 . 92 . Cai Y , Xin X , Shim GJ , Mokuno Y , Uehara H , Yamada T , Agui T , Matsumo K . Pituitary adenylate cyclase - acti - vating polypeptide ( PACAP ) and vasoactive intestinal peptide ( VIP ) stimulate interleukin - 6 production through the third subtype of VIP / PACAP receptor in rat bone marrow - derived cells . Endocrinology 1997 ; 138 : 2515 - 20 . 93 . Greenfield EM , Horowitz MC , Lavish SA . Stimulation by parathyroid hormone of interleukin - 6 and leukemia inhibitory factor expression in osteoblasts is an immedi - ate - early gene response induced by cAMP signal trans - duction . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 10984 - 9 . 94 . Persson E , Voznesensky OS , Huang YF , Lerner UH . Increased expression of interleukin - 6 by vasoactive intestinal peptide is associated with regulation of CREB , AP - 1 , and C / EBP , but not of NF - ÎB , in mouse calvarial osteoblasts . Bone 2005 ; 37 : 513 - 29 . 95 . Delgado M , Pozo D , Ganea D . The significance of vasoactive intestinal peptide in immunomodulation . Pharmacol Rev 2004 ; 56 : 249 - 90 . 96 . Persson E , Lerner UH . The neuropeptide VIP potenti - U . H . Lerner and E . Persson : Osteotropic neuropeptides 165 ates IL - 6 production induced by pro - inflammatory osteotropic cytokines in calvarial osteoblasts and the osteoblastic cell line MC3T3 - E1 . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005 ; 335 : 705 - 11 . 97 . Delgado M , Abad C , Martinez C , Leceta J , Gomariz RP . Vasoactive intestinal peptide prevents experimen - tal arthritis by down - regulating both autoimmune and inflammatory components of the disease . Nature Med 2001 ; 7 : 563 - 8 . 98 . Juarranz Y , Abad C , Martinez C , Arranz A , Gutierrez - Ca ñ as I , Rosignoli F , Gomariz RP , Leceta J . Protective effect of vasoactive intestinal peptide on bone destruc - tion in the collagen - induced arthritis model of rheuma - toid arthritis . Arthritis Res Ther 2005 ; 7 : R1034 - 45 .