Professorial collaborations via CMC : Interactional dialectics Marceline Thompson - Hayes a , Danna M . Gibson b , Andrea Towers Scott c , Lynne M . Webb d , * a Arkansas State University , Department of Communication , P . O . Box 369 , State University , AR 72467 , USA b Columbus State University , 4225 University Ave . , Columbus , GA 31907 , USA c University of Central Florida , 1001 Oakwood Rd . , Orange City , FL 32763 , USA d Department of Communication , University of Arkansas , 417 Kimpel Hall , Fayetteville , AR 72701 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Available online 11 October 2008 Keywords : Computer mediated communication Dialectics Qualitative study College teachers Collective behavior Written communication a b s t r a c t We conducted twenty semi - structured interviews with university professors from eight states in the US about their collaborations via computer mediated communication . Our thematic analysis of verbatim transcripts uncovered four dialectical tensions ( an interplay of opposing and contradictory forces typi - cally resolved through communication ) in such interactions : relational connection and personal auton - omy , creativity and the mundane , task and socio - emotional goals , as well as novelty and efﬁcacy . (cid:2) 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Computer mediated communication ( CMC ) can be an effective tool for professors who engage in scholarly collaborations . Previous research documents the positive inﬂuence of both technology ( Teles & Ragsdale , 1991 ) and writing groups on academic writing ( Lee & Boud , 2003 ) . For many in the academy , CMC technology has been pivotal in overcoming hurdles of geography ( Kraut , Egido , & Galegher , 1988 ; Watson , 1994 ) , ﬁnances , and time ( e . g . , time away from the university and personal life ) to facilitate innovative and fulﬁlling research , publication , and consulting activities ( Sch - roeder & Fry , 2007 ) . Professors’ increasing and extensive use of collaborations , especially in research ( e . g . , Casper , Jong , Meyer , & Moller , 2000 ) and the production of written scholarship ( Bayer , 1991 ) , facili - tates the development of knowledge and innovation ( Audretsch & Link , 2006 ) . Given the beneﬁts and proliferation of professorial collaboration , it was perhaps inevitable that the communication surrounding such collaborations would become the object of aca - demic study . Such research could increase the efﬁcacy of such endeavors through increased understanding of the communica - tion surrounding professorial collaboration via CMC . While previ - ous researchers have examined professorial collaboration ( e . g . , Schmitz & Whitworth , 2002 ) , professorial writing ( e . g . , Oliver , 1986 ) , as well as collaborative research ( e . g . , Schroeder & Fry , 2007 ) and writing via CMC ( e . g . , Barile & Durso , 2002 ) , we could locate no previously published study examining the intersection of these concerns , professorial collaborations via CMC . The pur - pose of our study was to undertake a preliminary examination of the interactional issues at play in professorial collaborations via CMC . 2 . Previous research In a recent review of the research on communication and technology , Walther , Gay , & Hancock ( 2005a ) described ﬁve lines of research : multimedia , hypertextuality , packet switching , synchronicity , and interactivity . Most relevant to our study , interactivity was described as ‘‘the extent to which source and receiver are interchangeable roles , exhibiting reciprocal inﬂu - ence” ( Walther et al . , 2005a ) . Walther et al . ( 2005a ) praised recent interactivity research ( e . g . , Rafaeli , 1988 ) that ‘‘sets the stage for conceptualizing serial communications as intertwined and cumulative , as opposed to action – reaction pairs” . Studies of CMC collaborations or virtual collaboration examine such intertwined and cumulative serial communication . Wainfan and Davis ( 2004 , p . 25 ) deﬁned virtual collaboration as ‘‘people working together who are interdependent in their tasks , share responsibility for outcomes , are geographically dispersed , and rely on mediated , rather than face - to - face ( FTF ) , communica - tion” . Professorial collaborations conducted via CMC ﬁt this deﬁnition . Given that many previous studies have examined virtual collab - oration ( e . g . , Barile & Durso , 2002 ) and given that books have been published on the subject ( e . g . , Wainfan & Davis , 2004 ) , why 0747 - 5632 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2008 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2008 . 09 . 003 * Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 479 575 5956 ; fax : + 1 479 575 6734 . E - mail addresses : mhayes @ astate . edu ( M . Thompson - Hayes ) , gibson _ danna @ colstate . edu ( D . M . Gibson ) , andrea4lsu @ cs . com ( A . T . Scott ) , LynneWebb320 @ cs . com ( L . M . Webb ) . Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Computers in Human Behavior journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / comphumbeh undertake an additional study of CMC and collaboration ? Walther et al . ( 2005a ) noted that ‘‘different groups will use technology and communicate in different ways” . Therefore , an examination of pro - fessorial collaborations , rather than collaborators generally , may reveal unique patterns of interaction . Further ‘‘DeSanctis and Poole ( 1994 ) suggested that the impact of technology on groups can be assessed by analyzing how groups tend to structure themselves around social routines that are closely linked to the tasks they undertake as well as to their surroundings or context” ( Walther et al . , 2005a ) . Therefore , we studied CMC in professorial collabora - tions to observe how professors , as a group , enact their social rou - tines , i . e . , their interactions , surrounding one of their professional activities , collaboration . Further , many researchers have studied virtual collaboration by assessing student collaborations ( e . g . , Barile & Durso , 2002 ; Gale - gher & Kraut , 1992 ) or interactions between students and instruc - tors ( e . g . , Paulus & Phipps , 2008 ) rather than examining the actual collaborations of professionals ( e . g . , Kimball & Rheingold , 2005 ) . In contrast , we queried actual professorial collaborators to assess their perceptions of their interactional experiences and their per - ceptions of how CMC inﬂuences both the process of collaboration itself as well as their on - going collaborative relationships . 2 . 1 . Advantages of collaboration via CMC ‘‘New media do not determine social and cultural response but , rather , provide opportunities for , and challenges to , existing social structures and cultural values” ( Jankowski , Foot , Howard , Jones , Mansell , Schneider , et al . , 2001 ) . What challenges and opportuni - ties are created by CMC and how have collaborators responded ? CMC provides an effective medium for task accomplishment ( VanLear , Sheehan , Withers , & Walker , 2005 ; Walther & Parks , 2002 ) such as sharing knowledge about on - going projects ( Skov - holt & Svennevig , 2006 ) as well as an effective medium for connec - tivity ( Quan - Haase , Cothrel , & Wellman , 2005 ) such as the providing of social support ( Burleson , Albrecht , & Satason , 1994 ; Pennebaker & Traue , 1993 ) and comforting ( Caplan & Turner , 2007 ) . Thus , CMC provides expanded opportunities for collabora - tion by offering creative and innovative means to engage in collab - oration ( Ramirez , Walther , Burgoon , & Sunnafrank , 2002 ) . CMC offers collaborators open access as well as the opportunity to im - prove time management and overcome geographical distance ( Walther & Boyd , 2001 ; Watson , 1994 ) , while engaging in a so - cially - created , friendly environment that overcomes many entry barriers common to face - to - face ( FTF ) interactions ( Rheingold , 1991 ; Rheingold , 1993 ) . Moreover , CMC technology helps deﬁne collaborative relationships through the interaction of the collabo - rators ( Walther & Parks , 2002 ) , including how they adapt to the medium itself ( Tidwell & Walter , 2002 ) and the development of new rules appropriate to the collaborative relationships ( Watson , 1994 ) . Finally , CMC’s ‘‘text - only channels allow senders greater control over message construction by providing more time to craft messages and the ability to edit” ( Walther et al . , 2005a ) – advanta - ges that may be particularly salient to collaborators producing written work products . Perhaps CMC’s greatest contribution to collaboration may be its ability to allow collectives to initiate and maintain connections ( Rheingold , 2002 ) , i . e . , collaborators agree to participate in an are - na that allows them to create , change , and maintain a co - con - structed environment to disseminate information ( Rheingold , 1991 ; Rheingold , 1993 ) . Because academic collaborations tend to be text - based , ‘‘introverted participants share their ideas on an equal footing with extroverts” ( Johnson , 2001 ) . Further , the med - ium provides collaborators a ‘‘level playing ﬁeld” by de - emphasiz - ing status and power ( Postmes , Spears , & Lea , 1998 ; Spears & Lea , 1994 ) and by obscuring the more obvious status distinctions or aggressive behaviors that can dominate FTF conversation ( Watson , 1994 ) . Thus , CMC collaboration may appeal to many professorial collaborators by freeing them to collaborate as equals ( Postmes et al . , 1998 ; Spears & Lea , 1994 ) and to share knowledge ( Metatek , 2005 ) . Finally , a pivotal beneﬁt of collaborating via CMC may be that the medium itself provides a less - threatening format for working out details of trust . Research documents the foundational role of trust in collaboration efforts ( Hossain & Wigand , 2004 ) , per - formance ( Paul & Reuben , 2004 ) , assessment ( Newell & Swan , 2000 ) , liking ( Walther & Bunz , 2005 ) , as well as partnership - build - ing and maintenance ( Kramer , 1999 ; Mayer , Davis , & Schoorman , 1995 ; Whitener , Brodt , Korsgaard , & Werner , 1998 ) . 2 . 2 . Challenges to collaboration via CMC Despite these advantages , we acknowledge three obvious chal - lenges to collaborating via CMC . First , CMC lacks nonverbal chan - nels inherent in more personal modes of communication , such as FTF and telephone communication . Indeed , Kato , Kato , and Akahor - i’s ( 2007 ) experimental ﬁndings suggested that the few emotional cues in e - mail messages can lead to misunderstanding . However , ‘‘e - mail and chat forums are developing pseudo - nonverbal proto - cols that more and more people accept as true representations of actual non - verbal signals” ( Carter , 2003 ) . Thus , many people em - ploy emoticons ( symbols that represent emotional states such as a smiley face ) to compensate for the absent nonverbal channel . While the frequency of emoticons varies with content and valence of the message ( Derks , Bos , & von Grumbkow , 2007 ) , the results of one experiment demonstrated proportional equivalency of ex - pressed affect in electronic versus FTF interaction ( Walther , Loh , & Granka , 2005b ) . In contrast , Byron and Baldridge ( 2007 ) reported that the meanings of nonverbal symbols used in e - mail are context bound and vary with recipient’s personality . Nonetheless , Krohn ( 2004 ) speculated that younger computer users may ﬁnd emoti - cons natural and , hence , they may become a normal part of busi - ness in the future . Second , CMC’s lack of nonverbal channels limits its capacity to transmit cues to identity and meaning ( Tanis & Postmes , 2003 ) , thus creating the potential for distrust and misunderstandings among users ( Burgoon , Bonito , Bengtsson , Ramierz , Dunbar , & Mic - zo , 1999 ) . However , the users’ task and interpersonal goals may mitigate such misunderstandings . For example , to pool and judge critical knowledge , collaborators may employ anthropomorphic technologies that simulate humanlike characteristics and promote mutuality . Conversely , collaborators may employ ‘‘leaner” technol - ogies ( e . g . , e - mail ) for more routine tasks that do not require crit - ical judgment . Third , CMC channels , speciﬁcally e - mail , appear more appropri - ate for divisible projects where each collaborator independently completes his / her tasks – tasks which later are combined into lar - ger wholes , e . g . , each collaborator writes a section of an essay . Con - versely , experimental evidence indicates that work teams tend to employ FTF and telephone communication in the planning stages of projects as well as through out integrative projects that cannot be easily divided into segments for independent completion ( Gale - gher & Kraut , 1992 ) . Do professorial collaborators employ varying communication modalities for interactive verses integrative tasks ? 2 . 3 . Purpose and research questions In sum , CMC aids the collaboration process with its potential to transform and inﬂuence relationships among collaborators , in both positive ( e . g . , de - emphasizing status ) and negative ( e . g . , creating misunder standings ) ways . HowdoesCMCinﬂuenceprofessorialcol - laborations per se and the relationships among professorial collabo - rators ? The purpose of our study was to undertake a preliminary M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 209 examinationoftheinteractionalissuesatplayinprofessorialcollab - orations enacted via CMC . To this end , we posed the following two research questions : (cid:2) RQ1 : Professors report that CMC inﬂuences their collaborations in what ways ? (cid:2) RQ2 : Professors report that CMC inﬂuences their collaborative relationships in what ways ? 3 . Method Bradley , Holm , Steere , and Stromqvist ( 1993 ) asserted that CMC researchers ‘‘need to look at the interaction of people at work from both a quantitative and qualitative perspective” . While many pre - vious analyses of CMC collaboration employed quantitative meth - ods ( e . g . , Barile & Durso , 2002 ) , we elected to employ a qualitative methodology in our study for ﬁve reasons : Qualitative methods ( a ) are appropriate for exploratory research ( Cresswell , 1998 ) , ( b ) al - low the ‘‘insiders’ perspective” to emerge , ( c ) provide a ‘‘closer to the actor’s perspective through detailed interviewing and exami - nation” ( Denzin & Lincoln , 1998 , p . 10 ) , and ( d ) ‘‘stress the socially constructed nature of reality” ( Denzin & Lincoln , 1998 , p . 8 ) , as seemed appropriate to the study of communication within a vir - tual reality . ( e ) Previous researchers employed qualitative methods to examine CMC , including but not limited to ‘‘immersion , reading FAQs , or observing” ( Walther et al . , 2005a ) . We employed the speciﬁc qualitative methodology of inter - viewing for three reasons : ( a ) Previous researchers had employed interviewing successfully as a methodology to ‘‘make sense” of on - line communication ( Dervin & Clark , 1999 ) . ( b ) Interviewing al - lows participants to share their perspectives across multiple pro - jects and years , and thus to provide rich data ( Newcomb , 1995 ) . ( c ) In interviews , participants ‘‘are able to point to changes caused by technological . . . factors” ( Newcomb , 1995 ) . 3 . 1 . Participants We interviewed a convenience sample of 20 US professors . The participants , hereafter called professors , were employed at univer - sities in eight states in the US , i . e . , Alabama , Arkansas , Florida , Georgia , Illinois , Mississippi , New York , and Oregon . The sample contained 12 males and 8 females , including professors at various ranks : 9 assistant , 3 associate , and 8 full professors . We inter - viewed professors from four disciples , including biomechanics , physical education , and teacher education , but the majority of the interviewees were professors in communication ( N = 14 ) , who we believed would be very articulate about interactional is - sues related to their collaborations . The professors reported working via CMC in collaborative groups of two to eight colleagues ; however , they typically worked in groups of two or three collaborators . Depending on the stage of the collaborative project , the professors reported interacting via e - mail several times daily or as infrequently as once every three months . The more actively involved they were in producing the work product , the more frequently they employed e - mail to inter - act . Similarly , the professors reported that the amount of time they spend composing a message sent via e - mail varied from a few min - utes to over an hour , depending on several factors , i . e . , the relation - ship between the interactants ( e . g . , professor – student ) , the content of the message ( e . g . , explaining a complex attachment ) , and the stage of the project ( e . g . , asking for edits on an early draft ) . The professors reported using CMC for multiple aspects of collabora - tion , but primarily sending drafts and discussing edits . While one professor stated that ‘‘there is no aspect of the research process that cannot be accomplished via e - mail , ” most reported reserving a few tasks for FTF interactions , including planning the project , idea generation , and addressing conﬂict . 3 . 2 . Instruments Three females with Ph . D . degrees in Communication , hereafter called interviewers , each independently conducted six or seven semi - structured interviews following a common protocol . Follow - ing Kvale’s ( 1996 ) guidelines , we developed an interview protocol consisting of 11 questions about professors’ perceptions of their CMC collaborations . 1 Professors were free to discuss teaching , re - search , writing , and / or consultative collaborations , but virtually all participants discussed research and writing collaborations . After the interviews , we e - mailed interviewees a one - page , written ques - tionnaire to gather information about the participants’ patterns of CMC that we used to describe our participants ( see preceding sub - section ) . The written questionnaire contained four open - ended ques - tions about the CMC they described in the interviews ( e . g . , on average , how often do you use e - mail to facilitate a research project ? Is it several times a day , once a day , a certain number of times per week ? Please provide any characterization you deem appropriate . ) . 3 . 3 . Procedures After receiving approval from Institutional Review Boards at three universities , we pilot tested the protocol during the ﬁrst two interviews conducted by each interviewer ( N = 6 pilot inter - views ) and subsequently reworded only a few items . To ensure consistency , we conducted all interviews during the same three week time period in September 2005 . Interviews followed a semi - structured format , allowing consistency with ﬂexibility dur - ing the interviews , i . e . , as needed , interviewers probed for speciﬁc answers to posed questions by asking additional questions ( Fon - tana & Frey , 1998 ) . Interviewers knew their interviewees prior to data collection , thus facilitating disclosure and metacommunica - tion . We conducted the interviews via telephone to allow a broader geographic sample than FTF interviews and more immediate re - sponses to answers , such as follow - up questions , than CMC inter - views . We audiotaped the 20 – 30 min interviews , producing 155 double - spaced pages ( 3359 lines ) of verbatim transcripts . We undertook a thematic analysis of the transcribed data . Its re - sults ( explained in detail in the ‘‘Results” section below ) prompted us to conduct a secondary analysis to discover dialectic tensions ( i . e . , the interplay of opposing and contradictory forces typically re - solved through communication ) present in the data . Thus , our analysis followed the same two - phase process as previous dialecti - cal analysts ( e . g . , Baxter , Braithwaite , Bryant , & Wagner , 2004 ) : ( a ) discovering themes within the data and ( b ) connecting themes to form dialectics . 3 . 4 . Phase one : identifying themes The interviewers read and reread the interview transcripts pro - duced in their respective subsamples to identify themes . Following Boyatzis ( 1998 ) , themes emerged from the data rather than the researchers imposing a priori conceptual categories on the data . We employed Owen’s ( 1984 ) criteria for identifying themes , i . e . , repetition ( relatively the same language to describe a phenome - non ) , recurrence ( differing language but similar meanings for a phenomenon ) , and forcefulness ( ideas strongly stressed verbally or nonverbally ) . 1 A copy of the interview protocol is available upon request from the ﬁrst author < e - mail address here > . 210 M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 The three interviewers conferred via two one - hour conference telephone calls to discuss trends across the sample . Interviewers revealed themes generated from their respective subsamples and then conﬁrmed or denied the presence of these themes in the other interviewers’ transcripts . We deliberately considered negative evi - dence ( discrepant patterns ) , as per Miles and Huberman’s ( 1994 ) guidelines . Through this analysis and discussion , six themes emerged from the data . To verify the validity of the coding proce - dure and emergent themes , a fourth coder examined randomly se - lected samples of the data comprising over ten percent of each transcript and conﬁrmed that each theme appeared in more than one transcript across at least two interviewers . 3 . 5 . Phase two : identifying the dialectics After we identiﬁed themes , we turned to the analytic task of ﬁnding connections among and within the themes . To begin this secondary analysis , the fourth coder proposed four speciﬁc dialec - tical tensions created by organizing the emergent themes into dia - lectics . Meeting via e - mail , the interviewers agreed that they had observed the proposed dialectics in the interviews they conducted . To test the validity of these observations , each interviewer re - viewed the transcripts of the other two interviewers . Additionally , the fourth coder reviewed the randomly selected segments of each interview . Each of the four coders discovered evidence of at least one entire dialectic ( i . e . , both poles ) in every transcript and evi - dence of multiple dialectics in most transcripts . 4 . Results 4 . 1 . Research question one ‘‘Professors report that CMC inﬂuences their collaborations in what ways ? ” Our thematic analysis uncovered three themes : lim - ited technology , expanded opportunity , and instrumentality . Table 1 provides quotations from the transcripts to illustrate each theme . 4 . 2 . Limited technology When the professors discussed CMC , they primarily referred to e - mail messages to ask questions , transmit edits , and send attach - ments . Only one professor mentioned instant messaging , for example . 4 . 3 . Expanded opportunity Several professors indicated that CMC provided opportunities to collaborate that would have been more difﬁcult or impossible without CMC . Several professors described CMC as ‘‘convenient , ” speciﬁcally noting that CMC ‘‘saves time” as collaborators send e - mail messages to one another rather than scheduling FTF or tele - phone meetings . Moreover , e - mail allowed correspondents to send and answer e - mail messages when convenient . 4 . 4 . Instrumentality While almost all the professors reported using CMC to commu - nicate with collaborators about virtually all aspects of research , they nonetheless characterized CMC as a ‘‘tool” to accomplish instrumental tasks and emphasized that CMC did not replace FTF communication . The professors reported using CMC most fre - quently for sharing drafts and edits . Thus , they characterized CMC as working well for the mechanical aspects of collaboration such as sending attachments . However , most professors identiﬁed FTF discussion as the best process for resolving conﬂict as well as generating unique and creative ideas . 4 . 5 . Research question two ‘‘Professors report that CMC inﬂuences collaborative relation - ships in what ways ? ” Our thematic analysis yielded three themes : nonverbal deﬁcit , relational connection , and personal autonomy . See Table 1 for illustrative quotations of each theme . 4 . 6 . Nonverbal deﬁcit Several professors noted that CMC lacks nonverbal elements . Many professors reported compensating for the lack of nonverbal information by using emoticons or bold letters to stress a particu - lar word or phrase . In addition , several professors reported using language strategically to convey emotion , i . e . , being extremely po - lite , using qualiﬁers when presenting suggestions such as saying ‘‘We don’t have to do it this way but . . . ” Alternatively , some profes - sors stated that because CMC lacks a nonverbal channel , they sim - ply ignored the emotional and / or relational aspects of the statements they composed and instead stayed task - focused by sending e - mail messages they described as short , quick , succinct , and to - the - point . 4 . 7 . Relational connection and personal autonomy Two themes comprised a dialectic addressing the issues of rela - tional connection and personal autonomy . Whereas most profes - sors thought that CMC provided a way to connect with colleagues to collaborate , other professors noted that collaborating via CMC allowed them to work relatively independently . We ex - plored both poles of the dialectic . 4 . 8 . Relational connection Professors reported that they preferred handling disagreements and conﬂicts via FTF . Further , almost all professors stated that they preferred to engage in more personal modes of communication at some point in the project because they desired to connect person - ally with their collaborators . Additionally , many professors stated that they preferred to know their collaborators before working to - gether via CMC . Several professors used the word ‘‘trust” to indi - cate that they wanted to know they could rely on their collaborators to do what they said they would do . In fact , only two professors reported actually completing projects entirely through CMC . In one case , the professor simply collected data and did not participate in the project’s design . In the other case , the professor knew both collaborators for years and believed strongly in the mission of the project . Other professors acknowl - edged that , while it may be possible to conduct a project entirely through CMC , they did not prefer that method . 4 . 9 . Personal autonomy Although many professors preferred more personal modes of communication to CMC , others appreciated the independence that CMC allowed . These professors noted that , with CMC , they set their own work pace , without feeling obligated to engage in ‘‘small talk” or personal conversation . 4 . 10 . Secondary analysis Our analysis yielded six themes with no conceptual overlap . The lack of conceptual overlap as well as the discovery of two themes that formed a dialectic , i . e . , relational connection and personal autonomy , prompted us to consider if our initial results might be reconceptualized as a series of dialectics . Thus , we undertook a sec - ondary analysis to discover any additional dialectical tensions M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 211 among the individual themes of expanded opportunities , instru - mentality , limited technology , and nonverbal deﬁcit . Table 2 dis - plays quotations from the transcripts to illustrate each dialectic . The instrumentality theme contained the oppositional ideas of ( a ) CMC functioning as a tool and ( b ) CMC’s inability to replace per - sonal communication for creative work . Thus , we conceptualized Table 1 Illustrative Quotations of Themes Theme Quotations RQ1 : Professors report that CMC inﬂuences their collaborations in what ways ? Limited technology ‘‘You know with e - mail you can write your ideas down more fully without being interrupted so you get everything out there . And then I think you can get feedback about that text . Similarly , face - to - face you can have . . . the whole text in front of you and work it through , um , in more detail . . . . One time I had a telephone call that worked well . . . She had a text ready with speciﬁc comments and questions” ‘‘More conference calling , e - mail has been the only experience so far ( no blogging or IM ) , we [ consulting group ] tend to be very brief on e - mail . That’s a personality characteristic , though , because I am a slow typer . It’s also because of timesaving issues . ” [ In response to the question how much of the interaction was conducted through CMC versus FTF : ] ‘‘We can’t meet FTF so 50 % e - mail , 50 % phone , no FTF . ” ‘‘I have been asked to collaborate on a book and the other authors and I have already been using email to communicate and will be using Skype to conference call . ” Expanded opportunities ‘‘CMC enables me to work on the project anytime and from anywhere . . . I worked on a project when I was in Graz , Austria for three weeks . I was not hampered by distance . ” ‘‘There was a time early in the 90’s that I would wait for things by mail . You don’t have to do that anymore ; it’s instant ! ” ‘‘You don’t have to travel to get your work done . . . ” ‘‘I think it has strengthened our ( peer ) relationships because it has allowed us to work together and to work probably more frequently than we could without it . . . through CMC , I feel we were able to accomplish things that were in the past only ideas . ” Instrumentality ‘‘It’s a tool . . . I think its biggest beneﬁt is its efﬁciency . It’s a way of shortening steps . ” ‘‘It helps you track your edits . . . ” ‘‘You can read at your own leisure . You can look it over , put it down , and come back . . . with a fresh perspective . ” ‘‘The most conversing that I do in collaborative work happens FTF actually . But the mechanics of collaboration , the sharing of draft material , it is just easy to do with an attachment . ” RQ2 : Professors report that CMC affects collaborative relationships in what ways ? Nonverbal deﬁcit ‘‘I think the lack of the nonverbal channel makes it a little more confusing . Like you know my personality , I have a tendency to smart off and , you know , be sarcastic . . . I had to be careful about that kind of stuff . ” ‘‘Sometimes I use the smiley face or a ‘he he’ as an attempt to alleviate any miscommunication . ” ‘‘We just say ‘here are the corrections ; ’ we don’t say ‘if you don’t mind’ or ‘how do you feel about that . ’ It’s certainly more direct . ” ‘‘I like that when I send a message , I don’t have to deal with all the niceties that I would have to on the phone . I can attach a ﬁle and say ‘the ﬁle is attached . Make your changes and send it back to me’ and she knows what I mean . I don’t have to spend time on the relationship . . . we can focus on the project at hand . ” Relational connection ‘‘My preference at some point is just to have a FTF conversation that we don’t just show up as print on a screen . . . to have a ‘human touch . ’” ‘‘My collaborator and I just really trust each other’s instincts about what oughtta go in or what not to go in . ” ‘‘Even when I send something via internet , I will follow up with a phone call or a pre - call just to say ‘‘Hey , this is what you are going to get , . . . or did you get it and what did you think . . . ” Sometimes I think there is just a need to connect with the voice . ” ‘‘I prefer FTF to clarify a lot of the issues . . . where you are going . . . those kinds of things . ” Personal autonomy ‘‘You have to have people who are good independent workers because so much work is individual . ” ‘‘Sometimes I just do the work that needs to be done and if the other person doesn’t like it , he’ll let me know . ” ‘‘With CMC , I get the ﬁrst , fresh perspective on my own . . . I can read the piece at my leisure ( as many times as I want ) without having to worry about someone giving their input . ” ‘‘I’m misunderstood over the phone a lot . . . I am kind of blunt sometimes and even though I don’t mean it personally , people misunderstand . . . so , to be quite honest withyou . . . [ Before CMC , ] I just did not collaborate . . . I wouldjust as soon do it by myself than have to talk onthe phone too long to somebody . . . Before , I was a solo act . . . ” Note . Each quotation from an individual interviewee . Table 2 Illustrative Quotations for the Dialectical Tensions Dialectic Description Quotation Relational connection and personal autonomy ( a ) CMC provides a way to connect with colleagues to collaborate and ( b ) collaboration via CMC allows relatively independent work ‘‘The dialogicalapproach . . . has helpedmeand my [ CMC ] collaborators . Again , we have areas of responsibility in the whole text , but the more we kind of set it up as a case – it is almost like a conversational interaction again where the parts interact with one another , the better we seem to do . . . . I know some people do this where it is almost like each sentence isa collaboration . I can’t do that . I work best where there is a chunked out division of labor . ” Creativity and the mundane tasks ( a ) CMC merely functions as a tool to convey information and ( b ) CMC cannot replace personal communication for creative work ‘‘I think every single [ collaboration ] I do is mostly e - mails and ﬁle transfers of papers . . . The FTF issues in this project were more the planning issues . . . we had to sit down and throw out a bunch of ideas and interact with each other on the spot . ” Task and socio - emotional goals in collaborative work ( a ) Collaborators compensate for CMC’s lack of nonverbal channel with emoticons and strategic language and ( b ) report that CMC’s lack of emotionality and low emphasis on the relational aspects of communicating allows them to stay task - focused ‘‘Sometimes you use the smiley face or a ‘he he’ so that you try to alleviate any miscommunication . . . If I call somebody I have to tell them my life story that’s happened since the last time I talked with them and I really don’t have time for that . In an e - mail , I can just say hi and everything is doing great , but I don’t have to go into detail . . . ” Novelty and efﬁcacy of CMC ( a ) Collaborators report use of limited technologies and ( b ) view CMC as convenient and time - saving by allowing asynchronous discourse ‘‘ . . . delegation , scheduling , timelines . . . data sharing - mostly through e - mails . Generally e - mailed attachments and data . . . a few times I tired IM but that can be expensive . ” Note . Each quotation from an individual interviewee . 212 M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 the dialectic of creativity and the mundane , two types of activities necessary to the research / writing processes . The theme nonverbal deﬁcit contained the oppositional ideas of ( a ) compensating for lack of nonverbal channels by using emoti - cons and strategic language as well as ( b ) CMC’s lack of emotional - ity and low emphasis on the relational aspects of communication , thus allowing interactants to stay task - focused . Thus , we conceptu - alized the potential dialectic of task and socio - emotional goals , two goals essential to accomplishment of any collaborative task . The third dialectic came from a combination of the theme noting professors’ use of limited technologies , primarily e - mail and attach - ments , with the theme of expanded opportunity or viewing CMC in terms of convenience , saving time , and asynchronous discourse . Thus , we conceptualized the dialectic of novelty and efﬁcacy , a dia - lectic that may be at play in any CMC interaction , i . e . , professors employ CMC technologies , e . g . , e - mail , when the technology’s efﬁ - ciency outweighs its difﬁculty of use ; with novel technologies , the difﬁculty of use may outweigh efﬁciency and ergo efﬁcacy . To test the validity of the proposed dialectics , each interviewer reviewed the transcripts of the other two interviewers . Addition - ally , the fourth coder reviewed the randomly selected segments comprising over ten per cent of each interview . Each coder discov - ered evidence of at least one entire dialectic in every transcript and evidence of multiple dialectics in most transcripts . Thus , we offer four dialectics that may represent the interactional challenges of on - going professorial collaborations conducted via CMC : relational con - nection and personal autonomy , creativity and the mundane , task and socio - emotional goals , and novelty and efﬁcacy . 5 . Discussion 5 . 1 . Summary of results We undertook a preliminary examination of the interactional issues of concern in professorial collaborations conducted via CMC . To this end , we conducted a thematic analysis of twenty semi - structured interviews with professors from eight states to an - swer two research questions querying the ways professors report that CMC inﬂuenced their collaborations per se and their collabo - rative relationships . Our analysis yielded six themes with no con - ceptual overlap . Our secondary analysis yielded four dialectics that may represent the interactional issues facing professors who collaborate via CMC : relational connection and personal autonomy , creativity and the mundane , task and socio - emotional goals , nov - elty and efﬁcacy . 5 . 2 . Interpretation of results We did not anticipate ﬁnding dialectical tensions at the onset of this project and thus we here provide a brief explanation of com - munication and dialectics . Dialectical tensions typically occur as a result of the interplay of opposing and contradictory forces , such as tension that occurs as a result of simultaneous needs for auton - omy and connection , openness and closeness , or novelty and pre - dictability ( Baxter , 1988 ) . Dialectical tensions are typically resolved through communication . For example , newlyweds may negotiate the solution to maintain autonomy by reserving one weekend a month to spend time with their individual friends , and maintain connectedness by spending the other weekends to - gether . It is through the communication during their negotiation that they resolve the dialectical tension . Multiple forms of dialectics exist , many speciﬁc to particular relationships and contexts . For example , Papa , Auwal , and Singhal ( 1995 ) explored the dialectic of control and emancipation in orga - nizing for social change and Mumby ( 2005 ) identiﬁed the dialectic of control and resistance as a routine social outcome of daily orga - nizational life . Moreover , Rawlins ( 1989 ) uncovered several dialec - tics speciﬁc to young adult friendships such as freedom to be both independent and dependent and Sahlstein ( 2006 ) described ro - mance partners as negotiating certainty and uncertainty in long - distance relationships . Similarly , unique tensions may occur among professors who collaborate via CMC . Notably , each dialectic we identiﬁed addressed a different aspect of the phenomenon un - der study , i . e . , the collaborative relationship , tasks at hand , goals of the collaboration , and the technologies employed . ( 1 ) Relational connection and personal autonomy represents a relationship dialectic originally identiﬁed by Rawlins ( 1989 ) in his research on friendships . Given that our professors frequently refer - enced collaborations with professional friends , it is not surprising that one of Rawlins dialectics emerged from the data . Further , this ﬁnding is consistent with previous research recognizing CMC’s po - tential to provide a venue for relationship development and main - tenance ; such research has examined interactivity via CMC ( e . g . , Chang & Wang , 2008 ) , documented the importance of trust in collaboration ( Hossain & Wigand , 2004 ; Whitener et al . , 1998 ) , and recognized CMC as an effective medium for social support ( Burleson et al . , 1994 ; Pennebaker & Traue , 1993 ) in a socially cre - ated friendly environment that overcomes many entry barriers common to FTF interactions ( Rheingold , 1991 ; Rheingold , 1993 ) . ( 2 ) Creativity and the mundane may represent two opposite but necessary aspects of scholarly endeavors . Indeed , Galegher and Kraut ( 1990 ) speculated that ‘‘intellectual team work demands extensive information sharing and coordination , but these commu - nication needs vary over time and tasks” . Consistent with Galegher and Kraut’s ( 1992 ) ﬁndings and Barile and Durso’s ( 2002 ) conclu - sion that ‘‘e - mail alone may not be an appropriate setting for writ - ing collaboratively” , our professors expressed a preference for telephone or FTF communication for integrative tasks , such as planning . Indeed , experience may have taught our professors what DeRosa , Smith , and Hantula ( 2007 ) concluded in their meta - analy - sis of the research on electronic group brainstorming , i . e . , that groups meeting FTF tend to outperform groups meeting only elec - tronically . Also consistent with Burgoon et al . ’s ( 1999 ) results sug - gesting that interfaces such as e - mail may work best for less complex tasks , our professors identiﬁed CMC as a useful tool for mundane tasks . Indeed , numerous previous researchers character - ized CMC as an effective medium for task accomplishment ( Garton & Wellman , 1995 ; VanLear et al . , 2005 ; Walther & Parks , 2002 ) , due to its ability to expand opportunities and offer alternative means for collaboration ( Ramirez et al . , 2002 ) that include provid - ing access , managing time , and overcoming geographical distance ( Walther & Boyd , 2001 ) . Further , previous research identiﬁes e - mail as a preferred medium of communication among coworkers ( Beaudoin , 2008 ; Kim , Kim , Park , & Rice , 2007 ) . Thus , in spite of re - search documenting disadvantages to modality switching ( Ramir - ez & Zhang , 2007 ) , our professors appeared comfortable switching communication modalities , i . e . , using CMC for the more mundane tasks and FTF for the more creative aspects of their collaborations . Among the unique contributions of the present study is the bal - anced viewpoint provided by our informants who reported collab - orating via CMC but employing FTF for more cognitively rich tasks , especially for creative work including hypothesis - generation and conﬂict management . The viewpoint that both FTF and CMC have a place in collaboration is supported by the results of one of the very few studies that has examined how one mode of communica - tion can inﬂuence the other during collaboration , i . e . , Dietz - Uhler and Bishop - Clark ( 2001 ) concluded that when collaborators em - ploy CMC followed by FTF interactions , they perceive their FTF interactions as ‘‘more enjoyable and include a greater diversity of perspectives” . M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 213 ( 3 ) We are not the ﬁrst CMC researchers to apply the label ‘‘task and socio - emotional” to on - line activities ( see Derks et al . , 2007 ; Pena & Hancock , 2006 ; Savicki & Kelley , 2000 ) . Further , the ‘‘task and socio - emotional” label has long been a staple among small group theorists to describe types of leaders and classes of commu - nication ( Bales , 2001 ) as well as activity tracks in decision - making ( Poole , Seibold , & McPhee , 1996 ) . Indeed , task and socio - emotional goals may be present in any group or collaborative undertaking . Our professors reported appreciating that CMC can be short , to - the - point , and task - focus . Conversely , and consistent with the observations of Carter ( 2003 ) and Parkinson ( 2008 ) , most profes - sors reported relying on quasi - nonverbal behavior such as emoticons to simulate the nonverbal channel to convey socio - emo - tional messages . Perhaps many professors balance the dialectic of task and socio - emotional goals by engaging in both behaviors , e . g . , write short e - mail messages that include emoticons where appropriate . The notion that collaborators achieve both task and socio - emotional goals via CMC is consistent with emerging con - temporary thought that users increasingly achieve interactive goals via modern technology – including interactive goals that tra - ditionally were viewed as only achievable via FTF interactions ( Walther et al . , 2005a ) . Indeed , following an extensive meta - anal - ysis , Derks , Fisher , and Bos ( 2008 ) concluded that ‘‘there is no indi - cation that CMC is a less emotional or less personally involving medium than F2F” . ( 4 ) Novelty and efﬁcacy may apply only in those collaborations enacted at least partially via CMC , as this dialectic clearly refers to the technological elements of interactions . While our professors acknowledged that CMC provided opportunities to collaborate that would have been more difﬁcult or impossible without CMC , they also employed very few types of CMC technology . For example , although many organizations adopt instant messaging technology to increase collaboration among geographically distant co - workers ( Cameron & Webster , 2005 ) , only one of our professors mentioned using instant messaging . Indeed , despite the promise of numerous innovative technologies to facilitate communication and collabora - tion in education ( Ingram , Hathorn , & Evans , 2000 ) , not all innova - tions are readily adopted ; as Walther et al . ( 2005a ) noted ‘‘even though video cameras for personal computers may often be ac - quired for less than $ 10 US , most people rely on e - mail and text - based chat for internet exchanges” . Consistent with Shedletsky and Aitken’s ( 2001 ) claim that faculty avoid workshops about com - puter technologies and consistent with Jankowski et al . ’s ( 2001 ) belief that ‘‘most changes occurring in the educational and re - search institutions related to communication studies and the Inter - net are incremental in nature rather than revolutionary” , we speculate that our informants used technologies that maximized efﬁciency , such e - mail for sending manuscripts , and avoided novel technologies in collaborations when new technologies involved a learning curve that reduced the professors’ collaborative efﬁciency . A future study could conﬁrm or deny this speculative explanation . 5 . 3 . Interpretation of the ﬁndings as a whole Caplan ( 2001 ) observed that CMC provides a unique communi - cation system , not easily described by traditional interpersonal communication theory , traditional mass communication theory , or a combination of theories from both domains . Thus , Caplan called for original theories to describe CMC behavior , such as Wal - ther’s ( 1996 ) theory of CMC as hyperpersonal interaction . Each dia - lectic we identiﬁed addressed a different aspect of the phenomenon under study , i . e . , the collaborative relationship , tasks at hand , goals of the collaboration , and the technologies employed . Thus , our results do not ﬁt neatly into Walther’s ( 1996 ) hyperper - sonal theories’ triad of concerns with receivers , senders , and mes - sage processes . Our results appear to better illustrate aspects of Spitzberg’s ( 2006 ) model of CMC Competence . Spitzberg’s model contains nine elements ; our four dialectics clearly exemplify four of these nine elements : media factors including efﬁciency ( dialectic of novelty and efﬁcacy ) , message factors , including task - orientation and so - cio - emotional orientation ( dialectic of task and socio - emotional goals ) , contextual factors including relational factors ( dialectic of relational connection and personal autonomy ) , and ﬁnally compe - tence outcomes , including appropriateness ( dialectic of creativity and the mundane ) . The purpose of our study was to undertake a preliminary examination of the interactional issues at play in pro - fessorial collaborations . Perhaps these four elements ( versus all nine of Spitzberg’s elements ) represent the most salient aspects of the CMC competency model at play in professorial collaborations . 5 . 4 . Limitations and suggestions for future research Given the preliminary nature of our investigation , we employed an appropriate methodology , i . e . , in depth interviews with a small convenience sample , to discover the appropriate directions for more expensive and elaborate future research . Indeed , in - depth interviews with any small sample should reveal major concerns with minimal capitol outlay . While such qualitative studies pro - vide detailed information from informants , the samples are neces - sary limited in size and scope , thus necessarily limiting the generalizability of the ﬁndings . Future studies in this line of re - search could employ larger , more diverse samples to examine fur - ther the issues identiﬁed in our preliminary study . Additionally , we gathered data from individual professors . Interviews with professorial work groups or collaborative dyads may illuminate another level of interactional issues . Further , future research could examine interactional concerns at various points in the collaborative process , from the initial idea and planning stages to project completion , as CMC may inﬂuence professorial collabo - rations in differing ways at various stages . Our preliminary study appropriately interviewed professors . However , an examination of actual e - mail messages exchanged may reveal how collaborators communicate emotions , address relational issues , and frame tasks . The proportion of task - related and relationship - related discourse exchanged may illuminate when and how professors discover potential problems in their col - laborative relationships and how quickly they attend to them . Tri - angulation of interview with observational data may be particularly illuminating . Finally , future research could examine the inﬂuence of CMC on various types of professorial collaborations such as peer vs . men - tor - mentee collaborations . Given CMC’s well documented ten - dency to ‘‘even the playing ﬁeld” ( Metatek , 2005 ; Postmes et al . , 1998 ; Spears & Lea , 1994 ) , perhaps status differences inﬂuence how collaborators employ CMC . Finally , future studies might examine collaborations among professionals who are not academ - ics to discover if non - professors grapple with the same set of inter - actional dialectics when they collaborate via CMC . 5 . 5 . Conclusions Despite these limitations , our study contributes to an under - standing of collaborations via CMC in four ways : ( 1 ) It represents the ﬁrst preliminary examination of the inﬂuence of CMC in profes - sorial collaborations . ( 2 ) It offers insights into the interactional challenges in professorial collaborations as well as professorial col - laborative relationships . ( 3 ) We discovered six preliminary themes that formed four dialectics ; these dialectics may represent the interactional challenges of professorial collaborations conducted via CMC : relational connection and personal autonomy , creativity and the mundane , task and socio - emotional goals , as well as 214 M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 novelty and efﬁcacy . ( 4 ) Finally , we offered thoughtful suggestions for future research . Acknowledgments Ms . Thompson - Hayes ( Ph . D . , University of Memphis ) , Ms . Gib - son ( Ph . D . , University of Memphis ) , and Ms . Scott ( Ph . D . , Louisiana State University ) serve as Assistant Professor in Communication at Arkansas State University , Columbus State University , and the Uni - versity of Central Florida , respectively . Ms . Webb ( Ph . D . , University of Oregon ) serves as Professor in Communication at the University of Arkansas . The authors acknowledge the equal contributions of the four authors to the success of this project . References Audretsch , D . B . , & Link , A . N . ( 2006 ) . Empirical evidence on knowledge ﬂows from research collaborations : Introduction to the special issue . Economics of Innovation and New Technology , 15 ( 1 ) , 1 – 3 . Bales , R . F . ( 2001 ) . Social interaction systems : Theory and measurement . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction . Barile , A . L . , & Durso , F . T . ( 2002 ) . Computer - mediated communication in collaborative writing . Computers in Human Behavior , 18 ( 2 ) , 173 – 190 . Baxter , L . ( 1988 ) . A dialectical perspective on communication strategies in relationship development . In S . W . Duck ( Ed . ) , A handbook of personal relationships ( pp . 257 – 273 ) . New York : Wiley . Baxter , L . A . , Braithwaite , D . O . , Bryant , L . , & Wagner , A . ( 2004 ) . Stepchildren’s perceptions of the contradictions in communication with stepparents . Journal of Social and Personal Relationships , 21 ( 4 ) , 447 – 467 . Bayer , A . E . ( 1991 ) . Career publication patterns and collaborative ‘‘styles” in American academic science . Journal of Higher Education , 62 ( 6 ) , 13 – 36 . Beaudoin , C . E . ( 2008 ) . Explaining the relationship between internet use and interpersonal trust : Taking into account motivation and information overload . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 13 , 550 – 568 . Boyatzis , R . E . ( 1998 ) . Transforming qualitative information : Thematic analysis and code development . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Bradley , G . , Holm , P . , Steere , M . , & Stromqvist , G . ( 1993 ) . Psychosocial communication and computerization . Computers in Human Behavior , 9 ( 2 – 3 ) , 157 – 169 . Burgoon , J . K . , Bonito , J . A . , Bengtsson , B . , Ramierz , A . , Dunbar , N . E . , & Miczo , N . ( 1999 ) . Testing the interactivity model : Communication processes , partner assessments , and the quality of collaborative work . Journal of Management Information Systems , 16 ( 3 ) , 33 – 56 . Burleson , B . R . , Albrecht , T . L . , & Satason , I . G . ( Eds . ) . ( 1994 ) . Communication of social support . Newbury Park : Sage . Byron , K . , & Baldridge , D . C . ( 2007 ) . E - mail recipients’ impressions of senders’ likability : The interactive effect of nonverbal cues and recipients’ personality . Journal of Business Communication , 44 , 137 – 160 . Cameron , A . F . , & Webster , J . ( 2005 ) . Unintended consequences of emerging communication technologies : Instant messaging in the workplace . Computers in Human Behavior , 21 ( 1 ) , 85 – 103 . Caplan , S . E . ( 2001 ) . Challenging the mass - interpersonal communication dichotomy : Are we witnessing the emergence of an entirely new communication system ? Electronic Journal of Communication , 11 ( 1 ) . Available from http : / / shadow . cios . org : 7979 / journals / EJC / 011 / 1 / 01112 . html . Caplan , S . E . , & Turner , J . S . ( 2007 ) . Bringing theory to research on computer - mediated comforting communication . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 , 985 – 998 . Carter , K . A . ( 2003 ) . Type me how you feel : Quasi - nonverbal cues in computer mediated communication . ETC : A Review of General Semantics , 60 , 29 – 39 . Casper , T . A . , Jong , R . A . , Meyer , W . H . , & Moller , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Support and development for remote collaborations in fusion research . Fusion Engineering and Design , 48 ( 1 – 2 ) , 231 – 237 . Chang , H . H . , and Wang , I . C . ( 2008 ) . An investigation of user communication behavior in computer mediated environments . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 ( 5 ) . Available online 11 March 2008 from http : / / www . sciencedirect . com . Cresswell , J . W . ( 1998 ) . Qualitative inquiry and research design : Choosing among ﬁve traditions . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Denzin , N . K . , & Lincoln , Y . S . ( 1998 ) . Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Derks , D . , Bos , A . E . R . , & von Grumbkow , J . ( 2007 ) . Emoticons and social interaction on the internet : The importance of social context . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 , 842 – 849 . Derks , D . , Fisher , A . H . , & Bos , A . E . R . ( 2008 ) . The role of emotion in computer - mediated communication : A review . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 , 766 – 785 . DeRosa , D . M . , Smith , C . L . , & Hantula , D . A . ( 2007 ) . The medium matters : Mining the long - promised merit of group interaction in creative idea generation tasks in a meta - analysis of the group brainstorming literature . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 , 1549 – 1581 . Dervin , B . , and Clark , K . D . ( 1999 ) . Exemplars of the use of the sense - making methodology ( meta - theory and method ) : In - depth introduction to the sense - making issues of the Electronic Journal of Communication . Electronic Journal of Communication , 9 ( 2 ) . Available from http : / / www . cios . org / www / ejc / v9n23499 . htm # Introduction . DeSanctis , G . , & Poole , M . S . ( 1994 ) . Capturing the complexity in advanced technology use : Adaptive structuration theory . Organization Science , 5 ( 2 ) , 121 – 147 . Dietz - Uhler , B . , & Bishop - Clark , C . ( 2001 ) . The use of computer - mediated communication to enhance subsequent face - to - face discussions . Computers in Human Communication , 17 ( 3 ) , 269 – 283 . Fontana , A . , & Frey , J . H . ( 1998 ) . Interviewing : The art of science . In N . K . Denzin & Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds . ) , Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials ( pp . 47 – 78 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Galegher , J . , and Kraut , R . ( 1992 ) . Computer - mediated communication and collaborative writing : Inﬂuence and adaption to communication constraints . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work ( pp . 155 – 162 ) . New York . Galegher , J . , and Kraut , R . ( 1990 ) . Computer - mediated communication for intellectual teamwork : A ﬁeld experiment in group writing . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : Proceedings of the 1990 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work ( pp . 65 – 78 ) . New York . Garton , L . , & Wellman , B . ( 1995 ) . Social impacts of electronic mail in organizations : A review of the research literature . 20 . In B . R . Burleson ( Ed . ) , Communication Yearbook ( pp . 434 – 453 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Hossain , L . , Wigand , R . T . ( 2004 ) . ICT enabled virtual collaboration through trust . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 10 ( 1 ) . Available from http : / / www3 . interscience . wiley . com / journal / 120837913 / abstract ? CRETRY = 1 & SRETRY = 0 . Ingram , A . L . , Hathorn , L . G . , & Evans , A . ( 2000 ) . Beyond chat on the internet . Computers & Education , 35 ( 1 ) , 21 – 35 . Jankowski , N . W . , Foot , K . , Howard , P . N . , Jones , S . , Mansell , R . , Schneider , S . , et al . ( 2001 ) . The internet and communication studies . InH . Nissenbaum & M . E . Price ( Eds . ) , Academy and the internet ( pp . 168 – 195 ) . New York : Peter Lang . Johnson , C . M . ( 2001 ) . A survey of current research on online communities of practice . The Internet and Higher Education , 4 ( 1 ) , 45 – 60 . Kato , Y . , Kato , S . , & Akahori , K . ( 2007 ) . Effects of emotional cues transmitted in e - mail communication on the emotions experienced by senders and receivers . Computers in Human Behavior , 23 , 1894 – 1905 . Kim , H . , Kim , G . J . , Park , H . W . , & Rice , R . E . ( 2007 ) . Conﬁgurations of relationships in different media : FtF , email , instant messenger , mobile phone , and SMS . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 12 , 1183 – 1207 . Kimball , L . , Rheingold , H . ( 2005 , April ) . How online social networks beneﬁt organizations . Available from http : / / www . rheingold . com / Associates / online - networks . html . Kramer , R . M . ( 1999 ) . Trust and distrust in organizations : Emerging perspectives , enduring questions . Annual Review of Psychology , 50 ( 1 ) , 569 – 598 . Kraut , R . , Egido , C . , Galegher , J . ( 1988 ) . Patterns of contact and communication in scientiﬁc research collaboration . Computer Supported Cooperative Work : Proceedings of the 1988 ACM Conference on Computer - supported Cooperative Work ( pp . 1 – 12 ) . New York . Krohn , F . B . ( 2004 ) . A generation approach to using emoticons as nonverbal communication . Journal of Technical Writing and Communication , 32 ( 4 ) , 321 – 328 . Kvale , S . ( 1996 ) . InterViews : An introduction to qualitative research interviewing . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Lee , A . , & Boud , D . ( 2003 ) . Writing groups , change and academic identity : Research development as local practice . Studies in Higher Education , 28 ( 2 ) , 187 – 200 . Mayer , R . C . , Davis , S . , & Schoorman , F . D . ( 1995 ) . An integrative model of organizational trust . Academy of Management Review , 20 ( 3 ) , 709 – 734 . Metatek , H . ( 2005 ) . Make the peer - to - peer connection . Network Computing , 16 ( 7 ) , 16 . Miles , M . B . , & Huberman , A . M . ( 1994 ) . Qualitative data analysis : An expanded sourcebook ( 2nd ed . ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Mumby , D . K . ( 2005 ) . Theorizing resistance in organization studies : A dialectical approach . Management Communication Quarterly , 19 ( 1 ) , 19 – 26 . Newcomb , H . M . ( 1995 ) . Media institutions : The creation of television drama . In K . B . Jensen & N . W . Jankowski ( Eds . ) , A handbook of qualitative methodologies for mass communication research ( pp . 93 – 107 ) . New York : Routledge . Newell , S . , & Swan , J . ( 2000 ) . Trust and interorganizational networking . Human Relations , 53 ( 10 ) , 1287 – 1328 . Oliver , R . T . ( 1986 ) . The professor as a writer . Communication Education , 35 ( 2 ) , 186 – 192 . Owen , W . F . ( 1984 ) . Interpretive themes in relational communication . Quarterly Journal of Speech , 70 ( 3 ) , 274 – 287 . Papa , M . J . , Auwal , M . A . , & Singhal , A . ( 1995 ) . Dialectic of control and emancipation in organizing for social change : A multitheoretic study of the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh . Communication Theory , 5 ( 3 ) , 189 – 223 . Parkinson , B . ( 2008 ) . Emotions in direct and remote social interaction : Getting through the spaces between us . Computers in Human Behavior , 24 , 1510 – 1529 . Paul , D . L . , & Reuben , R . ( 2004 ) . A ﬁeld study of the effect of interpersonal trust on virtual collaborative relationship performance . MIS Quarterly , 28 ( 2 ) , 183 – 227 . Paulus , T . M . , & Phipps , G . ( 2008 ) . Approaches to case analyses in synchronous and asynchronous environments . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 13 , 459 – 484 . M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216 215 Pena , J . , & Hancock , J . T . ( 2006 ) . An analysis of socioemotional and task communication in online multiplayer video games . Communication Research , 33 ( 1 ) , 92 – 109 . Pennebaker , J . W . , & Traue , H . C . ( 1993 ) . Inhibition and psychosomatic processes . In H . C . Traue & J . W . Pennebaker ( Eds . ) , Emotion inhibition and health ( pp . 146 – 163 ) . Seattle , WA : Hogrefe and Huber . Poole , M . S . , Seibold , D . R . , & McPhee , R . D . ( 1996 ) . The structuration of group decisions . In R . Y . Hirokawa & M . S . Poole ( Eds . ) , Communication and group decision - making ( 2nd ed . , pp . 114 – 146 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Postmes , T . , Spears , R . , & Lea , M . ( 1998 ) . Breaching or building social boundaries ? Communication Research , 25 , 689 – 715 . Quan - Haase , A . , Cothrel , J . , Wellman , B . ( 2005 ) . Instant messaging for collaboration : A case study of a high - tech ﬁrm . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 10 ( 4 ) . Available from http : / / www3 . interscience . wiley . com / journal / 120837970 / abstract . Rafaeli , S . ( 1988 ) . Interactivity : From new media to communication . In R . P . Hawkins , J . M . Weimann , & S . Pingree ( Eds . ) , Advancing communication science : Merging mass and interpersonal processes ( pp . 110 – 134 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Ramirez , A . , Jr . , Walther , J . B . , Burgoon , J . K . , & Sunnafrank , M . ( 2002 ) . Information - seeking strategies , uncertainty , and computer - mediated communication : Toward a conceptual model . Human Communication Research , 28 ( 2 ) , 213 – 228 . Ramirez , A . , Jr . , & Zhang , S . ( 2007 ) . Whenonlinemeets ofﬂine : Theeffectof modality switching on relational communication . Communication Monographs , 74 , 287 – 310 . Rawlins , W . K . ( 1989 ) . A dialectical analysis of the tensions , functions , and strategic challenges of communication in young adult friendships . In J . A . Anderson ( Ed . ) , Communication Yearbook 12 ( pp . 157 – 189 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Rheingold , H . ( 1993 ) . Cold knowledge and social warmth . Newsweek , 122 ( 10 ) , 49 – 50 . Rheingold , H . ( 2002 , November 20 ) . Learning from the ‘‘Thumb Tribes” . Business Week Online . Available from http : / / www . BusinessWeekOnline . Rheingold , H . ( 1991 ) . Reviews the book ‘‘Virtual Reality” . Science News , 140 , 322 – 323 . Sahlstein , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Praxis strategies for negotiating uncertainty – certainty in long - distance relationships . Western Journal of Communication , 70 , 147 – 165 . Savicki , V . , & Kelley , M . ( 2000 ) . Computer - mediated communication : Gender and group composition . CyberPsychology & Behavior , 3 ( 5 ) , 817 – 826 . Schmitz , J . , & Whitworth , K . ( 2002 ) . Collaborative self - assessment in the academy : Coping with structural blockages to self - discovery” . Communication Education , 51 ( 2 ) , 134 – 151 . Schroeder , R . , & Fry , J . ( 2007 ) . Social science approaches to e - science . Framing an agenda . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 12 , 563 – 582 . Shedletsky , L . J . , & Aitken , J . E . ( 2001 ) . The paradoxes of online academic work . Communication Education , 50 , 206 – 217 . Skovholt , K . , & Svennevig , J . ( 2006 ) . Email copies in workplace interaction . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 12 , 42 – 65 . Spears , R . , & Lea , M . ( 1994 ) . Panacea or panopticon ? : The hidden power in computer - mediated communication . Communication Research , 21 ( 4 ) , 427 – 460 . Spitzberg , B . H . ( 2006 ) . Preliminary development of a model and measure of computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) competence . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 11 , 629 – 666 . Tanis , M . , & Postmes , T . ( 2003 ) . Social cues and impression formation in CMC . Journal of Communication , 53 ( 4 ) , 676 – 693 . Teles , L . , & Ragsdale , R . ( 1991 ) . The impact of wordprocessing onwriting behaviour : The interaction of faculty and their secretaries . ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society , 20 ( 4 ) , 22 – 35 . Tidwell , L . C . , & Walter , J . B . ( 2002 ) . Computer - mediated communication effects on disclosure , impressions , and interpersonal evaluations : Getting to know one another a bit at a time . Human Communication Research , 28 ( 3 ) , 317 – 348 . VanLear , A . , Sheehan , M . , Withers , L . A . , & Walker , R . A . ( 2005 ) . AA online : The enactment of supportive computer mediated communication . Western Journal of Communication , 69 ( 1 ) , 5 – 27 . Wainfan , L . , & Davis , P . K . ( 2004 ) . Challenges in virtual collaboration : Videoconferencing , audioconferencing , and computer - mediated communications . Santa Monica , CA : Rand . Walther , J . B . ( 1996 ) . Computer - mediated communication : Impersonal , interpersonal , andhyperpersonalinteraction . CommunicationResearch , 23 , 3 – 43 . Walther , J . B . , & Boyd , S . ( 2001 ) . Attraction to computer - mediated social support . In C . A . Lin & D . Atkins ( Eds . ) , Communication technology and society : Audience adoption and uses of the new media ( pp . 133 – 167 ) . New York : Hampton Press . Walther , J . B . , & Bunz , U . ( 2005 ) . The rules of virtual groups : Trust , liking , and performance in computer - mediated communication . Journal of Communication , 55 , 828 – 846 . Walther , J . B . , Gay , G . , & Hancock , J . T . ( 2005a ) . How do communication and technology researchers study the internet ? Journal of Communication , 55 ( 3 ) , 632 – 657 . Walther , J . B . , Loh , T . , & Granka , L . ( 2005b ) . Let me count the ways : The interchange of verbal and nonverbal cues in computer - mediated and face - to - face afﬁnity . Journal of Language and Social Psychology , 24 ( 1 ) , 36 – 65 . Walther , J . B . , & Parks , M . R . ( 2002 ) . Cues ﬁltered out , cues ﬁltered in : Computer mediated communication and relationships . In M . L . Knapp , J . A . Daly , & G . R . Miller ( Eds . ) , The handbook of interpersonal communication ( 3rd ed . , pp . 529 – 563 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Watson , R . ( 1994 ) . Creating and sustaining a global community of scholars . MIS Quarterly , 18 ( 3 ) , 225 – 232 . Whitener , E . M . , Brodt , S . E . , Korsgaard , M . A . , & Werner , J . M . ( 1998 ) . Managers as initiators of trust : An exchange relationship framework for understanding managerial trustworthy behavior . Academy of Management Review , 23 ( 3 ) , 513 – 531 . 216 M . Thompson - Hayes et al . / Computers in Human Behavior 25 ( 2009 ) 208 – 216