Confronting Social Criticisms : Challenges when Adopting Data - Driven Policing Strategies Nitya Verma Department of Human - Centered Computing Indiana University , IUPUI Indianapolis , IN verman @ iupui . edu Lynn Dombrowski Department of Human - Centered Computing Indiana University , IUPUI Indianapolis , IN lsdombro @ iupui . edu ABSTRACT Proponents of data - driven policing strategies claim that it makes policing organizations more effective , efficient , and accountable and has the potential to address some policing social criticisms ( e . g . racial bias , lack of accountability and training ) . What remains less understood are the challenges when adopting data - driven policing as a response to these criticisms . We present results from a qualitative field study about the adoption of data - driven policing strategies in a Midwestern police department in the United States . We identify three key challenges police face with data - driven adoption efforts : data - driven frictions , precarious and inactionable insights , and police metis concerns . We demonstrate the issues that data - driven initiatives create for policing and the open questions police agents face . These findings contribute an empirical account of how policing agents attend to the strengths and limits of big data’s knowledge claims . Lastly , we present data and design implications for policing . Author Keywords Data - Driven Organizations ; Policing ; Law Enforcement ; Data Practices ; Challenges ; Metis . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous ; INTRODUCTION In the United States ( US ) , law enforcement agencies are under intense social scrutiny , and social concerns range from racial bias to a lack of police oversight and accountability to lack of training [ 39 ; 57 ] . This scrutiny is in part enabled by data , as critics of police use data to demonstrate the problems in policing [ 38 ; 41 ] . For example , Human Rights Data Analysis Group ( HRDAG ) , a nonprofit organization , “applies rigorous science to the analysis of human rights violations” in the policing context [ 55 ] . HRDAG’s US policing project assesses and improves upon police violence data accuracy . Their work is , in part , a response to the lack of systematic data about police violence , which hinders police accountability [ 38 ; 41 ] . As a response to these criticisms , the US government advocates for using data - driven strategies . For instance , Obama administration launched the Police Data Initiative ( PDI ) and Data - Driven Justice Initiative ( DDJ ) in 2015 and 2016 , respectively , to use data to “increase transparency , build community trust , and strengthen accountability” [ 61 ] . As of late - 2016 , over 120 jurisdictions across the country , including our case site , had committed to both PDI and DDJ . The adoption rate of these initiatives reaches about 30 % of the American population . Private and public sector organizations , like policing forces , scramble to adopt data - driven practices and technology [ 33 ; 59 ] because quantitative data enables organizations to rationalize efforts and legitimize decision - making [ 21 ] . For police agencies , under intense criticisms , being data - driven can provide ways for accountability . However , as big data becomes more prevalent , researchers voice concerns about the limitations of big data as it stands to change how we define , create , and engage with knowledge , particularly in human - services contexts , where people’s unpredictable nature is inherent [ 10 ; 46 ; 47 ] . Our findings indicate that as police adopt data - driven strategies , they contend with open challenges in how data does and does not support police work and mitigate social criticisms . In this paper , we identify three key challenges police face when adopting data - driven policing strategies , which include data - driven frictions , precarious and inactionable insights , and police metis concerns . Through the discussion of these challenges , we demonstrate the limitations and strengths of big data’s knowledge claims . In this paper , we demonstrate the challenges that inhibit police accountability in their communities , and if we are to hold police accountable through data , the HCI community has to address these open issues in order to resolve the social criticisms against police . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montreal , QC , Canada © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5620 - 6 / 18 / 04… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174043 CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 1 LITERATURE REVIEW This research draws from three areas of related work including research in U . S . law enforcement approaches and technology’s role ; data - driven policing ; and data politics . Information Technology in U . S . Law Enforcement While it’s beyond the scope of this paper to discuss policing history in depth , we focus on the evolving policing philosophies as they relate to the purpose of law enforcement in the US . Further , we situate how both changing technological landscape and policing philosophies impact technology choices and outcomes . Manning describes the role police in America as a bureaucratic organization that enforces political order through force [ 51 ] . However , police’s legitimacy is not infallible , their practices have been subject to criticisms and called to change . Since the 1960s , police reform efforts in the country had been predominantly based on the traditional policing model [ 44 ; 7 ] . Traditional policing refers to “responding to calls for service and managing crimes in a reactive manner” [ 7 ] . The traditional policing model values factors like arrest numbers and police officer response time , but not necessarily issues related to a community’s quality of life . More recently , police reform has incorporated community policing approaches , including collaborations between police and community ; management , personnel , and information technology support ; and lastly , a problem - solving orientation to develop and evaluate police strategies [ 7 ; 9 ] . According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics , about 70 % of police departments in 2013 included components of community policing in their mission , an increase from 53 % in 2007 [ 6 ] . Empirical research shows a diminishing public perception of police legitimacy [ 74 ; 2 ; 28 ; 75 ] . While researchers suggest that information technology ( IT ) adoption offers benefits like better administrative support , improved productivity and increased efficiency , scholars have raised questions about how the computerization of police work impacts community outcomes [ 63 ; 64 ; 26 ; 71 ] . Previous research indicates that IT adoption by itself does not increase productivity for police unless it is paired with strategic management practices ( i . e . , evidence - driven , decision - making tools ) [ 43 ] . While laptops in patrol cars have provided on - the - ground , timely access to information 1 , the responsibility for data collection has also shifted from transcribers over the phone to one - the - ground officers , which raises issues of data accuracy and quality , as well as technical training [ 1 ] . More generally , law enforcement , like other public services , operates under substantial technical , expertise , and budgetary constraints [ 64 ] . 1 According to a 2015 report by the Bureau of Justice Statistics , 9 in 10 police officers in the US are provided with in - field computerized access to police records [ 6 ] . Our research aims to understand how police are thinking through and dealing with the social criticisms from the community , while focusing on how data and technology influence their practices for accountability . Data - Driven Policing In this section , we present literature on the emergence of data - driven policing and its advantages and challenges . Data - driven policing refers to decision - making processes in policing that are guided by evidence - based strategies to understand crime problems and allocate limited resources with greater effectiveness and efficiency in order to reduce criminal and social harm [ 18 ] . While definitions vary , researchers have indicated how data - driven approaches can be related to and embedded in community - oriented policing [ 37 ] . In this paper , we use ‘data - driven policing’ to refer to the multifaceted , sociotechnical practices situated within the tool ecology and organizational mission for data - driven decision making . Data - driven policing is characterized by having the following components : data collection , analysis , local partnerships with community stakeholders , strategic operations , information sharing , monitoring , evaluating and adjusting operations , and measuring outcomes [ 18 ] . Due to the prevalence of open forms of relevant data ( e . g . , open governmental data ; social media ) , data collection and analysis is not constrained to only the data collected by police , but police also frequently reuse other public data ( i . e . census , fire department , medical services ) . Big data in policing refers to the amalgamation of data sources including camera feeds , license plate readers , alert - based systems , police reports , public services data , crime tips , and social media . Researchers characterize big data’s role in policing to be predictive ( applying a computational model to historical data to determine criminal activity’s future likelihood ) , repurpose already available data , and engage in mass surveillance [ 20 ] . Data - driven policing is , in part , the police’s response to social criticisms of police practices [ 50 ] . However , researchers have called for more research on how big data can support police accountability [ 65 ] . We build on this work to demonstrate the challenges in using data - driven strategies to avoid criticism . Law enforcement research identifies many benefits of data - driven policing including optimizing police resources , eliminating human biases , encouraging accountability within the police agencies and to the community , problem - solving , improving community support and engagement , and reducing crime [ 74 ; 15 ; 65 ; 14 ] . Researchers argue that by implementing data - driven policing , technology eliminates “undesirable biases” to “introduce more fairness into the police decision - making process” as a means to address recent social criticisms against police [ 20 ] . While organizational changes like committed management , defined objectives , and data expertise can help organizations work towards these benefits , researchers have called for further research to understand how data - driven policing strategies impact police practices , stakeholder relationships , and outcomes [ 20 ; 3 ] . CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 2 Researchers in sociology and public policy have also identified several technical and social challenges in the adoption and use of data - driven practices in policing . There are substantial challenges in the IT infrastructure that exacerbate IT management issues such as inaccurate data entry , lack of data quality , legacy systems , and siloed databases [ 64 ; 63 ] Social issues around police big data use point out how data frequently perpetuates and confirms police biases since data is not objective in nature [ 20 ; 65 ] . Big data can reproduce inequalities by exacerbating surveillance for individuals already under suspicion . Similarly , researchers warn against relying on data to make decisions rather than supplementing independent police assessment . For example , researchers fear that data could prime officers to look for crime in certain communities , instead of neutrally assessing the risks [ 65 ] . Big data in policing also magnifies concerns about the fourth amendment—the right to be secure against unreasonable searches—as it enables “perpetual indiscriminate data collection of entire populations” [ 20 ] . Similarly , data - driven policing critics raise concerns about the lack of understanding regarding long - term impacts of data - driven strategies , using data to justify over - policing disadvantaged communities , and community relationships with the police [ 74 ; 66 ] . While new strategies create positive media attention , researchers raise concerns about the effectiveness of using big data products and practices from the for - profit industry in mission - driven organizations like policing [ 11 ; 74 ] . As mission - driven organizations , police agencies are often characterized by issues of hierarchical , rigid command structure of police organizations , lack of data dissemination through the ranks , and lack of accountability on how data collection feeds into their strategies and goals , which all adds to the data - related challenges police agencies face . Other challenges include police officers’ resistance to change , preference for traditional policing , and difficulty implementing new programs [ 22 ; 73 ] Researchers recommend both technical and social efforts to alleviate these challenges for police in adopting data - driven policing . These recommendations include improving the IT infrastructures , aligning work practices with data - driven objectives , and providing committed management and expertise [ 20 ; 15 ; 52 ] . Our research contributes to this work by providing empirical evidence of the social and technical challenges police face when adopting data - driven strategies . Data Politics In this section , we review literature on the politics of data and how data politics manifests in public - services organizations . While academics widely acknowledge data’s politicized nature , data - driven practices and technologies are marketed as enablers of objectivity , accuracy , and truth in order to provide accountability and legitimacy to decisions [ 36 ; 42 ; 40 ] . Data is embedded with biases and values throughout the process of data collection , cleaning , analysis , and presentation [ 36 ; 47 ] . Subsequently , researchers have called for empirical research on the nature of how these biases and data politics play out in implementation [ 33 ; 10 ] . Research about public services using data to support decision - making has also characterized issues of data perpetuating discriminatory actions such as algorithm - based technology recommending longer jail sentences for black offenders [ 38 ; 41 ] . Researchers have also warned about how marginalized communities can be at higher risks for harm and loss of opportunities through data inclusion by public services [ 66 ] . Similarly , studies have also found that data collection in public services is often marred with inaccurate accounts that fail to capture work flows and that logics behind organizational accountability can impact organizational effectiveness negatively [ 35 ; 36 ] . While data can be misused due to its decontextualized nature , research raises questions about the role of qualitative knowledge in decision making in data - driven organizations [ 47 ; 46 ; 8 ] . This concern is especially relevant for professions that require higher levels of metis , which refers to practical knowledge , gut instinct , and experience [ 24 ] . Metis is “knowing how and when to apply the rules of thumb in concrete situations” and is often grasped through experience instead of explicitly taught . As big data favors quantitative data , it is important to understand how this epistemological bias impacts organizations and their stakeholders [ 47 ; 46 ] . Organizationally , big data brings issues of digital divides in organizations between those who have data access , skills , and literacy [ 30 ; 56 ] . This study builds on this work and provides empirical evidence of how data politics impact police actions and accountability . METHODS We conducted a field study of the Midwest Metropolitan Police Department ( MMPD ) studying their efforts to be data - driven . Field studies have been proclaimed as substantially important in studying the police field because they allow for closer consideration of how citizen interactions in policing evolve [ 60 ; 54 ] . Here , we focus on law enforcement challenges in conducting data - driven policing . Research Context MMPD is the law enforcement agency of one of the most populous cities in the Midwest . Their mission focuses on reducing crime and the fear of crime while enhancing public safety . MMPD has six service districts , with about 1600 police officers in the workforce . While MMPD has employed crime data analysts for over a decade , in early 2016 , under a new administration , MMPD doubled down on efforts to be data - driven . This included revamping the Information and Intelligence Center , which employs different kinds of analysts ( crime analysis , GIS , internet crimes , social media , real - time camera surveillance , and Uniform Crime Reporting ( UCR ) for the FBI ) . The Center is where requests are made for information for supporting ongoing investigations , writing funding grants , CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 3 and developing new initiatives . Community members also send requests for city’s crime data . Through our interviews and observations , our participants considered MMPD to be in the “infancy” stage of adopting data - driven policing . Our participants echoed that their efforts towards data - driven policing were hindered by the lack of budget for technological and human resources . MMPD , at the time of our study , employed only three civilian data analysts , while most of the other analysts in the Information and Intelligence Center were sworn officers , who were either interested in technology or on “light duty” because of an injury , or held multiple positions in the organization . Though MMPD does have a small in - house IT department , an external , third - party agency controls and maintains their IT infrastructure . Several of our informants expressed dissatisfaction about how the external agency handles the police’s technology needs because of incompatible IT best practices , lack of control over technology decisions , and organizational politics . MMPD has four key data - driven practices relevant to their work , which we will discuss in turn . First , Compare Statistics , more commonly known as CompStat 2 , is an adopted framework developed by New York Police Department for strategic problem solving and increased accountability [ 14 ] . At MMPD , district commanders present detailed crime reports about their districts ( provided by the analysts ) to the chief of police once a month , where the administration makes decisions about resource allocations and ways of addressing crime . Second , Social Disorder Index ( SDI ) is part of the data used during CompStat meetings that guides decision - making . SDI divides the city into small grids ( 250 ft by 250 ft ) and maps crime and other emergency incidents ( i . e . , fire department , emergency medical services , high - risk SWAT areas ) . These incidents are then each given scores based on the gravity of the incident ( e . g . , crimes against a person or property , mental illness , drug overdose ) . SDI is meant to help the police administration identify and address underlying patterns in high crime areas . Third , “heat list” analysis includes a running , monthly list of repeat victims and offenders in the districts . Lastly , community programs are implemented based on data about the area’s needs . For instance , by looking at where the most juvenile crime occurs , MMPD was able to choose a location to organize a youth basketball league to provide better community interactions with the police . MMPD’s data collection includes , but is not limited to , computer - aided dispatch system , crime reporting system , license plate readers , closed circuit ( CCTV ) cameras ( including collaborations with private businesses ) , social media , geographic information systems , and in - house forums for information dissemination . MMPD also collaborates with the local Fusion Center , which is a federally operated data exchange center to aid in police investigations . 2 https : / / compstat . nypdonline . org / Informants and Data Collection We conducted 16 semi - structured interviews ( 98 minutes , on average ) with MMPD members , including three civilians , three on - the - ground officers , three detectives , two lieutenants , two sergeants , and two captains across three of the six districts of MMPD . The civilian informants worked directly with data at the Information and Intelligence Center , while the sworn officers often held multiple responsibilities in terms of working with data and policing . We conducted the interviews with each informant using a protocol focused on the nature of the participants’ work , their roles in the organization , and how the participants understood their work to fit into the mission of the organization ; the different technologies and data sources they use in their work ; how they collect , extract , analyze and explore data ; the ways they make decisions with or without that data ; and the ways that the data they use relates to the mission of the organization—the rationality behind data - driven policing ; and their experiences of the challenges and benefits of technology and data use . We continually transcribed interviews to facilitate concurrent analysis . In addition to the interviews , we conducted 55 hours of observations , including community - police meetings , public safety meetings and training , and accompanying police during their patrols to understand their work’s breadth and context . The observations were conducted from September 2016 to July 2017 . Due to the limited nature of our site access , participants often spoke to us in a constrained , and sometimes , defensive manner . Throughout the data - collection , it was evident that we , as researchers , were outsiders to them , which undermined participant’s candidness . Given this , we did not always explicitly discuss certain sensitive issues around police and their technology use ( e . g . , specific details of their technology and data use , social criticisms towards police ) , depending on the participants’ demeanor . Data Analysis We analyzed data iteratively and inductively [ 32 ] . The initial open coding foregrounded what a data - driven approach to policing meant to our informants , which lead to five overarching categories related to police’s technology and data related challenges . Through iterative memoing and axial coding , we identified three sets of challenges MMPD navigate during data use as well as the role of data as it supports or thwarts police work . DATA - DRIVEN POLICING CHALLENGES In the following sections , we identify three key challenges centered on MMPD’s data - driven efforts : data - driven frictions , precarious and inactionable insights , and police metis concerns . These challenges shed light on how MMPD navigates new work possibilities afforded through data collection and analysis and balancing these new data forms with the human - element in police work . Through the discussion of these conversations , we highlight how data - driven challenges problematize police work . CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 4 Data - Driven Frictions Within MMPD , there are two approaches regarding how technology and data can mitigate pressing social concerns . The first data - driven approach supports officers by creating and using data to help legitimize decisions and position practices as arguably objective and unbiased . The second data - driven approach modifies existing police practice towards the tenets of community policing , by not focusing on solely enforcing the law , but by using data to provide a proactive policing orientation . Data is used to identify underlying issues fostering crime in order to attempt to address those issues through community collaborations . For most of our informants , the first is the current status quo , whereas , the second approach is an idealized vision some police want to progress towards . In the following section , we discuss the conversations policing agents have around the role of data and how these technological visions impact police practices . Here , police officers face challenges with new forms of data that offer new police goals , however , because of their limited resources , they experience tensions in choosing which agendas to actively work towards . Data for Legitimization Measures As MMPD works to understand and address criticisms about perpetuating social inequalities , police officers are thinking through their own work and role . In our case study , police agents predominantly use data to legitimize existing practices and decisions . For instance , a patrol officer in our study echoed a widespread sentiment about data collection efforts as a mechanism to “CYA” 3 ( i . e . , cover your ass ) in case there were any complaints filed against the officers and their work . For instance , during our observations , a police officer made timestamped comments within their dispatch system on the laptop after a store manager called about theft . The officer explained her documentation as a way for her supervisor to retrieve the officer’s side of the events in case a complaint by the store manager was made against MMPD . Similarly , another patrol officer would mark their location while driving through areas where community members had requested more patrol in order to provide data about the numbers of police officers in that area . Police also use data to garner public support for their practices and actions because of data’s perceived objectivity . “…with [ data ] we get more buy - in , we get more support… . I think that’s an effective result of data because again the community they get objective statistics from us now . It’s more transparent for them [ community members ] , that’s one of the goals . [ P6 , officer in the IT department ] “… one thing that [ the police department ] hope [ s ] to do with data is to have it more readily available for the public when incidents happen…to readily share accurate data with the public is crucial sometimes in keeping that 3 This is informant language . transparency and accountability with the department . ” [ P4 , detective ] As police begin using data as a mechanism for transparency and accountability with the public , this raises questions about how and who collects , analyses , and presents data . These questions about what the data does and does not depict have to be addressed in order to better support efforts of improving police and community relations . Likewise , more data does not necessarily equate to more transparent and accountable police forces—for instance , while initial reports suggested bodycams influenced police to be less aggressive with the police and cause a decline in reports against the police [ 5 ; 29 ] , research also showed the ways in which police shape recordings ( i . e . , shutting off cameras , placing evidence ) [ 4 ] . Data for Proactive , Community - Oriented Measures Next , we demonstrate how the proactive policing approach is part of the data - driven conversation at MMPD . Most of the informants from the Information and Intelligence Center envisioned using data to proactively address social issues and to change on - the - ground and administrative practices . One of the data - driven practices implemented by MMPD is the SDI , as introduced in the Research Context . Rather than just enforcing the law , the SDI aims to help police understand the prevalence of criminal and social issues across the city . In particular , the tool is meant to help the police administration identify and address underlying issues of high crime areas . “You have to have all three things to have the crime occur . [ … ] if we take any part of that convergence triad away , whether it is education for the victim , identifying the suspects early [ and ] making sure they are not in a position to re - offend , or changing the environment then we do not have the crime… their goal is to move forward to that predictive end . Right now , we’re really providing what has happened in the past… [ the data ] starts building a better bigger picture of how is that convergence setting created . ” [ P12 , officer ] For several MMPD officers , being data - driven enables them to understand what comorbid social conditions may underlie the city’s criminal patterns . Besides basing resource allocation decisions off of data , community outreach programs created based on community needs data . Community outreach at MMPD includes programs for at - risk youth to provide positive role - models , fundraising efforts for less advantaged communities , conducting community meetings with newer immigrant communities to develop trust , and helping community members develop evidence - based neighborhood safety strategies . Similarly , the repeat victim and offender heat lists enable officers to focus patrols . These data - driven practices , help officers attend to a larger range of issues to shift police’s focus towards preventing crime rather than just enforcing the law . “…you’re not going to arrest your way out of [ crime ] , and we think , in our case , certain areas of crime are related to poverty and mental health . [ A police CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 5 employee ] has access to all social services so when we go in and take a bunch of guys to jail , they go in and say [ to the remaining family ] , ‘we know your primary breadwinner , although [ through ] illegal [ activities ] , is gone , can we help you with food and rent and social services’… To connect social services with those people , who would retreat to crime otherwise… I do not think the general public understands how hard it is to be going in there with a lot of empathy and sympathy , and hugs , and at the same time you’re worried about getting shot . Ambushed . It is a tough role and I think our officers do a great job with it… and it is hard to identify the underlying issues . If it were easy to identify , it would already be fixed , this [ SDI ] data can then help that way . ” [ P10 , civilian at Information and Intelligence Center ] SDI is an effort towards a proactive policing mindset that helps shape police agents’ crime conceptions to try to proactively address crime’s underlying issues . Data - driven practices may alter the way police work within society . Data , as part of the proactive mindset , can foster collaborations between various public safety agencies ( e . g . , emergency medical services , fire departments ) to depict a more inclusive understanding of the city’s problems that utilize their resources . With this envisioned change , our informants grappled with the need to balance the dangers of the job . Within MMPD , there is resistance towards a proactive orientation by explaining that policing organizations are not equipped to handle solving underlying social issues : “…with our resources we’re just not designed to handle . . . we’re not public prevention . We [ police officers ] see the end result . They’re [ social services ] looking at the disease . We can just see and respond to the symptoms . ” [ P4 , detective ] Some police understand their work as reactionary responses to emerging issues and position other social services as better suited for treating crime’s underlying problems . The conversation within MMPD about these two orientations is in part shaping the future of their police work and identity . As MMPD commits more to being data - driven , police workers grapple with how data and technology can and cannot assuage social criticisms , while also inducing reflection on their sociotechnical visions for their work . Precarious and Inactionable Insights Data - driven policing practices are motivated , in part , by police’s desire to make decisions that are arguably more objective , impartial , and can be rationalized through data . While using collected data can lead to empirical data - driven decisions , there is a risk that data - driven insights may still lead to erroneous insights and faulty judgments . In this section , we discuss how various kinds of policing agents , from on - the - ground officers to data analysts , voice their concerns about how data - driven insights may lead to faulty decisions . Disparities in data - driven decision making and insights emerged for our informants in two key ways : faulty inferences from and unintended consequences of being data - driven , and unfeasibility of data - driven decisions . We highlight how data literacy issues exacerbate such concerns . Our data suggests that MMPD grapples with understanding the impact of their efforts through data . MMPD defined impact as changes to crime patterns , community tips , number of people involved in police - community efforts , and other police - community interactions . For example , an informant from the Information and Intelligence Center demonstrates the struggle in correlating improvements in the community with their data - driven effort : “…it is hard to prove… . the Chief is using the data and focusing the efforts … I think it is having an impact , but how do you prove that correlation ? ” [ P10 , civilian at Info and Intel Center ] The challenge of faulty inferences and unintended consequences emerged for MMPD officers through from data - driven decision making . As mentioned in the Research Context , each MMPD district participates in CompStat meetings as a data - driven accountability mechanism . As MMPD’s police agents use data for decision making , disparities in their empirical judgment emerge . For example , an officer demonstrated how resource allocation based solely on crime statistics data becomes problematic : “Here , in southwest district , when our crime rate was really low , then [ the commanders ] would adjust the manpower numbers and say , ‘Well , we usually like to have 30 officers work in that area . For the last six months , crime stats show that the crime is down 50 % . Why don’t we bust those number of officers down…let’s put them over here where crime is rampant . ’ That was not a good idea to do . Unfortunately , [ with ] municipalities , that is the way they work . What you always see is those numbers start to come back up over there where you just pulled those officers… but those crime stats lead to who gets what resources . ” [ P4 , detective ] Data analysis can be insufficient in representing the on - the - ground reality . Other examples about faulty , data - driven inferences include targeting officers’ patrol , which failed to incorporate the officers’ lived experience and knowledge about the area , and evaluating officers based on the number of arrests and tickets , which is not representative of police impact in the community towards reducing crime . As the commanders make sense of historical data to justify resource allocation , they stand to make false inferences about how criminal patterns will and will not be impacted by changing resource allocation , policies , and practices . Similarly , MMPD is also navigating how data use creates unintended consequences from their data - driven crime interventions . For instance , one officer explained a data - driven initiative he undertook to reduce burglaries in a certain area during summer : CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 6 “…we would tell our officers we want you to work in these areas in this particular timeframe for burglaries . Well , burglaries went down for the days we had targeted , but what was interesting is that [ the new patrol patterns ] displaced [ the crime ] . Because on our peak days , officers are out there , [ and ] they’re more visible in these areas in these particular timeframes…peak time for burglaries is between eight and noon on Wednesday . So , what you see is less burglaries on Wednesday between eight and noon . But now , you see more burglaries on Sundays between eight and noon . So , we go back and try something else , think about why [ the burglaries are ] happening in the first place” [ P2 , administrative officer ] As unplanned consequences emerge , MMPD officers figure out how to adjust their approaches for mitigating unwanted outcomes . As police determine how they impact crime when they change city conditions , using data to identify crime may actually be insufficient in reducing crime . While it would be impossible to think of every consequence police decisions can have in the community , this disparity does illuminate quantitative data’s insufficiency in representing reality that future efforts can be based off of . As police navigate the infancy of their data - driven efforts , they have concerns about data literacy , defined as the ability to read , create , and communicate data as information . These concerns range from the officers on - the - ground collecting data to commanders using data for resource allocations and strategies . “There is a data disconnect . [ Commanders ] see it , but they do not understand it… They really do not have a background in statistical information . [ For example , ] one of the commanders was presenting the SDI data for their district . And we were looking at one of the hotspots . And there was a criminal homicide score of 10 . And he presented that score of 10 as 10 individual criminal homicides in that little 250 - foot x 250 - foot area , which actually two criminal homicides happened because each one is a score of five . ” [ P15 , data analyst ] Police decision - makers do not always have a firm grasp of what the data represents when making judgments and how those decisions impact communities . Additionally , without a top - down push towards data literacy , the efforts to be data - driven remain half - hearted . A lack of resources for data - driven efforts , including manpower , technology , and data expertise , makes implementing data - driven decision unfeasible . Here , a patrol officer reflects on how insights about vehicular accidents in the city are futile because their resources for action are limited : “You cannot really predict the certain mile area of where a car crash will occur . We laughed because we were being told that we were going to have more directed patrols [ meaning that they would get precise traffic predictions ] . We know [ the data ] is there , but there isn’t really anything we can do with it because we do not have the manpower . You can keep telling me all along that we are going to have crashes here on the interstate . But if there is only two of us working , we cannot be proactive . We are more reactive than proactive . ” [ P5 , patrol officer ] Proactive , data - driven efforts do not impact the officers on - the - ground because organizations still struggle with insufficient workforce . Similarly , the lack of technological and criminology expertise within the organization makes implementing certain data - driven insights unlikely . For example , informants echoed frustration with the top management’s commitment to the data - driven efforts as he explained the lack of diversified expertise for data analysis : “Sometimes I do not see the action [ from the top management ] . When I was first hired , we were supposed to build a staff of like ten analysts that were from all different walks of the trade . Instead of just having a GIS guy and a couple of legacy analysts , getting a couple well - versed criminologists involved whether that is from the academic side or working in a police force side . I would just like to see a holistic approach to staffing data - driven ideas… the leadership needs to make the resources available instead of just talking about it . ” [ P15 , data analyst ] Without management’s commitment and specialized experts in data science and criminology , their data - driven efforts remain constrained . As MMPD tries to incorporate data into their decision - making , the difficulties in implementing insights require improved data literacy , and technological and expertise resources . Police Metis Concerns While informants indicated data helps justify and guide police actions in the face of growing social criticisms , concerns about the balance between the role of data and experiential , practical knowledge in supporting police work and accountability emerged . In this section , we demonstrate how our informants experience the epistemological bias in being data - driven , and highlight the ways in which quantitative data is insufficient for supporting police work , determining long - term impact on communities , and bolstering their accountability efforts . Police work entails a deep level of qualitative knowledge , referred to here as metis , which includes experiential knowledge , discretion , expert judgment , gut instinct , and biases [ 31 ; 19 ; 16 ; 24 ] . For example , police judgment is useful when deciding to issue a warning instead of ticket , in building relationships and trust in various communities , when dealing with mentally ill individuals , or when dealing with interpersonal conflicts and minor misconducts . Our informants raised concerns about overreliance on data - based insights that neglected police metis . This becomes problematic when data - driven efforts epistemologically favor metrics that can be easily quantified over officer’s lived CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 7 experiences . Examples of qualitative knowledge in police include the kinds of conversations and relationships police have with community members , the types of individuals police engage with , the times and places to patrol accounting for on - the - ground experiences , or how to frame police documentation about community interactions . Several informants pushed back on data - driven insights and their ability to sufficiently inform police work . Because experiential and practical knowledge is essential to the service and practices police engage in , MMPD police officers emphasized the importance of qualitative knowledge in their work ( i . e . , experience , knowledge about the community , relationships , and gut instinct ) . MMPD’s police force grapples with understanding the changing role of police metis when technology and data do and do not support their work . One informant spoke about how he thinks about the role of data in relation to the “human element” of their job . Data supplements work but the experiential and practical component of police work holds more value because of the way experience lends itself to their human - centered work : “I work almost totally on the data side right now , but I will be the first to say that the human side of [ policing ] is the most important [ … ] The data side of it is extremely important too . It can help show the crime that was committed . But beyond that there’s still the whole investigative side that has to be done where [ police ] have to engage in that human element to get confessions and intel that data can’t provide . There is nothing better than a human being doing what they do , especially police officers , out on the street , face - to - face contact , talking to people . [ P8 , officer at Info and Intel Center ] Here , P8 refers to engaging with the “human element” as a skill used to derive information out of individuals and communities they work with . While most of our informants acknowledged data’s potential to support police work , several informants were also quick to temper the role of data in comparison to the “human element” of their jobs . Similarly , a cybercrimes analyst echoed how important it is for police officers to find the middle ground between their own judgment and data : “Well , we cannot take all threats and all incidents and then put them in one predicting police formula . We need worker bees on the ground that take these incidents and analyze them from not only a data perspective , but a human intel and intention perspective as well . You cannot just police from a computer… data doesn’t go take the runs or interact with community members , solve their problems , get confessions . So you can’t have administrators making decisions on data , [ if ] they aren’t in the field with that human intel , ( being data - driven ) is not going to happen” [ P7 , sergeant ] Similarly , P7 points out that police work cannot be heavily based on data because of the role of human interaction in determining context and “intention . ” The human element , to our informants , is important in all stages of policing—from taking runs to investigating crimes to administrative decision - making , and data - driven strategies bring concerns regarding over - reliance on technology . While quantitative data can help police create seemingly objective pictures of their actions , the limitations of quantitative data in supporting police decision - making and work continue to emerge . Another limitation of quantitative data is how the use of technology and data impacts police capacities , skills , and communities . From these informants’ perspective , being data - driven may over - rely on technology and data in ways detrimental to police work and community . For instance , an informant , when speaking about the generational gap in technology usage within the organization , voiced his concern about how technology’s prevalence shapes and interferes with younger officer’s capacities : “…when it comes to the older officers , face to face , boots on their ground , real old - fashioned investigation will always , always trump technology . . . Data is just [ a ] supplement . In the end , a detective still has to exhaust that information and go out and interview or do something and find out if this is the right person . What I actually worry more about is the younger officers who start relying so much on technology . [ Younger police officers have not learned ] how to do that people side of the work . … Sometimes [ I have to ] pull them out of the computer and say , ‘you’ve got a human being sitting down at the entrance , who has information , go talk to him . ’ Or some of the biggest carriers of information for police [ are ] your drug dealers and your prostitutes . The younger officers are not really comfortable street wise , with the social dynamic of talking to people [ P8 , officer at Info and Intel Center ] While a few informants echoed concerns about how data - driven strategies impact police work , P8 indicated that the “people side” of their job is where police impact their communities ; quantitative data is insufficient for capturing impact on community relationships as the social skills required for policing are at risk for these informants . Lastly , quantitative data also falls short in the promises for providing increased accountability for police actions and community relationships . While most of our informants talked of data and technology as largely objective and neutral , one informant directly discussed the biases embedded in data work as well as police work . The informant explained how data , curated to be reported , in community meetings can be shaped into certain narratives : “Biggest challenge with data is accuracy . Here’s what’s bad about data : if you want the numbers to look higher than what they are , then you’re selective about what data you pull . You know , on the local [ community ] level , the numbers are going to say whatever you pull and have them say . ” [ P4 , detective ] CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 8 For this informant , a challenge he sees in quantitative data use in policing is about how data is politicized . Data is shaped based on who is collecting , analyzing , curating and presenting the data and how . Data use in policing for accountability raises issues of how data is used to shape narratives and provide rationality from certain perspectives . While quantitative policing data does provide certain lenses into police action , police’s data - driven strategies are not designed for improved accountability to the community . Big data supports data collection and interpretation of phenomena that can be easily quantified , which means it may leave out critical policing knowledge not well suited for quantification . Through the conversations surrounding the role of data and police metis , MMPD officers question quantitative data’s role and legitimization . As the police use technology and data to portray their work practices as objective and neutral , they also worry how over - reliance on data devalues their metis and consequently , impacts police outcomes , specifically , the police skills and practices fundamental to working with human - beings . DISCUSSION Data and Police Judgement As concerns about police judgment grow in terms of police’s disproportionate and negative impact on marginalized communities , data and technology stand to drive decision - making and police actions [ 21 ; 58 ; 52 ] . Our results indicate that polices’ data use alone is not sufficient to support police action and judgment because quantitative data provides rationalities that hinders police’s ability to understand marginalized communities’ policing criticisms and thus , hampers efforts towards accountability . Our research emphasizes the importance of understanding in what ways and how data can and cannot support police work . Now , we discuss how data could be used more constructively to influence police judgment by facilitating collaborations between the police and community to more robustly inform police’s preconceptions . First , quantitative data can be helpful in providing aggregated views of social issues that perpetuate criminal patterns . One of the frustrations our informants expressed was that while they understand how police actions impact communities negatively , directly addressing crimes’ comorbid issues of poverty , mental illness , and drug addiction are beyond typical police jurisdiction and training . While other scholars argue that police play a role in exacerbating these issues [ 19 ; 12 ] , the role of data in confronting police criticisms could help expand the issues police focus on and provide police with alternative ways of addressing issues . For example , instead of focusing on enforcing the law , through collaborations with social workers , police could be equipped to provide resources ( e . g . , food access , occupational trainings , or job opportunities ) to meet community needs . Second , data can temper police judgement through demonstrating police biases . Data can either confirm or counter their biases , depending on how data collection and analysis occurs . For instance , data could be used to demonstrate police bias driven by preconceptions of poverty and / or race ( i . e . the kinds of cars pulled over , the kinds of people targeted , and the kinds of leeway given to crime in higher social status communities ) . Third , quantitative data can support evidence - driven approaches towards community interventions . Because police agencies ( like most public services ) operate under significant resource constraints , proactive , community - building efforts , guided by big data , can address community needs , and improve access to resources ( i . e . youth programs to provide positive role - models , educational meetings for immigrant communities , drug awareness campaigns , or social work resources ) . Next , we discuss how data interventions would be ill informed if not accompanied by certain kinds of training and collaborations . Community Informed Police Accountability In this section , we address how community involvement potentially addresses some data limitations for the purpose of police accountability . Based on how data is shaped and decontextualized , data makes certain parts of police work invisible , including work practices and stakeholders ( beneficiaries and marginalized communities ) . The practices that are not easily quantified and digitized are important to account for in understanding how police shape data and impact communities . While data can temper issues of police judgment , we must have conversations about the appropriate role of police judgment because data - driven strategies do not eliminate the need for police metis . Subsequently , improving data collection can potentially help with the challenges around accountability , however , solutions for combating issues of data politics in police accountability cannot be effective without deeper community engagement . Previous work in HCI has highlighted the role of technology in community practices around crime [ 68 ; 25 ] . For instance , Erete’s work indicates that while technology can help increase social capital and efficacy in neighborhoods , technology is better suited to supplement community meetings around crime , rather than replace them as citizens participate in local , civic engagement initiatives [ 70 ] . Similarly , from the perpetrator’s perspective , signs of community “cohesion” were larger deterrents in committing crime than the use of surveillance technology [ 69 ] . Community informatics research has demonstrated that technology by itself may not increase communities’ political power , but does provide mechanisms for governmental accountability as well as options for citizens to participate in local decision - making [ 68 ; 67 ] . In order to assist police in becoming more accountable , we recommend that all phases of data work be community - driven . Such community - driven data practices could enable a more transparent way to account for police practices as well as determine how police actions are reflected in the data . This kind of collaboration would pull in stakeholders , including community members , critics , and experts , from the community to be part of data planning ( i . e . data collection , analysis , and implementation ) . Currently , the community is CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 9 presented with data as a final product of police work . However , if police want to legitimize their work through data , data cannot be created and presented to the community as an end product , but rather should be shaped in collaboration with the community . Barriers - to - entry inhibit involvement from minority and marginalized communities , as well as raise issues of power in this context ; depending on who can access being involved , data could carry certain agendas or still reproduce inequalities . Likewise , data literacy is also another issue that would constrain regular , community members from participating . While components of community informed police accountability still need to be figured out , it could provide a constructive way forward . Research shows that higher education and training can improve police performance , police agencies slowly adapt higher education standards and requirements for officers and providing additional training opportunities [ 27 ; 45 ] . Similarly , based on our results , as police implement data - driven strategies , the need for data literacy training is increasingly evident . Data literacy is important for officers throughout the organization , ranging from the administrative officers , who make decisions , to officers on - the - ground , who collect and implement data in the communities . We recommend that data literacy training include case studies demonstrating the politicized nature of data—how data plays a role in confirming and countering biases . In order to combat issues of data politics , it is important for police agents to understand the role data plays in accountability and how they play a role in framing the data before police accountability practices can be more legitimate . Similarly , data training could help police and communities understand how their data practices are tied to organizational missions . Design Implications Current data - driven policing technologies are inadequate in supporting police accountability to the public . A pre - existing condition for accountability is information transparency , which establishes and renders visible how data is produced and used for decision - making . Thus , to support information transparency , designs could present information about how data is produced and used to inform police practice ( i . e . , is race data self - reported by the police officers or gathered from official IDs like driver’s licenses ? How was data analyzed ? ) . Such changes will not eliminate data bias , but presenting information about how the data was produced and by whom may provide an awareness of factors shaping data . Metis , or experiential knowledge , shapes how police make decisions and interact in unpredictable and difficult situations and is unlikely to be entirely quantifiable . To deal with the bias towards quantitative data for supporting rationality , designs could legitimize qualitative data in the design of data - driven technologies . Specifically , designs incorporating more qualitative data forms ( e . g . , police narratives from incident reports , video footage from CCTV and social media , or community members’ accounts through written or audio recorded statements ) can help police officers reflect on how they produce data and how that data supports decision - making . More specifically , designs supporting the collection , exploration , and visualization of both qualitative and quantitative data could foster a certain level of integration of metis , or at least consideration of , in data - driven tools and practices . Further , for accountability purposes , police actions cannot be captured in their entirety through just police collected and interpreted data . Thus , we recommend the community be directly involved by providing official methods for documenting community’s perspectives . Currently , some systems already exist that document police - citizen interactions ( e . g . , www . copwatch . org ) , however , they are not officially considered by police during investigations . Thus , there is a need for officially capturing citizen perspectives where the power of shaping narratives does not lie just with policing agents . Without considering either police metis or a community’s lived experience , data - driven accountability efforts will likely remain insufficient , or worse , provide a false sense of security in terms of what the data does and does not reflect about police actions . Lastly , in order to better support the vision of proactivity behind data - driven policing , new tools for patrol officers could support information discoverability of local , social programs and resources ( e . g . , categorized information about local agencies for housing , jobs , or food access ; social workers’ contact information ) . Such knowledge could help community relations as police become a source of local knowledge for those in need . CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK For the informants at MMPD , challenges of adopting data - driven strategies in policing are experienced as they negotiate the sociotechnical visions for their work , some of which were explicitly meant to confront social criticisms of policing . In this paper , we have made the following contributions : identified three key challenges in adopting of data - driven policing ; identified how data can support and constrain police work and accountability ; provided design implications for data use in police accountability . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the informants at MMPD for sharing their time and experiences with us . We also thank Davide Bolchini , Alyson Young and Erin Brady for feedback on earlier drafts . REFERENCES 1 . Alana Northrop , Kenneth L . Kraemer , and John Leslie King . 1995 . Police use of computers . Journal of Criminal Justice 23 , no . 3 : 259 - 275 . 2 . Allan E . Lind , and Tom R . Tyler . 1988 . The social psychology of procedural justice . Springer Science & Business Media . 3 . Anthony A . Braga and David L . Weisburd . 2015 . Police innovation and crime prevention : Lessons learned from police research over the past 20 years . SSRN . CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 10 4 . Barak Ariel , Alex Sutherland , Darren Henstock , Josh Young , Paul Drover , Jayne Sykes , Simon Megicks , and Ryan Henderson . 2016 . Wearing body cameras increases assaults against officers and does not reduce police use of force : Results from a global multi - site experiment . ” European Journal of Criminology 13 , no . 6 : 744 - 755 . 5 . Barak Ariel , William A . Farrar , and Alex Sutherland . 2015 . The effect of police body - worn cameras on use of force and citizens’ complaints against the police : A randomized controlled trial . Journal of quantitative criminology 31 , no . 3 : 509 - 535 . 6 . Brian Reaves . 2013 . Local Police Departments , 2013 : Personnel , Policies , and Practices . Retrieved August 20 , 2017 https : / / www . bjs . gov / content / pub / pdf / lpd13ppp . pdf 7 . Carol A . Archbold . 2012 . Policing : A text / reader . Sage . 8 . Chris Bopp , Ellie Harmon , and Amy Voida . 2017 . Disempowered by Data : Nonprofits , Social Enterprises , and the Consequences of Data - Driven Work . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 3608 - 3619 . ACM . 9 . Community Oriented Policing Services . 2017 . Retrieved September 1 , 2017 from http : / / www . cops . usdoj . gov 10 . Danah Boyd and Kate Crawford . 2012 . Critical questions for big data : Provocations for a cultural , technological , and scholarly phenomenon . Information , communication & society 15 , no . 5 : 662 - 679 . 11 . David Alan Sklansky . 2011 . The Persistent Pull of Police Professionalism , NEW PERSPECTIVES IN POLICING . Harvard Kennedy Sch . , Cambridge , Mass . & Nat’l Inst . of Just . 12 . David Jacobs and David Britt . 1979 . Inequality and police use of deadly force : An empirical assessment of a conflict hypothesis . ” Social Problems 26 , no . 4 : 403 - 412 . 13 . David Weisburd and Anthony A . Braga . 2006 . Hot spots policing as a model for police innovation . ” Police innovation : Contrasting perspectives : 225 - 244 . 14 . David Weisburd , Stephen D . Mastrofski , Ann McNally , Rosann Greenspan , and James J . Willis . 2003 . Reforming to preserve : Compstat and strategic problem solving in American policing . ” Criminology & Public Policy 2 , no . 3 : 421 - 456 . 15 . Dean Dabney . 2010 . Observations regarding key operational realities in a Compstat model of policing . Justice Quarterly 27 , no . 1 : 28 - 51 . 16 . Debra Livingston . 1997 . Police discretion and the quality of life in public places : Courts , communities , and the new policing . ” Columbia Law Review : 551 - 672 . 17 . Dennis P . Rosenbaum . 1994 . The challenge of community policing : Testing the promises . Sage publications . 18 . Earl Hardy . 2010 . “Data - Driven Policing : How Geographic Analysis Can Reduce Social Harm . In Geography Public Safety 2 , 3 . 19 . Egon Bittner . 1967 . Police discretion in emergency apprehension of mentally ill persons . Social problems 14 , no . 3 : 278 - 292 . 20 . Elizabeth E . Joh . 2014 . Policing by numbers : big data and the Fourth Amendment . SSRN . 21 . Gareth Morgan , Fred Gregory , and Cameron Roach . 1997 . Images of organization . 22 . George E . Capowich and Janice A . Roehl . 1994 . Problem - oriented policing : Actions and effectiveness in San Diego . The challenge of community policing : Testing the promises : 127 - 146 . 23 . Hans Toch . 2008 . Police officers as change agents in police reform . ” Policing & Society 18 , no . 1 : 60 - 71 . 24 . James C . Scott . 1998 . Seeing like a state : How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed . Yale University Press . 25 . Jan Blom , Divya Viswanathan , Mirjana Spasojevic , Janet Go , Karthik Acharya , and Robert Ahonius . 2010 . Fear and the city : role of mobile services in harnessing safety and security in urban use contexts . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1841 - 1850 . ACM , 2010 . 26 . Janet B . Chan . 2001 . The technological game : How information technology is transforming police practice . Criminal Justice , 1 ( 2 ) , 139 - 159 . 27 . Jason Rydberg and William Terrill . 2010 . The effect of higher education on police behavior . Police Quarterly 13 , no . 1 : 92 - 120 . 28 . Jason Sunshine and Tom R . Tyler . 2003 . The role of procedural justice and legitimacy in shaping public support for policing . ” Law & society review 37 , no . 3 : 513 - 548 . 29 . Jay Stanley . 2013 . Police body - mounted cameras : With right policies in place , a win for all . New York : ACLU ( 2013 ) . 30 . Jenni Swenson . 2014 . Establishing an ethical literacy for learning analytics . In Proceedings of the CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 11 Fourth International Conference on Learning Analytics And Knowledge , pp . 246 - 250 . ACM . 31 . Joseph Goldstein . 1960 . Police discretion not to invoke the criminal process : Low - visibility decisions in the administration of justice . The Yale Law Journal 69 , no . 4 : 543 - 594 . 32 . Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss . 2008 . Basics of qualitative research : Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Thousand Oaks . 33 . Kate Crawford . 2013 . The hidden biases in big data . HBR Blog Network 1 . 34 . Kathleen H . Pine and Max Liboiron . 2015 . The politics of measurement and action . ” In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 3147 - 3156 . ACM . 35 . Kathleen H . Pine and Melissa Mazmanian . 2014 . Institutional logics of the EMR and the problem of ‘perfect’ but inaccurate accounts . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing , pp . 283 - 294 . ACM . 36 . Kathleen H . Pine and Melissa Mazmanian . 2015 . Emerging Insights on Building Infrastructure for Data - Driven Transparency and Accountability of Organizations . ” iConference 2015 Proceedings . 37 . Ken Peak and Emmanuel P . Barthe . 2009 . Community Policing and CompStat : Merged , or Mutually Exclusive ? Police Chief 76 , no . 12 : 72 . 38 . Kristian Lum . 2017 . Limitations of mitigating judicial bias with machine learning . Nature Human Behaviour 1 , no . 7 : s41562 - 017 . 39 . Kristian Williams . 2015 . Our enemies in blue : Police and power in America . AK Press . 40 . Landon Winner . 1999 . Do artifacts have politics ? In The Social Shaping of Technology ( 2nd . ed . ) , Donald MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman ( eds . ) . Open University Press , Buckingham , UK , 28 - 40 . 41 . Laurel Eckhouse . 2017 . Big data may be reinforcing racial bias in the criminal justice system . Retrieved September 10 , 2017 from https : / / www . washingtonpost . com / opinions / big - data - may - be - reinforcing - racial - bias - in - the - criminal - justice - system / 2017 / 02 / 10 / d63de518 - ee3a - 11e6 - 9973 - c5efb7ccfb0d _ story . html ? utm _ term = . 1624e4a93d3 a 42 . Lucy Suchman . 1993 . Do categories have politics ? The language / action perspective reconsidered . In Proceedings of the Third European Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work 13 – 17 September 1993 , Milan , Italy ECSCW’93 , pp . 1 - 14 . Springer Netherlands , 1993 . 43 . Luis Garicano and Paul Heaton . 2010 . Information technology , organization , and productivity in the public sector : Evidence from police departments . Journal of Labor Economics 28 , no . 1 : 167 - 201 . 44 . Malcolm K . Sparrow . 1988 . Implementing community policing . No . 9 . Washington , DC : US Department of Justice , National Institute of Justice . 45 . Mark Bond . 2014 . How education impacts police performance . Retrieved September 2 , 2017 from http : / / inpublicsafety . com / 2014 / 07 / how - education - impacts - police - performance / 46 . Matthew Marshall , David S . Kirk , and John Vines . 2016 . Accountable : Exploring the Inadequacies of Transparent Financial Practice in the Non - Profit Sector . ” In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 1620 - 1631 . ACM . 47 . Nitya Verma and Amy Voida . 2016 . On Being Actionable : Mythologies of Business Intelligence and Disconnects in Drill Downs . ” In GROUP , pp . 325 - 334 . 48 . Patricia Reeves and Walter L . Burt . 2006 . Challenges in data - based decision - making : Voices from principals . ” educational HORIZONS 85 , no . 1 : 65 - 71 . 49 . Peter K . Manning . 1992 . Information technologies and the police . Crime and Justice 15 : 349 - 398 . 50 . Peter K . Manning . 2001 . Technology’s ways : Information technology , crime analysis and the rationalizing of policing . Criminal Justice 1 , no . 1 : 83 - 103 . 51 . Peter K . Manning . 2005 . The study of policing . Police quarterly 8 , no . 1 : 23 - 43 . 52 . Peter K . Manning . 2008 . The technology of policing . Crime mapping , information technology . 53 . Peter K . Manning . 2014 . Information technology and police work . In Encyclopedia of criminology and criminal justice , pp . 2501 - 2513 . Springer New York . 54 . Peter K . Manning . 2015 . Researching policing using qualitative methods . In The Routledge handbook of qualitative criminology . Copes , Heith , and J . Mitchell Miller , eds . Routledge . 55 . Policing . 2016 . Retrieved September 5 , 2017 https : / / hrdag . org / policing / 56 . Rebecca Ferguson , Doug Clow , Leah Macfadyen , Alfred Essa , Shane Dawson , and Shirley Alexander . 2014 . Setting learning analytics in context : overcoming the barriers to large - scale adoption . In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Learning Analytics And Knowledge , pp . 251 - 253 . ACM , 2014 . CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 12 57 . Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic . 2015 . Critical perspectives on police , policing , and mass incarceration . Geo . LJ 104 : 1531 . 58 . Richard V . Ericson and Kevin D . Haggerty . 1997 . Policing the risk society . OUP Oxford . 59 . Rob Kitchin . 2014 . Big Data , new epistemologies and paradigm shifts . Big Data & Society 1 , no . 1 ( 2014 ) : 2053951714528481 . 60 . Robert K . Yin . 1994 . Case study research . Thousand Oaks : Sage Publications . 61 . Ronald Davis , Roy Austin , and DJ Patil . 2016 . Growing Numbers of Communities Are Using Data To Improve Policing and Criminal Justice . Retrieved August 20 , 2017 https : / / www . justice . gov / archives / opa / blog / growing - number - communities - are - using - data - improve - policing - and - criminal - justice 62 . Samuel Nunn and Kenna Quinet . 2002 . Evaluating the effects of information technology on problem - oriented - policing : If it doesn’t fit , must we quit ? . ” Evaluation Review 26 , no . 1 : 81 - 108 . 63 . Samuel Nunn . 2001 . Police information technology : Assessing the effects of computerization on urban police functions . Public Administration Review 61 , no . 2 : 221 - 234 . 64 . Samuel Nunn . 2001 . Police technology in cities : changes and challenges . Technology in Society 23 , no . 1 ( 2001 ) : 11 - 27 . 65 . Sarah Brayne . 2017 . Big Data Surveillance : The Case of Policing . American Sociological Review ( 2017 ) : 0003122417725865 . 66 . Seeta P . Gangadharan . 2012 . Digital inclusion and data profiling . ” First Monday 17 , no . 5 . 67 . Sheena L . Erete and Jennifer O . Burrell . 2017 . Empowered Participation : How Citizens Use Technology in Local Governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 2307 - 2319 . ACM . 68 . Sheena L . Erete . 2013 . Empowerment through community crime - prevention technologies . Interactions 20 , no . 6 ( 2013 ) : 27 - 31 . 69 . Sheena L . Erete . 2013 . Protecting the home : exploring the roles of technology and citizen activism from a burglar’s perspective . In Proceedings of the sigchi conference on human factors in computing systems , pp . 2507 - 2516 . ACM , 2013 . 70 . Sheena L . Erete . 2015 . Engaging around neighborhood issues : How online communication affects offline behavior . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , pp . 1590 - 1601 . ACM , 2015 . 71 . Sheena Lewis and Dan A . Lewis . 2011 . Digitalizing crime prevention theories : How technology affects victim and offender behavior . ” International Journal of Criminology and Sociological Theory 4 , no . 2 . 72 . Stephen D . Mastrofski , James J . Willis , and Tammy Rinehart Kochel . 2007 . The challenges of implementing community policing in the United States . ” Policing : A Journal of Policy and Practice 1 , no . 2 : 223 - 234 . 73 . Susan Sadd and Randolph M . Grinc . 1994 . Innovative neighborhood - oriented policing : Descriptions of programs in eight cities . ” New York : Vera Institute of Justice . 74 . Tammy Rinehart Kochel . 2011 . Constructing hot spots policing : Unexamined consequences for disadvantaged populations and for police legitimacy . ” Criminal Justice Policy Review 22 , no . 3 : 350 - 374 . 75 . Tom R . Tyler . 2006 . Why people obey the law . Princeton University Press . CHI 2018 Honourable Mention CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada Paper 469 Page 13