TRANSFER STRAND Alternative Perspectives on the Transfer of Learning : History , Issues , and Challenges for Future Research Joanne Lobato Department of Mathematics and Statistics San Diego State University A central and enduring goal of education is to provide learning experiences that are useful beyond the specific conditions of initial learning . For example , the design of innovative curricular materials and pedagogical approaches is often aimed at help - ing students develop robust understandings that will generalize to decision making and problem solving in other situations , both inside and outside the classroom . Other instructional approaches are aimed at improving the chances that later learn - ing is maximized . However , researchers’progress in understanding and supporting the generalization of learning has been limited due to methodological and theoreti - cal problems with the transfer construct . Numerous critiques of transfer ( Beach , 1999 ; Evans , 1998 ; Greeno , 1997 ; Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition , 1983 ; Lave , 1988 ; Packer , 2001 ; Tuomi - Gröhn & Engeström , 2003 ) have contrib - uted to a growing acknowledgment that “there is little agreement in the scholarly community about the nature of transfer , the extent to which it occurs , and the na - ture of its underlying mechanisms” ( Barnett & Ceci , 2002 , p . 612 ) . Carraher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) advocated abandoning transfer as a research construct because of the deep association of transfer with what they considered a fundamentally flawed transportation metaphor—the passive “carrying over” ( p . 19 ) of knowledge from one situation to another once learners recognized the simi - THE JOURNAL OF THE LEARNING SCIENCES , 15 ( 4 ) , 431 – 449 Copyright © 2006 , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Correspondence should be addressed to Joanne Lobato , Department of Mathematics and Statistics , San Diego State University , 6475 Alvarado Rd . , Suite 3206 , San Diego , CA 92120 . E - mail : lobato @ saturn . sdsu . edu larity between situations . Specifically , they contended that the following transfer dilemma had arisen : If one rejects the idea of transfer on the grounds that it is seri - ously misconceived , then the notion that new learning is constructed from previous learning seems to be denied ; if one accepts transfer , then questionable beliefs about knowledge seemed to be endorsed , particularly with respect to the ways in which abstraction , knowledge , and context are conceived . Other researchers side - stepped the apparent transfer dilemma by adopting a view that learning and trans - fer are conceptually indistinguishable , thus negating the need to devote special at - tention to transfer ( e . g . , Campione , Shapiro , & Brown , 1995 ) . Incontrast , severalalternativeapproachestotransferhaveemergedinresponseto the critiques of transfer : ( a ) transfer as consequential transitions ( Beach , 1999 , 2003 ) ; ( b ) the affordancesandconstraints approach ( Greeno , 1997 ; Greeno , Smith , & Moore , 1993 ) ; ( c ) preparation for future learning ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ; Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) ; ( d ) the actor - oriented transfer perspective ( Lobato , 2003 , in press - a ) ; and ( e ) several activity theoretic perspectives ( Tuomi - Gröhn & Engeström , 2003 ; vanOers , 2004 ) . Thesealternativeperspectiveshaveofferedare - thinking of transfer , including new definitions , metaphors , and methods . Inlightofthisactivity , theNationalScienceFoundationfundedtwoconferences : The first supported by the Social , Behavioral , and Economic Sciences Directorate ( see Mestre , 2003 , 2005 ) , and the second supported by the Education and Human Resources Directorate ( see Lobato , 2004b ) . Evidence for the endurance and timeli - ness of the transfer issue were also demonstrated in the publication of two edited books : Between School and Work : New Perspectives on Transfer and Bound - ary - Crossing ( Tuomi - Gröhn & Engeström , 2003 ) and Transfer of Learning From a ModernMultidisciplinaryPerspective ( Mestre , 2005 ) . Inhispresidentialaddressto the American Educational Research Association , Schoenfeld ( 1999 ) identified transfer as one of six most basic and pressing arenas in which educational research needed to make progress in the 21st century . He argued that even if one saw transfer as a subset of learning , the need for a renewed theory of transfer remained . In an effort to support productive discussion , debate , and resolution regarding key issues related to transfer , the Journal of the Learning Sciences ( JLS ) is spon - soring a 3 - year strand on transfer . This introductory piece to the transfer strand briefly traces the historical debate regarding the nature of transfer , identifies the conceptual and empirical progress that has been made by recent alternative per - spectives on transfer , and presents several research challenges . THE CONTESTED NATURE OF TRANSFER The Classical Transfer Perspective The classical transfer approach refers to the family of common elements theories that dominated the 20th century , starting with Thorndike’s ( 1906 ) identical ele - 432 LOBATO ments and more recently the cognitive instantiation of Thorndike’s approach ( e . g . , see Anderson , Corbett , Koedinger , & Pelletier , 1995 ) . According to Thorndike , transfer occurs to the extent to which original learning and transfer situations share identical elements—typically interpreted as shared features of physical environ - ments or common stimulus elements , especially by later behaviorists ( see Cox , 1997 , for a more detailed historical account ) . With the cognitive revolution , the notion of identical elements was reformu - lated as mental symbolic representations . That is , people construct symbolic repre - sentations of initial learning and transfer situations . Transfer occurs if these two representations are identical , if they overlap , or if a mapping can be constructed that relates features of the two representations ( Anderson et al . , 1995 ; Reed , 1993 ; Sternberg & Frensch , 1993 ) . Whereas some accounts of the history of transfer distinguish between the envi - ronmental theory of Thorndike and more recent cognitive approaches ( e . g . , see Royer , Mestre , & Dufresne , 2005 ; Tuomi - Gröhn & Engeström , 2003 ) , others con - ceive of a historical lineage from associationist to cognitivist perspectives on trans - fer ( e . g . , DeCorte , 1999 ) . Infact , SingleyandAnderson ( 1989 ) intheirseminalcog - nitive account of transfer explained that they “resurrected Thorndike’s theory by redefining his identical elements as the units of declarative and procedural knowl - edge in the ACT * theory” ( p . 248 ) . Despite the adaptations—from the brain cell / en - vironmental“mentalism”ofThorndike , tothestimuluselementsofthebehaviorists , and later to the if - then goals of cognitive production systems—the historical focus on common elements has remained ( Cox , 1997 ) . As summarized in a report by the NationalResearchCouncil , “Transferbetweentasksisrelatedtothedegreetowhich they share common elements , although the concept of elements must be defined cognitively” ( Bransford , Brown , & Cocking , 2000 , p . 78 ) . Critiques of the Classical Transfer Approach As with any mainstream thought , there are always challenges to it . In the case of transfer , those were not taken up historically for most of the 20th century . Two of these intellectual challenges merit brief mention . First , more than 100 years ago Høffding ( 1892 ) argued for psychological similarity and against similar ele - ments of task features as the basis of transfer , urging that “what matters is how the new situation is connected with the thinker’s trace of a previous situation , which may be quite idiosyncratic” ( cited in Pea , 1989 , pp . 8 – 9 ) . Second , Thorndike’s elementalism was questioned by Judd ( 1908 ) , who proposed that transfer is determined by the extent to which the learner is aware of underlying shared causal principles or deep structure . The preeminence of structural simi - larity ( i . e . , meaningful understanding ) over common surface features also found a voice among the Gestaltists ( e . g . , Katona , 1940 ; Wertheimer , 1945 / 1959 ) . Al - though these voices of dissent tended to be isolated , dissatisfaction with the clas - TRANSFER OF LEARNING 433 sical transfer perspective gained momentum in the 1980s and 1990s , when re - searchers began questioning the conceptualization of transfer by bringing to bear the assumptions about knowing , knowers , learning , and context from the theo - retical perspective of situated cognition ( captured most forcefully in Lave’s 1988 book , Cognition in Practice ) . The purpose of this article is not to add to the existing critiques of transfer , of which there are many . Rather , this article proposes that differentiating conceptual concerns from other issues ( e . g . , methods or knowledge organization ) can have important consequences for scholarship in this field . I argue , for example , that if conceptual problems are conflated with methodological problems , then it is easy to make minor methodological adjustments without responding to the more serious concerns raised regarding the conceptual roots of transfer . To advance this argu - ment , I first consider five theoretical problems with the classical transfer approach . First , classical transfer studies privilege the perspective of the observer and rely on models of expert performance , accepting as evidence of transfer only specific correspondences defined a priori as being the “right” mappings ( Evans , 1998 ; Lobato , 2003 ) . Consequently , transfer experiments can become what Lave ( 1988 ) called an “unnatural , laboratory game in which the task becomes to get the subject to match the experimenter’s expectations , ” rather than an investigation of the “pro - cesses employed as people naturally bring their knowledge to bear on novel prob - lems” ( p . 20 ) . Second , at the root of the transfer problem is a functionalist view of knowledge in which “the beneficial cognitive consequences of decontextualized learning , freeing oneself from experience” are seen as “a condition for generaliza - tion about experience” ( Lave , 1988 , p . 41 ) . From a situated perspective , the notion of detaching from concrete experience is problematic because knowledge cannot be isolated from practice and meaningfully studied ( Brown , Collins , & Duguid , 1989 ; Hall , 1996 ; Packer , 2001 ; van Oers , 1998 ) . Third , according to critics , transfer researchers often interpret context as the task presented to students and analyze the structure of tasks independently of the students’ purposes and construction of meaning in situations ( Carraher & Schliemann , 2002 ; Cobb & Bowers , 1999 ; Greeno , 1997 ) . Fourth , the “applying knowledge” metaphor of transfer suggests that knowledge is theoretically separa - ble from the situations in which it is developed or used , rather than a function of ac - tivity , social interactions , culture , history , and context . As a result , this view of transfer is severely limited by ignoring the contribution of the environment , arti - facts , and other people to the organization and support of the generalization of learning ( Beach , 1995 , 1999 ; Guberman & Greenfield , 1991 ; Laboratory of Com - parative Human Cognition , 1983 ; Lave , 1988 ; Pea , 1989 ) . Finally , the static nature of the application or transportation metaphor suggests that “the formation of trans - fer environments are not assumed to be an actual part of the process , but rather are seen as differentially supporting or interfering with it” ( Beach , 2003 , p . 40 ) . Con - sequently , the classical transfer approach does not account for the ways in which 434 LOBATO people often change transfer situations until they become similar to something they know ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . Isolating Concerns With the Conceptualization of Transfer From Issues Regarding Its Occurrence In addition to the aforementioned problems , the transfer literature has suffered from a paradox regarding its occurrence . On the one hand , obtaining transfer in both laboratory and school - based studies remains largely elusive ( Detterman , 1993 ; Gruber , Law , Mandl , & Renkl , 1996 ) ; on the other hand , nearly all learning theories presume that as people learn , they are continually using prior knowledge ( Bereiter , 1995 ; Dewey , 1938 ; Hatano & Greeno , 1999 ) . A number of researchers have critiqued the classical transfer approach on methodological grounds and have demonstrated greater levels of transfer by ( a ) moving from one - trial learning situa - tions to ensuring that students have the opportunity to understand a procedure , principle , or theory deeply enough to apply later ( Mayer , 1999 ) ; ( b ) shifting from the use of learning transfer tasks that share only structural features to the inclusion of tasks that also share some common surface features ( Novick , 1988 ) ; and ( c ) moving away from the use of independent problem solving as a test of transfer to the use of group assessments in which people can utilize resources and gather addi - tional information ( Fortus , Krajcik , Dershimer , Marx , & Mamlok - Naaman , 2005 ) . Others have explained the lack of transfer in research studies by distinguishing types of transfer . Butterfield and Nelson ( 1991 ) identified four categories of trans - fer ( within - task , across - tasks , discriminative , and inventive transfer ) . Perkins and Salomon ( 1988 ) distinguished between two forms of transfer ( low - road and high - road transfer ) . Barnett and Ceci ( 2002 ) created a taxonomy with nine dimen - sions , including categories for types of knowledge and types of transfer situations . These category systems have been used to reclassify the transfer literature and demonstrate categories in which transfer is in fact substantial . Although these organizational and methodological changes have provided im - portantinsightsintotheoccurrenceoftransfer ( or , moreaccurately , thelackthereof ) , it is also important to note that these adjustments can be adopted without addressing the concerns raised byLave ( 1988 ) and manyothers regarding the conceptual foun - dations of transfer . For example , research studies on transfer are still dominated by questions such as the following ( see summaries in Bransford et al . , 2000 ; Mestre , 2003 ) : ( a ) What conditions or factors facilitate transfer ? ( b ) Is transfer hindered by the compartmentalization or contextualization of instruction ? and ( c ) How can edu - cation prepare people to recognize the cues that signal application of appropriate knowledge ? However , eachquestionsuggeststhattransferisanunproblematiccon - sensual construct ; the only challenge being the facilitation of its occurrence . The situation is further muddied when conceptual and empirical claims are con - fused ( De Corte , 1999 ; Packer , 2001 ) . It is easy to conclude from Lave’s ( 1988 ) TRANSFER OF LEARNING 435 work that according to the situated cognition perspective , knowledge cannot trans - fer because it is so strongly embedded in the context in which it is acquired ( Ander - son , Reder , & Simon , 1996 ) . Greeno ( 1997 ) contested this interpretation by re - sponding that Lave’s point was misinterpreted as an empirical one when it was a conceptual one . According to Greeno , Lave’s argument concerned the issue of “how the question of generality and transfer should be formulated , not whether ‘transfer’ occurs” ( p . 12 ) . In fact , Lave acknowledged the existence of “continuity of activity across situations” while maintaining that “learning transfer” ( as cur - rently constituted ) was “not the central source of continuity” ( p . 186 ) . Identifying the Phenomenon Captured by Transfer Some of the alternative transfer perspectives have emerged not in order to offer an improved approach to the same phenomenon captured by classical measures , but to explore a different ( but related ) underlying phenomenon . For example , from the classical perspective , transfer is defined as the application of knowledge learned in one context to a new context ( Bransford et al . , 2000 ) . From the actor - oriented trans - fer perspective , transfer is defined as the generalization of learning , which can also be understood as the influence of learners’prior activities on their activity in novel situations ( Lobato , 2003 , in press - b ) . These definitions seem similar until one looks morecloselyatthemethodsemployedineachapproach . Althoughresearchersoper - ating from a classical perspective describe transfer as the influence of prior learning experiences on attempts to solve problems in new situations ( Marini & Genereux , 1995 ; Reed , Ernst , & Banerji , 1974 ) , in practice they examine the formation of par - ticular , highlyvaluedgeneralizationsratherthanthegeneralizationoflearningmore broadly ( Lobato , in press - b ) . This is due to both a reliance on expert models of per - formance and a requirement of correct performance on transfer tasks . Specifically , researchers operating from a classical transfer perspective typi - cally present participants with a sequence of tasks that share some structural fea - tures ( e . g . , a common solution approach or shared principle ) but have different sur - face forms ( e . g . , different word problem contexts ) , according to the researcher’s ( or other expert’s ) knowledge of the topic . Participants are then taught some solu - tion strategy , principle , or procedure with the initial learning task . If the partici - pants perform better on a transfer task than does a control group ( who receives the transfer task but no learning tasks ) , then positive transfer is said to have occurred . When performance improves , the researcher infers that students have generalized some aspect of the learning experience to the transfer tasks . In contrast , evidence for transfer from an actor - oriented perspective is found by scrutinizing a given activity for any indication of influence from previous activities and by examining how people appear to construe situations as similar using ethnographic methods , rather than relying upon statistical measures based on im - proved performance ( Lobato , in press - b ) . This allows for instances of generalizing 436 LOBATO to be captured by the actor - oriented transfer approach that would not be counted as transfer in the classical approach ( Lobato , in press - a ) . For example , Lobato and Siebert ( 2002 ) performed two analyses on a case study—one from a classical transfer perspective and one from an actor - oriented perspective . Whereas the clas - sical analysis demonstrated failure to transfer the slope formula , the actor - oriented analysis documented substantial ways in which the student’s proportional reason - ing in the transfer situation was influenced by learning experiences from a teaching experiment . In sum , transfer from the classical approach is the application from one setting to another of a predetermined set of knowledge from the researcher’s or expert’s point of view ; transfer from the actor - oriented perspective is the influence of learners’prior activities on their activity in novel situations , which entails any of the ways in which learning generalizes . Understanding which phenomena are investigated by various transfer perspec - tives involves an analysis of what transfers , the agency of transfer , and the context in which transfer occurs . This point is illustrated by contrasting five transfer ap - proaches : 1 . In classical transfer studies , researchers typically use improved performance as a measure of transfer , predetermining “what” will transfer rather than making the “what” an object of investigation . 2 . In contrast , diSessa and Wagner ( 2005 ) utilized coordination class theory to posit a transfer perspective that depends on careful analysis of an individual’s knowledge , not merely successful or unsuccessful performance . 3 . In the situative account offered by Greeno and colleagues ( Greeno , 1997 ; Greeno et al . , 1993 ) , both content knowledge and social positioning is emphasized . Transfer is redefined as the extent to which participating in an activity in one situa - tion influences one’s ability to participate in another activity in a different situa - tion . What transfers is not knowledge from task to task but patterns of participation across situations . 4 . In Beach’s ( 1999 , 2003 ) consequential transitions approach , transfer is not taken as the reproduction of something that had been acquired elsewhere ; rather it is conceived as a transition involving the transformation of knowledge , skill , and identity across multiple forms of social organization . 5 . Whereas Beach focused on developmental trajectories of relationships be - tween individuals and social context , Tuomi - Gröhn and Engeström ( 2003 ) focused on developmental trajectories of collective activity in different social organiza - tions . By drawing on activity theory , they treated transfer as the proliferation of collective practices . By considering a variety of phenomena that can be captured by different con - ceptualizations of transfer , I am not arguing that one phenomenon is most fruitful for investigation . Instead there are points of tension and compatibility among the TRANSFER OF LEARNING 437 various emerging models of transfer , as well as tradeoffs that each approach makes given the purposes for which each perspective was developed . The point instead is that the historical development of transfer has reached a point in which the “it” un - derlying an investigation of transfer can no longer be assumed to be a well - agreed - upon construct . Consequently , the growing maturity in the field makes it necessary for researchers to clarify the phenomenon that they are investi - gating and provide a rationale for how the particular transfer definition and ap - proach that is utilized fits the object of investigation . ALTERNATIVE PERSPECTIVES ON TRANSFER : CONTRIBUTIONS AND CHALLENGES Although Lave ( 1988 ) questioned the conceptualization of transfer in terms of its definitionorcharacterization , shealsopointedtoarethinkingoftransferalongmany dimensions . She did this by bringing to bear the assumptions about knowledge , learners , and context from a situated cognition perspective . One goal of the JLS transferstrandistobecomeanewvoiceforagroupthathastriedholisticallytoques - tion transfer from multiple dimensions as opposed to making minor adjustments alongasingledimension . Inthissection , Idiscusstheprogressthathasbeenmadere - thinking three important dimensions—the metaphor of transfer , conceptions of ab - straction , and transfer mechanisms . Additionally , I point to some remaining issues and challenges along the dimensions of abstraction and transfer processes . Metaphors One point of general agreement across various alternative transfer perspectives has been to replace the static application or transportation metaphor underlying trans - fer with a dynamic metaphor , such as production ( Lobato , 2003 ) or transformation ( Cobb & Bowers , 1999 ; Greeno et al . , 1993 ) . The classical transfer metaphor sug - gests that the tasks across which transfer occurs remain unchanged during transfer and that the “transferor” reproduces existing relations between fixed tasks ( Beach , 1999 ; Sfard , 1998 ) . In contrast , numerous researchers have provided evidence that the generalization of learning appears to be a more dynamic process than has been previously understood . For example , Carraher and Schliemann ( 2002 ) demonstrated that engagement with transfer situations can prompt people to reconstruct their understanding of initial learning situations in order to create relations of similarity with the transfer situation . Saxe ( 1989 ) characterized transfer in the context of everyday problem solving as a protracted process of repeated constructions of appropriation and spe - cialization rather than as an immediate alignment of prior knowledge to a new functional context . Lobato and Siebert ( 2002 ) documented a case study in which a 438 LOBATO student demonstrated evidence of transfer only after he appeared to reconstruct his understanding of the relationships among measurable quantities in a complex transfer situation . In each of these cases , the generalizing process involved chang - ing environments and constructing relations rather than reproducing existing rela - tions between unchanged tasks . In the preparation for future learning approach , Bransford and Schwartz ( 1999 ) made the dynamic aspects of transfer a structural part of their reformulation of transfer . As the name suggests , the preparation for future learning approach inves - tigates how people have been prepared to learn to solve novel problems ( Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears , 2005 ) . Rather than looking at how people directly apply old knowledge to solve new instances of problems in contexts in which people are de - prived of the real world conditions that they would ordinarily exploit ( such as so - liciting help from colleagues , seeking additional learning resources , and having opportunities to obtain feedback ) , the preparation for future learning approach demonstrates how the usefulness of prior knowledge may not be apparent until people have been given the opportunity to learn new information ( Schwartz & Martin , 2004 ) . In doing so , they document how people often change the transfer situation until it becomes similar to something they know ( Bransford & Schwartz , 1999 ) . In a similar effort to capture transfer in learning settings , Rebello et al . ( 2005 ) offered a model for documenting “dynamic transfer” as it is constructed in physics teaching interviews . Their model casts transfer as a dynamic phenomenon in which learners construct knowledge in targeted transfer situations . Abstraction Responding to critiques related to the roles of abstraction and decontextualization in transfer has been more challenging then tackling issues related to metaphor . In main - stream cognitive accounts of transfer , the formation of sufficiently abstract representa - tions is a necessary condition for transfer ( Reed , 1993 ; Singley & Anderson , 1989 ) . Abstraction is typically conceived as the extraction of commonalities from a set of concrete examples ( e . g . , Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ) . As a result , it is deemed important for learners to engage with multiple situations and to compare problem solutions in or - der to construct an abstract representation spanning them ( Chen & Daehler , 2000 ; Gentner , Loewenstein , & Thompson , 2003 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ) . Abstraction is thus conceived as a process of decontextualization . According to Fuchs et al . ( 2003 ) , abstractions “delete details across exemplars … and avoid contextual specificity so they can be applied to other instances or across situations” ( p . 294 ) . As mentioned previously , the notion of detaching from concrete experience is problematic from a situated perspective ( Hall , 1996 ) . Hence , many situated re - searchers reject decontextualization and abstraction as epistemologically incom - patible with situativity . In his article The Fallacy of Decontextualization , van Oers ( 1998 ) argued that if context is defined via personal interpretation of actions and TRANSFER OF LEARNING 439 events rather than in an absolute and detached way , then the notion of decontextualization seems to suggest “an occurrence of actions in a setting that is not interpreted by the agent . However , that would mean no situation , no action , no meaning at all” ( p . 136 ) . In response , some researchers have suggested that alternative accounts of trans - fer should forgo theories relying on the constructs of decontextualization and ab - straction ( Beach , Hundersmarck , & Vassallo , 2003 ; Engle & Greeno , 2003 ; Whitson , 2003 ) . However , Cobb ( 2003 , 2004 ) contended that situated theorists err in dismissing the notion of abstraction because they accept the standard character - ization of abstraction as a process of decontextualization at face value . In rejecting abstraction in its standard form , Cobb argued that situated theorists are operating on what Wertsch ( 2000 ) might term the semiotic territory of mainstream psychol - ogy . Rather than dispensing with the notion of abstraction , Cobb suggested that re - searchers adapt and develop different views of abstraction . Thefollowingalternativeconceptionsof abstractionhaveemergedinaneffortto formulate abstraction in a way that is compatible with a situated cognition perspec - tive : ( a ) situatedabstraction , ( b ) abstractionincontext , ( c ) collectiveabstraction , and ( d ) actor - orientedabstraction . Thenotionof situatedabstraction highlightsthecen - tralroleofmediatingtoolsandsuggeststhatartifactsandsymbolsystemsareconsti - tutive of meaning ( Hoyles , Noss , & Pozzi , 2001 ; Noss & Hoyles , 1996 ) . It is by this means that mathematical knowledge can be tied to the ways in which it was learned andusedinasocioculturalpractice , yetsimultaneouslybeexpressedinwaysthatex - hibit invariant mathematical relationships . In the abstraction in context approach , Hershkowitz , Schwarz , andDreyfus ( 2001 ) definedabstractionastheactivityofver - tically reorganizing previously constructed mathematics into a new mathematical structure within a social practice . By exploring the historical and social dimensions of abstraction , they demonstrated the importance of attending to the multifaceted context in which abstracting occurs . The notions of collective abstraction ( Cobb , 2004 ) and actor - oriented abstrac - tion ( Lobato , 2004a ) were presented during a symposium designed to address Cobb’s ( 2003 ) challenge to developdifferent views of abstraction . Cobb ( 2004 ) and Lobato ( 2004a ) both developed constructs that involved a rethinking of what is meant by context . In mainstream cognitive accounts of abstraction , context is often treated as the tasks or other features of an experimental situation that are considered toinfluencethemathematical reasoningevoked . Incontrast , Cobb ( 2004 ) tookcon - text to be the collective classroom norms and practices in which students participate andtowhosedevelopmenttheycontribute . Lobato ( 2004a ) consideredcontextfrom the point of view of the actor ( learner ) rather than as something inherent in the situa - tionthat theresearcher canmanipulate . As aresult , contextualizingcouldbeseenas a dynamic process rather than as a static feature of situations to be removed . In addition , Cobb ( 2004 ) and Lobato ( 2004a ) used the notion of reflective ab - straction ( Piaget , 1977 / 2001 ) as a basis for their approaches . In mainstream cogni - 440 LOBATO tive accounts , abstraction is typically considered to be an inductive process that oc - curs when a common property across instances is extracted and encoded in one’s scheme . In contrast , reflective abstraction is a constructive process in which the regularities abstracted by the learner are not inherent in the situation , but rather are a result of personal structuring related to learner’s goals and prior knowledge ( Piaget , 1980 ) . Cobb ( 2004 ) and Lobato ( 2004a ) both adapted reflective abstrac - tion ( which is an individual psychological construct ) to consider how aspects of re - flective abstraction are structured by the environment . Specifically , Cobb ( 2004 ) posited the notion of collective abstraction as the occasions in which the members of a community collectively constitute either prior activity or its results as an ex - plicit object of discourse , and Lobato ( 2004a ) used the notion of attention focusing to connect social and individual levels of analysis . In addition to these ideas , other themes have been offered for consideration as alternative views of abstraction are developed . Van Oers ( 2004 ) , drawing upon Cassirer ( 1923 / 1953 ) , put forward a view of abstracting as an act of putting objects in a specific context that articulates particular meaning to the objects involved . This view conceives of abstracting as a process of contextualization rather than of decontextualization . Nemirovsky ( 2004 ) posited the centrality of perceptual activ - ity in the reencountering of past experiences ( i . e . , transfer ) . To that end , he rejected the treatment of perception as a passive receptive process but instead treated per - ception as having active , temporal , bodily , and involuntary qualities . Although these alternative approaches to abstraction are promising , much work needs to be done . Most are at the stage of theorizing and need instantiation in multiple empirical studies . They need to be situated in corresponding ap - proaches to transfer and utilized to explain transfer events . The JLS would like to support the effort of the field to compare and contrast these constructs in order to consolidate efforts , build upon one another’s contributions , and get better trac - tion on the transfer dilemma . As new ideas and approaches to transfer develop , we will be in a better position to challenge current views regarding relationships among abstraction , context , and transfer . For example , a report from the National Research Council summarized the prevailing cognitive perspective on transfer : “Knowledge that is overly contextualized can reduce transfer ; abstract representations of knowledge can help promote transfer” ( Bransford et al . , 2000 , p . 53 ) . In a radical reformulation of this generally accepted assumption , diSessa and Wagner ( 2005 ) offered an alternative to transfer occurring by virtue of the abstract - ness of the mental representation , namely that transfer occurs through the accrual and coordination of specific knowledge that is useful in particular situations . Ac - cording to Wagner ( 2006 ) , transfer is supported through “the incremental refine - ment of knowledge resources that account for—rather than overlook—contextual variation” ( p . 1 ) . diSessa and Wagner also contended that the link between multi - ple contexts and transfer cannot be reduced to a numeric argument . In their words , TRANSFER OF LEARNING 441 “… a new context that does not require any new causal net elements or new readout strategies is not helpful , ” but a context that “provokes use of a new intuitive idea that extends the range of contexts that are seen as relevant … will likely be produc - tive” ( diSessa & Wagner , 2005 , 149 ) . Transfer “Mechanisms” The alternative models of transfer described previously represent , to a large degree , attempts to create alternative interpretive frameworks . As alternative approaches mature , they need to move toward theory development , which includes tackling the notion of transfer mechanisms . This presents theoretical challenges , because the verynotionofmechanismisassociatedwithaparticularviewofknowledgeandcau - sation that may no longer be applicable within an alternative interpretative frame - work , especially one grounded in a situative or sociocultural perspective . In classical models , transfer mechanisms are factors that can be controlled in order to produce transfer ( De Corte , 1999 ; Gentner et al . , 2003 ) . Van Oers ( 2004 ) criticized the classical transfer perspective because it focuses exclusively on the conditions for transfer and defines transfer merely on the basis of result qualities . However , once the conceptual and theoretical roots of transfer are questioned , the notion of a transfer mechanism doesn’t make sense in the same deterministic way . We need a notion of mechanism that refers to an explanation of how social environ - ments afford and constrain the generalization of learning , and thus shifts the focus from external factors that can be controlled to conceiving of transfer as a con - strained socially situated phenomenon . To this end , Maxwell’s ( 2004 ) notion of process causality is useful . Maxwell ( 2004 ) distinguished between two different but compatible types of causality – regularity causality and process causality . Process causality is based on a conceptual analysis of the processes by which some events can influence others . Specifically , process theory deals with events and the processes that connect them conceptually . In contrast , in the regularity conception , causality cannot be directly observed but can only be measured in the regularity of relationships between events . This necessitates a focus on the determination of a systematic relationship between inputs and outputs across a number of cases . Whereas regularity causa - tion is most useful in establishing that something is happening , process causality addresses why or how . Drawing on the notion of process causality , Lobato , Ellis , and Muñoz ( 2003 ) ad - vanced the notion of focusing phenomena to link features of instructional environ - mentswiththeparticularwaysinwhichindividualsgeneralizetheirlearningexperi - ences ( i . e . , transfer from an actor - oriented transfer perspective ) . Focusing phenomenaarefeaturesofclassroomenvironmentsthatregularlydirectstudents’at - tention toward certain ( mathematical ) properties or patterns when a variety of fea - tures compete for students’attention . Theyemerge not onlythrough the instructor’s 442 LOBATO actionsbutalsothroughmathematicallanguage , featuresofthecurricularmaterials , and the use of artifacts ( Lobato & Ellis , 2002a , 2002b ; Lobato et al . , 2003 ) . The re - sulting mathematical object of focus and what students notice mathematically are co - constitutedthroughfocusingphenomenaandstudents’prior knowledge , experi - ences , and goals . Although the idiosyncratic forms of transfer often identified throughtheuseoftheactor - orientedtransferperspectivemayat first seem arbitrary , the work on focusing phenomena is demonstrating a basis by which actor - oriented transfer is constrained ( Lobato , 2003 ) . For example , informal comparisons among the original studyand two follow - up studies indicated that qualitative differences in the nature of individuals’generalizations corresponded to significant differences in the focusing phenomena that emerged in the different instructional environments ( Ellis & Lobato , 2004 ; Lobato , 2005 ) . Thenotionoffocusingphenomenaasatrans - fer mechanism casts transfer as a constrained socially situated phenomenon rather than as something that can be controlled solely by altering external conditions . A second transfer “mechanism”—social framing —is offered by Engle ( this is - sue ) as part of a promising effort to extend work on a situative approach to transfer by Greeno and colleagues ( e . g . , Greeno et al . , 1993 ) to the analysis of classroom - based instances of transfer . Engle advances the hypothesis that “trans - fer is more likely to occur to the extent that learning and transfer contexts have been framed to create what is called intercontextuality between them” ( p . 456 ) . When this occurs , the content established during learning is considered germane to problem solving in the transfer context . She demonstrates two kinds of framing that are productive for transfer : ( a ) framing learning activities as being temporally connected with other settings in which the learning experiences are relevant , and ( b ) framing students as contributing members of a broader community of people involved in the particular intellectual endeavor . In her article , Engle provides evi - dence that these forms of framing appear to have encouraged the students to expect that they would be generatively using what they were learning , thus leading them to make better use of the content - based supports for transfer that were available . Finally , a third transfer process involves the discernment of differences . In a radical reversal of 100 years of transfer research emphasizing the role of similarity of various types ( task similarity , scheme similarity , psychological similarity , and similarity in socio - cultural practices ) , Marton ( this issue ) elaborates the role of dis - cerning differences in transfer . According to Marton , “transfer is about how what is learned in one situation affects or influences what the learner is capable of doing in another situation” ( p . 501 ) . This influence of one activity on another can have as much to do with perceived differences as to perceived similarities . Marton main - tains that the critical part of the transfer process is what learners attend to , which is affected by discernible differences as much as similarities . One powerful study presented in the article involves learning Cantonese tones . Spoken Cantonese words are distinguished by both sound and tone . When a foreigner hears a word , he cannot discern sound from tone unless the tone differs significantly from a familiar TRANSFER OF LEARNING 443 intonation pattern . However , if the first word is followed by a second word that has the same sound but a different tone , the foreigner suddenly hears the tone in the second word , and , retrospectively in the first word , because of the contrast . This case constitutes an instance of transfer because hearing the first word influenced what was heard when the second word was spoken . According to Marton , “al - though the sameness of the sounds across the two words was a necessary condition for discerning the tone , it was the difference—and not the sameness—that was at - tended to , discerned , and transferred” ( p . 531 ) . As new transfer processes are identified and elaborated , we can challenge cur - rent instructional approaches to transfer and develop new ones . For example , it is a widespread belief that “knowledge that is taught in only a single context is less likely to support flexible transfer than knowledge that is taught in multiple con - texts” ( Bransford et al . , 2000 , p . 78 ; see also for a summary of research ) . However , the work on focusing phenomena suggests that what is critical for the generaliza - tion of learning is not the number of contextual situations explored but the particu - lar mathematical regularities and properties to which students’ attention is drawn and that students notice ( Lobato , 2005 ) . Engle’s work ( this issue ) on framing sug - gests that as educators we need to pay closer attention to the classroom practices that develop around generalizing and to frame learning and transfer activities in such a way to promote intercontextuality . Finally , Marton’s paper ( this issue ) sug - gests that the important idea is making systematic use of variation to enhance learning , which could be accomplished within a single context , as long as the vari - ation is centrally related to the object of learning . THE JLSTRANSFER STRAND In this article , I have highlighted the conceptual critiques to the classical transfer approach , described the progress that has been made by alternative emerging ap - proaches to transfer , and identified some remaining issues . For the next 3 years , the JLS is interested in receiving empirical and theoretical papers that respond to chal - lenges regarding the conceptualization of transfer and constructively contribute to the ongoing transfer dialogue . It is my hope that we , as a community of research - ers , transcend the era of critiquing the classical transfer approach by resolving per - sistent and thorny issues and by further developing alternative approaches to trans - fer . Most of the alternative approaches are in their infancy and remain at the level of theoretical writing . Therefore , more work is needed to develop approaches with sufficient specificity to allow for the explanation of instances of transfer in class - rooms , as well as in work and everyday settings . In this issue , Marton and Engle begin this discussion , articulating important new ways to approach the difficult issue of transfer “mechanisms . ” The core arti - cles are followed by a commentary by Greeno , who situates the issue in terms of 444 LOBATO two critical themes for understanding transfer : ( a ) authoritative , accountable posi - tioning in interaction ; and ( b ) connected , general knowing in conceptual domains . The JLS encourages others to submit work related to the themes identified in this kickoff issue , as well as to other important dimensions of transfer . Our hope is that the JLS transfer strand will become a new voice for a group that is working toward resolutions that will have the power to influence the ways in which we understand and support the generalization of learning . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) under Grants REC – 0529502 and REC – 0450208 . The views expressed do not necessarily reflect official positions of the NSF . I am grateful to Anthony E . Kelly for his careful reading and insightful com - ments on a draft of this article . REFERENCES Anderson , J . R . , Corbett , A . T . , Koedinger , K . , & Pelletier , R . ( 1995 ) . Cognitivetutors : Lessonslearned . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 4 , 167 – 207 . Anderson , J . R . , Reder , L . M . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1996 ) . Situated learning and education . Educational Researcher , 25 ( 4 ) , 5 – 11 . Barnett , S . , & Ceci , S . J . ( 2002 ) . Whenandwheredoweapplywhatwelearn ? Ataxonomyforfartrans - fer . Psychological Bulletin , 128 , 612 – 637 . Beach , K . , Hundersmarck , S . , & Vassallo , S . ( 2003 , April ) . Consequential transitions : A sociocultural approach to the generalization of knowledge and identity . In K . Beach ( Chair ) , Sociocultural , semiotic , situative , and activity theoretic alternatives to the transfer metaphor : New understandings of how knowledgegeneralizes . Symposium conductedat theannual meetingof theAmericanEduca - tional Research Association , Chicago , IL . Beach , K . D . ( 1995 ) . Activity as a mediator of sociocultural change and individual development : The case of school - work transition in Nepal . Mind , Culture , and Activity , 2 ( 4 ) , 285 – 302 . Beach , K . D . ( 1999 ) . Consequential transitions : A sociocultural expedition beyond transfer in educa - tion . InA . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Reviewofresearchineducation ( Vol . 24 , pp . 101 – 140 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Beach , K . D . ( 2003 ) . Consequential transitions : A developmental view of knowledge propagation through social organizations . In T . Tuomi - Gröhn & Y . Engeström , ( Eds . ) , Between school and work : New perspectives on transfer and boundary - crossing ( pp . 39 – 62 ) . Oxford , United Kingdom : Elsevier Science . Bereiter , C . ( 1995 ) . A dispositional view of transfer . In A . McKeough , J . Lupart , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teaching for transfer : Fostering generalization in learning ( pp . 21 – 34 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Bransford , J . D . , Brown , A . L . , & Cocking , R . R . ( Eds . ) . ( 2000 ) . Learning and transfer . In How people learn : Brain , mind , experience , andschool ( pp . 31 – 78 ) . Washington , DC : NationalAcademyPress . TRANSFER OF LEARNING 445 Bransford , J . D . , & Schwartz , D . L . ( 1999 ) . Rethinkingtransfer : Asimpleproposalwithmultipleimpli - cations . In A . Iran - Nejad & P . D . Pearson ( Eds . ) , Review of research in education ( Vol . 24 , pp . 61 – 100 ) . Washington , DC : American Educational Research Association . Brown , J . S . , Collins , A . , & Duguid , P . ( 1989 ) . Situated cognition and the culture of learning . Educa - tional Researcher , 18 , 32 – 42 . Butterfield , E . C . , & Nelson , G . D . ( 1991 ) . Promotingpositivetransferofdifferenttypes . Cognitionand Instruction , 8 ( 1 ) , 69 – 102 . Campione , J . C . , Shapiro , A . M . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1995 ) . Forms of transfer in a communityof learners : Flexible learning and understanding . In A . McKeough , J . Lupart , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teaching for transfer : Fosteringgeneralizationinlearning ( pp . 35 – 69 ) . Mahwah , NJ : LawrenceErlbaum Associ - ates , Inc . Carraher , D . , & Schliemann , A . D . ( 2002 ) . Thetransferdilemma . TheJournaloftheLearningSciences , 11 , 1 – 24 . Cassirer , E . ( 1953 ) . Substance and function and Einstein’s theory of relativity ( W . C . Swabey & M . C . Swabey , Trans . ) . New York : Dover . ( Original work published 1923 ) Chen , Z . , & Daehler , M . W . ( 2000 ) . External and internal instantiation of abstract information fa - cilitates transfer in insight problem solving . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 25 , 423 – 449 . Cobb , P . ( 2003 , April ) . Discussant comments for the symposium . In K . Beach ( Chair ) , Sociocultural , semiotic , situative , and activity theoretic alternatives to the transfer metaphor : New understandings of how knowledgegeneralizes . Symposium conductedat theannual meetingof theAmericanEduca - tional Research Association , Chicago , IL . Cobb , P . ( 2004 , April ) . Exploring the construct of collective abstraction . In J . Lobato ( Chair ) , Re - thinking abstraction and decontextualization in relationship to the “transfer dilemma . ” Symposium conductedattheannualmeetingoftheAmericanEducationalResearchAssociation , SanDiego , CA . Cobb , P . , & Bowers , J . ( 1999 ) . Cognitiveandsituatedlearningperspectivesintheoryandpractice . Edu - cational Researcher , 28 ( 2 ) , 4 – 15 . Cox , B . D . ( 1997 ) . The rediscovery of the active learner in adaptive contexts : A developmental - histori - cal analysis of transfer of training . Educational Psychologist , 32 ( 1 ) , 41 – 55 . De Corte , E . ( 1999 ) . On the road to transfer : An introduction . International Journal of Educational Re - search , 31 , 555 – 559 . Detterman , D . K . ( 1993 ) . The case for the prosecution : Transfer as an epiphenomenon . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 1 – 24 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Dewey , J . ( 1938 ) . Experience and education . New York : Macmillan . diSessa , A . A . , & Wagner , J . F . ( 2005 ) . Whatcoordinationhastosayabouttransfer . InJ . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transferoflearningfromamodernmultidisciplinaryperspective ( pp . 121 – 154 ) . Greenwich , CT : In - formation Age . Ellis , A . B . , & Lobato , J . ( 2004 , April ) . Using the construct of “focusing phenomena” to explore links between attentional processes and “transfer” in mathematics classrooms . In J . Lobato ( Chair ) , Attentional processes , salience , and “transfer” of learning : Perspectives from neuroscience , cogni - tivescience , andmathematics education . Symposium conductedat theannual meetingof theAmeri - can Educational Research Association , San Diego , CA . Engle , R . , & Greeno , J . ( 2003 , April ) . Framing interactions to foster productive learning . In K . Beach ( Chair ) , Sociocultural , semiotic , situative , and activity theoretic alternatives to the transfer meta - phor : New understandings of how knowledge generalizes . Symposium conducted at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , Chicago , IL . Evans , J . ( 1998 ) . Problems of transfer of classroom mathematical knowledge to practical situations . In F . Seeger , J . Voigt , & U . Waschescio ( Eds . ) , Thecultureofthemathematicsclassroom ( pp . 269 – 289 ) . Cambridge , United Kingdom : Cambridge University Press . 446 LOBATO Fortus , D . , Krajcik , J . , Dershimer , R . C . , Marx , R . W . , & Mamlok - Naaman , R . ( 2005 ) . Design - based science and real - world problem - solving . International Journal of Science Education , 27 , 855 – 879 . Fuchs , L . S . , Fuchs , D . , Prentice , K . , Burch , M . , Hamlett , C . L . , Owen , R . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Explicitly teaching for transfer : Effects on third - grade students’mathematical problem solving . Journal of Ed - ucational Psychology , 95 ( 2 ) , 293 – 305 . Gee , J . P . , & Green , J . L ( 1998 ) . Discourse analysis , learning , and social practice : A methodological study . Review of Research in Education , 23 , 119 – 169 . Gentner , D . , Loewenstein , J . , & Thompson , L . ( 2003 ) . Learning and transfer . Journal of Educational Psychology , 95 ( 2 ) , 393 – 408 . Greeno , J . G . ( 1997 ) . Response : On claims that answer the wrong questions . Educational Researcher , 26 ( 1 ) , 5 – 17 . Greeno , J . G . , Smith , D . R . , & Moore , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Transfer of situated learning . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 99 – 167 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Gruber , H . , Law , L . , Mandl , H . , & Renkl , A . ( 1996 ) . Situated learning and transfer . In P . Reimann & H . Spada ( Eds . ) , Learning in humans and machines : Towards an interdisciplinary learning science ( pp . 168 – 188 ) . Oxford , United Kingdom : Pergamon . Guberman , S . , & Greenfield , P . M . ( 1991 ) . Learning and transfer in everyday cognition . Cognitive De - velopment , 6 , 233 – 260 . Hall , R . ( 1996 ) . Representation as shared activity : Situated cognition and Dewey’s cartography of ex - perience . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 5 , 209 – 238 . Hatano , G . , & Greeno , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Commentary : Alternative perspectives on transfer and transfer studies . International Journal of Educational Research , 31 , 645 – 654 . Hershkowitz , R . , Schwarz , B . B . , & Dreyfus , T . ( 2001 ) . Abstraction in context : Epistemic actions . Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 32 ( 2 ) , 195 – 222 . Høffding , H . ( 1892 ) . Outlines of psychology ( M . Lowndes , Trans . ) . London : Macmillan . Hoyles , C . , Noss , R . , & Pozzi , S . ( 2001 ) . Proportional reasoning in nursing practice . Journal for Re - search in Mathematics Education , 32 ( 1 ) , 4 – 27 . Judd , C . H . ( 1908 ) . Therelationofspecialtrainingtogeneralintelligence . EducationalReview , 36 , 28 – 42 . Katona , G . ( 1940 ) . Organizing and memorizing . New York : Columbia University Press . Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition . ( 1983 ) . Culture and cognitive development . In P . H . Mussen ( Ed . ) , Handbook of child psychology : Vol . 1 . History , theory , and methods ( pp . 295 – 356 ) . New York : Wiley . Lave , J . ( 1988 ) . Cognition in practice : Mind , mathematics , and culture in everyday life . Cambridge , United Kingdom : Cambridge University Press . Lobato , J . ( 2003 ) . How design experiments can inform a rethinking of transfer and vice versa . Educa - tional Researcher , 32 ( 1 ) , 17 – 20 . Lobato , J . ( 2004a , April ) . Abstraction , situativity , and the “actor - oriented transfer” perspective . In J . Lobato ( Chair ) , Rethinking abstraction and decontextualization in relationship to the “transfer di - lemma . ” Symposium conductedattheannualmeetingoftheAmericanEducationalResearchAssoci - ation , San Diego , CA . Lobato , J . ( 2004b ) . An international working conference : Addressing the transfer dilemma . Proposal REC - 0450208 funded by the National Science Foundation . Lobato , J . ( 2005 , August ) . Attention - focusingandthe “transfer”oflearning . InJ . Emanuelsson & M . F . Pang ( Chairs ) , Contrasting different perspectives on the object of learners´ attention . An invited symposium of the Special Interest Group on Phenomenography and Variation Theory conducted at the11thBiennialConferenceoftheEuropeanAssociationforResearchonLearningandInstruction , Nicosia , Cyprus . Lobato , J . ( in press - a ) . When students don’t apply the knowledge you think they have , rethink your assumptions about transfer . In C . Rasmussen & M . Carlson ( Eds . ) , Making the connection : Re - TRANSFER OF LEARNING 447 search and teaching in undergraduate mathematics . Washington , DC : Mathematical Association of America . Lobato , J . ( inpress - b ) . Researchmethodsforalternativeapproachestotransfer : Implicationsfordesign experiments . In A . E . Kelly & R . Lesh ( Eds . ) , Design research in education . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Lobato , J . , & Ellis , A . B . ( 2002a ) . An analysis of the teacher’s role in supporting students’connections between realistic situations and conventional symbol systems . Mathematics Education Research Journal , 14 ( 2 ) , 99 – 120 . Lobato , J . , & Ellis , A . B . ( 2002b ) . The focusing effect of technology : Implications for teacher educa - tion . Journal of Technology and Teacher Education , 10 ( 2 ) , 297 – 314 . Lobato , J . , Ellis , A . B . , & Muñoz , R . ( 2003 ) . How “focusing phenomena” in the instructional environ - ment afford students’generalizations . Mathematical Thinking and Learning , 5 ( 1 ) , 1 – 36 . Lobato , J . , & Siebert , D . ( 2002 ) . Quantitative reasoning in a reconceived view of transfer . Journal of Mathematical Behavior , 21 ( 1 ) , 87 – 116 . Marini , A . , & Genereux , R . ( 1995 ) . The challenge of teaching for transfer . In A . McKeough , J . Lupart , & A . Marini ( Eds . ) , Teaching for transfer : Fostering generalization inlearning ( pp . 1 – 20 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Maxwell , J . ( 2004 ) . Causal explanation , qualitative research , and scientific inquiry in education . Edu - cational Researcher , 33 ( 2 ) , 3 – 11 . Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Multimedia aids to problem - solving transfer . International Journal of Educa - tional Research , 31 , 611 – 623 . Mestre , J . ( 2003 ) . Transfer of learning : Issues and research agenda : Report of a workshop held at the National Science Foundation . Retrieved September 25 , 2006 , from http : / / www . nsf . gov / pubs / 2003 / nsf03212 / nsf03212 . pdf Mestre , J . ( Ed . ) . ( 2005 ) . Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . Nemirovsky , R . ( 2004 ) . “I also remember” : On the centrality of perceptual activity in the re - encounter ofpastexperiences . InJ . Lobato ( Chair ) , Rethinkingabstractionanddecontextualizationinrelation - shiptothe“transferdilemma . ” Symposium conductedattheannualmeetingoftheAmericanEduca - tional Research Association , San Diego , CA . Noss , R . , & Hoyles , C . ( 1996 ) . Windowsonmathematicalmeanings : Learningculturesandcomputers . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer Academic . Novick , L . R . ( 1988 ) . Analogical transfer , problem similarity , and expertise . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 ( 3 ) , 510 – 520 . Packer , M . ( 2001 ) . The problem of transfer , and the sociocultural critique of schooling . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 10 , 493 – 514 . Pea , R . ( 1989 ) . Socializing the knowledge transfer problems ( Report No . IRL89 - 0009 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Institute for Research on Learning . Perkins , D . N . , & Salomon , G . ( 1988 ) . Teaching for transfer . Educational Leadership , 46 ( 1 ) , 22 – 32 . Piaget , J . ( 1980 ) . Adaptation and intelligence . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Piaget , J . ( 2001 ) . Studies in reflecting abstraction ( R . L . Campbell , Trans . ) . Philadelphia , PA : Taylor & Francis . ( Original work published 1977 ) Rebello , S . , Zollman , D . , Albaugh , A . R . , Engelhardt , P . B . , Gray , K . E . , Hrepic , Z . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Dynamic transfer : A perspective from physics education research . J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 217 – 250 ) . Greenwich , CT : Informa - tion Age . Reed , S . K . ( 1993 ) . A schema - based theory of transfer . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transfer on trial : Intelligence , cognition , and instruction ( pp . 39 – 67 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Reed , S . K . , Ernst , G . W . , & Banerji , R . ( 1974 ) . Theroleofanalogyintransferbetweensimilarproblem states . Cognitive Psychology , 6 , 436 – 450 . 448 LOBATO Reeves , L . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 115 ( 3 ) , 381 – 400 . Rosch , E . , & Mervis , C . B . ( 1975 ) . Familyresemblances : Studies in the internal structure of categories . Cognitive Psychology , 7 , 573 – 605 . Royer , J . M . , Mestre , J . P . , & Dufresne , R . J . ( 2005 ) . Introduction : Framing the transfer problem . In J . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . vii – xxvi ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age . Saxe , G . ( 1989 ) . Transfer of learning across cultural practices . Cognition and Instruction , 6 ( 4 ) , 325 – 330 . Schoenfeld , A . H . ( 1999 ) . Lookingtowardthe21st century : Challenges of educational theoryandprac - tice . Educational Researcher , 28 ( 7 ) , 4 – 14 . Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . D . , & Sears , D . ( 2005 ) . Efficiency and innovation in transfer . In J . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 1 – 52 ) . Green - wich , CT : Information Age . Schwartz , D . L . , & Martin , T . ( 2004 ) . Inventing to prepare for future learning : The hidden efficiency of encouraging original student production in statistics instruction . Cognition and Instruction , 22 ( 2 ) , 129 – 184 . Sfard , A . ( 1998 ) . On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one . Educational Re - searcher , 27 ( 2 ) , 4 – 13 . Singley , M . K . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1989 ) . Thetransferofcognitiveskill . Cambridge , MA : HarvardUni - versity Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Frensch , P . A . ( 1993 ) . Mechanisms of transfer . In D . K . Detterman & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Transferontrial : Intelligence , cognition , andinstruction ( pp . 25 – 38 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Thorndike , E . L . ( 1906 ) . Principles of teaching . New York : Seiler . Tuomi - Gröhn , T . , & Engeström , Y . , ( 2003 ) . Conceptualizing transfer : From standard notions to devel - opmental perspectives . In T . Tuomi - Gröhn & Y . Engeström , ( Eds . ) , Between school and work : New perspectives on transfer and boundary - crossing ( pp . 19 – 38 ) . New York : Pergamon . van Oers , B . ( 1998 ) . The fallacy of decontextualization . Mind , Culture , and Activity , 5 ( 2 ) , 135 – 142 . van Oers , B . ( 2004 , April ) . The recontextualization of inscriptions : An activity - theoretical approach to the transferability of abstractions . In J . Lobato ( Chair ) , Rethinking abstraction and decontextualization in relationship to the “transfer dilemma . ” Symposium conducted at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , San Diego , CA . Wagner , J . F . ( 2006 ) . Transfer in pieces . Cognition and Instruction , 24 ( 1 ) , 1 – 71 . Wertheimer , M . ( 1959 ) . Productive thinking . New York : Harper & Row . ( Original work published 1945 ) Wertsch , J . V . ( 2000 ) . Voices of collective remembering . New York : Cambridge University Press . Whitson , J . ( 2003 , April ) . Thinking , learning , knowing , doing , and becoming : Semiotic and pragmatic bases for an alternative to “transfer . ” In K . Beach ( Chair ) , Sociocultural , semiotic , situative , and ac - tivity theoretic alternatives to the transfer metaphor : New understandings of how knowledge gener - alizes . Symposium conducted at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Associa - tion , Chicago , IL . TRANSFER OF LEARNING 449