ORIGINAL ARTICLE Adenovirus - mediated REIC / Dkk - 3 gene transfer inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in an orthotopic prostate cancer model K Edamura 1 , Y Nasu 1 , M Takaishi 2 , T Kobayashi 1 , F Abarzua 1 , M Sakaguchi 2 , Y Kashiwakura 3 , S Ebara 1 , T Saika 1 , M Watanabe 1 , N - H Huh 2 and H Kumon 1 1 Department of Urology , Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine , Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences , Okayama , Japan ; 2 Department of Cell Biology , Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine , Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences , Okayama , Japan and 3 Center for Gene and Cell Therapy , Okayama University Hospital , Okayama , Japan We had previously reported that REIC / Dkk - 3 , a member of the Dickkopf ( Dkk ) gene family , works as a tumor suppressor . In this study , we evaluated the therapeutic effects of an intratumoral injection with adenoviral vector encoding REIC / Dkk - 3 gene ( Ad - REIC ) using an orthotopic mouse prostate cancer model of RM - 9 cells . We also investigated the in vivo anti - metastatic effect and in vitro anti - invasion effect of Ad - REIC gene delivery . We demonstrated that the Ad - REIC treatment inhibited prostate cancer growth and lymph node metastasis , and prolonged mice survival in the model . These therapeutic responses were consistent with the intratumoral apoptosis induction and in vitro suppression of cell invasion / migration with reduced matrix metalloprotease - 2 activity . We thus concluded that in situ Ad - REIC / Dkk - 3 gene transfer may be a promising therapeutic intervention modality for the treatment of prostate cancer . Cancer Gene Therapy ( 2007 ) 14 , 765 – 772 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . cgt . 7701071 ; published online 29 June 2007 Keywords : Dkk - 3 ; REIC ; prostate cancer ; apoptosis ; metastasis ; invasion Introduction Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer - related deaths in the male population of the United States . 1 Cancer metastasis is a major clinical issue , as it accelerates death in cancer patients and is accompanied with troublesome and often painful clinical symptoms . In spite of androgen depriva - tion therapy , radiation and cytotoxic chemotherapy , disease progression and metastasis occur in most cases . Therefore , novel and effective therapies against prostate cancer are urgently needed . The malignant progression of prostate cancer is often accompanied by the downregulation of apoptosis 2 and increased metastatic activity , such as invasion and motility . 3 Cancer cells modulate the apoptotic and meta - static processes by producing both positive and negative effectors , 4 , 5 and a number of proteins exhibit potent anticancer effects involved in these processes . 6 – 9 REIC / Dkk - 3 , a member of the Dickkopf ( Dkk ) gene family known to interfere with Wnt signaling via Wnt receptors , 10 , 11 was recently reported to play a distinct role in apoptosis induction 12 , 13 and invasion / motility inhibi - tion . 14 , 15 Its expression was initially found to be down - regulated in human cancer cells in comparison to the levels in normal cells , 16 – 19 and similar findings were documented when analyzing normal prostate and cancer materials . 13 , 20 Moreover , REIC / Dkk - 3 expression in prostate cancer consistently shifts to be downregulated at the critical transition from non - invasive disease to highly invasive disease . 13 , 20 These findings strongly suggest that REIC / Dkk - 3 is a tumor - suppressor gene and an attractive therapeutic protein to inhibit prostate cancer progression . Gene therapy has been used in clinical trials for human diseases and it is considered to have a novel and attractive therapeutic potential . Our group has demonstrated the feasibility of using adenoviral and adeno - associated viral vectors to deliver therapeutic genes to animals and humans . 21 – 24 Specifically regarding gene therapy for the treatment of prostate cancer , adenovirus - mediated gene delivery has been well reported and indicates a definite advantage in terms of a high transduction efficacy . 13 , 25 We herein generated adenoviral vectors encoding both mouse and human REIC genes and attempted to suppress the mouse prostate cancer growth in the orthotopic mice model by intratumoral REIC gene transfer . We investi - gated further the anti - metastatic effect of in vivo Ad - REIC gene therapy to demonstrate its therapeutic utility against prostate cancer progression . Received 16 October 2006 ; revised 2 April 2007 ; accepted 19 April 2007 ; published online 29 June 2007 Correspondence : Dr Y Nasu , Department of Urology , Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine , Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences , 2 - 5 - 1 Shikata - cho , Okayama 700 - 8558 , Japan . E - mail : ynasu @ md . okayama - u . ac . jp Cancer Gene Therapy ( 2007 ) 14 , 765 – 772 r 2007 Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 0929 - 1903 / 07 $ 30 . 00 www . nature . com / cgt Materials and methods Animals C57BL / 6 adult male mice were purchased from SLC Inc . ( Hamamatsu , Japan ) and maintained in a specific pathogen - free environment with free access to food and water at the laboratory animal center of Okayama University . They were allowed to adapt to their environ - ment for more than 1 week beginning the experiments were begun . The animals were housed and handled in accordance with the Okayama University Animal Research Committee Guidelines . Cell line RM - 9 mouse prostate cancer cell line was kindly provided by Dr TC Thompson ( Baylor College of Medicine , Houston , TX ) . The cell line was derived from a primary prostate tumor induced in the Zipras / myc - 9 infected mouse prostate reconstitution model system using C57BL / 6 mice . 26 The cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ; Nissui Pharmaceu - tical Co . Ltd , Tokyo , Japan ) with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Gibco - BRL , Grand Island , NY ) , 10m M 4 - ( 2 - hydroxy - ethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid , without the use of antibiotics . Adenovirus vector carrying REIC / Dkk - 3 For the overexpression of mouse or human REIC / Dkk - 3 , a full - length cDNA was integrated into a cosmid vector pAxCAwt and transferred into an adenovirus vector by the COS - TPC method ( Takara Bio , Shiga , Japan ) . An adenovirus vector carrying LacZ gene was used for the control , as described previously . 13 In vivo experiments For the orthotopic tumor formation , C57 / BL6 mice were intraperitoneally anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital ( 0 . 1 mg / g body weight ) and placed in the supine position . A low abdominal transverse incision was made and the bilateral dorsal lobes of prostate were exposed . Following the trypsinization of RM - 9 cells , 5 . 0 (cid:1) 10 3 cells in 10 m l of Hanks’ balanced salt solution were injected using a 30 - guage needle and a 25 - m l glass syringe ( Hamilton Co . , Reno , NV ) directly into the right dorsal lobe of the prostate . A clearly recognizable bleb within the injected prostatic lobe was considered as a sign of a technically satisfactory injection . The abdominal wound was closed with stainless steel clips ( Autoclip ; Becton Dickinson Co . , Sparks , MD ) . One week after the RM - 9 cell injection , when the tumor diameter reached 5 mm , 1 . 2x10 8 PFU of an adenovirus vector carrying full - length mouse or human REIC / Dkk - 3 cDNA and LacZ ( Ad - mREIC , Ad - hREIC and Ad - LacZ ) was intratumorally injected in a 25 m l vehicle . The same volume of phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) was injected as a negative control . Measurement of the orthotopic tumor growth The size of the tumors was measured every 3 days after the treatment using the transrectal ultrasonography ( TRUS ) that we previously established . 27 A 20 - MHz - based radial scan probe integrated into a 6 Fr . catheter ( ALOKA Co . Ltd , Tokyo , Japan ) and an ultrasound unit ( SSD - 550 ; ALOKA Co . Ltd ) were used for this study . The 20 - MHz transducer provides high - resolution images with an axial resolution of 0 . 2 mm and revolves at 15 frames per second , producing a 360 1 cross - sectional real - time image . The tip of the catheter was lubricated with ultrasound gel and then inserted into the rectum while the mouse was secured without anesthesia . The tumor volumes were calculated using the formula 1 / 2 (cid:1) ( the shortest diameter ) 2 (cid:1) ( the longest diameter ) . Histological analysis and apoptosis assay For the analysis of lymph node metastasis , the mice were killed and retroperitoneal lymph nodes were removed , fixed by formalin and embedded for paraffin sections . The sections ( 5 m m ) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin , and examined histologically . To identify the cells under - going apoptosis in orthotopic RM - 9 tumors , an in situ TdT - mediated dUTP nick end labeling ( TUNEL ) assay was performed using a kit ( Roche , Indianapolis , IN ) as described previously . 13 Briefly , the tumor tissue was cut , placed in the optical cutting temperature ( OCT ) com - pound and snap - frozen in liquid nitrogen . The frozen sections ( 10 m m ) were then fixed with methanol for 30 min at room temperature ( RT ) , washed and permeabilized with PBS containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and stained with the TUNEL reaction mixture . Invasion assay Invasion assay with a Matrigel - coated membrane was performed using a 24 - well invasion chamber system ( BD Biosciences , Bedford , MA ) , according to the manufac - turer’s instructions . The cells were trypsinized and seeded in the upper chamber at 2 . 5 (cid:1) 10 5 cells / well in serum - free DMEM . The vector carrying LacZ or REIC / Dkk - 3 , at a multiplicity of infection ( MOI ) of 10 , was added immediately after cell plating . DMEM supplemented with 50 % FBS ( used as a chemoattractant ) was placed in the bottom well . Incubation was carried out for 24 h at 37 1 C in humidified air with a 5 % CO 2 atmosphere . The cells were allowed to migrate through a porous , Matrigel - coated membrane ( BD Biosciences ) . After the incubation , the chamber was removed , and invading cells on the bottom side of the membrane were fixed with methanol at RT and stained with hematoxylin . The number of invading cells was determined by counting five high - power fields ( (cid:1) 200 ) on each membrane and calculated as the mean number of cells per field . The invasion index , corrected for the cell motility , was calculated using the following formula : No : of cellsinvadingthroughaMatrigel (cid:2) coatedmembrane (cid:1) 100 No : of cellsmigratingthroughanuncoated ð control Þ membrane Motility assay The cell motility assay was performed using a porous , uncoated membrane ( BD Biosciences ) instead of the Matrigel - coated membrane used in the invasion assay . A total of 1 (cid:1) 10 5 cells / well were placed in the upper REIC / Dkk - 3 inhibits tumor growth and metastasis K Edamura et al 766 Cancer Gene Therapy chamber in serum - free DMEM . The vector at a 10 MOI was added immediately after cell plating . DMEM supplemented with 50 % FBS was placed in the bottom well . The cells were allowed to migrate through a porous , uncoated membrane ( BD Biosciences ) for 24 h at 37 1 C . The number of migrating cells was determined by counting five high - power fields ( (cid:1) 200 ) on each mem - brane and then calculated as the mean number of cells per field . Zymography The gelatinolytic activity of matrix metalloproteases ( MMPs ) in the conditioned medium of RM - 9 cell line was determined using zymography . The subconfluent cells were treated or not treated with Ad - REIC or Ad - LacZ at 10 MOI in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS . After cultivating the cells for 24 h , to remove any excess amount of serum proteins in the culture medium , the cells were washed two times with Opti - MEM ( Gibco / BRL , Carlsbad , CA ) and thereafter maintained in the same medium for 24 h . Next , 10 ml of the conditioned medium in each was collected , concentrated to 100 m l by centrifu - gation method with a Centricon ( Amicon Ultra - 15 Ultracell - 10k ; Millipore , Billerica , MA ) and mixed with 50 m l of 3 (cid:1) sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) sample buffer . Subsequently , the 10 m l mixtures were applied to 7 . 5 % SDS - polyacrylamide slab gel containing 1 mg / ml gelatin ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St Louis , MO ) . The gel was run at RT using a vertical electrophoresis system for separation by the molecular mass . After electrophoresis , the gel was soaked in 2 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 1 h to remove SDS and incubated in 50 mmol / l Tris – HCl ( pH 8 . 0 ) containing 0 . 5 mmol / l CaCl 2 and 1 m mol / l ZnCl 2 for 16 h at 37 1 C . The gel was then stained with 1 % Coomassie brilliant blue G250 ( CBB - G250 ) . After the staining , the gel was further treated with 10 % methanol and 5 % acetic acid to destain . The proteolytic activity was detected as bands on a blue background of the CBB - stained gel . As a loading control , similarly applied SDS - polyacrylamide gel was run , electroblotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane , as described previously , 13 and stained with CBB - G250 . Statistical analysis The data are shown as the mean 7 s . e . m . Mann – Whitney U - test or Fisher’s exact test was performed for the statistical analysis between the two groups . Kaplan – Meier curves and log - rank tests were used for the survival analysis . Differences were considered significant if P o 0 . 05 . Results Intratumoral injection of Ad - REIC inhibits prostate tumor growth and induces apoptosis We recently revealed that Ad - hREIC - mediated over - expression of REIC protein in cancer cells could efficiently induce apoptosis in vitro and in the subcuta - neous prostate tumor model . 13 Therefore , the current study , using an orthotopic prostate cancer model , was performed as a preclinical study of this gene therapy . We first evaluated whether or not Ad - REIC treatment could inhibit RM - 9 tumor growth in the model . As the prostate cancer size in clinical patients is routinely determined by TRUS , we also used this same system throughout this study . The high - resolution TRUS allowed for simple and reliable monitoring of the in situ tumor size ( Figure 1a ) . When the orthotopic tumors were formed , the mice were divided into four treatment groups with comparable tumor ranges . In the Ad - mREIC - or Ad - hREIC - treated group , tumor growth was significantly suppressed in comparison to the control groups ( Figure 1b ) . The growth curve of the Ad - LacZ - injected tumors was similar to that of PBS - treated tumors ( Figure 1b ) , and all of the mice in these groups lived until day 17 after the treatment . In the next experiment , the tumors were harvested and examined by TUNEL staining . Only a few apoptotic cells were observed in the tumors injected with PBS or with Ad - LacZ on day 3 , whereas many cells were positive in the Figure 1 Suppression of tumor growth by intratumoral Ad - REIC delivery ( a and b ) . ( a ) Representative macroscopic and transrectal ultrasonographic views of orthotopic RM - 9 tumors on day 15 after Ad - mREIC or Ad - LacZ treatment . ( b ) Orthotopic RM - 9 tumors were formed and injected intratumorally with Ad - mREIC , Ad - hREIC , Ad - LacZ or PBS on treatment day 0 . Tumor size was measured by TRUS ; data represent the average of five individual mice in each group ; bars , 7 s . e . m . A significant difference was observed ( * P o 0 . 05 ) between the Ad - REIC and Ad - LacZ treatments . REIC / Dkk - 3 inhibits tumor growth and metastasis K Edamura et al 767 Cancer Gene Therapy Ad - mREIC - injected tumors ( Figure 2a ) . A quantitative analysis of apoptosis was performed in the tumor sections of the Ad - mREIC - , Ad - LacZ - or PBS - treated groups at the indicated times . As the number of apoptotic cells correlated with the number of (cid:1) 200 power fields in which they were found , the data were expressed as the number of positive cells / (cid:1) 200 power fields . On day 3 , an approximately sevenfold increase in apoptotic activities was detected in the Ad - mREIC - treated tumors in comparison to the control groups ( Figure 2b ) . In situ REIC gene transfer suppresses spontaneous lymph node metastases We previously disclosed that RM - 9 cell implantation in the mouse prostate led not only to the formation of a primary tumor , but also to spontaneous metastases to the para - aortic lymph nodes . 22 At the time of killing of the current orthotopic model mice , we incidentally discovered a smaller incidence of para - aortic lymph node swelling in the animals treated with intratumoral Ad - REIC injection , in comparison to the controls . We therefore noticed the possibility that an Ad - REIC treatment may inhibit lymph node metastases of the RM - 9 cells as well as the tumor growth , and then attempted to test this hypothesis . As it seems that mice with larger orthotopic prostate tumors show more incidence of lymph node metastasis , we considered that a killing at the same tumor volume would be necessary to compare the metastatic status between the treatment groups . When the tumor volume reached an average of 750 mm 3 by TRUS measurement , the mice in each group were killed and retroperitoneal lymph nodes were histologically examined ( Figure 3a ) . Thereafter , the number of metastatic lymph nodes and the incidence of metastasis were analyzed to determine the in vivo anti - metastatic effect of Ad - REIC treatment . The number of lymph nodes positive for metastasis was 3 . 2 7 0 . 6 in the Ad - LacZ group , and it significantly decreased to 0 . 9 7 0 . 4 in the Ad - mREIC group ( Figure 3b ) . In addition , only 42 – 45 % of mice in the Ad - REIC - treated groups showed histologically proven nodal metastasis , while metastasis was seen in 82 % of the control animals ( Figure 3b ) . Figure 2 Increased apoptotic rates in Ad - mREIC - treated tumors ( a and b ) . ( a ) Representative TUNEL staining from the Ad - mREIC - , Ad - LacZ - or PBS - treated RM - 9 tumors on day 3 is shown . The sections were counterstained with DAPI . ( b ) Quantitative analyses of TUNEL - positive cells were carried out using the data from TUNEL staining of RM - 9 tumors on days 3 and 9 after the treatments . The data represent the average of five individual mice in each group ; bars , 7 s . e . m . There was a significant difference ( * P o 0 . 01 ) between the Ad - mREIC and Ad - LacZ treatments . PBS , phosphate - buffered saline . Figure 3 Suppression of cancer metastasis by intratumoral Ad - REIC delivery ( a and b ) . ( a ) Representative macroscopic and microscopic views of RM - 9 metastasis in the retroperitoneal lymph nodes after Ad - mREIC or Ad - LacZ treatment . The mice in each group were killed when the tumor volume reached an average of 750mm 3 by TRUS measurement . Arrowheads indicate the retro - peritoneal lymph nodes . The lymph node sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin . Histological RM - 9 metastasis was revealed in the lymph node of the Ad - LacZ - treated mouse but not of the Ad - mREIC - treated mouse . ( b ) The number of metastatic lymph nodes and incidence of metastasis were analyzed when the tumor volume reached an average of 750mm 3 by TRUS measurement . The data represent the average of 10 – 12 individual mice in each group ; bars , 7 s . e . m , or percentage of animals with lymph node metastasis . PBS , phosphate - buffered saline ; TUNEL , TdT - mediated dUTP nick end labeling . REIC / Dkk - 3 inhibits tumor growth and metastasis K Edamura et al 768 Cancer Gene Therapy REIC gene transfer inhibits the invasion and migration of RM - 9 cells in vitro On the basis of the current results that in situ REIC gene delivery significantly suppressed the spontaneous lymph node metastases in vivo ( Figure 3b ) , we next examined the in vitro effects of Ad - REIC treatment on RM - 9 cell invasiveness and motility , which are major factors that determine the metastatic activity . 28 The Matrigel invasion assay system has been used to analyze the three - step cell invasion activity : ( a ) adhesion to a substrate ; ( b ) dissolution of the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) ; and ( c ) migration . 14 , 29 Using this assay , we observed a significant decrease in the invasion activity of Ad - mREIC - or Ad - hREIC - treated RM - 9 cells , in comparison to the control cells ( Figure 4a ) . Because the Ad - REIC treatment suppressed RM - 9 cell invasion , we next examined its inhibitory effect on cell motility , one of the components of the cancer invasion process , by transwell migration assay . RM - 9 cells placed in the upper chamber were induced to migrate across 8 m m membrane pores in response to the chemoattractant . As expected , the number of motile RM - 9 cells was significantly decreased after the Ad - REIC treatment ( Figure 4a ) . Neither distinctive cellular mor - phological changes nor any significant apoptotic induc - tion confirmed by TUNEL assay was detected under the experimental conditions . Ad - REIC treatment suppresses MMP - 2 secretion in RM - 9 cells It is well known that both invasion and metastasis of cancer cells occur through the activation of MMPs , such as MMP - 2 and - 9 , which degrade the ECM to overcome the ECM barrier at cell migration . 5 We preliminarily examined MMP - 2 expression in the Ad - REIC - treated cells by western blot analysis and disclosed the reduced expression in comparison to that of the control cells ( data not shown ) . To determine whether or not the inhibition of RM - 9 invasion by Ad - REIC relies on a downregulated proteolysis by the MMPs , we assessed MMPs activities by gelatin zymography . In the control RM - 9 cells treated with Ad - LacZ , zymographic bands consistent with pro and active forms of MMP - 2 were observed at the expected molecular weight 30 ( Figure 4b ) . In the Ad - REIC - treated cells , the MMP - 2 band density of both forms was evidently decreased ( Figure 4b ) . In particular , the level of MMP - 2 active form at 64 kDa showed a significant decline after the Ad - mREIC or Ad - hREIC treatment . In situ REIC gene therapy prolongs the survival of mice in an orthotopic prostate cancer model To further confirm the therapeutic utility of Ad - REIC gene therapy , we analyzed the survival of the treatment groups . The tumor - bearing mice treated with Ad - mREIC or Ad - hREIC had a significantly prolonged survival in comparison to the control ( Figure 5 ) . Therefore , both the in vivo ablation of prostate tumor volume and inhibition of lymph node metastasis were achieved using an adenovirus - mediated gene delivery of REIC with a consequently improved survival . Discussion We previously cloned the REIC / Dkk - 3 gene , whose expression was shown to be markedly downregulated in Figure 4 Decreased invasion and migration activity of RM - 9 cells after Ad - REIC treatment . ( a ) In vitro invasion assay through Matrigel and transwell migration assay were performed as described in Materials and methods section . Data represent the average of three independent experiments in each group ; bars , 7 s . e . m . ( b ) Extra - cellular secretion of both the pro and active forms of MMP - 2 was determined by zymography . As a loading control , a similarly loaded gel was run , electroblotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane and stained with CBB - G250 . The experiment was carried out in triplicate . Figure 5 Long - term survival of RM - 9 tumor - bearing mice after intratumoral Ad - REIC delivery . Kaplan – Meier curve is shown in the Ad - mREIC - , Ad - hREIC - , Ad - LacZ - and PBS - treated groups , with each group consisting of five mice . There was a significant difference ( P o 0 . 005 ) between Ad - REIC and Ad - LacZ treatments . REIC / Dkk - 3 inhibits tumor growth and metastasis K Edamura et al 769 Cancer Gene Therapy many human cancer cell lines . 16 – 19 By in vitro transfection experiments , it was also determined that REIC / Dkk - 3 possessed not only antiproliferative activities 17 , 20 but also apoptotic effects against tumor cells . 12 , 13 Therefore , the growing evidence showing that REIC / Dkk - 3 definitely works as a tumor suppressor prompted us to evaluate the possibility of in situ REIC / Dkk - 3 gene therapy . As the RM - 9 cells lack the endogenous REIC protein , confirmed by Western blot analysis ( data not shown ) , and are suitable to establish an orthotopic tumor followed by spontaneous metastases , we used the cell line for this study . We herein demonstrated that the intratumoral Ad - REIC injection suppressed the prostate cancer progres - sion with regard to tumor growth and the metastasis in the orthotopic prostate cancer model . In addition , using TRUS in the model , we could sufficiently monitor tumor growth and its suppression by REIC / Dkk - 3 gene therapy . As for the apoptotic function of REIC , we recently revealed the forced expression of REIC / Dkk - 3 induced apoptosis in human prostate cancer cell lines lacking endogenous REIC / Dkk - 3 expression but not in REIC / Dkk - 3 proficient normal prostate epithelial and stromal cells . 13 The apoptosis involved c - Jun - NH 2 - kinase ( JNK ) activation , mitochondrial translocation of Bax , reduction of Bcl - 2 and the release of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm . 13 The overexpression of REIC / Dkk - 3 induced apoptotic cell death in several types of human cancer cell through the activation of caspase - 3 , which is known to be a major apoptosis executor in the downstreaming of cytochrome c . 12 In this study , the TUNEL analysis disclosed a significantly increased apoptotic incidence in the Ad - REIC - treated RM - 9 tumors in comparison to the control tumors . The high level of apoptotic cell popula - tion observed on day 3 after Ad - mREIC treatment was maintained on day 9 , when the treated tumors showed definite reductions in size in comparison to the controls . Since we confirmed the mREIC protein expression in the day 3 tumor by western blotting ( data not shown ) , these results coincide with previous reports in which a forced REIC expression induced cancer cell apoptosis in both in vitro and in vivo conditions . 12 , 13 Therefore , an important finding of the current study is that adenovirus - mediated REIC / Dkk - 3 gene delivery induces apoptosis in the in vivo prostate cancer model , suggesting that the induction of apoptosis accounts for the growth inhibition and pro - longed survival in Ad - REIC - treated mice . We herein used an orthotopic syngeneic prostate cancer model together with mouse TRUS and could efficiently demonstrate the utility of intratumoral Ad - REIC treat - ment to prevent lymph node metastasis . According to our present knowledge , this is the first study to disclose the in vivo anti - metastatic activity of REIC / Dkk - 3 . It is conceivable that the suppression of cancer metastasis by in situ Ad - REIC injection contributed to the improved survival of the groups . To elucidate the anti - metastatic mechanisms , we performed in vitro invasion and migra - tion assays and revealed the downregulated invasiveness and motility of Ad - REIC - treated RM - 9 cells . These results are consistent with the reported studies in which REIC / Dkk - 3 stable transfected cell lines of osteosarcoma and melanoma showed an inhibition of both the invasion and motile activity in vitro . 14 , 15 MMP - 2 is thought to be a key enzyme for degrading type IV collagen in the ECM and basement membrane that facilitates local invasion , metastasis of cancer cells and angiogenesis within the various types of tumors , including prostate cancer . 5 , 31 , 32 Zymography is often used to measure MMP - 2 level and activity of the conditioned medium , and the result indicates a positive correlation with the cell invasion capacity . 33 , 34 We found that the Ad - REIC treatment inhibited the level of extracellular MMP - 2 in RM - 9 cells when determined by zymography , indicating that the suppressed in vitro invasion and in vivo metastasis are attributed to the downregulated MMP - 2 activity , at least in part . As both the pro and active forms of MMP - 2 were suppressed , it is conceivable that the Ad - REIC treatment could inhibit both MMP synthesis and activity . The question , however , remains as to how Ad - REIC downregulated the MMP - 2 level and / or activity in the RM - 9 prostate cancer cells . MMPs synthesis / activation and tumor cell invasion have been associated with the activation of their regulators , such as the extracellular signal - regulated protein kinase ( ERK ) / mitogen - activated protein kinase and JNK / stress - acti - vated protein kinase . 35 , 36 It is possible that these regulators are intracellularly activated either by direct interaction with REIC / Dkk - 3 or indirectly through some , as yet , unknown target proteins of REIC / Dkk - 3 . On the other hand , it is interesting that human Dkk - 1 , which is a member of the Dkk gene family and has 39 % homology to human REIC / Dkk - 3 , 10 also possesses anti - invasion activities . 37 , 38 Based on the well - investigated Dkk - 1 function that the protein is a secreted antagonist of the Wnt cell signaling molecules and blocks the canonical Wnt – b - catenin signaling pathway , 10 , 11 , 39 , 40 we could not rule out the potential that the humoral REIC / Dkk - 3 protein secreted after Ad - REIC treatment may block Wnt signaling , similar to the Dkk - 1 protein . An important future step will be to clarify the mechanistic details of the Ad - REIC - triggered anti - invasion processes . We herein demonstrated that the adenovirus - mediated REIC / Dkk - 3 gene transfer suppressed prostate cancer progression in the orthotopic prostate cancer model . The results not only support our understanding of REIC / Dkk - 3 as a tumor - suppressor gene and an attractive interventional target in this malignancy but also indicate that REIC / Dkk - 3 deserves further exploration as a potential therapeutic tool in the other diseases of human cancer . Further experiments should examine the possibi - lity of clinical Ad - REIC gene therapy in terms of its safety and toxicity . Acknowledgements This work was supported by a Scientific Research Grant from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science ( B ( 2 ) 15390491 ; Y Nasu ) and a Health and Labor Sciences Research Grant from the Ministry of Health , Labor and Welfare ( Third Term Comprehensive Control Research for Cancer ; H Kumon ) . We thank Genofunction , Co . Ltd REIC / Dkk - 3 inhibits tumor growth and metastasis K Edamura et al 770 Cancer Gene Therapy for providing an adenovirus vector carrying REIC / Dkk - 3 , and Yuka Matono and Katsuo Ohno for their technical assistance . References 1 Jemal A , Murray T , Ward E , Samuels A , Tiwari RC , Ghafoor A et al . Cancer statistics 2005 . CA Cancer J Clin 2005 ; 55 : 10 – 30 . 2 Rittmaster RS , Thomas LN , Wright AS , Murray SK , Carlson K , Douglas RC et al . The utility of tissue transglutaminase as a marker of apoptosis during treatment and progression of prostate cancer . J Urol 1999 ; 162 : 2165 – 2169 . 3 Sehgal I , Baley PA , Thompson TC . Transforming growth factor beta1 stimulates contrasting responses in metastatic versus primary mouse prostate cancer - derived cell lines in vitro . Cancer Res 1996 ; 56 : 3359 – 3365 . 4 Ferreira CG , Epping M , Kruyt FA , Giaccone G . Apoptosis : target of cancer therapy . Clin Cancer Res 2002 ; 8 : 2024 – 2034 . 5 Curran S , Murray GI . Matrix metalloproteinases in tumour invasion and metastasis . J Pathol 1999 ; 189 : 300 – 308 . 6 Ren C , Li L , Goltsov AA , Timme TL , Tahir SA , Wang J et al . mRTVP - 1 , a novel p53 target gene with proapoptotic activities . Mol Cell Biol 2002 ; 22 : 3345 – 3357 . 7 Watanabe M , Nasu Y , Kashiwakura Y , Kusumi N , Tamayose K , Nagai A et al . Adeno - associated virus 2 - mediated intratumoral prostate cancer gene therapy : long - term maspin expression efficiently suppresses tumor growth . Hum Gene Ther 2005 ; 16 : 699 – 710 . 8 Li H , Lindenmeyer F , Grenet C , Opolon P , Menashi S , Soria C et al . AdTIMP - 2 inhibits tumor growth , angiogenesis , and metastasis , and prolongs survival in mice . Hum Gene Ther 2001 ; 12 : 515 – 526 . 9 Yang X , Wei LL , Tang C , Slack R , Mueller S , Lippman ME . Overexpression of KAI1 suppresses in vitro invasiveness and in vivo metastasis in breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 5284 – 5288 . 10 Krupnik VE , Sharp JD , Jiang C , Robison K , Chickering TW , Amaravadi L et al . Functional and structural diversity of the human Dickkopf gene family . Gene 1999 ; 238 : 301 – 313 . 11 Mao B , Wu W , Davidson G , Marhold J , Li M , Mechler BM et al . Kremen proteins are Dickkopf receptors that regulate Wnt / beta - catenin signalling . Nature 2002 ; 417 : 664 – 667 . 12 Hsieh SY , Hsieh PS , Chiu CT , Chen WY . Dickkopf - 3 / REIC functions as a suppressor gene of tumor growth . Oncogene 2004 ; 23 : 9183 – 9189 . 13 Abarzua F , Sakaguchi M , Takaishi M , Nasu Y , Kurose K , Ebara S et al . Adenovirus - mediated overexpression of REIC / Dkk - 3 selectively induces apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells through activation of c - Jun - NH2 - kinase . Cancer Res 2005 ; 65 : 9617 – 9622 . 14 Hoang BH , Kubo T , Healey JH , Yang R , Nathan SS , Kolb EA et al . Dickkopf 3 inhibits invasion and motility of Saos - 2 osteosarcoma cells by modulating the Wnt - beta - catenin pathway . Cancer Res 2004 ; 64 : 2734 – 2739 . 15 Kuphal S , Lodermeyer S , Bataille F , Schuierer M , Hoang BH , Bosserhoff AK . Expression of Dickkopf genes is strongly reduced in malignant melanoma . Oncogene 2006 ; 25 : 5027 – 5036 . 16 Tsuji T , Miyazaki M , Sakaguchi M , Inoue Y , Namba M . A REIC gene shows down - regulation in human immortalized cells and human tumor - derived cell lines . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000 ; 268 : 20 – 24 . 17 Tsuji T , Nozaki I , Miyazaki M , Sakaguchi M , Pu H , Hamazaki Y et al . Antiproliferative activity of REIC / Dkk - 3 and its significant down - regulation in non - small - cell lung carcinomas . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001 ; 289 : 257 – 263 . 18 Kobayashi K , Ouchida M , Tsuji T , Hanafusa H , Miyazaki M , Namba M et al . Reduced expression of the REIC / Dkk - 3 gene by promoter - hypermethylation in human tumor cells . Gene 2002 ; 282 : 151 – 158 . 19 Kurose K , Sakaguchi M , Nasu Y , Ebara S , Kaku H , Kariyama R et al . Decreased expression of REIC / Dkk - 3 in human renal clear cell carcinoma . J Urol 2004 ; 171 : 1314 – 1318 . 20 Kawano Y , Kitaoka M , Hamada Y , Walker MM , Waxman J , Kypta RM . Regulation of prostate cell growth and morphogenesis by Dickkopf - 3 . Oncogene 2006 ; 25 : 6528 – 6537 . 21 Nasu Y , Timme TL , Yang G , Bangma CH , Li L , Ren C et al . Suppression of caveolin expression induces androgen sensi - tivity in metastatic androgen - insensitive mouse prostate cancer cells . Nat Med 1998 ; 4 : 1062 – 1064 . 22 Nasu Y , Bangma CH , Hull GW , Lee HM , Hu J , Wang J et al . Adenovirus - mediated interleukin - 12 gene therapy for prostate cancer : suppression of orthotopic tumor growth and pre - established lung metastases in an orthotopic model . Gene Therapy 1999 ; 6 : 338 – 349 . 23 Nasu Y , Djavan B , Marberger M , Kumon H . Prostate cancer gene therapy : outcome of basic research and clinical trials . Tech Urol 1999 ; 5 : 185 – 190 . 24 Watanabe M , Kashiwakura Y , Kusumi N , Tamayose K , Nasu Y , Nagai A et al . Adeno - associated virus - mediated human IL - 10 gene transfer suppresses the development of experimental autoimmune orchitis . Gene Therapy 2005 ; 12 : 1126 – 1132 . 25 Nasu Y , Kusaka N , Saika T , Tsushima T , Kumon H . Suicide gene therapy for urogenital cancer : current outcome and prospects . Mol Urol 2000 ; 4 : 67 – 71 . 26 Lu X , Park SH , Thompson TC , Lane DP . Ras - induced hyperplasia occurs with mutation of p53 , but activated ras and myc together can induce carcinoma without p53 mutation . Cell 1992 ; 70 : 153 – 161 . 27 Kusaka N , Nasu Y , Arata R , Saika T , Tsushima T , Kraaij R et al . Transrectal ultrasound for monitoring murine ortho - topic prostate tumor . Prostate 2001 ; 47 : 118 – 124 . 28 Lester BR , McCarthy JB . Tumor cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix and signal transduction mechanisms implicated in tumor cell motility , invasion and metastasis . Cancer Metastasis Rev 1992 ; 11 : 31 – 44 . 29 Albini A . Tumor and endothelial cell invasion of basement membranes . The matrigel chemoinvasion assay as a tool for dissecting molecular mechanisms . Pathol Oncol Res 1998 ; 4 : 230 – 241 . 30 Vayalil PK , Katiyar SK . Treatment of epigallocatechin - 3 - gallate inhibits matrix metalloproteinases - 2 and - 9 via inhibition of activation of mitogen - activated protein kinases , c - jun and NF - kappaB in human prostate carcinoma DU - 145 cells . Prostate 2004 ; 59 : 33 – 42 . 31 John A , Tuszynski G . The role of matrix metalloproteinases in tumor angiogenesis and tumor metastasis . Pathol Oncol Res 2001 ; 7 : 14 – 23 . 32 Lokeshwar BL . MMP inhibition in prostate cancer . Ann NY Acad Sci 1999 ; 878 : 271 – 289 . 33 Park MJ , Lee JY , Kwak HJ , Park CM , Lee HC , Woo SH et al . Arsenic trioxide ( As2O3 ) inhibits invasion of HT1080 REIC / Dkk - 3 inhibits tumor growth and metastasis K Edamura et al 771 Cancer Gene Therapy human fibrosarcoma cells : role of nuclear factor - kappaB and reactive oxygen species . J Cell Biochem 2005 ; 95 : 955 – 969 . 34 Ke Z , Lin H , Fan Z , Cai TQ , Kaplan RA , Ma C et al . MMP - 2 mediates ethanol - induced invasion of mammary epithelial cells over - expressing ErbB2 . Int J Cancer 2006 ; 119 : 8 – 16 . 35 Mitra SK , Hanson DA , Schlaepfer DD . Focal adhesion kinase : in command and control of cell motility . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005 ; 6 : 56 – 68 . 36 Hu B , Jarzynka MJ , Guo P , Imanishi Y , Schlaepfer DD , Cheng SY . Angiopoietin 2 induces glioma cell invasion by stimulating matrix metalloprotease 2 expression through the alphavbeta1 integrin and focal adhesion kinase signaling pathway . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 775 – 783 . 37 Pukrop T , Klemm F , Hagemann T , Gradl D , Schulz M , Siemes S et al . Wnt 5a signaling is critical for macrophage - induced invasion of breast cancer cell lines . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 5454 – 5459 . 38 Pollheimer J , Loregger T , Sonderegger S , Saleh L , Bauer S , Bilban M et al . Activation of the canonical wingless / T - cell factor signaling pathway promotes invasive differentiation of human trophoblast . Am J Pathol 2006 ; 168 : 1134 – 1147 . 39 Zorn AM . Wnt signalling : antagonistic Dickkopfs . Curr Biol 2001 ; 1 : R592 – 595 . 40 Caricasole A , Ferraro T , Iacovelli L , Barletta E , Caruso A , Melchiorri D et al . Functional characterization of WNT7A signaling in PC12 cells : interaction with A FZD5 x LRP6 receptor complex and modulation by Dickkopf proteins . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 37024 – 37031 . REIC / Dkk - 3 inhibits tumor growth and metastasis K Edamura et al 772 Cancer Gene Therapy