RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY ◥ CELL BIOLOGY Tubulin glycylation controls axonemal dynein activity , flagellar beat , and male fertility Sudarshan Gadadhar * , Gonzalo Alvarez Viar † , Jan Niklas Hansen † , An Gong † , Aleksandr Kostarev , Côme Ialy - Radio , Sophie Leboucher , Marjorie Whitfield , Ahmed Ziyyat , Aminata Touré , Luis Alvarez * † , Gaia Pigino * † , Carsten Janke * INTRODUCTION : Microtubules are key compo - nents of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton . Although they are involved in a wide variety of functions , microtubules are structurally highly similar across most cell types and organisms . It was suggested that a “ tubulin code , ” formed by com - binations of tubulin posttranslational mod - ifications , adapts individual microtubules to specific functions within living cells . How - ever , clear - cutfunctionalandmechanisticdata verifyingthisconceptarestillscarce . Glycylation is among the least explored posttranslational modifications of tubulin and has , so far , exclu - sively been found on microtubules of cilia and flagella from a variety of species . Previous work has suggested that glycylation might be essen - tial for cilia and flagella , but mechanistic insight remains lacking . RATIONALE : Two enzymes from the tubulin - tyrosine ligase - like ( TTLL ) family , TTLL3 and TTLL8 , are essential to initiate glycylation of tubulin in mammals . To entirely abolish glycylation at the organism level and to de - termine its physiological function , we gen - erated a double - knockout mouse lacking both glycylating enzymes ( Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − ) . Inacti - vation of these two enzymes led to a lack of glycylation in all analyzed cilia and flagella . This allowed us to investigate the role of glycylation in the function of these organelles . RESULTS : Despite the absence of glycylation in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice , no gross defects were ob - served at the organism and tissue levels . Mo - tile ependymal cilia in brain ventricles as well as motile cilia in the respiratory tract were present and appeared normal . Sperm flagella were also assembled normally , and sperm were able to swim . However , in vitro fertility assays showed that male Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice weresubfertile . Computer - assistedspermanaly - ses revealed motility defects of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . Further analyses showed that lack of glycylation leads to perturbed flagellar beat patterns , causing Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − spermtoswim predominantly along circular paths . This is highly unusual for mammalian sperm and in - terferes with their ability to reach the oocyte for fertilization . To determine the molecular mechanisms underlying this aberrant flagel - lar beat , we used cryo – electron tomography . The three - dimensional structure of the 96 - nm repeat of the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm axoneme showed no aberrations in its overall assembly . By contrast , the structure of both outer and inner dynein arms ( ODAs and IDAs ) was per - turbed in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagella . Classification analysis showed that the incidence and distribu - tion of pre - powerstroke and post - powerstroke conformations of ODAs and IDAs were altered in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . These ultrastructural findings indicate that glycylation is required to efficiently control the dynein powerstroke cycle , which is essential for the generation of a phys - iological flagellar beat . CONCLUSION : Our work shows that tubulin glycylation regulates the beat of mammalian flagella by modulating axonemal dynein motor activity . Lack of glycylation leads to perturbed sperm motility and male subfertility in mice . Considering that human sperm are more sus - ceptible than mouse sperm to deficiencies in sperm motility , our findings imply that a per - turbation of tubulin glycylation could underlie some forms of male infertility in humans . ▪ RESEARCH Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , 144 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 1 of 1 The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online . * Corresponding author . Email : carsten . janke @ curie . fr ( C . J . ) ; sudarshan . gadadhar @ curie . fr ( S . G . ) ; pigino @ mpi - cbg . de ( G . P . ) ; luis . alvarez @ caesar . de ( L . A . ) † These authors contributed equally to this work . Cite this article as S . Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) . DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . abd4914 READ THE FULL ARTICLE AT https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . abd4914 Wild type Ttll3 – / – Ttll8 – / – α βαβαβαβαβαβαβαβαβαβαβα βαβαβαβαβαβαβαβαβαβαβα GGG G G G E EE E E E E E G G α β EE E E EE E E E E E α β γ β – + – + β - dynein head γ - dynein head Dynein tail Dynein stalk A Wild type Ttll3 – / – Ttll8 – / – B Wild type Ttll3 – / – Ttll8 – / – C Sperm flagellum microtubules are glutamylated and glycylated . Straight swimming path Straight / curved Circular Dynein motors are in perturbed conformations . Sperm flagellum microtubules are only glutamylated . Perturbed swimming paths : M o u s e m o d e l s S p e r m m o t ili t y D y n e i n m o t o r s Tubulin glycylation controls sperm motility . ( A ) Microtubules in sperm flagella are rich in tubulin posttranslational modifications . Mice deficient for the glycylating enzymes TTLL3 and TTLL8 lack glycylation . ( B ) Mammalian sperm swim in linear paths . In the absence of glycylation , abnormal , mostly circular swimming patterns are observed , which impede progressive swimming . ( C ) Absence of glycylation leads to perturbed distribution of axonemal dynein conformations in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagella , which impedes normal flagellar beating . RESEARCH ARTICLE ◥ CELL BIOLOGY Tubulin glycylation controls axonemal dynein activity , flagellar beat , and male fertility Sudarshan Gadadhar 1 , 2 * , Gonzalo Alvarez Viar 3 † , Jan Niklas Hansen 4 † , An Gong 5 † , Aleksandr Kostarev 3 , Côme Ialy - Radio 6 , Sophie Leboucher 1 , 2 , Marjorie Whitfield 6 , Ahmed Ziyyat 6 , 7 , Aminata Touré 6 , Luis Alvarez 5 * † , Gaia Pigino 3 , 8 * † , Carsten Janke 1 , 2 * Posttranslational modifications of the microtubule cytoskeleton have emerged as key regulators of cellular functions , and their perturbations have been linked to a growing number of human pathologies . Tubulin glycylation modifies microtubules specifically in cilia and flagella , but its functional and mechanistic roles remain unclear . In this study , we generated a mouse model entirely lacking tubulin glycylation . Male mice were subfertile owing to aberrant beat patterns of their sperm flagella , which impeded the straight swimming of sperm cells . Using cryo – electron tomography , we showed that lack of glycylation caused abnormal conformations of the dynein arms within sperm axonemes , providing the structural basis for the observed dysfunction . Our findings reveal the importance of microtubule glycylation for controlled flagellar beating , directional sperm swimming , and male fertility . M icrotubules ( MTs ) are ubiquitous cyto - skeletal components that are structur - ally highly similar across most cell types and organisms . Their rich va - riety of posttranslational modifica - tions ( PTMs ) has long been suggested to form a “ tubulin code ” that allows MTs to adapt to specific functions ( 1 ) . However , clear - cut func - tional and mechanistic data verifying this con - cept are still scarce . Glycylation is among the least explored tubulin PTMs and has , so far , exclusively been found on axonemal MTs of a variety of species ( 2 ) but rarely on cytoplas - mic MTs . Tubulin glycylation in mammals is catalyzed in two steps : the tubulin - tyrosine ligase - like ( TTLL ) glycylating enzymes TTLL3 and TTLL8 add the first glycine residues to unmodified tubulin , while TTLL10 exclusively elongates nascent glycine chains . Absence of elongated glycine chains owing to a consti - tutively inactive TTLL10 in humans is physio - logically tolerated ( 3 ) , whereas a complete loss of glycylation in mice has damaging effects : Knockout of Ttll3 in combination with short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) – mediated knockdown of Ttll8 in mouse brain ventricles results in the loss of motile cilia from the affected ependy - mal cells ( 4 ) . In retina and colon , two organs that do not express Ttll8 , the knockout of Ttll3 alone leads , respectively , to a progressive shortening of the photoreceptors ’ connecting cilia followed by retinal degeneration ( 5 ) and to the partial loss of primary cilia in the colon , accompanied by accelerated development of colorectal tumors ( 6 ) . Finally , knocking down TTLL3 in cultured Madin - Darby canine kid - ney ( MDCK ) cells leads to a substantial short - ening of primary cilia ( 7 ) . Thus , glycylation appears to play a crucial role in ciliary integ - rity and function ; however , its function in the most specialized mammalian cilium , the sperm flagellum , has remained elusive . Sperm fla - gella , similar to motile cilia , are extremely sus - ceptible to alterations in the tubulin PTM polyglutamylation ( 8 – 11 ) , but glycylation has only been shown to be essential for the in - tegrity of the sperm flagellum in Drosophila melanogaster ( 3 ) . The distinct assembly , struc - ture , and size of Drosophila sperm flagella ( 12 ) do not allow direct conclusions to be drawn regarding mammalian sperm . Loss of tubulin glycylation does not affect ciliogenesis To understand the role of glycylation from the physiological to theultrastructural , mechanistic level , we generated a double - knockout mouse for the two initiating glycylases Ttll3 and Ttll8 ( Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − ; fig . S1 ) . Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice showed a complete absence of glycylation in motile ependymal cilia from brain ventricle walls ( fig . S2 , A and D ) , motile cilia in the trachea ( fig . S2 , B and D ) , and sperm flagella ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) , as well as the primary cilia from the kidney collecting tubules ( fig . S2C ) . Cilia and flagella were still present in all tissues analyzed ( Fig . 1A and fig . S2 , A to C ) , and moreover , no gross defects were observed at the organism and tissue levels . For instance , the brain and kidneys appeared normal , and there were no signs of hydrocephaly ( fig . S3A ) or polycystic kidneys ( fig . S3B ) , which are typ - ical signs of ciliary dysfunctions ( 13 ) . Trachea , too , showed no aberrations in the multiciliated epithelium ( fig . S3C ) . The absence of ciliary defects in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice was unex - pected . In particular , the loss - of - cilia pheno - type in ependymal cells , which was induced by shRNA - mediated depletion of TTLL8 in a Ttll3 − / − background ( 4 ) , was not reproduced in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice , probably because of compensatory mechanisms during mouse development ( 14 , 15 ) . Absence of glycylation affects sperm motility and male fertility Although the overall tissue architecture of testes was not perturbed ( fig . S3D ) , the de - creased average litter size of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice ( 6 . 5 ± 2 . 4 versus 8 . 4 ± 3 . 9 for heterozygote controls ) ( Fig . 2A and fig . S3E ) hinted at the possibility that mice were subfertile . To test specificallyformalesubfertility , weusedinvitro fertilization assays , which provide a more sen - sitive readout than does in vivo fertilization ( 16 ) . The fertilization index of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm in vitro was about one - fourth that of wild type ( Fig . 2B and fig . S4B ) , which estab - lishes the subfertility of sperm lacking tubulin glycylation . To determine whether lack of glycylation af - fectsthefertilizationpotentialof Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm , we investigated three major parame - ters that govern the quality of sperm isolated fromthecaudaepididymides : spermcell count , morphology , and motility ( 17 ) . Counts and via - bility of sperm from Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were nearly identical to those of controls ( fig . S3 , F and G , and table S1 ) , and only some sperm cells showed morphological defects ( fig . S3H ) . In contrast , most of the motility parameters assessed with computer - assisted sperm analy - ses ( CASA ) ( fig . S4A ) ( 18 ) were changed in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm as compared with wild type ( Fig . 2C , fig . S4C , and table S1 ) . We found a clear decrease not only in the proportion of progressive sperm but also in curvilinear velocity ( VCL ) , straight - line velocity ( VSL ) , and average path velocity ( VAP ) , three ki - nematic parameters assessing sperm velocity ( Fig . 2C and fig . S4A ) . These results strongly suggested a reduced fertilization potential of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm owing to reduced sperm motility ( asthenozoospermia ) , a common cause of male infertility ( 19 ) . Defects in sperm motility are due to altered flagellar beat patterns Followingtheobservationofreducedmotilityof Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm , we further characterized the flagellar beat of those sperm . We first performed two - dimensional ( 2D ) analyses of RESEARCH Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 1 of 12 1 Institut Curie , Université PSL , CNRS UMR3348 , F - 91400 Orsay , France . 2 Université Paris - Saclay , CNRS UMR3348 , F - 91400 Orsay , France . 3 Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , D - 01307 Dresden , Germany . 4 Institute of Innate Immunity , Medical Faculty , University of Bonn , D - 53127 Bonn , Germany . 5 Center of Advanced European Studies and Research , D - 53175 Bonn , Germany . 6 Université de Paris , Institut Cochin , INSERM , CNRS , F - 75014 Paris , France . 7 Service d ’ histologie , d ’ embryologie , Biologie de la reproduction , Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris , Hôpital Cochin , F - 75014 Paris , France . 8 Human Technopole , I - 20157 Milan , Italy . * Corresponding author . Email : carsten . janke @ curie . fr ( C . J . ) ; sudarshan . gadadhar @ curie . fr ( S . G . ) ; pigino @ mpi - cbg . de ( G . P . ) ; luis . alvarez @ caesar . de ( L . A . ) † These authors contributed equally to this work . single sperm cells tethered with their heads at the glass surface . Wild - type sperm showed the characteristic symmetric flagellar beat , whereas flagella of sperm from Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were beating asymmetrically , thus in - ducing a rotatory swimming trajectory in one preferential direction ( Fig . 3A and movie S1 ) . Analyses of flagellar beat parameters ( 20 ) revealed that the mean flagellar curvature for Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm was more than three times higher than for wild type ( Fig . 3B and fig . S5 , A to C ) . Moreover , Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella beat with less than half the ampli - tude of wild type , and their beat was biased toward the open - hook side of the sperm head , which could explain the asymmetric beat ( Fig . 3C and fig . S5 , C and D ) . Another major defect was found in the peak frequencies of the flagellar beat . Whereas a homogeneous peak frequency was detected along the entire length of wild - type flagella , Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagella were beatingwithalowerfrequencyclosetothesperm head but with a more than two times higher fre - quencyintherestoftheflagellumcomparedwithwild - type sperm ( Fig . 3D and fig . S5E ) . Such modifications of beat patterns cannot be ex - plained by premature hyperactivation , a sperm behavior that normally occurs during sperm transit in the female genital tract and ensures proper sperm progression toward the oocyte . Hyperactivation would result in a higher beat amplitude and lower beat frequencies and , accordingly , inahigheramplitudeoflateralhead displacement ( ALH ) and a lower beat - cross fre - quency ( BCF ) in CASA analyses ( 21 – 23 ) . Given thatALHwaspersistentlylowerandBCFhigherfor Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm ( Fig . 2C ) , we excluded the presence of premature hyperactivation . Altered flagellar beat patterns result in anomalous sperm swim paths The altered beat patterns we observed for Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm were likely to translate into altered swim paths . We thus simulated the swim paths of sperm in three dimensions Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 2 of 12 50 µm 50 µm 50 µm 50 µm A B w il d t y pe T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - - tubulin - tubulin - tubulin 25015010075 50 37 50 Sperm 12G10 Gly - pep1 kDa merge ( zoom ) overview Gly - pep1 6 - 11B - 1 DAPI T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - w il d t y p e T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - 10 µm 10 µm 10 µm 10 µm Fig . 1 . Total absence of glycylation in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice . ( A ) Paraffin - embedded testes sections stained for tubulin acetylation ( 6 - 11B - 1 ; green ) , glycylation ( Gly - pep1 ; red ) , and DNA [ 4 ′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) ] . Nuclear staining shows normal sperm head morphology and a normal arrangement of sperm heads of different developmental stages in the seminiferous tubules of wild - type , Ttll3 − / − , Ttll8 − / − , and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − testes . Sperm flagella are present in all genotypes ( labeled by 6 - 11B - 1 ) , and are glycylated in wild - type and single - knockout but not in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm tails . ( B ) Immunoblotofspermsamplesfromwild - type , Ttll3 − / − , Ttll8 − / − , and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice . Note that in single - knockout mice ( Ttll3 − / − , Ttll8 − / − ) , glycylation ( Gly - pep1 ) is only partially abolished , while it is undetectable in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . The anti - a - tubulin antibody 12G10 confirmed equal tubulin load . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE on the basis of the flagellar beat patterns we had determined from tethered sperm ( Fig . 3 ) , under the assumption that the flagellar beat is not perfectly planar ( Fig . 4A ) . Our simulations showed that wild - type sperm should swim in a twisted ribbon trajectory ( 24 ) , whereas Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm would adopt a helical swim path ( Fig . 4B ) . To test these predictions , we directly determined the 3D trajectories of free - swimming sperm by in - line holographic microscopy ( 25 ) . As predicted , wild - type sperm cellsswaminatwistedribbontrajectory , where - as Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm swam predominantly in helical paths ( Fig . 4C and fig . S6 ) . Both swim - ming patterns allow sperm to advance , how - ever , when Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm reached the wall of the observation chamber , their swim - mingpathsspontaneouslyswitchedfromhelicaltocircularswimming ( Fig . 4D ) , which impedes progressive swimming . Circular swimpatterns have been reported for sperm of marine in - vertebrates ( 26 ) , but they are atypical for mam - malian sperm ( 27 ) . To test the propensity of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm to switch to circular swimming , we recorded the swim paths of large numbers of free - swimming sperm cells near the glass surface of the recording cham - ber . Under these conditions , wild - type sperm swam almost exclusively along straight or curved paths , whereas most ( ~ 86 % ) of the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm swam in circular paths ( Fig . 4 , E and F , and movie S2 ) . Only a small fraction ( ~ 14 % ) of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − spermshowed incidental progressive movement , but even those switched intermittently to circular move - ments ( movie S3 ) . The predominantly circular swimming of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − spermatozoa near the glass surface can be explained by the in - creased average curvature of their flagella ( Figs . 3B and 4A ) : Mesoscale hydrodynamics simula - tions predict that a high mean curvature of the flagellar beat contributes to the accumulation of sperm at the surface , prevents sperm rolling , and results in swimming along tight circles ( 28 ) . The main defect of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm cells , their nonlinear swimming pattern , clearly hampered their capacity to reach the site of fertilization . To achieve progressive swimming , spermrequireasymmetricflagellarbeat , which Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm fail to generate . A higher beat asymmetry , as seen for Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm , is known to result in an increased ro - tational velocity perpendicular to the transla - tional velocity of the sperm cell ( 20 , 29 , 30 ) and consequently induces swimming along helical or circular paths . Even helical swim paths can become circular when sperm cells encounter a surface , thus impeding progressive movement ( 28 ) . Thus , while Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm can advance , and eventually proceed to fertiliza - tion , they are highly inefficient when com - pared with wild - type sperm . Therefore , it appears that the perturbed flagellar beat , which results in nonprogressive swim paths , is most likely the reason for the observed sub - fertility of the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice . Lack of glycylation leads to an altered distribution of axonemal dynein conformations To understand the molecular basis of the per - turbedbeat patterns ofspermflagellathat lack glycylation , wedeterminednative3Dstructures of axonemes in situ by plunge - freezing swim - ming sperm and imaging their flagella using cryo – electron tomography . We then applied subtomogram averaging to the straight seg - ments of the distal part of the flagellar prin - cipal piece to generate high - resolution 3D electron density maps of the axonemal 96 - nm repeat ( 31 ) . First , we observed that the absence of gly - cylation in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axonemes affected neither the assembly of the MTs nor the over - all macromolecular structure of the axonemes ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . We also observed other axonemal features , such as a barrel - shaped structurebetweentheradialspokes1and2andaproteinstructurelinkingtheneckregionsofradialspokes2and3 ( Fig . 5A ) . These struc - tures , which were not seen in axonemes of other species , were present in both wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mouse sperm flagella . The molecular identity of these barrel and linker structures remains unclear . However , the differ - ence map between the 96 - nm repeat models of wild - typeand Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axonemesrevealed structural alterations in the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axo - nemaldyneinarmsandtheirMT - bindingdomains on the B tubule of each MT doublet ( Fig . 5C ) . Axonemal dynein motors — the outer and inner dynein arms ( ODAsandIDAs ) — produce the force necessary to power flagellar motion and are organized in complexes that link to - gether neighboring axonemal MT doublets ( 32 ) . Functionally , ODAsarethoughttocontrol the beat amplitude and frequency , and IDAs the beat waveform ( 33 ) . Consequently , loss or mislocalization of specific axonemal dynein isoforms in a flagellum can cause alterations of the flagellar beat . However , this appeared not to be the case in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axonemes , because all ODA and IDA heavy chains were presentinthe3Delectrondensitymaps ( Figs . 5 , A and C , and 6 , A and B ) . Moreover , we con - firmedthatthetwoODAheavychains ( DNAH17 : b - heavy chain ; DNAH8 : g - heavy chain ; fig . S7A ) and the IDA heavy and light chains ( DNAH2 : IDA - f b - heavy chain ; DNALI1 : light interme - diate chain ; fig . S7B ) were present and cor - rectly distributed along the entire length of the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagella . Thus , we reasoned that the structural alterations of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axonemes that were highlighted by the differ - encemapmusthavebeenofamoresubtlenature . Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 3 of 12 Fig . 2 . Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice show subfertility and reduced sperm motility . ( A ) Analysis of litter size . Comparison of heterozygotes ( Ttll3 + / − Ttll8 + / − ) with Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice shows a reduction in the average number of pups per litter ( see fig . S3E for details ) . ( B ) In vitro fertilization assay with wild - type oocytes . The average fertilization index of five independent experiments ( fig . S4B ) shows a strong decrease of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm fertility . ( C ) Computer - assisted sperm analyses ( CASA ) comparing wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice show a reduced proportion of progressive sperm . In particular , Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm had reduced velocity parameters : curvilinear velocity ( VCL ) , straight - line velocity ( VSL ) , and average path velocity ( VAP ) , together with reduced amplitude of lateral head displacement ( ALH ) . The beat - cross frequency ( BCF ) , on the other hand , was higher in the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 n ° f u s ed s pe r m / n ° oo cy t e s p < 0 . 0001 C A B Computer - assisted sperm analyses ( CASA ) Average in - vitro fertilization index Litter size 0 5 10 15 20 n ° o f pup s pe r b i r t h p = 0 . 0127 Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - Ttll3 + / - Ttll8 + / - 0 10 20 30 40 50 % o f p r og r e ss i v e s pe r m progressive motility p = 0 . 0092 wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - 0 20 40 60 80 100 VS L ( µ m / s ) straight - line velocity p = 0 . 0003 wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - mean amplitude of lateral head displacement 0 5 10 15 A L H ( µ m ) wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - p = 0 . 0003 0 50 100 150 VAP ( µ m / s ) average path velocity p = 0 . 0003 wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - p = 0 . 0002 0 50 100 150 200 250 V C L ( µ m / s ) curvilinear velocity wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - mean beat cross frequency B C F ( H z ) wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - p = 0 . 0005 0 10 20 30 40 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE Proper spatial and temporal coordination of dynein motor activities is crucial to drive flagellar motility . Experimental evidence from sea urchin sperm and Chlamydomonas flagella showsthatinbeatingflagella , mostODAsadopt apre - powerstrokeconformation , whereasinter - mediate and post - powerstroke conformations are mostly found on subsets of MTs in the bent regions of axonemes ( 34 ) . Regardless of the nature of the mechanism that initiates the beatingoftheflagellum — which isstilldebated in the field — a spatiallyclustereddistribution of active and inactive dynein motors , correlating withthebendingoftheflagellum , isrequiredfor the propagation of the normal bending motion . Our analysis of straight segments of ac - tive wild - type mouse sperm flagella showed that ODAs were predominantly in the pre - powerstroke conformation ( Fig . 6A and movie S4 , A and B ) , indicating that the distribution of dynein conformations , previously observed in echinoderms and algae ( 34 ) , is also con - served in mammals . In contrast , analysis of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagella showed drastically al - tered structures of the b - and g - heavy chains of ODAs ( Fig . 6A and movie S4 , A and B ) . The averageofall Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − ODAsfromstraight axoneme segments showed poorly resolved heavy chains ( Fig . 6A ) , which is characteristic of flexible or conformationally heterogeneous structures that disappear in subtomogram av - erages . This observation indicated defects in theconformationalarrangementofthedyneinheavychainsin Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axonemes , which we confirmed with a subtomogram clas - sificationapproach . Only26 % of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − ODAs exhibited the pre - powerstroke confor - mation , about 18 % could not be classified , and the remaining 56 % showed either the post - powerstroke state ( 32 % ) or mixed conforma - tions of opposing states of the b - and g - heavy chains , either as pre - post ( 19 % ) or post - pre con - formations ( 5 % ) ( Fig . 6 , B and C , and movie S4C ) . Notably , the b - heavy chains were most affected by the absence of glycylation . The space distribution of the ODA conformations in the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagellar segments was considerably altered as compared with wild - type flagella ( Fig . 6D ) , did not reveal a dis - cernible pattern , and showed uncoordinated dynein activity . This altered conformational distribution of ODAs is presumably linked to an altered force - generation profile that results in an aberrant beating phenotype . Subtomogram averaging of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axonemes further revealed that IDAs also show an abnormal shift of their heavy chains toward the MT plus - end ( fig . S8A ) , a conformation characteristic of immotile flagella ( 34 ) . Sub - tomogram classification of IDAs from sperm flagella ( fig . S8 , B to D ) revealed that in wild type , 42 % of the IDAs were in pre - powerstroke and 22 % in a post - powerstroke conformation ( fig . S8 , C and D ) . By contrast , only 20 % of the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − IDAs were in pre - powerstroke and 45 % IDAs were in post - powerstroke con - formation ( fig . S8 , C and D ) . Among all IDAs analyzed , IDA - f showed the most prominent structural and positional difference between wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella ( fig . S8B ) . The conformational reconfiguration of IDA - f occurred concurrently with an oppos - ing tilting motion of the nexin - dynein regu - latory complex ( N - DRC ) and the radial - spoke heads . This movement was perpendicular to the MT axis and associated with a displace - ment of thenext MTdoublet ( movie S5 ) . Similar movementshavealsobeendescribedforthenexin - dynein regulatory complex in Chlamydomonas axonemes ( 35 ) and for the MT doublets in sea urchin sperm flagella ( 34 ) . Mechanisms by which glycylation affects flagellar beat Our structural data show that the lack of gly - cylation in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm axonemes does not affect the binding and assembly of dyneins to A - tubules of the axonemal MT doublets ( Fig . 6A , fig . S8A , and movie S4 ) . Nevertheless , the lack of glycylation perturbed the coordination of motor activities . Thus , the affinity of the dynein MT - binding domain for the B tubule may depend on tubulin glycyla - tion , potentially changing the dynamics of the “ reloading ” from the post - powerstroke intothepre - powerstrokestate . Indeed , invitro single - molecule experiments have shown that other tubulin PTMs canalter certain aspectsof the interactions between dynein motors and MTs ( 36 , 37 ) . Perturbations of dynein – MT in - teractions are expected to affect the flagellar beat characteristics , such asthe amplitudeand Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 4 of 12 B D C - 10 10 30 50 f r equen cy ( H z ) 0 40 80 120 arc length ( µm ) 0 40 80 120 0 30 60 90 a m p li t ude ( µ m ) y arc length ( µm ) c u r v a t u r e ( mm - 1 ) 0 40 80 120 arc length ( µm ) 40 20 0 - 20 Mean curvature Peak frequency Y amplitude midpiece principal piece midpiece principal piece midpiece principal piece wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - A 20 µm w il d t y p e T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - 20 µm 0 140 ms Time projections of head - tethered sperm - 10 0 10 20 wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - c u r v a t u r e ( mm - 1 ) p < 0 . 0001 0 20 40 wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - a m p li t ude ( µ m ) p < 0 . 0001 0 20 40 WT 0 - 5 µm p < 0 . 0001 5 µm - end T3 - / - T8 - / - WT T3 - / - T8 - / - f r equen cy ( H z ) p < 0 . 0001 Fig . 3 . Asymmetric beat of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella . ( A ) Color - coded time projections of dark - field recordings of head - tethered mouse spermatozoa in two dimensions : The depicted color - coded time span ( 140 ms ) corresponds to one beat cycle of wild - type sperm . The flagellar envelope of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm cells is asymmetrically displaced to the open - hook side of the head , in contrast to wild - type sperm . See also movie S1 . ( B to D ) Multiparameter motility analyses of the flagellar beat using the software SpermQ . In all line graphs , solid lines indicate the time - averaged values , and dotted lines the standard deviation for different arc - length positions along the flagellum . Scatter dot plots show the time - and arc - length - averaged values for individual sperm cells ( dots ) as well as the mean values ±SEM ( bars ) . ( B ) Mean flagellar curvature . ( C ) Amplitude of flagellar beat in the direction perpendicular to the head - midpiece axis . ( D ) Representation of peak frequencies of the flagellar beat . Scatter plot shows the peak frequencies separately for the first 5 m m and for the rest of the flagellum . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE the frequency , which is what we observed for Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) . Yet it remains unclear why the flagellar beat of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm features a higher mean curvature and why the midpiece and the prin - cipal piece displayed different beat frequen - cies . The observed increased mean curvature of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagellacouldeitherbecaused by a differential distribution of glycylated tu - bulin across different MT doublets and the resulting effect of this asymmetry on motor activity , or it could be caused by the effect of a generalized increase in motor activity on an inherently asymmetric axonemal structure . Whatever the origin , such asymmetry would result in bending in one preferred direction and axonemal twist , which has been suggested to control the switching point of flagellar os - cillations ( 38 ) . The outer dense fibers and the mitochondrialsheath , structuresthatarepresent in the flagellar midpiece , could prevent flagel - lar twist at this location ( 39 ) . This would result in the observed arc length – dependent beat fre - quencies of the strongly bent Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagellum . In addition , the altered dynein ac - tivity we observed might result in local inhibi - tion of MT sliding . Sliding inhibition , in turn , could result in secondary waves that emanate farther up in the flagellum , as observed in flagella lacking glycylation ( movies S1 and S2 ) . Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 5 of 12 E 0 2 s 50 µm 0 2 s 50 µm wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - A F w il d t y p e T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - B w il d t y p e T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - C Computed 3D sperm trajectories Experimental 3D sperm trajectories Helical - to - circular path transition D 50 µ m 3 . 5 0 straight straight / curved circular 100 % 75 % 25 % 0 % 50 % wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - s w i mm i ng beha v i o r p < 0 . 0001 circularstraight / curved Time projections of free - swimming sperm near surfaces 3D flagellar shapes Sperm swimming behavior 5 0 µ m 5 0 µ m t i m e ( m s ) time ( s ) time ( s ) 0 96 50 µ m 0 3 time ( s ) 0 3 10 µm 10 µm 10 µm 50 µ m 50 µ m back view back view back view back view back view 10 µm 50 µ m w il d t y p e T t ll 3 - / - T t ll 8 - / - Fig . 4 . Altered swimming behavior of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . ( A ) 3D flagellar shapes used to compute the 3D swimming path of sperm cells . The shapes were extracted from experiments using tethered sperm ( Fig . 3A ) . The flagellar shapes correspond to about half a beat period , but simulations were based on the complete time series . The z component was assumed to be a smooth arc of constant curvature along the flagellar arc length ( k z = 5 × 10 − 3 m m − 1 ; projections shown in black ) . ( B ) Computed swimming paths of sperm cells using resistive - force theory . Wild - type spermatozoa are predicted to swim along a twisted ribbon , whereas Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm cells are predicted to swim along a helical path . ( C ) Representative examples for reconstruction of 3D swimming paths from in - line holographic recordings of freely swimming sperm . Wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm swim along a twisted ribbon and a helical path , respectively . Insets [ ( B ) and ( C ) ] : Back view of the path in the direction indicated by the arrow . See also fig . S6 for individual sperm trajectories . ( D ) 3D holographic trajectory of a Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm showing the transition from a helical to a circular swimming path when reaching the upper wall of the observation chamber . See also movie S3 . ( E ) Color - coded time projections of representative dark - field recordings of freely swimming wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm near the glass surface ( see also movie S2 ) . ( F ) Quantification of the swimming patterns observed in ( E ) . The graph represents the mean ( ±SEM ) of the different mice analyzed . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE The increased frequency and reduced ampli - tude of these waves would be consistent with findings in demembranated sperm ( 40 ) . Our observation that tubulin glycylation is essential for the coordination of the power - stroke cycle of axonemal dynein motors does not exclude the possibility that additional processes sensitive to glycylation contribute to the observed flagellar beat phenotype . For instance , proper flagellar beat also involves the central - pair MTs that transmit mechan - ical signals via the radial spokes through the nexin - dynein regulatory complex , which con - trol both IDAs and ODAs ( 41 , 42 ) . Indeed , central - pair MTs are also glycylated ( 43 ) , and so we cannot exclude the possibility that the potential absence of glycylation on these MTs also contributes to a perturbed swimming pattern . To verify whether the lack of glycylation also affects the beating of other motile cilia in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice , we recorded ependymal cilia of brain ventricles in isolated brain slices . Cilia from both wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice showed similar beat frequencies in three independent experiments ( movie S6 ) , suggest - ing no major beat defects . However , ependymal cilia are shorter than sperm flagella and might , similar to respiratory cilia in the trachea ( 44 ) , contain different dynein heavy chains in their axonemes . Thus , the sensitivity of motile cilia to glycylation might be different from what we observed in sperm flagella . While our data demonstrate a causative role of glycylation for the observed defects of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm , othertubulinPTMsmight also be involved . Earlier studies in Tetrahymena thermophila as well as in murinephotoreceptors have revealed that absence of tubulin glycylation leadstoanincreaseintubulinpolyglutamylation ( 5 , 45 , 46 ) . This is intuitive , becauseboth PTMs use overlapping modification sites on tubulin Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 6 of 12 B C Difference map of 96 - nm repeat averages Cross - section of the 96 - nm repeat MTBD IDA ODA 20 nm 20 nm wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - 20 nm RS1 RS2 RS3 RS1 RS2 RS3 A wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - Sub - tomogram averages of the axonemal 96 - nm repeat - - + + ODA IDA IC / LC tether radial spokes N - DRC unidentified densities Fig . 5 . The assembly of the axonemal 96 - nm repeat is not affected in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . ( A ) 3D - isosurface rendering of the 96 - nm repeats from active wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella after subtomogram averaging . All known components of the axonemal 96 - nm repeat were identified in both wild type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − , indicating that absence of glycylation did not affect their assembly . We further identified densities of structures that are not found in axonemes from other species ( crimson - colored ) . A barrel - shaped structure between radial spokes 1 and 2 ( RS1 and RS2 ) and a density that links the neck of radial spokes 2 and 3 ( RS2 and RS3 ) . ODA , outer dynein arm ; IDA , inner dynein arm ; IC / LC , dynein intermediate chain / light chain ; N - DRC , nexin - dynein regulatory complex . ( B ) Slice through subtomogram averaged wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − 96 - nm repeats . No evident modifications to the macromolecular assembly of the axoneme were found upon depletion of tubulin glycylation . ( C ) Difference map of wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − 96 - nm repeat averages . Areas of the 96 - nm repeat that present meaningful structural differences between the two averages are circled in red . These include ODAs , IDAs , and part of the external wall of the B - tubule . MTBD , microtubule - binding domain . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 7 of 12 20 nm A B wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - 20 µm Sub - tomogram averages of all outer dynein arms ( ODAs ) D wild type Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - Distribution of ODA conformations in axonemes Classificationof ODAs Class averages showing different ODA conformations Slices through sub - tomogram averages pre - pre - dynein head - dynein head dynein tail dynein stalk pre - post post - pre post - post 1 3 3 1 2 4 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 C 100 % 75 % 18 % 6 % 7 % 61 % 26 % 19 % 32 % 18 % 5 % 8 % 25 % 0 % 50 % wildtype Ttll3 - / - Ttll8 - / - pe r c en t age o f c on f i gu r a t i on 200 nm 3 4 3 4 3 4 γ β MT fibrous sheath fibrous sheath microtubules membrane membrane MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT MT pre - pre pre - post unclassified post - pre post - post * * * * - - - - - - + + + + + + MT MT MT MT Fig . 6 . Distribution of ODA conformations are perturbed in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella . ( A ) Averages of all ODA subtomograms from wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella ( from straight axonemal segments ) highlight that the structures of the dynein heads ( b - heavy chain , magenta ; g - heavy chain , green ) are altered in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm . Asterisks indicate the position of b - and g - heavy chains in the wild - type structure and the corresponding coordinates in the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − average . The Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − average shows a shift of both b - and g - dynein heads toward the MT plus - end ( + ) . ( B ) Representative class averages of the distinct ODA conformations identified in wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagella . Isosurface rendering ( top panels ) and representative orthogonal and longitudinal slices ( lower panels ) through b - and g - heavy chains [ color - coded as in ( A ) ] . The numbered lines illustrate the slicing planes through the subtomogram averages in the lower panels . The superimposed schematic models show the positions of dynein b - and g - AAA domains ( magenta and green , respectively ) , the dynein stalks ( orange lines ) , and the MT binding domains ( orange dot ) . Note that pre - pre , pre - post , post - pre , and post - post refer to dynein g - and b - heavy chain conformations , respectively ( pre = pre - powerstroke , post = post - powerstroke ) . While the position of the stalk is clearly visible in the pre - pre and post - post conformations , as highlighted by the schematics , the stalks were not easily identified in the pre - post and post - pre conformations , probably because of their unstable conformation . ( C ) Incidence of the distinct ODA conformations in wild - type ( n = 2691 particles ) and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − ( n = 3656 particles ) axonemes . Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − flagella show a particularly increased percentage of pre - post and post - post powerstroke conformations . ( D ) Distribution of the different ODAs conformations visualized in wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − axonemes shows the absence of a clear pattern of distribution in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm [ color coding of dots as in ( B ) and ( C ) ] . The distribution in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − indicates a reduced ability of ODAs to coordinate their activity states . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE ( 47 ) . Accordingly , we also found an increase in tubulin polyglutamylation in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm ( fig . S9 ) . Nevertheless , it is rather un - likely that increased polyglutamylation partici - pates in the observed defects in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm , given that the defects in mice lacking the deglutamylases CCP1 ( 9 , 11 ) or CCP5 ( 48 ) are substantially different from those found in Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice . Conclusion Here we have elucidated the functional roles and molecular mechanisms of tubulin glycy - lation in ciliary and flagellar functions . The generation of a mouse model entirely lacking tubulin glycylation allowed us to reveal the importance of this PTM for mammalian sperm flagella . We demonstrated that the functional distribution of post - and pre - powerstroke con - formations of axonemal dynein arms , which is an essential prerequisite for a physiological flagellar beat ( 33 , 34 , 42 ) , depends on the pres - ence of tubulin glycylation . Absence of glycy - lation in flagella of Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm led to severe alteration of the symmetry , amplitude , andfrequencyoftheflagellarbeat , whichresulted in sperm failing to swim along a straight line . Straightline swimming , however , is a crucial re - quirement for sperm to reach the oocyte in the femalereproductivetract . Although Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − males were fertile , they produced smaller litter sizes and were revealed to be subfertile using in vitro fertilization assays . Human sperm are more susceptible to deficiencies than are mouse sperm ( 49 ) , and sperm motility defects such as asthenozoospermia account for almost 80 % of the sperm defects observed in infertile men ( 50 ) . Thus , our findings could have im - plications for human fertility . Our cryo – electron tomography of the mam - malian sperm flagellum uncovers the molecu - lar mechanism by which glycylation supports flagellar beating and in turn affects sperm swimming and male fertility . Considering the massive evolutionary pressure on sperm fitness ( 51 , 52 ) , our findings might explain why glycyla - tionhas , with onlyafewexceptions , beenmain - tainedthroughout evolution . Finally , our work implies that a perturbation of tubulin glycyla - tioncouldpotentiallyprovideamolecularcauseofmaleinfertilityinhumans . Materials and methods Transgenic mice Generation of Ttll3 − / − and Ttll8 − / − mice The Ttll3 − / − mice were generated in the lab as previously described ( 5 ) ( fig . S1A ) . The Ttll8 flox / flox mouse was generated from the Ttll8 tm1a ( EUCOMM ) Wtsi targeting vector obtained from EUCOMM consortium ( IKMC Project # 83158 ) at the Institut Clinique de la Souris , Strasbourg , France . The targeting vector was constructed as follows : the 5 ′ ( 4 . 7 - kb ) and 3 ′ ( 4 . 7 - kb ) regions of Ttll8 , LacZ and inter - loxP ( 0 . 6kb ) fragmentswereamplifiedbypolymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) and sequentially subcloned into an MCI proprietary vector containing the LoxP sites and a neomycin resistance cassette flanked by the flippase recognition target ( FRT ) sites ( fig . S1B ) . The linearized construct was electroporated in 129S2 / SvPas mouse embry - onic stem ( ES ) cells . After selection , targeted clones were identified by PCR using external primers and further confirmed by Southern blot with 5 ′ and 3 ′ external probes . Two posi - tive ES clones were injected into blastocysts , and derived male chimeras gave germline trans - mission . Theexcisionoftheneomycinresistance cassette was performed in vivo bybreeding the chimeras with a Flp deleter line ( C57BL / 6N geneticbackground FLP under ACTBpromoter ) to generate the Ttll8 flox / flox mice . To generate Ttll8 − / − mice , we excised exon 2 by crossing Ttll8 flox / flox mice with mice expressing cre - recombinase under the control of a PGK pro - moter ( 53 ) . For generation of the double - knockout Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice , the single - knockout mice wereintercrossedtogeneratetheheterozygotes Ttll3 + / − Ttll8 + / − , which were later crossed be - tween each other to generate the homozygote Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice . All animals were back - crossed at least seven generations to the C57BL / 6N animals . Mouse genotyping DNA was extracted from ear fragments ( col - lected during mouse identification ) or tail fragments , using proteinase K ( # 193504 , MP Biomedicals ) . PCR - based genotyping was per - formed using primers listed in fig . S1C and protocols listed in fig . S1D . Examples of geno - typing results for all transgenes and deletions are shown in fig . S1E . Mouse strain breeding Animal care and use for this study were per - formed in accordance with the recommenda - tions of the European Community ( 2010 / 63 / UE ) for the care and use of laboratory ani - mals . Experimental procedures were specif - ically approved by the ethics committee of the Institut Curie CEEA - IC # 118 ( authorization no . 04395 . 03 given by National Authority ) in com - pliance with the international guidelines . Tissue histology Six - month - old mice were anesthetized by intra - peritonealapplicationofketamineandxylazine ( 100 mg per kilogram body weight for keta - mine and 10 mg per kilogram body weight of xylazine ) and subjected to cardiac perfusion with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ; pH 7 . 4 ) containing 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) . After perfusion , the mice were dissected , and the tissues were post - fixed with 4 % PFA in PBS overnight at 4°C . The fixed tissues were washed and embedded in paraffin . Seven - micrometer sections were obtained using a microtome ( # RM2245 , Leica Biosystems ) . Sections were further analyzed using immunocytochemistry or hematoxylin - eosin staining . Sperm isolation and Coomassie blue staining Sperm from 3 - month - old male mice were stained with Coomassie blue staining solution as described earlier ( 48 ) . Briefly , the mice were cervically dislocated , and the epididymides isolated and lacerated in 1 ml PBS using 26G needles ( 0 . 45 mm by 13 mm ; # 613 - 5377 , VWR ) to allow thespermatozoa to swim out fromthe epididymides by incubating for 15 min at 37°C . The sperm suspensions obtained from both wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were fixed with 4 % PFA , centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min at room temperature ( RT ) , and resuspended in 100 mM ammonium acetate , and a smear was prepared with 50 to 70 m l of the sample on previously coated poly - L - lysine glass slides . Oncethesmear wasdry , itwasrehydratedand stained with 0 . 22 % Coomassie blue ( # 35050 , Serva Electrophoresis GmBH ) for 2 min at RT . The slides were subsequently washed with water , mounted with Aquatex mounting me - dium ( # 108562 , Merck Millipore ) , and analyzed . Culture of primary ependymal cells Primary ependymal cells were cultured using the well - established protocol for isolation , culturing , and differentiation ( 54 ) . Briefly , the brains of wild - type , Ttll3 − / − , Ttll8 − / − , or Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − PN0 - PN2 mouse pups were isolated and dissociated , and the cells from the subventricular zone were isolated by dis - sociating the ventricles using papain for 1 hour at37°C . Thecellswereplatedat highdensityin Dulbecco ’ s modified eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ) containing 10 % FBS in a 25 - cm 2 flask precoated withpoly - L - lysine ( P4832 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . When cellsreachedconfluency , theastroglialmonolayer was replated onto precoated 12 - mm or 24 - mm glass coverslips respectively in 24 - well or 6 - well plates at adensityof10 4 cells / m land maintained in serum - free medium to enable differentiation . Dissection of lateral ventricles and whole - mount immunostaining To analyze the ependymal cilia in the brain ven - tricle by immunocytochemistry , whole - mount sections of the ventricles were obtained as per the protocol described earlier ( 54 ) . Briefly , PN15 pups from wild - type , Ttll3 − / − , Ttll8 − / − , or Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were cervically dislocated , and the whole brain was retrieved by carefully peelingofftheskullwithoutdisturbingthebraintissueusingspringscissorsandforceps . The brain was dissected in PBS using a micro knife under a stereomicroscope . During the entire dissection procedure , the tissue was held by inserting the forceps abovethe corpus callosum and into the thalamus to ensure the ventricle wall was not disturbed . Once the two cortical Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 8 of 12 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE hemispheres were separated , the hippocampus was carefully removed , followed by the median wall . Then , to ensure better access to the anti - bodies , thethalamus , choroidplexus , andcorpus callosum were separated from the ventricle . Once the lateral wall was obtained , it was permeabilizedwith0 . 1 % TritonX - 100inBRB80 ( 80mMK - Pipes , pH6 . 8 , 5mMNa - EGTA , 5mM MgCl 2 ) for 90 s , followed by fixing with 4 % PFA in BRB80 for 20 min at RT . The tissue was then carefully washed three times with PBS , blocked for 1 hour with saturation buffer ( PBS contain - ing 10 % FBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) , and stained with 200 m l primary antibodies listed in table S2 in a 2 - ml Eppendorf tube at 4°C overnight . After 3× washing off the primary antibodies with PBS containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , the tis - sues were stained with the respective sec - ondary antibodies , as indicated in table S2 for 1 hour at RT . All the antibodies were diluted in saturation buffer . Nuclei were visualized by staining for 5 min with DAPI ( 0 . 02 m g / ml ; # D3571 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . After staining , the tissues were further dis - sectedbeforemounting . First , thecortexaround and under the lateral wall was excised , taking care of the curvature and depth of the lateral wall . The rostral part of the wall was cut prior to the caudal part . The tissue was held using forceps inserted into the thalamus . Once the thalamus was removed , the tissue was trans - ferred to a clean slide and mounted using ProLong Gold ( # P36934 , Thermo Fisher Scien - tific ) , taking care not to exert excess pressure on the tissue while mounting . Staining samples for immunofluorescence microscopy Immunocytochemistry of testes , kidney , and trachea was carried out according to the es - tablished protocols ( 55 ) . In brief , the tissue sections on the slides were hydrated with PBS , immersed in 10 mM Na - citrate pH 6 . 0 , and boiled in a microwave for 7 min to enable an - tigen retrieval . The slides were subsequently cooled in ice for 1 hour , after which they were blocked with blocking buffer [ PBS containing 10 % normal goat serum ( NGS ) , 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 ] . Immunostainingofthedifferentdyneins in spermatozoa was carried out by preparing smears of the wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm on clean glass slides . The smears were fixed with 4 % PFA for 10 min , followed by antigen retrieval and permeabilized with PBS containing 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 . Thesmearswere then blocked for 1 hour at RT with buffer con - taining 1 % BSA . The slides were then stained with the different primary antibodies as listed in table S2 overnight at 4°C in a humid cham - ber . After washing the slides 4 × 5 min with PBScontaining0 . 1 % TritonX - 100 , thesections were stained with the respective secondary antibodiesas listedintableS2 for 1 hourat RT . Most of the antibodies used were diluted in PBS containing 5 % NGS , 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 , except the dynein antibodies that were diluted in PBS containing 1 % BSA , 0 . 02 % Triton X - 100 . Nuclei were visualized by staining for 5 min with DAPI ( 0 . 02 m g / ml ; # D3571 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Theslidesweresubsequentlywashed and mounted with ProLong Gold ( # P36934 , Thermo Fisher Scientific ) or DAPI Vectashield ( # H1200 , Vector Laboratories ) . Microscopy of histology , immunocytochemistry , and immunofluorescence All immunofluorescence images apart from the whole - trachea section and sperm immuno - fluorescence ( in figs . S2B and S7 , respectively ) were acquired using the Nikon Ti - E spinning disk inverted confocal laser microscope using either a 60× [ oil immersion ; numerical aper - ture ( NA ) 1 . 40 ] ora100× ( oilimmersion ; NA1 . 49 ) objectives at RT . Images were acquired using the Prime95B sCMOS camera ( Photometrics ) and Leica MM AF imaging software . Multiple Z - stacks were acquired , and a maximum in - tensity projection was prepared in Fiji v2 . 1 . 0 ( National Institute of Health ) to generate the final image . Whole - trachea sections were imaged using the Structured Illumination Mi - croscope ( Optigrid / Leica systems ) with a 5× ( NA 0 . 15 ) objective at RT , an ORCA - Flash4 . 0 camera ( Hamamatsu ) , and Leica MM AF im - aging software and processed using Fiji v2 . 1 . 0 . For the histology , hematoxylin - eosin stained tis - sue sections were imagedin the AxioImager . M2 microscope ( Zeiss ) using either a 10× ( NA 0 . 3 ) , 20× ( NA0 . 5 ) , ora63× ( waterimmersion ; NA1 . 2 ) objective . Multiple tiles of each tissue section were imaged . Tiles were subsequently stitched , background adjusted and processed using the ZEN v2 . 3 software ( Zeiss ) . Sperm immuno - fluorescence was imaged using Zeiss Axiophot epifluorescence microscope with a 63× ( oil im - mersion ; NA 1 . 40 ) or 100× ( oil immersion ; NA 1 . 49 ) objective using a cooled charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( Hamamatsu ) underiden - tical instrument settings , with MetaMorph soft - ware ( Molecular Devices ) . Immunoblot analyses Wild - type , Ttll3 − / − , Ttll8 − / − , or Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation , and the trachea were harvested in 2 - ml vials . The trachea were weighed and resuspended in lysis buffer ( PBS pH 7 . 5 , containing 25 mM HEPES , 200 mM NaCl , 5 % glycerol , 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , 0 . 5 % NP40 and protease inhibitor cocktail ) at 100 m l per 100 mg of the tissue and homogenized . The homogenate was then centrifuged at 10 , 000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant collected . The epididymides from these mice were lacerated in 1 ml PBS to allow the spermatozoa to swim out from the epididymides by incubating for 15 min at 37°C . The sperm suspension was centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min at 4°C , after which the sperm pellets obtained were lysed in 100 m l of lysis buffer and centrifuged at 10 , 000 g for 10 min at 4°C , and the supernatant collected . After estimating the total protein using the Pierce BCA protein estimation kit ( # 23227 ; LifeTechnologies ) , 1 to 2 m gofthetotal proteinwasrunon10 % SDS – polyacrylamidegel electrophoresis ( SDS - PAGE ) gels . Aspecificpro - tocol for SDS - PAGE gels was used to separate a - and b - tubulin ( 56 ) . Proteinsweretransferred to nitrocellulose membranes with Trans - Blot Turbo using transfer packs ( # 1704159 ; Bio - Rad ) and subjected to immunoblot analysis . The ciliated cells , grown on six - well plates were harvested at different time intervals , with 500 m l of Laemmli buffer [ 400 mM Tris - HCl , pH6 . 8containing450mMDTT , 10 % ( w / v ) SDS , 50 % ( v / v ) glycerol , ~ 0 . 006 % ( w / v ) bromo - phenol blue ] , heated to 95°C for 10 min and equal protein was run on 10 % SDS - PAGE gels and analyzed by immunoblot analysis . For all immunoblots , the membranes were blocked overnight with PBS containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ( PBS - T ) and 5 % nonfat milk and then incubated for 2 hours at RT with the dif - ferent primary antibodies as listed in table S2 . Antibodies were diluted in PBS - T containing 2 . 5 % nonfat milk . Membranes were washed four times with PBS - T and then incubated for 1 . 5 hours with respective secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase , as listed in table S2 , diluted to 1 : 10 , 000 in PBS - T . Af - ter washing , antibody labeling was revealed using Clarity Western ECL detection reagent ( # 1705061 ; Bio - Rad ) . Ependymal cilia beating analyses Image acquisition and generation of videos Brain sections from PN20 - PN30 wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were collected and imaged asdescribedin ( 57 ) . Briefly , thedissected brains were sectioned into ~ 200 - m m sagittal sections in Leibovitz L15 medium . The sections were then placed in 100 m l medium on a glass slide and covered with a 24 mm by 60 mm glass coverslip no . 1bygentlysealing itwith vacuum grease . The sections were immediately imaged using the CLSM - SP5 confocal light microscope ( Leica Biosystems ) equipped with a resonance scanner for high - speed imaging , using a 60× ( oil immersion ; NA 1 . 4 ) objective at 37°C . The sections were imaged at 64 pixels by 48 pixels ( 15× zoom ) at 100 frames per second ( FPS ) for 3 to 5 s using the LSM software , to obtain beat - ing cilia with minimal tissue background . The timeseriesobtainedwereexportedas . avivideos , which were adjusted for their brightness and contrastusingFijiv2 . 1 . 0 . Forbettervisualization of the curvature of the ciliary beat , the videos were slowed down 20 - fold , to run at 5 FPS . Cilia beat frequency analysis To analyze the ependymal cilia beat frequen - cy ( CBF ) , the videos obtained for both the Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 9 of 12 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were ana - lyzed using the CiliaFA plugin developed for ImageJ ( 58 ) that allowed fast , automated beat frequency analysis minimizing manual errors . The software works on extracting the pixel intensities , coupled with Fast Fourier Trans - formation in Microsoft Excel to provide the CBF . 256 frames of each video obtained from the wild - type or Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − brain sections were analyzed in CiliaFA . The CBF obtained were tabulated and quantified using GraphPad prism version 8 . Sperm motility analyses Sperm preparation for motility and holographic analyses of flagellar beat Mouse sperm were collected by cutting off the cauda epididymites followed by a swim - out process in modified TYH medium ( 10 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 , 135 mM NaCl , 4 . 8 mM KCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 1 . 2 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 1 mM MgSO 4 , 5 . 6 mM glucose , 0 . 5 mM Na - pyruvate , 10 mM L - lactate ) for 30 min at 37°C . Sperm were col - lected carefully without touching oil and tis - sue fragments . Analysis of sperm motility and flagellar beating Freely swimming and tethered sperm were studied in TYH medium containing 3 and 0 . 3 mg / ml BSA , respectively . Images were re - corded using a high - speed camera ( pco . dimax ; PCO AG ) and an inverted microscope ( IX 71 ; Olympus ) . The temperature of the microscope was adjusted to 37°C using an incubator ( Life Imaging Services , Switzerland ) . Wide - field images were recorded at 50 FPS using a 4× objective ( UPLanFLN ; Olympus ) and custom - made observation chambers with a 100 - m m depth . Illumination was achieved using a 660 - nm LED . Dark - field and holographic re - cordings were achieved using a 10× objective ( UPLSAPO10X ; Olympus ) and an additional 1 . 6× magnifying lens . Dark - field images were recorded at 250 FPS using a M730L4 LED light source . For anal - ysis , images were processed by a Gaussian blur ( sigma : 0 . 5 pixels ) and the Subtract Back - ground method ( radius : 5 pixels ) in ImageJ . Next , the flagellar analysis was performed using SpermQ ( 20 ) . Positive curvature re - fers to bending in the direction of the hook - shaped sperm head . The peak frequency was determined from the Fast Fourier Trans - form of the curvature values . Individual values for all the analyses are provided in table S3 . Three - dimensional holographic images were recorded at 500 or 1000 FPS in observation chambers with a 150 - m m depth . Coherent illu - mination was produced by a 510 - nm laser ( LDH - D - C serials , PicoQuant GmbH ) and the corresponding controller ( Sepia II Multichan - nel Processor , PicoQuant GmbH ) . Holograms were analyzed as previously described ( 25 ) . In brief : The background was calculated by averaging all the holograms from each record - ing , and a background - free hologram was ob - tained by dividing the original hologram by the background . The Rayleigh - Sommerfeld back - propagation method ( 59 ) was used to numerically refocus each background - free hologram , resulting in a refocused stack . A filter based on the Gouy phase anomaly ( 60 ) was applied on the refocused stack , and the 3D coordinates of the sperm flagellum were extracted by localizing the brightest shape in the refocused stack . The head x and y coordinates were estimated by calculating the center of mass of the scattering pattern from the sperm head . To determine robustly the z head coordinates , we fitted a plane to the basal end of the flagellum ( about 11 m m from the head center ) . The head z coordinate was obtained by substituting the head x and y coordinates into the plane equation . All the analysis was done in the open - source soft - ware ImageJ combined with custom - made Java plugins . Three - dimensional trajectories predicted from flagellar beat patterns were computed using resistive - force theory , as previously de - scribed ( 25 , 29 ) , using the 2D flagellar beat pattern from tethered sperm ( Fig . 3A ) and as - suming a constant z = z ( s ) component charac - terizedbyan arcofcurvature k z = 5×10 − 3 m m − 1 along the full flagellar arc length s . Generating color - coded projections Color - coded videos and projections were generated using custom ImageJ macros . The macros and code are open source and freely available at https : / / github . com / hansenjn / ColorStackByTimeAndProject . Computer - assisted sperm analyses ( CASA ) Sperm motility was assessed by computer - assistedspermanalysis ( CASA ) usingtheCEROS II apparatus ( Hamilton Thorne , Beverly , MA , USA ) . Briefly , mouse sperm cells expelled from the cauda epididymis were recovered in M2 medium ( Sigma - Aldrich , Saint - Louis , MO , USA ) and incubated for 10 min at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 . The suspension was collected , and total sperm count determined . At least 500 sperm cells per sample were analyzed in 20 m m chambers ( Leja Products B . V . , Netherlands ) with a Zeiss AX10 Lab . A1 microscope ( 10× objective ) and using HT CASAII software . The settings were as follows : acquisition rate , 60 Hz ; number of frames , 45 ; mini - mum head brightness , 175 ; minimum tail brightness , 80 ; minimum head size , 10 m m 2 ; minimum elongation gate , 1 % ; maximum elongation gate , 100 % ; objective magnifica - tion factor , 1 . 2 . Theprincipal motilityparameters measured were curvilinear velocity ( VCL ) , average path velocity ( VAP ) , straight - linevelocity ( VSL ) , beat / crossfrequency ( BCF ) , amplitudeoflateralhead displacement ( ALH ) . Progressive sperm cells were characterized by average path velocity ( VAP ) > 45 m m / s and straightness ( STR = VSL / VAP ) > 45 % , respectively . Sperm viability analyses Sperm viability was assessed by eosin - nigrosin staining as previously described ( 61 ) . Briefly , 10 m l ofsperm suspension was mixedwith 20 m l of eosin and 30 m l nigrosin , and a 20 - m l droplet was smeared onto a clean glass slide . After drying , a minimum of 200 cells per genotype were counted . In vitro fertilization analyses Preparation of oocytes C75B6L / N female mice ( 6 to 8 weeks old , Janvier Labs , France ) were superovulated with 5 IU of pregnant mare serum gonado - tropin ( PMSG ) and 5 IU human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ; Intervet , France ) 48 hours apart . About 14 hours after hCG injection , the animals were sacrificed by cervical dis - location . Cumulus oophorus were collected by tearing the ampulla wall of the oviduct , placed in Ferticult medium ( # FECU100 ; FertiPro N . V . , Belgium ) supplemented with 3 % BSA ( # A3311 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . To remove the zona pellucida ( ZP ) , cumulus cells were removed by a brief exposure to hyaluronidase IV - S ( 1 mg / ml ; # H3884 , Sigma - Aldrich ) and ZP was then dissolved with acidic Tyrode ’ s ( AT ) solution , pH 2 . 5 ( # T1788 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) un - der visual monitoring . The zona - free eggs were rapidly washed five times with Ferticult medium and kept at 37°C under 5 % CO 2 for 2 to 3 hours to recover their fertilization ability . Capacitated sperm preparation Mouse spermatozoa were obtained from the cauda epididymides of wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − male mice ( 8 - to 10 - week - old ) and capacitated at 37°C under 5 % CO 2 for 90 min in a 500 - m l drop Ferticult medium sup - plemented with 3 % BSA , under mineral oil . The total sperm count was obtained , and 10 5 sperm per ml from either wild - type or Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were used for each experiment . In vitro fertilization Zona - free eggs were inseminated withcapaci - tated spermatozoa for 3 hours in a 100 - m l drop of Ferticult medium 3 % BSA at a final con - centration of 10 5 / ml . Then , they were washed and directly mounted in Vectashield / DAPI ( Vector Laboratories , CA , USA ) for observa - tion under ultra - violet light ( Nikon Eclipse E600 microscope ) . Only oocytes showing at least one fluorescent decondensed sperm head within their cytoplasm were considered fertilized . To assess the fertilization index ( FI ) , Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 10 of 12 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE the number of decondensed sperm heads per oocyte was counted . Cryo - EM analyses Cauda epididymides were extracted , lacerated inPBS , andkeptfor 10minat37°C . Swimming sperm cells were collected and rapidly plunge - frozen on Quantifoil Holey Carbon grids using a Leica Automatic PlungeFreezer EM GP . Sam - pleswereimagedwithaFEITitanHalo ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) operated at 300 keV using a Gatan energy filter and a Gatan K2 Summit direct electron detector . SerialEM software was used to operate the microscope during acquisi - tion of tomographic tilt series . Tomographic series were acquired at angles from − 26° to 40°and − 28°to − 40°usinga2°tiltincrements . Each image was acquired in dose fractiona - tion mode with about 2e / Å 2 total electrondose . Image frames were further processed with K2Align software ( 62 ) to generate each image of a tilt series . Generated tilt series were pro - cessed with etomo from IMOD software pack - age ( 63 ) to reconstruct tomograms by weighted back - projection using fiducial - based aligned , CTF - corrected , dose - weighted filtered image stacks ( 64 ) . Tomograms were further filtered using nonlinear anisotropic diffusion ( 63 ) be - fore tomographic inspection and annotation . We chose straight segments of the sperm tails for our analyses to optimize the conditions for the tomographic reconstruction . The positions of the 96 - nm axonemal repeats and the asso - ciatedODAswithinunfilteredtomogramsweremodeledusing3dmod . Initially , 983 96 - nm repeats and 3166 ODA particles were extracted forwildtype , whilefor Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − , 61796 - nm repeats and 3656 ODA particles were ex - tracted . All particles from each MT doublet were manually aligned to a common reference before fine automatic alignments and subto - mogram averaging using PEET ( 65 ) . For the final averages of the 96 - nm repeat , 900 wild - typeand540 Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − particleswereused ( fig . S10 ) . For the ODA - related analysis , only particles from MT doublet pairs showing no mechanical disruption were included for fur - ther conformational analysis . The number of ODA particles used in this analysis was 2691 for wild type and 3656 for Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − . Each ODA particle was classified according to the combined result of principal component anal - ysis and k - means clustering ( 65 ) of particle regions containing either b - or g - heavy chains . IDAs were classified with principal compo - nent analysis of independently aligned wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella . This allowed their classificationintopre - and post - powerstroke configurations . 3dmod was used to inspect the resulting averages and gener - ate sliced views , while further 3D rendering and structure fitting for clearer visualization was carried out using Chimera ( 66 ) . For the complete cryo - analysis , sperm samples from one wild - type mouse were used , while in the Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − case , the samples used came from two different mice . Statistical analyses All the quantifications are listed in table S1 . P values were calculated by unpaired Student ’ s t test . 2D and 3D motility analyses To determine the swimming patterns , ~ 250 sperm from six different wild - type and five different Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were analyzed . For all the flagellar beat parameter analyses , 76 spermatozoa from six different wild - type mice and 58 spermatozoa from four differ - ent Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were analyzed . Ependymal cilia beat frequency analyses To determine the CBF , sections from three in - dividual wild - type or Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were analyzed . Fromeachsection , 13 to26individual cells were imaged for their ciliary beat and CBF wasdeterminedusingCiliaFApluginforImageJ . Scatter plots from each experiment were plotted using GraphPad Prism version 8 . The lines indicate the mean ( ± SEM ) . CASA analyses To determine the motility parameters , sperm from five wild - type and six Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice were analyzed . The graphs for each of the in - dividualmotilityparameterswereplottedusingGraphPadPrismversion8 . Mean values of in - dividualexperimentswereplottedasbargraphswithstandarderrorofmean ( ±SEM ) between individual experiments . In vitro fertilization assay To analyze the fertilization index of the sperm with in vitro fertilization tests , the experiments wereperformedfivetimes , usingfiveindividual wild - type and Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − mice . The fertil - ization index is plotted as a ratio of the total number of fused sperm to the total number of oocytes used per experiment . The graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism version 8 . Mean values of individual experiments were plotted in bar graphs with standard error of mean ( ±SEM ) between individual experiments . Image and video processing ImmunofluorescenceandhistologyimagesweretreatedwithAdobePhotoshop . Intensities were adjusted exclusively in a linear manner , and no additional image treatments were performed . For mounting the composite videos , the still panels were prepared in Adobe Illustrator and thensubsequentlymounted onto the individual video compositions in Adobe After Effects . Each composition was rendered as a QuickTime moviewithAdobeMediaEncoderandexportedas1280pixelby720pixelvideoswithQuickTimePlayerv10 . 4 . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . C . Janke , M . M . Magiera , The tubulin code and its role in controlling microtubule properties and functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 21 , 307 – 326 ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 020 - 0214 - 3 ; pmid : 32107477 2 . M . H . Bré et al . , Axonemal tubulin polyglycylation probed with two monoclonal antibodies : Widespread evolutionary distribution , appearance during spermatozoan maturation and possible function in motility . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 727 – 738 ( 1996 ) . pmid : 8718664 3 . K . Rogowski etal . , Evolutionarydivergenceofenzymaticmechanisms forposttranslationalpolyglycylation . Cell 137 , 1076 – 1087 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 05 . 020 ; pmid : 19524510 4 . M . Bosch Grau et al . , Tubulin glycylases and glutamylases have distinct functions in stabilization and motility of ependymal cilia . J . Cell Biol . 202 , 441 – 451 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201305041 ; pmid : 23897886 5 . M . Bosch Grau et al . , Alterations in the balance of tubulin glycylation and glutamylation in photoreceptors leads to retinal degeneration . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 938 – 949 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 199091 ; pmid : 28104815 6 . C . Rocha et al . , Tubulin glycylases are required for primary cilia , control of cell proliferation and tumor development in colon . EMBO J . 33 , 2247 – 2260 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201488466 ; pmid : 25180231 7 . S . Gadadhar et al . , Tubulin glycylation controls primary cilia length . J . Cell Biol . 216 , 2701 – 2713 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201612050 ; pmid : 28687664 8 . A . Konno et al . , Ttll9 − / − mice sperm flagella show shortening of doublet 7 , reduction of doublet 5 polyglutamylation and a stall in beating . J . Cell Sci . 129 , 2757 – 2766 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 185983 ; pmid : 27257088 9 . R . J . Mullen , E . M . Eicher , R . L . Sidman , Purkinje cell degeneration , a newneurologicalmutationinthemouse . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 73 , 208 – 212 ( 1976 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 73 . 1 . 208 ; pmid : 1061118 10 . P . Vogel , G . Hansen , G . Fontenot , R . Read , Tubulintyrosineligase - like 1 deficiency results in chronicrhinosinusitisand abnormal developmentofspermatidflagellainmice . Vet . Pathol . 47 , 703 – 712 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0300985810363485 ; pmid : 20442420 11 . H . - Y . Wu , P . Wei , J . I . Morgan , Role of cytosolic carboxypeptidase 5 in neuronal survival and spermatogenesis . Sci . Rep . 7 , 41428 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep41428 ; pmid : 28128286 12 . C . Mencarelli , P . Lupetti , R . Dallai , New insights into the cell biology of insect axonemes . Int . Rev . Cell Mol . Biol . 268 , 95 – 145 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1937 - 6448 ( 08 ) 00804 - 6 ; pmid : 18703405 13 . J . F . Reiter , M . R . Leroux , Genes and molecular pathways underpinning ciliopathies . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 18 , 533 – 547 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 60 ; pmid : 28698599 14 . M . A . El - Brolosy , D . Y . R . Stainier , Genetic compensation : A phenomenoninsearchofmechanisms . PLOSGenet . 13 , e1006780 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1006780 ; pmid : 28704371 15 . M . A . El - Brolosy et al . , Genetic compensation triggered by mutant mRNA degradation . Nature 568 , 193 – 197 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 019 - 1064 - z ; pmid : 30944477 16 . R . Talevi , R . Gualtieri , In vivo versus in vitro fertilization . Eur . J . Obstet . Gynecol . Reprod . Biol . 115 ( suppl . 1 ) , S68 – S71 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejogrb . 2004 . 01 . 015 ; pmid : 15196719 17 . H . H . Pusch , The importance of sperm motility for the fertilization of human oocytes in vivo and in vitro . Andrologia 19 , 514 – 527 ( 1987 ) . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1439 - 0272 . 1987 . tb01891 . x ; pmid : 3425955 18 . R . P . Amann , D . Waberski , Computer - assisted spermanalysis ( CASA ) : Capabilities andpotential developments . Theriogenology 81 , 5 – 17 . e1 , 3 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . theriogenology . 2013 . 09 . 004 ; pmid : 24274405 19 . Z . Heidary , K . Saliminejad , M . Zaki - Dizaji , H . R . Khorram Khorshid , Genetic aspects of idiopathic asthenozoospermia as a cause of male infertility . Hum . Fertil . 23 , 83 – 92 ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 1080 / 14647273 . 2018 . 1504325 ; pmid : 30198353 20 . J . N . Hansen , S . Rassmann , J . F . Jikeli , D . Wachten , SpermQ — A simple analysis software to comprehensively study flagellar beating and sperm steering . Cells 8 , 10 ( 2018 ) . doi : 10 . 3390 / cells8010010 ; pmid : 30587820 21 . S . T . Mortimer , D . Mortimer , Kinematics of human spermatozoa incubated under capacitating conditions . J . Androl . 11 , 195 – 203 ( 1990 ) . pmid : 2384341 22 . J . M . Neill , P . Olds - Clarke , A computer - assisted assay for mouse sperm hyperactivation demonstrates that bicarbonate but not bovine serum albumin is required . Gamete Res . 18 , 121 – 140 ( 1987 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / mrd . 1120180204 ; pmid : 3507366 23 . B . Marquez , G . Ignotz , S . S . Suarez , Contributions of extracellular and intracellular Ca 2 + to regulation of sperm Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 11 of 12 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE motility : Release of intracellular stores can hyperactivate CatSper1 and CatSper2 null sperm . Dev . Biol . 303 , 214 – 221 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2006 . 11 . 007 ; pmid : 17174296 24 . T . - W . Su et al . , Sperm trajectories form chiral ribbons . Sci . Rep . 3 , 1664 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep01664 ; pmid : 23588811 25 . J . F . Jikeli et al . , Sperm navigation along helical paths in 3D chemoattractant landscapes . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7985 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms8985 ; pmid : 26278469 26 . R . L . Miller , “ Sperm chemo - orientation in the metazoa ” in Biology of Fertilization , Volume 2 , C . B . Metz , A . Monroy , Eds . ( Academic Press , 1985 ) , pp . 275 – 337 . 27 . T . - W . Su , L . Xue , A . Ozcan , High - throughput lensfree 3D tracking of human sperms reveals rare statistics of helical trajectories . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 16018 – 16022 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1212506109 ; pmid : 22988076 28 . J . Elgeti , U . B . Kaupp , G . Gompper , Hydrodynamics of sperm cells near surfaces . Biophys . J . 99 , 1018 – 1026 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 05 . 015 ; pmid : 20712984 29 . A . Gong et al . , The steering gaits of sperm . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . London Ser . B 375 , 20190149 ( 2020 ) . doi : 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2019 . 0149 ; pmid : 31884910 30 . H . C . Crenshaw , A new look at locomotion in microorganisms : Rotating and translating . Am . Zool . 36 , 608 – 618 ( 1996 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / icb / 36 . 6 . 608 31 . D . Nicastro et al . , The molecular architecture of axonemes revealed by cryoelectron tomography . Science 313 , 944 – 948 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1128618 ; pmid : 16917055 32 . R . Viswanadha , W . S . Sale , M . E . Porter , Ciliary motility : Regulation of axonemal dynein motors . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect . Biol . 9 , a018325 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018325 ; pmid : 28765157 33 . M . E . Porter , W . S . Sale , The 9 + 2 axoneme anchors multiple inner arm dyneins and a network of kinases and phosphatases that control motility . J . Cell Biol . 151 , F37 – F42 ( 2000 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 151 . 5 . F37 ; pmid : 11086017 34 . J . Lin , D . Nicastro , Asymmetricdistributionandspatialswitchingof dyneinactivity generates ciliary motility . Science 360 , eaar1968 ( 2018 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aar1968 ; pmid : 29700238 35 . L . Gui et al . , Scaffold subunits support associated subunit assembly in the Chlamydomonas ciliary nexin - dynein regulatory complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 23152 – 23162 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1910960116 ; pmid : 31659045 36 . J . D . Alper , M . Tovar , J . Howard , Displacement - weighted velocity analysis of gliding assays reveals that Chlamydomonas axonemal dynein preferentially moves conspecific microtubules . Biophys . J . 104 , 1989 – 1998 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 03 . 041 ; pmid : 23663842 37 . R . J . McKenney , W . Huynh , R . D . Vale , M . Sirajuddin , Tyrosination of a - tubulin controls the initiation of processive dynein - dynactin motility . EMBO J . 35 , 1175 – 1185 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201593071 ; pmid : 26968983 38 . P . Sartori , V . F . Geyer , J . Howard , F . Jülicher , Curvature regulation oftheciliarybeatthroughaxonemaltwist . Phys . Rev . E 94 , 042426 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 94 . 042426 ; pmid : 27841522 39 . C . B . Lindemann , K . A . Lesich , Functional anatomy of the mammalian sperm flagellum . Cytoskeleton 73 , 652 – 669 ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21338 ; pmid : 27712041 40 . M . Fujimura , M . Okuno , Requirement of the fixed end for spontaneous beating in flagella . J . Exp . Biol . 209 , 1336 – 1343 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jeb . 02131 ; pmid : 16547304 41 . E . F . Smith , P . Yang , The radial spokes and central apparatus : Mechano - chemical transducers that regulate flagellar motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 57 , 8 – 17 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 10155 ; pmid : 14648553 42 . T . Kubo , Y . Hou , D . A . Cochran , G . B . Witman , T . Oda , A microtubule - dynein tethering complex regulates the axonemal inner dynein f ( I1 ) . Mol . Biol . Cell 29 , 1060 – 1074 ( 2018 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E17 - 11 - 0689 ; pmid : 29540525 43 . R . Orbach , J . Howard , The dynamic and structural properties of axonemal tubulins support the high length stability of cilia . Nat . Commun . 10 , 1838 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 09779 - 6 ; pmid : 31015426 44 . T . Ishikawa , Axoneme structure from motile cilia . Cold Spring Harbor Perspect . Biol . 9 , a028076 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a028076 ; pmid : 27601632 45 . D . Wloga et al . , TTLL3 Is a tubulin glycine ligase that regulates the assembly of cilia . Dev . Cell 16 , 867 – 876 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 04 . 008 ; pmid : 19531357 46 . D . Wloga et al . , Hyperglutamylation of tubulin can either stabilize or destabilize microtubules in the same cell . Eukaryot . Cell 9 , 184 – 193 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1128 / EC . 00176 - 09 ; pmid : 19700636 47 . C . Janke , The tubulin code : Molecular components , readout mechanisms , and functions . J . Cell Biol . 206 , 461 – 472 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201406055 ; pmid : 25135932 48 . T . Giordano et al . , Loss of the deglutamylase CCP5 perturbs multiple steps of spermatogenesis and leads to male infertility . J . Cell Sci . 132 , jcs226951 ( 2019 ) . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 226951 ; pmid : 30635446 49 . Z . - E . Kherraf et al . , SPINK2 deficiency causes infertility by inducing sperm defects in heterozygotes and azoospermia in homozygotes . EMBO Mol . Med . 9 , 1132 – 1149 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 15252 / emmm . 201607461 ; pmid : 28554943 50 . S . M . Curi et al . , Asthenozoospermia : Analysis of a large population . Arch . Androl . 49 , 343 – 349 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1080 / 01485010390219656 ; pmid : 12893510 51 . T . R . Birkhead , D . J . Hosken , S . Pitnick , in Sperm Biology : An Evolutionary Perspective , T . R . Birkhead , D . J . Hosken , S . Pitnick , Eds . ( Academic Press , 2009 ) , pp . vii – viii . 52 . L . Alvarez , The tailored sperm cell . J . Plant Res . 130 , 455 – 464 ( 2017 ) . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10265 - 017 - 0936 - 2 ; pmid : 28357612 53 . Y . Lallemand , V . Luria , R . Haffner - Krausz , P . Lonai , Maternally expressed PGK - Cretransgeneas a tool forearlyanduniform activation of theCre site - specific recombinase . TransgenicRes . 7 , 105 – 112 ( 1998 ) . doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1008868325009 ; pmid : 9608738 54 . N . Delgehyr et al . , Ependymal cell differentiation , from monociliated to multiciliated cells . Methods Cell Biol . 127 , 19 – 35 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / bs . mcb . 2015 . 01 . 004 ; pmid : 25837384 55 . S . M . Q . Hussaini et al . , Heat - induced antigen retrieval : An effective method to detect and identify progenitor cell types during adult hippocampal neurogenesis . J . Vis . Exp . 78 , e50769 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 3791 / 50769 ; pmid : 24022759 56 . M . M . Magiera , C . Janke , “ Investigating tubulin posttranslational modifications with specific antibodies ” in Microtubules , In Vitro , vol . 115 of Methods in Cell Biology , J . J . Correia , L . Wilson , Eds . ( Academic Press , 2013 ) , pp . 247 – 267 . 57 . A . J . AlOmran , H . C . Saternos , T . Liu , S . M . Nauli , W . A . AbouAlaiwi , Live imaging of the ependymal cilia in the lateral ventricles of the mouse brain . J . Vis . Exp . 100 , e52853 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 3791 / 52853 ; pmid : 26067390 58 . C . M . Smith et al . , ciliaFA : A research tool for automated , high - throughput measurement of ciliary beat frequency using freely available software . Cilia 1 , 14 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1186 / 2046 - 2530 - 1 - 14 ; pmid : 23351276 59 . S . - H . Lee , D . G . Grier , Holographic microscopy of holographically trapped three - dimensional structures . Opt . Express 15 , 1505 – 1512 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1364 / OE . 15 . 001505 ; pmid : 19532383 60 . L . Wilson , R . Zhang 3rd , Localizationof weak scatterers indigital holographicmicroscopyusingRayleigh - Sommerfeldback - propagation . Opt . Express 20 , 16735 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1364 / OE . 20 . 016735 61 . L . Björndahl , I . Söderlund , U . Kvist , Evaluation of the one - step eosin - nigrosin staining technique for human sperm vitality assessment . Hum . Reprod . 18 , 813 – 816 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / humrep / deg199 ; pmid : 12660276 62 . X . Li et al . , Electron counting and beam - induced motion correction enablenear - atomic - resolutionsingle - particlecryo - EM . Nat . Methods 10 , 584 – 590 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2472 ; pmid : 23644547 63 . J . R . Kremer , D . N . Mastronarde , J . R . McIntosh , Computer visualization of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 , 71 – 76 ( 1996 ) . doi : 10 . 1006 / jsbi . 1996 . 0013 ; pmid : 8742726 64 . Q . Xiong , M . K . Morphew , C . L . Schwartz , A . H . Hoenger , D . N . Mastronarde , CTF determination and correction for low dose tomographic tilt series . J . Struct . Biol . 168 , 378 – 387 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2009 . 08 . 016 ; pmid : 19732834 65 . J . M . Heumann , A . Hoenger , D . N . Mastronarde , Clustering and variance maps for cryo - electron tomography using wedge - masked differences . J . Struct . Biol . 175 , 288 – 299 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 05 . 011 ; pmid : 21616153 66 . E . F . Pettersen et al . , UCSF Chimera — A visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 , 1605 – 1612 ( 2004 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcc . 20084 ; pmid : 15264254 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank C . Arnoult ( University of Grenoble , France ) , S . Bodakuntla , M . M . Magiera ( Institut Curie ) , E . Feraille ( University of Geneva , Switzerland ) , T . Stünker , J . Wistuba ( University Clinics Münster , Germany ) , and D . Wachten ( University of Bonn , Germany ) for critical analysis and insightful discussions . We also thank N . Spassky and N . Delgehyr ( Ecole Normale Superieur , Paris ) for technical assistance with the mouse primary ependymal cell culture and mouse ventricle whole - mount staining experiments . We acknowledge the Mouse Clinical Institute ( PHENOMIN - Institut Clinique de la Souris , MCI / ICS ) for generating the transgenic Ttll8 mice in the Genetic Engineering and Model Validation Department by M . - C . Birling with funds from the CNRS . We thank J . Helppi [ Biomedical Services of Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics ( MPI - CBG ) ] for managing the genetically modified mice and for helping with tissue dissection . We thank the Electron Microscopy facility of the MPI - CBG for technical support . We further thank C . Alberti , E . Belloir , F . Bertrand , V . Dangles - Marie , I . Grandjean , H . Hermange , C . Caspersen , M . M . Magiera , S . Bodakuntla , N . - L . J . Nguyen , C . Rollin , C . Serieyssol , A . Thadal , and L . Vaslin ( Institut Curie ) fortechnical assistance . We are grateful toM . - N . Soler , C . Lovo , and L . Besse from the imaging platform PICT - IBiSA @ Orsay ( Institut Curie , Orsay ) for technical assistance in the use of the Leica Structured Illumination Microscope ( Optigrid ) and the Nikon Eclipse Ti - E inverted microscope systems . We also thank B . Friedrich for his support using resistive - force theory . Funding : This work was supported by the ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0001 - 02 , the LabEx Cell ( n ) Scale ANR - 11 - LBX - 0038 . C . J . is supported by the Institut Curie , the French National Research Agency ( ANR ) awards ANR - 12 - BSV2 - 0007 and ANR - 17 - CE13 - 0021 , the Institut National du Cancer ( INCA ) grant 2014 - PL BIO - 11 - ICR - 1 , and the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale ( FRM ) grant DEQ . 20170336756 . S . G . received a 1 - year postdoctoral fellowship from LabEx Cell ( n ) Scale ANR - 11 - LBX - 0038 . G . P . , G . A . V . , and A . K . are supported by the Max Planck Society and the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union ’ s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program ( grant 819826 ) to G . P . J . N . H . holds a PhD Fellowship by the Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds . The work of L . A . was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft via the priority program SPP 1726 “ Microswimmers . ” M . W . and A . T . are supported by the French National Research Agency ( ANR ) awards DIVERCIL - 17 - CE13 - 0023 and ANR FLAGELOME 19 - CE17 - 0014 . Author contributions : Conceptualization : S . G . , L . A . , G . P . , and C . J . Methodology , analyses , and validation : Mouse generation , genotyping , ependymal cell culture , immunoblot , immunocytochemistry , and histological analyses : S . G . , S . L . , M . W . , and C . J . CASA and in vitro fertility analyses : A . T . , M . W . , A . Z . , C . I . - R . , S . G . , and C . J . 2D motility and 3D in - line holography analyses : J . N . H . , A . G . , and L . A . Computation of ideal trajectories using resistive - force theory : A . G . and L . A . Sample preparation for cryo – electron tomography : G . A . V . , A . K . , and S . G . Cryo – electron tomography , subtomogram averaging , particle classification , 3D model rendering , and interpretation : G . A . V . , A . K . , and G . P . Writing : original draft : S . G . and C . J . ; review and editing : S . G . , G . A . V . , J . N . H . , A . G . , A . T . , A . Z . , L . A . , G . P . and C . J . Visualization : S . G . , G . A . V . , J . N . H . , A . G . , A . K . , A . T . , M . W . , A . Z . , L . A . , G . P . , and C . J . Supervision : L . A . , G . P . , A . T . , and C . J . Project administration : C . J . Funding acquisition : S . G . , L . A . , G . P . , A . T . and C . J . Competing interests : The authors declare no competing financial interests . Data and materials availability : The 3D averaged structures of the 96 - nm repeats of the wild - type and TTLL3 − / − TTLL8 − / − sperm flagella as well as all major classes of the ODAs and IDAs have been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank ( EMDB ) under IDs EMD - 11942 ( pre - pre - powerstroke conformation of the ODAs ) , EMD - 11943 ( pre - post - powerstroke conformation of the ODAs ) , EMD - 11944 ( post - pre - powerstroke conformation of the ODAs ) , EMD - 11945 ( post - post - powerstroke conformation of the ODAs ) , EMD - 11946 ( axonemal 96 - nm repeat from active wild - type sperm flagella ) , EMD - 11947 ( axonemal 96 - nm repeat from active Ttll3 − / − Ttll8 − / − sperm flagella ) , EMD - 11948 ( axonemal 96 - nm repeat from active sperm flagella showing IDAs in pre - powerstroke conformations ) , and EMD - 11949 ( axonemal 96 - nm repeat from active sperm flagella showing IDAs in post - powerstroke conformations ) . All other data are available in the manuscript or the supplementary material . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS science . sciencemag . org / content / 371 / 6525 / eabd4914 / suppl / DC1 Figs . S1 to S10 Tables S1 to S3 ReferencesMDARReproducibility Checklist Movies S1 to S6 View / request a protocol for this paper from Bio - protocol . 26 June 2020 ; resubmitted 13 October 2020 Accepted 18 November 2020 10 . 1126 / science . abd4914 Gadadhar et al . , Science 371 , eabd4914 ( 2021 ) 8 January 2021 12 of 12 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE