The Information Society , 18 : 371 – 384 , 2002 Copyright c ° 2002 Taylor & Francis 0197 - 2243 / 02 $ 12 . 00 + . 00 DOI : 10 . 1080 / 0197224029010818 6 Searching for Safety Online : Managing “Trolling” in a Feminist Forum Susan Herring School of Library and Information Science , Indiana University , Bloomington , Indiana , USA Kirk Job - Sluder School of Education , Indiana University , Bloomington , Indiana , USA Rebecca Scheckler Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , Blacksburg , Virginia , USA Sasha Barab School of Education , Indiana University , Bloomington , Indiana , USA A common phenomenon in online discussion groups is the indi - vidualwho baits and provokes other group members , often with the result of drawing them into fruitless argument and diverting atten - tion from the stated purposes of the group . This study documents a case in which the members of an online community—a feminist web - based discussion forum—are targeted by a “troll” attempting to disrupt their discussion space . We analyze the strategies that make the troller successful and the targeted group largely ineffec - tual in responding to his attack , as a means to understand how such behavior might be minimized and managed in general . The analysis further suggests that feminist and other nonmainstream online forums are especially vulnerable , in that they must balance inclusive ideals against the need for protection and safety , a tension that can be exploited by disruptive elements to generate intragroup con(cid:143) ict . Keywords CMC , con(cid:143) ict management , deception , disruptive behav - ior , feminism , trolling Received 21 November 2001 ; accepted 1 April 2002 . We received feedback on this article from multiple sources . We are especially grateful to Blaise Cronin , Mary Gray , Geert Lovink , John Paolillo , Barry Wellman , and three anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions . Address correspondence to Prof . Susan Herring , SLIS , Indiana Uni - versity , Bloomington , IN 47405 , USA . E - mail : herring @ indiana . edu Online discussion forums allow for convenient and on - going communication among groups of people separated in place and time . In the best of cases , such forums can evolve into communities whose members share informa - tion , experience a sense of belonging , and provide mu - tual support ( Preece , 2000 ; Rheingold , 1993 ) . Moreover , the relative anonymity of the Internet can make people feel safe talking about issues that might be considered sensitive , inappropriate or dangerous in face - to - face pub - lic conversation ( Donath , 1999 ; cf . Kiesler et al . , 1984 ) . These properties make online forums especially attractive to individuals seeking support for suffering from disease or abuse , and to members of minority social and political groups such as homosexuals , racial minorities , and femi - nists . Such groups can be considered vulnerable popula - tions , in that they tend to be stigmatized and discriminated against by mainstream society . 1 At the same time , online discussion forums provide a new arena for the enactment of power inequities such as those motivated by sexism , racism , and heterosexism . The relative anonymity of the Internet releases some of the inhi - bitions of a civil society , resulting in (cid:143) aming , harassment , and hate speech online ( Ess , 1996 ) . Despite the illusion they can give of security and privacy ( King , 1996 ) , on - line forums can be accessed by individuals hostile to the purpose of the forums , actively seeking to disrupt and un - dermine them . Moreover , the asynchronous , distributed 371 372 S . HERRING ET AL . nature of online discussion forums allows those moti - vated to disrupt discussions to have far - reaching effects . These practices , while clearly problematic , are nonethe - less widespread and often tolerated , due in part to the per - vasiveness on the Internet of civil libertarian values that consider abusive speech a manifestation of individual free - dom of expression ( Pfaffenberger , 1996 ) . As a consequence of these characteristics of discussion forums , nonmainstream groups must confront a number of tensions online . Primary among these is the need to balance safety for participants with openness to free ex - pression and discussion . Even in a community of individ - uals who share common values and experiences , a diver - sity of viewpoints can be expected , and differing views must be tolerated and respected if a climate of support and trust is to be achieved and diversity encouraged . But must online communities tolerate viewpoints that are di - rectly in con(cid:143) ict with the goals of the community itself ? In the case of groups already on the fringes of society , this may include harassing or hostile speech that repro - duces the discrimination they face in mainstream society . While some participants (cid:142) nd that challenging prejudice online can be an empowering act of resistance , others (cid:142) nd that it diverts energy and attention away from the goals of the group ( Collins - Jarvis , 1997 ) . If a decision is made to restrict participation in an online forum to those individu - als who support its goals , a second tension arises between setting protective boundaries and avoiding “ghettoization” of the group ( Hall , 1996 ) . A common question underlying these tensions is : When—and where—is it legitimate to draw the line ? In this study , we document a case study in which the members of a vulnerable online community—a feminist web - based discussion forum—respond to an individual at - tempting to disrupt their discussion space . Inasmuch as the individual represents himself insincerely ( in this case , as interested in discussing feminism ) , we characterize his behavior as trolling , and his messages that lure mem - bers of the community into fruitless argument as trolls ( Donath , 1999 ) . With the exception of Donath ( 1999 ) , who de(cid:142) nes the phenomenon and gives examples from Usenet newsgroups , trolling has received little scholarly attention to date . In this study , we move beyond Donath’s limited , albeit useful , observations to analyze the speci(cid:142) c mechanisms used by a troller , 2 and the responses of the group . The troller in this case succeeded in disrupting the group for nearly 2 months , but the group failed to reach a consensus regarding how to deal with him , despite unanimous agreement that he was a problem . The analysis sheds empirical light on the mechanisms of online decep - tion and disruptive behavior , and points up the challenges of dealing effectively with such behavior in large , dis - tributed , online groups , where consensus is often dif(cid:142) cult to achieve ( Dubrovsky et al . , 1991 ; Sudweeks & Rafaeli , 1996 ) . The remainder of this article is organized into six sec - tions . We (cid:142) rst review the literature on trolling and on dis - ruption of online feminist spaces . We then discuss the data and methods used in this study . The third section analyzes in detail the troller’s behavior , including his ideological manipulation of tensions inherent in the feminist move - ment . This is followed by an analysis of the community’s response in which members attempt to isolate the troller by challenging , shunning , and calling for the forum adminis - trators to ban him . The (cid:142) fth section discusses the forum’s relative lack of success in managing the troller , noting the challenges inherent in such situations . We conclude by proposing interventions to forestall trolling behavior , and identifying further avenues for research into disruptive be - havior in online discussion groups . BACKGROUND Trolling Trolling entails luring others into pointless and time - consuming discussions . The name derives from the prac - tice used in (cid:142) shing where a baited line is dragged behind a boat ( Oxford English Dictionary , 1992 ) , 3 although some Internet discourse refers to the troll as a (cid:142) ctional mon - ster waiting under the bridge to snare innocent bystanders . Trolling often starts with a message that is “intention - ally incorrect but not overly controversial . ” In this re - spect , trolling contrasts with (cid:143) aming , which is “an elec - tronic mail or Usenet news message intended to insult , provoke or rebuke , or the act of sending such a message” ( Free Online Dictionary of Computing , 1998 ) . Trolling further differs from (cid:143) aming in that the goal of (cid:143) ame bait is to incite any and all readers , whereas the goal of a stereotypical troll is to draw in particularly naive or vul - nerable readers . Catching inexperienced users or “new - bies” is a commonly stated aim of trollers ( Andrew , 1996 ; Donath , 1999 ) . As one Internet user , Andrew , 4 states on his web site dedicated to trolling , “The object of recre - ational trolling is to sit back and laugh at all those gullible idiots that will believe * anything * ” ( Andrew , 1996 ) . In practice , however , trolling and (cid:143) aming often merge , in that in both cases there is intent to disrupt the ongoing conversation , and both can lead to extended aggravated argument . Donath characterizes trolling as “a game about identity deception” ( Donath , 1999 , p . 45 ) in which all the par - ticipants are not cognizant of the nature of the game . 5 The troller tries to write something deceptive , but not bla - tantly so , in order to attract the maximum number of re - sponses ( Andrew , 1996 ; Donath , 1999 ) . Andrew extols a SEARCHING FOR SAFETY 373 successful troll : His troll ran for over a year , it is known to have generated in excess of 3 , 500 responses ( an average of 1 response every 160 minutes for a whole year ) and the greatest coup of all was when aninnocent american [ sic ] student lost not only her internet account but was also expelled from high school for abuse of the computer systems . Somehow she had managed to get the blame for causing the troll . In the context of Usenet , where trolling (cid:142) rst arose , a highly successful troll is onethat is cross - posted to , and responded to on , many different newsgroups , thereby disrupting mul - tiple groups with a minimum expenditure of effort . An - drew ( 1996 ) distinguishes “career trollers”—individuals who deliberately set out to disrupt groups and / or make trouble—from others motivated simply by the desire to attract attention . The incident cited above had disastrous results for a female high school student , an outcome claimed as suc - cess by the troller . Other effects included the disruption of discussion and waste of bandwidth for a year . For Do - nath , there is a further repercussion , the loss of trust that can occur in a discussion group disrupted by trolling . The seriousness of this effect is dependent upon the nature of the group . Groups that deal with emotionally charged and sensitive topics , for example , groups for victims of rape and sexual abuse , are more at risk than lighthearted ones . Some participants opt not to post to groups following inci - dents of loss of trust ( Brail , 1996 ) . In this regard , vulnera - ble and inexperienced computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) participants not only are more likely to be targeted by trolling , but also may be more adversely affected by it . New users tend disproportionately to be women , the young , and other nontraditional computerusers ( Mowbray , 2001 ) . For this reason , perhaps , Andrew ( 1996 ) refers to the generic target of trolling as “she . ” Disruption of Online Feminist Spaces When women gather online , and especially when they at - tempt to discuss feminism , they are not uncommonly the target of negative attention from individuals , mostly men , who feel threatened by or otherwise uncomfortable with feminism . The literature on disruption of online feminist spaces dates back to the early days of computer - mediated communication research . Balka ( 1993 ) traces the history of four feminist forums from the 1980s , all of which expe - rienced some degree of male harassment . Ebben ( 1994 ) describes the evolution on Usenet of the soc . feminism newsgroup , which was started in response to an earlier in - carnation of the newsgroup soc . women having been taken over by men , and which itself has subsequently been taken over by men posting antifeminist and misogynistic mes - sages ( Sutton , 1994 ) . Collins - Jarvis ( 1997 ) documents the crisis that befell Comserve’s Gender hotline when several males began bombarding the forum with antifeminist mes - sages , causing female subscribers to (cid:143) ee the group , and the forum eventually to be shut down . In a similar vein , Reid ( 1994 ) reports an incident on a MUD for sexual abuse sur - vivors , in which a male - presenting character with the name “Daddy” traumatized the community by shouting graphic descriptions of violent sexual acts to those present on the MUD . In the interests of insuring a space in which women feel safe to participate , feminists online have sometimes taken the separatist route of excluding males from participation . Hall ( 1996 ) describes the practices of a women - only dis - cussion group for lesbians and bisexuals , its reasons for not allowing men , and the challenges it faces in enforcing its women - only policy . The women - only policy of Sys - ters , an online forum for women in computer science , is explained and justi(cid:142) ed by its founder , Anita Borg , in Camp ( 1996 ) . Herring et al . ( 1995 ) suggest that women - only groups , regardless of whether they discuss feminism , are a reaction to patterns of male domination in mixed - gender discussion groups on the Internet . Women are discouraged from participating in computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) by men posting more , longer , and more aggres - sive messages ( Herring , 1994 , 1999 ; Herring et al . , 1995 ; Kramarae & Taylor , 1993 ; Spender , 1995 ) , and by com - plaints that women are dominating the conversation even when such is not the case ( Herring et al . , 1995 ) . Women - only groups create environments in which women can speak and be heard on topics of interest to them . At the same time , such groups are controversial : They risk be - ing exclusionary and thereby provoking further male re - sentment ( Hall , 1996 ) , and they can become “ghettoes” in which women’s online presence is marginalized relative to the Internet at large ( cf . Herring , 1994 ) . As an alternative to excluding male participants , some women - centered groups respond to disruptive or harass - ing behaviors by implementing participation policies that make it more dif(cid:142) cult for future disruption to occur . Thus the Gender hotline reopened with a moderator who now (cid:142) lters all messages received before posting them ( Collins - Jarvis , 1997 ) . The MUD for sexual abuse survivors de - scribed by Reid ( 1994 ) implemented a process of identity veri(cid:142) cation , and disabled the feature that allowed users to communicate simultaneously with everyone in the MUD . Other groups introduce a policy that allows disruptive par - ticipants to be banned from the group , as occurred in the present study . Disruptive incidents that force group members to articu - late explicit norms and rules may also have the unintended effect of strengthening an online group’s self - de(cid:142) nition as a community . A well - known example is the virtual rape that took place on LambdaMOO , in which the charac - ters of two women were taken over by a male - presenting 374 S . HERRING ET AL . character , MrBungle , and made to commit violent sex - ual acts on themselves in a public forum . This incident was greeted with widespread outrage in LambdaMOO , al - though the group could not agree on how MrBungle should be dealt with , even after a public meeting was held in the MOO to discuss it . Ultimately , a single wizard took mat - ters into his own hands and “killed” MrBungle’s character . As a result of these disruptive events , a system of self - governance was established on the MOO , complete with elected of(cid:142) cials , effectively institutionalizin g the commu - nity’s newly articulated value system ( Dibbell , 1993 ) . The reactions of online groups to harassment and dis - ruption can be situated theoretically with respect to two dialectics that run through the literature on women’s on - line discussion groups . The (cid:142) rst is the tension between libertarian values on individual freedom of expression , on the one hand , and communitarian values on the good of the group , on the other . In the libertarian view , the In - ternet is a new frontier , free from rules . Although most see freedom of speech as a feature of democracy ( Ess , 1996 ) , some libertarian discussions go so far as to argue for anarchy of the Internet ( Barlow , 1996 ) . A communitarian view of freedom of speech , in contrast , recognizes that less empowered persons might require buffering so that their rights to speech are preserved , and for the good of the community as a whole ( Ellsworth , 1989 ; Ess , 1996 ; Herring , 1996b , 1999 ; Reid , 1999 ) . The literature about online harassment underscores the tension between libertarian and communitarian values , in that harassment often arises in spaces known for their freedom , lack of censure , and experimental nature ( Brail , 1996 ; Dibbell , 1993 ; Reid , 1999 ) . Herring makes an ex - plicit connection between online harassment and libertar - ian values in a study of gender harassment , noting that “This ‘rhetoric of harassment’ crucially invokes libertarian principles of freedom of expression , constructing women’s resistance as ‘censorship’” ( 1999 , p . 151 ) . The second dialectic is found in the literature on fem - inist stances ( Gur - Ze’ev , 1999 ; Hall , 1996 ; Kenway & Nixon , 1999 ) . Hall ( 1996 ) explicitly contrasts bringing women into the extant culture , the liberal view , with the provision of separate women’s spaces , the radical view . The literature on online harassment provides ample evi - dence as to why women might want separate online spaces . In addition to the research on silencing just cited , numer - ous studies report the use of CMC to annoy , intimidate , and harass women online ( Dibbell , 1993 ; Donath , 1999 ; Ebben & Kramarae , 1993 ; Ebben , 1994 ; Herring , 1994 , 1996b , 1999 , 2002 ; Herring et al . , 1995 ; Shade , 1993 ; Sutton , 1994 ; We , 1993 ) . The present study describes one trolling incident tar - geted at a feminist group , and the tensions attempts to manage it provoked within the group between libertar - ian / communitarian and liberal / separatist values . THE CASE STUDY Context The trolling incident occurred on a web - based discussion forum sponsored by a large - circulation feminist magazine published in the United States . 6 The purpose of the discus - sion forum is to provide a space for dialogue advancing feminist concerns and issues . The forum has over 4000 members , of whom about 200 participate actively . In the discussion analyzed in this article , 41 individuals partici - pated , 90 % of them female and 10 % of them male . Partic - ipants sometimes disagree on individual interpretations of feminist ideology and action , but generally share an agree - ment that women are politically disadvantaged compared to men , and that feminism is the best way to address this problem . In early February 2000 , this agreement was challenged from two different sources . Several gun rights advocates from another forum joined the feminist forum exclusively to advocate against gun control legislation , starting more than a dozen new threads to argue their point of view . During the same period , a new male participant , Kent , 7 started posting messages that were intentionally antago - nistic to the core values of the forum . In his introduc - tion to the forum , Kent identi(cid:142) ed himself as a middle - aged man in a professional position that involved overseas travel . He claimed to have been previously removed from other feminist forums for his views , and he also claimed he would eventually be removed from this feminist forum . He described himself as openly hostile to feminism , and started attacking forum members in dozens of posts spread throughout the forum . Over a period of 8 days alone , more than 80 posts were written to a thread discussing Kent’s participation in that thread . Partly as a result of this discussion , the forum ad - ministrators adopted a new policy for participating in the forum ( see Appendix A ) . Kent was eventually banned from the forum as a result of the new policy . Procedures Our analysis focused on Kent’s activities in the forum , as represented in a single thread of 111 messages posted between March 13 and March 21 . This thread was selected because it contained the most explicit discussion by the group about how to respond to Kent’s behavior . The data analysis used grounded theory methods ( Strauss & Corbin , 1998 ; Glaser & Strauss , 1967 ) to de - velop a coding scheme for behaviors exhibited in the thread . After the (cid:142) rst pass coding of the data , we re - viewed our coding and identi(cid:142) ed patterns in terms of re - lated themes . 8 Once we came to an agreement about the main themes , and what they meant , we coded all member SEARCHING FOR SAFETY 375 posts accordingly and went back through the data to extract the examples used in this article . The coding process was informed by the previous ex - periences of the authors in Internet discussion forums , and by the fact that one of the authors had participated in the forum for several months prior to this discussion . Our data analysis thus draws on observations and analyses of simi - lar incidents in the past and on an intimate knowledge of the context of the forum . ANALYSIS The troller , Kent , was successful in disrupting commu - nication on the forum for a period of almost 8 weeks . It is instructive to examine the strategies he used , and to consider why they were successful . In fact , Kent does not precisely (cid:142) t the model of the disingenuous troller , but rather succeeds in disrupting the group by a combination of trolling and other means , including provocations at - tuned to the topic ( feminism ) and the audience ( feminists ; mostly women ) of the group . Speci(cid:142) cally , he exploits ten - sions within feminism itself with regard to freedom of ex - pression and the legitimacy of separatist spaces , making it more dif(cid:142) cult for the group to take effective action against him . The Troller Provokes Following Andrew ( 1996 ) , we identify three de(cid:142) nitional criteria for trolls : 1 . Messages from a sender who appears outwardly sincere . 2 . Messages designed to attract predictable responses or (cid:143) ames . 3 . Messages that waste a group’s time by provoking futile argument . Kent’s participation in the feminist forum meets all three criteria for trolling . Each of these behaviors is discussed in turn in what follows . Outward Manifestations of Sincerity . In several mes - sages , Kent presents himself as someone who is sincerely interested in debating the merits of feminism , and thus as a legitimate participant in the group . He appeals to feminists on the forum to provide “proof” against his anti - feminist claims : Example 1 Kent 3 - 15 - 2000 04 : 48 PM Every poster here has told me that I’m wrong and they are right about feminism . Do you see that ? I at least offer proof . I want to discuss , not just drop a slogan and ride out throwing dismissive insults . . . . To prove or not to prove would obviously be the rightful sub - ject of my entire time here . If you disagree then you can say so . You do . If you want to shut me up though , better be more convincing than just saying you disagree . [ emphasis added ] He also claims to be sincerely unclear about why others have a problem with his postings , and appeals to them to explain it to him , implying ( and in some cases , overtly stat - ing ) that he will modify the behaviors they (cid:142) nd offensive : Example 2 Kent 3 - 15 - 2000 01 : 38 PM . . . In summary what exactly is offensive about my posts ? If you can tell me I will either stop doing it or leave the board . If however you refuse to tell me , and I’ve not been shy about asking SPECIFICALLY what standards I’m supposed to live by , then I will carry on doing it of course . . . . I’m aware of the trouble I’m causing you [ web mistress ] . I’m aware that you’ve been willing to go to that trouble ( probably not on my account but on principle of course ) . I’m not un - grateful and if you come up with some solution that involves me changing my behavior than please feel free to ask me . [ emphasis added ] In these messages , Kent attempts to present himself as rigorous and principled as regards the rules of debate , and potentially cooperative if others meet his conditions ( pro - viding proofs , answering his questions , etc . ) . Rather than provoking response through contentiousness , he appeals to others to respond in good faith . He attempts to appear outwardly sincere ( criterion 1 of our de(cid:142) nition of trolling ) as a means of drawing others into responding . Flame Bait . The posts by Kent that others (cid:142) nd offen - sive are pejorative statements about feminism and femi - nists , including the members of the forum . Given the au - dience , these remarks are “designed to attract predictable comments or (cid:143) ames” ( criterion 2 ) . They include insults , name - calling , contentious presuppositions , and blatantly contentious assertions about feminism , as for example the following : Example 3 Kent 3 - 13 - 2000 09 : 29 PM . . . Incidentally I take the silence over the gender wage gap hoax to mean that no feminist here even wants to TRY to defend their biggest lie : that men are paid more for the same work than women are . [ contentious presuppositions ( the gender wage gap is a hoax ; that men are paid more for the same work than women is a lie ) ] Example 4 Kent 3 - 14 - 2000 01 : 51 PM Gee , Simone , I dunno , maybe its because you’re a bimbo who can’t (cid:142) gure out the difference between an anecdote and 376 S . HERRING ET AL . a statistic ? If you want more money then get off your lazy ass and make some . [ name - calling ; insults ] Example 5 Kent 3 - 14 - 2000 10 : 11 PM ( quoted by another member ) Feminism is evil and bigoted and always has been . Just look at the bitches on this group . Frankly I don’t see how you can bear to be near them . [ blatantly contentious assertion ; name - calling ; insults ] Still , although such posts are clearly intended to be of - fensive , it might be argued that Kent is still acting in good faith , according to his stated intent to debate the merits of feminism . Indeed , in one post he justi(cid:142) es the use of insults as necessary to his debate strategy : Example 6 Kent 3 - 15 - 2000 01 : 38 PM . . . My personal feeling is that I don’t want to insult people more than is necessary to expound my point of view . Those of you who think insults are not necessary should talk to those who have just said that , for example , use of the word “bigot” . . . should be considered an insult . Or talk to those who challenged me to get personal by dismissing all my points about the feminist leadership , history and activities as “just extremists” and said “point out hate on this board . ” Now having said that personal challenges are a necessary part of my point of view [ . . . ] Attempts to Provoke Futile Argument . However , fur - ther analysis makes clear that Kent is not , in fact , interested in the give - and - take of genuine debate , but rather in pro - voking futile argument ( criterion 3 ) . A fundamental unco - operativeness and perverseness is evident in Kent’s covert rhetorical strategies , which include refusing to acknowl - edge others’ points ( or even that they have responded ) , willfully misinterpreting others’ motives and views , and taunting others for not ignoring him . 9 Example 7 Kent 3 - 15 - 2000 04 : 58 PM [ Context : Venus and others have made numerous arguments to which Kent has not responded ] . . . Venus , if you ever get around to making any arguments I will reply to them in the same tone or better . Find me an example of where I haven’t or didn’t and I’ll certainly apologise to whoever . [ Refusing to acknowledge others’ points . ] Example 8 Kent 3 - 15 - 2000 08 : 10 PM [ Context : Simone pointed out that Kent had not responded to a challenge she made about the gender wage gap in response to Kent’s previous challenge . ] Now Simone , isn’t that better than biching and moaning ? Sorry if you feel I’ve been ignoring you . [ Willfully misinterpreting another’s point . ] Kent employs strategies of denial and distortion , even when others respond to his questions or attempt to cor - rect his misrepresentations . As a consequence , his offers to modify his behavior if others will only “answer” his questions or provide “arguments” or “proof” ultimately appear insincere . He does not acknowledge anything that others post as answers , arguments , or proofs . Finally , Kent manifests perversity in taking those who are critical of him to task for not doing what they say they will do , even though it is unfavorable to him : Example 9 Kent 3 - 15 - 2000 10 : 21 PM This conversation reminds me of the quote at the top of the board sometimes about high - heels . THINK . If you don’t like reading my stuff than just DON’T ok ? Now is that so hard , you “strong women” ? Don’t read it . Don’t reply to it . Don’t post stupid comments about it . Don’t make jokes about it . Don’t reply with pathetic insults . Don’t post about how your so NOT reading it . Don’t post asking others not to read it . JUST CUT IT OUT FOT GOD’S SAKE This post is paradoxical , in that Kent has been expend - ing considerable effort to post over a period of several weeks . He clearly wants others to read and respond to him , yet here he exhorts the “women” in the group to ig - nore him . This allows him to taunt them for not being “strong” enough to do what they say they are going to do , and as such is a further put - down of feminism and the fo - rum . At the same time , it sows confusion by introducing an appearance of arbitrariness into Kent’s position . This strategy , together with the distortion and denial strategies described earlier , violates conventional rules of conversa - tional cooperation ( Grice , 1991 [ 1968 ] ) . To the extent that Kent is engaging in such behavior intentionally , it suggests a motive on his part to “create chaos and confusion , ” one of the objectives of trolling ( Andrew , 1996 ) . There is thus considerable evidence that Kent is a troller—that is , someone who is intentionally misrepre - senting himself as interested in debating about feminism , but whose actual motive is to provoke and disrupt . Kent provides explicit support for this interpretation by his avowal that he has come to the group in order to provoke its members to kick him off , and in his boasting mention that he has been kicked off several feminist groups previously , suggesting that he views the activity as entertainment or sport . SEARCHING FOR SAFETY 377 At the same time , he is both less and more than a typical troller . He does not obey the principle of minimal expendi - ture of effort , nor does he attempt to engage other groups in the interaction . Moreover , he does not hide his trolling intent ( although he does not refer to it in those terms ) , and his intentions are ultimately clear enough to the major - ity of group members—that is , he does not really “fool” them , inconsistent with another objective of trolling . Ul - timately , his attempts at appearing sincere are too riddled with hostility and sarcasm to be persuasive . Ideological Manipulation . What Kent lacks in decep - tiveness , he makes up for in ideological manipulation of his audience . He exploits the tension between freedom of expression and the mostly female group’s interest in maintaining a civil environment by presupposing that the former should outweigh the latter : Example 10 Kent 3 - 15 - 2000 04 : 48 PM . . . So to re - cap . What you are saying is that I should be banned because I keep saying all feminists are bigots and liars and so forth ? In fact I should be banned for my well - documented and supported opinion on the very topic which this board is set up to discuss ? In anotherpost , he suggests that women are “refusing to de - bate” with him because they fear the threat he poses to fem - inism ; this ties back to his general claim that feminists are intolerant of debate . Later , he explicitly delegitimizes the communitarian value system that underlies the calls to ban him by describing the forum as a “girlies support group” characterized by “catty / emotional in(cid:142) ghting , ” a feature he also attributes to “early feminism as a movement . ” 10 This line of argument touches a nerve with this audience , in as much as feminism struggles to balance openness with a recognition of the need for women - centered spaces . Taken seriously , it places the group members in a double bind : If they allow Kent to continue , he pollutes their online en - vironment with anti - feminist harassment ; if they ban him , they close off debate and risk being labeled censorious . This bind may partially explain why forum members were unable to reach a consensus on how to deal with Kent . The Group Responds All but a small minority of participants expressed the view that Kent was a problem and agreed that his behavior was intended to undermine the forum . Moreover , most ultimately agreed that his posts were in violation of the group’s norms and values . However , despite widespread agreement on the existence and nature of the problem , the group could not agree on a course of action . Rather , par - ticipants split between calling for Kent to be banned , and calling for the group as a whole to ignore him in the hopes that he would lose interest and go away . In practice , nei - ther suggestion was followed : Participants engaged with Kent by trying to reason with him , and , when that failed , by insulting him in an escalating con(cid:143) ict , thereby falling into the trap the troller had laid for them . At the same time , the con(cid:143) ict led group members to negotiate explicitly what was appropriate discourse for the forum , reinforcing the group’s identity and leading to clearer limits on disruptive behavior . These responses are discussed next . Calls for Administrative Banning . Many participants in the discussion proposed banning Kent administratively from participation on the forum system . Some explicitly invoked the communitarian or “radical” notion of protect - ing the forum as a “safe space” for feminists : Example 11 Danielle ( Member ) 03 - 16 - 2000 01 : 09 PM I can’t believe we’re discussing whether or not to ban [ Kent ] . There’s no question inmy mind . Free speech does not include a long list of behaviors . Police are obligated to investigate death threats . Threats against the President or US Govern - ment have to be investigated by the Secret Service . Libel and slander laws limit what can be printed . Not all printed mate - rials , like pornography , are available to all citizens , like chil - dren . Filing a false police report is a crime . There’s no excuse for [ Kent ] ’s behavior . There’s no political rationalization . I have only read a couple ofhis posts because Idon’t need that shit . I see that some of you have engaed him and that’s your decision . But I wish you wouldn’t . One thing that I’ve al - ways looked forward to in feminism is the creation of “safe” spaces . [ Kent ] is not goingaway on his own . I have no qualms about advocating the use of the [ ] boards with this in mind . [ emphasis added ] Perhaps out of a concern that this stance could be in - terpreted as isolationist , censorious , or admitting female weakness ( interpretations repeatedly articulated by Kent ) , others who favored banning offered a more legalistic jus - ti(cid:142) cation , maintaining that Kent’s posts were in violation of the rules of the forum , and that he should be removed on those grounds . Example 12 mizz - t ( Member ) 03 - 14 - 2000 02 : 55 PM [ Quotes an insulting post from Kent ( example 4 ) —call me a rat , a tattle - tale , a trouble maker , a whiny bitch , whatever you like , but isn’t this violating the rules of the board already ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? I have HAD it with this guy ! ! The proposal to ban Kent met with considerable sup - port , but it also encountered two obstacles . First , the forum members did not know what technological or administra - tive procedures would have to be followed in order to ban someone . In fact , no one had ever been banned from the forum before , and thus no procedures had been formally 378 S . HERRING ET AL . established . Second , an equally vocal group of participants opposed banning on philosophical grounds . Calls to Ignore the Antagonist Voluntarily . This group of members recommended simply not responding to Kent , suggesting that he would disappear if he did not get the kinds of angry responses he was seeking . Voluntarily ignoring Kent would deny him his audience , while main - taining the forum’s dedication to free speech . These justi - (cid:142) cations are present in Emily’s call to ignore Kent : Example 13 Emily ( Member ) 03 - 16 - 2000 05 : 34 PM Ireallydon’tthinkweshouldbebanningor censoringanyone . If it becomes ridiculously extreme , sure why not . But I don’t really think it is necessary here . I think if everyone starts ignoring him he’s bound to go away eventually . This is a characteristically libertarian approach to trolling , in that it relies on denying the troller’s desire to stir up trouble ( shunning ) rather than administrative sanctions ( banning ) . At the same time , Glenda raises a central problem with shunning . Although shunning is presented as a passive strategy ( i . e . , just do nothing ) , in fact it requires consider - able self - control not to respond to offensive provocation . Glenda argues that ignoring Kent is an appealing ( and more effective ) solution , but ultimately too dif(cid:142) cult to carry out : Example 14 Glenda ( Member ) 03 - 15 - 2000 12 : 04 AM On to Kent—I keep TRYING to keep my mouth shut and ignore him , I really do ! Guess I’ve got more masochistic ten - dencies than I thought . : rollseyes : Actually , I’m getting better at not offering any opinions of my own—just raking him over the coals for his . Shunning is ssoooo much more effective than banning—but that won’t stop any junior members from unwittingly stepping into his trap . Experienced forum members might ignore Kent’s provo - cations , but new forum members would be tempted to re - spond in kind . Glenda’s distinction makes an important point : Effectively shunning a disruptive individual requires a group consensus to follow through on ignoring the indi - vidual . Despite widespread agreement that ignoring Kent was a good idea , many participants continued to argue with him , thereby undermining the group’s attempt to shun him . Refuting the Antagonist’s Claims . Forum members occasionally attempted to refute Kent’s claims by answer - ing his questions , suggesting counterexamples , or pointing out logical (cid:143) aws . In a lengthy post , Marjorie challenges Kent on numerous fronts : Example 15 Marjorie 03 - 15 - 2000 02 : 50 PM ‘What was offensive ? ’ ? ? ? Being called a bitch , for starters . And referring to ‘those bitches who run the shelters . ’ And “Maybe you should try being a man and facing sexual rejection hundreds of times from bitches like you . ” And “Yesyou miserable * * * * you gettoCHOOSE . The man , poor bastard , has no choice . Do you comprehend the differ - ence princess ? ” And “What you mean is the feminist fag - boy self - (cid:143) agellation view of men’s issues . ” And “Gee , Merilyn , I dunno , maybe its because you’re a bimbo who can’t (cid:142) gure out the difference between an anec - dote and a statistic ? ” And all the bullshit on Julie . What’s offensive is the fact that you repeatedly run back to the basest terms you can : bimbo , bitch , princess , baby , girl . Anything to let us know we’re less than people . And for all the proli(cid:142) c posting you do , you can’t name a single instance of anyone here hating men , not caring about men , blaming men for everything , etc . Anyone who comes close is immediately reminded ( by us ) that THAT’S NOT WHAT FEMINISM IS ABOUT . All you can do is go on and on about how you know what we * really * mean , even when it’s the opposite of what we say . Twist the words around , call us liars and bigots , and treat us like shit , all to “prove” your point . You call EVERYTHING we say “feminist propaganda lies . ” As determined by you , de(cid:142) nition courtesy of you . Why the fuck should * anyone * bother ? But what is most insulting is the continual whining about how put - upon you are . How HOUNDED you are . Like you didn’t come here and TELL US you were going to hound us . Like you didn’t come here SPECIFICALLY to get this reaction . Like your previous experiences didn’t clue you into the fact that when you treat people like shit , THEY WON’T WANT YOU AROUND . And you DO treat people like shit , con - stantly . Me ? I get it because I point that fact out . You seem to have no ability whatsoever to refrain from your verbal abu - siveness , and then we get to hear about how not only is it our fault , but you’re doing it FOR us , out of the goodness of your heart . Personally , I’m sick to death of YOUR lies ( all feminists are bigots and liars , we blame men for everything , blah , blah , blah ) . And how lucky you are to just be handed this forum for saying anything you want , and how badly you abuse it and us , and then go running to your “oh , poor me” excuses while calling * us * victims , because you’re sooo innocent of any wrongdoing . Grow up . This post is characterized by an angry and aggressive tone , including heavy use of sarcasm such as “you’re sooo in - nocent of any wrongdoing . ” Marjorie’s intent appears to be to shame Kent by “telling it like it is . ” Insulting the Antagonist . In other posts , forum mem - bers simply return insults for insults , effectively lowering themselves to Kent’s level : Example 16 Sharon 03 - 15 - 2000 04 : 54 PM i don’t think you could even give us an accurate summary of your ass Kent . . . . SEARCHING FOR SAFETY 379 This example came after Kent’s lengthy explanation of his goals on the forum ( Example 6 ) . Sharon directly insults Kent’s ability to participate in the discussion , using vulgar language to do so . In other posts , forum members portray Kent as immature , suggesting he is an 8 - year - old child pretending to be an adult . Another strategy used by some forum members is the off - record insult . Donald made an in(cid:143) ammatory statement in the context of an ongoing discussion about Kent , yet without mentioning Kent’s name : Example 17 Donald 03 - 14 - 2000 10 : 23 PM Tell me if this sounds like anyone you know : “Batterers are very into making excuses and presenting them - selves as victims . They really see other people . . . as abusing or attempting to control them . It’s the way to rationalize , min - imize or deny their own behavior . ” Just curious . Kent responded with anger a few posts later , clearly in - terpreting the comment as directed at him personally . In response , Donald invoked plausible deniability , taking the opportunity indirectly to insult Kent further , implying he was paranoid for becoming offended : Example 18 Donald 03 - 15 - 2000 03 : 45 PM I just want to point out that if people assume I’m talking about them when I say bad things , that’s not my fault . My comments are like birds I set free on the wind , and if someone wants to catch them and hold on to them as their very own , that is their choice . “Paranoia , paranoia . . . everybody’s coming to get me . . . ” Donald distances himself from the insult by quoting an - other text rather than making his own statement . For the most part , however , members avoided insulting Kent as a person , instead criticizing his posting style and his disrup - tive effects on the forum . Challenging Kent by refuting his claims and insulting him undermined attempts to shun him . As in the cases of gender harassment described by Herring ( 1999 ) , insults and refutations were used by the troller as a springboard for further attacks . Negotiating What Is Appropriate . In Example 6 , Kent expressed a controversial view of what the appropriate norms of online debate should be . He wrote that personal attacks were appropriate and necessary to achieving the political goal of challenging feminism . This view , and the behavior that accompanied it , forced the group to de(cid:142) ne more concisely what they believed to be appropriate and inappropriate styles of participation in the forum . According to some members , an appropriate challenge focuses on a person’s ideas , while an inappropriate chal - lenge focuses on the person expressing the ideas . Example 19 Donald 03 - 14 - 2000 03 : 17 PM Yeah , I think ( hope ) that just about everybody can see the difference between attacking someone’s ideas and attacking someone personally . Itmayseemlikea slightdistinctionfrom a semantic standpoint , but it is wholly signi(cid:142) cant . “This argument is dumb” vs . “You are dumb . ” “You sound like a bimbo” vs . “You are a bimbo . ” “I disagree” vs . “I think you’re a stupid bitch who needs to get the fuck up off her lazy fat ass and stop sitting around the house stuf(cid:142) ng her face full of twinkies and shooting heroin and also giving pamphlets about the Devil to little children who happen to come by selling Girl Scout cookies . ” We could also discuss the quantity of space taken up with a givenargument , constructivevs . destructivearguments , being respectful vs . being a tool , etc . A further point of discussion , introduced by the forum moderator , concerned the use of obscenities . Several par - ticipants in the discussion addressed the difference be - tween a nonspeci(cid:142) c use of obscenities , “What the fuck ? , ” and obscenities directed toward a speci(cid:142) c person such as “Fuck you . ” Nonspeci(cid:142) c use of obscenities was considered to be emphatic , while obscenities directed at a speci(cid:142) c per - son were considered hostile . Most importantly , and with surprisingly little discussion , the group came to an agreement that personally insulting or offensive speech that persisted after warnings from the moderator would not be tolerated : After three such warn - ings , the offender would be banned from the forum . A new policy statement to this effect appeared on the forum Web site for the (cid:142) rst time on March 15 ( Appendix A ) . However , it would not be applied to Kent until two weeks later , at which time the forum moderator—like the wizard who “killed”MrBungle in the LambdaMOO case ( Dibbell , 1993 ) —acted independently to ban him . DISCUSSION Why was this group not more effective in defending itself against the troller’s attacks ? We propose four explanations for this lack of success , the (cid:142) rst ideological , the second psychological , the third experiential and the fourth relating to the nature of online forums . As with the MrBungle case , forum members were caught between con(cid:143) icting ideologies . Liberal and lib - ertarian views advocate letting everyone participate , and combating problematic speech through debate . Communi - tarian views focus on maintaining safe space ; together with radical views , they lead to the creation of separate environ - ments such as those focused on women’s concerns ( Hall , 1996 ) . Kent effectively exploited this tension—inherent in 380 S . HERRING ET AL . the situation of any group that is vulnerable by virtue of being a target of discrimination or harassment—by push - ing the bounds of harassing behavior , at the same time invoking principles of free speech and open debate . More - over , by daring forum members to ban him—indeed , by making getting banned his goal—Kent guaranteed that he would “win” regardless of the outcome of the forum’s deliberations . This form of ideological manipulation was especially effective given that his audience was a feminist forum committed in principle to inclusiveness . At the same time , the troller’s token displays of interest in feminist issues , and his token expressions of willingness to be convinced by evidence , psychologically manipulated members into continuing to engage with him , thereby pro - longing an interaction that had seriously disruptive effects on the forum . Why do people respond to provocation , even when they recognize intellectually that angry responses are what is being sought ? Grice ( 1991 [ 1968 ] ) observed that meaningful communication rests on a default assump - tion of mutual cooperation , leading communicators to as - sume that others are generally trying to be truthful , clear , consistent , etc . , even when surface appearances suggest otherwise . Moreover , communicators are rationally moti - vated to protect one another’s social face , on the premise that harmony is more likely than con(cid:143) ict to produce desir - able social outcomes for all involved ( Brown & Levinson , 1987 ) . 11 In contrast , a troller is fundamentally uncooper - ative : He seeks to confuse and deceive , rather than to be clear . The troller in the present study is also fundamentally unconcerned with maintaining others’ social face : On the contrary , like a (cid:143) amer , he seeks to maximize face threats by means of insults and put - downs . Such behavior appears ir - rational to many online communicators , to whom it might never have occurred that anything useful could be gained by harassing and disrupting others . Accordingly , they per - sist in attempting to reason with the disruptive individual , to appeal to his better nature , or , failing that , to shame him . Their belief in the universality of the social contract may partially blind them to what we take to be the troller’s ac - tual motivations : the desire to attract attention , including negative attention ; and the desire to exercise control and feel superior by manipulating others to fall into a trap of the troller’s design . 12 The target group in this case was also inexperienced with trolls , and thus responded more naively to the troller than a more experienced group might have done . Although the members of the forum sensed that Kent was trying to make trouble , they did not apply the word “trolling” to his behavior , nor did they appear to have available the men - tal concept of trolling by any other name . This is perhaps not surprising , given that trolling has traditionally been a Usenet phenomenon , and Usenet , although large , is still unknown to many Internet users . More surprising is that as feminists , the members of the forum did not relate Kent’s behavior to a wider pattern of antifeminist harassment on - or of(cid:143) ine . When early feminist Internet discussion groups such as WMST - L ( the Women’s Studies List ; Herring , 1996a ) and those discussed by Balka ( 1993 ) were harassed by males wanting to “discuss feminism , ” they quickly rec - ognized the behaviors as online manifestations of the same disruptive harassment that feminists often encounter in the real world , and responded accordingly . Why might the reactions of online feminist groups to disruption have changed in the intervening decade ? First , the women in the early groups and those in the present study are different populations , individually and demo - graphically . The early adopter , highly educated , upper - middle class ’70s - style feminist of the 1980s and early 1990s has given way to the younger and more demograph - ically diverse feminists who populate Web forums , most of whom , consistent with the demographics of Web forum participants more generally , have come online within the past 5 years . In the absence of direct continuity between the earlier and the current groups , there is little opportunity for the experiences of the former to have informed the aware - ness of the latter . Second , tolerance for disruptive behavior on the Internet appears to have increased since the early 1990s . The notion that hostile or harassing speech online was protected under the First Amendment was a contested proposition in the early days , advanced primarily by men , and resisted by some women , who were accused of “cen - sorship” for their views ( Herring , 1996b , 1999 ) . Since that time , the notion has attained near - hegemonic status , and is voiced by both women and men . Kent invoked free speech rhetoric in his abusive messages , and the members of the forum tolerated them for longer than they might have oth - erwise , we suspect , because of the prevailing view that abusive online communication is “free expression , ” and hence legitimate . Such a view both encourages trolling behavior and makes it harder to resist . An additional factor that abets disruptive activity is the dif(cid:142) culty of achieving consensus in online groups . Text - based CMC has been claimed to result in more frequent disagreements , greater polarization on controversial is - sues , and longer times to reach consensus than face - to - face interaction ( Sproull & Kiesler , 1991 ; cf . Sudweeks & Rafaeli , 1996 ) . These effects can be overcome to some ex - tent by centralizing authority in the role of a moderator or group administrator , removing the requirement for abso - lute group consensus on each decision . The group analyzed in the present study operated in a decentralized manner that required consensus ( as opposed to a majority vote ) in order for a decision about the troll to be implemented . Since consensus could not be achieved , no decision was taken . The web mistress’s subsequent intervention effec - tively implemented a more centralized authority model , which the forum members appeared to welcome , since the forum did not provide individual members with the SEARCHING FOR SAFETY 381 technological means to ban or (cid:142) lter messages from other users . Thus both the social organization and the techno - logical properties of the forum made it dif(cid:142) cult for users to protect themselves from harassment by the troller , thereby inadvertently facilitating the troller’s disruptive goals . CONCLUSIONS We conclude by suggesting several proactive interventions that might help to forestall individuals and groups from being trolled , yet not suppress debate . The (cid:142) rst is to make use of (cid:142) lters to block the harasser’s messages . We believe that such technological enhance - ments can play a useful , if limited , role . A “kill(cid:142) le” ca - pability permits individual users not to view posts from selected other individual users . Kill(cid:142) les shift some of the (cid:142) ltering abilities of moderators from a centralized admin - istrator to the individual participant , thereby preserving a decentralized structure and individual freedom of speech ( Spertus , 1996 ) . At the same time , kill(cid:142) les do not exclude the posts from the view of other readers , nor from the archives of the forum . As in the case of the virtual rape pre - viously cited , social damage can effectively be done to in - dividuals without their reading the offending post ( Dibbell , 1993 ) . Moreover , since kill(cid:142) les are reactive , users neces - sarily view some objectionable messages before they set a kill(cid:142) le , making it only a partial (cid:142) lter even for individual users . Equally important is to educate users about trolling . Trollers stereotypically ( although not exclusively ) prey on inexperienced Internet users and populations that are vulnerable for other reasons . Forum administrators might warn users about the patterns that trollers follow . Simply naming the danger can heighten people’s awareness of it . Because the danger is emotional rather than physical , we can imagine that warning about trolling might be simi - lar to warning about phone pranks or sales scams , where awareness of the modus operandi is often suf(cid:142) cient to fore - stall the effect of the advantage - taking event . A number of Web sites give advice to individuals about how to avoid being trolled , 13 including how to identify trolls ( a message makes unbelievable claims , is cross - posted to a large num - ber of newsgroups , etc . ) , how to respond to trolls ( resist the temptation to respond ; set a (cid:142) lter to block messages from the troller’s email address ) , and where to report trollers ( e . g . , to their Internet Service Providers , which often have policies against trolling , (cid:143) aming , and other forms of online harassment ) . Perhaps while we are educating users , we might also in - form them of the lack of anonymity of Internet communi - cation , no matter how safe and secure a discussion site may appear . Users need to be aware of the practice of archiving Internet transcripts , of how easily messages can be dis - seminated to other Internet venues , and of the fact that at least one system administrator always has access privi - leges to the contents of their servers , even when messages have been deleted . Greater awareness might lead users to re(cid:143) ect before responding hastily to provocative messages , since such messages could potentially come back to haunt them later . The interventions just cited apply primarily to individ - uals . The present case also points to the need for online forums to articulate policies , guidelines for appropriate participation , and penalties for violating those guidelines , in advance of harassment episodes taking place . Public online spaces are likely to experience disruption from trolling and (cid:143) aming unless policies and capabilities are implemented for excluding problem users . It is necessary in this regard to distinguish clearly between cooperative debate ( however heated ) and uncooperative provocation ( however masked ) . Unambiguous and strong moderation from the start can avoid many problems ( for an example , see Korenman & Wyatt , 1996 ) . Some evidence suggests that groups vulnerable to harassment and trolling bene(cid:142) t especially from stricter centralized moderation ( Herring , 2000 ) . Weshould also seek to understand the social psychology of trolling so as to be better able to predict its occurrence and limit its harmful effects . Why do trollers troll ? In cases where stigmatized groups such as feminists or homosex - uals are the target , we might speculate that the underlying motivation is hatred towards people who are perceived as different or threatening by the troller . When groups are targeted for their vulnerability alone , as in the case of dis - abled people or inexperienced users , a motivation suggests itself in terms of control and an enhanced sense of self - empowerment . However , not all disruptive online behavior is targeted at at - risk populations—trollers have disrupted discussion groups for sports car racers ( male ) , 14 video software artists ( technologically sophisticated ) 15 and even Internet researchers ( sophisticated about online social practices ) . 16 A common denominator in the trolling cases that we are aware of is that trollers appear to enjoy the at - tention they receive , even—and perhaps especially—when it is unremittingly negative . 17 This evidence suggests that ignoring the provocations of a troller might indeed be an effective way of thwarting him ( or her ) , 18 and that the def - inition of trolling needs to be expanded beyond the tradi - tional stereotype to encompass a wider range of attention - seeking disruptive behaviors . Given the proliferation of Internet communities and the numbers of people who stand to be impacted by trolling and disruptive online behaviors , more research is clearly needed in this area . Interviews with trollers , some of whom are openly proud of their trolling exploits , might be carried out to shed light on the motivations for trolling . 19 Compar - ative studies are needed to determine if patterns of trolling differ when mainstream groups are the target rather than 382 S . HERRING ET AL . minority groups , when trolling is instigated via a single message or sustained participation , and when the troller is multiple individuals rather than a single individual 20 or a software agent rather than a person . 21 Studies might also be carried out to show how trolling is affected by the availability of technical tools that give participants greater control over the online environment . Ultimately , we see Internet trolling as a manifestation of a much broader phenomenon whereby individuals take pleasure in disrupting the social order out of anger , perver - sity or contempt . It would be interesting to compare online disruption with disruptive behavior in face - to - face groups in playgrounds , classes , meetings , support groups , and so - cial events . It may be that the textual nature of computer - mediated disruption makes its strategies more apparent and leads to insights that would otherwise elude us in spo - ken interactions , but which can then be applied to of(cid:143) ine as well as online situations . At the same time , the Internet poses unique opportunities for abusers and concomitant challenges for those wishing to avoid abuse . Among the challenges we see are the need to set clear boundaries on acceptable speech in order to ensure that civility , safety , and freedom can coexist . NOTES 1 . We exclude from this category political minorities such as white supremacists whose members come mostly or entirely from the dom - inant ( white , heterosexual , able - bodied , male ) group . Feminists are included on the grounds that the label carries a stigma outside of fem - inist contexts , and self - declared or suspected feminists are frequently targets of abuse . This is the case even within academia , where feminism has achieved a degree of legitimacy in terms of publication , curricu - lar , and hiring practices . The vulnerability of feminists is , of course , related to the fact that most feminists are women . Women could also be considered a vulnerable group according to a broad interpretation of the de(cid:142) nition given here . 2 . In discourse about this phenomenon on the Internet , the terms “troll” and “troller” are used interchangeably to refer to a person who sends disingenious , provocative messages ( “trolls” ) . To avoid confu - sion , we use “troller” to refer to the person , and “troll” to refer to the message , consistent with Donath ( 1999 ) . 3 . The (cid:142) shing metaphor in fact gives rise to three different mean - ings for the word : ( a ) To troll for (cid:143) ames ( most common usage , as in the present discussion ) . ( b ) To troll for ( cyber ) sex ( e . g . , http : / / www . leathernroses . com / cyber / trolling . htm ) . ( c ) To dredge for data , e . g . , search for some speci(cid:142) c information on the Web ( e . g . , http : / / opop . nols . com / write / HTTP . html ) . The second and third meanings predate the Internet . Trolling in the (cid:142) rst sense has been practiced and discussed on the Internet since at least the early 1990s ; two well - known early trollers are Usenet personalities James “Kibo” Parry and Ted Frank ( http : / / www . kill(cid:142) le . org / » tskirvin / faqs / legends / legends1 . html ) . 4 . As with many people attempting to disrupt online communica - tion , Andrew conceals his of(cid:143) ine identity . A search of his web site reveals no mention of his last name , location , or other identifying characteristics . 5 . For a game - like approach to trolling , see Perry’s ( n . d . ) criteria for earning the “Trolling Merit Badge , ” which involves successfully trolling seven kinds of targets : newbies , idiots , political newsgroups , the opposite sex , “oldbies , ” famous persons , and kibo ( cf . note 3 ) . 6 . Access to the discussion forum requires users to register as members by providing their names and e - mail addresses , but member - ship is free and open to anyone . 7 . We have replaced allforumparticipantnameswithpseudonyms . 8 . Examples of initial coding categories include “taunt , ” “blame , ” and “contentious assertion . ” Examples of themes include “outward manifestations of sincerity , ” “ideological manipulation , ” and “refuting claims” ( see Analysis ) . 9 . All typographical errors in the examples were produced by the original authors . 10 . We note in passing that Kent makes a number of remarks that demean notjust feminists , butwomen ingeneral . He evokes misogynis - tic stereotypes through the use of expressions such as “girlies support group , ” “catty , ” and ( earlier ) “hysterical” to describe a woman who was critical of him . 11 . Individuals deviate from these ideals , sometimes deliberately , but cooperation and politeness remain default expectations in everyday communication . See Herring ( 1994 , 1996b ) , however , for discussion of gender differences in the value placed on politeness . 12 . Thisbehaviorisrational , inasmuchasitprovidesthetrollerwith the outcomes he desires , albeit arguably for psychologically unhealthy reasons . 13 . See , e . g . , Gilmore ( 2000 ) , Sackman ( 1995 ) , http : / / www . agoraphobiazine . net / trolling . html . 14 . BarryWellman ( e - mailcommunication , Mar30200215 : 19 : 40 ) . 15 . Mieszkowski ( 2002 ) . 16 . An extended trolling episode took place on the Association of Internet Researchers List ( AIR - L ) between fall 2001 and spring 2002 . 17 . Group responses to a troller are not always entirely negative . In both the AIR - L case and the cases reported by Mieszkowski ( 2002 ) , some members defended the troller . What motivates people to do this is a question requiring further research . 18 . The troller described by Mieszkowski ( 2002 ) self - presents as a woman—actually several women—under the pseudonym Netochka Nezvanova . 19 . A challenge associated with interviewing trollers is that they maynotrepresentthemselves ina straightforward way , asMieszkowski ( 2002 ) observed . 20 . See footnote 18 . 21 . Serdar Argic , a notorious troll from the early 1990s who posted thousandsof messagestomultiplediscussiongroupsabouttheTurkish – Armenian con(cid:143) ict in World War I , is believed to have been a soft - ware agent ( bot ) ( Rob Furr , message posted to air - l @ aoir . org , 21 Mar 2002 14 : 45 : 09 ; for other theories , see http : / / www . kkc . net / eyenet / 1994 / net0728 . htm ) . REFERENCES Andrew . 1996 . The troller’s FAQ . Retrieved 1 / 10 / 01 h http : / / www . altairiv . demon . co . uk / afaq / posts / trollfaq . html i SEARCHING FOR SAFETY 383 Balka , Ellen . 1993 . Women’s access to on - line discussions about feminism . Electronic Journal of Communication 3 ( 1 ) . Retrieved 11 / 11 / 01 h http : / / www . cios . org / www / ejc / v3n193 . htm i Barlow , John Perry . 1996 . A declaration of independence of cyberspace . Retrieved 1 / 18 / 01 h http : / / www . eff . org / pub / Censorship / Internet censorship bills / barlow 0296 . declarationv i Brail , Stephanie . 1996 . The price of admission : Harassment and free speech in the wild , wild west . In Wired women : Gender and new realities incyberspace , eds . L . Cherny and E . R . Weise , pp . 141 – 157 . Seattle , WA : Seal Press . Brown , Penelope , andLevinson , Stephen . 1987 . Politeness . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Camp , L . Jean . 1996 . We are geeks , and we are not guys : The sys - ters mailing list . In Wired women : Gender and New Realities in Cyberspace , eds . L . Cherny and E . R . Weise , pp . 114 – 125 . Seattle : Seal Press . Collins - Jarvis , Lori . 1997 . Discriminatory messages and gendered power relations in on - line discussion groups . Paper presented at the 1997 annual meeting of the National Communication Association , Chicago . Dibbell , Julian . 1993 . A rape in cyberspace : How an evil clown , a Haitian trickster spirit , two wizards , and a cast of dozens turned a database into a society . Village Voice 23 December . Donath , JudithS . 1999 . Identity anddeceptioninthevirtualcommunity . In Communities in cyberspace , eds . M . A . Smith and P . Kollock , pp . 29 – 59 . London : Routledge . Dubrovsky , Vitaly J . , Kiesler , Sara , and Sethna , Beheruz N . 1991 . The equalization phenomenon : Status effects in computer mediated and face - to - face decision making groups . Human Computer Interaction 6 : 119 – 146 . Ebben , Maureen M . 1994 . Women on the net : An exploratory study of gender dynamics on the soc . women computer network . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Illinois , Urbana - Champaign . Ebben , Maureen , and Kramarae , Cheris . 1993 . Women and information technologies : Creating a cyberspace of our own . In Women , informa - tion technology , and scholarship , eds . H . J . Taylor , C . Kramarae , and M . Ebben , pp . 15 – 27 . Urbana , IL : Women , Information Technology , and Scholarship Colloquium , Center for Advanced Study , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . Ellsworth , Elizabeth . 1989 . Why doesn’t this feel empowering ? Work - ing through the repressive myths of critical pedagogy . Harvard Educational Review 59 ( 3 ) : 271 – 297 . Ess , Charles . 1996 . The political computer : Democracy , CMC , and Habermas . In Philosophical perspectives on computer - mediated communication , ed . C . Ess , pp . 197 – 230 . Albany : State University of New York Press . Free online dictionary of computing . 1998 . Retrieved 11 / 11 / 01 h http : / / wombat . doc . ic . ac . uk / foldoc / contents . html i Gilmore , Glynne . 2000 . Ignore trolls on newsgroups . Retrieved 7 / 2 / 02 h http : / / www . angel(cid:142) re . com / biz4 / glynnegilmore / page11 . html i Glaser , Barney , and Strauss , Anselm L . 1967 . The discovery of grounded theory : Strategies for qualitative research . Chicago : Aldine . Grice , H . Paul . ( 1991 [ 1968 ] ) . Logic and conversation . In Pragmatics : A reader , ed . S . David , pp . 305 – 315 . New York : Oxford University Press . Gur - Ze’ev , I . 1999 . Cyberfeminism and education in the era of the exile of the spirit . Educational Theory 49 ( 4 ) : 437 – 455 . Hall , Kira . 1996 . Cyberfeminism . In Computer - mediated communi - cation : Linguistic , social and cross - cultural perspectives , ed . S . C . Herring , pp . 147 – 170 . Amsterdam : John Benjamins . Herring , SusanC . 1994 . Genderdifferencesincomputer - mediated com - munication : Bringing familiarbaggage tothenew frontier . Retrieved 11 / 11 / 01 h http : / / www . cpsr . org / cpsr / gender / herring . txt i Herring , Susan C . 1996a . Two variants of an electronic message schema . In Computer - mediated communication : Linguistic , social and cross - cultural perspectives , ed . S . C . Herring , pp . 81 – 108 . Amsterdam / Philadelphia : John Benjamins . Herring , Susan C . 1996b . Posting in a different voice . In Philosophi - cal perspectives on computer - mediated communication , ed . C . Ess , pp . 113 – 145 . Albany : State University of New York Press . Herring , Susan C . 1999 . The rhetorical dynamics of gender harassment on - line . The Information Society 15 : 151 – 167 . Herring , Susan C . 2000 . Gender differences in CMC : Findings and implications . Computer Professionals for Social Responsibil - ity Newsletter , Winter 2000 . Retrieved 11 / 11 / 01 h http : / / www . cpsr . org / publications / newsletters / issues / 2000 / Winter2000 / index . html i Herring , Susan C . 2002 . Gender [ sic ] violence : Recognizing and re - sisting abuse in online environments . Asian Women 14 ( summer ) : 187 – 212 . Herring , Susan , Johnson , Deborah A . , and DiBenedetto , Tamra . 1995 . “This discussion is going too far ! ” : Male resistance to female par - ticipation on the Internet . In Gender articulated : Language and the socially constructed self , eds . K . Hall and M . Bucholtz , pp . 67 – 96 . New York : Routledge . Kenway , J . , and Nixon , H . 1999 . Cyberfeminisms , cyberliteracies , and the educational cyberspheres . Educational Theory 49 ( 4 ) : 457 – 474 . Kiesler , Sara , Siegel , Jane , and McGuire , Timothy W . 1984 . Social psy - chological aspects of computer - mediated communication . American Psychologist 39 : 1123 – 1134 . King , Storm . 1996 . Researching Internet communities : Proposed eth - ical guidelines for the reporting of results . The Information Society 12 : 119 – 127 . Korenman , Joan , and Wyatt , Nancy . 1996 . Group dynamics in an e - mail forum . In Computer - mediated communication : Linguistic , social and cross - cultural perspectives , ed . S . C . Herring , pp . 225 – 242 . Amsterdam : John Benjamins . Kramarae , Cheris , and Taylor , H . Jeannie . 1993 . Women and men on electronic networks : A conversation or a monologue ? In Women , information technology , and scholarship , eds . H . J . Taylor , C . Kramarae , and M . Ebben , pp . 52 – 61 . Urbana , IL : Women , Information Technology , and Scholarship Colloquium , Center for Advanced Study , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . Mieszkowski , Katharine . 2002 . The most feared woman on the Inter - net . Salon . com , March 1 , 2002 . Retrieved5 / 17 / 02 h http : / / www . salon . com / tech / feature / 2002 / 03 / 01 / netochka / print . html i Mowbray , Melinda . 2001 . Reducing demographic bias . In Online com - munities : Commerce , community action , and the virtual university , eds . C . Werry and M . Mowbray , pp . 97 – 125 . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . Oxford English Dictionary . 1992 . Retrieved 9 / 28 / 99 h http : / / etext . lib . virginia . edu / oed . html i Perry , John . n . d . Net Scouts Home Page . Retrieved 7 / 2 / 02 h http : / / www . perry . com / bizarre / scout . html i Pfaffenberger , Brian . 1996 . “IfIwantit , it’s OK : ” Usenetandthe ( outer ) limits of free speech . The Information Society 12 : 365 – 386 . 384 S . HERRING ET AL . Preece , Jennifer . 2000 . Online communities : Designing usability , supporting sociability . Chichester , UK : John Wiley . Reid , Elizabeth . 1994 . Cultural formations in text - based virtual re - alities . Unpublished master’s thesis , University of Melbourne , Australia . Retrieved 6 / 15 / 01 h http : / / home . earthlink . net / » aluluei / cult - form . htm i Reid , Elizabeth . 1999 . Hierarchy and power : Social control in cy - berspace . In Communities in cyberspace , eds . M . A . Smith and P . Kollock , pp . 107 – 133 . London : Routledge . Rheingold , Howard . 1993 . The Virtual community : Homesteading on the electronic frontier . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Retrieved 6 / 15 / 01 h http : / / www . rheingold . com / vc / book i Sackman . 1995 . Usenet (cid:142)sh tales—How to avoid being trolled . Re - trieved 7 / 2 / 02 h http : / / netconference . about . com / gi / dynamic / offsite . htm ? site = http % 3A % 2F % 2Fwww . intersurf . com % 2F % 7Eaevinc % 2 Faev2trol . htm i Shade , Leslie Regan . 1993 . Gender issues in computer networking . Re - trieved 11 / 11 / 01 h http : / / cpsr . org / cpsr / gender / leslie regan shade . txt i Spender , Dale . 1995 . Nattering on the net : Women , power , and cyberspace . North Melbourne : Spinifex . Spertus , Ellen . 1996 . Social and technical means for (cid:142)ghting on - line harassment . Retrieved 7 / 3 / 02 h http : / / www . ai . mit . edu / people / ellens / Gender / glc i Sproull , Lee , and Kiesler , Sara . 1991 . Connections : New ways of work - ing in the networked organization . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Strauss , Anselm , and Corbin , Juliet . 1998 . Basics of qualitative re - search : Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Sudweeks , Fay , and Rafaeli , Sheizaf . 1996 . How do you get a hundred strangers to agree ? Computer mediated communication and collab - oration . In Computer networking and scholarly communication in the twenty - (cid:142)rst - century university , eds . T . Harrison and T . Stephens , pp . 115 – 136 . Albany , NY : SUNY Press . Sutton , Laurel . 1994 . Using Usenet : gender , power , and silence in electronic discourse . In Proceedings of the 20th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society , eds . S . Gahl , A . Dolbey , and C . Johnson , pp . 506 – 520 . Berkeley , CA : Berkeley Linguistics Society . We , Gladys . 1993 . Cross - gender communication in cyberspace . Retrieved 11 / 11 / 01 h ftp : / / cpsr . org / cpsr / gender / we cross gender i APPENDIX A Rules : [ Name ] magazine’s policy is to allow free debate on our boards , as long as users follow basic rules of human de - cency . Personally attacking , (cid:143) aming or threatening another [ name ] board member is strictly forbidden . Threatening vio - lence against a group of people ( like Jews , or homosexuals , or feminists , for example ) will also not be tolerated . If you violate these rules , you will be banned from the [ name ] boards . So behave !