International Journal of Molecular Sciences Article VEGF Triggers the Activation of Coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 Complex within the Growth Cone Matthias Schlau 1 , † , Daniel Terheyden - Keighley 1 , † , Verena Theis 1 , Hans Georg Mannherz 2 and Carsten Theiss 1 , * 1 Institute of Anatomy , Department of Cytology , Ruhr - University Bochum , Universitätsstraße 150 , 44780 Bochum , Germany ; matthias . dumpich @ rub . de ( M . S . ) ; daniel . terheyden - keighley @ ruhr - uni - bochum . de ( D . T . - K . ) ; verena . theis @ rub . de ( V . T . ) 2 Research Group Molecular Cardiology , University Hospital Bergmannsheil and St . Josef Hospital , c / o Clinical Pharmacology , Ruhr - University , 44780 Bochum , Germany ; hans . g . mannherz @ ruhr - uni - bochum . de * Correspondence : carsten . theiss @ rub . de ; Tel . : + 49 - 234 - 32 - 24560 † These authors contributed equally to this work . Received : 22 December 2017 ; Accepted : 24 January 2018 ; Published : 27 January 2018 Abstract : A crucial neuronal structure for the development and regeneration of neuronal networks is the axonal growth cone . Affected by different guidance cues , it grows in a predetermined direction to reach its ﬁnal destination . One of those cues is the vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , which was identiﬁed as a positive effector for growth cone movement . These positive effects are mainly mediated by a reorganization of the actin network . This study shows that VEGF triggers a tight colocalization of coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 complex to the actin cytoskeleton within chicken dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) . Live cell imaging after microinjection of GFP ( green ﬂuorescent protein ) - coﬁlin and RFP ( red ﬂuorescent protein ) - LifeAct revealed that both labeled proteins rapidly redistributed within growth cones , and showed a congruent distribution pattern after VEGF supplementation . Disruption of signaling upstream of coﬁlin via blocking LIM - kinase ( LIMK ) activity resulted in growth cones displaying regressive growth behavior . Microinjection of GFP - p16b ( a subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex ) and RFP - LifeAct revealed that both proteins redistributed into lamellipodia of the growth cone within minutes after VEGF stimulation . Disruption of the signaling to the Arp2 / 3 complex in the presence of VEGF by inhibition of N - WASP ( neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich – Scott protein ) caused retraction of growth cones . Hence , coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 complex appear to be downstream effector proteins of VEGF signaling to the actin cytoskeleton of DRG growth cones . Our data suggest that VEGF simultaneously affects different pathways for signaling to the actin cytoskeleton , since activation of coﬁlin occurs via inhibition of LIMK , whereas activation of Arp2 / 3 is achieved by stimulation of N - WASP . Keywords : VEGF ; coﬁlin ; Arp2 / 3 ; LIMK ; N - WASP ; time - lapse imaging ; growth cone ; cytoskeleton ; actin 1 . Introduction In order to guide the outgrowth of neuronal axons to their correct destinations , their distal ends form highly motile extensions—the growth cones , which are guided by soluble or non - soluble repellent or attractant cues [ 1 , 2 ] . Understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in regulating axon guidance is critical for the development of neuroregenerative disease therapies . Activated growth cones explore the immediate environment with numerous ﬁlopodia , thin ﬁnger - like extensions of the plasma membrane , which are stabilized by bundles of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) . Spanning between them are lamellipodia , veil - like plasma membrane extensions stabilized by a branched F - actin network that determine the direction of cell movement through their protrusive activity . Many Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / ijms19020384 www . mdpi . com / journal / ijms Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 2 of 19 signaling pathways aim to modify the actin cytoskeleton , which in axonal growth cones , is constantly reorganized by de - and re - polymerization processes . Actin polymerization is a directional process powered by the hydrolysis of ATP ( adenosine triphosphate ) by the actin subunits immediately after their addition to the so - called fast growing or plus end , whereas the dissociation of actin subunits from the ﬁlament occurs from the minus end . This process is termed actin treadmilling or cycling , and can provide protrusive forces when the plus ends are oriented towards the plasma membrane [ 3 ] . Thus , membrane protrusions by ﬁlopodia or lamellipodia are solely actin - based forms of motility . Dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton depends on the activation of speciﬁc combinations of actin binding proteins . Polymerization of monomeric actin is promoted by nuclei of small actin oligomers , whose formation and stabilization are favored by nucleating proteins , such as the formins and the Arp2 / 3 complex , which is composed of seven different protein subunits [ 4 – 6 ] . Within lamellipodial membrane extensions , the speciﬁc role of Arp2 / 3 is to nucleate the polymerization and branching of new actin ﬁlaments whose plus ends are oriented towards the plasma membrane . Due to their plus - end elongation , a branched F - actin network produces the protrusive force necessary for the extension of the lamellipodial plasma membrane [ 5 ] . Ultimately , this leads to a huge actin turnover rate , the prerequisite of actin - based cell motility [ 7 ] . The main and best - known upstream effectors of Arp2 / 3 activity are proteins of the WASP - family , with N - WASP ( neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich – Scott protein ) being the most prominent member . N - WASP binds to the Arp2 / 3 complex , and initiates conformational changes , enabling it to bind to existing “mother” actin ﬁlaments , and to initiate the outgrowth of new “daughter” ﬁlaments facilitating branching [ 6 , 8 , 9 ] . The Arp2 / 3 complex has been shown to be the target of various signaling cascades within the growth cone . For example , Sema3a , which acts as a repellent , leads to a decrease in the Arp2 / 3 activity within the growth cone [ 10 ] . In addition to rapid actin polymerization leading to reorganizations of the actin cytoskeleton , existing or “aged” actin ﬁlaments have to be rapidly disassembled in order to replenish the pool of reusable monomeric actin . Proteins able to fragment existing actin ﬁlaments are the members of the ADF ( actin depolymerizing factor ) / coﬁlin family [ 11 – 15 ] . In addition , by its F - actin severing activity , coﬁlin may create additional plus ends on ﬁlament fragments , which then act as nuclei for new rounds of ﬁlament elongation [ 16 ] . A number of different signaling proteins are known to regulate the activity of ADF / coﬁlin . Phosphorylation of the serine3 residue of ADF / coﬁlin by LIM kinase ( LIMK ) leads to inhibition of their actin binding ability , and thus to inactivation . In neuronal tissue , both ADF and coﬁlin are expressed though coﬁlin , which appears to be the dominant form [ 16 ] . Therefore , we concentrated on the effects of coﬁlin in this study . In growth cones , inactivation of coﬁlin also seems to be initiated by LIMK . In opposition to LIMK , the phosphatase Slingshot - 1 ( Ssh - 1 ) activates coﬁlin via dephosphorylation [ 17 ] . Extracellular signaling molecules regulate coﬁlin and Arp2 / 3 activity . The signaling factors , NGF ( nerve growth factor ) and netrin - 1 , for example , have been shown to activate coﬁlin within axonal growth cones , since exposure of chicken - DRG to NGF or netrin - 1 resulted in an increase of dephosphorylated coﬁlin within their growth cones [ 18 ] . Conversely , Reelin has been shown to regulate coﬁlin phosphorylation via LIMK during the migration of cortical neurons [ 19 ] . Because these signaling proteins act very similarly to the vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , it appears plausible that coﬁlin and / or Arp2 / 3 could also be affected by VEGF signaling . VEGF is well known to promote numerous steps during development . Primarily , it was shown to direct vasculogenesis and angiogenesis by vascular path ﬁnding and endothelial sprouting [ 20 ] . In addition , a number of other tissues , the nervous system in particular , are also affected by VEGF [ 21 ] . It supports neuroprotection , as well as neurodevelopment and neuroregeneration [ 22 , 23 ] . Neuronal structures affected by VEGF are , for example , Schwann cells [ 24 ] , oligodendrocytes [ 25 ] , cortical and hippocampal neurons [ 26 ] , and dorsal root ganglia ( DRG ) neurons [ 22 ] . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 3 of 19 In vitro and in vivo studies showed that VEGF is an attractant factor , which plays a crucial role in the proper path ﬁnding of axons [ 27 , 28 ] . Furthermore , in vitro studies revealed that VEGF led to a considerably larger increase in growth cone size than NGF ( nerve growth factor ) [ 29 ] . Previously , it was shown that axonal growth directed by VEGF is mediated by the ( tyrosine auto - ) phosphorylation of VEGFR - 2 after VEGF binding [ 30 ] , which initiates a signaling cascade leading to an increased turnover of actin within the growth cone . In VEGF - stimulated endothelial cells , it is well known that rapid , actin - based turnover processes are triggered via pathways dependent on the activation of the small GTP - binding proteins of the Rho family , such as Ras , Raf , and Cdc42 [ 31 ] . Each of these Rho family members induces the formation of a special form of supramolecular organization of ﬁlamentous actin . Thus , Cdc42 is known to initiate pathways leading to an activation of particular sets of actin binding proteins , such as coﬁlin and Arp2 / 3 , often resulting in the formation of ﬁlopodia or lamellipodia [ 32 ] . However , the complete signaling cascade after the stimulation of VEGFR - 2 and the mechanism of the increased actin turnover within the growth cone are still not clear . The aim of this study was to analyze the effects of VEGF on the downstream targets of VEGFR - 2 within the axonal growth cone , and to identify mechanisms which lead to VEGF - based actin reorganization . Therefore , we studied the distribution and contribution of two actin binding proteins on dorsal root ganglion growth cone activity after VEGF exposure . Our data are based on microinjection experiments using vectors leading to an overexpression of wildtype coﬁlin , or a constitutively inactive mutant of coﬁlin , or the ﬂuorescently tagged p16 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex . The ﬂuorescent tags allowed us to follow their distribution in relation to the actin cytoskeleton by live cell imaging . Furthermore , to assess to what degree the activation of coﬁlin or Arp2 / 3 is inﬂuenced by their canonical upstream proteins , we inhibited upstream regulators with speciﬁc inhibitors directed against LIM - kinase family proteins and N - WASP . 2 . Results 2 . 1 . Analysis of the Distribution of Coﬁlin and Actin in the Growth Cone Growth cones of chicken DRG were analyzed after 3 days of cultivation in nutrient medium supplemented with growth factors . Observations at lower magniﬁcations showed that these DRG neurons grew radially into the periphery , and formed an extensive axonal meshwork . The density of the meshworks increased noticeably in stimulated ganglia . As reported previously , we observed a clear increase in the density of the neuronal networks , and in the number of neurites that were growing into the periphery in DRG exposed to NGF . A further enhancement of these effects was observed by VEGF exposure [ 29 ] . In these DRG , coﬁlin and actin were colocalized within the neurites up to the growth cones . In DRG exposed to the LIMK - inhibitor BMS - 5 ( Bristol - Myers Squibb expression technologies group LIMK inhibitor 5 ) , the morphology was comparable to control conditions . Axons of inhibited DRG did not noticeably spread further into the periphery than control DRG . Additionally , the density of the axonal meshwork was not higher than it was in controls ( shown in [ 21 ] ) . Higher magniﬁcations allowed a detailed analysis of individual growth cones ( Figure 1 ) . Compared to control conditions ( Figure 1a ) , a growth enhancing effect of NGF ( Figure 1b ) and VEGF ( Figure 1c ) was seen . Both coﬁlin and actin were distributed throughout the whole growth cone , and a tight colocalization of these proteins was observed . The addition of VEGF led to a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the mean circumference and mean area of the growth cones accompanied with a dispersal of actin and coﬁlin , which , however , maintained their colocalization ( 12 DRG , 69 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 85 . 3 µ m , mean area actin = 50 . 5 µ m 2 , mean circumference coﬁlin = 84 . 1 µ m , mean area coﬁlin = 50 . 7 µ m 2 ) compared to controls ( 12 DRG , 51 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 48 . 2 µ m , mean area actin = 23 . 6 µ m 2 , mean circumference coﬁlin = 48 . 1 µ m , mean area coﬁlin = 23 . 4 µ m 2 ) . The observed alterations regarding the differences in circumference were highly signiﬁcant , showing an increase of 77 % for actin and 75 % for coﬁlin ( p < 0 . 0001 ) . Changes in the area also revealed signiﬁcant differences , with an increase of 113 % for actin and 116 % for coﬁlin Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 4 of 19 ( p < 0 . 0001 ) . Growth cones of NGF - stimulated cells also grew in both mean circumference ( DRG , 53 growth cones ; mean circumference actin 71 . 9 µ m , mean circumference coﬁlin 71 . 2 µ m ) and mean area ( mean area actin = 40 . 6 µ m 2 , mean area coﬁlin = 40 . 4 µ m 2 ) . Compared to control conditions , these alterations were highly signiﬁcant , with a 48 % greater coﬁlin and a 50 % larger actin circumference , as well as an increase in area , with a 74 % enlargement of the coﬁlin and a 71 % enlargement of the actin area ( p < 0 . 0001 ) . Blocking LIMK signaling via BMS - 5 , and thereby coﬁlin phosphorylation , led to parameters equivalent to that of controls ( i . e . , control—medium enriched solely with the inhibitor ; Figure 1d ) : analyzing 12 DRG with 55 growth cones resulted in mean circumference actin = 45 . 9 µ m , mean circumference coﬁlin = 45 . 9 µ m ; mean area actin = 21 . 8 µ m 2 , mean area coﬁlin = 21 . 9 µ m 2 . For medium enriched with VEGF plus NGF and BMS - 5 ( Figure 1e ) , we analyzed 12 DRG with 57 growth cones ( mean circumference actin 52 . 3 µ m , mean circumference coﬁlin 53 . 8 µ m ; mean area actin 24 . 2 µ m 2 , mean area coﬁlin 24 . 2 µ m 2 ) . Taken together , these results suggested that VEGF affects the actin cytoskeleton via LIMK signaling possibly in a coﬁlin dependent manner ( see Figure 1f ) . Subsequently , the role of LIMK in these signaling pathways was examined in greater detail . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 as well as an increase in area , with a 74 % enlargement of the cofilin and a 71 % enlargement of the actin area ( p < 0 . 0001 ) . Blocking LIMK signaling via BMS - 5 , and thereby cofilin phosphorylation , led to parameters equivalent to that of controls ( i . e . , control—medium enriched solely with the inhibitor ; Figure 1d ) : analyzing 12 DRG with 55 growth cones resulted in mean circumference actin = 45 . 9 µm , mean circumference cofilin = 45 . 9 µm ; mean area actin = 21 . 8 µm 2 , mean area cofilin = 21 . 9 µm 2 . For medium enriched with VEGF plus NGF and BMS - 5 ( Figure 1e ) , we analyzed 12 DRG with 57 growth cones ( mean circumference actin 52 . 3 µm , mean circumference cofilin 53 . 8 µm ; mean area actin 24 . 2 µm 2 , mean area cofilin 24 . 2 µm 2 ) . Taken together , these results suggested that VEGF affects the actin cytoskeleton via LIMK signaling possibly in a cofilin dependent manner ( see Figure 1f ) . Subsequently , the role of LIMK in these signaling pathways was examined in greater detail . Figure 1 . Distributional changes of anti - cofilin and phalloidin rhodamine in DRG growth cones subsequent to application of NGF , VEGF , or BMS - 5 . Controls ( a ) show a congruent distribution pattern of cofilin ( green ) and actin ( red ) ( n = 51 ) . Stimulation with NGF ( b ) ( n = 53 ) or VEGF ( c ) ( n = 69 ) lead to a highly significant increase in their mean circumference and area for both actin and cofilin , compared to control conditions ( * * * = p < 0 . 0001 ) . The number of filopodia increased . Inhibition of cofilin signaling by application of the LIMK - inhibitor BMS - 5 ( d ) under control conditions ( n = 55 ) and ( e ) under stimulation with VEGF plus NGF ( n = 57 ) did not lead to significant alterations of growth cone morphology as compared to controls . The table ( f ) shows statistical data of anti - cofilin - stained growth cones . The graphs show the mean circumference ( g ) and the mean area ( h ) of the analyzed growth cones . Scale bars = 10 µm . Error bars = SEM . 2 . 2 . VEGF Leads to Rapid Changes in Cofilin Distribution and Repels Growth Cones When LIMK is Inhibited Figure 1 . Distributional changes of anti - coﬁlin and phalloidin rhodamine in DRG growth cones subsequent to application of NGF , VEGF , or BMS - 5 . Controls ( a ) show a congruent distribution pattern of coﬁlin ( green ) and actin ( red ) ( n = 51 ) . Stimulation with NGF ( b ) ( n = 53 ) or VEGF ( c ) ( n = 69 ) lead to a highly signiﬁcant increase in their mean circumference and area for both actin and coﬁlin , compared to control conditions ( * * * = p < 0 . 0001 ) . The number of ﬁlopodia increased . Inhibition of coﬁlin signaling by application of the LIMK - inhibitor BMS - 5 ( d ) under control conditions ( n = 55 ) and ( e ) under stimulation with VEGF plus NGF ( n = 57 ) did not lead to signiﬁcant alterations of growth cone morphology as compared to controls . The table ( f ) shows statistical data of anti - coﬁlin - stained growth cones . The graphs show the mean circumference ( g ) and the mean area ( h ) of the analyzed growth cones . Scale bars = 10 µ m . Error bars = SEM . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 5 of 19 2 . 2 . VEGF Leads to Rapid Changes in Coﬁlin Distribution and Repels Growth Cones When LIMK is Inhibited Individual neurons were microinjected with a combination of GFP - coﬁlin and RFP - LifeAct plasmids , which encode green ﬂuorescent coﬁlin and a red ﬂuorescent actin binding protein , respectively [ 33 ] . The neurons were incubated for 24 – 48 h after microinjection . Both proteins were expressed and distributed throughout the whole growth cone , and showed an almost congruent distribution pattern . Supplementation of the nutrient medium with VEGF initiated enhanced growth cone motility , such as rapid shape changes and the formation of protrusions within minutes . These movements were accompanied by distributional changes of actin and coﬁlin . Coﬁlin was concentrated in protruding growth cones , and was transported along the growth cone up to its outer edges . Similar molecular movement patterns were observed for the actin distribution . There was a strong ﬂuorescence accumulation of coﬁlin in freshly formed ﬁlopodia . Simultaneously , actin was distributed along these newly formed ﬁlopodia , with no alternation in its ﬂuorescence intensity . Both proteins aggregated before a new protrusion was formed , and showed a congruent accumulation over the entire observation period . The addition of VEGF led to an increase in the mean circumference of the coﬁlin signal by 16 % within the ﬁrst hour ( n = 5 , Figure 2 ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 18 Individual neurons were microinjected with a combination of GFP - cofilin and RFP - LifeAct plasmids , which encode green fluorescent cofilin and a red fluorescent actin binding protein , respectively [ 33 ] . The neurons were incubated for 24 – 48 h after microinjection . Both proteins were expressed and distributed throughout the whole growth cone , and showed an almost congruent distribution pattern . Supplementation of the nutrient medium with VEGF initiated enhanced growth cone motility , such as rapid shape changes and the formation of protrusions within minutes . These movements were accompanied by distributional changes of actin and cofilin . Cofilin was concentrated in protruding growth cones , and was transported along the growth cone up to its outer edges . Similar molecular movement patterns were observed for the actin distribution . There was a strong fluorescence accumulation of cofilin in freshly formed filopodia . Simultaneously , actin was distributed along these newly formed filopodia , with no alternation in its fluorescence intensity . Both proteins aggregated before a new protrusion was formed , and showed a congruent accumulation over the entire observation period . The addition of VEGF led to an increase in the mean circumference of the cofilin signal by 16 % within the first hour ( n = 5 , Figure 2 ) . Figure 2 . Live cell imaging of the axonal growth cones ( n = 5 ) . DRG cells were microinjected with a combination of RFP - LifeAct and eGFP - cofilin plasmids , and observed for approximately 2 h . Distributional behavior of cofilin and actin was observed and analyzed after VEGF application . Both proteins displayed a fast response to the VEGF application , and steadily changed their distributional pattern ( arrows ) . The distribution of both RFP - LifeAct and eGFP - cofilin showed colocalization at every time point of observation . Scale bar : 10 µm . Figure 2 . Live cell imaging of the axonal growth cones ( n = 5 ) . DRG cells were microinjected with a combination of RFP - LifeAct and eGFP - coﬁlin plasmids , and observed for approximately 2 h . Distributional behavior of coﬁlin and actin was observed and analyzed after VEGF application . Both proteins displayed a fast response to the VEGF application , and steadily changed their distributional pattern ( arrows ) . The distribution of both RFP - LifeAct and eGFP - coﬁlin showed colocalization at every time point of observation . Scale bar : 10 µ m . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 6 of 19 Subsequently , we analyzed the growth cones of neurons , which had been microinjected with RFP - LifeAct and S3D - GFP - coﬁlin , a phosphomimetic and therefore constitutively inactive coﬁlin mutant [ 34 ] . After 24 h , both proteins were expressed and distributed within the neurons . While LifeAct was visible throughout the whole neuron , S3D - coﬁlin was mainly found concentrated in the axons and growth cones . After VEGF - stimulation , the microinjected growth cones ( n = 10 ) displayed only small alterations in their motility . The distribution of S3D - coﬁlin was not recognizably altered during the observation period , while the distribution of actin seemed to change . Actin movement was observable , especially near the edges of the growth cone , but it did not result in marked changes of the growth cone morphology , apart from rufﬂing near the membrane ; but no additional protrusions were observed ( Figure 3 ) . These data seemed to suggest a dominant negative effect of S3D - coﬁlin over endogenous wildtype coﬁlin . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 Subsequently , we analyzed the growth cones of neurons , which had been microinjected with RFP - LifeAct and S3D - GFP - cofilin , a phosphomimetic and therefore constitutively inactive cofilin mutant [ 34 ] . After 24 h , both proteins were expressed and distributed within the neurons . While LifeAct was visible throughout the whole neuron , S3D - cofilin was mainly found concentrated in the axons and growth cones . After VEGF - stimulation , the microinjected growth cones ( n = 10 ) displayed only small alterations in their motility . The distribution of S3D - cofilin was not recognizably altered during the observation period , while the distribution of actin seemed to change . Actin movement was observable , especially near the edges of the growth cone , but it did not result in marked changes of the growth cone morphology , apart from ruffling near the membrane ; but no additional protrusions were observed ( Figure 3 ) . These data seemed to suggest a dominant negative effect of S3D - cofilin over endogenous wildtype cofilin . Figure 3 . DRG - cells microinjected with eGFP - cofilin - S3D and RFP - LifeAct were stimulated with VEGF and observed for at least one hour ( n = 10 ) . Stimulated growth cones did not show any significant reaction after stimulation . Other than some ruffling of actin near the edge of the growth cone , there was no actin activity observable . Activity of cofilin - S3D was not observed . Scale bar : 10 µm . Conversely , when phosphorylation of cofilin by LIMK was inhibited by BMS - 5 ( supposedly leading to activation of most endogenous cofilin ) , VEGF - exposed growth cones displayed remarkable changes in shape , characterized by a backward retraction towards the axon shaft . They also displayed remarkable changes in the distribution of both cofilin and actin , dominated by the selective concentration of cofilin in the tip of the growth cone ( Figure 4 ) . Additionally , we observed an increase in the number of filopodia within the first hour of observation by about 2 . 86 - fold ( mean value ) . This effect was observed in 7 of 10 growth cones . The retraction of the growth cone base is characteristic of growth cone collapse , which is presumably due to the unbalanced activation of the F - actin severing Figure 3 . DRG - cells microinjected with eGFP - coﬁlin - S3D and RFP - LifeAct were stimulated with VEGF and observed for at least one hour ( n = 10 ) . Stimulated growth cones did not show any signiﬁcant reaction after stimulation . Other than some rufﬂing of actin near the edge of the growth cone , there was no actin activity observable . Activity of coﬁlin - S3D was not observed . Scale bar : 10 µ m . Conversely , when phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIMK was inhibited by BMS - 5 ( supposedly leading to activation of most endogenous coﬁlin ) , VEGF - exposed growth cones displayed remarkable changes in shape , characterized by a backward retraction towards the axon shaft . They also displayed remarkable changes in the distribution of both coﬁlin and actin , dominated by the selective concentration of coﬁlin in the tip of the growth cone ( Figure 4 ) . Additionally , we observed an increase in Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 7 of 19 the number of ﬁlopodia within the ﬁrst hour of observation by about 2 . 86 - fold ( mean value ) . This effect was observed in 7 of 10 growth cones . The retraction of the growth cone base is characteristic of growth cone collapse , which is presumably due to the unbalanced activation of the F - actin severing activity of coﬁlin , leading to an increased disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Controls showed no alternations in shape and size of the observed growth cones . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 18 activity of cofilin , leading to an increased disassembly of actin filaments . Controls showed no alternations in shape and size of the observed growth cones . Figure 4 . When the activity of LIMK was inhibited by the application of BMS - 5 , growth cones with clear alterations in their shape were observed ( n = 10 ) . The number of filopodia increased ( arrows ) , but there was no noticeable protrusion . The base of the growth cones retracted towards the axonal shaft , which is a sign of repellent growth . Scale bar : 10 µm . 2 . 3 . Analysis of the Distribution of the Arp 2 / 3 - Complex within the Axonal Growth Cone Similarly to cofilin , the distribution of the Arp2 / 3 complex also exhibited a clear response to VEGF stimulation ( Figure 5 ) . Again , growth cones of 3 day old chicken DRG neurons were analyzed . Immunohistochemistry was performed with anti - Arp2 primary antibodies and phalloidin rhodamine . In DRG neurons cultivated in control nutrient medium ( Figure 5a ) or medium supplemented with NGF ( Figure 5b ) , Arp2 / 3 was distributed throughout the whole neuron up to the tip of the growth cone . There was a tight colocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin . Overall , Figure 4 . When the activity of LIMK was inhibited by the application of BMS - 5 , growth cones with clear alterations in their shape were observed ( n = 10 ) . The number of ﬁlopodia increased ( arrows ) , but there was no noticeable protrusion . The base of the growth cones retracted towards the axonal shaft , which is a sign of repellent growth . Scale bar : 10 µ m . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 8 of 19 2 . 3 . Analysis of the Distribution of the Arp 2 / 3 - Complex within the Axonal Growth Cone Similarly to coﬁlin , the distribution of the Arp2 / 3 complex also exhibited a clear response to VEGF stimulation ( Figure 5 ) . Again , growth cones of 3 day old chicken DRG neurons were analyzed . Immunohistochemistry was performed with anti - Arp2 primary antibodies and phalloidin rhodamine . In DRG neurons cultivated in control nutrient medium ( Figure 5a ) or medium supplemented with NGF ( Figure 5b ) , Arp2 / 3 was distributed throughout the whole neuron up to the tip of the growth cone . There was a tight colocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin . Overall , actin was expressed more prominently and distributed up to the outer edges in each examined growth cone . Arp2 / 3 showed a brighter ﬂuorescence in the central domain of the growth cone , but was also visible throughout the whole growth cone . Single growth cones were analyzed at higher magniﬁcations to compare the distribution of Arp2 / 3 with actin . To visualize the Arp2 / 3 complex , we used primary antibodies directed against Arp2 in combination with FITC - conjugated secondary antibodies . Actin was labeled using a phalloidin rhodamine stain . For analysis , the circumference and area of single growth cones were measured . Once again , VEGF enhanced the growth of axonal growth cones ( Figure 5c , f , g ) . VEGF stimulation led to an increase in the circumference and area for both proteins , Arp2 / 3 and actin ( 12 DRG , 50 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 87 . 9 µ m , mean area actin = 57 . 5 µ m 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 81 . 5 µ m , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 54 . 7 µ m 2 ) . Compared to controls , the mean circumference of Arp2 / 3 showed an increase of 69 % , whereas the mean circumference of actin increased by about 74 % . The mean area enlarged by around 100 % for Arp2 / 3 and 115 % for actin compared to controls ( 12 DRG , 52 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 49 . 7 µ m , mean area actin = 26 . 8 µ m 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 47 . 6 µ m , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 26 . 8 µ m 2 ; all conditions p < 0 . 001 ) . Compared to controls , NGF - stimulated growth cones had a mean circumference that was 29 % larger for Arp2 / 3 and 38 % for actin . The mean area increased by around 67 % for Arp2 / 3 and 70 % for actin ( 12 DRG , 50 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 69 . 3 µ m , mean area actin = 46 . 5 µ m 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 62 . 3 µ m , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 45 . 5 µ m 2 ; each condition p < 0 . 001 ) . Thus , the stimulating effect of VEGF was more powerful than that of NGF . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 actin was expressed more prominently and distributed up to the outer edges in each examined growth cone . Arp2 / 3 showed a brighter fluorescence in the central domain of the growth cone , but was also visible throughout the whole growth cone . Single growth cones were analyzed at higher magnifications to compare the distribution of Arp2 / 3 with actin . To visualize the Arp2 / 3 complex , we used primary antibodies directed against Arp2 in combination with FITC - conjugated secondary antibodies . Actin was labeled using a phalloidin rhodamine stain . For analysis , the circumference and area of single growth cones were measured . Once again , VEGF enhanced the growth of axonal growth cones ( Figure 5c , f , g ) . VEGF stimulation led to an increase in the circumference and area for both proteins , Arp2 / 3 and actin ( 12 DRG , 50 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 87 . 9 µm , mean area actin = 57 . 5 µm 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 81 . 5 µm , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 54 . 7 µm 2 ) . Compared to controls , the mean circumference of Arp2 / 3 showed an increase of 69 % , whereas the mean circumference of actin increased by about 74 % . The mean area enlarged by around 100 % for Arp2 / 3 and 115 % for actin compared to controls ( 12 DRG , 52 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 49 . 7 µm , mean area actin = 26 . 8 µm 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 47 . 6 µm , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 26 . 8 µm 2 ; all conditions p < 0 . 001 ) . Compared to controls , NGF - stimulated growth cones had a mean circumference that was 29 % larger for Arp2 / 3 and 38 % for actin . The mean area increased by around 67 % for Arp2 / 3 and 70 % for actin ( 12 DRG , 50 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 69 . 3 µm , mean area actin = 46 . 5 µm 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 62 . 3 µm , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 45 . 5 µm 2 ; each condition p < 0 . 001 ) . Thus , the stimulating effect of VEGF was more powerful than that of NGF . When the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex was blocked by the addition of the N - WASP inhibitor wiskostatin , there was no significant alteration in mean circumference or mean area for either protein compared to control conditions ( Figure 5d – h ) . Neither the growth cones of DRG - neurons in control medium supplemented with wiskostatin , ( Figure 5e ) ( 12 DRG , 52 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 51 . 34 µm , mean area actin = 26 . 21 µm 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 49 . 7 µm , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 26 µm 2 ) nor growth cones in wiskostatin - enriched medium plus NGF and VEGF ( Figure 5f ) ( 12 DRG , 48 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 50 . 6 µm , mean area actin = 27 . 5 µm ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 49 . 5 µm , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 28 . 5 µm 2 ) showed any significant growth activity ( Figure 5f – h ) , demonstrating a clear inhibitory effect of wiskostatin . Figure 5 . Cont . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 9 of 19 Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 Figure 5 . Distributional changes of anti - Arp2 and phalloidin rhodamine , subsequent to the application of NGF , VEGF , or wiskostatin . ( a ) Controls ( n = 52 ) show a congruent distribution pattern of Arp2 ( green ) and actin ( red ) . Arp2 showed a stronger fluorescent level in lamellipodia under every condition examined . Stimulation with NGF ( b ) ( n = 50 ) and additional VEGF ( c ) ( n = 50 ) lead to a highly significant increase in the mean circumference and area in both Arp2 and actin compared to standard conditions ( * * * = p < 0 . 001 ) . After inhibition of Arp2 / 3 - signaling by application of the N - WASP - inhibitor ( d ) wiskostatin under control conditions ( n = 55 ) and after stimulation with VEGF plus NGF ( e ) ( n = 57 ) , the growth cones did not differ significantly from controls . The table ( f ) shows the statistical data for growth cones , stained with anti - Arp2 . The graphs ( g ) show the mean circumference and the mean area ( h ) of the analyzed growth cones . Scale bars = 10 µm . Error bars = SEM . 2 . 4 . VEGF Triggers the Redistribution of Arp2 / 3 and Repels Growth Cones When N - WASP is Inhibited In order to investigate the effect of exposure to VEGF on Arp2 / 3 complex distribution , we added VEGF to neurons microinjected with a vector mixture of RFP - LifeAct and EGFP - p16b , which encodes for green fluorescent protein tagged p16 - Arc , a component of the fully assembled Arp2 / 3 complex . For live cell imaging , pictures were taken every 90 s for at least 90 min , with VEGF being added to the medium shortly before starting image collection . We observed 10 growth cones of 10 different neurons . All observed neurons displayed similar distribution patterns of the proteins . LifeAct was distributed throughout the whole neuron , reaching from the perikaryon up to the outer edges of the growth cone , with a very bright fluorescence signal . By contrast , p16 - Arc was mainly distributed within neurite regions proximal to the perikaryon , with only a weak fluorescent signal . Some neurons also exhibited a weak signal in their growth cones , with p16 - Arc mainly localized within the central region of the growth cone , but also partially in the periphery . When VEGF was added to the nutrient medium , both of the expressed recombinant proteins showed a positive response within minutes , and started to redistribute within the growth cones . The main reaction observed was a shape change of the growth cone with newly formed protrusions , high motility and protrusional movement . The observed reactions were dominated by alterations in the actin distribution , with actin being redistributed all over the growth cones . These changes were also accompanied by distributional alterations of p16 - Arc , which were especially observable in areas of the growth cones showing a strong fluorescent pattern of actin ( Figure 6 ) . Nutrient medium supplemented with wiskostatin were used to analyse growth cones for at least 90 min . VEGF - supplementation then initiated a process which led to a decrease in the mean length of the extensions of growth cones , indicating a repellent behavior . The observed growth cones retracted towards their axonal shafts . Under control conditions , there were no noticeable alternations in shape or motility . Figure 5 . Distributional changes of anti - Arp2 and phalloidin rhodamine , subsequent to the application of NGF , VEGF , or wiskostatin . ( a ) Controls ( n = 52 ) show a congruent distribution pattern of Arp2 ( green ) and actin ( red ) . Arp2 showed a stronger ﬂuorescent level in lamellipodia under every condition examined . Stimulation with NGF ( b ) ( n = 50 ) and additional VEGF ( c ) ( n = 50 ) lead to a highly signiﬁcant increase in the mean circumference and area in both Arp2 and actin compared to standard conditions ( * * * = p < 0 . 001 ) . After inhibition of Arp2 / 3 - signaling by application of the N - WASP - inhibitor ( d ) wiskostatin under control conditions ( n = 55 ) and after stimulation with VEGF plus NGF ( e ) ( n = 57 ) , the growth cones did not differ signiﬁcantly from controls . The table ( f ) shows the statistical data for growth cones , stained with anti - Arp2 . The graphs ( g ) show the mean circumference and the mean area ( h ) of the analyzed growth cones . Scale bars = 10 µ m . Error bars = SEM . When the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex was blocked by the addition of the N - WASP inhibitor wiskostatin , there was no signiﬁcant alteration in mean circumference or mean area for either protein compared to control conditions ( Figure 5d – h ) . Neither the growth cones of DRG - neurons in control medium supplemented with wiskostatin , ( Figure 5e ) ( 12 DRG , 52 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 51 . 34 µ m , mean area actin = 26 . 21 µ m 2 ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 49 . 7 µ m , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 26 µ m 2 ) nor growth cones in wiskostatin - enriched medium plus NGF and VEGF ( Figure 5f ) ( 12 DRG , 48 growth cones ; mean circumference actin = 50 . 6 µ m , mean area actin = 27 . 5 µ m ; mean circumference Arp2 / 3 = 49 . 5 µ m , mean area Arp2 / 3 = 28 . 5 µ m 2 ) showed any signiﬁcant growth activity ( Figure 5f – h ) , demonstrating a clear inhibitory effect of wiskostatin . 2 . 4 . VEGF Triggers the Redistribution of Arp2 / 3 and Repels Growth Cones When N - WASP is Inhibited In order to investigate the effect of exposure to VEGF on Arp2 / 3 complex distribution , we added VEGF to neurons microinjected with a vector mixture of RFP - LifeAct and EGFP - p16b , which encodes for green ﬂuorescent protein tagged p16 - Arc , a component of the fully assembled Arp2 / 3 complex . For live cell imaging , pictures were taken every 90 s for at least 90 min , with VEGF being added to the medium shortly before starting image collection . We observed 10 growth cones of 10 different neurons . All observed neurons displayed similar distribution patterns of the proteins . LifeAct was distributed throughout the whole neuron , reaching from the perikaryon up to the outer edges of the growth cone , with a very bright ﬂuorescence signal . By contrast , p16 - Arc was mainly distributed within neurite regions proximal to the perikaryon , with only a weak ﬂuorescent signal . Some neurons also exhibited a weak signal in their growth cones , with p16 - Arc mainly localized within the central region of the growth cone , but also partially in the periphery . When VEGF was added to the nutrient medium , both of the expressed recombinant proteins showed a positive response within minutes , and started to redistribute within the growth cones . The main reaction observed was a shape change of the growth cone with newly formed protrusions , high motility and protrusional movement . The observed reactions were dominated by alterations in the actin distribution , with actin being redistributed all over the growth cones . These changes were also accompanied by distributional alterations of p16 - Arc , which were especially observable in areas of the growth cones showing a strong ﬂuorescent pattern of actin ( Figure 6 ) . Nutrient medium supplemented Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 10 of 19 with wiskostatin were used to analyse growth cones for at least 90 min . VEGF - supplementation then initiated a process which led to a decrease in the mean length of the extensions of growth cones , indicating a repellent behavior . The observed growth cones retracted towards their axonal shafts . Under control conditions , there were no noticeable alternations in shape or motility . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 Figure 6 . Live cell imaging of the axonal growth cones . DRG - cells were microinjected with a combination of RFP - LifeAct and eGFP - p16b plasmids and observed for approximately 2 h ( n = 10 ) . Distributional behavior of p16 - Arc and actin was observed and analyzed after VEGF application . Both proteins showed a fast response to the VEGF application , and steadily changed their distributional pattern . P16 - Arc predominantly aggregated in lamellipodia , but it was also detected in filopodia ( arrows ) . The distributional changes of both proteins were congruent , with a tight colocalization . Scale bar : 10 µm . 3 . Discussion VEGF is a growth factor most commonly associated with its prominent roles in vasculogenesis , however , recently it has been shown to be involved also in the development of the nervous system . Likewise , as a prominent player in neurodevelopment , VEGF also plays a critical role in neurodegeneration ( reviewed in [ 35 ] ) . More specifically , it has been implicated in motor neuron survival via VEGFR - 2 signaling , making this particular pathway of interest to therapy developments Figure 6 . Live cell imaging of the axonal growth cones . DRG - cells were microinjected with a combination of RFP - LifeAct and eGFP - p16b plasmids and observed for approximately 2 h ( n = 10 ) . Distributional behavior of p16 - Arc and actin was observed and analyzed after VEGF application . Both proteins showed a fast response to the VEGF application , and steadily changed their distributional pattern . P16 - Arc predominantly aggregated in lamellipodia , but it was also detected in ﬁlopodia ( arrows ) . The distributional changes of both proteins were congruent , with a tight colocalization . Scale bar : 10 µ m . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 11 of 19 3 . Discussion VEGF is a growth factor most commonly associated with its prominent roles in vasculogenesis , however , recently it has been shown to be involved also in the development of the nervous system . Likewise , as a prominent player in neurodevelopment , VEGF also plays a critical role in neurodegeneration ( reviewed in [ 35 ] ) . More speciﬁcally , it has been implicated in motor neuron survival via VEGFR - 2 signaling , making this particular pathway of interest to therapy developments of motor neuron diseases [ 36 ] . Previous morphological analyses showed that it has a direct effect on growth cone motility and size of chicken DRG [ 29 ] . These data revealed that VEGF increases growth cone motility in a fashion similar to NGF , and both showed an additive effect when combined . Upon VEGF stimulation , clear changes in the actin cytoskeleton organization have been reported along with a redistribution of actin binding proteins , namely of coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 complex [ 21 ] . Here , we analyzed the cytoskeletal reorganization and actin dynamics in greater detail by studying known signaling pathways leading to coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 complex after VEGF stimulation . 3 . 1 . VEGF Triggers a Change in the Distribution of Coﬁlin in a LIMK - Dependent Pathway Our live cell imaging experiments showed that VEGF stimulation triggered rapid cytoskeleton rearrangement , along with an increase in growth cone motility and growth rate . Actin and coﬁlin distribution was coherently affected , as seen by their tight colocalization in immunostaining experiments and live cell imaging of growth cones after VEGF addition . Coﬁlin is known to be activated by low pH [ 37 ] , capping proteins [ 38 ] , binding of the 14 - 3 - 3 protein [ 39 ] , phosphatidylinositol [ 40 ] , and nitric oxide [ 41 ] , but the main regulatory mechanism of its activity appears to be the phosphorylation of Ser3 by LIMK , leading to its inactivation [ 42 , 43 ] , whereas dephosphorylation by slingshot protein family members activate it [ 44 ] . In mammals , coﬁlin exists as two variants in addition to ADF : the non - muscle coﬁlin - 1 , and in muscle tissue , coﬁlin - 2 [ 45 ] . Chicken tissues also contain an ADF variant , although only one coﬁlin form is expressed , which is closer to mammalian coﬁlin - 2 , but shows 80 % identity to coﬁlin - 1 [ 46 , 47 ] . The biological activities of mammalian and avian coﬁlin are , however , fully comparable [ 46 ] . Like in mammals , avian coﬁlin is regulated by phosphorylation at serine - 3 by an avian LIMK isoform [ 48 ] . Here , we analyzed the effect of an alteration of the state of phosphorylation of coﬁlin by inhibition of LIMK , and additionally by transfection of the constitutively inactive , phosphomimetic S3D - coﬁlin mutant tagged with GFP [ 49 ] on growth cone behavior after VEGF stimulation . The described transfection experiments led to the expression of non - muscle human coﬁlin - 1 in chicken DRG neurons . Due to the high sequence identity and functional similarity of mammalian and avian coﬁlin , we are conﬁdent that the reported results are not caused by a functional speciﬁcity of the mammalian coﬁlin . Instead , we believe that they represent a general aspect of coﬁlin actions in DRG . The LIM protein kinase family are well known negative regulators of coﬁlin via phosphorylation , with LIMK1 being highly expressed in neuronal tissue [ 50 ] . It has been shown that LIMK overexpression results in a reduced growth cone motility , but also in a compensatory slingshot upregulation to increase the rate of dephosphorylation , and thus increase ( or restore ) growth cone motility [ 48 ] . BMS - 5 is a potent inhibitor of both LIMK1 and LIMK2 , the two most common proteins of the LIMK family [ 51 ] . Inhibition of LIMK , and thus inhibition of coﬁlin phosphorylation , showed no effect on unstimulated control cells in an immunohistochemical analysis . However , when the same experiments were performed in the presence of VEGF , LIMK inhibition via BMS - 5 resulted in smaller growth cones with fewer extensions . This apparently inconsistent result might be explained by a complete activation of coﬁlin with a subsequent increase in the total F - actin disassembly capacity . Similarly , transfection of S3D - coﬁlin led to a reduction in growth cone activity . The mechanism of this apparently dominant negative effect cannot be explained by a competition for actin , because the S3D - coﬁlin mutant possesses a reduced actin binding capacity [ 52 ] . One speculative explanation could be the existence of inhibitory binding to the dephosphorylating slingshot protein , that could lead to the complete inactivation of the endogenous coﬁlin as an additional consequence . Of note , Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 12 of 19 the inhibitory effect of S3D - coﬁlin of growth cone morphology and motility described here is , to our knowledge , the ﬁrst clear description of a negative effect of this phosphomimetic coﬁlin mutant . Live cell imaging of growth cones expressing constitutively inactive coﬁlin ( ﬂuorescent S3D - coﬁlin ) revealed that a combination of VEGF and BMS - 5 reduced the mean size and number of extensions of growth cones below the level of controls . To investigate this effect further , growth cones were exposed to gradients of VEGF in the presence of BMS - 5 . This resulted in the dramatic effect of growth cone collapse and retraction within minutes . This result suggests that VEGF plays a dual role as both a chemoattractant , and under speciﬁc conditions , a chemorepellent . This dual - role effect can be seen in other canonical neurotrophic factors , such as sema3a , which causes growth cone collapse via the LIMK pathway , as seen by a reduction in repulsive ability when LIMK is inhibited [ 51 ] . Another example is BMP7 ( bone morphogenic protein 7 ) , which can induce either phosphorylation or dephosphorylation of coﬁlin , and has been shown to attract growth cones in a LIMK - dependent manner in Xenopus spinal neurons [ 53 ] . This dual - role hypothesis is supported by a phosphocycling model of coﬁlin , as seen in experiments showing the phosphorylated - to - dephosphorylated ratio of coﬁlin being stable even after stimulation [ 54 ] . To conclude , VEGF - stimulated growth cones with inhibited coﬁlin ( S3D - coﬁlin ) still show a negative effect , even when LIMK is also inhibited via BMS - 5 . Upon exposure to a VEGF gradient , a repulsive phenotype was uncovered in this conﬁguration , which contrasts its characteristic chemoattractive role . 3 . 2 . VEGF Triggers the Distribution of the Arp2 / 3 Complex within the Growth Cone in an N - WASP Dependent Pathway Immunohistochemical experiments revealed that after VEGF stimulation , growth cones had a larger circumference and area versus not only controls , but even NGF - stimulated neurons as well . This also indicates a possible increase in motility based on the correlation between growth cone size and motility [ 55 ] . On a molecular level , this could be explained by VEGF having a positive effect on the co - distribution of Arp2 / 3 and actin in the growth cone . Here , Arp2 / 3 is indispensable for directed growth [ 19 , 56 ] , and thought to additionally act by coupling membrane proteins to the extracellular matrix after binding to vinculin [ 57 ] . When we exposed growth cones injected with RFP - LifeAct and EGFP - p16b ( a component of the full Arp2 / 3 complex ) to VEGF , we observed , after two hours , a higher Arp2 / 3 concentration in their central region as compared to the peripheral area . This possibly results in axonal growth due to in an increased actin branching in lamellipodia , leading to increased ﬁlopodia formation [ 14 ] as seen by live cell imaging . The function of these ﬁlopodia will most probably be the exploration of the surrounding environment , and subsequent initiation of growth cone migration . Due to the high speed of Arp2 / 3 redistribution after VEGF stimulation , we hypothesize that VEGF affects Arp2 / 3 within the growth cone itself . To investigate how VEGF inﬂuences Arp2 / 3 on a molecular level , we ﬁrst tested an upstream regulator of Arp2 / 3 , namely N - WASP , by inhibiting it with wiskostatin . The inhibition of Arp2 / 3 had no effect on de novo ﬁlopodia formation or lamellipodia protrusion , however , it had a minimal effect on actin organization . Growth cones with inhibited Arp2 / 3 were comparable to controls , however , inhibited growth cones which were then stimulated with VEGF could be seen to have fewer extensions . Labelling actin and Arp2 / 3 via ﬂuorescent proteins ( LifeAct / EGFP - p16b ) showed a loss in motility , retracting ﬁlopodia , and subsequent growth cone collapse after stimulation with VEGF . VEGF - driven growth cone progression is easily disrupted by interfering with even just one of the actin - supporting proteins . To elucidate the repelling effect of N - WASP inhibited growth cones , the proteins involved in Arp2 / 3 regulation identiﬁed so far , such as the WAVE protein family , along with Nck - interacting and Src - kinases , which are involved in Arp2 / 3 regulation via phosphorylation [ 58 ] , will be further analyzed in future studies . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 13 of 19 4 . Materials and Methods 4 . 1 . Immunohistochemistry and Evaluation of Morphology 4 . 1 . 1 . DRG Explants The animals employed were treated according to the tenets of the Helsinki agreement and its guiding principles for the care and use of animals ( DHEW Publication , NIH 80 - 23 ) . Explanted DRG cells of 10 day old chicken embryos were isolated as described earlier [ 30 ] . In brief , after preparation of the nervous tissue , the connective tissue was removed , and each DRG was cultured in nutrient medium on a glass coverslip ( ø 32 mm , Kindler , 02R321 - D , Freiburg , Germany ) coated with type I rat tail collagen . The coverslips were transferred into double coverslip Maximov slides , and incubated for 3 days in a CO 2 incubator ( 5 % CO 2 , 37 ◦ C , 90 % humidity ) . The nutrient medium consists of minimum essential medium ( MEM , Sigma - Aldrich , M2279 , Darmstadt , Germany ) , supplemented with 10 % horse serum ( HS , Biochrom , Berlin , Germany , Product No . S9135 ) , 2 mM L - glutamine ( Sigma - Aldrich , G7513 , Darmstadt , Germany ) , 2 % chicken embryonic extract , and 0 . 1 % gentamicin ( Sigma - Aldrich , G1397 , Darmstadt , Germany ) . The cells were either incubated with the pure nutrient medium ( control group ) or with medium enriched with 50 ng / mL nerve growth factor - 7S ( NGF group ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , N0513 , Darmstadt , Germany ) or mouse VEGF - 165 ( VEGF group ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , V4512 , Darmstadt , Germany ) in a concentration of 0 . 1 µ g / mL [ 22 , 29 , 30 ] . Additionally , VEGF plus NGF - enriched medium was supplemented with BMS - 5 ( BMS - 5 + NGF + VEGF group ) ( Synkinase , SYN - 1024 , San Diego , CA , USA ) in a concentration of 10 µ M [ 59 ] or wiskostatin ( wiskostatin + NGF + VEGF group ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , W2270 , Darmstadt , Germany ) in a concentration of 6 µ M [ 60 ] . For controls , we also supplemented the pure nutrient with BMS - 5 ( BMS - 5 group ) or wiskostatin ( wiskostatin group ) . After 3 days of in vitro incubation , explants were ﬁxed . 4 . 1 . 2 . Immunohistochemistry DRG explants were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min and permeabilized with 0 . 015 % Triton - X - 100 in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) for 5 min . After three washing steps with PBS , non - speciﬁc binding sites were blocked by incubation for 30 min with 2 % ( w / v ) goat serum in PBS ( Sigma - Aldrich , G9023 , Darmstadt , Germany ) . Explants were again washed in PBS three times , and were incubated either with anti - coﬁlin [ 34 ] ( 1 : 100 in PBS ) or anti - Arp2 ( 1 : 100 in PBS , Cell signaling technology , 3128S , Frankfurt am Main , Germany ) overnight at 4 ◦ C . The samples were then incubated with the secondary FITC - conjugated antibody ( goat anti - rabbit IgG , Sigma - Aldrich ; F6005 , Darmstadt , Germany ) diluted to 1 : 200 in PBS for two hours at room temperature . To label actin , cells were ﬁnally treated with phalloidin rhodamine ( 1 : 20 in PBS , Sigma - Aldrich , P1951 , Darmstadt , Germany ) for 30 min . Finally , cell cultures were rinsed in PBS and coverslipped in mounting medium ( Dako , S302380 - 2 , Agilent , Santa Clara , CA , USA ) . 4 . 1 . 3 . Analysis of Growth Cone Morphology The morphology of the growth cones was analyzed after cultivating DRG - explants for 3 days under different in vitro conditions . The areas and circumferences of 549 growth cones were analyzed by confocal laser scanning microscopy ( Zeiss LSM 510 Meta , Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) in combination with a Zeiss 63 × oil immersion lens ( Plan - Apocromat , NA 1 . 4 ) . In total , growth cones were analyzed under 10 different conditions of at least 10 DRG explants , resulting in the analysis of at least 48 growth cones for each condition . Measurements were obtained with physiology software ( LSM image browser , Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) . Statistical analyses were performed with the Statistica software ( Release 12 , Statsoft , Oklahoma , USA ) . We utilized a one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) and an additional post hoc analysis ( Scheffe test ) to compare the growth cone parameters of control , stimulated , or inhibited cells . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 14 of 19 4 . 2 . Live Cell Imaging 4 . 2 . 1 . Dissociated DRG Cell Cultures Dissociated cell cultures of DRG neurons were obtained as previously described [ 30 ] . Brieﬂy , DRG from 10 days old chicken embryos were dissected in Hanks’ balanced salts solution . DRG cells of 8 – 12 chicken embryos were explanted for coating and cultivation of 4 – 6 coverslips . We transferred the DRG into prewarmed ( 37 ◦ C ) dissociation medium ( 0 . 05 % trypsin ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc , Invitrogen , 25050 , Schwerte , Germany ) , 1 : 250 in calcium - magnesium - free saline , CMF ) and then stirred with a Teﬂon - covered magnetic stirring bar . After 5 min of agitation , the supernatant containing the dissociated cells was transferred into a centrifuge tube containing 20 mL minimal essential medium ( Sigma - Aldrich , MO , USA , product No . M2279 ) and 10 % horse serum ( Biochrom , Berlin , Germany , product No . S9135 ) to block trypsination , supplemented with 2 mM L - glutamine ( Sigma - Aldrich , G7513 , Darmstadt , Germany ) , and 0 . 1 % gentamicin ( Sigma - Aldrich , G1397 , Darmstadt , Germany ) or penicillin ( 1000 unit / mL ) . After the addition of fresh trypsin solution ( 37 ◦ C ) , the remaining DRG material was gently stirred for an additional 5 min , before again transferring the supernatant into the prepared tube . This procedure was repeated 4 times over a total of 20 min . Thereafter , the suspension containing the collected cells in horse serum - enriched medium was centrifuged for 10 min at 2400 × g . The pelleted cells were resuspended in 4 mL fresh nutrient ganglion medium , consisting of minimal essential medium containing 10 % horse serum , 6 % glucose , 1 % chicken embryo extract , 2 mM L - glutamine , 50 ng / mL nerve growth factor - 7S ( Sigma - Aldrich , N0513 , Darmstadt , Germany ) , and 0 . 1 % gentamicin . Aliquots of 350 µ L ( ~ 1 × 10 5 cells / mL ) of the cell suspension were cultured on glass coverslips ( ø 32 mm , Kindler , 02R321 - D , Freiburg , Germany , ) for up to 5 days in a CO 2 incubator ( 5 % CO 2 , 37 ◦ C , 90 % humidity ) . Before cultivation , the glass coverslips were coated with type I rat tail collagen ( Sigma - Aldrich , C7661 , Darmstadt , Germany ) in 0 . 1 % acetic acid ( Sigma - Aldrich , A6283 , Darmstadt , Germany ) , and left to dry . 4 . 2 . 2 . Microinjection The insertion of plasmids into single neurons of dissociated DRG cultures was performed as described before [ 34 ] . In brief , sterile glass capillaries ( ø 0 . 2 – 0 . 5 µ m , Femtotips , Eppendorf , Hamburg Germany ) were backﬁlled with 2 µ L of vector suspension in distilled water . Microinjection was performed under visual control using an inverse microscope equipped with phase - contrast optics ( Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) . The pressure injection tool ( Eppendorf , Hamburg , Germany ) generated a pressure increase of 15 – 30 hPa over 0 . 2 s , and maintained a constant pressure of 5 – 15 hPa on the tip before injection was performed ( p c : 5 – 15 hPa , p i : 15 – 30 hPa , t i : 0 . 2 s ) . To maintain acceptable conditions for the cells , cultures were kept on a heatable stage ( 37 ◦ C ) during injection . The post - injection time of 24 – 48 h in a CO 2 incubator ( 37 ◦ C ; 5 % CO 2 ; humidity : 90 % ) was sufﬁcient for protein expression and detection of their distribution within the DRG cells . To analyze colocalization of actin with different actin binding proteins , we used vector combinations of pLifeAct - TagRFP ( LifeAct , Ibidi , 60102 , Martinsried , Germany ) with either EGFP - wt - coﬁlin - 1 , EGFP - S3D - coﬁlin - 1 ( New England Biolabs , Frankfurt , Germany ) [ 34 ] or EGFP - p16b [ 61 ] , each suspended in distilled water . The properties of the coﬁlin vectors have been described previously [ 49 ] . In essence , the coﬁlin encoded was the wildtype human non - muscle coﬁlin - 1 and its S3D - mutant both tagged at their N - terminus with EGFP , which had been employed previously in transfection experiments of mammalian cells [ 49 ] ( see also Discussion ) . 4 . 2 . 3 . Live Cell Imaging with the Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope After 24 – 48 h , the microinjected DRG were analyzed by time - lapse imaging with the aid of confocal laser scanning microscopy ( CLSM , Zeiss LSM 510 Meta ) . To get the best imaging results , we employed a Rose - chamber , a LD - C - Apochromat 40 × water immersion lens ( Plan - Neoﬂuar , NA 1 . 1 ) , and Tempcontrol ( Carl Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) to maintain a steady medium temperature for Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 15 of 19 many hours [ 33 ] . For comparing the motility rate after adding different factors , nutrient medium was replaced immediately before starting live cell imaging . Single growth cones were observed for approximately 2 h in intervals of 60 – 90 s . To avoid bleaching and cytotoxic effects , low laser power was used . 5 . Conclusions From our experiments , we can conclude that VEGF stimulates coﬁlin within the growth cone , and that growth cones with constitutively inactive coﬁlin do not grow upon VEGF stimulation . Furthermore , we have shown that LIMK is involved in downstream VEGF growth cone stimulation . Additionally , disrupting LIMK - dependent coﬁlin signaling results in repulsive growth , however , after longer cultivation , these growth cones look comparable to unstimulated controls . With regards to Arp2 / 3 regulation , activation due to VEGF stimulation depends on N - WASP within the growth cone . This mainly occurs within the lamellipodia , where Arp2 / 3 helps to form new actin branches . Finally , inhibiting N - WASP reduces ﬁlopodia size , and causes growth cones to retract upon VEGF stimulation ( Figure 7 ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 18 Figure 7 . VEGF increases growth cone motility and the growth rate by signaling through VEGFR - 2 . Cdc42 phosphorylates N - WASP , resulting in the activation of ARP2 / 3 . Activated Arp2 / 3 can bind actin , initiating polymerization and branching . Inhibition of N - WASP via wiskostatin prevents the activation of Arp2 / 3 , and thus also G - actin polymerization to F - actin . VEGF signaling via Cdc42 also activates LIMK , which inactivates cofilin , preventing the fragmentation of F - actin into G - actin . BMS - 5 inhibits LIMK , shifting the equilibrium away from Ssh - 1 , resulting in more active cofilin . Arrows in blue indicate a positive impact on axonal growth , whereas red arrows indicate a repulsive effect . Acknowledgments : Matthias Schlau especially thanks the Heinrich und Alma Vogelsang - Stiftung for financial support with a graduation scholarship . The authors thank Prof . Klemens Rottner ( Braunschweig ) for providing eGFP - p16 and further acknowledge Claudia Grzelak , Stephanie Wenderdel and Anke Lodwig for their excellent technical assistance , and Aja Lenz for secretarial work . Hans Georg Mannherz thanks the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for continuous support . The graphical abstract contains components by Servier and is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3 . 0 Unported License ( https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) . Author Contributions : Matthias Schlau , Daniel Terheyden - Keighley and Carsten Theiss conducted the experiments and analysis . Matthias Schlau and Daniel Terheyden - Keighley contributed equally to the experimental workload ( joint first authors ) . Verena Theis , Hans Georg Mannherz and Carsten Theiss contributed to the concept and design of this study . The paper was written by all authors . Conflicts of Interest : The authors declare no conflict of interests . References 1 . Dent , E . W . ; Gertler , F . B . Cytoskeletal dynamics and transport in growth cone motility and axon guidance . Neuron 2003 , 40 , 209 – 227 . 2 . Lowery , L . A . ; van Vactor , D . The trip of the tip : Understanding the growth cone machinery . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2009 , 10 , 332 – 343 . 3 . Wegner , A . Treadmilling of actin at physiological salt concentrations . An analysis of the critical concentrations of actin filaments . J . Mol . Biol . 1982 , 161 , 607 – 615 . 4 . Dominguez , R . Actin filament nucleation and elongation factors—Structure - function relationships . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 2009 , 44 , 351 – 366 . 5 . Machesky , L . M . ; Atkinson , S . J . ; Ampe , C . ; Vandekerckhove , J . ; Pollard , T . D . Purification of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by affinity chromatography on profilin - agarose . J . Cell Biol . 1994 , 127 , 107 – 115 . Figure 7 . VEGF increases growth cone motility and the growth rate by signaling through VEGFR - 2 . Cdc42 phosphorylates N - WASP , resulting in the activation of ARP2 / 3 . Activated Arp2 / 3 can bind actin , initiating polymerization and branching . Inhibition of N - WASP via wiskostatin prevents the activation of Arp2 / 3 , and thus also G - actin polymerization to F - actin . VEGF signaling via Cdc42 also activates LIMK , which inactivates coﬁlin , preventing the fragmentation of F - actin into G - actin . BMS - 5 inhibits LIMK , shifting the equilibrium away from Ssh - 1 , resulting in more active coﬁlin . Arrows in blue indicate a positive impact on axonal growth , whereas red arrows indicate a repulsive effect . Acknowledgments : Matthias Schlau especially thanks the Heinrich und Alma Vogelsang - Stiftung for ﬁnancial support with a graduation scholarship . The authors thank Prof . Klemens Rottner ( Braunschweig ) for providing eGFP - p16 and further acknowledge Claudia Grzelak , Stephanie Wenderdel and Anke Lodwig for their excellent technical assistance , and Aja Lenz for secretarial work . Hans Georg Mannherz thanks the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for continuous support . The graphical abstract contains components by Servier and is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3 . 0 Unported License ( https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 / ) . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 16 of 19 Author Contributions : Matthias Schlau , Daniel Terheyden - Keighley and Carsten Theiss conducted the experiments and analysis . Matthias Schlau and Daniel Terheyden - Keighley contributed equally to the experimental workload ( joint ﬁrst authors ) . Verena Theis , Hans Georg Mannherz and Carsten Theiss contributed to the concept and design of this study . The paper was written by all authors . Conﬂicts of Interest : The authors declare no conﬂict of interests . References 1 . Dent , E . W . ; Gertler , F . B . Cytoskeletal dynamics and transport in growth cone motility and axon guidance . Neuron 2003 , 40 , 209 – 227 . [ CrossRef ] 2 . Lowery , L . A . ; van Vactor , D . The trip of the tip : Understanding the growth cone machinery . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2009 , 10 , 332 – 343 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 3 . Wegner , A . Treadmilling of actin at physiological salt concentrations . An analysis of the critical concentrations of actin ﬁlaments . J . Mol . Biol . 1982 , 161 , 607 – 615 . [ CrossRef ] 4 . Dominguez , R . Actin ﬁlament nucleation and elongation factors—Structure - function relationships . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 2009 , 44 , 351 – 366 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 5 . Machesky , L . M . ; Atkinson , S . J . ; Ampe , C . ; Vandekerckhove , J . ; Pollard , T . D . Puriﬁcation of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by afﬁnity chromatography on proﬁlin - agarose . J . Cell Biol . 1994 , 127 , 107 – 115 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 6 . Machesky , L . M . ; Insall , R . H . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 1998 , 8 , 1347 – 1356 . [ CrossRef ] 7 . Wear , M . A . ; Schafer , D . A . ; Cooper , J . A . Actin dynamics : Assembly and disassembly of actin networks . Curr . Biol . 2000 , 10 , R891 – R895 . [ CrossRef ] 8 . Machesky , L . M . ; Mullins , R . D . ; Higgs , H . N . ; Kaiser , D . A . ; Blanchoin , L . ; May , R . C . ; Hall , M . E . ; Pollard , T . D . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin ﬁlaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 1999 , 96 , 3739 – 3744 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 9 . Rohatgi , R . ; Ma , L . ; Miki , H . ; Lopez , M . ; Kirchhausen , T . ; Takenawa , T . ; Kirschner , M . W . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 1999 , 97 , 221 – 231 . [ CrossRef ] 10 . Brown , J . A . ; Bridgman , P . C . Disruption of the cytoskeleton during Semaphorin 3A induced growth cone collapse correlates with differences in actin organization and associated binding proteins . Dev . Neurobiol . 2009 , 69 , 633 – 646 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 11 . Andrianantoandro , E . ; Pollard , T . D . Mechanism of Actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell . 2006 , 24 , 13 – 23 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 12 . Sun , H . Q . ; Kwiatkowska , K . ; Yin , H . L . Actin monomer binding proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 1995 , 7 , 102 – 110 . [ CrossRef ] 13 . Cooper , J . A . ; Schafer , D . A . Control of actin assembly and disassembly at ﬁlament ends . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 2000 , 12 , 97 – 103 . [ CrossRef ] 14 . Svitkina , T . M . ; Borisy , G . G . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 1999 , 145 , 1009 – 1026 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 15 . Al Haj , A . ; Mazur , A . J . ; Buchmeier , S . ; App , C . ; Theiss , C . ; Jokusch , B . M . ; Hannappel , E . ; Weeds , A . G . ; Mannherz , H . G . Thymosin β 4 inhibits ADF / coﬁlin stimulated F - actin dycling and cell migration : Reversal by Arp2 / 3 complex . Cytoskeleton 2014 , 71 , 95 – 107 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 16 . Sarmiere , P . D . ; Bamburg , J . R . Regulation of the neuronal actin cytoskeleton by ADF / coﬁlin . J . Neurobiol . 2004 , 58 , 103 – 117 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 17 . Endo , M . ; Ohashi , K . ; Sasaki , Y . ; Goshima , Y . ; Niwa , R . ; Uemura , T . ; Mizuno , K . Control of growth cone motility and morphology by LIM kinase and Slingshot via phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of coﬁlin . J . Neurosci . 2003 , 23 , 2527 – 2537 . [ PubMed ] 18 . Marsick , B . M . ; Flynn , K . C . ; Santiago - Medina , M . ; Bamburg , J . R . ; Letourneau , P . C . Activation of ADF / coﬁlin mediates attractive growth cone turning toward nerve growth factor and netrin - 1 . Dev . Neurobiol . 2010 , 70 , 565 – 588 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 17 of 19 19 . Chai , X . ; Zhao , S . ; Fan , L . ; Zhang , W . ; Lu , X . ; Shao , H . ; Wang , S . ; Song , L . ; Failla , A . V . ; Zobiak , B . ; et al . Reelin and coﬁlin cooperate during the migration of cortical neurons : A quantitative morphological analysis . Development 2016 , 143 , 1029 – 1040 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 20 . Senger , D . R . ; Galli , S . J . ; Dvorak , A . M . ; Perruzzi , C . A . ; Harvey , V . S . ; Dvorak , H . F . Tumor cells secrete a vascular permeability factor that promotes accumulation of ascites ﬂuid . Science 1983 , 219 , 983 – 985 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 21 . Dumpich , M . ; Mannherz , H . G . ; Theiss , C . VEGF Signaling Regulates Coﬁlin and the Arp2 / 3 - complex within the Axonal Growth Cone . Curr . Neurovasc . Res . 2015 , 12 , 293 – 307 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 22 . Sondell , M . ; Lundborg , G . ; Kanje , M . Vascular endothelial growth factor has neurotrophic activity and stimulates axonal outgrowth , enhancing cell survival and Schwann cell proliferation in the peripheral nervous system . J . Neurosci . 1999 , 19 , 5731 – 5740 . [ PubMed ] 23 . Sondell , M . ; Sundler , F . ; Kanje , M . Vascular endothelial growth factor is a neurotrophic factor which stimulates axonal outgrowth through the ﬂk - 1 receptor . Eur . J . Neurosci . 2000 , 12 , 4243 – 4254 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 24 . Sondell , M . ; Lundborg , G . ; Kanje , M . Vascular endothelial growth factor stimulates Schwann cell invasion and neovascularization of acellular nerve grafts . Brain Res . 1999 , 846 , 219 – 228 . [ CrossRef ] 25 . Hayakawa , K . ; Pham , L . D . ; Som , A . T . ; Lee , B . J . ; Guo , S . ; Lo , E . H . ; Arai , K . Vascular endothelial growth factor regulates the migration of oligodendrocyte precursor cells . J . Neurosci . 2011 , 31 , 10666 – 10670 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 26 . Cao , L . ; Jiao , X . ; Zuzga , D . S . ; Liu , Y . ; Fong , D . M . ; Young , D . ; During , M . J . VEGF links hippocampal activity with neurogenesis , learning and memory . Nat . Genet . 2004 , 36 , 827 – 835 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 27 . Erskine , L . ; Reijntjes , S . ; Pratt , T . ; Denti , L . ; Schwarz , Q . ; Vieira , J . M . ; Alakakone , B . ; Shewan , D . ; Ruhrberg , C . VEGF signaling through neuropilin 1 guides commissural axon crossing at the optic chiasm . Neuron 2011 , 70 , 951 – 965 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 28 . de Almodovar , C . R . ; Fabre , P . J . ; Knevels , E . ; Coulon , C . ; Segura , I . ; Haddick , P . C . ; Aerts , L . ; Delattin , N . ; Strasser , G . ; Oh , W . J . ; et al . VEGF mediates commissural axon chemoattraction through its receptor Flk1 . Neuron 2011 , 70 , 966 – 978 . 29 . Olbrich , L . ; Foehring , D . ; Happel , P . ; Brand - Saberi , B . ; Theiss , C . Fast rearrangement of the neuronal growth cone’s actin cytoskeleton following VEGF stimulation . Histochem . Cell Biol . 2013 , 139 , 431 – 445 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 30 . Foehring , D . ; Brand - Saberi , B . ; Theiss , C . VEGF - induced growth cone enhancement is diminished by inhibiting tyrosine - residue 1214 of VEGFR - 2 . Cells Tissues Organs 2012 , 196 , 195 – 205 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 31 . Lamalice , L . ; Houle , F . ; Jourdan , G . ; Huot , J . Phosphorylation of tyrosine 1214 on VEGFR2 is required for VEGF - induced activation of Cdc42 upstream of SAPK2 / p38 . Oncogene 2004 , 23 , 434 – 445 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 32 . Nobes , C . D . ; Hall , A . Rho , Rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell 1995 , 81 , 53 – 62 . [ CrossRef ] 33 . Masyuk , M . ; Morosan - Puopolo , G . ; Brand - Saberi , B . ; Theiss , C . Combination of in ovo electroporation and time - lapse imaging to study migrational events in chicken embryos . Dev . Dyn . 2014 , 243 , 690 – 698 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 34 . Theiss , C . ; Napirei , M . ; Meller , K . Impairment of anterograde and retrograde neuroﬁlament transport after anti - kinesin and anti - dynein antibody microinjection in chicken dorsal root ganglia . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 2005 , 84 , 29 – 43 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 35 . Storkebaum , E . ; Carmeliet , P . VEGF : A critical player in neurodegeneration . J . Clin . Investig . 2004 , 113 , 14 – 18 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 36 . Oosthuyse , B . ; Moons , L . ; Storkebaum , E . ; Beck , H . ; Nuyens , D . ; Brusselmans , K . ; van Dorpe , J . ; Hellings , P . ; Gorselink , M . ; Heymans , S . ; et al . Deletion of the hypoxia - response element in the vascular endothelial growth factor promoter causes motor neuron degeneration . Nat . Genet . 2001 , 28 , 131 – 138 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 37 . Bernstein , B . W . ; Painter , W . B . ; Chen , H . ; Minamide , L . S . ; Abe , H . ; Bamburg , J . R . Intracellular pH modulation of ADF / coﬁlin proteins . Cell Motil . Cytoskelet . 2000 , 47 , 319 – 336 . [ CrossRef ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 18 of 19 38 . Ressad , F . ; Didry , D . ; Egile , C . ; Pantaloni , D . ; Carlier , M . F . Control of actin ﬁlament length and turnover by actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) in the presence of capping proteins and ARP2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 1999 , 274 , 20970 – 20976 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 39 . Gohla , A . ; Bokoch , G . M . 14 - 3 - 3 regulates actin dynamics by stabilizing phosphorylated coﬁlin . Curr . Biol . 2002 , 12 , 1704 – 1710 . [ CrossRef ] 40 . Yonezawa , N . ; Homma , Y . ; Yahara , I . ; Sakai , H . ; Nishida , E . A short sequence responsible for both phosphoinositide binding and actin binding activities of coﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 1991 , 266 , 17218 – 17221 . [ PubMed ] 41 . Zhang , H . H . ; Wang , W . ; Feng , L . ; Yang , Y . ; Zheng , J . ; Huang , L . ; Chen , D . B . S - nitrosylation of Coﬁlin - 1 Serves as a Novel Pathway for VEGF - Stimulated Endothelial Cell Migration . J . Cell . Physiol . 2014 , 230 , 406 – 417 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 42 . Morgan , T . E . ; Lockerbie , R . O . ; Minamide , L . S . ; Browning , M . D . ; Bamburg , J . R . Isolation and characterization of a regulated form of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 1993 , 122 , 623 – 633 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 43 . Bamburg , J . R . ; Bernstein , B . W . ADF / coﬁlin . Curr . Biol . 2008 , 18 , R273 – R275 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 44 . Niwa , R . ; Nagata - Ohashi , K . ; Takeichi , M . ; Mizuno , K . ; Uemura , T . Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot , a family of phosphatases that dephosphorylate ADF / coﬁlin . Cell 2002 , 108 , 233 – 246 . [ CrossRef ] 45 . Ono , S . ; Minami , N . ; Abe , H . ; Obinata , T . Characterization of a novel coﬁlin isoform that is predominantly expressed in mammalian skeletal muscle . J . Biol . Chem . 1994 , 269 , 15280 – 15286 . [ PubMed ] 46 . Abe , H . ; Endo , T . ; Yamamoto , K . ; Obinata , T . Sequence of cDNAs encoding actin depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin of embryonic chicken skeletal muscle : Two functionally distinct actin regulatory proteins exhibit high structural homology . Biochemistry 1990 , 29 , 720 – 725 . [ CrossRef ] 47 . Li , L . ; Zhang , W . ; Chai , B . ; Zhang , Q . ; Xie , J . ; Chen , S . ; Zhao , S . Neuronal maturation and laminar formation in the chicken optic tectum are accompanied by the transition of phosphorylated coﬁlin from cytoplasm to nucleus . Gene Expr . Patterns 2014 , 16 , 75 – 78 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 48 . Ross - Macdonald , P . ; de Silva , H . ; Guo , Q . ; Xiao , H . ; Hung , C . Y . ; Penhallow , B . ; Markwalder , J . ; He , L . ; Attar , R . M . ; Lin , T . A . ; et al . Identiﬁcation of a nonkinase target mediating cytotoxicity of novel kinase inhibitors . Mol . Cancer Ther . 2008 , 7 , 3490 – 3498 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 49 . Mannherz , H . G . ; Gonsior , S . M . ; Gremm , D . ; Wu , X . ; Pope , B . J . ; Weeds , A . G . Activated coﬁlin colocalises with Arp2 / 3 complex in apoptotic blebs during programmed cell death . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 2005 , 84 , 503 – 515 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 50 . Pröschel , C . ; Blouin , M . J . ; Gutowski , N . J . ; Ludwig , R . ; Noble , M . Limk1 is predominantly expressed in neural tissues and phosphorylates serine , threonine and tyrosine residues in vitro . Oncogene 1995 , 11 , 1271 – 1281 . [ PubMed ] 51 . Aizawa , H . ; Wakatsuki , S . ; Ishii , A . ; Sasaki , K . Y . ; Ohashi , K . ; Sekine - Aizawa , Y . ; Sehara - Fujisawa , A . ; Mizuno , K . ; Goshima , Y . ; Yahara , I . Phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase is necessary for semaphorin 3A - induced growth cone collapse . Nat . Neurosci . 2001 , 4 , 367 – 373 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 52 . Lai , F . P . L . ; Szczodrak , M . ; Block , J . ; Faix , J . ; Breitsprecher , D . ; Mannherz , H . G . ; Stradal , E . E . B . ; Dunn , G . A . ; Small , J . V . ; Rottner , K . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin netword turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J . 2008 , 27 , 982 – 992 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 53 . Wen , Z . ; Han , L . ; Bamburg , J . R . ; Shim , S . ; Ming , G . L . ; Zheng , J . Q . BMP gradients steer nerve growth cones by a balancing act of LIM kinase and Slingshot phosphatase on ADF / coﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 2007 , 178 , 107 – 119 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 54 . Chen , H . ; Bernstein , B . W . ; Bamburg , J . R . Regulating actin - ﬁlament dynamics in vivo . Trends Biochem . Sci . 2000 , 25 , 19 – 23 . [ CrossRef ] 55 . Argiro , V . ; Bunge , M . B . ; Johnson , M . I . Correlation between growth form and movement and their dependence on neuronal age . J . Neurosci . 1984 , 4 , 3051 – 3062 . [ PubMed ] 56 . Mongiu , A . K . ; Weitzke , E . L . ; Chaga , O . Y . ; Borisy , G . G . Kinetic structural analysis of neuronal growth cone veil motility . J . Cell Sci . 2007 , 120 , 1113 – 1125 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 57 . DeMali , K . A . ; Barlow , C . A . ; Burridge , K . Recruitment of the Arp2 / 3 complex to vinculin : Coupling membrane protrusion to matrix adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 2002 , 159 , 881 – 891 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 58 . LeClaire , L . L . ; Rana , M . ; Baumgartner , M . ; Barber , D . L . The Nck interacting kinase NIK increases Arp2 / 3 complex activity by phosphorylating the Arp2 subunit . J . Cell Biol . 2015 , 208 , 161 – 170 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Int . J . Mol . Sci . 2018 , 19 , 384 19 of 19 59 . Mashiach - Farkash , E . ; Rak , R . ; Elad - Sfadia , G . ; Haklai , R . ; Carmeli , S . ; Kloog , Y . ; Wolfson , H . J . Computer - based identiﬁcation of a novel LIMK1 / 2 inhibitor that synergizes with salirasib to destabilize the actin cytoskeleton . Oncotarget 2012 , 3 , 629 – 639 . [ PubMed ] 60 . Pfannes , E . K . ; Theves , M . ; Wegner , C . ; Beta , C . Impact of the carbazole derivative wiskostatin on mechanical stability and dynamics of motile cells . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 2012 , 33 , 95 – 106 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] 61 . Rottner , K . ; Kaverina , I . N . ; Stradal , T . E . B . Cytoskeleton proteins . In Cell Biology , A Laboratory Handbook ; Celis , J . E . , Ed . ; Elsevier Academic Press : London , UK , 2006 ; Volume 3 , pp . 111 – 119 . © 2018 by the authors . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .