Design for unanticipated use . Mike Robinson Introduction . ● Unanticipated use ● Anticipation of sequence ● 3 examples : ● Information Lens . Designed to be an automatic spam filter for e - mails , but used as an archiver after the mails were read . ● The Coordinator . Designed as a sequentially structured conversation model with message categories , but the users ignored the choices and just «hit enter» to send a message . ● Manufacturing Resource Planning system . ● Orginally used to calculate a production master schedule , but when the company changed from a master schedule to local plans based on current orders , it was used «backwards» . ● Analysis of practice vs the work situation The nature of work . ● Programmability of work ● Situated action ● Every course of action is ad hoc and depends on material and social circumstances . ● Plans exist to position us to deal with contingencies , not as specifications . ● Anticipate use of artefacts . ● Relationships are transient or their patterns change with the situation at hand . ● Actors are not pre - determinable and there will be fluid transitions between individual and cooperative work , different task and different media and tools . Common artefacts . ● Predictability Common artefacts needs to be dependable to the actor and get the job done . Many designs may be feasible and the form of an artefact is the outcome of processes of competition , persusation , selection and evolution . ● Peripheral Awareness ● London underground ● The controller ask a driver to delay a couple of minutes . The DIA is aware of the timetable and the real time display and announces the delay before the controller has finished his request to the driver . Common artefacts . ● Implicit communication Communication without exchanging words . This type of conversation is mediated by the material they work on , for instance carrying a table . Implicit communication has advantages , combined with other means of communication or a predefined set of state changes or symbols . ● Flight Strips in Air Traffic Control State changes are conventional and formalised . ● Double Level Language Implicit communicaiton and direct communication are complementary and mutually supportive . Applications that support one level of communication and not the other tend to fail .