Endocytosis , the process through which cells internal­ ize portions of their plasma membrane along with extracellular material , is fundamentally important in cell physiology . Endocytosis counterbalances the con­ tinuous delivery of new membrane to the cell surface by exocytosis , regulates the abundance of proteins in the plasma membrane , controls the signalling output of receptors , mediates cellular uptake of nutrients and is also exploited by pathogens to enter cells . To sup­ port these various functions , multiple molecularly and morphologically distinct forms of endocytosis , both constitutiv e and regulated , operate in all cells 1 – 4 . Generation of an endocytic vesicle requires the recruitment of various proteins from the cytosol that orchestrate the bending inward of the plasma membrane to form a deeply invaginated bud and subsequently promote its fission . One such protein that directly par­ ticipates in the fission reaction is the GTPase dynamin , the founding member of a family of GTPases that have diverse roles in membrane­remodelling events through­ out the cell ( FIG . 1 ) . The role of dynamin in endocytosis has now been investigated for more than 20 years 5 – 8 . A considerable amount of evidence indicates that dynamin assembles into helical polymers at the necks of budding vesicles and that its GTP hydrolysis­dependent conformational change promotes fission of the under­ lying tubular membrane to generate a free endocytic vesicle ( FIG . 2 ) . However , several aspects of its func­ tion , its precise mechanisms of action and the specific roles of multiple dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells have remained elusive . Furthermore , although multiple dynamin­dependent and dynamin­independent endo­ cytic pathways have been described , we have a good understanding only of how dynamin is recruited and then acts at fission sites for clathrin­mediated endo­ cytosis . In this Review , we discuss how complementary experimental approaches have greatly increased our understanding of dynamin’s action . We also highlight how this information has been further enhanced by new insights into the function and mechanistic action of dynamin­like proteins ( DLPs ) . The discovery of dynamin Dynamin was originally identified as a GTPase that co­purified with brain microtubules 6 , 9 . Its role in endo­ cytosis was revealed only subsequently , when the muta­ tions responsible for the temperature­sensitive paralytic phenotype of Drosophila melanogaster shibire mutants were mapped to the dynamin gene 7 , 8 . In these mutants , paralysis results from the neuronal activity­dependent depletion of synaptic vesicles , which is accompanied by the accumulation of arrested ‘collared’ endocytic pits at the presynaptic plasma membrane 5 . Subsequent studie s revealed that similar collared pits formed at mamma­ lian presynaptic plasma membranes upon exposure to GTP­γS , a slowly hydrolysable GTP analogue , and that they contained oligomeric assemblies of dynamin 10 . The assembly of helical dynamin polymers either in solution 11 or on membrane templates was additionally reconstituted with the purified protein 11 ( FIG . 2e ) . Further investigations in non­neuronal cells showed that dynamin is a general component of clathrin­coated endocytic pits and that its GTPase activity is important for endocytosis : dynamin mutants with impaired GTP binding ( such as the com­ monly used Lys44Ala mutant ) and / or hydrolysis cycles have dominant­negative effects on endocytosis 12 – 15 . 1 Department of Cell Biology , Yale University School of Medicine . 2 Program in Cellular Neuroscience , Neurodegeneration and Repair , Yale University School of Medicine . 3 Kavli Institute for Neuroscience , Yale University School of Medicine . 4 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , Connecticut 06510 , USA . e‑mails : shawn . ferguson @ yale . edu ; pietro . decamilli @ yale . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3266 Published online 11 January 2012 Synaptic vesicles Small ( ~ 40 nm in diameter ) vesicles within neuronal presynaptic terminals that store and release neurotransmitter . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase Shawn M . Ferguson 1 , 2 and Pietro De Camilli 1 – 4 Abstract | Dynamin , the founding member of a family of dynamin - like proteins ( DLPs ) implicated in membrane remodelling , has a critical role in endocytic membrane fission events . The use of complementary approaches , including live - cell imaging , cell - free studies , X - ray crystallography and genetic studies in mice , has greatly advanced our understanding of the mechanisms by which dynamin acts , its essential roles in cell physiology and the specific function of different dynamin isoforms . In addition , several connections between dynamin and human disease have also emerged , highlighting specific contributions of this GTPase to the physiology of different tissues . REVIEWS NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 75 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Caveolae ER Atlastin Mitochondrion Clathrin - coated pit Clathrin - coated pit Membrane ruﬄes Endosomalactin comet E P E C Actin pedestal Podosomes and invadopodia OPA1 Nucleus Dynamin Dynamin Actin Mitofusin Endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria Nucleus Ancient bacterium DRP1 SRC homology 3 domain ( SH3 domain ) . A domain that mediates protein – protein interactions and binds Pro - containing short amino acid motifs . This domain is frequently found in proteins involved in signalling , endocytosis and actin regulation . GAPs and GEFs ( GTPase - activating proteins and guanine nucleotide exchange factors ) . GAPs promote GTP hydrolysis by GTPases , whereas GEFs displace the GDP generated by the reaction , thus allowing the next cycle of GTP binding and hydrolysis to proceed . Pleckstrin homology domain ( PH domain ) . These domains often contain binding sites for phosphoinositides ( most typically phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate and phosphatidyl - inositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ) and thus help target proteins to specific membranes . However , they can also function in protein – protein interactions . Three dynamin isoforms in mammals Mammalian genomes contain three dynamin genes 16 . The proteins encoded by these genes share the same domain organization and 80 % overall homology , but they have distinct expression patterns . Dynamin 1 is selectively expressed at high levels in neurons and is gen­ erally not present in non­neuronal tissues 17 , 18 , although it can be detected in many cultured cell lines 19 , 20 . Dynamin 2 is expressed ubiquitously 17 , 21 . Dynamin 3 is found predominantly in the brain ( at much lower levels than dynamin 1 ) and testis , and at lower levels in some tissues , such as the lung 16 , 17 , 22 . Dynamin diversity is com­ pounded by the existence of multiple splice variants for each of the three dynamins 16 . Invertebrates , such as Caenorhabditis elegans and D . melanogaster , possess only a single dynamin gene 7 , 23 . So , the existence of three dynamin genes in mammals could in principle reflect differences between the ‘housekeeping’ role of dynamin in clathrin­mediated endocytosis , which is mediated by dynamin 2 , and the specialized forms of endo­ cytosis in cells that additionally express dynamin 1 and / or dynamin 3 . In addition , this triplication of the dynamin gene during evolution may be partly explained by a need to fine­tune overall dynamin levels in specific tissues . Different dynamin isoforms have some unique protein – protein interactions 24 – 27 . However , most of the differences between isoforms are quantitative rather than qualitative ; these include affinities for SRC homology 3 domain ( SH3 domain ) ­containing proteins 22 , rates of GTPase activity , oligomerization efficiency and lipid­binding properties 28 . Nonetheless , a recent report stating that differences in the lipid­binding characteristics of dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 cause robust differences in their membrane­fission activ­ ity 28 indicates that this remains an area of active research and that additional studies are required to fully address the issue of redundancy between dynamin isoforms . A family of DLPs The dynamins are the founding members of a family of GTPases known as the DLPs , the members of which participate in membrane remodelling ( FIG . 1 ; TABLE 1 ) and share basic features of domain organization ( BOX 1 ) . They also have similar catalytic mechanisms and modes of action that differ from those of the RAS superfamily of regulatory GTPases . The G domains of DLPs undergo nucleotide­dependent dimerization and dimer­dependent GTP hydrolysis 29 – 32 . G domain dimerization reciprocally induces structural rearrangements in the catalytic centre of the partner DLP , which stimulate GTP hydrolysis 33 . In contrast to small regulatory GTPases of the RAS family , DLP family GTPases have low affinity for nucleotides and do not require separate GAPs and GEFs ( GTPase­activating proteins and guanine nucleotide exchange factors ) , as they load spontaneously with GTP and have intrinsic mechanisms for stabilizing the transition state during GTP hydrolysis 29 . In the case of dynamin , GTP hydroly­ sis is thought to be supported by a sodium or potassium ion within the active site 30 . In other DLPs , divergent mechanisms are used to stabilize the transition state . However , the lack of a requirement for additional GAP proteins , and the importance of G domain dimerizatio n , is conserve d within the DLP family . Furthermore , whereas the GTP binding and hydrolysis cycle of regulatory GTPases mediates the recruitment and release of effector proteins , the cellular function of DLPs is tightly coupled to the dimerization of their G domains and , at least for some of them , to their polymeriza­ tion 29 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 35 . The conformational changes produced by GTP binding and hydrolysis in the G domain of DLPs are transduced into a movement relative to adjacent domains 36 – 38 that , when propagated along the polymer , is expected to produce a force on membranes 31 , 32 . Thus , for dynamin , the cycle of GTP loading and hydrolysis is intimately coupled to its membrane­fission activity ( FIG . 2d ) . This explains why mutations in dynamin that are designed to lock it into a GTP­bound state do not result in the constitutive activation of endocytosis 15 , in contrast to the persistent activity exhibited by regulatory GTPases that harbour equivalent mutations . Domain organization of dynamin On the basis of its primary sequence , dynamin , a cyto­ solic protein , has typically been described as comprisin g : an amino­terminal G domain ; a ‘middle’ or ‘stalk’ region ; a pleckstrin homology domain ( PH domain ) ; a GTPase effector domain ( GED ) , so called because of its interactions with the G domain 39 ; and a Pro­rich c arboxy­termina l region , typically referred to as the Pro­ rich domain ( PRD ) 16 ( FIG . 2a ) . More recently , informa­ tion about the structures of dynamin and DLPs 30 , 34 , 36 , 37 , including the crystal structure of dimers of nearly full­ length dynamin ( lacking only the PRD ) 31 , 32 have allowed for a modified definition of dynamin domains that bette r reflects the predicted three­dimensional hairpin­like folding of the full­length protein ( FIG . 2a , b ) . Figure 1 | Sites of action of dynamin and DLPs in a mammalian cell . Dynamin is localized at sites of endocytosis . It is also found at actin meshworks nucleated by the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , such as membrane ruffles , podosomes and invadopodia , and at actin pedestals induced by pathogenic bacteria ( such as enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) ) . Other dynamin - like proteins ( DLPs ) , including atlastin , dynamin - related protein 1 ( DRP1 ) , optic atrophy 1 homologue ( OPA1 ) and mitofusin , localize to sites of intracellular membrane fission and fusion in the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , mitochondria and peroxisomes ( not shown ) . The possible endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria and peroxisomes ( that is , their formation by the endocytosis of an ancient bacterium ) may explain the role of a DLP in the fission of these organelles . R E V I E W S 76 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology N e c k N e c k N e c k 1 301 520 627 751 864 GTPase Middle PH GED PRD G domain ‘Stalk’ ‘Stalk’ ‘Foot’ PRD a Dynamin 1 b d c e Polymerization of dynamin helix Membrane ﬁssion GTP - dependent dimerization of G domains , GTP hydrolysis and resulting membrane constriction G domain GTP Neck ‘Stalk’ ‘Foot’ 1 3 2 2 90° The G domain and BSE . The G domain sits on a helical bundle , known as the bundle signalling element ( BSE ) 30 or neck 40 , which is formed by three helices derived from sequences at the N­terminal and C­terminal sides of the G domain and from the C­terminal region of the GED , respectively ( FIG . 2 ) . Consistent with the idea that this region of the GED is in close physical proximity with , and is functionally linked to , the G domain , a screen for suppressor mutations of a mutation in the G domain of D . melanogaster dynamin identified a mutation within the GED C terminus 41 . The BSE is followed by a stalk , which is composed of helices from the middle domain and the N­terminal region of the GED 30 – 33 , and a PH domain 42 , which forms the vertex or ‘foot’ of the stalk hairpin and binds membranes . The PRD , which is expected to be unfolded , emerges at the boundary between the BSE and the G domain , most likely project­ ing away from the membrane , where it might interact with other proteins . Dimerization through the stalk . The stalk of dynamin dimerizes in a cross­like fashion ( FIG . 2a , b ) to yield a dynamin dimer in which the two G domains are oriented in opposite directions 30 – 33 ( FIG . 2b ) . This dimer is the basic dynamin unit and is different from the additional dimer­ ization interface that is generated by the interaction of two G domains ( FIG . 2b , c ) , which is discussed below . Phospholipid association through the PH domain . The PH domain binds acidic phospholipids in the cytosolic leaflet of the plasma membrane , and phosphatidyl­ inositol­4 , 5­bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) in particular , via a positively charged surface at the foot of the dynamin hairpin 42 , 43 . PH­domain mutants that impair phospho­ inositide binding exert dominant­negative effects on clathrin­mediated endocytosis 44 , 45 . The binding between the isolated dynamin PH domain and phosphoinositides is of very modest affinity ( > 1 mM ) , but this membrane interaction is strengthened by charge­dependent asso­ ciation with other negatively charged phospholipids and by avidity afforded by dynamin polymerization 43 – 46 . A hydrophobic loop emerging from the PH domain may promote membrane interactions and may also have curvatur e­generatin g or ­sensing properties 28 , 47 . Coordinating dynamin function through the PRD . The PRD contains an array of PXXP amino acid motifs , which interact with many SH3 domain­containing proteins ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) to localize dynamin at endocytic sites and coordinate dynamin’s function with these other factors during endocytosis 48 – 51 . Accordingly , dynamin lacking the PRD cannot rescue endocytic defects in dynamin­knockout fibroblasts 19 . The PRD – SH3 interactions are typically of moderate affinity , but the presence of multiple SH3­binding motifs in the PRD and multiple SH3 domain­containing pro­ teins at endocytic sites , as well as the polymeric state of these proteins , results in a significant avidity effect , which enhances the ability of such interactions to concentrate dynamin . At least some interactions of the dynamin PRD are regulate d by phosphorylation 48 . Figure 2 | Structure of dynamin and putative mechanism of dynamin - mediated membrane fission . a | Linear representation of the domain organization of dynamin based on its three - dimensional structure , as revealed by crystallographic studies ( numbers indicate amino acid position within the primary sequence of the human dynamin 1 xa splice variant ) . Regions that belong to the same folded module are shown in the same colour . The crystal structure of a dynamin dimer is shown below ( minus the PRDs , which are thought to be unfolded ) , and is colour - coded to match the linear representation ( created with PyMOL ( Schrödinger ) ; Protein Data Bank code 3SNH 31 ) . b | Schematic representation of dynamin dimers and of helical dynamin polymers around a tubular template in two different orientations ( with 90° rotation between them ) . The colour - coding of the domains matches the colours in part a ( minus the PRDs , which are thought to project out of the polymerized helix ) . The approximate location of the bound nucleotide is highlighted in yellow ( small circles ) . Dynamin polymerization occurs as a result of interactions between the ‘stalks’ of dynamin monomers ( interface 2 ) and between stalk dimers ( interfaces 1 and 3 ) . The GTP - dependent dimerization of G domains between adjacent rungs of the dynamin helix ( highlighted by yellow stars in the longitudinal view of the helix ) , is thought to promote assembly - stimulated GTPase activity , resulting in membrane constriction and ultimately fission . c | Proposed GTP hydrolysis - dependent lever - like movement of dynamin’s neck ( the bundle signalling element ) , relative to the G domain . d | Schematic view of these key steps leading to dynamin - mediated membrane fission . e | Cryo - electron microscopy image showing a helical polymer of purified dynamin that has driven the formation of a tubule from a liposome . GED , GTPase effector domain ; PH , pleckstrin homology ; PRD , Pro - rich domain . Image in part e courtesy of A . Frost , University of Utah , USA , and V . Unger , Northwestern University , USA . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 77 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Coordinating polymerization and activity Purified dynamin spontaneously polymerizes into rings and helices when incubated in solutions with low ionic strength 11 or in the presence of narrow negatively charged tubular templates ( such as membrane tubules , microtubules or actin bundles ) 6 , 52 – 54 . It can also tubu­ late membrane bilayers under appropriate conditions by forming a continuous membrane coat around them 10 , 55 – 57 . Dynamin polymerization resulting from the apposition of dimers via stalk – tip interactions ( FIG . 2b ; interfaces 1 and 3 ) occurs an angle that determines the diameter of the ring 31 , 32 . The tetrameric form of dynamin , which can be abundant in solution 58 , may be an intermediate in higher­ order assembly 34 , 38 . Thus , the stalks form the core of the ring , whereas the BSE and G domains of each dimer pro­ ject towards the adjacent rungs of the dynamin helix 31 , 32 ( FIG . 2b ) . It follows that G domain dimerization , which is critical for GTP hydrolysis and for dynamin function , can only occur across adjacent rungs ( FIG . 2b ) , which explains the robust stimulation of dynamin’s GTPase activity upon polymerization 54 . A similar overall domain organization and mode of polymerization is predicted to be shared by all DLPs implicated in membrane fission 59 . However , the module that binds the membrane in these other proteins is divergent from dynamin , and the PRD is replaced by sequences with different binding properties . Such diver­ gence probably reflects the different mechanisms that recruit different DLPs to membranes and may speak against a key role of the PRD and the PH domain in the mechanics of fission . Membrane fission by the dynamin helix The mechanisms by which dynamin drives membrane fis­ sion have been the subject of intense debate and have been analysed in living cells 12 , 15 , 44 , 54 , broken­cell preparations 10 , 60 and minimal systems based on purified dynamin and artificial lipid bilayers 55 , 56 , 61 – 63 . Models derived from these experiments have suggested that , when dynamin has polymerized around the neck of an endocytic bud ( or a tubular membrane template in vitro ) , its GTP hydrolysis­ dependent structural reorganization triggers constriction ( in the ‘twistase’ and / or ‘constrictase’ models ) or stretch­ ing ( in the ‘poppase’ model ) to promote membrane fission ( FIG . 2b ) . Importantly , cell­free studies have shown that purified dynamin alone can cut synthetic lipid tubules in the presence of GTP 55 , 56 , 61 , 63 . Thus , although other fac­ tors may assist the action of dynamin in vivo , dynamin is sufficien t to mediate membrane fission . Recent crystallographic and cryo­electron micros­ copy ( cryo­EM ) studies of dynamin and DLPs have offered important new clues about how dynamin works . First , the demonstration that dynamin belongs to the superfamily of G proteins activated by nucleotide­ dependent dimerization ( GADs ) 29 strongly argues against the possibility that GTP­bound dynamin may function by recruiting another effector 39 . Second , as G domain dimerization is critical for GTPase activ­ ity 29 , 30 , 59 , 61 , 64 and requires interactions between adjacent rungs of the dynamin helix 30 ( FIG . 2b ) , dynamin’s action requires , at a minimum , a polymer that wraps around a membrane template to connect to the next rung . Third , studies of dynamin and of the DLP atlastin suggest that GTP hydrolysis by a G domain dimer leads to a promi­ nent lever­like movement of the adjacent domain , the BSE in the case of dynamin 36 – 38 ( FIG . 2c ) . Such a move­ ment could constrict the dynamin helix when propa­ gated along its subunits . As this movement is triggered by the interaction of G domains on adjacent rungs of a helix , it could produce a coordinated rotational slid­ ing of one rung on the next , which is consistent with Table 1 | Diverse roles for DLPs at membrane interfaces DLPs Organisms Subcellular localization and sites of action Functions Refs Classical dynamins Animals Endocytic sites in the plasma membrane ; ARP2 / 3 - containing actin meshworks Endocytic membrane fission ; regulation of ARP2 / 3 - dependent actin dynamics – DRP1 Animals Mitochondrial outer membrane ; peroxisomes Mitochondrial fission ; peroxisome division 159 – 162 Mitofusin Animals Mitochondrial outer membrane Mitochondrial fusion 159 – 162 OPA1 Animals Mitochondrial inner membrane Mitochondrial fusion 159 – 162 , 188 Atlastin Animals ER Fusion of ER membranes 167 , 168 , 189 Myxovirus resistance proteins Animals ER Antiviral 169 , 190 Guanylate - binding proteins Animals Intracellular vesicles Defence against viral and bacterial pathogens 170 , 191 , 192 Phragmoplastin Plants Cell plate Cell division 171 ARC5 , ADL Plants Chloroplast Chloroplast fission 193 , 194 Vps1 Fungi Endosomes ; plasma membrane ? Membrane fission 98 , 195 Bacterial DLP Cyanobacteria Integral membrane protein Membrane fusion ? 40 ARC5 , ACCUMULATION AND REPLICATION OF CHLOROPLASTS 5 ; ARP2 / 3 , actin - related protein 2 / 3 ; DLPs , dynamin - like proteins ; DRP1 , dynamin - related protein 1 ; ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; OPA1 , optic atrophy 1 homologue ; Vps1 , vacuolar protein sorting - associated 1 . R E V I E W S 78 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Line tension A force that acts to minimize the length of the energetically unfavourable interface between adjacent membrane domains of different composition . the reported twisting of dynamin­coated tubules during GTP hydrolysis 55 . However , in principle , such movement could also simply constrict the tubule by producing a structural change in the ring without any rotation 32 . Surprisingly , however , if a dynamin helix has been assembled in the absence of hydrolysable GTP , sub­ sequent GTP loading and hydrolysis does not necessarily trigger fission , possibly because a long dynamin coat can function as a stabilizing scaffold 55 , 61 , 62 . In cell­free systems , efficient fission of lipid tubules occurs optimally under conditions in which dynamin polymerization occurs in the presence of GTP , allowing rapid coupling between dynamin assembly , GTP hydrolysis and polymer disas­ sembly 56 , 61 , 63 . Under these conditions , fission is proposed to result from the membrane destabilization that is pre­ dicted to occur when the constricted ring disassembles ( FIG . 2d ) . A long , continuous dynamin helix may be less efficient in promoting fission because it lacks a focal point for constriction or has less efficient subunit disso­ ciation . In fact , taking into consideration bulk cytoplas­ mic GTP concentrations of ~ 2 mM versus the binding affinity of dynamin for GTP ( K d = ~ 1 μM ) 65 , dynamin oligomerizing into helices should be in a predominantly GTP­bound state and be poised to hydrolyse GTP and disassemble quickly when the G domains of one turn can dimerize with the G domains of the next turn . Under some physiological conditions , local regulation of GTP levels probably contributes to proper dynamin function , as mutations in the nucleoside diphosphate kinase gene , which helps maintain such levels , make synapses more sensitive to dynamin mutations 66 . Although there have been important advances in our understanding of the structure of dynamin , we have much to learn about how conformational changes pro­ duced by the GTP hydrolysis cycle of dynamin relate to dynamin­mediated membrane fission . For example , the relative contributions of G domain dimerization versus subsequent GTP hydrolysis in the constriction and fis­ sion of membranes remain undefined . Furthermore , GTP hydrolysis may not only produce a power stroke but also contribute to membrane destabilization by inducing helix disassembly . Additional factors cooperating in fission . Although dynamin alone can constrict and cut lipid tubules , the con­ striction of the dynamin ring in vivo is likely to be assisted or regulated by other factors to achieve fission ( FIG . 3 ) . These include : membrane tension generated by actin , either via its polymerization or via myosin motors 55 , 61 , 67 , 68 ; a heterogeneous distribution of lipids on the two sides of the constriction , contributing to line tensio n 69 ; enzymatic degradation of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , leading to catastrophic dis­ sociation of dynamin and other endocytic factors after GTP hydrolysis 70 ; and the partial destabil ization of the bilayer by neighbouring lipid­bindin g proteins , such as proteins containing Bin – amphiphysin – Rvs ( BAR ) domains 71 . The potential role of BAR domain­containing proteins has acquired interest with the realization that the GTPase activity of dynamin involves interactions between dynamin rungs because the intercalation of BAR domains between rungs could hinder such an interaction 71 – 73 and thus potentially inhibit dynamin’s action . Cryo­EM studies aimed at elucidating the precise organizational relationship between dynamin rings and BAR domain proteins should help to determine the contribution that this makes . A key component of clathrin - coated pits Dynamin may contribute to multiple forms of endo­ cytosis , but its action is best understood in the context of clathrin­mediated endocytosis 12 – 14 , 17 , 19 , 20 , 22 , 67 , 74 ( FIG . 3 ) . During the formation of endocytic buds ( FIG . 3 ) , a subse t of scaffold proteins ( such as FCH domain only 1 ( FCHO1 ) , epidermal growth factor receptor substrate 15 ( EPS15 ) and intersectin ) 67 , 75 and clathrin adaptors ( for example , the adaptor protein 2 ( AP2 ) complex , AP180 and its homologue clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukaemia ( CALM ; also known as PICALM ) and epsin ) are first recruited to the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ­rich plasma mem­ brane , coincident with the binding of some of these pro­ teins to endocytic sorting motifs of integral membrane proteins 1 , 76 . Such components cluster cargo , induce membrane curvature and also have actin­nucleating properties 1 , 76 . The coat subsequently grows through the assembly of the clathrin lattice , which , through positive feedback , recruits additional cargo adaptors and endo­ cytic factors 1 , 76 , 77 . Dynamin also slowly accumulates around the growing pit 67 . Deep invagination of the bud and formation of a narrow neck , which is often assisted by a burst of actin polymerization 19 , 78 , involves the recruitment of BAR domain­containing proteins , sever al of which bind dynamin as well as the PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 phosphatase synaptojanin 19 , 72 , 73 , 79 ( BOX 2 ; FIG . 3 ; see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . It is at this point that dynamin rapidly accumulates at bud necks to mediat e fission 67 , 80 ( FIG . 3 ) . Box 1 | A family of DLPs Dynamins are the founding members of a family of GTPases known as the dynamin - like proteins ( DLPs ) , the members of which share basic features of domain organization and roles in membrane remodelling ( FIG . 1 ) . Within this family , some proteins act similarly to dynamin in mediating membrane fission . For example , dynamin - related protein 1 ( DRP1 ) is important for the fission of mitochondria and peroxisomes 159 – 162 . Others are more distant members and mediate homotypic membrane fusion 159 – 162 . These include mitofusin , which controls the fusion of mitochondrial outer membranes , optic atrophy 1 homologue ( OPA1 ) , which is important for inner mitochondrial membrane fusion , and atlastin , which mediates the fusion of endoplasmic reticulum membranes 159 – 162 , 167 , 168 . Also included in this family , on the basis of their structure and assembly properties , are the antiviral , interferon - inducible myxovirus resistance proteins 9 , 169 and guanylate - binding proteins 170 , whose precise functions remain unknown . Plant DLPs control membrane traffic during cell plate formation in cytokinesis 171 and mediate chloroplast division 172 , 173 . A bacterial DLP implicated in membrane remodelling has also been identified and structurally characterized 40 , 172 . Additionally , although differing from the DLPs in that they are ATPases rather than GTPases , the EPS15 homology domain - containing ( EHD ) proteins share structural similarities and are also implicated in membrane remodelling 174 . Mutations in DLPs other than dynamin , and more specifically in DLPs that affect mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum dynamics , have been identified as causes of inherited diseases . These include mutations in OPA1 ( inducing optic atrophy type 1 ) 175 , mitofusin 2 ( leading to Charcot – Marie – Tooth disease type 2A ) 176 , atlastin ( resulting in hereditary spastic paraplegia ) 177 and DRP1 ( generating lethal perinatal defects in mitochondria and peroxisome fission ) 178 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 79 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology b A b un d a n c e a t p i t Actin DynaminClathrin coat Endophilin – 80 0 – 20 20 40 60 80 – 40 – 60 t ( s ) Clathrin - coated pit N - WASP , ARP2 / 3 , actin + Dynamin a – Dynamin Dynamin Endophilin Membrane ﬁssion Caveolae Small flask - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane that are involved in the endocytic uptake of various cell surface molecules and some viruses , in signalling and in the regulation of plasma membrane tension . The enrichment of dynamin at clathrin­coated endo­ cytic pits has been extensively demonstrated by fluo­ rescence microscopy 12 , 51 , 67 , 80 , including super­resolution methods 60 and EM 10 , 81 . Furthermore , live imaging of cells expressing fluorescent dynamin shows that dynamin lev­ els at the pits are low during early stages of clathrin­coated pit maturation ( FIG . 3 ) , most likely reflecting low­affinity interactions with other endocytic factors , and rise mark­ edly during later stages — reflecting polymerization at the bud neck — to reach a peak that coincides with mem­ brane fission 67 , 80 , 82 ( FIG . 3b ) . Factors that cooperatively , but redundantly , regulate dynamin assembly here include : PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and other acidic phospholipids present in the plasma membrane 83 , 84 ; the tubular membrane tem­ plate at the bud neck 53 ; proteins containing dynamin­ binding SH3 domains ( primarily BAR domain­containing proteins 72 , 73 , whose polymerization forms a powerful high­avidity affinity matrix 71 ; see Supplementary infor­ mation S1 ( table ) ) ; and actin , which can directly bind dynamin 85 ( FIG . 3 ) . The coinciding accumulation of BAR proteins , actin and dynamin at late stages of endocyto­ sis 67 , 80 , which is consistent with feed­forward mechanisms , is particularly striking ( FIG . 3b ) . The sequence of events underlying clathrin­mediated endocytosis is evolutionarily conserved , as this process shows mechanistic similarity to endocytosis at actin patches in yeast 86 , 87 . Surprisingly , however , there are mixed reports as to whether the closest yeast homologue of dynamin , vacuolar protein sorting­associated 1 ( Vps1 ) , does 88 , 89 or does not 86 , 90 participate in actin patch endo­ cytosis , questioning how essential dynamin is for clathrin­ mediated endocytosis . It is possible that unique properties of the yeast plasma membrane , for example tension and / or the presence of a cell wall , explain this difference 91 . Dynamin in other endocytic pathways Endocytosis can also occur without clathrin , and dynamin has been implicated in some clathrin­independent endo­ cytic pathways ( FIG . 1 ) . For example , a role for dynamin in caveolin­dependent internalization has been sug­ gested , and both dynamin and actin were transiently detected at caveolae , coincident with their fission from the plasma membrane 92 , 93 . However , the dynamics and function of dynamin at caveolae remain largely undefined . Surprisingly , the absence of dynamin is accompanied by a loss of caveolae and of their core component caveolin 1 , rather than by the increase in caveolae abundance that might be expected if dynamin were required for their fis­ sion 19 . Thus , it is not yet clear whether dynamin has a key role during the endocytic fission of caveolae . With respect to clathrin­ and caveolin­independent endocytic pathways , evidence for a role of dynamin is , in many cases , primarily dependent on approaches using dominant­negative mutants ( which may exert indirect effects ) or pharmacological inhibition with drugs ( which may have off­target or non­physiological effects ; see Supplementary information S2 ( box ) ) . Thus , definitive answers as to how dynamin affects such pathways will require a combination of methods and should include loss­of­function studies . As robust bulk endocytosis still occurs in fibroblasts lacking dynamin 19 and in the pres­ ence of dominant­negative dynamin mutants 12 , dynamin cannot have a universal role in endocytic vesicle fission . Roles in intracellular budding Vesicle budding , and thus membrane fission , occurs at multiple points throughout the secretory and endocytic pathways . Although dynamin does not affect most of these events , several experimental approaches have sug­ gested that it might contribute to the fission of clathrin­ coated vesicles that bud from the trans ­Golgi network ( TGN ) 94 , as well as of other vesicles that bud from either the Golgi complex or endosomes 20 , 95 – 97 . The yeast dynamin homologue Vps1 has also been implicated in retrograde traffic between endosomes and the Golgi complex 98 . However , there was no obvious accumulation of clathrin­ coated pits at the TGN of fibroblasts lacking dynamin 19 , suggesting that dynamin is not universally required for Figure 3 | Dynamin and clathrin - mediated endocytosis . a | The putative sequence of events in the action of clathrin adaptors , actin , Bin – amphiphysin – Rvs ( BAR ) domain - containing proteins and dynamin at clathrin - coated endocytic pits , as revealed by studies of cells that lack dynamin ( dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 double - knockout fibroblasts ) 19 . Lack of dynamin results in an arrest of the endocytic reaction at the stage of deeply invaginated pits and in the actin - dependent elongation of their BAR domain - containing protein - coated tubular necks ( lower - right electron microscopy ( EM ) micrograph ) . When actin is depolymerized ( for example , through latrunculin B treatment ) , clathrin - coated buds collapse to Ω - shaped pits with short , wide necks ( upper - left EM micrograph ) . The fluorescence micrograph shows tubulated endocytic clathrin - coated pits in dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 double - knockout fibroblasts , as revealed by live - cell imaging of the BAR domain - containing protein endophilin 2 , which was labelled with green fluorescent protein ( tubular neck ) , and of clathrin light chain , which was labelled with red fluorescent protein . b | Schematic timeline showing the accumulation of endocytic proteins at endocytic pits . The zero time represents the fission reaction , as determined by the loss of accessibility of the bud lumen to the extracellular medium ( based on data from REF . 67 ) . Note that the role of actin may be non - essential under some conditions 78 , 100 . ARP2 / 3 , actin - related protein 2 / 3 ; N - WASP , neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein . EM and fluorescence micrographs in part a are reproduced , with permission , from REF . 19 © ( 2009 ) Elsevier . R E V I E W S 80 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Lamellipodia Broad , thin plasma membrane protrusions that are driven by actin polymerization and are critical for cell motility and for some forms of bulk endocytosis . Podosomes Focal sites of dynamic actin polymerization at the plasma membrane that are found in motile cells at sites of cell – matrix interaction , where they promote the local degradation of the matrix . These structures are critical for supporting cell migration through the extracellular matrix and for bone resorption by osteoclasts . Similar to invadopodia , which are found in invasive cells . clathrin­mediated budding . It is also important to con­ sider that some defects observed at non­endocytic sites when dynamin is inhibited may arise indirectly through clathrin sequestration at the cell surface , perturbation of membrane traffic , effects on signalling pathways and / or cytoskeletal dynamics . Dynamin and the cytoskeleton Dynamin interacts both directly and indirectly with the cytoskeleton . The relationship between these inter­ actions and the endocytic function of dynamin is one of the most interesting and poorly understood aspects of dynamin biology . Intimate links with actin . A major property of dynamin , and one that is likely to be fundamentally important to its action , is its link to the actin cytoskeleton . A link between dynamin and actin at endocytic sites is not surprising and is consistent with the importance of actin for many endocytic events , including at least a subset of clathrin­ mediated endocytic processes 19 , 67 , 68 , 99 , 100 . However , immuno fluorescence studies and live­cell analyses show that dynamin also colocalizes prominently with actin meshworks that are nucleated by the actin regulators neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( N­WASP ) – WAVE and actin­related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) at several other sites , including lamellipodia 101 , membrane ruffle s ( including circular dorsal ruffles 102 and ruffles that mediate phagocytosis 103 ) , invadopodia 104 , podosomes 105 , actin comets 106 , 107 and the actin pedestals that can be associated with bacterial cell entry 108 ( FIG . 1 ) . At these sites , dynamin is not restricted to the membrane inter­ face but is present in the actin meshwork itself ( FIG . 1 ) . This co localization is consistent with the PRD­mediated binding of dynamin to numerous actin­regulating pro­ teins , including proteins that contain CDC42­interacting or ­regulating domains ( summarized in Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . Indeed , dynamin can bundle around actin filaments assembled in the presence of its partner cortactin , which can simultaneously bind filamen­ tous actin ( F­actin ) 52 , 102 . The stalk region of dynamin itself can also bind F­actin directly 85 . This raises the question of whether dynamin can directly influence actin dynamic s and may have a role in actin function independen t of endocytosis . However , as membrane remodelling is the shared property of dynamin and other DLPs , and thus is likely to be the most critical function of dynamin , links between dynamin and actin may predominantly reflect its role in membrane remodelling during endocytosis . Studies in yeast emphasize the critical role of actin in endocytosis , further supporting this possibility 86 , 90 , 109 . The interaction of dynamin with actin and its regu­ latory proteins may help position dynamin at endocytic sites ( FIGS 1 , 3 ) . For example , a role of actin in directing the localization of dynamin at endocytic sites is supported by studies of mammalian cells that lack dynamin , which have shown that F­actin acts upstream of dynamin at clathrin coated pits 19 ( FIG . 3 ) . Actin may also generate membrane tension at the neck of endocytic buds , thus synergizing with dynamin during fission . Conversely , perturbation of dynamin function in living cells ( by the expression of mutant dynamin or by pharmacological inhibition ) can perturb actin dynamics 85 , 101 , 106 , 107 , 110 , 111 . However , in cells that lack dynamin , stress fibres do not seem to be affected 19 . The most obvious change observed in these cells is the accumulation of ARP2 / 3­dependent actin mesh­ works around the necks of arrested endocytic clathri n­ coated pits 19 ( FIG . 3 ) . There is also evidence of alterations to other ARP2 / 3­dependent actin­based structures in these cells , such as circular membrane ruffles and invadopodia and / or podosomes 104 , 105 , 111 ( S . M . F . , O . Destaing , R . Baron and P . D . C . , unpublished observations ) . However , it is dif­ ficult to discriminate between direct and indirect effects in these experiments , as disrupted endocytosis may alter signalling pathways ( see below ) . The recent crystallographic studies of dynamin 30 – 33 have raised new questions about potential non­endocytic effects of dynamin on actin dynamics . The helical organi­ zation of dynamin polymers at the bud neck appears to be optimally suited to allow an interaction in trans between dynamin G domains to promote GTP hydrolysis ( FIG . 2b ) . However , purified dynamin can also polymerize into helices around actin bundles and microtubules . It will be important to determine whether such a transient helica l arrangement occurs physiologically at non­endocytic sites ; these structures would be expected to produce detectable bursts of fluorescence in cells expressing green fluorescent protein­labelled dynamin but have not yet been observed . Box 2 | Sensing and generating membrane curvature Some proteins that function at the membrane interface bind preferentially to curved membranes . This can result from : the intrinsic curvature of the membrane - binding surface of these proteins ; their propensity to oligomerize into curved scaffolds ; or the presence of amphipathic helices whose partial insertion into the bilayer is facilitated by the loose packing of phospholipids at sites of high positive curvature . The same proteins can also force the membrane to curve and thus induce , propagate or stabilize bilayer curvature 71 , 179 – 182 . The ability of these proteins to function primarily as curvature sensors or curvature inducers depends on various factors , such as regulated affinity for the membrane ( through changes in the phosphorylation , folding state or surface charge of the membrane ) and local concentration 179 . Dynamin has important curvature - sensing and - generating properties 53 , owing to its polymerization into rings 11 and to the presence of a hydrophobic loop emerging from its pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain 47 . BAR domains . Many proteins that bind dynamin’s Pro - rich domain ( PRD ) via an SRC homology 3 ( SH3 ) domain also contain Bin – amphiphysin – Rvs ( BAR ) domains , which are protein modules with curvature - generating and - sensing properties 71 , 79 , 183 ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . BAR domains comprise amino acid sequences that fold into coiled - coils and dimerize into elongated , curved structures that are optimally suited to bind the negatively charged cytosolic leaflet of the plasma membrane 71 , 182 , 184 , 185 . The presence of amphipathic helices or lipid - binding modules that flank the BAR domains and their propensity to polymerize further enhance the bilayer - moulding properties of these proteins 71 . In BAR domain - containing proteins that bind dynamin , the bilayer - binding surface is optimally suited to bind endocytic intermediates 71 because it is typically concave ( with shallow curvature in FCH - BAR ( F - BAR ) domains , such as syndapin , formin - binding protein 17 ( FBP17 ) , transducer of CDC42 - dependent actin assembly 1 ( TOCA1 ) and CDC42 - interacting protein 4 ( CIP4 ) 71 , 185 , 186 , and narrow curvature in classic BAR domains , such as endophilin , amphiphysin , sorting nexin 9 ( SNX9 ) and SNX18 ( REF . 71 ) ) . BAR domain - containing proteins are proposed to coordinate the progressive acquisition of bilayer curvature at the necks of coated pits with the recruitment of factors that drive constriction , fission and immediate post - fission events ( FIG . 3 ) . Dynamin binding to the SH3 domain of BAR or F - BAR domain - containing proteins also relieves autoinhibitory intramolecular interactions that limit the membrane - binding activity of the BAR or F - BAR domain 186 , 187 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 81 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Actin comets ‘Tails’ of filamentous actin nucleated by endosomes or intracellular pathogens that propel the endosome or pathogen through the cytoplasm through the force produced by actin polymerization . Possible ties to microtubule dynamics ? Although dynamin interacts with microtubules in vitro 6 , dynamin only shows strong colocalization with microtubules in cells when its PH domain is mutated 112 . Moreover , disrup­ tion of dynamin function or lack of dynamin both result in a robust increase in the level of acetylated tubulin 19 , 112 , a modification associated with stable microtubules . This effect may be related either directly to the ability of dynamin to bind microtubules or to altered microtubule dynamics that result from alterations in the structure and functional state of the cell cortex ( for example , the great abundance of endocytic clathrin coated pits and of a robust accumulation of actin around them ) , where the stability of the plus end of microtubules is regulated . Control of cytokinesis . Dynamin 2 concentrates at sites of abscission and was implicated in the completion of cytokinesis 113 – 115 . Given the role of microtubules as well as membrane traffic during abscission 116 – 118 , and the con­ nections that dynamin has to each of these pathways , the precise role of dynamin in cytokinesis remains unclear . Interestingly , dynamin 2 is phosphorylated during mitosis by cyclin­dependent kinase 1 ( CDK1 ) , and its dephospho­ rylation by calcineurin at these sites is required during cytokinesis 114 . This phosphorylation cycle of dynamin 2 is reminiscent of the phosphorylation cycle of dynamin 1 in nerve terminals , which is mediated by CDK5 and calcineurin 119 ( FIG . 4 ) . The broad use of this signalling pathway may be indicative of its fundamental impor­ tance . Indeed , this extends to CDK1 phosphorylation of dynamin­related protein 1 ( DRP1 ) , which promotes mitocho ndrial fission during mitosis 120 . Endocytosis and signalling As clathrin­mediated endocytosis is the major pathway of receptor internalization , dynamin regulates the abundance on the plasma membrane , and thus the signalling output , of diverse receptors , including growth factor receptors , G protein­coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) , ionotropic neuro­ transmitter receptors , ion channels , cell adhesion proteins and signalling proteins , such as Notch 121 – 124 . This was first emphasized by the major neurogenic developmental effects of the D . melanogaster shibire mutation 125 , which arise from the inhibition of Notch signalling ( a phenotype that is also observed when dynamin is lost 124 ) . In addi­ tion to these indirect effects of dynamin on signalling , dynamin also interacts directly with a large collection of signalling proteins ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) . These interactions may help coordinate signal­ ling from receptors internalized by clathrin­coated pits with the dynamics of the pits and resulting vesicles , and they probably reflect an inseparable partnership between endocytosis and signalling . The broader effects of endo­ cytosis on signalling have been extensively studied and reviewed elsewhere 3 , 121 , 126 . A full and systematic assessment of how dynamin affects signalling has yet to be performed . However , dynamin loss significantly increases phosphorylation and activation of the Tyr kinase activated CDC42 kinase ( ACK ) , which interacts with clathrin and other factors implicated in clathrin­mediated endocytosis 127 . These findings suggest that dynamin may limit ACK signalling by promoting clathrin­coated pit turnover . Unique roles for dynamin isoforms Gene­knockout studies in mice 17 , 19 , 22 and the cells derived from them have provided numerous insights into dynamin function and the specific roles of the three dynamin isoforms . Dynamin 2­knockout mice die early in embryonic development , which is consistent with the ubiquitous expression and housekeeping functions of this isoform 19 . Conditional dynamin 2­knockout cells showed transient defects in clathrin­mediated endocytosi s . However , the severity of this phenotype was reduced by dynamin 1 upregulation , demonstrating that these two isoforms have at least some overlapping functions 19 , 20 . A double conditional knockout of dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 in mice 19 , and an analysis of fibroblasts derived from these mice , confirmed that dynamin has an essential role in clathrin­mediated endocytosis but also yielded unexpected results . Surprisingly , dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 double­knockout fibroblasts survived for several weeks in culture without proliferation 19 , which precluded analysis of the proposed role for dynamin in cytokinesis 128 . Most strikingly , dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 double­knockout cells accumulated endocytic clathrin­ coated pits connected to the plasma membrane by long tubular necks 19 ( FIG . 3 ) , similarly to the phenotype pro­ duced by some dynamin mutants 81 and to that observed in cells recovering from a temperature­induced block in endocytosis 129 . These tubular necks , which were highly dynamic , had an outer diameter of approximately 36 nm ( REF . 19 ) , which is consistent with that of tubules coated by BAR domain­containing proteins 71 . Accordingly , fluorescent imaging analysis shows that various BAR domain­containing proteins , such as endophilin , sort­ ing nexin 9 ( SNX9 ) , amphiphysin and tuba are present in these tubules 19 , 127 , as are N­WASP , components of the ARP2 / 3 complex , other actin regulatory proteins and F­actin 19 ( FIG . 3a ) . Thus , although dynamin may modulate early stages of clathrin­coated pit formation , it is essential only for a late step of clathrin­mediated endocytosis , when membrane fission occurs . Moreover , the key function of dynamin is to terminate the formation of a deeply invaginated pit , which is orchestrated by other factors . These studies have also helped elucidate the sequence of events that occur upstream of dynamin , by allowing otherwise transient intermediates to accumulate ( FIG . 3a ) . They showed that the actin cytoskeleton has a primary role in elongating the tubular necks of the coated pits and that the recruitment of BAR domain­containing proteins on tubules , which is mediated to some extent by their curvature­sensing prop­ erties , may help shape , stabilize and elongate the tubules in tight coordination with actin . Dynamin and the nervous system Endocytosis has a housekeeping role in neurons , as in other cells . However , endocytosis , and clathrin­mediated endocytosis in particular , also has a specialized role in nerve terminals , mediating the local recycling of synaptic vesicle membranes after exocytosis 130 ( FIG . 4a ) . Consistent R E V I E W S 82 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Neck G domain‘Stalk’ ‘Stalk’ ‘Foot’ PRD Double knockout a d Resting synapse b c Presynaptic Postsynaptic Clathrin Vesicle DynaminActin Dynamin 1 Stimulated synapse P P P P Calcineurin Calcineurin Syndapin Ca 2 + Wild type with this , disruption of synaptic transmission is the most dramatic and rapid effect produced by the temperature­ sensitive inactivation of dynamin in D . melanogaster 5 , 7 , 8 . Furthermore , perturbing dynamin impairs synaptic vesicle recycling , and thus neuronal communication , in severa l experimental models 5 , 17 , 22 , 23 , 131 – 136 . The fact that all three dynamins are expressed in neu­ rons , with both dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 being expressed primarily in the nervous system , raises questions about the specific roles that each of the three dynamins has here 17 , 21 . On the basis of knockout studies , only dynamin 2 is essential for the development of the nervous system 19 . Its conditional knockout using the Cre – loxP system in early neuronal progenitors 137 , prior to the onset of expression of dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 , drastically impairs brain develop ment ( S . M . F . and P . D . C . , unpublished observa­ tions ) . However , conditional deletion of dynamin 2 in neurons at an early postnatal stage 138 does not affect mouse viability or cause any discernible neurological phenotype ( S . M . F . and P . D . C . , unpublished observations ) . This indicates that , when dynamin 1 and / or dynamin 3 are expressed , they can replace the function of dynamin 2 . Dynamin 1 and nervous system function . Dynamin 1 is present at high concentrations in the nervous syste m , is concentrated at synapses and shows markedly increased levels during synaptogenesis 17 , 18 . Additionally , dynamin 1 and several other endocytic proteins , collectively called ‘dephosphins’ ( REFS 139 – 141 ) , are constitutively phos­ phorylated in resting synapses . This dynamin phospho­ rylation depends , at least in part , on CDK5 ( REF . 119 ) , and , upon nerve stimulation , dynamin is rapidly dephos­ phorylated by the calcium­ and calmodulin­dependent phosphatase calcineurin 139 ( FIG . 4d ) ; this is predicted to facilitate dynamin inter actions with endocytic proteins to promote endocytosis 48 . The direct interaction of a dynamin 1 splice variant ( the ‘b’ C­terminal variant ) with calcineurin , through a PXIXIT­like calcineurin­ binding motif ( PRITIS ) , further emphasizes the poten­ tial physiological importance of this calcium­dependent dephosphorylation reaction for synaptic function 24 , 25 ( S . Giovedi , S . M . F . and P . D . C . , unpublished observa­ tions ) . On the basis of these considerations , dynamin 1 was expected to be essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Figure 4 | Dynamin participates in synaptic vesicle recycling at neuronal synapses . a | From electron microscopy analysis , wild - type synapses ( left ) are characterized by an abundance of synaptic vesicles and very few clathrin - coated pits or clathrin - coated vesicles , which is consistent with the transient nature of clathrin - coated structures even during intense synaptic activity . At synapses that lack the great majority of their normal dynamin content ( for example , from dynamin 1 - knockout neurons or , even more strikingly , from dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double - knockout neurons ; right ) there is a depletion of synaptic vesicles and a striking accumulation of uniformly sized clathrin - coated pits , which bud from long invaginations of the plasma membrane 17 , 22 , 145 . A small increase in the abundance of clathrin - coated pits is also observed postsynaptically , where pits are more heterogeneous in size . b | Representative electron micrograph of a presynaptic terminal from a dynamin 1 - knockout neuron . Presynaptic vesicle clusters at two synaptic junctions are very small ( regions defined by dashed lines ) , whereas clathrin - coated vesicular structures are highly abundant and occupy the bulk of the terminal . As shown by electron tomography ( see part c ) , all such structures are coated pits , although in this thin section ( ~ 60 nm ) their tubular ‘stalks’ can only be seen in few cases , and their connection with the plasma membrane cannot be appreciated 17 , 145 . c | Partial electron tomography reconstruction from dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double - knockout nerve terminals , showing a long tubular plasma membrane invagination studded with numerous individual clathrin - coated pits . The arrow indicates the opening of this tubular structure at the peripheral presynaptic plasma membrane . d | In resting synapses , the Pro - rich domain ( PRD ) of dynamin 1 is phosphorylated , preventing association with syndapin . Upon stimulation and increased cytosolic calcium concentration , the protein phosphatase calcineurin , which directly binds a dynamin 1 splice variant ( xb ) , dephosphorylates dynamin 1 , allowing its interaction with syndapin . This regulated interaction is thought to promote synaptic vesicle endocytosis at times of elevated neuronal activity . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 83 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Calyx of Held A large synapse within the mammalian auditory brainstem that is suitable ( in mice and rats ) for presynaptic measurement of membrane capacitance and thus for the detection of synaptic vesicle exocytosis and endocytosis on a millisecond timescale . Dendritic spines Small ( ~ 1 μ m ) , spine - like , actin - rich protrusions of neuronal dendrites that function as postsynaptic sites for excitatory neurotransmission . They are closely opposed to presynaptic sites of neurotransmitter release and are enriched in neurotransmitter receptors . Charcot – Marie – Tooth disease A peripheral nervous system dysfunction that is characterized by slow action potential conduction owing to defects in either the myelin sheath , which insulates neuronal axons , or the axons themselves . Centronuclear myopathy A group of skeletal muscle diseases that result in muscle weakness and which are characterized by the abnormal central location of nuclei within muscle fibres . Surprisingly , dynamin 1 is dispensable for basic functions of the nervous system 17 . However , dynamin 1­knockout mice rapidly develop a severe neurological phenotype , fail to thrive and die within two weeks of birth 17 . Thus , dynamin 1 is not unique among the three dynamins in its ability to support synaptic vesicle recycling . However , the massive increase in dynamin 1 expression during the first postnatal weeks is critical to sustain the increase in syn­ aptic activity that occurs as the nervous system matures . Consistent with this , direct measurements of endocytic rates at the calyx of Held synapse in the mouse brain stem show that the endocytic rate in dynamin 1­knockout mice is normal after small stimuli but rapidly saturates and fails to scale with exocytosis as stimulus strength increases 136 . Dynamin 3 at the synapse . Dynamin 3 was pro­ posed to have a specific postsynaptic role , forming special ized endocytic sites that locally recycle AMPA ( α­amino­3­hydroxy­5­methyl­4­isoxazole propionic acid ) receptors in dendritic spines 142 . Consistent with this , dynamin 3 binds the ENA – VASP­homology 1 ( EVH1 ) domain of the postsynaptic protein Homer through a PXXF motif that is not present in dynamin 1 and dynamin 2 , and this property appeared consistent with the reported strong localization of dynamin 3 to dendritic spines 27 . However , this dendritic enrichment of dynamin 3 was not confirmed by another study , which instead emphasized an overlapping role with dynamin 1 presyn­ aptically 22 . Thus , it is unclear whether any one dynamin isoform shows preferential enrichment or function within the postsynaptic compartment , although strong evidence indicates that the dynamins play an important part in the endocytosis of neurotransmitter receptors 143 , 144 . Dynamin 3­knockout mice do not show any obvious pathological phenotype 22 . By contrast , dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double­knockout mice have a more severe phenotype than dynamin 1 single­knockout mice 22 . They develop normally in utero but , although they maintain a limited degree of synaptic transmission , they die within several hours after birth . This result supports a partially overlapping function of the two neuronally enriched dynamins in synaptic transmission . Synaptic transmission in dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double - knockout mice . Electrophysiological recordings from cultured dynamin 1 single­knockout neurons and dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double­knockout neurons con­ firmed that synaptic transmission can still occur in the absence of these neuronal dynamins , although the ability to release neurotransmitter , and to sustain release upon sustained stimulation , is strongly reduced 17 , 22 . Likewise , these mutants show a delay in compensatory endo cytosis in response to a stimulus 17 , 22 . The main ultrastructural defects observed are a reduced number of synaptic vesicles and a massive accumulation of endocytic clathrin­coated pits located along deep invaginations of the plasma mem­ brane 17 , 22 , 145 ( FIG . 4a , b ) . Dynamin 1 has been implicated in the bulk endocytosis that helps to recover synaptic vesicl e membrane in response to strong stimuli 146 . However , a form of bulk endocytosis still occurs in response to mas­ sive stimulation in both dynamin 1­knockout 136 , 145 and dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double­knockout neurons ( Y . Wu , S . M . F . and P . D . C . , unpublished observations ) . Overall , the results of these knockout studies in mice demonstrate that even the combined absence of dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 does not abolish synaptic vesicle recycling . It is most likely that dynamin 2 is suf­ ficient to support synaptic vesicle endocytosis , albeit at a slower rate . This conclusion is supported by the ability of dynamin 2 overexpression to , at least partially , rescue synaptic vesicle recycling defects in dynamin 1­knockou t neurons 17 . However , the additional occurrence of dynamin­independent synaptic vesicle recycling cannot be excluded . These findings support a model wherein the occurrence of two neuronally enriched dynamin iso­ forms ( dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 ) and the extremely high level s of one of them ( dynamin 1 ) are primarily needed not to support a specific form of endocytosis , either presynaptically or postsynaptically , but to allow clathrin­ mediated endocytosis to function over a very broad range of neuronal activities . Nonetheless , unique properties of dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 ( and their splice variants ) may fine­tune their functions in neurons . Dynamin links to human disease Roles of abnormal dynamin function in genetic disease have begun to emerge . Whereas mutations in dynamin 2 show links to tissue­specific diseases , mutations in dynamin 1 specifically affect the nervous system . Dynamin 2 and tissue - specific diseases . Multiple unique missense mutations , or short deletions , within the middle , PH and stalk domains of dynamin 2 have been identified in patients with two autosomal­dominant genetic con­ ditions , intermediate Charcot – Marie – Tooth disease 147 and centro nuclear myopathy 148 . Charcot – Marie – Tooth disease is a peripheral neuropathy that is characterized by muscular weakness of the extremities and defects in neuronal axon conduction . Centronuclear myopathy is a group of con­ genital diseases characterized by muscle weakness . The dominant mode in which these disorders are inherited supports the idea that the mutant dynamin gains a toxic function ( see Supplementary information S2 ( box ) ) . How perturbed dynamin 2 function results in these conditions is unclear . There is no clear correlatio n between the diseases and the mutation sites in the dynamin structure , making mechanistic interpretations difficult . It is interesting to note , however , that mutations in the PH domain of dynamin 2 in patients with Charcot – Marie – Tooth disease are more frequently located in the N­terminal portion of the domain , whereas mutations in patients with centronuclear myopathy are more frequently located in the C­terminal portion of the dynamin 2 PH domain 149 . Structural analysis shows that , although d isease­linked mutations in the PH and stalk domains are distant within the primary sequence of dynamin , they actually cluster at an interface between these two domains and so can potentially influence dynamin oligomeriza­ tion 31 . It additionally remains unknown why altering the function of dynamin 2 affects certain tissues so selectively . Mutations in amphiphysin 2 , a major binding partner of dynamin in brain and muscle tissues , can also give rise R E V I E W S 84 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved to an autosomal­recessive form of centronuclear myo­ pathy 150 . The muscle­specific isoform of amphiphysin 2 is expressed at very high levels and affects muscle func­ tion 151 , raising the possibility that muscle pathology in these centronuclear myopathies involves an interaction between dynamin and amphiphysin 2 . A role for dynamin 1 in epilepsy ? So far , no human diseas e has been mapped to the dynamin 1 or dynamin 3 genes . Nonetheless , given the prominent expression and func­ tions of these proteins in neurons , mutations that produce neurological phenotypes are likely to occur . Supporting this possibility , a spontaneous mouse mutation — creatin g the fitful mutant mouse — that causes seizures and hearin g impairment maps to the dynamin 1 gene 152 . This missense mutation ( Ala408Tyr ) occurs in an alternatively spliced region within the middle domain of dynamin 1 and may affect its oligomerization . Electrophysiological recordings from neurons of these mice demonstrated defects in GABA ( γ­aminobutyric acid ) ­ergic neurotrans­ mission in response to prolonged stimulation 152 , a defect that is similar to that of dynamin 1­knockout mice 17 , 145 . Thus , subtle perturbations of dynamin 1 function that are otherwise compatible with life can enhance suscept­ ibility to seizure , and dynamin 1 should be considered as a candidate gene in idiopathic cases of human epilepsy . It is of further intere st that knockout mice for mutations in any of three dynamin­binding proteins , amphiphysin 153 , syndapin ( also known as PACSIN ) 154 and endophilin 155 , also have seizures . Additionally , mutations in human synapsin 1 , another protein that has been implicated in synaptic vesicl e recycling , have been identified in patients with epilepsy 156 . It is most likely that impairing synaptic vesicle recycling lowers the threshold for seizure through greater effects on inhibitory neurons that have a high rate of synapti c vesicle turnover and thus a high endocytic demand . Another spontaneous animal model with impaired dynamin 1 function is exercise­induced collapse , a reces­ sive condition that has been observed in dogs 157 . These otherwise healthy animals display acute and severe muscl e weakness resulting in a life­threatening collapse in response to intense exercise or excitement . The under­ lying missense mutation , Arg256Leu , is located within the dynamin 1 G domain . The functional consequence of this mutation on GTPase activity remains uncharacterized . Conclusions and future questions The function of dynamin has been extensively investi­ gated in vitro and in vivo , and this has provided power ful insights into its cellular roles . Studies of dynamin have also helped identify factors that deform membranes and / or sense membrane curvature and that participate in the control of membrane fission . Cryo­EM and crys­ tallographic studies of dynamin and other members of the dynamin superfamily have provided important new insights into how it mediates membrane fission . However , major question s remain open . The precise mechanism through which dynamin achieves fission remains to be elucidated . The similari­ ties and evolutionary relationship between DLPs that mediate membrane fission ( such as dynamin and DRP1 ) and those that mediate membrane fusion ( such as atlastin , optic atrophy 1 homologue ( OPA1 ) and mitofusin ) are intriguing and unexpected because they suggest analogies between the mechanisms that mediate these seemingly opposite membrane­remodelling processes . Elucidating the basis of these similarities will be important . Likewise , it will be interesting to determine why DLPs are needed for only a subset of membrane­fissio n reactions . Other GTPases have been implicated in some membran e­ budding reactions that do not involve dynamin or other DLPs : for example , the ADP­ribosylation factor 1 ( ARF1 ) GTPase affects coatome r complex I ( COPI ) ­dependent budding from the Golgi complex and the secretion­ associated RAS­related 1 ( SAR1 ) GTPase that regulates COPII­dependent budding from the endoplasmic reticu­ lum 158 . However , both ARF1 and SAR1 are classic regu­ latory GTPases that function by recruiting downstream effectors , indicating that they use a fundamentally differ­ ent mechanism to that of dynamin . The two intracellular fission reactions besides endocytosis that clearly require DLPs are the fission of mitochondria 159 – 162 and the fission of chloroplasts ( in plants ) . The endo symbiotic origin of these organelles implies that their outer membrane is ancestrally derived from the plasma membrane , possi­ bly explaining why the fission of their outer membrane requires a dynamin ( FIG . 1 ) . Other exciting areas that need to be explored include possible non­endocytic functions of dynamin , particu­ larly those involving the cytoskeleton ( and the actin cytoskeleton in particular ) . The possibility that dynamin could be a target for cancer therapy , because of its role in either cytokinesis 114 or cell migration and tissue inva­ sion 163 , deserves consideration . Interestingly , the invasive activity of pancreatic ductal carcinoma was associated with elevated dynamin 2 expression 163 . Are the poten­ tial non­endocytic actions of dynamin mediated by its polymerization in a manner that is analogous to that at the neck of clathrin­coated pits ? Structural studies indicate that helical polymerization of dynamin around tubular templates 30 – 33 is optimally suited to promoting G domain dimerization and thus GTP hydrolysis . However , perhaps other structural configurations are possible . It can be anticipated that the range of known genetic diseases resulting directly from mutations in dynamin genes will expand . Interestingly , several genes impli­ cated in endocytosis , including CALM and genes that encode the dynamin­binding proteins CD2­associated protein ( CD2AP ) and amphiphysin 2 , have been linked to Alzheimer’s disease by genome­wide association stud­ ies 164 , 165 . Dynamin 2 also mediates the internalization and infectivity of bacterial 166 and viral pathogens , including HIV 2 , 26 . In addition to these possibilities , polymorphisms within dynamin genes may contribute to susceptibility to many other specific diseases , as dynamin­dependent endocytosis is implicated in multiple processes that are relevant to disease . Twenty years after the discovery that dynamin has a critical role in endocytosis , the function and mechanisms by which this protein acts remain a most important and timely field of investigation . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 85 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 1 . McMahon , H . T . & Boucrot , E . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 517 – 533 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Mercer , J . , Schelhaas , M . & Helenius , A . Virus entry by endocytosis . Ann . Rev . Biochem . 79 , 803 – 833 ( 2010 ) . 3 . Scita , G . & Di Fiore , P . P . The endocytic matrix . Nature 463 , 464 – 473 ( 2010 ) . 4 . Howes , M . T . , Mayor , S . & Parton , R . G . Molecules , mechanisms , and cellular roles of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 519 – 527 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Koenig , J . H . & Ikeda , K . Disappearance and reformation of synaptic vesicle membrane upon transmitter release observed under reversible blockage of membrane retrieval . J . Neurosci . 9 , 3844 – 3860 ( 1989 ) . Shows the depletion of synaptic vesicles and accumulation of collared pits in the plasma membrane of shibire mutant synapses upon acute stimulation at the non - permissive temperature , and thus nicely demonstrates the critical role played by dynamin in synaptic vesicle recycling . 6 . Shpetner , H . S . & Vallee , R . B . Identification of dynamin , a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules . Cell 59 , 421 – 432 ( 1989 ) . 7 . van der Bliek , A . M . & Meyerowitz , E . M . Dynamin - like protein encoded by the Drosophila shibire gene associated with vesicular traffic . Nature 351 , 411 – 414 ( 1991 ) . 8 . Chen , M . S . et al . Multiple forms of dynamin are encoded by shibire , a Drosophila gene involved in endocytosis . Nature 351 , 583 – 586 ( 1991 ) . References 7 and 8 identify dynamin as the product of the shibire gene and set the stage for studies of dynamin as a critical endocytic protein . 9 . Obar , R . A . , Collins , C . A . , Hammarback , J . A . , Shpetner , H . S . & Vallee , R . B . Molecular cloning of the microtubule - associated mechanochemical enzyme dynamin reveals homology with a new family of GTP - binding proteins . Nature 347 , 256 – 261 ( 1990 ) . 10 . Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . & De Camilli , P . Tubular membrane invaginations coated by dynamin rings are induced by GTP - γ S in nerve terminals . Nature 374 , 186 – 190 ( 1995 ) . 11 . Hinshaw , J . E . & Schmid , S . L . Dynamin self - assembles into rings suggesting a mechanism for coated vesicle budding . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 ( 1995 ) . References 10 and 11 show the ability of dynamin to polymerize into helices around membrane templates and at the base of clathrin - coated pits , leading to a model wherein the assembly of dynamin into helical polymers followed by conformational changes triggered by GTP hydrolysis could lead to membrane fission . 12 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . & Schmid , S . L . Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 ( 1994 ) . 13 . Herskovits , J . S . , Burgess , C . C . , Obar , R . A . & Vallee , R . B . Effects of mutant rat dynamin on endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 565 – 578 ( 1993 ) . 14 . van der Bliek , A . M . et al . Mutations in human dynamin block an intermediate stage in coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 553 – 563 ( 1993 ) . Demonstrates that dynamin mutants with impaired GTP binding and hydrolysis exert dominant - negative effects on clathrin - mediated endocytosis . 15 . Marks , B . et al . GTPase activity of dynamin and resulting conformation change are essential for endocytosis . Nature 410 , 231 – 235 ( 2001 ) . Shows the importance of GTP hydrolysis by dynamin in the endocytic actions of dynamin , arguing against a regulatory GTPase - like function for dynamin . 16 . Cao , H . , Garcia , F . & McNiven , M . A . Differential distribution of dynamin isoforms in mammalian cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 2595 – 2609 ( 1998 ) . 17 . Ferguson , S . M . et al . A selective activity - dependent requirement for dynamin 1 in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Science 316 , 570 – 574 ( 2007 ) . Reveals using dynamin 1 - knockout mice that , contrary to expectations , dynamin 1 is not required for the making of synaptic vesicles but rather serves to enhance the efficiency of this clathrin - mediated process at synapses . 18 . Nakata , T . et al . Predominant and developmentally regulated expression of dynamin in neurons . Neuron 7 , 461 – 469 ( 1991 ) . 19 . Ferguson , S . M . et al . Coordinated actions of actin and BAR proteins upstream of dynamin at endocytic clathrin - coated pits . Dev . Cell 17 , 811 – 822 ( 2009 ) . Analyses the endocytic intermediates that accumulate in cells lacking dynamin and indicates a role for F - actin in the recruitment of BAR domain - containing proteins to the tubular neck of clathrin - coated pits . 20 . Liu , Y . W . , Surka , M . C . , Schroeter , T . , Lukiyanchuk , V . & Schmid , S . L . Isoform and splice - variant specific functions of dynamin - 2 revealed by analysis of conditional knock - out cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 5347 – 5359 ( 2008 ) . 21 . Cook , T . A . , Urrutia , R . & McNiven , M . A . Identification of dynamin 2 , an isoform ubiquitously expressed in rat tissues . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 644 – 648 ( 1994 ) . 22 . Raimondi , A . et al . Overlapping role of dynamin isoforms in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Neuron 70 , 1100 – 1114 ( 2011 ) . Reports that , although dynamin 3 - knockout mice lack a discernible phenotype , analysis of dynamin 1 and dynamin 3 double - knockout mice reveals a role for both dynamins in the recycling of synaptic vesicles . 23 . Clark , S . G . , Shurland , D . L . , Meyerowitz , E . M . , Bargmann , C . I . & van der Bliek , A . M . A dynamin GTPase mutation causes a rapid and reversible temperature - inducible locomotion defect in C . elegans . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 10438 – 10443 ( 1997 ) . 24 . Xue , J . et al . Calcineurin selectively docks with the dynamin Ixb splice variant to regulate activity - dependent bulk endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 30295 – 30303 ( 2011 ) . 25 . Bodmer , D . , Ascano , M . & Kuruvilla , R . Isoform - specific dephosphorylation of dynamin1 by calcineurin couples neurotrophin receptor endocytosis to axonal growth . Neuron 70 , 1085 – 1099 ( 2011 ) . 26 . Pizzato , M . et al . Dynamin 2 is required for the enhancement of HIV - 1 infectivity by Nef . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 6812 – 6817 ( 2007 ) . 27 . Gray , N . W . et al . Dynamin 3 is a component of the postsynapse , where it interacts with mGluR5 and Homer . Curr . Biol . 13 , 510 – 515 ( 2003 ) . 28 . Liu , Y . W . et al . Differential curvature sensing and generating activities of dynamin isoforms provide opportunities for tissue - specific regulation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , E234 – E242 ( 2011 ) . 29 . Gasper , R . , Meyer , S . , Gotthardt , K . , Sirajuddin , M . & Wittinghofer , A . It takes two to tango : regulation of G proteins by dimerization . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 423 – 429 ( 2009 ) . 30 . Chappie , J . S . , Acharya , S . , Leonard , M . , Schmid , S . L . & Dyda , F . G . domain dimerization controls dynamin’s assembly - stimulated GTPase activity . Nature 465 , 435 – 440 ( 2010 ) . Reveals , through an analysis of the structure of a dynamin G domain – GED fusion protein , a need for dynamin G domain dimerization in mediating GTP hydrolysis and proposes that such dimerization occurs between rungs of the dynamin helix . 31 . Faelber , K . et al . Crystal structure of nucleotide - free dynamin . Nature 477 , 561 – 566 ( 2011 ) . 32 . Ford , M . G . J . , Jenni , S . & Nunnari , J . The crystal structure of dynamin . Nature 477 , 556 – 560 ( 2011 ) . Describes the first crystal structures of nearly full - length dynamin and reveals extensive interactions that support dynamin assembly into polymeric helices . 33 . Chappie , J . S . et al . A pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer identifies a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 ( 2011 ) . Comparisons between dynamin G domain – GED fusion protein structures that mimic the GTP - bound state and ones that mimic a transition state suggest that large conformational changes accompany GTP hydrolysis . 34 . Gao , S . et al . Structural basis of oligomerization in the stalk region of dynamin - like MxA . Nature 465 , 502 – 506 ( 2010 ) . 35 . Ingerman , E . et al . Dnm1 forms spirals that are structurally tailored to fit mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 1021 – 1027 ( 2005 ) . 36 . Bian , X . et al . Structures of the atlastin GTPase provide insight into homotypic fusion of endoplasmic reticulum membranes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 3976 – 3981 ( 2011 ) . 37 . Byrnes , L . J . & Sondermann , H . Structural basis for the nucleotide - dependent dimerization of the large G protein atlastin - 1 / SPG3A . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 2216 – 2221 ( 2011 ) . 38 . Chappie , J . S . et al . A pseudoatomic model of the dynamin polymer identifies a hydrolysis - dependent powerstroke . Cell 147 , 209 – 222 ( 2011 ) . 39 . Sever , S . , Muhlberg , A . B . & Schmid , S . L . Impairment of dynamin’s GAP domain stimulates receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature 398 , 481 – 486 ( 1999 ) . 40 . Low , H . H . & Lowe , J . A bacterial dynamin - like protein . Nature 444 , 766 – 769 ( 2006 ) . 41 . Narayanan , R . , Leonard , M . , Song , B . D . , Schmid , S . L . & Ramaswami , M . An internal GAP domain negatively regulates presynaptic dynamin in vivo : a two - step model for dynamin function . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 117 – 126 ( 2005 ) . 42 . Ferguson , K . M . , Lemmon , M . A . , Schlessinger , J . & Sigler , P . B . Crystal structure at 2 . 2 Å resolution of the pleckstrin homology domain from human dynamin . Cell 79 , 199 – 209 ( 1994 ) . 43 . Zheng , J . et al . Identification of the binding site for acidic phospholipids on the PH domain of dynamin : implications for stimulation of GTPase activity . J . Mol . Biol . 255 , 14 – 21 ( 1996 ) . 44 . Lee , A . , Frank , D . W . , Marks , M . S . & Lemmon , M . A . Dominant - negative inhibition of receptor - mediated endocytosis by a dynamin - 1 mutant with a defective pleckstrin homology domain . Curr . Biol . 9 , 261 – 264 ( 1999 ) . 45 . Vallis , Y . , Wigge , P . , Marks , B . , Evans , P . R . & McMahon , H . T . Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 , 257 – 260 ( 1999 ) . 46 . Bethoney , K . A . , King , M . C . , Hinshaw , J . E . , Ostap , E . M . & Lemmon , M . A . A possible effector role for the pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain of dynamin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 13359 – 13364 ( 2009 ) . 47 . Ramachandran , R . et al . Membrane insertion of the pleckstrin homology domain variable loop 1 is critical for dynamin - catalyzed vesicle scission . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 4630 – 4639 ( 2009 ) . 48 . Anggono , V . et al . Syndapin I is the phosphorylation - regulated dynamin I partner in synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nature Neurosci . 9 , 752 – 760 ( 2006 ) . Finds that syndapin is the major dynamin - interact - ing protein in the brain and that this interaction is regulated by dynamin phosphorylation , potentially coupling this interaction to the activity status of neurons . 49 . Grabs , D . et al . The SH3 domain of amphiphysin binds the proline - rich domain of dynamin at a single site that defines a new SH3 binding consensus sequence . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13419 – 13425 ( 1997 ) . 50 . Lundmark , R . & Carlsson , S . R . Regulated membrane recruitment of dynamin - 2 mediated by sorting nexin 9 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 42694 – 42702 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Shpetner , H . S . , Herskovits , J . S . & Vallee , R . B . A binding site for SH3 domains targets dynamin to coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 13 – 16 ( 1996 ) . 52 . Mooren , O . L . , Kotova , T . I . , Moore , A . J . & Schafer , D . A . Dynamin2 GTPase and cortactin remodel actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 23995 – 24005 ( 2009 ) . 53 . Roux , A . et al . Membrane curvature controls dynamin polymerization . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 4141 – 4146 ( 2010 ) . 54 . Stowell , M . H . , Marks , B . , Wigge , P . & McMahon , H . T . Nucleotide - dependent conformational changes in dynamin : evidence for a mechanochemical molecular spring . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 27 – 32 ( 1999 ) . 55 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . & De Camilli , P . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane fission . Nature 441 , 528 – 531 ( 2006 ) . Visualizes dynamin - mediated membrane fission in an in vitro assay and reveals contributions by dynamin - mediated membrane constriction and membrane tension to membrane fission . 56 . Sweitzer , S . M . & Hinshaw , J . E . Dynamin undergoes a GTP - dependent conformational change causing vesiculation . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 ( 1998 ) . 57 . Takei , K . et al . Generation of coated intermediates of clathrin - mediated endocytosis on protein - free liposomes . Cell 94 , 131 – 141 ( 1998 ) . 58 . Ramachandran , R . et al . The dynamin middle domain is critical for tetramerization and higher - order self - assembly . EMBO J . 26 , 559 – 566 ( 2007 ) . 59 . Low , H . H . & Lowe , J . Dynamin architecture — from monomer to polymer . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 20 , 791 – 798 ( 2010 ) . 60 . Wu , M . et al . Coupling between clathrin - dependent endocytic budding and F - BAR - dependent tubulation in a cell - free system . Nature Cell Biol . 12 , 902 – 908 ( 2010 ) . R E V I E W S 86 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 61 . Bashkirov , P . V . et al . GTPase cycle of dynamin is coupled to membrane squeeze and release , leading to spontaneous fission . Cell 135 , 1276 – 1286 ( 2008 ) . Describes an in vitro membrane fission assay that suggests a role for repeated assembly and disassembly of short dynamin scaffolds in the triggering of membrane fission . 62 . Danino , D . , Moon , K . H . & Hinshaw , J . E . Rapid constriction of lipid bilayers by the mechanochemical enzyme dynamin . J . Struct . Biol . 147 , 259 – 267 ( 2004 ) . 63 . Pucadyil , T . J . & Schmid , S . L . Real - time visualization of dynamin - catalyzed membrane fission and vesicle release . Cell 135 , 1263 – 1275 ( 2008 ) . Reports an in vitro assay that closely mimics the in vivo situation by allowing observation of dynamin - mediated membrane fission in the continuous presence of GTP , and reveals the fluctuating assembly and disassembly of dynamin leading up to membrane fission . 64 . Ghosh , A . , Praefcke , G . J . , Renault , L . , Wittinghofer , A . & Herrmann , C . How guanylate - binding proteins achieve assembly - stimulated processive cleavage of GTP to GMP . Nature 440 , 101 – 104 ( 2006 ) . 65 . Binns , D . D . et al . The mechanism of GTP hydrolysis by dynamin II : a transient kinetic study . Biochemistry 39 , 7188 – 7196 ( 2000 ) . 66 . Krishnan , K . S . et al . Nucleoside diphosphate kinase , a source of GTP , is required for dynamin - dependent synaptic vesicle recycling . Neuron 30 , 197 – 210 ( 2001 ) . 67 . Taylor , M . J . , Perrais , D . & Merrifield , C . J . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1000604 ( 2011 ) . Details a systematic analysis of the recruitment of a large collection of proteins to clathrin and their relationship to the membrane fission event . 68 . Collins , A . , Warrington , A . , Taylor , K . A . & Svitkina , T . Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1167 – 1175 ( 2011 ) . 69 . Liu , J . , Sun , Y . , Drubin , D . G . & Oster , G . F . The mechanochemistry of endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000204 ( 2009 ) . 70 . Chang - Ileto , B . et al . Synaptojanin 1 - mediated PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 hydrolysis is modulated by membrane curvature and facilitates membrane fission . Dev . Cell 20 , 206 – 218 ( 2011 ) . 71 . Frost , A . , Unger , V . M . & De Camilli , P . The BAR domain superfamily : membrane - molding macromolecules . Cell 137 , 191 – 196 ( 2009 ) . 72 . Farsad , K . et al . Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 193 – 200 ( 2001 ) . 73 . Takei , K . , Slepnev , V . I . , Haucke , V . & De Camilli , P . Functional partnership between amphiphysin and dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 33 – 39 ( 1999 ) . 74 . Huang , F . , Khvorova , A . , Marshall , W . & Sorkin , A . Analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor by RNA interference . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 16657 – 16661 ( 2004 ) . 75 . Henne , W . M . et al . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 , 1281 – 1284 ( 2010 ) . 76 . Traub , L . M . Tickets to ride : selecting cargo for clathrin - regulated internalization . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 583 – 596 ( 2009 ) . 77 . Kirchhausen , T . Adaptors for clathrin - mediated traffic . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 705 – 732 ( 1999 ) . 78 . Saffarian , S . , Cocucci , E . & Kirchhausen , T . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000191 ( 2009 ) . 79 . Itoh , T . et al . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell 9 , 791 – 804 ( 2005 ) . 80 . Perera , R . M . , Zoncu , R . , Lucast , L . , De Camilli , P . & Toomre , D . Two synaptojanin 1 isoforms are recruited to clathrin - coated pits at different stages . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 19332 – 19337 ( 2006 ) . 81 . Damke , H . , Binns , D . D . , Ueda , H . , Schmid , S . L . & Baba , T . Dynamin GTPase domain mutants block endocytic vesicle formation at morphologically distinct stages . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2578 – 2589 ( 2001 ) . 82 . Massol , R . , Boll , W . , Griffin , A . M . & Kirchhausen , T . burst of auxilin recruitment determines the onset of clathrin - coated vesicle uncoating . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 10265 – 10270 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Barylko , B . et al . Synergistic activation of dynamin GTPase by Grb2 and phosphoinositides . J . Biol . Chem 273 , 3791 – 3797 ( 1998 ) . 84 . Zoncu , R . et al . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 3793 – 3798 ( 2007 ) . 85 . Gu , C . et al . Direct dynamin - actin interactions regulate the actin cytoskeleton . EMBO J . 29 , 3593 – 3606 ( 2010 ) . 86 . Conibear , E . Converging views of endocytosis in yeast and mammals . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 513 – 518 ( 2010 ) . 87 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . & Drubin , D . G . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 , 305 – 320 ( 2005 ) . 88 . Nannapaneni , S . et al . The yeast dynamin - like protein Vps1 : vps1 mutations perturb the internalization and the motility of endocytic vesicles and endosomes via disorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 89 , 499 – 508 ( 2010 ) . 89 . Smaczynska - de , R . II . et al . Yeast dynamin Vps1 and amphiphysin Rvs167 function together during endocytosis . Traffic 14 Nov 2011 ( doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2011 . 01311 . x ) . 90 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . & Drubin , D . G . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 – 414 ( 2006 ) . 91 . Aghamohammadzadeh , S . & Ayscough , K . R . Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 11 , 1039 – 1042 ( 2009 ) . 92 . Pelkmans , L . , Puntener , D . & Helenius , A . Local actin polymerization and dynamin recruitment in SV40 - induced internalization of caveolae . Science 296 , 535 – 539 ( 2002 ) . 93 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 ( 1998 ) . 94 . Jones , S . M . , Howell , K . E . , Henley , J . R . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . Role of dynamin in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . Science 279 , 573 – 577 ( 1998 ) . 95 . Derivery , E . et al . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev . Cell 17 , 712 – 723 ( 2009 ) . 96 . Kreitzer , G . , Marmorstein , A . , Okamoto , P . , Vallee , R . & Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Kinesin and dynamin are required for post - Golgi transport of a plasma - membrane protein . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 125 – 127 ( 2000 ) . 97 . Mesaki , K . , Tanabe , K . , Obayashi , M . , Oe , N . & Takei , K . Fission of tubular endosomes triggers endosomal acidification and movement . PloS ONE 6 , e19764 ( 2011 ) . 98 . Rothman , J . H . , Raymond , C . K . , Gilbert , T . , O’Hara , P . J . & Stevens , T . H . A putative GTP binding protein homologous to interferon - inducible Mx proteins performs an essential function in yeast protein sorting . Cell 61 , 1063 – 1074 ( 1990 ) . 99 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Schmid , S . L . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 964 – 975 ( 2005 ) . 100 . Boulant , S . , Kural , C . , Zeeh , J . C . , Ubelmann , F . & Kirchhausen , T . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 1124 – 1131 ( 2011 ) . 101 . Schlunck , G . et al . Modulation of Rac localization and function by dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 256 – 267 ( 2004 ) . 102 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 ( 2003 ) . 103 . Gold , E . S . et al . Dynamin 2 is required for phagocytosis in macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 190 , 1849 – 1856 ( 1999 ) . 104 . Baldassarre , M . et al . Dynamin participates in focal extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1074 – 1084 ( 2003 ) . 105 . Ochoa , G . C . et al . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 – 389 ( 2000 ) . 106 . Lee , E . & De Camilli , P . Dynamin at actin tails . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 161 – 166 ( 2002 ) . 107 . Orth , J . D . , Krueger , E . W . , Cao , H . & McNiven , M . A . The large GTPase dynamin regulates actin comet formation and movement in living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 167 – 172 ( 2002 ) . 108 . Unsworth , K . E . et al . Dynamin is required for F - actin assembly and pedestal formation by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli ( EPEC ) . Cell . Microbiol . 9 , 438 – 449 ( 2007 ) . 109 . Kubler , E . & Riezman , H . Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 12 , 2855 – 2862 ( 1993 ) . 110 . Gomez , T . S . et al . Dynamin 2 regulates T cell activation by controlling actin polymerization at the immunological synapse . Nature Immunol . 6 , 261 – 270 ( 2005 ) . 111 . Yamada , H . et al . Dynasore , a dynamin inhibitor , suppresses lamellipodia formation and cancer cell invasion by destabilizing actin filaments . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 390 , 1142 – 1148 ( 2009 ) . 112 . Tanabe , K . & Takei , K . Dynamic instability of microtubules requires dynamin 2 and is impaired in a Charcot – Marie – Tooth mutant . J . Cell Biol . 185 , 939 – 948 ( 2009 ) . 113 . Skop , A . R . , Liu , H . , Yates , J . 3rd , Meyer , B . J . & Heald , R . Dissection of the mammalian midbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis mechanisms . Science 305 , 61 – 66 ( 2004 ) . 114 . Chircop , M . et al . Phosphorylation of dynamin II at serine - 764 is associated with cytokinesis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1813 , 1689 – 1699 ( 2011 ) . 115 . Thompson , H . M . , Skop , A . R . , Euteneuer , U . , Meyer , B . J . & McNiven , M . A . The large GTPase dynamin associates with the spindle midzone and is required for cytokinesis . Curr . Biol . 12 , 2111 – 2117 ( 2002 ) . 116 . Goss , J . W . & Toomre , D . K . Both daughter cells traffic and exocytose membrane at the cleavage furrow during mammalian cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 181 , 1047 – 1054 ( 2008 ) . 117 . Gromley , A . et al . Centriolin anchoring of exocyst and SNARE complexes at the midbody is required for secretory - vesicle - mediated abscission . Cell 123 , 75 – 87 ( 2005 ) . 118 . Morita , E . et al . Human ESCRT and ALIX proteins interact with proteins of the midbody and function in cytokinesis . EMBO J . 26 , 4215 – 4227 ( 2007 ) . 119 . Tan , T . C . et al . Cdk5 is essential for synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 701 – 710 ( 2003 ) . 120 . Kashatus , D . F . et al . RALA and RALBP1 regulate mitochondrial fission at mitosis . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 1108 – 1115 ( 2011 ) . 121 . Sorkin , A . & von Zastrow , M . Endocytosis and signalling : intertwining molecular networks . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 609 – 622 ( 2009 ) . 122 . Sigismund , S . et al . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev . Cell 15 , 209 – 219 ( 2008 ) . 123 . Vieira , A . V . , Lamaze , C . & Schmid , S . L . Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 274 , 2086 – 2089 ( 1996 ) . 124 . Windler , S . L . & Bilder , D . Endocytic internalization routes required for Delta / Notch signaling . Curr . Biol . 20 , 538 – 543 ( 2010 ) . 125 . Poodry , C . A . shibire , a neurogenic mutant of Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 138 , 464 – 472 ( 1990 ) . 126 . Polo , S . & Di Fiore , P . P . Endocytosis conducts the cell signaling orchestra . Cell 124 , 897 – 900 ( 2006 ) . 127 . Shen , H . et al . Constitutive activated Cdc42 - associated kinase ( Ack ) phosphorylation at arrested endocytic clathrin - coated pits of cells that lack dynamin . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 493 – 502 ( 2011 ) . 128 . Chircop , M . et al . Inhibition of dynamin by dynole 34 – 2 induces cell death following cytokinesis failure in cancer cells . Mol . Cancer Ther . 10 , 1553 – 1562 ( 2011 ) . 129 . Goldenthal , K . L . , Pastan , I . & Willingham , M . C . Initial steps in receptor - mediated endocytosis . The influence of temperature on the shape and distribution of plasma membrane clathrin - coated pits in cultured mammalian cells . Exp . Cell Res . 152 , 558 – 564 ( 1984 ) . 130 . Dittman , J . & Ryan , T . A . Molecular circuitry of endocytosis at nerve terminals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 25 , 133 – 160 ( 2009 ) . 131 . Newton , A . J . , Kirchhausen , T . & Murthy , V . N . Inhibition of dynamin completely blocks compensatory synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 17955 – 17960 ( 2006 ) . 132 . Shupliakov , O . et al . Synaptic vesicle endocytosis impaired by disruption of dynamin - SH3 domain interactions . Science 276 , 259 – 263 ( 1997 ) . 133 . Sundborger , A . et al . An endophilin – dynamin complex promotes budding of clathrin - coated vesicles during synaptic vesicle recycling . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 133 – 143 ( 2011 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | FEBRUARY 2012 | 87 © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 134 . Xu , J . et al . GTP - independent rapid and slow endocytosis at a central synapse . Nature Neurosci . 11 , 45 – 53 ( 2008 ) . 135 . Yamashita , T . , Hige , T . & Takahashi , T . Vesicle endocytosis requires dynamin - dependent GTP hydrolysis at a fast CNS synapse . Science 307 , 124 – 127 ( 2005 ) . 136 . Lou , X . , Paradise , S . , Ferguson , S . M . & De Camilli , P . Selective saturation of slow endocytosis at a giant glutamatergic central synapse lacking dynamin 1 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 17555 – 17560 ( 2008 ) . 137 . Isaka , F . et al . Ectopic expression of the bHLH gene Math1 disturbs neural development . Eur . J . Neurosci . 11 , 2582 – 2588 ( 1999 ) . 138 . Dewachter , I . et al . Neuronal deficiency of presenilin 1 inhibits amyloid plaque formation and corrects hippocampal long - term potentiation but not a cognitive defect of amyloid precursor protein [ V717I ] transgenic mice . J . Neurosci . 22 , 3445 – 3453 ( 2002 ) . 139 . Cousin , M . A . & Robinson , P . J . The dephosphins : dephosphorylation by calcineurin triggers synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Trends Neurosci . 24 , 659 – 665 ( 2001 ) . 140 . Lee , S . Y . , Wenk , M . R . , Kim , Y . , Nairn , A . C . & De Camilli , P . Regulation of synaptojanin 1 by cyclin - dependent kinase 5 at synapses . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 546 – 551 ( 2004 ) . 141 . McPherson , P . S . , Takei , K . , Schmid , S . L . & De Camilli , P . p145 , a major Grb2 - binding protein in brain , is co - localized with dynamin in nerve terminals where it undergoes activity - dependent dephosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30132 – 30139 ( 1994 ) . 142 . Lu , J . et al . Postsynaptic positioning of endocytic zones and AMPA receptor cycling by physical coupling of dynamin - 3 to Homer . Neuron 55 , 874 – 889 ( 2007 ) . 143 . Carroll , R . C . et al . Dynamin - dependent endocytosis of ionotropic glutamate receptors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 14112 – 14117 ( 1999 ) . 144 . Perez - Otano , I . et al . Endocytosis and synaptic removal of NR3A - containing NMDA receptors by PACSIN1 / syndapin1 . Nature Neurosci . 9 , 611 – 621 ( 2006 ) . 145 . Hayashi , M . et al . Cell - and stimulus - dependent heterogeneity of synaptic vesicle endocytic recycling mechanisms revealed by studies of dynamin 1 - null neurons . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 2175 – 2180 ( 2008 ) . 146 . Clayton , E . L . et al . The phospho - dependent dynamin - syndapin interaction triggers activity - dependent bulk endocytosis of synaptic vesicles . J . Neurosci . 29 , 7706 – 7717 ( 2009 ) . 147 . Zuchner , S . et al . Mutations in the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin 2 cause dominant intermediate Charcot – Marie – Tooth disease . Nature Genet . 37 , 289 – 294 ( 2005 ) . 148 . Bitoun , M . et al . Mutations in dynamin 2 cause dominant centronuclear myopathy . Nature Genet . 37 , 1207 – 1209 ( 2005 ) . 149 . Durieux , A . C . , Prudhon , B . , Guicheney , P . & Bitoun , M . Dynamin 2 and human diseases . J . Mol . Med . 88 , 339 – 350 ( 2010 ) . 150 . Nicot , A . S . et al . Mutations in amphiphysin 2 ( BIN1 ) disrupt interaction with dynamin 2 and cause autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy . Nature Genet . 39 , 1134 – 1139 ( 2007 ) . 151 . Lee , E . et al . Amphiphysin 2 ( Bin1 ) and T - tubule biogenesis in muscle . Science 297 , 1193 – 1196 ( 2002 ) . 152 . Boumil , R . M . et al . A missense mutation in a highly conserved alternate exon of dynamin - 1 causes epilepsy in fitful mice . PLoS Genet . 6 , e1001046 ( 2010 ) . 153 . Di Paolo , G . et al . Decreased synaptic vesicle recycling efficiency and cognitive deficits in amphiphysin 1 knockout mice . Neuron 33 , 789 – 804 ( 2002 ) . 154 . Koch , D . et al . Proper synaptic vesicle formation and neuronal network activity critically rely on syndapin I . EMBO J . 30 , 4955 – 4969 ( 2011 ) . 155 . Milosevic , I . et al . Recruitment of endophilin to clathrin - coated pit necks is required for efficient vesicle uncoating after fission . Neuron 72 , 587 – 601 ( 2011 ) . 156 . Fassio , A . et al . SYN1 loss - of - function mutations in autism and partial epilepsy cause impaired synaptic function . Hum . Mol . Genet . 20 , 2297 – 2307 ( 2011 ) . 157 . Patterson , E . E . et al . A canine DNM1 mutation is highly associated with the syndrome of exercise - induced collapse . Nature Genet . 40 , 1235 – 1239 ( 2008 ) . 158 . Donaldson , J . G . & Jackson , C . L . ARF family G proteins and their regulators : roles in membrane transport , development and disease . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 362 – 375 ( 2011 ) . 159 . Detmer , S . A . & Chan , D . C . Functions and dysfunctions of mitochondrial dynamics . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 870 – 879 ( 2007 ) . 160 . Hoppins , S . , Lackner , L . & Nunnari , J . The machines that divide and fuse mitochondria . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 76 , 751 – 780 ( 2007 ) . 161 . Okamoto , K . & Shaw , J . M . Mitochondrial morphology and dynamics in yeast and multicellular eukaryotes . Annu . Rev . Genet . 39 , 503 – 536 ( 2005 ) . 162 . Westermann , B . Mitochondrial fusion and fission in cell life and death . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 872 – 884 ( 2010 ) . 163 . Eppinga , R . D . et al . Increased expression of the large GTPase dynamin 2 potentiates metastatic migration and invasion of pancreatic ductal carcinoma . Oncogene 15 Aug 2011 ( doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2011 . 329 ) . 164 . Hollingworth , P . et al . Common variants at ABCA7 , MS4A6A / MS4A4E , EPHA1 , CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer’s disease . Nature Genet . 43 , 429 – 435 ( 2011 ) . 165 . Naj , A . C . et al . Common variants at MS4A4 / MS4A6E , CD2AP , CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late - onset Alzheimer’s disease . Nature Genet . 43 , 436 – 441 ( 2011 ) . 166 . Veiga , E . et al . Invasive and adherent bacterial pathogens co - opt host clathrin for infection . Cell Host Microbe 2 , 340 – 351 ( 2007 ) . 167 . Hu , J . et al . A class of dynamin - like GTPases involved in the generation of the tubular ER network . Cell 138 , 549 – 561 ( 2009 ) . 168 . Orso , G . et al . Homotypic fusion of ER membranes requires the dynamin - like GTPase atlastin . Nature 460 , 978 – 983 ( 2009 ) . 169 . Haller , O . , Gao , S . , von der Malsburg , A . , Daumke , O . & Kochs , G . Dynamin - like MxA GTPase : structural insights into oligomerization and implications for antiviral activity . J . Biol . Chem 285 , 28419 – 28424 ( 2010 ) . 170 . Prakash , B . , Praefcke , G . J . , Renault , L . , Wittinghofer , A . & Herrmann , C . Structure of human guanylate - binding protein 1 representing a unique class of GTP - binding proteins . Nature 403 , 567 – 571 ( 2000 ) . 171 . Gu , X . & Verma , D . P . Phragmoplastin , a dynamin - like protein associated with cell plate formation in plants . EMBO J . 15 , 695 – 704 ( 1996 ) . 172 . Low , H . H . , Sachse , C . , Amos , L . A . & Lowe , J . Structure of a bacterial dynamin - like protein lipid tube provides a mechanism for assembly and membrane curving . Cell 139 , 1342 – 1352 ( 2009 ) . 173 . Miyagishima , S . Y . et al . A plant - specific dynamin - related protein forms a ring at the chloroplast division site . Plant Cell 15 , 655 – 665 ( 2003 ) . 174 . Daumke , O . et al . Architectural and mechanistic insights into an EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling . Nature 449 , 923 – 927 ( 2007 ) . 175 . Delettre , C . et al . Nuclear gene OPA1 , encoding a mitochondrial dynamin - related protein , is mutated in dominant optic atrophy . Nature Genet . 26 , 207 – 210 ( 2000 ) . 176 . Zuchner , S . et al . Mutations in the mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 cause Charcot – Marie – Tooth neuropathy type 2A . Nature Genet . 36 , 449 – 451 ( 2004 ) . 177 . Zhao , X . et al . Mutations in a newly identified GTPase gene cause autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia . Nature Genet . 29 , 326 – 331 ( 2001 ) . 178 . Waterham , H . R . et al . A lethal defect of mitochondrial and peroxisomal fission . N . Engl . J . Med . 356 , 1736 – 1741 ( 2007 ) . 179 . Baumgart , T . , Capraro , B . R . , Zhu , C . & Das , S . L . Thermodynamics and mechanics of membrane curvature generation and sensing by proteins and lipids . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 62 , 483 – 506 ( 2011 ) . 180 . Farsad , K . & De Camilli , P . Mechanisms of membrane deformation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 372 – 381 ( 2003 ) . 181 . Antonny , B . Membrane deformation by protein coats . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 386 – 394 ( 2006 ) . 182 . McMahon , H . T . & Gallop , J . L . Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic cell membrane remodelling . Nature 438 , 590 – 596 ( 2005 ) . 183 . Peter , B . J . et al . BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure . Science 303 , 495 – 499 ( 2004 ) . 184 . Frost , A . et al . Structural basis of membrane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell 132 , 807 – 817 ( 2008 ) . 185 . Shimada , A . et al . Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a filament for membrane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 129 , 761 – 772 ( 2007 ) . 186 . Wang , Q . et al . Molecular mechanism of membrane constriction and tubulation mediated by the F - BAR protein pacsin / syndapin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 12700 – 12705 ( 2009 ) . 187 . Rao , Y . et al . Molecular basis for SH3 domain regulation of F - BAR - mediated membrane deformation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 8213 – 8218 ( 2010 ) . 188 . Cipolat , S . , Martins de Brito , O . , Dal Zilio , B . & Scorrano , L . OPA1 requires mitofusin 1 to promote mitochondrial fusion . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 15927 – 15932 ( 2004 ) . 189 . Moss , T . J . , Daga , A . & McNew , J . A . Fusing a lasting relationship between ER tubules . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 416 – 423 ( 2011 ) . 190 . Gao , S . et al . Structure of myxovirus resistance protein a reveals intra - and intermolecular domain interactions required for the antiviral function . Immunity 35 , 514 – 525 ( 2011 ) . 191 . Kim , B . H . et al . A family of IFN - γ – inducible 65 - kD GTPases protects against bacterial infection . Science 332 , 717 – 721 ( 2011 ) . 192 . MacMicking , J . D . IFN - inducible GTPases and immunity to intracellular pathogens . Trends Immunol . 25 , 601 – 609 ( 2004 ) . 193 . Gao , H . , Kadirjan - Kalbach , D . , Froehlich , J . E . & Osteryoung , K . W . ARC5 , a cytosolic dynamin - like protein from plants , is part of the chloroplast division machinery . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4328 – 4333 ( 2003 ) . 194 . Glynn , J . M . , Miyagishima , S . Y . , Yoder , D . W . , Osteryoung , K . W . & Vitha , S . Chloroplast division . Traffic 8 , 451 – 461 ( 2007 ) . 195 . Vater , C . A . , Raymond , C . K . , Ekena , K . , Howald - Stevenson , I . & Stevens , T . H . The VPS1 protein , a homolog of dynamin required for vacuolar protein sorting in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , is a GTPase with two functionally separable domains . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 773 – 786 ( 1992 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute , the G . Harold and Leila Y . Mathers Charitable Foundation , US National Institutes of Health grants ( R37NS036251 , DK45735 and DA018343 ) , the W . M . Keck Foundation and a National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression distinguished investigator award to P . D . C . We thank H . Shen , M . Pirucello , A . Raimondi and O . Daumke for their suggestions and insights and M . Pirucello and A . Raimondi for assistance with the prepara - tion of figures . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . DATABASES Protein Data Bank : http : / / www . rcsb . org / pdb / home / home . do 3SNH FURTHER INFORMATION Pietro De Camilli’s homepage : http : / / medicine . yale . edu / labs / decamilli / www / Home . html SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) | S2 ( box ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 88 | FEBRUARY 2012 | VOLUME 13 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved