WASP deﬁciency leads to global defects of directed leukocyte migration in vitro and in vivo Scott B . Snapper , * , 1 Parool Meelu , * , † Deanna Nguyen , * Britt M . Stockton , ‡ Patricia Bozza , § Frederick W . Alt , ‡ Fred S . Rosen , ‡ Ulrich H . von Andrian , ‡ and Christoph Klein † * Gastrointestinal Unit and the Center for Inﬂammatory Bowel Diseases , Massachusetts General Hospital , and ‡ Center for Blood Research , Department of Pathology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts ; † Department of Pediatric Hematology / Oncology , Hannover Medical School , Germany ; and § Departamento de Fisiologia e Farmacodinamica , IOC , Fundacao Oswaldo Cruz , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil Abstract : Intact cellular migration is critically important for the induction and regulation of the immune response . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) regulates surface receptor signal - ing to the actin cytoskeleton in hematopoietic cells and thus plays a pivotal role in cellular locomotion . WASP deﬁciency causes WAS , characterized by immunodeﬁciency , thrombocytopenia , and ec - zema . Cell migration defects may contribute to the pathophysiology of WAS . In this study , we used a variety of in vitro and in vivo assays to comprehen - sively analyze migration properties of lympho - cytes , dendritic cells ( DC ) , and neutrophils from WASP - deﬁcient mice . We provide evidence that WASP - deﬁcient lymphocytes show a marked re - duction in tethering in an in vitro ﬂow chamber assay as well as decreased migration of T cells in response to the CC chemokine ligand 19 ( CCL19 ) . In vivo , compared with wild - type lymphocytes , WASP - deﬁcient lymphocytes showed signiﬁcantly impaired homing to Peyer’s patches upon adoptive transfer into recipient mice . In addition , bone mar - row - derived DC migrated less efﬁciently in re - sponse to CCL19 . In vivo studies showed decreased migration of DC from skin to draining lymph nodes in WASP - deﬁcient animals . Finally , we also docu - ment decreased neutrophil migration in vitro and in vivo . In summary , our studies suggest that WASP plays an important role in the locomotion of lymphocytes , DC , and granulocytes in vitro and in vivo and thus , reveal a crucial role of WASP in physiological trafﬁcking of various hematopoietic cell lineages . These results further delineate immu - nological abnormalities in WASP - deﬁcient mice , which will be useful to assess preclinical gene ther - apy studies . J . Leukoc . Biol . 77 : 000 – 000 ; 2005 . Key Words : primary immunodeﬁciency (cid:1) Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome (cid:1) gene therapy (cid:1) chemokines INTRODUCTION Intact cell migration plays a key role for the function of the immune system : Maturation of cells of the innate and adaptive immune system takes place in distinct , anatomical compart - ments , and immunological effector functions have to be oper - ative wherever the integrity of the organism is challenged . Thus , immune cells are constantly “en route” to complete their maturation and to exert their effector functions . Migration of cells is orchestrated by a complex interplay of interactions of cell - surface receptors with their respective cognate ligands [ 1 ] . Disturbed migration of immune cells can lead to immunodeﬁ - ciency diseases , as exempliﬁed by leukocyte adhesion deﬁ - ciency type I ( LADI ) [ 2 ] and LADII [ 3 ] . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) is an X - linked dis - order characterized by immunodeﬁciency , thrombocytopenia , eczema , and lympho - reticular malignancies . Hematopoietic cells from WAS patients show characteristic abnormalities in signaling and cytoskeletal rearrangement [ 4 , 5 ] . The protein defective in patients with this syndrome , WASP , is expressed exclusively in cells of hematopoietic origin and constitutes an important link between cell - surface signaling events and the rearrangement of the actin - cytoskeleton . A defect in neutrophil and monocyte chemotaxis was already noted in early studies using cells from WAS patients [ 6 , 7 ] , suggesting that the clinical phenotype of WAS reﬂects a gen - eral defect of signaling pathways involving the regulation of cell motility and the cytoskeleton . More recently , these studies were extended to macrophages and dendritic cells ( DC ) derived from WAS patients . Monocytes fail to migrate and polarize their cytoskeleton in response to a variety of chemotactic agents such as formyl methionyl - leucyl - phenylalanine ( fMLP ) , monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 ( MCP - 1 ) , macrophage in - ﬂammatory protein - 1 (cid:1) ( MIP - 1 (cid:1) ) , and colony - stimulating fac - tor - 1 ( CSF - 1 ) [ 8 , 9 ] . A reduced translocational motility was also seen in DC in vitro [ 10 ] . A defect in podosome formation reﬂects the aberrant cytoskeletal rearrangement in macro - phages and DC from WAS patients [ 11 , 12 ] . Furthermore , T cells from WAS patients exhibit decreased chemotaxis in re - sponse to chemoattractants [ 13 ] . These ﬁndings suggest , at least in part , that the complex immunodeﬁciency underlying WAS might result from aberrant 1 Correspondence : Massachusetts General Hospital , Jackson 706 , 55 Fruit Street , Boston , MA 02114 . E - mail : ssnapper @ partners . org Received August 7 , 2004 ; revised January 18 , 2005 ; accepted January 19 , 2005 ; doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0804444 . 0741 - 5400 / 05 / 0077 - 0001 © Society for Leukocyte Biology Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 77 , June 2005 1 Uncorrected Version . Published on March 17 , 2005 as DOI : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0804444 Copyright 2005 by The Society for Leukocyte Biology . migration of immune cells [ 4 ] . In this study , we use WASP - deﬁcient mice to comprehensively analyze the role of WASP in the directed cellular locomotion of lymphocytes , DC , and neu - trophils in vitro and in vivo to further delineate the phenotype of murine WASP deﬁciency . These studies will also help to set the stage for preclinical gene therapy studies aiming at the correction of WAS using transplantation of genetically modi - ﬁed , hematopoietic stem cells . MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals WASP - deﬁcient ( WKO ) mice ( 129SvEv background ) were described previ - ously and bred in speciﬁc pathogen - free facilities at the Center for Blood Research ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) , Massachusetts General Hospital ( Boston , MA ) , or Hannover Medical School ( Germany ) [ 14 ] . No variation in the clinical or immune phenotype has been identiﬁed in WKO mice bred in different facilities . WKO animals used for these studies had no macroscopic evidence of colitis . The size of spleens and lymph nodes was comparable with wild - type ( WT ) control mice . 129 SvEv control ( WT ) mice were purchased from Taconic Farms ( Germantown , NY ) . All experiments were carried out using age - and sex - matched animals ( 4 – 8 weeks of age ) . Cells and monoclonal antibodies ( mAb ) Where indicated , T cells were puriﬁed from mouse peripheral lymph nodes ( PLN ) using negative depletion of B cells by immunomagnetic bead - labeling with anti - immunoglobulin antibodies and negative depletion ( Dynal Biotech , Oslo , Norway ) . The purity of T cells exceeded 90 % in all experiments and was conﬁrmed using cell - surface markers against Thy - 1 and B220 . DC were obtained from murine bone marrow culture using previously published proto - cols [ 15 ] . In brief , mononuclear bone marrow cells were incubated in the presence of murine recombinant granulocyte macrophage ( GM ) - CSF and in - terleukin - 4 ( IL - 4 ) for 7 – 8 days . In some experiments , conditioned medium from a genetically engineered cell line expression murine GM - CSF and murine IL - 4 was used . Fluorescein - activated cell sorter ( FACS ) staining for CD11c , major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class II , CD40 , CD80 , and CD86 conﬁrmed the purity of DC . In some experiments , further puriﬁcation of DC was performed using a CD11c magnetic bead isolation system following the manufacturer’s instructions ( Miltenyi , Bergisch - Gladbach , Germany ) . All an - tibodies were purchased from BD / PharMingen ( Franklin Lakes , NJ ) . Flow chamber assay Tethering assays were performed essentially as reported previously [ 16 ] . Peripheral node addressin ( PNAd ) was immunopuriﬁed from human tonsils and coated on a plastic slide to study tethering and rolling of murine lympho - cytes in a ﬂow chamber apparatus as described [ 17 ] . WT and WKO PLN lymphocytes were perfused over immobilized PNAd at 1 (cid:2) 10 6 cells / ml at a constant shear stress ( 1 . 6 dyne / cm 2 ) and recorded on videotape . The number of tethered cells was counted during a 3 - min period after the frequency of rolling had reached equilibrium . Infusions of assay media containing 5 mM EDTA were used to clear the ﬁeld of view of all adherent cells between recordings . WT and WKO cells were compared while rolling through the identical ﬁeld of view . Lymphocytes that displayed erratic rolling behavior ( skipping or a rolling distance of less than three cell diameters ) were not included . In vivo migration assays In vivo homing assays were performed as previously reported [ 16 , 18 ] . Brieﬂy , WT and WKO mice were killed to prepare single - cell suspensions of PLN lymphocytes . First , 5 (cid:2) 10 7 cells of each population were labeled for 30 min with calcein - AM ( 20 (cid:3) M ) or tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate ( TRITC ; 30 (cid:3) g / ml , Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , washed three times with cold RPMI 1640 containing 10 % fetal calf serum ( Life Technologies , Gibco , Grand Island , NY ) , mixed , and injected through a catheter in the right jugular vein of anesthetized WT - recipient mice . Cells remaining in the catheter were saved to control for potential differences in cell input . After 2 h , recipients were anesthetized and exsanguinated again by puncture of the retro - orbital plexus . Peripheral blood lymphocytes were isolated by density gradient separation on Lympholyte - M ( Cedar Lane , Ontario , Canada ) . Spleen , PLN , mesenteric lymph nodes ( MLN ) , Peyer’s patches ( PP ) , and bone marrow were dissected and pressed through ﬁne wire mesh to yield single - cell suspensions , which were analyzed on a ﬂow cytometer ( Becton Dickinson ) after gating for viable lymphocytes by forward - and light - scatter characteristics . The relative fre - quency of the two donor cell populations was determined for each individual organ and corrected for differences in cell input in the same animal . Identical results were obtained when WT and WKO cells were stained with the alter - native - labeling agent . Adhesion receptor expression on isolated PLN lympho - cytes was analyzed using biotinylated mAb CD62L , lymphocyte function - associated antigen - 1 ( LFA - 1 ) , (cid:1) 4 , (cid:4) 7 , and CD44 , followed by appropriate second - stage reagents . Neutrophil migration into the pleural cavity was investigated as recently described [ 19 ] . Brieﬂy , intrathoracic injections were performed in 8 - to 12 - week - old WT ( n (cid:5) 8 ) and WKO ( n (cid:5) 8 ) , anesthetized mice with lipopolysaccha - ride ( LPS ; 250 ng / cavity , Escherichia coli 0127 : BB , Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) or control vehicle ( sterile saline ) . Animals were killed after 4 h , blood , bone marrow , and pleural cells were recovered and counted , and differential analyses were performed . DC migration was studied using previously published protocols [ 20 ] . In brief , the ventral abdomen and thorax were stained with 450 (cid:3) l ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ; 5 mg / ml dissolved in equal volumes of dibutylphtalate and acetone ) . After 24 h , the mice were killed , and the percentage of CD11c - positive , FITC - positive cells was determined in cell suspensions of draining lymph nodes . Transwell migration assays In vitro chemotaxis assays were performed using Costar Transwell inserts ( see ref . [ 21 ] ) in 24 - well plates . Cells were washed three times and resuspended in serum - free medium [ Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) 1 % albu - min , Pen (cid:6) Strep ) . For T cell migration , 5 (cid:2) 10 5 T cells were put in the upper well in a volume of 100 (cid:3) l , using 5 (cid:3) m pore - size Transwell inserts ( Costar , Cambridge , MA ) . The lower well contained 1 ml serum - free DMEM supple - mented with various concentrations of chemokines [ CC chemokine ligand 9 ( CCL19 ) , R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ] . The plates were incubated at 37°C for 4 h before harvesting the migrated cells in the lower chamber . Quantiﬁ - cation of input and output cells was performed using FACS analysis in a time - triggered acquisition setting . The absence of adherent cells to the under - surface of the Transwell plate was ascertained by light microscopy . For DC migration assays , 1 (cid:2) 10 6 bone marrow - derived DC were added in serum - free medium containing 1 % low endotoxin bovine serum albumin ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) to 5 (cid:3) m pore - size Transwell inserts ( Costar ) in a 24 - well plate . After 120 min incubation time , the Transwell inserts were removed , and 10 4 15 (cid:3) m microsphere beads ( Dynospheres , Bangs Laboratories , Fishers , IN ) were added to each well . Cells were stained with anti - CD11c and anti - MHC II mAb ( BD / PharMingen ) and analyzed by FACS . Numbers of cells in the input and transmigrated populations were calculated as : ( no . of cells acquired / no . of Dynospheres acquired ) (cid:2) 10 4 Dynospheres / sample . Bone marrow neutrophils were isolated from the hindlimbs using a previ - ously described Percoll gradient technique [ 22 ] . The purity of cells was conﬁrmed using FACS analysis ( Gr1 and CD11b expression ) and Giemsa stains . Migration experiments were performed in serum - free medium in 48 Transwell plates with 3 . 0 (cid:3) m pore - size tissue culture - treated polycarbonate membrane ( Corning ) . Migrated cells were quantiﬁed by FACS , by addition of inert beads as described above ( Dynospheres ) . RESULTS Defective homing of WKO lymphocytes to PP We ﬁrst analyzed the expression pattern of cell - surface recep - tors known to play a role in lymphocyte homing by ﬂow cytometry . WKO lymphocytes did not differ from WT lympho - cytes with respect to the surface expression of L - selectin ( CD62L ) , LFA - 1 , (cid:1) 4 and (cid:4) 7 integrins , CD43 , and CD44 ( data 2 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 77 , June 2005 http : / / www . jleukbio . org not shown ) . We then investigated whether adoptively trans - ferred WKO lymphocytes had migration defects to PLN nodes using an in vivo migration assay [ 16 ] . Equal numbers of WT and WKO lymphocytes were labeled with TRITC ( red ﬂuores - cence ) or calcein - AM ( green ﬂuorescence ) . Both populations were mixed at a ratio of 1 : 1 immediately prior to intravenous injection into a WT recipient mouse . To monitor the homing characteristics , the recipient mouse was killed 2 h after the adoptive lymphocyte transfer . Lymphoid organs were har - vested , and single - cell suspensions were analyzed using ﬂow cytometry ( Fig . 1A ) . Figure 1B represents a synopsis of seven independent experiments . Whereas the ratio of WT : WKO cells was not statistically different in peripheral lymphoid organs , a signiﬁcant decrease of WKO cells was seen in PP . As ex - pected , concomitant with this decrease in migration , there was a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the percentage of WKO cells in peripheral blood . Defective homing to PP but not other peripheral lymphoid nodes may result from the increase in ﬂow rates ( i . e . , shear stress ) unique to this lymphoid compartment . Defective tethering of WKO lymphocytes and decreased chemotaxis of WKO T cells To assess whether tethering of lymphocytes is impaired by WASP deﬁciency , we used a dynamic ﬂow chamber system that allows the monitoring of lymphocytes on a PNAd - coated surface under physiological ﬂow forces . Figure 2A shows the result of seven independent experiments . Compared with WT lymphocytes , WKO cells were defective in tethering on a PNAd - coated surface . As directed T cell migration of naı¨ve T cells is critically dependent on the interaction of CC chemokine receptor 7 with its cognate ligands CCL19 and CCL21 , we next tested the ability of T cells to migrate through a chemokine gradient using a Transwell migration assay . As shown in Figure 2B , WT T cells migrated effectively in response to a CCL19 gradient . In contrast , WKO T cells migrated at a signiﬁcantly reduced rate through a wide range of chemokine concentrations . These experiments suggest that WASP plays an integral role in regulating cell - cell adhesion and cellular migration in response to chemokines . Similar defects in B cell migration have been identiﬁed recently ( L . Westerberg and E . Severinson , personal communication ) . Aberrant migration of WKO DC T cells and DC migrate to the paracortex of lymph nodes , where they meet to initiate an antigen - dependent immune response . Mature DC are known to migrate in response to CCL19 [ 21 ] . We therefore used a CCL19 - dependent Transwell migration assay to assess the chemotactic response of bone marrow - derived DC . The percentage of migrated class II (cid:6) CD86 (cid:6) - expressing DC is shown in Figure 3A . Similar to the results seen with WKO T cells , WKO DC were defective in their migratory response to CCL19 . Fig . 1 . Defective lymphocyte migration in vivo . ( A ) Representative dot - blot showing the relative amounts of WT and WKO cells in the catheter used for the injec - tion ( left panel ) , as well as in blood ( middle panel ) and in PP ( right panel ) 2 h after injection . In this represen - tative experiment , WT and WKO cells were stained prior to injection with TRITC and calcein - AM , respec - tively . Note the relative decrease in homing of WASP - KO cells to PP ( right panel ) with a concomitant increase in WKO cells in the blood ( middle panel ) . ( B ) WKO lymphocytes are defective in homing to PP . Cu - mulative data of seven independent experiments are shown . The relative contribution of lymphocytes for each data point was normalized by the precise amount of WT and WKO cells in the catheter before injection ( A , left panel ) . BM , Bone marrow . Snapper et al . Migration defects in WASP deﬁciency 3 Next , we analyzed the in vivo trafﬁcking of DC and checked the capacity of Langerhans cells to migrate from skin to drain - ing lymph nodes . We determined that WT and WKO mice show similar numbers of epidermal skin Langerhans cells by immunohistochemical analysis ( data not shown ) . The abdomi - nal walls of WT and WKO mice were painted with FITC - labeled isomers . Draining lymph nodes were removed after 24 h and analyzed by ﬂow cytometry for FITC - positive DC . As shown in Figure 3B , WKO mice showed a markedly reduced number of FITC - loaded DC compared with WT control ani - mals , suggesting that WASP - deﬁcient Langerhans cells were impaired in their trafﬁcking capacity . Defective granulocyte migration in WKO mice To assess the trafﬁcking properties of neutrophils , we analyzed their migration using an in vitro Transwell migration assay . WKO neutrophils showed a reduced capacity to migrate toward the chemoattractant fMLP ( Fig . 4 ) . Next , we injected E . coli LPS into the pleural cavity of WT and WKO mice and determined the number of migrated neutrophils ( Fig . 5 ) . Whereas WKO mice and WT mice respond equally to LPS with respect to the release of neutrophils from bone marrow to peripheral blood , we found a signiﬁcant difference in the capacity of neutrophils to accumulate in the pleural cavity . These results suggest that the release of neutrophils from bone marrow is intact , whereas the accumulation of neutrophils in inﬂammatory target organs is impaired in WKO mice . It is interesting that there was an increase in WKO neutro - phils in the pleural cavity of mock - treated mice . This may reﬂect a mild degree of pleural inﬂammation associated with WASP deﬁciency reminiscent of inﬂammatory changes in the colon of young WKO mice . DISCUSSION Our results document that murine WKO cells of various hemato - poietic lineages show aberrant migration in vitro and in vivo . These ﬁndings bear implications not only for the clariﬁcation of the immunopathology of WAS but also for the development and assessment of therapeutic strategies using transplantation of ge - netically transduced hematopoietic stem cells . In particular , WKO lymphocytes show altered tethering and chemotaxis in vitro and decreased migration to PP in vivo . In contrast , although reduced , migration of WKO lymphocytes to Fig . 2 . Defective lymphocyte migration in vitro . ( A ) WKO lymphocytes tether less efﬁciently to PNAd under shear ﬂow in vitro . Lymphocytes from WT and WKO lymph nodes were isolated and al - lowed to ﬂow over puriﬁed PNAd in an in vitro ﬂow chamber apparatus . Data pairs connected by solid lines indicate tethering fractions of WT and WKO lymphocyte samples in the same experiment . ( f – f ) Average tethering fractions . Displayed is the paired tethering rate in seven individual experiments . ( B ) Defective chemotaxis of WKO T cells in response to CCL19 in a Transwell migration assay . Displayed are the fraction WT and WKO T cells migrating in response to increasing concentrations of CCL19 as quantiﬁed by ﬂow cytometry . Fig . 3 . Defective DC migration in vitro and in vivo . ( A ) Defective chemotaxis of WKO DC in response to CCL19 . Bone marrow - derived WT and WKO cells were assayed for their ability to migrate across Transwell plates in response to various concentrations of CCL19 . The data indicate the fraction of migrated MHC II (cid:6) CD86 (cid:6) cells . ( B ) Defective in vivo migration of WKO epidermal DC to draining lymph nodes . The abdominal and thoracic skin of WKO WT animals was shaved and painted with a solution of FITC isomers . The animals ( n (cid:5) 4 ) were killed , and the proportion of FITC - positive cells in lymph node suspensions was determined by ﬂow cytometry . 4 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 77 , June 2005 http : / / www . jleukbio . org PLN did not achieve statistical signiﬁcance . Homing of circu - lating lymphocytes to PP and PLN via specialized , high endo - thelial venules ( HEV ) is orchestrated by distinct receptor - ligand interactions . Whereas the predominant PP HEV ligand for (cid:1) 4 (cid:4) 7 and L - selectin is mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule - 1 [ 23 , 24 ] , homing to PLN is primarily dependent on the PNAd [ 25 , 26 ] . Whether our ﬁndings showing site - speciﬁc homing differences reﬂect WASP - dependent intracellular sig - naling pathways or cellular reactions toward physical condi - tions , such as different intravascular shear forces , is unknown . Our observation is intriguing , given the fact that WKO mice develop chronic colitis associated with a massive inﬁltration of all hematopoietic lineages . Although WKO lymphocytes are required for colitis induction and T cells sufﬁcient to mediate disease , the contribution of aberrant lymphoid trafﬁcking to the pathophysiology of colitis remains unknown ( D . Nguyen and S . B . Snapper , submitted ) . In the absence of WASP , human T lymphocytes display abnor - mal chemotaxis in response to the T cell chemoattractant stroma - derived factor 1 ( SDF - 1 ) [ 13 ] , and SDF - 1 - mediated chemotaxis is dependent on WASP - Cdc42 interactions and is associated with WASP phosphorylation [ 13 , 27 ] . Our studies suggest that the T cell migration defect is not restricted to SDF - 1 but rather reﬂects a general underlying inability for directed migration . Several investigators have analyzed human WASP - deﬁcient cells of the monocyte / macrophage lineage . Zicha et al . [ 9 ] have shown that directional motility of WASP - deﬁcient macro - phages on a glass surface was abolished , although transloca - tional locomotor capacity appeared preserved . Similarly , mono - cytes from WAS patients show impaired migration in response to fMLP , MCP - 1 , and MIP1 - (cid:1) [ 8 ] . Furthermore , macrophages and DC from WAS patients show absent podosomes and are unable to polarize in response to fMLP or regulated on activa - tion , normal T expressed and secreted [ 10 – 12 ] . Despite these migratory defects , it has been difﬁcult by some to document clear , functional alterations of antigen - presenting cells ( APC ) [ 28 ] . Nonetheless , defects in phagocytosis have been reported in WASP - deﬁcient APC [ 29 ] . In this study , we show that in vivo migration of DC and granulocytes is severely affected in WKO mice . Furthermore , the in vitro and in vivo defects in directed DC migration by WKO DC described here are con - sistent with and extend the abnormalities in cell adhesion and podosome formation recently reported [ 30 ] . Mechanistically , it remains challenging to prove whether a defect in cell migration is directly responsible for the immuno - dysregulation and associated clinical phenotypes associated with WAS deﬁciency in mice and men [ 4 ] . Our comprehensive analysis along with previous in vitro experiments [ 6 – 10 ] suggest that WASP deﬁciency is responsible for a severe defect in cell migra - tion in vitro and in vivo in multiple cell types . However , this defect is not absolute , and it will be interesting to see whether the presence of WASP homologues , such as WASP family Verprolin - homologous protein ( WAVE ) and neural WASP , accounts for the residual migration capacity . Clearly , proper cell migration re - quires a highly complex interplay of multiple signaling cascades Fig . 4 . Detective granulocyte migration in vitro . Peripheral blood granulo - cytes were puriﬁed from WT and WKO mice and analyzed for their migratory response to fMLP in a Transwell migration assay . Displayed is the fraction of cells migrating in response to fMLP . Data are representative of three indepen - dent experiments . Fig . 5 . Detective granulocyte migration in vivo . WT and WKO mice ( groups of eight ) were injected with LPS or mock - injected into the pleural cavity . Four hours later , the mice were killed , and the number of neutrophils was determined in the bone marrow ( A , counts / 0 . 5 (cid:2) 10 6 / femur ) , blood ( B , counts / 10 (cid:2) 10 3 / ml ) , and pleural cavity ( C , counts / 10 (cid:2) 10 6 / cavity ) . WT and WKO mice respond equally to LPS with release of neutrophils from the bone marrow ( A ) and a concomitant increase of neutrophils in the blood ( B ) . However , WKO neutrophils are defective in migrating into the pleural cavity ( C ) . PBS , Phosphate - buffered saline . Snapper et al . Migration defects in WASP deﬁciency 5 and is not merely determined by WASP family proteins . Regu - lated by Rac1 , WAVE proteins have been implicated in the formation of lamellipodial protrusions and thus , may play a crucial role in leukocyte migration [ 31 , 32 ] . In summary , our results underline the importance of WASP for directed cellular locomotion in hematopoietic cells and shed new light on the pathophysiology of WASP deﬁciency . In addition , they have implications for the preclinical and clinical assessment of gene therapy studies aimed at correction of the WAS phenotype using hematopoietic stem cells . This is especially critical , given recent in vivo data by Lacout et al . [ 33 ] , demonstrating that WAS deﬁciency affects the in vivo migration of hematopoietic stem cells and may be responsible for the nonrandom X inactivation char - acteristic of female carriers of the WAS mutation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( HL59561 and AI50950 ) to S . B . S . and grants from the German Research Council ( DFG ) , the Fritz - Thyssen - Foun - dation , and the Henkel - Foundation to C . K . P . M . , D . N . , and B . M . S . contributed equally to this work . REFERENCES 1 . von Andrian , U . H . , Mempel , T . R . ( 2003 ) Homing and cellular trafﬁc in lymph nodes . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 3 , 867 – 878 . 2 . Kishimoto , T . K . , Hollander , N . , Roberts , T . M . , Anderson , D . C . , Springer , T . A . ( 1987 ) Heterogeneous mutations in the (cid:4) subunit common to the LFA - 1 , Mac - 1 , and p150 , 95 glycoproteins cause leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency . Cell 50 , 193 – 202 . 3 . Etzioni , A . , Harlan , J . M . , Pollack , S . , Phillips , L . M . , Gershoni - Baruch , R . , Paulson , J . C . ( 1993 ) Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency ( LAD ) II : a new adhesion defect due to absence of sialyl Lewis X , the ligand for selectins . Immunodeﬁciency 4 , 307 – 308 . 4 . Thrasher , A . J . ( 2002 ) WASp in immune - system organization and func - tion . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 2 , 635 – 646 . 5 . Snapper , S . B . , Rosen , F . S . ( 1999 ) The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) : roles in signaling and cytoskeletal organization . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 17 , 905 – 929 . 6 . Altman , L . C . , Snyderman , R . , Blaese , R . M . ( 1974 ) Abnormalities of chemotactic lymphokine synthesis and mononuclear leukocyte chemotaxis in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . J . Clin . Invest . 54 , 486 – 493 . 7 . Ochs , H . D . , Slichter , S . J . , Harker , L . A . , Von Behrens , W . E . , Clark , R . A . , Wedgwood , R . J . ( 1980 ) The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome : studies of lymphocytes , granulocytes , and platelets . Blood 55 , 243 – 252 . 8 . Badolato , R . , Sozzani , S . , Malacarne , F . , Bresciani , S . , Fiorini , M . , Bor - satti , A . , Albertini , A . , Mantovani , A . , Ugazio , A . G . , Notarangelo , L . D . ( 1998 ) Monocytes from Wiskott - Aldrich patients display reduced chemo - taxis and lack of cell polarization in response to monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 and formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenylalanine . J . Immunol . 161 , 1026 – 1033 . 9 . Zicha , D . , Allen , W . E . , Brickell , P . M . , Kinnon , C . , Dunn , G . A . , Jones , G . E . , Thrasher , A . J . ( 1998 ) Chemotaxis of macrophages is abolished in the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Br . J . Haematol . 101 , 659 – 665 . 10 . Binks , M . , Jones , G . E . , Brickell , P . M . , Kinnon , C . , Katz , D . R . , Thrasher , A . J . ( 1998 ) Intrinsic dendritic cell abnormalities in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Eur . J . Immunol . 28 , 3259 – 3267 . 11 . Linder , S . , Nelson , D . , Weiss , M . , Aepfelbacher , M . ( 1999 ) Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macro - phages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 9648 – 9653 . 12 . Burns , S . , Thrasher , A . J . , Blundell , M . P . , Machesky , L . , Jones , G . E . ( 2001 ) Conﬁguration of human dendritic cell cytoskeleton by Rho GT - Pases , the WAS protein , and differentiation . Blood 98 , 1142 – 1149 . 13 . Haddad , E . , Zugaza , J . L . , Louache , F . , Debili , N . , Crouin , C . , Schwarz , K . , Fischer , A . , Vainchenker , W . , Bertoglio , J . ( 2001 ) The interaction between Cdc42 and WASP is required for SDF - 1 - induced T - lymphocyte chemo - taxis . Blood 97 , 33 – 38 . 14 . Snapper , S . B . , Rosen , F . S . , Mizoguchi , E . , Cohen , P . , Khan , W . , Liu , C . H . , Hagemann , T . L . , Kwan , S . P . , Ferrini , R . , Davidson , L . , Bhan , A . K . , Alt , F . W . ( 1998 ) Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein - deﬁcient mice reveal a role for WASP in T but not B cell activation . Immunity 9 , 81 – 91 . 15 . Klein , C . , Bueler , H . , Mulligan , R . C . ( 2000 ) Comparative analysis of genetically modiﬁed dendritic cells and tumor cells as therapeutic cancer vaccines . J . Exp . Med . 191 , 1699 – 1708 . 16 . Stockton , B . M . , Cheng , G . , Manjunath , N . , Ardman , B . , von Andrian , U . H . ( 1998 ) Negative regulation of T cell homing by CD43 . Immunity 8 , 373 – 381 . 17 . Diacovo , T . G . , Puri , K . D . , Warnock , R . A . , Springer , T . A . , von Andrian , U . H . ( 1996 ) Platelet - mediated lymphocyte delivery to high endothelial venules . Science 273 , 252 – 255 . 18 . Weninger , W . , Crowley , M . A . , Manjunath , N . , von Andrian , U . H . ( 2001 ) Migratory properties of naive , effector , and memory CD8 ( (cid:6) ) T cells . J . Exp . Med . 194 , 953 – 966 . 19 . Penido , C . , Castro - Faria - Neto , H . C . , Vieira - de - Abreu , A . , Figueiredo , R . T . , Pelled , A . , Martins , M . A . , Jose , P . J . , Williams , T . J . , Bozza , P . T . ( 2001 ) LPS induces eosinophil migration via CCR3 signaling through a mechanism independent of RANTES and eotaxin . Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 25 , 707 – 716 . 20 . Forster , R . , Schubel , A . , Breitfeld , D . , Kremmer , E . , Renner - Muller , I . , Wolf , E . , Lipp , M . ( 1999 ) CCR7 coordinates the primary immune response by establishing functional microenvironments in secondary lymphoid or - gans . Cell 99 , 23 – 33 . 21 . Kellermann , S . A . , Hudak , S . , Oldham , E . R . , Liu , Y . J . , McEvoy , L . M . ( 1999 ) The CC chemokine receptor - 7 ligands 6Ckine and macrophage inﬂammatory protein - 3 (cid:4) are potent chemoattractants for in vitro - and in vivo - derived dendritic cells . J . Immunol . 162 , 3859 – 3864 . 22 . Glogauer , M . , Marchal , C . C . , Zhu , F . , Worku , A . , Clausen , B . E . , Foerster , I . , Marks , P . , Downey , G . P . , Dinauer , M . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 2003 ) Rac1 deletion in mouse neutrophils has selective effects on neutrophil func - tions . J . Immunol . 170 , 5652 – 5657 . 23 . Berg , E . L . , McEvoy , L . M . , Berlin , C . , Bargatze , R . F . , Butcher , E . C . ( 1993 ) L - selectin - mediated lymphocyte rolling on MAdCAM - 1 . Nature 366 , 695 – 698 . 24 . Berlin , C . , Berg , E . L . , Briskin , M . J . , Andrew , D . P . , Kilshaw , P . J . , Holzmann , B . , Weissman , I . L . , Hamann , A . , Butcher , E . C . ( 1993 ) (cid:1) 4 (cid:4) 7 integrin mediates lymphocyte binding to the mucosal vascular addressin MAdCAM - 1 . Cell 74 , 185 – 195 . 25 . Bargatze , R . F . , Jutila , M . A . , Butcher , E . C . ( 1995 ) Distinct roles of L - selectin and integrins (cid:1) 4 (cid:4) 7 and LFA - 1 in lymphocyte homing to Peyer’s patch - HEV in situ : the multistep model conﬁrmed and reﬁned . Immunity 3 , 99 – 108 . 26 . Warnock , R . A . , Askari , S . , Butcher , E . C . , von Andrian , U . H . ( 1998 ) Molecular mechanisms of lymphocyte homing to peripheral lymph nodes . J . Exp . Med . 187 , 205 – 216 . 27 . Okabe , S . , Fukuda , S . , Broxmeyer , H . E . ( 2002 ) Activation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and its association with other proteins by stromal cell - derived factor - 1 (cid:1) is associated with cell migration in a T - lymphocyte line . Exp . Hematol . 30 , 761 – 766 . 28 . Garrett , W . S . , Chen , L . M . , Kroschewski , R . , Ebersold , M . , Turley , S . , Trombetta , S . , Galan , J . E . , Mellman , I . ( 2000 ) Developmental control of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42 . Cell 102 , 325 – 334 . 29 . Leverrier , Y . , Lorenzi , R . , Blundell , M . P . , Brickell , P . , Kinnon , C . , Ridley , A . J . , Thrasher , A . J . ( 2001 ) Cutting edge : the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is required for efﬁcient phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . J . Immunol . 166 , 4831 – 4834 . 30 . Burns , S . , Hardy , S . J . , Buddle , J . , Yong , K . L . , Jones , G . E . , Thrasher , A . J . ( 2004 ) Maturation of DC is associated with changes in motile characteristics and adherence . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 57 , 118 – 132 . 31 . Anderson , S . I . , Behrendt , B . , Machesky , L . M . , Insall , R . H . , Nash , G . B . ( 2003 ) Linked regulation of motility and integrin function in activated migrating neutrophils revealed by interference in remodeling of the cy - toskeleton . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 54 , 135 – 146 . 32 . Suetsugu , S . , Yamazaki , D . , Kurisu , S . , Takenawa , T . ( 2003 ) Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral rufﬂe formation for ﬁbroblast cell migration . Dev . Cell 5 , 595 – 609 . 33 . Lacout , C . , Haddad , E . , Sabri , S . , Svinarchouk , F . , Garcon , L . , Capron , C . , Foudi , A . , Mzali , R . , Snapper , S . B . , Louache , F . , Vainchenker , W . , Dumenil , D . ( 2003 ) A defect in hematopoietic stem cell migration explains the nonrandom X - chromosome inactivation in carriers of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Blood 102 , 1282 – 1289 . 6 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 77 , June 2005 http : / / www . jleukbio . org