Differential uptake of DNA – poly ( ethylenimine ) polyplexes in cells cultured on collagen and ﬁbronectin surfaces Anandika Dhaliwal a , Maricela Maldonado b , Zenas Han b , Tatiana Segura a , b , * a Biomedical Engineering Interdepartmental Program , University of California , Los Angeles , CA , USA b Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department , University of California , Los Angeles , CA , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 19 January 2010 Received in revised form 27 March 2010 Accepted 29 March 2010 Available online 3 April 2010 Keywords : Mesenchymal stem cells Extracellular matrix Endocytosis Cytoskeleton Non - viral gene delivery a b s t r a c t Genetically modiﬁed bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) have proven to be efﬁcient cell carriers for local or systemic delivery of therapeutics as well as growth factors to augment tissue for - mation . However , efﬁcient non - viral gene transfer to these cells is limiting their applicability . Although most studies have focused on designing more efﬁcient condensation agents for DNA , our focus in this manuscript is to study the role of two extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins , collagen I ( Col I ) and ﬁbronec - tin ( Fn ) , on the ability of MSCs to become transfected . Here we report that plating MSCs on Col I - coated surfaces inhibits transfection , while plating MSCs on Fn - coated surfaces enhances transfection . The mechanism by which these ECM proteins affect non - viral gene transfer involves the endocytosis pathway used for polyplex uptake and intracellular tension . We found that Fn promoted internalization through clathrin - mediated endocytosis and that this pathway resulted in more efﬁcient transfection than caveo - lae - mediated endocytosis and macropinocytosis . Further , the disruption of actin – myosin interactions resulted in an enhancement of gene transfer for cells plated on Fn - coated surfaces , but not for cells plated on Col I . We believe that the cellular microenvironment can be engineered to enhance the ability of cells to become transfected and that through understanding the mechanisms by which the ECM affects non - viral gene transfer better materials and transfection protocols can be realized . (cid:2) 2010 Acta Materialia Inc . Published by Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Gene delivery can be achieved with the use of modiﬁed viruses ( viral delivery ) or polymers ( non - viral delivery ) that encapsulate or condense plasmid DNA into particles that can transport DNA into the cell . Although viral delivery is generally more efﬁcient than non - viral approaches , it has limitations due to its potential immu - nogenicity and insertion mutagenesis [ 1 ] . Because of these safety concerns , non - viral approaches have been investigated . The inves - tigation of effective ways to deliver genes using a non - viral ap - proach has focused on ( 1 ) the vector used to condense DNA into a nanoparticle , ( 2 ) the sustained release of DNA or DNA nanoparti - cles from scaffolds [ 2 ] , ( 3 ) the design of the plasmid DNA used [ 3 ] and , more recently , ( 4 ) engineering of the cell and the cellular microenvironment to enhance the process of gene transfer [ 4 , 5 ] . Most effort has focused on ( 1 ) , the design of more sophisticated condensing agents for DNA that can more efﬁciently target the de - sired cells and achieve enhanced internalization , intracellular traf - ﬁcking and nuclear entry [ 6 ] . Among all the condensing agents , cationic polymers , such as poly ( ethylenimine ) ( PEI ) , are widely uti - lized for non - viral gene delivery because they are able to condense DNA through electrostatic interactions between the positively charged amines in the cationic polymer and the negatively charged phosphates on the DNA . The condensation of DNA with PEI forms particles ( polyplexes ) in the range 50 – 200 nm in diameter [ 7 ] . DNA / PEI polyplexes enter the cell through endocytosis and are believed to be able to escape the endosome through endosomal buffering ( the proton sponge effect [ 8 , 9 ] ) . Aside from DNA conden - sation , the amines in PEI have been heavily modiﬁed with ligands , peptides and polymers to enhance targeting [ 10 ] , endosomal es - cape [ 11 ] , nuclear localization [ 11 , 12 ] and stability [ 13 ] . After each iteration a new condensing agent for DNA is realized and the ﬁeld gets closer to an efﬁcient vector for non - viral gene delivery . How - ever , other aspects of the non - viral gene delivery process , such as the role of the cellular microenvironment and the mechanistic pathways involved within the cell , should be considered to arrive at an optimal solution for efﬁcient and targeted gene transfer . Although not as widely studied , the cellular microenvironment has been successfully engineered to enhance gene transfer to a variety of cell types . For example , the stiffness of the matrix to which the cells are bound affects their ability to internalize and 1742 - 7061 / $ - see front matter (cid:2) 2010 Acta Materialia Inc . Published by Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2010 . 03 . 038 * Corresponding author at : Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Department , University of California , Los Angeles , CA , USA . Tel . : + 1 310 206 3980 ; fax : + 1 310 206 4170 . E - mail address : tsegura @ ucla . edu ( T . Segura ) . Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Acta Biomaterialia journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / actabiomat process DNA , with stiffer substrates achieving higher polyplex internalization and overall gene transfer efﬁciency [ 14 ] . Further , several studies have found that the integrins through which the cells are bound and the ligand density also modulate the process of gene transfer . Cells plated on surfaces with different densities and nano - scale arrangements of the integrin binding peptide RGD demonstrated that surfaces containing the highest density of RGD and shortest distance between RGDs enhanced transgene expression [ 15 ] . Cationic lipid - mediated gene transfer to rat smooth muscle cells is enhanced when the cells are plated on sur - faces that promote a v b 3 binding , with antibodies against a v b 3 and b 3 decreasing the amount of gene transfer [ 16 ] . Fibronectin ( Fn ) has been found to enhance non - viral gene transfer to mesenchymal stem cells [ 17 , 18 ] . Last , studies that compared gene transfer on dif - ferent structural ECM proteins showed that gene transfer to NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts was enhanced when the cells were plated on Fn , when compared with cells plated on collagen I ( Col I ) , laminin and bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) [ 4 ] and that gene transfer to PC12 cells was enhanced in collagen IV compared with Col I , lam - inin , Fn and polylysine [ 19 ] . Although the mechanism by which the cellular microenviron - ment modulates non - viral gene transfer has not been thoroughly investigated , some studies have begun to point to the role of the uptake pathways and cell cytoskeleton . Studies investigating the mechanism of PEI / DNA complex internalization and overall gene transfer efﬁciency into adherent cell concluded that actin polymer - ization into stress ﬁbers and microtubule motor proteins , as well as protein kinase C ( PKC ) - induced phosphorylation , play a major role in polyplex internalization and trafﬁcking [ 15 , 17 , 20 , 21 ] . Fn - in - duced enhancement of gene transfer to ﬁbroblasts was correlated with endocytosis [ 4 ] , while for PC12 cells enhancement on collagen IV was correlated with the relative projected nuclear area of the plated cells [ 5 ] . These studies suggest that the extracellular matrix environment can be engineered to modulate cell processes that en - hance the process of non - viral gene transfer . In this manuscript we report that Col I and Fn can modulate the efﬁciency of non - viral gene transfer to mouse cloned mesenchymal stem cells ( mMSCs ) , with Col I inhibiting non - viral gene transfer and Fn enhancing non - viral gene transfer . We also investigated the mechanism by which Col I and Fn modulate either the inhibi - tion or enhancement of non - viral gene transfer to mMSCs . Because the cellular cytoskeleton and endocytosis pathway have been shown to affect the process of non - viral gene transfer to adherent cells , we investigated whether the possible differences in non - viral gene transfer to mMSCs plated on either Col I or Fn was due to dif - ferences in their cytoskeleton and internalization pathways . mMSCS were seeded on Col I - or Fn - coated dishes and transfected in the presence or absence of pharmacological inhibitors for cyto - skeletal or endocytic components . mMSCs were used because they have potential applications in regenerative medicine and cell ther - apy . We believe that through understanding the role of the extra - cellular matrix ( ECM ) in the process of non - viral gene transfer more efﬁcient approaches for gene transfer will be elucidated that place the cell and the ECM as key parameters in the process . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Materials Plasmid pEGFP - luc was purchased from Clontech ( Palo Alto , CA ) and expanded using a Giga Prep Kit from Qiagen following the manufacturer’s protocol . Linear PEI ( 25 kg mol (cid:2) 1 ) was purchased from Polysciences ( Warrington , PA ) . Various inhibitors , namely amiloride hydrochloride hydrate , cytochalasin D ( CD ) , nocodazole ( Noc ) and butanedione monoxime ( BDM ) , were purchased from Sigma – Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Endothelin I was purchased from Calbiochem ( Gibbstown , NJ ) . Genistein , chlorpromazine hydro - chloride and chloroquine diphosphate salt were purchased from Fisher scientiﬁc . Fn was purchased from Sigma and Col I was pur - chased from R & D Systems ( Minneapolis , MN ) . All other reagents were purchased from Fisher Scientiﬁc unless speciﬁed otherwise . 2 . 2 . Cell culture Mouse bone marrow cloned mesenchymal stem cells ( D1 , CRL12424 ) were purchased from ATCC ( Manassas , VA ) . Cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( Sigma – Al - drich ) containing 10 % bovine growth serum ( BGS ) ( Hyclone , Logan , UT ) and 1 % penicillin / streptomycin antibiotics ( Invitrogen , Grand Island , NY ) and cultured at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . 2 . 3 . Protein coating Proteins were coated using a method described by Kruger - Kra - sagakes et al . [ 22 ] with minor modiﬁcations . The stock solutions of Fn and Col I were diluted in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) to ob - tain the ﬁnal densities used for coating . Protein solution at speciﬁc initial densities was added in each well of a tissue culture plate and the plate was incubated overnight at 4 (cid:3) C in a humid environment , followed by incubation at 37 (cid:3) C for 2 h . The solution was removed and the wells washed twice with PBS to remove unbound proteins . Wells were further incubated with BSA ( 1 % in PBS ) for 30 min at 37 (cid:3) C , followed by two washings with PBS . 2 . 4 . Imaging of coated proteins The homogeneity of the immobilized proteins was qualitatively observed using a NanoOrange Protein Quantitation Kit ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) following the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modiﬁcations . The NanoOrange solution was added to ECM - coated plates ( 96 - well or 48 - well tissue culture plates ) coated prior to BSA blocking . The plate was then incubated at 95 (cid:3) C for 10 min and at room temperature for 20 min before reading the plate using a ty - phoon scanner . The scan was visualized for protein homogeneity and was quantiﬁed using gray scale intensity readings . 2 . 5 . Transfection mMSCs were seeded in 48 - well plates that had previously been modiﬁed with ECM proteins at cell densities of 20 , 000 cells per well . The cells were allowed to attach and incubated on the sur - faces for 16 h before DNA / PEI polyplexes were added . DNA / PEI polyplexes were formed by mixing equal volumes of plasmid DNA with 25 kDa linear PEI . For every 1 l g of DNA , 1 . 65 l g of PEI was added to the DNA solution , to obtain a N / P ratio of 12 , vor - texed for 15 s and incubated at room temperature for 15 min . Poly - plexes were added directly to the medium in the plated cells at a ﬁnal DNA concentration of 0 . 5 l g for 48 - well plates . Salt was added directly to the wells after addition of transfection solution to obtain a ﬁnal concentration of 150 mM NaCl . Transfection was quantiﬁed 48 h post - transfection using the Promega Luciferase As - say system with a luminometer ( Turner Biosystems Modulus , Sun - nyvale , CA ) and an integration period of 10 s . 2 . 6 . Cell proliferation The Cell Titer 96 (cid:4) Aqueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay ( Promega ) was performed to determine the cytotoxicity and prolif - eration of cells exposed to different conditions . Aqueous One Solu - tion ( 20 l l ) was added to each well to be assayed and incubated for 2 h . Sodium dodecyl sulfate ( 25 l l of a 10 % solution ) was added to A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 3437 each well after incubation . Fluorescence was measured using a plate reader at 490 nm . 2 . 7 . Internalization of polyplexes Plasmid DNA ( pGFPluc ) and the ﬂuorescent DNA intercalator YOYO - 1 were mixed at a ratio of 1 YOYO - 1 molecule per 50 base pairs and were allowed to complex for 60 min at room tempera - ture . YOYO - 1 - labeled DNA was then used to prepare PEI / DNA com - plexes at a N / P ratio of 12 ( as mentioned above ) and bolus transfection was performed . Two hours after exposure to the poly - plexes cells were washed with PBS , trypsinized with 50 l l of 0 . 25 % trypsin – EDTA and ﬁnally suspended in 350 l l of 0 . 04 % Trypan blue in 1 % BGS in PBS . Fluorescent cells were detected by ﬂow cytome - try with a FACScan X and data were analyzed with CELLQuest ( Beckton Dickinson ) . Experiments were performed in triplicate , analyzing 7000 total events per sample . For all samples gating was done such that the negative control had 5 % positive events ( i . e . 5 % of the negative control had internalized DNA ) . 2 . 8 . Studying the role of the cytoskeleton in gene transfer For treatment the cells were allowed to attach for 14 – 15 h be - fore the medium in the wells was replaced with medium contain - ing the inhibitor for 30 min . The medium in the wells was changed with fresh complete medium after treatment prior to transfection . Cells were treated with 10 l M Noc to depolymerize microtubules , 10 mM BDM to inhibit myosin ATPase and 20 l M CD to inhibit ac - tin polymerization and the resultant tension . Cell morphology was analyzed immediately after treatment . Transfections were carried out to study cell viability , internalization and gene expression after treatment , using previously mentioned methodologies . Cell viabil - ity was studied 4 and 48 h after treatment and transfection . 2 . 9 . Cell morphology Cell morphology was analyzed to assess the effect of cytoskele - tal inhibitors . Wells were placed on a plastic coverslip using an 8 - well ﬂexiperm and the assembly was placed inside a sterile tissue culture Petri dish . mMSCs ( 20 , 000 cells per 250 l l of medium ) were seeded per well on a coverslip pre - coated with Fn or Col I and incubated for 16 h before being treated with cytoskeletal inhibitors . Immediately after treatment cells were ﬁxed and stained for actin , microtubulin and nuclear DNA using rhoda - mine – phalloidin , Alexa488 microtubulin stain and Hoechst dye , respectively , following the manufacturer’s instructions and stan - dard staining protocols . Brieﬂy , after two PBS washes the cells were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature . The cell membrane was weakened with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in 1 (cid:3) PBS for 3 min . The staining solution consisted of phalloidin and Hoechst dyes . The staining solution was added to each well and left in the dark for 30 – 60 min at room temperature , followed by washing with 0 . 05 % Tween 20 . The samples were observed with a ﬂuorescence microscope . The cell nucleus was observed as a blue stain , the actin ﬁlaments were observed as a red stain , while the microtubulin was observed as a green stain . Images were taken with a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 inverted microscope at 40 (cid:3) magniﬁ - cation , keeping the same exposure for all images and analyzed using Image J software to obtain the mean gray scale values . 2 . 10 . Analyzing endocytotic pathways Cells were treated with inhibitors of endocytosis 16 h after cell attachment prior to transfection to determine the endocytotic pathways active in cells plated on Fn - and Col I - coated surfaces . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis was inhibited using 10 l g ml (cid:2) 1 chlorpromazine , caveolae - mediated endocytosis was inhibited using 200 l M genistein and macropinocytosis was inhibited using 100 l M amiloride hydrochloride . A 30 min pretreatment was gi - ven , followed by incubation with polyplexes for 4 h in the presence of inhibitors . The medium was then replaced with fresh medium . Gene expression and internalization were analyzed as described above . Cell proliferation after inhibitor treatment was analyzed 4 and 48 h after transfection using the above mentioned method . 2 . 11 . Statistics All statistical analyses were performed using the computer pro - gram Instat ( GraphPad , San Diego , CA ) . Experiments were statisti - cally analyzed using the Tukey test , which compares all pairs of Fig . 1 . NanoOrange stainingof immobilized proteins . ( A ) Wells coated withFn at an initial density of 0 , 10 , 20 and 40 l g ml (cid:2) 1 , respectively . Mean NanoOrange ﬂuorescence of wells coated with ( B ) Fn and ( C ) Col I , respectively , using a typhoon scanner . Statisticalanalysis was done using the Tukey – Kramer multiple comparison test . * , Signiﬁcant change in ﬂuorescence between the two surfaces at P < 0 . 05 ; + , + + + , signiﬁcant change withrespect to anuncoated surface at P < 0 . 05 and P < 0 . 001 , respectively . 3438 A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 columns , Dunnet’s test , which compares all columns versus a con - trol column , or the unpaired t - test ( two - tailed P value ) , which compares two columns , as mentioned in the ﬁgure legends . All tests used a 95 % conﬁdence interval . 3 . Results and discussion 3 . 1 . Col I and Fn modulate gene transfer to mMSCs The ECM environment has been implicated in the modulation of transgene expression to a variety of cell types [ 4 , 5 ] . Because of the potential therapeutic applications of efﬁcient transfection of MSCs [ 23 ] we wanted to investigate how ECM proteins that bind through different integrin receptors affect non - viral gene transfer to MSCs . The role of Col I and Fn on the efﬁciency of non - viral gene transfer of DNA / PEI to mMSCs was studied by plating mMSCs on surfaces that had been pre - coated with Col I and Fn and then performing a traditional bolus transfection . Protein coatings are reported as the solution concentration used to coat the surface . The solution concentrations used are those suggested by the manufacturer for the protein type . We kept the solution concentrations within the same order of magnitude for both proteins being studied . However , for Col I higher coating densities are recommended ( 50 – 100 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) than for Fn ( 10 – 40 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) . Increasing protein coat - ing with increasing protein solution concentration was conﬁrmed with a ﬂuorescent protein quantiﬁcation assay ( Fig . 1 ) . The pro - tein - modiﬁed surfaces were imaged via a typhoon scanner . The protein coating was found to be uniform ( Fig . 1A ) with the ﬂuores - cence intensity increasing with increasing protein solution concen - tration ( Fig . 1B and C ) . Polyplexes prepared at an N / P ratio of 12 were used to transfect cells plated on uncoated surfaces or surfaces pre - coated with Fn and Col I . It was observed from initial studies using different N / P ratios to analyze transgene expression and toxicity that as the N / P ratio increased , transfection efﬁciency also increased , but so did toxicity . An N / P ratio of 12 was chosen as it was the highest N / P ratio with minimal toxicity , whereas with higher N / P ratios signiﬁcant toxicity was observed . We observed that both Col I and Fn affected the efﬁciency of non - viral gene transfer to mMSCs . Col I signiﬁcantly inhibited transgene expression , while Fn signiﬁ - cantly enhanced transgene expression when compared with cells plated on uncoated surfaces , the traditional surface used for non - viral gene transfer studies ( P < 0 . 001 , Fig . 2A ) . The efﬁciency of transgene expression was further modulated by the amount of pro - tein immobilized on the surface . Although not statistically signiﬁ - cant , increasing the concentration of Col I resulted in a dose – response inhibition of transgene expression , with gene transfer to mMSCs plated on a 100 l g ml (cid:2) 1 Col I - coated surface resulting in less transgene expression than mMSCs cultured on a 25 l g ml (cid:2) 1 Col I - coated surface ( Fig . 2A ) . In contrast , increasing the surface concentration of Fn resulted in a dose – response enhancement of transgene expression , with gene transfer to mMSCs plated on a 20 l g ml (cid:2) 1 Fn - coated surface resulting in signiﬁcantly less trans - gene expression than to mMSCs cultured on a 40 l g ml (cid:2) 1 Fn - coated surface ( P < 0 . 001 ) . The dose – response for Fn - coated sur - faces agrees with previous reports that showed an enhancement Fig . 2 . Effect of Fn and Col I density on DNA / PEI transgene expression , proliferation and internalization . mMSCs were plated on uncoated , Col I - coated or Fn - coated surfaces for 16 h prior to being transfected with a luciferase encoding plasmid . ( A ) Transgene expression was analyzed at 48 h , while cell proliferation was analyzed at 24 , 48 and 96 h for ( B ) Col I - coated or ( C ) Fn - coated surfaces . ( D ) Cells were transfected with YOYO - 1 labeled polyplexes and after 2 h cells were collected using trypsin and polyplex internalization analyzed by ﬂowcytometry . A total of 7000 events were analyzed per sample . Gating was done such that the negative control had 5 % positive events . Fold increase in transgene expression and internalization was calculated with respect to the uncoated control . Statistical analysis was done using the Tukey – Kramer multiple comparison test . * , * * , * * * , Signiﬁcant change in gene expression or internalization between protein surfaces at different concentrations at P < 0 . 05 , P < 0 . 01 and P < 0 . 001 , respectively ; + , + + , + + + , signiﬁcant change in gene expression and internalization on the protein - coated surfaces with respect to that observed on the uncoated surface at P < 0 . 05 , P < 0 . 01 and P < 0 . 001 , respectively . A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 3439 of gene transfer for NIH 3T3 cells cultured on Fn [ 4 ] . However , a dose – response inhibition of non - viral gene transfer for mMSCs cul - tured on Col I - coated surfaces was not previously reported . 3 . 2 . Proliferation does not fully explain the modulation of gene transfer by Col I and Fn Our ﬁrst inclination to explain the differences in gene transfer for cells plated on Col I - and Fn - coated surfaces was that the pro - liferation rate for mMSCs plated on the different surfaces was af - fected , which in turn affected the efﬁciency of gene transfer , as has been previously reported [ 24 ] . Cells that divide rapidly have been shown to be easier to transfect than cells that are non - divid - ing [ 25 , 26 ] . Cell proliferation was signiﬁcantly enhanced for cells plated on Fn - coated surfaces for all concentrations of Fn ( P < 0 . 001 ) when compared with uncoated surfaces ( Fig . 2C ) , but not when compared with Col I - coated surfaces ( Fig . 2B ) . For Col I proliferation was also enhanced 24 h after cell plating when com - pared with uncoated surfaces ( P < 0 . 05 ) , except for cells plated on 100 l g ml (cid:2) 1 coated surfaces , which had the same level of prolifer - ation as uncoated surfaces . After 48 h there was no difference be - tween Col I and uncoated surfaces except for the highest concentration of Col I tested , which had signiﬁcantly less cell pro - liferation . Although cell proliferation could explain the enhance - ment of gene transfer on Fn - coated surfaces compared with uncoated surfaces , it does not explain why gene transfer was inhib - ited for cells plated on Col I or the dose – response characteristics of gene transfer observed on Fn - coated surfaces . Thus , to begin to understand the reason for the observed differences in gene transfer for mMSCs plated on Col I and Fn we investigated the internaliza - tion rate by ﬂow cytometry and the cellular cytoskeleton and endocytosis pathways using pharmacological inhibitors . 3 . 3 . Polyplex internalization is enhanced on Col I - coated surfaces To determine whether the internalization rate of DNA / PEI poly - plexes by mMSCs was affected by the protein coat , ﬂow cytometry was performed with ﬂuorescently labeled DNA . Cells were plated on Col I - or Fn - coated surfaces and ﬂuorescently labeled polyplexes were added and incubated with the cells for 2 h . We expected the internalization rate on Fn - coated surfaces to be signiﬁcantly higher than that on Col I - coated surfaces since the gene transfer efﬁciency on Fn surfaces was higher . However , we found the opposite . Poly - plex internalization on Fn - coated surfaces was signiﬁcantly less than that observed for cells plated on uncoated surfaces and cells plated on Col I - coated surfaces for all concentrations of Fn tested ( P < 0 . 001 , Fig . 2D ) . Further , internalization on Col I was enhanced when compared with internalization on uncoated surfaces ( P < 0 . 05 ) , even though gene transfer was inhibited ( Fig . 2D ) . To further conﬁrm this ﬁnding , we performed internalization studies with a lower incubation time of 20 min . We found the same trend . Internalization on Col I was enhanced and internalization on Fn was decreased ( data not shown ) . Since the endocytosis rate did not explain why mMSCs plated on Fn - coated surfaces had en - hanced gene transfer over uncoated and Col I - coated surfaces we turned to determining whether the speciﬁc endocytotic pathway used for uncoated and Col I - coated and Fn - coated surfaces were different . 3 . 4 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis mediates efﬁcient gene transfer to mMSCs To determine whether differences in the route of polyplex up - take could explain the differences observed in transgene expres - sion and polyplex internalization between cells plated on uncoated surfaces and on Col I - and Fn - coated surfaces , the endo - somal pathways used for polyplex internalization were studied . Because blocking speciﬁc endosomal pathways requires the use of pharmacological inhibitors we wanted to ensure that they were non - toxic to the cells . We considered 65 % viability an acceptable level to conduct our assay . We found that treatment with all the endosomal inhibitors and polyplexes had at least 65 % viability ( Fig . 3 ) compared with untreated cells . Inhibition of macropinocytosis , caveolae - mediated endocytosis and clathrin - mediated endocytosis in mMSCs can affect the inter - nalization and the overall gene transfer efﬁciency of PEI / DNA com - Fig . 3 . Cell viability after endocytosis inhibitor treatment . Cells were plated on ( A ) uncoated , or ( B ) Col I - coated or ( C ) Fn - coated surfaces . Cells were pretreated with the inhibitors for 30 min , followed by incubation with DNA / PEI polyplexes for 4 h in the presence of the inhibitors . Cell viability was analyzed at 4 and 48 h after addition of the polyplexes using the MTT assay . Statistical analysis was done using Dunnett’s multiple comparison test , which compares each treatment condition with the control . + , + + , Signiﬁcant change at P < 0 . 05 and P < 0 . 01 , respectively . 3440 A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 plexes . To be able to compare the effect of the inhibitors directly , the data were normalized to make the no treatment condition ( NT ) for each surface coating 1 . Inhibition of macropinocytosis re - sulted in a statistical ( P < 0 . 001 ) increase in gene expression on all surfaces , indicating that directing internalization via other path - ways resulted in more efﬁcient intracellular trafﬁcking ( Fig . 4A ) . The increase in transgene expression was highest for cells plated on Col I - coated surfaces ( a 10 - fold increase ) , indicating that for cells plated on Col I more polyplexes were actively internalized and routed using this endosomal pathway . Inhibition of macropin - ocytosis resulted in a statistical decrease in internalized polyplexes for all the surfaces ( P < 0 . 001 ) , conﬁrming that all surfaces pro - moted internalization via this pathway ( Fig . 4B ) . Inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis resulted in a statis - tical decrease in gene expression for cells plated on uncoated and Fn - coated surfaces ( P < 0 . 01 ) and no change in gene expression Fig . 4 . Effect of endocytotic pathways on transgene expression and polyplex internalization . Cells were plated on uncoated , Col I - coated ( 50 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) or Fn - coated ( 40 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) surfaces for 14 – 16 h prior to treating the cells with amileroide , chlorpromazine and genistein to inhibit macropinocytosis and clathrin - and caveole - mediated endocytosis , respectively . Cells were pretreated for 30 min , following which bolus transfection was done with our without YOYO - 1 labeled polyplexes for 2 or 4 h in the presence of inhibitors . The medium was replaced 2 or 4 h after transfection with treatment . ( A ) Transgene expression was analyzed 48 h after transfection using luciferase assay and ( B ) internalization was assessed 2 h after transfection using ﬂowcytometry . A total of 7000 events were analyzed per sample . Gating was done such that the negative control had 5 % positive events . The transgene expression obtained after treatment with a speciﬁc inhibitor was compared with an untreated sample using an unpaired t - test ( two - tailed P value ) . Statistical analysis for internalization was done using the Tukey – Kramer multiple comparison test , which compares all pairs with the same protein coat . * , * * , * * * , Signiﬁcant change at P < 0 . 05 , P < 0 . 01 and P < 0 . 001 , respectively . A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 3441 for cells plated on Col I - coated plates ( Fig . 4A ) . Internalization of polyplexes after clathrin - mediated endocytosis inhibition resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in polyplex internalization for all surfaces tested ( P < 0 . 001 , Fig . 4B ) . Since gene transfer was not affected after clathrin inhibition on Col I , this indicates that clathrin is not an effective route for gene transfer on Col I . On the other hand , the sig - niﬁcant decrease in gene transfer after clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis inhibition ( 92 % decrease ) on Fn - coated surfaces suggests that this pathway is critical for efﬁcient gene transfer to cells pla - ted on Fn . Inhibition of caveolae - mediated endocytosis resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in transgene expression for cells plated on un - coated surfaces ( P < 0 . 001 ) , a 13 . 2 - fold increase for cells plated on Col I - coated plates and no signiﬁcant change for cells plated on Fn - coated plates , indicating that caveolae - mediated endocytosis is activated to different extents in mMSCs seeded on different sur - faces ( Fig . 4A ) . Internalization of polyplexes after caveolae - medi - ated inhibition resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in polyplex internalization for all the surfaces tested ( P < 0 . 001 , Fig . 4B ) . Inter - estingly , although caveolae - mediated endocytosis plays a role in internalization on Fn , it does not affect transgene expression , fur - ther suggesting that this internalization pathway is not an effective route for gene transfer to mMSCs plated on Fn . Overall , our results show that for mMSCs plated on protein - coated surfaces polyplexes Fig . 5 . Effect of treatment with cytoskeletal inhibitors on actin and microtubular networks of Fn . Cells were seeded on Fn - coated surfaces and 14 h after cell seeding treated with ( A ) no inhibitor or inhibitors of ( B ) the actin network , ( C ) actin – myosin interactions or ( D ) the microtubular network . Immediately after inhibitor treatment changes in cell morphology were visualized by staining for actin , using rhodamine – phalloidin , microtubulin , using Alexa488 - conjugated anti - a - tubulin stain , and for DNA , using Hoechst dye . Images were taken with a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 inverted microscope at 40 (cid:3) magniﬁcation and analyzed with Image J to obtain mean gray scale values for actin ( red ) , tubulin ( green ) and DNA ( blue ) . The average mean gray scale values for ( E ) actin and ( F ) tubulin were normalized to the mean gray scale value for DNA ( n = 4 images ) and plotted for each treatment . Statistical analysis was done using the Tukey – Kramer multiple comparison test , which compares all pairs with the same protein coat . * , Signiﬁcant change at P < 0 . 05 . 3442 A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 internalized through caveolae - mediated endocytosis do not result in efﬁcient gene transfer , while polyplexes internalized through clathrin - mediated endocytosis result in efﬁcient gene transfer . Although genistein is widely used as a caveolae - mediated endo - cytosis inhibitor , it is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor and has been re - ported to effect cell growth and proliferation [ 27 ] . Thus the observed changes in internalization and overall gene transfer efﬁ - ciency could be due to changes in proliferation . Likewise , treat - ment with chlorpromazine does not speciﬁcally block clathrin endocytosis . It is also a antipsychotic and acts as an antagonist ( blocking agent ) on different post - synaptic receptors [ 28 ] . However , since all the different conditions were treated the same , we believe that differences between protein coatings go beyond changes in proliferation . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis has been previously reported to result in more efﬁcient transgene expression than macropinocyto - sis and caveolae - mediated endocytosis for histidylated polylysine / DNA polyplexes [ 29 ] and alginate – chitosan particles [ 30 ] . The efﬁ - cacy of the clathrin pathway in transfection has been attributed to complexes being trafﬁcked to the endosome where they are re - leased by the proton sponge effect , while caveolae - mediated endo - cytosis can lead to vesicle - entrapped complexes [ 30 ] . In addition , a Fig . 6 . Effect of treatment with cytoskeletal inhibitors on actin and microtubular networks of Col I . Cells were seeded on surfaces pre - coated with Col I and 14 h after cell seeding treated with ( A ) no inhibitor or with inhibitors against ( B ) the actin network , ( C ) actin – myosin interactions or ( D ) the microtubular network . Immediately after inhibitor treatment changes in cell morphology were visualized by staining for actin , using rhodamine – phalloidin , microtubulin , using Alexa488 - conjugated anti - a - tubulin , and for DNA , using Hoechst dye . Images were taken with a Zeiss AxioObserver Z1 inverted microscope at 40 (cid:3) magniﬁcation , and analyzed with Image J to obtain mean gray scale values for actin ( red ) , tubulin ( green ) and DNA ( blue ) . The average mean gray scale values for ( E ) actin and ( F ) tubulin were normalized to the mean gray value for DNA ( n = 4 images ) and plotted for each treatment . A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 3443 recent study has shown that the effective mode of endocytosis de - pends on the cell type along with the type of PEI used [ 31 ] . In COS - 7 cells the clathrin - dependent pathway was observed to be the main contributor to efﬁcient gene transfer [ 31 ] . In HUH - 7 cells gene transfer by linear PEI polyplexes occurred mainly via the clathrin - dependent route , whereas both pathways mediated trans - fection by branched PEI polyplexes [ 31 ] . In HeLa cells both path - ways were observed to mediate successful transfection , with the caveolae - mediated pathway being more efﬁcient [ 31 ] . Our results indicate that the effective route of internalization can be modu - lated by the cellular microenvironment . 3 . 5 . Reductions in cytoskeletal tension and microtubule polymerization enhance gene transfer to mMSCs To further investigate the mechanism by which the ECM envi - ronment affects non - viral gene transfer to mMSCs the role of the cellular cytoskeleton in cells plated on Fn was investigated . In par - ticular , we investigated the role of actin polymerization , myosin – actin interaction and the microtubular network , because they have been previously implicated in the modulation of non - viral gene transfer and endocytosis . To visualize and quantify the changes in the cytoskeleton network of cells after inhibitor treatment , cells were plated on Fn - and Col I - coated surfaces , treated with the inhibitor , ﬁxed and stained for actin , microtubules and the nucleus . Images were taken at 40 (cid:3) magniﬁcation and analyzed to obtain grey scale values . After treatment with CD , an actin destabilizing agent , the cellular actin network was severely compromised for cells plated on Fn as well as on Col I ( Figs . 5B and 6B ) . However , no change was observed in the actin ( Figs . 5E and 6E ) and micro - tubulin ( Figs . 5F and 6F ) ﬂuorescence intensities . After treatment with Noc , a microtubule polymerization destabilizing agent , no sig - niﬁcant change was observed in microtubule ﬂuorescence ( Figs . 5F and 6F ) . However , the cellular morphology was signiﬁcantly af - fected on both Col I - and Fn - coated surfaces , with the cells becom - ing rounder and less spread ( Figs . 5D and 6D ) . For cells plated on Fn - coated surfaces a signiﬁcant increase in actin stress ﬁbers was observed after Noc treatment ( Fig . 5D and E , P < 0 . 05 ) . After treat - ment with BDM , an inhibitor of actin – myosin interaction , a signif - icant increase in actin stress ﬁbers was observed for cells plated on Fn - coated surfaces ( Fig . 5E , P < 0 . 05 ) , but not for cells plated on Col I - coated surfaces ( Fig . 6E , P > 0 . 05 ) . As with the endocytosis inhibitors , we wanted to ensure that the cells plated on Col I - coated , Fn - coated and uncoated surfaces and treated with cytoskeleton inhibitors were viable before con - ducting our transfection studies . We considered 65 % viability an acceptable viability to conduct our assay using cytoskeletal inhib - itors . We found that cells treated with CD and BDM inhibitors had at least 65 % viability ( Fig . 7 ) compared with untreated cells . How - ever , treatment with Noc produced 50 % viability at 48 h . This was likely due to the prevention of cell division , since microtubules are key contributors to mitosis . Nevertheless , Noc has been previously used in gene transfer studies [ 21 , 32 – 34 ] and was used here to test the role of the microtubular network . Disruption of actin stress ﬁbers statistically increased transgene expression in cells plated on the uncoated and Fn - coated surfaces ( P < 0 . 05 ) , while the expression on Col I - coated surfaces was se - verely inhibited ( P < 0 . 01 , Fig . 8A ) . Internalization of polyplexes after actin stress ﬁber disruption was enhanced for cells plated on Fn ( P < 0 . 01 ) , but no signiﬁcant difference was observed for cells plated on uncoated or Col I - coated surfaces ( P > 0 . 05 , Fig . 8B ) . This indicates that for cells seeded on Fn - coated surfaces , which had poor internalization ( Fig . 2D ) , disruption of the actin network en - hanced endocytosis . Since the enhancement in endocytosis re - sulted in enhanced gene transfer , it is likely that this internalization was through the clathrin pathway , since this path - way showed efﬁcient gene transfer for cells seeded on Fn - coated surfaces . Further , for cells seeded on Col I the actin network ap - peared to be critical for gene transfer . The already inhibited gene transfer to mMSCs seeded on Col I - coated surfaces was further inhibited when the actin stress ﬁbers were disrupted . Together , these results suggest that cells seeded on Fn have a more signiﬁ - cant actin network than cells seeded on Col I , and that the number of actin stress ﬁbers to achieve efﬁcient gene transfer has a maxi - mum , with too much actin reducing gene uptake ( Fn case ) and too little actin reducing effective intracellular transfer ( Col I case ) . Fig . 7 . Cell viability after cytoskeleton inhibitor treatment . Cells were plated on ( A ) uncoated or ( B ) Col I - coated ( 50 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) or ( C ) Fn - coated ( 40 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) surfaces . Cells were treated for 30 min , after which the medium was replaced and polyplexes added . Cell viability was analyzed 4 and 48 h after addition of the polyplexes using the MTT assay . Statistical analysis was done using Dunnett’s multiple comparison test , which compares each treatment condition with a control . + , + + , Signiﬁcant change at P < 0 . 05 and P < 0 . 01 , respectively . 3444 A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 Disruption of actin – myosin interactions statistically increased transgene expression for cells seeded on uncoated and Fn - coated surfaces ( P < 0 . 05 ) , while expression on Col I was unchanged ( Fig . 8A ) . However , the internalization of polyplexes was signiﬁ - cantly decreased after disruption of the actin – myosin interactions on all surfaces ( Fig . 8B ) . These results suggest that for cells plated on Fn - coated surfaces decreasing the contractility of the cell in - creased intracellular trafﬁcking of the polyplexes to the nucleus . Further , the results suggest that cellular contractility , a result of ac - tin – myosin interaction , is low for cells seeded on Col I - coated sur - faces , since there was no effect when it was disrupted , while actin – myosin interaction was high for cell seeded on Fn - coated surfaces , since when it was disrupted enhanced gene transfer occurred . Disruption of microtubule polymerization signiﬁcantly in - creased transgene expression on uncoated , Col I - coated and Fn - coated surfaces ( P < 0 . 001 , Fig . 8A ) , while polyplex internalization signiﬁcantly decreased on Fn - coated and uncoated surfaces ( P < 0 . 05 , Fig . 8B ) . The microtubular network has previously been Fig . 8 . Role of the cell cytoskeleton in transgene expression and polyplex internalization . Cells were plated on uncoated , Col I - coated ( 50 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) or Fn - coated ( 40 l g ml (cid:2) 1 ) surfaces for 14 – 16 hprior to treatingthe cells withCD , BDM and Noc for 30 minto inhibit actin polymerization , myosin ATPase and microtubule polymerization , respectively . Immediatelyaftertreatmentwithinhibitorthemedium was replacedand bolus transfection wasdone withourwithoutYOYO - 1 labeledpolyplexes . ( A ) Transgeneexpression was analyzed 48 h after transfection using luciferase assay and ( B ) internalization was assessed 2 h after transfection using ﬂowcytometry . A total of 7000 events were analyzed per sample . Gating was done such that the negative control had 5 % positive events . Transgene expression and internalization obtained after speciﬁc inhibitor treatments were statistically compared with untreated samples using the unpaired t - test ( two - tailed P value ) . * , * * , * * * , Signiﬁcant change at P < 0 . 05 , P < 0 . 01 and P < 0 . 001 , respectively . A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 3445 implicated in caveole - mediated endocytosis [ 35 ] and lysosomal trafﬁcking of endosomes [ 36 ] . Thus , the increase in gene transfer on all surfaces can be attributed to reduced trafﬁcking to the lyso - somes and reduced DNA degradation intracellularly . Since the enhancement in gene transfer was observed for all surface coat - ings , the effect appears independent of protein surface coating . As with the inhibitors of endocytosis , the action of the cytoskel - etal inhibitors was not solely on the cell cytoskeleton , but affected related pathways . Noc interferes with microtubule polymerization but also affects related processes such as mitotic spindle formation [ 37 ] . This explains the signiﬁcant decrease in proliferation ob - served 48 h after Noc treatment ( Fig . 7 ) . CD , which is a potent inhibitor of actin polymerization , has also been reported to arrest the cell cycle at the G 1 – S transition by activating p53 - dependent pathways [ 38 ] . However , the concentrations and time periods used in our investigation have been widely used to speciﬁcally study the cell cytoskeleton [ 39 , 40 ] and are different from those used to study related functions , such as cell cycle arrest [ 37 , 38 ] . BDM , which is widely used as a skeletal myosin II inhibitor , has been shown be a cytoprotectant [ 41 ] , as well as affecting multiple mechanisms such as muscle contraction , ionic current ﬂow and synaptic trans - mission [ 42 ] . As with the endocytotic inhibitors , all the different conditions were treated the same and we believe that differences between protein coatings go beyond changes in proliferation . These studies indicate that structural ECM constituents affect the efﬁciency of non - viral gene transfer by modulating cell cyto - skeletal dynamics , uptake mechanisms and the resultant intracel - lular trafﬁcking . We believe that an in - depth understanding of the underlying mechanisms of gene transfer in cells will provide clues to design cell pretreatments and develop scaffolds and gene delivery protocols able to enact efﬁcient gene transfer . In conclusion , we found that non - viral gene transfer to mMSCs plated on surfaces coated with Col I or Fn resulted in different levels of gene expression and polyplex internalization . Our analysis sug - gests that the differences observed are due to differences in the endosomal pathways used for polyplex uptake and differences in the cellular cytoskeleton of the cell . In particular , we found that efﬁ - cient gene transfer to mMSCs plated on protein - coated surfaces is achieved when polyplexes are internalized through clathrin - medi - ated endocytosis and that Fn promotes clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis . Further , overall transgene expression for mMSCs plated on Col I - coated surfaces was inhibited . This inhibition was attributed to the promotion of internalization through caveolae - mediated endocytosis and reduced actin polymerization . Last , we found that the amount of cellular tension affects non - viral gene transfer , with decreased actin – myosin interaction resulting in decreased inter - nalization on all surfaces . The understanding of how the cellular microenvironment affects the efﬁciency of non - viral gene transfer to MSCs can aid in the design of effective strategies to genetically modify these cells and achieve their therapeutic potential . Acknowledgements We sincerely appreciate the cooperation and valuable advice rendered by all the members of the Segura Laboratory , especially Yuguo Lei , Quinn Ng , Sean Anderson , Talar Tokatlian and Shiva Gojggini . We would also like to thank undergraduate researcher Eleana Manousiouthakis , as well as high school student Caleb Shield , for their time and effort during this project . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant 1R21EB009516 - 01A1 . Flow cytometry was performed in the UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center ( JCCC ) and Center for AIDS Research Flow Cytometry Core Facility , which is supported by Na - tional Institutes of Health awards CA - 16042 and AI - 28697 and by the JCCC , the UCLA AIDS Institute and the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA . Appendix A . Figures with essential color discrimination Certain ﬁgures in this article , particularly Figures . 5 and 6 , are difﬁcult to interpret in black and white . The full color images can be found in the on - line version , at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2010 . 03 . 038 . References [ 1 ] Thomas CE , Ehrhardt A , Kay MA . Progress and problems with the use of viral vectors for gene therapy . Nat Rev Genet 2003 ; 4 ( 5 ) : 346 – 58 . [ 2 ] Saul JM , Linnes MP , Ratner BD , Giachelli CM , Pun SH . Delivery of non - viral gene carriers from sphere - templated ﬁbrin scaffolds for sustained transgene expression . Biomaterials 2007 ; 28 ( 31 ) : 4705 – 16 . [ 3 ] Mairhofer J , Grabherr R . Rational vector design for efﬁcient non - viral gene delivery : challenges facing the use of plasmid DNA . Mol Biotechnol 2008 ; 39 ( 2 ) : 97 – 104 . [ 4 ] Bengali Z , Rea JC , Shea LD . Gene expression and internalization following vector adsorption to immobilized proteins : dependence on protein identity and density . J Gene Med 2007 ; 9 ( 8 ) : 668 – 78 . [ 5 ] Uchimura E , Yamada S , Uebersax L , Yoshikawa T , Matsumoto K , Kishi M , et al . On - chip transfection of PC12 cells based on the rational understanding of the role of ECM molecules : efﬁcient , non - viral transfection of PC12 cells using collagen IV . Neurosci Lett 2005 ; 378 ( 1 ) : 40 – 3 . [ 6 ] Gao X , Kim KS , Liu D . Nonviral gene delivery : What we know and what is next . AAPS J 2007 ; 9 ( 1 ) : E92 – 104 . [ 7 ] Lungwitz U , Breunig M , Blunk T , Gopferich A . Polyethylenimine - based non - viral gene delivery systems . Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2005 ; 60 ( 2 ) : 247 – 66 . [ 8 ] Boussif O , Lezoualch F , Zanta MA , Mergny MD , Scherman D , Demeneix B , et al . A versatile vector for gene and oligonucleotide transfer into cells in culture and in - vivo – polyethylenimine . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995 ; 92 ( 16 ) : 7297 – 301 . [ 9 ] Akinc A , Thomas M , Klibanov AM , Langer R . Exploring polyethylenimine - mediated DNA transfection and the proton sponge hypothesis . J Gene Med 2005 ; 7 ( 5 ) : 657 – 63 . [ 10 ] Chen J , Gao X , Hu K , Pang Z , Cai J , Li J , et al . Galactose – poly ( ethylene glycol ) – polyethylenimine for improved lung gene transfer . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008 ; 375 ( 3 ) : 378 – 83 . [ 11 ] Kircheis R , Wightman L , Wagner E . Design and gene delivery activity of modiﬁed polyethylenimines . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001 ; 53 ( 3 ) : 341 – 58 . [ 12 ] Mi Bae Y , Choi H , Lee S , Ho Kang S , Tae Kim Y , Nam K , et al . Dexamethasone - conjugated low molecular weight polyethylenimine as a nucleus - targeting lipopolymer gene carrier . Bioconjug Chem 2007 ; 18 ( 6 ) : 2029 – 36 . [ 13 ] Luo X , Pan S , Feng M , Wen Y , Zhang W . Stability of poly ( ethylene glycol ) – graft - polyethylenimine copolymer / DNA complexes : inﬂuences of PEG molecular weight and PEGylation degree . J Mater Sci 2010 ; 21 : 597 . [ 14 ] Kong HJ , Liu J , Riddle K , Matsumoto T , Leach K , Mooney DJ . Non - viral gene delivery regulated by stiffness of cell adhesion substrates . Nat Mater 2005 ; 4 ( 6 ) : 460 – 4 . [ 15 ] Kong HJ , Hsiong S , Mooney DJ . Nanoscale cell adhesion ligand presentation regulates nonviral gene delivery and expression . Nano Lett 2007 ; 7 ( 1 ) : 161 – 6 . [ 16 ] Perlstein I , Connolly JM , Cui X , Song C , Li Q , Jones PL , et al . DNA delivery from an intravascular stent with a denatured collagen – polylactic – polyglycolic acid - controlled release coating : mechanisms of enhanced transfection . Gene Ther 2003 ; 10 ( 17 ) : 1420 – 8 . [ 17 ] Yoshikawa T , Uchimura E , Kishi M , Funeriu DP , Miyake M , Miyake J . Transfection microarray of human mesenchymal stem cells and on - chip siRNA gene knockdown . J Control Release 2004 ; 96 ( 2 ) : 227 – 32 . [ 18 ] Okazaki A , Jo JI , Tabata Y . A reverse transfection technology to genetically engineer adult stem cells . Tissue Eng 2007 ; 13 : 245 . [ 19 ] Uchimura E , Yamada S , Uebersax L , Yoshikawa T , Matsumoto K , Kishi M , et al . On - chip transfection of PC12 cells based on the rational understanding of the role of ECM molecules : efﬁcient , non - viral transfection of PC12 cells using collagen IV . Neurosci Lett 2005 ; 378 ( 1 ) : 40 – 3 . [ 20 ] Kopatz I , Remy JS , Behr JP . A model for non - viral gene delivery through syndecan adhesion molecules and powered by actin . J Gene Med 2004 ; 6 ( 7 ) : 769 – 76 . [ 21 ] Suh J , Wirtz D , Hanes J . Efﬁcient active transport of gene nanocarriers to the cell nucleus . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 ; 100 ( 7 ) : 3878 – 82 . [ 22 ] Kruger - Krasagakes S , Grutzkau A , Krasagakis K , Hoffmann S , Henz BM . Adhesion of human mast cells to extracellular matrix provides a co - stimulatory signal for cytokine production . Immunology 1999 ; 98 ( 2 ) : 253 – 7 . [ 23 ] Kumar S , Chanda D , Ponnazhagan S . Therapeutic potential of genetically modiﬁed mesenchymal stem cells . Gene Ther 2008 ; 15 ( 10 ) : 711 – 5 . [ 24 ] Wilke M , Fortunati E , van den Broek M , Hoogeveen AT , Scholte BJ . Efﬁcacy of a peptide - based gene delivery system depends on mitotic activity . Gene Ther 1996 ; 3 ( 12 ) : 1133 – 42 . [ 25 ] Mortimer I , Tam P , MacLachlan I , Graham RW , Saravolac EG , Joshi PB . Cationic lipid - mediated transfection of cells in culture requires mitotic activity . Gene Ther 1999 ; 6 ( 3 ) : 403 – 11 . [ 26 ] Brunner S , Sauer T , Carotta S , Cotten M , Saltik M , Wagner E . Cell cycle dependence of gene transfer by lipoplex , polyplex and recombinant adenovirus . Gene Ther 2000 ; 7 ( 5 ) : 401 – 7 . 3446 A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 [ 27 ] Markovits J , Linassier C , Fosse P , Couprie J , Pierre J , Jacquemin - Sablon A , et al . Inhibitory effects of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein on mammalian DNA topoisomerase II . Cancer Res 1989 ; 49 ( 18 ) : 5111 – 7 . [ 28 ] Peroutka SJ , Synder SH . Relationship of neuroleptic drug effects at brain dopamine , serotonin , alpha - adrenergic , and histamine receptors to clinical potency . Am J Psychiatry 1980 ; 137 ( 12 ) : 1518 – 22 . [ 29 ] Goncalves C , Mennesson E , Fuchs R , Gorvel JP , Midoux P , Pichon C . Macropinocytosis of polyplexes and recycling of plasmid via the clathrin - dependent pathway impair the transfection efﬁciency of human hepatocarcinoma cells . Mol Ther 2004 ; 10 ( 2 ) : 373 – 85 . [ 30 ] Douglas KL , Piccirillo CA , Tabrizian M . Cell line - dependent internalization pathways and intracellular trafﬁcking determine transfection efﬁciency of nanoparticle vectors . Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2008 ; 68 ( 3 ) : 676 – 87 . [ 31 ] von Gersdorff K , Sanders NN , Vandenbroucke R , De Smedt SC , Wagner E , Ogris M . The internalization route resulting in successful gene expression depends on both cell line and polyethylenimine polyplex type . Mol Ther 2006 ; 14 ( 5 ) : 745 – 53 . [ 32 ] Brisson M , Tseng WC , Almonte C , Watkins S , Huang L . Subcellular trafﬁcking of the cytoplasmic expression system . Hum Gene Ther 1999 ; 10 ( 16 ) : 2601 – 13 . [ 33 ] Grosse S , Aron Y , Thevenot G , Monsigny M , Fajac I . Cytoskeletal involvement in the cellular trafﬁcking of plasmid / PEI derivative complexes . J Control Release 2007 ; 122 ( 1 ) : 111 – 7 . [ 34 ] Lindberg J , Fernandez MA , Ropp JD , Hamm - Alvarez SF . Nocodazole treatment of CV - 1 cells enhances nuclear / perinuclear accumulation of lipid – DNA complexes and increases gene expression . Pharm Res 2001 ; 18 ( 2 ) : 246 – 9 . [ 35 ] Wong AW , Scales SJ , Reilly DE . DNA internalized via caveolae requires microtubule - dependent , Rab7 - independent transport to the late endocytic pathway for delivery to the nucleus . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 ( 31 ) : 22953 – 63 . [ 36 ] Li D , Li P , Li G , Wang J , Wang E . The effect of nocodazole on the transfection efﬁciency of lipid - bilayer coated gold nanoparticles . Biomaterials 2009 ; 30 ( 7 ) : 1382 – 8 . [ 37 ] Hsu SL , Yu CT , Yin SC , Tang MJ , Tien AC , Wu YM , et al . Caspase 3 , periodically expressed and activated at G2 / M transition , is required for nocodazole - induced mitotic checkpoint . Apoptosis 2006 ; 11 ( 5 ) : 765 – 71 . [ 38 ] Rubtsova SN , Kondratov RV , Kopnin PB , Chumakov PM , Kopnin BP , Vasiliev JM . Disruption of actin microﬁlaments by cytochalasin D leads to activation of p53 . FEBS Lett 1998 ; 430 ( 3 ) : 353 – 7 . [ 39 ] Bhadriraju K , Yang M , AlomRuiz S , Pirone D , Tan J , Chen CS . Activation of ROCK by RhoA is regulated by cell adhesion , shape , and cytoskeletal tension . Exp Cell Res 2007 ; 313 ( 16 ) : 3616 – 23 . [ 40 ] Polte TR , Eichler GS , Wang N , Ingber DE . Extracellular matrix controls myosin light chain phosphorylation and cell contractility through modulation of cell shape and cytoskeletal prestress . Am J Physiol 2004 ; 286 ( 3 ) : C518 – 28 . [ 41 ] Thum T , Borlak J . Butanedione monoxime increases the viability and yield of adult cardiomyocytes in primary cultures . Cardiovasc Toxicol 2001 ; 1 ( 1 ) : 61 – 72 . [ 42 ] Sellin LC , McArdle JJ . Multiple effects of 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime . Pharmacol Toxicol 1994 ; 74 ( 6 ) : 305 – 13 . A . Dhaliwal et al . / Acta Biomaterialia 6 ( 2010 ) 3436 – 3447 3447