TITLE : A Universal Approach to Analyzing Transmission Electron Microscopy with ImageJ AUTHORS AND AFFILIATIONS : Jacob Lam 1 , 2 , Michelle Biete 3 , Margaret Mungai 4 , Salma AshShareef 1 , 2 , Kit Neikirk 3 , Edgar Garza Lopez 5 , Trace A . Christensen 6 , Jeffrey L . Salisbury 6 , 7 , Prasanna Katti 8 , Brian Glancy 8 , 9 , Renata O . Pereira 1 , 2 , E . Dale Abel 1 , 2 * , Antentor Hinton , Jr . 5 * 1 Department of Internal Medicine , University of Iowa – Carver College of Medicine , Iowa City , IA . 2 Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center , Iowa City , IA . 3 Daniel K . Inouye College of Pharmacy , University of Hawaii at Hilo , Hilo , HI . 4 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California Berkeley , Berkeley , CA 5 Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics , Vanderbilt University , Nashville , TN 6 Microscopy and Cell Analysis Core Facility , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN . 7 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN . 8 National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD . 9 National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD . * These authors share senior authorship . Jacob Lam Jacob - Lam @ uiowa . edu Michelle Biete mbiete @ hawaii . edu Margaret Mungai Margaret _ Mungai @ berkeley . edu Salma AshShareef Salma - AshShareef @ uiowa . edu Kit Neikirk kneikirk @ hawaii . edu Edgar Garza Lopez egarzalopez @ gmail . com Trace A Christensen christensen . trace @ mayo . edu Jeffrey Salisbury Salisbury @ mayo . edu Prasanna Katti Prasannakatti . katti @ nih . gov Brian Glancy Brian . glancy @ nih . gov Renata Pereira renata - pereira @ uiowa . edu E . Dale Abel Dale - Abel @ uiowa . edu Antentor Hinton , Jr . antentor . o . hinton . jr @ vanderbilt . edu Corresponding Author Antentor Hinton , Jr . Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics Vanderbilt University antentor . o . hinton . jr @ Vanderbilt . Edu 319 - 383 - 3095 SUMMARY : We discuss a standardized method for measuring and quantifying organelle features using transmission electron microscopy and accessing for interactions between subcellular structures ; organelles of focus include mitochondria , endoplasmic reticulum , lysosomes , and autophagosomes . ABSTRACT : Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) is a scientific research standard for producing nanometer - resolution ultrastructural images of subcellular components within cells and tissues . Mitochondria , endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , lysosomes , and autophagosomes are organelles of particular interest to those investigating metabolic disorders . However , there is no clear consensus amongst regarding the best methods for quantifying the features of organelles in TEM images . In this protocol , we propose a standardized approach to accurately measure the morphology of these important subcellular structures using the free program ImageJ , developed by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) . Specifically , we detail procedures for obtaining mitochondrial length , width , area , and circularity , in addition to assessing cristae morphology . We further provide methods for measuring interactions between the mitochondria and ER and measuring the length and width of lysosomes and autophagosomes . This standardized method can be used to quantify key features of organelle morphology , allowing investigators to produce accurate and reproducible measurements of organelle structures in their experimental samples . INTRODUCTION : Organelles involved in cellular metabolism are some of the most studied subcellular structures . Mitochondria play essential roles in multiple metabolic pathways and are responsible for generating cellular energy . Additionally , mitochondria are involved in apoptosis and cell death pathways , as well as the production and consumption of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) 1 . The endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) plays a key role in protein and lipid synthesis , as well as in calcium homeostasis 2 . Additionally , autophagosomes and lysosomes work together to degrade and recycle intracellular components and damaged organelles 3 . Organelle dysfunction contributes to the pathogenesis of many diseases , including type II diabetes mellitus , cardiovascular disease , and Alzheimer’s disease 4 – 6 . Thus , due to their central roles in pathophysiology , studying the structure of these organelles and accurately assessing how they are disrupted under disease conditions is of paramount importance . Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) is one of the most widely used methods for studying organelle structure . This technique produces nanometer - resolution images by transmitting electrons through an ultrathin section of the sample and magnifying the resulting image using a series of lenses 7 . TEM has enabled researchers to study the ultrastructure of organelles in a wide variety of healthy and diseased cells and tissues , yielding important insights into key cellular processes and disease development 8 . However , several limitations remain to using TEM when studying organelles . While overall organelle structures can be readily determined from TEM images , quantifying changes in organelle morphology presents a substantial challenge . Further , there has been no clear consensus regarding the most effective methods for measuring organelle features from TEM images . To address this issue , we propose a standardized approach for analyzing TEM images with the image analysis tool ImageJ , which was developed by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) . We outline methods for measuring features of important organelles , including mitochondria , ER , lysosomes , and autophagosomes . In addition , we provide strategies for assessing how these organelles interact with one another . By using a standardized method to quantify organelle morphology as proposed by this study , investigators can generate accurate and easily reproducible measurements of organelle features , thereby increasing the precision and relevance of their data . PROTOCOL : 1 . Installing and Preparing ImageJ Software for Analysis 1 . 1 . Download ImageJ software from the NIH website ( https : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / download . html ) . 1 . 2 . Install and open the ImageJ software . 1 . 3 . Open the Region of Interest ( ROI ) Manager , which is used to record and keep track of measurements , by selecting Analyze → Tools → ROI Manager ( Figure 1A ) . 1 . 4 . Click on Analyze → Set Measurements to input the measurements that ImageJ will make , such as area , circularity , and perimeter ( Figure 1A ) . 1 . 5 . Drag the image to be analyzed ( TIFF or DM3 file ) directly into ImageJ ( Figure 1B ) . 1 . 5 . 1 . Alternatively , click File → Open to open the selected image . 1 . 6 . Considerations 1 . 6 . 1 . For accuracy and reproducibility , ensure that each image contains a scale bar , length , and image magnification . The scale bar and bar length are important for setting the appropriate units within the Image J settings . 1 . 6 . 2 . Quantification of samples should be performed by three individuals in a randomized and blinded manner to ensure an unbiased approach . 2 . Analyzing Mitochondrial Morphology 2 . 1 . Measuring mitochondrial area , circularity , and perimeter . 2 . 1 . 1 . Click on Freehand Selections on the toolbar to access the Freehand tool . 2 . 1 . 2 . Trace the outline of the entire cell . To store the measurement , click Add on the ROI Manager . This will be used to normalize later measurements . 2 . 1 . 3 . Trace the outer mitochondrial membrane of each mitochondrion . Add the shape to the ROI Manager ( Figure 2A ) . 2 . 1 . 4 . Click on Measure in the ROI Manager to obtain the measurements for each shape . 2 . 2 . Measuring mitochondrial length and width 2 . 2 . 1 . Click on Straight , Segmented , or Freehand Lines on the toolbar and select Straight Line . 2 . 2 . 2 . Draw a straight line along the major and minor axis of each mitochondrion . Add the measurements to the ROI Manager ( Figure 2A ) . 2 . 2 . 3 . Click the Measure function to obtain lengths and widths . 3 . Analyzing Cristae Morphology 3 . 1 . Split each image into four quadrants and randomly pick two quadrants to analyze ; use the same quadrants for all images . 3 . 2 . Using the Freehand tool in ImageJ , outline the outer membrane of a mitochondrion . Add the measurement to the ROI Manager . 3 . 3 . Trace the outline of each crista within the mitochondrion . Add each measurement to the ROI Manager ( Figure 2B ) . 3 . 4 . Click on Measure in the ROI Manager to obtain the area of each crista , and cristae surface area is the sum of the areas of all the cristae in a single mitochondrion . 3 . 5 . To calculate cristae volume density , cristae surface area is divided by the area of the mitochondrion . 3 . 6 . To determine the cristae number , count the number of cristae in each mitochondrion . Alternatively , you can use the number of cristae measurements obtained earlier . 3 . 7 . To assign a mitochondrion a cristae score , evaluate cristae abundance and form . Assign a score between 0 and 4 ( 0 – no sharply defined crista , 1 – greater than 50 % of mitochondrial area without cristae , 2 – greater than 25 % of mitochondrial area without cristae , 3 – many cristae but irregular , 4 – many regular cristae ) 9 . 3 . 8 . Considerations 3 . 8 . 1 . Average cristae measurements in cells are based on 1000 mitochondria from 100 cells or 10 mitochondria per cell from 2 , 000 cells . For tissue samples , average measurements are based on three independent animals with 330 mitochondria measured from at least 10 images . 4 . Analyzing Mitochondria - ER Contacts ( MERCs ) 4 . 1 . Split each image into four quadrants and randomly pick two quadrants to analyze ; use the same quadrants for all images . 4 . 2 . Identify a Mitochondrion - ER contact ( MERC ) , a mitochondrion in close contact with the ER membrane , in your TEM image . 4 . 3 . Using the Freehand Selections tool , trace both the outer membrane of the mitochondrion and the ER membrane at a contact point ( Figure 2C ) . 4 . 4 . To obtain the MERC contact length , click on the Straight , Segmented , or Freehand Lines tool on the toolbar , select Freehand Line , and draw a line spanning the length of the contact site ( Figure 2C ) . Add the measurement to the ROI Manager and use the Measure function to determine the length of the contact . 4 . 5 . To measure the MERC distance , use the Freehand Line tool to draw a line between the two organelles ( Figure 2D ) . Add the measurement to the ROI Manager and use the Measure function to determine the distance . 4 . 6 . To calculate percent coverage , divide the contact length by either the mitochondrial surface area ( mitochondrial percent coverage ) or ER surface ( ER percent coverage ) , and multiply the value by 100 to obtain a percentage . 4 . 7 . Similar measurements can be made for other organelle interactions using the same steps detailed here . 4 . 8 . Considerations 4 . 8 . 1 . Average MERC changes in cells should be based on 100 to 400 images . For tissue samples , measurements should be based on three independent animals with 100 to 400 images per animal . 4 . 8 . 2 . Average MERC distance and length in cells should be based on 50 to 100 images . For tissue samples , measurements should be based on three independent animals with 10 to 15 images per animal 5 . Analyzing Lysosomes and Autophagosomes 5 . 1 . Click on the Freehand Selections to access the Freehand tool . 5 . 2 . Trace the outline of the entire cell . Click Add on the ROI Manager . This will be used to normalize later measurements . 5 . 3 . Trace the membrane of each lysosome and autophagosome . Add the shape to the ROI Manager ( Figure 2E ) . Click Measure in the ROI Manager to obtain measurements for the area . 5 . 4 . To obtain length and width , use the Straight Line tool to draw a line down the major and minor axes of each organelle . Add the measurements to the ROI Manager and use the Measure function to obtain numerical values for each measurement . REPRESENTATIVE RESULTS : This protocol standardizes an approach to obtaining accurate and reproducible measurements of organelle morphological features . Below , we discuss findings based on this TEM image analysis approach . OPA - 1 Knockdown Decreases Mitochondrial Area and Disrupts Cristae Structure Optic atrophy protein - 1 ( OPA1 ) is an inner mitochondrial membrane protein that plays an essential role in inner mitochondrial membrane fusion , in concert with mitofusin proteins MFN1 and MFN2 that mediate outer membrane fusion 10 . Previous studies have demonstrated that OPA1 knockdown inhibits mitochondrial fusion and increases the number of fragmented mitochondria 11 . Using our proposed method outlined above , we confirmed this finding in mouse skeletal muscle tissue ( Figure 3A ) . Specifically , we showed that knocking down Opa1 significantly decreases the mean mitochondrial area for the peri - nuclear mitochondria cluster ( Figure 3B ) . Additionally , we observed an increase in both the number of mitochondria per square micron and the average circularity index ( Figure 3C and 3D ) . These findings suggest that loss of OPA1 decreases mitochondrial fusion and increases fission events , consistent with previous studies . Beyond its role in mitochondrial dynamics , OPA1 plays a direct role in cristae remodeling 12 . To assess the effect of OPA1 on cristae morphology , we used our TEM analysis protocol to quantify cristae changes in OPA1 - knockdown skeletal muscle tissue . We confirmed disruption of cristae morphology , and reductions in the average number of cristae per mitochondrion , average cristae surface area , and cristae volume density in OPA1 - knockdown cells ( Figures 3E – 3G ) . Furthermore , the cristae score was reduced in OPA1 - knockdown cells relative to the control group ( Figure 3H ) . These results confirm that OPA1 is essential for cristae remodeling and that loss of OPA1 disrupts normal cristae structure . Thapsigargin Treatment Increases MERCs The interaction points between the ER and mitochondria , commonly referred to as mitochondria - ER contacts ( MERCs ) , are increasingly becoming a focus of study in cellular biology . In particular , emerging research has implicated defective MERCs in multiple age - associated diseases , such as neurodegenerative diseases , metabolic syndrome , and cardiovascular diseases 13 . To test our method of quantifying MERCs , we measured the effect of thapsigargin treatment on MERCs in murine cells ( Figure 4A ) . Thapsigargin is a sarco - ER Ca 2 + - ATPase ( SERCA ) inhibitor that induces ER stress 14 . ER stress inducers like thapsigargin cause mitochondria to move closer to the ER 15 . In our analysis , we found that thapsigargin treatment greatly decreases the distance between mitochondria and the ER compared with the control cells ( Figure 4B ) . The average contact length is also significantly increased in treated cells ( Figure 4C ) . These findings suggest that thapsigargin treatment influences MERC structure by increasing the degree of contact between mitochondria and the ER and decreasing the distance between the two organelles , as previously reported 15 . Thapsigargin Treatment Alters Lysosome and Autophagosome Morphology We also investigated morphological changes in lysosomes and autophagosomes in response to thapsigargin treatment ( Figure 5A ) . Using our TEM image analysis protocol , we found that both mean lysosomal area and the number of lysosomes per square micron are significantly increased in response to thapsigargin treatment ( Figure 5B and 5C ) . Mean autophagosome area and the number of autophagosomes per square micron are also significantly increased in thapsigargin - treated cells ( Figure 5D and 5E ) . Thapsigargin inhibits ER function and promotes cellular stress . These findings support a model in which cell - stress induced organellar damage induces the activity of the recycling machinery , including lysosomes and autophagosomes , to break down damaged organelles . Thus , the morphological changes detected and quantified here by TEM are consistent with the expected effects of thapsigargin treatment 15 , 16 . DISCUSSION : TEM is one of the most powerful tools for assessing organelle morphology in cells and tissues . However , to our knowledge , there is no standardized protocol for quantitatively assessing organelle morphology with TEM . Herein , we describe a straightforward approach for accurately quantifying organelle features from TEM images , which can easily be reproduced in all cell and tissue types . Using this method , we verified results from multiple previous studies that assessed how manipulation of mitochondrial and ER proteins using genetic and pharmacological approaches alters organelle morphology . On a broader scale , this method can be applied to any field of study and cell type where organelle structure is a focus . For example , mitochondria play a role in many complex diseases , including type II d iabetes , cardiomyopathy , and Alzheimer’s disease 4 , 6 . Therefore , understanding how these diseases impact mitochondrial structure determined by TEM in conjunction with this precise methodology may lead to a greater understanding of their pathophysiology . One critical step for successfully implementing this method is to ensure that the image to be analyzed is clear enough to identify specific structures . Several organelles , including the mitochondria , have distinguishing characteristics and are easily observable even at lower magnifications . However , finer structures , such as the cristae within mitochondria , may not be so readily apparent . To address this , higher magnifications of 2 , 500x or even 5 , 000x should be used to better resolve organelles of interest . Although TEM is a useful and powerful tool for assessing organelle structure in cells and tissues , this method of structural analysis has some limitations that may impact our proposed method . Different investigators may possess varying levels of proficiency at using the tools of ImageJ , especially the freehand tools , which could lead to variability in the data or the amount of time required to complete the analysis . However , most investigators should be able to take advantage of this method with practice and the analysis can be completed remotely . Another limitation is that samples must be sliced into ultrathin segments to be properly imaged , meaning three - dimensional characteristics cannot be fully captured by this technique . Thus , features such as organelle volume or organelle interactions in three dimensions cannot be reliably assessed without using alternative methods . In such cases , more advanced techniques , including focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy ( FIB - SEM ) or serial block - face scanning electron microscopy ( SBF - SEM ) , can be used to image subcellular structures in three dimensions , although accurate quantification is extremely time - consuming 16 . A third limitation of TEM and our analysis method is the lack of live imaging . Due to the requirement of fixing samples in resin , TEM captures only a single snapshot of a sample in time . Consequently , information about dynamic characteristics , such as how organelles move in the cell and change over time cannot be obtained through this approach . Therefore , other techniques , such as fluorescent staining or proximity ligation assay , might be needed to complement this approach 17 . Despite these limitations , our TEM analysis method represents a powerful tool for accurately assessing and quantifying organelle morphology , with the potential for broad application in the study of metabolic disorders and other diseases associated with organelle disruption . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS : We also would like to thank our undergraduate colleagues Benjamin Kirk and Innes Hicsasmaz for helping to optimize the analysis technique . This work was supported by NIH grants R01HL108379 and R01DK092065 to E . D . A , as well as the T32 HL007121 , UNCF / BMS EE Just Faculty Fund , the Burroughs Welcome Fund CASI Award , and the Ford Foundation to AHJ . DISCLOSURES : The authors have no disclosures to report . REFERENCES : 1 . Brand , M . D . , Orr , A . L . , Perevoshchikova , I . V . & Quinlan , C . L . The role of mitochondrial function and cellular bioenergetics in ageing and disease . Br . J . Dermatol . 169 , 1 – 8 ( 2013 ) . 2 . Schwarz , D . S . & Blower , M . D . The endoplasmic reticulum : Structure , function and response to cellular signaling . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 73 , 79 – 94 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Yang , Y . & Klionsky , D . J . Autophagy and disease : unanswered questions . Cell Death Differ . 27 , 858 – 871 ( 2020 ) . 4 . Wallace , D . C . A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and degenerative diseases , aging , and cancer : A dawn for evolutionary medicine . Annu . Rev . Genet . 39 , 359 – 407 ( 2005 ) . 5 . Ozcan , L . & Tabas , I . Role of endoplasmic reticulum stress in metabolic disease and other disorders . Annu . Rev . Med . 63 , 317 – 328 ( 2012 ) . 6 . Wang , W . , Zhao , F . , Ma , X . , Perry , G . & Zhu , X . Mitochondria dysfunction in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease : Recent advances . Mol . Neurodegener . 15 , 1 – 22 ( 2020 ) . 7 . Facility , U . of I . C . M . R . Methodology . https : / / cmrf . research . uiowa . edu / . 8 . Franken , L . E . , Grünewald , K . , Boekema , E . J . & Stuart , M . C . A . A Technical Introduction to Transmission Electron Microscopy for Soft - Matter : Imaging , Possibilities , Choices , and Technical Developments . Small 16 , 1 – 15 ( 2020 ) . 9 . Eisner , V . et al . Mitochondrial fusion dynamics is robust in the heart and depends on calcium oscillations and contractile activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , E859 – E868 ( 2017 ) . 10 . Zorzano , A . , Liesa , M . & Palacín , M . Role of mitochondrial dynamics proteins in the pathophysiology of obesity and type 2 diabetes . International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology vol . 41 1846 – 1854 ( 2009 ) . 11 . Parra , V . et al . Insulin stimulates mitochondrial fusion and function in cardiomyocytes via the AktmTOR - NFkB - Opa - 1 signaling pathway . Diabetes 63 , 75 – 88 ( 2014 ) . 12 . Frezza , C . et al . OPA1 Controls Apoptotic Cristae Remodeling Independently from Mitochondrial Fusion . Cell vol . 126 177 – 189 ( 2006 ) . 13 . Moltedo , O . , Remondelli , P . & Amodio , G . The mitochondria – endoplasmic reticulum contacts and their critical role in aging and age - associated diseases . Front . Cell Dev . Biol . 7 , 1 – 13 ( 2019 ) . 14 . Lindner , P . , Christensen , S . B . , Nissen , P . , Møller , J . V . & Engedal , N . Cell death induced by the ER stressor thapsigargin involves death receptor 5 , a non - autophagic function of MAP1LC3B , and distinct contributions from unfolded protein response components . Cell Commun . Signal . 18 , 1 – 23 ( 2020 ) . 15 . Bravo , R . et al . Increased ER - mitochondrial coupling promotes mitochondrial respiration and bioenergetics during early phases of ER stress . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 2511 ( 2011 ) . 16 . Bravo - Sagua , R . et al . mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin and ER stressor tunicamycin induce differential patterns of ER - mitochondria coupling . Scientific Reports . 6 ( 1 ) , ( 2016 ) . 17 . Bleck , C . K . E . , Kim , Y . , Willingham , T . B . & Glancy , B . Subcellular connectomic analyses of energy networks in striated muscle . Nat . Commun . 9 , 1 – 11 ( 2018 ) . 18 . Söderberg , O . et al . Characterizing proteins and their interactions in cells and tissues using the in situ proximity ligation assay . Methods 45 , 227 – 232 ( 2008 ) . Figure 1 . Preparing ImageJ software for image analysis . ( A ) On the ImageJ toolbar , the “Analyze” menu contains many of the settings and tools needed for this analysis method . ( B ) Representative screenshot of a transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) image that is ready to be analyzed . Figure 2 . Analyzing organelle morphology with ImageJ . ( A ) Representative TEM image illustrating how to measure mitochondrial length , width , area , and circularity . ( B ) Representative TEM image illustrating how to obtain cristae measurements ( yellow ) . ( C , D ) Representative TEM images illustrating how to determine ER - mitochondria contact length and ER - mitochondria contact distance ( yellow ) . ( E ) Representative TEM image illustrating how to obtain lysosome and autophagosome measurements . Figure 3 . Knockdown of optic atrophy protein - 1 ( OPA1 ) decreases mitochondrial area and disrupts cristae structure . ( A ) Representative TEM images of mitochondria in mouse skeletal muscle tissue from OPA1 knockdown ( red outline ) and control ( blue outline ) tissue . ( B ) Quantification of perinuclear mitochondrial area , ( C ) number of mitochondria per square micron , and ( D ) mitochondrial circularity index . ( E ) Quantification of cristae number , ( F ) cristae area , ( G ) cristae volume , and ( H ) cristae score . Statistical significance is indicated by asterisks ; * , * * , * * * , * * * * indicate p ≤ 0 . 05 , p ≤ 0 . 01 , p ≤ 0 . 001 , and p ≤ 0 . 0001 , respectively . Figure 4 . Thapsigargin treatment increases mitochondria - endoplasmic reticulum contacts ( MERCs ) . ( A ) Representative TEM images of mouse skeletal muscle from untreated ( blue outline ) and ( red outline ) thapsigargin - treated cells . ( B ) Quantification of MERC distance and ( C ) MERC length . Statistical significance is indicated by asterisks ; * , * * , * * * , * * * * indicate p ≤ 0 . 05 , p ≤ 0 . 01 , p ≤ 0 . 001 , and p ≤ 0 . 0001 , respectively . MERCs appear at orange arrows . Figure 5 . Thapsigargin alters lysosome and autophagosome morphology . ( A ) Representative TEM images of lysosomes and autophagosomes in mouse skeletal muscle from untreated ( blue outline ) and ( red outline ) thapsigargin - treated cells . ( B ) Quantification of lysosome area in each treatment group . ( C ) Quantification of the number of lysosomes per square micron . ( D ) Quantification of autophagosome area . ( E ) Quantification of the number of autophagosomes per square micron . Statistical significance is indicated by asterisks ; * , * * , * * * , * * * * indicate p ≤ 0 . 05 , p ≤ 0 . 01 , p ≤ 0 . 001 , and p ≤ 0 . 0001 , respectively . Autophagosomes appear at black arrows and blue arrows for lysosomes .