43 What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? C . ESTELLE SMITH , GroupLens Research , Dept . Computer Science , University of Minnesota ( UMN ) , USA AVLEEN KAUR , GroupLens Research , Dept . Computer Science , University of Minnesota , USA KATIE Z . GACH , University of Colorado Boulder , USA LOREN TERVEEN , GroupLens Research , Dept . Computer Science , University of Minnesota , USA MARY JO KREITZER , Earl E . Bakken Center for Spirituality & Healing , UMN , USA SUSAN O’CONNER - VON , Earl E . Bakken Center for Spirituality & Healing , UMN , USA Spirituality is an understudied topic in social computing ; however , for Online Health Community ( OHC ) users facing life - threatening illness , it is of fundamental importance . Through in - depth focus groups with OHC stakeholders in a US context , we derive a definition of “spiritual support” for use by designers and researchers who study online social support . We show that spiritual support is an integral dimension that underlies other social support types , and that if we ignore spirituality in design , we fail to mitigate problematic issues that arise in online spaces when users’ spiritual values clash . Based on participants’ ideations , we provide design implications for OHCs and other social media to better facilitate spiritual support through : ( 1 ) representing spiritual beliefs , ( 2 ) assistance with supportive communication , ( 3 ) support network visualization and mobilization , and ( 4 ) advance care planning and digital legacy . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and social com - puting . Additional Key Words and Phrases : Online health communities , CaringBridge , social support , spiritual support , prayer support , spirituality , religion , supportive communication , digital legacy , visualization , health , patient , caregiver ACM Reference Format : C . Estelle Smith , Avleen Kaur , Katie Z . Gach , Loren Terveen , Mary Jo Kreitzer , and Susan O’Conner - Von . 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 5 , CSCW1 , Article 43 ( April 2021 ) , 42 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449117 1 INTRODUCTION Many of us will eventually receive a life - threatening or life - limiting health diagnosis . In response to a serious health crisis , people must grapple with difficult new circumstances as they deal with their pain and fear , and seek healing . Simultaneously , they are propelled into a state of needing Authors’ addresses : C . Estelle Smith , GroupLens Research , Dept . Computer Science , University of Minnesota ( UMN ) , Minneapolis , MN , 55455 , USA , smit3694 @ umn . edu ; Avleen Kaur , GroupLens Research , Dept . Computer Science , University ofMinnesota , Minneapolis , MN , 55455 , USA , kaurx111 @ umn . edu ; KatieZ . Gach , UniversityofColoradoBoulder , Information Science Department , Boulder , CO , USA , catherine . gach @ colorado . edu ; Loren Terveen , GroupLens Research , Dept . Computer Science , University of Minnesota , Minneapolis , MN , 55455 , USA , terveen @ umn . edu ; Mary Jo Kreitzer , Earl E . Bakken Center for Spirituality & Healing , UMN , Minneapolis , MN , 55455 , USA , kreit003 @ umn . edu ; Susan O’Conner - Von , Earl E . Bakken Center for Spirituality & Healing , UMN , Minneapolis , MN , 55455 , USA , ocon0025 @ umn . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2021 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2573 - 0142 / 2021 / 4 - ART43 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449117 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 2 C . Estelle Smith , et al . help not only from healthcare providers , but also from their friends and loved ones . Over 80 % of American internet users seek online resources to meet their health needs [ 35 ] . Accordingly , Online Health Communities ( OHCs ) are a topic of prominent interest in Human - Computer Interaction and Social Computing ( e . g . , [ 4 , 21 , 23 , 47 , 66 ] ) . OHCs provide numerous opportunities for users to get social support : “an exchange of resources between two individuals perceived by the provider or the recipient to be intended to enhance the well - being of the recipient . ” [ 64 ] Cutrona and Suhr’s classic typology has been widely used to study social support across five categories : informational ( resources on diseases , symptoms , or treatments ) , emotional ( encouraging messages of empathy and care ) , instrumental ( financial assistance or material aid ) , network ( belonging within specific communities ) , and esteem ( affirming a person’s intrinsic value ) support [ 27 ] . Given these categories , HCI researchers have studied social support in OHCs from many different angles . For example , studies have explored factors that affect user retention or engagement [ 47 , 49 , 69 , 74 ] , patterns in the exchange of support [ 5 , 44 ] , linguistic features that reveal health information [ 22 , 28 , 32 , 37 ] , or matters of death and digital legacy [ 36 , 41 , 47 ] . CaringBridge ( www . caringbridge . org ) is an OHC and social media platform based in Minnesota , USA that draws national and international users . In 2019 , CaringBridge served over 300 , 000 people daily , including 40 million unique users from 237 countries [ 66 ] . CaringBridge provides users with journaling tools for expressive writing [ 47 ] , social support [ 13 ] , and connecting with others with similar experiences [ 44 ] . Importantly , recent work on CaringBridge suggests a gap in our understanding of online social support . Smith et al . revealed that prayer support ( defined as “prayers , spiritual blessings , positive karma , good juju , warm thoughts” ) not only exists as a distinct support category , but also that CaringBridge users rate it to be most important to them [ 66 ] . Because people’s spiritual or religious beliefs are often core components of both their offline and online identities , values , and experiences [ 9 ] , and because spirituality often becomes a major focal point for people enduring health crises [ 17 , 26 ] , Smith et al . suggest that the prevalence of prayer on CaringBridge points to spiritual support as a fundamental and understudied concept in OHCs and other social computing contexts . It is critical that researchers and designers understand what spiritual support is , and how it raises implications for design in online spaces . Therefore , this study investigates these two issues on the CaringBridge platform . We conducted an exploratory qualitative study , using participatory design methods to include and empower a variety of local CaringBridge stakeholders – i . e . users , spiritual leaders , healthcare workers , and employees . Anyone experiencing a health crisis is likely to have a medical and social support network that is heterogeneous in both its spiritual and professional composition . Therefore , our aim was to develop a definition of spiritual support for the HCI research community that is both inclusive and independent of any given belief system . In order to understand this design space and any sociotechnical tensions within it , we recruited participants with diverse beliefs and roles . We asked participants to discuss their own experiences of spiritual support , and then to synthesize their own definitions of it . By analyzing these data , we derived a definition of spiritual support which we report in Section 5 . 1 . 4 . We also asked participants to brainstorm technology ideas that could facilitate their experiences of spiritual support . From these ideations , we distilled a set of thematic design implications for spiritual support ( Sections 5 . 2 . 1 and 5 . 2 . 2 ) : ( 1 ) representing spiritual beliefs , ( 2 ) assistance with supportive communication , ( 3 ) support network visualization and mobilization , and ( 4 ) advance care planning and digital legacy . In our discussion ( Section 6 ) , we then reflect on how these implications may generalize to other online contexts . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 3 2 THE CARINGBRIDGE PLATFORM CaringBridge is a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) non - profit organization with a vision to create “a world where no one goes through a health journey alone . ” [ 18 ] Its primary tool is an online journal which contains health “updates” authored by patients and / or family caregivers . Rather than a forum for strangers with similar conditions , the journal resembles a personal blog with customizable privacy controls . Authors can choose to keep sites private , invite - only , or viewable by either anyone online or registered CaringBridge users only ; the latter option is most popular since it enables authors to monitor who has visited , and to block unwanted visitors . Authors can also choose whether their site is searchable on public search engines ( e . g . , Google , Bing , etc . ) , or only on CaringBridge . Visitors can “follow” a site’s journal and receive notifications every time the author ( s ) share a new update . Through these mechanisms , CaringBridge creates an online social network that spans offline and online contexts . Prior works like [ 47 , 66 ] provide more detail on the platform’s technical features . CaringBridge was founded in 1997 in Minnesota , USA in order to share the story of one family’s experience of a pre - mature birth and loss of the baby [ 19 ] . The service was first adopted by locals for its utility , convenience , and ability to help people get support through any type of health crisis . CaringBridge sites are often followed by members of patients’ communities , such as their family , friends , and co - workers or colleagues . In keeping with local culture and demographics , many early adopters were also members of spiritual communities in the area . In a 2011 survey of CaringBridge users , 90 % identified as “spiritual or religious , ” and 88 % of those were Christian [ 6 ] , suggesting that Christian communities form one key audience of CaringBridge sites . This informs its facilitation of social support—most especially prayer support [ 66 ] . 3 RELATED LITERATURE We identified two major bodies of prior work relevant to this study which inform our research questions . We first review the healthcare literature in order to distinguish spirituality from religion and highlight the offline importance of spirituality and spiritual care during health crises . Next , we review the small body of work that has examined online spirituality in the HCI and CSCW research communities , and the much more substantial body of work examining social support in OHCs . 3 . 1 Spirituality and Spiritual Care in Offline Healthcare Contexts 3 . 1 . 1 Differentiating Spirituality and Religion . A growing body of literature recognizes the impor - tance of spirituality in the lives of patients and families . Although definitions of spirituality vary in the literature , they all tend to agree that people are spiritual beings [ 78 ] , and that spirituality may be independent of and not limited to any particular religious tradition [ 17 ] . The word reli - gion is derived from the Latin religare , meaning to tie or to bind , which relates to the connection with a deity and an institutionalized system of religious beliefs , practices , rituals and values [ 1 ] . Contemporary theological scholarship refers to religion in terms of denominational and doctrinal characteristics and experiences [ 51 ] . On the other hand , the word spirituality is derived from the Latin spiritus , meaning breath , which refers to the vital and life - giving nature of spirituality [ 2 ] . With the more recent focus on individualism—especially in western society—and the movement away from religious authority , spirituality is viewed as a broader and more distinct construct [ 67 ] . Spiritual practices may , for example , include contemplative reading , exploring nature , meditation , breathing exercises , and journaling [ 58 ] . In this study , we recruited both traditional religious and more broadly spiritual leaders ; we refer to both as spiritual leaders , since spirituality can ( but does not necessarily need to ) include religious practices . While many definitions of spirituality exist in the literature , a commonly accepted definition is needed to increase the scientific rigor of spirituality research and spiritual care in clinical practice . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 4 C . Estelle Smith , et al . In this study , we used the following widely accepted definition that was developed through a national consensus of health experts and faith leaders [ 57 ] : Spirituality is the aspect of humanity that refers to the way individuals seek and express meaning and purpose , and the way they experience their connectedness to the moment , to self , to others , to nature , and to the significant or sacred . 3 . 1 . 2 The Importance of Spirituality in Times of Health Crisis . Many patients facing life - limiting or life - threatening illness are lead to seek meaning and purpose in their lives . This can enhance their spiritual awareness as they try to make sense of their suffering [ 17 ] and help them to cope more effectively [ 57 ] . To specifically address this spiritual dimension of quality of life , the World Health Organization developed a tool to measure spirituality , religiousness , and personal beliefs [ 30 ] . Using this tool , a large body of work demonstrates a positive relationship between patients’ spirituality and quality of life outcomes [ 7 , 40 , 53 , 67 ] . For patients facing imminent death , meeting spiritual care needs through supportive relationships is considered an integral part of end of life care [ 26 ] . Many patients wish to discuss spirituality with their physicians , however most patients report that this did not occur [ 10 ] . Physicians and nurses report insufficient time and lack of training , choosing instead to refer their patients to chaplains [ 11 ] . Yet there exists an urgent deficiency of spiritual care providers – a status quo that has worsened since the onset of the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 33 ] . Although there is much discussion about the key components of spiritual care , most disciplines agree that providing spiritual care requires compassionate presence , deep listening , and serving others—that is , creating a space where healing can occur for the support recipient and provider [ 60 ] . In particular , essential elements of spiritual care include authenticity , kindness , compassion , respect , dignity , humanity , vulnerability , service , honesty , and empathy [ 60 ] . For most patients , offline spiritual care does not require fulfillment of unrealistic expectations—only compassion and caring . However , there is a gap in our understanding of how these experiential qualities of offline spiritual care translate to experiences in online spaces . The prevalence of prayer support on CaringBridge [ 66 ] suggests that it is an excellent context to explore this issue online , while the critical importance of spirituality during health crises underscores the importance of our first research question : RQ1 : How do CaringBridge stakeholders experience providing and receiving spiritual support ? 3 . 2 Spirituality and Support in Online Contexts 3 . 2 . 1 Spirituality in HCI . In research on OHCs , spiritual language and spiritual practices have been previously framed as a subcategory of support people may receive from others ( e . g . , [ 34 , 42 ] ) . This framing , however , reflects the overall minimization of spirituality in HCI research . Over a decade ago , Genevieve Bell raised concerns about how HCI approaches spirituality , and described “the many ways in which new technologies can and do deliver religious experiences . ” [ 9 ] She therefore called for deeper research into the intersection between spirituality and technology ; our study can be seen as a response to Bell’s call . Spirituality in HCI most often examines how people’s everyday spiritual practices are carried out in online contexts , as well as how various technologies might be interacting with or changing those practices . Buie and Blythe have summarized much of this work in [ 15 ] , in which they identify “three themes of technospiritual ICT in HCI research” : practical , institutional , and experiential . Practical spirituality examines technologies that can practically facilitate ongoing aspects of spiritual practice , e . g . , how families use home automation to support routine religious practices [ 71 ] . Institutional spirituality refers to the ways in which religious groups directly use technologies for their everyday work , such as “research and reflection , sermons , and pastoral care” [ 72 , p . 207 ] . OHCs can play a role in institutional spirituality , since they can be used as a way for church communities or people of faith to provide support through existing practices ( e . g . , prayer ) [ 66 , 68 ] . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 5 As highlighted by RQ1 , our work primarily focuses on experiential spirituality online , with some secondary overlap in institutional spirituality . Though Bell is known for her anxieties sur - rounding what experiences may be lost in the transference of spiritual practices from in - person to technologically - mediated [ 8 ] , people may be gaining unforeseen benefits from seeking and experiencing spiritual support online . However , online contexts differ in their perceived levels of safety for vulnerable disclosures and support seeking , based on the affordances and design of those platforms , as the next section explores . 3 . 2 . 2 The Relationship Between Platform Design and Support in Online Communities . Studies of social support in the HCI and CSCW literature have shown that some online spaces can be supportive at times and problematic at others . Accordingly , OHC users must perform a cost - benefit analysis—weighing the benefits of possibly receiving social support against risks associated with disclosing personal health information [ 79 ] . For example , for people who disclose depression symptoms on Instagram , there is “considerable evidence of social support , a sense of community , and little aggression or support for harmful or pro - disease behaviors” [ 4 ] . Similarly , Facebook users can receive various types of social support , from comments of encouragement and shared celebration , to thoughtful private messages [ 16 ] . At the same time , Chancellor et al . have found that communities on Instagram [ 24 ] and Reddit [ 21 ] can also be used in ways that are harmful – e . g . , by promoting disordered eating ; thus proper design and moderation are essential to ensure that these platforms promote well - being . However , the literature generally suggests that specific OHCs for medical conditions ( e . g . , for diabetes , cancer , etc . ) attract users with supportive , healing intentions rather than to promote symptomatic behavior [ 23 , 63 ] . The level of privacy in online spaces has also been shown to impact the amount and depth of supportive interactions . In online cancer support groups , the volume of difficult self - disclosures is higher in public channels , yet effects such as leading others to self - disclose and provide support are usually stronger in private conversations , where users follow - up on public posts [ 75 ] . This pattern is reflected in other contexts , as well . For instance , Instagram users sometimes set up multiple accounts – they post only idealized content on “real” accounts , but more genuine , vulnerable , and support - seeking content on “fake” secondary accounts shared privately with close friends [ 73 ] . Similarly , people with rare or stigmatized illnesses must grapple with concerns about public self - presentation on Facebook [ 54 ] , yet they can sometimes find even better support in private Facebook groups than from their surrounding communities or families [ 38 , 48 , 77 ] . Case studies of online fandom [ 31 ] and experiences of perceived “transparency” related to mental illness [ 56 ] also reinforce established HCI concepts that privacy is contextual , and that granular controls can help people curate the content they produce , and therefore feel safer . These studies and other research in HCI demonstrate that platform designs , norms of use , levels of privacy , and other features such as accessibility , data management practices , etc . greatly impact the way that support is exchanged online . Simultaneously , research shows that major life disruptions such as health crises change how people interact with technology – i . e . rather than focusing on using technology to work and complete tasks efficiently , people shift towards using it more for community support and to re - establish a feeling of stability [ 50 ] . People generally come to CaringBridge when they have serious and life - threatening health issues – a time of utmost vulnerability and need , when matters of spirituality and meaning in life take a more central and focal role . Thus , we ask our second research question : RQ2 : What are the design implications of spiritual support in online communities ? Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 6 C . Estelle Smith , et al . 4 METHODS During August - October 2019 , we conducted a series of in - person focus groups with CaringBridge stakeholders using participatory design methods . Here , we describe our stakeholder groups , re - cruitment , workshops , and methodological limitations . This study was approved by the University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board . 4 . 1 Stakeholder Groups We identified four main stakeholder groups whose input is vital to the successful design , imple - mentation , and adoption of an effective online spiritual support system : • GROUP 1 : OHC users are patients , caregivers , and their friends and family who constitute the core group of end users for systems intended to provide social and spiritual support . We refer to this group with participant IDs that begin with the standard “P” identifier . • GROUP 2 : Spiritual leaders , including for both religious and non - religious communities , play pivotal roles in the healing and / or dying processes of many OHC users , and in directing community members to offline and online resources for spiritual care and social support . We refer to this group with participant IDs that begin with “L . ” • GROUP 3 : Healthcare workers , including doctors , nurses , psychologists , and chaplains 1 , have extensive experience and involvement in many individual health crises , and are often the first to recommend specific technologies to patients—e . g . , some doctors and nurses directly recommend that patients join OHCs like CaringBridge in the wake of receiving difficult diagnoses . We refer to this group with participant IDs that begin with “H . ” • GROUP 4 : OHC Employees determine current and future product directions , and can provide key organizational insights about the feasibility of specific product ideas in a real world context . We refer to this group with participant IDs that begin with “E . ” 4 . 2 Workshops We facilitated 3 focus groups of OHC users , 2 each of spiritual leaders and healthcare workers , and 3 groups of OHC employees in belief - neutral locations , including meeting spaces at a public library and local non - profits . In order to facilitate the replication of this work in other contexts or online communities , Section A . 1 in the Appendix provides detailed descriptions of workshop protocols . Each focus group included 3 or 4 participants and lasted approximately 2 hours . We asked Group 1 - 3 stakeholders to first discuss and define spiritual support . They then went through structured brainstorming and prototyping activities to generate design ideas grounded in their group’s definition of spiritual support . We used an IDEO - inspired brainstorming activity [ 39 ] to scaffold divergent thinking across a broad spectrum of possible technologies without regard for feasibility or practical considerations . In the Group 4 workshops , we presented the outputs of the earlier groups to OHC employees . Group 4 helped to filter , refine , and iterate these ideas , resulting in design implications that were actionable for CaringBridge ( and likely more generally : see Section 6 ) . 4 . 3 Recruitment Table 1 provides a summary of all participants , including their self - described belief systems . For Group 1 , we have included participants’ health conditions in the Role column . Of 34 participants , 8 1 The role of chaplains has evolved over the decades from primarily members of the military to essential members of the health care team . We categorize chaplains as healthcare workers because they are integrated with healthcare teams in order to provide holistic and spiritual care and resources . Many are not ordained ministers and are non - denominational , although some are also spiritual leaders in their communities . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 7 GROUP 1 : Online Health Community Users ID Gender Belief Role P1 F Agnostic ( Former Presbyterian ) Family Caregiver ( Unspecified ) P2 F Catholic Patient ( Longterm Brain Tumor ) P3 F Jewish Patient ( Cancer ) P4 F Methodist Family Caregiver ( Hemorrhage ) P5 F Lutheran Close Friend ( Severe Burn ) P6 M Agnostic ( Former Hindu ) Family Caregiver ( Cancer ) P7 F Agnostic Close Friend ( Cancer ) P8 F Conservative Quaker Patient ( PTSD ) P9 F Spiritual " Hodge Podge " Patient ( PTSD ) P10 F Interfaith Buddhist Caregiver ( Unspecified ) P11 * F Jewish Patient ( Cancer ) GROUP 2 : Spiritual and / or Religious Leaders ID Gender Belief Title L1 F Yogi ( Former Catholic ) Yoga Teacher L2 F Lutheran Pastor L3 M Lutheran Pastor L4 M United Church of Christ Visitation Minister L5 F Shaman , Yogi , Meditation Shamanic Energy Healer L6 M Muslim Imam GROUP 3 : Healthcare Workers ID Gender Belief Title H1 F Buddhist , Earth - Based , Pagan , Unitarian Chaplain , End - of - Life Consultant H2 F Progressive Spiritual & Palliative Care Provider H3 F Christian ( Former Catholic ) Hospice Nurse H4 M United Church of Christ Chaplain , Ordained Minister H5 F Non - religious Spiritual ( Former Catholic ) Clinical Psychologist H6 F Lutheran , Unitarian , Humanist , Buddhist Professor Emeritus , Nursing H7 M Christian MD , Surgeon GROUP 4 : Online Health Community Employees ID Gender Belief Organizational Division E1 F Catholic ( former Presbyterian ) Leadership E2 F Catholic Leadership E3 F N / A Technology E4 F Ukrainian Orthodox Technology E5 F Christian Technology E6 M None Technology E7 F Lutheran Technology E8 M Bhadavad Ghita , Buddhism , Taoism Marketing E9 F Roman Catholic ( practicing ) Marketing E10 F Agnostic Customer Care Table 1 . Participant Summary . * Due to advanced illness , P11 was unable to attend a focus group ; therefore we instead interviewed P11 at her home . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 8 C . Estelle Smith , et al . are male , 25 are female , and 1 is non - binary . 2 Some participants fit within multiple stakeholder groups . Notably , almost all Group 2 - 4 participants are also OHC users . Participants eligible for multiple groups could attend the group of their choice . For example , a nurse who has battled a brain tumor since childhood , and a pastor who cared for her husband after sustaining severe burn wounds , both attended Group 1 . To protect participants’ anonymity , we report separately on additional demographics in Section A . 1 . 3 of the Appendix . The demographics of CaringBridge’s user base [ 6 , 43 , 66 ] ( and moreover , the United States [ 20 ] ) skew Christian . However we explicitly sought to develop a definition of spiritual support that is both inclusive and independent of any given belief system , including Christianity . We made this decision for two main reasons : ( 1 ) Any particular group of OHC users ( e . g . , the community of people who follow a patient’s CaringBridge site ) may be heterogeneous in its spiritual or religious composition , even if the majority share similar beliefs . It is crucial for designers to consider social dynamics that may arise in contexts where users hold conflicting beliefs . ( 2 ) CaringBridge aims to develop inclusive products that are supportive for all users . We recruited for Groups 1 - 3 in three ways . First , we invited individuals in our personal networks . Second , we surveyed CaringBridge employees to identify participants from among their personal and professional networks , whom we then invited over email . Finally , a local non - profit organiza - tion 3 that focuses on interfaith programming and social justice advocacy connected us with local spiritual leaders and posted on their social media . Group 1 - 3 participants chose to either receive a $ 50 gift card ( cash value ) or donate their time . For Group 4 , CaringBridge management created a list of key personnel who choose or implement product directions ( e . g . , Founder , CEO , Product Manager , UX Designer , IT Director ) or whose work supports users ( e . g . , Content Strategist , Customer Care Representative ) . These employees were invited but not required to attend . Group 4 workshops occurred on - site during business hours , therefore employees were not offered additional compensation . 4 . 3 . 1 Methodological Considerations . All but one participant had either used or referred others to use CaringBridge prior to participating in the study , and all of them are locals to the area ; thus our work has the benefit of high ecological validity in a specific geographical location and OHC context . We made extensive efforts to recruit participants of diverse beliefs , professional roles , genders , and racial backgrounds . However , the majority of participants ( especially OHC users ) who accepted our invitations were female and white ; obviously , this is not representative of the overall population of the US . On the other hand , our participant demographics are consistent with CaringBridge user demographics ( as noted in prior CaringBridge work [ 66 ] ) as well as other Online Health Communities [ 29 , 59 ] ) . While focus groups allow for collection of in - depth individual and group perspectives , the relatively small sample size intrinsic to this methodology cannot capture the full diversity and richness of peoples’ spiritual and / or religious experiences ; future work can expand upon our findings through replications of this work in other contexts , and surveys or large - scale quantitative methods with larger , more diverse populations . Another consequence of small group conversation is that participants may be more inclined to agree and find common ground , rather than express contrary opinions . A number of participants even expressed universalist views – e . g . , that most spiritual and religious belief systems hold more in common than apart . This type of view is clearly not universal , and may even be a minority viewpoint . However , we presume that the perspectives of our participants encompass rather than oppose narrower or more traditionally religious perspectives . Pragmatically , OHC Employees were 2 Following recommendations from [ 3 ] , we discussed options with this participant ; they chose to share their true gender identity in an aggregate description , but to label their table row with the gender identity assigned at birth . 3 Minnesota Council of Churches , http : / / www . mnchurches . org / Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 9 able to filter and refine participant ideations , given their domain expertise and knowledge of their user base . Thus , in Section 5 . 2 . 2 , we present design implications that we are confident are suitable for CaringBridge . Then in the discussion ( Section 6 ) , we will discuss the potential generalizability of these implications in other contexts . 4 . 4 Analysis by Grounded Theory Method We saved all materials generated during the workshops , including recordings of conversations , completed worksheets , large flipboard papers of brainstorm ideas , sketches , and videos . We com - pleted our analysis using a Grounded Theory Method [ 25 ] approach . All audio recordings , written materials , and flipboard data were transcribed by members of our research team . We completed one round of open coding on the transcripts , and then held a series of immersive group meetings to create affinity maps of emerging concepts . We iterated on our mappings until we settled on a final definition for spiritual support . The first author re - coded all transcripts according to the main con - cepts of this definition . Separately from the analysis that resulted in our spiritual support definition , we also met to review and cluster all brainstorm ideas into six thematic technology categories . We then coded all of the brainstorm ideas according to these themes . We have removed all identifying details and lightly edited the quotes presented in this work to remove speech disfluencies . 5 FINDINGS 5 . 1 The Experience of Spiritual Support ( RQ1 ) In this section , we describe the basic triadic structure of spiritually supportive interaction , and its two major properties : mutuality and holistic care . This structure is derived from participants’ sharing of their personal experiences , 4 their conversations with each other , and the spiritual support definitions they created . 5 Based on these data , we provide a definition of spiritual support for use by the Social Computing and HCI communities ( Section 5 . 1 . 4 ) , and include illustrative examples of how this definition can be expressed through each prior category of social support ( Section 5 . 1 . 5 ) . 5 . 1 . 1 The Triadic Structure of Spiritually Supportive Interactions . Participants described their ex - periences of spiritual support as a triadic relationship between : ( 1 ) a “recipient , ” ( 2 ) a “provider , ” and ( 3 ) the “sacred” or “significant . ” For example , H7 said , “Spiritual support may be like a triangle , wherever the higher power is , to you and to the other person . ” Our data suggest that the subjective experience of spiritual support can occur when people feel a connective presence between two ( e . g . , recipient and the sacred , or provider and the sacred ) or all three points of this triad ( e . g . , recipient and the sacred , via the community of supporters , and vice versa ) . Furthermore , participants explained that the experiential qualities of this presence are critical . As L2 put it , “You can be a non - presence anxious or a non - anxious presence . ” A “non - presence anxious” refers to a provider who is frenzied , distracted , or fixated on their own experience and feelings rather than the recipient’s , while a “non - anxious presence” refers to a person who is calm , collected , and able to listen deeply . Effective spiritual support occurs when a recipient feels positive and non - anxious presence directly with the sacred , or when they feel connection to the sacred by way of their community , or something else . As H4 put it , “There’s an energy and it’s not tangible . . . It’s sort of the love between us . Sometimes it’s neighbor to neighbor , and sometimes it’s more supernatural . ” 5 . 1 . 2 Mutuality . Participants across all stakeholder groups repeatedly and emphatically described spiritual support as a phenomenon that occurs mutually between recipients and providers— “for it 4 To honor participants’ sharing , and to better support future work , we have included an exhaustive list of their experiences in Appendix A . 2 . 5 Table 3 in Appendix A . 3 includes the definitions written by each focus group from stakeholder groups 1 , 2 , and 3 . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 10 C . Estelle Smith , et al . The “Sacred” or “Significant” ( Transcendent of specific belief systems ) “Provider” ( e . g . community member ) “Recipient” ( e . g . patient , family member ) An integral dimension that underlies and can be expressed through social support categories including : prayer , instrumental , informational , emotional , network , and esteem support . The purpose of this dimension is helping recipients and providers to experience a mutually positive presence with each other , and with the sacred or significant . The Structure of Interaction : Spiritual Support is : Fig . 1 . A definition of “Spiritual Support” for use in HCI studies of social support . is in giving that we receive , ” according to one group’s written definition . For example , L4 said , “I’ve been torn between offering and receiving , they just seem to melt together . ” Similarly , H4 said , “You think you’re caring for other people , and often you realize you’re cared for at the same time . ” A number of participants used the concept of “mirroring” to explain this sense of mutuality . For example , L5 explained that every time she provides a healing session , she learns and heals something about herself “because we become sacred mirrors for each other . ” Given these data , we use the words “recipient” to indicate the intended target of support and “provider” to indicate a party intending to provide support , yet we use these words with the caveat that both recipients and providers are mutually experiencing a supportive exchange . 5 . 1 . 3 Holistic Care . Participants often expressed that when they care for someone , there can be a spiritual element or dimension to any form of support . They said that all types of support “weave together , and if we separate them out , we lose something . ” ( L3 ) Furthermore , the purpose of the support is to holistically address any need that “the whole human” might have . Participants specifically mentioned spiritual support examples from all five support types from Cutrona and Suhr’s typology [ 27 ] , as well as prayer support [ 66 ] . For example , P6 said , “Be it through meals , conversation , prayer . . . you give them nourishment for their mind , body , and soul . I would consider all these different avenues spiritual support . ” Thus we conclude that spiritual support is holistic , and often underlies the other support categories . 5 . 1 . 4 A Definition of Spiritual Support . Because of this confluence of data across all stakeholder groups , we suggest that spiritual support should not be viewed as a separate or novel category in and of itself . Rather , our analysis suggests the following definition : Spiritual support is an integral dimension that underlies and can be expressed through every category of social support , including informational , emotional , instrumental , network , es - teem [ 27 ] , and prayer [ 66 ] support . This dimension creates a triadic relationship between a recipient , a provider , and the sacred or significant , with the purpose of helping recipients and providers experience a mutually positive presence with each other , and with the sacred or significant . 5 . 1 . 5 Illustrations of the “Spiritual Dimension” Underlying Social Support Categories . The extent to which the spiritual dimension influences each social support category varies , and can be expressed in different ways that are culturally and contextually dependent . In particular , prayer support differs in that it seems intrinsically spiritual by nature , whereas the other categories may or may not be experienced by people in that way , depending on the particular person ( s ) and context . Thus , we devote more space here to discussing the nuances of prayer support . Then , we provide brief Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 11 examples of how other support categories can have an underlying spiritual aspect , and how we stand to make serious mistakes if we ignore that dimension . Prayer support : Many participant comments echoed and accentuated prior work that Caring - Bridge users rate prayer to be of utmost importance [ 66 ] . For example , P4 said that CaringBridge was critical for “constantly reminding us of all the people who were praying for us . ” Additional detailed examples from P2 , P5 , L1 , L6 and others can be found in Appendix A . 2 . Yet participants also raised a critical distinction between religious communication and spiritual support . Many patients exist in geographical or cultural contexts that view their disease as a punishment or consequence of moral failure [ 14 ] . Furthermore , religious communication typically affirms adherence to the same beliefs over time . Yet life - threatening diseases change people’s lives in dramatic ways . If they lack flexibility to adapt and evolve their beliefs , they often suffer unnecessarily . As H2 said , they “start to doubt and wonder and self - condemn because they’ve been taught not to readjust their spirituality . ” Participants described that spiritual support often involves creating space for people to heal and adapt , rather than enforcing religious beliefs . Given this need for spiritual autonomy and evolution , and the reality of spiritual heterogeneity in the world , our data suggest three important considerations for prayer support : ( 1 ) Discernment . Support providers must first discern the recipient’s needs . For example , L2 described an experience involving a 17 - year old Leukemia sufferer . The girl’s self - described “prayer warrior” parents were “bombarding” and “slamming” her with their prayers and faith , but she didn’t want or need religious prayer . Instead , she needed a more flexible connection with her pastor to cope with her fear , and to find her own meaning . L2 described it as a “spiritual presence there” when through emotional – not prayer – support , they shared a few moments of silence and gentle conversation . ( 2 ) Permission and Openness . During in - person interactions , a number of participants specifically mentioned asking for permission before praying . In an online setting however , if a user does not directly ask for prayer , there is no straightforward way for others to understand their openness to prayer . This matters because prayer is sometimes unwanted . For example , E10 said , “If someone knows I’m a non - theist and says , I’m praying for you , what that says to me is , you don’t know me . Or you do know me , and you don’t care . ” Accordingly , prayer can feel combative or imposing when it does not respect the support recipient’s beliefs , rendering it ineffective ( or even damaging ) . ( 3 ) Respect . When there is openness or permission for prayer , respectful interaction can help bridge gaps between differing beliefs , in both offline and online spaces . Participants described prayer as a fluid and energetic concept that can transcend differences between beliefs , when shared respectfully . For example , L5 said , “Blessing is what I would say is in the same category as prayer for me , ” while P3 likened prayers to “sending healing energy . ” While prayer is intrinsically spiritual , we next provide examples that demonstrate how all other support categories can have a spiritual dimension . Emotional Support : An example from H3 ( a nurse ) shows that relating spiritual experiences to emotions can improve a sense of wellness . Through gentle bedside conversation about the patient’s spiritual experience , H3 provided emotional support to a cancer patient who had been lying unresponsive in bed for days : Then her husband came and I was like , awesome , he’s gonna see her awake , and she just kept smiling . I was like , what are you looking at ? Do you see something ? And she’s like , I see three beautiful beings . And I said , you look so peaceful , and she goes , I’m so peaceful . I said , you look happy , are you happy ? And she said , I’m so happy . And she ended up dying later that day . And I was like , the husband got to hear her say , I’m happy , I’m at peace . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 12 C . Estelle Smith , et al . Instrumental Support : Participants frequently discussed how their spiritual communities come together to provide instrumental support ( such as meals dropped off to their homes , or rides to the hospital ) for members experiencing health crises . P6 explained that while his wife was being treated for cancer , when they received meals , “It wasn’t even about the food , it was just kind of them doing something out of love , taking time out of their day , showing that they care . ” Similarly , L4 described her congregation’s “community of belonging that just has meals together . We have Minnesota hot dish and [ we say ] grace . 6 ” In this example , an element of blessing or gratitude underpins and enriches the meal in a spiritually supportive way . Of course , providing food also could violate someone’s beliefs – e . g . , it would be insulting to bring a pork meal to a vegan or a devout Muslim family . Informational support : Spiritual leaders especially described informational support as a critical function of their role . For example , L6 shared that immigrants frequently rely on spiritual leaders to translate and advise them on medical information , since some procedures practiced in the US violate religious beliefs from their home country . To cope with such issues , L3 described how some organizations have manuals to help hospital staff understand how different faith traditions deal with illness or dying . “This information equips staff in an increasingly pluralistic society to understand the specifics . ” More generally , L3 views information as one of the most important ways he can guide people moving through health crises . He recommends specific “CareNotes” informational pamphlets 7 to his parishioners , so that he can point out , “Here’s anxiety . Here’s resilience . [ I can ] just help interpret it . These things affect their spirits in a very real way . ” Esteem support : Participants discussed that support recipients often derive a deep sense of intrinsic meaning and purpose specifically from their spiritual or religious beliefs . Appealing to these beliefs can help to provide better esteem support , while ignoring or contradicting them can feel deeply invalidating . On the other hand , P8 also shared an example of spiritual support not tied to a specific religious belief . Just the evening before , she had been supporting a suicidal friend : This past 24 hours I have been working so hard and providing spiritual support and trying to affirm that there is meaning , affirming that there is beauty even when you can’t see it , but you will be able to see it again , affirming that they are special and important . Network support : A number of participants mentioned that their church or temple shares out CaringBridge links to the entire congregation , and “it’s the whole community that is actually healing and gaining . ” ( E1 ) This helps to create a sense of belonging and mutual network support . For example , describing his own parish , L3 said : On CaringBridge , we’re talking about the individual , but there’s also that whole support network intimately around them who also almost need CaringBridge , for them to be able to be strengthened to provide that support . 5 . 2 Participant Ideations of Technology to Provide Spiritual Support ( RQ2 ) After defining spiritual support , participants brainstormed technology ideas that could help fa - cilitate their perceived experiences of spiritual support . We begin this section by sharing and synthesizing participants’ ideations to demonstrate how spiritual support broadly relates to a vari - ety of technological contexts . In response to OHC users’ ideations , OHC employees then iterated and reflected upon those ideas – in some cases , generating implementable product concepts , and in others , raising critical feasibility or conceptual concerns . Drawing on data from across all the groups , we derive design implications for OHCs and safe spaces like CaringBridge . 6 “Saying grace” is a phrase that refers to a routine practice of prayer before eating . 7 https : / / carenotes . com / about - us / Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 13 Fig . 2 . Care mApp . This smartphone app has three screens : ( 1 ) a geographic map with the patient’s location “pinned” as a heart icon and profile icons pinned at support providers’ locations , with lines connecting providers to the heart icon . A red line around one support provider’s icon is a “glow” showing that they are currently online ; ( 2 ) clicking on the glowing icon shows a list of ways that this support provider is available to help out ; ( 3 ) a calendar tool allows users to “sign up for coverage . ” 5 . 2 . 1 Brainstorms and prototypes of OHC users , spiritual leaders , and healthcare workers . Partic - ipants generated 224 individual ideas ( range of 22 to 40 ideas per focus group ) . Appendix A . 4 presents all ideas that received at least one “favorite” vote . 8 Throughout this section , we share and refer to OHC users’ sketches . These images are scans of participants’ original work , however we digitally altered the images by replacing most handwritten text with typeset text in order to improve readability . In the Appendix , Table 4 summarizes their video recordings of physical prototypes . We clustered and coded the brainstorm ideas into six thematic categories , as we will describe in this section . ( Note that some ideas fit in multiple categories , and were coded accordingly , thus summing the presented percentages to > 100 % . ) Overall , participants’ brainstorm ideas reflected their conception of spiritual support as a holistic dimension of support that attends to any and all of the recipient’s needs , whether related to their body , mind , or spirit . Thus , similar to the examples in section 5 . 1 . 5 , these brainstorm ideas evoke the spiritual dimension to varying degrees . Community and Human Dignity : As disease states progress , people become disconnected from the usual patterns of their life , and their physical appearance and abilities degrade . It can become difficult to see them for the person they once were . Thus , 62 % of ideas pertained to keeping recipients connected with their existing communities , helping recipients find new communities , or retaining their human dignity as bodily and cognitive capacities fade away . Many ideas in this cluster appeal to network and / or emotional support by tapping into local spiritual communities or non - profit organizations for volunteers . For example , youth “tech ambassadors” could help seniors at their church to use new technologies to connect with far away loved ones rather than staying isolated in care facilities , or a wearable device that plays back audio clips of voices from beloved community members could help people feel connected with people they love and miss from their congregation or spiritual group . When medical treatment requires travel , a validated “yelp” for nearby houses of worship , or online communities for strangers with similar conditions and spiritual beliefs , could help people to access more network support . Along these 8 The complete list of brainstorm ideas is available for viewing or download at : https : / / docs . google . com / spreadsheets / d / 1AicN3b _ RJuAJlfBuRradLUBIPDhcvl _ JJkcYRCwOKtk Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 14 C . Estelle Smith , et al . Fig . 3 . GodBox . This sketch depicts a flow of three screens initiating an account on a smartphone app : ( 1 ) A preliminary screen allows a user to select their higher power from a dropdown menu ( or add their own text ) ; ( 2 ) A second screen says , “Welcome to [ User’s Selection ] Box” ; ( 3 ) An input field prompts users to write about their worries . The participant sketched three additional screens ( not pictured ) showing that the app returns personalized content , consistent with their beliefs , responding to the user’s specific worries . lines , one group made a video about 3D printing temporary tattoos of spiritual symbols ( Table 4 . A ) to help users externally represent their beliefs and connect with others who share those beliefs . P4 sketched a visualization tool that shows recipients a geographic representation of providers in their spiritual support network ( Figure 2 ) , along with all of the support types they can provide . Finally , some ideas in this category also pertained to esteem support . These ideas served to affirm the recipient’s pre - illness identity and intrinsic worth , while also reminding support providers of the recipient’s humanity despite their declining physical state—e . g . , a bedside iPad playing slideshows of wonderful memories from their life . Sound and Text : Textual forms of messaging are ubiquitous , yet they lack the comfort provided by the human voice , and are often not accessible for older adults , patients incapacitated by disease or visual impairment , and those who lack tech literacy . Therefore , 22 % of ideas related to sound and text , in order to add a sensory component and increase the accessibility and ease of locating support . Many of these ideas facilitate prayer support by helping people to find topically relevant prayers , scriptures , guided meditations , soothing music or nature sounds , or podcasts that help them navigate their illness and re - connect to what feels sacred to them . The ideas involved personalized digital recommendations or “curators” to find materials or recordings , and sometimes voice - related features to interact with them . For example , P6 sketched a phone app called “Thinking of You” ( not pictured ) , which simply allows users to record and send voice messages to the recipient when the provider thinks of them – as a manner of communicating non - religious spiritual connection . Figure 3 shows an app by P9 that allows users to select a “Higher Power , ” and then write about their worries ; based on those worries , the app would serve relevant content to encourage and inspire the user . Participants also emphasized that adding voice - related features to OHCs like CaringBridge could enhance the spiritual element of the emotional and prayer support they already receive there – e . g . , voice - activated requests to play audio clips of CaringBridge messages in their voice of choice . Many of these ideas are readily implementable . As E1 said , “I do think there’s an entry into voice . We could have a CaringBridge skill on Alexa . ” Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 15 Fig . 4 . Virtual Reality . Three participant sketches captured ideas related to Virtual or Augmented Reality ; this figure depicts a representative storyboard sketch . The top left box shows a person in a patient’s gown wearing a VR headset . Arrows point to three other panels , each containing a VR experience selectable by the patient : ( 1 ) being with community members , ( 2 ) visiting with a dog , or ( 3 ) being outside in nature beside a tree . Practical Resources : During health crises , many people find themselves in new and challenging circumstances , sometimes far from home . For chronic and terminal conditions , it can be especially difficult to sustain a stream of support from the same support providers . Thus , informational and instrumental support become vital lifelines of help – not only for recipients , but also for providers who need help to say and do the right things . Accordingly , 17 % of ideas related to practi - cal tech resources for finding and coordinating support from new providers , providing training resources for providers , or making it easier to practically manage and exchange information . Participants expressed that , “oftentimes , [ support ] comes as a surprise . . . from places we didn’t necessarily expect . ” ( H4 ) Unexpected support from strangers may feel even more spiritually connective , since it is given spontaneously out of a sense of human compassion or love rather than obligation , and technology could provide new ways to facilitate this . For example , participants imagined an online course for local volunteers to provide training and certification on how to talk about hard topics given cultural and spiritual differences between people , plus a community app that allows them to drop off meals or visit with isolated patients . 9 Similarly , one group created a video about a smart system for connecting hospital in - patients to volunteers with therapy dogs , since for many people , dogs are uplifting and spiritually connective creatures ( Table 4 . B ) . In other cases , training resources could help providers be kinder and more sensitive online – e . g . , an educational video of a child explaining how to communicate empathetically ( “please be nice ! ” ) . Finally , some ideas involved accessing vital information for spiritual and psychological care – e . g . , algorithms on CaringBridge to recommend virtual CareNotes for specific symptoms or problems , or family 9 This idea is similar to the Meals - on - Wheels ( https : / / meals - on - wheels . com ) concept , but with a less structured contribution expectation , more spontaneity , and a less specific community of people receiving the support . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 16 C . Estelle Smith , et al . Fig . 5 . Everywhere - apist . This three - panel storyboard shows a child seeing their parent ill in bed , “speaking with” an AI therapist on their phone , and then talking through feelings with their ill parent . members attending medical video calls together to keep everyone informed and aware of how to cope with the patient’s physical and spiritual care needs . Virtual and Augmented Reality : Many participants described how difficult it is for patients to find any respite at all from their illness when they become immobilized and cannot leave their beds . Participants suggested that virtual and augmented reality ( 12 % of ideas ) can provide immersive multi - modal experiences that transport the recipient away from pain and isolation to instead experience intentional and mindful presence in nature or other sacred places of personal significance . VR / AR ideas seem most valuable for prayer , network , and emotional support . First , because patients are often incapable of setting up these types of experiences , participants’ ideas emphasized that hospital staff or family friends may need to do so . Second , the brainstorm ideas emphasized the importance of social interaction within these spaces , e . g . , virtually attending religious or spiritual services with their community in real time , sharing family dinners and saying grace together in an augmented environment , or having a “VR buddy” ( e . g . , grandchild or best friend ) accompany the recipient on a virtual trip around the world to experience sacred places or dream destinations . Accordingly , several sketches depicted VR / AR ideas , e . g . , Figure 4 , in which the participant has prominently included options for the user to be in virtual spaces with their community members , a beloved dog , or simply alone in nature . Artificial Intelligence : Participants noted the increasing prevalence of Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) embedded in their online experiences . Fascinatingly , their ideas suggest that in situations when human intelligence is ill - equipped to cope with the difficult realities of illness and death , AI may be able help people make sense of their situation , or to be better support providers for people in these situations . Participants imagined a variety of applications , smart objects , or robots that use AI ( 10 % of ideas ) to help people with supportive communication , discern their needs or express meaning in difficult situations , or even to stay safe . These ideas seem less related to any specific social support category , but more related to discerning what is useful . For example , one important concept that was repeatedly expressed across groups , is that many support providers do not know what to write or say in response to difficult , painful , or terminal health situations . Accordingly , some ideas related to automatic text generated by AI algorithms to help support providers know what to say and what not to say . Another category of ideas related to helping people make sense and meaning amidst crisis . For example , Figure 5 depicts a child using an “Everywhere - apist” app that offers an AI therapist on demand , which asks questions to help Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 17 Fig . 6 . Three Touches . In times of crisis , this smartphone app is accessed by pushing the “home” button repeatedly ( rather than standard navigation – an access modality that may not be implementable due restric - tions imposed by smartphone operating systems ) . The app allows users to pre - set content , e . g . : ( 1 ) inspiring words or scripture , ( 2 ) a scrolling feed of calming photos , and ( 3 ) text messages to a pre - specified helper . the user figure out what they are struggling with . ( Incidentally , a different group joked about a “smart” wine glass that becomes an AI therapist . ) In cases of extreme distress , AI could even have a protective function – e . g . , a smart car that won’t drive off a bridge . Physiology : Many wearable technologies now monitor physiological parameters like heart rate , physical activity , breathing patterns , or blood glucose . Participants recognized the utility of these sensors for detecting moments when a recipient is in immediate need of medical and spiritual support for physical or psychological distress . Consequently , participants brainstormed about apps or wearable sensors related to monitoring and providing immediate responses to physiological distress ( 7 % of ideas ) . For example , Table 4 . C describes a video about wearable devices that diffuse soothing essential oil aromatherapy if a serious spike in stress is detected ( e . g . , panic attack ) , as well as alerting a pre - specified support provider . Similarly , Figure 6 depicts an app called “Three Touches” that triggers pre - planned photos to calm the user , text consistent with the user’s beliefs , or pre - set texts to a trusted provider if the user touches the home screen button three times ( or simply “button smashes” ) to indicate extreme distress . These types of applications are important because users may not be capable of caring for themselves in these moments – the presence of a support provider is vital to help return to a state of stability . 5 . 2 . 2 Design Implications for Spiritual Support on CaringBridge . In this section , we combine and balance perspectives from Groups 1 - 3 , as well as the additional reflections and ideations of Group 4 participants , to contribute four concrete design implications to facilitate spiritual support . Our chosen IDEO brainstorm methodology for Groups 1 - 3 intentionally scaffolded participants to think divergently and creatively – i . e . “outside - the - box” – to encourage and free them to come up with new and numerous ideas . On the other hand , Group 4 participants helped us to narrow and re - focus ideations back to the OHC context . One major strength of this methodology is that OHC employees were able to highlight concepts that are feasible for CaringBridge , refine them in a way that makes them actionable on the platform , and in some cases , iterate on and enrich them given their expertise domain knowledge . In our discusion , we reflect on the promising potential for broader generalizability of these implications . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 18 C . Estelle Smith , et al . Note that although CaringBridge employees ( Group 4 ) thought that ideas related to the “VR / AR” and “physiology” clusters were interesting and could be helpful , they are presently out of scope for CaringBridge ( but might eventually be possible through partnerships or cross - platform integration ) . Therefore , the four concrete design implications we derived reflect ideas only from the other thematic clusters of Group 1 - 3 ideations . Representing Spiritual Beliefs : The fundamental aim of CaringBridge is to connect people to a community of support providers , some of whom likely share their beliefs , while others likely do not . Offering a way for users to represent their membership in a given spiritual community or religion could make it easier to respect and honor those beliefs . For instance , support providers who do share that belief can connect about it , whereas others who do not may be better able to infer ways to behave to avoid offending the recipient . This is important because many participants expressed that it is vital for OHCs to be safe spaces , free of the “negative energy out there” ( L2 ) on other social media . For example , P3 shared : A site like CaringBridge is really specific to what people are going through , and I think that would be easier for people to feel that spiritual connection more than let’s say Facebook . CaringBridge seems like a safe space to do that . Iterating on the GodBox ( Figure 3 ) prompt to “Choose your Higher Power , ” OHC employees reflected that users could opt - in to select their beliefs during the site creation UX flow . For instance , E8 described how CaringBridge authors could “set the stage when they create a site” if CaringBridge offered a field to optionally select their belief from a drop - down menu . Furthermore , the “temporary tattoos” video ( Table 4 . A ) also caused employees to consider visual ways for users to express spiritual or other core values . As E2 put it , “the concept of articulating to a safe community that you know , something that you care deeply about , as something that is part of you , yes , I love that idea . ” E10 discussed how a variety of symbols for spiritual beliefs ( e . g . , a cross , star of David , crescent moon and star , om character ) or treatment milestones ( e . g . , 1 - year or 3 - years cancer free , chemo patient , etc . ) could be made available to users in a prominent profile location . These visuals could have the added benefit of providing a way to tap into an even larger support network . E10 said : We spend a lot of time on CaringBridge connecting them with the community that they know they have , and they are sometimes surprised by the community they didn’t know they had . . . To have a way on their CaringBridge site , to see that this person has something in common with me , breaks down that social barrier . In summary , textually or visually representing spiritual beliefs could help support recipients to share and affirm their beliefs in a safe space , connect with new support providers , and influence how people communicate with them , as the next implication explores in more detail . Assistance with Supportive Communication : One of the most common problems described across all stakeholder groups was that support providers “want to say the right things , they want to be there , but they just don’t know how . ” ( E5 ) Our data emphatically suggest that CaringBridge is well positioned to provide technological assistance with supportive communication , so that providers can do a better job of providing spiritual support by saying or asking about the right types of things . Sometimes well - intentioned people write comments on CaringBridge that can be perceived as unhelpful or damaging . Participants discussed major obstacles such as : ( 1 ) disregarding or imposing on the recipient’s beliefs , ( 2 ) words or prayers that feel “empty” ( L2 ) due to a perceived lack of genuine intent or thoughtfulness , ( 3 ) focusing too little on the recipient’s experience and too much on the provider’s feelings or expressions of pain or loss , or ( 4 ) avoiding or denying hard topics like death and new disabilities . For example , L3 shared : Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 19 CaringBridge was helpful in the sense that it was able to get information out to a lot of people about what exactly had happened and what her condition was . It wasn’t helpful in terms of the responses from some people . There were some really naive ways of relating to what was going on . ‘Everything was gonna be fine . ’ Well , you can’t say that . Because it’s not gonna be fine . I wish that hadn’t been spoken to this family because they’re struggling already with the reality . And now you’re trying to undermine that in some way . Our data offer three main strategies for avoiding these difficulties in supportive messaging : ( 1 ) Training Resources . Continual training and guidance through the UI / UX could help support providers to craft their words . For example , P6 wished for an introductory UX pathway or pop - up on CaringBridge “like ‘Hi , you just signed in , this is the person’s site you are visiting . Do you have any questions ? Are you nervous about saying the wrong things ? ” H4 similarly called for easy access to training resources , directly in the commenting UI field – “If you feel like you don’t know what to say or write , click here for some helpful guidance from our caring scientists . ” Clicking would then lead to videos , educational modules , or virtual CareNotes – concepts that are well represented in the “practical resources” brainstorm cluster . ( 2 ) Belief - aligned prayers or sacred words . If users opt - in to share their beliefs , the system can offer features to providers enrich their comments with scriptures , prayers , or non - religious sayings or quotes that either align with or at least respect the recipient’s beliefs – as suggested by the “sound and text” brainstorm cluster . For example , E8 said that her agnostic family members “are not going to want to hear bible verses , but they’d love to hear just , thinking of you , stay strong . ” On the other hand , E5 stressed that , “Something that really brings me comfort – yes , I’m a Christian , I would love to hear inspiring bible verses . ” A recommender system or rotating list of options beside the commenting window could offer suggestions such texts . ( 3 ) Automatic text suggestions . From the AI cluster , participants suggested that “technology could help inform people who respond to help them in their responses . ” ( L3 ) They suggested mechanisms for nudging users , such as automatic text responses offered in the commenting interface . E8 shared , “There have been times in the past where I will Google things of , what to say , what not to say . But if it’s right at your finger tips , three little bubbles [ to pick from ] , that might work . ” Users could select a response they like as a starting point , and then edit as they please , to bring the comment into greater alignment with their personal knowledge of the recipient and the recipient’s beliefs . Support Network Visualization and Mobilization : Spiritual support involves attending holis - tically to the needs of the recipient . However , similarly to how support providers often don’t know what to do or say , recipients are often unable to discern or articulate what they need . For example , L2 said , “Some people are clueless , ” and P5 said , “Sometimes they don’t even know what they need until you bring it up . ” For these reasons , P6 said , “it is up to the community to then see what [ they can do ] and how . ” Visualization of the spiritual support network could serve as a powerful way to mobilize the community to identify and serve the holisitic needs of recipients . Of all the individual prototypes , OHC employees reacted most enthusiastically to the Care mApp sketch ( Figure 2 ) which visualizes the recipient’s spiritual support network . E5 shared that , “We want to have a Care Team [ product ] . We want it to have resources specific to your health needs , ” and that adding a visual element is in excellent alignment with that product goal . Importantly , while the third Care mApp screen allows recipients to articulate their needs ( similar to CaringBridge’s existing Planner tool ) , the second “Ways I Can Help” screen also allows providers to share what they feel prepared to offer help with . E2 affirmed the especial utility of designing such a “help board” since it seeds other providers with “ideas of things you could also do . ” Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 20 C . Estelle Smith , et al . Furthermore , OHC employees felt that “a way to visually show people [ in the network ] puts a totally different dimension on support” ( E3 ) and that “just being able to visually feel something” ( E4 ) would enhance a real sense of presence , especially when providers are online and glowing . E2 noted how this relates to prayer support in a powerful way : I think the map is specifically useful for spiritual support , because a lot of people say that CaringBridge is part of their ministry , that it propelled the power of prayer , that I felt so loved . If they could see where that prayer was coming from , it would be very compelling . In summary , visualizing the support network offers new ways for providers to offer all types of support , and for recipients to perceive and feel the spiritual support their network has to offer . Advance Care Planning and Digital Legacy : Participants described a temporal aspect to spiritual support that a technology platform like CaringBridge is well - suited to serve . That is , sometimes support is urgently and instantly needed during a difficult moment . On the other hand , P3 highlighted how her concept of spiritual support extends beyond the timespan of her life : I don’t know what happens to the spirit after the body dies , but I feel like , to have my thoughts and my words continue on beyond me is a part of keeping my spirit alive . In both cases , CaringBridge can help support recipients and providers by providing mechanisms and encouragement to arrange for their spiritual support in advance of difficult moments , and even for what will occur after death . For example , the “Three Touches” app ( Figure 6 ) allows users to think ahead and plan for moments in the future when they know they will be in distress . OHC employees appreciated this intuition and reflected that CaringBridge could create an “emergency button” ( E3 ) to pre - set things that will be needed , and at a later moment , “just say , I need it right now . ” ( E7 ) They also iterated on this idea to consider how CaringBridge could prompt users to grapple with planning in advance for major medical events and end - of - life care . As E2 said , “You’re in control right now , but you will not be [ later ] . ” Beyond advance care planning , OHCs could provide mechanisms for crafting after - death legacy or memorialization content for those they will leave behind . Death is a taboo topic that many people are unwilling or find extremely difficult to discuss , but there may be opportunities for technology to ease people past those barriers . E3 suggested : We could serve up tools or modules or templates to think about mentioning these things . . . It can be positioned not in this death , dark , horrible , everybody’s - scared - to - talk - about way , but like , here’s a space to create memories . Such tools could help users to do things like preserve and share “voices we won’t always be able to hear” ( E9 ) as well as to shape the way that they are remembered for generations to come , since “people should be able to tell their own story . ” ( E2 ) 6 DISCUSSION In this work , we reported on participatory design focus groups with CaringBridge users , spiritual leaders , healthcare workers , and CaringBridge employees . The definition of spiritual support that we derived through this process ( Section 5 . 1 . 4 ) suggests a number of divergences from the prior literature on online social support . First , rather than an ancillary support category , or a sub - category of some other form of support , participants experience spiritual support as an underlying energetic presence expressed through the other categories that have been conventionally used to characterize social support , including informational , emotional , instrumental , network , esteem [ 27 ] , and prayer support [ 66 ] . Second , our data suggest that the experience of feeling supported is mutual , “for it is in giving that we receive . ” Third , it suggests a triadic relationship between support recipients , support Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 21 providers , and the sacred , rather than a dyadic relationship between recipients and providers . This triadic relationship is important because it suggests that the purpose of the support is not only to meet material or social needs , but also to help recipients feel connected to what matters most to them , regardless of whether that is spiritual , religious , or secular in nature . Since we define spiritual support as an underlying dimension of social support , our results relate to broader phenomena noted in studies of social support . In general , we anecdotally observe that the use of phrases like “thoughts & prayers” or “praying for you” are ubiquitous in public online spaces ( e . g . , Reddit , Twitter , public Facebook groups ) used by United States users , where people do sometimes disclose personal health information . We speculate that these usages may be more “lightweight , ” which does not necessarily imply that they are any less valuable or meaningful , only that they require less context or deep understanding . Future work can characterize public usages across platforms to understand how users feel about these public exchanges of spiritual language . However , our data and analysis , and prior work in social support more broadly ( see Section 3 . 2 . 2 ) , suggest that users may feel safest to exchange more “heavyweight” spiritual support within the following three contexts : ( 1 ) OHCs with more privacy controls like CaringBridge , Lotsa Helping Hands , or MealTrain that offer patient - focused sites that bring together and coordinate specific offline communities [ 66 ] ; ( 2 ) online communities or groups that focus on specific conditions or situations and provide community support for all members , e . g . , Alcoholics Anonymous online meetings , Patients Like Me , Cancer Survivors Network [ 75 ] ; or ( 3 ) private spaces on larger social media ( e . g . , special groups or direct messages on Facebook or Instagram ) where users want to connect in more genuine , intimate , or supportive ways [ 38 , 48 , 73 , 77 ] . CaringBridge stakeholders’ ideations helped us to distill four implications for cases where design could be more sensitive to the spiritual dimension of people’s experiences : ( 1 ) representing spiritual beliefs , ( 2 ) assistance with supportive communication , ( 3 ) support network visualization and mobilization , and ( 4 ) advance care planning and digital legacy . We will now discuss how our design implications may generalize across the three types of contexts mentioned above . 6 . 1 Representing spiritual beliefs We offer the design implication that safe spaces can provide textual and / or visual ways for users to represent their spiritual beliefs . This implication may generalize across all three types of safe contexts mentioned above . For instance , on CaringBridge , the site creation UX flow has been designed to take “three minutes or less” 10 so that users experiencing a crisis do not need to struggle with complicated site set up and configuration . In a simple series of screens , users can enter their name , health condition ( optional ) , and desired privacy setting . It would not be difficult to add another question with a drop - down menu to specify their beliefs , and whether or not they would like to display a visual sticker or icon related to those beliefs . However , employees discussed a number of issues that must be carefully considered . First , there is trade - off between time - efficiency and the value of understanding user’s beliefs , so adding one more screen is non - trivial . Second , some people may have no interest in representing their beliefs ; this type of choice must be optional . Moreover , to be fully inclusive , a dropdown menu needs to be exhaustive , which is not possible . Allowing an “other” free response field , or encouraging users to reach out when their belief is not represented , could mitigate this issue . In other contexts , similar UX options and considerations apply . For example , Facebook already allows users to write in free - response text about their “Religious Views” in their “Basic Info” section . Instagram and Facebook could provide optional profile badges or icons that let users indicate what matters most to them . In disease - specific OHCs , or private health groups on Facebook , designers 10 See https : / / www . caringbridge . org / createwebsite . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 22 C . Estelle Smith , et al . could ensure that spiritual or religious information appears alongside names and profile photos for users when they click on other’s names in the group to learn more about them . Especially in that initial encounter , it may be meaningful for religious and spiritual information to be upfront , rather than buried deep in their profile , as a mechanism for starting conversations . However , for stigmatized individuals ( e . g . , trans individuals seeking support online ) , Scheuerman et al . also advise that “a lack of awareness of intersectional power structures simply reproduces power inequities that beget harm . ” For our study , this means that all design considerations about religious communication and expressions of spiritual support must be carried out with awareness of how heterogeneous groups may perceive power dynamics of others’ belief systems [ 62 ] . 6 . 2 Assistance with supportive communication We offer the design implication that safe spaces can provide assistance with supportive commu - nication . On CaringBridge , our participants suggested that resources such as training materials for supportive communication , recommendations for contextually appropriate scriptures , prayers , or sayings to enrich responses , or automatic text suggestions could all be embedded in the com - menting UI / UX to help support providers write better comments . In Section 5 . 1 . 5 , participants also described how for some users , prayers are especially desired and meaningful , while for other users with differing beliefs , receiving prayers can feel insensitive to their beliefs , or like unwanted bombardment . Our analysis suggests that platforms could benefit from features that allow support recipients to specify whether or not they are open to receiving prayers . Since most supportive exchanges online are now facilitated through messaging interfaces , this implication may also generalize across all three types of safe contexts . For instance , Peng et al . recently deployed a bot in a simulated OHC for people with depression to help with crafting supportive messages by either assessing the comments and offering opportunities to improve them , or providing comment recommendations to base their comments off of [ 55 ] . This bot helped to improve people’s confidence in their messages ; our work suggests that such innovation could be improved by considering a spiritual dimension ( e . g . , adding scripture recommendations into the mix , or offering another mechanism that offers culturally / spiritually relevant training ) . In reflecting on these types of ideas , our participants did not raise any obvious concerns with the concept of embedded training resources . However , AI or ML - based interventions are trickier . For example , in discussing the Everywhere - apist ( Figure 5 ) , OHC employees discussed that “there’s something weird about something in the computer telling my kid what to think” ( E7 ) . They were concerned not to replace humans in supportive interactions , yet they were also interested by the concept of using AI to assist them . To navigate this tension , future studies must : ( 1 ) clarify the opportunities , limitations , and risks of AI ; ( 2 ) understand the acceptability of such technology in this context ; and ( 3 ) ensure that machine assistance helps users to communicate genuine intent and positive presence , rather than making it easier to send generic or perhaps soulless messages . 6 . 3 Support network visualization and mobilization Designers of safe spaces could build new tools for network visualization and mobilization . Prior works on visualization tools for social support have focused on platforms designed to support a specific recipient . They stress the importance of providing users with a view of both the entire network and support providers’ individual faces [ 65 ] , or allowing people to customize the way that their support providers are arranged [ 70 ] . Our work also suggests the importance of building mechanisms to address recipients’ needs holistically – mind , body , and spirit – into such tools . For instance , participants suggested that visualizations could be especially good at providing for material and spiritual needs if support providers post all the ways that they are individually able to help . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 23 Visualizing this to the group could help both the recipient and the community to discern and articulate the most helpful wants and needs . In community - centered sites or private groups , visualizations might also be designed to represent the entire network . Rather than emphasizing one focal individual , such a tool might focus on showing everyone in the group who is currently online and available to chat , or possibly even share a prayer or meditation . Such a tool could create a sense of spiritual presence by showing community members to “glow” when they are actively praying or sending healing vibes , and by demonstrating geographically where everyone is praying from . 6 . 4 Advance care planning and digital legacy Advance care planning pertains to ensuring that a person’s needs will be met by planning ahead for logistical and care considerations that accompany chronic , life - threatening or terminal illnesses . Participants’ ideations suggested that technology may be a powerful tool that can help people overcome barriers to thinking about these difficult issues in advance , at a time when their symptoms are not yet impacting them significantly . Tools like this may be best suited for patient - centered apps or sites like CaringBridge , since they are focused on matters that intensely affect both the support recipient and their immediate family and close friends . To achieve this , the Planner tool on CaringBridge could be enriched with prompts to consider crucial care details and pre - populate calendar items that could later be scheduled with ease , or invoked during an emergency , when the time eventually comes . Matters of “digital legacy” or “profile memorialization” are gaining traction across the research community , and are likely to impact all platforms that host user - generated profiles and content . At this moment in history , most users of social media and online communities are still alive , and thus have agency in how they create , maintain , or delete their online profiles . As time goes on , an increasing proportion of online profiles will belong to users who have passed away . In their day - to - day use of platforms , most users will not be consciously thinking of how their data could endure indefinitely . Moreover , recent work found that users tend not to use platform affordances to deal with what should happen after they are gone . For example , Facebook provides a Legacy Contact feature that allows users to pre - select trusted individuals to manage their accounts , but users generally ignore this feature , forcing those who survive them to circumvent it and make their own decisions about what to do [ 36 ] . On CaringBridge , approximately one third of users who create a site due to a cancer diagnosis will have passed away at the time when their sites become inactive [ 47 ] . Our data suggest that unlike Facebook users , CaringBridge users are highly conscious that their sites are meaningful locations for them to intentionally create digital legacies , that will help their spirits to somehow endure beyond their lifespan . Given this awareness , CaringBridge may be uniquely positioned to offer ways to capture words , audio recordings , and videos to share with future generations . How to do this well , however , must remain a topic for future work . 7 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 7 . 1 Limitations of Scope In grappling with matters of spirituality and religion , tech companies must balance creating an inclusive space for all users who want or need their services against catering to the specific spiritual and religious needs of particular user groups . Situated in a more Western and liberal ideology that values inclusion , CaringBridge stakeholders may have different opinions of or approaches to spiritual support than members or employees of other online communities . Future work should explore this topic in other US - based and international contexts to validate , contrast , or refute our discussion of generalizability . Furthermore , we conducted our workshops with participants of Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 24 C . Estelle Smith , et al . diverse beliefs . We have previously enumerated the methodological limitations of focus groups ( Section 4 . 3 . 1 ) , however it will be valuable for researchers and designers to understand if conducting similar studies with people who all hold the same religious or spiritual beliefs yield similar or divergent conclusions . Finally , one theme that has been underrepresented in our presentation of this data is that participants discussed a lack of online spaces and resources for helping children to explore their spirituality and cope with life - threatening illness ; this important topic is beyond scope here , but should be explored in future work . 7 . 2 Disciplinary Boundaries We were touched by the depth and diversity of the experiences shared by our participants . Some of these experiences involved technology in a fundamental way . But many did not . In fact , quite the contrary is demonstrated by one of our favorite brainstorm ideas— “a big comfy armchair that turns off all the tech when you sit in it” —and a quote from H4 , “God help us if it’s just robots taking care of people at end of life . ” In this last section , we discuss some concepts from our data that we did not cover in this paper , which instead focused on actionable design implications . In doing so , we will refer readers to a few of the many experiences that are stashed away for safekeeping in Appendix A . 2 . If you enjoyed reading this manuscript , we recommend you also peruse those stories , though we only have space to call out a few here . Some critical aspects of spiritual support are difficult or impossible to grapple with exclusively through design . Notably , there seems to be something sacred and irreplaceable about simply sitting in silence beside the bed of someone who is ill , holding their hand , giving them a hug . There is an art and a finesse to dealing with challenging inter - and intrapersonal dynamics , and the way that those intersect with faith or spirituality . L6 shared about the internal struggle he felt to control his emotions as he held the hand of his dying friend . H2 shared a story of an anorexic woman near death , who was able to accept a feeding tube only after a compassionate conversation . P11 shared an inspiring account of using her artwork to move from darkness to light as she interpreted her decades - long battle with cancer . Our data point to a clear need for a broader framework for spiritual support spanning aspects of both sociotechnical and non - technological social interaction . Efforts to study spiritual support in Social Computing and HCI will continue to be improved in conjunction with other disciplines like nursing , medicine , and social psychology . The related work presented in Section 3 . 1 . 2 provides a helpful pointer to the social and behavioral elements of effective offline spiritual care , while our work here provides the beginnings of a broader framework , which can be further developed in future work . Finally , although this work was not motivated by the COVID - 19 pandemic , our data was collected only a few months before the outbreak began . We would be remiss to neglect commenting on how the global crisis that began in late 2019 has intensified the vital importance of our work here . Many families cannot be physically present with ill or dying loved ones in hospitals , bereavement rituals and gatherings cannot be held , and the healthcare system remains ill - equipped to cope with a medical crisis of this magnitude [ 33 ] . Some early studies are beginning to demonstrate shifts in OHC and social media usage as a result ( e . g . , [ 12 , 61 ] ) . Beyond immediate deficits in medical care , there are also urgent deficiencies of spiritual care providers to attend holistically to the needs of patients [ 33 ] . While technology cannot solve this problem alone , we hope that this work supports innovation to help to close this gap , and help users to provide each other with the spiritual support that is so desperately needed during these challenging times . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We want to express our deepest gratitude to all of our participants ; we cannot adequately thank them for sharing their vulnerability , their time , and their words . This work was supported by Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 25 CaringBridge ; we especially thank Patricia McMorrow , Brigid Bonner , and Heather Jarvie for their contributions to planning , recruiting , and facilitating focus groups . We also thank Liwanag Ojala for connecting us with Dr . Curtiss DeYoung at the Minnesota Council of Churches , who helped to recruit spiritual leaders , and who freely volunteered a wonderful venue for our workshops with them . Harita Duggirala , a high school volunteer , was an excellent help in conducting several of the workshops . We are also indebted to Stevie Chancellor , Mo Houtti , John Harwell , Adel Al - Dawood , Anjali Srivastava , and our anonymous reviewers , who have all provided excellent feedback on drafts of this paper . REFERENCES [ 1 ] 2020 . Definition of Religion by Merriam - Webster . https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / religion [ 2 ] 2020 . Definition of Spirituality . https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / spirituality Library Catalog : www . merriam - webster . com . [ 3 ] JacobAbbott , HaleyMacLeod , NoviaNurain , GustaveEkobe , andSameerPatil . 2019 . LocalStandardsforAnonymization Practices in Health , Wellness , Accessibility , and Aging Research at CHI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300692 [ 4 ] Nazanin Andalibi and Andrea Forte . 2018 . Responding to Sensitive Disclosures on Social Media : A Decision - Making Framework . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 6 ( Dec . 2018 ) , 31 : 1 – 31 : 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3241044 [ 5 ] Nazanin Andalibi , Oliver L . Haimson , Munmun De Choudhury , and Andrea Forte . 2018 . Social Support , Reciprocity , and Anonymity in Responses to Sexual Abuse Disclosures on Social Media . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 5 ( Oct . 2018 ) , 28 : 1 – 28 : 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3234942 [ 6 ] Isolde K . Anderson . 2011 . The Uses and Gratifications of Online Care Pages : A Study of CaringBridge . Health Communication 26 , 6 ( Sept . 2011 ) , 546 – 559 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10410236 . 2011 . 558335 [ 7 ] Mei Bai and Mark Lazenby . 2014 . A Systematic Review of Associations between Spiritual Well - Being and Quality of Life at the Scale and Factor Levels in Studies among Patients with Cancer . Journal of Palliative Medicine 18 , 3 ( Oct . 2014 ) , 286 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / jpm . 2014 . 0189 Publisher : Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . , publishers . [ 8 ] Genevieve Bell . 2006 . No more SMS from Jesus : ubicomp , religion and techno - spiritual practices . In International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing . Springer , 141 – 158 . [ 9 ] Genevieve Bell . 2012 . Messy Futures : culture , technology and research . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . [ 10 ] Megan Best , Phyllis Butow , and Ian Olver . 2015 . Do patients want doctors to talk about spirituality ? A systematic literature review . Patient Education and Counseling 98 , 11 ( Nov . 2015 ) , 1320 – 1328 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pec . 2015 . 04 . 017 [ 11 ] Megan Best , Phyllis Butow , and Ian Olver . 2015 . Doctors discussing religion and spirituality : A systematic literature review : . Palliative Medicine ( Aug . 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0269216315600912 Publisher : SAGE PublicationsSage UK : London , England . [ 12 ] Laura Biester , Katie Matton , Janarthanan Rajendran , Emily Mower Provost , and Rada Mihalcea . [ n . d . ] . Quantifying the Effects of COVID - 19 on Mental Health Support Forums . ( [ n . d . ] ) , 12 . [ 13 ] Rosaleen Bloom , Susan Beck , Wen - Ying Chou , Maija Reblin , and Lee Ellington . 2019 . In Their Own Words : Experiences of Caregivers of Adults With Cancer as Expressed on Social Media . Oncology Nursing Forum 46 , 5 ( Sept . 2019 ) , 617 – 630 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1188 / 19 . ONF . 617 - 630 [ 14 ] Kate Bowler . 2018 . Everything Happens for a Reason : And Other Lies I’ve Loved . Random House . [ 15 ] Elizabeth Buie and Mark Blythe . 2013 . Spirituality : There’s an App for That ! ( But Not a Lot of Research ) . In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2315 – 2324 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2468754 [ 16 ] Moira Burke and Mike Develin . 2016 . Once More with Feeling : Supportive Responses to Social Sharing on Facebook . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1462 – 1474 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2835199 [ 17 ] Margaret Burkhardt and Mary Nagai - Jacobson . 2016 . Spirituality and health . In Holistic Nursing : A Handbook for Practice ( 7 ed . ) . 135 – 166 . [ 18 ] CaringBridge . 2020 . CaringBridge About Us . https : / / www . caringbridge . org / about - us / [ 19 ] CaringBridge . 2020 . CaringBridge History . www . caringbridge . org / about - us / history / [ 20 ] Pew Research Center . 2019 . In U . S . , Decline of Christianity Continues at Rapid Pace . Technical Report . https : / / www . pewforum . org / 2019 / 10 / 17 / in - u - s - decline - of - christianity - continues - at - rapid - pace / Library Catalog : Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 26 C . Estelle Smith , et al . www . pewforum . org Section : Publications . [ 21 ] Stevie Chancellor , Andrea Hu , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2018 . Norms Matter : Contrasting Social Support Around Behavior Change in Online Weight Loss Communities . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174240 [ 22 ] Stevie Chancellor , Zhiyuan Lin , Erica L Goodman , Stephanie Zerwas , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2016 . Quantifying and predicting mental illness severity in online pro - eating disorder communities . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 1171 – 1184 . [ 23 ] Stevie Chancellor , Tanushree Mitra , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2016 . Recovery Amid Pro - Anorexia : Analysis of Recovery in Social Media . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . CHI Conference 2016 ( May 2016 ) , 2111 – 2123 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858246 [ 24 ] Stevie Chancellor , Jessica Annette Pater , Trustin Clear , Eric Gilbert , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2016 . # thyghgapp : Instagram content moderation and lexical variation in pro - eating disorder communities . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 1201 – 1213 . [ 25 ] Kathy Charmaz . 2014 . Constructing grounded theory . Sage . [ 26 ] Barbara Clyne , Sinead M . O’Neill , Daniel Nuzum , Michelle O’Neill , James Larkin , Máirín Ryan , and Susan M . Smith . 2019 . Patients’ spirituality perspectives at the end of life : a qualitative evidence synthesis . BMJ Supportive & Palliative Care ( Nov . 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / bmjspcare - 2019 - 002016 Publisher : British Medical Journal Publishing Group Section : Review . [ 27 ] Carolyn E . Cutrona and Julie A . Suhr . 1992 . Controllability of Stressful Events and Satisfaction With Spouse Support Behaviors . Communication Research 19 , 2 ( April 1992 ) , 154 – 174 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 009365092019002002 [ 28 ] Munmun De Choudhury and Emre Kıcıman . 2017 . The language of social support in social media and its effect on suicidal ideation risk . In Proceedings of the . . . International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media . International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media , Vol . 2017 . NIH Public Access , 32 . https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles / PMC5565730 / [ 29 ] D . C . DeAndrea and J . C . Anthony . 2013 . Online peer support for mental health problems in the United States : 2004 – 2010 . Psychological Medicine 43 , 11 ( Nov . 2013 ) , 2277 – 2288 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0033291713000172 [ 30 ] World Health Organization Department of Mental Health & Substance Dependence . 2002 . WHOQOL - SRPB Field - Test Instrument . https : / / www . who . int / mental _ health / media / en / 622 . pdf [ 31 ] Brianna Dym and Casey Fiesler . 2018 . Vulnerable and online : Fandom’s case for stronger privacy norms and tools . In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 329 – 332 . [ 32 ] Sindhu Kiranmai Ernala , Asra F . Rizvi , Michael L . Birnbaum , John M . Kane , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2017 . Linguistic Markers Indicating Therapeutic Outcomes of Social Media Disclosures of Schizophrenia . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 1 , CSCW ( Dec . 2017 ) , 43 : 1 – 43 : 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134678 [ 33 ] Betty R . Ferrell , George Handzo , Tina Picchi , Christina Puchalski , and William E . Rosa . 2020 . The Urgency of Spiritual Care : COVID - 19 and the Critical Need for Whole - Person Palliation . Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 60 , 3 ( Sept . 2020 ) , e7 – e11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jpainsymman . 2020 . 06 . 034 [ 34 ] Tabor E . Flickinger , Claire DeBolt , Ava Lena Waldman , George Reynolds , Wendy F . Cohn , Mary Catherine Beach , Karen Ingersoll , and Rebecca Dillingham . 2017 . Social Support in a Virtual Community : Analysis of a Clinic - Affiliated Online Support Group for Persons Living with HIV / AIDS . AIDS and Behavior 21 , 11 ( Nov . 2017 ) , 3087 – 3099 . [ 35 ] Susannah Fox . 2011 . The social life of health information , 2011 . Pew Internet & American Life Project Washington , DC . [ 36 ] Katie Z Gach and Jed R Brubaker . 2020 . Experiences of Trust in Postmortem Profile Management . ACM Transactions on Social Computing 3 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 26 . [ 37 ] Robert Giaquinto and Arindam Banerjee . 2018 . Topic Modeling on Health Journals with Regularized Variational Inference . AAAI ( 2018 ) . [ 38 ] Katrina L Hinson . 2017 . Framing illness through Facebook enabled online support groups . Communication Design Quarterly Review 4 , 2b ( 2017 ) , 22 – 31 . [ 39 ] IDEO . 2019 . Design Kit : IDEO Brainstorm Rules . https : / / www . designkit . org / methods / 28 [ 40 ] Najmeh Jafari , Ziba Farajzadegan , Ahmadreza Zamani , Fatemeh Bahrami , Hamid Emami , Amir Loghmani , and Nooshin Jafari . 2013 . Spiritual Therapy to Improve the Spiritual Well - Being of Iranian Women with Breast Cancer : A Randomized Controlled Trial . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2013 / 353262 ISSN : 1741 - 427X Library Catalog : www . hindawi . com Pages : e353262 Publisher : Hindawi Volume : 2013 . [ 41 ] Jialun " Aaron " Jiang and Jed R . Brubaker . 2018 . Tending Unmarked Graves : Classification of Post - mortem Content on Social Media . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW ( Nov . 2018 ) , 81 : 1 – 81 : 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274350 [ 42 ] Bethany Lynn Johnson , Margaret Quinlan , and Nathan Pope . 2020 . " Sticky Baby Dust " and Emoji : Social Support on Instagram during In Vitro Fertilization . Rhetoric of Health & Medicine 3 , 3 ( Aug . 2020 ) , 320 – 349 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5744 / rhm . 2020 . 1017 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 27 [ 43 ] Mary Jo Kreitzer , Susan Telke , Linda Hanson , Brent Leininger , and Roni Evans . 2019 . Outcomes of a gratitude practice in an online community of caring . The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine 25 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 385 – 391 . [ 44 ] Zachary Levonian , Marco Dow , Drew Erikson , Sourojit Ghosh , Hannah Miller Hillberg , Saumik Narayanan , Loren Terveen , and Svetlana Yarosh . 2020 . Patterns of Patient and Caregiver Mutual Support Connections in an Online Health Community . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2007 . 16172 ( 2020 ) . [ 45 ] Henri Lipmanowicz and Keith McCandless . 2019 . Conversation Cafe . http : / / www . liberatingstructures . com / 17 - conversation - cafe / [ 46 ] Henri Lipmanowicz and Keith McCandless . 2019 . Liberating Structures . http : / / www . liberatingstructures . com / [ 47 ] Haiwei Ma , C . Estelle Smith , Lu He , Saumik Narayanan , Robert A . Giaquinto , Roni Evans , Linda Hanson , and Svetlana Yarosh . 2017 . Write for Life : Persisting in Online Health Communities Through Expressive Writing and Social Support . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 1 , CSCW ( Dec . 2017 ) , 73 : 1 – 73 : 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134708 [ 48 ] Haley MacLeod , Grace Bastin , Leslie S . Liu , Katie Siek , and Kay Connelly . 2017 . " Be Grateful You Don’T Have a Real Disease " : Understanding Rare Disease Relationships . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1660 – 1673 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025796 event - place : Denver , Colorado , USA . [ 49 ] Michael Massimi , Jackie L . Bender , Holly O . Witteman , and Osman H . Ahmed . 2014 . Life Transitions and Online Health Communities : Reflecting on Adoption , Use , and Disengagement . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1491 – 1501 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531622 [ 50 ] Michael Massimi , Jill P . Dimond , and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2012 . Finding a New Normal : The Role of Technology in Life Disruptions . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’12 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 719 – 728 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145314 [ 51 ] Susan E . McClement . 2010 . Spiritual issues in palliative medicine . Oxford University Press . https : / / oxfordmedicine . com / view / 10 . 1093 / med / 9780199656097 . 001 . 0001 / med - 9780199656097 - chapter - 171 Publication Title : Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine Section : Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine . [ 52 ] Michael J . Muller and Sarah Kuhn . 1993 . Participatory Design . Commun . ACM 36 , 6 ( June 1993 ) , 24 – 28 . [ 53 ] Amir Musarezaie , Mahboube Ghasemipoor , Tahere Momeni - Ghaleghasemi , Mahnaz Khodaee , and Fariba Taleghani . 2015 . A Study on the Efficacy of Spirituality - Based Intervention on Spiritual Well Being of Patients with Leukemia : A Randomized Clinical Trial . Middle East Journal of Cancer 6 , 2 ( April 2015 ) , 97 – 105 . http : / / mejc . sums . ac . ir / article _ 41999 . html Publisher : Shiraz University of Medical Sciences . [ 54 ] Mark W . Newman , Debra Lauterbach , Sean A . Munson , Paul Resnick , and Margaret E . Morris . 2011 . It’s Not That I Don’T Have Problems , I’M Just Not Putting Them on Facebook : Challenges and Opportunities in Using Online Social Networks for Health . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 341 – 350 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958876 [ 55 ] Zhenhui Peng , Qingyu Guo , Ka Wing Tsang , and Xiaojuan Ma . 2020 . Exploring the Effects of Technological Writing Assistance for Support Providers in Online Mental Health Community . ( 2020 ) . [ 56 ] Justin Petelka , Lucy Van Kleunen , Liam Albright , Elizabeth Murnane , Stephen Voida , and Jaime Snyder . 2020 . Being ( In ) Visible : Privacy , Transparency , and Disclosure in the Self - Management of Bipolar Disorder . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376573 [ 57 ] Christina Puchalski , Betty Ferrell , Rose Virani , Shirley Otis - Green , Pamela Baird , Janet Bull , Harvey Chochinov , George Handzo , Holly Nelson - Becker , Maryjo Prince - Paul , Karen Pugliese , and Daniel Sulmasy . 2009 . Improving the Quality of Spiritual Care as a Dimension of Palliative Care : The Report of the Consensus Conference . Journal of Palliative Medicine 12 , 10 ( Oct . 2009 ) , 885 – 904 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / jpm . 2009 . 0142 [ 58 ] J . Quinn . 2019 . Integrative nursing and care of the human spirit . In Integrative Nursing ( 2 ed . ) . Oxford University Press , 82 – 99 . [ 59 ] Stephen A . Rains and Kevin B . Wright . 2016 . Social Support and Computer - Mediated Communication : A State - of - the - Art Review and Agenda for Future Research . Annals of the International Communication Association 40 , 1 ( Jan . 2016 ) , 175 – 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 23808985 . 2015 . 11735260 [ 60 ] Rachel Naomi Remen . 1996 . In the Service of Life . Noetic Sciences Review 37 ( 1996 ) , 24 – 25 . [ 61 ] Koustuv Saha , John Torous , Eric D Caine , and Munmun De Choudhury . 2020 . Psychosocial Effects of the COVID - 19 Pandemic : Large - scale Quasi - Experimental Study on Social Media . Journal of medical Internet research 22 , 11 ( 2020 ) , e22600 . [ 62 ] Morgan Klaus Scheuerman , Stacy M Branham , and Foad Hamidi . 2018 . Safe spaces and safe places : Unpacking technology - mediated experiences of safety and harm with transgender people . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 1 – 27 . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 28 C . Estelle Smith , et al . [ 63 ] Eva Sharma and Munmun De Choudhury . 2018 . Mental Health Support and Its Relationship to Linguistic Accommoda - tion in Online Communities . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 641 : 1 – 641 : 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174215 event - place : Montreal QC , Canada . [ 64 ] Sally A Shumaker and Arlene Brownell . 1984 . Toward a theory of social support : Closing conceptual gaps . Journal of social issues 40 , 4 ( 1984 ) , 11 – 36 . [ 65 ] Meredith M . Skeels , Kenton T . Unruh , Christopher Powell , and Wanda Pratt . 2010 . Catalyzing Social Support for Breast Cancer Patients . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 173 – 182 . [ 66 ] C . Estelle Smith , Zachary Levonian , Haiwei Ma , Robert Giaquinto , Gemma Lein - Mcdonough , Zixuan Li , Susan O’Conner - Von , and Svetlana Yarosh . 2020 . " I Cannot Do All of This Alone " : Exploring Instrumental and Prayer Support in Online Health Communities . arXiv : cs . HC / 2005 . 11884 [ 67 ] Karen E . Steinhauser , George Fitchett , George F . Handzo , Kimberly S . Johnson , Harold G . Koenig , Kenneth I . Pargament , Christina M . Puchalski , Shane Sinclair , Elizabeth J . Taylor , and Tracy A . Balboni . 2017 . State of the Science of Spirituality andPalliativeCareResearchPartI : Definitions , Measurement , andOutcomes . JournalofPainandSymptomManagement 54 , 3 ( Sept . 2017 ) , 428 – 440 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jpainsymman . 2017 . 07 . 028 [ 68 ] Elizabeth Stowell , Teresa K . O’Leary , Everlyne Kimani , Michael K . Paasche - Orlow , Timothy Bickmore , and Andrea G . Parker . 2020 . Investigating Opportunities for Crowdsourcing in Church - Based Health Interventions : A Participatory Design Study . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376833 [ 69 ] Yi - ChiaWang , RobertKraut , andJohnMLevine . 2012 . Tostayorleave ? : therelationshipofemotionalandinformational support to commitment in online health support groups . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . ACM , 833 – 842 . [ 70 ] Susan S . Witte , Nabila El - Bassel , Louisa Gilbert , Elwin Wu , Maurice Matiz , Lucy Appert , Jessica Rowe , Susan Dreher , and Zarina Mustapha . [ n . d . ] . Social Support Network Map Tool . https : / / ssnm . ctl . columbia . edu / map / about / Library Catalog : ssnm . ctl . columbia . edu . [ 71 ] Allison Woodruff , Sally Augustin , and Brooke Foucault . 2007 . Sabbath day home automation : “it’s like mixing technology and religion” . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . 527 – 536 . [ 72 ] Susan P . Wyche , Gillian R . Hayes , Lonnie D . Harvel , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2006 . Technology in Spiritual Formation : An Exploratory Study of Computer Mediated Religious Communications . In Proceedings of the 2006 20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’06 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA . [ 73 ] Sijia Xiao , Danaë Metaxa , Joon Sung Park , Karrie Karahalios , and Niloufar Salehi . 2020 . Random , Messy , Funny , Raw : Finstas as Intimate Reconfigurations of Social Media . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 74 ] Diyi Yang , Robert Kraut , and John M . Levine . 2017 . Commitment of Newcomers and Old - timers to Online Health Support Communities . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 6363 – 6375 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3026008 [ 75 ] Diyi Yang , Zheng Yao , Joseph Seering , and Robert Kraut . 2019 . The Channel Matters : Self - disclosure , Reciprocity and Social Support in Online Cancer Support Groups . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300261 [ 76 ] Jason Yip , Tamara Clegg , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Helene Gelderblom , Emily Rhodes , and Allison Druin . 2013 . Brownies or bags - of - stuff ? domain expertise in cooperative inquiry with children . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , New York , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2485760 . 2485763 [ 77 ] Alyson L . Young and Andrew D . Miller . 2019 . " This Girl is on Fire " : Sensemaking in an Online Health Community for Vulvodynia . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300359 [ 78 ] Caroline Young and Cyndie Koopsen . 2010 . Spirituality , Health , and Healing : An Integrative Approach . Jones & Bartlett Publishers . Google - Books - ID : zd1egJXMCzEC . [ 79 ] Xing Zhang , Shan Liu , Xing Chen , Lin Wang , Baojun Gao , and Qing Zhu . 2018 . Health information privacy concerns , antecedents , and information disclosure intention in online health communities . Information & Management 55 , 4 ( June 2018 ) , 482 – 493 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . im . 2017 . 11 . 003 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 29 A APPENDIX A . 1 Workshop Design Using concepts from Liberating Structures [ 46 ] , we designed structured activities to encourage all participants to contribute equally and allow organic interaction to emerge . We used slide shows with accompanying print - outs to communicate instructions and guidelines . We also provided worksheets with prompts and wire - frame diagrams to be completed by participants . A . 1 . 1 OHC Users , Spiritual Leaders , and Healthcare Workers . Focus groups for the first three stakeholder groups were structured similarly , with a few small differences . All groups began with background information from the facilitator about the nature and purpose of the research , and then participant introductions within their groups . OHC users completed four sequential activities ( described in detail below ) : ( 1 ) a Conversation Cafe [ 45 ] to define “spiritual support , ” ( 2 ) an IDEO - inspired brainstorm , ( 3 ) a UI sketching activity , and ( 4 ) a rapid prototyping activity with craft supplies . Spiritual leaders and healthcare workers sequentially completed : ( 1 ) the same Conversation Cafe as OHC users , ( 2 ) a second Conversation Cafe on contextual and community factors related to spiritual support , and ( 3 ) an IDEO brainstorm . Conversation Cafe to define “spiritual support . ” A Conversation Cafe [ 45 ] ensures that all participants have opportunities to contribute their perspectives through timed rounds of conversa - tion . All groups began with a Conversation Cafe to create their own definition of “spiritual support , ” which was especially important because it constituted the foundation of all remaining activities . Participants were prompted to : • 1 - 2 min . each : Share any story of a time in their life when they had provided or received what they felt to be spiritual support . This prompt was designed to build trust among participants and establish an experiential reference for subsequent conversation . • 1 min . each : Compare and contrast their experiences . This prompt was specifically rec - ommended by Conversation Cafe guidelines to give all participants a chance to voice their thoughts on others’ experiences . • 20 min . of open group conversation : Each group was provided with the international consensus definition of “spirituality” [ 57 ] and asked to write their group’s own definition of “spiritual support . ” This prompt mimics the process that generated the consensus definition , in which leading experts and diverse faith leaders met and were required to come to consensus on an actionable and inclusive definition of spirituality before they could conclude [ 57 ] . • 1 min . each : Share concluding comments , per Conversation Cafe guidelines . IDEO Brainstorm . All groups completed 20 - minute IDEO - inspired brainstorms [ 39 ] in order to quickly generate many ideas of technologies that could provide spiritual support , according to their definition . A facilitator reviewed IDEO’s brainstorming rules , seeded the groups with explanations of many technology categories 11 to consider in their ideations , and then acted as a scribe , writing each idea on a paper flipboard as it was spoken . Each participant received three stickers to place on their favorite web , app , or online ideas , and three more for their favorite physical or embodied ideas . UI Sketching and Rapid Prototyping . In order to capture more detail about end users’ concepts of technology products that could provide spiritual support , OHC users completed two rapid prototyping activities . Each participant sketched one or two of their favorite online - based ideas from their group brainstorm . Each group also worked together to quickly construct a low - fidelity 11 Websites , phone apps , computers , wearables , smart objects , large screens or interactive displays , virtual or augmented reality , projections , holograms , and devices or interfaces embedded in homes , hospitals , cars , places of worship , etc . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 30 C . Estelle Smith , et al . prototype of their favorite embodied ideas using “Bags - of - Stuff” [ 76 ] filled with craft supplies , and to record videos explaining how it would be used . Conversation Cafe on contextual and community factors . Rather than rapid prototyping , we asked spiritual leaders and healthcare workers to complete a second Conversation Cafe to explore : ( 1 ) how they observed their communities and peers providing spiritual support , according to their group definitions , and ( 2 ) challenges , obstacles , or tensions related to providing spiritual support – esp . related to the use of technology in this context . A . 1 . 2 OHC Employees . One aim of participatory design methods is to impact future product development or inspire new ways of thinking that are in alignment with users’ needs and desires [ 52 ] . Consequently , we did not ask employees to write definitions of spiritual support . Rather , we exposed them to outputs from the three OHC user groups in order to : ( 1 ) share these users’ ideations with them , and ( 2 ) learn about their perspectives on these ideations . More specifically , we split each employee focus group into three modules . In each module , we presented one OHC user group’s definition of spiritual support , along with their rapid prototypes ( sketches and videos ) . OHC employees then participated in structured conversations to share their perceptions and opinions about the definitions and prototypes , compare and contrast their opinions , and discern possible product directions or ideas of relevance to CaringBridge . A . 1 . 3 Additional Demographic Information about the Participant Sample . This section provides additional information about participants’ demographic information . We include it here in order to make the information available , while reporting in aggregate to protect participants’ identities . Three participants selected “Asian / Pacific Islander , ” one participant selected “Black / African American , ” and the remainder selected “White” ( including one participant of Middle Eastern ethnicity ) . Three participants have trade / technical / vocational training or an associate’s degree , 11 have Bachelor’s degrees , and 20 have Post - Bachelor’s degrees . 5 are retired , 3 selected “other , ” and the remainder are employed . Figure 7 shows the distributions of participants’ incomes and ages . Fig . 7 . Distributions of Participants’ Income and Age . In the left figure , note that 7 participants preferred not to share their income . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 31 A . 2 Participants’ Experiences of Providing and / or Receiving Spiritual Support In the table below , we include all experiences shared by participants in response to the first prompt of our Conversation Cafe activity to define spiritual support . ( “Share any story of a time in their life when they had provided or received what they felt to be spiritual support . ” ) Some participants described additional specific instances during conversation , which we include here as well . ID Participant descriptions of any experience receiving and / or providing spiritual support P1 I have looked for spiritual support over the course of time when my mother was dying , that was 30 years ago . I felt the need to pray or stuff , I don’t think I got any results . Then more recently my brother died . I did feel like there was a spiritual thing going with my relationship with my niece at the time . I mean , it didn’t feel otherworldly , but I did feel like I was supported and I hope I was supportive to her . P1 I had a CaringBridge experience , the most profound one I have ever had , that ended with a post yesterday that said he is dying . Started out a week ago . He had a stroke . After that , he is going to hospice care because there are critical faculties that won’t come back . For me I am mostly shocked and horrified . I mean , I am 73 years old , I should know these things happen , but I am shocked and horrified because he wasn’t the kind of person I thought of as weak in any way . But I have read everything on there and I am thinking about [ his wife’s name ] and his 2 children and I am giving a lot more credit to spirituality in terms of what I think it is doing for them . P2 I would say , something that I witnessed on my floor [ at a hospital , working as a nurse ] , it was an older woman . She had just been admitted and she had a kind of a rough night and didn’t feel great and she was just near tears . I think it was an aid that was in the room and they were talking about religion . They were the same religion . And the aid got down on her knees and held the woman’s hand and she said , can I pray for you when I go home ? It was towards the end of the shift and the woman , I thought she was going to cry , she just changed her whole tone . And it just gave her an extra bit of hope , and I think it was a kind thing to do . P3 Over the past year I have been coming to terms with my cancer diagnosis and being able to connect with people through CaringBridge , me being able to talk through it through my writing , and then having their comments come back , that just felt extremely supportive and I think I wouldn’t have felt so good without that . P4 My dad had a hemorrhage and he was in SICU [ Surgical Intensive Care Unit ] 8 weeks , and then a brain injury unit for 6 weeks , and then a TCU [ Transitional Care Unit ] for 100 days , and home health and long term cognitive recovery . So it was very life and death day - to - day for weeks . We started a CaringBridge site just a couple days after his initial injury . That experience was really helpful , particularly for my mom . I was going through a time at that point where I wasn’t really religious and she was . And seeing all the people coming out of the woodwork to support us , and seeing a community . We were in a hospital a couple of hours from their hometown , so we didn’t see people day to day , but to be able to be constantly reminded of all the people who were praying for us , that was really critical for her , particularly for that time . And I think it helped facilitate the other forms of care by connecting people who could coordinate bringing us things and that sort of thing . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 32 C . Estelle Smith , et al . P4 I was talking about it with [ a friend ] , she said when her mom was really elderly , she had been very religious very christian all her life and she is really excited about Jesus , but she would always get worked up whenever we mentioned Jesus because she knew it meant something she couldn’t remember . But she said once she got the communion , she just lit up because for her , the language and the concepts were kind of not working , but there was this other type of kinesthetic or physical [ sensation ] . P5 Spiritual support was the night that my husband was burned , he actually blew our garage up with himself in it accidentally . But when I got down to the hospital after bringing my kids over to my moms and stuff , I had made maybe one phone call to a friend . And when I walked into the hospital there were 8 people from our church there already praying . “What can we do ? Can we get your kids ? Do you need a prayer shawl ? ” P6 I read a lot of books during [ wife’s name ] journey with cancer , books on spirituality and healing . Getting your mind right was kind of what I was trying to do because we went through a lot of things . I am sure with all our experiences we have all been through a lot of things . One of the things that I got from that was that at the end of the night every night three things that you liked about your day . So we would just talk about it because we would be sad a lot and so we would just talk about what were three things that impacted you today . Some of them either what you saw or did , but one of them had to be an action . And so just communication and finding ways to cope , that was my contribution . P6 In our case it was , universally I don’t know , but for us [ receiving meals ] was [ spiritual support ] because the people who would come to deliver , and it wouldn’t be an expectation of sitting in our house and us entertaining them . But they would just kind of give her a hug or something , and it was quick and it was loving . And to us it was , it wasn’t even about the food , it was just kind of them doing something out of love , taking time out of their day showing that they care . P7 I guess when my dad died , we used CaringBridge for that . Sorry I’m gonna start crying . [ starts crying ] It is just nice to know that people are thinking of us and giving us support . P7 A coworker this week lost her husband , so we got a card and collected some money . Everyone was writing in the card and a lot of my coworkers are religious , I am guessing , and they wrote we are praying for you or whatever . And I was just like , oh , I am thinking of you , I am sending positive thoughts or whatever , which I think is my way of " praying " if you have to classify it as something . P8 I have a really intense bit of PTSD and one of the things that I did was I was able to write essays about it and I had a blog and it was a private blog and I would link it to Facebook for a few chosen people . It just felt really good when people would like on it , you know , to feel really held and witnessed . P9 I was going through EMDR therapy for a situation of gang rape that I experienced when I was 14 . To go back and reprocess that almost killed me . But there is an app on here [ her smartphone ] called “Change Me Prayers” and what it is , and I’ll show it to you . You just tap and you can see different prayers . So I had this moment where I was suicidal , and I just had my partner leave me . I was freaking out and I didn’t know what to do , and this prayer popped up and I just broke down . Like it was really intense right , like trying to understand the way this correlated , and it was just very helpful . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 33 P10 I was at a Zen temple and we were asked to gather in a group called counsel practice , and the counsel leaders had put together an altar with a variety of things , a branch and a bowl of fruit and so on . I noticed the bowl of fruit on the altar and it reminded me of a bowl of fruit I carried during my wedding ceremony . And it just reminded me of what and who am I really committed to . And I thought it was a very powerful use of an object talking piece to really tap into that commitment , and tapping into that commitment made me feel centered . P11 I had the light - bulb moment , I was like , oh my god , I can use my paintings for [ healing my own energy ] because I’m a painter , and I’ve been doing this work for a long time . Somebody said , well why don’t you paint yourself completely healed ? That was a gateway for me to learn some amazing things . Because what happens is , when I paint , I basically enter what I call an altered state . People call it the zone , I think anybody can go there when they’re in their own discipline and they’re really in alignment with it . . . So first , I realized I needed to paint the cancer , which looked like this void , an emptiness . When I was painting it , part of me thought that dying was a solution to all my problems . When I realized that , I was like , ooh , it takes a lot more courage to be here and to clean up your mess , and I realized as I was painting it , that what I was painting was not light , this is darkness masquerading as light . . . Over the next probably year , I worked on several versions of another painting of being completely healed . What was interesting about it was , it was the same shape , it was like this leaf shape , and instead of being a void , it was a channel of light . And I thought , OK , so if I’m willing to stay in the void of this emptiness , of this darkness , of this nothingness , if I can stay present to that , then it becomes a channel of light . Then I can channel all this love and light . And that’s exactly what happened . And that’s why I then went into chaplaincy . L1 The most memorable receiving and giving spiritual support is saying the rosary with my father - in - law when he was dying from cancer . He was home on hospice and everyday I would go and sit and pray with him and that was just the highlight of his day at that point in time . No technology involved in that one . L1 I had a friend of mine who died from lung cancer at age 40 , never smoked , anyway . She was doing the whole juicing thing and one day she just leans and goes , “Will you hate me forever if I wanna have a cheeseburger and fries ? ” And I said , “let’s go . ” So we went and got one and we hid out in this little town so she could eat her gol darn cheeseburger and fries rather than drink green juice . L1 At the end of her life , she had an internal bleeding and so she was alive for just a few hours after we took her to the hospital , but she was a devout Catholic and she had a very favorite priest . And when the event happened , he was , there was a funeral that he was attending to and so they sent the substitute priest and I mean he was fine , he was a good guy , but not her favorite and the family , not me , but her sons and daughters just could not accept that . As being the final , the finality of their mother’s life here and she passed when he was in the room , not the right priest but the other priest and it was interesting to observe how that disrupted their calm at the end of her life . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 34 C . Estelle Smith , et al . L2 The thing that comes to my mind is a 17 year old girl with Leukemia many years ago . Her parents were like “prayer warriors” you know , “God only gives us what we can handle” and all this kind of stuff . They were almost bombarding her with , you know , kind of slamming down this faith thing and she was just a 17 year old kid , scared . I went and visited her in the hospital one day , and I was talking to her and she was scared and it’s like , yeah I understand and it was just so powerful that she was able to share that with me . I don’t remember what else we talked about , but it was just a very holy powerful moment . I went away and I was like , oh my God , there was a spiritual presence there , and in an unlikely way and in a surprising way so that was profound for me . L3 A member of our congregation , a young girl , had been diagnosed with epilepsy and she was having seizures . That happened when she was 13 , and her family brought her up to camp . It had been a rainy day , she wanted to go in the water , and she started having a seizure . Even though the lifeguard was on the dock , when she turned around , the girl was gone . We found her in the lake , brought her back out , flew her to [ a different city 3 hours away ] with her massive brain injury . So then it was trying to figure out how to provide support for her , but also for her parents who had been at the camp for , for everybody else who had been at the camp , for the whole congregation . There was this complicated kind of array of all the things that were going on in lives of so many people . CaringBridge became a part of that in good and bad ways , but it was also just trying to figure out what is it exactly , you know that they are going to need . The mother couldn’t sleep at night and so one of the requests was can you help find somebody to come up and stay with me in the room that they’d given her to sleep because I can’t be here alone . So , trying to bring people up every night to [ that city ] where they could stay with her . L4 I’ve been torn between offering and receiving , they just seem to melt together . I was getting support from an interim support group and talking about , I had great difficulty dealing with people with dementia . I had pulled [ a patient with dementia ] away from an activity , we were in this room and they were having so much fun , and I was like , why the hell did I pull her away ? And so the group helped me to understand that I could have just joined her in the activity , and this is only the second time or third time I’ve seen her , and the other time she was in bed and I was much better . My hesitation was , it’s like , this one person told me six times that she was the first person baptised in the new sanctuary at this church and I was like " Okay , I’m here , but what else " . . . This just felt like she was wrapped in this round of saying the same thing and that meaningless , and they encouraged me that just my presence and listening , and then I could have joined them in the activity . L5 My ex - partner had cancer for the second time and she went into brain surgery to remove her tumour and it happened to be the Wednesday they had the labyrinth in the chapel at [ hospital name ] . No one else was there but me [ long pause ] and I knew that the pastor was in the office . And it was beautiful because I knew he was just holding space for me because I was able to just be there and make the sounds I needed to make with any of my tools that I had , [ begins crying ] and to just know that there was that safe space . I think this is what a lot of people miss . And that’s part of why I do this with my clients still , to allow them that safe space for whatever sounds or movements or anything . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 35 L5 I just walk in , she looked like her battery was always at like one percent when I walked in , and I was able to be there and just do a healing session with her . Her cousin also came over that day and was like , what happened ? She was not like this this morning , and then we communed and had dinner together , and it was just like that , that being present for somebody I think is huge . L6 It was recently , a very very close friend of mine . He was a member of our congregation as well . He did not know he had kidney cancer till later . He was visiting in [ his home country ] and was kind of tired and it was a lot of fatigue . They couldn’t come up with any diagnosis till he came back and they found out and it was late diagnosis . So , it was a matter of days being in the hospital . The most difficult part for me was he was very very close to me . Sometimes , if he let , you do not want to be emotional . You want to be more of spiritual supportive and so on and so forth . And , a day before he died , I was there and he asked me to hold his hands . The whole time that I was there , he wasn’t speaking but just communicating with me with his eyes , and I really really understood what he was referring to . So , I was really really really struggling with my emotions , really struggling with my emotions and he didn’t let my hand go . I wanna leave as soon as I can , but his brother and his friends say , " [ Participant’s name ] , stay as much as you can . " So I stayed , and then I asked him , " Can I go ? " And he said no , stay more , stay more , stay more . It was 35 minutes until I say , " I’m tired , I have to go and take my coffee " and he says , " don’t go . " 8 hours later later he passed away . H1 The first one that just pops into my mind is when my husband was in the hospital having had a massive motorcycle accident and he was one of those , will he make for the first 24 hours , we’ll see . And , I had a friend start a CaringBridge site . He did survive and he’s doing very well , but everyday we would just read these , and he was in ICU for almost two weeks . This is the description I came away with , it’s like riding the wave of love . That’s what it felt like . Both of us could feel this support , that was writing . Later when people stop writing because you’ve gotten better or whatever , you can feel that diminishing . That was very very tangible . H2 I had a patient that I was working with and she was down to 70 pounds . She was 35 and she wouldn’t eat and she had to get stable before she could go to the eating disorder clinic . And the staff called me to make her eat , as they often do , as spiritual care providers , " fix this please . " And so I went in and talked to her and she wouldn’t get a feeding tube . She really needed to get nutrition . And so through conversation , part of this spirituality definition comes to mind is to express meaning in the situation , because in conversation with her , the reason that she didn’t want to go get a feeding tube was that when you are being treated for eating disorders , you have a way of eating that you’re “supposed” to eat . It’s a “plan . ” So if she had a feeding tube , she couldn’t do the “plan . ” In other words , she was failing . In conversation , she was able to realize , oh this could be a bridge to being back to the plan . So it helped her make sense of it . And I walked out , and I guess the feeding tube , she’s good with it . And it was just , having the conversation and helping her develop her meaning or explore her meaning . And listening . Being present . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 36 C . Estelle Smith , et al . H3 When I was an oncology nurse at [ hospital name , ] I just had different experiences with patients , right before they’re dying . I had one moment when somebody had cancer and she had been laying there kind of unresponsive . But then this morning she woke up , and I was like hey , do you want to stand up ? Let’s brush your teeth , let’s get you cleaned up . I got her back in bed , then her husband came and I was like , awesome , he’s gonna see her awake , and she just kept smiling . And I was like , what are you looking at ? Do you see something ? And she’s like I see three beautiful beings . And I said , you look so peaceful , and she goes , I’m so peaceful . I said you look happy , are you happy ? And she said , I’m so happy . And she ended up dying later that day and I was like , the husband got to hear her say , I’m happy , I’m at peace . H4 Even though I have a lot of experience providing spiritual support , one of the experiences that most sticks out to me was that my father had ALS and he was 84 and the doctors said it will be relatively quick . And I had been out about six weeks before he passed away , and had just started my chaplain internship . Somebody came and found me on oncology and pulled me out from a patient and said , I’m saddened to tell you this but your dad died . And it was a . . . I just broke down and I said , I thought I was ready . This oncologist who I didn’t think really knew who I was , or you know , was all business , stopped in her tracks and just put her arms around me and said don’t worry about anything . Just go take care of yourself and your family , we’ll take care of everything else . . . . The night I got back from my dad’s funeral , I was on call and I got a call at midnight , 96 year old woman , she had keeled over the family dinner , and after a couple hours in the ED , doctor said we gotta call it , there’s not much we can do . So we sort of gathered the family together . So I went from caring for , to being cared for , to caring for . So , giving , receiving , all in a 72 - hour period . H5 I’ve had hundreds and hundreds [ of spiritual support experiences ] , only because of working with kids who die , but the very first one I ever had was when I was an intern at a medical college and I went in with a single mother whose baby was dying and did not have family around . So the nurses called me at 3 in the morning and I went in , I was an intern , I was young , I could do those things . But I’ll never forget it , to know just to be there with someone in that moment . Now I’ve lost this , I always describe this as " going clinical " to get you through those very moving things . I’m a manager now so I do less . Boy , I am not able to go clinical as well as I used to . Now I feel it , and if I feel it I’m gonna cry , but that was the start and it was very meaningful and I was very glad to be there for her . H6 One thing I’ve been working on with my husband , who was raised Catholic , and he’s very spiritual , but he can’t tap into it anymore . So we’ve joined [ a worldwide choir ] , and through being a part of that activity , that’s really for him , helped him get more connected to himself . I think it’s the music . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 37 H7 Patients can often be fairly demanding at times and fairly hard to deal with . And in fact , some of these people , some of the issues that grind on you , are actually a reflection of stuff in your own background . Like for instance , if you grew up in an environment as a youngster , you know , dealing with chemical dependencies , father alcoholism , mother this , abusive whatever , and folks sitting across on the exam table are coming to you and they are chemically dependent or abusive or something , it tends to trip the wire a bit . But in the broader context , what I found was that , Christ calls us , in the Christian world , to be charitable . But also recognize that we are called not only to be charitable , but also to be willing to receive charity . And so , in that negative conflict , you actually have to perceive the person on the table as being a physical presence of God . And so , treat that guy as if he were Christ himself , as the least of my brothers . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 38 C . Estelle Smith , et al . A . 3 Individual Focus Groups’ Definitions of Spiritual Support and Prototype Videos G R O U P 1 ( A ) Spiritual support encompasses connection with people and the larger world , has an uplifting effect , and enables continued contribution beyond this lifespan . ( B ) Spiritual support is being present , tailoring it to each person’s needs , meals , con - versation , asking what they need , eliminating barriers to their spiritual life , and unconditional support . ( C ) Someone , something , or an experience acting as a catalyst to connect a person in need to their perception of a loving spiritual source . G R O U P 2 ( D ) A response to each individual holistically , body – mind – soul – heart , with consideration for cultural and religious background . ( E ) Physical or energetic presence with intentional connectivity to a divine source facili - tating an experience of the sacred . G R O U P 3 ( F ) Spiritual support is allowing and being present for the evolving process of deriving meaning and creating purpose in one’s life , which creates connections with self and others , transcends divisions , and magnifies the power of community . ( G ) Being with vulnerability and grace and compassion is mutual , “for it is in giving that we receive . ” Table 3 . Spiritual Support Definitions . Participants in focus groups for stakeholder Group 1 ( OHC users ) , Group 2 ( spiritual leaders ) , and Group 3 ( healthcare workers ) generated definitions of spiritual support during their first structured activity . These definitions formed the basis of subsequent activities and discussion . Video Concept Description of Contents A . Temporary tattoos of spiri - tual symbols This prototype involved paper cutouts and playdough shapes representing temporary tattoos of spiritual symbols . Participants suggested technology for designing and 3D - printing temporary tattoos to remind them of core beliefs and provide a visible representation of spiritual community membership , to make it easier to connect with others who share those beliefs . B . Summoning therapy dogs at the hospital using a “smart” dog collar + wearable bracelet system Participants used pipe cleaners to make bracelets , and hot glue , pom poms and googly eyes to make a therapy dog wearing a pipe cleaner “smart” collar . They demonstrated that hospitalized patients could wear a “smart” bracelet to notify them if a dog was currently available and to send signals to the dog’s collar if they needed snuggles or a chance to walk the dog . C . Responding to physiological distress through wearable devices Participants used fabric to create an on - skin “patch” for continuously moni - toring a person’s cortisol levels , plus a “smart” necklace or bracelet . If the patch detects a spike in stress , the jewelry diffuses soothing essential oils . If it detects a major drop in cortisol ( indicating a dissociative state , a common symptom of PTSD ) , the jewelry would automatically alert helpers via text . Because PTSD is often a paralyzing experience , participants wanted a calming mechanism that requires no conscious effort . Table 4 . Summary of Videos created by OHC Users . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 39 A . 4 Participant Ideations for Technology to Provide Spiritual Support Table 5 . IDEO Voting Results . OHC Users App , web , & online - based ideas # Votes Embodied & physical ideas # Votes “AI coordinator” for managing “big pic - ture” of patient’s health , to ensure all types of data ( from physician , physio - logical , physical symptoms recorded by patient ) work together 4 Podcast curator ( “To look for these things are very overwhelming , so hav - ing someone filter out the good and bad podcasts . ” ) 2 Website for kids interacting about feel - ings to help them understand dis - ease / death 3 Tech that physically transports immobi - lized patients to nearby nature ( e . g . big clear sphere “vehicle , ” like the “Gyro - sphere” in Jurassic World ) 2 “Door Dash” for accessing spiritual sup - port resources on demand 2 A human “VR buddy” who accompanies the patient to take them anywhere in VR 2 AI therapist for patient to ask questions 2 Validated yelp search for spiritual cen - ters / houses of worship ( “Curated and accredited , so the entries are validated . ” ) 1 Physical prayer box or app for writing about worries 2 VR to connect with family & friends 1 “Door Dash” for accessing Faith Com - munity Nurse Network 1 VR to connect with nature 1 Virtual health status for diagnosis ( Save patients the time / emotional burden of a 5 - min appt . at the hospital with a 1 - hr wait , just to get devastating news . ) 1 Podcasts to help talk with children about illness / death 1 Personalized meditation apps for stress relief / calming down 1 Podcasts to help patients going through illness journey 1 Alexa - to - Alexa voice messaging ( " You can tell your Alexa that you are thinking about someone and then it dings their Alexa . " ) 1 Multimedia campaign to make people aware of a local nonprofit of registered nurses with experience in spiritual care 1 Spirituality tracker ( for spiritual prac - tices , rituals , moments , etc . ) 1 A navigator for spriritual support ( “Vol - unteers or people who know the pro - cess , helping to navigate people during health crises . ” ) 1 Smart device for diffusing essential oils at stressful moments ( " Like , you need lavendar right now " ) 1 Spiritual symbols as impermanent tat - toos 1 An app that transports you into a forest 1 Meetups / videos when panic is triggered 1 A feature to freeze all your tech for a set amount of time 1 Desired visiting hours specified online 1 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 40 C . Estelle Smith , et al . Reader for offline text 1 Wearable that detects physiological pa - rameters and can change features of the environment ( “Check heartrate and change the lights in your house or the music . ” ) 1 Feature for leaving async video / audio messages 1 Dog collar that tells when you need love 1 Simulating another human to interact with 1 Augmented environment that allows pa - tients to request colors , sounds , smells , and tangibles ) 1 Smart car that won’t drive off the bridge 1 Online community for requesting ani - mal visits ( “Say you wanted to pet a cat , or if you want to see a particular ani - mal , if there is a way to connect with pet owners . ” ) 1 Yoga app that tells you what poses help with specific symptoms 1 Smartwatch that emits smell ( essential oil ) when your heartrate is up ( smell - o - vision ) 1 VR into nature 1 Binaural beats for changing brainwaves 1 Problematic physiological reading cues caretaker or nurse to come in ( like glu - cose text service ) 1 Spiritual Leaders App , web , & online - based ideas # Votes Embodied & physical ideas # Votes Empathy training for OHC users who are leaving comments 2 Device next to bed playing constant pho - tos / memories with music ( “When peo - ple send a CaringBridge note , it pops up with a visual or music along with it . ” ) 3 International manual of cultural and re - ligious understanding 2 Technology ambassador , members of 2nd / 3rd generation within the family can help older members navigate new tech 3 App for self - help spiritual resources 2 Face - to - face communication for remote visitation 2 On - demand comfort , a way to get spiri - tual support in real time 2 Wearable that transmits anxious / lonely mood to closest friends ( “Connect with five closest people on CaringBridge . ” ) 1 Integrate and recommend relevant " CareNotes " ( expert - written info pam - phlets available at hospitals ) in Caring - Bridge conversations . ( " That will then trigger an educational piece of correct information that would then be embed - ded in the threads so you can re - educate without calling somebody out . " ) 1 Opt - in devotions on CaringBridge ( “Pa - tients could ask CaringBridge to play a brief devotional piece for them at a certain time . ” ) 1 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . What is Spiritual Support and How Might It Impact the Design of Online Communities ? 43 : 41 Patient - created storyboard display ( " Ev - erybody who comes into patient’s room knows their story " ) 1 Wearable tachyon rods ( rods believed to store positive healing energy , “More user - friendly tachyon rods that can be then worn on the body and help people resonate and be their own healers . ” ) 1 Algorithms for connecting Caring - Bridge users with similar rare illnesses 1 Use images , sounds to simulate interac - tions with the divine 1 Facetime for video chats 1 Make sure to keep the human element ( “I want to talk to somebody , I don’t want to explain by texting” ) 1 Feature that makes it easier to share per - tinent information across care types 1 Technology for helping to access the unconscious mind ( " How can we use our dreams , interpretations or visuals ? " , " How can technology tap into the power of the unconcscious and help develop deeper understanding ? " ) 1 Using tech to improve self - awareness 1 Tracking mechanisms for helping spiri - tual leaders keep track of patients who want to see them 1 Tech features that emphasize cross - cultural respect 1 Healthcare Workers App , web , & online - based ideas # Votes Embodied & physical ideas # Votes Caregiver - specific online community 3 In - home robot to retrieve items , remind meds , get me a beer / wine 3 Life review device to help hospital vol - unteers ( e . g . iPad loaded with photo memories ) , esp . for patients with demen - tia 2 Online course for certifying “trusted vol - unteers” who are strangers 2 Online community for people with odd / rare diseases 2 Education aids to " view your own medi - cal chart later " 2 Voice - controlled telehealth screen for support groups ( no tech skills required ) 1 Private journal for sharing with spiritual care provider or therapist 1 Therapeutic music recommendation , by developmental stage 1 VR into special places with personal sig - nificance 1 Video messaging for patients and fami - lies , on CaringBridge or elsewhere 1 VR into sacred places 1 Virtual reality into their church , nature , or beloved scenes from local area 1 Device for helping to transition into a new disability 1 Online “confessional” app for working on forgiveness ( “Some of them could be connected to a priest , but just in general , for letting go of resentment . ” ) 1 Music application for use with ( or apart from ) life review 1 App for encouraging journaling 1 Aromatherapy robot with ocean mist scent 1 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 . 43 : 42 C . Estelle Smith , et al . Touch screen with music / nature scenes 1 Smart wine glass that becomes your therapist 1 Interactive watch that links patients to sources of spiritual support 1 Voice - activated access to CaringBridge 1 Caringbridge messages read to you via voice activation 1 Feature to streamline administrative permissions . ( " Patient can designate right from the get - go , I want these six people or two people or whatever to have access to my healthcare informa - tion . " ) 1 Smell - o - gram for patients ( e . g . baking , cookies ) 1 Received June 2020 ; revised October 2020 ; accepted December 2020 Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW1 , Article 43 . Publication date : April 2021 .