Effect of HSP27 and Co ﬁ lin in the injury of hypoxia / reoxygenation on hepatocyte membrane F - actin micro ﬁ laments Yafei Zhang , MD , Jiazhong Wang , MD , Hong Ji , MD , Hongwei Lu , MD , Le Lu , MD , Jinlong Wang , MD , Yiming Li , MD ∗ Abstract Hypoxia – reoxygenation ( H / R ) injury hepatocyte models were established to simulate the ischemia / reperfusion injury of transplanted organ . Through the study of the molecular mechanism of H / R on the F - actin damage of the liver cytomembrane , the mechanism of F - actin damage induced by ischemia and reperfusion was studied from the level of cell and molecule . The hypoxic environment of cells in vitro was simulated by chemical hypoxia agent CoCl 2 . Liver cells were detected by MTT , H / R group was subdivided into 3 subgroups : H / R 2 , 4 , and 6h . Changes of cell shape and the growth state , apoptosis , ultrastructural changes , and the changes in F - actin micro ﬁ lament content were observed . Heat shock protein 27 ( HSP27 ) , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin gene and protein levels were determined by real - time polymerase chain reaction and western blot assay , respectively . Cells showed circular adherence growth under normal circumstances , while the spindle cells and shedding cells were signi ﬁ cantly increased in H / R groups . Apoptosis cells in H / R group were increased signi ﬁ cantly with the extension of hypoxia time . The number of endoplasmic reticulum was decreased signi ﬁ cantly in the H / R group , the mitochondrion hydropic was degenerated and the glycogen was disappeared . The F - actin ﬁ bers in the H / R group were disordered , the morphology of the ﬁ bers was obviously decreased , and the ﬂ uorescence staining decreased obviously ( P < . 05 ) . The transcription and expression levels of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin were signi ﬁ cantly lower than those in the control group ( P < . 05 ) . These results demonstrate that H / R can affect the correct assembly of F - actin micro ﬁ laments and weakens the normal cycle of F - actin micro ﬁ laments through inhibiting the protein expression and gene transcription of HSP27 and Co ﬁ lin in hepatocytes , thereby changing the skeleton of F - actin micro ﬁ laments . Abbreviations : H / R = hypoxia – reoxygenation , HSP = heat shock protein , ITBL = ischemic type biliary lesion , PBS = phosphate buffer solution . Keywords : F - actin , hepatocyte , hypoxia / reoxygenation 1 . Introduction The structure and function of liver is very complex , which has not yet been fully understood . Facing liver disease , a lot of therapeutic methods are helpless , especially the ﬁ nal stage liver disease . Liver disease is the main cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide , constituting a great threat to human health . [ 1 , 2 ] Previous studies have shown that [ 3 – 6 ] F - actin micro ﬁ laments were destructed and the microvilli were loss in the early stage of hepatic artery ischemia reperfusion . However , the morphology and molecularmechanismsofthe changeinF - actin , microvilli , and hepatocyte have not been reported . Therefore , from the clinical point of view , itisofgreat signi ﬁ cance tounderstand the molecular mechanism of the abnormal changes of F - actin ﬁ laments . As a small heat shock protein , heat shock protein 27 ( HSP27 ) can mediate the correct assembly of F - actin ﬁ lament . [ 7 , 8 ] Co ﬁ lin can change the structure of F - actin ﬁ laments and promote the circulation of F - actin ﬁ laments . [ 9 , 10 ] This experiment simulates ischemia reperfusion injury of transplanted organ by establishing hepatocytes in vitro hypoxia / reoxygenation ( H / R ) injury model . Detecting the gene transcription and protein expression of HSP27 and Co ﬁ lin , observing the ultrastructure changes by electron microscope , and observing the content change of F - actin through confocal laser microscope , we are to investigate the mechanism of the injury of F - actin induced by ischemia reperfusion from the cellular and molecular levels . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Materials Rat liver cells ( BRL - 3A ) were purchased from the Life Science Institute of Shanghai , Chinese Academy of Sciences , and the treatment of cells was in accordance with ethical standards . Main reagents and instruments used in the experiment as follows : basal medium ( Corning , Herndon , Virginia ) , SYBR Green RT - PCR kit and reverse transcription Kit ( Toyobo , Osaka , Japan ) , Western and IP cell lysis , BCA protein concentration determination kit ( Beyotime Biotechnology Research Institute , Shanghai , China ) , Editor : Wenyu Lin . This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( NSFC No . 81170454 ) . The authors have no con ﬂ icts of interest to disclose . Department of General Surgery , The Second Af ﬁ liated Hospital of Xi ’ an Jiaotong University , Xi ’ an , Shaanxi , China . ∗ Correspondence : Yiming Li , Department of General Surgery , The Second Af ﬁ liated Hospital of Xi ’ an Jiaotong University , No . 157 , Xiwu Road , Xi ’ an , Shaanxi 710004 , China ( e - mail : liyimingdoc @ 163 . com ) . Copyright © 2017 the Author ( s ) . Published by Wolters Kluwer Health , Inc . This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution - Non Commercial - No Derivatives License 4 . 0 ( CCBY - NC - ND ) , where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited . The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without permission from the journal . Medicine ( 2017 ) 96 : 16 ( e6658 ) Received : 27 December 2016 / Received in ﬁ nal form : 28 March 2017 / Accepted : 29 March 2017 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1097 / MD . 0000000000006658 Observational Study Medicine ® OPEN 1 Co ﬁ lin , HSP27 monoclonal antibodies ( BD , Lake Franklin , New Jersey ) , GAPDH and TBP polyclonal antibody ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . Santa Cruz , California ) , CoCl 2 ( Sigma , Santa clara , California ) , FITC - Phalloidin and Anti decay sealing agents ( Alexis , New York , NY ) , and Transmission electron microscope ( H - 600 , HITACHI Company , Tokyo , Japan ) . Ordinary inverted microscope ( TS100 , Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) and Laser scanning confocal microscopy ( TCS Sp8 , Leica , Solms , Germany ) , real - time quantitative PCR instrument ( Stepone , ABI , Carlsbad , California ) chemiluminescence gel imaging system ( GboxChemi hr16 , Syngene , Cambridge , UK ) were provided by the Central Laboratory of the Second Af ﬁ liated Hospital of Xi ’ an Jiaotong University . This study had been approved by the Ethics Committee of Xi ’ an Jiaotong University School of Medicine and was performed in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the Chinese National Institutes of Health . All procedures involving animals were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Xi ’ an Jiaotong University ( IACUC protocol number : XJTULAC20120026 ) . Patient consent was not applicable in this study for no patient was involved . 2 . 2 . H / R model building Cells were cultured in 5 % CO 2 and 95 % O 2 environment routinely . The hypoxic environment in vitro was simulated by chemical hypoxia agent CoCl 2 ( 100 m mol / L ) . Cell growth inhibition rate was determined using the MTT ( Sigma ) assay according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . We found that when the hypoxia time was 3h , the inhibition rate reached 50 % , while the morphological changes of hypoxia in the liver cells occurred under the inverted microscope , such as cell morphology changes gradually from multiangle to circular and elliptical shape , and the gap becomes larger , electron microscopy found mitochondrial swell , more vacuoles occur in the cells , suggesting that the hypoxia model was built successfully . Then the completely DMEM high glucose medium was placed in the incubator ( 95 % air , 5 % CO 2 ) to the corresponding time points . 2 . 3 . Groups Cells were divided randomly into normal control group and H / R group . H / RgroupwasfurtherdividedintoH / R2 , 4 , and6hgroups ( reoxygenation2 , 4 , and6h , respectively , afterhypoxia3h ; Fig . 1 ) . 2 . 4 . Growth state of the cells was observed by inverted microscopy The change of cell shape and the growth state of the cells were observed by inverted microscope . 2 . 5 . Ultrastructural changes of cells were observed by transmission electron microscopy Reoxygenated BRL - 3A cells at different time points were digested by Trypsin and collected , centrifugal to mass , and then produced Figure 1 . Flow chart of our study . Zhang et al . Medicine ( 2017 ) 96 : 16 Medicine 2 ultrathin sections of electron microscope and observed ultra - structural changes of cells by transmission electron microscope . 2 . 6 . Apoptotic cells were observed by ﬂ uorescence microscope Prepared cell samples and washed the residual trypsin , disposed upper liquid , gently resuspension cells with the phosphate buffer solution ( PBS ) 1mL buffer and count , making the number of cells is > 105 , then 500g centrifuged 5min . Add 400 m L 1 (cid:1) binding buffer to gently resuspension cells . Add 10 m L Propidium Iodide ( PI ) , gently mixed evenly , avoid light ice bath 5min ; 1000g centrifuged 5min , collecting cells , gently resuspension cells with 50 to 100 m L 1 (cid:1) binding buffer , observed and taken pictures with ﬂ uorescence microscope after smear . Count the number of apoptotic cells using Image Proplus software . 2 . 7 . F - actin ﬁ laments were observed by laser confocal microscopy Cells were planted on the sterile tablets , rinsed carefully with PBS after 18h , given corresponding treatment for different groups , then ﬁ xed 10min with 37g / L polyoxymethylene at room temperature , washed 3 times with PBS ; FITC - Phalloidin staining solution ( dissolved in methanol , PBS diluted to 10mg / L ) was added avoiding light , incubated 1h at room temperature , washed 3 times by PBS ( 15min every time ) , mounted by anti ﬂ uorescent attenuation mounting medium . Finally , observed and acquisited image by laser confocal microscopy , determined the mean - speci ﬁ c ﬂ uorescence intensity of liver cytomembrane . 2 . 8 . Real - time quantitative PCR Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent . RNA was reverse - transcribed to cDNA using a reverse transcriptase kit . The relative abundance of each mRNA sample was quantitated by qPCR with speci ﬁ c primers and SYBR Premix Ex Taq . Primers for GAPDH , Co ﬁ lin , HSP27 , and F - actin were designed and synthesized by Shanghai bio engineering technology services Co . , Ltd ( Table 1 ) . Real - time polymerase chain reactions ( PCRs ) were conducted using an iQ Multicolor Real - Time PCR Detection System . Cycle threshold values were obtained from the Bio - Rad iQ5 2 . 0 Standard Edition optical System software . Data were analyzed using the DD Ct method and GAPDH served as an internal control . 2 . 9 . Western blot analysis Membrane proteins were extracted using the membrane protein extraction kit . Equal amounts of sample were separated using SDS — PAGE . Gels were electroblotted with Sartoblot onto polyvinylidene di ﬂ uoride membranes . The membranes were blocked in Carnation nonfat milk and probed with a 1 : 200 dilution of the HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and GAPDH antibodies and a 1 : 1000 dilution of the second antibody . Antigen / antibody complexes were visualized with a chemiluminescence system and scanned into images . The relative densities of the bands were analyzed using NIH Image . The ratio of target protein to GAPDH served as an index for statistical analysis . 2 . 10 . Statistical analysis All experiments were repeated at least 3 times . Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation and processed with SPSS 13 . 0 statistics software ( SPSS Inc . , Chicago , IL ) . Differences between 2 groups were assessed by Student t test , and 1 - or 2 - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with Turkey post hoc test was used for multiple comparisons . Differences were analyzed using ANOVA . A value of P < . 05 was considered statistically signi ﬁ cant . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . CoCl 2 inhibits the proliferation of liver cells Cells were treated by CoCl 2 with a concentration 100 m mol / L , and the hypoxia time was about 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , and 6h , respectively . MTT assay found that the inhibition rate was increased in a time - dependent pattern ( Fig . 2 ) . 3 . 2 . Cellular morphology changed Inverted microscope found that cells showed normal circular adherence growth in control group , grew well , showed irregular polygon , and arranged more closely . Liver cells showed different degrees of morphological changes in H / R groups , such as cell shrinkage , cell arranged loosely and the intercellular space widened , fusiform cells increased signi ﬁ cantly . With the exten - sion of hypoxia time , exfoliated cells increased signi ﬁ cantly and then breaking , disappear ( Fig . 3 ) . 3 . 3 . Ultrastructural changed The cytoplasm of normal liver cells was ﬁ lled with mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum . While the number of endoplasmic reticulum was decreased signi ﬁ cantly in the H / R group compared with the control group , the mitochondrion hydropic was degenerated and the glycogen was disappeared ( Fig . 3 ) . 3 . 4 . Increase of apoptosis Fluorescence microscope found that only a few cells showed red staining in control group . More cells in H / R were stain red , there Table 1 Primer sequences of Co ﬁ lin , HSP27 , F - actin , and b - actin . Gene Forward ( 5 0 – 3 0 ) Reverse ( 5 0 – 3 0 ) GAPDH AGAAGGCTGGGGCTCATTTG AGGGGCCATCCACAGTCTTC Co ﬁ lin CAAGAAGGACCTGGTGTTC TTGGAGCTGGCGTAGATCATT HSP27 CGTTGCCAATAACACAAACG GGCTTCTACTTGGCTCCAGA F - actin GCTAAGAAGGCGATACAA AGAATGAGGACTGGGTGA Figure 2 . Inhibitory effect of CoCl 2 on the proliferation of hepatic cells was detected by MTT . MTT assay found that the inhibition rate was increased in a time - dependent pattern . Zhang et al . Medicine ( 2017 ) 96 : 16 www . md - journal . com 3 was no obvious background staining . Meanwhile , the negative controls also had no background staining , so the false positive can be excluded . In H / R groups , red nuclei increased signi ﬁ cantly ( P < . 05 ) with the time of reoxygenation , that is , the number of apoptosis cells increased ( Fig . 4A and B ) . By western blot , the expression of cleaved Caspase 3 protein was increased with the extension of hypoxia time , in line with the results of PI staining ( Fig . 4D and E ) . Figure 3 . Morphology and ultrastructure changes in each group . Inverted microscope ( (cid:1) 100 ) showed that liver cells grew well in normal circumstances , appeared irregular polygon and the cells arranged closely . While , H / R groups showed cell shrinkage , arranged loosely , intercellular space widened , and fusiform cells increased . With theextension ofhypoxiatime , exfoliatedcells increasedsigni ﬁ cantly andthenbreaking , disappear . Electronmicroscopy ( (cid:1) 30 , 000 ) showedthat the cytoplasm of normal liver cells was ﬁ lled with mitochondria ( ) and endoplasmic reticulum ( ) . While , the number of endoplasmic reticulum was decreased signi ﬁ cantly in H / R group and the mitochondrion hydropic was degenerated . Figure 4 . Apoptosis of hepatocytes and the distribution of F - actin . PI staining was used to observe the apoptosis of hepatocytes . Fluorescence microscope ( (cid:1) 20 ) found that only a few cells showed red staining among normal controls . While , most cells in H / R were stained red in H / R groups , which was increased signi ﬁ cantly with the time of reoxygenation , that is , the number of apoptosis cells increased signi ﬁ cantly ( P < . 05 , A , B ) . By western blot , the expression of cleaved Caspase 3 protein was increased with the extension of hypoxia time , in line with the results of PI staining ( D , E ) . Confocal laser scanning microscopy ( (cid:1) 400 ) showed that the F - actin was densely distributed in cells periphery in control group , with bright ﬂ uorescent staining . While , the ﬂ uorescence of F - actin ﬁ bers in the H / R group was disordered , the morphology of the ﬁ bers was obviously changed , and the ﬂ uorescence staining decreased obviously . The average ﬂ uorescence intensity had signi ﬁ cant differences in H / R group and control group ( P < . 05 , A , C ) . ∗ P < . 05 vs control group . PI = Propidium Iodide . Zhang et al . Medicine ( 2017 ) 96 : 16 Medicine 4 3 . 5 . Distribution of F - actin ﬁ laments decreased The control group showed that the F - actin was densely distributed in the periphery of the cells , and the ﬂ uorescent staining was bright . While the ﬂ uorescence of F - actin ﬁ bers in the H / R group was disordered , the morphology of the ﬁ bers was obviously changed , and the ﬂ uorescence staining decreased obviously . The average ﬂ uorescence intensity had signi ﬁ cant differences in H / R group and control group ( P < . 05 , Fig . 4A and C ) . 3 . 6 . Transcription of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin was inhibited By RT - PCR , the mRNA levels of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin in H / R 2 , 4 , and 6h group were signi ﬁ cantly lower than those of the control group ( P < . 05 , Fig . 5A ) . 3 . 7 . Expression of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin was inhibited By western blot , the expression of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin in H / R group was signi ﬁ cantly lower than those in control group ( P < . 05 , Fig . 5B and C ) . 4 . Discussion With the successful implementation of the world ’ s ﬁ rst human orthotopic liver transplantation in 1963 , [ 11 ] the upsurge of liver transplantation was lifted in the world . Presently , liver transplantation has become an important treatment for end - stage liver disease . In recent years , with the improvement of liver transplantation technology and the improvement of the aware - ness of biliary complications , the biliary anastomotic stenosis due to surgical resection was decreased . However , the high incidence of biliary complications after liver transplantation is still a worldwide problem for liver transplantation . [ 12 , 13 ] Among them , the ischemic type biliary lesion ( ITBL ) is the major type of biliary complications after liver transplantation , which has greatly affected the long - term survival of recipients . ITBL refers to nonanastomotic stenosis in the biliary tree of the graft liver and appears ischemia imaging change without arterial thrombosis . It may lead to intra - and extra - hepatic biliary stricture , bile duct injury and late graft loss , and is one of the reasons for retransplantation . [ 14 , 15 ] Several risk factors are discussed to be major parameters for the development of ITBL . Among them , prolonged ischemic times , reperfusion injury , disturbance in blood ﬂ ow through the peribiliary vascular plexus , immunologi - cally induced injury , cytotoxic injury , and ischemia reperfusion injury appear to have the most important in ﬂ uence . [ 13 , 16 ] There are many canaliculi formed by liver cytomembrane microvilli . Tsukada et al [ 17 ] found that bile canaliculi microvilli contains a lot of micro ﬁ laments bundles of actin ( F - actin ) , these ﬁ laments extending from the plasma membrane to the lumen constitute the inner core of canalicular microvilli . The actin ﬁ laments have important role in the bile secretion of bile duct contraction and in maintaining the normal morphology and structure of hepatocytes and bile duct . [ 18 , 19 ] Continuous actin polymerization and depolymerization of F - actin achieve the contraction of bile duct , and then promote the excretion of bile . Loss of the integrity of the actin will result in bile secretion disorders . [ 3 , 20 , 21 ] Therefore , when various reasons damage the cytoskeleton and lead to the dysfunction of actin ﬁ laments , the bile duct contraction is blocked , and then bile duct expansion , resulting in cholestasis . The establishment of H / R model in our study simulated ischemia reperfusion injury , excluding the effects of hemody - namics , hormone and nerve re ﬂ ex , can accurately re ﬂ ect the role of HSP27 and Co ﬁ lin in the injury of F - actin . MTT assay found Figure 5 . H / R can signi ﬁ cantly inhibit the gene transcription and protein expression of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin . By RT - PCR , the mRNA levels of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin in H / R 2 , 4 , and 6h group were signi ﬁ cantly lower than those of the control group ( P < . 05 , A ) . By western blot , the expression of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin in H / R group was signi ﬁ cantly lower than those in control group ( P < . 05 , B , C ) . ∗ P < . 05 vs control group . Zhang et al . Medicine ( 2017 ) 96 : 16 www . md - journal . com 5 that the inhibition rate increased with the time of hypoxia , having time - dependent pattern , indicating that CoCl 2 can well simulate the hypoxia environment of cells in vitro , which were consistent with many research reports . [ 22 – 24 ] Inverted microscope found that cells showed circular adherence growth under normal circumstances , grew well , showed irregular polygon and the cells arranged more closely . While cells showed different degrees of morphological changes in H / R groups , such as cell shrinkage , cell arranged loosely , and intercellular space widened , fusiform cells increased signi ﬁ cantly . With the extension of hypoxia time , exfoliated cells increased signi ﬁ cantly and then breaking , disappear . The cytomembrane was intact under normal condition . PI staining found that only a few cells showed red staining in control group , which may result from the normal apoptosis of cells . In H / R groups , red nuclei increased signi ﬁ cantly with the time of reoxygenation , that is , the number of apoptosis cells increased . By western blot , the expression of cleaved Caspase 3 protein was increased with the extension of hypoxia time , in line with the results of PI staining . H / R could make ATP enzyme inactivation , energy production , and release barriers , ion pump function is inhibited , intracellular and extracellular ion balance disorder , which leads to the morphological changes and apoptosis of cells . The electron microscopic results showed that the cytoplasm of normal liver cells was full of mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum , while the number of endoplasmic reticulum decreased signi ﬁ cantly in the H / R group compared with the control group , the mitochondrion hydropic degenerated and the glycogen disappeared . The control group showed that the F - actin was densely distributed in the periphery of the cells , and the ﬂ uorescent staining was bright . While the ﬂ uorescence of F - actin ﬁ bers in H / R group was disordered , the morphology of the ﬁ bers was obviously changed , and the ﬂ uorescence staining decreased obviously . There were signi ﬁ cant differences of the average ﬂ uorescence intensity in H / R group compared with control group . It was showed that cell activity and the distribution of F - actin were obviously inhibited by H / R , this change is consistent with previous in vivo studies . [ 25 , 26 ] This experiment used real - time PCR and western blot detect the transcription level and protein expression of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin . The current results indicate that the transcription and expression levels of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin in H / R 2 , 4 , and 6h group were signi ﬁ cantly lower than those in control group , and with the prolongation of reperfusion time , the transcription and expression levels of the trend were decreased , indicating that the transcription and expression of HSP27 , Co ﬁ lin , and F - actin were obviously inhibited by H / R , which were consistent with changes of ﬂ uorescence and ultrastructural of electron microscope in this experiment . It is suggested that the alterations of HSP27 and Co ﬁ lin activity may be an effective mechanism for the damage of F - actin ﬁ laments in the membrane of the H / R cells . The process of actin polymerization can be divided into 4 steps : actin monomer activation ; actin monomer polymerization nucleation ; actin ﬁ lament growth ; and polymerization achieves dynamic equilibrium . [ 5 , 6 ] HSP27 is a kind of small heat shock protein , whose expression can be induced by cellular stress stimulation and can mediate the correct assembly of actin as molecular chaperone . The regulatory mechanism HSP27 is dependent on the expression of its proteins and phosphorylated proteins . Phosphorylated HSP27 is an active form of cellular protection function . However , the phosphorylation of HSP27 will destroy its structure and make it lose the function of molecular chaperone . [ 7 , 27 ] Physiological levels of oxygen free radicals are necessary for life , but large amounts of oxygen free radicals may lead to irreversible cell damage and cell death . [ 28 ] Experiments have proved that in the animal nonskeletal muscle cells , oxygen free radicals can make actin polymerization regulator ( HSP27 ) phosphorylated through activating the mitogen - activated protein kinase ( especially protein kinase 2 / P38 ) . As a result , the structure of actin cytoskeleton was changed obviously . [ 29 ] As we all know , H / R can produce more oxygen free radicals . [ 30 ] In this experiment , we hypothesized that liver cells produced a large amount of oxygen free radicals after H / R , lead to the phosphorylation of HSP27 , causes it lose the function of molecular chaperones , thereby causing the changes of the F - actin cytoskeleton structure ( Fig . 6 ) . In addition , Co ﬁ lin is also important factor to regulate cytoskeletal remodeling . Co ﬁ lin can bind to actin ﬁ laments or actin monomers , its main function is to decompose the actin ﬁ laments and increase the dissociation speed of the actin monomer from end of the actin ﬁ laments , so as to promote the cycle of actin micro ﬁ laments . [ 31 ] The activity of Co ﬁ lin depends on the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of N terminal Ser - 3 sites . [ 32 ] Previous research has shown that oxidative stress can promote the phosphorylation of Co ﬁ lin in endothelial cells and inhibit the activity of Co ﬁ lin , thus it can affect the polymerization of actin . [ 33 ] We speculate that oxidative stress can promote the phosphorylation of Co ﬁ lin in hepatocytes after H / R , thereby weaken the function of decomposing actin ﬁ laments , decreased the dissociation speed of the actin monomer from end of the actin ﬁ laments , affect the normal cycle of the actin ﬁ lament , so as to cause the changes in the F - actin cytoskeleton structure ( Fig . 6 ) . In conclusion , H / R can enhance the phosphorylation of HSP27 and Co ﬁ lin in liver cells , affect the biological activity of Co ﬁ lin and HSP27 , thus affect the correct assembly of F - actin and weaken the normal circulation of F - actin , and then change the normal cytoskeleton of F - actin micro ﬁ laments . Cell experiments excluded hemodynamics , hormone , and nerve re ﬂ ex can accurately re ﬂ ect the role of HSP27 and Co ﬁ lin in the injury of F - actin and the effective mechanism of F - actin injury , which can better explain the ischemia reperfusion injury of F - actin in vivo , thus further guide clinical work . Figure 6 . Schematic diagram . H / R = hypoxia – reoxygenation . Zhang et al . Medicine ( 2017 ) 96 : 16 Medicine 6 References [ 1 ] Greco E , Nanji S , Bromberg IL , et al . Predictors of peri - opertative morbidity and liver dysfunction after hepatic resection in patients with chronic liver disease . HPB 2011 ; 13 : 559 – 65 . [ 2 ] El - Karaksy HM , El - Shabrawi MM , Mohsen NA , et al . Study of predictive value of pediatric risk of mortality ( PRISM ) score in children withendstageliverdiseaseandfulminanthepaticfailure . IndianJPediatr 2011 ; 78 : 301 – 6 . [ 3 ] Nieuwenhuijs VB , De Bruijn MT , Padbury RT , et al . Hepatic ischemia - reperfusion injury : roles of Ca 2 + and other intracellular mediators of impaired bile ﬂ ow and hepatocyte damage . Dig Dis Sci 2006 ; 51 : 1087 – 102 . [ 4 ] van der Heijden M , Versteilen AMG , Sipkema P , et al . Rho - kinase - dependent F - actin rearrangement is involved in the inhibition of PI3 - kinase / Akt during ischemia - reperfusion - induced endothelial cell apopto - sis . Apoptosis 2008 ; 13 : 404 – 12 . [ 5 ] Hutchins BI , Klenke U , Wray S . Calcium release - dependent actin ﬂ ow in the leading process mediates axophilic migration . J Neurosci 2013 ; 33 : 11361 – 71 . [ 6 ] Ritchey L , Chakrabarti R . Aurora A kinase modulates actin cytoskeleton through phosphorylation of Co ﬁ lin : implication in the mitotic process . BBA Mol Cell Res 2014 ; 1843 : 2719 – 29 . [ 7 ] Huang J , Xie LD , Luo L , et al . Silencing heat shock protein 27 ( HSP27 ) inhibits the proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro . Mol Cell Biochem 2014 ; 390 : 115 – 21 . [ 8 ] Kostenko S , Johannessen M , Moens U . PKA - induced F - actin rearrange - ment requires phosphorylation of HSP27 by the MAPKAP kinase MK5 . Cell Signal 2009 ; 21 : 712 – 8 . [ 9 ] Anne OS , Bernheim - Groswasser A . Reconstitution of actin - based motility by vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) depends on the recruitment of F - actin seeds from the solution produced by Co ﬁ lin . J Biol Chem 2014 ; 289 : 31274 – 86 . [ 10 ] ChenCK , Benchaar SA , PhanM , etal . Co ﬁ lin - induced changesin F - actin detected via cross - linking with benzophenone - 4 - maleimide . Biochemis - try 2013 ; 52 : 5503 – 9 . [ 11 ] Starzl TE , Marchioro TL , Vonkaulla KN , et al . Homotransplantation of the liver in humans . Surg Gynecol Obstet 1963 ; 117 : 659 – 76 . [ 12 ] Hansen T , Hollemann D , Pitton MB , et al . Histological examination and evaluation of donor bile ducts received during orthotopic liver transplantation — a morphological clue to ischemic - type biliary lesion ? Virchows Arch 2012 ; 461 : 41 – 8 . [ 13 ] Jin X , Shi XJ , Wang MQ , et al . Causes and management of ischemic - type biliarylesionafter orthotopiclivertransplantation . ZhonghuaYiXueZa Zhi 2011 ; 91 : 251 – 5 . [ 14 ] Bang JB , Kim BW , Kim YB , et al . Risk factor for ischemic - type biliary lesion after ABO - incompatible living donor liver transplantation . World J Gastroenterol 2016 ; 22 : 6925 – 35 . [ 15 ] Scanga AE , Kowdley KV . Management of biliary complications following orthotopic liver transplantation . Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2007 ; 9 : 31 – 8 . [ 16 ] Farid WRR , de Jonge J , Zondervan PE , et al . Relationship between the histological appearance of the portal vein and development of ischemic - type biliary lesions after liver transplantation . Liver Transplant 2013 ; 19 : 1088 – 98 . [ 17 ] Tsukada N , Ackerley CA , Phillips MJ . The structure and organization of the bile canalicular cytoskeleton with special reference to actin and actin - binding proteins . Hepatology 1995 ; 21 : 1106 – 13 . [ 18 ] Yi - ming LI , Ji - dong LIU , Hong JI , et al . Effect of ischemia - reperfusion on bile canalicular F - actin micro ﬁ laments in rat liver . J Xi ’ an Jiaotong Univ Med Sci 2009 ; 30 : 210 – 3 . [ 19 ] Benkoel L , Dodero F , Hardwigsen J , et al . Effect of ischemia - reperfusion on bile canalicular F - actin micro ﬁ laments in hepatocytes of human liver allograft : image analysis by confocal laser scanning microscopy . Dig Dis Sci 2001 ; 46 : 1663 – 7 . [ 20 ] Nagai H , Kato A , Kimura F , et al . Endothelin - 1 aggravates hepatic ischemia / reperfusion injury during obstructive cholestasis in bile duct ligated mice . J Surg Res 2010 ; 162 : 46 – 53 . [ 21 ] Sudo R , Kohara H , Mitaka T , et al . Coordinated movement of bile canalicular networks reconstructed by rat small hepatocytes . Ann Biomed Eng 2005 ; 33 : 696 – 708 . [ 22 ] Dai ZJ , Gao J , Ma XB , et al . Up - regulation of hypoxia inducible factor - 1alpha by cobalt chloride correlates with proliferation and apoptosis in PC - 2 cells . J Exp Clin Cancer Res 2012 ; 31 : 28 . [ 23 ] Torii S , Kurihara A , Li XY , et al . Inhibitory effect of extracellular histidine on cobalt - induced HIF - 1alpha expression . J Biochem 2011 ; 149 : 171 – 6 . [ 24 ] Zhong X , Lin R , Li Z , et al . Effects of Salidroside on cobalt chloride - induced hypoxia damage and mTOR signaling repression in PC12 cells . Biol Pharm Bull 2014 ; 37 : 1199 – 206 . [ 25 ] Wang JZ , Liu Y , Wang JL , et al . Hepatic artery bridging lessens temporary ischemic injury to bile canaliculi . World J Gastroenterol 2015 ; 21 : 10113 – 25 . [ 26 ] Liu Y , Wang J , Yang P , et al . Delayed rearterialization unlikely leads to nonanastomotic stricture but causes temporary injury on bile duct after liver transplantation . Transplant Int 2015 ; 28 : 341 – 51 . [ 27 ] Sun Y , Meng GM , Guo ZL , et al . Regulation of heat shock protein 27 phosphorylation during microcystin - LR - induced cytoskeletal reorgani - zation in a human liver cell line . Toxicol Lett 2011 ; 207 : 270 – 7 . [ 28 ] Hambarde S , Singh V , Chandna S . Evidence for involvement of cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase in the excessive resistance of Sf9 Lepidopteran insect cells against radiation - induced apoptosis . PLoS ONE 2013 ; 8 : e58261 . [ 29 ] Evertsson K , Fjallstrom AK , Norrby M , et al . p38 mitogen - activated protein kinase and mitogen - activated protein kinase - activated protein kinase2 ( MK2 ) signalinginatrophicandhypertrophicdenervatedmouse skeletal muscle . J Mol Signal 2014 ; 9 : 2 . [ 30 ] Collins P , Jones C , Choudhury S , et al . Increased expression of uncoupling protein 2 in HepG2 cells attenuates oxidative damage and apoptosis . Liver Int 2005 ; 25 : 880 – 7 . [ 31 ] Huh YH , Kim SH , Chung KH , et al . Swiprosin - 1 modulates actin dynamics by regulating the F - actin accessibility to Co ﬁ lin . Cell Mol Life Sci 2013 ; 70 : 4841 – 54 . [ 32 ] Lian JP , Marks PG , Wang JY , et al . A protein kinase from neutrophils that speci ﬁ cally recognizes Ser - 3 in Co ﬁ lin . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 2869 – 76 . [ 33 ] Hsieh YC , Rao YK , Wu CC , et al . Methyl anteinate A from antrodia camphorata induces apoptosis in human liver cancer cells through oxidant - mediated Co ﬁ llin - and Bax - triggered mitochondrial pathway . Chem Res Toxicol 2010 ; 23 : 1256 – 67 . Zhang et al . Medicine ( 2017 ) 96 : 16 www . md - journal . com 7