Probing mechanical principles of cell - nanomaterial interactions Date : December 14 , 2012 ( Friday ) Time : 5 : 30 pm - 6 : 30 pm Venue : Lecture Theatre A , Chow Yei Ching Building Speaker : Professor Huajian Gao Walter H . Annenberg Professor School of Engineering , Brown University Abstract : Nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes , nanowires , nanofibers and graphene have potential applications for next generation microchips , composites , barrier coatings , biosensors , and drug delivery . There is also an urgent need to understand the hazards of nanomaterials to health . In this talk , we will discuss some recent studies at Brown University on the mechanics of cell - nanomaterial interactions , including the mechanics of cellular uptake of nanoparticles by receptor - mediated endocytosis and coarse - grained molecular dynamics simulations of complete lipid bilayer segments interacting with nanoparticles . The discussions will be organized around the following questions : Why and how does cellular uptake of nanoparticles depend on the particle size , shape , aspect ratio and elasticity ? In particular , we will discuss the effect of nanoparticle size on receptor - mediated endocytosis [ 1 ] , the effect of elastic stiffness on cell - particle interactions [ 2 ] and how cylindrical one - dimensional nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes [ 3 ] and graphene enter cells . Speaker : Professor Huajian Gao received his B . S . degree from Xian Jiaotong University of China in 1982 , and his M . S . and Ph . D . degrees in Engineering Science from Harvard University in 1984 and 1988 , respectively . He served on the faculty of Stanford University between 1988 and 2002 , where he was promoted to Associate Professor with tenure in 1994 and to Full Professor in 2000 . He served as a Director at the Max Planck Institute for Metals Research between 2001 and 2006 before joining the Faculty of Brown University in 2006 . At present , he is the Walter H . Annenberg Professor of Engineering at Brown . Professor Gao’s research is focused on the understanding of basic principles that control mechanical properties and behaviors of materials in both engineering and biology . He is an author / co - author of nearly 300 scientific papers with more than 12K citations and an h - index of 58 . He is a Member of the U . S . National Academy of Engineering and co - editor - in - chief of the Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids ( 2006 ) , the flagship journal of his field . He is also the recipient of numerous academic honors ranging from a John Simon Guggenheim Fellowship in 1995 to recent honors including the Charles Russ Richards Memorial Award of ASME ( 2011 ) , the Alexander von Humboldt Prize of Federal Republic of Germany ( 2011 ) , and the Rodney Hill Prize in Solid Mechanics of the International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics ( 2012 ) . To register , please visit the following web page : http : / / hkuems1 . hku . hk / hkuems / ec _ hdetail . aspx ? UEID = 20514 & guest = Y The lecture will be conducted in English . * All are welcome *