adfa , p . 1 , 2011 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 Leveraging Children’s Behavioral Distribution and Singularities in New Interactive Environments : Study in Kindergarten Field Trips Inseok Hwang 1 , Hyukjae Jang 1 , Taiwoo Park 1 , Aram Choi 1 , Youngki Lee 1 , Chanyou Hwang 1 , Yanggui Choi 2 , Lama Nachman 3 , and Junehwa Song 1 1 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology , Daejeon , Republic of Korea inseok | hjjang | twpark | archoi | youngki | cyhwang | junesong @ nclab . kaist . ac . kr 2 Yerang Kindergarten , Daejeon , Republic of Korea yanggui . choi @ gmail . com 3 Intel Corporation , Santa Clara , California USA lama . nachman @ intel . com Abstract . The behavior observations on young children in new , first - in - the - life environments have significant implications . We can often uniquely observe a child’s unforeseen interaction with the environment and peer - children . It would be not only a piece of discovery but a beginning of an open quest worth explor - ing . Out - of - classroom activities like kindergarten’s field trips are perfect oppor - tunities , but those are quite different from regular classroom activities where the teachers’ conventional observation methods are hardly practical . This paper proposes a novel approach to extend the teachers’ awareness on the children’s field trip behaviors by means of mobile and sensor technology . We adopt the notion of behavioral distribution and singularities . We estimate the children’s representative behavioral state in a given context , and study the effect of focus - ing on the behaviors which are unlikely in this context . We discuss our 14 - month collaborative study and various qualitative benefits through multiple de - ployments on actual kindergarten field trips . Keywords : Behavior , distribution , singularity , children , kindergarten , field trip , smartphone , sensor . 1 Introduction Careful observations on children’s behaviors , such as play , interactions , and class activities , give many implications of their social status [ 4 ] , skills [ 21 ] , development [ 26 ] , and assessments [ 23 ] . Behavior observations are particularly important in young ages as their linguistic skills are in early stage . Pervasive technologies have assisted the human experts to be more observant on and aware of children’s behaviors in terms of clinical needs [ 9 , 15 ] , collaborative learning [ 19 ] , etc . Kindergartens 1 are good 1 Kindergartens in Korean communities are institutions for children who are not old enough to attend elementary schools , typically 4 ~ 6 years old . examples around us where the teachers conduct extensive observation on their chil - dren’s behaviors every day , and make use of it on the way they teach , interact with , and take care of each child . We newly explore the behavior observations of young children in out - of - classroom activities , such as field trip events , by means of pervasive technologies . Our empirical study in a kindergarten supports that the children’s behaviors in field trips imply great significance ; their behaviors in first - in - the - life environments are often unforeseen , uniquely observable and hardly reproduced in classroom routines . In spite of the im - portance , behavior observations are hardly possible in field trip situations . A new , out - of - routine environment with full of cognitive stimuli and feeling of freedom is an excellent condition to excite young children and even make them careless . Unfamiliar environments make the children more dependent on adults . The teachers should watch over the children in a bird’s - eye - view , devoting their full efforts to protect them against potential incidents and taking care of their basic needs . The teachers cannot afford consistent attention to each child and make timely recording , and a lot of unique , situation - specific behaviors are hardly observed and not persistently retained . In this paper , we leverage the collective behavioral features of children monitored by wearable sensing platforms , offering the teachers the behavioral clues of the chil - dren which were hardly noticeable in the field but potentially significant . Those clues may serve as motives where the teachers would like to review the situation around those moments and might find important implications . For example , in an outdoor hiking , a pair of girls spends minutes at a dandelion while the rest are randomly play - ing around . At that time , the teacher cannot pay much attention on those girls as her priority is to prevent the actively playing children from injuries . After they come back , she gets a report about those two girls’ distinctive behaviors . She gets intrigued , and reviews the video taken around this moment . Then she engages conversation with the girls about what they liked , using their own fun to help developing rich expression and sharing experiences . The teacher further postulates theories of those girls’ inter - ests or sympathy on botanical themes , devising personalized contents in regard to them . Our idea of monitoring the children’s field trip behaviors gained much interest from both teachers and parents for opening new possibilities of multi - dimensional , persistent benefits obtainable from field trips which might be anecdotal otherwise . The major challenges in monitoring the field trip behaviors lie in the vast contextu - al - and population - diversity ; there are so many different field trip venues , different themes and activities within , and even different children groups . We can hardly clas - sify all the behaviors which might exist . Determining the significance of a behavior would be an open question depending on the context and applicable disciplines . In this light , we propose the notions of the children’s behavioral distribution and singularities . Our rationale is that we may find contextual implications from statistical representations of many children’s behaviors in a shared situation . Then we hypothe - size that the singularities , which we define as behaviors that are unlikely in the distri - bution but do appear , might be likely the points which the teachers find context - specific significance from , but could not notice within the middle of field trips . We report our empirical study on monitoring the singularities by mobile and sensor technologies . It includes our 14 - month studies in a local kindergarten , the collabora - tive re - design of the children’s backpacks into mobile sensing platforms , and the de - ployment on five different field trips with 9 ~ 12 children each . We thoughtfully built a teacher - friendly reporting system , allowing them to conveniently review the singulari - ties suggested . We discuss our observations and advantages from extensive use cases . The teachers often discovered unforeseen behaviors and social relation of a child . They combined those discoveries with their knowledge and built rich theories . They also brought persuasive effects to the children and even recommended the field trip venue a direction to facilitate better experiences in future events . The major contributions of this study are as follows . First , we delivered the design considerations and field practices to leverage pervasive technologies for behavioral monitoring in field trips . Second , we evaluated our designs by deploying it on multi - ple field trip events and delivered their rich benefits , especially in terms of extending the teachers’ awareness on children’s field trip behaviors . 2 Related Works Monitoring and Archiving Children’s Behaviors . The motivations for monitoring children’s behaviors are from various clinical , developmental , parental , and educa - tional needs . A large body of researches designed self - stimulatory behavior monitor - ing of autistic children [ 9 , 15 ] , and elaborated the design principles with functional behavior assessment from longitudinal studies [ 8 ] . We focus on the probabilistic no - tions in a group of general children’s behaviors , rather than clinically specific behav - iors . Mobile technologies have enabled advanced organization of interesting moments for parental needs [ 14 ] , presenting an instant capture and organization of their chil - dren ' s interesting moments . We share the notion of finding the moments of interest , but we study a large and dynamic population where a teacher can hardly find individ - ually interesting moment on - the - fly . Playful Toothbrush [ 1 ] takes a gaming approach to promote good tooth brushing habits . We later discuss persuasive effects as well , but as a possible implication depending on the teacher’s interpretation . Children’s physi - cal activity intensities in a classroom are aggregated and compared [ 12 ] for possible correlations with their tempers . We address the issues in out - of - classroom activities and rich behavioral features within . We then discuss the qualitative benefits extending field trips from anecdotal events toward better integration with childhood education . Out - of - class Learning Activity and Pervasive Technology . The learning experience of children during field trips implies condensed educational values . Empirical studies show that content - related experiences in field trips are engraved in one’s persistent memory , recallable even in adulthood with little decline [ 7 ] , and yield better acquisi - tion of knowledge than simply learning in the classroom [ 17 ] . Advances in pervasive technology have enriched students’ field trips by digitally augmenting the environ - ment or interactions within . Ambient Wood [ 24 ] and Tangible Flags [ 2 ] enrich the children’s experience by integrating a specifically crafted technology and site - specific contents in existing natural environments . We address a different problem space , pos - tulating that even today’s field trips retain considerable potential to better understand the children’s behaviors within . We study how technologies bring their behaviors to the foreground of the teachers’ awareness , expecting the teachers initiate educative methods in regard to this new discovery . We put effort into the monitoring transpar - ency not to disturb the children’s natural behaviors , as well as site - independent tech - nology , envisioning a part of general support for many field trips . Applying Technology in Educational Settings for Children . The ubiquity of mo - bile devices and interactive contents is enabling many creative applications in educa - tional settings . It was advised that use of technologies in schools should be under holistic consideration of benefits , risks , policies , etc . [ 3 ] . A large scale study provided guidance for deploying technologies in existing settings with pre - structured education [ 22 ] . Their efforts greatly affected our design process . We carefully collaborated with the kindergarten not to impede their existing practices . We examined the privacy and safety matters with many stakeholders . Extensive studies in the interaction design and children also enlightened us to better understand children’s developmental nature and participatory roles [ 11 ] . Although our primary users are the teachers rather than the children , the children joined as testers and informant [ 5 ] . We have been advised to find appropriate monitoring modality and attain gradual integration of technology . Leveraging Collective Characteristics in Population . Large - scale studies on human activities explored correlations between digital traces and human attributes [ 18 , 20 ] . The similarities within population were incorporated for better personally tuned clas - sification [ 16 ] . The symmetries of group activities with interactive tabletops delivered implications of collaboration [ 19 ] . These works shed light on characterizing the no - tion of group in children ; the kindergarten is a community with strong similarity in attributes of ages , developments , education , and shared daily activities for up to 8 hours a day . However , we do not correlate a certain behavioral characteristics with a specific attribute . The rapidly changing nature of young children would make it diffi - cult to develop a model with consistent fidelity . Notably , a design guideline for a today’s child would be no longer appropriate after months [ 11 ] . Instead , we test more general notion of behavioral singularity as the teacher - perceived significance . 3 Motivations and Implications of Behavioral Observation We discuss significant implications in behavior observation , the challenges and moti - vation found from our 14 - month collaboration with a private kindergarten in the city of Daejeon , South Korea . We regularly discussed with the teachers on a weekly basis , and participated in 11 field trips . 3 . 1 The Implications and Challenges in Today’s Behavioral Observation We found that observing the children’s behaviors is one of the integral , everyday tasks of kindergarten teachers in the classrooms . The teachers arrange notebooks or laptops always available in the classrooms to retain observations as many as possible . To demonstrate the implications in behavior observations , we quote a daily observa - tion log on a child . “ We did ‘walking along the thin beams of constellation - shapes . ’ Ahyun did very good in balancing her body . ( … ) I encouraged her in praise of her performance . Hearing that , she got apparently more active . She wanted to try more constellations . I saw her performance also gave others confidence , making them try boldly . ( … ) ” 1 This may seem like a simple episode about ‘Ahyun’ , but it has many implications . ( 1 ) It records a new discovery . Previously , this teacher has known for a long time that Ahyun is mostly of little confidence . It explains the importance of her today’s performance . ( 2 ) It records a lesson that encouraging Ahyun affected the per - formance of everyone . The teacher retains this lesson and shares it effectively with her fellow teachers in monthly meetings . ( 3 ) When switching the teacher in charge , this log is transferred to the newly coming teacher who knows little about Ahyun . However , when they get out of their classrooms and go to a field , the teachers are required to change their priorities ; they have to be protectors and caregivers far more than educators . In brief , they cannot afford to pay consistent and sufficient attention to individual children nor make prompt note - taking . The key attributions are :  The stimulatory environment often makes children careless , unpredictable , or self - oriented . The sources of stimuli are diverse , e . g . , little animals or robots . Many empirical evidences support the attribution . T1 ( Teacher # 1 ) stated , “ They just get out of the line and rush to something . It happens in a blink of an eye . ” T5 recalled , “ [ a child ] touched a rose and got pricked his finger . He didn’t know about the thorns . ” T3 stated , “ When [ a child ] got immersed in something , he didn’t respond to my instruction . ( … ) Even he couldn’t notice we are moving out . ( … ) I count heads every a few minutes . ” The literature explains the relevant natures of young children , that preschoolers concentrate on one aspect at a time and neglect others , without much anticipating what will happen by they are doing [ 11 ] .  The unfamiliar environment renders children more dependent on adults . There are well - established developmental milestones expected from a child at a given age [ 23 ] , like changing clothes and walking up steps . However , being in a new envi - ronment makes it difficult for children to do what they used to . T4 states , “ My children are potty - trained , but they have no idea where the toilets are . I find them toilets so many times even during a single field trip . ( … ) Even there is no small toi - let available , so I personally assist them . ” T3 states , “ Thirst is a common problem . Fountains are often unavailable , or installed too high for a child to drink alone . ” 3 . 2 Potential Benefits of Extended Behavior Observation in the Field Although the teachers hardly conduct behavior observations in today’s field trips , we discussed what potential benefits would be obtainable if the teachers somehow get to know more about the children’s behaviors . We videotaped 7 field trips and reviewed together with the teachers . Actually they do videotape their field trips sometimes , but 1 All quotes from the teachers’ writing and statements are translated from Korean language . they do not use it for reviewing the children’s behaviors . They attempted it a few times years ago , but discarded it as it was too inefficient . The teachers and we could discover a large number of small but unique behaviors in each field trip situation . Notably , the following example discusses that a discovery is not only a piece of knowledge but also an origin where rich benefits may emerge . We observed a boy trying to operate a miniature maglev train at Science Quest Park . This place is about half size of a football ground , exhibiting scientific gadgets and interactive tabletops . We found this boy stayed here for over five minutes . T5 stated it was unusually long at his age , stating , “ I’m surprised I couldn’t notice this . ( … ) I passed by him twice to check everybody is doing well . ( … ) I don’t recall such an im - pressive concentration of him . ” We do not jump to a premature conclusion why he stayed so long . More important lesson is that finding the distinctive behavior is a be - ginning of an open question worth exploring . The teachers stated that they would need to make conversation with him , to better understand the context and the child . Watching the video together would improve the effectiveness of conversation and the proficiency in his expression . T5 stated that such interaction initiates a natural , self - motivated reminiscence on him , stimulating his memory and making a strong imprint . It helps him keeping this memory for a long time which might be volatile otherwise . The more important benefit can be found in the literature , that such a process can train him to use long - term memory [ 11 ] . Furthermore , noting that he was trying to figure out how to run the train by tapping different permutations of the console but - tons , knowing this behavior may help teachers identify a need for scaffolding [ 25 ] ; a little help from the teacher would enable him to complete a work , which otherwise might remain incomplete on his own . We do not discuss the real - time intervention , but the teachers appreciated it as advices for planning a new activity . 4 Behavioral Singularity : Intuition and Rationale Due to the individual and contextual diversities and the rapid development of young children , it may not be able to classify all the behaviors observable from the children in the field ; even it might not be a closed set . In addition , the significance of a given behavior would be very context - dependent ; e . g . the previous maglev example might be interpreted into a distinctive concentration , or into not mingling with other friends . Hence we do not intend to classify or recognize specific behaviors . Alternatively , we leverage the existing conventions of how the teachers watch over the children in the field , like a bird’s - eye view . Section 3 discussed that many small , individual behav - iors are less paid attention to , and not imprinted on the teacher’s memory . In this light , we postulate that the teacher keeps track of a “blurred” awareness on what the children have been doing in overall . We aim to enrich their awareness by pervasive technology , but do it “selectively” in terms of the behaviors’ significance . We must consider that the teachers’ resources are highly limited . Not to mention they are extremely busy in the field , it is nontrivial to spare a chunk of time from their existing , densely structured kindergarten workload . Fine chronicles of every single child would be little different from a full video review which was discarded already . We propose the notion of behavioral singularity as an estimate of potential signifi - cance . It is defined as the behaviors which are expected less occurring or unlikely with respect to the common behaviors in a given situation . To represent the situation on which we determine a singularity , we adopt the notion of behavioral distribution . It is basically analogous to a probability distribution modeling the children’s behav - iors , used to determine the likelihood of an observed behavior . The rationale behind these notions is that the teacher may retain good awareness of overall behaviors which have been occurring commonly and frequently . Regarding the example of two girls and a dandelion in Section 1 , the teacher recalls the overall impression around that time like “ they were actively playing with each other ” and “ they were catching others , and rolling on the grass . ” It means that , those girls’ behaviors , squatting still in front of a dandelion together , were not one of commonly occurring behaviors . We do not assert that the notion of singularity may estimate all possible behavioral significances . A child’s frequently repeated behaviors would yield high probability , and hence may not be determined as a singularity . However , teachers might find a significant implication from the repetition . We address that frequent behaviors can be easily perceived by the teacher , not necessarily with pervasive technology support . 5 Design Considerations and Prototyping This section discusses our design considerations and prototypes to test our implication of behavioral singularities . We designed ( 1 ) wearable mobile sensing system to trans - parently monitor behavior features , ( 2 ) computational methods to evaluate singulari - ties from the features , and ( 3 ) teacher - friendly system to report the singularities . 5 . 1 Mobile Sensing System for Children’s Behaviors in the Field We designed a mobile sensing system that continuously monitors the physical fea - tures of a child’s behaviors . We used the off - the - shelf smartphones , Google Nexus One ( Android 2 . 2 ) , to develop our prototype sensing platforms . Our major considerations were the comfort , safety , and privacy . In overall , the en - tire study was conducted with voluntary children under the teachers’ and the parents’ consent . The comfort is very important as our targets are 4 ~ 5 years old . An adult may easily carry a smartphone feeling little discomfort , but a child of much smaller body would not . We focused on their backpacks , which they wear for the most time in the field . The average weight of a backpack was 1 . 3 kg including items like a drink and fruits . Our sensing platform added 0 . 15 kg , or 11 . 5 % extra weight to the backpack . Figure 1 shows our re - designed backpacks ; a smartphone and a sensor mote ( dis - cussed below ) are securely integrated in SenseCam - like configuration [ 10 ] . We com - municated carefully with the children wearing these backpacks , looking for any sign of discomfort . Fortunately they liked it , and envied those wearing our backpacks . We discussed with the parents for children’s privacy and safety , explaining the da - ta that can be monitored . Regarding the radio power , we confirmed it far below the government regulation and the international guideline [ 13 ] . We also considered third - party priv was resol for dedic But we b the presen We us erometerschild’s ac takes pict We addit estimate i Signal St took mor Note t better coh welcomed 5 . 2 Ev Figure 2 each feat tion well - mine a si respect to S A , S P , an peer prox itized bef We de lustrated of an artw heading r those sam orientatiotrajectorytime , the F vacy of the v lved as our ki cated use . On believe it redu nce of passers sed multiple s s , compasses , ctivity intensi tures at 1 fram tionally emplo inter - child pro trength Indica e than 10 sec that we attemp herence to the d by children , valuating Sin illustrates the ture dataset . F - describing th ingularity , i . e o this distribut nd S D , each c ximities , and i fore being rep emonstrate the in Figure 3 ; t work . The raw ranging from 0 mples monitor ons remained y ( the thick so video showed Fig . 1 . Re - desig isitors to the indergarten us e exception w ces some con sby is little mi ensing modal and cameras ity and body me for every 4 oyed TinyOS oximity at 2 H ator ) . The sma at a time , too pted to introd e child’s sight , as it was not ngularities fro e overall flow For each featu he overall beh . , a child who tion . As a resu ontaining sing mage differen orted to the te e details by ta the children w w data are tim 0 ~ 359 ° . Figu ed from n = 9 toward the cu olid line ) whi d that Child # 1 gned backpacks venue , in cas sually conduc was the moun ncerns as phot inded in Korea ities available s . The acceler orientation , 4 sec which m S - compatible m Hz from the ra artphone was sparse to trac duce a cap wit ht . It was decl a part of their om Behaviora to evaluate th ure type at a t haviors of the ose behavior ult , we obtain gularities of b ntials , respecti eachers . aking an exam were listening me - stamped sa ure 3 shows a 9 children for 5 urator , we can ich is highly 1 had been loo ( left ) , Children se of unintent cted field trip ntain - hiking , a tographing in an culture . e in the smartp rometer and t respectively , may show what motes with 8 adio signal fea unable to do ck the children th a small cam ined because r regular cloth al Distributio he feature - spe time interval , majority of ch features show n feature - spec body orientati ively . Those a mple with a re to the curato amples of the a cylindrical v 500 sec . When n confirm it b concentrated oking at a wal n wearing the b ional photogr s by reserving a naturally op a public moun phone , includ he compass c at 20 Hz . Th t is in front of 02 . 15 . 4 radio atures like RS it as its Bluet n’s dynamic re mera installed wearing a ca hing in field tr on ecific singular we estimate a hildren . Then w large dispar ific singularity ion , activity in are combined al ‘compass’ r’s explanatio smartphone’s isualization o n many childr by their mean and stable . D ll - mounted scr ackpacks ( Righ raphing . It g the sites pen space . untain with ding accel - collect the he camera f the child . o stack , to SSI ( Radio tooth scan elocation . d to obtain ap was not rips . rities from a distribu - we deter - rities with ty sets , S O , intensities , and prior - dataset il - on in front s compass of a part of ren’s body n compass During this creen aside ht ) from the as a sing shown in ples colle ( We use most chil mal distri ues of m iteration tion for T ness of hi We adopt We us = Q ( i ) fo tion as it some par probabilifore we s tation in shown th The singu similar m 1 As a he sample Fig . 2 . O curator for m gularity in term n Figure 2 . Ste ected for a tim 60 sec . ) Step ldren’s histogr ibution 1 N . W mean and varia and move on T 0 in terms of is / her histogra t Kullback - Le (cid:1830) (cid:3012)(cid:3013) (cid:4666)(cid:1842) | | (cid:1843)(cid:4667) se C k and N fo or all i , and D K puts stronger rt of the sampl stic model . In say child # 1 sh an extent of D he detailed pro ularities in ter manners , and w euristic , we try es , at least 60 % Overall flow to tures , evaluat more than 1 mi ms of his bod ep 1 : Let C k d me interval T 0 p 2 : We estim rams , C = C 1 ⋃ We used Lillief ance of N . If t to T 1 . If acce f body orienta am , C k , with re eibler divergen (cid:3404) ∑ (cid:1842)(cid:4666)(cid:1861)(cid:4667) log (cid:3036) or P and Q , re KL ( P | | Q ) > 0 emphases on le space , we h n this example howed a singu D KL , and add a ocedure to ev rms of other we present add y to find a norm or more . estimate the b e te the singularit inute . The foll dy orientation denote the his = [ t 0 , t 1 ) , whe mate the distr ⋃ … ⋃ C n . We fors test as w the hypothesi epted , we pres ations . Step 3 espect to the m nce : g (cid:3017)(cid:4666)(cid:3036)(cid:4667) (cid:3018)(cid:4666)(cid:3036)(cid:4667) , where P espectively . D 0 otherwise . It larger positiv have more obs e , we obtained ular behavior a a tuple ( child valuate singula features are e ditional featur mal distribution ehavioral distrib ties , prioritize a lowing proced n , which is ac stogram of Ch ere t 1 = t 0 + w ribution descr simply hypot we did not hyp is is rejected , sume N to be : We evaluate majority of ch P : observation KL ( P | | Q ) equ ts property is ve disparities o servations than d the highest around T 0 in t # 1 , T 0 , D KL ) t arities in term evaluated by t re - specific exp n well - accepted butions from th and combine the dure evaluates ccordant with hild # k ’s com w , w is the win ribing the uni thesize it is fr pothesize parti we discard th the behaviora e the per - child hildren’s distri n , Q : model . uals 0 if and o accordant wit of P ( i ) over Q n those expec D KL for P = C terms of his bo to S O . Step 4 : ms of body ori the step 1 thr planations bel d to the largest he children’s sen e singularities s Child # 1 h the flow mpass sam - ndow size . ion of the rom a nor - icular val - he current al distribu - d unlikeli - ibution , N . only if P ( i ) th our no - Q ( i ) , i . e . , at cted by the C 1 . There - ody orien - : We have ientations . rough 3 in low . After number of nsor fea - obtainingfield trip the same noted as m T t and T t + For entire D KL , and singularitaffordablThe sin children features w erometer tion , as w trum . Th compass . either be i ty childreFor the elements The proc than each cal examp have been ing aroun Fig . 3 . E re - c g the singulari duration , tho T from more multi - feature + 1 , they are m e duration [ T 0 top - k singula ties suggested e time and pe ngularities in are denoted a with the AC p samples . We we often obser he rest of proc The typical ing very calm en . The two gi e proximity , w of P ij are ess edures in Figu h single child , mples of the sin n mostly very nd under relati Evaluating a sin centered to 0 ° f ities in each fe se are combin than one feat singularities i merged as well T 0 , T end ] , all sin arities are repo d to the teach rceived fidelit terms of the a as S A and S P , part from the test if the act rved that those cedures to ev singularities m or showing e irls at a dande we make the p sentially the R ure 2 are cond to the estima ngularities in close to each ively dense an ngularity from th from the actual feature set , nam ned across tim ature set , those in Figure 2 ) . I l ( denoted as c ngularities are orted to the te hers , selecting ty . The follow activity intens , respectivelyenergy freque tivity intensit e were heavily valuate singul in terms of excessive phy elion in Sectio proximity data RSSI values m ducted by com ated distributio terms of prox h other or very nd stationary s he distribution sample mean o mely S O , S A , S me and feature e are combine If a child is fou continuous sin e prioritized b eachers . As k g an appropri wing sections d sities and the p y . We evaluat ency spectrum ies are from a y biased towar larities are an activity inten sical activitie n 1 is an exam aset P ij for N C measured betw mparing each on of all N C 2 ximity , S P , are y distant , and s situations . of body orienta of 102 . 4 ° for pre S P , and S D for es . If a child i ed and re - weig und consecuti ngularities in based on their decides the n ate k depend discuss it . proximities be te the activity m of each chil an exponentia rd the low ene nalogous to th nsities , S A , are s relative to th mple of this ki C 2 pairs of chil ween the chil pair of childr pairs of childr e pairs of chil sometimes a c ation ( The distri esentation purpo r the entire is found at ghted ( de - ively from Figure 2 ) . ir weights , number of ds on their etween the y intensity ld’s accel - al distribu - ergy spec - he case of e children he majori - ind . ldren . The ld i and j . ren , rather dren . Typi - ldren who child mov - ibution is ose ) In add differenticamera . I interactioThe plac choose a playing w would no and many constructsuch an e balls dow many oth but not a gram of i of all chil ty . It show the right , estimatedNote that image dif interactioincludes we do no 5 . 3 De We desig The first Fig . dition , we stud ials between t Image differe on targets , esp e with the m a target , make with new one ot give much d y attractions t an interestin example . The wn through a her children , a s long as the p image differen ldren . Figure ws his D KL va we can see m d from all the t we extended fferentials to f on targets are a child who h t attribute S D t esign of Teac gned a system consideration 4 . Evaluating a died an experim the histogram ntials might b pecially in sett aglev in Sect e interactions es . We observ discriminationinvolve phys ng distribution situation is th complex stru around t = 9 m previous one . ntial values an 4 shows his c alues for t = 0 more details at e children , ov the time wind find stable dis either very co has been stand to interaction cher - Reportin for teachers t n is that the m a singularity fro mental feature ms of tempora be an estimat tings with ma tion 3 . 2 is su with their ch ved that the n as the childr sical activities n , mostly fro hat child # 4 en ucture” , he m min . Then he l . The D KL valu nd the log - nor consistent inte ~ 14 min , sho t this moment . verlapped with dow for the ov stributions . Th onsistent or ve ding still , taki consistency ; ng System to convenientl monitoring sh om the distribut e , ‘image diffe ally adjacent i te of how oft any choices of uch a case wh hoices , move accelerometerren’s orientati s . However , om log - norma ntered a hall a made quite a left and playe ues are evalua mal distributi eraction was e owing the pea . It shows the h the child # 4 verall distribu he set S D often ery frequently ing a rest , or it is subject to ly review the hould be not tion of camera d erentials’ , whi images from t en a child ch f interactive a here the child to another , a rs or compas ions are mostl the image di al families . Fi at t = 7 min . A longer interac d with other a ated for per - ch on approxima evaluated as a k for t = 9 ~ 1 log - normal di 4’s sample dis tion . It is a he n includes a ch y changing . B running aroun o teacher’s val suggested sin only transpar differential featu ich are the the phone hanges her attractions . dren freely and begin ss features ly random ifferentials igure 4 is At “rolling ction than attractions hild histo - ating those singulari - 10 min . At istribution stribution . euristic for hild whose But S D also nd . Hence lidation . ngularities . rent to the tures children b were hesi non - safet philosophThe teach home , wh design ne Figure providingteacher o completeWe built larities , b afford an 6 D We deplo Figure 6 , ed in at l to / from th 1 ~ 2 teach evaluatiogularitiesqualitativThe su singularit but also unobt itant about div ty - critical info hy , “retrospec hers had differ hen they take eeded to be fle e 5 shows our g “top - k ” sing or an undergra d , the monito it on the web but gives the t hour to review eployment oyed our mobi with 4 ~ 5 - yea least one trip . he venues . Al hers . Each fie n consists of s suggested by ve observation ubjective valid ty by referenc Fig . 5 . A trusive to the verting their a ormation . Furt ct” . The seco rent preferenc a nap , or even exible to meet prototype rep gularities and aduate assista ored features a to enable flex teacher an op w one field tri and Evalu ile monitoring ar - old 9 ~ 12 ch Each trip las ll deployment eld trip report two phases . ( y the reporting ns through free dation results cing the video A screenshot of t teachers’ duti attention from ther discussion ond considerat ces in time ava n at the teach t their time an porting system d the associat ant majoring i are uploaded xible access . T ption to see m ip , and review uation Stud g platforms in hildren ( 3 ~ 4 g sted 1 . 5 ~ 2 ho ts were under was reviewed ( 1 ) We collect g system . ( 2 ) M e - format inter are summariz o and the 1st - p the web - based ies . In the mid the children t ns led us to a tion is their l ailability , like ers’ home for d location pre m . It is an inte ted videos rec in child educa and the singu The system sh more . On aver wed 10 ~ 20 sin dy n five different girls ) . In total , urs , not coun parental cons d by the teach ted their subje More importan rviews with th zed in Figure person - views teacher - reportin ddle of a field to mobile devi teacher - friend imited afforda e after the chil r thorough rev eferences . ractive web a corded by an ation . Once a ularities are p hows first top age , the teach gularities per t field trips as , 16 children p ting the trans sents and supe er who led the ective validati ntly , we deliv ose teachers . 7 . They valid shown in the ng system d trip , they ices to see dly design dable time . ldren went views . The application n auxiliary a field trip prioritized . 10 singu - hers could hour . s shown in participat - sportations ervised by e trip . The ion of sin - ver various dated each e reporting system . T common singularitior in the We repor each set . attribute venience , through t k . Howev explanatisingularit ly low ne major rea singular c this issue whole re choose th not surpr The lowe good estim Fig . 7 . S The teachers behavior in te ty . For each a e field , or she rt the effect of Note that we the singularit , as ‘image d the video . In o ver , ‘new - to - a on may be th ty might be lik ew - to - agree pe ason for ‘not n child whose a e in Section sults ( upper ) heir interactio rising as ‘inte er results show mations on th Subjective valid centages Fig . 6 . Five f checked it “a erms of the fe greed one , she saw it but did f increasing k used the term ies from imag differentials’ a overall , we can agree’ percent at , the singula kely unnoticed ercentage for t new’ was that activity was a 7 . For interac and those on on targets ( low eraction consi w that , if the s he singularities dation for 1st an are the ratios o field trip destina agree” if they eature type aro e checked it “ d not rememb by showing t m ‘interaction ge differential are not an ob an see that the ntages are not arities become d by the teach the top 1 ~ 10 s t , the teachers lot higher tha ction consiste nly from the wer ) . Those tw istency’ is mo situation is we s in terms of i nd 2nd ten singu of ‘new’ out of t ations for deplo y agreed that ound 1 minute “new” if she h ber it until rev the 1st and 2n consistency’ e ls to it . It was bservable beha smaller numb necessarily l e less clear fo hers in the fiel singularities o were already an other child ency , we repo situations wh wo sets’ large ostly defined ell fit , the ima nteraction con ularities from e the ‘agreed’ sin oyment and eva the child sho e window at th had not seen th viewing the si d ten singular even though w s for the teach avior they can ber of ‘agree’ lower for larg or a larger k , b d . We note th of activity inte aware of the dren . We brief ort two result here the childr ely different r in the latter s age differentia nsistencies . ach feature set . ngularities . luation study owed less he time of his behav - ingularity . rities from we did not hers’ con - an validate for larger ger k . The but such a he relative - ensity . The suggested fly discuss t sets : the dren freely results are situations . als exhibit The per - 6 . 1 Qualitative Observations We present an extensive set of observations , including immediate findings like dis - coveries and recalls , as well as long - term ones like facilitating interactions with the children or class activities . We broadly categorize the observations below . Unveiling the Social Dynamics Depending on the Settings and Contexts . The teachers discussed the implications regarding the children’s unexpected social interac - tions . The teachers related some unique interactions to children’s polymorphic nature depending on different settings . For example , T5 stated , “ ( in Science Quest Park ) It helped me find many times that [ C3 ( Child 3 ) ] and [ C15 ] stayed so close in Science Quest Park . ( … ) It was quite unexpected to me . I’ve known [ C3 ] is quite independent and likes playing in her own way . ” T5 reasoned later , saying C15 is a 1 - year - younger boy than C3 , “ I guess [ C3 ] played as if she were an elder sister to [ C15 ] . ( … ) Actual - ly [ C3 ] had visited that place several times but [ C15 ] visited at the first time . ” Reconstructing the Contextual Understanding from Fragmented Memories . In - terestingly , reporting a singularity could often bring back some pieces of fragmented , faint memories to the teachers . Then the teachers easily interconnected the fragments and got some larger , contextual understanding . T5 stated , referring to Science Quest Park , “ I found that , [ C9 ] played so long with the Moon Buggy simulator . Instantly , I recalled a moment there , [ C9 ] mumbled a few words like ‘zero gravity’ and ‘dust’ . ( … ) Now I understand what it was all about . ( … ) It’s amazing ! Many children just have fun with the simulator but he found a piece of science ! ” We could see that such a small mumbling itself was insignificant to the teacher at that moment in their field trip , and the memory became already blurry since they came back . It would probably have passed out if the teacher did not find some relevant context from the report . Bringing Reflection and Self - Motivation to the Children . Although our direct user group is the teachers , we found many cases that potential benefits were mediated to the children through the teachers . When a teacher found some behavior of a child , the teacher often used it as a part of means to initiate self - motivation and reflection to the child . T5 stated , “ ( At National Science Museum , ) I found that [ C7 ] was interacting with a rocket launcher for a long time . ” It is a button - triggered air - propelled rocket launcher . T5 told us what happened . “ At the museum , I told him ‘let’s move on to the next hall’ , but he did not want to leave . ( … ) Even I tried to lead him by the hand . ” When T5 found again this C7’s behavior , she recalled his stubborn behavior and de - vised a strategy to smoothly persuade C7 . “ We just gently watched the video together . ( … ) I was certain that he felt something . ( … ) He recalled what he did . ( … ) He was a lot different . If I had just talked to him as usual , he might have taken it just a nag . ” In Unity There is New Significance . We found that the teachers combined multiple , simultaneous singularities and built new , larger understanding not delivered by indi - vidual singularities . Importantly , an insignificant singularity on its own often contrib - uted to some significance by being combined with another . In the hiking , C1 and C5 were frequently suggested as singularities in terms of their activity intensities and close proximities . T9 stated , “ ( from the video ) I could see they were running the trails together , far ahead of other friends . ( … ) [ C5 ] ’s high activity was not surprising to me . I know him well for more than a year . But [ C1 ] was unexpected . ( … ) I believe , on that day , mingling with [ C5 ] somehow changed [ C1 ] to be a lot more active . ” Motives of Making Suggestions to the Field Trip Venue . Some singularities moti - vated the teachers to make a suggestion to the venue for children’s better experiences . T9 stated , “ ( In Prehistoric Settlement , ) I got a report about [ C5 ] ’s orientation . ( … ) The curator was giving a presentation about the settlement . Everyone was sitting and mostly looking at the curator . ( … ) [ C5 ] was sitting toward his right for a few minutes . ” By carefully watching the video and the C5’s first - person view , “ I think a computer screen at that corner attracted his attention . ” T9 emphasized it would not be appropriate to just tell C5 not to . Instead , T9 made suggestions to the office of the settlement to revise their item placements and shorten their presentation . She added that they would mostly welcome such comments as it is a place designed for children , and we should not blame C5 for something caused by badly designed environment . 7 Discussion , Implications , and Limitations In this section , we discuss the implication and potential extensibility of our approach , as well as the limitations of this study . The teachers were enthusiastic in bringing new ideas regarding our system . One idea is a tool for parental feedback . They state that kindergarten - driven field trips comprise a large part of children’s out - of - routine events in many dual - income fami - lies . However , today’s parental feedbacks about field trips are lack of rich infor - mation . Many parents know little more than the destination , some pictures , and the child’s own crude expression . To this end , however , the reporting system needs to be re - designed to fit the parental needs . As the notion of behavioral singularity has im - plication on other children’s characteristics , the disclosure of information about a child to other parents needs to be resolved . Another idea is that the technology - aided reminiscence would extend young children’s thoughts and widen their often self - oriented views . T6 suggested a potential use for experience sharing among the chil - dren , right after a field trip when they retain vivid memory . T6 discussed , “ For a child , comparing what I did with others would be a lot powerful to widen the child’s sight . ( … ) She might realize many other fun and methods she didn’t know so far . ” The singularities we suggested are not all informative to the teachers . For example , a boy was suggested as a singularity in terms of his activity intensity , as he kept mov - ing around while his classmates mostly stayed still in front of an exhibit . However , it was not newly informative ; the teacher has already seen this particular behavior . Sub - sequent discussion led us to postulate that it might be trivial for the teachers to isolate a few highly dynamic behaviors out of many calm children . Interestingly , the oppo - sites , noticing a calm child out of mostly dynamic children , are nontrivial even if our system evaluates similar disparity metrics in both cases . This observation would be a topic of further study to incorporate a human cognitive model in evaluating singulari - ties , regarding the isolation of an event from backgrounds with different dynamicity . It should be discussed that our system does not deliver a complete set of singulari - ties . It did miss to suggest some behaviors which the teacher determines eligible as a singular one . For example , there was an exhibit which can be viewed from any direc - tion around it . Although the children stood still around it and paid consistent attention , our system did not suggest the child whose body orientation was diverted from the exhibit . It can be explained that the circular formation of the children around the ex - hibit resulted in rather evenly distributed body orientations ; therefore it failed to satis - fy step 2 in Figure 2 . This case shows a limitation where the method assuming a cen - tered distribution may not work . We believe that some modern museums installed with infrared beacons on each exhibit and giving a transceiver to each visitor would help resolving the issue . More general solution may require a broader study on char - acteristic distribution of children’s collective behaviors , but it is a concern that em - bracing more delicate situations might cause a negative effect on the overall fidelity . From the practices of field trips , we derived the design philosophy of retrospect for the teacher - reporting . But we believe that , in some cases , real - time intervention can be beneficial . An example would be the scaffolding for the child at the maglev in Section 3 . 2 . However , real - time notifications are very context - dependent issues ; oth - erwise it will be highly annoying and disruptive . It would be a non - trivial research question incorporating interaction design for highly compact and unobtrusive infor - mation delivery , context awareness to determine the current risk level and required teacher’s attention , and machine learning to make it tuned along a series of field trips . Some issues remain in regard to fully integrating our prototype system on non - experimental settings . The teachers gave advices to further evolve our prototype to be more complete for persistent use as a part of regular field trips . First , our system needs to be more versatile to cover a larger variety of field trip settings . Although our integration of the smartphone with the backpack satisfied the teachers , parents , and children in terms of the transparency and comfort , it is not completely versatile and interruption - free . For example , it was not possible to monitor the children’s quarterly physical exercise event . Children also take off backpacks when taking a rest or having snacks . We envision state - of - the - art sensor technology [ 6 ] will enable more seamless daily - life monitoring including a larger variety of field trip situations . The battery lifetime of the smartphones also limit the durations of applicable field trips , typically no longer than 2 ~ 3 hours . It still covers the majority of field trips that the kindergarten conducts , but a few exceptions exist like a full - day picnic per semester . Second , the situation - dependencies require further studies . We found that , the singularities from different feature sets may imply different teacher - perceived significances depending on the situations , even if those singularities have similar weight values . An extreme example is the interaction consistencies , which showed largely different results de - pending on whether we narrowed down the situations to free - choice activities or not . A brief idea by the teachers was having a few presets each representing a field trip type , a coarse - grained classification of situations . They conveniently choose one , and it re - weights each feature set of singularities well - fit to the selected field trip type . The further questions would be the classification problem of a large variety of field trips , and the limitation when a single trip consists of various situation types . 8 Conclusion We explored the collective behavior monitoring on a group of children under shared contextual settings by pervasive technology , and its assistive potentials for human experts in the child education . We proposed a notion of statistical distribution to de - scribe the collective behavioral characteristics , and studied the educational implica - tions in finding the behaviors which are less probable with respect to the distribution . We have received many qualitative results , but also identified that our notions on behavioral distributions and singularities need to incorporate further considerations for complete and smooth deployment . We believe that our proposed notions may open opportunities in different domains of collective human behavior monitoring . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea grant ( No . 2011 - 0018120 ) funded by the Korean Government , and the SW Computing R & D Program of KEIT ( 2011 - 10041313 , UX - oriented Mobile SW Platform ) funded by the Ministry of Knowledge Economy of Korea . References 1 . Chang , Y . - C . , Lo , J . - L . , Huang , C . - J . , Hsu , N . - Y . , Chu , H . - H . , Wang , H . - Y . , Chi , P . - Y . , Hsieh , Y . - L . : Playful Toothbrush : Ubicomp Technology for Teaching Tooth Brushing to Kindergarten Children . In : CHI 2008 , pp . 363 - 372 , ACM , New York ( 2008 ) 2 . Chipman , G . , Druin , A . , Beer , D . , Fails , J . A . , Guha , M . L . , Simms , S . : A Case Study of Tangible Flags : A Collaborative Technology to Enhance Field Trips . In Proc . IDC 2006 , pp . 1 - 8 , ACM , New York ( 2006 ) . 3 . Cramer , M . , Hayes , G . R . : Acceptable Use of Technology in Schools . Pervasive Compu - ting , vol . 9 , issue . 3 , pp . 37 - 44 , IEEE , New York ( 2010 ) 4 . Dodge , K . A . : Behavioral Antecedents of Peer Social Status . Child Development , vol . 54 no . 6 , pp . 1386 - 1399 ( 1983 ) 5 . Druin , A . : The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology . Behavior and Infor - mation Technology , vol . 21 , no . 1 , pp . 1 - 25 ( 2002 ) 6 . EcoMote . http : / / www . ecomote . net / 7 . Falk , J . H . , Dierking , L . D . : School Field Trips : Assessing Their Long - Term Impact . Cura - tor , vol . 40 , issue 3 , pp . 211 - 218 ( 1997 ) 8 . Hayes , G . R . , Gardere , L . M . , Abowd , G . D . , Truong , K . N . : CareLog : a Selective Archiving Tool for Behavior Management in Schools . In : CHI 2008 , pp . 685 - 694 , ACM ( 2008 ) 9 . Hayes , G . R . , Kientz , J . A . , Truong , K . N . , White , D . R . , Abowd , G . D . , Pering , T . : Designing Capture Applications to Support the Education of Children with Autism . In : Davies , N . ( eds . ) UbiComp 2004 , LNCS , vol . 3205 , pp . 161 - 178 , Springer , Heidelberg ( 2004 ) 10 . Hodges , S . , Williams , L . , Berry , E . , Izadi , S . , Srinivasan , J . , Butler , A . , Smyth , G . , Kapur , N , Wood , K . : SenseCam : A Retrospective Memory Aid . In : Dourish , P . , et al . ( eds . ) UbiComp 2006 , LNCS , vol . 4206 , pp . 177 - 193 , Springer , Heidelberg ( 2006 ) 11 . Hourcade , J . P . : Interaction Design and Children . Foundations and Trends in HCI . vol . 1 , no . 4 , pp . 277 - 392 ( 2007 ) 12 . Hwang , I . , Jang , H . , Nachman , L . , Song , J . : Exploring Inter - child Behavioral Relativity in a Shared Social Environment : A Field Study in a Kindergarten . In : UbiComp 2010 , pp . 271 - 280 , ACM , New York ( 2010 ) 13 . International Commission on Non - Ionizing Radiation Protection . Guidelines for limiting exposure to time - varying electric , magnetic , and electromagnetic fields ( up to 300GHz ) . Health Physics , vol . 74 no 4 , pp . 494 - 522 ( 1998 ) 14 . Kientz , J . A . , Abowd , G . D . : KidCam : Toward an effective technology for the capture of children ' s moments of interest . In : H . Tokuda , et al . ( eds . ) Pervasive 2009 , LNCS , vol . 5558 , pp . 115 - 132 , Springer , Heidelberg ( 2009 ) 15 . Kientz , J . A . , Hayes , G . R . , Westeyn , T . L . , Starner , T . , Abowd , G . D : Pervasive computing and autism : Assisting caregivers of children with special needs . IEEE Pervasive Compu - ting , vol . 6 no . 1 , pp . 28 - 35 . IEEE ( 2007 ) 16 . Lane , N . D . , Xu , Y . , Lu , H . , Hu , S . , Choudhury , T . , Campbell , A . T . , Zhao , F . : Enabling Large - scale Human Activity Inference on Smartphones using Community Similarity Net - works ( CSN ) . In : UbiComp 2011 , pp . 355 - 364 , ACM , New York ( 2011 ) 17 . MacKenzie A . A . , White R . T . : Fieldwork in Geography and Long - Term Memory Struc - tures . American Educational Research Journal , vol . 19 , no . 4 , pp . 623 - 632 , American Edu - cational Research Association ( Winter , 1982 ) 18 . Madan , A . , Cebrian , M . , Lazer , D . , Pentland , A . : Social Sensing for Epidemological Be - havior Change . In : UbiComp 2010 , pp . 291 - 300 , ACM , New York ( 2010 ) 19 . Martinez , R . , Kay , J . , Wallace , J . R . , Yacef , K . : Modeling Symmetry of Activity as an In - dicator of Collocated Group Collaboration . In : Konstan , J . A . , et al . ( eds . ) UMAP 2011 , LNCS , vol . 6787 , pp . 207 - 218 , Springer , Heidelberg ( 2011 ) 20 . Olguin , D . O . , Waber , B . N . , Kim , T . , Mohan , A . , Ara , K . , Pentland , A . : Sensible Organiza - tion : Technology and Methodology for Automatically Measuring Organizational Behavior . IEEE Trans . Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , vol . 39 , no . 1 , pp . 43 - 55 IEEE ( 2009 ) . 21 . Overy , K . , Nicolson , R . I , Fawcett , A . J , Clarke , E . F . : Dyslexia and Music : Measuring Mu - sical Timing Skills . Dyslexia , vol . 9 no . 1 , pp . 18 - 36 , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . ( 2003 ) 22 . Poole , E . S . , Miller , A . D . , Xu , Y . , Eiriksdottir , E . , Catrambone , R . , Mynatt , E . D . : The Place for Ubiquitous Computing in Schools : Lessons Learned from a School - based Intervention for Youth Physical Activity . In : UbiComp 2011 , pp . 395 - 404 , ACM , New York ( 2011 ) 23 . Ramsay , M . C . , Reynolds , C . R . , Kamphaus , R . W . : Essentials of Behavioral Assessment . John Wiley and Sons , Inc . , New York ( 2002 ) . 24 . Rogers , Y . , Price , S . , Randell , C . , Fraser , D . S . , Weal , M . , Fitzpatrick , G . : Ubi - learning In - tegrates Indoor and Outdoor Experiences . Communications of the ACM , vol . 48 , no . 1 , pp . 55 - 59 . ACM , New York ( 2005 ) 25 . Soloway , E . , Jackson , S . L . , Klein , J . , Quintana , C . , Reed , J . , Spitulnik , J . , Stratford , S . J . , Studer , S . , Eng , J . , Scala , N . : Learning Theory in Practice : Case Studies of Learner - centered Design . In : CHI 1996 , pp . 189 - 196 . ACM , New York ( 1996 ) 26 . Squires , J . , Nickel , R . E . , Eisert , D . : Early Detection of Developmental Problems : Strate - gies for Monitoring Young Children in the Practice Setting . Developmental and Behavior - al Pediatrics , vol . 17 no 6 , pp . 420 - 427 ( 1996 )