Annals of Biomedical Engineering , Vol . 34 , No . 5 , May 2006 ( C (cid:1) 2006 ) pp . 748 – 758 DOI : 10 . 1007 / s10439 - 006 - 9081 - 0 Measurement and Characterization of Whole - Cell Mechanical Behavior M ICHAEL J . J AASMA , 1 W ESLEY M . J ACKSON , 1 , 2 and T ONY M . K EAVENY 1 , 3 1 Orthopaedic Biomechanics Laboratory , Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of California , Berkeley , CA ; 2 Joint Graduate Program in Bioengineering , University of California , Berkeley and San Francisco , CA ; and 3 Department of Bioengineering , University of California , Berkeley , CA ( Received 17 November 2004 ; accepted 24 August 2005 ; published online : 8 April 2006 ) Abstract— An understanding of whole - cell mechanical behavior can provide insight into cellular responses to mechanical loading and diseases in which such responses are altered . However , this aspect of cellular mechanical behavior has received limited atten - tion . In this study , we used the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) in conjunction with several mechanical characterization methods ( Hertz contact theory , an exponential equation , and a parallel - spring recruitment model ) to establish a mechanically rigorous method for measuring and characterizing whole - cell mechanical behavior in the deformation range 0 – 500 nm . Using MC3T3 - E1 osteoblasts , measurement repeatability was assessed by perform - ing multiple loading cycles on individual cells . Despite variability in measurements , repeatability of the measurement technique was statistically conﬁrmed . The measurement technique also proved acceptable since only 5 % of the total variance across all measure - ments was due to variations within measurements for a single cell . The parallel - spring recruitment model , a single - parameter model , accurately described the measured nonlinear force – deformation response ( R 2 > 0 . 99 ) while providing a mechanistic explanation of whole - cell mechanical behavior . Taken together , the results should improve the capabilities of the AFM to probe whole - cell mechanicalbehavior . Inaddition , thesuccessoftheparallel - spring recruitmentmodelprovidesinsightintothemicromechanicalbasisofwhole - cell behavior . Keywords— Cell mechanics , Mechanical properties , Atomic force microscope , Osteoblasts . INTRODUCTION Cellular mechanical behavior dictates cellular responses to mechanical loading , which are critical for mechanotrans - duction and the resulting effects at the tissue level . 18 , 27 Although whole - cell mechanical behavior has received lim - ited investigation , this behavior is important in mechan - otransduction because in vivo loading can be applied over a large region of the cell . Such loading invokes a mechanical response that depends on the structure and behavior of the entire cell . For example , ﬂuid ﬂow subjects a large portion of the cell membrane to mechanical loading , which , in turn , Address correspondence to Michael J . Jaasma , 2166 Etcheverry Hall , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 - 1740 . Electronic mail : mjaasma @ biomech1 . me . berkeley . edu can induce a structural response , including rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton within the cell . 12 , 13 , 37 In addition , mechanical loading at localized regions of the cell , such as integrins , selectins , and cadherins , engages a structural response as loads are transmitted throughout the cell by the cytoskeleton . 32 , 47 A complete description of whole - cell mechanical behavior is also required to validate microme - chanical models of the cell . The atomic force microscope ( AFM ) has excellent potential for these investigations . To investigate whole - cell mechanical behavior , the mea - surement method should be accurate and repeatable , and the mathematical characterization method should accurately describe the measured behavior . Measurement repeatability has been largely neglected in AFM studies of cellular me - chanical behavior . Quantitative repeatability results have only been reported for a single cell in each study . 9 , 44 , 45 Re - peated measurements of local mechanical behavior yielded a coefﬁcient of variation ( COV = S . D . / mean ) of 5 – 29 % . To mathematically characterize cellular mechanical behav - ior , most AFM studies have included calculation of cel - lular elasticity by applying Hertz contact theory ( spheri - cal probe ) or an extension of this theory for nonspherical probes . 28 , 43 These characterizations assume that the cell is a homogeneous , isotropic , and linearly elastic half space that is subjected to small deformations . However , living cells are ﬁnite , heterogeneous structures , 34 , 41 that have been shown to exhibit nonlinear elastic 38 , 46 and viscoelastic be - havior . 1 , 48 Cells also can be subjected to large deformations under loading with the AFM . 10 , 34 Not surprisingly , Hertz contact theory predictions do not always agree well with experimental data . 8 , 42 To address the limitations of Hertz contact theory , ﬁnite element models , 8 , 10 alternative mate - rial constitutive models , 22 , 34 viscoelastic models , 48 as well as quadratic , 42 , 45 and exponential , 35 equations have been used to characterize cellular mechanical behavior . Although quadratic and exponential equations can be applied directly to the cellular force – deformation response—avoiding the need to make a priori assumptions of material behavior— these mechanical characterization methods have received limited attention . Mechanistic models , such as the parallel - spring recruitment model , have been effective in describing 0090 - 6964 / 06 / 0500 - 0748 / 0 C (cid:1) 2006 BiomedicalEngineeringSociety 748 Whole - Cell Mechanical Behavior 749 the nonlinear elasticity of tendon and ligament , 17 but have not been applied to cellular mechanical behavior . In ad - dition , most studies using the AFM have focused on the mechanical behavior of localized regions of the cell ( length scale of ∼ 10 – 60 nm ) . 9 , 35 , 41 , 45 , 48 while the structural be - havior of the whole cell , or even a large portion of the cell , has received much less attention . 1 , 7 , 8 , 31 The literature lacks a detailed investigation into mechanical characterization at the whole - cell level . Given the limited study of whole - cell mechanical be - havior and its mathematical characterization as well as the limited veriﬁcation of the AFM as a suitable tool for mea - suring such behavior , the overall goal of this study was to use the AFM in conjunction with several characterization methods to establish a mechanically rigorous and robust method for measuring and characterizing whole - cell me - chanical behavior . Our speciﬁc objectives were to : 1 ) quan - tify the repeatability of the measurement method , 2 ) com - pare the descriptive and predictive abilities of whole - cell mechanical behavior for Hertz contact theory , an exponen - tial equation , and a mechanistic parallel - spring recruitment model , and 3 ) use these results to characterize whole - cell mechanical behavior and the natural intercell variability in this behavior for a single cell line . METHODS Cell Culture MC3T3 - E1 osteoblastic cells ( ATCC , Manassas , VA ) were cultured in tissue culture ﬂasks ( Corning Inc . , Corning , NY ) using α - MEM ( Cellgro , Herndon , VA ) sup - plemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( GIBCO , Gaithers - burg , MD ) and 1 % penicillin - streptomycin ( Cellgro ) under standard culture conditions ( 37 ◦ C , 5 % CO 2 ) . Cells were between passages 20 and 22 for all experiments . One to 4 days prior to experimentation , cells were detached with 0 . 25 % trypsin - EDTA ( GIBCO ) and plated on an etched glass coverslip ( Bellco Glass , Vineland , NJ ) in a 60 - mm culture dish ( Corning ) to achieve 20 % conﬂuence on the day of experimentation . Before plating , the coverslips were coated with collagen I ( BD Biosciences , Bedford , MA ) , the main organic constituent of bone matrix . 29 Prior to loading with the AFM , the growth media was replaced with CO 2 independent medium ( GIBCO ) supplemented with 10 % fe - tal bovine serum , 1 % penicillin - streptomycin , and 80 µ M L - glutamine ( GIBCO ) . Due to evaporation during experi - mentation ( 2 . 5 h per culture ) , the media was initially di - luted with distilled water ( combined volume of 3 . 5 ml ) to maintain osmolality in the acceptable range of 260 – 320 mOsm / kg 16 throughout experimentation . Prior to loading , cells were chosen at random , but mi - totic , multinucleated , morphologically abnormal , and over - lapping cells were excluded . An image of each cell was cap - tured with a CCD camera ( Orca 100 , Hamamatsu , Japan ) under phase contrast microscopy at 200 × magniﬁcation to allow for accurate identiﬁcation of preselected cells once the AFM cantilever was placed in the cell culture media . Atomic Force Microscope An atomic force microscope with a temperature - controlled ( 37 ± 0 . 04 ◦ C ) stage ( BioScope , Veeco Metrol - ogy , Santa Barbara , CA ) was mounted on an inverted mi - croscope ( TE300 , Nikon , Melville , NY ) . The entire system was positioned on a vibration isolation table ( 9101 , Kinetic Systems , Boston , MA ) , and the AFM head and stage were enclosed within an acrylic box for isolation from acoustic noise and air currents . V - shaped , tipless , gold - coated silicon nitride cantilevers , having a length of 200 µ m ( Veeco Metrology ) , were used in all experiments . A polystyrene microsphere ( diame - ter = 25 . 2 ± 1 µ m , Duke Scientiﬁc , Palo Alto , CA ) was glued onto the underside of each cantilever using a two - part epoxy ( ITW Performance Polymers , Riviera Beach , FL ) and a ﬁne - positioning device ( The Micromanipulator Company , Carson City , NV ) . The microsphere probe of - fers a well - deﬁned contact region , as compared to a ﬂat cantilever alone , and having a diameter on the same or - der of magnitude as the global cellular dimensions , it is large enough to ensure measurement of whole - cell me - chanical behavior . 26 Using the thermal ﬂuctuation method in air , 5 , 25 the cantilever spring constant was determined to be 61 . 0 ± 8 . 1 mN / m ( mean ± S . D . , n = 3 ) . To ensure that the cantilever deﬂection and spring constant were mea - sured at the point of applied force , the laser was po - sitioned to reﬂect off the cantilever directly above the center of the microsphere . Prior to experimentation in a culture dish ( 10 – 15 cells tested per dish ) , cantilever sen - sitivity was calibrated in water on a glass microscope slide . Mechanical Measurement with the AFM Measurement of cellular mechanical behavior was con - ducted via cyclic loading with the AFM . In each loading cycle , the position of the base of the cantilever followed a triangular wave function with an amplitude of 2 . 0 µ m at a loading rate of 4 . 0 µ m / s . To minimize uncertainties in imposed cellular deformation that can be introduced by system drift , the large amplitude was chosen so that the can - tilever would lose contact with the cell during the unloading portion of each cycle . The 1 . 0 - Hz loading cycle frequency was chosen to match in vivo loading of osteoblasts during routine locomotion . 4 , 49 Before loading , the cell nucleus was positioned directly underneath the microsphere . Then , ﬁve calibration loading cycles were conducted , with a single loading cycle being completion of a full triangle wave pattern . As is seen in numerous soft tissues , 19 preliminary experiments revealed a small , but apparent , equilibration of mechanical behavior 750 J AASMA et al . over the ﬁrst two loading cycles . Thus , the ﬁrst two cycles were performed for preconditioning and were not analyzed . The loading portion of each of the last three cycles was immediately analyzed ( MATLAB 6 . 1 , The Mathworks Inc , Natick , MA ) to determine the cantilever deﬂection required to obtain a maximum cellular deformation of 600 nm . With the goal of evaluating cellular deformation in the range of 0 – 500 nm , deformation that can invoke an intracellular calcium response , 6 a maximum deformation of 600 nm was chosen in order to consistently obtain the desired deforma - tion range . If a deformation of 600 nm was not reached in all three loading curves , the procedure was repeated . Imme - diately after performing the calibration loading cycles and determining the appropriate cantilever deﬂection , the cal - culated cantilever deﬂection was input as the trigger deﬂec - tion in trigger mode of the AFM software ( Nanoscope III 5 . 12b40 , Veeco ) , and the cell was loaded for 12 additional cycles . Brieﬂy , in trigger mode the cantilever is extended ( loading ) until the trigger deﬂection is reached , after which the cantilever is retracted ( unloading ) the entire loading cy - cle amplitude ( 2 . 0 µ m ) . Then , the loading cycle is repeated . The complete procedure starting with the ﬁve calibration loading cycles through the 12 trigger mode loading cycles will be referred to as a single loading session . To evaluate measurement repeatability , cells were di - vided into two groups . In the ﬁrst group ( n = 36 cells ) , direct repeatability was evaluated by performing two full loading sessions on a single cell , for which the loading sessions were separated by a 5 - min pause . For the second loading session , the relative stage / cantilever position was not adjusted , but the trigger deﬂection was recalculated as described previously . In the second group ( n = 18 cells ) , positioning repeatability was evaluated by performing two loading sessions on a single cell that were separated by a 5 - min pause during which the stage position was perturbed and the cell was repositioned under the cantilever . Loading Curve Analysis Since the cantilever was intended to lose contact with the cell during the unloading portion of each loading cycle , the point of initial probe / cell contact had to be determined for each loading cycle . Using the loading portion of the can - tilever deﬂection vs . cantilever base extension curve ( often called a force curve in the AFM literature ) , the point of contact was determined by analyzing the slope of the curve ( see Appendix A ) . Occasionally the cantilever appeared to remain attached to the cell during the entire unloading portion of a loading cycle , possibly forming a membrane tether 40 If this occurred , the cell was discarded from anal - ysis ( n = 7 cells ) . The point of contact was used with the cantilever base position and deﬂection to determine cellular deformation and applied force . 39 Since the cantilever is assumed to act in a linear elastic fashion , the force applied by the cantilever FIGURE 1 . Parallel - spring recruitment ( PSR ) model of the cell . The model consists of a large number of linearly elastic spr - ings , each having a spring constant of k . An additional spring is recruited with a small increase in cellular deformation . on the cell was calculated according to Hooke’s Law . The cellular force – deformation curve was then constructed for the loading portion of each loading cycle . To account for variations in maximum cellular deformation between load - ing cycles , each force – deformation curve was truncated to the cellular deformation range of 0 – 500 nm . Then , the Levenberg – Marquardt algorithm was used to ﬁt each trun - cated curve to the equations for Hertz contact theory , an exponential equation , and a mechanistic parallel - spring re - cruitment ( PSR ) model ( Fig . 1 ) . Hertz : F = 4 3 E 1 − ν 2 R 12 δ 32 ( 1 ) Exponential : F = a e ( e b e δ − 1 ) ( 2 ) PSR model : F = a PSR δ 2 , ( 3 ) where F is the applied force , δ is the cellular deformation , E and ν are the Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the cell , respectively , R is the microsphere radius , and a e , b e , and a PSR are curve - ﬁt mechanical parameters ( see Appendix B for the derivation of the PSR model equation ) . The Hertz equation is based on contact between a spherical indenter ( microsphere ) and an elastic half plane ( cell ) . 28 The cell was assumed to be incompressible , having a Poisson’s ratio of 0 . 5 . It should be noted that this assumption does not affect the accuracy of the Hertz ﬁt , it only affects the magni - tude of the predicted modulus . Thus , in the Hertz equation , the force – deformation curve was ﬁt for E , while the other equations were ﬁt for the mechanical parameters ( a i and b i ) . Using the ﬁrst two loading cycles for preconditioning and , thus , omitting them from analysis , the loading curves from the last 10 loading cycles were evaluated for each loading session . If cellular deformation did not reach 500 nm in Whole - Cell Mechanical Behavior 751 any of the 10 loading curves , the cell was discarded from analysis ( n = 4 cells ) . Cellular reaction force at 500 nm deformation ( F 500 ) was also used in the analyses . Mean parameters for each loading session are referred to unless otherwise stated . Statistical Analysis Using Grubbs’ test 20 on the overall mean value of F 500 for each cell , one outlier was detected and discarded from further analyses . Thus , in total , we obtained valid measure - ments from 42 of the 54 cells ( n = 28 for direct repeatability , n = 14 for positioning repeatability ) . To assess direct and positioning repeatability , F 500 was compared between the two loading sessions for a single cell . First , a method for statistically evaluating measurement agreement was used in which the difference in mean values between loading sessions is plotted against the overall mean value for both loading sessions . 3 A relation existed between the difference in mean values and overall mean value , so a logarithmic transformation was performed to achieve difference / overall mean independence , as assumed in the analysis . As a second metric for repeatability , a linear regression was performed on F 500 for the second loading session versus the ﬁrst ses - sion for direct and positioning repeatability . The regression slope and coefﬁcient of determination were used to assess repeatability . Direct and positioning repeatability were also assessed quantitatively through measurement uncertainty , which is deﬁned as the difference in mean F 500 between the two loading sessions expressed as a percentage of the over - all mean for both loading sessions . Finally , measurement precision within a single loading session was assessed by calculating the COV for F 500 per loading session . The descriptive abilities of Hertz contact theory , the exponential equation , and the PSR model were compared by evaluating the coefﬁcient of determination and the root mean square ( RMS ) of the curve - ﬁt residuals , a measure of the average deviation of the data from the characterization method prediction . In addition , using only the ﬁrst loading session for each cell ( n = 42 ) , the predictive capabilities of the various parameters of each characterization method were evaluated by calculating the coefﬁcient of determi - nation for the regression of F 500 versus each mechanical parameter . Using only the ﬁrst loading session for each cell ( n = 42 ) , mechanical behavior variability for the MC3T3 - E1 os - teoblastic cell line was analyzed by performing a one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) between and within cells on F 500 . RESULTS Measurement agreement was statistically conﬁrmed for both direct and positioning repeatability . Evaluating the differences in log - transformed F 500 values between the ﬁrst and second loading sessions showed that greater than 95 % of the differences fell within 1 . 96 S . D . of the average dif - ference for both repeatability measures [ Fig . 2 ( A ) and ( B ) ] . A linear regression on F 500 of the second session versus that of the ﬁrst session for a given cell resulted in regres - sion slopes moderately close to 1 . 0 [ Fig . 2 ( C ) and ( D ) ] , which was within the conﬁdence interval for both direct and positioning repeatability . Nonetheless , the coefﬁcient of determination was only 0 . 39 and 0 . 46 for direct and posi - tioning repeatability , respectively . Despite the relatively low coefﬁcient of determination values , average measurement uncertainty was only 8 and 14 % for direct and position - ing repeatability , respectively . F 500 showed no systematic variability within a single loading session . Measurement precision within a single loading session , characterized by the average COV per loading session for F 500 , was 13 % , but a one - way ANOVA showed that 95 . 3 % of the total variance in F 500 was due to systematic differences between cells . The exponential and PSR model characterization meth - ods consistently followed the nonlinear experimental force – deformation response , while the Hertz equation did not ( Fig . 3 ) . Due to the large range in cellular reaction force over a single force – deformation curve , all of the characterization methods showed high coefﬁcient of determination values ( Table 1 ) . Nonetheless , the lower descriptive ability of the Hertz model was seen quantitatively in the average RMS of the curve - ﬁt residuals , which was 3 . 4 - and 2 . 8 - fold higher for the Hertz characterization method compared to the ex - ponential and PSR model methods , respectively . Predictive capabilities of individual mechanical parameters increased as the number of parameters in the characterization method decreased ( Fig . 4 ) . For the MC3T3 - E1 osteoblastic cell line , mechanical behavior , as characterized by F 500 , varied by an order of magnitude across cells ( range = 1 . 2 – 12 . 3 nN ) with a COV of 56 % ( mean ± S . D . = 4 . 8 ± 2 . 7 nN ) . All of the mechani - cal parameters from the three characterization methods also revealed substantial variability across the cell line . DISCUSSION A complete understanding of whole - cell mechanical be - havior can provide insight into how cells respond to me - chanical loading and diseases in which such responses are altered . The overall goal of this study was to use the AFM in conjunction with several characterization methods to establish a mechanically rigorous and robust method for measuring and characterizing whole - cell mechanical be - havior . Measurement repeatability was conﬁrmed for two types of repeatability metrics , indicating that the AFM is a suitable tool for investigating whole - cell mechanical be - havior . However , the moderate repeatability and precision indicate that these measurement limitations should be con - sidered in the design of future AFM experiments . The PSR model proved to be an excellent characterization method of 752 J AASMA et al . - 0 . 8 - 0 . 4 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 1 . 2 1 . 6 D i ff e r en c e i n l oga r i t h m o f F 500 ( l og n N ) Overall mean logarithm of F 500 ( log nN ) Mean + 1 . 96 σ Mean Mean - 1 . 96 σ - 0 . 8 - 0 . 4 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 0 0 . 4 0 . 8 1 . 2 1 . 6 D i ff e r en c e i n l oga r i t h m o f F 500 ( l og n N ) Overall mean logarithm of F 500 ( log nN ) Mean + 1 . 96 σ Mean Mean - 1 . 96 σ 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 y = 0 . 86x + 1 . 0 R 2 = 0 . 39 S e c ond s e ss i on F 500 ( n N ) First session F 500 ( nN ) 0 5 10 15 20 0 5 10 15 20 y = 0 . 84x + 0 . 45 R 2 = 0 . 46 S e c ond s e ss i on F 500 ( n N ) First session F 500 ( nN ) A B D C FIGURE 2 . Measurement repeatability . ( A ) Direct and ( B ) positioning repeatability are conﬁrmed for F 500 using a test for mea - surement agreement 3 . Repeatability between the two loading sessions is veriﬁed since the differences in mean value of the log - transformed F 500 data fall within ± 1 . 96 σ of the average difference . ( C ) Direct and ( D ) positioning repeatability also shown by plotting mean F 500 for the second loading session vs . the ﬁrst loading session . Error bars represent S . D . for individual loading sessions . whole - cell mechanical behavior and is particularly attrac - tive mathematically since it is a single - parameter model . MC3T3 - E1 osteoblastic cells showed considerable inter - cell variability in whole - cell mechanical behavior as the COV for both F 500 and a PSR , the mechanical parameter of the PSR model , was 56 % ( n = 42 cells ) . Taken together , these results should improve the capabilities of the AFM to probe whole - cell mechanical behavior . In addition , the success of the PSR model provides valuable insight into the micromechanical basis of whole - cell behavior . This study has a number of strengths . First , in seeking to obtain a good representation of in vivo cellular behavior , all experiments were performed under standard culture condi - tions . The osteoblastic cells were also grown on collagen I , the main organic constituent of bone . 29 Second , to limit potentially confounding effects associated with the material heterogeneity of the cell , all loading was performed over the nucleus and a single range in cellular deformation was analyzed for all loading curves . Third , the imposed cellular deformation was likely comparable to normal in vivo levels because the maximum deformation was in the range that in - vokes an intracellular calcium response . 6 Fourth , based on previous work in our laboratory , a sufﬁciently large micro - sphere probe was used to ensure measurement of whole - cell behavior . 26 Despite these strengths , several caveats are noted . First , the exponential and PSR model characterization methods do not account for probe / cell contact area , and , hence , the curve - ﬁt parameters in these characterization methods may be probe dependent . Nevertheless , these characterization methods are favored over Hertz contact theory because they describe the force – deformation response with 3 - fold lower residual values . In preliminary analyses , we also evalu - ated several viscoelastic models , including the Maxwell , Kelvin – Voigt , and standard linear solid models , 19 which all showed limited descriptive abilities for describing the mea - sured whole - cell mechanical behavior . Second , since cells exhibit viscoelastic behavior , all of the characterization Whole - Cell Mechanical Behavior 753 0 100 200 300 400 500 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Deformation ( nm ) F o r c e ( n N ) DataHertzExponentialPSR model FIGURE 3 . Typical whole - cell force – deformation response and characterization method descriptions of the response . The exponential and PSR model characterization methods con - sistently captured the force – deformation response , while the Hertz equation showed limited descriptive abilities . methods may be loading rate dependent . The loading rate used in this study was slow enough that the viscous behavior had only a minor stiffening effect on the force – deformation response ( data not shown ) , which is consistent with results from a previous study . 1 Also , the 1 - Hz loading frequency was chosen to mimic in vivo loading of osteoblasts dur - ing locomotion . 4 , 49 Third , all experiments were performed on nonconﬂuent osteoblastic cells , so the characterization method results and the conclusions drawn from them may not apply to all cell phenotypes or to conﬂuent cell cultures . Based on comparable cellular structure across multiple phe - notypes , we anticipate that the PSR model and exponential equation characterization methods will perform well for numerous adherent phenotypes . And ﬁnally , by virtue of the speciﬁc nature of the applied load , the behavior reported here does not provide a complete view of in vivo mechanical behavior . Nonetheless , a well - deﬁned , controlled loading technique is provided to investigate whole - cell mechanical behavior as well as the effects of disease and mechanical or biochemical treatments on this behavior . Although measurement agreement was conﬁrmed for both direct and positioning repeatability , there was vari - TABLE 1 . Comparison of descriptive measures for mechani - cal characterization methods Characterization method Average R 2 Average RMS of curve - ﬁt residuals ( nN ) Hertz 0 . 955 0 . 31 Exponential 0 . 996 0 . 09 PSR 0 . 993 0 . 11 ability in mean F 500 between loading sessions [ Fig . 2 ( C ) and ( D ) ] . Relative to absolute F 500 values , however , the differences in F 500 were moderate as the average measure - ment uncertainty per cell was only 8 and 14 % for direct and positioning repeatability , respectively . The only difference between these repeatability tests was the adjustment of the relative probe / cell position in the positioning repeatability test . Therefore , we conclude that probe / cell positioning er - ror accounts for only 6 % of the measurement uncertainty . The additional variability in measurements between loading sessions is likely due to cytoskeletal rearrangement dur - ing the 5 - min pause period . However , structural changes were not predictable as no systematic changes in F 500 were observed . Regardless of the source of the variability , the modest level of measurement repeatability indicates that the uncertainty associated with measurements from a sin - gle loading session should be accounted for in statistical design by using a sufﬁciently large sample size . Despite its limitations , the AFM measurement technique is adequate to detect differences in whole - cell mechanical behavior between cells . Measurement precision was mod - erate as the average COV for F 500 per loading session was 13 % . However , this precision is toward the lower bound of the range reported in three AFM studies ( COV = 5 – 29 % ) . 9 , 44 , 45 Variations in precision between cells , which can be seen in Fig . 2 ( A ) and ( B ) , are largely due to can - tilever noise that causes variability in the contact prediction . The moderate precision reported here and in other studies indicates that AFM studies of cellular mechanical behav - ior should incorporate averaging of multiple measurements from the same cell . The fact that only 5 % of the total vari - ance in F 500 across all measurements was due to variations within measurements for a single cell conﬁrms that the variability within a loading session for a single cell is small compared to the variability in mechanical behavior across cells . The MC3T3 - E1 osteoblast cell line showed consider - able intercell variability in whole - cell mechanical behavior as the COV for F 500 was 56 % . While this level of vari - ability is higher than that reported for local cellular me - chanical behavior ( COV = 6 – 26 % ) , 9 , 33 , 36 , 48 it is similar to that reported for NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts probed with a micro - sphere ( COV = 43 % ) , 31 and substantially less than that re - ported for primary osteoblasts probed with similar size mi - crospheres ( diameter = 10 – 30 µ m ) ( COV = 103 % ) . 7 The higher variability in measured mechanical behavior in that study , 7 may be a result of greater biological heterogeneity for primary osteoblasts compared to MC3T3 - E1 cells . An - other potential source of the higher variability is the large range in probe size coupled with the use of Hertz contact theory . Hertz theory accounts for probe size , but this may add false variability in calculated whole - cell moduli since Hertz theory does not accurately describe this behavior . Regardless , the large range in osteoblast mechanical be - havior measured in both studies may help to explain the 754 J AASMA et al . 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 y = 0 . 0026x - 0 . 01 R 2 = 0 . 99 F 500 ( n N ) F 500 ( n N ) F 500 ( n N ) E ( Pa ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 y = 7 . 1x + 1 . 5 R 2 = 0 . 59 a e ( nN ) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 10 20 30 40 50 y = 0 . 26x - 0 . 02 R 2 = 0 . 99 a PSR ( nN µ m - 2 ) A B C FIGURE 4 . Predictive capabilities of mechanical characterization parameters for whole - cell mechanical behavior . For the expo - nential characterization method , the parameter with the highest coefﬁcient of determination is shown . E was highly correlated with F 500 , while the Hertz characterization method did not provide an accurate description of the force – deformation response . In contrast , a e was moderately correlated with F 500 , but the exponential method provided an accurate description of the force – deformation response . Combining these effects , the PSR model showed excellent predictive ( a PSR correlation with F 500 ) and descriptive ( agreement with force – deformation response ) capabilities . inter – cell variability in the magnitude of mechanical load required to invoke an intracellular calcium response . 7 , 49 To determine the best characterization method from those studied , several factors must be considered . Quan - tiﬁcation of the descriptive capabilities via the RMS of the curve - ﬁt residuals for the force – deformation response showed that the exponential equation and PSR model were 3 . 4 - and 2 . 8 - fold superior to the Hertz characterization method , respectively . Although the exponential method de - scribed the force – deformation response with the highest level of accuracy , the improvement over the PSR model was minimal . It can be seen in Fig . 4 that as the num - ber of parameters within a characterization method de - creases , the predictive capability of a single parameter in the model increases . Because the PSR model provides a single mechanical parameter that accurately predicts the force – deformation response , we contend that it is favored over the two - parameter exponential method . Additionally , be - cause there is no mechanistic basis for the exponential equation , the parameter values are difﬁcult to interpret . In contrast , the PSR model provides insight into the microme - chanical basis of whole - cell mechanical behavior . While the PSR model provides an accurate , computa - tionally efﬁcient means of characterizing the experimental results , one limitation of this characterization method is its inability to determine the source or sources of the nonlinear - ity in the force – deformation response . This limitation can be addressed through further investigation into the inability of Hertz contact theory to accurately describe the measured force – deformation response . According to Hertz contact theory , an increase in probe / cell contact area with increas - ing deformation results in a nonlinear force – deformation response for a linearly elastic material . Thus , the accurate descriptions provided by the PSR model and exponential Whole - Cell Mechanical Behavior 755 FIGURE 5 . Schematic of microstructural basis for whole - cell mechanical behavior . In the unloaded state , the cytoskeletal ﬁlaments can have a slack conﬁguration . As a force , F , is applied to an integrin ( A ) , the attached ﬁlaments becomes taut ( B ) , which also increases the ﬁlaments’ ability to resist deformation . As a result , force is transferred to mechanically connected ﬁlaments . These ﬁlaments then become taut ( C ) and transfer loading to additional ﬁlaments . In this representation of the cellular microstructure , the interconnected cytoskeleton is the source of the nonlinear cell stiffness . Similar behavior would occur under tensile and shear loading . equation do not necessarily indicate nonlinear elastic be - havior at the whole - cell level . Correcting for the Hertz con - tact theory assumption that the cell is ﬂat by accounting for its curvature did not alter the descriptive abilities . Because the shape of the force – deformation response was consistent across all loading sessions , the homogeneous material as - sumption also does not appear to be violated . However , the inability of the Hertz equation to follow the extent of the measured nonlinearity in the force – deformation response may be due in part to the assumption that the cell is in - ﬁnitely thick . A modiﬁcation to Hertz contact theory has been proposed to account for the stiffening effect of the rigid substrate beneath a thin sample . 14 This modiﬁcation increases the nonlinearity of the Hertz equation , but several ﬁnite element analyses , 8 , 10 do not support the degree of the increased nonlinearity that is predicted . These ﬁnite element studies indicate that , relative to the standard Hertz equation , approximately 25 – 50 % of the increase in stiffness with increasing deformation that we observed is an artifact caused by the ﬁnite thickness of the cell . Therefore , the remaining nonlinearity in the force – deformation response appears to be an indication of appreciable nonlinear elastic behavior . This is not a surprising result since nonlinear cellular mechanical behavior has been observed with other mechanical loading devices . 38 , 46 Finally , the ability of the PSR model to accurately de - scribe whole - cell mechanical behavior suggests how the cell microstructure contributes to the observed nonlinear elastic behavior . Each spring can represent a component of the cell’s mechanical structure , such as a cytoskeletal ﬁla - ment ( Fig . 5 ) . If each ﬁlament behaves as an entropic spring , in agreement with a freely jointed chain or worm - like chain model of a ﬁlament , its stiffness increases dramatically as a force is exerted on it . This is due to a decrease in entropy that accompanies a taut ﬁlament conﬁguration . 24 As a force is initially exerted on a cell , the load is resisted by ﬁlaments in the cortical cytoskeleton as they become taut ( Fig . 5 ) . Due to the interconnected cytoskeletal meshwork , additional force exerted on a taut ﬁlament is transferred to neighboring ﬁl - aments that are mechanically connected to it . Accordingly , as deformation increases , numerous ﬁlaments become me - chanically active , and , thus , cellular stiffness increases with deformation . In a similar manner , prestressed cable network models predict a nonlinear force – deformation response . 11 Computationally , however , the PSR model is a much sim - pler method for describing experimentally observed force – deformation responses . Regardless of the micromechanical details , our ﬁndings support this general framework of in - cremental recruitment of identical elastic elements with increasing cellular deformation . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Funding for this study was provided by the National Sci - ence Foundation ( BES - 0201951 ) and the Whitaker Foun - dation Graduate Fellowship Program ( WMJ ) . The authors would like to thank Michael Yu , Chet Lim , and May Chu for technical assistance as well as Jordi Alcaraz and Daniel Fletcher for advice on AFM techniques . 756 J AASMA et al . APPENDIX A The point of initial cantilever / cell contact had to be de - termined for each loading cycle . This procedure is critical since contact prediction has been shown to substantially af - fect calculated modulus when using Hertz contact theory . 14 Commonly used contact prediction methods include direct analysis of the force curve for a change in slope , 9 , 30 , 44 and Hertz model equation analysis via examination of speciﬁc data points , 15 , 23 , 39 least - squares curve ﬁtting , 2 , 14 , 21 and an exact solution . 8 Least - squares curve ﬁtting was recently used to ﬁt the force curve with a nonlinear equation . 45 Al - though this method does not incorporate the assumption of elastic behavior , it does assume that the force – deformation response follows the same functional form as is predicted by Hertz contact theory for a pyramidal probe . All meth - ods , except direct analysis of the force curve , incorporate assumptions about cell material behavior , and current di - rect analysis techniques can be subjective because they re - quire user - dependent determination of the point where a substantial change in the slope of the force curve occurs . Therefore , we sought to develop an objective method for determining the point of contact that does not require a priori assumptions about the material behavior of the cell . We also required a robust , repeatable method that could be used for cantilevers with differing tip geometries . When in contact , the cell and cantilever system can be represented by elastic elements in series . The equivalent spring constant , k eq , is k eq = k cant (cid:1) k cell k cant + k cell (cid:2) , ( A . 1 ) where k cant is the cantilever spring constant . During con - tact , z = u c + δ , ( A . 2 ) where z is the position of the base of the cantilever and u c is the cantilever deﬂection . Using Hooke’s law , F = k cant u c , it follows that during contact , k eq = dF dz = k cant du c dz . ( A . 3 ) Hence , from Eqs . ( A . 1 ) and ( A . 3 ) , du c dz = k cell k cant + k cell . ( A . 4 ) Finally , before contact , we can consider k eq = 0 , and thus , du c dz = 0 . Therefore , with only mechanical forces acting , we predict contact to occur at the last instant in the loading curve where the slope of the cantilever deﬂection is zero . This theory was implemented by ﬁrst ﬁltering the can - tilever deﬂection data with a low pass ﬁlter ( Fig . 6 ) . Then , du c dz was calculated at each point by evaluating the slope when ﬁtting a quadratic equation to u c ( z ) for a range in z of ± 7 . 8 nm ( ± 2 data points ) . It was observed through visual inspection of the point of contact that after contact , FIGURE 6 . Cantilever deﬂection vs . cantilever base position . Force curve showing ﬁltered deﬂection data and two ROI for determining the point of contact . The loading cycle ( solidline ) begins at point A with the cantilever above the cell ( noncon - tact ) . The cantilever is lowered ( arrow indicates where con - tact is predicted to occur ) until 600 nm of cellular deformation is reached at point B . The cantilever is then fully retracted ( dashedline ) to its original location . du c dz is piecewise linear over large intervals in z . However , in the vicinity of the point of contact , noise and nonlin - earities are observed in du c dz . The nonlinearities are likely due to a combination of factors including mechanical and electrostatic interactions with the cell glycocalyx as well as hydrodynamic drag acting on the cantilever . Therefore , two regions of interest ( ROI ) were chosen where cellular mechanical forces dominate the cantilever / cell interaction , and the point of contact was extrapolated from this region . The two ROI were deﬁned as the range over which du c dz was 0 – 15 % and 10 – 40 % of its minimum value ( du c dz is negative during contact ) . A line was ﬁt to du c dz over each ROI , and each line was extrapolated to cross du c dz = 0 , i . e . k eq = 0 ( Fig . 7 ) . Of the two predicted contact points , the lower z value ( greater cantilever extension ) was deﬁned as the point of contact . Often the two ROI predicted nearly identical points of contact . However , due to the various forces acting on the cantilever near contact , both ROI were required to consistently predict the point of contact accurately . This contact prediction method proved to be robust as contact predictions were accurate for cantilevers with 5 , 10 , and 45 µ m microspheres as well as cantilevers with pyramidal tips ( data not shown ) . APPENDIX B To model the nonlinear cellular force – deformation re - sponse that has been observed , 35 , 42 a parallel - spring recruit - ment ( PSR ) model was used . Various spring recruitment Whole - Cell Mechanical Behavior 757 FIGURE 7 . Derivative of cantilever deﬂection vs . cantilever base position . The linear ﬁt to each ROI is extrapolated through the ordinate . Contact is predicted at the lower base position where the two linear ﬁts cross the ordinate . models have been used to describe the nonlinear elasticity of soft tissues such as tendon and ligament . 17 In a parallel - spring recruitment model , a spring will undergo deformation , i . e . , become mechanically active , once its re - cruitment deformation has been reached . The model we used to describe whole - cell mechanical behavior consists of a large number of parallel springs , each having the same spring constant , k ( Fig . 1 ) . The force at a given cellular deformation is determined according to the equation F ( δ ) = (cid:3) δ 0 K ( x ) dx , ( B . 1 ) where K ( δ ) is the tangent stiffness at the deformation , δ . If each spring’s recruitment deformation is considered to be a random variable , there is a linear distribution of recruitment deformation values . Due to the parallel arrangement , the overall spring constant , K ( δ ) , can be expressed as K ( δ ) = n ( δ ) k , ( B . 2 ) where n ( δ ) is the number of mechanically active springs . As the cell is deformed , the percentage of the cell that is mechanically active is equal to the ratio of the current deformation to the deformation at which all of the material has reached its recruitment deformation , δ ∗ . Therefore , K ( δ ) = K ( δ ∗ ) δ ∗ δ = 2 a PSR δ , ( B . 3 ) where a PSR is a constant that represents one - half the ratio of the tangent stiffness to the deformation at any cellular deformation . Using Eqs . ( B . 1 ) and ( B . 3 ) , it follows that F ( δ ) = a PSR δ 2 . ( B . 4 ) REFERENCES 1 A - Hassan , E . , W . F . Heinz , M . D . Antonik , N . P . D’Costa , S . Nageswaran , C . Schoenenberger , and J . H . Hoh . Relative mi - croelastic mapping of living cells by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 74 : 1564 – 1578 , 1998 . 2 Alcaraz , J . , L . Buscemi , M . Grabulosa , X . Trepat , B . Fabry , R . Farre , and D . Navajas . Microrheology of human lung ep - ithelial cells measured by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 84 : 2071 – 2079 , 2003 . 3 Bland , J . M . , and D . G . Altman . Statistical methods for assess - ing agreement between two methods of clinical measurement . Lancet 1 : 307 – 310 , 1986 . 4 Burr , D . B . , A . G . Robling , and C . H . Turner . Effects of biomechanical stress on bones in animals . Bone 30 : 781 – 786 , 2002 . 5 Butt , H . J . , and M . Jaschke . Calculation of thermal noise in atomic force microscopy . Nanotechnology 6 : 1 – 7 , 1995 . 6 Charras , G . T . , and M . A . Horton . Determination of cellular strains by combined atomic force microscopy and ﬁnite element modeling . Biophys . J . 83 : 858 – 879 , 2002 . 7 Charras , G . T . , and M . A . Horton . Single cell mechanotransduc - tion and its modulation analyzed by atomic force microscope indentation . Biophys . J . 82 : 2970 – 2981 , 2002 . 8 Charras , G . T . , P . P . Lehenkari , and M . A . Horton . Atomic force microscopy can be used to mechanically stimulate os - teoblasts and evaluate cellular strain distributions . Ultrami - croscopy 86 : 85 – 95 , 2001 . 9 Collinsworth , A . M . , S . Zhang , W . E . Kraus , and G . A . Truskey . Apparent elastic modulus and hysteresis of skeletal muscle cells throughout differentiation . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 : C1219 – C1227 , 2002 . 10 Costa , K . D . , and F . C . Yin . Analysis of indentation : Implica - tions for measuring mechanical properties with atomic force microscopy . J . Biomech . Eng . 121 : 462 – 471 , 1999 . 11 Coughlin , M . F . , and D . Stamenovic . A prestressed cable net - work model of the adherent cell cytoskeleton . Biophys . J . 84 : 1328 – 1336 , 2003 . 12 Cucina , A . , A . V . Sterpetti , G . Pupelis , A . Fragale , and S . Lepidi . Shear stress induces changes in the morphology and cytoskeleton organisation of arterial endothelial cells . Eur . J . Vasc . Endovasc . Surg . 9 : 86 – 92 , 1995 . 13 Davies , P . F . , A . Robotewskyj , and M . L . Griem . Quantitative studies of endothelial cell adhesion . Directional remodeling of focal adhesion sites in response to ﬂow forces . J . Clin . Invest . 93 : 2031 – 2038 , 1994 . 14 Dimitriadis , E . K . , F . Horkay , J . Maresca , B . Kachar , and R . S . Chadwick . Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft material using the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 82 : 2798 – 2810 , 2002 . 15 Domke , J . , and M . Radmacher . Measuring the elastic proper - ties of thin polymer ﬁlms with the atomic force microscope . Langmuir 14 : 3320 – 3325 , 1998 . 16 Freshney , R . I . Culture of Animal Cells . New York : Wiley - Liss , 2000 . 17 Frisen , M . , M . Magi , L . Sonnerup , and A . Viidik . Rheological analysis of soft collagenous tissue . J . Biomech . 2 : 13 – 20 , 1969 . 18 Fung , Y . C . Biomechanics : Motion , Flow , Stress , and Growth . New York : Springer - Verlag , 1990 . 19 Fung , Y . C . Biomechanics : Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues . New York : Springer - Verlag , 1993 . 20 Grubbs , F . E . Procedures for detecting outlying observations in samples . Technometrics 11 : 1 – 21 , 1969 . 21 Haga , H . , S . Sasaki , K . Kawabata , E . Ito , T . Ushiki , and T . Sambongi . Elasticity mapping of living ﬁbroblasts by AFM 758 J AASMA et al . and immunoﬂuorescence observation of the cytoskeleton . Ul - tramicroscopy 82 : 253 – 258 , 2000 . 22 Hategan , A . , R . Law , S . Kahn , and D . E . Discher . Adhesively - tensed cell membranes : Lysis kinetics and atomic force mi - croscopy probing . Biophys . J . 85 : 2746 – 2759 , 2003 . 23 Hofmann , U . G . , C . Rotsch , W . J . Parak , and M . Radmacher . Investigating the cytoskeleton of chicken cardiocytes with the atomic force microscope . J . Struct . Biol . 119 : 84 – 91 , 1997 . 24 Howard , J . Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton . Sunderland , MA : Sinauer Associates , 2001 . 25 Hutter , J . L . , and J . Bechhoefer . Calibration of atomic - force microscope tips . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 64 : 1868 – 1873 , 1993 . 26 Jaasma , M . J . Osteoblast Mechanical Behavior and Its Adap - tation to Mechanical Loading . PhD Dissertation , University of California , Berkeley , CA , 2004 . 27 Janmey , P . A . The cytoskeleton and cell signaling : Component localizationandmechanicalcoupling . Physiol . Rev . 78 : 763 – 781 , 1998 . 28 Johnson , K . L . Contact Mechanics . Cambridge , MA : Cambridge University Press , 1985 . 29 Lee , C . A . , and T . A . Einhorn . The bone organ system . In : Osteoporosis , edited by R . Marcus , D . Feldman , and J . Kelsey , Vol . 1 . New York : Academic , 2001 , pp . 3 – 20 . 30 Mahaffy , R . E . , S . Park , E . Gerde , J . Kas , and C . K . Shih . Quan - titative analysis of the viscoelastic properties of thin regions of ﬁbroblasts using atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 86 : 1777 – 1793 , 2004 . 31 Mahaffy , R . E . , C . K . Shih , F . C . MacKintosh , and J . Kas . Scanning probe - based frequency - dependent microrheology of polymer gels and biological cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 : 880 – 883 , 2000 . 32 Maniotis , A . J . , C . S . Chen , and D . E . Ingber . Demonstration of mechanical connections between integrins , cytoskeletal ﬁla - ments , and nucleoplasm that stabilize nuclear structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 : 849 – 854 , 1997 . 33 Mathur , A . B . , G . A . Truskey , and W . M . Reichert . Atomic force and total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy for the study of force transmission in endothelial cells . Biophys . J . 78 : 1725 – 1735 , 2000 . 34 McElfresh , M . , E . Baesu , R . Balhorn , J . Belak , M . J . Allen , and R . E . Rudd . Combining constitutive materials modeling with atomic force microscopy to understand the mechanical properties of living cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 ( Suppl 2 ) : 6493 – 6497 , 2002 . 35 Miyazaki , H . , and K . Hayashi . Atomic force microscopic mea - surement of the mechanical properties of intact endothelial cells in fresh arteries . Med . Biol . Eng . Comput . 37 : 530 – 536 , 1999 . 36 Ohashi , T . , Y . Ishii , Y . Ishikawa , T . Matsumoto , and M . Sato . Experimental and numerical analyses of local mechanical prop - erties measured by atomic force microscopy for sheared en - dothelial cells . Biomed . Mater . Eng . 12 : 319 – 327 , 2002 . 37 Pavalko , F . M . , N . X . Chen , C . H . Turner , D . B . Burr , S . Atkinson , Y . F . Hsieh , J . Qiu , and R . L . Duncan . Fluid shear - induced mechanical signaling in MC3T3 - E1 osteoblasts requires cytoskeleton – integrin interactions . Am . J . Physiol . 275 : C1591 – C1601 , 1998 . 38 Petersen , N . O . , W . B . McConnaughey , and E . L . Elson . Depen - dence of locally measured cellular deformability on position on the cell , temperature , and cytochalasin B . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 79 : 5327 – 5331 , 1982 . 39 Radmacher , M . , M . Fritz , C . M . Kacher , J . P . Cleveland , and P . K . Hansma . Measuring the viscoelastic properties of human platelets with the atomic force microscope . Biophys . J . 70 : 556 – 567 , 1996 . 40 Raucher , D . , and M . P . Sheetz . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buffering membrane tension . Biophys . J . 77 : 1992 – 2002 , 1999 . 41 Rotsch , C . , and M . Radmacher . Drug - induced changes in cytoskeletal structure and mechanics in ﬁbroblasts : An atomic force microscopy study . Biophys . J . 78 : 520 – 535 , 2000 . 42 Sato , M . , K . Nagayama , N . Kataoka , M . Sasaki , and K . Hane . Local mechanical properties measured by atomic force mi - croscopy for cultured bovine endothelial cells exposed to shear stress . J . Biomech . 33 : 127 – 135 , 2000 . 43 Sneddon , I . N . The relation between load and penetration in the axisymmetric Boussinesq problem for a punch of arbitrary proﬁle . Int . J . Eng . Sci . 3 : 47 – 57 , 1965 . 44 Sugawara , M . , Y . Ishida , and H . Wada . Local mechanical prop - erties of guinea pig outer hair cells measured by atomic force microscopy . Hear . Res . 174 : 222 – 229 , 2002 . 45 Sugawara , M . , Y . Ishida , and H . Wada . Mechanical properties of sensory and supporting cells in the organ of Corti of the guinea pig cochlea—study by atomic force microscopy . Hear . Res . 192 : 57 – 64 , 2004 . 46 Wang , N . , J . P . Butler , and D . E . Ingber . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 : 1124 – 1127 , 1993 . 47 Wang , N . , K . Naruse , D . Stamenovic , J . J . Fredberg , S . M . Mijailovich , I . M . Tolic - Norrelykke , T . Polte , R . Mannix , and D . E . Ingber . Mechanical behavior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 : 7765 – 7770 , 2001 . 48 Wu , H . W . , T . Kuhn , and V . T . Moy . Mechanical properties of L929 cells measured by atomic force microscopy : Effects of anticytoskeletal drugs and membrane crosslinking . Scanning 20 : 389 – 397 , 1998 . 49 You , J . , C . E . Yellowley , H . J . Donahue , Y . Zhang , Q . Chen , and C . R . Jacobs . Substrate deformation levels associated with routinephysicalactivityarelessstimulatorytobonecellsrelative toload - inducedoscillatoryﬂuidﬂow . J . Biomech . Eng . 122 : 387 – 393 , 2000 .