CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Designing for Social Interaction in the Age of Excessive Smartphone Use Hüseyin Uğur Genç Aykut Coşkun KUAR , Koç University KUAR , Koç University İstanbul , Turkey İstanbul , Turkey hgenc17 @ ku . edu . tr aykutcoskun @ ku . edu . tr ABSTRACT Excessive smartphone use has negative effects on our social relations as well as on our mental and psychological health . Most of the previous work to avoid these negative effects is based on a top - down approach such as restricting or limiting users ' use of smartphones . Diverging from previous work , we followed a bottom - up approach to understand the practice of smartphone use in public settings from the users’ perspective . We conducted observations in four coffeehouses , six focus group sessions with 46 participants and three design workshops with 15 designers . We identified five themes that help better understand smartphone use behavior in public settings and four alternative design approaches to mediate this behavior , namely enlighteners , preventers , supporters , and compliers . We discuss the implications of these themes and approaches for designing future interactive technologies aimed at mediating excessive smartphone use behavior . Author Keywords Design for behavioral change ; Smartphone ; Focus group Design workshop ACM Classification Keywords • Human - centered computing ~ Ubiquitous and mobile computing • Human - centered computing ~ Human computer interaction ( HCI ) INTRODUCTION Smartphones accompany us in every aspect of our lives . We have become more dependent on them for almost every daily task , from making a payment to connecting to our homes . While smartphone applications offer promising ways to ease our lives and even to prevent and treat chronic diseases such as diabetes [ 5 ] or alcoholism [ 16 ] , their overuse may lead to physical and mental health problems . These include sight problems , joint pain and neck pain symptoms [ 30 ] , sleep disturbances and depression [ 31 ] , and smartphone addiction Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI ' 20 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04… $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376492 [ 29 , 32 ] . Furthermore , excessive smartphone use negatively influences our social interactions such as damaging the level of intimacy and connection between friends , reducing conversation quality [ 36 , 42 ] , and making companions feel awkward and excluded in social settings [ 20 ] . Previously , HCI researchers explored this problem in the scope of behavior change . They offer solutions aimed at reducing the negative effects of excessive smartphone use . However , majority of these solutions commonly benefit from strategies helping users to restrict their smartphone use . For example , providing users with an opportunity to set use - limits for themselves [ 25 , 29 , 33 ] or setting use - limits to each other via a mobile app [ 26 , 27 ] , and reminding excessive use through visual and haptic feedback [ 8 , 38 ] . Diverging from this work , we aim to identify alternative ways of mediating excessive smart phone use without necessarily restricting it . We believe that a wider exploration of this solution space [ 11 ] from the users’ perspective would make a relevant contribution to the field . It would provide researchers and practitioners working on this problem with more approaches from which they can select according to different behavioral change contexts [ 2 ] ( e . g . , different characteristics of target users , situational factors and so on ) . As smartphones have become ubiquitous devices , there are many settings that we can see the negative effects of their excessive use . In this work , we focus on examining the negative effects on daily social interactions . We selected public settings as a case , because it would allow us to understand these interactions easily . In the scope of this paper , we refer a public setting as a physical location where a social group ( family , friends , colleagues and so on ) meet and spend time together . Inspired by practice - based design [ 47 ] , we utilized various data collection techniques to better understand the practice of smart phone use in public settings and identify potential design directions for mediating this behavior . We first made unstructured observations in four coffeehouses . Then , we conducted six focus group sessions with 46 participants representing three different age groups ( Table 1 ) . In these observations and focus groups , we explored • the situations that trigger smartphone use during daily social interactions , • people’s motivations for using and not using their smartphones during these interactions , Paper 365 Page 1 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA • their feelings and reactions towards people who constantly interact with their phones instead of engaging in the conversation . Based on this exploration , we revealed five themes that provide an account of people’s smartphone use behavior in public settings . Then , we conducted three design workshops with 15 designers whose task was to generate solutions for mediating smartphone use in social settings by using these themes as a reference . After analyzing designers’ solutions , we identified four alternative design approaches : • Enlighteners : creating awareness about the quality of social interaction by informing the users . • Preservers : aiming to mitigate the triggers of phone checking behavior in social settings . • Supporters : increasing the quality of the conversation among users and helping avoid the strange lull moments . • Compliers : providing smooth isolation for users in relation to social interaction . We believe that these themes and design approaches can inspire designers and researchers in developing future interactive technologies that help users manage their excessive smartphone use . RELATED WORK Excessive smartphone use and its influence on our mental health and social relations Excessive smart phone use may have adverse effects on our mental health . For example , surveying 467 young people about their social media usage habits during the day and night time , researchers found that social media use leads to lower sleep quality , lower self - esteem and a higher level of anxiety [ 50 ] . The time spent on social media networks may also have psychological effects on the individuals . Many clinicians observed the symptoms of various mental disorders such as anxiety and depression in people who spend more time in social media [ 50 ] . Furthermore , researchers working on social media use and time spent on these networks found that students , who spend more than two hours of a day in social networking sites like Facebook or Instagram , are more likely to suffer from distress , poor mental health , and even suicidal thoughts [ 46 ] . Many studies indicate that excessive smart phone use have negatively influences our social relations . For example , people become less engaged with their immediate social environment , due to heavy smart phone use during social interaction [ 1 , 7 , 36 , 45 ] . The time spent with friends becomes less valuable , which is positively and significantly related to life satisfaction [ 45 ] . They enjoy a meal with their friends less when their smartphones were present . People have tense arousal and boredom , because they feel less socially connected and perceive time slower [ 12 ] . Even , excessive smartphone use is associated with lower relationship satisfaction with the romantic partner [ 44 ] . Mediating excessive smartphone use via persuasive technology Persuasive technologies [ 13 ] , defined as interactive technologies designed to change users’ attitudes or behaviors , has gained significant interest from the HCI community within the last two decades . To date , researchers offered design strategies to motivate behavior change [ 9 , 14 , 37 ] , explored the effectiveness of these strategies [ 24 ] , provided tools and frameworks helping designers to ideate [ 34 ] as well as developed prototypes to motivate various behaviors including sustainable ( e . g . , [ 23 ] ) and healthy behaviors ( e . g . , [ 43 ] ) . Recently excessive smartphone use has also received attraction from researchers working in this field . For example , AppDetox [ 33 ] and The SAMS [ 29 ] are two mobile applications which allow users to set rules for the applications they want to use less . Let’s FOCUS [ 21 ] aims to reduce phone use in classrooms through giving context - aware reminders to students . Unlike these solutions focusing on individuals and their intention to regulate their own behavior , Lock n ' lol [ 26 ] and NUGU [ 27 ] aim to reduce smartphone use by restricting group members’ smartphone use time . They use group - limiting mode to restrict the application use and to mute notification alerts . Differently from Lock n’ lol , NUGU allows users to share their limiting time schedules and , contexts that they are willing to limit their smartphone use ( i . e . , studying , working etc . ) . Similarly , FamiLync [ 25 ] turns use - limiting action into a family activity . All family member’s smartphone use statistics are shown in a dashboard which provides social awareness of smartphone use . These examples commonly use strategies restricting users’ smartphone use via either individuals’ motivation or social facilitation . However , these restricting strategies depend on several conditions to be successful . Users should be aware of the negative effects of excessive smartphone use , have tendency to mediate this use behavior [ 3 ] and they need to have high level of self - regulation [ 51 ] to insist on this behavior change decision . Also , using these strategies may even create unintended outcomes . For example , the results of a recent study showed that teens , who had to limit their social media use involuntarily , experienced negative feelings and increased the time they spend in social media after the break period was over [ 4 ] . There are also other solutions that followed a different approach in terms of giving feedback about excessive use . For instance , LockDoll [ 8 ] is a doll that notifies group members according to phone usage by an ambient light and by waving its arm . SCAN [ 39 ] monitors the interaction between group members by built - in sensors , and defers notifications until it detects break - points in interactions like a moment of silence . Such alternative solutions are valuable in terms of expanding the design space for solutions mediating excessive smart phone use . Having an expanded solution space would allow applying different solutions , Paper 365 Page 2 CHI 2020 Paper comparing their effectiveness in terms of mediating excessive smart phone use , and selecting the most suitable solutions for different behavioral change contexts ( e . g . a social gathering or a meeting ) . From this viewpoint , we conducted three exploratory studies to expand our understanding of the problem of excessive smartphone use and our solution space to deal with this problem . We started our exploration with conducting unstructured observations in four coffeehouses . Then , we conducted six focus group sessions with 46 participants to better understand the smartphone use as a practice from the users’ perspective . After synthesizing the results of these observations and focus groups into five themes , we conducted design workshops in order to identify design directions for mediating smartphone use in public settings . The remainder of the paper first explains the details of each study . As we followed an iterative data collection process , i . e . each stage fed the next one , we present the method and results of each study separately . Then , we will discuss the overall implications of our work for designing interactive technologies aimed at mediating excessive smart phone use in social settings . STUDY 1 : COFFEEHOUSE OBSERVATIONS We made the observations in four different coffeehouses located in a metropolitan city center . Our purpose was to identify the behaviors pertaining to smartphone use during daily social interactions . We made each observation in the afternoon . They approximately took five hours . The observer ( the first author ) was a non - participant , there was no contact with the observed population . We paid special attention to not to cross eavesdropping borders during observations . Our aim was neither to get an in - depth speech analysis nor listening to private conversations , but it was to gain an overall understanding of people’s behaviors via observing gestures , facial expressions , reactions , silent moments , and speech ratios 1 . As a result of this , we were unable to build rapport or ask questions as new information comes up . The observer’s overall attitude was to watch the interactions between people and take notes regarding the influence of smartphone use on these interactions . In these observations , we noticed that people frequently check their phones during a conversation . This behavior creates silent moments in conversations . It causes people to give superficial and delayed answers to the questions of others in the setting . These observations can be summarized as ( Figure 1 ) ; a . Users , who are not using their smartphones , may be more engaged in social interaction because absence of smartphones creates less distraction . b . Smartphone use may provide a medium for interaction . For example , we observed that two 1 The all three studies did receive an ethical committee approval from Koç University’s ethics committee ( IRB ) . CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA participants tried to take the best photo of the coffee and scenery by arranging the items on their desk together . c . Users may use their smartphones to enrich their interactions . Some individuals showed digital content in their smartphones to their companions . ( e . g . internet memes and received messages ) . We observed that the interaction among group members become frequent and longer in such cases . d . Smartphone use may end the users’ interactions with each other . We observed that as users started to use their phones , their communication with others were broken down . e . Smartphone use may make user’s responses delayed , superficial and short . We observed that users’ attention to their social interactions may be distracted by their smartphones . For example , notifications and online conversations influence the quality of social interactions . Figure 1 . Identified social interactions during observations In summary , these observations showed that phone checking behavior may have negative effects on the quality of social interaction , and thus , motivated us to get deep insights about this behavior and its effects . STUDY 2 : FOCUS GROUPS We conducted six focus group sessions to better understand users’ smartphone use patterns in social settings , motivations for using their phones during their social interactions , as well as their feelings and reactions in these situations . 46 participants attended the focus group sessions . All of them have a smartphone and use at least one mobile app for social media networks . We also used age as an inclusion criterion ( Table 1 ) . Our purpose was to discover possible differences and similarities between different generations [ 49 ] . At the beginning of each session , we asked participants to present themselves by saying their names , ages , occupations , and mobile applications that they frequently use . Then , we asked the following questions ; - In what kind of situations , you interact with your smartphone and why ? Paper 365 Page 3 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA - In what kind of situations , you don’t interact with your smartphone and why ? - In these situations , if the person next to you uses his or her smartphone , how do you feel ? - How do you react to this behavior ? For answering these questions , participants were engaged in an individual activity and a group activity . First , they wrote down the answers to post - its separately for five minutes . Second , they grouped all the post - its and extended the initial answers by talking about them for 25 minutes . This structure is inspired from [ 40 ] . Our purpose was to gather participants’ insights both at the individual and group level . Groups ( Age Range ) FG1 Number ( Sex ) FG1 Mean of Age ( SD ) FG2 Number ( Sex ) FG2 Mean of Age ( SD ) Young Adults I ( 18 - 25 ) 8 ( 4 Female , 4 Male ) 19 . 50 ( 0 . 75 ) 8 ( 4 Female , 4 Male ) 22 . 62 ( 1 . 79 ) Young Adults II ( 26 - 40 ) 9 ( 5 Female , 4 Male ) 30 . 77 ( 4 . 46 ) 7 ( 3 Female , 4 Male ) 34 . 3 ( 4 . 42 ) Middle - Aged Adults ( 41 - 55 ) 7 ( 2 Female , 5 Male ) 43 . 7 ( 4 . 03 ) 7 ( 4 Female , 3 Male ) 44 . 6 ( 3 . 2 ) Group Total 24 ( 11 Female , 13 Male ) 22 ( 11 Female , 11 Male ) In total 46 Participants ( 22 Female , 24 Male ) Table 1 . Age and sex distributions of focus groups The duration of each focus group was about two hours . they were video - recorded and transcribed into text , then analyzed by qualitative coding [ 35 ] . We first read the transcripts to familiarize ourselves with the data , then we coded them by following a deductive approach , using the questions as categories . Then , we re - coded each category by following an inductive approach , with codes derived from the data . We identified new categories with this approach . After coding the first transcripts separately , we discussed the compatibility of our codes . Then , we continued coding the remaining transcripts with agreed upon codes . This analysis resulted in five themes , which we explain below . It should be noted that , since our purpose is to collect as many different opinions as possible during the focus groups , we did not quantify the number of comments made by each participant . Theme 1 : Feeling of curiosity drives phone checking behavior in social settings Participants are aware of the negative effects of smartphone use . However , they accepted that they use their devices in social settings to share something on social media and to check notifications or recent updates on their social media accounts . The driving force behind this behavior is the feeling of curiosity , which participants mainly associated with their social media accounts . They stated that social media helps them connect with their friends , family and such without any need for physical presence . Losing this connection , i . e . being unable to follow what their friends are doing , creates a fear of missing out [ 41 ] . They reported that they oftentimes get stressed because of this feeling . Moreover , they told that the notifications coming from their one - to - one or group conversations in WhatsApp fire up this curiosity . Most of the participants approved that the more the number of notifications ( especially successive messages from group conversations ) are , the more these notifications stir this feeling . Interestingly , some participants mentioned that they check their smartphones unconsciously . Even though there is no indicator for a notification , they often tend to check whether there is a notification . They highlighted that they perform this behavior more when the phone is on the silent mode . “When the phone is on silent mode , I am pressing the home button to open the screen to see if there is a notification to check . ‘Is there something to check ? Maybe I didn ' t hear it . ’ I mean , we have the habit to check the devices unconsciously . This happens very often . ” – Female , Young Adults II Theme 2 : Checking smartphone in a social gathering makes the companion feel negative emotions Although participants said that they can use their smartphones during social interaction , they accepted that when a person checks his or her phone , they feel angry , offended , upset , bored , and even worthless . All participants agreed that smartphones should not be used while talking about important things such as counseling a friend after a break - up . They revealed that the frequency and the duration of phone checking behavior are crucial in feeling these emotions . All groups agreed that this behavior can only be justified in situations where using the phone is absolutely necessary such as a call from a family member , school manager or a colleague . Since each participant agreed that phone checking occurred in a social gathering elicits negative emotions , they use various tactics to prevent this behavior . If the checking behavior is frequent and long , most of the participants said that they usually warn the person performing this behavior verbally . For example , one participant used to warn his friends by ironically saying “You will exceed your mobile data quota , use mine . ” ( Male , Middle - aged Adults ) . Other participants mentioned that they use “staring” , “keeping quiet” , “shaking legs” and “sighing” as tactics to draw attention . Also , some said that they shift their focus onto another thing in such situations or they leave the place . The reactions to these breaks in interactions may be more severe . For example , one participant indicated that she used to warn her friends by physical coercion , Paper 365 Page 4 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA “One of my close friends is addicted to his phone . He uses his phone a lot . Once , I hit his head with a pillow . In another time , I hide his phone . I did this , not because I feel worthless , but he gets lost in there . You know he cares about you but still , he does play with his phone . ” – Female , Young Adults II Theme 3 : ‘Staying in the moment’ makes phone checking behavior tolerable Several participants reported that they tend to “stay in the moment” by putting their phones away , turning off the mobile data or using silent mode to avoid distractions caused by notifications . They told that the activities such as working , jaunting or playing with a cat can also enable them to forget their phones entirely . Others reported that they tend to use their smartphones in social settings although they acknowledged the distractions they lead to . However , these participants admitted that this behavior would be unpleasant for the other individuals in a meeting . They told that they tend to justify this behavior by giving a valid reason , for example , stating the importance of a message . One interesting finding across all age groups was that the phrase “ I am with you” is many times more than enough justification for the interruptions in interactions . For many participants , the being or not being with the person next to them is the key factor to tolerate phone checking behavior . Moreover , this clarification attempt is seen as a sign of respect to the other person . “One day , I saw my high school teacher whom I had not seen him for two years . Right at the moment , I got a very important message which I needed to tell other people . I said to him ‘Give me a second , something happened . After I write it , I will be with you . ’ . After several phone calls and messages , I explained : ‘I might check the phone sometimes . Not because I ' m less interested in you , but because this is important . ’ I do these explanations to indicate my ‘being with the person in front of me . ’ I feel better . ” – Female , Young Adults I The results indicate that participants tend to convey the message of “staying in the moment” without saying its reason . In all of the focus group sessions , the most mentioned indicators for this phrase is one’s making an eye contact with his or her companion while checking his or her smartphone . Theme 4 : Phone checking is not the cause , but the result of the lulls in conversations All of the participants regarded phone checking in a social setting as an unpleasant behavior . However , they said that smartphone use has both negative and positive effects on the conversation quality , supporting previous work [ 12 , 15 ] . For example , they opposed to the idea that the smartphone use kills the conversations . They claimed that the phone is not the cause of the lulls in conversations , rather it is the result of these lulls . In other words , when there is a lull in a conversation , people tend to start using their phones . Another aspect that lead people to start interacting with their phones in a social setting , their desire to be isolated from the group for a moment . This behavior occurs when their degree of intimacy with people next to them is not high , and the conversation is not interesting . Participants indicated that they tend to use smartphones for isolating themselves when lulls happen in conversations . They further stated that smartphones can be even used to deal with lulls in the conversations . Smartphones may fire up a conversation by giving a subject to talk about such as presenting a content from social media networks . But all participants stated that because smartphones can create infinite materials to talk about , the suggested topics may seem superficial to the group . For instance , one participant emphasized that memories are more powerful and meaningful than the content in the social media . “…Maybe there are more topics in social media , but they seem superficial . For example , the thing we laughed three months ago does not make me laugh now . I forget it . There is nothing left , it feels like nothing has enriched me . ” – Male , Middle - aged Adults Theme 5 : Age groups have different reservations about phone checking behavior in social settings We observed that people from different age groups tend to perceive and react phone checking behavior differently . While middle - aged participants ( 41 - 55 ) consider this behavior as a harmful habit and think that it should be modified , young adult participants ( 18 - 25 , 26 - 40 ) thought that it has no negative impact on their lives . For young adults , this was not a big and general problem . They also don’t blame smartphones for reducing the quality of social interaction . They mentioned that banning or restricting smartphone use makes the phone more attractive , which is in line with previous work [ 4 ] . Another difference between different age groups was the way they react to lulls in conversations . All of the participants reported that lulls occasionally occur in their daily conversations . However , it seems that young adults tolerate these silent moments more than the middle - aged adults do . While young adults do not mind sitting silently and interacting with their phones during a meeting , middle - aged participants tend to end a meeting when the frequency of pauses increase . STUDY 3 : DESIGN WORKSHOPS In the third study , we conducted three design workshops with 15 junior professional designers . The purpose of these workshops was to identify design directions that can be used when exploring the solutions for mediating smartphone use in public settings without banning smartphones . Paper 365 Page 5 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Workshop 1 Workshop 2 Workshop 3 Number of Participants 6 5 4 Mean Age ( Standard Deviation ) 24 . 6 ( 2 . 42 ) 26 ( 6 . 51 ) 22 . 75 ( 2 . 18 ) Professions ( Number ) Industrial Designer ( 3 ) Interaction Designer ( 3 ) Industrial Designer ( 2 ) UX / UI Designer ( 3 ) Industrial Designer ( 3 ) UX / UI Designer ( 1 ) Number of Ideas 21 26 20 Table 2 . The characteristics of workshop participants We recruited the designers first by using our personal contacts 2 and then by snowballing method . Six designers attended the first workshop , five attended the second workshop , and four attended the third workshop ( Table 2 ) . The workshops were divided into four sections . In the first part ( 20 minutes ) , we presented the insights of the observations and focus groups in order to familiarize designers with the topic . After , we introduced themes and describe them one - by - one . Then , we asked them to generate solutions for mediating smartphone use in social settings . We emphasized that the solutions should not prohibit the smartphone . In the second part ( 30 minutes ) , designers started ideating individually because we wanted them to generate ideas without being affected by others . In the third part ( 90 minutes ) , they worked in groups . During these three stages , we asked them to develop as many ideas as possible on each theme . The participants drew their ideas on an A4 sheet of paper via free hand sketching ( Figure 2 ) . In the last 40 minutes of the workshops , we wanted designers to present their ideas to all the participants . To analyze the workshop outcomes , first we searched for ideas aimed at banning the phone via external stimulus as well as the ideas that are not in line with the workshop brief . We only found one idea , locking the smartphone physically in case of excessive use . We excluded this idea from the analysis . This resulted in a total of 67 ideas ( Table 2 ) . Then , we allocated each idea to the theme it belonged to . This allocation showed that the groups generated at least one idea for each theme . The most used theme was Theme 1 : Feeling of curiosity drives phone checking behavior in social settings ( N = 29 ) . The least used theme was Theme 5 : Age groups have different reservations about phone checking behavior in social settings ( N = 6 ) . Thus , it seems that we had a good coverage of solutions addressing each theme . Later , we analyzed the ideas based on the approach taken to mediating smart phone use . This analysis resulted in four design approaches : Enlighteners ( N = 21 ) , Preservers ( N = 16 ) , 2 The authors are design researchers who have close contacts with many professional designers working at industry . Supporters ( N = 18 ) and Compliers ( N = 12 ) . In the following , we elaborate on each approach by giving examples from generated ideas . Since our aim was to show the breadth of the design space explored by designers , instead of explaining each idea in detail , we tried to present a range of ideas categorized under each approach . Enlighteners Focus groups participants stated that once they start to use their smartphones during social interactions , they might get lost in their devices ( Theme 1 ) . As a result , they become less engaged in the conversation . Addressing this problem , enlighteners aim to create awareness about such situations by informing the users ( Figure 2a ) . In majority of the enlightener ideas , designers developed feedback mechanisms that show conversation quality in a social gathering or the frequency and amount of smartphone use . Overall , there were ideas using common strategies to give feedback such as showing a red alert screen to the user or sending a notification like “Return to chat with friends” as a reminder when they focus on their smartphones . As our aim was to identify alternative approaches to mediating use habit , here we do not elaborate on such ideas . Rather , we explain the ideas which explored different ways of giving feedback . Physical Changes to Convey Information We identified two interesting strategies followed by designers during the workshops . The first was conveying information through physical changes . One example was a smartphone case that changes its color or heat according to the frequency of smartphone use . Another example solution includes a smartphone which grows old and wrapped by an ivy , as the quality of the interaction increases . By doing so , as the designers described , the smartphone will fuse with the environment and draws an analogy about moments that we ' ve forgotten to use smartphones while we are on exciting conversations . There were also ideas that addressed other senses . For example , changing the music or the smell of an environment according to the conversation quality . Meaningful Feedback The second strategy was making the feedback provided to the user more meaningful . One of the ideas were based on emphasizing the value of time by informing the users what they can do in real life with the time they spend on their smartphones . For example , when users use their smartphones for 15 minutes , this app gives them a suggestion such as “These 15 minutes , you could go for a run with your friend . ” . In another idea , when a group of people want to use their smartphones , they escape from their owners and hug each other to remind the user how important to have intimate time with your beloved ones . Paper 365 Page 6 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Figure 2 – Four Design Approaches a ) Enlighteners b ) Preservers c ) Supporters d ) Compliers Preservers The ideas under this approach focus on preventing the triggers of phone checking behavior in social settings thus preserving the ongoing social interaction between the users ( Figure 2b ) . According to the results of focus groups , these triggers were feeling of curiosity and notifications ( Theme 1 ) . We identified three strategies targeting these triggers . Smarter Filters The first strategy was managing the smartphone notifications in a smarter way . Designers , who stated that a large number of notifications and their irrelevancy to the situation were perceived as distracting as they interrupt the conversation ( Theme 2 ) , developed smart filters for the management of notifications . For example , a smart filter app shows the most relevant notifications and mute other notifications by understanding what the user is talking about and whom s / he is with . When the user is talking about business with his or her colleagues at a lunch , s / he will see the notification about financial news . But in a more intimate atmosphere where the user meets with his or her close friends , s / he will see the notifications of concert activity instead of financial news . In another smart filter idea , the designers connected the filtering process to the quality of the conversation and allowed the users receive notifications gradually . This idea was about muting the notifications when the conversation is rich and receiving them as the level of interaction decreases . Unobtrusive Notifications The second strategy was making regular notifications as unobtrusive as possible . Designers , who emphasized the importance of eye contact during a meeting which was also observed in focus groups ( Theme 3 ) , developed ideas for controlling notifications without interacting with the smartphone . For example , in an audible notification scenario that can replace the classical notifications ( e . g . , vibration , simple sound feedback or displaying in the notification panel etc . ) , the smartphone says the sender of the notification . ( e . g . , “Colleague” , “Mom” ) . If the user asks for more detail , it says the broadest keywords that best describe the subject of notification ( e . g . , “Reports to be completed” , “Shopping List” ) . The user may or may not choose to check the notification after this step . The participants also speculated a wearable apparatus ( a very small object such as a wristband or a ring ) which provides tactile feedback differentiated according to the notification priority . In addition , there were also ideas that categorize the notifications as unlikely and likely . For example , if receiving a phone call from the user’s boss is an unlikely event , the system shows him or her the notification of this event with the iconic images on the back side of the phone and skips the other notifications . Invisible Notifications The third strategy was making the behavior of checking notifications more difficult via gamification . In [ 22 ] , the study focused on preventing phone checking via a lockout task intervention . Users are required to type the given digits to check the notifications . However , in our workshops , designers emphasized the playful part of this kind of interventions by using meaningful design frictions [ 10 ] . For example , in an idea , designers concealed the source of the notifications , and turned them into colored bricks . They designed games which include color and shape matching interactions through these colored blocks . Another idea was reducing the visibility of the screen and notifications by creating bubbles on the screen for each notification . By doing so , users are not able to see the notifications clearly until they pop the bubbles . Supporters All designers stated that they consider the amount of speech and the depth of the subject as the variables that determine the quality of the conversation . The ideas developed from this point of view were aimed at increasing the quality of the conversation among users and avoiding the strange lull moments , as mentioned in the focus groups ( Theme 4 ) ( Figure 2c ) . The ideas for the differences between generations ( Theme 5 ) mostly focused on this approach ( N = 5 ) . We identified three strategies used to increase the frequency of interaction between users and to enhance the quality of the conversation . Conversation Boosters The first strategy was boosting the conversation . Some ideas on this topic are based on collecting data about users’ interests and present the common ones as the proposed topic to initiate a conversation between group members . Users can enter their own preferences into these systems manually , or the system can pull data from users ' social media accounts automatically . Also , they can collect these data instantly with sensors from the environment . Designers proposed different alternatives for how these conversation boosters can work . In one of the examples , Paper 365 Page 7 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA when the user draws a question mark or H letter ( initial for Help ) on the closed phone screen , the phone sends related notification as if the user had received a notification from an ordinary news source ( a story about sports news or a cultural event ) . With this new interaction style , the designers intended that the user does not want his / her call for help to be seen by his / her friends . Another idea was based on reflecting the conversation topics of each table in a restaurant or a coffeeshop to the walls . With this system , it is envisioned that the users that have exhausted their topics will be inspired by the environment . These boosters were also speculated for the generational differences . Designers who stated that finding common interests between different age groups is hard to reveal and it affects the relationship and interactions between these groups . The ideas aiming at exploring an interesting topic for each individual , when a lull moment occurs , can uncover common conversations between generations and may fill this generational gap . Pop - up Memories The second strategy was encouraging group members to find something to talk about themselves rather than suggesting an existing topic . The designers , who emphasized the fact that the strained attempts for a conversation would cause artificiality which was also observed in focus groups ( Theme 4 ) , tried to overcome this problem by asking questions to the users instead of giving them a direct topic . For example , one group designed a screen saver application that could be installed on smartphones . This application shows the abstract and simple icons floating on the phone , which can initiate conversation in the lull moments . These icons are selected from the intersections of trending topics and interests of the users . With this kind of abstraction and simplicity , the designers aimed to increase the number of topics that can be revealed from an icon . For example , users can think of rain , a film , a song , or an experience that they have when the umbrella icon on the screen begins to float . Engaging the “Uninterested” Members in the Conversation The third strategy was engaging the group members who want to be out of the conversation as they get bored of the topic . For example , in a situation in which a user is bored , a game that gives him or her the right to change the topic of a conversation . In another scenario , when the user is not knowledgeable with the current topic and bored , an application provides help by explaining the topic or giving some clues about it . Compliers This approach includes ideas complying with users’ intention to be involved in a conversation or not . In particular , they were inspired by users’ desire to isolate themselves by using their smartphones in social environments , as identified in the focus groups ( Theme 4 ) ( Figure 2d ) . For this approach , we identified two strategies . Prominent Isolation One strategy followed by designers was making the need for isolation highly visible for other group members . Designers thought that this would help users understand one’s need for isolation in an explicit way . For example , when the user wants to isolate his or herself from the others , as the use of phone increases and as his or her social interaction with the group decreases , an iceberg - like separator rises in front of the user . Similar to this idea , when the user is in the isolation mode , a bubble machine starts to blow bubbles from the user ' s phone to make the user less visible . In another idea , designers envisioned an AR based application which allows users to wear a virtual animal costume when they need isolation . Exaggerated Isolation Another strategy was physically separating the isolated user from the environment to make him or her aware of the consequences of this isolation . For example , the chair of the user who wants to be isolated from the group and use his or her smartphone continuously , rises up . Similarly , the desk begins to pull towards the isolated user . With these physical changes , the designers were trying to create physical difficulties to the users , and they wanted to show that isolation should have a cost . DISCUSSION In this part , we revisit the findings of each study as a whole ( observations , focus groups and design workshops ) , and discuss them as design implications . Our aim in conducting this study was to identify alternative design approaches for mediating excessive smart phone use in daily social interactions , as we argued that restricting smart phone use would not be a sustainable solution for this problem . Overall , the results show that although people are aware of the potential negative impact of excessive smart phone use on their social relations , most tend to use their smartphones during their daily social interactions . It doesn ' t seem realistic or possible to discard these devices that become more important and more ubiquitous in people ' s lives . Thus , it appears that the study results provide evidence supporting our initial argument . Furthermore , our work would have several implications for designing solutions aimed at mediating excessive smart phone use in public settings , which we discuss next . Informing about the quality of interaction beyond using traditional means A big part of the ideas proposed by workshop participants were focused on informing the users about the quality of interaction they have ( enlighteners ) . For example , solutions involve informing about the time spend using one’s smartphone in a gathering or the frequency of phone checking while your friend are talking . These types of solutions have still potential for mediating smartphone use . However , we think that designers should benefit from non - conventional means of giving feedback when thinking about these solutions . They can redesign the spaces in which users are located . They can give users unusual experiences by Paper 365 Page 8 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA augmenting the environment itself and the objects already found in the environment such as using the coffee table to give feedback . At the stage of informing the user about the situation , designers can develop their ideas on different modalities such as sound and smell . Furthermore , the information given may not be the directly related with the quality of the speech or the amount of smartphone use . In other words , what we call feedback may not be just a status reporter , because user might get used to such feedback after a certain period of time , and the long - term effect may not be sufficient . To avoid this , designers can come up with ideas which contain “meaningful” feedback mechanisms [ 18 ] or a feedback which is intended to raise awareness in the user or has different achievements ( i . e . , rewards , discounts etc . ) . For example , instead of providing color map to show the level of interaction , a design come up with a suggestion which will have an effect on users’ lives such as inspiring them to do cultural activities . Triggering nonconventional interactions with the smartphone Smartphones are powerful interactive devices that allow us to perform many tasks . The features and abilities of smartphones can be used to trigger new interactions between people , particularly in public settings . For example , a user asking for help during a lull moment in a conversation ( Theme 3 ) can draw a question mark on the closed smartphone screen to get help for the topic to talk , or smartphone case can display icons to initiate a topic . Besides creating new interactions that help group members engaged in the conversations , smartphones can be also used in situations where such an engagement is not desired . Although the need for isolation ( Theme 4 ) is a negatively perceived concept in social interaction , designers can turn this issue into a non - disturbing phenomenon for the users by creating entertaining solutions ( compliers ) ( Theme 2 ) . However , particular attention should be paid to this kind of solution whether entertaining part is valid for users who use the product or not . For example , in the chair idea , which rises up when the user wants to be isolated , mentioned before , is this situation an entertaining one or does it cause a public shaming ? Therefore , depending on the context designers may focus on new interactions that invite people into group interaction or create interactions that can change the negative perception of being isolated . These new interactions could be also used to address users unconscious checking behavior or their tendency to use their smartphones when they are bored . Designers can develop smart phone applications that make this use behavior fun and give users an option to their phone as a fidgeting tool . For example , a game that requires the user to tap the same rhythm given by the vibration of the smartphone without being noticed to the friend or an app that turns the smartphone into a hidden musical instrument . Considering the generational differences when designing solutions for mediating smartphone use Our rationale for selecting the focus group participants from different age groups was to uncover any differences regarding the reactions towards and motivations for smart phone use during social interaction occurred in public settings . Analyzing the focus group results , we discovered that while young adults are comfortable with using their smartphones during social interactions as well as more tolerant to people who perform this behavior , middle - aged individuals have many reservations regarding this behavior . In general , middle - aged participants ( 40 - 55 ) , thought that this behavior is problematic and that it significantly reduces the quality of interaction between a social group . For example , when there is a lull in a conversation , young adults said that they do not mind siting silently and checking their phones . On the contrary , middle - aged adults accused the smartphone use for creating these lulls and stated that they even tend to leave the group if the lulls persist ( Theme 5 ) . However , we realized that none of the solutions proposed in the design workshops addressed such differences . One potential explanation for this may be the fact that since all of the workshop participants were young adults , their solutions might have inspired by their own experiences that they have as a young adult . Another explanation may be the fact that focus groups helped discovering the generational differences in a broad way ; that is , it did not allow us to get deeper insights at the individual level . In line with these limitations , in the future , we plan to conduct interviews and co - design workshops with families to understand the generational differences in relation to this excessive behavior better . Keeping the attention in the “real world” We discovered that , when people are with their companions in a public setting , such as hanging out with friends in a café , there are two major reasons that prevent them from interacting with each other . These are 1 ) notifications coming from their smartphones that shift their attention from their companions to smartphones ( Theme 1 ) , and 2 ) lulls in the conversation that trigger smartphone use ( Theme 4 ) . Design workshop results indicated that this attention shift can be mediated by informing the group members about how it impacts the quality of social interaction ( enlighteners ) , preventing or managing the subjects that create the distractions ( preservers ) , and supporting the situations which motivate group members to interact with each other ( supporters ) . Many of the ideas categorized under supporters was focused on shifting the attention from the virtual world ( checking your Facebook page ) to the real world ( telling a story to your companion ) . According to the findings , if the users enjoy the topic of a conversation or the moment they are in , they are less distracted and even forget the existence of their smartphones ( Theme 3 ) . As designers develop solutions to make a conversation more engaging , they should think about ways that can produce content that is appropriate to each individual ' s interests and that will not make users feel forced Paper 365 Page 9 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA or artificial about the topic . Also , users ' past experiences can be used as an inspiration source for the content generation . While trying to manage smartphone notifications which distract the users during social interaction ( preservers ) , designers should generate adaptive solutions that can change according to the context [ 19 ] . For example , while a user is in a business meeting , notifications related with other kind of things such as nonserious and nonurgent content should be detected and filtered . In addition to this adaptability , solutions should be aware of important and unlikely events of user’s life . They should not deprive users of their smartphone while reducing the distractions of users , for example filtering out an important notification about one’s job interview outcome , because a solution that deprives the users might be subject to harsh criticism from users . In addition to filtering solutions , the notifications themselves and the methods of providing them can be re - designed . For example , rather than using a traditional “beep” sound which distracts all of the group members in a gathering , different modalities such as tactile feedback on the user’s skin or narrated feedback can be used to maintain eye contact with others [ 17 ] . Alternatively , the way we receive notifications can be gamified via turning smartphones into “pleasurable troublemakers” [ 28 ] which makes it difficult ( not impossible ) to check unnecessary notifications . Taking into account users’ concerns about approaches Mediating excessive smart phone use has many benefits such as overcoming the negative effects of smartphone use on our physical , mental and social wellbeing , as we mentioned in previous work . Furthermore , using bottom up design approaches to mediate this behavior have a potential to increase the effectiveness of the solutions as it might increase users’ acceptance . However , since such approaches still rely on changing user behavior through using interactive technologies , they carry the similar risks with other persuasive technologies . In the following , we briefly mention two of these , which should be taken into account while designing future solutions . Even though the interventions of the designers are meaningful and positive for the users , they may not be welcomed by them , or these interventions may create unintended outcomes [ 48 ] . For example , in our focus groups sessions , participants told about solutions aimed at boosting a conversation via topic suggestions could create an artificiality . This may harm the natural interaction as a result of the interference of an external factor . Another issue related with such solutions would be privacy [ 6 ] , as they rely on users’ personal data such as ( interests , likes , friends etc . ) to identify relevant topics to boost conversations . Furthermore , the ideas presented under the compliers should handle with care . Even though the purpose of this approach is to make users’ isolation smoother and more tolerable , they 3 http : / / thelightphone . com may reduce the interaction between people and make the other users feel awkward and excluded in social settings . Thus , it is essential to learn more about users’ reactions towards the solutions generated to identify which of these is the most suitable ones for a specific context and a specific user group . CONCLUSION In this study , we presented the results of an exploratory study aimed at examining smartphone use during daily social interactions and identifying ways of reducing its use without restriction . First , we made unstructured observations in four coffeehouses , then conducted six focus group sessions with 46 participants to gain a deeper understanding of users’ smartphone use behavior . After analyzing these explorations and conducted three design workshops with these themes in order to identify design approaches to mediate smartphone use in public settings . The four design approaches are ; • Enlighteners : creating awareness about the quality of social interaction by informing the users . • Preservers : aiming to mitigate the triggers of phone checking behavior in social settings . • Supporters : increasing the quality of the conversation among users and helping avoid the strange lull moments . • Compliers : providing smooth isolation for users in relation to social interaction . These design approaches would inspire other designers and researchers in designing solutions that can mitigate excessive smartphone use without necessarily restricting it . However , we note that this would not be a trivial effort . First of all , smartphones have become inseparable parts of our lives . We use them for communicating , learning , entertaining , shopping and for many other daily tasks . Second , they are purposefully designed to grab our attention and keep it for a long time through , for example , sending constant notifications to check our phone . So , what role design could have in addressing the broader problem of excessive smart - phone use , in particular during social interaction ? We can exemplify two potential scenarios that touch upon this question by using preservers approach . One scenario could be re - designing public places in a way that they mediate the things that can disrupt human - to - human interaction . For example , when a team enters a meeting room , the room can turn all the phones into silent mode . Another scenario could be designing a new wave of smartphones or apps that prioritize social interaction over interaction in social media . For example , Lightphone 3 is a new generation of phone designed to provide some main functionalities like calling , texting , setting an alarm , and listening to music without sending feeds and notifications . We believe that examining scenarios like these in order to better understand design’s role in addressing excessive smartphone is a topic worth exploring in the scope of future work . Paper 365 Page 10 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mariek M . P . Vanden Abeele , Marjolijn L . Antheunis , and Alexander P . Schouten . 2016 . The effect of mobile messaging during a conversation on impression formation and interaction quality . Computers in Human Behavior 62 : 562 – 569 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2016 . 04 . 005 [ 2 ] Charles Abraham and Susan Michie . 2008 . A Taxonomy of Behavior Change Techniques Used in Interventions . Health Psychology 27 , 3 : 379 – 387 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 6133 . 27 . 3 . 379 [ 3 ] Icek Ajzen . 1991 . The theory of planned behavior . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 50 , 2 : 179 – 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0749 - 5978 ( 91 ) 90020 - T [ 4 ] AP / NORC . AP / NORC : American Teens are Taking Breaks from Social Media ( April 27 , 2017 ) . 1 : 1 – 44 . Retrieved from http : / / www . apnorc . org / projects / Pages / American - Teens - are - Taking - Breaks - from - Social - Media ; - Many - Step - Back - Deliberately , - but - Half - of - Breaks - are - Involuntary . aspx [ 5 ] Eirik Årsand , Miroslav Muzny , M Sc , Meghan Bradway , Jan Muzik , and Gunnar Hartvigsen . 2015 . Performance of the First Combined Smartwatch and Smartphone Diabetes Diary Application Study . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1932296814567708 [ 6 ] Daniel Berdichevsky and Erik Neuenschwander . 1999 . Toward an ethics of persuasive technology . Communications of the ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 301353 . 301410 [ 7 ] Genavee Brown , Adriana M . Manago , and Joseph E . Trimble . 2016 . Tempted to Text : College Students’ Mobile Phone Use During a Face - to - Face Interaction With a Close Friend . Emerging Adulthood 4 , 6 : 440 – 443 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2167696816630086 [ 8 ] Seungwoo Choi and Uichin Lee . 2016 . LockDoll : Providing Ambient Feedback of Smartphone Usage within Social Interaction . CHI Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems : 1165 – 1172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892445 [ 9 ] Sunny Consolvo , David W . McDonald , and James A . Landay . 2009 . Theory - driven design strategies for technologies that support behavior change in everyday life . In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 , 405 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518766 [ 10 ] Anna L . Cox , Sandy Gould , Marta E . Cecchinato , Ioanna Iacovides , and Ian Renfree . 2016 . Design frictions for mindful interactions : The case for microboundaries . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892410 [ 11 ] Steven P . Dow , Alana Glassco , Jonathan Kass , Melissa Schwarz , Daniel L . Schwartz , and Scott R . Klemmer . 2012 . Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more divergence , and increased self - efficacy . Design Thinking Research : Studying Co - Creation in Practice 17 , 4 : 127 – 153 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 21643 - 5 _ 8 [ 12 ] Ryan J . Dwyer , Kostadin Kushlev , and Elizabeth W . Dunn . 2018 . Smartphone use undermines enjoyment of face - to - face social interactions . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 78 , October : 233 – 239 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jesp . 2017 . 10 . 007 [ 13 ] B . J . Fogg . 2003 . Persuasive Technology : Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 1 - 55860 - 643 - 2 . X5000 - 8 [ 14 ] BJ J Fogg . 2009 . Creating persuasive technologies : an eight - step design process . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology - Persuasive ’09 , 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1541948 . 1542005 [ 15 ] David Ginsberg and Moira Burke . 2017 . Hard Questions : Is Spending Time on Social Media Bad for Us ? Facebook Newsroom . [ 16 ] David H Gustafson , Fiona M Mctavish , Ming - yuan Chih , Amy K Atwood , Roberta A Johnson , Michael G Boyle , Michael S Levy , Hilary Driscoll , Steven M Chisholm , Lisa Dillenburg , Andrew Isham , and Dhavan Shah . 2015 . A Smartphone Application to Support Recovery From Alcoholism A Randomized Clinical Trial . 71 , 5 : 566 – 572 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1001 / jamapsychiatry . 2013 . 4642 [ 17 ] Chris Harrison and Scott E . Hudson . 2009 . Texture displays . In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1519047 [ 18 ] Marc Hassenzahl , Kai Eckoldt , Sarah Diefenbach , Matthias Laschke , Eva Lenz , and Joonhwan Kim . 2013 . Designing moments of meaning and pleasure . Experience design and happiness . International Journal of Design 7 , 3 : 21 – 31 . [ 19 ] Joyce Ho and Stephen S . Intille . 2005 . Using context - aware computing to reduce the perceived burden of interruptions from mobile devices . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’05 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1054972 . 1055100 [ 20 ] L . Humphreys . 2005 . Cellphones in public : social interactions in a wireless era . New Media & Society 7 , 6 : 810 – 833 . Paper 365 Page 11 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 21 ] Inyeop Kim , Gyuwon Jung , Hayoung Jung , Minsam Ko , and Uichin Lee . 2017 . Let’s focus : location - based intervention tool to mitigate phone use in college classrooms . Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers on - UbiComp ’17 : 101 – 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3123024 . 3123165 [ 22 ] Jaejeung Kim , Joonyoung Park , Hyunsoo Lee , Minsam Ko , and Uichin Lee . 2019 . LocknType : Lockout task intervention for discouraging smartphone app use . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300927 [ 23 ] Jesper Kjeldskov . 2012 . Using mobile phones to support sustainability : A field study of residential electricity consumption . Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) : 2347 – 2356 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2208276 . 2208395 [ 24 ] Predrag Klasnja , Sunny Consolvo , and Wanda Pratt . 2011 . How to evaluate technologies for health behavior change in HCI research . In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 , 3063 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979396 [ 25 ] Minsam Ko , Seungwoo Choi , Subin Yang , Joonwon Lee , and Uichin Lee . 2015 . FamiLync : facilitating participatory parental mediation of adolescents’ smartphone use . Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing : 867 – 878 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2750858 . 2804283 [ 26 ] Minsam Ko , Seungwoo Choi , Koji Yatani , and Uichin Lee . 2016 . Lock N’ LoL : Group - based Limiting Assistance App to Mitigate Smartphone Distractions in Group Activities . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems : 998 – 1010 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858568 [ 27 ] Minsam Ko , Kyong - Mee Chung , Subin Yang , Joonwon Lee , Christian Heizmann , Jinyoung Jeong , Uichin Lee , Daehee Shin , Koji Yatani , and Junehwa Song . 2015 . NUGU : A Group - based Intervention App for Improving Self - Regulation of Limiting Smartphone Use . Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15 : 1235 – 1245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675244 [ 28 ] Matthias Laschke and Marc Hassenzahl . 2015 . Pleasurable Troublemakers . In The Gameful World : Approaches , Issues , Applications . 167 – 195 . Retrieved from http : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org / xpl / articleDetails . jsp ? arnum ber = 7040533 [ 29 ] Heyoung Lee , Heejune Ahn , Samwook Choi , and Wanbok Choi . 2014 . The SAMS : Smartphone addiction management system and verification . Journal of Medical Systems 38 , 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10916 - 013 - 0001 - 1 [ 30 ] Sojeong Lee , Hwayeong Kang , and Gwanseob Shin . 2017 . Head flexion angle while using a smartphone . 0139 , October . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00140139 . 2014 . 967311 [ 31 ] Sakari Lemola , Nadine Perkinson - Gloor , Serge Brand , Julia F . Dewald - Kaufmann , and Alexander Grob . 2014 . Adolescents’ Electronic Media Use at Night , Sleep Disturbance , and Depressive Symptoms in the Smartphone Age . Journal of Youth and Adolescence 44 , 2 : 405 – 418 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10964 - 014 - 0176 - x [ 32 ] Yu - Hsuan Lin , Li - Ren Chang , Yang - Han Lee , Hsien - Wei Tseng , Terry B J Kuo , and Sue - Huei Chen . 2014 . Development and validation of the Smartphone Addiction Inventory ( SPAI ) . PloS one 9 , 6 : e98312 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0098312 [ 33 ] Markus Löchtefeld , Matthias Böhmer , and Lyubomir Ganev . 2013 . AppDetox . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia - MUM ’13 : 1 – 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2541831 . 2541870 [ 34 ] Susan Michie , Maartje M . van Stralen , and Robert West . 2011 . The behaviour change wheel : A new method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions . Implementation Science 6 , 1 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1748 - 5908 - 6 - 42 [ 35 ] M . a . Miles , M . B . & Huberman . 1994 . Qualitative data analysis : An expanded sourcebook ( 2nd ed . ) . Qualitative data analysis : An expanded sourcebook ( 2nd ed . ) . 20 , 1 : 159 – 160 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1098 - 2140 ( 99 ) 80125 - 8 [ 36 ] Shalini Misra , Lulu Cheng , Jamie Genevie , and Miao Yuan . 2016 . The iPhone Effect : The Quality of In - Person Social Interactions in the Presence of Mobile Devices . Environment and Behavior 48 , 2 : 275 – 298 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0013916514539755 [ 37 ] Harri Oinas - Kukkonen and Marja Harjumaa . 2009 . Persuasive systems design : Key issues , process model , and system features . Communications of the Association for Information Systems 24 , 1 : 485 – 500 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17705 / 1CAIS . 02428 [ 38 ] Fabian Okeke , Cornell Tech , Michael Sobolev , Cornell Tech , Nicola Dell , Deborah Estrin , and Cornell Tech . 2016 . Good Vibrations : Designing and Evaluating a Ubiquitous Intervention for Reducing Paper 365 Page 12 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Digital Consumption . 1 , 1 : 1 – 18 . [ 39 ] C . Park , J . Lim , J . Kim , S . - J . Lee , and D . Lee . 2017 . “Don’t bother me . I’m socializing ! ” : A breakpoint - based Smartphone notification system . Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , CSCW : 541 – 554 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998189 [ 40 ] Karolien Poels , Yvonne De Kort , and Wijnand IJsselsteijn . 2007 . “It is always a lot of fun ! ” : Exploring dimensions of digital game experience using focus group methodology . Future Play 2007 : 83 – 89 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1328202 . 1328218 [ 41 ] Andrew K . Przybylski , Kou Murayama , Cody R . Dehaan , and Valerie Gladwell . 2013 . Motivational , emotional , and behavioral correlates of fear of missing out . Computers in Human Behavior 29 , 4 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2013 . 02 . 014 [ 42 ] Andrew K . Przybylski and Netta Weinstein . 2013 . Can you connect with me now ? How the presence of mobile communication technology influences face - to - face conversation quality . Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 30 , 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0265407512453827 [ 43 ] Stephen Purpura , Victoria Schwanda , Kaiton Williams , William Stubler , and Phoebe Sengers . 2011 . Fit4life : tje design of a persuasive technology promoting healthy behavior and ideal weight . In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 , 423 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979003 [ 44 ] James A . Roberts and Meredith E . David . 2016 . My life has become a major distraction from my cell phone : Partner phubbing and relationship satisfaction among romantic partners . Computers in Human Behavior 54 : 134 – 141 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2015 . 07 . 058 [ 45 ] Valentina Rotondi , Luca Stanca , Miriam Tomasuolo , and Milano Bicocca . 2016 . Connecting Alone : Smartphone Use , Quality of Social Interactions Connecting Alone : Smartphone Use , Quality of Social Interactions and Well - being . Journal of Economic Psychology , 357 . [ 46 ] Hugues Sampasa - Kanyinga and Rosamund F Lewis . 2015 . Frequent Use of Social Networking Sites Is Associated with Poor Psychological Functioning Among Children and Adolescents . Cyberpsychology , behavior and social networking 18 , 7 : 380 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1089 / cyber . 2015 . 0055 [ 47 ] Elizabeth Shove , Mika Pantzar , and Matt Watson . 2012 . The Dynamics of Social Practice . The dynamics of social practice . Everyday Life and how it Changes : 1 – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4135 / 9781446250655 . n1 [ 48 ] Agnis Stibe and Brian Cugelman . 2016 . Persuasive backfiring : When behavior change interventions trigger unintended negative outcomes . In Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 31510 - 2 _ 6 [ 49 ] Michele Van Volkom , Janice C . Stapley , and Vanessa Amaturo . 2014 . Revisiting the Digital Divide : Generational Differences in Technology Use in Everyday Life . North American Journal of Psychology 16 , 3 : 557 – 574 . Retrieved from http : / / eds . a . ebscohost . com / eds / pdfviewer / pdfviewer ? si d = 8227534e - bd9a - 4dde - b408 - e23a3d58e350 @ sessionmgr4002 & vid = 1 & hid = 4210 [ 50 ] Heather Cleland Woods and Holly Scott . 2016 . # Sleepyteens : Social media use in adolescence is associated with poor sleep quality , anxiety , depression and low self - esteem . Journal of Adolescence 51 , June : 41 – 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . adolescence . 2016 . 05 . 008 [ 51 ] Barry J . Zimmerman . 2000 . Attaining self - regulation : A social cognitive perspective . Handbook of Self - Regulation : 13 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 012109890 - 2 / 50031 - 7 Paper 365 Page 13