International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12369 - 017 - 0454 - 3 Between the Social and the Technical : Negotiation of Human - Centered Robotics Design in a Middle School Classroom Andrea Gomoll 2 · Selma Šabanovi´c 1 · Erin Tolar 2 · Cindy E . Hmelo - Silver 2 · Matthew Francisco 1 · Orion Lawlor 3 Accepted : 6 December 2017 / Published online : 15 December 2017 © Springer Science + Business Media B . V . , part of Springer Nature 2017 Abstract This paper presents a middle school human - centered robotics ( HCR ) learning experience and the ways in which it supported students’ orientation to technical and social aspects of Science , Technology , Engineering , and Mathematics ( STEM ) . The interdisciplinary project associated with this analysis aims to engage diverse students in authentic STEM practices by creating robotic technologies that can assist people in their school , and connect with remote peers . The goal of this project is to increase student interest in and knowledge of STEM topics , and to help students recognize STEM as relevant to their daily lives and broader societal issues . The human - centered focus of the curriculum encouraged thinking from multiple perspectives ( e . g . design , social science , programming ) and allowed for diverse STEM exploration . We present samples from student work and classroom interactions . These samples show challenges and successes in engaging students with STEM as a combination of social and technical questions and skills . We trace the trajectory of one group’s work to highlight moments in which students navigated an engineering design cycle , analyzed and designed social environments , and crossed disciplinary domains through HCR design—using a phenomena , mechanisms , components framework ( PMC ) to explore systems thinking . Phenomena refers to attention to the function of the robotic technology in the classroom environment . Components included a focus on single parts of the robot , while mechanism addressed how parts of the robot worked together . This qualitative case study demonstrates the capacity social robotics and inquiry - based learning experiences hold for broadening notions of STEM as a social and multidisciplinary learning domain . Keywords Human - centered robotics · STEM education · Problem - based learning · Sociotechnical systems · Engineering design cycle · Qualitative case study 1 Introduction Robotics has become an increasingly popular topic for intro - ducing children of all ages to a variety of disciplinary principles—from STEM to social skills [ 1 – 6 ] . Providing stu - dents with opportunities to learn through hands - on robotic applications has been effective in engaging diverse groups of students with technology , including female [ 7 ] and minority populations [ 8 ] . Although robotics is expected to have broad B Andrea Gomoll agomoll @ indiana . edu 1 School of Informatics and Computing , Indiana University , 901 E . 10th . St . , Bloomington , IN 47408 , USA 2 School of Education , Indiana University , 201 N . Rose Ave . , Bloomington , IN 47405 , USA 3 College of Engineering and Mines , University of Alaska Fairbanks , PO Box 756660 , Fairbanks , AK 99775 , USA societal application in the future , K - 12 robotics curricula still focus largely on the development of technical skills and knowledge without much reference to the social and cultural contexts in which people practice and experience them [ 7 ] . We see this technology - only focus as limiting the opportunity for using robotics to engage a wide and diverse audience in STEM , and the societally beneﬁcial development of STEM disciplines themselves [ 9 ] . In this paper , we present a human - centered robotics cur - riculum designed around the identiﬁcation of an authentic social problem in students’ everyday school environment that robotics can help them understand and address through telep - resent interaction . Human - centered robotics ( HCR ) —the development of robots that provide services and assistance to people in their daily lives [ 10 ] —provides us with an applica - tion context that combines the need to understand technical aspects of robots with the desire to address social issues and concerns . This approach is motivated by the recogni - 123 310 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 tion that , to broaden participation and interest in STEM , we need to go beyond the focus on technical achievements . “Human - centered” applications in particular should moti - vate and enable diverse groups of students to explore the intricacies of scientiﬁc principles and technology design as they consider how these principles can be used to improve their social worlds [ 11 ] . For example , researchers found that novice users designing their own robotic technologies within sociotechnical systems were able to question their own assumptions about the social and physical world [ 12 ] . In another example , Hamner et al . [ 7 ] found that robots that students can use interactively to express themselves and com - municate with others are motivational for female students . This suggests that socially relevant uses for robots can be particularly successful in motivating participation in STEM among a broader set of learners , including those who have not previously expressed an interest in technology and those currently underrepresented in STEM ﬁelds ( e . g . females and ethnic minorities ) . Building on prior educational successes with robotics , and the promise of human - centered robotics in particular , our HCR curriculum creates a robotics experience to help learn - ers develop technical skills along with an understanding of the relationship between technology , nature , and society . We designed this unit to support students as they considered both social and technical aspects of STEM . As students engaged in the design of human - centered robots , they situated robots meaningfully in social spaces . By working together to solve a problem , we conjectured that students would be motivated by the opportunity to serve a need in their local environment and by the possibility of personalized technology design . Early iterations of our curriculum showed that opportunities to personalize during robot design promoted engagement with STEM principles and practices [ 13 ] . This motivation stands in contrast to the common practice of using robotics com - petitions to motivate K - 12 students’ involvement in STEM [ 7 ] . In much robotics work , technical issues provide an abun - dance of structured problems that often result in research and development that focuses on technical concerns . This focus is often paired with the expectation that social ben - eﬁts will occur as a result of technical improvement [ 14 ] . In K - 12 learning environments , the immediacy of techni - cal challenges can overshadow the exploration of nuanced social considerations , as students may not take time to con - sider the larger functions technical components might have in their social context . Our work aims to replace this tech - nocentric trend with a sociotechnical perspective . To do this , we used a problem - based learning ( PBL ) approach aimed at supporting the variety of ways that humans can build robots and create robotics knowledge . We argue that this approach can prepare students to do work in STEM ﬁelds , and to contribute to the development of socially responsi - ble and robust robotics technologies . This “epistemological pluralism” acknowledges that seemingly rote and techni - cal practices ( e . g . computing ) are embedded within social systems that include diverse knowledge practices and val - ues [ 14 ] . Orienting students to these systems in a ﬂexible , problem - centered way can bring a more diverse population of students , and their varying perspectives on technological and social issues , into the discussion and development of robot designs for society . This paper seeks to present tangible examples of the ways our human - centered robotics curriculum has supported stu - dents’ exploration of social and technical aspects of robotics design and development , as well as where improvements can be made in this HCR curriculum and beyond . We ask broadly : In what ways does a problem - based and human - centered robotics experience engage middle school students in mak - ing connections between the social and technical aspects of STEM ? In particular , honing in on these connections as a key piece of systems thinking , we ask : ( 1 ) How do students connect the social and technical needs , requirements , and possibilities in their design process ? And ( 2 ) How do stu - dents develop “systems thinking” about robots , i . e . how do they describe the social and technical phenomena , mecha - nisms , and components related to their robot design ? In this paper , we explore these questions through an inter - pretive analysis of systems thinking in four ﬁnal projects designed by students in one middle school class , and through a qualitative case study that traces the trajectory of one group’s work throughout the HCR unit to highlight moments inwhichstudentsnavigatedanengineeringdesigncycle , ana - lyzed and designed for the social environments around them , and crossed disciplinary domains through human - centered robot design . Disciplinary knowledge and design practices in these experiences were not meant to be formal , but to emerge through emergent practice in the spirit of engineer - ing design—becoming familiar with iterative design work through doing . We ﬁrst provide background and details about our curriculum , and then present our analysis of students’ engagement with the social and technical aspects of robotics as they worked with our materials . Problem - based learning ( PBL ) is the inquiry - based ped - agogical strategy that framed our curricular design [ 15 ] . PBL situates learning in collaborative groups faced with ill - structured problems , and it features a facilitator who guides the learning process [ 16 ] . PBL has been used effectively to address design problems [ 17 , 18 ] . The problems posed by HCR are an excellent ﬁt for PBL , as they are “wicked” problems that are complex , multi - faceted , indeterminate , and occur in open systems [ 19 ] . Building on the capacity of HCR to motivate engagement and interest in STEM , we devel - oped a curriculum of robotics experiences that stems from a human - centered problem posed as a design challenge : “How can we create a robot that serves a need in our local con - 123 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 311 text and can be used to connect with remote peers ? ” By positioning the challenge as a problem in which students work collaboratively with their instructor , we take up the open - ended structure of an inquiry - based unit . This structure moves away from the “top down” approach used in many STEM classrooms [ 7 ] . In our curriculum , students design robotic systems to ﬁt into real contexts of use , which they study as they develop and evaluate their telepresence robot designs . As they attempt to understand and deﬁne a design problem , students learn to negotiate the complexity of sociotechnical issues and decide among competing possibilities . Students articulate their choices using scientiﬁc reasoning and critical thinking strategies as they assume responsibility for the technical and social consequences of their designs . Throughout this unit , inquiry - based pedagogical strategies guided student think - ing and interactions [ 16 , 20 ] . These strategies ask students to grapple with their design , collect data , create artifacts , and communicate developing ideas , helping them to build knowledge about what it means to collaborate and solve com - plex problems . Thus , the goal of the unit is to learn about the engineering design cycle rather than to acquire formal knowledge in a particular disciplinary tradition ( e . g . physics , psychology ) or develop technical skills . Engaging in itera - tive user - centered design , this unit aims to develop systems thinking skills as students explore the interconnectedness of social and technical problems and solutions through hands - on robot design . The design and structure of our unit is informed by several engineering and crosscutting aspects of the Next Generation Science Standards ( NGSS ) , a set of educational science stan - dards that are being implemented increasingly widely in the U . S . [ 21 ] . NGSS recognizes that students must grapple with system components as interdependent . In addition , NGSS includes a focus on engineering design as a practice , and a call to address the social meaning and consequences of tech - nology [ 21 ] . Throughout our HCR unit , students consider the connection of robotic components to their function in the physical system of the robot a nd the social system of the human environment as they engage in design . As stu - dents troubleshoot , they must consider human expectations and habits in addition to trial and error technical testing . As they move through an engineering design cycle [ 22 ] , they deﬁne and delimit an engineering problem , develop possible solutions , and optimize designed solutions . As part of this approach , students are expected to consider these elements as they construct an explanation of how and why their design works for other people . From our sociocultural perspective , learning in this curriculum happens within speciﬁc social contexts as learners are challenged to analyze and design for their everyday lives . Knowing is thus an accomplishment co - constructed by the learner and the surrounding context [ 23 ] . 1 . 1 HCR Unit Trajectory Our HCR curriculum has been implemented in Indiana and Alaska , in both formal ( ﬁve middle and high school class - rooms ) and informal ( one after school club ) contexts , starting in spring 2015 . Initial analyses of the implementation of an early version of our curriculum in the informal context of an after school club provided evidence that the model shows promise for engaging female students in robotic design [ 13 ] . Our HCR unit includes ﬁve major types of activities : brain - storming and exploring , mapping , embodied programming , designing , and building . These components of the curricu - lum are taken up differently by each instructor—adjusted to ﬁt prioritized educational standards , timeline , and class - room culture . All implementations make use of the iRobot Create 2 platform and a robotics stack called RobotMoose ( http : / / robotmoose . com ) . This paper focuses on the speciﬁc implementation of our curriculum carried out in a middle school Applied Science classroom in fall 2016 . Students in this course had little to no prior knowledge about or experi - ence with robotics . In Fig . 1 , we provide an overview of the curriculum components enacted in this particular classroom . StudentsbeganwithaninteractiveexperienceexploringHCR robots ( A ) , brainstormed how robots could ﬁll local human needs ( B ) , mapped their local environments to better under - stand how a robot would move within them ( C ) , engaged in embodied programming as they took on the role of the robot and translated directions into basic code ( D ) , practiced pro - gramming and troubleshooting as they drove iCreate robots ( called “KT” in this course context ) ( E ) , designed and cre - ated prototypes of robots to be used in their schools ( F ) , and built a working HCR robot ( G ) . Throughout this curriculum trajectory , the instructor and facilitators in the classroom drew upon a variety of inquiry - based strategies and tasks . Just - in - time feedback , mini - lectures , and guiding questions were provided as students faced challenges in their problem - solving process . For exam - ple , when students became frustrated with the amount of time it took to create programmed instructions for their classroom robots to navigate a path , tutorials were pre - sented that guided students to make “buttons” for selected actions . Students engaged in brainstorming sessions early in the unit to determine prior knowledge and what infor - mation was needed to progress in solving the problem . As they recognized the limitations of their current knowledge in the problem - solving process , students identiﬁed learn - ing issues and worked closely with facilitators to locate information and develop skill sets to address these issues . Students participated in “gallery walks” at two time points in the unit—sharing all design artifacts with peers and providing feedback on each other’s designs . These just - in - time instructional strategies and peer feedback practices are key in inquiry - based learning experiences , which sup - 123 312 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 Fig . 1 HCR curriculum trajectory port students as they grapple with an ill - structured problem [ 16 , 18 ] . 2 Methods of Data Collection and Analysis 2 . 1 Participants and Data Sources Participants included 16 students in a 7th and 8th grade Applied Science class held in fall 2016 in a rural U . S . pub - lic school . The ﬁve - week elective Applied Science course typically incorporates a variety of science topics ( e . g . , crim - inology ) , making it an ideal setting for our interdisciplinary STEM unit . Our ﬂexible HCR unit allowed instructors to determine the length of the unit based on their class’ discipline , structure , and goals . While different classes par - ticipating in our larger project ranged from meeting every day for three weeks , to meeting once per week over nine months , the Applied Science class in this analysis met Mon - day through Friday for ﬁve weeks , with each class session lasting approximately 50 minutes . The students were divided into four small groups for the duration of the unit . Five students identiﬁed as female , and 11 as male . All student artifacts were collected throughout the unit ( e . g . design draw - ings , daily reﬂective responses about the design process ) . Many of these artifacts were stored in the learning manage - ment system Canvas . Video that captured the whole class was recorded for each class session ; video footage was also collected for two focus groups during each class period . The instructor selected these focus groups—prioritizing groups that were comfortable speaking in the presence of a camera . All student groups were audio recorded during each session . See Table 1 for an overview of all data sources and methods used to analyze each source . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 313 Table 1 Data types and methods of analysis Data type Method of analysis Video data : full classroom view ; focal group view Video logged with high level descriptions of classroom activity in two - minute increments . Log data was used to highlight points of interest tracing back from the “rich point” of students’ ﬁnal HCR presentations . Time points for interaction analysis sessions were selected from these logs . 360 - degree video footage was also captured each day for two focal groups Audio data : recorded daily for each group Audio recordings were used to explore moments ﬂagged in full class video that were difﬁcult to hear in video data Final presentation video data Students were video recorded giving ﬁnal presentations of their robot designs . These presentations were structured using a set of guiding questions co - designed by the research team and the instructor . Questions focused on students’ navigation of the engineering design cycle ( asking questions , collecting information , developing and testing solutions , and iteratively improving designs ) . Presentations were analyzed in interaction analysis sessions where a rich point was identiﬁed Final robot artifacts Physical prototypes and images of each team’s ﬁnal robot were collected by the research team . These artifacts were analyzed alongside the students’ ﬁnal presentation—exploring social and technical components that came through in each group’s design Written artifacts and drawings ( e . g . , graphic organizers , design drawings ) Written and drawn artifacts were analyzed in multiple interaction analysis data sessions with the research team . Researchers converged around the themes of social versus technical focus , student attention to client / human needs , changes between individual and group designs , etc . When the decision was made to focus on Group 4 , all artifacts created by the group throughout the unit were laid out on a table in an analysis session . Research team members intersubjectively identiﬁed emergent features of early designs that did and did not appear in the ﬁnal product . These features were then traced in interaction analysis sessions of the video data that occurred in the class periods where the artifacts were created 2 . 2 Data Analysis We investigated our research question through mixed quali - tative methods . We drew upon tenets of interactional ethnog - raphy , video analysis , and interaction analysis . Our research team ﬁrst worked to explore where students ended up in the unit based on their ﬁnal products in order to inform tracing back how they got there . This approach was inspired by work in interactional ethnography ( IE ) —a qualitative approach in the social sciences in which a moment or representation is tri - angulated with pieces of rich data that came before it in order to tell a story about learning [ 24 , 25 ] . The IE approach views classrooms as emerging cultural spaces where learners con - struct rules , norms , and practices in interaction , and identiﬁes “rich points” where knowledge and cultural practices can be clearly seen . Rich points are then traced outward in “cycles of activity . ” This process allows the research team to ground interpretations of students’ and teachers’ displays of disci - plinary knowledge in interactional and discourse data . IE thus provides a deeper and more iterative approach to video and interactional analysis—requiring the research team to move across time points and data sources to tell the story of an evolving learning community . In this form of analy - sis , artifacts are used as an anchor point [ 24 , 25 ] . This study takes an IE approach to unpacking the disciplinary knowl - edge of human - centered robotics and design displayed in middle school students’ ﬁnal presentations and draws upon tenets of video , artifact , and interaction analysis to inter - pret the co - construction of knowledge that led to this rich point . Following the video and interaction analysis recommen - dations of Powell , Francisco , and Maher [ 26 ] and Jordan and Henderson [ 27 ] , we identiﬁed critical events related to the negotiation of social and technical aspects of the curriculum and how they connected to students’ end products and pre - sentations . Our analysis was performed as a collaborative effort of the research group ; rather than conducting individ - ual coding sessions , the researchers interpreted the materials through group discussion aiming to come to a consensus , as described below [ 26 , 27 ] . Validity in this qualitative study comes from the research team’s intersubjective process of coming to a consensus across data sessions as data sources are triangulated . In the ﬁrst stage of our analysis , we held two inter - action analysis sessions in which all four student groups’ ﬁnal design drawings and presentations of their robots were analyzed by the research team . Presentation clips were tran - scribed and analyzed following Jordan and Henderson’s process of viewing interactional data : noticing key features relating to research questions , considering these features in group discussion , and iteratively reviewing the data with attention to emergent themes [ 27 ] . Participants in the data sessions noted interesting features of each interaction and highlighted students’ attention to human - centered and social aspects of the design , success and frustration with technical difﬁculties , and negotiation of teamwork . In these sessions , we identiﬁed one student group’s transition from an abstract and technically focused robot design drawing to the articu - lation of connections between social and technical aspects of their robot in the ﬁnal design presentation . We wondered : 123 314 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 What sparked this group’s shift ? What supported their nego - tiation of technical and social aspects of this experience ? We opted to zoom in on this group’s activity for the analysis presented here by ﬁrst compiling all drawn artifacts created by the group . These artifacts , completed throughout the unit , were used as a series of checkpoints through which we could see changes in the group’s design thinking and practice . We held a group data analysis session to examine these artifacts . The research team , which included several undergraduate and graduate students who observed and facilitated in the classroom environment , referenced relevant memos that sur - rounded these artifacts and used ﬁeld notes to bring forward interactional details that helped to interpret the artifact con - tent . We then explored the annotated overview of each class period and video data surrounding these artifacts in order to triangulate our interpretations about the ways in which the in - class interaction and PBL class structure informed the students’ ﬁnal designs . In this inductive data exploration , we developed com - mon language for identifying how students were grappling with technical and social aspects of robot design . This lan - guage was informed by the conceptualization of phenomena - mechanisms - components ( PMC ) framework [ 28 ] . PMC con - siders phenomena as overarching patterns and functions , components as individual pieces of a system , and mech - anisms as the link between components and phenomena , providing a framework for understanding and assessing sys - tems thinking . We adapted PMC to ﬁt our designed HCR context—using it to get a sense of how students were mov - ing towards systems thinking as they connected social and technical aspects of the problem at hand . PMC provided a framework for seeing shifts in students’ reasoning . We used“components , ”“mechanism , ”and“phenomena”tolabel what we saw within student artifacts , actions , and utterances throughout the data set . Attention to components included a focus on single parts of the robot , mechanism was ﬂagged as a consideration of how two or more parts of the robot worked together , whereas a focus on phenomena included attention to the function of the robotic technology and the way it would serve a purpose and interact in the classroom environment . Phenomena was used in Sinha et al . ’s work describing nat - ural systems [ 28 ] , and we adapted this term to reference a robot’s function in the human environment for our current research . In our human - centered robotics unit , we hoped to see evidence of all PMC levels as a sign of students moving toward systems thinking , but we designed the activities and scaffolds to support frequent connection to phenomena . 3 Findings In the sections that follow , we present key extracts from each of the ﬁnal presentations and design drawings cre - ated by the four groups of students to highlight where they ended up , and to “work backwards” in the case of one group to understand how they incorporated social and tech - nical elements in their ﬁnal robot design . Though all groups achieved a human - centered connection at the phenomena level , the presentations varied in their explanation of com - ponents and mechanisms . We ﬁrst provide a description of each group’s ﬁnal presentation and then trace the trajectory of one group’s work at several time points throughout the HCR unit to highlight moments in which students navigated the engineering design cycle , analyzed and designed for the social environments around them , and crossed disciplinary domains through HCR design . To accomplish this tracing , we analyzed video recordings of classroom interactions . We also address group design drawings as an additional data point that provides evidence of the four groups’ attention to social and technical aspects of robotics . Before starting to build their robots , students were asked to individually brain - storm robot designs and come to a group consensus about which design they would ultimately create . These group designs could combine elements of several individual stu - dent designs . When consensus was achieved , each group created an orthographic design drawing ( top , front , and side views ) to represent their imagined human - centered robot . In tracing back to this group artifact , completed 7 days before the ﬁnal presentation , we gained a sense of the group’s ini - tial shared orientation to the technical and social , which may or may not have come through in their ﬁnal presen - tations and products . This informed our decision to focus on one group in particular ( Group 4 ) that had a discon - nect between their design drawing and what they ultimately built . The research team was curious about the transforma - tion of ideas from this technically - focused early sketch to the hybrid social - technical end product , and we were motivated to trace the ﬁnal product backward in order to better under - stand how to support this transition towards socially - oriented design in future work . We present data points as moments in which students moved between the technical and the social to uncover the complexity of the design problem . This quali - tative case study demonstrates the capacity social robotics and problem - based learning experiences hold for broad - ening notions of STEM as a social and multidisciplinary practice . 3 . 1 Recycling , Nurses , Papers , and Books : Four Groups’Final Presentations On the ﬁnal day of the 5 - week HCR unit , students were challenged to present and demonstrate their robot designs . Students prepared to speak about their robot’s purpose , the inspiration behind their designs , their target robot user , and theirdesignprocess . InFig . 2 , weseetheﬁnishedHCRrobots 123 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 315 Fig . 2 Final robot presentations Fig . 3 Engineering design process image lined up proudly across gray tiles at the front of the classroom during this culminating class period . In the following extracts from each presentation , we hear the students speak about their social and technical consider - ations and how these considerations were embodied in the physical robot prototypes shown in Fig . 2 . 3 . 1 . 1 Group 1 : Trash Recycling Robot Group 1’s robot ( Fig . 2a ) stands approximately three feet tall and features large block letters that spell “Trash” and “Recycling” across the robot’s cardboard body . The four students in this group designed their robot to collect trash and recycling from student groups during class periods . This design was selected when the group recognized a need to keep their classroom clean , which would beneﬁt the environment at large . Telepresence components ( e . g . the Chromebook camera and RobotMoose remote driving pro - gram ) allowed the waste - collecting robot to be controlled by the classroom instructor from her desk . These compo - nents also allowed remote visitors from Alaska to explore the classroom . About two minutes into their presentation , students Martha , Annie , and Odin 1 discussed their design process—honing in on the importance of troubleshooting . In this short interaction , we see how these students focused on physical components and mechanisms—attending to their robot’s balance , stability , and the speciﬁc parts that made this possible . As the students reﬂected , they used an image of the engineering design process to aid in structuring their response ( see Fig . 3 ) . This image featured the following cate - gories : Imagining , asking questions , collecting information , developing and testing solutions , and improving the design [ 22 ] . Martha : . . . Um , how did you overcome these challenges ? We tried a lot of different ways . For the stableness , we had to add the four support bars , which are these ( points to wooden dowel rods on the robot body ) . For making sure it would stay up…we had to make sure everything was even and equal…And for making sure it would get around the tables and everything…we had Annie start calculating the steps . Odin : …When we asked a question , we asked like how could we get it to stay up , and so when it like jerks back - wards , how , howwoulditnotfall…Forimagine , wekinda thought up our ideas , kinda drew it out a little bit , see if it would work . To collect information , we… saw what was weak or wasn’t as sturdy , and so we added to it . And then , develop and test solutions , after we saw what was weak , we added to it , and if it still didn’t work , we added more . Though Group 1’s design was based in a human need ( dis - posing of garbage and an environmental commitment to recycling ) , their articulation of the design process focused on physical components and the work the group did to help 1 All students have been given pseudonyms . 123 316 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 them operate together ( mechanism ) . Here , the technical work of assuring robot stability appeared to overshadow the more human - centered aspects of the unit’s ﬁnal product . For exam - ple , Odin mapped all pieces of the design cycle to the single issue of stability . Though it is notable that the students were able to identify a learning issue and how they overcame it ( an important piece of PBL ) , the group did not connect the need for stability to the HCR function of their design ( phenomena ) or to the social environment more broadly . 3 . 1 . 2 Group 2 : Nurse Assistant Robot Group 2’s robot features a protective ring of PVC pipe and a white Styrofoam cooler pulled by three strands of braided yarn . It includes cardboard shelves lined with red felt . Like Group 1 , Group 2 focused on technical challenges and solu - tions in their design cycle reﬂection . This group created a robot used by the school nurse to transport medication and snacks to classrooms . Telepresence components allowed the nurse to remotely deliver these items throughout the school without leaving her ofﬁce . George , one of two male students in this group , summed up a component - level challenge and how it was addressed through testing : George : Test solutions . One thing we did was we made a shelf , and we tested it by putting weight on it . When we ﬁrst made a shelf , we glued it down and it wasn’t as sturdy as we needed it to be . So we , by putting poles under the shelf to help support it better , we asked things like , is there any other way to help support the robot , and also…do we…need anything else to make the…robot a success ? In this response , there is orientation to an individual com - ponent of the robot—the shelf . This shelf was originally designed to hold medication . The students interpreted “test - ing” in their presentation in terms of technical trial and error ( rather than as a more social user testing experience ) . Orientation to the social function occurred later in the pre - sentation , but was heavily guided by the instructor . Near the end of the presentation , the instructor provided an anecdote about how this robot could have helped a sick student ear - lier in the day . This interaction demonstrated the perceived value of the robot design from an authentic user perspec - tive . The students did not build on this connection , but it showed promise for the development of future scaffolds that might support connections like these earlier in the design process . 3 . 1 . 3 Group 3 : Book Robot Group 3 , like groups 1 and 2 , focused their ﬁnal presentation on explaining the technical challenges they faced as they worked to stabilize their robot . Group 3’s human - centered purpose was not speciﬁc . The students identiﬁed a need to hold books in the library , but the group did not provide rea - soning for why a human - centered robot would work well for this task . It was not clear how telepresence components functioned within this design . In the interaction below , we hear the group speak to their robot’s purpose and abstractly explain their design process : Matt : The need our robot ﬁlls is carrying library books for the librarian in the library Mark : Ms . [ Librarian ] needed help in the library , carrying books . Eli : It’s used for students…library users and the librarian . Matt : People can place books in the library in the top bin . Mark : …We started with the base of the robot and worked our way up . Eli : The challenge was balancing the robot… Here , students attended to both social needs ( help carrying books ) and technical aspects ( balancing components ) . How - ever , the connection between technical and social was not yet clear . 3 . 1 . 4 Group 4 : Teacher Assistant Robot Group 4’s robot towers at the height of classroom tables— topped with a cardboard box emblazoned on one side with red and white pompoms in the shape of the local university logo . In this group’s presentation , the connection between components , mechanism , and phenomena was ﬂeshed out further . Group 4 was the only group to code and demon - strate a functioning prototype . This achievement prompted our team to focus on this group’s process in more detail— tracing the elements of the ﬁnal product back in order to understand the experiences and curricular dimensions that made this outcome possible . Group 4 articulated their robot design as a helper for the multitasking teacher . Recogniz - ing that their own instructor often lost valuable class time collecting student papers , the students imagined a robot that would stop at each table to collect papers from students . This same robot , controlled by the instructor from her desk , could also be used to allow remote visitors to explore the class - room environment via telepresence . The group described the purpose of their robot with a clear social orientation : Jack : I just felt the need that like sometimes teachers are grading papers and stuff and they don’t want to get up to collect everybody else’s papers , ‘cause they’re doing other stuff , so you can reprogram the robot to go to people’s desks and pick up their papers and bring them back . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 317 Graham : …Our robot goes to each table and gets… the papers and will take it back to the starting point . ( The instructor asks who uses the robot . When the group responds that the user is only teachers , the instructor responds ) Instructor : Students do though , ‘cause students don’t have to get up and give me their papers anymore . Jess : All you have to do is press a button that is already coded to the table , and it’ll run back for you too . In this impromptu interaction with the instructor , social and technical aspects of the design were addressed as students touched on both technical coding and social function while considering user workﬂow . Jess led this consideration as she outlined the simple process their instructor would go through to meet a need in the local environment . This exchange mir - rored a ﬁrst phase of user testing—assessing the user’s initial impressions and communicating what the piece of technol - ogy could do for them in their everyday lives . The exchange also demonstrated understanding of the connection between the phenomena ( the actions of the robot in the space as a teacher aid ) and mechanism ( programmed buttons as a means of controlling the robot to perform a human - centered task ) . Group 4 went on to perform a live demonstration of their robot . This group was able to assemble the physical parts of their robot and to develop programmed buttons for pre - determined sequences of movement ( e . g . collect papers from Table 1 ) . As the group demonstrated their robot’s movement within the class presentation , they ran into a challenge . The robot stopped without turning to face the table and collect papers as intended . Jack directed Graham to “re - run that code . ” Graham took this direction , and the group members all smiled as their robot returned to its designated starting point and classmates clapped . In this moment , we see evidence of students’ internalization and application of the develop - ing and testing solutions portion of the engineering design cycle . Rather than asking for help from an authority ﬁgure ( e . g . instructor or technology facilitator ) , the students imme - diately began troubleshooting . Their excitement and success was palpable . Though this group struggled early in the unit to move forward from technical challenges like these , it was clear in this ﬁnal demonstration that they were comfortable with the iterative process of testing . The students no longer perceived this as a failure . The students’ experience here with iterative testing is one example of a group’s success merging social and technical considerations . In our analysis of Group 4’s design drawing ( Fig . 4 ) , we found that it did not reﬂect what they actually built . Their robot design sketch included a description that highlighted books rather than papers , and it had a laptop positioned at the back bottom section of the robot . There was a considerable transformation from this phase of the group’s work to the ﬁnal presentation of their human - centered robot . It was this Fig . 4 Group 4’s robot design drawing transformation , and the group’s success connecting technical and social aspects in their ﬁnal presentation , that spurred our decision to trace this particular group backward , via their arti - facts and interactional data , to understand how their design changed over time and how they succeeded in keeping the sociotechnical focus to the end . 3 . 2 Zooming in on Group 4 Despite variation in the social and technical emphases that came through in each of these four presentations , each group’s design was clearly inspired by the environment that surrounded these students and the social fabric of their every - day lives . One of the central aims of this analysis is to give a sense of how our HCR unit was experienced by one group , particularly how they worked through the social and techni - cal aspects of robot design . In narrowing our focus to one group of 4 students , we are able to tell a rich story about their trajectory and what made their ﬁnal presentation possi - ble . Building on our data sessions exploring students’ ﬁnal presentations and group robot designs , we selected the group ( Group 4 ) that was able to take their design furthest in the limited time span and that had an interesting transforma - tion between their design drawing and ﬁnal presentation . We hoped that by understanding how this group achieved their ﬁnal product , we might be better able to scaffold this process moving forward . This group was also noted in facilitator memos for ownership of their design—working collabora - tively to ensure that their robot was built and programmed for the ﬁnal showcase . Finally , Group 4 engaged in pre - liminary user testing , which provided an especially fruitful opportunity for bridging the social and technical . In the artifact and interaction examples that follow , we highlight Group 4’s navigation of the technical and social aspects of robotics design during our human - centered robotics curricu - lum . 123 318 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 Fig . 5 Group 4 early design drawings 3 . 2 . 1 Early Robot Design Drawings Following the unit’s introductory activities and opportunities to brainstorm , students created their individual human - centered robot designs with the understanding that they would be sharing them with their group members and work - ing to convince others that their design should be taken up . In these initial design drawings , we see how students indi - vidually attended to technical and social aspects . Evidence of attention to phenomena , mechanisms , and components in these artifacts speaks to shifts that occurred prior to the ﬁnal presentation . In Fig . 5 , we see Jack , Jerry , and Graham’s designs . Jess was absent the day that these drawings were created . Jack’s diagram included many labeled parts—attending in detail to the technical components of the imagined robot . This artifact had a “programmable system , ” a “screen , ” “lights , ” “body . ” It is labeled as “collabsible” ( sic ) . In Jack’s attention to a programmable system , we see depiction of a mechanism—how all of the parts will work together . The noted collapsibility suggests human - centeredness , as do the lights appearing at the base of the drawn robot . Jerry’s design is abstract—focused on a more human - centered function . We see a dishwasher labeled in the center of the robot body . From this , we glean an overarching function for the robot , but we do not yet have a sense of how this func - tion is achieved . This drawing can thus be understood at the phenomena level . Finally , Graham’s drawing appears grounded in social aspects and ecosystems . Multiple human needs have been identiﬁed—humans with disabilities who need to carry books , people who have memory loss that could be helped with technology . These details demonstrate a focus on phenomena . It is also notable that Graham included drawn aspects of the environment that surround humans ( e . g . shelves with items on them ) . At this point in the unit , the students of Group 4 had diver - gent ideas about what would make a functional and useful human - centered robot for their local environment . We turn to written descriptions of these brainstormed ideas to gain a greater sense of how they negotiated their group design and made their way towards the ﬁnal showcase . 3 . 2 . 2 Imagining a Robot Design : What I Know , Ideas , What I Need to Know , and Action Steps Following their individual sketches of human - centered robot designs , students were asked to complete a graphic organizer designed to mirror the problem - based learning cycle [ 15 ] . Students completed a worksheet which asked them to list the local need that their robot would fulﬁll , what they know about this need , ideas for the robot design ( parts , features ) , what they needed to know in order to design and build the robot , and next steps for making their ideas into a reality . Students also completed orthographic drawings of their designs at this stage . These two artifacts would be used to help individual students advocate for their design ideas at the group level— working towards consensus for the single robot that each groupwouldultimatelybuild . Here , weexploretheseartifacts for evidence of social and technical connections made at the individual level that may have informed the groups’ ﬁnal robot design and construction . In his graphic organizer , Jack identiﬁed his robot as a robot for giving and receiving books , writing “I know that teachers don’t like handing out 35 books and haveing ( sic ) them get in the way . . . So I want it to collect books and give them out . ” Jack noticed his teachers’ frustration and imagined a way to alleviate it using technology . In his ideas column , Jack wrote about a big box or crate with “metal rods” that could be used to lift the books up and down . This description attended to the mechanisms of the proposed robot design— considering how the parts would work together to perform a 123 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 319 Fig . 6 Jack’s orthographic drawing function in the surrounding environment . Jack noted that he needed to know “how to work the rods to lift the books up and down and connect them to the robot . ” Jack did not identify programming as a means of operating the metal rods , but the process is implicit in his work . In the last column , Jack highlighted planning with his group mates and drawing a model as next steps . Jack’s orthographic design drawing ( Fig . 6 ) featured labeled “extending rods , ” “book holder / box” and “bars . ” The drawn design included a laptop placed at the base of the robot body . This drawing closely mirrors the design draw - ing submitted by the whole team , though it differs from the designthatthegroupultimatelybuilt . InJack’slabeleddesign features , we see a connection between components and phe - nomena . Jack noted that the physical component of the box would be used to hold books ( the overarching function ) , and we know from his organizational chart description that the rods in this drawing represent a system for collecting and organizing books from each classroom table . Inhergraphicorganizer , Jessdescribedherimaginedrobot as a “robot to be able to take phone calls in the ofﬁce for when parentscalltotelltheschoolkidswon’tbeheretoday . Itcould save the ofﬁce ladies time . It could also write it in Harmony for the absence report . ” Here , Jess identiﬁed a need to stream - line school ofﬁce responsibilities that could be fulﬁlled by automated technology . She referenced the school’s notiﬁca - tion management system , Harmony , as a digital tool that her human - centered robot could interface with . This ﬁrst column considered phenomena and began to address mechanism— how the robot would keep track of the calls it took . Jess listed “a forwarder machine , a red light in case someone needs to pick up the phone , a ringtone , and a caller ID screen” as ideas for robot parts and features . These features were likely present in Jess’ everyday life—a representation of expecta - Fig . 7 Jess’ orthographic drawing tions for the action of “answering a phone , ” and “leaving a message . ” Jess attended to the need for environmental cues ( red light , ringtone , caller ID screen ) , and the issue of stor - age for calls when a human is away from the desk . Each of these considerations takes into account the social human environment and its norms , and maps these norms to techni - cal components . Jess then identiﬁed additional information she needed to know—including how many robots would be needed and how often the phone rings . Jess’ orthographic drawing ( Fig . 7 ) labeled a “cable con - nection , ”“landlinephone , ”“KT , ”and“laptop . ”Eachofthese labeled components ﬁt into the system that Jess imagined for her human - centered robot . In her short responses and design drawing , Jess attended to human needs , components , phe - nomena , and usability . In Jerry’s graphic organizer , a human need was identiﬁed and an abstract action plan was devised . Jerry titled his robot a book organizer and noted , “The problem is that my robot could help make a better selection of books for us because so many aren’t on the shelf . ” Jerry listed a hand “that can organize , ” “a spot to pick up books when they might fall , ” and “speed” as necessary features of his robot . These features are abstract , and Jerry appears to have considered his robot at component ( hand ) and phenomena ( organizing books ) levels . He has not yet made a connection between them . He lists knowledge about building a robot as what he needs to know , and “plan and take action” as his action plan . In his orthographic drawing ( Fig . 8 ) , Jerry labeled a “lap - top , ” “Quizbot parts , ” the KT robot , and a “hand . ” It appears that Jerry intended to use parts from an introductory robotics station that occurred early in the unit ( Quizbot , which had a simple design consisting of a round “face” , a stand , and two motors that allowed it to move with 2 degrees of freedom ) to construct the hand he imagined . At this stage , Jerry did not demonstrate how this would work , but there is evidence that 123 320 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 Fig . 8 Jerry’s orthographic drawing he was beginning to consider mechanisms that would allow his design to function . Graham’s imagined robot , designed “to collect assign - ments / homework in [ the instructor’s ] room , ” was outlined in detail across the four columns of his graphic organizer . Gra - ham identiﬁed that the robot should “not interrupt learning , ” “should be easy and quick , ” and “should collect assignments in [ the instructor’s room ] . ” This ﬁrst column description acknowledged the rules and norms of the classroom environ - ment as a quiet space not to be interrupted . It also emphasized that this new technology should not be an added burden to its user ( the instructor ) . Graham stated that his robot would have a long pole for holding the assignment box / bin , and he referred to his robot as “Wilbur . ” This name was ultimately adopted by the group for their ﬁnal robot design . Graham stated that his robot “will be able to run code and stop at each table , should be a friendly presence with a face to encour - age the turning in of homework . ” Again , Graham attended to the culture of the classroom . Graham also noted in his ideas for robot design that his robot should have a cover for its computer screen , and that it needed to be “a little taller than a table or student desk . ” Here , Graham attended to the limitations of the technology components ( need to be pro - tected ) and to the physical space that the robot would need to navigate to perform its task . In his responses to column 2 in his graphic organizer , Graham touched on components , mechanisms , and phenomena . In his sketched ideas , we see many traces of this group’s ﬁnal product . Graham listed his “need to knows” as “how to code a stop button , how to build a safe way to house assignments , and make the robot seem as nice as possible . ” With this list , Graham highlighted the technical ( a stop button ) , the mechanical ( coding ) and the social / phenomena ( how the robot will interact with humans in the space ) . Gra - ham addressed action items by stating that he needed supplies to “build Wilbur from the ground up , ” “time to code , ” and Fig . 9 Graham’s orthographic drawing “time to detail Wilbur . ” This attention to time connects nicely to the iterative nature of the engineering design cycle students are working through . In Graham’s orthographic drawing ( Fig . 9 ) , we see further attention to technical components ( height , “assignment bin , ” “support pole , ” “computer box” ) and social components and personalization ( naming the robot Wilbur and the inclusion of a “mohawk” ) . Across these arti - facts , we see how all group members seemed to attend to the social aspects of robotics , albeit in different ways . 3 . 2 . 3 Group Orthographic Drawing Following the completion of individual design drawings , graphic organizers , orthographic drawings , and play - doh prototypes , the whole class participated in a Gallery Walk [ 29 ] . This experience gave students the opportunity to lay out all drawings , models , and written artifacts they’d created in support of their design ideas , and to receive feedback from peers outside of their groups . This feedback ( recorded on structured forms ) could be used by students to make changes to their designs . Each group was charged with coming to a consensus on a design to build . In Fig . 10 , we see the design drawing submitted by Group 4 . The group stated that their robot would be used for hand - ing out and receiving books . The drawn design appears to mirror Jack’s individual design drawing . Despite the overlap of this submitted drawing and Jack’s initial drawing , Group 4’s ﬁnal presentation included several aspects of Graham’s brainstorming work ( collecting assignments , the button used to stop at each table ) . How did the group come to integrate these elements ? What pushed them towards the social ori - entation they ultimately took up ? To explore these questions further , we move to Group 4’s interaction as they made deci - sions about their group design , selected the materials they would use , and constructed their robot . 123 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 321 Fig . 10 Group 4 orthographic drawing 3 . 2 . 4 “What are We Gonna Do ? ” : Narrowing the Design Following the Gallery Walk experience , all four groups were given a budget and worksheet for recording a list of materials needed to build their robot designs . Students were allotted $ 50 to work with , and they were presented with a price list that included available materials ( e . g . poster board , glue guns , custom laser cutting services ) . Students were allowed to bring items from home for free , and they were required to provide reasoning for any custom 3D printing or laser cut - ting commissioned from the research team . Students were tasked with coming to consensus on a shared group design and creating a ﬁnal materials list for this design . In the exchanges that follow , we see how Group 4 used material and budgetary constraints as well as the perceived technical difﬁculty of each individual design to inform their decision - making process . They moved from attending to components and mechanisms in their individual designs to phenomena as they worked towards their shared group design . Shortly before this ﬁrst exchange , Jess structured group problem solving by asking the group to make a deci - sion about materials . Jerry offered a response in terms of the materials needed for his individual design , which featured a large hand . Graham solicited further detail by asking how the hand would operate ( addressing mechanism level design concerns ) . As the group considered Jerry’s designed hand , they recognized the time and ﬁnancial constraints involved , eventually ruling the hand out of their group design . In their exchange about the hand , Graham raised a learning issue—how would the group get the parts of the robotic arm to move ? This learning issue demonstrated attention to mechanism—what parts do we need and how will the parts work together ? Jerry provided an abstract response , not - ing that “wires” would be needed , and Graham ﬂeshed this out—proposing that cardboard pieces could be used to create a three - dimensional ﬁnger . Jess brought in the added con - straint of their budget . With these constraints foregrounded , Jerry proposed that they eliminate the hand from their shared design . At this point , the group used material , technical , and ﬁscal reasoning to justify their choice to not include a key piece of Jerry’s design . They brainstormed at component and mech - anism levels ( “hand” and “wires” ) , and all group members offered contributions to this decision . The group moved for - ward with their decision - making process—looking for ways to successfully merge their individual design ideas . Their dis - cussion focused for a while on design materials needed and their cost , as well as the time and effort needed to implement the designs . Here , Jess reoriented the group to the larger phe - nomena and how their robot would work as a human - centered robot in their classroom environment . A facilitator came to the group to ask about their selected robot’s purpose . After a short description by Jack of a pulley system that could be operated manually to lift books up and down , Jess pointed out , “So basically , our robot that’s supposed to do stuff for us , we’redoingforit . ”ThispointpromptsGrahamtoexplainthat the robot could simply travel to each table to collect books rather than moving them up and down . Jess responded , “So it’s basically just like , a box . ” With this summary , Jess high - lighted that manually operating a pulley system defeats the purpose of automating book collection through the use of a human - centered robot . This demonstrated an awareness of the human environment and how to design for it ( phenom - ena ) . Jack and Graham continued to negotiate which of their design ideas would be taken up at the group level . At this phase , the group abandoned their pulley system . Jess chimed in with an alternate proposal that moved beyond the “walking box , ” but was not as complex as the pulley system proposed by Jack : Jess : ( overlapping ) We could do like , tiny squares . Graham : Tiny squares ? Oh like , little boxes ? Boxes on boxes ? …Wouldn’t it be cool if you could take them off too ? This interchange of ideas speaks to the drawn box design included at the bottom right hand corner of Group 4’s sub - mitted design drawing ( Fig . 11 ) . Here , we see Jess’ idea to include multiple boxes instead of a pulley system rep - resented . The group has attended to this idea as reasonable within their budget ( they can bring boxes from home ) and as less technically complex than the original pulley system . In the above exchanges that occurred throughout Group 4’s selection of a cohesive robot design and creation of a materials list , we see the themes and connections made in 123 322 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 Fig . 11 Partial view of Group 4’s design drawing their ﬁnal presentation emerge . As all four group mem - bers considered the technical , ﬁnancial , and task - oriented constraints of constructing their robot design , they moved between component , mechanism , and phenomena levels . From these brief interactive moments , we see how the group progressed from Jack’s book carrying design to a hybrid ﬁnal design involving assignment collection and a creative stabil - ity system . In the following episode , we see how the group continued to move between the technical and the social as they engaged in the construction of their robot design . 3 . 2 . 5 Wobbles and Stability : the Intuitive Physics of Balance Following Group 4’s design brainstorm and early “build day” experiences , the group’s robot emerged as a teacher’s assistant—passing out papers to students in small groups . As the group built and tested their robot , they recognized an issue with stability . Their robot continued to tip as it got close to the table where it was meant to collect assignments—wobbling beneath the weight of the laptop placed on its top . As the three boys in the group debated how to use a skein of yarn to solve the problem , Jess jumped in with an idea to poke holes in the base and the top of the cardboard robot body and thread the yarn through them—pulling tight to balance the body . Graham championed Jess’ idea and began to carry it through . The rest of the group followed suit and was happy with the result . A facilitator in the room commended Jess for her idea , and Jess admitted “yeah , I felt pretty good about that . ”Jerrybegantotesttheweightofpaperstheirrobotcould hold , and the group reﬂected on their work—commenting on the balance principles they uncovered . Jerry : All the pressure is on this right now . Graham : Yeah , all the pressure - Jack : ( overlapping ) So you need to make sure it’s tight . Here , the students were attuned to the technical . Acting on Jess’ idea to weigh down the front by attaching strings , they discovered their robot was much more stable . Jack provided reasoning : “All of the pressure is on this right now , ” referring to the string . The group successfully used science knowledge toimprovetheirdesign . Theywentontotesttheirrobot’spath again , after it nearly hit another student standing in the way . Despite their path being more successful this time around , Jack stated “We’ll adjust that” multiple times , indicating his attention to iterative work and the technical coding aspect of the robot . Meanwhile , Jerry mimed putting papers into the robot , reﬂecting its social function . The facilitator and tech facilitator directed attention to the social by asking questions and interacting with the students . 4 Discussion Our descriptions of ﬁnal student projects above , and the iter - ative design process through which the groups developed their ﬁnal designs , show that students were able to use our HCR curriculum to attend to both the technical and social aspects of robotics , though different problems they encoun - tered along the way sometimes led them to prioritize one over theother . Asstudentsengagedintrialanderrorastheyreﬁned their robot designs , they demonstrated orientation to an itera - tiveengineeringdesignprocess . Intheirinformalexperiences with analyzing a design environment , students also consid - ered social and cultural factors . The focus on providing a beneﬁt to the local school environment allowed students to start their work from a space they were familiar with and to demonstrate their understanding of designing for speciﬁc social environments . We see evidence of this understanding in the kinds of locally speciﬁc functions students chose ( e . g . , helpingateacher , collectingtrash ) andthewaystheyincorpo - rated the social dynamics of the classroom into their designs . In contrast to competition - based educational robotics initia - tives , or robotics challenges in which an artiﬁcial problem ( e . g . , program your robot to pick up several blocks ) is a thin veneer for largely technical pursuits , our curriculum sparked students to carefully think through how the technical capabil - ities of robots could relate to the social world around them . These connections , though preliminary , are promising in this middle school context . Although students could move between social and tech - nical considerations in their designs , they struggled to consider both simultaneously . This is a common occurrence in robotics design more generally . Robotics often aims to provide societal beneﬁts , but the technical complexity of constructing and programming robots commonly results in a technologically deterministic focus in robotics development . Thus , social beneﬁts are expected to result from technical advancement without specifying the exact mechanisms of 123 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 323 this connection [ 9 ] . In this sense , the difﬁculties students experienced in connecting the social and technical aspects of robotics are authentic to the HCR design . Further itera - tions of our curriculum will involve developing additional scaffolding activities for engaging students in integrating the sociotechnical aspects of design . This could include making sure that students experience at least one user testing cycle , which several groups did not do due to lack of time in the semester . Despite the authentic challenges students experienced in connecting the social and technical , using a problem - based approach and human - centered application domain for design gave students ample opportunities to think through hardware design , programming , and the socially beneﬁcial use of tech - nology from different perspectives . Students explored the physical properties of the materials they were using , consid - ered the interconnections of technical , ﬁscal , and social costs and beneﬁts of different design options , and discussed how people might respond to having their robot in the environ - ment . As seen in our examples , human - centered robotics is particularly well suited for supporting this kind of problem - based learning because the functions robots are expected to perform are inextricably linked with the social envi - ronment and people’s needs , attitudes , and responses to different robot designs . Our curriculum also goes beyond prior work in which designing social “robot diaries” was shown to motivate female students in particular by relat - ing robotics to their interest in socializing with each other [ 7 ] . The focus on developing robots for the broader social environment as encouraged by this HCR curriculum seemed to allow students to shift their focus to different technical and social aspects as the moment required . Students pur - sued their interests , deﬁning in their own words what they saw as beneﬁcial and appropriate for their community . The diversity of concerns and approaches that students could take , as well as the open - ended nature of the problems they were solving , also supported an epistemologically pluralis - tic learning context . In short , an environment was created in which multiple ways of knowing were possible . Students collaboratively negotiated which approach was appropri - ate for solving the problem and what to focus on in their designs . Our examples show that most of the groups participating in the class were motivated to actively participate in HCR design , and to connect it to different areas of their own inter - est and concern ( e . g . hardware design , providing assistance to people ) . Male and female students alike took part in the activities , and emerged as discussion and design leaders at different times in the project . In summary , our work demonstrates that a problem - based HCR curriculum can help students attend to and work through the connections between social and technical aspects of emerging technology design . This opportunity prepares students to recognize the interconnections between the tech - nical and social as components of a larger system ( systems thinking ) , as we described in our analysis of students’ work using the PMC schema . Furthermore , our curriculum shows how different types of disciplinary knowledge ( e . g . , pro - gramming , social science , design ) are all needed to produce societally useful technological artifacts . By focusing primar - ily on one small group’s work , we aim to inform future curriculum development and research on learning in these areas rather than to generalize these results more broadly . As students are immersed in and aware of the social environ - ment from their earliest educational experiences , we expect this type of approach can be extended into earlier ( K - 6 ) and later ( undergraduate , graduate ) educational years . This extension might include amending the technical complexity of the work being done to ﬁt the age group , but would keep the sociotechnical , problem - based focus of the learning activi - ties . As we continue to investigate the dynamic connections students make within our human - centered robotics context , we work to inform broadening notions of what STEM learn - ing can and should look like . Acknowledgements We acknowledge the contributions of Haley Molchan , Stella Huang , Charlie Mahoney , AnnaRose Girvin , Miranda Meade , and Ben Oistad who played a key role in the implementation of our curriculum . Funding This research was funded by National Science Foundation awards DRL - 1433414 and DRL - 1433841 . Compliance with Ethical Standards Conﬂicts of interest The authors declare no other conﬂicts of interest . Informed Consent All participants and their parents / guardians agreed to participate in this study and submitted informed consent forms . References 1 . Barker BS , Ansorge J ( 2007 ) Robotics as means to increase achievement scores in an informal learning environment . J Res Technol Educ 39 : 229 – 243 2 . Weinberg JB , Pettibone JC , Thomas SL , Stephen ML , Stein C ( 2007 ) The impact of robot projects on girls’ attitudes toward sci - ence and engineering . In : Robotics science and systems ( RSS ) workshop on research in robots for education . Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA , 30 June 2007 3 . MataricMJ , KoenigNP , Feil - SeiferD ( 2007 ) Materialsforenabling hands - on robotics and STEM Education . In : AAAI spring sympo - sium : semantic scientiﬁc knowledge integration , pp 99 – 102 4 . Williams D , Ma Y , Prejean L ( 2010 ) A preliminary study exploring the use of ﬁctional narrative in robotics activities . J Comput Math Sci Teach 29 ( 1 ) : 51 – 71 5 . Robinson LE , Whittier M ( 2007 ) Teaching evolution to non - English proﬁcient students by using Lego robotics . Am Second Educ 35 ( 3 ) : 19 – 28 123 324 International Journal of Social Robotics ( 2018 ) 10 : 309 – 324 6 . Scassellati B , Admoni H , Matari´c M ( 2012 ) Robots for use in autism research . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 14 : 275 – 294 7 . Hamner E , Lauwers T , Bernstein D , Nourbakhsh IR , DiSalvo CF ( 2008 ) Robot diaries : broadening participation in the computer sci - encepipelinethroughsocialtechnicalexploration . In : AAAIspring symposium : using AI to motivate greater participation in computer science , pp 38 – 43 8 . Qidwai UA ( 2007 ) A LAMP - LEGO experience of motivating minority students to study engineering . ACM SIGCSE Bull 39 ( 4 ) : 41 – 44 9 . Šabanovi´c S ( 2010 ) Robots in society , society in robots . Int J Soc Robot 2 ( 4 ) : 439 – 450 10 . Schaal S ( 2007 ) The new robotics : towards human - centered machines . HFSP J 1 ( 2 ) : 115 – 126 11 . Baker D , Leary R ( 1995 ) Letting girls speak out about science . J Res Sci Teach 32 ( 1 ) : 3 – 27 12 . DiSalvoC , Nourbakhsh I , HolstiusD , AkinA , LouwM ( 2008 ) The neighborhood networks project : a case study of critical engage - ment and creative expression through participatory design . In : Proceedingsofthe10thconferenceonparticipatorydesign , Indiana University , pp 41 – 50 13 . Gomoll A , Hmelo - Silver CE , Šabanovi´c S , Francisco M ( 2016 ) Dragons , ladybugs , and softballs : girls’ STEM engagement with human - centered robotics . J Sci Educ Technol 25 ( 6 ) : 899 – 914 14 . Turkle S , Papert S ( 1992 ) Epistemological pluralism and the reval - uation of the concrete . J Math Behav 11 ( 1 ) : 3 – 33 15 . Hmelo - Silver CE , Duncan RG , Chinn CA ( 2007 ) Scaffolding and achievement in problem - based and inquiry learning : a response to Kirschner , Sweller , and Clark ( 2006 ) . Educ Psychol 42 : 99 – 107 16 . Hmelo - Silver CE ( 2004 ) Problem - based learning : What and how do students learn ? Educ Psychol Rev 16 ( 3 ) : 235 – 266 17 . Hmelo CE , Holton DL , Kolodner JL ( 2000 ) Designing to learn about complex systems . J Learn Sci 9 ( 3 ) : 247 – 298 18 . Kolodner JL , Camp PJ , Crismond D , Fasse B , Gray J , Hol - brook J , Puntambekar S , Ryan M ( 2003 ) Problem - based learning meets case - based reasoning in the middle - school science class - room : putting learning by Design ( TM ) into practice . J Learn Sci 12 ( 4 ) : 495 – 547 19 . Buchanan R ( 1992 ) Wicked problems in design thinking . Des Issues 8 ( 2 ) : 5 – 21 20 . Blumenfeld PC , Soloway E , Marx RW , Krajcik JS , Guzdial M , Palincsar A ( 1991 ) Motivating project - based learning : sustaining the doing , supporting the learning . Educ Psychol 26 ( 3 – 4 ) : 369 – 398 21 . NGSS Lead States ( 2013 ) Next generation science standards : for states , by states . http : / / www . nextgenscience . org / get - to - know 22 . Resnick M ( 2007 ) All I really need to know ( about creative think - ing ) I learned ( by studying how children learn ) in kindergarten . In : Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on creativity and cognition . ACM , pp 1 – 6 23 . Danish JA , Gresalﬁ MS ( 2018 ) Cognitive and sociocultural per - spective on learning : tensions and synergy in the learning sciences . In : Fischer F , Hmelo - Silver CE , Goldman SR , Reimann , P ( eds ) International handbook of the learning sciences . Routledge , New York 24 . Castanheira ML , Green JL , Yeager E ( 2009 ) Investigating inclusive practices : an interactional ethnographic approach . In : Kumpulainen K , Hmelo - Silver CE , César M ( eds ) Investigating classroom interaction : methodologies in action . Sense Publishers , Rotterdam , The Netherlands , pp 145 – 178 25 . Baker WD , Green JL ( 2007 ) Limits to certainty in interpreting video data : interactional ethnography and disciplinary knowledge . Pedagog Int J 2 ( 3 ) : 191 – 204 26 . Powell AB , Francisco JM , Maher CA ( 2003 ) An analytical model for studying the development of learners’ mathematical ideas and reasoning using videotape data . J Math Behav 22 ( 4 ) : 405 – 435 27 . Jordan B , Henderson A ( 1995 ) Interaction analysis : foundations and practice . J Learn Sci 4 ( 1 ) : 39 – 103 28 . Sinha S , Rogat TK , Adams - Wiggins KR , Hmelo - Silver CE ( 2015 ) Collaborative group engagement in a computer - supported inquiry learning environment . Int J Comput Support Collab Learn 10 ( 3 ) : 273 – 307 29 . Kolodner JL ( 2002 ) Facilitating the learning of design prac - tices : lessons learned from an inquiry into science education . J Ind Teach Educ 39 ( 3 ) : 3 . http : / / scholar . lib . vt . edu / ejournals / JITE / v39n3 / kolodner . html Andrea Gomoll is a Graduate Research Assistant and Ph . D . student in the Learning Sciences at Indiana University . She studies inquiry - based learning in a variety of disciplinary contexts and creates learning expe - riences that bridge the many curricula of our lives . Andrea currently works closely with Dr . Cindy Hmelo - Silver . She received her Master’s Degree in the Learning Sciences from Indiana University in 2016 . Selma Šabanovi´c is an Associate Professor of Informatics and Cog - nitive Science at Indiana University Bloomington . Her research com - bines the social studies of computing , focusing particularly analyzing the design , use , and consequences of robots in different social and cul - tural contexts , with research on human – robot interaction ( HRI ) and social robotics . Šabanovi´c has held the positions of Visiting Professor at Bielefeld University’s Cluster of Excellence in Cognitive Interaction Technology ( CITEC ) in 2014 , Lecturer in Stanford University’s Pro - gram in Science , Technology and Society in 2008 – 2009 , and Visiting Scholar at the Intelligent Systems Institute in AIST , Tsukuba , Japan and the Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon University in 2005 . She currently serves as the Co - Editor in Chief of the ACM Transactions on Human – Robot Interaction , and is a steering committee member of the ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human – Robot Interac - tion ( HRI 2018 ) . She received her Ph . D . in Science and Technology Studies from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 2007 . Erin Tolar is a graduate student in the Learning Sciences program at the Indiana University School of Education . She currently works with Dr . Cindy Hmelo - Silver as a Graduate Research Assistant . Her research involves implementing a human - centered robotics curriculum in middle school classrooms using principles of problem - based learn - ing . Erin also earned a Bachelor of Musical Arts degree from DePauw University in 2016 . CindyE . Hmelo - Silver is the Barbara B . Jacobs Chair in Education , Pro - fessor of Learning Sciences , and Director of the Center for Research on Learning and Technology in the School of Education of Indiana University . Her research interests focus on how people learn about complex phenomena and how technology can help support that learn - ing . As part of this work , she studies problem - based learning , collabo - rative knowledge construction , and computer supported collaborative learning . MatthewFrancisco is a Lecturer in the School of Informatics , Comput - ing , and Engineering at IU and a Systems Architect for the R House Human Robot Interaction lab . Francisco has been working in tech - nology education for twelve years with a focus on physical systems design , cultural and social aspects of computer and Internet technol - ogy , and innovation in computer modeling of social systems . Orion Lawlor is an Associate Professor of Computer Science at the University of Alaska Fairbanks . His research interests span web robotics , digital fabrication , computer graphics , and parallel comput - ing . He has previously worked for the Center for Simulation of Advan - ced Rockets in 2002 – 2004 . He received his Ph . D . in Computer Sci - ence from the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . 123