Penguins , Camels , and Other Birds of a Feather : Brokerage , Boundary Spanning , and Leadership in Open Innovation Communities Lee Fleming Morgan Hall T95 Harvard Business School Boston , Mass . 02163 lfleming @ hbs . edu ( 617 ) 495 - 6613 David M . Waguespack University at Buffalo The State University of New York Department of Political Science 514 Park Hall , Buffalo , NY 14260 ( 716 ) 633 - 7594 dw23 @ buffalo . edu April 8 , 2005 We are very appreciative of the help of Scott Bradner and many other members of the IETF in completing this study . We would also like to thank Jóhanna Birnir , Ronald Burt , Michael Hannan , Eric von Hippel , Jerry Kim , Karim Lakhani , Siobhan O ' Mahony , Renee’ Richardson , Tim Simcoe , John Simon , Mike Tushman , Steve Wheelwright , and , in particular , Woody Powell and Olav Sorenson for their feedback , and the Harvard Business School Division of Research for support . The work has also benefited from seminars given at Harvard and Stanford universities and the Universities of Chicago , Maryland , and California at Berkeley . 2 Abstract : What types of human and social capital identify the emergence of leaders of open innovation communities ? Consistent with the norms of an engineering culture , we find that future leaders must first make strong technical contributions . Beyond technical contributions , they must then integrate their voluntary communities in order to avoid the ever present danger of forking and balkanization . This is enabled by two correlated but distinct social positions : brokerage , and boundary spanning between technological modules . An inherent lack of trust associated with brokerage positions can be overcome through physical interaction or contributions within technological boundaries . Successful leaders are thus the product of strong technical contribution and a structural position that can bind the community together . 3 Open innovation communities typically lack financial or corporate backing , forgo personal ownership rights to their members’ work , rely on unpaid volunteers , and eschew formal planning and management structures . Despite these apparent handicaps they have dramatically changed our conceptions of how innovation can and should be managed as well as prompted calls for new theories of innovation ( von Hippel and von Krogh , 2003 ) . Open community development methods appear superior to proprietary efforts on some measures ( Kogut and Metiu , 2001 , Mockus , Fielding , and Herbsleb , 2002 ) , and popular : 18 million people use open source operating systems ( Rivlin , 2003 ) . Even as open source operating systems challenge the world’s most powerful software firm , proponents of community innovation are extending the model into new contexts such as gene transfer technology ( Broothaerts et al . , 2005 ) , medical innovation , crime solving , textbook and encyclopedia publishing , education , space exploration ( Goetz , 2003 ) , and third world communities for which software customization in local languages remains cost prohibitive ( Economist , 2003 ) . Open communities have spawned some of the most important technological breakthroughs of our era including web browsers , e - mail , and the web itself . The very protocols that enable different Internet technologies to work together emerged from innovation within a voluntary , non - proprietary , open innovation community . Though most communities take full advantage of electronic communication media , their members innovate , not anonymously and randomly in cyberspace , but with reference to identity , reputation , technologically derived status , collegial networks , and physical interaction ( Raymond , 2000 ; Lakhani and von Hippel , 2003 ; O’Mahony and Ferraro , 4 2003 ) . Despite their bazaar - like , egalitarian , argumentative , unplanned , chaotic appearance , open innovation communities rely heavily upon strong leadership to function effectively and resist splintering , forking , and balkanization ( DiBona , Ockman , and Stone , 1999 , Lerner and Tirole , 2001 , Kogut and Metiu 2001 , Lee and Cole 2003 , von Hippel and von Krogh 2003 , Lakhani 2004 ) . Reputation counts ; though it remains informal , leadership must be constantly earned through technical acumen and managerial skill . The implication is that in order to understand the success of open innovation communities we must understand the emergence of their leaders ( von Hippel and von Krogh , 2003 ) . This understanding can also yield insights into how human and social capital influence career mobility . The importance of social capital was illustrated by Burt ( 1992 ) , who demonstrated that " brokers , " individuals who connect otherwise disconnected actors , can exploit “structural holes” to advance more quickly in their careers . An individual who works with other individuals who do not otherwise interact can control information and shape collegial and managerial perceptions . Predating Burt’s structural hole theory , Allen ( 1977 ) and Tushman ( 1977 ) illustrated a widespread correlation between ability , ties across multiple organizations , and leadership . They described how “boundary spanners” usually contribute the best engineering , identify , translate , and relay information within and across engineering firms , and often assume managerial authority . These two literatures , within sociological and management of technology traditions , have developed with surprisingly little mutual awareness or interaction , given the similarity of research questions . 5 Although the measures of brokerage and boundary spanning correlate empirically , the concepts remain theoretically distinct . Brokers can span boundaries , but not all boundary spanners broker . This unexamined difference leaves a variety of unanswered questions . For example , what are the different mechanisms by which the occupants of the two positions attain leadership positions ? Burt’s early descriptions characterized brokers as calculating and politically savvy operators , while Allen and Tushman characterized boundary spanners as well respected guardians who redirected crucial information , both within and outside the firm . If these characterizations hold any validity , then colleagues of the broker and boundary spanner will surely hold different perceptions about individuals in each position . Colleagues will be less likely to trust a broker ( Coleman 1988 , Burt 2001b ) , and this lack of trust will be exacerbated within open innovation communities , which are inherently wary of balkanization and co - optation by commercial interests . The most effective strategies and behaviors of aspiring leaders will therefore be different for brokerage versus boundary spanning roles . More generally , open innovation communities provide an opportunity to develop theories of human and social capital in a novel context that lacks pecuniary incentives , hierarchical authority , and formal structure . Leadership in such communities depends more on the trust and mobilization of peers than on approval of superiors . To wit , members cannot be fired or forced to participate in any activity , nor be compelled to pay attention to any other member . Ascendancy in such relationships relies purely , to borrow a phrase from politics , upon “the power to persuade " ( Neustadt , 1990 ) . In addition to providing field settings in which to research a novel social phenomenon , open innovation 6 communities often archive their interactions electronically . These public records afford social scientists an unprecedented opportunity to construct databases of human and social capital , social and political processes , and a host of outcomes , including the emergence of leadership . To explain the emergence of leadership within open innovation communities , we induct theory from interviews , archival research , and observations at community events . Estimating rate models for appointment as a working group leader in the Internet Engineering Task Force ( IETF ) , arguably the world’s first open innovation community ( Bradner , 1999 ) , we demonstrate the importance of the first technical contribution for future leaders . Marginal returns to additional contributions decrease , but nevertheless remain positive . Individuals who broker work collaborations are more likely to assume leadership , but the effect is strongly contingent upon physical interaction with the community , a consequence of the diminished trust inherent in brokered social contexts . Consistent with the argument that they must overcome lack of trust , brokers also encounter difficulties when they attempt to simultaneously span technological boundaries within the community . Boundary spanners , in contrast , do not suffer from a lack of trust . Successful leaders are thus the product of strong technical contribution coupled with physical interaction , contingent strategies , and a structural position that can bind the community together . 7 Open Innovation Communities and the Internet Engineering Task Force The institution of science might be considered the first open innovation community ( Dalle and David , 2003 ) , but its technological equivalent began in academic computer departments in the 1960s ( DiBona , Ockman , and Stone , 1999 ) . Consistent with the norms of science ( Merton 1973 ) , department members made their software readily available to others , forgoing financial compensation , and in return , earned reputation and status . The advent of the Internet and world - wide - web enlarged the potential scale of these efforts giving rise to such extensive communities as Linux , Perl , Apache , Debian , and the Internet Engineering Task Force ( IETF ) . 1 We define an open innovation community as a group of unpaid volunteers who work informally , attempt to keep their processes of innovation public and available to any qualified contributor , and seek to distribute their work freely . While we induct theory from many open innovation communities , we test our hypotheses with a specific dataset culled from the archives of the IETF , with the dependent variable as time to appointment as a working group leader within the IETF . We first briefly describe the IETF and process of appointment . Although strictly speaking the IETF is an open standards rather than an open source community , it nevertheless exhibits critical “open innovation community” features in that any individual can volunteer to participate , proceedings remain transparent , and all technology originated therein is made freely available ( Bradner , 1999 ) . The IETF is also 1 The first part of our paper’s title refers to the animals frequently associated with these projects . The penguin , the logo for Linux , was chosen by founder Linus Torvalds for somewhat idiosyncratic reasons . Perl is associated with camels because the cover of a popular Perl manual features one . " Birds of a feather " is what the IETF terms nascent projects . Apache , though not explicitly referenced in the title , has as its logo an eagle feather . Space considerations preclude detailed histories of the various communities , for which we refer interested readers to books edited by DiBona , Ockman , and Stone ; Abbate ; Mowery and Simcoe ; Feller , Fitzgerald , Hissam , & Lakhani 2005 ; see also von Hippel and von Krogh 2003 . 8 the most long lived of the well - known open innovation communities and arguably exerts the greatest social and economic impact because of its association with the Internet . Of its potential as a model for maturing open technical communities Bradner ( 1999 : 47 and 52 ) reports that : IETF standards are developed in an open , all - inclusive process in which any interested individual can participate . All IETF documents are freely available over the Internet and can be reproduced at will . In fact the IETF’s open document process is a case study in the potential of the Open Source movement . . . . The IETF supported the concept of open sources long before the Open Source movement was formed . In 1986 an amalgam of ad hoc technical committees advising the Defense Advanced Research Projects Administration ( DARPA ) on the original ARPANET Internet backbone coalesced into the IETF . This occurred just as the Internet was expanding to include the emerging National Science Foundation ' s NSFNET and as emerging commercial Internet service providers began to replace both networks . The IETF has no official mandate to govern Internet technology . Challenged by more traditional standards - developing organizations and even government bodies , it has nonetheless emerged as the de facto standards developing organization for the Internet ( Abbate , 1999 ; Mowery and Simcoe , 2002 ; see also Harris , 2001 ; Bradner , 1996 , 1998 ; and Hoffman and Bradner , 2002 for insiders’ descriptions ) . The IETF develops and maintains the core Internet standard , TCP / IP ( Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol ) , as well as many other standards that are pervasive in modern computing and networking but largely invisible to the average user . Bradner ( 1999 ) asserts that : “all of the basic technology of the Internet was developed or has been 9 refined in the IETF . ” Although much of the communication and work of the task force is conducted via electronic media , members meet three times annually , carrying forward a tradition begun in January 1986 when 21 “IETFers” met for the first time in San Diego . Membership remains open to all comers and has continued to grow , with as many as 2 , 800 individuals attending meetings and thousands more interacting online . Members participate in the IETF at least nominally as individuals ( Bradner , 1999 ) , though they typically work for firms , universities , or governments . There being no dues or membership lists , in principle , any person can “join” the IETF . The IETF accomplishes most of its work within aptly named Working Groups ( WGs ) organized under larger functional areas ( figure 1 ) . Individuals can freely associate , virtually or physically , with any of the extant technical working groups . Groups and their leaders seek and if successful are granted charters to address specific technical problems within a delimited time and domain . The Secure Shell Group , for example , was chartered to update and standardize the popular SSH protocol ( Secure Shell secsh , 2003 ) . Working groups have chairs as well as individuals or design teams charged to produce documents that detail proposed standards . Area directors ( ADs ) appoint working group chairs . A nominating committee ( NOMCON ) , randomly selected from community members who have attended at least two IETF meetings in the past two years , appoints ADs ( generally two for each area ) . New working groups emerge mainly from grass roots interest in a topical area and are typically preceded by a “Birds of a Feather” ( BOF ) meeting convened during a 10 conference . 2 Members solicit participation in BOFs through electronic invitations disseminated to the IETF mailing list . Organizers who generate favorable sign - up response receive physical meeting space at the next IETF conference . If a meeting is well attended and elicits broad interest , an AD will charter a group and appoint a chair ( usually the BOF organizer ) . Appointment can thus be construed as confirmation of successful , if informal , open community leadership . Even though formal appointment is by an AD , the process recognizes only successful bottom up efforts . 3 Very few members advance to leadership ; of 955 individuals who first attended an IETF meeting in 1995 , 34 have become WG chairs . 2 “One of the principal differences between the IETF and many other standards organizations is that the IETF is very much a bottom - up organization . It is quite rare for the executive leaders within the IETF , the IESG ( Internet Engineering Steering Group ) or the IAB ( Internet Architecture Board ) members , to create a working group on their own to work on some problem that is felt to be an important one . Almost all working groups are formed when a small group of interested individuals get together on their own and then propose a working group to an Area Director” ( Bradner , 1999 : p . 49 ) . It is much the same with other open innovation communities . “Today , an open source software development project is typically initiated by an individual or a small group with an idea for something interesting they themselves want for an intellectual or personal or business reason” ( von Hippel and von Krogh , 2003 ) . 3 This process , commonly observed in open innovation communities , was described by the founder of Linux thus : “‘The lieutenants get picked – but not by me , ’ explains Torvalds . ‘Somebody who gets things done , and shows good taste – people just start sending them suggestions and patches’” ( Hamm , 2005 ) . 11 Human Capital , Social Capital , and Leadership in Open Innovation Communities Human capital explanations of success emphasize the capabilities of individuals ( Coleman , 1988 ) ; people with greater skills , intelligence , and creativity are more likely to innovate or get promoted . Such explanations resonate strongly within engineering and open innovation communities . Many engineers reject social or “softer” explanations of success and tend to focus on purely functional contributions – they believe that the best solutions and deserved recognition should rely solely upon individual expertise , creativity , and hard work . Open innovation communities , like most engineering cultures , value technical contributions over all else , eschewing positional power and even democracy in favor of proven technology ( Wasserman , 2003 ) . Von Krough , Spaeth , and Lakhani ( 2003 ) document how applicants must contribute lines of code to be accepted into the community , those who merely post suggestions , critiques , and pleas generally being ignored . Despite a strong aversion to non - technical sources of prestige and authority , community members readily recognize the status derived from technical contribution . Successful contributors , according to Raymond ( 1998 ) , gain , “good reputation among one’s peers , attention and cooperation from others…and higher status in the…exchange economy . ” Rivlin ( 2003 ) illustrates how Torvalds realizes his authority is technically derived , tenuous , and constantly in need of collective reaffirmation : His hold over Linux is based more on loyalty than legalities . He owns the rights to the name and nothing else . Theoretically , someone could appropriate every last line of his OS and rename it Sally . “I can ' t afford to make too many stupid mistakes , ” Torvalds says , “because then people watching will say , hey , maybe we can find someone better . I don ' t have any authority over Linux other than this notion that I know what I ' m 12 doing . ” He jokingly refers to himself as “Linux ' s hood ornament , ” and he ' s anything but an autocrat . His power is based on nothing more than the collective respect of his cohorts . Status accrues to past contributors and translates into a higher probability of future leadership ( Lee and Cole 2003 ) . Bradner ( 2003b ) maintains that “if someone is seen as strong and as having done good work in the past ( and can argue their position well ) they gain quite a bit of status and future proposals from them tend to get a better ride . ” As Hamm describes ( 2005 ) , “In a world where everybody can look at every bit of code that is submitted , only the A + stuff gets in and only the best programmers rise to become Torvalds’ top aides . ” Individuals who can solve difficult problems gain reputation and esteem in the opinions of their colleagues . Such individuals will become leaders whose opinions will be sought out and respected and guide the future technical and social evolution of the community . H1 : Technical contribution will increase a member’s likelihood of becoming an open innovation community leader . While an initial technical contribution signals competence , additional contributions provide declining marginal returns . An engineer who aspires to leadership must demonstrate communication , motivational , and organizational skills . Technical challenge being a large part of what motivates prospective contributors , leaders must ensure that enough sufficiently interesting work is left for their followers . Lerner and Tirole ( 2001 : 220 ) explain it thus . The initial leader must…assemble a critical mass of code to which the programming community can react . Enough work must be done to show that the project is doable and has merit . At the same time , to attract additional programmers , it may be important that the leader does not perform too much of the job on his own and leaves challenging 13 programming problems to others . … While many make fewer programming contributions , having moved on to broader project management tasks , the individuals we talked to believed that the initial experience was important in establishing credibility to manage the project . Bradner ( 2003a ) concurs , maintaining that “people who are too involved in the [ technical ] documents” are less likely to become leaders . “So does the leader / coordinator for a bazaar - style effort really have to have exceptional design talent , ” inquires Raymond ( 1998 ) , “or can he get by on leveraging the design talent of others ? I think it is not critical that the coordinator be able to originate designs of exceptional brilliance , but it is absolutely critical that the coordinator be able to recognize good design ideas from others . ” These arguments imply that contributions past the initial one provide less and less benefit to aspiring leaders of open innovation communities . H1a : The positive relationship between technical contribution and leadership will demonstrate a threshold effect for the first technical contribution . H1b : Contributions beyond the first technical contribution will increase a member’s likelihood of becoming an open innovation community leader at a decreasing marginal rate . Technical contribution remains the primary prerequisite for aspiring open innovation community leaders . Given the ability to contribute , however , an aspiring leader must still choose what and with whom ( if anyone ) to contribute . Engineers who collaborate more widely are more likely to lead , for a variety of reasons . The technical reputations of collaborative engineers will become more widely known , because their reputation will spread through the opinions of co - authors . Isolates’ reputations will only spread when their engineering is used or read by others . Isolates will also be less able to build consensus , motivate contribution , and affect convergence on difficult technical issues . 14 Controlling for their amount of technical contribution , engineers who have worked with a wider number of colleagues will be better able to mobilize successful initiatives because they can recruit a greater number of interested colleagues . Aspiring leaders need colleagues , friends , and “birds of a feather” who know and respect the leader’s abilities . H2 : A greater number of working relationships will increase a member’s likelihood of becoming an open innovation community leader . While working with many co - authors should increase the likelihood of leadership , the most important role – and challenge - for an open innovation community leader is to integrate and bind the community together . Because such communities remain voluntary , members can always leave and mobilize a new effort , a process known as “forking . ” ( DiBona , Ockman , and Stone 1999 , Kogut and Metiu 2001 , Lerner and Tirole 2001 ) Of Torvalds Rivlin ( 2003 ) writes : “More than anything he seeks to avoid taking sides in a way that might splinter his followers . ‘I ' d much rather have 15 people arguing about something than 15 people splitting into two camps , each side convinced it ' s right and not talking to the other , ’ he says . ” Leaders can forestall this process through integrating and intermediary roles such as brokerage and boundary spanning ( Perrone , Zaheer , and McEvily , 2003 ) . Leaders who work within cohesive networks or technological boundaries are less likely to be aware of , and less able to influence , balkanization processes . Occupants of brokerage and boundary spanning positions therefore have great influence over the evolution of open innovation communities . Conflicting arguments have been made , however , for the influence of brokerage upon leadership . Burt ( 1992 , 1997 , 2000 , 2001a ) , who defines a broker as the only social 15 connection or bridge among a group of actors , argues that brokering enhances both career mobility and promotion . In the current empirical context , brokering occurs when co - authors do not collaborate with one another on another project in the absence of the focal engineer . The focal actor who brokers among colleagues thus occupies and exploits a “structural hole . ” Contrast this with constraint , which occurs when an actor’s alters know each other well , when there exists redundant , dense , and cohesive interaction among the actor’s contacts ( Coleman , 1988 ) . Burt’s classic information control arguments for the strategic superiority of brokering are that brokers ( 1 ) gain first access to information and control of its diffusion , ( 2 ) can present different strategies to different groups ( because unconnected observers will lack the opportunity to compare strategies ; see also Padgett and Ansell , 1993 ) , and ( 3 ) will be considered for an expanded set of opportunities because they will be known to a wider set of groups . If open innovation communities were truly open there would be no opportunity to control information and the context would remain outside the boundary conditions of Burt’s arguments . Despite the strong functional and normative pressures for openness , it remains impossible for all information within open communities to be shared . Intense working relationships such as collaboration on technical publications will involve dyadic or small group communication that will not be widely shared . Nor are personal e - mails or telephone and face - to - face conversations likely to be shared . This limitation is recognized in the working group guidelines for the IETF , to wit : “It is often useful , and perhaps inevitable , for a sub - group of a working group to develop a proposal to solve a particular problem . Such a sub - group is called a design team . In order for a design team to remain 16 small and agile , it is acceptable to have closed membership and private meetings” ( Bradner , 1998 : 18 ; Bradner , 2004 ) . For these reasons open innovation communities remain within the boundary conditions of Burt’s arguments . Illustrating Burt’s arguments in the context of open innovation communities , brokerage provides definite advantages to aspiring leaders . Because brokers can draw upon different social networks , they bring greater and less redundant resources to bear upon a problem . They will know the skill sets and technical experiences of individuals in a wider diversity of social arenas and be able to recruit them for appropriate future projects . Furthermore , because of their position as the sole intermediary of an information bottleneck , brokers are themselves more likely to come up with innovative ideas ( Hargadon and Sutton 1997 ; Burt 2003 ) . This will enhance their technical reputation and indirectly , their likelihood of becoming a leader . But brokerage can also occasion disadvantages for aspiring leaders . Researchers have long argued that cohesive social structures build trust by exerting pressure for consistent norms among individuals with embedded and overlapping relationships ( Granovetter , 1992 ) . Cohesive networks also increase the likelihood of sanctions against individuals who violate their norms ( Coleman , 1988 ) and facilitate communication of reputation effects ( Reagans and McEvily , 2003 ) . Particularly important in the current context , the potential for information control and political action inherent in brokerage structures does not sit well with cultures obsessed with the open , immediate , transparent flow of information . Consider Raymond’s ( 1998 ) appeal to open innovation communities to 17 “…be open to the point of promiscuity . … When writing gateway software of any kind , ” he urges , “take pains to disturb the data stream as little as possible - and _ never _ throw away information unless the recipient forces you to ! ” Community members understand and fear the potential for abuse and proclaim strong norms against manipulative behavior . Raymond ( 1998 ) again : “Surreptitiously filing someone’s name off a project is , in a cultural context , one of the ultimate crimes . ” The power of a broker who controls the flow of information to influence the attribution of credit can undermine the fundamental mechanics of open innovation communities inasmuch as attribution is a driving incentive and the basis of status . Brokers must consequently allay concerns that they might violate norms against hiding and manipulating information . They must also contend with the inherent and previously recognized challenges of mobilizing across networks ( Von Krough , Spaeth , and Lakhani , 2003 ) . As Coleman ( 1988 ) has argued and Gould ( 1991 ) described with reference to the Parisian revolts of 1871 , mobilization will be easier if leaders can call upon dense , cohesive networks , particularly if they are themselves embedded in such networks . Brokers face the added difficulty of balancing conflicting demands of simultaneous membership in multiple groups that might have differing role expectations ( Podolny and Baron , 1997 ) . Because brokerage exerts both positive and negative influences on leadership the overall effect of the role remains an empirical question . We can still test our model of leadership , however , by developing other potentially observable implications . In particular , if another variable moderates the advantages or disadvantages of brokerage we should observe an interaction effect . For example , if followers’ trust can be gained through 18 assurances that a potential leader will not abuse a brokerage position , we should observe a contingent and positive correlation between brokerage and subsequent leadership . Burt ( 2001b ) recognized the problem in contexts beyond open innovation communities : “The social capital of brokerage depends on trust—since the value created by brokers by definition involves new , and so incompletely understood , combinations of previously disconnected ideas—but trust is often argued to require network closure , precisely the condition that brokers rise above . ” Lerner and Tirole ( 2001 ) attest to the fundamental importance of trust within open innovation communities ; “The key to a successful leadership , ” they observe , “is the programmers’ trust in the leadership : that is , they must believe that the leader’s objectives are sufficiently congruent with theirs and not polluted by ego - driven commercial or political biases . ” This is precisely how Torvalds has retained leadership in Linux according to one contributor : “Linus has power , but he doesn’t have it by fiat . … He has power because people trust him” ( Hamm , 2005 ) . Brennan reports that the Debian community developed a “web of trust” specifically to repel commercial Trojan horses : “The more deep and tightly interlinked the web of trust is , the more difficult it is to defeat” ( Brennan , 2003 , cited in O’ Mahony and Ferraro , 2003 ) . 4 Davies ( 2003 : 15 ) cites an official description of the IETF that explicitly claims that trust remains intransitive as a network relationship . [ IETF processes ] are all reliant on personal knowledge of the capabilities of other individuals and an understanding built on experience of what they can be expected to deliver , given that there are almost no sanctions that 4 Open innovation communities use the term “Trojan horse” to refer to the threat of corporate manipulation and malicious sabotage , such as the deliberate planting of insidious bugs ( DiBona , Ockman , and Stone , 1999 ) . 19 can be applied beyond not asking them to do a similar task again . The relationship works best when it is two - way—the person being asked to perform a task needs to be able to rely on the behavior of the person doing the asking . In essence , the IETF is built on a particular kind of one - to - one personal trust relationship . This is a very powerful model but it does not scale well because this trust is not transitive . Just because you trust one person , it does not mean that you trust ( i . e . , know the capabilities of and can rely on ) all the people that person trusts in turn . If absence of trust causes potential followers to doubt a leader’s motives , opportunities to observe the leader should ameliorate that doubt . We suggest that physical attendance and greater interaction with the community constitute such opportunities . Burt ( 2001b ) proposes that given sufficient face time and repeated interaction , brokers can overcome potential distrust of the role and turn the position to their advantage . However much electronic interaction predominates in modern open innovation communities , trust is still based on personal contact . Admission to the Debian community’s web of trust , for example , involves personal and physical “key signings” complete with government issued identification and a handshake ( O’ Mahony and Ferraro , 2003 ) . A short paper on how open source conventions should be run advises planners to “shape the social space” and maximize social interactions through physical layout , after - hours meeting places , message boards , and copious refreshments ( Raymond , 2000 ) . The IETF holds three physical conventions a year at various locations around the globe : The meetings , held three times a year , are week - long dweebfests whose primary goal is to reinvigorate the Working Groups to get their tasks done , and whose secondary goal is to promote a fair amount of mixing between the Working Groups and the areas…there is lots of work , as well as a fair amount of time for socializing ( Harris 2001 pg . 10 ) . Face time in the community will facilitate members’ assessments of whether an aspiring leader might harbor blatantly political motives or be inclined to abuse the brokerage 20 position . For these reasons , we argue that trust developed through physical interaction will increase the likelihood that a broker will achieve leadership . H3 : The interaction of physical attendance and greater brokerage in working relationships will increase a member’s likelihood of becoming an open innovation community leader . In addition to the integrating role of social broker , individuals can also work across internal community boundaries and perform the integrating role of “boundary spanning . ” The importance of boundary spanners to technical organizations and the process of innovation was emphasized in early research on the structure of engineering organizations ( Allen , 1977 ; Tushman , 1977 ) . Individuals who occupy these positions tend to hold advanced technical degrees , make the most important technical contributions , earn the respect of their colleagues , communicate with peers in other organizations , and , most important for the current study , advance into management and technical leadership positions . Boundary spanners stimulate the innovation process because formal organizational boundaries correlate with technical boundaries ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . These boundaries can become barriers to the flow of information due to the evolution of local dialects ( Dougherty , 1992 ) and the not - invented - here syndrome ( Allen , 1977 ) . Technologies can be refined more productively within technologically focused efforts , but at the risk of becoming incremental and obsolete ( Fleming , 2001 ) . Boundary spanners reduce this risk of obsolescence by gathering , interpreting , and disseminating non - redundant information across boundaries ( Allen , 1977 ; Tushman , 1977 ) . They also integrate efforts across mutually interdependent organizations ( Lorsch , 1965 ) . 21 Because the foregoing research predates the rise of open innovation communities the internal boundaries of such communities remain unclear ( O’ Mahony and Ferraro , 2003 ) . These boundaries do exist , however , and as in private firms , usually correspond to the interfaces between technological sub - systems ( Henderson and Clark , 1990 ) . Each boundary demarcates a distinct technological module . Internal community boundaries are defined directly by leaders’ architectural considerations and indirectly by followers’ choices of where to volunteer their efforts . Torvalds , for example , delegates responsibility for different modules to a handful of trusted lieutenants ( Hamm , 2005 ) , each of whom reviews submitted code , accepts the best , and works with Torvalds and the other lieutenants to resolve issues that cross technical boundaries . Bradner ( 1998 , 2004 ) describes how individuals who aspire to leadership in the IETF must define their technological boundaries relative to other community efforts as part of their Birds of a Feather proposals : “Is there a good understanding of any existing work that is relevant to the topics that the proposed working group is to pursue…and , if so , is adequate liaison in place ? ” Once these boundaries have been suggested , contributors choose where to work and in doing so , create more or less intense areas of social interaction . Technological design boundaries thus become social boundaries as engineers focus on the immediate technical challenge . Nothing , however , prevents a boundary spanner from being the only engineer to collaborate across modules and thereby be a social broker , or from being one of many engineers to collaborate across modules and not be a social broker . Open innovation communities are well aware of these issues and value individuals that can span technical boundaries ( Davies 2003 , pg . 13 ; Bradner 2004 ) , for many of the same 22 reasons that they value social brokers . That boundary spanners should be more creative and able to call upon more diverse resources is explicitly recognized in the expectation that leaders promote “cross - pollinating between groups” ( Davies , 2003 : 13 ) . ” In addition to providing the advantages of social brokerage , boundary spanners are in an even stronger position to control the potential for community forking , which generally occurs when alternative technical solutions both attract dedicated coalitions that refuse to compromise or resolve incompatibilities . Hamm ( 2005 ) describes how “Linux backers fret that different versions of the software will become incompatible with one another” and Davies and Hoffman ( 2004 : 6 ) recount recent discussions of IETF problems that emphasize the difficulty of technological interdependence . The IETF has effective mechanisms for dealing with well - defined problems of limited scope . These problems are well handled in IETF Working Groups , where experts in a given technology can convene and solve the problems specific to one technology area . However , we are much less effective at resolving complex problems that affect more than one IETF area . Boundary spanners , being more aware of other efforts within the community , can better negotiate the boundaries of their own groups’ efforts . Individuals who span boundaries before attempting to lead are better prepared for a variety of reasons : simple technical awareness of interdependent technologies and their inventors ; expanded personal creativity ; greater likelihood of having observed or directly participated in conflict resolution . Potential followers , particularly the most competent , will be aware of technical interdependencies and value individuals who have worked across their communities’ internal boundaries . Individuals with experience working across internal community boundaries are for these reasons more likely to become leaders . 23 H4 : Internal community boundary spanning will increase a member’s likelihood of becoming an open innovation community leader . Despite their probable correlation , social brokerage and boundary spanning remain distinct social positions . For example , a boundary spanner might be the only collaborative linkage between groups and thus also be a collaborative broker ; alternately , she could be but one of a number of linkages across a cohesive boundary . These distinctions provide an additional opportunity to test our theory in parallel with hypothesis three . Our development of hypothesis three held that if a social broker must overcome concerns about trust before becoming a leader , actions and positions that increase trust will exhibit a positive interaction with the social brokerage position . We now propose that the simultaneous pursuit of social brokerage and boundary spanning will exhibit a negative interaction , because spanning a boundary will diminish potential followers’ trust . Consider first an individual who spans multiple boundaries and simultaneously brokers collaborative relationships . This individual’s collaborators will be less familiar with one another , not having worked together previously , and , if they contribute in different technical areas , will be less aware of the technologies , objectives , and reputations of collaborators in the non - local areas . In such a situation concerns about trust will be magnified if an individual invests serious resources in another group’s efforts , to wit , Podolny and Baron ( 1997 ) : “Each constituency grows increasingly suspicious that its needs are receiving less attention from the boundary spanner than someone else’s needs . ” Suspicion will be greater , to the extent that a constituency is locally cohesive and insulated from other constituencies . 24 Now consider the opposite extreme : an individual who spans multiple boundaries and simultaneously works within cohesive collaborative relationships . This individual’s collaborators will be quite familiar with one another owing to prior working relationships . Furthermore , these cohesive relationships by definition must span technological boundaries within the community . An individual will thus be observed by mutual acquaintances on both sides and be trusted by both sides to resolve technological and organizational boundary conflicts . Such an individual is more likely to satisfy conflicting goals and expectations among collaborating organizations . Cohesive boundaries also signify active technical areas of innovative search and attempts to resolve technological interdependencies . Taken together , these arguments imply that leaders will emerge from among those who make public contributions at the boundaries of socially cohesive and strongly interacting technical organizations within a community . H5 : The interaction of brokerage and internal community boundary spanning will decrease a member’s likelihood of becoming an open innovation community leader . 25 Evidence We draw data primarily from the published proceedings of the IETF ' s tri - annual meetings from its inception in 1986 to 2002 , and from the organization ' s RFC publication series over the same time period . 5 , 6 Each proceedings represents a “snapshot” of the IETF at a given time , complete with a list of registered conference attendees ( including their email affiliations ) and archived charters for each of the active working groups indicating current chairs and area directors . It can thus be determined from the proceedings when individuals first attended an IETF conference and if and when they began to lead a working group . RFC publications indicate , within a designated time frame , which engineers are publishing technical documents and whether , and with which other engineers and established working groups , they are collaborating . We supplemented these archival data with extensive interviews of community leaders ( Bradner 2003 and 2004 , Kaufman 2003 ) at their places of employment and at the 56 th IETF meeting in San Francisco , March 16 - 21 , 2003 . We developed from these sources a longitudinal dataset of observations on 15 , 465 individual IETF participants at four month intervals . This dataset spans 1989 to 2002 , the first three years’ of conference data having been truncated due to leading independent variable creation . Subjects enter the risk set upon first attending an IETF meeting or in the first trimester of 1989 if community involvement occurred before 1989 . Subjects exit 5 In 1987 , 1989 , and 1990 the IETF held four meetings . 6 The acronym RFC means " Request for Comments . " In current parlance an RFC refers to a published document , not one under review . RFCs either detail a technical standard ( standards - track RFC ) or provide other relevant information ( non - standards - track RFC ) . The Internet Engineering Steering Group ( IESG ) , comprising the IETF chair and area directors , has final authority to approve or reject proposed publications . 26 on the first working group chair appointment or are treated as right censored . We do not estimate repeated events models because prior leadership experience would strongly influence the probability of an additional appointment . For example , a prior leader , particularly if successful , would probably be more trusted and benefit less from the publication of standards drafts or advantageous network positions . Future research , however , aims to clarify the relationships between position , trust , prior leadership success , and repeated or higher level leadership ( for example , appointment as an Area Director ) . A subset of data consists of those individuals who publish two or more RFC documents . For these 609 individuals we can compute meaningful social network measures based on collaboration patterns . The analysis requires two or more publications because individuals with a single publication are by definition in a cohesive and non - brokering relationship with all collaborators on that one publication . 7 We discuss the problems and remedies associated with this kind of sample selection below . We investigated other potential measures of relationships , but found each wanting : email interactions and working group attendance lists were inconsistently archived , particularly for earlier interactions ; email contributions would be skewed in favor of communicative extroverts ; interviewees reported that individuals often had no knowledge or relationship with affiliated ( that is , same employer ) colleagues . In contrast , standards collaborations and Standards - track RFCs typically must also be approved by an established relevant IETF working group . Non - standards - track RFCs are not subject to working group scrutiny prior to publication . 7 Although common employer is another possible way to infer social relations in this empirical context , firms often send dozens of employees from different divisions to IETF meetings . Interview subjects frequently asserted that they would only know a handful of their affiliated colleagues and that this did not influence or represent their other social relations . 27 the WG publication affiliation measure strong , accurately measured , and very important social relationships in this community . Variables Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for independent variables in the full risk set of 15 , 465 subjects observed during 243 , 370 trimesters , Table 2 bi - variate correlations for the same data . Tables 3 and 4 present statistics and correlations for networked subjects , 609 subjects observed over 5 , 032 trimesters . The dependent variable Leader is a categorical indicator that a subject appears as a working group leader at the end of the current observation period . There are 473 events in the full risk set and 117 events in the network risk set . Community presence ( instrumented ) measures the extent of an individual ' s physical involvement with the IETF community over the prior three years . Conference attendance data and participants’ phone numbers enabled us to develop an instrument to control for endogeneity ( for example , we cannot directly observe an individual’s aspirations for leadership , or her employer’s wish to co - opt the community by influencing the leadership processes ) . We begin by counting the number of IETF conferences an individual attends over the prior three years . Aspirations probably correlate with the probability of attaining a leadership position , and given that the IETF remains a volunteer organization , with the effort expended to attend conferences . That aspirations remain unobserved raises the concern that a variable that simply counts attendances at conferences is endogenously determined . In ordinary least squares estimation endogeneity violates the assumption that an independent variable is uncorrelated with the error term ( Greene , 1993 : 285 ) . One 28 solution to this problem is to find a proxy that is correlated with the offending independent variable but not the disturbance term . Put another way , the proxy needs to correlate with attendance but not with the probability of becoming a leader . To develop such a proxy we employ the instrumental variable approach ( Greene , 1993 : 603 ) . We first regressed three years conference attendance on a series of variables deemed likely to influence the probability of attending a conference but unlikely to influence selection to a leadership position . Generally speaking , the variables used to compute Community presence ( instrumented ) relate to the costs of , and propensity for , participation in the IETF . Miles accounts for total distance , in miles , between an engineer ' s home and all IETF meetings during the prior three years . 8 To create this measure we assigned each subject to a latitude and longitude based on the phone number reported in the conference registration list , then calculated ( using the STATA sphdist ado subroutine ) spherical distance between the subject and each meeting ' s latitude and longitude ( for a similar calculation see Sorenson and Stuart , 2001 ) . Miles enters the first stage equation as a polynomial term . Non - US is a categorical indicator that the subject lives outside the United States . University affiliation and Government affiliation indicate that a subject works for an organization of the respective type and not the reference category of a firm . The assumption is that non - commercial organizations might have limited resources to support member attendance . Affiliated conference attendees is the number of conference appearances by a subject ' s colleagues ; we include this as a measure of the resources a given employer devotes to IETF participation . 8 Zero values for attendance occur when a member attends her first conference in her home town . 29 After regressing observed three year conference attendance on Travel miles , Non - US , University , Government , and Affiliated conference attendees , we recovered predicted values for Community presence ( instrumented ) . In OLS estimation the predicted variable is " purified " of the endogenous element that is correlated with the disturbance term . The R ^ 2 for the regression of these variables upon attendance was 16 . 3 % . Given the high amount of explained variance , the instrument should not be vulnerable to finite sample and weak instrument bias ( Bound , Jaeger , and Baker 1995 ) . Stock , Wright , and Yogo ( 2002 ) also define a strong instrument as having less than 10 % bias , relative to a model without an instrument . The 5 % F critical value for this criterion and degrees of freedom is 11 . 51 , well below the first stage F statistic of 90 . 63 . ( ln ) IETF Publications , which counts total IETF technical publications authored or co - authored in the prior three years , is our main measure of individual human capital . These documents also reveal working group affiliation . Two WGs indicates that an engineer spanned two technical sub - domains ; Three + WGs indicates that a subject spanned three or more . Use of a count variable for the number of working group memberships instead of breakout into mutually exclusive categories returned similar estimates . We retain the exclusive categories to enable qualitative differentiation between working group membership ( a control variable ) and boundary spanning . We also use publication data to construct longitudinal social networks . We created social network measures based on co - authorship by constructing 51 social networks , one for each trimester with a three year window on prior linkages , with valued symmetrical ties 30 between all IETF authors . We calculated the following network position variables in UCINET version 6 ( Borgatti , Everett , and Freeman , 2001 ) . Degree measures , on the basis of all drafts published in the previous three years , the number of unique individuals with whom an engineer has published a draft . Social Brokerage measures the opposite of individual constraint , where constraint measures the extent to which ego has ties with many alters and those alters have ties between them ( Burt 1992 ) . We enter the negative of constraint ( Eq . 1 ) as our measure of brokering . In equation 1 , p ij is the proportion of i’s relations directly invested in contact j . ∑ q qj iq p p is the portion of i’s direct connections invested in contacts q who are in turn invested in contact j . The sum in the parentheses is the proportion of i’s direct and indirect connections that are invested in contact j . The sum of squared proportions over all contacts j is a measure of individual i’s network constraint . ( 1 ) We calculate each of the social network measures only for cases in which a subject has two or more publications . The logic behind this restriction is that variation on brokerage or boundary spanning is possible only when an actor has two or more opportunities ( i . e . , two or more publications ) on which to interact with other individuals . Restricting analysis to such a subset produces a non - random sample and possibly biases results by neglecting the factors that led to inclusion in the sample in the first place . A standard solution to selection bias is to first estimate a selection parameter on the full data , then include this parameter in models that use the restricted sample ( Heckman 1976 ) . Although not as well developed in the hazard model context , preliminary work ( Boehmke , Morey , and j i q p p p c c qj q iq j ij ij ij , , ) ( , Constraint 2 i actor ≠ + = = ∑ ∑ 31 Shannon , 2004 ) indicates that sample selection can also bias hazard model estimates . To address this problem , following Heckman we estimate the probability that any of our at - risk engineers publishes two or more IETF documents on a number of variables likely to influence network entry . These model estimates include ( ln ) Community Size at t , which gauges changes in the baseline level of authorship relative to the size of the internet community . U . S . Patents obtained by a subject during the prior three years captures individuals with demonstrated technical expertise and a propensity to publish . Patent counts were arrived at by matching IETF engineers to the population of U . S . patent inventors ( as developed by Fleming , King , and Juda , 2004 ) . 9 Affiliated RFC Authors and Affiliated WG chairs indicate employer resources sufficient to support a high level of IETF participation . We include categorical indicators for Non - US and University and Government affiliation . The selection instrument , the Inverse Mills Ratio , indicates the probability of non - selection based on a first stage equation that estimates the probability of authoring two or more IETF publications . A positive coefficient indicates that selected individuals are more likely than the population at large to become leaders . Finally , the models include a series of control variables . Summer Meeting , Winter Meeting , and Non - North American Meeting are dummy variables that denote the season 9 In order to explore the demographics of IETF members , we linked the IETF data back into the patent database and performed some basic regressions on variables from Fleming , King , and Juda ( 2004 ) . Relative to the entire population of inventors of U . S . patents , IETF members with patents had significantly more patents , collaborators , and number of assignees ( that is , their patents were owned by a greater number of organizations – this correlates most strongly with personnel movement ) . IETF members demonstrated no significant difference in their brokerage of other inventors , boundary spanning , future prior art citations to their patents ( a widely used indicator of quality ) , references to the non - patent ( generally scientific ) literature , and proclivity to repeatedly collaborate with the same colleagues . Hence , IETF members who patent appear to publish more , and work with more people and organizations , than typical inventors , though we hesitate to claim strong inferences due to the differences in context , measures , and comparison groups . 32 and location of the current IETF conference . We include these variables to control for community processes possibly being related to the timing of working group chair appointments . Appointments to the IESG typically being made at the spring meeting , it is conceivable , for example , that " lame - duck " area directors approve fewer groups during that trimester . IETF Executive is an indicator that a subject is a past or present member of one the IETF ' s executive committees . It is possible , though rare , for individuals to jump straight to a higher level position and still be at risk of their first working group appointment . Affiliated Executive indicates that a subject’s co - worker currently holds a position on one of the high level IETF oversight committees . We do not assume that these individuals know one another inasmuch as some firms send hundreds of engineers to the IETF . Rather , we construe that high level leadership to be a proxy for firms that commit significant resources to the community . ( ln ) Community size is the natural log of total meeting registrants over the prior three years meant to capture changes in the supply of engineers and size of the community . Incumbent WG Chairs is a count of incumbents ( those not at risk of a first leadership position ) holding chair positions and intended to gauge the extent to which the community currently fulfills its leadership needs . Executive Tie measures the number of collaborative working relationships with a current Area Director within the last three years to control for reliance on personal ties with individuals who have control over the appointment process . Finally , the indicator variable WG Contributor records when a subject has participated in an existing working group within the prior three years . Such individuals are more likely to lead because they have already demonstrated affinity for social interaction and gained greater exposure to organizational processes , leadership models , and opportunities for informal leadership . 33 Models We estimate hazard models of the duration T from first attendance at an IETF conference until appointment as a working group leader . Rate models are more appropriate than choice models because members are not competing for a limited number of positions . Instead , they create positions based on their understanding of technical issues and opportunities that confront the Internet community . Rate models also accommodate censored observations . Equation 2 defines the instantaneous hazard of appointment as a leader . T represents the time between a member’s first attendance at an IETF meeting and ( possible ) appointment as a working group leader ; r ( t ) is the instantaneous hazard of making the transition from individual member to appointment as a working group leader . The data change at trimester frequency , basically every four months , to correspond to the frequency of the IETF conferences . t t t T t T t t r t t → ≥ < ≤ = → ' ) | ' Pr ( lim ) ( ' ( 2 ) We estimated semi - parametric Cox models ( equation 3 ) to avoid making parametric assumptions about the form of duration dependence in the underlying hazard rate ( Cox , 1972 ) . Given the relatively few events , we used the Breslow method for handling ties . The model’s hazard rate is the product of an unspecified baseline rate , h ( t ) , and an exponential term that includes covariates X . The Cox model assumes , however , that the proportional hazards remain constant over time . We tested this assumption both graphically and with a Schoenfeld ( 1982 ) test . Neither inspection nor the statistical test indicated a significant relationship between time and model residuals ( p value < 0 . 23 ) . 34 Piece - wise exponential models returned very similar substantive results . We estimated all models with STATA version 8 . ) ( ) ( ) ( X e t h t r β = ( 3 ) Results Table 5 reports hazard models for appointment to Working Group leadership for the entire dataset , table 6 for the networked risk set . Models 1 to 5 explore the functional relationship between drafts and appointment for the full risk set . Model 1 provides a baseline with controls only . Model 2 introduces a categorical indicator of any publication , model 3 the ln of drafts , and model 4 both the indicator and ln of drafts . Model 5 adds a second order term for the number of drafts ( we introduce the square of the original variable to avoid collinearity between the ln and second order terms ) . Model 5 does not demonstrate significant improvement over previous models ( according to a chi squared test of the difference of maximum likelihoods with one degree of freedom ) . Model 4 is nested and much better than the earlier models , hence , publication provides an initial benefit for any publication , followed by declining marginal returns for additional contributions . The lack of significance of the second order term indicates that the influence of additional drafts never turns negative , although the ln indicates decreasing importance . Figure 2 , based on an unreported model that uses indicator categories for total publications ( without any other measures of publication ) , demonstrates the dramatic nature of the publication effect and is consistent with a threshold and logged specification . The effect sizes are quite large in the models and figure . According to model 4 , the first 35 publication increases the likelihood of becoming a leader by 143 % . 10 Figure 2 indicates that for three publications the point estimate increases 1 , 590 % relative to having none . These results support the arguments of hypothesis one : a single publication greatly increases an individual’s probability of leadership , and that additional publications increase that probability at a declining marginal rate . Models 6 through 14 in table 6 present results for the networked risk set . Model 6 presents a baseline estimation and model 7 steps in the publication variable . We maintain the publication variable and controls in all subsequent specifications both because publications has such a powerful effect and because we want to guard against the possibility that differences in social network position are simply the result of the number of times ( i . e . , number of publications ) we observe a subject . Models 8 through 12 enter additional explanatory variables individually and then with interactions . Model 13 tests a full specification and model 14 includes the networking risk set selection term . Despite the importance of structural position to leadership , individuals still gain advantage through additional publications . A one standard deviation increase in publications increases the probability of leadership by 22 % ; having authored two drafts , authoring a third increases the probability by 10 % . Surprisingly , degree never demonstrates a significant effect in any model ; working with additional co - authors does not correlate with leadership . We attribute this to a dilution effect of the credit that occurs when an individual co - authors with too many others . Discussion with IETF members lent 10 As calculated by : . 143 ) 1 ( 100 ) 1 * 887 . 0 ( = − e 36 validity to this interpretation . Hence , the results support hypothesis one but not hypothesis two . The models support the hypothesized relationships for both brokerage and boundary spanning . We argued that the net effect of brokerage remains unpredictable due to positive and negative influences of the position on the perceptions of potential followers . We proposed in hypothesis three , however , that physical attendance at meetings would ameliorate negative perceptions , such that attendance and interaction should demonstrate a positive interaction . All the models support this interaction effect . Model 14 ( from which we draw all interpretations of effect magnitude ) indicates that an individual who simultaneously increases attendance and social brokerage position by one standard deviation each will increase the likelihood of becoming a leader by 49 % . Brokerage alone increases the likelihood of leadership by 70 % , indicating that it has a net positive influence on the chance of leadership ( instrumented attendance has no impact ) . Figure 3 , which plots the intersection effect for low , medium , and high values of social brokerage , indicates that most of the positive effect of the brokerage position accrues to individuals who attend many conferences . Conversely , a cohesive ego network structure is preferred for those without a strong community presence . Hence , the models and figure three support hypothesis three . Although social brokerage and its interaction with attendance demonstrate strong positive effects , the benefits of boundary spanning are potentially greater . Contributing to two working groups correlates with a 63 % increase in leadership ( over and above the 98 % 37 benefit of contributing within any working group ) . Contributing to three or more working groups correlates with a 287 % increase . Simultaneous brokerage and membership in two groups correlates with a negative interaction effect of 45 % , in three or more groups , 64 % . Figure 4 illustrates the negative consequences of simultaneous brokerage and boundary spanning . With increased brokerage , benefits increase for individuals who work within a group but decrease sharply for those who straddle three or more . Hence , the models support hypothesis 4 , that boundary spanning increases the likelihood of leadership , and hypothesis 5 , that simultaneous brokerage decreases this positive effect . Further supporting our theory , unreported models did not demonstrate even marginally significant interaction between boundary spanning and the instrumented attendance variable . Although prediction and observation of a null result do not test theory ( hence , are not included in our hypotheses ) , the lack of significance is nevertheless consistent with our contention that fellow community members perceive the two roles differently . To directly compare the different structural strategies and their influence on leadership we assume two individuals ; first , a broker who scores one standard deviation above the brokerage mean and contributes to only one working group , and second , a boundary spanner who scores at the brokerage mean and contributes to two groups . Both strategies work similarly well if they attend an average number of conferences . The broker is then 70 % more likely to become a leader compared with a 63 % increase for the boundary spanner . If both individuals increase their attendance at conferences by one standard deviation , the advantage shifts to the broker , since she gains 49 % from the interaction of brokerage and attendance . The advantage shifts back to the boundary spanner , however , 38 if she spans additional boundaries ; assuming all else stays equal , she is 224 % more likely to become a leader . 11 While it appears moderately effective to bind a single working group with itself , it appears even more effective to bind three groups within the larger community . Moderately ambitious individuals should therefore look for local integration opportunities ; very ambitious individuals should seek out the cohesive nexuses of community wide activity . Furthermore , for individuals who have already authored many drafts , it would be easier to span an additional boundary , given the incremental impact of a single additional collaboration on a deeply embedded structural position . With respect to control variables , considering first the full risk set , increasing the size of the community ( ( ln ) Community Size ) increases the potential leadership opportunities , and crowding in the leadership ranks ( Incumbent WG Chair Population ) diminishes those opportunities . New appointments occur less often during the summer meetings ( Summer Meeting ) . Shared affiliation with a higher level leader ( Affiliated Executive ) increases the probability of leadership , a result we interpret to indicate that the engineer ' s firm strongly supports participation in the community ( rather than cronyism ) . Supporting this interpretation , in the networked risk set , collaboration with an Area Director subtracts from the likelihood of leadership , a result consistent with community espoused norms . With the exception of the incumbent working group population , none of the controls demonstrate significance in the networked risk set . Contributing within a working group has a substantial positive effect of 98 % . Finally , the selection term , though positive , does not reach conventional levels of significance . 11 287 % advantage for three or more groups minus the 63 % advantage for two groups . 39 Discussion While the results support most of the predictions , it is important to demarcate their limitations , both theoretical and empirical . We generalize the theoretical implications with caution , because the social context differs from that of private firms ( Burt 1992 , 1997 , 2001a ; Podolny and Baron , 1997 ) . This research considers how individuals who participate in voluntary communities emerge as leaders , as opposed to how for - profit firms promote to middle management . Aspiring managers leverage brokerage positions by controlling information , resources , and , ultimately , the perceptions of those who do the promoting . Such efforts are facilitated by focusing on maximizing uncertainty among a few key decision makers . In a voluntary community , however , leadership requires mobilizing efforts across a large ( and often unknown ) population of peers , friends , and colleagues . Members who gain reputations as controlling individuals who actively manage perceptions will probably face informal sanction ( von Hippel and von Krogh , 2003 ) . As the results indicate , aspiring leaders in voluntary communities need to offset these potentially negative perceptions with additional assurances that they intend to benefit and bind the community as a whole . Overall , however , the results illustrate the power of brokerage and boundary spanning concepts in a previously unexamined social context . Caution should also be exercised before generalizing the results to all open innovation communities , particularly those that lack physical interaction . Our results are conditional upon attendance , though our data indicated that every IETF leader attended at least one meeting . The issues of trust and forking remain salient for all open innovation 40 communities and warrant additional research and elaboration . Caution should also be exercised due to the monotonically increasing environmental munificence during the period of observation - the IETF ( and the industries that supported it ) expanded during all but the last few years of the study . Continuously expanding resources and leadership opportunities facilitate the dispersion of benefits , enable coalition building , and probably ease distrust . The IETF’s recent self - examination ( Wasserman 2003 ) admits as much , even as it attempts to grapple with increasingly divisive processes and communal fissures . Elaborating this relationship between munificence and positional efficacy remains an opportunity for future research , within communities and firms . Community growth and membership change also highlights an opportunity to study the demographic dynamics of voluntary communities . For example , when do current members or leaders attract demographically extreme recruits , in which case the possibility of forking or “disruptive selection” ( McPherson , Popielarz , and Drobnic 1992 ) should greatly increase . While our network analysis provided a novel methodology for the analysis of publication based relationships , the research still suffers from a variety of empirical limitations . While the Heckman selection term reached significance in partial models ( not shown ) , the lack of significance in the final model indicates weakness in the predictors of multiple publications . Nonetheless , the lack of substantive change adds to our confidence . Overall , the approach illustrates a method that can be replicated whenever network variables remain unobserved or undefined for a subset of subjects , for example , for an isolated subject . 41 In addition to the limitations of the selection instrument , the dependent variable of appointment measures leadership after a Birds of a Feather meeting , and not the organization of the meeting itself . Ideally , we would observe which community members attempted to organize a meeting , and then conditional on that successful organization , which members advance to leadership . Archived Birds of a Feather meeting documentation remains inconsistent , however , and more complete for meetings that become working groups . Rather than introduce unquantifiable success bias into our models , we developed the instrumental variable based on attendance , which controls for members’ aspirations and attempts to lead . Without use of the instrument , technical contribution becomes insignificant , roles and their interactions become less significant , and mere attendance appears as the most effective route to leadership . Inferences drawn from this model would be wrong , however , because it does not control for the self selection of aspiring leaders to attend . This incomplete specification would therefore miss the importance of technical contribution and the nuanced influence of brokerage and its interaction with physical presence . The results should still be regarded with caution , despite the strength of the instrument ( an R ^ 2 of 16 . 3 % ) , given that the second stage estimates a non - linear Cox model , and the use of instruments with non - linear models remains controversial ( see Bowden and Turkington 1981 , Box - Steffensmeier and Jones 2004 , vs . Hausman , Newey , and Powell 1995 ) . Despite the limitations , the results contribute to the larger network literature . They highlight the previously unexamined differences between brokerage and boundary spanning positions and demonstrate that the role conflict previously associated with both 42 positions ( Podolny and Baron , 1997 ) appears to be more strongly associated with brokerage . This finding should be elaborated in different contexts with dynamic analysis , because boundaries change as often as the relationships that straddle them . The current research studied boundaries that emerge from leaders’ architectural and individuals’ voluntary choices , remain relatively informal , and dissipate with completion of the group’s work . Firm boundaries are more formal , longer lived , and probably support the transformation and hardening of technological boundaries into social boundaries . In private firms , brokerage and boundary spanning probably correlate more strongly , such that individuals who span a cohesive boundary should become increasingly rare over time . Given that the quantitative research on the benefits of brokerage upon innovation does not distinguish brokerage from boundary spanning , it also remains unclear which position fosters creativity more effectively . These positions must be studied dynamically , since successful innovation probably leads to a rapid accretion of ties and increased cohesion across social or technological boundaries , once a breakthrough has occurred . Our results can also inform research into the careers and management of scientific and technical professionals . First , as figure 2 dramatically illustrates , the work demonstrates the importance of human capital . To advance in these scientific and technical contexts an individual cannot rely upon political power , affiliation , or relationships with powerful individuals ( indeed , prior collaboration with a powerful individual demonstrates a significantly negative influence upon leadership ) . Given the demonstration of technical ability , however , an individual’s social capital gains immense value . Social capital remains contingent , however , and should be cultivated selectively . For example , an oft 43 heard concern of junior academics is the high risk of gaining tenure as a boundary spanner . An economic sociologist , for example , is probably better advised to pursue tenure in one or the other field rather than try to demonstrate legitimacy and contribution in both fields simultaneously . Similar interaction effects —e . g . , physical participation within departments and attendance at conferences or , more important , contribution at a cohesive boundary—might obtain in scientific communities . Such cohesive boundaries likely give birth to new communities and active research efforts and provide fertile ground for high visibility contributions as happened , for example , with biology , chemistry , crystallography , and the discovery of DNA . Finally , non - academic engineers and scientists are increasingly mobile whether as long - term or temporary professionals ( Bradach , 1997 ; Rosenkopf , Metiu , and George 2001 ; Gura , 2004 ) . Such mobility requires extra - organizational reputation , contacts , and access to opportunities . Open innovation communities enable professionals to establish a reputation outside of a single organization , to cultivate contacts in other firms , and to learn about employment opportunities . Economists , who were at first perplexed as to why an individual would contribute to a volunteer effort without pecuniary compensation , have since argued that skill enhancement and quality signaling constitute the primary motivations . This implies that community contributors will earn higher salaries and be more likely to change employers . Our work , in emphasizing the importance of social networks , provides the additional explanation that individuals contribute to develop contacts that enhance career mobility . Future research hopes to differentiate between the economic and social influences on open innovation community contributors’ employment mobility . 44 Conclusion The IETF archives afford a rare and detailed look at the social , technical , and political dynamics within an open innovation community . We used the entire history of sixteen years of meetings and communications to trace the emergence of leaders within the organization . The models demonstrated a threshold effect for the first technical contribution , with decreasing marginal returns for additional contributions . That both brokering and boundary spanning roles greatly increase the likelihood of leadership points to the importance of social positions that can unite open innovation communities . We argued that trust does not come easily to community members who fear co - optation by commercial interests or forking over technical disagreements . Because brokers by definition contrive less cohesive and trusting contexts , the probability that they will assume leadership roles is highly contingent on building trust with community members . We argue that aspiring leaders can build trust through physical attendance and , consistent with this argument , find that the positive effect of brokerage demonstrates contingency with physical attendance . Also consistent with our emphasis on trust in open innovation communities , brokerage and boundary spanning demonstrated a negative interaction , indicating that brokers who span boundaries remain at a disadvantage . Our results emphasize the importance of intermediary and integrating roles , for brokers within technological boundaries , and for boundary spanners across cohesive technological boundaries . Open innovation communities represent a new and powerful social context in which to pursue knowledge and advance technology ( von Hippel and Krogh , 2003 ) . Even if they 45 represent merely a recombinant hybrid between the institutions of science and norms of communities of technological practice , their results to date and potential to shape the rate and direction of technological change remain impressive . Increasing technological complexity and interdependence put these communities at perpetual risk of forking and balkanization . Without strong leaders they inevitably splinter and fail . Leaders , in binding their communities together , foster the integration needed to forestall these eventualities . The contribution of this research is to delineate and describe the factors that produce those leaders . 46 References Abbate , J . 1999 Inventing the Internet . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ahuja , G . 2000 “Collaboration networks , structural holes , and innovation : A longitudinal study . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 45 : 426 - 455 . Allen , T . 1977 Managing the Flow of Technology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Boehmke , Frederick J . , Daniel S . Morey , and Megan Shannon 2004 " Selection bias and continuous - time duration models : Consequences and a proposed solution . " Working paper , University of Iowa . Bound , J . , D . Jaeger , and R . Baker 1995 “Problems with instrumental variables estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous explanatory variable is weak . ” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 90 , 430 : 443 - 450 . Borgatti , S . , M . Everett , and L . Freeman 2001 UCINET 6 . 0 Version 1 . 00 . Natick , MA : Analytic Technologies . Bowden , R . , and D . Turkington 1981 “A comparative study of instrumental variables estimators for nonlinear simultaneous models . ” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 76 , 376 : 988 - 995 . Box - Steffensmeier , J . M . , and Bradford S . Jones 2004 Event History Modeling : A Guide for Social Scientists . NY : Cambridge University Press . Bradach , J . 1997 “Flexibility : The new social contract between individuals and firms ? ” Working paper 97 - 088 , Harvard Business School . Bradner , S . 1996 The Internet Standards Process—Revision 3 . RFC 2026 . Bradner , S . 1998 IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures . RFC 2418 . Bradner , S . 1999 “The Internet Engineering Task Force . ” In C . DiBona , S . Ockman , and M . Stone , ( eds . ) , Open Sources : Voices from the Open Source Revolution : 47 - 52 . Sebastapol , CA : O’Reilly . 47 Bradner , S . 2003a “IETF structure and Internet standards process . ” Presentation to the 57 th IETF Convention , Vienna , Austria . 2003b Personal communications , January 29 , June 26 , Cambridge , MA . Bradner , S . 2003b personal communication , Cambridge , Ma . March 24 . Bradner , S . 2004 personal communication , Cambridge , Ma . August 28 . Broothaerts , W . , H . Mitchell , B . Weir , S . Kalnes , L . Smith , W . Yang , J . Mayer , C . Roa - Rodriguez , and R . Jefferson 2005 “Gene transfer to plants by diverse species of bacteria . ” Nature , 433 : 629 - 633 . Burt , R . 1992 Structural Holes . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Burt , R . 1997 “The contingent value of social capital . ” Administration Science Quarterly , 42 : 339 - 365 . Burt , R . S . 2000 “The network structure of social capital . ” Research in Organizational Behavior , 22 : 345 - 423 . Burt , R . 2001a “Structural holes versus network closure as social capital . ” In N . Lin , K . Cook , and R . Burt ( eds . ) , Social Capital : Theory and Research . Aldine de Gruyter . 2001b “Bandwidth and echo : Trust , information , and gossip in social networks . ” In A . Casella and J . Rauch ( eds . ) , Networks and Markets : Contributions from Economics and Sociology . Russell Sage Foundation . Burt , R . 2003 “Social origins of good ideas . ” Working paper , University of Chicago . Coleman , J . S . 1988 " Social capital in the creation of human capital . " American Journal of Sociology , 94 : S95 - S120 . Cox , D . 1972 “Regression models and life - tables ( with discussion ) . ” Journal of Royal Statistical Society , Series B 34 : 187 - 220 . Coya , S . 48 “IETF structures and Internet Standards Process , ” http : / / ietf . org / newcomer / frame . htm . Dalle , J . , and P . David 2003 “The allocation of software development resources in ‘open source’ production mode . ” Working paper , Stanford University . Davies , E . 2003 “IETF problem statement , ” http : / / www . ietf . org / Internet - drafts / draft - ietf - problem - issue - statement - 02 . txt . Davies , E . , and J . Hofman 2004 “IETF problem resolution process , ” http : / / rfc3844 . x42 . com / . DiBona , C . , S . Ockman , and M . Stone 1999 “Introduction . ” In C . DiBona , S . Ockman , and M . Stone ( eds . ) , Open Sources : Voices from the Open Source Revolution : 1 - 19 . Sebastapol , CA : O’Reilly . Dougherty , D . 1992 “ Interpretive barriers to successful product innovation in large firms . ” Organization Science , 3 , 2 : 179 - 202 . Economist 2003 “Open source’s local heros . ” The Economist Technology Quarterly , ( Dec . 6 ) . Feller , J . , Fitzgerald , B . , Hissam , S . , & Lakhani , K . R . ( Eds . ) . 2005 . Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software . Cambridge : MIT Press . Fleming , L . 2001 “Recombinant Uncertainty in Technological Search . ” Management Science , 47 , 1 : 117 - 132 . Fleming , L . , C . King , and A . Juda 2004 “Small worlds and regional advantage” Working paper , Harvard Business School . Friedrich , R . 1982 “In defense of multiplicative terms in multiple regression equations . ” American Journal of Political Science , 26 , 4 : 797 - 833 . Goetz , T . 2003 “Open source everywhere . ” Wired , 11 , 11 . Gould , R . 1991 “Multiple networks and mobilization in the Paris Commune , 1871 . ” American Sociological Review , 56 , 6 : 716 - 729 . Granovetter , M . 49 1992 “Problems of explanation in economic sociology . ” In N . Nohria and R . Eccles ( eds . ) , Networks and Organization . Boston , Ma : Harvard Business School Press . Greene , W . 1993 Econometric Analysis , Englewood Cliffs , N . J . : Prentice Hall . Gura , T . 2004 “Joining a trend , scientists increasingly say ‘call my agent’ . ” Science , 303 ( 16 January ) : 303 - 304 . Hamm , S . 2005 “Linux , Inc . ” Business Week , Issue 3918 ( Jan . 31 ) : 60 . Hansen , M . 1999 “The search - transfer problem : The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across organization subunits . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 , 1 : 82 - 111 . Hargadon , A . , and R . Sutton 1997 “Technology brokering and innovation in a product design firm . ” Administration Science Quarterly , 42 : 716 - 749 . Harris , S . 2001 The Tao of IETF—A Novice ' s Guide to the Internet Engineering Task Force . RFC 3160 . Hausman , J . , W . Newey , and J . Powell 1995 “Nonlinear errors in variables : Estimation of some Engel curves , ” Journal of Econometrics , 65 : 205 - 233 . Heckman , James J . 1976 " Sample selection bias as a specification error . " Econometrica , 47 : 153 - 161 . Henderson , R . and K . Clark 1990 “Architectural Innovation : The Reconfiguration of Existing Product Technologies and Failure of Established Firms , ” Administration Science Quarterly 35 : 9 - 30 . Hoffman , P . , and S . Bradner 2002 Defining the IETF . RFC 3233 . Kaufman , C . 2003 personal communication , Westford , Ma . July 28 , 2003 , Kogut , B . , and A . Metiu 2001 “Open - source software development and distributed innovation . ” Oxford Review of Economic Policy , 17 , 2 : 248 - 264 . 50 Lakhani , K . R . 2004 “The determinants of developer mobilization in open source communities . ” Working paper , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Lakhani , K . R . , and E . von Hippel 2003 " How open source software works : Free user to user assistance . " Research Policy 32 , 6 : 923 - 943 . Lee , G . , and R . Cole 2003 “From a firm - based to a community - based model of knowledge creation . ” Organization Science , 14 , 6 : 633 - 649 . Lerner , J . , and J . Tirole 2001 “Some simple economics of open source . ” The Journal of Industrial Economics , L , 2 : 197 - 234 . Lorsch , P . 1965 Product Innovation and Organization . New York : McMillan . McPherson , J . and P . Popielarz , and S . Drobnic 1992 “Social Networks and Organizational Dynamics . ” American Sociological Review 57 , 153 - 170 . Merton , R . 1973 “The normative structure of science . ” In N . Storer ( ed . ) , The Sociology of Science : Theoretical and Empirical Investigations . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Mockus , A . , R Fielding , and J . Herbsleb 2002 “Two case studies of open source software development : Apache and Mozilla . ” ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology , 11 , 3 : 309 - 346 . Mowery , D . , and T . Simcoe 2002 “Is the Internet a U . S . invention ? An economic and technological history of computer networking . ” Research Policy , 31 : 1369 - 1387 . Neustadt , R . E . 1990 Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents : The Politics of Leadership from Roosevelt to Reagan . New York : Free Press . O ' Mahony , S . , and F . Ferraro 2003 “Managing the boundary of an ‘open’ project . ” Working paper , Harvard Business School . Padgett , J . , and C . Ansell 51 1993 “Robust action and the rise of the Medici , 1400 - 1434 . ” American Journal of Sociology , 98 : 1259 - 1319 . Perrone , V . , A . Zaheer , and B . McEvily 2003 “ Free to be trusted ? Organizational constraints on trust in boundary spanners . ” Organization Science , 14 , 4 : 422 - 439 . Podolny , J . M . , and J . N . Baron 1997 " Resources and relationships : Social networks and mobility in the workplace . " American Sociological Review , 62 , 5 : 673 - 693 . Podolny , J . M . , and T . E . Stuart 1995 “A role - based ecology of technological change . ” American Journal of Sociology , 100 , 5 : 1224 - 1260 . Raymond , E . 1998 “The cathedral and the bazaar , ” version 1998 / 11 / 22 . Available at www . tuxedo . org . Raymond , E . 2000 “Conventions at light speed : What hackers can learn from SF fandom , ” http : / / www . catb . org / ~ esr / writings / sfshows / . Reagans , R . , and B . McEvily 2003 “Network structure and knowledge transfer : The effects of cohesion and range . ” Administrative Science Quarterly , 48 : 240 - 267 . Rivlin , G . 2003 “Leader of the Free World : How Linus Torvalds became benevolent dictator of Planet Linux , the biggest collaborative project in history . ” Wired , 11 , 11 . Rosenkopf , L . , A . Metiu , and V . George 2001 " From the bottom up ? Technical committee activity and alliance formation . " Administrative Science Quarterly , 46 : 748 - 772 . Schoenfeld , D . 1982 “Partial residuals for the proportional hazards regression model . ” Biometrika 69 : 239 - 241 . Secure Shell secsh 2003 http : / / www . ietf . org / html . charters / secsh - charter . html . Sorenson , O . , and T . E . Stuart 2001 “Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture capital investments . " American Journal of Sociology , 106 : 1546 - 1588 . Stock , J . , J . Wright , and M . Yogo 52 2002 “A survey of weak instruments and weak identification in generalized method of moments . ” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics , 20 , 4 : 518 - 529 . Stuart , T . , H . Hoang , and R . Hybels 1999 “Interorganizational endorsements and the performance of entrepreneurial ventures . ” Administration Science Quarterly , 44 : 315 - 349 . Tushman , M . 1977 “Special Boundary Roles in the Innovation Process . ” Administration Science Quarterly , 22 : 587 - 605 . Von Hippel , E . , and G . von Krogh 2003 “Open source software and the ‘private - collective’ model : Issues for organization science . ” Organization Science , 14 , 2 : 209 - 223 . Von Krogh , G . , Spaeth , S . , & Lakhani , K . R . 2003 . Community , Joining , and Specialization in Open Source Software Innovation : A Case Study . Research Policy , 32 ( 7 ) : 1217 - 1241 . Wasserman , M . 2003 “IETF problem resolution processes , ” http : / / www . ietf . org / Internet - drafts / draft - ietf - problem - process - 01 . txt . 53 Table 1 : Descriptive statistics for full risk set ( N = 243405 ) . Mean Std . Dev . Min Max Summer Meeting 0 . 33 0 . 47 0 . 00 1 . 00 Winter Meeting 0 . 35 0 . 48 0 . 00 1 . 00 Non - North American Meeting 0 . 25 0 . 43 0 . 00 1 . 00 IETF Executive 0 . 00 0 . 04 0 . 00 1 . 00 Affiliated Executive 0 . 15 0 . 36 0 . 00 1 . 00 Patents 0 . 13 0 . 82 0 . 00 33 . 00 ( ln ) Community Size 8 . 49 0 . 62 5 . 74 8 . 99 Incumbent WG Chairs 162 . 71 47 . 44 16 . 00 230 . 00 Community Presence ( Inst . ) a 0 . 00 0 . 40 - 1 . 49 2 . 92 Miles 16569 . 67 9776 . 30 0 . 00 60072 . 18 Non US 0 . 24 0 . 43 0 . 00 1 . 00 University affiliation 0 . 12 0 . 33 0 . 00 1 . 00 Government affiliation 0 . 05 0 . 22 0 . 00 1 . 00 Affiliated Conf . Attendees 61 . 23 142 . 07 0 . 00 1286 . 00 IETF Publication Dummy 0 . 061 0 . 239 0 . 00 1 . 00 ( ln ) IETF Publications 0 . 059 0 . 237 0 . 00 3 . 04 a mean centered to facilitate interpretation of interaction effects ( Friedrich 1982 ) Table 2 : Bi - variate correlation matrix for full risk set ( N = 243405 ) . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 Summer Meeting 1 . 00 2 Winter Meeting - 0 . 52 1 . 00 3 Non - N . American Meeting 0 . 60 - 0 . 42 1 . 00 4 ( ln ) Community Size 0 . 00 0 . 06 0 . 18 1 . 00 5 Incumbent WG Chairs - 0 . 01 0 . 08 0 . 17 0 . 94 1 . 00 6 Affiliated Executive - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 06 1 . 00 7 IETF Executive 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 07 - 0 . 06 0 . 11 1 . 00 8 Patents 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 00 0 . 07 0 . 02 1 . 00 9 Community Presence ( Inst . ) 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 0 . 06 0 . 16 0 . 15 0 . 24 0 . 01 0 . 04 10 IETF Publication Dummy 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 06 0 . 09 0 . 11 0 . 06 11 ( ln ) IETF Publications 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 06 - 0 . 05 0 . 09 0 . 15 0 . 06 9 10 11 9 Community Presence ( Inst . ) 1 . 00 10 IETF Publication Dummy 0 . 07 1 . 00 11 ( ln ) IETF Publications 0 . 07 0 . 92 1 . 00 54 Table 3 : Descriptive statistics for network risk set ( N = 5066 ) . Variable Mean Std . Dev . Min Max Summer Meeting 0 . 33 0 . 47 0 . 00 1 . 00 Winter Meeting 0 . 34 0 . 47 0 . 00 1 . 00 Non - North American Meeting 0 . 23 0 . 42 0 . 00 1 . 00 IETF Executive 0 . 04 0 . 20 0 . 00 1 . 00 Affiliated Executive 0 . 31 0 . 46 0 . 00 1 . 00 ( ln ) Community Size 8 . 35 0 . 75 5 . 74 8 . 99 Incumbent WG Chairs 153 . 20 51 . 51 16 . 00 230 . 00 Patents 0 . 37 1 . 38 0 . 00 17 . 00 Executive Tie 0 . 57 0 . 77 0 . 00 5 . 00 Community Presence ( Inst . ) a 0 . 00 1 . 17 - 4 . 84 4 . 04 Miles 18872 . 36 7829 . 88 0 . 00 59767 . 03 Non US 0 . 15 0 . 36 0 . 00 1 . 00 University affiliation 0 . 13 0 . 33 0 . 00 1 . 00 Government affiliation 0 . 04 0 . 19 0 . 00 1 . 00 Affiliated Conf . Attendees 126 . 53 221 . 19 0 . 00 1286 . 00 ( ln ) IETF Publications 1 . 35 0 . 34 1 . 10 3 . 04 Degree 7 . 01 6 . 19 0 . 00 39 . 00 WG Contributor 0 . 82 0 . 38 0 . 00 1 . 00 Two WGs b 0 . 23 0 . 42 0 . 00 1 . 00 Three + WGs b 0 . 05 0 . 23 0 . 00 1 . 00 Social Brokerage a 0 . 00 0 . 27 - 0 . 66 0 . 46 Inverse Mills Ratio 2 . 33 0 . 23 1 . 31 2 . 74 Affilated RFC Authors 19 . 57 36 . 63 0 . 00 203 . 00 Affilated WG chairs 19 . 25 35 . 92 0 . 00 192 . 00 a mean centered to facilitate interpretation of interaction effects ( Friedrich 1982 ) . b the omitted reference category is " Zero WGs " . Table 4 : Bi - variate correlation matrix for network risk set ( N = 5066 ) . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 Summer Meeting 1 . 00 2 Winter Meeting - 0 . 50 1 . 00 3 Non - N . American Meeting 0 . 55 - 0 . 39 1 . 00 4 ( ln ) Community Size 0 . 02 0 . 06 0 . 21 1 . 00 5 Incumbent WG Chairs 0 . 01 0 . 07 0 . 20 0 . 95 1 . 00 6 Affiliated Executive - 0 . 02 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 02 - 0 . 03 - 0 . 02 1 . 00 7 IETF Executive - 0 . 01 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 20 - 0 . 18 0 . 31 1 . 00 8 Patents 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 07 0 . 05 0 . 04 - 0 . 05 1 . 00 9 Community Presence ( Inst . ) 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 11 0 . 38 0 . 41 0 . 14 0 . 06 0 . 04 1 . 00 10 ( ln ) IETF Publications 0 . 00 0 . 00 - 0 . 01 - 0 . 04 - 0 . 03 0 . 07 0 . 18 0 . 02 0 . 10 11 Executive Tie 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 16 0 . 17 0 . 03 - 0 . 13 0 . 07 0 . 12 12 Degree 0 . 01 0 . 03 0 . 08 0 . 38 0 . 41 0 . 09 - 0 . 02 0 . 08 0 . 25 13 WG Contributor 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 26 0 . 25 0 . 01 - 0 . 05 - 0 . 03 0 . 22 14 Two WGs 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 03 0 . 12 0 . 13 0 . 00 - 0 . 02 0 . 02 0 . 11 15 Three + WGs 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 09 0 . 09 0 . 03 0 . 04 - 0 . 01 0 . 10 16 Social Brokerage 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 07 0 . 24 0 . 27 0 . 07 0 . 02 0 . 08 0 . 18 17 Inverse Mills Ratio 0 . 01 0 . 03 0 . 06 0 . 28 0 . 24 - 0 . 45 - 0 . 05 - 0 . 39 - 0 . 10 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 10 ( ln ) IETF Publications 1 . 00 11 Executive Tie 0 . 21 1 . 00 12 Degree 0 . 28 0 . 47 1 . 00 13 WG Contributor 0 . 06 0 . 09 0 . 31 1 . 00 14 Two WGs 0 . 12 0 . 06 0 . 18 0 . 26 1 . 00 15 Three + WGs 0 . 42 0 . 16 0 . 32 0 . 11 - 0 . 13 1 . 00 16 Social Brokerage 0 . 17 0 . 23 0 . 56 0 . 20 0 . 21 0 . 21 1 . 00 17 Inverse Mills Ratio - 0 . 09 - 0 . 07 - 0 . 03 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 02 - 0 . 05 1 . 00 56 Table 5 : Cox hazard models of appointment as Working Group Chair among IETF participants , 1989 - 2002 . 1 2 3 4 5 Summer Meeting - 0 . 427 - 0 . 419 - 0 . 392 - 0 . 399 - 0 . 397 ( 0 . 137 ) * * ( 0 . 136 ) * * ( 0 . 137 ) * * ( 0 . 137 ) * * ( 0 . 137 ) * * Winter Meeting - 0 . 029 - 0 . 009 0 . 017 0 . 011 0 . 012 ( 0 . 115 ) ( 0 . 115 ) ( 0 . 116 ) ( 0 . 116 ) ( 0 . 116 ) Non - N . A . Meeting 0 . 043 0 . 035 0 . 029 0 . 030 0 . 028 ( 0 . 159 ) ( 0 . 158 ) ( 0 . 158 ) ( 0 . 158 ) ( 0 . 158 ) IETF Executive 1 . 127 0 . 249 - 0 . 463 - 0 . 251 - 0 . 216 ( 0 . 273 ) * * ( 0 . 275 ) ( 0 . 284 ) ( 0 . 286 ) ( 0 . 286 ) Affiliated Executive 0 . 642 0 . 482 0 . 530 0 . 492 0 . 486 ( 0 . 109 ) * * ( 0 . 109 ) * * ( 0 . 109 ) * * ( 0 . 109 ) * * ( 0 . 109 ) * * Patents 0 . 067 0 . 031 0 . 041 0 . 032 0 . 031 ( 0 . 034 ) + ( 0 . 040 ) ( 0 . 039 ) ( 0 . 040 ) ( 0 . 040 ) ( ln ) Community Size 0 . 104 0 . 320 0 . 389 0 . 399 0 . 417 ( 0 . 165 ) ( 0 . 166 ) + ( 0 . 166 ) * ( 0 . 166 ) * ( 0 . 166 ) * Incumbent WG Chairs - 0 . 016 - 0 . 017 - 0 . 018 - 0 . 018 - 0 . 019 ( 0 . 003 ) * * ( 0 . 003 ) * * ( 0 . 003 ) * * ( 0 . 003 ) * * ( 0 . 003 ) * * Community Pres . ( Inst . ) 0 . 046 - 0 . 057 - 0 . 099 - 0 . 098 - 0 . 094 ( 0 . 161 ) ( 0 . 160 ) ( 0 . 158 ) ( 0 . 158 ) ( 0 . 159 ) IETF Pub . Dummy 2 . 025 0 . 887 0 . 663 ( 0 . 099 ) * * ( 0 . 188 ) * * ( 0 . 240 ) * * ( ln ) IETF Publications 1 . 678 1 . 137 1 . 399 ( 0 . 070 ) * * ( 0 . 143 ) * * ( 0 . 223 ) * * IETF Pubs . squared - 0 . 006 ( 0 . 004 ) Log Likelihood - 4132 . 69 - 3964 . 11 - 3948 . 15 - 3937 . 45 - 3936 . 11 Observations 243405 243405 243405 243405 243405 Individuals 15466 15466 15466 15466 15466 Events 473 473 473 473 473 Standard errors in parentheses + significant at 10 % ; * significant at 5 % ; * * significant at 1 % 57 Table 6 : Cox hazard models of appointment as Working Group Chair among IETF participants , 1989 - 2002 . 6 7 8 9 Summer Meeting - 0 . 133 - 0 . 106 - 0 . 106 - 0 . 089 ( 0 . 275 ) ( 0 . 275 ) ( 0 . 275 ) ( 0 . 276 ) Winter Meeting 0 . 344 0 . 353 0 . 352 0 . 346 ( 0 . 243 ) ( 0 . 245 ) ( 0 . 245 ) ( 0 . 245 ) Non - North American Meeting 0 . 307 0 . 295 0 . 295 0 . 273 ( 0 . 298 ) ( 0 . 297 ) ( 0 . 298 ) ( 0 . 297 ) IETF Executive 0 . 162 - 0 . 071 - 0 . 074 - 0 . 115 ( 0 . 382 ) ( 0 . 386 ) ( 0 . 387 ) ( 0 . 385 ) Affiliated Executive 0 . 128 0 . 156 0 . 155 0 . 125 ( 0 . 217 ) ( 0 . 218 ) ( 0 . 218 ) ( 0 . 219 ) Patents - 0 . 042 - 0 . 046 - 0 . 047 - 0 . 052 ( 0 . 089 ) ( 0 . 089 ) ( 0 . 089 ) ( 0 . 088 ) ( ln ) Community Size 0 . 447 0 . 525 0 . 527 0 . 568 ( 0 . 358 ) ( 0 . 360 ) ( 0 . 361 ) ( 0 . 361 ) Incumbent WG Chair Population - 0 . 017 - 0 . 017 - 0 . 018 - 0 . 019 ( 0 . 006 ) * * ( 0 . 006 ) * * ( 0 . 006 ) * * ( 0 . 006 ) * * Executive Tie - 0 . 106 - 0 . 208 - 0 . 214 - 0 . 244 ( 0 . 135 ) ( 0 . 136 ) ( 0 . 145 ) ( 0 . 138 ) + WG Contributor 0 . 701 0 . 625 0 . 618 0 . 677 ( 0 . 285 ) * ( 0 . 287 ) * ( 0 . 292 ) * ( 0 . 297 ) * Community Presence ( Instrumented ) - 0 . 037 - 0 . 041 - 0 . 042 - 0 . 053 ( 0 . 126 ) ( 0 . 125 ) ( 0 . 125 ) ( 0 . 126 ) ( ln ) IETF Publications 0 . 878 0 . 867 0 . 772 ( 0 . 228 ) * * ( 0 . 245 ) * * ( 0 . 230 ) * * Degree 0 . 003 ( 0 . 022 ) Social Broker ( - constraint ) 0 . 871 ( 0 . 376 ) * Log Likelihood - 593 . 21 - 586 . 82 - 586 . 81 - 584 . 06 Observations 5066 5066 5066 5066 Individuals 610 610 610 610 Events 117 117 117 117 Standard errors in parentheses + significant at 10 % ; * significant at 5 % ; * * significant at 1 % 58 Table 6 ( cont . ) : Cox hazard models of appointment as Working Group Chair among IETF participants , 1989 - 2002 . 10 11 12 13 14 Summer Meeting - 0 . 091 - 0 . 115 - 0 . 116 - 0 . 107 - 0 . 120 ( 0 . 276 ) ( 0 . 276 ) ( 0 . 274 ) ( 0 . 275 ) ( 0 . 275 ) Winter Meeting 0 . 342 0 . 329 0 . 343 0 . 343 0 . 332 ( 0 . 244 ) ( 0 . 245 ) ( 0 . 246 ) ( 0 . 245 ) ( 0 . 245 ) Non - North American Meeting 0 . 281 0 . 290 0 . 295 0 . 300 0 . 311 ( 0 . 299 ) ( 0 . 299 ) ( 0 . 298 ) ( 0 . 298 ) ( 0 . 299 ) IETF Executive - 0 . 231 0 . 014 - 0 . 034 - 0 . 159 - 0 . 268 ( 0 . 386 ) ( 0 . 388 ) ( 0 . 389 ) ( 0 . 390 ) ( 0 . 401 ) Affiliated Executive 0 . 103 0 . 150 0 . 145 0 . 136 0 . 264 ( 0 . 219 ) ( 0 . 218 ) ( 0 . 219 ) ( 0 . 220 ) ( 0 . 245 ) Patents - 0 . 056 - 0 . 038 - 0 . 033 - 0 . 032 0 . 015 ( 0 . 088 ) ( 0 . 088 ) ( 0 . 086 ) ( 0 . 085 ) ( 0 . 094 ) ( ln ) Community Size 0 . 562 0 . 472 0 . 542 0 . 530 0 . 330 ( 0 . 356 ) ( 0 . 362 ) ( 0 . 365 ) ( 0 . 363 ) ( 0 . 403 ) Incumbent WG Chair Population - 0 . 020 - 0 . 018 - 0 . 018 - 0 . 018 - 0 . 017 ( 0 . 006 ) * * ( 0 . 006 ) * * ( 0 . 006 ) * * ( 0 . 006 ) * * ( 0 . 006 ) * * Executive Tie - 0 . 301 - 0 . 227 - 0 . 223 - 0 . 221 - 0 . 204 ( 0 . 140 ) * ( 0 . 136 ) + ( 0 . 137 ) ( 0 . 145 ) ( 0 . 146 ) WG Contributor 0 . 724 0 . 440 0 . 514 0 . 670 0 . 685 ( 0 . 299 ) * ( 0 . 302 ) ( 0 . 316 ) ( 0 . 327 ) * ( 0 . 327 ) * Community Presence ( Instrumented ) - 0 . 029 - 0 . 048 - 0 . 041 - 0 . 022 - 0 . 011 ( 0 . 124 ) ( 0 . 126 ) ( 0 . 127 ) ( 0 . 125 ) ( 0 . 125 ) ( ln ) IETF Publications 0 . 703 0 . 478 0 . 501 0 . 579 0 . 592 ( 0 . 228 ) * * ( 0 . 272 ) + ( 0 . 275 ) + ( 0 . 278 ) * ( 0 . 278 ) * Degree - 0 . 030 - 0 . 027 ( 0 . 027 ) ( 0 . 027 ) Social Broker ( - constraint ) 1 . 398 1 . 142 1 . 975 1 . 957 ( 0 . 419 ) * * ( 0 . 439 ) * * ( 0 . 493 ) * * ( 0 . 491 ) * * Social Broker X Comm . Presence 1 . 160 1 . 275 1 . 265 ( 0 . 288 ) * * ( 0 . 289 ) * * ( 0 . 288 ) * * Two WGs 0 . 539 0 . 511 0 . 506 0 . 489 ( 0 . 227 ) * ( 0 . 225 ) * ( 0 . 225 ) * ( 0 . 226 ) * Two WG X Social Broker - 2 . 017 - 2 . 261 - 2 . 222 ( 0 . 878 ) * ( 0 . 895 ) * ( 0 . 894 ) * Three + WGs 1 . 049 1 . 382 1 . 384 1 . 353 ( 0 . 369 ) * * ( 0 . 445 ) * * ( 0 . 443 ) * * ( 0 . 445 ) * * Three + WG X Social Broker - 3 . 292 - 3 . 692 - 3 . 749 ( 1 . 657 ) * ( 1 . 760 ) * ( 1 . 760 ) * Inverse Mills Ratio 0 . 694 ( 0 . 633 ) Log Likelihood - 576 . 14 - 581 . 89 - 576 . 82 - 567 . 21 - 566 . 58 Observations 5066 5066 5066 5066 5066 Individuals 610 610 610 610 610 Failures 117 117 117 117 117 Standard errors in parentheses + significant at 10 % ; * significant at 5 % ; * * significant at 1 % 59 Figure 1 : Diagram of IETF structure . Adapted from Steve Coya ' s IETF newcomer ' s orientation presentation entitled " IETF Structures and Internet Standards Process , " http : / / ietf . org / newcomer / frame . htm . Multiplier effect of publication on leadership ( + / - 95 % confidence intervals ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 + Number of publications in prior 3 years Figure 2 : Publication spline for full risk set . 60 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 Community Presence ( inst ) l ea d e r s h i p m u l t i p li e r low social brokerage ( cohesion ) medium social brokerage high social brokerage Figure 3 : Interaction between social brokerage and community presence ( mean + / - one standard deviation of brokerage from model 14 ) . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - 0 . 32 - 0 . 24 - 0 . 16 - 0 . 08 0 0 . 08 0 . 16 0 . 24 0 . 32 Brokerage Score L ea d e r s h i p M u l t i p li e r no boundary span Boundary span ( 2 WG ) Boundary span ( 3 WG ) Figure 4 : Interaction between technical boundary spanning and social brokerage ( model 14 ) .