Washington University School of Medicine Digital Commons @ Becker Open Access Publications 2006 Cortactin has an essential and specific role in osteoclast actin assembly Shandiz Tehrani Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis Roberta Faccio Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis Indra Chandrasekar Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis F . Patrick Ross Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis John A . Cooper Washington University School of Medicine in St . Louis Follow this and additional works at : https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / open _ access _ pubs Part of the Medicine and Health Sciences Commons This Open Access Publication is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Becker . It has been accepted for inclusion in Open Access Publications by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Becker . For more information , please contact engeszer @ wustl . edu . Recommended Citation Tehrani , Shandiz ; Faccio , Roberta ; Chandrasekar , Indra ; Ross , F . Patrick ; and Cooper , John A . , , " Cortactin has an essential and specific role in osteoclast actin assembly . " Molecular Biology of the Cell . 17 , 7 . 2882 - 2895 . ( 2006 ) . https : / / digitalcommons . wustl . edu / open _ access _ pubs / 431 Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 17 , 2882 – 2895 , July 2006 Cortactin Has an Essential and Speciﬁc Role in Osteoclast Actin Assembly □ V Shandiz Tehrani , * Roberta Faccio , † Indra Chandrasekar , * F . Patrick Ross , ‡ and John A . Cooper * Departments of * Cell Biology and Physiology , † Orthopedic Surgery , and ‡ Pathology and Immunology , Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , MO 63110 Submitted March 8 , 2006 ; Accepted April 4 , 2006 Monitoring Editor : Thomas Pollard Osteoclasts are essential for bone dynamics and calcium homeostasis . The cells form a tight seal on the bone surface , onto which they secrete acid and proteases to resorb bone . The seal is associated with a ring of actin ﬁlaments . Cortactin , a c - Src substrate known to promote Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin assembly in vitro , is expressed in osteoclasts and localizes to the sealing ring . To address the role of cortactin and actin assembly in osteoclasts , we depleted cortactin by RNA interference . Cortactin - depleted osteoclasts displayed a complete loss of bone resorption with no formation of sealing zones . On nonosteoid surfaces , osteoclasts ﬂatten with a dynamic , actin - rich peripheral edge that contains podosomes , ﬁlopodia , and lamellipodia . Cortactin depletion led to a speciﬁc loss of podosomes , revealing a tight spatial compartmentalization of actin assembly . Podosome formation was restored in cortactin - depleted cells by expression of wild - type cortactin or a Src homology 3 point mutant of cortactin . In contrast , expression of a cortactin mutant lacking tyrosine residues phosphor - ylated by Src did not restore podosome formation . Cortactin was found to be an early component of the nascent podosome belt , along with dynamin , supporting a role for cortactin in actin assembly . INTRODUCTION Cortactin is a prominent Src substrate ( Maa et al . , 1992 ) expressed in many vertebrate cell types . Hematopoietic cells generally express the cortactin homologue hematopoietic cell - speciﬁc 1 ( HS1 ) instead of cortactin . In cultured ﬁbro - blasts , cortactin localizes to sites of dynamic actin assembly , including lamellipodia ( Weed et al . , 2000 ) . Biochemical stud - ies have shown that cortactin can bind Arp2 / 3 complex and actin ﬁlaments , which enhances Arp2 / 3 - induced nucleation and stabilizes actin ﬁlament branches ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) family members also bind Arp2 / 3 complex , but they bind actin monomers , which makes them more efﬁcient at nucleation . Cortactin and WASp can be synergistic in vitro because they are able to bind to Arp2 / 3 complex at the same time ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . Cortactin has a Src homology ( SH ) 3 domain and a proline - rich region , which are not required for F - actin and Arp2 / 3 interaction ( Figure 1A ) . These regions may allow cortactin to function as an adaptor to amplify cellular signaling path - ways . The signaling and actin assembly functions of cortac - tin may both exist , working in a positive feedback loop . We chose osteoclasts as a system to study the cellular function of cortactin for several reasons . First , osteoclasts are available as primary cells whose physiological function , namely , resorption of bone , can be assayed directly . Second , osteoclasts express cortactin , but they are derived from monocytic precursors that lack cortactin . Finally , cortactin is a target of c - Src , which is critical for osteoclast function ( Soriano et al . , 1991 ) . In vertebrates , bone remodeling and turnover requires osteoclasts to resorb bone . Osteoclasts form an integrin - based contact with the bone surface ( Vaananen et al . , 2000 ) , which in association with actin forms a ring - shaped sealing zone ( Kanehisa et al . , 1990 ; Saltel et al . , 2004 ) . Osteoclasts secrete acid and proteases inside the sealing zone , which degrades the bone . On nonosteoid surfaces ( Saltel et al . , 2004 ) , actin in oste - oclasts forms podosomes , ﬁlopodia , and lamellipodia at the cell edge . Podosomes are small columns of F - actin , surrounded by a ring of proteins characteristic of integrin - based focal ad - hesions . Podosomes are also a prominent feature of the actin cytoskeleton of dendritic cells ( Burns et al . , 2001 ) , macrophages ( Linder et al . , 1999 ) , smooth muscle cells ( Gimona et al . , 2003 ) , and Src - transformed ﬁbroblasts ( Mizutani et al . , 2002 ) . The F - actin core of podosomes contains the actin nucleator Arp2 / 3 complex and its activators cortactin , WASp , and neuronal - WASp ( N - WASp ) ( Linder and Aepfelbacher , 2003 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex depletion results in fewer podosomes and no seal - ing zone formation in an osteoclast - like cell line ( Hurst et al . , 2004 ) . In vivo evidence about the importance of cortactin - based actin assembly in osteoclast function and podosome forma - tion is lacking . We depleted cortactin in primary mouse This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E06 – 03 – 0187 ) on April 12 , 2006 . □ V The online version of this article contains supplemental material at MBC Online ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org ) . Address correspondence to : John A . Cooper ( jcooper @ wustl . edu ) . Abbreviations used : FACS , ﬂuorescence activated cell sorter ; HS1 , hematopoietic cell line - speciﬁc protein ; MCSF , macrophage colony - stimulating factor ; MOI , multiplicity of infection ; NFATc1 , nuclear factor of activated T - cells c1 ; N - WASp , neuronal - WASp ; RANKL , receptor activator of nuclear factor (cid:1) B ligand ; RNAi , RNA interfer - ence ; SEM , scanning electron microscopy ; TRAP , tartrate - resistant acid phosphatase ; WASp , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . 2882 © 2006 by The American Society for Cell Biology osteoclasts using short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) delivered with a lentiviral system ( Rubinson et al . , 2003 ) . We found that cortactin was absolutely necessary for bone resorption , sealing zone formation , and podosome formation in oste - oclasts but that cell differentiation and actin - based motility were otherwise remarkably normal . In addition , rescue studies of cortactin knockdown cells with exogenous cortactin and cortactin mutants suggest a critical role for cortactin’s ty - rosine phosphorylation downstream of Src . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies and Reagents Antibodies were raised in chickens against a N - terminal fragment of mouse cortactin ( C90 ) and used for immunoblots . Anti - Arp3 antibody ( R43 ) was used as described previously ( Welch et al . , 1997 ) . The 3F2 monoclonal anti - body ( mAb ) against capping protein (cid:2) 2 was used for immunoblots as de - scribed previously ( Schafer et al . , 1994 ) . The 4F11 mAb against cortactin was a gift from Dr . Scott Weed ( West Virginia University , Health Sciences Center , Morgantown , WV ) and was used in immunoﬂuorescence staining ( Kanner et al . , 1990 ) . The monoclonal anti - c - Src antibody was a gift from Dr . Steven Teitelbaum ( Department of Pathology , Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , MO ) . The monoclonal anti - actin antibody C4 was a gift from Dr . James Lessard ( Department of Pediatrics , University of Cincinnati , Cincinnati , OH ) ( Lessard , 1988 ) . Anti - c - Fos , anti - nuclear factor of activated T - cells c1 ( NFATc1 ) , anti - N - WASp , and anti - WASp rabbit polyclonal antibod - ies and anti - dynamin2 goat polyclonal antibody were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz , CA ) . Anti - (cid:2) 3 integrin rabbit polyclonal antibody was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology ( Beverly , MA ) . Anti - Pyk2 rabbit polyclonal antibody was purchased from BioSource Inter - national ( Camarillo , CA ) . Anti - FLAG mAb M2 and rhodamine - and couma - rin - labeled phalloidin were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) - conjugated anti - chicken , anti - mouse , and anti - rabbit second antibodies ( Pierce Chemical , Rockford , IL ) were used in immu - noblots . Alexa - conjugated anti - mouse , anti - rabbit , and anti - goat second antibod - ies ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) were used for immunoﬂuorescence . Glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - receptor activator of nuclear factor (cid:1) B ligand ( RANKL ) was puriﬁed as described previously ( McHugh et al . , 2000 ) . Mouse Osteoclast Culture Bone marrow macrophages were isolated from 4 - to 8 - wk - old mice , cultured overnight in (cid:3) - minimal essential medium ( MEM ) containing 10 % heat - inac - tivated fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , and subjected to Ficoll - Hypaque gradient puriﬁcation as described previously ( Feng et al . , 2001 ) . Cells ( 5 (cid:1) 10 6 ) col - lected from the gradient interface were plated in a P100 suspension culture dish ( Corning Costar , New York , NY ) in the presence of 1 : 10 CMG14 - 12 culture supernatant ( Takeshita et al . , 2000 ) , containing the equivalent of 120 (cid:4) g / ml recombinant macrophage colony - stimulating factor ( MCSF ) . The cells were infected with lentivirus at 3 d after harvest . For in vitro generation of osteoclasts , macrophages were cultured in (cid:3) - MEM containing 10 % heat - inactivated FBS in the presence of 100 ng / ml RANKL and 100 (cid:4) g / ml MCSF for 5 d . In culture , lentivirus - infected and uninfected osteoclasts were viable and looked morphologically healthy for at least 10 d in the presence of MCSF and RANKL . Experiments on glass were performed after 5 d in culture , and experiments on bone were performed after 8 d in culture . Reverse Transcription - Polymerase Chain Reaction ( RT - PCR ) Total RNA was collected from macrophages after 0 – 4 d of RANKL treatment using the RNeasy kit ( QIAGEN , Valencia , CA ) . Reverse transcription from equal amounts of total RNA was performed using the SuperScript system ( Invitrogen ) , followed by PCR with oligonucleotides speciﬁc for cortactin , HS1 , WASp , N - WASp , WAVE1 , WAVE2 , WAVE3 , and glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) . Lentivirus and RNA Interference ( RNAi ) The pLL3 . 7 lentiviral - based shRNA expression system ( kindly provided by Dr . Frank Gertler , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA ) was used as described previously ( Rubinson et al . , 2003 ) . Short hairpin RNA sequences were selected to target the coding region of mouse cortactin . Sequence 1 and 2 targeted the 5 (cid:2) - ggattcggcgggaagtatg - 3 (cid:2) coding region and the 5 (cid:2) - gactgagaagcatgcctcc - 3 (cid:2) coding region of the cortactin gene , respec - tively . As a control , we scrambled sequence 1 to give 5 (cid:2) - ggacaggtaggttcgtgag - 3 (cid:2) , which has no signiﬁcant similarity to known genes as assessed by National Center for Biotechnology Information BLASTn searches . 293T cells were cotransfected with pLL3 . 7 and packaging plasmids pHR’CVM8 . 2 (cid:3) R and pCMV - VSV - G ( gifts from Dr . Sheila Stewart , Washington University School of Medicine ) using FuGENE ( Roche Diagnostics , Indianapolis , IN ) . Optimal viral particle numbers for infection were based on infection efﬁciency , deter - mined from the percentage of target cells with green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) , which is expressed independently from the RNAi sequence . Concen - trated viral titers for multiplicity of infection ( MOI ) studies were obtained by centrifugation of viral supernatants at 83 , 000 (cid:1) g for 90 min . Based on MOI studies , viral titers of (cid:4) 3 (cid:1) 10 6 viral particles were used for optimal infection . Figure 1 . Expression of cortactin and other Arp2 / 3 activators dur - ing osteoclast differentiation . ( A ) Schematic representation of mouse cortactin and major interacting partners . Cortactin’s N - terminal acidic ( NTA ) domain binds Arp2 / 3 complex and the repeat region binds actin ﬁlaments . The helical / proline - rich domain contains three tyrosines ( 421 , 466 , and 482 ) that are targeted for phosphory - lation by active Src . The SH3 domain of cortactin binds a number of proline - rich – containing proteins ( denoted by X ) , including N - WASp and dynamin . ( B ) Expression of cortactin and other Arp2 / 3 complex activator genes by RT - PCR of primary macro - phages cultured in the presence of RANKL for the indicated num - ber of days . GAPDH is a control . ( C ) Anti - cortactin and rhodamine - phalloidin staining of cells differentiated for 4 d . Cortactin is present in multinucleated osteoclasts ( OC ) but not in macrophages ( arrow ) . An asterisk marks a mononucleate cortactin - positive cell , which is presumably a maturing osteoclast before fusion . Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly Vol . 17 , July 2006 2883 To infect macrophages , the virus - containing supernatant was collected 3 d after transfection of packaging cells and added to bone marrow macrophages plated on a P100 culture dish along with 8 (cid:4) g / ml protamine sulfate . After 4 h , the viral supernatant was replaced with fresh macrophage media . Cells were cultured 2 – 3 d in macrophage medium , lifted using trypsin / EDTA , and resuspended in Hank’s balanced salt solution supplemented with 1 % FBS for sorting . Infectivity efﬁciencies were determined by observing GFP expression in infected cells as a function of lentiviral titer . Cells from the highest infec - tivity titer where then sorted for GFP expression using ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorter ( FACS ) to enrich for infected cell populations . Cells were sorted for GFP expression in the Siteman Cancer Center High Speed Sorter Core Facility using a MoFlo high - speed ﬂow cytometer ( Dako Colorado , Fort Collins , CO ) . GFP - positive cells were plated on glass or dentine slices in osteoclast differ - entiation medium . Retrovirus and Cortactin Mutants The pBABE murine leukemia virus retroviral - based expression system was kindly provided by Dr . Sheila Stewart ( Washington University School of Medicine ) . FLAG - tagged cortactin wild - type and mutant ( 3YF and W525K ) cDNAs were expanded by PCR from previously described plasmids ( Head et al . , 2003 ; gifts from Dr . Scott Weed , West Virginia University , Health Sciences Center , Morgantown , WV ) and cloned into the pBABE expression plasmid . RNAi - resistance was conferred by mutating three nucleotides in the region targeted by RNAi sequence 1 from 5 (cid:2) - gg a ttcgg c gggaa g tatg - 3 (cid:2) to 5 (cid:2) - gg c ttcg - g a gggaa a tatg - 3 (cid:2) with the QuikChange multisite - directed mutagenesis kit ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) . To generate retrovirus , 293T cells were cotrans - fected with pBABE constructs and packaging plasmids pUMVC3 and pCMV - VSV - G ( gifts from Dr . Sheila Stewart , Washington University School of Med - icine ) using FuGENE ( Roche Diagnostics ) . Viral titers of (cid:4) 3 (cid:1) 10 6 viral particles were used for optimal infection . This viral titer had no cytotoxic effects on target cells . The virus - containing supernatant was collected 3 d after transfection and added to bone marrow macrophages plated on a acid - washed glass coverslips in culture dishes along with 8 (cid:4) g / ml protamine sulfate . After 4 h , the viral supernatant was replaced with fresh macrophage medium . Cells were cultured 2 – 3 d and then treated with 2 (cid:4) g / ml puromycin in osteoclast medium containing RANKL , as described above . Western Blot Analysis Cells were lysed in SDS sample buffer , boiled , and electrophoresed on 10 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels . Proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂu - oride membranes , which were blocked with 2 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 0 . 1 % Tween 20 . Membranes were incubated with the appropriate antibody for 1 h in blocking solution , followed by HRP - conjugated second antibody incubation for 1 h in blocking solution . Bands were visualized with an ECL kit ( GE Healthcare , Little Chalfont , Buckinghamshire , United Kingdom ) , followed by exposure to au - toradiography ﬁlm . Immunoﬂuorescence and Time - Lapse Movies For immunoﬂuorescence , cells on coverslips or dentine were ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature for 15 min , permeabilized with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 1 min , followed by blocking with 8 % BSA in PBS for 1 h . For anti - Arp3 staining , cells were treated with an additional methanol rinse and costained for actin using monoclonal anti - actin ( C4 ) antibodies . All other actin staining was done with ﬂuorescent - labeled phal - loidin . Cells were incubated in primary antibody solutions containing 2 % BSA in PBS for 1 h , followed by Alexa - conjugated second antibody solution containing 2 % BSA in PBS for 1 h . Coverslips were mounted on glass slides , and dentine slices were mounted on coverslips . Images were collected with an Olympus IX70 inverted microscope ( Olympus , Melville , NY ) equipped with a 10 (cid:1) Plan 0 . 25 Ph1 phase objective , a 100 (cid:1) PlanApo 1 . 40 oil objective ( immu - noﬂuorescence microscopy ) , and a 60 (cid:1) PlanApo 1 . 40 oil Ph3 phase objective ( immunoﬂuorescence and time - lapse microscopy ) . Images were captured with a Coolsnap HQ camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) and processed using QED In Vivo software ( Media Cybernetics , Silver Spring , MD ) . For time - lapse movies , cells on glass coverslips were mounted on glass slides and bathed in 10 % FBS in DMEM containing 25 mM HEPES buffer without phenol red ( Invitrogen ) . Images were captured every 10 s for (cid:4) 5 min . The sample temperature was maintained at 37°C . Scanning Electron Microscopy ( SEM ) Cells on glass coverslips were ﬁxed for 2 h with 2 % phosphate - buffered glutaraldehyde , postﬁxed with 1 % aqueous osmium tetroxide for 1 h , dehy - drated in an ethyl alcohol series , and critical point dried from liquid CO 2 . Mounted coverslips were sputter - coated with 30 nm of gold and examined by Dr . Michael Veith ( Washington University , St . Louis , MO ) in a Hitachi S - 450 scanning electron microscope ( Hitachi America , Brisbane , CA ) at 20 - KV ac - celerating voltage . Tartrate - resistant Acid Phosphatase ( TRAP ) Staining and Bone Resorption Bone resorption was assayed by culturing macrophages on dentine slices in the presence of RANKL and MCSF for 8 d . Cells were ﬁxed with 2 % para - formaldehyde in PBS and stained for TRAP to conﬁrm osteoclastogenesis using a kit ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) . For resorption pit visualization , cells were removed by brief treatment with 2 N NaOH followed by 0 . 5 % toluidine blue solution staining . RESULTS Cortactin Is Expressed during Osteoclast Differentiation Cortactin is expressed in all vertebrate cells and tissues , except in cells of hematopoietic origin , which generally ex - press only the cortactin homologue HS1 ( Kitamura et al . , 1995 ) . Because osteoclasts are hematopoietic - derived cells and are known to express cortactin ( Hiura et al . , 1995 ) , we asked whether cortactin would be expressed during differ - entiation of osteoclasts in culture , from monocyte precur - sors . RT - PCR was performed on primary bone marrow mac - rophages induced to differentiate into osteoclasts with RANKL and MCSF ( Yasuda et al . , 1998 ) . After 5 d , (cid:4) 90 % of macrophages differentiated into osteoclasts . Cortactin was undetectable initially , and expression was induced during differentiation ( Figure 1B ) . Immunoﬂuorescence staining conﬁrmed that osteoclasts and their mononuclear precursors express cortactin , whereas the few macrophages that did not differentiate were negative for cortactin ( Figure 1C ) . HS1 was expressed , at a constant level , during the time course of differentiation ( Figure 1B ) . In vitro , cortactin activates Arp2 / 3 complex in a manner synergistic with WASp family members ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) . We asked whether the expression of any other Arp2 / 3 activators changed during osteoclast differentiation . The lev - els of WASp , N - WASp , and WAVE2 , assessed by RT - PCR , did not change during osteoclast differentiation ( Figure 1B ) . WAVE1 expression was low , detected only with additional PCR cycles , and its level did not change ( our unpublished data ) . WAVE3 expression was not detected , even with ad - ditional cycles . Cortactin Depletion in Osteoclasts Using Lentiviral RNAi Expression To determine the role of cortactin in actin assembly and the function of osteoclasts , we depleted cortactin using RNAi . A lentiviral system was used . Lentiviruses integrate into the host cell genome , so the cells maintained a constitutive expression of RNAi after infection . The lentiviral vector expressed GFP as an independent marker , allowing us to sort and collect a homogenous population of infected pri - mary macrophages , which we then induced to differentiate into osteoclasts . First , we assessed the efﬁciency of the infection and the health of the cells as a function of viral titer . To assess infection efﬁciencies , the percentage of cells expressing GFP was measured by FACS , as a function of viral titer ( Figure 2A ) . The highest infectivity rates were achieved with 3 (cid:1) 10 6 viral particles for control and knockdown lentivirus , with lower infectivity rates at lower and higher viral titers . This optimal viral titer was used for most subsequent experi - ments , followed by sorting of GFP - positive cells to enrich for infected cells . To test for adverse effects of viral infection on the cells , we assessed the viability of macrophages , as a function of viral titer . Cells were infected , sorted by FACS , and plated on glass . The number of cells that were alive and adherent was followed by phase - contrast microscopy for 2 – 5 d , which is the number of days required for in vitro differ - S . Tehrani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2884 entiation of macrophages into osteoclasts . Control and knockdown infected macrophages remained fully viable and adherent over time regardless of the viral titer used for infection ( Figure 2B ) . We assessed the efﬁciency of cortactin knockdown with immunoblots and immunoﬂuorescence . Two different RNAi sequences targeting cortactin ( 1 and 2 ) and a scrambled RNAi control sequence were used . The level of cortactin knockdown with RNAi sequence 1 or 2 in osteoclasts was (cid:5) 90 % by immunoblot analysis ( Figure 2C ) . Cortactin immu - noﬂuorescence staining was diminished to background lev - els in cells expressing RNAi sequence 1 or 2 , with no change in cells expressing control RNAi ( Figure 2D ) . Cortactin - depleted Osteoclasts Fail to Form Sealing Rings and Resorb Bone We assessed the ability of cortactin - depleted osteoclasts to resorb bone . Macrophages expressing RNAi were plated on dentine and differentiated into osteoclasts . The number of mature osteoclasts on dentine was the same for cortactin - depleted and control cells , revealed by counting cells ( Figure 3A ) and staining for TRAP , an osteoclast marker ( Figure 3B ) . Large , multinucleated cells were observed in control and knockdown cells , indicating normal fusion during differen - tiation ( Figure 3B ) . Osteoclasts expressing scrambled RNAi produced numerous bone resorption pits , assessed by tolu - idine blue staining ( Figure 3C ) . In contrast , cells expressing cortactin RNAi did not produce any resorption pits at all . Cortactin RNAi sequence 1 and 2 gave the same result . Control cells expressing scrambled RNAi formed normal sealing rings that contained F - actin and cortactin ( Figure 3D ) . Cells depleted for cortactin did not form actin - rich sealing rings . Their morphology resembled that of macro - phages , as assessed by rhodamine - phalloidin ( Figure 3D ) . The Role of Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly on Nonosteoid Surfaces On glass and other nonosteoid surfaces , the most prominent feature of the actin cytoskeleton of osteoclasts is a belt of podosomes just behind the cell edge , with lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia at the cell edge . Podosomes have a central core of F - actin and actin - binding proteins , surrounded by a ring of proteins found in focal adhesions ( Linder and Aepfelbacher , 2003 ) . We observed cortactin staining in podosomes in all Figure 2 . Knockdown of cortactin in osteoclasts . ( A ) Infectivity rate , based on GFP expression , as a function of viral titer . Macrophages were infected with lentivirus expressing a cortactin RNAi knockdown sequence ( 1 ) or a control scrambled RNAi sequence . The RNAi plasmid expressed GFP independently . ( B ) FACS - sorted macrophages were cultured on glass in osteoclast medium . Viability was assessed by phase - contrast morphology and by substrate attachment . ( C ) Level of cortactin in knockdown cells , by immunoblot . Infected and FACS - sorted macrophages were differentiated into osteoclasts for 5 d in culture . The samples are the control scrambled RNAi sequence , the cortactin knockdown RNAi sequence 1 , and the cortactin knockdown RNAi sequence 2 . Capping protein (cid:2) 2 is a loading control . ( D ) Anti - cortactin immunoﬂuorescence of cortactin in osteoclasts expressing control RNAi or knockdown RNAi sequence 1 , plated on glass . The level of ﬂuorescence in the knockdown cells was similar to that seen for controls without ﬁrst antibody . GFP accumulates in the nuclei of infected cells . Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly Vol . 17 , July 2006 2885 mature osteoclasts ( Figure 4A ) , along with F - actin and Arp2 / 3 complex , assessed by rhodamine - phalloidin and anti - Arp3 staining , respectively ( Figure 4 , A and B ) . Depletion of cortactin caused an essentially complete loss of podosomes , as revealed by rhodamine - phalloidin ﬂuores - cence and phase - contrast microscopy ( Figure 5A ) . The area where podosomes were lost showed weak diffuse F - actin staining , when the gain was increased , and the phase - con - trast image had a ground - glass appearance . These features are consistent with the presence of an actin ﬁlament network that excludes vesicles . This phenotype was rescued by ex - pression of RNAi - resistant wild - type cortactin expression , as described below , which conﬁrms the speciﬁcity of the knockdown effects . We asked whether cortactin - depleted cells had short - lived podosomes by performing time - lapse phase - contrast movies ( Supplemental Movies 1 and 2 ) . In control cells , podosomes looked like a belt of phase - dark puncta a short distance from Figure 3 . Cortactin - depleted osteoclasts are viable and differentiate on bone , but they fail to resorb bone or form sealing rings . ( A ) Cell viability . Macrophages expressing scrambled or cortactin RNAi sequence 1 were plated on dentine slices and differentiated into oste - oclasts for 8 d . Cells were counted on day 1 and day 8 . ( B ) Osteoclast differentiation . Cells on dentine as in A were stained for an oste - oclast - speciﬁc marker , TRAP . RNAi control and knockdown sequence 1 samples are shown . The number of cells and the degree of TRAP staining is similar . ( C ) Bone resorption . After removal of osteoclasts , dentine slices were stained with toluidine blue solution to reveal resorption pits . Pits seem dark by trans - mitted light microscopy . Control cells pro - duced pits , and knockdown cells showed no evidence of resorption . ( D ) Actin sealing ring formation . Osteoclasts on dentine were stained with rhodamine - phalloidin and anti - cortactin antibody . Control osteoclasts formed actin rings , and knockdown cells did not . Rep - resentative examples are shown . Figure 4 . Cortactin , actin , and Arp2 / 3 com - plex localization to podosomes . Osteoclasts on glass were costained for cortactin and F - actin , or Arp3 and actin . ( A ) Low - and high - magni - ﬁcation ﬂuorescence images of osteoclasts stainedwithanti - cortactinantibodyandrhoda - mine - phalloidin . ( B ) Higher magniﬁcation im - ages of the periphery of two adjacent oste - oclasts stained with anti - Arp3 and anti - actin antibodies . In all images , podosomes look like punctate , ﬂuorescent structures . Diffuse stain - ing for actin , cortactin , and Arp3 is observed between podosomes . S . Tehrani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2886 the cell edge . Characteristic of podosomes , the puncta ap - peared and disappeared on a time scale of minutes , and they did not move relative to the substrate ( Supplemental Movie 1 ) . Cortactin - depleted cells had no podosomes , and the area had a ground - glass appearance ( Figure 5A and Supplemen - tal Movie 2 , respectively ) . We asked how well the presence of cortactin correlated with the presence of podosomes , by infecting cells with different amounts of virus . As the viral titer increased , the percentage of cells displaying cortactin staining decreased . The percentage of cells with podosomes also decreased in a similar manner , indicating a correlation between the pres - ence of cortactin and podosomes ( Figure 5 , B and C ) . We asked whether other aspects of actin - based motility were affected by cortactin depletion . Lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial structures were seen at the cell edge of cortactin - depleted cells by rhodamine - phalloidin staining and phase - contrast imaging of ﬁxed preparations ( Figure 5A ) and by time - lapse phase - contrast imaging of live cells ( Supplemen - tal Movies 1 and 2 and Figure 6A ) . Compared with control Figure 5 . Cortactin depletion results in loss of podosomes in osteoclasts . ( A ) Fluorescence and phase - contrast images of osteoclasts stained with anti - cortactin antibodies and rhodamine - phalloidin after infection with lentivirus expressing a control scrambled RNAi ( top ) or cortactin RNAi sequence 1 or 2 ( middle and bottom , respectively ) . The level of ﬂuorescence in the anti - cortactin images of cells depleted for cortactin was the same as that seen in cells stained with second antibody alone ( our unpublished data ) . The F - actin images on the left were captured at a gain setting optimal for observing podosomes . The F - actin images on the right are high magniﬁcations of the boxed areas , collected with a higher gain setting , which reveals that the knockdown cells have a persisting presence of F - actin in the region that would be occupied by podosomes , along with lamellipodia - and ﬁlopodia - like structures at the cell edge . ( B ) The percentage of cells displaying immunoﬂuorescence staining for cortactin as a function of lentiviral titer for control and knockdown cell samples . Samples were assessed visually using ﬂuorescence microscopy . Cells displaying any detectable cortactin staining above background were included as positive . ( C ) The percentage of cells displaying podosomes as a function of lentiviral titer for control and knockdown cell samples . Samples were assessed visually using rhodamine - phalloidin staining and ﬂuorescence microscopy . Cells displaying any number of podosomes were included as positive , as assessed by rhodamine - phalloidin staining . Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly Vol . 17 , July 2006 2887 cells , cortactin - depleted cells showed a slight increase in the ratio of lamellipodia to ﬁlopodia in the phase - contrast mov - ies . The movies also revealed phase - light and phase - dark vesicles undergoing rapid saltatory motion in a region just behind the podosome area , with no obvious effect from cortactin depletion ( Figure 6A ) . The overall shape and size of the osteoclasts on glass were not changed by cortactin depletion , based on phase - contrast light microscopy and SEM images . SEM showed ﬁlopodia - like structures and membrane protrusions on the dorsal surface of knockdown and control cells ( Figure 6B ) . Overall , control and knock - down cells were relatively similar in these other manifesta - tions of actin assembly and actin - based motility . We asked whether RANKL - induced osteoclast differenti - ation occurred normally in cells depleted for cortactin . RANKL signaling results in the expression of a number of osteoclast - speciﬁc proteins . Control and cortactin - depleted cells expressed c - Fos , c - Src , NFATc1 and (cid:2) - 3 integrin upon RANKL treatment , all of which are markers of osteoclast maturation not found in macrophages ( Figure 6C ) . Cell fu - sion also occurred , which is characteristic of osteoclast dif - ferentiation , with no apparent difference in the average number of nuclei per cell between control and knockdown cells ( Figure 2D ; our unpublished data ) . Cortactin Is an Early Component for Podosome Belt Formation To understand how cortactin depletion affects podosome dynamics , we examined the assembly and disassembly of podosomes . When a cell edge was advancing , a single belt of podosomes was generally observed , in the area just behind the cell edge ( Supplemental Movie 1 ) . The belt was several podosomes wide . New podosomes formed at the peripheral , outer , edge of the belt , whereas podosomes disappeared from the central , inner , edge of the belt . The lifetime of a podosome was (cid:4) 2 min . These ﬁndings are consistent with previous studies ( Destaing et al . , 2003 ) . In contrast , when a cell was stationary , we often observed two belts of podosomes separated by 1 – 2 (cid:4) m ( Figure 7A and Supplemental Movie 3 ) . Alone , each belt resembled a single belt described above , in terms of the number , arrangement , and behavior of the individual podosomes . Each belt moved outward , in the manner of single belts . The key difference was in their life cycle . At some point in time , the outer belt disappeared , because all its podosomes disassembled , and a new inner belt appeared , with podosomes assembling de novo . The inner belt would move out , and then the cycle would repeat . Thus , when two belts of podosomes were present , the inner belt was newer than the outer one , in every case . In ﬁxed cell preparations , costained for cortactin and F - actin , the inner , newer belt had less intense rhodamine - phalloidin staining than did the outer belt , and this differ - ence was reﬂected in the darkness of the podosomes in the phase - contrast images ( Figure 7A ) . In contrast , cortactin stained both belts equally well , suggesting that cortactin occurs early in the life of a podosome belt . We asked whether a similar trend in cortactin : F - actin ratio could be observed by comparing individual podosomes within a single belt . In this case , new podosomes are those on the outer edge of the belt . We measured the ﬂuorescence intensities of cortactin and F - actin for individual podosomes in double - stained images ( Figure 7B ) . We calculated the ratio of cortactin : F - actin ﬂuorescence for each podosome , measured its distance from the cell edge and plotted the average ratio versus the distance ( Figure 7 , C and D ) . Over - all , the curves showed no consistent trend up or down , even Figure 6 . Effect of cortactin depletion on podosomes , membrane protrusions , and osteoclast maturation . ( A ) Membrane and cell edge dynamics in time - lapse phase - contrast microscopy movies of osteoclasts expressing scrambled or cortactin RNAi sequence 2 . These images are frames from Supplemental Movies 1 and 2 . Podosomes are seen as phase - dark puncta just behind the cell edge in control cells . Cortactin - depleted cells show no podosomes . Control and cortactin - depleted cells exhibit dynamic membrane protrusions , including lamellipodia ( white arrows ) . Rapidly moving phase - light and phase - dark vesicles are seen farther back from the cell edge in control and knockdown cells ( black arrowheads ) . These vesicles may be endocytic . ( B ) Scanning electron microscopy of osteoclasts expressing scrambled or cortactin RNAi sequence 1 . Control and cortactin - depleted cells show ﬁlopodia - like structures and dorsal membrane protrusions . ( C ) Immunoblot of osteoclast markers in cells expressing control scrambled RNAi , knockdown sequences 1 or knock - down sequence 2 . Pyk2 is a loading control . All four osteoclast markers tested are present in control and cortactin - depleted cell samples . S . Tehrani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2888 when the curves were aligned at the starting point ( Figure 7D ) . That a difference is seen when comparing two belts , and not podosomes within one belt , may reﬂect the spatial reg - ulation of the assembly process or the magnitude of the temporal differences in age . Because cortactin localized to nascent podosome belts and cortactin depletion resulted in the loss of podosomes , we asked whether other podosome components were able to localize in a podosome - like pattern despite the absence of cortactin and F - actin . Dynamin2 has been found in podo - somes of osteoclasts and RSV - transformed cells ( Ochoa et al . , 2000 ) , and the SH3 domain of cortactin can bind directly to the proline - rich region of dynamin ( Weed and Parsons , 2001 ) . N - WASp localizes to podosomes of Src - transformed ﬁbroblasts ( Mizutani et al . , 2002 ) , and cortactin can bind and activate N - WASp in vitro ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) . WASp is important for podosome formation in macrophages ( Linder et al . , 1999 ) and osteoclasts ( Calle et al . , 2004 ) . Here , dy - namin2 , N - WASp and WASp localized in a punctate pattern with podosomes in control osteoclasts ( Figure 8 ) . Dynamin2 showed preferential staining of the inner podosome belt , when two belts were present ( Figure 8A ) . On cortactin de - pletion , the distribution of all three proteins was diffuse in the cytoplasm , without any appreciable punctate podosome pattern ( Figure 8 , A – C ) . Thus , assembly of dynamin , N - WASp , and WASp at the podosome either depends on or , more likely , is cooperative with that of cortactin and F - actin . Expression of Cortactin Mutants in Control and Knockdown Cells To investigate the biochemical basis of cortactin’s function in osteoclasts , we expressed cortactin mutants using an N - terminal FLAG tag and a retroviral system ( Figure 9A ) . The 3YF mutant of cortactin contained 3 tyrosine - to - phenylala - nine mutations at residues Y421 , Y466 , and Y482 , which are known to be phosphorylated downstream of Src in cells and to account for essentially all of the Src - induced tyrosine phos - phorylation of cortactin in cells ( Head et al . , 2003 ) . The SH3 mutant of cortactin contained a tryptophan - to - lysine mutation at W525 , which causes loss of binding to proline - rich ligands ( Kinley et al . , 2003 ) . First , we expressed the cortactin mutants in osteoclasts that had normal levels of endogenous cortactin . The level of exogenously expressed FLAG - tagged cortactin was two - to threefold higher than that of endogenous cortactin , based on anti - cortactin immunoblots ( Figure 9B ) . The SH3 point mu - Figure 7 . Cortactin and F - actin in podosome belt mat - uration . ( A ) An example of anti - cortactin and F - actin ( rhodamine - phalloidin ) staining of a cell region with two podosome belts . Cortactin ﬂuorescence intensity is similar in the two belts , whereas the F - actin ﬂuores - cence and phase - contrast darkness are more pro - nounced in the outer belt ( black arrow ) than in the inner belt ( white arrow ) . ( B ) Podosome belt formation in time - lapse phase - contrast microscopy . Images are frames from Supplemental Movie 3 . These movies re - veal that the outer belt ( black arrow ) is older , and the inner belt ( white arrow ) is younger . ( C ) Quantitation of anti - cortactin and F - actin ( rhodamine - phalloidin ) ﬂuo - rescence of individual podosomes within a single belt . Boxes were placed around podosomes , and pixel ﬂuo - rescence values were determined . Boxes 1 – 4 are exam - ples of podosomes (cid:4) 0 . 1 , 5 , 10 , and 15 (cid:4) m from the cell edge ( arrow ) . ( D ) Fluorescence intensities for multiple podosomes within a single belt were averaged and plotted as a function of distance from the cell edge . Each plot of the 12 curves represents the averaged podosome intensity ratios from a single osteoclast . The graph on the left plots the actual ratios . For the graph on the right , the curves were adjusted up or down to begin at the same point . Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly Vol . 17 , July 2006 2889 tant of cortactin migrated slower than wild - type cortactin in the SDS gel , as seen previously ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) . Overexpression of wild - type cortactin in osteoclasts did not signiﬁcantly alter the percentage of cells containing po - dosomes , and the cells looked normal by phase - contrast microscopy and phalloidin staining ( Figure 9 , C and D ) . Expression of either the SH3 mutant or the 3YF mutant of cortactin resulted in an (cid:4) 20 – 30 % statistically signiﬁcant decrease in the number of osteoclasts with podosomes ( Fig - ure 9C ) . In cells with podosomes , the FLAG - tagged SH3 and 3YF mutant cortactins localized normally to podosomes , as did FLAG - tagged wild - type cortactin ( Figure 9D ) . Biochem - ically , cortactin is a monomer ( Weaver et al . , 2002 ) , so the ability of the FLAG - tagged mutants to localize normally is probably not due to association with endogenous wild - type cortactin . Thus , the SH3 and 3YF cortactin mutants caused small but statistically signiﬁcant dominant negative effects on podosome assembly . Next , we tested the ability of the mutants to rescue podo - some assembly in cells depleted of cortactin by knockdown . These FLAG - tagged cortactin rescue expression constructs were rendered resistant to the cortactin RNAi knockdown sequence 1 by three codon - neutral nucleotide changes . Ex - pressed in 293T cells , the protein levels for the mutants and wild - type cortactin rescue constructs were similar to each other and near that of endogenous cortactin , based on anti - cortactin immunoblots ( Figure 10A ) . Primary macrophages were infected with control and cortactin knockdown lenti - virus and sorted for GFP expression as described above . Those cells were then infected with retroviral cortactin ex - pression constructs . The retroviral constructs contained a puromycin resistance marker , which allowed us to select for Figure 8 . Localization of dynamin2 , N - WASp , and WASp in control and cortactin - depleted osteoclasts . ( A ) Dynamin2 localized predominantly to the inner podo - some belt in osteoclasts expressing control scrambled RNAi . Dynamin2 was not observed at the cell edge in cells expressing cortactin RNAi sequence 1 . N - WASp ( B ) and WASp ( C ) localized equally well to the inner and outer podosome belts in control osteoclasts ex - pressing scrambled RNAi . This localization was lost , and the staining was diffuse after cortactin depletion ( cortactin RNAi sequence 2 in B and cortactin RNAi sequence 1 in C ) . Black arrows point to the older outer belts , and white arrows point to the new inner belts . S . Tehrani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2890 infected cells . Puromycin - resistant cells were differentiated into osteoclasts , and the presence of podosomes was as - sessed . In cells expressing control scrambled RNAi , the 3YF and SH3 cortactin mutants had small dominant negative effects ( Figure 10B , left ) similar to those described above for cells without RNAi ( Figure 9C ) . Cortactin knockdown cells in - fected with an empty rescue expression construct had a greatly decreased percentage of osteoclasts with podosomes , as expected , and expression of wild - type cortactin restored Figure 9 . Effects of overexpression of cortactin mutants on podosome formation . ( A ) Diagram illustrating the nature of the cortactin mutants . All constructs included an N - terminal FLAG tag . 3YF contains three tyrosine to phenylalanine mutations ( residues 421 , 466 , and 482 ) , and SH3† contains the mutation W525K in the SH3 domain . ( B ) Anti - cortactin immunoblot of osteoclasts expressing the cortactin mutants . The FLAG - tagged cortactins run higher than endogenous cortactin , and the SH3 W525K mutant is anomalously high in SDS gels , as seen in previous studies . Capping protein (cid:2) 2 is a loading control . ( C ) Percentage of osteoclasts with podosomes . Osteoclasts expressing the cortactin mutant rescue constructs were ﬁxed , stained with rhodamine - phalloidin and viewed by ﬂuorescence microscopy to visualize podosomes . Error bars are SE of proportion , and asterisks indicate statistical difference ( p (cid:6) 0 . 01 ) compared with vector and wild type . Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by the binomial probability distribution function . The number of cells was (cid:5) 35 in each sample . ( D ) Osteoclasts expressing cortactin mutants were ﬁxed and costained with rhodamine - phalloidin and anti - FLAG . Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly Vol . 17 , July 2006 2891 that value to near normal levels ( Figure 10B , right ) . The rescued cells appeared normal in phase - contrast and rhoda - mine - phalloidin ﬂuorescence images ( Figure 10C ) . That wild - type cortactin rescues conﬁrms that the cortactin knockdown phenotype is not a nonspeciﬁc effect of the RNAi sequence . Figure 10 . Rescue of cortactin knockdown phenotype with cortactin mutants . ( A ) Expression of RNAi - resis - tant FLAG - tagged cortactin constructs in 293T cells ex - pressing knockdown or control RNAi . Anti - cortactin antibody was used , revealing absence of cortactin in cells expressing knockdown RNAi , and restoration of cortactin in knockdown cells expressing FLAG - tagged wild - type and mutant cortactin constructs . ( B ) Presence of podosomes in cells expressing rescue constructs . Cells expressing control scrambled RNAi ( left ) or cor - tactin knockdown RNAi sequence 1 ( right ) were in - fected with RNAi - resistant , FLAG - tagged cortactin res - cue constructs . The percentage of cells with podosomes is plotted , based on rhodamine - phalloidin staining of the differentiated osteoclasts . Error bars are SE of pro - portion , and asterisks indicate statistical difference ( p (cid:6) 0 . 01 ) compared with vector and wild type . Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by the binomial probabil - ity distribution function . ( C ) Fluorescence and phase - contrast images of osteoclasts expressing RNAi and cortactin mutants , ﬁxed , and stained with rhodamine - phalloidin and anti - FLAG . The top half is cells express - ing control scrambled RNAi , and the bottom half is cells expressing cortactin knockdown RNAi sequence 1 . S . Tehrani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2892 In contrast , the 3YF cortactin mutant did not rescue the cortactin knockdown phenotype , producing results similar to those for empty vector ( Figure 10B , right ) . The SH3 mu - tant of cortactin was able to rescue , at a level less than but not signiﬁcantly different from that of wild type ( Figure 10B , right ) . We asked how the mutant cortactins localized , by anti - FLAG staining . In cells expressing control scrambled RNAi , the cortactin mutants localized to podosomes ( Figure 10C ) , as seen for cells not expressing RNAi ( Figure 9D ) . In cortactin knockdown cells , 3YF - cortactin was localized dif - fusely , whereas wild - type and SH3 mutant cortactin local - ized to podosomes ( Figure 10C ) . DISCUSSION We discovered that cortactin is necessary in osteoclasts for actin ring assembly , bone resorption , and podosome assem - bly . The knockdown phenotypes were speciﬁc , strong , and highly penetrant . A great deal is known about cortactin’s biochemical properties to promote actin assembly via Arp2 / 3 complex and to act as a scaffold for signaling mol - ecules in vitro ( Weed et al . , 2000 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 , 2002 ) . However , the function of cortactin in cells has remained somewhat elusive . The only study of loss of cortactin func - tion in an intact organism is in Drosophila , where complete loss - of - function mutations of the sole cortactin gene had only minor effects , producing smaller F - actin ring canals of germline cells and impaired migration of border cells in oogenesis ( Somogyi and Rorth , 2004 ) . In cultured cells , a variety of stud - ies point to a role for cortactin in actin - based processes such as pathogen invasion ( Lambotin et al . , 2005 ; Selbach and Backert , 2005 ) , endocytosis ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ; Sauvonnet et al . , 2005 ) , post - Golgi transport ( Cao et al . , 2005 ) , cell adhesion ( El Sayegh et al . , 2004 ; Helwani et al . , 2004 ) , and lamellipodial persistence ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ) . In these studies , cortactin was generally found to associate with sites of actin assembly , and , in some cases , expression of cortactin mutants or knockdown of cortactin produced partial loss of actin - based motility or actin cytoskeleton assembly . We hypothesized that cortactin might have a more crucial role in osteoclasts because cortactin is expressed in oste - oclasts ( Hiura et al . , 1995 ) , and osteoclasts are derived from hematopoietic cell precursors that express the cortactin ho - mologue HS1 but not cortactin itself ( Miglarese et al . , 1994 ) . Here , we found that cortactin expression was indeed in - duced upon osteoclast differentiation . In contrast , the ex - pression of HS1 and other Arp2 / 3 activators , including WASp - family members , did not change with osteoclast dif - ferentiation . To test our hypothesis , we depleted cortactin from oste - oclasts using RNAi delivered with lentivirus . Cortactin - de - pleted osteoclasts plated on bone did not form actin - based sealing rings and were completely deﬁcient in bone resorp - tion . We suspect that the actin sealing ring defect is the cause of the failure in bone resorption , but we cannot rule out the possibility that secretion of acid and proteases may have been decreased . On nonosteoid surfaces , osteoclasts form actin - based podosomes , and we found that cortactin deple - tion led to the absence of podosomes , based on rhodamine - phalloidin staining of ﬁxed cells and phase - contrast imaging of live cells . Thus , cortactin is necessary for podosome as - sembly in this setting . Recently , cortactin expression was also shown to be necessary for the podosome formation that results from phorbol ester treatment of the A7r5 line of vascular smooth muscle cells ( Zhou et al . , 2006 ) . Whether the mechanisms for actin assembly in sealing rings and podosomes are similar is an open question in osteoclast biology . Early studies suggested the hypothesis that podosomes might represent precursors of sealing rings , based on the localization of podosome - like structures around resorption pits in ﬁxed cells and on certain similarities in molecular composition ( Kanehisa et al . , 1990 ; Lakkakorpi and Vaananen , 1991 ) . In contrast , in a recent study of living osteoclasts on mineralized substratum , actin sealing rings were observed by GFP - actin imaging , but podosomes were not seen ( Saltel et al . , 2004 ) . Inhibition of Rho did convert the sealing ring into a belt of podosomes ( Saltel et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting that podosomes might be rapidly and efﬁciently incorporated into the sealing ring by the action of Rho . Our results here show that the sealing ring and podosomes both require cortactin to form , providing further evidence for their relationship . Perhaps the most remarkable ﬁnding from our study was the speciﬁcity of the actin assembly defect caused by the loss of cortactin in osteoclasts on glass . The cell edge was highly dynamic in cortactin - depleted cells , in phase - contrast mov - ies . Lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia were both present and dy - namic . The cortactin - depleted cells showed a slight increase in the amount of lamellipodial activity , relative to ﬁlopodia . In a detailed study of lamellipodia in the HT1080 ﬁbrosar - coma cell line , cortactin depletion decreased the persistence time of lamellipodia by half , with no effect on protrusion speed , protrusion distance , or retraction speed ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ) . Given the proximity of podosomes and lamellipodia at the cell edge of the osteoclast , and that both seem to be nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex , we ﬁnd it remarkable that podosomes are completely absent , whereas lamellipodia are relatively normal . Therefore , different regulators of Arp2 / 3 complex may have distinct functions at close locations within one cell . A priori , cortactin might promote podosome actin assem - bly either by increasing actin ﬁlament polymerization or by decreasing depolymerization . In vitro , cortactin activates Arp2 / 3 complex for actin nucleation , which increases the rate of polymerization , but cortactin also stabilizes actin ﬁlament branches formed by Arp2 / 3 complex , which de - creases the rate of depolymerization ( Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . Cortactin appears before ﬁlamentous actin when podosomes assemble in phorbol ester - stimulated A7r5 smooth muscle cells ( Webb et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that cortactin promotes actin polymerization . Two results from our study also sup - port this idea . First , in time - lapse movies of cortactin - de - pleted cells , podosomes were not observed . If the primary role of cortactin was to stabilize actin ﬁlaments in podo - somes , then one might have expected to see podosomes form at normal rates but disassemble rapidly . Second , in cases where cells had two belts of podosomes at their pe - riphery , cortactin accumulation seemed to precede that of F - actin , based on differential staining of the newer , inner belt . In contrast , when we compared old and new podo - somes within one belt , in cases where cells only had one belt , the ratio of cortactin to F - actin was the same . Perhaps the age differences between old and new podosomes are greater when a second belt is created . A number of other molecular components , in addition to cortactin , are known to play important roles in the assembly of podosomes and the function of osteoclasts ( reviewed by Linder and Aepfelbacher , 2003 ) . Integrins , signaling pro - teins , and actin cytoskeleton components have all been im - plicated in various studies . For example , gelsolin is an actin ﬁlament severing protein found in the podosome , and oste - oclasts from gelsolin - deﬁcient mice have no podosomes ( Chellaiah et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , WASp knockout mice have moderate deﬁcits in the number of podosome - forming Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly Vol . 17 , July 2006 2893 osteoclasts ( Calle et al . , 2004 ) . In this study , WASp - deﬁcient osteoclasts on bone showed a decrease in the area of bone surface resorbed , whereas other parameters , such as volume and depth of resorption pits , were unaffected . In addition , calpain , which can proteolyze the podosome proteins talin , Pyk2 and ﬁlamin , has been found to be important for oste - oclast activity ( Marzia et al . , 2006 ) . Dynamin localizes to osteoclast podosomes , and expres - sion of dynamin mutants can inhibit osteoclast activity ( Bruzzaniti et al . , 2005 ) . In vitro , dynamin and cortactin can bind directly to each other , and their interaction can cause actin assembly on lipid vesicles , in the presence of Arp2 / 3 ( Schafer et al . , 2002 ) . Here , we observed dynamin staining of podosomes , with increased staining of the inner younger belt , when cells had two belts , consistent with dynamin being important for podosome assembly . Dynamin binds to the SH3 domain of cortactin ( Schafer et al . , 2002 ) , as do several other proteins , including N - WASp ( Kowalski et al . , 2005 ) , faciogenital dysplasia ( Kim et al . , 2004 ) , WASp - interacting protein ( Kinley et al . , 2003 ) , and CD2AP / CIN85 ( Lynch et al . , 2003 ) . In osteoclasts , the phys - iologically relevant binding partners of cortactin’s SH3 do - main have yet to be deﬁned . Overexpression of a C - terminal fragment of cortactin , which included the SH3 domain , in - hibited podosome formation in smooth muscle cells ( Webb et al . , 2006 ) , presumably by causing nonproductive interac - tions with cortactin binding partners . Here , we tested an SH3 point mutation ( W525K ) in full - length cortactin for the ability to rescue the osteoclast knockdown phenotype . The mutant was able to rescue , at a value less than , but not signif - icantly different from , that of wild - type cortactin . When ex - pressed in control cells with normal levels of endogenous cortactin , this SH3 mutant of cortactin had a modest domi - nant negative effect . Therefore , the SH3 domain may have a minor role in cortactin function . The cortactin SH3 mutant localized to podosomes , so the SH3 domain does not target cortactin to podosomes . Instead , the SH3 domain may re - cruit other proteins . This is consistent with studies in ﬁbro - blasts , in which the N - terminal acidic Arp2 / 3 - binding do - main and the F - actin binding domain of cortactin are each necessary and together sufﬁcient for cortactin localization to lamellipodia ( Weed et al . , 2000 ) . The role of cortactin’s tyrosine phosphorylation , down - stream of Src , has been an important question . Here , we found that the three tyrosines targeted for phosphorylation by Src are necessary for podosome formation in osteoclasts , based on failure of a 3YF mutant to suppress the knockdown phenotypes . When expressed in cells with endogenous cor - tactin , this mutant had only a small dominant negative effect , and the mutant protein localized to podosomes , sug - gesting that the tyrosine residues have a primary or direct role in cortactin function . Consistent with our results , the 3YF cortactin mutant failed to rescue a cortactin knockdown defect in endothelial cells assayed for the ability to support leukocyte transmigration ( Yang et al . , 2006 ) . In conclusion , cortactin - depleted osteoclasts fail to form actin - based sealing rings and fail to resorb bone , showing that cortactin - based actin assembly is necessary for the seal - ing ring to function . On glass , actin - based podosomes do not form , which supports the notion that podosomes and seal - ing rings have molecular mechanisms in common . In other respects , cortactin - depleted osteoclasts are remarkably nor - mal in terms of actin assembly at the cell edge . A 3YF mutant of cortactin localizes normally but fails to restore podosome formation in cortactin - depleted cells , demonstrating the im - portance of cortactin’s tyrosine phosphorylation down - stream of Src . In contrast , the SH3 domain of cortactin is largely dispensable in this context . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to Drs . Ken Blumer and Sheila Stewart for helpful insight and discussion and to Dr . Stewart for assistance with lentivirus . We thank Dr . Frank Gertler for the lentivirus vector . Dr . Scott Weed kindly provided cortactin antibodies . This work was supported in part by National Research Service Award , Medical Scientist , GM - 07200 ( to S . T . ) ; National Institutes of Health Grant GM - 38542 ( to J . A . C . ) ; and National Institutes of Health Grants AR - 48812 and AR - 46852 ( to F . P . R . ) . The Siteman Cancer Center is supported in part by National Cancer Institute Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA91842 . REFERENCES Bruzzaniti , A . , Neff , L . , Sanjay , A . , Horne , W . C . , De Camilli , P . , and Baron , R . ( 2005 ) . Dynamin forms a Src kinase - sensitive complex with Cbl and regulates podosomes and osteoclast activity . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 3301 – 3313 . Bryce , N . S . , Clark , E . S . , Leysath , J . L . , Currie , J . D . , Webb , D . J . , and Weaver , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1276 – 1285 . Burns , S . , Thrasher , A . J . , Blundell , M . P . , Machesky , L . , and Jones , G . E . ( 2001 ) . Conﬁguration of human dendritic cell cytoskeleton by Rho GTPases , the WAS protein , and differentiation . Blood 98 , 1142 – 1149 . Calle , Y . , Jones , G . E . , Jagger , C . , Fuller , K . , Blundell , M . P . , Chow , J . , Chambers , T . , and Thrasher , A . J . ( 2004 ) . WASp deﬁciency in mice results in failure to form osteoclast sealing zones and defects in bone resorption . Blood 103 , 3552 – 3561 . Cao , H . , Weller , S . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Huang , B . , Chen , J . L . , Stamnes , M . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2005 ) . Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin - dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 483 – 492 . Chellaiah , M . , Kizer , N . , Silva , M . , Alvarez , U . , Kwiatkowski , D . , and Hruska , K . A . ( 2000 ) . Gelsolin deﬁciency blocks podosome assembly and produces increased bone mass and strength . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 665 – 678 . Destaing , O . , Saltel , F . , Geminard , J . C . , Jurdic , P . , and Bard , F . ( 2003 ) . Podosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in oste - oclasts expressing actin - green ﬂuorescent protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 407 – 416 . El Sayegh , T . Y . , Arora , P . D . , Laschinger , C . A . , Lee , W . , Morrison , C . , Overall , C . M . , Kapus , A . , and McCulloch , C . A . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin associates with N - cadherin adhesions and mediates intercellular adhesion strengthening in ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 117 , 5117 – 5131 . Feng , X . , Novack , D . V . , Faccio , R . , Ory , D . S . , Aya , K . , Boyer , M . I . , McHugh , K . P . , Ross , F . P . , and Teitelbaum , S . L . ( 2001 ) . A Glanzmann’s mutation in beta 3 integrin speciﬁcally impairs osteoclast function . J . Clin . Investig . 107 , 1137 – 1144 . Gimona , M . , Kaverina , I . , Resch , G . P . , Vignal , E . , and Burgstaller , G . ( 2003 ) . Calponin repeats regulate actin ﬁlament stability and formation of podo - somes in smooth muscle cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 2482 – 2491 . Head , J . A . , Jiang , D . , Li , M . , Zorn , L . J . , Schaefer , E . M . , Parsons , J . T . , and Weed , S . A . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation requires Rac1 activity and association with the cortical actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 , 3216 – 3229 . Helwani , F . M . , Kovacs , E . M . , Paterson , A . D . , Verma , S . , Ali , R . G . , Fanning , A . S . , Weed , S . A . , and Yap , A . S . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin is necessary for E - cadherin - mediated contact formation and actin reorganization . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 899 – 910 . Hiura , K . , Lim , S . S . , Little , S . P . , Lin , S . , and Sato , M . ( 1995 ) . Differentiation dependent expression of tensin and cortactin in chicken osteoclasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 30 , 272 – 284 . Hurst , I . R . , Zuo , J . , Jiang , J . , and Holliday , L . S . ( 2004 ) . Actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex is required for actin ring formation . J . Bone Miner . Res . 19 , 499 – 506 . Kanehisa , J . , Yamanaka , T . , Doi , S . , Turksen , K . , Heersche , J . N . , Aubin , J . E . , and Takeuchi , H . ( 1990 ) . A band of F - actin containing podosomes is involved in bone resorption by osteoclasts . Bone 11 , 287 – 293 . Kanner , S . B . , Reynolds , A . B . , Vines , R . R . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1990 ) . Mono - clonal antibodies to individual tyrosine - phosphorylated protein substrates of oncogene - encoded tyrosine kinases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 87 , 3328 – 3332 . Kim , K . , Hou , P . , Gorski , J . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Effect of Fgd1 on cortactin in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin assembly . Biochemistry 43 , 2422 – 2427 . S . Tehrani et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2894 Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Bissonette , E . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 , 384 – 393 . Kitamura , D . , Kaneko , H . , Taniuchi , I . , Akagi , K . , Yamamura , K . , and Watanabe , T . ( 1995 ) . Molecular cloning and characterization of mouse HS1 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 208 , 1137 – 1146 . Kowalski , J . R . , Egile , C . , Gil , S . , Snapper , S . B . , Li , R . , and Thomas , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 79 – 87 . Lakkakorpi , P . T . , and Vaananen , H . K . ( 1991 ) . Kinetics of the osteoclast cytoskeleton during the resorption cycle in vitro . J . Bone Miner . Res . 6 , 817 – 826 . Lambotin , M . , Hoffmann , I . , Laran - Chich , M . P . , Nassif , X . , Couraud , P . O . , and Bourdoulous , S . ( 2005 ) . Invasion of endothelial cells by Neisseria menin - gitidis requires cortactin recruitment by a phosphoinositide - 3 - kinase / Rac1 signaling pathway triggered by the lipo - oligosaccharide . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 3805 – 3816 . Lessard , J . L . ( 1988 ) . Two monoclonal antibodies to actin : one muscle selective and one generally reactive . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 10 , 349 – 362 . Linder , S . , and Aepfelbacher , M . ( 2003 ) . Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of invasive cells . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 376 – 385 . Linder , S . , Nelson , D . , Weiss , M . , and Aepfelbacher , M . ( 1999 ) . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates podosomes in primary human macro - phages . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 9648 – 9653 . Lynch , D . K . , Winata , S . C . , Lyons , R . J . , Hughes , W . E . , Lehrbach , G . M . , Wasinger , V . , Corthals , G . , Cordwell , S . , and Daly , R . J . ( 2003 ) . A Cortactin - CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) complex provides a novel link between epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21805 – 21813 . Maa , M . C . , Wilson , L . K . , Moyers , J . S . , Vines , R . R . , Parsons , J . T . , and Parsons , S . J . ( 1992 ) . Identiﬁcation and characterization of a cytoskeleton - associated , epidermal growth factor sensitive pp60c - src substrate . Oncogene 7 , 2429 – 2438 . Marzia , M . , Chiusaroli , R . , Neff , L . , Kim , N . Y . , Chishti , A . H . , Baron , R . , and Horne , W . C . ( 2006 ) . Calpain is required for normal osteoclast function and is downregulated by calcitonin . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 9745 – 9754 . McHugh , K . P . , Hodivala - Dilke , K . , Zheng , M . H . , Namba , N . , Lam , J . , Novack , D . , Feng , X . , Ross , F . P . , Hynes , R . O . , and Teitelbaum , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Mice lacking beta3 integrins are osteosclerotic because of dysfunctional oste - oclasts . J . Clin . Investig . 105 , 433 – 440 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Perrais , D . , and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clath - rin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 – 606 . Miglarese , M . R . , Mannion - Henderson , J . , Wu , H . , Parsons , J . T . , and Bender , T . P . ( 1994 ) . The protein tyrosine kinase substrate cortactin is differentially expressed in murine B lymphoid tumors . Oncogene 9 , 1989 – 1997 . Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2002 ) . Essential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed ﬁbroblasts . Cancer Res . 62 , 669 – 674 . Ochoa , G . C . , et al . ( 2000 ) . A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 377 – 389 . Rubinson , D . A . , et al . ( 2003 ) . A lentivirus - based system to functionally silence genes in primary mammalian cells , stem cells and transgenic mice by RNA interference . Nat . Genet . 33 , 401 – 406 . Saltel , F . , Destaing , O . , Bard , F . , Eichert , D . , and Jurdic , P . ( 2004 ) . Apatite - mediated actin dynamics in resorbing osteoclasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 5231 – 5241 . Sauvonnet , N . , Dujeancourt , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin and dynamin are required for the clathrin - independent endocytosis of gammac cytokine receptor . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 155 – 163 . Schafer , D . A . , Korshunova , Y . O . , Schroer , T . A . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 1994 ) . Differential localization and sequence analysis of capping protein beta - sub - unit isoforms of vertebrates . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 453 – 465 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1852 – 1857 . Selbach , M . , and Backert , S . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin : an Achilles’ heel of the actin cytoskeleton targeted by pathogens . Trends Microbiol . 13 , 181 – 189 . Somogyi , K . , and Rorth , P . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin modulates cell migration and ring canal morphogenesis during Drosophila oogenesis . Mech . Dev . 121 , 57 – 64 . Soriano , P . , Montgomery , C . , Geske , R . , and Bradley , A . ( 1991 ) . Targeted disruption of the c - src proto - oncogene leads to osteopetrosis in mice . Cell . 64 , 693 – 702 . Takeshita , S . , Kaji , K . , and Kudo , A . ( 2000 ) . Identiﬁcation and characterization of the new osteoclast progenitor with macrophage phenotypes being able to differentiate into mature osteoclasts . J . Bone Miner . Res . 15 , 1477 – 1488 . Vaananen , H . K . , Zhao , H . , Mulari , M . , and Halleen , J . M . ( 2000 ) . The cell biology of osteoclast function . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 377 – 381 . Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 . Webb , B . A . , Eves , R . , and Mak , A . S . ( 2006 ) . Cortactin regulates podosome formation : roles of the protein interaction domains . Exp . Cell Res . 312 , 760 – 769 . Weed , S . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin : coupling membrane dynam - ics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 20 , 6418 – 6434 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 . Welch , M . D . , DePace , A . H . , Verma , S . , Iwamatsu , A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved subunits and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin ﬁlament assem - bly . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 375 – 384 . Yang , L . , Kowalski , J . R . , Zhan , X . , Thomas , S . M . , and Luscinskas , F . W . ( 2006 ) . Endothelial cell cortactin phosphorylation by Src contributes to poly - morphonuclear leukocyte transmigration in vitro . Circ . Res . 98 , 394 – 402 . Yasuda , H . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Osteoclast differentiation factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin / osteoclastogenesis - inhibitory factor and is identical to TRANCE / RANKL . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 3597 – 3602 . Zhou , S . , Webb , B . A . , Eves , R . , and Mak , A . S . ( 2006 ) . Effects of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin on podosome formation in A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells . Am . J . Physiol . 290 , C463 – C471 . Cortactin in Osteoclast Actin Assembly Vol . 17 , July 2006 2895