GSS Meeting Productivity and Participation Equity : A U . S . & Mexico Cross - Cultural Field Study Roberto J . Mejias College of Business Administration , The University of Oklahoma , Norman , Oklahoma , 73019 Douglas R Vogel Karl Eller Graduate School of Management , Univmity of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona , 8572 1 Morgan M . Shepherd College of Business , University of Colorado , Colorado Springs , Colorado , 80933 Abstract This study is a cross - cultural GSS $ eM investigation which compared group productivity levels and participation equity perceptions within and between U . S . and Mexican groups . Two identical JieM studies were undertaken at matched US . rrnd Mexican sites to measure the eflects of national culture ( US . and Mexican ) upon group productivity levels and perceptions of participation equity within GSS a d non - GS environments . Across both cultures , results indicate that US . and Mexican GSS groups generated more ideas per participant than trtaditional manual groups . In all but one category , both US . and Mexiccm GSS groups also generated more “unique” or non - redundant ideas per group . A comparison between cultures reported that US . groups generated more comments per participant and more unique ideas per group than Mexican groups when the identiv of the participants was not anoqmous . US . groups reported no diferences in perceived participation equity between treatments , while Mexican GSS groups reported higher perceived participation equiq than Mexican manual groups . A comparison study revealed that Mexican GSS groups perceived higher participation equity levels than US . GSS groups with main eflects recorded for the cultural factor . Introduction With the increasing globalization of many world economies many managers , particularly from multinational corporations ( MNCs ) , must strategically coordinate their operations across culturally diverse environments [ 33 ] . This task is further complicated when group meetings must be integrated between crosscultural project teams whose members may perceive group meetings differently from the traditional North concept of desirable group behavior . Many organizations have increasingly considered the use of group support system ( GSS ) technologv to maximize the effectiveness of these group meetings . The conceptual foundations supporting the applicability of current GSS designs however , have been based upon traditional North American concepts of desirable group behavior [ 53 ] . The vast majority of empirical research regarding GSS technology and its effects on group decision making has been c o d e d to U . S . subjects within U . S . organizations 1441 . Few GSS studies have considered cultural dimensions in their analyses and even fewer have employed empirical data to test their hypotheses [ MI . In view of the significant global developments in IT , this has clearly been a disappointing shortcoming of current IT research . This cross - cuItural field investigation compares the effects of national culture @ e . , U . S . and Mexican ) upon group productivity levels and perceived participation equity in GSS and non - GSS environments . The field studies were conducted at two research sites : the University of Arizona , in Tucson , A r i z o ~ , and ITESM ( Instittito Tecnolbgico y de fitudios Superiores de Monterrey ) in Monterrey , Nuevo Leon , Mexico . The study examined productivity and equity perceptions both within and between national cultures as groups were exposed to three experimental study treatments : GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identified and Manual - Identified treatments . Importance . of Cross - Cultural IT Research Globally , IT has increasingly been utilized by both industrialized nations and , to a lesser degree , by developing nations to support decision making activities [ 33 , 381 . The implementation of U . S . - designed IT for Mexican applications is particularly interesting because its success in Mexico has been shown to affect the proliferation of computing technology in smaller neighboring Latin American countries [ 25 ] . As a consumer , Mexico purchases approximately 65 % of its durable goods from the United States even during periods of economic inflation and currency devaluation . Mexico’s premier technological institute , ITESM , has used Ventana GroupSystemsO software to bring together 469 1060 - 3425197 $ 10 . 00 0 1997 IEEE business and environmental groups to generate robust solutions to their country ' s environmental turbulence . Clearly . the study of IT proliferation in an important developing country such as Mexico may contribute to a better understanding of the implications of computing for the rest of Latin America [ 51 ] . Prior Cross - Cultural GSS Research Historically , IT literature has been directed at understanding how new information technologes are diffused within and across U . S . firms [ 44 ] . Within the IT literature few GSS studies have advanced a theoretical perspective on possible cultural effects [ 44 ] and even fewer studies have employed empirical data to test their assumptions and hypotheses . A review of research [ 7 , 11 , 21 , 28 ] indicates that the majority of GSS studies on group performance have been confined to U . S . subjects within U . S . environments . Only within the last five years , since GSS has been exported across national boundaries , have the issues of " cultural applicability " and " compatibility " surfaced [ 30 , 28 , 53 I . The moderating effect of culture and nationality upon the behavior and attitudes of employees in foreign operatives has been well established by many researchers in numerous early cross cultural studies [ 4 , 19 , 24 , 34 , 37 , 39 , 40 , 541 . Prior research has also found that cultural differences between Asiatic and Western - English speaking cultures can be quite pronounced [ 15 ] . For example , while US . companies extensively use electronic mail , Japanese firms , prefer to utilize FAX more often than US . firms [ 44 ] . Some researchers believe that even preferences for the type of analysis may differ between cultures [ 38 ] . Europeans and Japanese prefer more analytical solutions and normative models while Americans prefer heuristics and descriptive models [ 53 ] . If differences in design preferences for certain models exist between cultures , one would expect observable Merences in performance among GSS groups from Merent cultural environments . Hofstede ' s Model For the current study , Hofstede ' s model of cultural Merentiation was used as a theoretical framework to predict differences in group meeting performance and perceptions that could be attributed to cultural effects . The Hofstede field study [ 16 , 171 included over 53 countries and surveyed over 116 , 000 respondents [ 12 , 131 . Hofstede ' s cultural differentiation model included four dimensions of national culture along which people ' s value systems may vary . These four dimensions were termed power - dmtance , uncertainty - avoidance , indiw dualisbc - collectivisb c , and masculinity - femininity . The power - distance dimension describes the relative distance and relationship between a supervisor and a subordinate . Power - distance is the extent to which a particular culture recognizes the unequal distribution of power ( e . g . boss and subordinate ) in its institutions and organizations . Uncertainty - avoidance is the extent to which members of a particular culture feel uncomfortable or threatened by unknown outcomes . The individualistic - collectivistic dimension refers to the relationship between the individual and his larger environment . Individualistic cultures are more self - reliant and are expected to look after only themselves and their immedate families . Collectivistic cultures have a preference for cohesive social frameworks and avoid confrontation or disagreement among group members [ 53 ] . The masculinity - femininity dimension reveals the relative trade - off between an assertive environment ( masculine ) versus a nurturing ( feminine ) environment [ 53 ] . Research Framework and Hypotheses Based upon the previous GSS literature and Hofstede ' s model of cultural Merentiation [ 16 , 13 the following hypotheses were developed to predict the performance and perceptions af U . S . and Mexican groups . The predictions included comparisons both within and between U . S . and Mexican national cultures . The field study therefore , was divided into two areas of analysis ; a comparison of GSS vs . non - GSS prdctivity and participation perception within each national culture , and between U . S . and Mexican groups . Two groups of hypotheses are proposed Hypothesis Group - A : ( Within Each Culture ) Hypothesis A - 1 : The number of comments generated during group meetings within both the U . S . and Mexican national cultures will be greater in GSS - supported groups than in non - GSS ( manual ) groups . Hypothesis A - 2 : The number of unique ideas generated during groups meetings within both the US . and Mexican national cultures will be greater in GSS - supported groups than in non - GSS groups . Hypothesis A - 3 : Participants from GSS groups within both U . S . and Mexican national cultures will perceive more particiaation e & ty than participants from non - GSS groups . Hypothesis Group - B : ( Between Cultures ) Hypothesis B - 1 : U . S . groups , across all experimental treatments , will generate a greater number of comments during group meetings than Mexican groups . 470 Hypothesis B - 2 : U . S . groups , across all experimental treatments , will generate a greater number of uniaue ideas during group meetings than Mexican groups . Hypothesis B - 3 : Participants from Mexican groups will perceive more particitwion eauity with the meeting process than participants from US . groups . Justification for Hypothesis Group - A Productivity : Hypotheses A - 1 and A - 2 were based upon previous GSS lab and field studies . A considerable amount of GSS research has compared the productivity of groups supported by GSS technology with groups using manual meeting technology [ 8 , 20 , 7 , 31 , 11 , 47 , 261 . On the whole , the majority of U . S . GSS research supports the findings that GSS - supported group generated more ideas and unique alternatives than unstructured groups or groups not supported by electronic technology [ ll , 41 , 9 , 31 , 10 , 53 , 49 ] . Although there has been little research on cross - cultural GSS productivity , we hypothesize that the egalimian and supportive communication features of GSS would generate similar positive productivity results in the Mexican culture as have been experienced in the U . S . OSboIlle [ 32 ] initially used the term " number of unique ideas " as a measure of creativity and productivity . Among the studies reviewed by George [ 111 , several studies found that GSS groups generated more unique alternatives than non - GSS groups . Based upon these empirical findings , we hypothesized that U . S . and Mexican groups using GSS technology would be more productive and would also generate more " unique " and non - redundant ideas ( Hypothesis A - 2 ) , than manual groups . Participation Equity : Hypothesis 3 - A was based on several studies [ 7 , 8 , 9 , 14 , 22 , 31 , 541 that have demonstrated that GSS technology encourages more equal participation by reducing domination by a few group members [ 15 ] . However , while GSS technology has been shown to promote equal participation in North American groups ( e . g . U . S . and Canada ) [ 54 ] , it was not clear whether a GSS could achieve the same & ect in a Merent cultural environment as Mexico . In high power - distance countries like Mexico , differences in socio - economic classes and inequality of participation have existed for centuries and are characteristic of Mexico ' s cultural norms . Nevertheless , we hypothesized that the communication - enhancing features of GSS would minimize many of Mexico ' s high powerdistance effects ( e . g . , domination , conformance pressure ) that are more apparent in traditional ( manual ) mating environments . We hypothesized that the particular structured features of a GSS environment would encourage Mexican group members to participate at a higher level traditionally not experienced within Mexican face - to - face manual meetings . Additionally , we hypothesized that the increased participation and interaction experienced within a GSS environment would lead to more perceived equal participation within Mexican GSS groups than Mexican non - GSS groups . Justification for Hypothesis Group - B Productivity : The predictions for Hypotheses B - 1 , B - 2 , and B - 3 , which contrast productivity and perception levels between different national cultures are based upon previous cultural GSS research and the Hofstede model . Hofstede [ 16 , 171 , states that traditional cultures ( i . e . , Mexican ) , may be strongly influenced by cultural propensities of high powerdistance , low uncertainty - avoidance and high collectivism . However , it is unknown at this point in cross - cultural GSS research whether such traditional cultures using GSS technology would be more productive or less productive than their US . counterparts . Within this theoretical h e w o r k , we only hypothesized that diflerences in productivity between Mexican and US . groups would be correlated to cultural differences but that the magnitude of these differences was uncertain . Participation Equity : Only a hanm of studies have addressed the effect of culture on GSS technology and how it may affect group processes [ 26 , 30 , 51 , 531 . Morales et al . , [ 30 ] state that GSS tends to " level the playing field " which encourages more equal Mexican participation removing the pressing concern for what patrbnes ( i . e . , bosses or superiors ) are thinking . Since GSS technology would be expected to reduce many of the aforementioned powerdistance effects that are present in a traditional nonegalitarian cultures such as Mexico [ 9 , 10 , 111 , Mexicans groups would be predicted to perceive more participation equity than US . group , who normally experience equality in group settings and may take equal participation in meetings for granted Research Methodology The current research study consisted of two areas of analysis . The first area investigated the effects of GSS technology upon group productivity and individual perceptions within the Mexican national culture and within the U . S . national culture . Each intranational study , therefore , consisted of a 2 x 2 within subjects factorial design study with supporting technology ( GSS vs . non - GSS ) and identification features ( anonymous vs . identified ) constituting the two independent variables . The second area of analysis was an international or cross - cultural comparison of the effects of GSS upon 471 Hofstede’s Cultural Dimensions 1 Uncertainty Avoidance1 Southeast Asia ( Singapore ) Market Model AnglolScandinavia ( U . S . , Australia , . U . K . ) I I LOW HIGH Latin America ( Mexico , Chile , Brazil ) Machine Model Germanic , Israeli ( Germany , Israel ) HIGH LOW I FamilvModel I Pyramid Model I - I I I - - - - - - - - - C ~ lleCtiVisfiC I In dividualista Mexico , Chile , United States , Brazil , Columbia Australia , U . K . * * Figure 1 . group productivity and individual perceptions between US . and Mexican Cultures . This analysis consisted of a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design where supporting technology ( GSS vs . manual ) , identification features ( anonymous vs . identified ) , and national culture ( US . vs . Mexican ) represented the three independent variables . Normally , this 2 x 2 x 2 design would create eight experimental treatment cells . However , because of the perceived artificiality of an “anonymous communication” treatment within the Manual group treatment , two of the cells were not considered realistic for experimentation . The removal of these two cells left a total of six treatment cells in the final study design Research sites : Several Mexican research sites were considered for the current crosscultural field study . After field visits to several potential sites , the ITESM campus in Monterrey , Mexico , proved to be the best match for the U . S . site ( University of Arizona ; Tucson , Arizona ) . Cnteria for matching sites were similarity of academic programs , similarity of participant sample hses , and similanty of group software used at each site . The use of identical group software was especially critical so that dfferences recorded wzthzn each culture and between cultures could not be attributed to differences in software . Subjects : A total of 42 groups from both U . S . and Mexican research sites constituted the sample base for this crosscultural field study The U . S national culture sample consisted of 22 student groups , or 230 upper & vision ( juniors . seniors ) production management and busincss administration undergraduate college students . The Mexican national culture sample consistcd of 20 student groups , or 239 upper division industrial engineering and business administration students . Both national samples were divided into three experimcntal study treatments : GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identified , and Manual - Identified . As mentioned above , a Manual - Anonymous treatment was not used . Task and Field Study Procedures The procedures for the w e n t field study were composed of nine identical phases for group participants across both national cultures : 1 . Explanation of the purpose of the field study to participants ( with examples and illustrations ) 2 . Idea brainstorming by participants for 15 minutes 3 . Preliminary categorization of brainstormed ideas into logcal groupings or “unique Idea categories” 4 . Review and modification of preliminary idea category list by participants 5 . 1st ranking of idea category list from most important to least important 6 . Graphical display of group agreement statistic and verbal discussion ( 10 minutes ) of 1st ranking results 7 . 2nd ranking of idea categories 8 . Discussion of 2nd ranking ( 5 minutes ) 9 . Completion of post survey “Perceptions Questionnaire” Participants were asked to submit either their real name ( for the identified treatments ) or an anonymous pseudonym ( for the anonymous treatments ) . Participation equity was measured , along with other participant perceptions , via a 63 - item questionnaire and a seven - point Likert scale originally developed by Tyran [ 47 . A double translated Spanish version was generated by the principal researcher who was a bilingual , f ~ generation U . S . citizen of Mexican and Spanish heritage [ 26 ] Dependent Variables and Measures This research paper focuses on three ( 3 ) dependent variables : Average Number offideas Generated , or the total number of comments and ideas generated by group participants ( either electronicaliy or manually ) , during the brainstorming session Number of Unique Ideas Gerteruted , or the number of non - redundant ideas generated during the group brainstorming session , Purticipafion Equity , or the perceived opportunity by inlvlduals in the group session for equal participation in the group’s processes . 472 Field Study Results The results from the field study were divided into two segments : the analysis within each national culture ( Hypothesis Group - A ) and the analysis between cultures ( Hypothesis GroupB ) . For both analyses , a significance level of 0 . 05 was used for hypotheses testing . For the analysis within each national culture , one - factor ANOVAs were used to determine if observed differences between the means of each of the three experimental treatments levels ( GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identified , Manual - Identikd ) were true systematic effects ( i . e . experimental treatment ) . If significant F - ratios were found , Tukey h d Shefft post hoc tests were conducted . For the analysis between national cultures , two - faor ANOV & were used to test for main effects ( i . e . , culture and experimental treatment ) and interaction effects . The t tests were used for a priori comparisons between cultures under each of the three experimental study treatments . Analysis Wdzh Cultures Productivity : For the U . S . sample , GSS supported groups ( GSS - Anonymous , GSS - Identified ) generated a greater average number of comments per individual ( 7 . 78 and 7 . 43 ) than Manual - Identilied groups ( 4 . 33 ) . These differences were significant at the p < 0 . 006 level ( F = 6 . 65 ) . " Key and Shad post hoc tests indicated that differences in means between the GSS and the Manual - Identified treatments were significant at the p < 0 . 05 level . Within the Mexican national sample , Mexican GSS supported groups also generated a higher number of comments per participant ( GSS - Anonymous , 7 . 02 ; GSS - Identified , 5 . 36 ) than Manual groups ( 3 . 41 ) and these Merences were sigujficant at the p < 0 . 001 level ( F = 13 . 11 ) . Tukey and ShefGe post hoc comparison tests also indicated that GSS - Anonymous and GSS - Identified group means were significantly different from Manual group means at the p < 0 . 05 level ( see Table 1 ) . The previous pattern of GSS producti ~ ty , however , was not demonstrated with regard to the number of w i p e idees per group generated by the U . S . sample . U . S . Manual - Identified groups , and not GSS supported groups , generated a higher number of unique ideas per group ( 2 . 77 ) followed by GSS - Anonymous groups ( 2 . 01 ) and GSS - Identified groups ( 1 . 97 ) . Although these differences were not signiscant at the p < 0 . 05 level ( p < 0 . 077 ; F = 2 . 96 ) they indicate further investigation . On the other hand , Mexican groups using GSS technology generatd more unique ideas per group ( GSS - Anonymous , 1 . 66 ; GSS - Identified groups 1 . 34 ) than Manual - Identified groups ( 0 . 85 ) . Tukey and Sheffd tests indicated signiscant differences for " number of unique ideas " between GSS - Anonymous groups and Manual groups significant at the p < 0 . 016 level ( F = 5 . 29 ) . Participation Equity : For the U . S . groups , results indicate no significant differences between the three experimental study treatments with regard to perceived participation equify ( see Table 1 ) . However , within the Mexican sample , GSS supported group participants reported more participation equity than manual groups but this was sigmficant only at the p < 0 . 10 level ( F = 2 . 33 ) . Analysis Between Cultures Productivity : U . S . groups , across all three experimental study treatments , generated more average number of comments per individual than Mexican groups . These differences , however , were signiticant only for the pair - wise comparisons of US . and Mexican GSS - Idenfi3ed groups ( p < 0 . 052 , t = 2 . 16 ) . A comparison of U . S . and Mexican Manual - Identijed groups indicated a Merence in average comments per individual , although this difference was only significant at the p < 0 . 10 level ( t = 1 . 68 ) . A two - factor ANOVA revealed main effects ( p < 0 . 001 ; F = 13 . 21 ) for both the culture factor ( p < 0 . 02 , F = 5 . 75 ) and the experimental treatment factor ( p < 0 . 001 , F = 16 . 2 ) . There were no interactive effects . U . S . groups generated more unique ideas per group than Mexican groups only for the Manual - Identified ( p 0 . 001 , t = 6 . 26 ) and the GSS - Identified treatments ( p < 0 . 074 , t = 1 . 96 ) . A two - fhctor ANOVA revealed main effects ( p < 0 . 001 ; F = 10 . 34 ) for both culture ( p < 0 . 001 , F = 21 . 7 ) and the experimental treatment factor ( p < 0 . 032 , F = 3 . 79 ) . There was a interactive effect between the culture and experimental treatment at the p < 0 . 016 level ( F = 4 . 62 ) . Participation Equity : Mexican groups , recorded higher levels of satidkction than U . S . groups9 particularly for the GSS treatments GSS - Anonymous ( p < 0 . 001 , t = - 4 . 27 ) and GSS - Identified ( p < 0 . 002 , t = - 3 . 95 ) . Differences between U . S . and Mexican groups were not significant at the p < 0 . 05 level for the Manual - Identified treatment ( p < 0 . 28 t = 1 . 09 ) . A two - factor ANOVA revealed that main effects differences ( p < 0 . 001 , F = 9 . 42 ) in perceived participation equity were due to the main effects of culture ( F = 26 . 64 , p 0 . 001 ) and not to experimental treatments . Discussion of Results Hypothesis Group " A " : Analysis Whin Cultures Productivity : These findings support previous the literature that GSS - supported groups generate more ideas and alternatives than groups not supported by electronic technologv [ 7 , 8 , 9 , 1 11 . Of interest , was the fact that 473 474 within the Mexican sample , Mexican GSS groups generated more " relative " comments and ideas than Mexican manual groups at a greater statistical difference than their American counterparts ( t = 13 . 11 vs . t = 6 . 65 ) . This may have been due , in part , to the ability of GSS technology to exert a greater relative influence on the Mexican groups by possibly reducing the effects associated with high power - distance cultures . Mexican GSS groups may have generated more relative comments that would otherwise be difficult in a traditional face - to - face meeting . The anonymity of GSS environments may have also allowed Mexican GSS participants to more freely submit candid comments which would otherwise prove politically delicate in traditional manual meeting environments . Unique Ideas : Interestingly , the previously dominant pattem of GSS productivity was not demonstrated across both cultures with regard to the " number of unique or non - redundant ideas " . For the U . S . sample , Manual - Identified groups generated more unique ideas per participant than U . S . GSS groups ( p 0 . 07 , F = 2 . 95 ) . Unlike their U . S . counteqmts , Mexican GSS groups generated more unique ideas per participant than Mexican manual groups . This interesting difference clearly illustrates the cultural contrasts of the " power - distance " and " individualistic ~ llectivioilectivistic " dimensions described by Hofstede [ 16 , 17 , 181 . Though comparatively speaking , Mexican GSS groups generated less unique ideas than U . S . GSS groups , Mexican GSS groups generated significantly more unique ideas relative to Mexican Manual groups thereby , generating a greater statistical dif€erence than their American CoWlteIparts ( p < 0 . 0016 ; F = 5 . 29 versus p < 0 . 077 , F = 2 . 95 ) . The principal researcher observed , however that U . S . GSS participants , appeared to be more concerned in " cranking out " as many " ments or ideas as possible , not taking as much time as Mexican GSS participts to carefully read and respond the ideas submitted by other members of their group . Participation Equity : Within the U . S . sample , no Werences in perceived participation equity between GSS and manual groups were reported . Within the Mexican sample however , GSS groups reported more perceived participation equity than Mexican Manual groups , although this difference was only significant at the p < 0 . 10 level . Because GSS technology was expected to encourage a more candid and less evaluative meeting environment via the reduction of traditional mmmunication barriers , it was predicted that GSS part ~ cipants across both U . S . and Mexican cultures , would perceive more pamapation equty than manual groups . These results , therefore , partially support our hypotheses ( Hypothesis A - 3 ) and may be supportive of the different cultural propensities postulated by Hofstede ' s model [ 16 , 17 , 181 . Participants from low power - distance cultures ( e . g . , U . S . ) appear to take equal participation in group settings for granted and subsequently , may not perceive higher relative participation levels within GSS environments . Conversely , the egalitarian features of GSS may have had a greater effect on collectivistic and high power - distance cultures like Mexico who normally do not operate in equal and participative environments . Mexican GSS participants may have been encouraged to participate and exert themselves less anxiously than in manual groups . Hypothesis Group " B " : Analysis Between Cultures : Productivity : The experimental results partially supported our hypothesis that differences would exist between U . S . and Mexican groups with regard to the average number of comments generated per participant . These differences were signiiicant only for the pair - wise comparison of the U . S . and Mexican GSS - ldenti $ ed groups ( p < 0 . 052 , t = 2 . 16 ) . While differences between the US . and Mexican Manual - Zdentijkd were si @ cant only at the p < 0 . 10 level ( t = 1 . 68 ) , this finding may suggest that the greatest differences in performance between U . S . and Mexican groups existed in those groups where there was no anonymity @ e . , GSS - Identified and Manual - Identified groups ) and the identity of the group participant was known . Supporting this finding was that there were no si & cant differences found between U . S . and Mexican GSS - Anonymous groups ( p < 0 . 501 ; see table 2 ) . The results of the field study suggest that as the degree of unonymity was increased that the average number of comments or ideas per participant increased . In those experimental treatments where the identity of the contributor was known , Mexican GSS - Identified and Mexican Manual - Identified participants may have been influenced by traditional cultural influences ( i . e . , high power - distance ) compelling them to restrict their comments and relative input into the group process . Additionally , since Mexicans come from a high supportive - nurturing culture [ 16 , 17 , Mexican GSS participants may have been less assertive and individualistic within group scenarios than their U . S . counterparts in submitting their comments and ideas . Unique Ideas Per Group : The statistical results from the field study only partially support our predictions ( Hypothesis B - 3 ) that significant differences in the number of unique or non - redundant ideas per participant would exist between U . S . and Mexican groups . Although US . groups in general , generated more unique ideas per individual than Mexican participants ( p . c 0 . 001 ) these differences , were only significant for the Identijied 475 experimental treatments ( GSS - Identified and Manual - Identified ) . High power - distance cultures appear to experience more relatwe group process losses ( e . g . , evaluation apprehension , conformance pressure , domination ) in traditional face - to - face meetings than in GSS environments [ 28 ] . Conditioned by “collectivistic” values , [ 16 , 17 , 181 Mexican manual group environments may not generate the same ability to express ideas as Sreely as in an anonymous GSS environments . Participation Equity : The results of the field study partially support the hypothesis that Mexican GSS groups would perceive higher levels of participation equity than U . S . GSS groups . Although Mexican groups across all experimental treatments recorded higher perceived participation equity levels than U . S . groups , these differences were signifcant only for the GSS supported experimental groups ; GSS - Anonymous ( p < 0 . 001 ) and GSS - Identified ( p < 0 . 002 ) . Differences between U . S . and Mexican Manual - Identifed groups were si @ cant at the p < 0 . 05 level ( i . e . , p < 0 . 28 ) . GSS technology was expected to reduce the group process losses normally associated with high power - distance and high collectivistic countries like Mexico . Steiner [ 43 ] states that communication barriers to equal participation and effective group interaction are often driven by cultural norms . Subsequently , this may result in the domination of meetings by higher status individuals and the intimidation of ( and subsequent nonantribution by ) lower status members of the group [ 20 ] . These results may explain why Mexican groups supported by GSS technology may have perceived more participation equity than what they were traditionally accustomed , and perceived more relative participation equity than what U . S . participants normally experience . Implications and Conclusion This cross - cultural field study has several important implications . First , groups , like organizations , use technology to accomplish certain objectives and are strongly fashioned by the cultural norms of that particular environment . However , though different cultures may possess different social settings and meeting protocols , the common feature of problem - solving groups remains the exchange of information [ 53 ] . As predicted from previous GSS literature , GSS - supported groups across both U . S . and Mexican cultures produced more ideas , comments and unique , non - redundant ideas than traditional manual groups . The fact that GSS technology generated this result w i t h a sigmficantly different cultural [ 16 ] environment ( i . e . , Mexico ) is noteworthy in itself with fascinating implications for technology’s effect on other cultures . Even though culture may be somewhat resistant to change , technology can be an overwhelming force , given certain sociological and economic conditions [ 53 ] . Second , as seen by our field study results , culture may be correlated with certain group outcomes and may affect certain perception levels . However , simply predicting that differences in group outcomes will exist based upon cultural models may be an over - SimpWication of culture’s effect . While GSS technology often promotes more equal participation in egalitarian North American cultures ( e . g . , U . S . and Canada ) , it was not entirely certain at the onset of these field investigations whether GSS would achieve similar effects in a traditional culture ( e . g . , Mexico ) where inequality of position and participation have existed for centuries . While U . S . group participants may have experienced partxipation equity in their everyday group interactions , Mexican participants perceived more participation equity than U . S . participants and expressed these perceptions accordingly . The ability of Mexican groups to generate si @ cantly different results from U . S . groups using identical GSS technology [ 28 ] may be attributed to cultural effects . Third , Attewell and Rule [ I ] state that the impact of ( organizational ) culture greatly influences technological effects . Undoubtedly , exported hardware and software nearly always require modifications to suit local regulations , laws or social customs . Traditionally , these modifications have focused on altering the technical facilities of the software [ 53 ] . Because GSS development and design has historically been grounded on US . or North American culture , the successful adaptation of GSS technology into another national culture may require significant modifications to technical and social facilities [ 53 ] with particular sensitivity to the social norms of the host country [ 28 ] . The recent introduction of GSS technology into Mexican business operations represents a new mode of interaction for a traditional culture where power - distances between superior and subordinate and collectivistic group behavior have been perpetuated for centuries [ 30 ] . Therefore , the ability of GSS technology to mitigate age - old power - distance meeting protocols and increase the constructive exchange of information must be analyzed with cautious enthusiasm . Fourth , an important component underlying GSS research practice is the assumption that the addition of anonymity to the information exchange within a group will lead to a more balanced involvement of group members ( e . g . , participation equity ) . However , anonymity may have both positive and negative consequences when applied to other traditional national cultures [ 28 ] . Recent GSS research has revealed that the “lack of engagement” or vigorous verbal exchange ( clearly present in traditional 476 face - to - face meetings ) may often leave users feeling emotionally unfulfilled and unchallenged despite exceptionally good results [ 36 ] . For example , the principal researcher discovered that while the anonymity feature of GSS within Mexican meeting environments was considered advantageous and effectual for electronic brainstorming , Mexicans clearly preferred vigorously discussing the relative merits of various alternatives prior to voting or ranking [ 28 ] . A GSS technology that is restrictive with its communication features may impose a cultmlly determined model ( e . g . , North American ) that may prove inappropriate for certain cultures [ 53 ] . The predictions of futurists like Marshall McLuhan [ 23 ] and Alvin Toffler [ 45 ] appear to be coming true . The world has developed into a " global village " where national boundaries are no longer barriers to business operations and trade ( 31 . In view of the revolutionary developments in computer hardware , solhare and global tel " munications , it only makes prudent business sense that we consider cultural factors in the analysis , design and implementation of any new technology , especially as it relates to electronic support for group meetings . The conspicuous and surprising scarcity of cross - cultural studies in the area of electronic support for group decision making ( e . g . , GSS ) has been a disappointing shortcoming of current IT research and has been a continuing motivation for the current stream of GSS cross - cultural research . References 1 . AttewelL P . and Rule , J . " Computing and organizations : What we know and what we don ' t know " , Con " icati & of the A W , Vol . 12 Dec . 1984 , 1184 - 1191 2 . Baer , W . ; and Birch , M . ; " The International Economic Relations of a Small Country : The Case of Paraguay . " Economic Development and Cultural Change , The University of Chicago , 1987 . 3 . Belli , P . " Globalizing the Rest of the World " , Hmard Business Raiov , JUly - Augusf 1991 . 4 . Brislin , R . Harcourt Brace College , Publishers , Orlanda Florida , 1993 . 5 . Daly , B . L . " The influence of fixe - to - tkce versus computer - mediated communications channels on collective induction " . Accounting , Management andInfoimation Technology , Vol . 3 , 1993 . 6 . Delbecq , A . L . ; Van de Ven , AH . and Gustafson , D . H . Group Techniques for Program Phning , Scott Foresman , Glencoe , IL , 1975 . Understanding Culture ' s Injluence on Behavior , 7 . Dennis , A . R . ; Nunamaker , J . F . , and Vogel , D . R . " A comparison of laboratory experiments and field studies in the study of electronic meeting systems " , Journal of Managemmt Information Systems , Winter 1990 - 91 , 107 - 135 . 8 . DeSanctis , G . , and R . B . Gdupe . " A foundation for the study of group decision support systems " , Managment Science , May , 1987 . 9 . Gallupe R . B . ; DeSanctis , G . ; and Dickson , G . " Computer Based Support for Group Problem - Finding : An Experimental Investigation " , MS Quarterly , June . 1988 . 10 . Gallupe R . B . ; Dennis A . R . ; Cooper W . ; Valacich J . S . ; Bastianutti , L . and Nunamaker , J . " Electmnic Brainstorming & Group Size " , Acadony ofManagement Joumal , Vol35 , June , 1992 . 11 . George , J . F . ; Easton , G . ; Nunamaker , J ; and Northcraft G . " A study of collaborative group work with and Without computer - based support " , Information Systemr Research , Vol . 1 , No . 4 , December , 1990 , 394 - 415 . 12 . Gudykunst , William B . , Intergroup Conmnmication , Edward Arnold Publisher , London , 1986 . 13 . Gudykunsf W . B . ; Ting - Toomey , S . ; ChqE . Culture and Interpersonal Communication ; Sage Publications , kerly Hills , CA . , 1988 . 14 . Hiltz , S . R . and TurIoE , M . " Structuring computer - mediated communication systems To avoid information overload , " Comnmications of the ACM , 28 ( 7 ) , 1985 , 680 - 689 . 1 5 . Ho , T . H . ; Raman K . S . ; and Watson R . T . ' Group decision support systems : The cultural tictor , Proceedings of the 10th Annual Intemtiod Cot $ erence on I $ ormation System , 1 19 - 129 , 1989 . 16 . Hofitede , G . Culture ' s Comquences : Internatiokl Dflerences m Related Ydues , Sage Publications , Beverly Hills , CA . , 1980 . 17 . Hofstede , G . Culture and Organizatian : Sofrwme of the Mind , McGraw - Hill Book Company , London , 1991 . 18 . Hofstede , G . Uncommon Sense About Oqynizations : Cases , and Field Observations , Sage Publications , Thousands Oaks , 1994 . 19 . Ivancevich , J . M . and J . C . Baker . " The job satisfacton of amerim managers oveseas " , MsUBusiness Topics , 1969 . 20 . Jarvenpaa , S . ; Rao , V . S . ; and Huber , G . P . ; " Computer support for meetings of groups working on unstructured problems : A field experiment " , M S Quarterly , December , 1988 , 645 - 666 . 21 . Kraemer K . L . , and Pinonneault A . " The implication of group support technologies : An evaluation of the empirical research " , The Proceedings of the Twenty Second Hawaii International CoMerence on System Sciences ( HKXY , ) , Hawaii 1989 . 22 . Maier N . F , and A . R . Solem . " The contribution of a discussion leader to the quality of group thinking : The effective use of minority opinion " , Nu " Relations , Vol . 5 , pp . 277 - 288 ; 1952 . 23 . McLub , M . , Understanding Media : The Extensions of Man . McGraw - Hill , New York , 1 % 4 . 24 . Mejias , R . J . ; " A cross cultural study of blue collar employee need perception among Mexican and American operatives " , unpublished M . S . rhesis . University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona , 1980 . 477 25 . Mejias , R . J . , “Computing in South America The information technologes in Uruguay” , Working Paper , Dept . of Management Information Systems , University of Arizona , 1991 . 26 . Mejias , R . J ; “A cross cultural comparison of group support system ( GSS ) outcomes A US . and Mexico field experiment” , copyrighted Ph . D . dissertation , Department of MIS , College of BPA the University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona , 1995 . 27 . Mejias , R . J . ; Lazaneo , L . ; Rico , A , ; Torres , A , ; Vogel , D . , and Shepherd , M . “A cross - cultural comparison of GSS and non - GSS consensus and satisfaction levels within and between the U . S . and Mexico” , Proceedings of the 29th Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences ( HlCSS ) ) , January , 1996 . 28 . Mejias , R . J . ; Shepherd M . ; Vogel , D . ; and Lazaneo , L . ; “Consensus and Perceived Satisfaction Levels : A CrossCultural Comparison of GSS and non - GSS Outcomes Within and Between the U . S . and Mexico” , forthcoming , Journal of Management Information Systems QMlS ) , Special Winter Issue , 1996 . 29 . Mintzberg , Henry . The Nature of Managerial Work , Harper and Row , New York , 1 983 . 30 . Morales , B . ; H . Monera , and D . Vogel , “Group support for regional development in Mexico” , Proceedings of the 28th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences @ CSS ) , 1995 . 31 . Nunamaker , J . F . Jr . ; L . M . Applegate , and B . R . Konsynski . “Facilitating group creativity with GDSS” , Jmmal of Management Information System , Spring , 1987 , pp . 5 - 19 . 32 . Osbome , A . Applied Imagination , Second Edition , Scribners , New York , 1957 . 33 . Pavlia , Shailendra ; Paviia , Prashant ; Zigli , R ; “Global Information Technology Environment : Key Issues in Advanced and Less - Developed Nations“ , Chapter 1 in The Global Issues of Information Technology Managemen & by Pavlia , Pavlia and Zigli , Idea Group Publishing , Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , 1992 34 . Porter L . W . and E . E . Lawler . “Properties of organizational structure in relation to job attitudes and job behavior” , Pvchological Bullekn , Vol . 64 , 1965 , pp . 23 - 51 . 35 . . Porter , M Press , Macmillan , Inc . , New York , 1990 . The Competitive Advantage of Nations , The Free 36 . Reinig , B , ; Bnggs , R . ; Shepherd , M ; Yen , J . ; and Nunamaker , J . “Affective Reward and the Adoption of Group Supprt Systems : Productivity is Not Always Enough” , Joumal of Management Information System , Vol . 12 , No . 3 , Winter 95 - 96 , pp 169 - 185 . 37 . Richman , B . ; “The Significance of cultural variables” , Academy of ManagementJoumal , Vol . 8 , 1965 , 292 - 309 . 38 . Sauter , V . “Cross Cultural Aspects of Model Management Needs in a Transnational Decision Support System” , Chapter 15 6 - om text , Zhe Global Issues of Information Technology Management , by Pavlia , Pavlia and Zigli , the idea Group Publishing , Harrisburg , PA , 1992 , pp . 332 - 350 . 39 . Simmonetti . S . H . , and Joseph Weitz . “Job sabsfaction : Some non - cultural effects” , Personnel Psychology , Vol . 5 , 1967 . 40 . Slocum , John ; P . M . Topichak and D . Kuhn . “A cross - cultural study of need satisfaction and need importance for operative employees” , Personnel Psychology , Vol 24 , 197 1 . 41 . Steeb , R . , and Johnston , S . C . “A computer - based interactive system for group decision support system” , LEEE Transaction on Systems , Man , and Cybemetics ( SMC - 11 : 8 ) , August , 1981 , 42 . Stevik , M . , “Beyond the chalkboard Computer support for collaboration and problem - solving meetings” , Communications of the ACM , Vol . 30 , 1 ; Jan . 1987 . 43 . Steiner , I . D . Group Process and Productivity , Academic Press : New York , 1972 . 44 . Straub , Detmar . “The effect of culture on IT diffusion : Email and FAX in Japan and the United States” , Information Systems Research , March , 1994 , pp 23 - 47 . 45 . Toffler , Alvin . The mird Wave . W . Morrow Company , Inc . , New York , 1980 . 46 . Turoff , M . , and S . R . Hiltz . “Computer support for group versus individual decisions , lEEE Transactions on Conmnmication , 30 , January , 1982 , 82 - 91 . 47 . Tyran , Craig . ”The Software Inspection : The Task and Mechanisms for Group Support” , Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Department of MIS , University of Arizona , 1993 . 48 . Valacich J . ; Dennis A . R . , Connolly T . “Idea generation in computer based groups : A new ending to an old story” , Organizational Behavior andHuman Decision Processes , ( in press ) . 49 . Valacich , J . R . ; and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . ; “An Experimental Investigation of the Effects of Group Size in an Electronic Meeting Environment , ” IEEE Transactions on Systems Man , and Cybemetics , vol . 20 , no . 5 , 1990 , pp . 1049 - 1057 50 . Van de Ven , AH . and Delbecq A . L . “The effectiveness of nominal , delphi , and interacting group decision making processes” , Academy ofManagement Journal , December 1974 . pp 605421 . 5 1 . Vogel , D . R . ; “The Significance of IT Proliferation in Mexlco” Department of MIS , doctoral seminar presentation at the University of Arizona , March , 1993 . 52 . Watson , R . ; G . DeSanctis and M S . Poole . “Using a GDSS to facilitate group consensus . Some intended and unintended consequences” , M S Quarterly , Sept . , 1988 , pp . 463 - 478 53 . Watson . R ; Ho , T . H . ; Raman , K . S ; “Culture A fourth dimension of group support systems” , Comnzcatzons of the A . CM . , October , 1994 pp 45 - 55 . 54 . Zigurs , I . , Poole M . , and DeSanctis G . “A Study of Influence in Computer - Mediated Group Decision Making , “ M S Quarterly , December , 1988 , pp 625 - 644 . 478