18 The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building SUCHETA GHOSHAL and AMY BRUCKMAN , Georgia Institute of Technology Social movement organizing is becoming increasingly dependent on communication technologies . How can Computer - Supported Cooperative Work systems support grassroots organizations in facilitating collective action through democratic participation ? In this article , we study Science for the People - Atlanta , a social movement organization dedicated to building a grassroots movement around science activism . We used ac - tion research , both participating in the organization and studying it . We use the Freirean model of participa - tory communication theory to unpack the movement - building process of SftP - Atlanta . The Freirean model provides a three - step , iterative process for sustainable movement building : forming a collective identity , mov - ing toward collective action , and engaging in reflexive dialog . We analyze both the perceived strengths and weaknesses of their sociotechnical practices in supporting the organization as they iteratively go through the phases of the Freirean model . Finally , we identify inclusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence as three values desirable for sociotechnical practices of grassroots organizing . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → HCI theory , concepts and models ; Computer supported cooperative work ; Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing ; Additional Key Words and Phrases : Grassroots social movements , sociotechnical systems , value - sensitive design ACM Reference format : Sucheta Ghoshal and Amy Bruckman . 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Move - ment Building . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 26 , 3 , Article 18 ( May 2019 ) , 36 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3318140 1 INTRODUCTION Lakewood , a neighborhood in the south of Atlanta , has exceptionally poor living conditions . Res - idents struggle on several fronts , having an average per - household income of $ 18 , 000 / year and lacking the accessibility of fresh produce—a situation commonly defined as a “food desert” [ 53 ] . Jasmine , 1 a volunteer activist of Science for the People - Atlanta ( SftP - Atlanta ) who is also a resi - dent of Lakewood , brought these statistics up in one of the organization’s monthly meetings and proposed that SftP - Atlanta should focus their research efforts within the Lakewood community . Members present in that meeting discussed the issue in further detail , and three members of the or - ganization signed up as volunteers interested in being involved in the community . In the months that followed , SftP - Atlanta collaborated with the Lakewood - based organization Georgia Citizen 1 The names mentioned in the article have been changed to protect participants’ anonymity . Authors’ addresses : S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman , Georgia Tech , North Ave NW , Atlanta , GA 30332 ; emails : sucheta @ gatech . edu , asb @ cc . gatech . edu . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2019 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 1073 - 0516 / 2019 / 05 - ART18 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3318140 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 2 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman Coalition on Hunger over various offline and online means of collaboration , and prepared a de - tailed report on the Lakewood’s socioeconomic infrastructure . This report further guided their needs analysis with the community , at the end of which , they decided to help build a community - owned and run food co - operative . According to the volunteers from SftP - Atlanta , the goal of this “Urban Garden 2 ” project was “not only to make fresh produce accessible , but also to create jobs and strengthen the community as a whole . ” SftP - Atlanta , the grassroots science - activist organization we partnered with in our research , is focused on building a movement around a practice of science that is inclusive , participatory , and accessible . 3 They are a group of accredited scientists , researchers , and science enthusiasts who are committed to offering their skills and expertise toward causes of social justice . As a grassroots organization , they focus on the practical needs and requirements of local communities , and fol - low a bottom - up approach of movement building . Toward their organizational goal of mobilizing scientific skills for the causes of people , SftP - Atlanta collaborates with individuals and communi - ties most impacted by social injustice , and further positions these impacted groups as leaders in framing research questions , assigning interpretations , and designing meaningful solutions . Their leaderless governance structure strives to allow all members to equally engage in collective ac - tion . Movement building for this organization has been a continuous process supported by a set of sociotechnical practices consisting of several social computing technologies , technological knowl - edge and skills of members , local norms around these technologies , and so on . Although much has been studied about the role of social computing technologies in rapid move - ment organizing , there has been less work done on understanding the role of social computing platforms in building up a grassroots movement . In our work , we conducted action research ( AR ) with SftP - Atlanta from its inception , and studied the role of social computing technologies in or - ganizing a grassroots movement from the ground up . As researchers in the domain of Computer - Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , we under - stand that computing technologies are inherently value - laden : values are embodied in and repro - duced through how we design , build , and choose to use certain computing technologies [ 10 , 22 , 26 ] . Therefore , we see our responsibilities as twofold : we strive to build systems that not only promote instrumental values , such as functional efficiency , safety , reliability , and usability , but also embody substantive social , moral , and political values that societies and people subscribe to . Our investiga - tion of the existing sociotechnical practices of SftP - Atlanta reveals that while the social computing technologies they chose to use served some of the instrumental purpose , they often lacked the so - cial , moral , and political alignment with the causes of grassroots organizing . While technologies were chosen with an expectation of being an “efficient” solution to some practical problems , the very choice of certain social computing technologies introduced new power relationships within the organization that were antithetical to the philosophical beliefs of the organization . With social movement organizing becoming increasingly dependent on social computing tech - nologies ( e . g . , Facebook 4 , Twitter 5 , Slack 6 ) that were built with commercial values in mind , these conflicts become a default reality of movement building . However , these conflicts come with con - sequences that are not just ideological but also practical : how can a group democratically decide on issues when the decision - making tool that is supposed to facilitate that process disproportion - ately favors people who are more comfortable with technology ? In our work , we provide a way of 2 https : / / atlanta . scienceforthepeople . org / index . php / foodcoop / . 3 https : / / atlanta . scienceforthepeople . org . 4 http : / / facebook . com . 5 http : / / twitter . com . 6 http : / / slack . com . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 3 understanding and working around conflicts that may exist within the sociotechnical ecosystem of grassroots social movements . In this article , we start by grounding ourselves with the philosophical values that the movement of SftP - Atlanta is founded upon . Members of SftP - Atlanta take a pedagogical approach to their ac - tivism . As a group of scientists , researchers , science - workers with little to no background in social movement organizing , members of this organization realized that they needed to read , contextual - ize , and collectively reflect on different philosophies of social action . They are notably inspired by the philosophy of Brazilian educator and philosopher Paulo Freire . Following their lead , we chose the Freirean model of participatory communication theory of social movement organizing [ 24 , 51 ] to understand their process of movement building . The Freirean model of participatory communi - cation theory offers a clear structure that helps us unpack the iterative steps of social movement organizing [ 24 ] . Leveraging that framework , we present an empirical account of both the perceived strengths and weaknesses of their sociotechnical practices in supporting the organization as they iteratively go through the three key phases of forming a collective identity , facilitating collective action , and fostering reflexive dialog . Our analysis leads us to identify inclusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence as three essential values of grassroots movement building . Further , we note that there are often tensions among these values : while they are philosophically interdependent , it can be challenging to simultaneously embody them through design . Designing for the values of grassroots organizing will therefore require designers to not only keep an eye on each value indi - vidually , but also understand how they interact , or move in relation to one another . In this article , we provide a way for activists to make sense of the philosophical conflicts that may arise in their day - to - day organizing practices . We also provide social computing researchers an understanding of how grassroots social movements encounter such conflicts in their everyday activities . 2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Collective Social Action in Grassroots Movements Grassroots organizations like SftP - Atlanta strive to make local impact through collective social action . Grassroots activism is a method of organizing that follows a bottom - up approach of move - ment building [ 39 , 52 ] . At the core of this process is the belief in the power of collective action through democratic participation of all individuals involved in the movement . Collective action is defined as a phenomenon where there is individual action toward collec - tive ends [ 28 ] . Tarrow emphasizes the different forms of collective action that may take place de - pending on the context , and further categorized social movements as contentious collective action [ 54 ] . Contentious collective actions work toward their goals by building organizations , elaborat - ing ideologies , socializing and mobilizing constituencies , and driving their members to engage in self - development and the construction of collective identities [ 54 ] . Although this form of collective action happens outside of existing political structures , they do not take place in a political vacuum . Instead , by empowering ordinary individuals to challenge authorities , they become political in the broader sense of the term as having to engage with power relationships inherent in the society . The process of organizing collective action , therefore , strives to not only make social impact through political action , but also ensures individual empowerment through the process [ 48 ] . 2 . 2 Designing for Values of Collective Social Action The phenomenon of collective social action , especially in the realm of social justice , has long been of a topic of interest for social computing researchers . Social issues such as the experiences of marginal users [ 59 ] , health [ 43 , 44 ] , environmental issues [ 23 ] , and international development ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 4 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman ( ICTD ) [ 36 ] have been areas of interest in HCI . Social computing researchers have also focused on characterizing the social and temporal dynamics as observed on social media in recent move - ments such as the Indignados in Spain , the Occupy movement in the US , the Arab Spring , and the Tunisian Revolution . All these made heavy use of online social media for mobilization , and have been extensively studied [ 8 , 20 , 40 , 55 – 57 ] Beyond big data analyses of networked protests and mass movements , social computing re - searchers have also been invested in understanding the role of design in motivating and enabling collective social action . This approach of intentionally designing systems for a socio - political pur - pose is rooted in HCI’s turn to acknowledging , understanding , and designing for human values . In the following sub - sections , we situate ourselves in the overall body of work in values in design ( VID ) , and more specifically in the domain of designing for social justice and democratic values . 2 . 2 . 1 Designing for Values . In her influential article “Value - Sensitive Design” ( VSD ) , HCI re - searcher Batya Friedman notes that “values embedded in any given implementation [ of computing technologies ] are likely to be widespread , pervasive , and systematic” [ 26 ] . Friedman’s formulation of VSD calls for a commitment to design for human values . Flanagan et al . echo a similar commit - ment , and further argue that incorporating VID is a necessary but complex challenge : designing around certain values not only requires technical competence , but also a reflective understanding of the relevant values [ 22 ] . According to Flanagan et al . conscientious designers , who aim to design with a commitment to values , must follow relevant dimensions of at least three modes of inquiry : technical ( incorporating design processes and tools that will result in embodiment of the rele - vant values ) , philosophical ( absorbing relevant philosophical reflections on values ) , and empirical ( investigating the values in relation to individuals and their societies ) [ 22 ] . While some early work in VSD suggests that one identify values and then design for them , Le Dantec et al . [ 38 ] argue that the values themselves need to be discovered . We must empirically investigate the values of our users—not assume them . Le Dantec et al . demonstrate that photo elicitation studies are one useful method for surfacing values . In this work , we follow their model of working to elicit the values of our subjects , and propose that AR [ 30 ] is a method that can help surface values . 2 . 2 . 2 Designing for Values of Social Justice . Recent work in HCI has explored the intersection of design and social justice . Sasha Costanza - Chock articulates a framework of “design justice . ” Building upon a set of principles developed by an emerging network of designers and commu - nity organizers , Costanza - Chock defines design justice as “a field of theory and practice that is concerned with how the design of objects and systems influences the distribution of risks , harms , and benefits among various groups of people” [ 10 ] . While the design justice principles provide a set of values to design with , Costanza - Chock further draws from the theories of intersectionality and matrix of domination ( white supremacy , heteropatriarchy , capitalism , and settler colonialism ) [ 9 ] to name the oppressive and exploitative systems and values to design against [ 10 ] . Similarly , Dombrowski et al . have argued that interaction design with a social - justice orientation can lead to the design of technological artifacts that are aware of its social and political responsibilities [ 17 ] . Irani et al . introduced postcolonial computing as a framework for designing systems in the field of HCI4D [ 34 ] . Bardzell have suggested that Feminist HCI methods can be applied to the design of systems that aim to serve the causes of social justice [ 6 ] . Dimond et al . have built on the agenda set forth by Feminist HCI and conducted both techni - cal and empirical inquiries to understand how an online storytelling platform supported a social movement organization working to stop street harassment [ 14 ] . Incorporating values of advocacy in their research and design , Irani and Silberman built Turkopticon , a tool that supported workers of the digital micro - labor marketplace Amazon Mechanical Turk in understanding , advocating , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 5 and practicing their rights as digital workers [ 34 ] . HCI researcher Tad Hirsch built TXTMob , a secure messaging platform for activists thereby recognizing privacy as an important value in the work of social justice advocates [ 32 ] . In our article , we exercise a similar commitment for values of social justice , although in our case , we are more specifically committed to the values of grassroots movements working toward the causes of social justice . 2 . 2 . 3 Designing for Democratic Values . Grassroots organizing is rooted in the ideas of partici - patory democracy [ 46 ] . Democracy as a political philosophy has long been a topic of interest in HCI . Carl DiSalvo conducts a philosophical inquiry on the work of John Dewey [ 12 ] in his influ - ential essay “Design and the Construction of Publics” [ 15 ] . DiSalvo proposes participatory design as a potential means toward fostering democracy [ 15 ] . The emergence of participatory design as a method for democratic decision making around tech - nology can be traced back to Scandinavia in the 1970s [ 35 ] . While early participatory design work focused more on democracy in the workplace , relevance of participatory design in communities outside of the workplace evolved over the years . DiSalvo et al . discuss community - based partici - patory design as a field within broader participatory design work [ 16 ] , and further point out how community - based participatory design considers social constructs and relations of groups in addi - tion to looking at technologies . Le Dantec and DiSalvo further show ways of fostering community engagement through participatory design [ 37 ] . They note that in order to fully realize the potential of participatory design as a useful tool for community participation , we have to turn to practices of participatory design that are more rooted in the idea of “future design” or “infrastructuring , ” rather than traditional approaches that are more product oriented [ 7 , 19 ] . This shift indicated that instead of designing fixed products , designing for future use would focus on building sociotechni - cal infrastructures that would exercise a commitment to the dynamic values of democracy . In this article , we find ourselves echoing DiSalvo’s reflections on the role of design in a democ - racy [ 15 ] . DiSalvo identified that it is within the “contemporary socio - technical mess of people , technologies , and objects” that the task of designing for democracy is situated [ 15 ] . In our work , we similarly situate ourselves in a “sociotechnical mess [ 15 ] ” that supported SftP - Atlanta as it formed , grew , and evolved into a social movement . Additionally , we analyze this socio - technical mess in the socio - political context of grassroots movement building . With our work , we see our - selves contributing to the overall field of VID , with a more specific contribution to the growing body of work in HCI that advocates for the need of intentionally designing technical systems for the values of social justice and democracy . Toward this goal , we present in this article our find - ings and analysis from all three modes of inquiries we conducted in partnership with SftP - Atlanta . While our AR provides an empirical account of their intended values of movement organizing , understanding the philosophical foundation of SftP - Atlanta further helps to contextualize our em - pirical findings . The first author of this article also engaged in some technical inquiry in helping organization build their web platform—although more substantive work to design for grassroots values is needed . Our contribution in the technical space therefore is the identification of the so - ciopolitical values that current social computing technologies used for the grassroots purpose can be evaluated against and future systems supporting grassroots movements can be designed with . We further connect the philosophical values to the state - of - the - art research on CSCW systems and provide implications for design for the future systems in this space . We also contribute a nuanced discussion on the complex relationship among these three values , and further argue that future design for grassroots values , will not only need to accommodate each individual value , but also understand how they interact , or move in relation to one another . In what follows , we first describe our philosophical inquiry of the movement building process of SftP - Atlanta . While there are several philosophical theories of social movements that explain the ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 6 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman phenomenon of grassroots activism , SftP - Atlanta as an organization emphatically identified with the emancipatory politics and pedagogy of Brazilian educator and philosopher Paulo Freire [ 24 ] . Our participation in the reading groups of SftP - Atlanta and the subsequent discussions on Freire indicate that they contextualized his philosophy for their purpose of building up a movement that is driven by grassroots praxis . This translates to a combination of action and reflection on how science can be of service to the historically marginalized communities in and around Atlanta . SftP - Atlanta’s interpretation of Freire , and their process of movement building ( inspired by his pedagogy ) can be best described using the Freirean model of participatory communication the - ory . Participatory communication theory of social movement organizing , as conceptualized by Snow and Soule , is a framework that directly extended Freirean politics and offers a clear lens for understanding the iterative process of grassroots social movement building [ 51 ] . In the fol - lowing sections , we will first discuss the philosophy of Freire , followed by the Freirean model of participatory communication theory of social movement organizing , and will finally present the overarching research question that guided this study . 3 PHILOSOPHICAL GROUNDING AND THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 3 . 1 Liberating Pedagogy of Paulo Freire A critical pedagogy of social justice was articulated by Brazilian educator and philosopher Paulo Freire [ 24 ] . Freire , influenced by Marxist and anti - colonial ideologies , advocates for an emanci - patory practice of education , the crux of which is to enable individuals to take part in collective social action . This critical pedagogy further states that social action should be driven by praxis : a combina - tion of action and reflection . Freire believes that individuals have the capacity for reflection , for conceptualizing , for critical thinking , for making decisions , and for planning toward social change . Therefore , to enable democratic participation in social movement organizing is to make sure every individual involved in the movement gets to exercise their “right and power to intervene in the social order and change it through political praxis” [ 24 ] . Freire’s philosophy of praxis regards dialog as a tool for individuals to achieve the critical con - sciousness that can lead them toward emancipation . Furthermore , it is through the practice of reflexive dialog that a collective sense of identity and solidarity is formed . However , according to Freire , liberating pedagogy cannot be reduced to either verbalism or activism , it must be a combi - nation of both . As one of the footnotes from Freire’s seminal book “Pedagogy of the Oppressed” reads [ 24 ] : ActionReflection (cid:2) word = work = praxis Sacrifice of action = verbalization Sacrifice of reflection = activism . 3 . 2 Freirean Model of Participatory Communication Theory of Movement Building Building off of Freire’s philosophy of praxis , the participatory communication model of social movement organizing stresses the importance of democratization and participation at all levels— international , national , local , and individual [ 48 ] . Participatory communication theory emphasizes the importance of practicing reciprocal collaboration throughout all levels of participation [ 49 ] . This implies that listening to what others say , respecting others’ attitudes , establishing mutual trust , and believing in the ability of the masses to develop themselves and their environment are crucial to the growth and sustenance of a social movement organization [ 49 ] . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 7 SftP - Atlanta’s journey toward collective action can be described with the help of the Freirean model of participatory communication theory . The participatory communication model suggests that grassroots movement organizing typically follows three steps toward sustainable movement building [ 51 ] . — Forming a collective identity . This step entails a careful analysis of the power relationships that shape structural inequalities in each social and historical context . Through this analysis the collective identity of the organization and the initial framing of the movement will be formed . — Mobilizing toward collective action . This strategic analysis informs the next phase , in which individuals involved in the social movement cooperate to bring change through collective action . — Engaging in reflexive dialogue . Finally , the third and the iterative step in this model of move - ment organizing is reflection . By encouraging reflection about framing practices , participa - tory communicators foster ongoing reflexive dialogues that build new generations of leaders and extend relational networks . While these steps of movement building are somewhat sequential , they do not result in a linear process of organizing . Similar to the cyclic nature of Freire’s pedagogy ( action informing reflection ; reflection influencing action ) , this process is also iterative . Grassroots group often do not create a collective identity in vacuum . Instead , the identity of the group develops through the process of organizing collective actions ; similarly , engaging in reflexive dialog results in more meaningful collective action . As a result , these steps of movement building end up being interdependent in reality . While the Freirean model of participatory communication theory provides a powerful lens to un - derstand SftP - Atlanta’s process of movement building , as social computing researchers we wanted to understand the role of their sociotechnical practices in supporting the organization in their pro - cess of day - to - day organizing . It is this inquiry that led us to the overarching research question of our study : what is the role of social computing technologies in supporting the process of grassroots movement building ? Before we begin to describe the empirical account of our findings , we first need to discuss the history and the political context of SftP - Atlanta . In what follows , we provide a brief description of the national movement of SftP that SftP - Atlanta came out of . We further narrate the history of SftP - Atlanta followed by an overview of their political activities . 4 CONTEXT 4 . 1 Science for the People SftP is a U . S . - based organization dedicated to building a social movement around progressive and radical perspectives on science and society . Their organizational goals include 7 : —Growing an international organization of STEM workers , educators , and activists who work to serve the people—especially in poor , oppressed , and marginalized communities . —Contributing to social , economic , and environmental justice internationally . —Seeking new and radical solutions for problems of energy , environment , agriculture , public health , and workplace safety . —Establishing platforms of communication and educational tools for STEM workers , educa - tors , and activists to develop research , strategies , and tactics to achieve these goals . 7 https : / / scienceforthepeople . org . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 8 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman Table 1 . List of Participants in Our Study Participants Age and gender Ethnicity and nationality Occupation Rachel 33 , Female Caucasian ; US Public Health Analyst Emma 25 , Female Caucasian ; US High School Science Teacher Sam 35 , Male Caucasian ; Italy Researcher in Neuroscience Natalie 30 , Female Caucasian ; Spain Researcher in Data Science Alex 30 , Male Caucasian ; US Researcher in Cybersecurity Chris 28 , Male Caucasian ; US Student and IT Consultant Steven 66 , Male Caucasian ; US Environmental Justice Worker Emily 37 , Female Caucasian ; US Assistant Professor in Microbiology Jasmine 27 , Female African - American ; US Student Becky 26 , Male African - American ; US Software Engineer There are seven local chapters affiliated with the organization . The local chapters of SftP em - body the core principles and strive to fulfill the strategic vision of the organization . They are encouraged by the national body to use their own autonomy and ingenuity as they develop and apply bottom - up , grassroots strategies to address local issues . In our research , we partner with the Atlanta chapter of the SftP , to simultaneously engage in the organization and study their use of social computing technologies in organizing a local movement around science - activism . 4 . 2 Science for the People - Atlanta Rachel had never been a part of any activist organization , but like many others , she identified the 2016 US presidential election as a moment of political crisis . She attended the Women’s March in Atlanta in January 2017 , 8 and kept wishing that she could do more than just attend protest marches . She wished she could use her skills and experience as a public health worker toward helping people who would need it the most in a time of crisis . And so , when her friend Sam invited her to a potluck dinner he hosted to plan and discuss the possibility of initiating a movement around science activism , she was immediately interested . Later , at that dinner , she realized she was not the only person in the room who felt the urgency of coming together for the causes of social justice . As she shared her reason for choosing to be a part of the movement , she said : These are difficult times , and I feel miserable and powerless . But I also see this as time of collective spiritual growth . That potluck dinner was the birth of the movement of SftP - Atlanta , the grassroots science - activist organization we study in this article . The first author of this article was present at that first of - ficial gathering of SftP - Atlanta and has stayed involved as an active member of the organization through the time of this research , witnessing the birth and formation of a grassroots social move - ment organization . As we discuss the story of SftP - Atlanta throughout the rest of the article , the demographic information of the members we interviewed is described in Table 1 . For the pur - pose of reserving anonymity of the participants , the names we will be using in this article are all fictional . Among the 10 members we interviewed , Rachel , Emma , Sam , Natalie , Alex , Chris , and Steven were part of the core member group that formed in January . Emily reported to have found out about the organization from their website . Shortly after she signed up to become a member , she 8 https : / / atlantamarch . com . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 9 Fig . 1 . Collective action in SftP - Atlanta . was invited to the organization’s subsequent face - to - face meeting . Sam and Jasmine connected at an activist event , and she came on board as a member in May , 2017 . Becky , an experienced activist and community organizer with ties to several grassroots organizations in Atlanta , was recruited through Emma’s personal network . 4 . 3 Advocacy of SftP - Atlanta SftP - Atlanta is built on a local community of scientists , researchers , and science enthusiasts . Like Rachel , they all came together with the shared belief that “scientific reasoning could be an ex - tremely powerful tool to resist injustice . 9 ” They also identified that activating scientific discourse among public would not happen without a re - imagination of the practice of science for the causes of social justice . Following the core values of SftP , the local chapter in Atlanta built their identity around a practice of science - activism that is inclusive , participatory , and accessible . Their plan of collective action toward this goal includes both short - term and long - term advocacy work ( as shown in Figure 1 ) . Their short - term collective action includes both taking part in activist events happening in and around Atlanta as well as organizing public - facing events to advocate for their cause of science - activism . For instance , as a part of their short - term advocacy , they organized a film screening of a documentary on climate change . They also collaborated with two other grassroots environmen - tal justice organizations to co - organize a panel discussion at a local university on environmental racism . Their long - term collective action is a step by step process that was informed by methods of community - centered research . It includes making connection with a local community organi - zation ; establishing a partnership between the organization and SftP - Atlanta ; and positioning the partner organization as leaders in shaping research questions , framing interpretations , and de - signing meaningful research action and outcomes . It is important to note that as a group coming into the local communities , SftP - Atlanta is not looking to take over their struggle , but instead pro - vide further resources to the community to better enable them to engage in their own praxis . For instance , in one such partnership , SftP - Atlanta is collaborating with an environmental justice or - ganization called ECO - Action , helping them create a web platform to communicate their research . In this partnership , SftP - Atlanta members trained in web development , data science , and science communication came together to collectively contribute to the shared cause of SftP - Atlanta and the partner organization . The shared cause in this case is to make scientific research around envi - ronmental injustice accessible to ordinary people , and especially to the communities that are most affected by those injustices . 9 http : / / atlanta . scienceforthepeople . org . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 10 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman In another partnership , the organization is collaborating with two local grassroots organizations called Project South and Georgia Collation for Hunger , and working to set up a food cooperative in Lakeweood , a local neighborhood that is known to be a “food desert” in Atlanta . For that project , three members of SftP - Atlanta are collaborating with members from two different organizations that already have experience working in that neighborhood . Social movement research has evaluated results of movement organizing with a focus on two main questions : the effects of the movement ( a ) on its members and ( b ) on the general social situ - ation [ 47 ] . Keeping those markers of evaluation in mind , we observed that SftP - Atlanta , through the time ( 11 months ) they have been active , have recruited about 20 more members , established 3 community partnerships , and grew and sustained a community of scientist - activists contributing to the social justice initiatives in and around Atlanta . While face - to - face meetings played a crucial role in establishing the collective identity of SftP - Atlanta , the internal organizing that led to the outcomes of this organization was supported by a collection of social computing tools . Their use of online tools and technologies resembles the way volunteer - run organizations make use of online tools to conduct meaningful collaborations . That said , they also appropriated certain tools in unique and innovative ways for their purpose of movement organizing that makes SftP - Atlanta an interesting case to study . 5 METHODS In our work with SftP - Atlanta , our empirical inquiry was driven by emancipatory AR and qualita - tive interviews . As we describe our methods , data collection process , and analysis in more detail , we will also provide researcher self - disclosure and reflexivity to objectively position and describe our participation in SftP - Atlanta . 5 . 1 Emancipatory Action Research AR or participatory AR is an approach to conducting democratic , collaborative , and socially rel - evant research through continuous partnership with a community . Hopkins et al . defines AR as , “action disciplined by enquiry , a personal attempt at understanding while engaged in a process of improvement and reform” [ 33 ] . Theories of AR further emphasize the importance of doing re - search with people , not for them . AR is also seen a cyclic process of action and critical reflection ; the process of reflection then influencing the next phase of action [ 13 ] . As the HCI community became increasingly interested in research with substantial social benefits , Hayes suggested AR as a possible method for those interventions [ 30 ] . Although there were some overlaps between AR and the existing qualitative methods practiced in HCI ( e . g . , field work , iterative design , participa - tory design ) , the concept of HCI researchers positioning themselves as “friendly outsiders” in the communities they study was a new approach . The position of “friendly outsider” implies , action researchers would simultaneously help organizations and study them , working from a position of closeness rather than distancing themselves from their object of study . There are several forms and practices around AR in which the researcher can take a more in - volved position than the “friendly outsider” role . One such method is emancipatory AR , a form of AR that “promotes emancipatory praxis in the participating practitioners ; that is , it promotes a critical consciousness which exhibits itself in political as well as practical action to promote change” [ 27 ] . Informed by the radical social movements of Marxism , anarchism , feminism , anti - racism , environmentalism , and liberationist movements in Latin America , emancipatory AR strives to address systemic injustices ( e . g . , racism , sexism , classism ) inherent in society . Emancipatory ac - tion researchers transcend the “outsider” position by taking a political stance in solidarity with whom they are conducting research with [ 31 ] . Following these principles of emancipatory AR , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 11 we co - constructed our research with the members of SftP - Atlanta through participation , as we wanted to gain a first - hand knowledge of how technology can help organize collective action in a grassroots community . Furthermore , in our work we see emancipatory AR as a method for empirically discovering val - ues practiced by a community . Building on the VSD methodologies , Le Dantec et al . identified a need for effective empirical instruments for discovering values in a given context [ 38 ] . They ar - gue that a conceptual understanding of values is not enough as discussing values in the abstract bars us from understanding them as lived experiences . They call for empirical investigations that “treat values as local phenomena , expressed in a local vocabulary . ” We build on their work , and further apply emancipatory AR as an empirical method that helps us understand the local context of values . AR is explicitly value - laden [ 42 ] . As Hayes points out , AR aims to implement some con - structive change in the community [ 30 ] . Therefore , “AR researchers must understand the values they and their community partners bring to the project so as to interrogate explicitly what they hope to achieve , why they hope to achieve it , and what makes them believe the solutions they are attempting will do so” [ 30 ] . Similarly , in our AR with SftP - Atlanta , we took up an activist role , participated and facilitated their organizational activities , and developed their web platform with them . Our close relationship with the community plays a central role in discovering the values of grassroots organizing as lived experiences of SftP - Atlanta . In the following section , we will discuss our positionality as action researchers and further elaborate on our partnership with SftP - Atlanta . 5 . 2 Researcher Self - Disclosure and Reflexivity Feminist social sciences and AR see researcher self - disclosure and reflexivity as an essential el - ement in the method [ 31 ] . Through researcher self - disclosure , AR and feminist methodologies insist that , the researcher must disclose his / her position in the world , goals , and intellectual and political beliefs . In our research , the first author joined SftP - Atlanta as a volunteer activist for the organization . The author learned about the organization through Facebook , and upon establishing a connection with one of the existing members , was invited to the first face - to - face meeting ( the previously mentioned potluck dinner ) with the core members of the organization . SftP - Atlanta particularly needed help with the development of their web platform . The author had experience with web building and offered to develop the website for the organization . In the first phase of our AR , the first author facilitated several participatory design workdays with other members of the organization , and subsequently developed the web - platform of SftP - Atlanta with the community ( Figure 2 ) . The author then maintained and iterated on the design of the website throughout the course of this study . The first author since stayed involved in the organization both as an action researcher and a vol - unteer activist . During the course of this study , the author participated in several organizational activities including around 30 face - to - face meetings . She facilitated around 10 of those face - to - face meetings , attended all of their direct - action initiatives ( film screenings , seminars , protest marches ) , and actively contributed her research skills in SftP - Atlanta’s collaboration with Eco - Action . More - over , she became an admin of SftP - Atlanta’s Slack channel and Facebook group , and used those platforms to communicate with the rest of the community on a daily basis . The first author took extensive field notes throughout the course of her participation in the organization . Furthermore , the first author’s political values are aligned with the organization that the values SftP - Atlanta stands by . For instance , both believe that science can be a positive tool for the causes of social justice . The second author , although subscribed to SftP - Atlanta’s newsletter , is not a member of the organization . Due to first author’s close involvement with the organization , the second author helped in minimizing bias in data collection and analysis . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 12 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman Fig . 2 . Website of SftP - Atlanta . 5 . 3 Data Collection and Analysis While the field notes from our participation in the organization worked as an important resource for this study , we also performed semi - structured interviews with 10 active members of SftP - Atlanta who were also the users of the tools used by the organization . The participants of our interview study were all active in SftP - Atlanta with various degrees of involvement with organi - zational activities . They represent a spectrum of identities : some of our participants reported to have strong activist backgrounds , while some identified more as community organizers . We had three participants who were participating in social actions for the first time with SftP - Atlanta . They subscribed to the organization as a reaction to the 2016 presidential election of the United States . 10 Our main method of recruitment for the interviews was the first author’s network in the orga - nization . Our participants consist of five females and five males , between the ages of twenty - five to sixty - four . Our semi - structured interviews contained questions regarding the following topics : motivation for joining SftP - Atlanta , individual roles in the organization , tool use , organizational workflows , and so on . Our goal was to gain a better understanding of how SftP - Atlanta members interact with tools , workflows , and each other in the organization . After transcribing the interviews , we qualitatively analyzed the interview data and field notes using inductive and deductive approaches . The first author open - coded the interviews and conducted a thematic analysis based on the theoretical framework and emergent themes grounded in the interview data . We also identified the themes based on interest to the CSCW and CHI community . 6 FINDINGS Grassroots movements have spontaneous growth ; however , our interviews suggest that such or - ganizing requires intense planning and collaboration among all members . In SftP - Atlanta this col - laborative process is supported by a combination of social and technological networks . Toward answering our research question of understanding the role of social computing technologies in grassroots movement building , we will now present the findings from our empirical inquiry on the sociotechnical practices of SftP - Atlanta . First , we will describe the sociotechnical ecosystem that supports the movement of SftP - Atlanta . With this description , we mean to build a narrative on how the sociotechnical practices were constructed in the first place : the choices and decisions 10 https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / 2016 _ United _ States _ presidential _ election . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 13 around the tools , who chose the tools , and what drove them to make the choices they made . Next , we will analyze the role of this ecosystem in the process of their movement building in the light of Paulo Freire’s model of participatory communication theory . Our analysis of SftP - Atlanta’s so - ciotechnical practices is informed by both the first author’s participation in the organization , and the interview study we conducted with the members of the organization . Our analysis reveals both strengths and weaknesses of the ecosystem in supporting grassroots movement building . Finally , our analysis of each step leads us to identify three core values that can guide future design of sociotechnical systems aiming to support grassroots movement building . 6 . 1 A Description of the Sociotechnical Ecosystem of SftP - Atlanta SftP - Atlanta’s sociotechnical ecosystem is not monolithic , it is a combination of several online plat - forms ( Google Tools , Slack , Facebook , the web platform ) , bi - weekly meetings , volunteer activists , and local rules . These elements , in turn , shaped their practices of movement building . Sociotechni - cal system studies define human organization as an integration of two heterogeneous but mutually supportive systems : a social system in which members form relationships through activities , and a technical system that they use to perform a series of tasks related to specific goals . These two systems are interdependent , and greater coordination between the two leads to higher produc - tivity in the organization [ 5 ] . Grassroots social movements , too , consist of social and technical systems : a social system made of volunteer activists collaboratively working toward their collec - tive mission , and technical systems that fosters collaboration in the social system . Together , this ecosystem shapes the sociotechnical practices of grassroots movement building . Optimized inte - gration between these two systems leads to more effective practices that will then lead to more participation from the members . The social system of SftP - Atlanta evolved with time . As we mentioned before , the potluck dinner in January 2017 marks as the official inception of the organization . In the first potluck dinner organized by three core members , all participants were handed a questionnaire with six questions : What’s your educational and occupational background ? How did you hear about SftP ? What interests you about the organization ? What’s your experience in organizing ? Are you a part of any labor , environmental , or other activist organizations ? Do you know other people who would be interested in getting involved with organizing SftP ? A core group of 10 members was formed after that meeting . They met weekly for the next two months to frame a collective identity and a vision for the organization . These members were also simultaneously leveraging their social ties to recruit more people in the organization . In the first two months , the core group members of SftP - Atlanta engaged in readings on themes includ - ing but not limited to grassroots politics , participatory democracy [ 46 ] , pedagogy of social action [ 25 ] , feminist epistemologies [ 4 ] , and so on . The group would also engage in analysis of the local political landscape of Atlanta . This led to a creation of their core principles by the end of January . The core group members also chose the technical system of SftP - Atlanta . These tools were chosen over the course of first three months since their first meeting in January 2017 . In that potluck dinner , participants also discussed the technologies they could use to continue the work of building up the movement . While several participants expressed their concerns with using commercial platforms like Google and Facebook , they were also quick to identify that at the initial stage of building and sustaining a movement they should prioritize usability over the politics of the platforms . At the end of the potluck dinner , the core members decided to create a Google ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 14 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman account , a drive folder 11 from that account , and finally a document in the drive to collect and synthesize the skillsets of the members . We elaborate on the role of Google Drive in framing a collective identity in the coming sections of this article . While Google Drive worked as a repository for organizational data , the web platform of SftP - Atlanta along with the Facebook account was created to establish the organization’s identity to the broader public . Using Facebook was another decision where the members felt conflicted , but also recognized that a social media presence was necessary to establish a strong public presence . Emma ( a participant in this study ) set up the Facebook page of the organization . Although the admin privileges were shared among a few of the core members , Emma took up the primary responsibility of managing the page . As the technical and social system started to grow , members started to realize a need for more effective asynchronous coordination between the social and technical systems . During a face - to - face meeting in February 2017 , Alex ( a participant in this study ) shared the idea of creating a Slack channel for the group . Slack is a proprietary team collaboration tool . Alex had already been using Slack for work and had found it to be effective for the purpose of asynchronous communication . In his interview with us , Alex reflected that as a hacker he was an avid user of Internet Relay Chat ( IRC ) platforms , and he saw Slack as a more user - friendly version of IRCs : I like Slack a lot . It is nice because using IRC has a bit of a learning curve , and it was just kind of like a beardy hacker kind of thing , and Slack is made that style of communication a lot more accessible – Alex When Alex shared his idea to a meeting with eleven participants , four of them said they had a similarly positive experience with it , two of them shared that they have Slack accounts but are not actively using the tool , five of them had no prior experience with the tool . Some of the members also suggested that the group should look for open source alternatives that are customizable , as an activist group like theirs might have needs that a commercial team collaboration tool might not ac - commodate . While Sam , Alex , and Natalie took up the task of doing more research on open source alternatives , the group decided that they would create and use a Slack channel until an alternative was found . The members with prior experience with Slack offered to help others with less or no ex - perience with the tool . Here , it is important to note that later when open source alternatives were found , members ( primarily the ones who had to learn Slack for this organization ) showed very little enthusiasm to learn yet another tool . When asked how she felt about the proposed transition to a new tool , one of our participant shared : Slack was hard enough for me . I am not on these platforms like others , I am not a techie , I don’t think I can manage yet another tool . – Rachel This reluctance ( shown by some members ) to accept “yet another” tool to the technical system of the organization inspired the group to look for technological affordances within the Slack universe instead of adding a new tool to the ecosystem . Their choice of the to - do bot of Slack is an example of such usability - driven choice . Three months into organizing their movement , SftP - Atlanta started to work on concrete projects . The group started to realize that they needed a task - management tool to increase accountability in their social system . Addressing this concern , Sam suggested the to - do bot of Slack as a way of managing and distributing tasks to members . The to - do bot is a project management application integrated with Slack . The group was quick to adapt to a choice that was merely an extension of a technical system ( Slack ) that they were already using . 11 https : / / www . google . com / drive / . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 15 The technical system of SftP - Atlanta was established in the first three to four months of move - ment building , while the social system continued to evolve as the organization continued to grow both in terms of membership and projects they were involved in . To the newer members who joined after the first four months the technical system was presented as a given fact about the organizational ecosystem . However , the social roles associated with the tools were transferred to newer members . For instance , Jasmine joined SftP - Atlanta in March , 2017 , and after joining a few of their face - to - face meetings she showed interest in helping with the Facebook account . She was promptly made an admin of the Facebook page by Emma . Not all transitions were as seamless as it was with Jasmine’s role as the Facebook admin . SftP - Atlanta’s social system was built upon the foundations of grassroots democracy . The technical systems that SftP - Atlanta chose to use were , as was pointed out by the core members themselves , all commercial platforms with values often in conflict with grassroots politics . As a result , the social and the technical systems of SftP - Atlanta were not always integrated in the most optimal way . The sociotechnical practices of SftP - Atlanta , in turn , were not always successful in supporting the grassroots process of movement building . In order to better understand this conflict between the social and the technical systems of the organization , we need to examine SftP - Atlanta’s sociotechnical practices in the light of their own politics . In the following sections , we will analyze both the strengths and the weaknesses of this sociotechnical practices in supporting the iterative steps of grassroots movement building . 6 . 2 Examining the Sociotechnical Practices of Grassroots Movement Building SftP - Atlanta is founded upon the values embedded in grassroots organizing . They are dedicated to building a movement around science activism from the ground up with a goal of producing local impact . Toward their goal of establishing a solid political foundation , they organized several read - ing groups . From our field observations and our interviews with the 10 members of SftP - Atlanta , we observe three primary goals that guided them through their process of internal organizing : building their organizational capacity and expanding their relational networks , mobilizing their members toward collective action , and fostering meaningful engagement among the members . Several organizational activities were planned and executed to collectively accomplish these goals . In our work , we wanted to make sense of these goals and activities in the light of a phi - losophy that SftP - Atlanta subscribes to . For that purpose , we will now turn to the Freirean model of participatory communication theory . Our observations of their goals and activities reveal that SftP - Atlanta followed the three iterative steps of grassroots movement building that the theory of participatory communication also suggests : building a collective identity , facilitating collective action , and fostering reflexive dialog . We further analyze the sociotechnical ecosystem as a means for operationalizing this process of movement building . Our analysis of the ecosystem indicates both strengths and weaknesses of the sociotechnical practices in supporting the unique qualities of bottom - up movement building . We further analyze their strengths and the weaknesses and identify values that emerge from their practices of movement building . 6 . 2 . 1 Building a Collective Identity . All the core members we interviewed identified the potluck dinner gathering of January 2017 , as the birth of the movement of SftP - Atlanta . As one of the members noted in that meeting : To plan our actions in and around Atlanta , we have to first realize who we are as a community . – Rachel From that informal gathering to a grassroots science - activist organization , an essential part of SftP - Atlanta’s journey was to collectively explore and establish their identity as an organization , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 16 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman Fig . 3 . Goals and activities toward collective identity . that is , who they were as a community . Reflecting on the organizational goal one of our participant noted : I see the goal of our organization is to push for a type of scientific inquiry the ultimate goal of which is to make the world better for all people – Emma Although there was a shared cause that initiated the process of organizing for SftP - Atlanta , con - structing the goals and the guiding principles that framed the collective identity of the organiza - tion required more nuanced interventions ( Figure 3 ) . As a first step toward forming an identity , the theory of participatory communication stresses the importance of careful analysis of the so - cial and political context in which a movement is being organized . This implies a critical under - standing of the broader structural issues that might be influencing the cause of the movement , the power relationships that shape the cause , and a collective consensus on how the movement should be addressing the issues it is dealing with . Our participants reflected on how the sociotechnical ecosystem of the organization played a crucial role in this phase of movement building . Perceived Strengths of Current Practices for Building a Collective Identity . Since there was no hierarchical structure leading the movement , the collective identity of SftP - Atlanta was formed through several collaborative work sessions ( both offline and online ) among the core members of the organization . The focus of those collaborations was to decon - struct the “ultimate goal” into two concrete actions : recording and analyzing the scientific skills and political interests of each member and developing a set of guiding principles that would direct their organizational activities . For the first task , all core members were asked to communicate their research and polit - ical background in three to four sentences on a shared document in SftP - Atlanta’s Google Drive . Two of the members with expertise in community organizing then volunteered to synthesize the document and further draft a few guiding principles where the individual voices of the members were chronicled . The Google document containing the guiding principles was then iterated in the network of the core members to reach a consensus on those principles . The result of this internal analysis was a more refined framing of the ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 17 movement of SftP - Atlanta . As one of our participants explained , it also identified new requirements in the organizational agenda : We realized that it’s important for Science for the People to be a resource to the people . But to serve the people as resources , we need to know what questions they have or what’s going on in the communities that need to be answered . That document was our way of collectively exploring the question : do we have the resources to help in answering those questions people might have for us ? – Emma Once there was a shared understanding of the organizational identity among the core members , the next priority for SftP - Atlanta was to establish connections with local com - munities to work with and to grow its organizational capacity by recruiting new members . The collective identity of the organization , as crafted through democratic collaboration , further influenced the framing of the organization’s advocacy strategies as well as the re - cruitment policies . For SftP - Atlanta , the purpose of advocacy was twofold , i . e . , ( a ) to find and recruit potential members and ( b ) to build a network of allies who would be willing to partner with the organization . Social media , and particularly Facebook , was the tool the organization used for this purpose . Although some of the members were initially wary of Facebook’s policies and were personally absent from the platform , the group collec - tively voted on having a social media presence . One of the participants who volunteered to manage the social media presence of the organization explained : I see the use of Facebook in getting the word out . Reposting , retweeting , mak - ing sure the subjects of concern are present in the communication sphere . We could reach to the big audience that we could not have reached by any other means before . – Jasmine Our participants also noted that having a presence in the landscape of social media , be - cause of its broad reach , made the members feel less alone . The virtual support system ( network of allies ) played a vital role situating the work of the organization in the broader grassroots network : I can see how it makes us feel less isolated as we do the work , because social justice work can be very exhausting , and people get burnt out . – Jasmine While the Facebook page of SftP - Atlanta served a purpose of raising a general awareness about the issues the organization’s identity is tied to , the public page was rarely used to directly recruit members from the Facebook world . Recruitment in a social movement organization requires more nuanced approach than what the Facebook page could afford . The members soon realized a need for a different tool for this process , which led the first author to co - create a sign - up feature on their web platform . Recruitment in SftP - Atlanta is a two - way process : while there were some members who reported initiating a connection with the organization via their web platform and were later recruited by an existing member , the core members we interviewed also reported having approached potential members through various networks . Our participants found the sign - up feature on the web platform to be more useful in the first scenario . The second scenario required more human intervention . An active recruiter in the organization reported their strategy : Sometimes I just point them to our website , or I give them my email address or my phone number , when they seem to be interested . When you talk to people you sense it , how much they are interested . Then depending on that I ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 18 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman either give them my contact if it’s really strong interest that I see . If it’s not that strong , I just point them to our webpage so that they can explore and decide for themselves . – Sam Our participants reflected on how recruiting individuals and advocating for a cause one is personally and politically invested in , can be an emotional exercise : If you expose yourself too much to people who are sort of , you know , not so invested in the idea . . . and they don’t follow up , it sometimes consumes you . You invest and there is nothing coming back , which is where you must be patient . Because you can never avoid that . ” – Sam “Science for the People is always at the front of my mind . I’m always thinking about it . Even if I’m not messaging in the Slack group or something I’m talking to my coworkers , I’m talking to my bosses , I’m talking to this person that I met at a coffee shop in Detroit about it . It’s at the forefront of my mind all the time because I think it’s so important that it exists . – Emma Although both agreed that the emotional component of advocacy is irreplaceable , they also noted that the web platform helped in streamlining this process of recruitment . One of the recruiters of the organization personally ( over email ) reached out to everyone who would sign up as a volunteer activist through that feature on the website . The objective of this step was to establish a stronger connection with potential members and depending on the conversation they would get invited to the monthly meetings or to the Slack channel . Recruitment in SftP - Atlanta was not only about acquiring new volunteers ; the organi - zation was also focused on building partnerships with other community organizations . They intended to make this process of partnership formation a two - way process like that of the member recruitment , which led the organization to include a sign - up feature on their web platform for community partners as well . However , our participants reflected on how complex this process of network formation is . SftP - Atlanta has established three community partnerships so far , and in each of these three cases , our participants reported following strategies that were more human - driven than tool - driven . As one of our par - ticipants elaborated , in three of these partnerships , one or more members of SftP - Atlanta would attend meetings of the organization , and similarly the other organization would also have representatives in the monthly meetings of SftP - Atlanta . It is through this pro - cess of relationship building that mutual trust is formed and that leads to a stronger part - nership between two organizations : So far , it’s been by two or more individuals from each organization bonding , and then you show up at their events , they show up at your events . Every - body gets a feeling of how the organization functions . I think that’s very important for the type of organization that we are . Which is to say , a grass - roots organization . You want to know how the other organization works in its core , the surface is not enough , because you need to share core values to collaborate . – Sam Perceived weaknesses of current practices for building a collective identity . While the existing sociotechnical practices functionally supported the organization in their phase of identity formation , the choice of this ecosystem came with its limitations . In our obser - vations of the face - to - face meetings of the organization , we realized that different mem - bers of the organization , depending on their level of familiarity with the tools ( or with technology in general ) , interacted with the tools in different ways . While differences in ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 19 experiences while interacting with the same tool is not unexpected in a diverse commu - nity , it can sometimes end up having consequences . As one of our participants reflected on his introduction to the Slack channel : I felt a little lost in the conversations in the beginning . If you’re just jump - ing into it , you don’t know what’s happening and you don’t know all the conversations , you don’t even know how to use the tools , there is a lot to it . I really wish it was like some sort of introduction or something of that kind , an on - boarding experience or something , either by the organization or the tool . – Becky It is crucial for a grassroots movement organization running strictly on a volunteer capac - ity with no practiced hierarchy to be able to successfully tie new members into the existing web of volunteers and provide them with a sense of community . One of our participants was also concerned about how this barrier to entry in the organization’s sociotechnical environment might accidentally result in loss of representative voices : I think that it ends up favoring people who are already using Slack for their jobs so they’re on it all day versus people who only use Slack for Science for the People . They end up not necessarily participating in the conversations as much or being represented in the conversation as much . – Emma Drawing on the participatory communication theory of movement building and its em - phasis on the importance of democratic participation , we argue that it is a responsibility for both the designers of the systems and the facilitators of those environments to ensure that technologically disadvantaged voices also get represented . Furthermore , reflecting on the way SftP - Atlanta’s sociotechnical ecosystem formed , we realize that these tech - nologies were chosen by only a few of the core members , and were expected to be used by all who become members of the organization . This expectation assumes a certain level of technological competence that might not always be the case for everyone who is in - terested in the organization . Our analysis of the perceived strengths and the weaknesses of the sociotechnical prac - tices of SftP - Atlanta in this phase of collective identity indicates a conflict between the social and technical systems at work . While on one hand the organization wanted to stay true to the democratic values of grassroots organizing , on the other hand , it often strug - gled to meaningfully include all members in the sociotechnical ecosystem in order for it to be a fair and equitable democracy . Reflecting on this conflicted relationship between the social and technical systems , we identify a key value of grassroots movement building as inclusivity . 6 . 2 . 2 Moving Toward Collective Action . The identity of an organization is also tied to the ac - tions it participates in . Freire suggests that collective action in social movement organizations to be informed by the shared understanding of the organization’s identity . According to Freire , “the interrelation of the awareness of aim and of process is the basis for planning action , which implies methods , objectives , and value options” [ 24 ] . Building off of Freire’s ideology of praxis , participa - tory communication theory suggests collective action as the second step of movement building . While the sociotechnical practices in place helped in mobilizing the members toward direct action ( Figure 4 ) , our participants also reported how their values were often in conflict with their own technological infrastructure . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 20 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman Fig . 4 . Goals and activities toward collective identity . Perceived strengths of current practices for supporting collective action . For SftP - Atlanta , the two key activities that facilitated collective action were democratic decision making and proper task management ( Figure 4 ) . Collaborative decision - making is es - sential in democratic environments . Whether it was about taking part in a campaign or starting a new project , for the first few months since inception , any crucial decision that would require participation from the members of the organization was always decided collaboratively by making use of both online ( Slack ) and offline ( face - to - face monthly meetings ) communication infrastructure . Interestingly , the strategies they used on Slack were a virtual equivalent of their offline strategy for decision making at this stage . The facilitator of the decision - making process would post the issue and ask for votes using three different emoji : thumbs up if one agreed , thumbs down if one disagreed , and a neu - tral face if one was agnostic about the issue . Additionally , the post would urge members to add the reasoning behind their votes as a comment on the post - thread . One of our par - ticipants who identified as more of community organizer in the organization explained how Slack was useful for her work within the organization : I can see how decisions are being made , who was making those decisions , who was being the initiator or the campaigner role , or whatever . I think it’s useful to have all that stuff visually displayed and it’s easy for me in my mind since so much of organizing is just understanding the social landscape that the organization is operating in . I think that ends up being extremely helpful . – Emma Social movement theory stresses the importance of having regular internal meetings in grassroots movement organizing , as it helps create safe spaces for the members of the or - ganization . Members of SftP - Atlanta realized the significance of a safe space for complex decision - making processes to take place . As one member reflected : We need to create a space where every member feels as comfortable while disagreeing with a decision as they feel while agreeing with it . – Emily While monthly meetings did help foster that trust , the channel on Slack which has a presence of all 40 members accelerated the development of trust . Appropriating the af - fordances of the existing Slack channel to democratic decision making was also to foster this sense of comfort and safety in the process . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 21 Deciding on an action was usually followed by decomposing the idea of action into tan - gible tasks that members can then volunteer to take up . Grassroots movements run by volunteer activists require a robust infrastructure for task distribution and management . In case of SftP - Atlanta , this was also mediated through a sociotechnical system that re - volved around the to - do bot plugin on Slack . The job responsibilities in the organization were distributed in two ways : either individuals took up tasks during the monthly meet - ings , or the two members who identified themselves as community organizers would approach certain members with tasks . The second method needed the community orga - nizers to be aware of the skills and interests of every member . After that initial exchange of task details , which happened either face - to - face or over chat on Slack , the tasks were then formally assigned to the members with the help of the to - do plugin on Slack . SftP - Atlanta operated in a strictly non - hierarchical manner , and so at the core of their internal process is even distribution of labor among the volunteers . In practice , this was done by switching roles often . Our participants found the process of organizing tasks and setting up deadlines for the deliverable to be useful in keeping them motivated : I checked off my little “completed” for my to - do bot the other day . On the day it was due . I was so proud . Social movement organizing can sometimes get stuck at discourses around nebulous ideas and you can feel lost in ideas sometimes , but checking off an actual task has been an emotionally satis - fying experience . It also reminds me that I am playing a part in the big action – Emily Perceived weaknesses of current practices for supporting collective action . Our par - ticipants reported varied levels of trust on the systems they were using . The definition of trust , however , was different for different individuals . One of our participants reported , the closed source , “secretive” nature of the applications they were using made him ques - tion the tools frequently : I am almost always very , very aware of what I am sharing there . We don’t have any activities that I see in anyway could be perceived as subversive . There is no counter - power action . The thing is we are innocuous . Which is good . But , yeah , you never know . We don’t have any control whatsoever over these tools . We don’t even clearly know how these things work . They don’t tell you how secure Slack communication is . But I encrypt my emails . – Sam Another participant reported concerns about the privacy policies of Facebook events , and how that impacts the privacy of both the organization and the individuals associated with it . More specifically , he was worried that his attendance at a Facebook event ( if the event was public ) was by default public to his friends on Facebook . He shared that as an activist and a social justice worker he might be interested in participating in an event that he would not want to make everyone aware of : What worries me most is when you create a Facebook event , it is public by default . And if you don’t know better , most of the time it’s public , and when it’s public , and the fact I’m going to it , is being broadcasted to everyone I am friends with on Facebook . Sometimes , the information even travels outside of Facebook . I’ve had events that I went to that I was like , “oh maybe I don’t want everyone on the internet knowing I’m going to this . ” – Becky Although almost all our participants had a critical stance toward some of the politics ( or sometimes the lack of a careful political stance ) inherent in the systems in use , they ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 22 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman also reflected on how they collectively chose to still be present on those communica - tion spheres because of the power and reach those systems have already achieved . For instance , the same participant who reported to be concerned about Facebook’s privacy policies with events , also admitted that Facebook event were one of the most popular ways of organizing an activist event , because it could easily draw the attention of many people who were already in the platform : If you want to work with the people , you cannot not be on Facebook . Because that’s where the people are . – Jasmine Our participant further reflected on how the organization was leveraging the knowledge and the expertise of the cybersecurity researchers present in the group to educate each other about the issues of privacy and security in political organizing : What I think is a useful thing that we do in our organization , is educating each other on these issues of security and on alternative tools that we can use on an individual level . And we have experts in our team on cyber security ! Looking at the current state of affairs and the work that we do , I really don’t think the paranoia is immediately necessary . But things might change . And if it does we have the possibilities in our reach , it will not be too much of a trouble to adapt the new tools I feel . – Sam Another participant who self - identified as a “non - expert” of technology , reflected on how these conversations have influenced her interactions with the tools she had been using as a part of the group as well as in her personal life : I can see in the SftP group , being with people that are much more adept at technology , I started to feel that there’s going to be such a huge divide . And the people who really understand this technology are going to be so powerful and the rest of us are just going to be like , “what do we do ? ” Be - cause there is so much power in technology and all these tools and it’s so hard , unless you’re in that industry , to keep up with the speed at which it’s changing . – Rachel Almost all the systems our participants reflected on were not developed with a special intention to support social justice organizing . However , going back to the central tenet of our theoretical framework—the notion of democratic participation—it is only viable when the members of the sociotechnical ecosystem trust the platforms that are meant to enable democracy . Furthermore , our findings suggest that people might have differ - ent levels of comfort with technologies in use—knowledge and / or accessibility , in rela - tion to technology , also plays a role in making people feel more or less secure in a plat - form . For instance , Rachel’s reflection on the more “technical” internal discussions on privacy / security practices within the organization indicate that while she gained theo - retical knowledge of the privacy practices of these systems in use , she felt a little lost realizing that without adequate skills she was at more risk in such technological plat - forms . Previous social computing researchers have investigated the relationship between trust and privacy / security of systems [ 2 , 3 ] . From our investigation in SftP - Atlanta’s so - ciotechnical ecosystem , we see that the issues of security , privacy , trust , knowledge , and accessibility were all the more significant because of their purpose of movement orga - nizing . We argue that for there to be successful collective action through democratic par - ticipation , members need to feel secure enough to participate in the platforms used by a grassroots organization—privacy / security is a key value that sociotechnical practices of ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 23 Fig . 5 . Goals and activities toward collective identity . grassroots movement building can embody in order to effectively support meaningful col - lective action . Furthermore , for grassroots social movement organizations that may host people with varied level of competence in technology , sociotechnical practices around privacy / security would mean both choosing tools that functionally support their need for a trustworthy platform as well as investing time in collectively developing knowledge and skill of privacy practices . 6 . 2 . 3 Constructing an Infrastructure for Reflexive Dialog . The third and the iterative step in grassroots movement organizing is building and sustaining an infrastructure that supports reflex - ive dialog in the organization . The concept of reflexive dialog in participatory communication theory emerges from Freire’s dialogical pedagogy . For Freire , liberating pedagogy speaks of the fundamental need of a person to inquire and question existing structures [ 24 ] . In the case of SftP - Atlanta , constructing an ecosystem where free transaction of ideas and inquiries can take place was a crucial step toward fostering democratic participation ( Figure 5 ) . Perceived strengths of current practices for fostering reflexive dialog . For SftP - Atlanta , the nature of reflexive dialog within the organization changed over time . As a newly formed organization still in the phase of deciding on their collective identity , for the first few months since January 2017 , members would collectively reflect on what it meant to build a grassroots movement around science activism . As scientists , researchers , and sci - ence workers involved in different local institutions , SftP - Atlanta members engaged in a critical evaluation of the traditional modes of scientific inquiry . For instance , making science useful for the political causes of social justice is often perceived as an antithesis to the value - neutral position of traditional modes of knowledge production [ 29 ] . Given their academic background and trainings in traditional scientific inquiries , SftP - Atlanta dedicated many face - to - face meetings in the first few months in critically reflecting on what their role should be as “scientists” in local communities . The first author partici - pated in these initial meetings , and our field notes from participation indicate that the outcomes from these reflexive practices ranged from pedagogical ( i . e . , more awareness in members on how to develop a more community - centered practice of scientific inquiry ) to instrumental ( i . e . , a set of guiding principles that was later published in SftP - Atlanta’s web platform ) . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 24 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman While these conversations continued within the organization more informally , as the organization took shape , the monthly face - to - face meetings became more systematic . Typically , a monthly meeting would have introductions of new members ( if there were any ) , followed by discussions of updates from various projects , and careful reflections on existing practices and strategies in place . The transition to a more systematic design of monthly meetings was a conscious decision made by the organization after realizing that members from less - advantaged backgrounds working multiple jobs could not always afford the luxury of semi - structured conversational meetings [ 46 ] . At this stage , they pri - oritized the need of keeping all members updated with the progress of different projects and creating ways of holding each other accountable for the practical tasks they were responsible for . For instance , in one such face - to - face meeting in April 2017 , members involved in the Lakewood project reported back to the entire group on their latest development on a potential funding source for the community garden . The group discussed the potential benefits and drawbacks of writing a grant application for that particular funding source . The members involved also shared concerns regarding their lack of experience in writ - ing grant proposals for an agricultural initiative . As a response to that concern , Emily , who was not involved in the project before but had grant writing experience from her professional background , offered to help with the grant writing process if required . While the monthly face - to - face meetings became more about reporting back from dif - ferent projects , SftP - Atlanta turned to Slack to discuss readings on science and politics , and their movement strategies informed by their interpretations of these readings . Mem - bers of SftP - Atlanta considered Slack to be an effective platform that met their need of a medium for asynchronous communication : What Slack does is that it creates a virtual space where we meet , where we all are present . I believe that every single act of communication even if it’s just a thumb up or something , it counts . If I’m a new person , and I post something there and I post it into the void , an empty chamber , that might turn me down . But if there’s another person who reacts to that post , there is a communication . Act of communication binds people together . – Sam Slack’s asynchronous nature was reported to be particularly useful for the volunteer ac - tivists of the organization . Especially for our particular demographic , and the way in which we flirt with being a professional association almost , the asynchronous nature of Slack is super crucial . These folks are going to have other commitments , and they’re not going to want to feel completely disenfranchised , completely separate and alienated if they miss a face - to - face meeting – Emily Participants also noted that not everyone in the organization was comfortable with the online mode of communication : I think people have different communication styles . I noticed that some peo - ple who don’t really type out that much are much more willing to speak out loud and talk through their idea processing and bounce off ideas in that way . – Emma I don’t think you get to know people’s personalities as well on Google groups and Slack channels . I think seeing how people fill in different roles when ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 25 you’re all in a room together is different than the kind of roles people fulfill when they’re in an online community . – Jasmine On a related topic , participants further noted that their practices for reflexive dialog in the organization would be incomplete without the face - to - face meetings . In an attempt to combine the affordances of the offline and online modes of communication , members did a synergistic use of Slack and face - to - face meetings . For instance , once the date and the time of the monthly meetings would be set up , the agenda for the meeting would be collaboratively edited over the document sharing feature on Slack . Opening the meeting agenda for everyone in the organization to edit and modify was a step toward including the voices of individual members in the planning phase of a meeting . Similarly , the notes from the monthly meetings would have a record of reflections from members , which would then be posted on Slack as a “note” that can be further edited by other members . Perceived weaknesses of current practices for fostering reflexive dialog . While Slack was useful for sharing relevant readings and having discussions on them , when they had to decide on movement strategies , Slack had limitations . Members would organize face - to - face meetings dedicated on specific issues that might arise within the organization . For instance , in August 2017 , in an attempt to have an informal reflexive meeting , SftP - Atlanta organized a retreat where all core members went hiking to a nearby trail and dis - cussed their visions for the organization . In this retreat , in addition to discussing future projects that each member would like for the organization to be involved in , members of the organization critically reflected on the inherent politics of their sociotechnical prac - tices . SftP - Atlanta advocated for an open and transparent method of scientific inquiry , and more specifically for Open Science . However , the closed source nature of all the tools that they used made some of the members uncomfortable . One member shared : On principle I think Slack , should not be our first choice , because it’s propri - etary , it’s not open source . It’s not easily customizable for our needs . Plus , we don’t know where all our data is going , you know . Personally , I am looking forward to at some point hopefully replacing that with a similar tool that is open source . But most people knew Slack , and introducing a new tool require work , it requires time , and of course we don’t want to get stopped by these technical things . ” – Sam On a similar note , one of our participants reflected on how tools with explicit purpose and political values have the potential to contribute to the social and political ecosystem of an organization : It just becomes this community built around a platform that has a politics associated with it . I think there’s always politics built into a system . – Emma Emma referred to the success of riseup . net , in building a community around their work . Riseup is a collective that provides secure online communication tools ( email account , email list , VPN , online chat , etc . ) , and as they say it on their website , they are focused on supporting “people and groups working on liberatory social change . ” Our participant further expressed that her experience with different activist work led her to believe that there is an opportunity for a tool developed with the values of social justice to solidify the network among different social justice organizations : I think that overall that will really strengthen social movements is when peo - ple are using similar platforms . You don’t have to learn how to use something just to participate . – Emma ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 26 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman While there must be more to a successful grassroots network than just a tool , Emma’s re - flection does speak to the gap that exists between the social systems of grassroots move - ments wanting to practice new modes of democracy and the technical systems not sup - porting that . For instance , during the first few months of organizing SftP - Atlanta tried to implement a democratic model with the emoji - based voting and other social rules as - sociated with voting - based decision making . However , after a few successful implemen - tations of this method , they also reported to have struggled with establishing a reflexive infrastructure for decision - making with the process of voting . As one of our participants noted : The Slack vote versus the subsequent discussion at the most recent monthly meeting was vastly different . On Slack I was like ‘meh I don’t care’ , and so I would take a neutral position . But in the meeting , someone explained why she voted yes , and I was like ‘oh that actually makes me change my opinion’ . And I can tell you , I was not the only one . – Alex After realizing that the emoji - based voting was not adequate in supporting the group reaching consensus in a transparent way , the group started a ritual for members to add a comment on the voting thread explaining their decision on the subject . While some members followed that policy , from our observation of the group we could see that it did not help resolve the issue : It’s often not enough to know one’s decision . In a group like ours , there has to be a space for dialogue in decision - making . – Emily The Freirean model of participatory communication theory puts a strong emphasis on the role of reflexive dialogue in facilitating democratic participation . Reflection , according to Freire’s pedagogy of social action , complements action as the other half of praxis [ 24 ] . We argue that in order for there to be a successful reflexive environment for grassroots democracy and decision - making , members need to know more than “yes / no” opinions of other members . Decision - making , as a reflexive and pedagogical process , calls for ad - equate transparency in the sociotechnical practices enabling reflection . Transparency in this sociotechnical sense further speaks to both Alex and Emily’s account of the weakness of slack - based decision making : it lacked a space for meaningful exchange of opinions . What does a meaningful space for communication and collaboration look like ? What does it mean to design such an infrastructure ? CSCW researchers Erickson and Kellogg were invested in designing collaborative tools and technologies that would make mean - ingful communication happen [ 21 ] . They realized that in order to support communication that is deep , coherent , and productive , digital platforms need to support three essential elements of social interaction : visibility , awareness , and accountability . They named this combination of design qualities as social translucence [ 21 ] . Although emerging from very different sociopolitical settings , there is an interesting similarity between the communica - tion needs of SftP - Atlanta and the social situation that the idea of social translucence was built upon . Toward justifying the three principles of a social translucent system , Erickson and Kellogg tell the story of a door with a design problem : “opened quickly , it is likely to slam into anyone who is about to enter from the other direction” [ 21 ] . A successful design solution for this problem , they argue , is putting a glass window in the door . This solution would work for three reasons . One , the glass window would make socially significant information visible , that is to say , someone opening the door would be able to see the presence of another person on ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 27 the other side . The element of design supporting this process is visibility . Second , along with visibility , it would also support awareness in the sociotechnical system : meaning , based on what one perceives to be on the other side of the door they can make a choice of whether or not to open the door . Awareness creates an opportunity for social rules to govern our actions . Third , it would provide a way for the person on the other side of the door to hold the person opening the door accountable for the choice he makes . Thus , ensuring the third element of social translucence : accountability [ 21 ] . SftP - Atlanta’s sociotechnical practices for reflexive dialog—from using Slack as a com - munity space where members could have political discourse to leveraging face - to - face meetings for greater accountability within the ecosystem—strive for greater visibility , awareness , and accountability within the organization . While SftP - Atlanta’s goals for transparency and accountability have philosophical roots that can be traced back to the Freirean model of participatory communication theory , we can argue that these philo - sophical values can be operationalized in sociotechnical systems with the more instru - mental value of social translucence . Finally , our participants also emphasized the role of emotions in social movement organizing . According to one of our participants , the monthly face - to - face meetings were more effective in fostering emotional connections among the members : I think virtual platforms are necessary but not sufficient . To really feel emo - tionally connected , to really have buy - in to the group in a way which en - courages self - sacrifice , you need more than just virtual . Like , “I don’t feel like getting up this Saturday morning but I’m going to , to go to this meet - ing because this matters”—that emotional component is very hard to build through virtual communities . Also , just try imagining virtually attending Tahrir Square ! – Emily Emotions play a big role in any volunteer driven not - for - profit organization . In the case of a grassroots organization , it is one of the most essential elements in social movement organizing . There are also different webs of emotional networks in play in the landscape of SftP - Atlanta . There is emotional connection among the volunteer activists of the orga - nization who worked together to build and sustain the movement . Our participants also reflected on how their personal transformation from “researchers in a lab” to “volunteer science - activists working with a community” was an emotional journey and learning pro - cess for many . As our participants reflected , their partnerships with the different commu - nities were driven by a sense of solidarity that would be impossible to establish without face - to - face meetings and gatherings with the representatives with those communities : You hear about food desserts and you have an idea of what the situation looks like . But how would we imagine a solution to it if we never actually experience what it feels like to live there ? The truth is , most of us never will . But for this food co - op project , I am glad that we have established the connections with community workers from Lakewood who know about what is going on and who have been fighting their battle for years . We are just joining forces . – Sam Technology can never fully substitute some of the unique qualities of social interactions in grassroots organizing . The emotional component of movement organizing is one such . However , it is possible to imagine systems that work synergistically with the offline spirit of grassroots movements by staying committed to the bottom up nature of grassroots ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 28 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman movement formation and by addressing the concerns mentioned in the previous sections . As Ackerman pointed out , the sociotechnical gap of CSCW systems is perhaps unavoid - able , but if we are aware of the nature of the gaps we can acknowledge them and design around them . In Ackerman’s words , “an understanding of the sociotechnical gap lies at the heart of CSCW’s intellectual contribution . If CSCW ( or HCI ) merely contributes ‘cool toys’ to the world , it will have failed its intellectual mission . Our understanding of the gap is driven by technological exploration through artifact creation and deployment , but HCI and CSCW systems need to have at their core a fundamental understanding of how people really work and live in groups , organizations , communities , and other forms of collective life . Otherwise , we will produce unusable systems , badly mechanizing and dis - torting collaboration and other social activity” [ 1 ] . 7 DESIGNING FOR VALUES IN GRASSROOTS MOVEMENT BUILDING So far , we have described three modes of inquiries toward our original research question : what is the role of social computing technologies in grassroots movement building ? Our philosoph - ical inquiry led us to the Freirean model of participatory communication theory . Incorporating this as our theoretical framework , we further contextualized the findings from our empirical in - quiry on the perceived strengths and weaknesses of the sociotechnical practices of SftP - Atlanta . On a more technical note , we have also talked about how as action researchers we helped SftP - Atlanta build their web platform . Our overall investigation in this “sociotechnical mess” [ 15 ] of SftP - Atlanta reveals that the organization chose commercial social computing technologies that were not developed with grassroots groups in mind . As our description of their sociotechnical ecosystem suggests , most of these tools were chosen by the 10 core members , and out of expe - diency . Furthermore , we observed that while the organization tried to appropriate these social computing technologies for their collective purpose , the values inherent in them often conflicted with the values of grassroots organizing . Our analysis of this conflicted relationship between the social and technical systems of SftP - Atlanta in each step of their movement building further led us to identify a set of three values that the process of grassroots movement building calls for : in - clusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence . Our findings suggest that grassroots groups would benefit from having sociotechnical infrastructures and practices that attend to these values . As CSCW researchers in this space we believe that computing technologies can serve purposes that are more than just functional ; they can also carry substantive social , moral , and political val - ues . As we aim to design for the purposes of grassroots movement building , there is a need to investigate : what does it mean to design for these values ? Toward this goal , we will draw from both our philosophical and empirical inquiries : a combination that , according to Flanagan et al . , can lead us to a critical understanding of technologies and the values encoded in them [ 22 ] . In their words , philosophical inquiry “contributes to the effort of embodying VID by articulating the rationale behind , or the justification for , commitments to particular values in a given system . ” Ad - ditionally , an empirical investigation not only “complements the philosophical inquiry into what values are relevant , ” it also functions as “the primary means for addressing , systematically , the question whether a given attempt at embodying values is successful” [ 22 ] . We will now draw from the Freirean model of participatory communication theory and the empirical account of SftP - Atlanta’s process of movement building to expand on the following three core values we identified : inclusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence . While we reflect on the philosophical roots of these values , in what follows , we will also suggest design implications for both social and technical interventions that can be used to instrumentalize these values of grassroots movement building . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 29 7 . 1 Inclusivity A central tenet of grassroots movement building is its commitment to democratic participation at all levels : individual , local , regional [ 48 ] . Our philosophical and empirical investigations suggest that SftP - Atlanta attempted to construct an environment that strives to grant every member an equal voice . This notion of practicing a truly participatory democracy is rooted in Freire’s phi - losophy and the theoretical framework of participatory communication . In Freire’s words , “this is not the privilege of some few men , but the right of every ( wo ) man . Consequently , no one can say a true word alone—nor can he say it for another , in a prescriptive act which robs others of their words” [ 24 ] . Freire’s philosophy and SftP - Atlanta’s movement building therefore speaks to the value of inclusivity in grassroots movement building . Inclusion , in this context , would mean that all members feel comfortable with suggesting new ideas , taking an active part in the decision - making process , and even dissenting with existing prin - ciples if needed . For a group like SftP - Atlanta where there is an inevitable power relationship be - tween the middle - class scientists and marginalized communities from lower socioeconomic back - grounds they work with , inclusivity would have to practiced with an awareness of that unequal group dynamic . For SftP - Atlanta , this awareness led them to purposefully center the knowledge and experiences of the historically marginalized communities when it came to making decisions about a project in these communities . While SftP - Atlanta strives to maintain an inclusive envi - ronment , both our empirical investigation and participation in the organization shows that their intention of becoming a participatory and democratic environment often conflicted with the values encoded in both the technical systems they chose and how they chose those tools . The technolo - gies in their ecosystem were chosen by a few of the core members and were presented to the newer members as a given . While some of our participants reflected on how they had to “learn” Slack for the purpose of taking part in SftP - Atlanta’s organizational activities , some of our other participants expressed that they felt left out . While choosing technologies as an essential part of the grassroots infrastructure can be empowering for groups , certain tools assume certain levels of technological competence from its users . Therefore , the same tools that serve a seemingly functional purpose of communication can be disempowering for the technologically disadvantaged members of the movement . We argue that one of the many ways social computing systems can operationalize their commitment to inclusivity is by lowering their entry barriers as much as possible , so that the system does not end up favoring the technologically privileged members of the community . Ad - ditionally , grassroots groups who choose to use systems with higher barriers should have regular trainings on those tools , where more experienced members can educate the new members on the tools in use . There also needs to be a culture within the movement for ongoing critical reflections on technologies that a grassroots group choose to use . Finally , grassroots groups can stay aware of the challenges that choosing a technology brings to their goal of inclusivity , and further use their social infrastructures ( in case of SftP - Atlanta , their face - to - face monthly meetings ) to mindfully and intentionally accommodate the voices and opinions of the technologically marginal members of the group . 7 . 2 Privacy / Security Our findings suggest that in order for there to be successful collective action , members need to trust in the platforms enabling such actions . Fostering this sense of trust , however , will require the social computing systems to be designed with a commitment to the value of privacy / security . Issues of privacy , security , and trust have long been a topic of interest for social computing researchers . Acquisiti and Gross identified trust / security management as one of the key respon - sibilities of Social Networking Systems ( SNS ) [ 2 ] . Shin extended that argument and articulated ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 30 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman the relationship among security , privacy , and trust in the context of SNSs [ 50 ] . Perceived security is “the extent to which a user believes that using a SNS application will be risk - free” [ 50 ] . Palen and Dourish present privacy as a dynamic and dialectical process [ 45 ] . Dourish and Anderson further argued that privacy and security in design should be reimagined as “collective informa - tion practices” [ 18 ] . In their vision , collective information practices refer to “the ways in which we collectively share , withhold , and manage information ; how we interpret such acts of sharing , withholding , and managing ; and how we strategically deploy them as part and parcel of everyday social interaction . ” CSCW researchers have also engaged with the special privacy needs for communities committed to the causes of social justice . Activists perceive themselves as dissenters from the traditional power structures [ 32 ] . They further perceive their dissent to be risky work that sometimes requires protection from the surveillance of the State or other power structures they might be up against . Studying the work of political activists in a Palestinian village in West Bank , Wulf et al . have reflected on how privacy in the context of social media ( particularly Facebook ) was identified as a concern for the activists [ 58 ] . Driven by a similar concern around privacy , Tad Hirsch built the activist messaging tool TXTMob . Hirsch’s tool particularly focused on ensuring a private and secure communication platform to movement organizers [ 32 ] . We align ourselves with the work done by Hirsch , and echo the concerns raised by past researchers around the issues of privacy , security , and trust in social computing systems [ 3 , 11 , 50 ] In order to ensure a secure infrastructure for grassroots movement organizers , social computing systems will have to implement better encryption policies in messaging , offer a secure infrastruc - ture for data storage and maintenance , and clearly communicate their privacy policies to their users . Additionally , making the source code of the technical systems open and providing greater transparency on how encryption works in the systems can foster greater trust in the system . Fi - nally , security and privacy features are useless if they are not usable by real people in real situa - tions . This presents particular challenges for grassroots groups that , as discussed in the previous section , aim to include people from diverse educational and socio - economic backgrounds as first - class citizens in their organization . Therefore , in addition to choosing technologies that promote better privacy / security , grassroots groups would have to also invest time in collectively developing knowledge and skills of certain privacy practices . 7 . 3 Social Translucence Grassroots organizations like SftP - Atlanta follow a bottom up approach to movement organizing . One of the practical ways in which SftP - Atlanta tries to do that is with participatory decision - making—where every member of the group gets to contribute to the decisions made by the group . While in the beginning SftP - Atlanta attempted to use the affordances of Slack - based voting for this purpose , they quickly realized that it was not enough to count opinions in order to reach consensus . They needed to make space for letting members frame and justify their positions pub - licly . Decision making , in their context , had to be a participatory process that allowed the group to come to a collective decision through reflexive dialog among members . This in turn called for more transparency within the organization . We propose that this need for a more transparent en - vironment can be addressed with sociotechnical practices of social translucence [ 21 ] —this means both socially and technically designing for greater visibility , awareness , and accountability within a grassroots organization . A socially translucent grassroots infrastructure supporting reflexive dialog will have both de - velopmental and solidary outcomes [ 46 ] . Greater visibility and awareness of how decisions are made , projects are conceived , and tasks are accomplished will have the developmental outcome of ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 31 making members feel more agency over the actions made by the group as a whole . Seeing how decisions are made also has the potential to re - create new forms of solidarity through recognizing the legitimacy of different opinions . We argue that a socially translucent infrastructure is crucial for the kind of participatory democ - racy SftP - Atlanta strives to practice . Social translucence as a grassroots design value speaks to the two core requirements of a participatory democratic environment : transparency and reflexiv - ity . While transparency speaks to the affordance of being able to see how different opinions are formed , reflexive dialog , as Freire discusses it , makes space for a more pedagogical process of de - cision making . Especially for a group like SftP - Atlanta , where the scientists and the historically marginalized communities they collaborate with often had very different socioeconomic realities , a successful participatory decision - making process could potentially serve the pedagogical pur - pose of learning where each member is coming from . Moreover , the socially translucent practices within SftP - Atlanta were also meant to serve the developmental purpose of providing historically marginalized groups with an opportunity to hold science and scientists accountable for their work in these communities . However , as we have observed before , SftP - Atlanta’s philosophical goal of transparency and re - flexivity often conflicted with the values within their sociotechnical practices around Slack . How would this radical exchange of dialog between scientists and community members happen if deci - sions are made in Slack—a tool that inherently favored the more technologically adept members of the group ? Even when they voiced their opinions on issues on Slack , voting yes / no on the subject of an issue meant little . While SftP - Atlanta’s internal structure was unique in its own way , issues of visibility , awareness , accountability , are just as present in other venues of collaborative com - munication platforms . Erickson and Kellogg suggested ways in which designers can intentionally design for greater visibility , awareness , and accountability [ 21 ] . Introducing the notion of social translucence in the realm of social computing , Erickson and Kellogg identified three specific needs that socially translucent systems should be designed around : namely activity support , conversa - tion visualization and restructuring , and organizational knowledge spaces [ 21 ] . We argue that social computing technologies that are committed to enable the transparent and reflexive environment of grassroots organizing can benefit from incorporating these design suggestions made by Erikson and Kellogg , thereby exercising a commitment toward the design value of social translucence . While social translucence was introduced as a design idea for transparent communication infras - tructures , social translucence in the grassroots sense is more than just a technical task . Grassroots groups will have to stay mindful of the how their choice of certain technologies might act against the transparent and reflexive environment they wish to cultivate . They can further prioritize the presence of the primary stakeholders when making decisions on certain issues and let that deter - mine the place and method in which a decision is being made . For example , in case of SftP - Atlanta , a social intervention toward fostering social translucence might look like having these face - to - face meetings about the “Urban Garden” project in the neighborhood of Lakewood—which would allow more visibility , awareness , and accountability within the community . 7 . 4 Relationship Among the Three Values In this section , so far , we have discussed the philosophical roots of each of the values we identified . We further connected them to CSCW literature that provides insights on how to instrumentalize those philosophical values . Now it is important to acknowledge that there is a complex relation - ship among the three values we describe . While , philosophically these three values are interdepen - dent , when realized in a more instrumental way through design , they can be in conflict with one another . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 32 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman Although in our analysis each value is identified in each step of the movement - building process of SftP - Atlanta , these values flow through the overall philosophy of grassroots movement build - ing . Furthermore , these steps of movement building are iterative , and so are the values that emerge from them . This means that , although privacy / security can be traced back to the step of collective action , according to Freire , collective action is incomplete without the presence of reflexive dia - logue . Thus , privacy / security becomes a necessary value for a reflexive environment too . Similarly , ensuring a secure infrastructure can also lead to a more inclusive environment in the organization . And so , incorporating these values both socially and technically would result in more purposeful sociotechnical practices for grassroots movement building . On the other hand , as we speak of instrumentalizing these core values with design , we fur - ther identify that there are tensions among these values . Our participants reported interesting dichotomies that clearly show how these values are often in conflict with one another . For in - stance , many of the tools that currently offer privacy / security in communication often have low inclusivity and higher entry barriers for technologically less - adept individuals . On the other hand , Facebook’s higher inclusivity comes with the cost of privacy / security of the members who would rather not broadcast their participation in certain activist events . Furthermore , our findings suggest that a platform supporting reflexive dialog and democratic decision making requires a socially translucent infrastructure for collaboration and communica - tion . However , as Erikson and Kellogg point out while describing the challenges of designing so - cially translucent systems , there is always going to be a tension between visibility ( one of the key attributes of socially translucence ) and privacy / security [ 21 ] . According to Erickson and Kellogg , this essential tension between privacy and visibility is what differentiates socially translucent sys - tems from socially transparent systems . They argue , “privacy is neither good nor bad on its own—it simply supports certain types of behavior and inhibits others” [ 21 ] . They further explain this con - textual nature of privacy with the example of elections . In elections , the perceived validity of the process depends primarily on keeping certain aspects of the election private and others public . While the private aspects of the election process offer voters a secure infrastructure to vote , the public aspects of the process keep those who count the votes accountable to the voters . The qual - ities of visibility and accountability in socially translucent systems , therefore , have to constantly negotiate with the notion of privacy / security . This complex relationship among the three core values poses as a necessary yet difficult chal - lenge for us as CSCW researchers and designers . This challenge that is not unknown to the field of VID . As Flanagan et al . aptly notes , “engineering is rife with such conflicts—whether to favor safety over cost , transparency over privacy , aesthetics over functionality , with many more appearing at layers of fine granularity” [ 22 ] . They suggest resolving , dissolving , and tradingoff as three possible strategies to manage such conflicting values . Further , navigating conflicting values when choosing technologies is an internal challenge for grassroots groups as well . Our analysis can be helpful for grassroots organizations who want to make a critically informed decision about technologies they want to use . A critical evaluation of these technologies can further inform their sociotechnical practices of movement building . To provide an example of how our analysis could be used , in the following table we describe the strengths and the weaknesses of tools that SftP - Atlanta chose to use with respect to the values of inclusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence . We finally argue that in order to successfully design sociotechnical systems for the causes of grassroots movements , we need to understand the values embedded in them in all their complex - ities . Our identification of the core values of inclusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence is a beginning of that endeavor . In our ongoing AR , we are designing new communications tools for both SftP Atlanta and a larger coalition of groups called that Southern Movement Assembly that SftP - Atlanta is part of . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 33 Current tool Strengths Weaknesses Facebook Inclusivity . Facebook being a popular social networking platform , barrier to entry was very low . Privacy / Security . Facebook’s public nature was threatening to many of the movement organizers . Google tools ( drive , groups , email ) Inclusivity . Google tools were popular among the members . Barrier to entry was much lower compared to Slack . Privacy / Security . The overall lack of clarity around where all the data is being stored was a concern for many . Social translucence . Supported the col - laborative processes of framing the collective identity with visibility and awareness . Slack Social translucence . Supported the pro - cess of internal communication , task management , and voting - based deci - sion making with adequate visibility . Inclusivity . Members who were already not on Slack were uncomfortable with the in - terface and distanced themselves from the tool . Privacy / Security . For a platform serving as the primary mode of internal communi - cation , it was not perceived as a secure medium of communication . Social translucence . Slack did not provide the kind of socially translucent environ - ment required for participatory decision making . 8 CONCLUSION Freire is clear that education and cultural processes aimed at liberation do not succeed by freeing people from their chains , but by preparing them collectively to free them - selves . This is dialectically facilitated when conversation is replaced by a dialogical praxis [ 41 ] . Through this work , we make three contributions to the HCI literature on designing for social justice . First , we highlight the value of using Freire’s model of movement organizing to under - stand and help an organization working for social justice . Second , Le Dantec et al . [ 38 ] make a compelling case that values must be learned from participants , and suggest that more work is needed to understand methods for learning those values . In this work , we successfully used AR as a method for learning values from participants , and suggest this method is particularly suit - able in the area of designing for social justice . Finally , the specific values we learned from our participants—inclusivity , security / privacy , and social translucence—we believe to be more broadly useful to others studying and partnering with grassroots organizations . In Freire’s participatory communication theory , grassroots social movement organizing is not just an organizational process , it is also a pedagogical journey that strives to bring social change . Furthermore , the journey is as much a collective journey as it is an individual one . The essence of democratic participation in movement organizing is in its success in enabling all individuals to speak for themselves as they work toward a collectively identified goal . The philosophy of social movement organizing , as McLaren says , is not just to facilitate collective action but to do it through a process that brings agency to every individual involved in the action . It is easy to get lost in the mundane , day - to - day details of organizing . ( Who is going to the meeting ? Did we decide whether to partner with that new community group ? Has the website been updated ? ) Freire’s theory was suggested to us by our participants , and we and they have ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 34 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman found that it helps focus our attention on the bigger picture . The accumulation of these little day - to - day decisions shape an iterative process of forming a collective identity , planning action , and reflection . A focus on Freire’s notion of praxis particularly reminds us that reflection and action are interdependent . We believe that Freire’s theories can be of great use to members of the HCI community trying to design for social justice . As we design systems to support the philosophical process of social movements , it is crucial for CSCW researchers to understand the values embedded in grassroots organizing . While communi - cation technologies are becoming increasingly popular in these processes , as we observed in the internal organizing process of SftP - Atlanta , there exist use - cases where the same technologies are either insufficient or , as observed in this case , such technologies might accidentally disempower members of the organization . To make sense of some such conflicts , in this article , we do an anal - ysis of this sociotechnical reality of a grassroots social movement grounding ourselves in a social movement theory that they subscribed to . We have observed the movement since the time of its inception , partnered with it as it grew a sociotechnical ecosystem to support its organizational goals , and studied its use of social computing technologies in facilitating collective action . Toward our research question of critically understanding the role social computing technologies play in grassroots movement building , we aligned ourselves with HCI researchers and practitioners who have taken a similar critical approach and further urged us to look at the values encoded in and reproduced through the technologies we choose to use . Our close partnership with SftP - Atlanta let us see how the members of the organization often struggle with the same technologies that they chose to use for their work . Our analysis of both the strengths and the weaknesses in their sociotechnical practices led us to identify inclusivity , privacy / security , and social translucence as three values that future design of social computing systems can embody in order to better sup - port the process of grassroots movement organizing . We also call to mind that as designers and researchers working with a commitment to these values , we not only need to keep an eye on each individually , but also on the ways they interact with , or move in relation to one another . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to SftP - Atlanta for collaborating with us for the purpose of this study—and espe - cially thankful to our interview participants for sharing their experiences with technology with us . We would also like to thank Megan Leach , Ari Schlesinger , Lilly Irani , and our three anonymous reviewers who offered valuable feedback on earlier versions of this work . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mark Ackerman . 2000 . The intellectual challenge of CSCW : The gap between social requirements and technical feasibility . Human - Computer Interaction 15 , 2 ( 2000 ) , 179 – 203 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327051HCI1523 _ 5 [ 2 ] Alessandro Acquisiti and Ralph Gross . 2006 . Imagined communities : Awareness , information sharing , and privacy on the Facebook . In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Privacy Enhancing Technologies . Springer , Berlin , 36 – 58 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 11957454 _ 3 [ 3 ] Alessandro Acquisti , Laura Brandimarte , and George Loewenstein . 2016 . Privacy and human behavior in the age of information . Journal of Economic Literature 54 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 442 – 492 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1257 / jel . 54 . 2 . 442 [ 4 ] Linda Alcoff . 2016 . The problem of speaking for others author ( s ) . Cultural Critique 20 , 20 ( 2016 ) , 5 – 32 . Retrieved from http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 1354221 . [ 5 ] Joon Sang Baek , Sojung Kim , Yoonyee Pahk , and Ezio Manzini . 2018 . A sociotechnical framework for the design of collaborative services . Design Studies 55 ( 2018 ) , 54 – 78 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2017 . 01 . 001 [ 6 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : Taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1301 – 1310 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753521 [ 7 ] Erling Björgvinsson , Pelle Ehn , and Per - Anders Hillgren . 2010 . Participatory design and “democratizing innova - tion . ” In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference ( PDC’10 ) . 41 – 50 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900448 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . The Role of Social Computing Technologies in Grassroots Movement Building 18 : 35 [ 8 ] Javier Borge - Holthoefer and Walid Magdy . 2014 . Content and network dynamics behind Egyptian political polariza - tion on Twitter . Computers & Society ( 2014 ) , 1 – 30 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675163 [ 9 ] Allan Collins , Diana Joseph , and Katerine Bielaczyc . 2009 . Design research : Theoretical and methodological issues . Journal of the Learning Sciences 13 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 15 – 42 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls1301 [ 10 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2018 . Design justice : Towards an intersectional feminist framework for design theory and practice . In Proceedings of the Design Research Society 2018 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21606 / dma . 2017 . 679 [ 11 ] danah boyd . 2008 . Why youth heart social network sites : The role of networked publics in teenage social life . In Foundation Series on Digital Learning – Youth , Identity , and Digital Media . MacArthur ( Ed . ) , MIT Press , 119 – 142 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / dmal . 9780262524834 . 119 [ 12 ] John Dewey . 1927 . The Public and Its Problems . Swallow Press , Athens , OH . [ 13 ] B . Dick . 2001 . Action research : Action and research . In Effective Change Management Using Action Learning and Action Research : Concepts , Frameworks , Processes , Applications , S . Sankaran , B . Dick , R . Passfield , and P . Swepson ( Eds . ) . Southern Cross University Press , Lismore , NSW , 21 – 27 . [ 14 ] Jill P . Dimond , Michaelanne Dye , Daphne Larose , and Amy S . Bruckman . 2013 . Hollaback ! : The role of collective storytelling online in a social movement organization . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’13 ) . 477 – 490 . [ 15 ] Carl DiSalvo . 2009 . Design and the construction of publics . Design Issues 25 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 48 – 63 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / desi . 2009 . 25 . 1 . 48 [ 16 ] Carl Disalvo , Andrew Clement , and Volkmar Pipek . 2013 . Communities : Participatory design for , with and by com - munities . In Proceedings of the International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge , 182 – 209 . [ 17 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social justice - oriented interaction design . In Proceedings of the 2016ACMConferenceonDesigningInteractiveSystems ( DIS’16 ) . 656 – 671 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901861 [ 18 ] Paul Dourish and Ken Anderson . 2006 . Collective information practice : Exploring privacy and security as so - cial and cultural phenomena . Human - Computer Interaction 21 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 319 – 342 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327051hci2103 _ 2 [ 19 ] Pelle Ehn . 2008 . Participation in design things . In Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Participatory Design ( PDC’08 ) . 92 – 101 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1795234 . 1795248 [ 20 ] Nahed Eltantawy and Julie B . Wiest . 2011 . Social media in the Egyptian revolution : Reconsidering resource mobiliza - tiontheory . InternationalJournalofCommunication 5 ( 2011 ) , 1207 – 1224 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 1932 - 8036 / 2011FEA1207 [ 21 ] Thomas Erickson , Wendy A . Kellogg , and IBM T . J . Watson . 2000 . Social translucence : An approach to designing systems that support social processes . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 7 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 59 – 83 . [ 22 ] Mary Flanagan , Daniel C . Howe , and Helen Nissenbaum . 2008 . Embodying values in technology : Theory and practice . In Information Technology and Moral Philosophy . Cambridge University Press , 322 – 353 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511498725 . 017 [ 23 ] Marcus Foth , Jaz Hee - jeong Choi , and Christine Satchell . 2011 . Urban informatics . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’11 ) . 1 – 8 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958826 [ 24 ] Paulo Freire . 1970 . Pedagogy of the Oppressed . Bloomsbury Publishing . [ 25 ] Paulo Freire . 2000 . Cultural action for freedom ( 2000 ed ) . Harvard Educational Review , Cambridge , MA . [ 26 ] Batya Friedman . 1996 . Value - sensitive design . Interactions 3 , 6 ( 1996 ) , 16 – 23 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 242485 . 242493 [ 27 ] S . Grundy . 1982 . Three Modes of Action Research . Deakin University Press [ 28 ] R . Hardin . 2015 . Collective Action . Resources for the Future . Retrieved from https : / / books . google . com / books ? hl = en & lr = & id = GAseCwAAQBAJ & oi = fnd & pg = PP1 & dq = hardin + 2015 + collective & ots = SnVRB - SmvD & sig = SeI4MPZs XNINJ76VQMWZpzAMpNM . [ 29 ] Sandra G . Harding . 1986 . The Science Question in Feminism . Cornell University Press . [ 30 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 18 , 3 ( July 2011 ) , 1 – 20 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1993060 . 1993065 [ 31 ] K . G . Herr and G . L . Anderson . 2014 . The Action Research Dissertation : A Guide for Students and Faculty . Sage Publications . [ 32 ] Tad Hirsch and John Henry . 2005 . TXTmob : Text messaging for protest swarms . In Proceedings of the CHI’05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1455 – 1458 . [ 33 ] E . Hopkins , D . , Joyce , B . , and Calhoun . 2002 . A Teacher’s Guide to Classroom Research . Open University Press . [ 34 ] Lily C . Irani and M . Six Silberman . 2013 . Turkopticon : Interrupting worker invisibility in amazon mechanical turk . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 611 – 620 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470742 [ 35 ] Finn Kensing and Joan Greenbaum . 2013 . Heritage : Having a say . In The International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge , 21 – 36 . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 . 18 : 36 S . Ghoshal and A . Bruckman [ 36 ] John Kolko . 2010 . Abductive thinking and sense making : The drivers of design synthesis . Design Issues 26 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 28 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1162 / desi . 2010 . 26 . 1 . 15 [ 37 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Carl DiSalvo . 2013 . Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in participatory design . Social Studies of Science 43 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 241 – 264 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0306312712471581 [ 38 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec , Erika Shehan Poole , and Susan P . Wyche . 2009 . Values as lived experience : Evolving value sensitive design in support of value discovery . In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’09 ) . 1141 – 1150 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518875 [ 39 ] John Lofland . 1996 . Social Movement Organizations : Guide to Research on Insurgent Realities . Aldine de Gruyter , New York . [ 40 ] Gilad Lotan , Erhardt Graeff , Mike Ananny , Devin Gaffney , Ian Pearce , and danah boyd . 2011 . The Arab spring | the revolutionsweretweeted : Informationflowsduringthe2011TunisianandEgyptianrevolutions . InternationalJournal of Communication 5 ( 2011 ) , 31 . [ 41 ] P . McLaren . 2000 . Che Guevara , Paulo Freire , and the Pedagogy of Revolution . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers . [ 42 ] Jean McNiff and Jack Whitehead . 2011 . All you Need to Know About Action Research ( 2nd ed . ) . Sage Publications . [ 43 ] Meredith Ringel Morris , Scott Counts , Asta Roseway , Aaron Hoff , and Julia Schwarz . 2012 . Tweeting is believing ? Understanding microblog credibility perceptions . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’12 ) . 441 – 450 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145274 [ 44 ] Mark W . Newman , Debra Lauterbach , Sean A . Munson , Paul Resnick , and Margaret E . Morris . 2011 . It’s not that I don’t have problems , I’m just not putting them on Facebook . In Proceedings of the ACM 2011 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’11 ) . 341 – 350 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1958824 . 1958876 [ 45 ] Leysia Palen and Paul Dourish . 2003 . Unpacking “privacy” for a networked world . In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI’03 ) . 129 – 136 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 642611 . 642635 [ 46 ] Francesca Polletta . 2002 . Freedom is an Endless Meeting : Democracy in American Social Movements ( 2004 ed . ) . The University of Chicago Press . [ 47 ] Gary B . Rush and R . Serge Denisoff . 1971 . Social and Political Movements . Appleton - Century - Crofts . [ 48 ] JanServaes . 2006 . Participatorycommunication ( research ) fromaFreireanperspective . AfricanMediaReview 10 ( Sept . 2006 ) , 73 – 91 . Retrieved from http : / / pdfproc . lib . msu . edu / ? file = / DMC / African Journals / pdfs / africa media review / vol10no1 / jamr010001006 . pdf . [ 49 ] Jan Servaes and Patchanee Malikhao . 2005 . Participatory communication : The new paradigm ? In Media and Glocal Change . Rethinking Communication for Development . Nordicom , Sweden , 91 – 103 . [ 50 ] Dong Hee Shin . 2010 . The effects of trust , security and privacy in social networking : A security - based approach to understand the pattern of adoption . Interacting with Computers 22 , 5 ( 2010 ) , 428 – 438 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . intcom . 2010 . 05 . 001 [ 51 ] David A . Snow and Sarah Anne Soule . 2010 . A Primer on Social Movements . WW Norton . 292 pages . [ 52 ] Lee Staples . 2016 . Roots to Power : A Manual for Grassroots Organizing . Praeger Publishers Inc . 483 pages . Retrieved from https : / / vufind . carli . illinois . edu / all / vf - knx / Record / 15696699 / Description . [ 53 ] Stephanie Stokes . 2017 . Atlanta’s first food forest aims to increase access to fresh produce . 90 . 1 FM WABE ( Sept . 2017 ) . Retrieved from https : / / www . wabe . org / atlantas - first - food - forest - aims - increase - access - fresh - produce / . [ 54 ] Sidney G . Tarrow . 2011 . Power in Movement : Social Movements and Contentious Politics . Cambridge University Press . Retrieved from https : / / books . google . com / books ? hl = en & lr = & id = zpeVVfesY2AC & oi = fnd & pg = PR13 & dq = tarrow + power + in + movement & ots = rH2eR2Vzv2 & sig = RNH0tUXV3B5JoUbRDoTwstSwmjQ # v = onepage & q = tarrowpowerin movement & f = false . [ 55 ] Zeynep Tufekci . 2017 . Twitter and Tear Gas . Yale University Press . [ 56 ] Zeynep Tufekci and Christopher Wilson . 2012 . Social media and the decision to participate in political protest : Obser - vations from Tahrir square . Journal of Communication 62 ( 2012 ) , 363 – 379 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 2466 . 2012 . 01629 . x [ 57 ] Volker Wulf , Konstantin Aal , Ibrahim Abu Kteish , Meryem Atam , Kai Schubert , Markus Rohde , George P . Yerousis , and David Randall . 2013 . Fighting against the wall : Social media use by political activists in a Palestinian village . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1979 – 1988 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466262 [ 58 ] Volker Wulf , Kaoru Misaki , Meryem Atam , David Randall , and Markus Rohde . 2013 . ‘On the ground’ in Sidi Bouzid : Investigating social media use during the Tunisian revolution . In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW’13 ) . 1409 – 1418 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441935 [ 59 ] Susan P . Wyche , Elisa Oreglia , Morgan G . Ames , Christopher Hoadley , Aditya Johri , Phoebe Sengers , and Charles Steinfield . 2012 . Learning from marginalized users : Reciprocity in HCI4D . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference onComputerSupportedCooperativeWorkCompanion ( CSCW’12 ) . 27 – 28 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2141512 . 2141527 Received February 2018 ; revised February 2019 ; accepted February 2019 ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , Vol . 26 , No . 3 , Article 18 . Publication date : May 2019 .