REVIEW ARTICLE published : 18 June 2014 doi : 10 . 3389 / fonc . 2014 . 00153 Microtubules and their role in cellular stress in cancer Amelia L . Parker 1 , Maria Kavallaris 1 , 2 * and Joshua A . McCarroll 1 , 2 * 1 Tumour Biology andTargeting Program , Children’s Cancer Institute Australia , Lowy Cancer Research Centre , University of New SouthWales , Sydney , NSW , Australia 2 Australian Centre for NanoMedicine , University of New SouthWales , Sydney , NSW , Australia Edited by : Megan Chircop , Children’s Medical Research Institute , Australia Reviewed by : Matthias P . Wymann , University of Basel , Switzerland Keith R . Laderoute , SRI International , USA * Correspondence : Maria Kavallaris and Joshua A . McCarroll , Tumour Biology and Targeting Program , Children’s Cancer Institute Australia , Lowy Cancer Research Centre , University of New SouthWales , High Street , Randwick , Sydney , NSW 2052 , Australia e - mail : mkavallaris @ ccia . unsw . edu . au ; jmccarroll @ ccia . unsw . edu . au Microtubules are highly dynamic structures , which consist of α - and β - tubulin heterodimers , and are involved in cell movement , intracellular trafﬁcking , and mitosis . In the context of cancer , the tubulin family of proteins is recognized as the target of the tubulin - binding chemotherapeutics , which suppress the dynamics of the mitotic spindle to cause mitotic arrest and cell death . Importantly , changes in microtubule stability and the expression of different tubulin isotypes as well as altered post - translational modiﬁcations have been reported for a range of cancers . These changes have been correlated with poor prog - nosis and chemotherapy resistance in solid and hematological cancers . However , the mechanisms underlying these observations have remained poorly understood . Emerging evidence suggests that tubulins and microtubule - associated proteins may play a role in a range of cellular stress responses , thus conferring survival advantage to cancer cells . This review will focus on the importance of the microtubule – protein network in regulating critical cellular processes in response to stress . Understanding the role of microtubules in this context may offer novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of cancer . Keywords : microtubules , tubulin , post - translational modiﬁcations , microtubule - associated proteins , stress response INTRODUCTION Microtubules , together with microﬁlaments and intermediate ﬁl - aments , form the cell cytoskeleton . The microtubule network is recognized for its role in regulating cell growth and movement as well as key signaling events , which modulate fundamental cellu - lar processes . Emerging evidence also suggests that it is critically involved in cell stress responses . This review will focus on the role of microtubules in this context in cancer . Microtubules are composed of α - and β - tubulin heterodimers that associate to form hollow cylindrical structures ( 1 ) ( Figure 1 ) . They are highly dynamic , and are constantly lengthening and shortening throughout all phases of the cell cycle . During inter - phase , microtubules are nucleated at the centrosome ( minus end ) andradiatetowardthecellperiphery ( plusend ) . Interphasemicro - tubules are involved in the maintenance of cell shape and in the trafﬁcking of proteins and organelles ( 1 ) . Motor proteins translocate cell components on microtubule tracks , and protein – protein interactions with other adaptor proteins co - ordinate this process . Tubulin heterodimers also exist in soluble form in cells , and protein interactions with this tubulin population regulate microtubule behavior . The addition and removal of soluble tubulin heterodimers to dynamic microtubule ends is a highly regulated process ( Figure1 ) . Tubulin dimers are nucleotide binding proteins , with β - tubulin also possessing GTPase activity . The manner in which tubu - lin heterodimers are orientated in microtubules gives rise to a polar molecule that differs in both structure and kinetics at each end of the microtubule . The dynamics of tubulin addition and release are much slower at the minus end of the microtubule , which terminates with α - tubulin proteins , compared with the plus end of the microtubule , which terminates with β - tubulin proteins . The addition of a tubulin heterodimer to a micro - tubule activates the GTPase activity of β - tubulin , locking the β - tubulins in the microtubule in a GDP - bound state . The β - tubulins exposed to the solvent at the end of the microtubule form a GTP cap that is important in preventing microtubule depolymerization . Therefore , the binding of GTP at the micro - tubule plus end imparts structural and kinetic polarity to micro - tubules and is an important regulator of microtubule stability . It is believed that the polymerized and soluble tubulin pools interact with different signaling networks , however , the dynamic exchange of tubulin subunits between these pools makes it difﬁ - cult to distinguish the functional roles of soluble and polymerized tubulin experimentally . The reader is referred to several excellent reviews for more detailed information on microtubule structure and dynamics ( 1 , 2 ) . Duringmitosis , microtubulesformthespindletoenablecorrect chromosomal segregation ( 3 ) . Tubulin - binding agents ( TBAs ; e . g . , taxanes , vinca alkaloids , epothilones , and eribulin ) are important chemotherapeutic drugs that suppress spindle dynamics , causing subsequent mitotic arrest and cell death in rapidly dividing cells ( 3 ) . Recent evidence suggests that the induction of cell stress in interphase cells also contributes signiﬁcantly to TBA - mediated cell death ( 4 – 6 ) , highlighting the importance of tubulin in cell stress responses in cancer . In humans , microtubules are composed of combinations of eight α - tubulin isotypes and seven β - tubulin isotypes , with the different tubulin isotypes possessing speciﬁc tissue and developmental distributions ( 7 ) ( Table 1 ) . The members of the tubulin family share a high degree of structural homol - ogy and are distinguished from one another by highly diver - gent sequences at their carboxy - terminal ( C - terminal ) tail ( 8 ) . www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 1 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress FIGURE 1 | Microtubules are dynamic structures that interact with diverse proteins . ( A ) Microtubules form a dynamic network and are constantly lengthening and shortening . In interphase [ ( A ) , left ] , microtubules are anchored at the centrosome ( minus end ) and radiate toward the cell periphery ( plus end ) . The microtubule network undergoes dramatic remodeling throughout the cell cycle , from interphase and through mitosis [ ( A ) , right ] . Green : α - tubulin , blue : DAPI . Images courtesy of Dr . Sela Po’uha . ( B ) Heterodimers of α - and β - tubulin associate to form microtubules . The dynamic addition and removal of tubulin heterodimers is faster at microtubule plus ends than at microtubule minus ends . Both endogenous factors andTBAs regulate and inﬂuence microtubule dynamics . A variety of proteins involved in cellular homeostatic mechanisms and stress responses also interact with tubulins either in their soluble or polymerized forms . Post - translational modiﬁcations on tubulins inﬂuence these interactions . Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd : Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology [ Ref . ( 9 ) ] , Copyright 2011 and Nature Reviews Cancer [ Ref . ( 15 ) ] , Copyright 2010 . Table 1 | Tubulin isotypes present in humans [ Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd : Nature Reviews Cancer ( Ref . ( 15 ) ) Copyright 2010 and Elsevier ( Ref . ( 233 ) ) Copyright 2009 ] . Tubulin isotype Gene name Accession number α - TUBULIN α 1A - Tubulin TUBA1A NP _ 006000 α 1B - Tubulin TUBA1B AAC31959 α 1C - Tubulin TUBA1C Q9BQE3 α 3C - Tubulin TUBA3C Q13748 α 3E - Tubulin TUBA3E NP _ 997195 α 4A - Tubulin TUBA4A NP _ 005991 α 8 - Tubulin TUBA8 Q9NY65 α - Like 3 - Tubulin TUBAL3 NP _ 079079 β - TUBULIN β I - Tubulin TUBB NM _ 178014 β II - Tubulin TUBB2A , TUBB2B NM _ 001069 ; NM _ 178012 β III - Tubulin TUBB3 NM _ 006086 β IVa - Tubulin TUBB4 NM _ 006087 β IVb - Tubulin TUBB2C NM _ 006088 β V - Tubulin TUBB6 NM _ 032525 β VI - Tubulin TUBB1 NM _ 030773 Theauthorsdirectreaderstocomprehensivereviews ( 233 ) forfurtherinformation on tubulin isotype structure . The C - terminal tails of tubulin are also thought to mediate protein – protein interactions and act as sites of post - translational modiﬁcations to confer unique functionality to each iso - type ( 9 ) . TUBULIN ALTERATIONS IN CANCER Diverse changes in the microtubule network have been identi - ﬁed and characterized in a wide variety of cancers , including altered expression of tubulin isotypes , alterations in tubulin post - translational modiﬁcations , and changes in the expression of microtubule - associated proteins ( MAPs ) ( Table 2 ) . Despite evi - dence from in vitro studies associating tubulin mutations with resistance to TBAs ( 10 – 13 ) , tubulin mutations are not clini - cally prevalent and their importance in disease progression and chemotherapy resistance is controversial ( 14 ) . Microtubule alter - ations are thought to inﬂuence cellular responses to chemother - apeutic and microenvironmental stressors , thereby contributing to broad spectrum chemotherapy resistance , tumor development , and cell survival . CHANGES IN TUBULIN ISOTYPE COMPOSITION Altered tubulin isotype expression is the most widely charac - terized microtubule alteration reported in cancer and has been observed in both solid and hematological tumors . These changes are often associated with chemotherapy resistance and poor Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 2 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress Table 2 | Clinical studies of tubulin alterations in cancer . Microtubule alteration Observation Effect Cancer Reference Altered isotype expression High β I - tubulin Poor response to docetaxel treatment Breast cancer ( 234 ) High β III - tubulin expression Poor survival , poor outcome for surgical resection orTBA response ; correlates with subtype Non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) ( 21 , 31 , 108 , 235 – 238 ) Correlates with poor survival , poor response to platinum and taxane treatment , advanced stage , or aggressive disease Ovarian cancer ( 13 , 16 , 35 , 239 – 242 ) Favorable response to taxane treatment Ovarian ( clear cell adenocarcinoma ) ( 243 ) Poor response to taxane treatment Breast cancer ( 234 , 244 ) Correlates with disease stage Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma ( 17 ) Correlates with disease stage Glioblastoma ( 101 ) Localized to invasive edge Colorectal cancer ( 245 ) Poor response to taxane / platinum treatment Uterine serous carcinoma ( 246 ) Poor response to taxane treatment Gastric cancer ( 247 ) Aggressive disease , patient outcome Prostate cancer ( 36 , 248 , 249 ) Low β II - tubulin expression Correlates with poor response to taxane treatment or advanced stage disease Breast and ovarian cancer ( 239 , 250 ) High β IVa - tubulin expression Poor response to taxol treatment Ovarian cancer ( 240 ) High β V - tubulin expression Favorable response to taxane treatment NSCLC ( 251 ) High α 1b - tubulin expression Histological grade Hepatocellular carcinoma ( 252 ) High γ - tubulin expression Poorly differentiated Medulloblastoma ( 253 ) Altered post - translational modiﬁcation High ∆ 2 α - tubulin Poor response to vinca alkaloid treatment Advanced NSCLC ( 238 ) High detyrosinated tubulin Disease aggressiveness Breast cancer ( 48 ) Active tyrosination cycle Favorable patient outcome Neuroblastoma ( 50 ) prognosis ( Table 2 ) [ reviewed in Ref . ( 15 ) ] . Compared with α - tubulin isotypes , β - tubulin isotypes have received more atten - tion in this context , largely due to the availability of isotype - speciﬁc antibodies , and the fact that TBAs bind to the β - tubulin subunit to exert their toxic effect . Furthermore , β III - tubulin is the most comprehensively examined isotype across a variety of cancers . Elevated β III - tubulin levels are associated with poor progno - sis in a host of different epithelial cancers . In addition to TBA resistance , β III - tubulin levels inﬂuence sensitivity to non - tubulin - targeted agents [ reviewed in Ref . ( 15 ) ] . The clinical observations are supported by numerous in vitro studies where altered β III - tubulin levels confer resistance to a broad spectrum of drug classes in solid and hematological tumors [ reviewed in Ref . ( 15 ) ] . Cou - pled with evidence that β III - tubulin is also involved in tumor development and disease aggressiveness ( 16 – 18 ) , these results suggest that β III - tubulin may be acting as a survival factor in cancer . www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 3 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress Altered levels of β II - , β IVa - , β IVb - , and β V - tubulins have also been associated with resistance to TBAs in a number of drug resistant cancer cell types ( 19 – 26 ) . However , the clinical rele - vance of these speciﬁc tubulin isotypes is limited and requires further investigation . Moreover , the involvement of tubulin iso - types in disease progression is complex , and depends on both the treatment regime and disease stage ( 27 ) . Additional complex - ity may be conferred by interactions between different isotypes , since the overexpression of speciﬁc β - tubulin isotypes , such as β I , β II , and β IVb , does not affect TBA resistance in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells ( 28 , 29 ) . For β III - tubulin the results have been con - ﬂicting . Overexpression of β III - tubulin failed to confer resistance to TBAs in prostate cancer ( 28 , 29 ) . In contrast , overexpressing this isotype in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells conferred resistance to paclitaxel ( 30 ) . In cancer , alterations in the tubulin isotype composition have been detected at both the gene and protein level and result from increased gene transcription and enhanced mRNA stability ( 24 ) . However , tubulin mRNA levels do not always reﬂect protein expression due to the complexity of post - translational mecha - nisms that control tubulin expression ( 24 , 31 ) . For instance , the tumor suppressor miR - 100 and the miR - 200 family of microRNAs ( 24 , 32 , 33 ) as well as epigenetic mechanisms ( 34 , 35 ) are impli - cated in coordinating β - tubulin isotype expression . Therefore , dysregulation of miRNA networks and epigenetic mechanisms in cancer may also contribute to aberrant tubulin isotype expression in cancer . Recent evidence showing an association between ele - vated β III - tubulin expression and PTEN deletions in prostate cancer also suggest that changes in the levels of this isotype may result from PTEN - mediated genetic reprograming ( 36 ) . Cell stress inﬂuences the tubulin isotype composition . For example , β III - tubulin expression can be induced ( 24 , 37 ) or decreased ( 16 ) by chemotherapy treatment . The induction of β III - tubulin has been observed in response to vinca alkaloid treatment in breast cancer cells through an activator protein - 1 ( AP - 1 ) site on the β III - tubulin promoter ( 38 ) , while its induction in hypoxic and hypoglycemic conditions in ovarian cancer cells is mediated by hypoxia - inducible factor ( HIF ) 1 α and Hu antigen ( HuR ) , respec - tively , at the 3 (cid:48) untranslated region ( UTR ) ( 39 , 40 ) . The latter mechanism is a regulatory feature commonly utilized by proteins involved in cell stress , and enables rapid changes in protein levels ( 41 ) . However , it is to be noted that the regulation of β III - tubulin levelsincellstressresponsesmaydependuponthebasalexpressionoftheproteinandmayalsobecelltypespeciﬁc . Initially , differences in the drug binding afﬁnity and structural characteristics of microtubules composed of different β - tubulin isotypes were thought to explain correlations between aberrant tubulin isotype compositions and resistance to TBAs . However , recent observations correlating changes in isotype expression with tumor development and resistance to non - TBA agents have chal - lenged the simplicity of this model . With increased recognition of the importance of cell stress responses in chemotherapy efﬁ - cacy , isotype - mediated modulation of these responses may con - tribute to chemotherapy resistance . In particular , cellular home - ostasis relies on a dynamic microtubule network and may be per - turbed by alterations in microtubule stability and dynamics . The microtubuleisotypecompositiondoesaffectmicrotubulestability , with consequences for TBA sensitivity ( 7 , 23 , 42 ) . Stable micro - tubules play an important role in cellular trafﬁcking and their role in multiple stress responses are discussed below . Chemotherapy agents that do not bind to tubulin can also affect microtubule stability by unknown mechanisms ( 43 ) , and this may represent a mechanism common to chemotherapy agents of different classes . The tubulin isotype composition can also inﬂuence micro - tubule dynamics . In non - small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) cells , suppression of β III - tubulin using RNA interference technology decreases microtubule dynamics in the presence of TBAs , but has no effect under basal conditions ( 44 ) . These observations suggest that changes in isotype composition may inﬂuence micro - tubule dynamics in the presence of chemotherapeutic stressors but not under basal conditions ; however , a direct causal relation - ship between isotype expression , microtubule dynamics , and cell survival in response to these and other stressors has not been established . In general , the importance of microtubule dynamics in homeostatic cell signaling suggests that cell stress responses , and not just spindle dynamics , may be impacted by aberrant isotype expression in cancer , thus offering an additional determinant of chemosensitivity . TUBULIN POST - TRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS Tubulins are subject to diverse post - translational modiﬁcations ( PTMs ) [ reviewed in Ref . ( 9 ) ] . The majority of tubulin PTMs are highly heterogeneous , and little is understood about the regulation and impact of these modiﬁcations . Post - translational modiﬁca - tions are thought to regulate protein – protein interactions with the microtubule cytoskeleton , thereby affecting signaling events within the cell . The majority of these modiﬁcations are localized to the tubulin C - terminus and potentially impart speciﬁc functions to the different tubulin isotypes . Removal and addition of the α - tubulin C - terminal tyrosine occurs cyclically in cells . Tyrosine addition and removal are cat - alyzed by tubulin tyrosine ligase ( TTL ) , and carboxypeptidases , respectively ( 9 ) . Highly dynamic microtubules are more likely to be detyrosinated , due to the kinetic balance between higher TTL and carboxypeptidase activities on the soluble and polymerized tubulin pools , respectively ( 45 ) . While traditionally viewed as an intrinsichallmarkof stablemicrotubules , thedetyrosinationmotif alters motor protein recruitment to microtubules , thereby stabi - lizing microtubules and inﬂuencing trafﬁcking functions within the cell ( 46 ) . Tyrosination modiﬁcations of α - tubulin are known to be criti - cal for differentiation , cell cycle progression , organelle trafﬁcking , andvesiculartransport ( 9 ) . Alteredlevelsof tyrosinationmodiﬁca - tions and the enzymes responsible for them have been detected in a range of cancers and are associated with more aggressive disease ( 47 – 50 ) . Forinstance , lossof TTLinducesmesenchymaltransition inbreastcancercells , whichmaycontributetoincreasedmetastatic potential and altered cell stress responses ( 51 ) . Increased acetylation of α - tubulin on Lys40 has also been observed in tumor cells ( 52 ) . Elevated HDAC6 expression , one of several regulators of tubulin acetylation , is associated with better prognosis in breast cancer ( 53 ) . Sirtuin - 2 is also respon - sible for tubulin deacetylation ( 54 ) and has been linked with the regulation of autophagy in response to stress [ reviewed in Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 4 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress Ref . ( 55 ) ] . HDAC6 does inﬂuence microtubule stability ( 56 ) , however , whether acetylation itself inﬂuences microtubule sta - bility remains uncertain . Acetylated tubulin is implicated in intracellular trafﬁcking ( 57 ) , endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) local - ization , and ER – mitochondria interactions ( 58 ) , as well as the regulation of microtubule dynamics ( 59 ) . The involve - ment of α - tubulin acetylation in a broad range of cell func - tions may reﬂect its importance in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis . Other post - translational modiﬁcations have been detected in prostate and hepatic cancers . Removal of the ﬁnal two residues of the β IVb - tubulinC - terminaltailwasidentiﬁedinhigherstageliver cancer and in a mouse model of hepatic carcinoma ( 60 ) . Polyg - lutamylated α - tubulins ( 47 ) and the polyglutamylation enzyme TTL - like 12are elevated inprostate cancer and correlatewith more aggressive disease ( 61 ) . Overall , despite a lack of clarity surrounding the mechanis - tic details of the function of tubulin PTMs , mounting evidence points to their role in fundamental cell processes . The diverse PTMalterationsobservedinarangeof cancersarelikelytoperturb homeostatic processes , thereby contributing to stress response sig - naling . Detailed spatiotemporal mapping of tubulin PTMs and proteomic studies investigating their role in signaling networks are required to elucidate the inﬂuence of tubulin PTMs on cellular stress responses . MICROTUBULE - ASSOCIATED PROTEINS A wide variety of proteins are known to interact with tubulins . Interactions between tubulin and MAPs inﬂuence microtubule stability and dynamics , and are known to affect chemotherapy sen - sitivity and tumor growth in cancer [ reviewed in Ref . ( 62 ) ] . Aber - rant expression of primarily neuronal MAPs ( e . g . , Tau , MAP2 ) has been detected in non - neuronal cancer tissue . For example , tau overexpression is correlated with poor outcome in breast cancer , and this protein may inﬂuence taxane sensitivity by decreasing the afﬁnity of the drug for β - tubulin ( 63 ) . Altered MAP2 expression is also associated with taxane resistance ( 22 , 64 ) , with differential effects in primary and metastatic melanoma ( 65 ) . Increased MAP4 expression and altered expression of multi - ple MAP4 isoforms have been detected in TBA - resistant leukemia and NSCLC cells in vitro ( 10 , 11 , 66 ) . In addition , changes in stathmin , survivin , BRCA1 , CLIP170 , and VHL expression have all been associated with chemotherapy resistance and disease pro - gression ( 62 , 67 ) . For instance , stathmin was recently shown to play an important role in regulating neuroblastoma cell migration and invasion ( 68 ) . Moreover , silencing its expression using RNAi gene - silencing technology signiﬁcantly reduced lung metastases in a clinically relevant orthotopic neuroblastoma mouse model ( 68 ) . The overexpression of kinesins also inﬂuences chemotherapy sen - sitivity and disease progression through mitotic and non - mitotic mechanisms [ reviewed in Ref . ( 69 ) ] . A recent study has shown that kinesins interact differentially and speciﬁcally with tubulin isotypes and tubulin post - translational modiﬁcations ( 70 ) . In this way , changes in tubulin isotype expression and post - translational modiﬁcations seen in cancer may also inﬂuence motor protein functionandthenumerousbasicprocessesthatdependupontheseinteractions . The effect of MAPs on cell function in cancer is complex , with interactions between individual MAPs inﬂuencing survival and metastases . Progress toward understanding the functional consequences of these proteins and their signaling networks in cancer relies upon more comprehensive characterization of the interactions between tubulins and MAPs , and the inﬂuence of tubulin isotypes and PTMs on these interactions . MICROTUBULE CYTOSKELETON IN STRESS RESPONSES Microtubules inﬂuence homeostatic mechanisms and cell stress responsesbyregulatingintracellulartrafﬁcking , actingasascaffold for the co - localization and sequestration of stress response pro - teins , transmitting stress signals through cytoskeletal remodeling and modulating the induction of cell death pathways . Examples of their role in these processes are described below . MICROTUBULES AND CELLULAR SIGNALING While microtubules possess distinct functions in particular stress responses , the microtubule network also inﬂuences common sig - naling pathways engaged by a variety of cellular stresses . Stress response signaling requires trafﬁcking of proteins and organelles throughout the cell and modulation of the microtubule network is expected to inﬂuence signal transduction events . For example , TBAs differentially suppress microtubule - mediated intracellular transport in neuronal cells ( 71 ) . In addition to general effects on signal transduction , micro - tubules regulate mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) sig - naling . The MAPK superfamily includes extracellular regulated kinases ( ERK ) , c - Jun N - terminal protein kinase ( JNK ) , and p38 families and is critically involved in mediating the initiation and execution of a range of cellular stress responses [ reviewed in Ref . ( 72 ) ] . MAPK proteins interact extensively with the microtubule network , with one - third of the total MAPKs associating with microtubules through kinesin motor proteins ( 73 ) . Interactions between microtubules and these signaling proteins can regulate and co - ordinate widespread cellular stress signaling events . The JNK signaling pathway is induced by a wide range of envi - ronmental stressors ( 72 ) and TBAs activate this pathway in the induction of apoptosis ( 74 – 76 ) . In particular , JNK signaling is required for the execution of apoptosis in response to ER stress and autophagy ( 77 ) . JNK co - ordinates cytoskeletal architecture in normal cells and JNK1 regulates microtubule dynamics ( 78 , 79 ) . JNK1 also phosphorylates MAP1 and MAP2 to alter their distri - bution and microtubule architecture ( 79 ) . In this context , JNK , the heavy chain kinesin family - 5B protein and β III - tubulin form a complex , raising the possibility that alterations in β - tubulin iso - typecompositionmayaffectJNKpathwayactivationandcelldeathresponses . While TBAs generally activate JNK signaling to initiate apop - tosis [ reviewed in Ref . ( 80 ) ] , microtubule stabilizing and destabi - lizing agents differentially inﬂuence downstream signaling events , suggesting that microtubule stability regulates JNK signaling ( 81 ) . Compared with etoposide and doxorubicin , vinblastine uniquely causes c - Jun phosphorylation , AP - 1 activation , ERK inactiva - tion , and p53 downregulation ( 81 ) . Microtubule destabilizing and stabilizing agents initiate apoptosis via JNK signaling through AP - 1 dependent and AP - 1 independent mechanisms , respectively www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 5 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress ( 82 ) . The AP - 1 dependent pathway leads to positive feedback of c - Jun levels and sustained JNK signaling ( 82 ) , suggesting that microtubule – JNK interactions may constitute a feedback loop for the ampliﬁcation and damping of signaling pathways to regulate stress response kinetics . Extracellular regulated kinase also interacts with microtubules and phosphorylates MAPs to regulate their activity ( 83 , 84 ) . MAPK - mediated MAP phosphorylation is implicated in hypoxic stress responses ( 85 ) . Differential induction of ERK signaling by TBAs may also mediate downstream effects independently of apoptosis induction ( 86 ) . It is well established that microtubules are involved in the translocation of messenger proteins between different cell com - partments to enable efﬁcient signal transduction . However , increasing evidence supports a role for microtubule dynamics , tubulin isotypes , and MAPs in speciﬁcally regulating the course , amplitude , and kinetics of MAPK signaling . p53 AND MICROTUBULES p53 is a key mediator of cellular stress responses and its activity heavily depends on microtubules ( 87 ) . p53 is translocated to the nucleus along microtubule tracks by dynein proteins in a complex with heat shock protein 90 ( Hsp90 ) and Hsp90 immunophilins ( 87 – 89 ) . The binding of Hsp90 to p53 inhibits MDM2 - mediated degradation of the protein by the ubiquitin – proteasome sys - tem ( 90 ) . Microtubule dynamics regulate p53 levels . p53 levels and its nuclearaccumulationareincreasedbyTBAtreatmentatdosesthatsuppressmicrotubuledynamicsbutdonotdisruptthestructureofthemicrotubulenetwork ( 87 , 91 ) . MAP1B also associates with p53 , decreasing its activity and inhibiting doxorubicin - induced apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells ( 92 ) . p53 signaling can inﬂuence microtubule dynamics and remodeling , as well as the expression of tubulin isotypes and MAPs ( 93 ) . Taken together , by regulating p53 levels and translocation , microtubules signiﬁcantly impact p53 - mediated stress response signaling . HYPOXIA Rapid cell proliferation and poor vascular development leads to hypoxic regions within solid tumors . Hypoxia - inducible factor 1 ( HIF1 ) is considered to be the master regulator of cellular adap - tation to hypoxia and is upregulated in a large proportion of solid cancers ( 94 ) . In the absence of oxygen , HIF1 α heterodimerizes to the con - stitutively active β subunit to initiate transcriptional changes [ reviewed in Ref . ( 95 ) ] . HIF1 α stabilization is regulated by enzyme - mediated hydroxylation , which enables recognition of HIF1 α for ubiquitinylation and degradation by proteins such as the von Hippel – Lindau ( VHL ) protein ( 96 ) . Low oxygen levels inactivate the hydroxylases , leading to stabilization and nuclear translocation of the α subunit where the HIF1 heterodimer binds to hypoxia responsive elements in target gene promoters ( 95 ) . Dramatic microtubule remodeling occurs under hypoxic con - ditions . Decreased microtubule polymerization has been observed in response to anoxic conditions ( 0 – 2 % O 2 ) ( 85 , 97 ) , while increased microtubule polymerization has been observed in physiological hypoxia ( 3 % O 2 ) ( 98 ) . Enhanced microtubule polymerization under these conditions is coupled with increased tubulin detyrosination and glycogen synthase kinase 3 β ( GSK3 β ) inhibition ( 98 ) , while phosphorylation of the MAPs dynein light chain tctex - type 1 ( DYNLT1 ) , MAP4 , and stathmin have each been associatedwithmicrotubuledepolymerization ( 85 ) . Discrepancies between these observations may be due to the differential effects of anoxia compared with physiological hypoxia , or alternatively may reﬂect the role of the GSK3 β pathway and MAP interac - tions on microtubule remodeling ( 98 ) . Hypoxic activation of the p38 / MAPK pathway contributes to phosphorylation of MAP4 and stathmin ( 85 ) . Microtubule remodeling in response to hypoxia may impact metastatic processes with increased microtubule poly - merization inﬂuencing integrin trafﬁcking and invasion in breast cancer cells ( 98 ) . MAP4 protects against microtubule disruption during hypoxia by enhancing tubulin polymerization and concomitant upreg - ulation of tubulin expression ( 97 ) . It also maintains ATP pro - duction under hypoxic conditions and prevents mitochondrial permeabilization ( 97 ) . The non - phosphorylated form of DYNLT1 also protects against microtubule disruption and mitochondr - ial permeabilization and maintains the cellular energy status in hypoxia , with phosphorylation of DYNLT1 potentiating cell death through mitochondrial permeabilization ( 99 ) . DYNLT1 - mediated interactions between tubulin and Voltage Dependent Anion Channels ( VDACs ) may facilitate cross - talk between the microtubule cytoskeleton , intrinsic apoptotic pathway , and mito - chondrial quality control system to inﬂuence cell survival in hypoxia ( 97 ) . Hypoxic adaptation may also be regulated by speciﬁc tubu - lin isotypes in cancer cells . For instance , β III - tubulin ( encoded by the TUBB3 gene ) is induced under hypoxic conditions by direct binding of HIF1 α to the E box motif within its 3 (cid:48) UTR ( 39 ) . Hypoxic upregulation of this isotype appears to be cell type spe - ciﬁc , depends on the epigenetic status of the TUBB3 3 (cid:48) UTR and is also inﬂuenced by the basal β III - tubulin expression level ( 26 , 39 ) . The expression of this tubulin isotype is also regulated by HuR ( 40 ) , which is involved in HIF1 α stabilization ( 100 ) . High β III - tubulin expression is also detected in close proximity to necrotic tumorregions , furthersupportinga roleforthisprotein inhypoxic adaptation ( 101 ) . Hypoxia - inducible factor 1 α degradation is dependent on the short isoform of VHL , while the long isoform is a known regula - tor of microtubule dynamics ( 102 ) . In renal cell carcinoma , where VHL mutations result in upregulated HIF expression , there is a loss of microtubule – HIF coupling , suggesting that VHL may be responsible for microtubule - mediated regulation of HIF signal - ing ( 103 ) . However , the mechanisms underlying this observation and the functional consequences of this regulatory process are uncertain . Hypoxia - inducible factor 1 activity depends upon its ability to translocate to the nucleus , and microtubules act as tracks for dynein - mediated HIF1 translocation ( 103 ) . Suppression of microtubule dynamics decreases HIF1 α levels by increasing HIF1 α mRNA association with inactive ribosomal subunits and by tar - geting this mRNA to P - body components ( 104 ) . Suppression of microtubule dynamics and HIF nuclear translocation pre - vents VEGF - mediated hypoxic adaptation in prostate and breast Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 6 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress cancer cells and decreases angiogenesis in a murine ortho - topic breast tumor model ( 94 ) . However in this study , micro - tubule dynamics regulated HIF1 α levels to the same extent in both normoxic and hypoxic conditions ; therefore , this mecha - nism may not be responsible for regulating HIF1 α levels specif - ically in response to hypoxia . Recent evidence suggests that hypoxic adaptation also depends upon microtubule - mediated perinuclear mitochondrial clustering ( 105 ) , and highlights the importance of organelle localization in cellular adaptation to hypoxia . Overall , the hypoxic response is associated with dramatic microtubule remodeling , and altered MAP signaling to main - tain bioenergetics and organelle function under hypoxic condi - tions . The microtubule network also regulates hypoxic adaptation by affecting HIF1 α signaling and organelle localization , placing microtubules as a central player in the hypoxic stress response . While current evidence suggests that β - tubulins may function in an isotype - speciﬁc manner in this context , a more comprehensive analysis of the contributions of each individual isotype to hypoxic adaptation is required . OXIDATIVE STRESS Aberrant oxidative stress signaling has been reported in many cancers . Theupregulationof enzymesresponsibleforredoxhome - ostasis , metabolic reprograming , and exposure to extracellular inducersof intracellularoxidativespeciesallcontributetoaberrant oxidative conditions in cancer [ reviewed in Ref . ( 106 ) ] . Markers of oxidative stress correlate with chemotherapy response and upreg - ulation of redox enzymes , such as glutathione peroxidases , have been observed in the acquisition of chemotherapy resistance and genomic instability [ reviewed in Ref . ( 106 ) ] . Tubulins interact with mediators of the oxidative stress response , with direct interactions between β III - tubulin and glutathione S - transferase µ 4 observed in ovarian cancer cells ( 107 ) . β III - tubulin and the DNA damage repair enzyme exci - sion repair cross - complementation group - 1 ( ERCC1 ) act together to inﬂuence patient response to taxane and paclitaxel combina - tion treatment ( 108 ) ; however , the mechanisms underlying this co - operative effect are unknown . Speciﬁc tubulin isotypes may also alter oxidative stress responses by acting as redox switches ( 109 ) . In particular , ser / ala124 , which is a cysteine in β III - , β V - and β VI - tubulins , and cys239 , which is a serine in β III - , β V - , and β VI - tubulins , have been speciﬁcally identiﬁed as potential sensors of oxidative stress ( 109 ) . Cys239 is readily oxidized and its oxidation inhibits microtubule assembly and stability ( 109 ) . Therefore , alterations in tubulin isotype composition may inﬂuence microtubule stability inanoxidativeenvironmenttomaintainmicrotubuleintegrityandcellsurvivalintheseadverseconditions . Moreover , oxidative stress inﬂuences tubulin post - translational modiﬁcations . Nitrotyrosine is a common byproduct of nitrosyl radical production in oxida - tive stress and can be incorporated into microtubules through the tyrosination / detyrosination cycle ( 110 ) . While nitrotyrosine incorporation does not affect microtubule assembly , architecture , or cell viability ( 111 ) , it does increase the stability of neuronal microtubules ( 112 ) . Furthermore , elevated levels of nitrosylated α - tubulins correlate with disease stage in gliomas ( 113 ) . Oxidative stress is also induced by TBAs , suggesting an involvement of microtubules in oxidative stress responses , and is an important mechanism of action for platinum - based chemotherapeutic agents ( 114 ) . Paclitaxel treatment induces reac - tive oxygen species through activation of the JNK pathway in melanoma cells ( 115 ) . TBA treatment also inﬂuences NADPH oxi - dase activity , increases ROS levels and induces bystander effects in breast cancer cells ( 116 ) . This effect may be mediated by changes in microtubule dynamics and stability , with these factors regulat - ing Rac1 translocation and subsequently , NADPH oxidase activity ( 117 , 118 ) . Studiesinneuronsandendothelialcellsindicatethatthemicro - tubulecytoskeletonundergoesremodelinginresponsetooxidativestress ( 119 ) . Oxidative stress induces microtubule depolymer - ization , and increases the pool of soluble tubulin ( 120 , 121 ) . 4 - Hydroxy - 2 - nonenal ( 4 - HNE ) , a secondary product of lipid per - oxidation and marker of oxidative stress , also causes microtubule depolymerization , together with tubulin crosslinking ( 122 , 123 ) . Thisdepolymerizationmaybecausedbypreferentialreactionof 4 - HNE with soluble tubulin , thereby disrupting the soluble / polymer fractionation of tubulin subunits and subsequent microtubule assembly ( 124 ) . Interactions between microtubules and MAPs protect microtubules from depolymerization in response to oxida - tive stress ( 122 , 125 ) , and alters cellular trafﬁcking in oxidative conditions ( 126 ) . Collectively , there is growing evidence supporting a role for tubulin isotypes and the microtubule network in both sensing and responding to oxidative stress in cancer through direct structural changes and protein – protein interactions . This is supported by observations in neuronal models , however , the speciﬁc roles of tubulin isotypes and their accessory proteins in oxidative stress responses remain to be clariﬁed . METABOLIC STRESS Metabolic stress occurs in cancer as a result of uncontrolled cell proliferationintheabsenceof adequatenutrients [ reviewedinRef . ( 127 ) ] . Microtubules and tubulins are involved in responding to metabolic stress by sensing and modulating metabolic processes to maintain cellular energy levels . The microtubule network is hypothesized to play a critical role in the regulation of cellular metabolism ( 128 ) . Early studies suggested that microtubules may act as a sensor of the energy state of the cell ( 129 ) with ATP depletion causing insta - bility of detyrosinated microtubule plus ends ( 130 , 131 ) . AMPK is a major sensor for the metabolic state of the cell and affects micro - tubule dynamics by phosphorylation of CLIP170 ( 132 ) . CLIP170 alters paclitaxel sensitivity in breast cancer cells by enhancing the binding of the drug to tubulin ( 67 ) . In neuronal cells , activation of AMPK in metabolic stress prevents growth of axonal micro - tubules ( 133 ) , further supporting a role for microtubules in early metabolic stress signaling events . The main neuronal tubulin , β II - tubulin , was also identiﬁed as a downstream target of AMPK in murine brain extracts ( 134 ) . Metabolic modulation of microtubule dynamics and tubu - lin post - translational modiﬁcations may allow for rapid and widespread stress responses . For example , nutrient starvation induces hyperacetylationof tubulin , which may actin concert with www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 7 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress AMPK to induce autophagy in response to decreased ATP levels ( 77 ) , thereby engaging multiple stress response pathways through microtubule - related signaling . METABOLIC REGULATION Tubulins and microtubules have been suspected to function as a key modulator of mitochondrial metabolism for some time ( 128 ) . Recent studies have demonstrated that tubulin is capable of inter - acting with , and blocking the VDAC , thereby regulating ATP and metabolite compartmentalization and contributing to the War - burg effect ( 135 – 138 ) . This interaction is mediated by the tubulin C - terminal tail ( 135 ) , raising the possibility that post - translational modiﬁcationsanddifferenttubulinisotypesmaydifferentiallyreg - ulate VDAC dynamics to inﬂuence metabolic reprograming in cancer . Tubulins , andinparticular β III - tubulin , associatewithenzymes of the tricarboxylic acid cycle and glycolysis ( 107 ) . In vitro studies in reduced systems showed that tubulin interacts with a variety of glycolytic enzymes including pyruvate kinase , phosphofruc - tokinase , aldolase , hexokinase , GAPDH , and lactate dehydroge - nase ( 139 – 144 ) . Interactions with some of these enzymes may be isotype - speciﬁc , by interacting with the α - tubulin C - terminal tail ( 142 ) rather than the tubulin body ( 140 ) . Preferential interactions between glycolytic enzymes and either the soluble or polymerized tubulin pool may also inﬂuence meta - bolic activity and microtubule dynamics ( 139 , 141 , 144 ) . GAPDH activity is differentially regulated by its interaction with either the soluble or polymerized tubulins ( 143 ) , and this interaction inﬂu - ences microtubule dynamics ( 145 ) . Interactions between meta - bolic enzymes and tubulins may therefore mediate bi - directional signaling events to sense and respond to metabolic stress . Indeed , mathematicalmodelingof metabolicpathwaysandtubulin’smod - ulation of enzyme activity suggest that glycolytic ﬂux is regu - lated by microtubule polymer levels ( 146 ) , however , the mech - anisms by which the microtubule network inﬂuences metabolic homeostasis and the importance of the soluble and polymerized tubulin fractions in these functions remain to be characterized experimentally . The association between GAPDH and microtubules may also inﬂuence cellular trafﬁcking , with a recent study ﬁnding that ATP generated from vesicular GAPDH activity fuels the energy con - sumption of motor proteins during vesicular transport ( 147 ) . Furthermore , GAPDH is known to mediate membrane fusion , and its association with microtubules may co - regulate membrane trafﬁcking during glycolytic stress ( 148 ) . The presence of GAPDH on microtubules allows the recruitment of Rab2 protein to reg - ulate membrane and ER – Golgi trafﬁcking independently of its catalytic activity ( 145 , 149 ) . Given the importance of ER – Golgi trafﬁcking in protein glycosylation , the interaction of GAPDH with microtubules may function as a point of communication between metabolic and protein modiﬁcation pathways under a range of stresses . For example , in neuronal cells , GAPDH binds tubulin through the neuronal MAP1B protein but is relocalized upon oxidative stress ( 150 ) . Speciﬁc interactions between tubulin isotypes and glycolytic enzymes support the pro - survival effect of altered tubulin isotypes in cancer . Pyruvate kinase interacts with tubulin via the tubulin C - terminal tail and depolymerizes stabilized microtubules ( 140 , 151 ) . In particular , β III - tubulin interacts with the mitochondrial - localized pyruvate kinase M2 ( 107 ) , which is associated with the Warburg effect . Feedback from metabolic products also inﬂuences the association of pyruvate kinase with microtubules , as well as microtubule stability ( 151 ) , further supporting a role for the microtubule cytoskeleton in the regulation of metabolic ﬂux . Altered metabolic activity also inﬂuences microtubule architec - ture ( 152 ) , raising the possibility that the microtubule system may communicatewithmetabolicnetworksinabi - directionalmanner . β III - tubulin has been speciﬁcally implicated in glucose stress responses . Treatment of ovarian cancer cells with tunicamycin or wortmannin to block protein glycosylation and PI3K signal - ing , respectively , upregulates β III - tubulin and alters the post - translational modiﬁcations of non - mitochondrial tubulins in cell lines with low basal β III - tubulin expression ( 107 ) . β III - tubulin induction and decreased β I - tubulin expression have also been observed for ovarian cancer cells under glucose starvation ( 40 ) . Upregulation of β III - tubulin in these conditions correlates with HuRbindingtothe β III - tubulin3 (cid:48) UTR ( 40 ) . Thisfunctionof HuR is independent of its role in the nuclear export of mRNA ; how - ever , whether HuR is involved in the stabilization of β III - tubulin mRNA under hypoglycemic conditions was not investigated . Cor - relations between increased HuR , β III - tubulin expression , and poor survival in ovarian cancer samples further support a role for this mechanism in inﬂuencing cancer progression and patient outcome ( 40 ) . The current evidence strongly supports a role for the micro - tubules in regulating metabolic activity and metabolic reprogram - ing in response to nutrient starvation . However , the mechanistic details underpinning these observations is lacking and the impor - tance of speciﬁc tubulin isotypes , tubulin post - translational mod - iﬁcations , and associated proteins in regulating metabolic stress responses requires further characterization . AUTOPHAGY Macroautophagy ( hereafter referred to as autophagy ) can be induced in cells in response to diverse stresses , including meta - bolic and ER stress [ reviewed in Ref . ( 153 ) ] . Autophagy is a catabolic process that enables isolation and recycling of protein and organelle components by sequestering them into vacuoles for subsequent lysosomal degradation ( 154 ) . It is also an impor - tant quality control process , allowing for the removal of damaged organelles and proteins , and protects cells from oxidative stress damage ( 155 ) . Autophagic activity can support cells during ATP depletion , and thus is intrinsically linked with metabolic stress responses ( 154 ) . Recent evidence supports a role for autophagy in the survival and treatment sensitivity of cancer cells , and several recent reviews have been devoted to this topic ( 156 – 158 ) . Microtubules have been known to play a critical role in autophagic ﬂux for several decades ( 159 ) , however our understanding of their importance in autophagy initiation , trafﬁcking , and lysosomal fusion has been furthered in recent years . Evidence for a microtubule role in autophagy regulation comes from the alteration of autophagic ﬂux upon treatment with TBAs in vitro ( 160 – 163 ) . Disruption of autophagic ﬂux by Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 8 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress TBAs is important in the mechanism of action of , and resis - tance to , TBAs in cancer ( 4 , 164 ) . The inﬂuence of TBAs on autophagy may be mediated by inhibition of Akt / mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) signaling ( 165 ) , or suppression of microtubule dynamics , and additional studies are required to characterize this mechanism . Microtubule - associated protein - 1 light chain 3 ( MAP1LC3 , also referred to as LC3 ) , a critical member of the autophagy network , interacts directly with tubulin in both its free and phosphatidylethanolamine - conjugated form ( 77 , 160 ) . LC3 also interacts with microtubules through MAP1 proteins ( 166 – 168 ) . The promotion of autophagy by MAP1S reduces genomic instability to suppress tumor development in hepatocarcinoma , and MAP1S may also co - ordinate mitochondrial dynamics and autophagy ( 155 , 167 ) . Other autophagy proteins also associate with microtubules , including ULK1 , Beclin - 1 , WIPI1 , autophagy related ( Atg ) protein 5 , and Atg12 , which are thought to be prin - cipally involved in autophagosome formation ( 77 , 169 , 170 ) . In neuronal models derived from neuroblastoma cells , autophagy inhibition is associated with decreased β - tubulin levels and sup - pressed neurite outgrowth ( 171 ) . However , links between altered tubulin expression and autophagy have not yet been reported in non - neuronal cancer cells . Autophagy initiation involves activation of the master regu - lator mTOR and the formation of the mTOR - containing com - plexes . mTOR activity is regulated by lysosomal localization ( 172 ) , with mTOR associating speciﬁcally with peripheral lysosomes ( 173 ) . Peripherally localized mTOR is sensitive to nutrient star - vation , which causes it to be released from lysosomes to form the mTORC1 complex and initiate autophagy ( 172 ) . Microtubules control the peripheral localization of lysosomes , and therefore ensure the sensitivity of mTOR to nutrient starvation ( 172 ) . Spa - tial partitioning of the microtubule - interacting kinesins KIF2A and KIF1B between peripheral or perinuclear lysosomes also inﬂuences mTOR activation and the initiation of autophagy ( 173 ) . Microtubules act as scaffolds and sequester proteins to regulate autophagy . Activating molecule in BECN1 - regulated autophagy 1 ( AMBRA1 ) acts as a linker protein between microtubules and the PI3K signaling complex responsible for autophagy induction ( 169 ) . Starvation induces phosphorylation of AMBRA1 by ULK1 , releasing the Beclin - 1 - PI3K complex from microtubules to the ER to initiate autophagosome formation ( 169 ) . Beclin - 1 – Bcl - 2 complexes are also sequestered on microtubules during periods of high nutrient availability . JNK1 - mediated phosphorylation of Bcl - 2 in response to nutrient starvation causes dissociation of Beclin - 1 from this complex to initiate autophagosome signaling and inﬂuence apoptosis ( 174 ) . Microtubules are also involved in the transport of several proteins whose localization is required for autophagosome formation ( 175 ) . Tubulinpost - translationalmodiﬁcationsalsoregulateautophagy initiation , as tubulin hyperacetylation occurs before autophago - some formation in response to nutrient starvation ( 77 ) . Acety - lation modiﬁcations signal kinesin recruitment to microtubules , with subsequent JNK activation , and release of Beclin - 1 from Beclin - 1 – Bcl - 2 complexes to initiate autophagy ( 77 ) . There - fore , tubulins serve as interacting partners in the regulation of autophagy initiation . During autophagy initiation autophagosome membranes are produced from existing intracellular membranes and micro - tubules are well positioned to act as carriers of these mem - brane components from existing organelles to sites of phagophor nucleation . Recent studies have shown that LC3 enrichment and autophagosome formation occur at contact sites between Parkin - tagged mitochondria and the ER ( 176 ) . Microtubules mediate translocation of both these organelles ( 177 , 178 ) and may crit - ically regulate their co - localization to initiate autophagosome formation . Theroleof microtubulesinautophagosomeformationisdiffer - entially regulated in basal and starvation conditions . Microtubule dynamics are required for autophagosome formation in response to nutrient starvation ( 77 , 162 ) but not under basal conditions ( 162 , 179 , 180 ) . Once formed , autophagosomes are transported along micro - tubules in both anterograde and retrograde directions ( 77 ) , where they are fused with lysosomes . The role of microtubules in medi - ating the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes remains con - troversial . Microtubule dynamics do not affect the co - localization and fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes ( 162 ) , which can occur in the absence of microtubules ( 160 ) . However , Kimura et al . arguethatmoreefﬁcientfusionisenabledbyactivetransportalongmicrotubule ( 181 ) . These contrary observations may be explained by the inﬂuence of pharmacological or RNA interference - based modulators on lysosomal behavior in addition to their effects on microtubule cytoskeleton . However , studies using tools that more selectively target the autophagy machinery are required to clarify the importance of microtubules in autophagosome – lysosome fusion in autophagy , and the mechanisms regulating these processes . Overall , microtubules regulate autophagy through scaffolding functions and in the intracellular trafﬁcking of autophagy compo - nents . While precise mechanistic details remain elusive , it is likely that tubulin alterations seen in cancer would inﬂuence autophagic function and the ability of cells to cope with microenvironmental and chemotherapeutic stressors that cause nutrient starvation and cellular damage . PROTEIN FOLDING STRESS Misfolded proteins may arise from protein damage , inadequate chaperoneactivity , andmalfunctionof proteinprocessingsystems . The ER is responsible for ensuring correct folding of membra - nous and secretory proteins and this organelle is highly sensitive to cellular conditions . Slight changes in any number of parame - ters can lead to accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER lumen and initiation of the unfolded protein response ( UPR ) [ reviewed in Ref . ( 182 ) ] . The UPR involves the induction of the ER - associated degradation machinery that allows transport of unfolded proteins to cytoplasmic proteasomal systems , suppres - sion of translation , and upregulation of chaperones in a concerted effort to reduce the burden of misfolded proteins ( 182 ) . Initiation of the UPR leads to amelioration of ER stress , or the initiation of cell death ( 182 ) . The UPR is upregulated in many cancers and is an important contributor to tumor development and main - tenance ( 182 – 184 ) . ER stress sensitizes cells to a broad range of chemotherapeutics including topoisomerase inhibitors ( 185 ) , www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 9 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress temozolomide ( 186 ) , platinum - based agents ( 187 , 188 ) , and TBAs ( 189 ) . Glucose regulated protein 78 ( GRP78 ) is a member of the heat shock protein 70 ( Hsp70 ) family and a master regulator of the ER stress response ( 190 ) . Alterations in GRP78 expression and localization have been linked with tumor aggressiveness , migra - tion , and invasion as well as chemoresistance , where it acts as a pro - survival factor ( 182 ) . Taxanes and vinca alkaloids induce ER stress through upregulation of GRP78 in breast cancer cells ( 5 ) . ER stress is also associated with JNK activation and apoptosis , which are inhibited upon GRP78 knockdown ( 5 , 191 ) . GRP78 interacts with β III - tubulin ( 107 ) , however , the functional con - sequences of this association are unknown . These observations suggest an intrinsic link between the microtubule cytoskeleton and the initiation of ER stress responses . Tubulin - binding agent treatment also initiates mechanisms to repress translation and ameliorate misfolded protein accumula - tion . Treatment of cervical cancer cells with TBAs induces P - body formation , which are cytoplasmic regions where mRNA transla - tion is inhibited ( 104 ) . P - body targeting of miRNA and mRNA is also an important regulator of numerous stress responses , includ - ing the regulation of HIF1 α levels in normoxic and hypoxic con - ditions ( 192 ) . Microtubule dynamics are also critically involved in the association of mRNA with stress granules ( 193 ) , which also regulate mRNA processing in response to stress ( 194 ) . Expansion of the ER network occurs during the UPR ( 195 ) , where it acts to relieve ER stress ( 196 ) . Microtubules are critically involved in regulating ER morphology , trafﬁcking , and expansion of the organelle to the periphery of the cell by direct attach - ment of the ER to microtubules ( 197 ) . Microtubule dynamics are tightly co - regulated with ER dynamics , which are suppressed by microtubule depolymerizing agents ( 178 , 198 ) . ER movement can occur by attachment to the microtubule plus ends ( 198 ) , or kinesin - mediated ER sliding along microtubules ( 58 , 199 ) . While the former mechanism occurs on highly dynamic microtubules , ER sliding occurs on acetylated microtubules ( 58 ) . Therefore , tubulin post - translational modiﬁcations may act as important regulators of ER expansion during the UPR . Mitochondria are also localized to acetylated microtubules , with this PTM poten - tially facilitating functional ER – mitochondrial interactions with diverse consequences for the cell , including autophagy induction ( 58 , 176 ) . Therefore , the microtubule network may co - ordinate whole cell reprograming in response to localized ER stress . Inneuronalneuroblastomamodels , collapseof themicrotubule network and evolution of ubiquitinated protein aggregates at the centrosome were observed in parallel with the initiation of ER stress ( 200 ) . While this suggests that maintenance of a functional ER network relies heavily upon the microtubule cytoskeleton , sim - ilar observations are yet to be reported in non - neuronal cancer cells . These observations suggest an intrinsic link between ER home - ostasis , the initiation of ER stress responses and the microtubule network ; however , the mechanisms co - regulating these systems remain elusive . Improved understanding of the role of micro - tubules in ER function , and the importance of this organelle in tumordevelopmentandcellsurvivalmayrevealstrategiesformoreeffectiveuseofexistingtreatmentsincancer . TUBULIN AND MOLECULAR CHAPERONES OUTSIDE OF THE ER Other chaperones outside of the ER system also interact with microtubules ( 201 ) . The small heat shock protein ( Hsp ) α B - crystallin regulates microtubule dynamics ( 202 ) and tubulin polymerization ( 203 ) by associating with microtubules through interactions with MAPs ( 204 ) . The association between α B - crystallin and tubulin may also prevent the aggregation of misfolded tubulin ( 202 ) . Heat shock protein 27 ( Hsp27 ) associates with microtubules ( 205 ) and alters the microtubule structure by promoting micro - tubule nucleation distant to the centrosome ( 206 ) . TBAs induce Hsp27 phosphorylation through the p38 signaling pathway in MCF - 7 cells , with microtubule stabilizers and destabilizers induc - ing different phosphorylation patterns on this protein ( 207 ) . However , the functional consequences of these phosphorylation sites are unclear . Hsp70 also associates with tubulin by interact - ing with the tubulin C - terminal tail , and this interaction may be mediated by MAP1B ( 208 , 209 ) . In particular , β III - tubulin has been found to associate with mitochondria - localized Hsp70 ( 107 ) . Hsp70 expression is induced by vinblastine treatment in melanoma cells ( 210 ) . Furthermore , crosstalk between Hsp70 and oxidative stress enzymes ( 211 ) suggests that interactions between the microtubule network and these proteins could have profound implications for a variety of stress responses . The Hsp90 family is the main cytosolic chaperones in basal and stressed conditions , where they mediate maturation of folded proteins ( 212 ) . Hsp90 client proteins are diverse and include oncoproteins that promote survival in response to environmen - tal stress [ reviewed in Ref . ( 213 ) ] . Hsp90 proteins have been found to associate with tubulin ; however , this occurs in an ATP - independent manner , suggesting that tubulin – Hsp90 associations arenotrelatedtoglobaltubulinre - foldingorthetargetingof tubu - lins to proteasome machinery ( 214 , 215 ) . The binding of Hsp90 to tubulins may instead ensure correct folding of nascent tubulin peptides , and prevent the formation of tubulin aggregates during cellular stress ( 214 ) . The association between these proteins may also reﬂect the role of Hsp90 as a molecular chaperone for proteins translocating on microtubules ( 216 ) . Heat shock protein 90 recruitment to microtubules depends on acetylated tubulins , with HeLa cells having higher levels of acetylated tubulin and Hsp90 recruitment to microtubules com - pared with non - tumoral RPE1 cells ( 52 ) . Tubulin acetylation is also associated with recruitment of the Hsp90 client proteins Akt and p53 to microtubules , with signiﬁcant implications for downstream signaling events and chemosensitivity ( 52 ) . Whether tubulin hyperacetylation is a widespread feature of cancers , or is speciﬁc to these cell types , is unclear , but these observations suggest that tubulin post - translational modiﬁcations may impact uponproteinfoldingstressincancer . Overall , interactionsbetween tubulins and Hsp90 may act as an important link between tubulin PTMs , protein folding , and stress response signaling . MITOCHONDRIAL FUNCTION As integrators of cell state and mediators of apoptotic sig - naling , mitochondria play a critical role in determining cell fate in response to stress . There is growing evidence that tubulin , microtubules , and the microtubule network regulate Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 10 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress mitochondrialfunctionincancer ( 217 ) . Microtubulesareinvolved in mitochondrial trafﬁcking and degradation , with these processes inﬂuencing microtubule stability and tubulin degradation ( 218 ) . Tubulin is an integral component of mitochondrial membranes ( 136 , 137 , 219 ) , and these membranes are enriched with β III - tubulin ( 107 , 137 , 217 ) . Mitochondria - associated β III - tubulin is distinguished from the cytoplasmic tubulin pool by distinct post - translational modiﬁcations ( 107 ) . Interactions between tubulin and VDAC discussed above , also support a role for tubulins in mitochondrial function . Tubulin - binding agents are known to affect mitochondrial stress ( 115 ) . Microtubule stabilizing and destabilizing TBAs cause changes in the mitochondrial membrane potential , which is criti - cal for the maintenance of respiration and regulation of apoptosis ( 135 , 220 ) . It is currently unclear whether these effects are inde - pendent of the tubulin - targeted activity of these agents . Neverthe - less , higher levels of soluble tubulin are associated with a lower mitochondrial membrane potential in cancer cells but not in non - transformed primary cells ( 220 ) . Therefore , modulation of mito - chondrial function by tubulin and microtubules may inﬂuence cell stress responses and cell survival signaling in cancer . CELL DEATH SIGNALING Failure of cellular stress responses to alleviate cellular dysfunction can result in the induction of cell death . Emerging evidence sup - ports a role for tubulins and microtubules in the execution of cell death in response to stress . For instance , tubulins interact with reg - ulators of mitochondrial membrane permeability and apoptosis . Interactions between tubulin , VDAC , and p53 ( discussed above ) may inﬂuence the mitochondrial permeability transition and reg - ulate apoptosis induction ( 221 ) . This is supported by evidence that TBAs mediate their apoptotic effects by directly compromising the mitochondrial outer membrane integrity ( 222 ) , whether through interactions with their traditional target , tubulin , or with B - cell Lymphoma / Leukemia - 2 ( Bcl - 2 ) ( 223 ) . Crosstalk between microtubules and apoptotic networks is also suggested by Bcl - 2 involvement in TBA - mediated cell death . In leukemic cell lines , the overexpression of Bcl - 2 suppresses the apoptotic response of TBAs independently of G2 / M arrest and structural microtubule alterations ( 224 – 226 ) . High Bcl - xL levels are protective against taxol - induced cell stress ( 225 ) . These effects may be explained by direct interactions between Bcl - 2 and tubulin ( 217 , 227 ) . Bcl - 2 interacting mediator of cell death ( Bim ) is also sequestered on microtubules by binding to the dynein light chain , thereby preventing initiation of apoptotic signaling ( 227 , 228 ) . Once released from microtubules , Bim translocates to mitochon - dria , and interacts with Bcl - 2 , Bcl - xL , or Bax to promote apoptosis ( 228 ) . Biophysical studies have also indicated that BH3 - domain proteins , of which Bim is a member , can interact with tubulin through this domain ( 227 ) . The pro - survival factors semaphorin 6A and survivin also associate with microtubules ( 107 , 229 , 230 ) with the latter affecting microtubule dynamics ( 229 ) . Semaphorin 6A interacts directly with β III - tubulin in ovarian cancer cell lines and its expression correlates with resistance to a broad range of chemotherapy agents ( 230 ) . By interacting with apoptotic pro - teins , tubulinalterationsmayhaveapro - survivaleffectbyreducing the apoptotic potential of cancer cells . Manipulation of the soluble and polymerized tubulin frac - tions may also modulate apoptotic potential . Bak associates with the polymerized fraction while Bid preferentially associates with the soluble fraction ( 227 ) . This interaction is mediated by the β - tubulin C - terminal tail region ( 227 ) , suggesting that tubulins may modulate apoptotic potential in an isotype - speciﬁc manner . How - ever , this interaction , its tubulin isotype speciﬁcity and functional consequences are yet to be validated in the more complex cell environment . Tubulin - binding agents are known to induce Bcl - 2 phosphory - lation , astatethatinhibitstheanti - apoptoticactivityof thisprotein ( 231 ) , suggesting that Bcl - 2 activity may be regulated by micro - tubule integrity . However , Bcl - 2 phosphorylation is elevated in cells undergoing G2 / M arrest and this observation may reﬂect the action of TBAs on the cell cycle checkpoint , rather than apoptotic signaling ( 232 ) . Direct and indirect interactions between tubulins , apoptotic proteins , and mitochondria suggest that the microtubule network communicates with the apoptotic machinery to regulate the exe - cution of the ﬁnal stages of cell death signaling . While the precise mechanistic details of this cross - talk remain elusive , the current evidence supports a role for isotype - speciﬁc regulation of cell death by tubulins . CONCLUSION Tubulins , microtubules , and their interacting partners are increas - ingly recognized as central players in the maintenance of cell homeostasis and execution of cell stress responses . Emerging evidence suggests that the modulation of tubulin isotype com - position , post - translational modiﬁcations and the expression of MAPs seen in cancer inﬂuence diverse cellular functions to promote cell survival under metabolic , protein , oxidative , and hypoxic stress . Microtubules and tubulins inﬂuence protein sig - naling networks through molecule and organelle transport , act as scaffolds for protein – protein interactions , modulate enzyme activity , and sequester stress response mediators . Developing a detailed spatiotemporal knowledge of the speciﬁc function of tubulin isotypes , their post translation modiﬁcations and the proteins they associate with presents a major challenge , and is a necessary foundation for understanding the role of the microtubule network in the regulation and execution of stress responses . By inﬂuencing a variety of cell stress responses , microtubules are well positioned to act as coordinators of cell function in response to stress . Furthermore , crosstalk between different stress response signaling events means that microtubule involvement in this context may have profound implications on diverse cellular functions ( Figure 2 ) . Improved understanding of the role of tubulins and micro - tubules in cell stress responses in cancer has appreciable clini - cal beneﬁts . The identiﬁcation of signaling pathways inﬂuenced by the microtubule cytoskeleton may offer a source of novel anticancer treatments . A ﬁrmer grasp on the role of the micro - tubule cytoskeleton in cell stress responses , and in particular in chemotherapeutic stress , should also enable more effective use of existing treatments . By proﬁling tubulin and microtubule aberra - tionsintumors , chemotherapeuticcombinationsknowntoinduce www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 11 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress FIGURE 2 | Microtubules regulate and co - ordinate diverse cellular stress responses in cancer cells . Alterations in the expression of tubulin isotypes , tubulin post - translational modiﬁcations , and the interaction of microtubules with MAPs seen in cancer affect a wide range of homeostatic mechanisms in response to cellular stress . Microtubules may function to co - ordinate stress responses across the cell , resulting in enhanced cell survival in the harsh tumor microenvironment , resistance to chemotherapy treatment , and the development of more aggressive disease ; MT , microtubules . particular stress states could be selected to exploit altered stress response signaling in cancers . Through these avenues , a thor - ough understanding of the role of the microtubule cytoskeleton in stress responses has the potential to lead to larger therapeutic win - dows , reduced chemotherapy resistance , and more effective cancer treatment with reduced side effects . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are supported by the Children’s Cancer Institute Aus - tralia for Medical Research , which is afﬁliated with the University of New South Wales ( UNSW ) and Sydney Children’s Hospitals and by grants from the National Health and Medical Research Council ( NHMRC ; Maria Kavallaris and Joshua A . McCarroll ) , Cancer Council NSW ( Maria Kavallaris ) , Cancer Institute NSW Career Development Fellowship ( Joshua A . McCarroll ) , NHMRC Senior Research Fellowship ( Maria Kavallaris ) , Steggles Postgrad - uate Scholarship ( Amelia L . Parker ) , CCIA Ph . D . , Excellence Award ( Amelia L . Parker ) , Australian Postgraduate Award ( Amelia L . Parker ) , and UNSW Research Excellence Award ( Amelia L . Parker ) . REFERENCES 1 . Nogales E . Structural insights into microtubule function . Annu Rev Biochem ( 2000 ) 69 : 277 – 302 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biochem . 69 . 1 . 277 2 . Downing KH , Nogales E . Tubulin structure : insights into microtubule prop - erties and functions . Curr Opin Struct Biol ( 1998 ) 8 ( 6 ) : 785 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 440X ( 98 ) 80099 - 7 3 . Jordan MA , Wilson L . Microtubules as a target for anticancer drugs . Nat Rev Cancer ( 2004 ) 4 ( 4 ) : 253 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc1317 Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 12 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress 4 . Veldhoen RA , Banman SL , Hemmerling DR , Odsen R , Simmen T , Sim - monds AJ , et al . The chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel inhibits autophagy through two distinct mechanisms that regulate apoptosis . Oncogene ( 2013 ) 32 ( 6 ) : 736 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2012 . 92 5 . Wang J , Yin YC , Hua H , Li MJ , Luo T , Xu L , et al . Blockade of GRP78 sensitizes breast cancer cells to microtubules - interfering agents that induce the unfolded protein response . J Cell Mol Med ( 2009 ) 13 ( 9B ) : 3888 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1582 - 4934 . 2009 . 00873 . x 6 . Xi GM , Hu XY , Wu BL , Jiang HM , Young CY , PangYX , et al . Autophagy inhibi - tion promotes paclitaxel - induced apoptosis in cancer cells . Cancer Lett ( 2011 ) 307 ( 2 ) : 141 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . canlet . 2011 . 03 . 026 7 . Luduena RF . Are tubulin isotypes functionally signiﬁcant . Mol Biol Cell ( 1993 ) 4 ( 5 ) : 445 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 4 . 5 . 445 8 . Sullivan KF , Cleveland DW . Identiﬁcation of conserved isotype - deﬁning vari - able region sequences for 4 vertebrate beta - tubulin polypeptide classes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 1986 ) 83 ( 12 ) : 4327 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 83 . 12 . 4327 9 . Janke C , Bulinski JC . Post - translational regulation of the microtubule cytoskeleton : mechanisms and functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol ( 2011 ) 12 ( 12 ) : 773 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3227 10 . Kavallaris M , Tait AS , Walsh BJ , He LF , Horwitz SB , Norris MD , et al . Multiple microtubule alterations are associated with vinca alkaloid resistance in human leukemia cells . Cancer Res ( 2001 ) 61 ( 15 ) : 5803 – 9 . 11 . MartelloLA , Verdier - PinardP , ShenHJ , HeLF , TorresK , OrrGA , et al . Elevated levels of microtubule destabilizing factors in a taxol - resistant / dependent A549 cell line with an alpha - tubulin mutation . Cancer Res ( 2003 ) 63 ( 6 ) : 1207 – 13 . 12 . Verdier - Pinard P , Wang F , Martello L , Burd B , Orr GA , Horwitz SB . Analysis of tubulin isotypes and mutations from taxol - resistant cells by combined iso - electrofocusing and mass spectrometry . Biochemistry ( 2003 ) 42 ( 18 ) : 5349 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi027293o 13 . Mozzetti S , Ferlini C , Concolino P , Filippetti F , Raspaglio G , Prislei S , et al . Class III beta - tubulin overexpression is a prominent mechanism of paclitaxel resistance in ovarian cancer patients . Clin Cancer Res ( 2005 ) 11 ( 1 ) : 298 – 305 . 14 . Sale S , Sung R , Shen PD , Yu K , Wang Y , Duran GE , et al . Conservation of the class I beta - tubulin gene in human populations and lack of mutations in lung cancers and paclitaxel - resistant ovarian cancers . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2002 ) 1 ( 3 ) : 215 – 25 . 15 . Kavallaris M . Microtubules and resistance to tubulin - binding agents . Nat Rev Cancer ( 2010 ) 10 ( 3 ) : 194 – 204 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc2803 16 . Ferrandina G , Zannoni GF , Martinelli E , Paglia A , Gallotta V , Mozzetti S , et al . Class III beta - tubulin overexpression is a marker of poor clinical outcome in advanced ovarian cancer patients . Clin Cancer Res ( 2006 ) 12 ( 9 ) : 2774 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 05 - 2715 17 . Lee KM , Cao D , Itami A , Pour PM , Hruban RH , Maitra A , et al . Class III beta - tubulin , a marker of resistance to paclitaxel , is overexpressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and intraepithelial neoplasia . Histopathology ( 2007 ) 51 ( 4 ) : 539 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2559 . 2007 . 02792 . x 18 . McCarroll JA , Gan PP , Liu M , Kavallaris M . Beta III - tubulin is a multifunc - tional protein involved in drug sensitivity and tumorigenesis in non - small celllungcancer . CancerRes ( 2010 ) 70 ( 12 ) : 4995 – 5003 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 09 - 4487 19 . Gan PP , McCarroll JA , Byrne FL , Garner J , Kavallaris M . Speciﬁc β - tubulin isotypes can functionally enhance or diminish epothilone B sensitivity in non - smallcelllungcancercells . PLoSOne ( 2011 ) 6 ( 6 ) : e21717 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0021717 20 . Gan PP , Kavallaris M . Tubulin - targeted drug action : functional signiﬁcance of class II and class IVb beta - tubulin in vinca alkaloid sensitivity . Cancer Res ( 2008 ) 68 ( 23 ) : 9817 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 08 - 1501 21 . Cucchiarelli V , Hiser L , Smith H , Frankfurter A , Spano A , Correia JJ , et al . Beta - tubulin isotype classes II and V expression patterns in nonsmall cell lung carcinomas . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton ( 2008 ) 65 ( 8 ) : 675 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20297 22 . Don S , Verrills NM , Liaw TY , Liu ML , Norris MD , Haber M , et al . Neuronal - associated microtubule proteins class III beta - tubulin and MAP2c in neurob - lastoma : role in resistance to microtubule - targeted drugs . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2004 ) 3 ( 9 ) : 1137 – 46 . 23 . Bhattacharya R , Cabral F . A ubiquitous beta - tubulin disrupts microtubule assembly and inhibits cell proliferation . Mol Biol Cell ( 2004 ) 15 ( 7 ) : 3123 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 01 - 0060 24 . Lobert S , Jefferson B , Morris K . Regulation of beta - tubulin isotypes by micro - RNA 100 in MCF7 breast cancer cells . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) ( 2011 ) 68 ( 6 ) : 355 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20517 25 . Verrills NM , Walsh BJ , Cobon GS , Hains PG , Kavallaris M . Proteome analy - sis of vinca alkaloid response and resistance in acute lymphoblastic leukemia reveals novel cytoskeletal alterations . J Biol Chem ( 2003 ) 278 ( 46 ) : 45082 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M303378200 26 . Mozzetti S , Iantomasi R , De Maria I , Prislei S , Mariani M , Camperchioli A , et al . Molecular mechanisms of patupilone resistance . Cancer Res ( 2008 ) 68 ( 24 ) : 10197 – 204 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 08 - 2091 27 . Dozier JH , Hiser L , Davis JA , Thomas NS , Tucci MA , Benghuzzi HA , et al . Beta classIItubulinpredominatesinnormalandtumorbreasttissues . BreastCancer Res ( 2003 ) 5 ( 5 ) : R157 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1186 / bcr631 28 . BladeK , MenickDR , CabralF . Overexpressionof classI , IIorIVbbeta - tubulin isotypes in CHO cells is insufﬁcient to confer resistance to paclitaxel . J Cell Sci ( 1999 ) 112 ( 13 ) : 2213 – 21 . 29 . Ranganathan S , McCauley RA , Dexter DW , Hudes GR . Modulation of endoge - nous beta - tubulin isotype expression as a result of human beta ( III ) cDNA transfection into prostate carcinoma cells . Br J Cancer ( 2001 ) 85 ( 5 ) : 735 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1054 / bjoc . 2001 . 1956 30 . HariM , YangH , ZengC , CanizalesM , CabralF . ExpressionofclassIII β - tubulin reduces microtubule assembly and confers resistance to paclitaxel . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton ( 2003 ) 56 ( 1 ) : 45 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 10132 31 . Levallet G , Bergot E , Antoine M , Creveuil C , Santos AO , Beau - Faller M , et al . High TUBB3 expression , an independent prognostic marker in patients with early non - small cell lung cancer treated by preoperative chemotherapy , is reg - ulated by K - Ras signaling pathway . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2012 ) 11 ( 5 ) : 1203 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 11 - 0899 32 . Cochrane DR , Spoelstra NS , Howe EN , Nordeen SK , Richer JK . MicroRNA - 200c mitigates invasiveness and restores sensitivity to microtubule - targeting chemotherapeutic agents . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2009 ) 8 ( 5 ) : 1055 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 08 - 1046 33 . Leskela S , Leandro - Garcia LJ , Mendiola M , Barriuso J , Inglada - Perez L , Munoz I , et al . The miR - 200 family controls beta - tubulin III expression and is asso - ciated with paclitaxel - based treatment response and progression - free sur - vival in ovarian cancer patients . Endocr Relat Cancer ( 2011 ) 18 ( 1 ) : 85 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1677 / ERC - 10 - 0148 34 . Akasaka K , Maesawa C , Shibazaki M , Maeda F , Takahashi K , Akasaka T , et al . LossofclassIIIbeta - tubulininducedbyhistonedeacetylationisassociatedwith chemosensitivity to paclitaxel in malignant melanoma cells . J Invest Dermatol ( 2009 ) 129 ( 6 ) : 1516 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1038 / jid . 2008 . 406 35 . IzutsuN , MaesawaC , ShibazakiM , OikawaH , ShojiT , SugiyamaT , et al . Epige - netic modiﬁcation is involved in aberrant expression of class III beta - tubulin , TUBB3 , in ovarian cancer cells . Int J Oncol ( 2008 ) 32 ( 6 ) : 1227 – 35 . 36 . Tsourlakis MC , Weigand P , Grupp K , Kluth M , Steurer S , Schlomm T , et al . β III - tubulinoverexpressionisanindependentpredictorofprostatecancerpro - gression tightly linked to ERG fusion status and PTEN deletion . Am J Pathol ( 2014 ) 184 ( 3 ) : 609 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ajpath . 2013 . 11 . 007 37 . Ranganathan S , Dexter DW , Benetatos CA , Hudes GR . Cloning and sequenc - ing of human betaIII - tubulin cDNA : induction of betaIII isotype in human prostate carcinoma cells by acute exposure to antimicrotubule agents . Biochim Biophys Acta ( 1998 ) 1395 ( 2 ) : 237 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 4781 ( 97 ) 00168 - 1 38 . Saussede - Aim J , Matera EL , Herveau S , Rouault JP , Ferlini C , Dumontet C . Vinorelbineinducesbeta3 - tubulingeneexpressionthroughanAP - 1site . Anti - cancer Res ( 2009 ) 29 ( 8 ) : 3003 – 9 . 39 . Raspaglio G , Filippetti F , Prislei S , Penci R , De Maria I , Cicchillitti L , et al . HypoxiainducesclassIIIbeta - tubulingeneexpressionbyHIF - 1alphabinding toits3’ﬂankingregion . Gene ( 2008 ) 409 ( 1 – 2 ) : 100 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . gene . 2007 . 11 . 015 40 . Raspaglio G , De Maria I , Filippetti F , Martinelli E , Zannoni GF , Prislei S , et al . HuR regulates beta - tubulin isotype expression in ovarian cancer . Cancer Res ( 2010 ) 70 ( 14 ) : 5891 – 900 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 09 - 4656 41 . Masuda K , Abdelmohsen K , Gorospe M . RNA - binding proteins implicated in the hypoxic response . J Cell Mol Med ( 2009 ) 13 ( 9A ) : 2759 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1582 - 4934 . 2009 . 00842 . x 42 . Schwarz PM , Liggins JR , Luduena RF . Beta - tubulin isotypes puriﬁed from bovine brain have different relative stabilities . Biochemistry ( 1998 ) 37 ( 13 ) : 4687 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi972763d www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 13 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress 43 . Boekelheide K , Arcila ME , Eveleth J . Cis - diamminedichloroplatinum ( ii ) ( cis - platin ) alters microtubule assembly dynamics . Toxicol Appl Pharmacol ( 1992 ) 116 ( 1 ) : 146 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0041 - 008X ( 92 ) 90156 - M 44 . Gan PP , McCarroll JA , Po’uha ST , Kamath K , Jordan MA , Kavallaris M . Microtubuledynamics , mitoticarrest , andapoptosis : drug - induceddifferential effects of beta III - tubulin . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2010 ) 9 ( 5 ) : 1339 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 09 - 0679 45 . KumarN , FlavinM . Preferentialactionofabraindetyrosinolatingcarboxypep - tidase on polymerized tubulin . J Biol Chem ( 1981 ) 256 ( 14 ) : 7678 – 86 . 46 . Peris L , Wagenbach M , Lafanechere L , Brocard J , Moore AT , Kozielski F , et al . Motor - dependent microtubule disassembly driven by tubulin tyrosination . J Cell Biol ( 2009 ) 185 ( 7 ) : 1159 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200902142 47 . Soucek K , KamaidA , PhungAD , Kubala L , Bulinski JC , Harper RW , et al . Nor - mal and prostate cancer cells display distinct molecular proﬁles of α - tubulin posttranslational modiﬁcations . Prostate ( 2006 ) 66 ( 9 ) : 954 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pros . 20416 48 . MialheA , Lafanechere L , Treilleux I , Peloux N , Dumontet C , BremondA , et al . Tubulindetyrosinationisafrequentoccurrenceinbreastcancersof poorprog - nosis . Cancer Res ( 2001 ) 61 ( 13 ) : 5024 – 7 . 49 . Lafanechere L , Courtay - Cahen C , Kawakami T , Jacrot M , Rudiger M , Wehland J , et al . Suppression of tubulin tyrosine ligase during tumor growth . J Cell Sci ( 1998 ) 111 : 171 – 81 . 50 . Kato C , Miyazaki K , Nakagawa A , Ohira M , Nakamura Y , Ozaki T , et al . Low expression of human tubulin tyrosine ligase and suppressed tubulin tyrosina - tion / detyrosinationcycleareassociatedwithimpairedneuronaldifferentiation in neuroblastomas with poor prognosis . Int J Cancer ( 2004 ) 112 ( 3 ) : 365 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ijc . 20431 51 . Whipple RA , Matrone MA , Cho EH , Balzer EM , Vitolo MI , Yoon JR , et al . Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition promotes tubulin detyrosination and microtentacles that enhance endothelial engagement . Cancer Res ( 2010 ) 70 ( 20 ) : 8127 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 09 - 4613 52 . Giustiniani J , Daire V , Cantaloube I , Durand G , Poüs C , Perdiz D , et al . Tubu - lin acetylation favors Hsp90 recruitment to microtubules and stimulates the signaling function of the Hsp90 clients Akt / PKB and p53 . Cell Signal ( 2009 ) 21 ( 4 ) : 529 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2008 . 12 . 004 53 . ZhangZH , YamashitaH , ToyamaT , SugiuraH , OmotoY , AndoY , et al . HDAC6 expression is correlated with better survival in breast cancer . Clin Cancer Res ( 2004 ) 10 ( 20 ) : 6962 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 04 - 0455 54 . Li WB , Zhang B , Tang JH , Cao Q , Wu YJ , Wu C , et al . Sirtuin 2 , a mammalian homologofyeastsilentinformationregulator - 2longevityregulator , isanoligo - dendroglial protein that decelerates cell differentiation through deacetylating alpha - tubulin . J Neurosci ( 2007 ) 27 ( 10 ) : 2606 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 4181 - 06 . 2007 55 . Ng F , Tang BL . Sirtuins’ modulation of autophagy . J Cell Physiol ( 2013 ) 228 ( 12 ) : 2262 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 24399 56 . TranAD , MarmoTP , SalamAA , CheS , FinkelsteinE , KabarritiR , et al . HDAC6 deacetylation of tubulin modulates dynamics of cellular adhesions . J Cell Sci ( 2007 ) 120 ( 8 ) : 1469 – 79 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 03431 57 . Gao YS , Hubbert CC , Yao TP . The microtubule - associated histone deacety - lase 6 ( HDAC6 ) regulates epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) endo - cytic trafﬁcking and degradation . J Biol Chem ( 2010 ) 285 ( 15 ) : 11219 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 042754 58 . Friedman JR , Webster BM , Mastronarde DN , Verhey KJ , Voeltz GK . ER sliding dynamics and ER - mitochondrial contacts occur on acetylated microtubules . J Cell Biol ( 2010 ) 190 ( 3 ) : 363 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200911024 59 . Daire V , Giustiniani J , Leroy - Gori I , Quesnoit M , Drevensek S , Dimitrov A , et al . Kinesin - 1regulatesmicrotubuledynamicsviaac - JunN - terminalkinase - dependent mechanism . J Biol Chem ( 2009 ) 284 ( 46 ) : 31992 – 2001 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 007906 60 . Miller LM , Menthena A , Chatterjee C , Verdier - Pinard P , Novikoff PM , Hor - witz SB , et al . Increased levels of a unique post - translationally modiﬁed β IVb - tubulin isotype in liver cancer . Biochemistry ( 2008 ) 47 ( 28 ) : 7572 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi8005225 61 . Wasylyk C , Zambrano A , Zhao C , Brants J , Abecassis J , Schalken JA , et al . Tubulin tyrosine ligase like 12 links to prostate cancer through tubulin posttranslational modiﬁcation and chromosome ploidy . Int J Cancer ( 2010 ) 127 ( 11 ) : 2542 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ijc . 25261 62 . Bhat KM , Setaluri V . Microtubule - associated proteins as targets in cancer chemotherapy . Clin Cancer Res ( 2007 ) 13 ( 10 ) : 2849 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 06 - 3040 63 . Rouzier R , Rajan R , Wagner P , Hess KR , Gold DL , Stec J , et al . Microtubule - associated protein tau : a marker of paclitaxel sensitivity in breast cancer . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2005 ) 102 ( 23 ) : 8315 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0408974102 64 . Soltani MH , Pichardo R , Song ZQ , Sangha N , Camacho F , Satyamoor - thy K , et al . Microtubule - associated protein 2 , a marker of neuronal differ - entiation , induces mitotic defects , inhibits growth of melanoma cells , and predicts metastatic potential of cutaneous melanoma . Am J Pathol ( 2005 ) 166 ( 6 ) : 1841 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0002 - 9440 ( 10 ) 62493 - 5 65 . Song ZQ , He CD , Sun CK , Xu YN , Jin X , Zhang Y , et al . Increased expression of MAP2 inhibits melanoma cell proliferation , invasion and tumor growth in vitro and in vivo . Exp Dermatol ( 2010 ) 19 ( 11 ) : 958 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0625 . 2009 . 01020 . x 66 . Verrills NM , Flemming CL , Liu M , Ivery MT , Cobon GS , Norris MD , et al . Microtubule alterations and mutations induced by desoxyepothilone B : implications for drug - target interactions . Chem Biol ( 2003 ) 10 ( 7 ) : 597 – 607 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 5521 ( 03 ) 00141 - 8 67 . Sun X , Li D , Yang Y , Ren Y , Li J , Wang Z , et al . Microtubule - binding protein CLIP - 170 is a mediator of paclitaxel sensitivity . J Pathol ( 2012 ) 226 ( 4 ) : 666 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1002 / path . 3026 68 . Byrne FL , Yang L , Phillips PA , Hansford LM , Fletcher JI , Ormandy CJ , et al . RNAi - mediated stathmin suppression reduces lung metastasis in an ortho - topic neuroblastoma mouse model . Oncogene ( 2014 ) 33 ( 7 ) : 882 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2013 . 11 69 . Rath O , Kozielski F . Kinesins and cancer . Nat Rev Cancer ( 2012 ) 12 ( 8 ) : 527 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc3310 70 . Sirajuddin M , Rice LM , Vale RD . Regulation of microtubule motors by tubulin isotypes and post - translational modiﬁcations . Nat Cell Biol ( 2014 ) 16 ( 4 ) : 335 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2920 71 . LaPointe NE , Morﬁni G , Brady ST , Feinstein SC , Wilson L , Jordan MA . Effects of eribulin , vincristine , paclitaxel and ixabepilone on fast axonal transport and kinesin - 1 driven microtubule gliding : implications for chemotherapy - induced peripheral neuropathy . Neurotoxicology ( 2013 ) 37 ( 0 ) : 231 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuro . 2013 . 05 . 008 72 . Dhillon AS , Hagan S , Rath O , Kolch W . MAP kinase signalling pathways in cancer . Oncogene ( 2007 ) 26 ( 22 ) : 3279 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1210421 73 . Reszka AA , Seger R , Diltz CD , Krebs EG , Fischer EH . Association of mitogen - activated protein - kinase with the microtubule cytoskeleton . Proc NatlAcad Sci U S A ( 1995 ) 92 ( 19 ) : 8881 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 92 . 19 . 8881 74 . ZhouJ , GuptaK , YaoJ , YeKQ , PandaD , GiannakakouP , et al . Paclitaxel - resistant human ovarian cancer cells undergo c - Jun NH2 - terminal kinase - mediated apoptosis in response to noscapine . J Biol Chem ( 2002 ) 277 ( 42 ) : 39777 – 85 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M203927200 75 . Wang TH , Popp DM , Wang HS , Saitoh M , Mural JG , Henley DC , et al . Microtubuledysfunctioninducedbypaclitaxelinitiatesapoptosisthroughbothc - JunN - terminalkinase ( JNK ) - dependentand - independentpathwaysinovar - ian cancer cells . J Biol Chem ( 1999 ) 274 ( 12 ) : 8208 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 274 . 12 . 8208 76 . Seidman R , Gitelman I , Sagi O , Horwitz SB , Wolfson M . The role of ERK 1 / 2 and p38 MAP - kinase pathways in taxol - induced apoptosis in human ovarian carcinomacells . ExpCellRes ( 2001 ) 268 ( 1 ) : 84 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1006 / excr . 2001 . 5262 77 . Geeraert C , Ratier A , Pﬁsterer SG , Perdiz D , Cantaloube I , Rouault A , et al . Starvation - induced hyperacetylation of tubulin is required for the stimulation of autophagy by nutrient deprivation . J Biol Chem ( 2010 ) 285 ( 31 ) : 24184 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 091553 78 . TararukT , OstmanN , LiWR , BjorkblomB , PadzikA , ZdrojewskaJ , et al . JNK1 phosphorylation of SCG10 determines microtubule dynamics and axoden - dritic length . J Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 173 ( 2 ) : 265 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200511055 79 . Chang LF , Jones Y , Ellisman MH , Goldstein LS , Karin M . JNK1 is required for maintenance of neuronal microtubules and controls phosphorylation of microtubule - associated proteins . Dev Cell ( 2003 ) 4 ( 4 ) : 521 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 03 ) 00094 - 7 80 . FanM , ChambersTC . Roleofmitogen - activatedproteinkinasesintheresponse of tumor cells to chemotherapy . Drug Resist Updat ( 2001 ) 4 ( 4 ) : 253 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1054 / drup . 2001 . 0214 Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 14 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress 81 . Brantley - Finley C , Lyle CS , Du LH , Goodwin ME , Hall T , Szwedo D , et al . The JNK , ERK and p53 pathways play distinct roles in apoptosis mediated by the antitumor agents vinblastine , doxorubicin , and etoposide . Biochem Pharmacol ( 2003 ) 66 ( 3 ) : 459 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 2952 ( 03 ) 00255 - 7 82 . Kolomeichuk SN , Terrano DT , Lyle CS , Sabapathy K , Chambers TC . Distinct signaling pathways of microtubule inhibitors – vinblastine and taxol induce JNK - dependentcelldeathbutthroughAP - 1 - dependentandAP - 1 - independent mechanisms , respectively . FEBS J ( 2008 ) 275 ( 8 ) : 1889 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2008 . 06349 . x 83 . Hoshi M , Ohta K , Gotoh Y , Mori A , Murofushi H , Sakai H , et al . Mitogen - activated - protein - kinase - catalyzed phosphorylation of microtubule - associated proteins , microtubule - associated protein - 2 and microtubule - associated protein - 4 , induces an alteration in their function . Eur J Biochem ( 1992 ) 203 ( 1 – 2 ) : 43 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1432 - 1033 . 1992 . tb19825 . x 84 . Reszka AA , Bulinski JC , Krebs EG , Fischer EH . Mitogen - activated protein kinase extracellular signal - regulated kinase 2 regulates cytoskeletal organiza - tion and chemotaxis via catalytic and microtubule - speciﬁc interactions . Mol Biol Cell ( 1997 ) 8 ( 7 ) : 1219 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 8 . 7 . 1219 85 . Hu JY , Chu ZG , Han J , Dang YM , Yan H , Zhang Q , et al . The p38 / MAPK pathway regulates microtubule polymerization through phosphorylation of MAP4 and Op18 in hypoxic cells . Cell Mol Life Sci ( 2010 ) 67 ( 2 ) : 321 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 009 - 0187 - z 86 . Liu XM , Wang LG , Kreis W , Budman DR , Adams LM . Differential effect of vinorelbineversuspaclitaxelonERK2kinaseactivityduringapoptosisinMCF - 7 cells . Br J Cancer ( 2001 ) 85 ( 9 ) : 1403 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1054 / bjoc . 2001 . 1910 87 . Giannakakou P , Nakano M , Nicolaou KC , O’Brate A , Yu I , Blagosklonny MV , et al . Enhancedmicrotubule - dependenttrafﬁckingandp53nuclearaccumula - tion by suppression of microtubule dynamics . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2002 ) 99 ( 16 ) : 10855 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 132275599 88 . Galigniana MD , Harrell JM , O’Hagen HM , Ljungman M , Pratt WB . Hsp90 - bindingimmunophilinslinkp53todyneinduringp53transporttothenucleus . J Biol Chem ( 2004 ) 279 ( 21 ) : 22483 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M402223200 89 . Giannakakou P , Sackett DL , Ward Y , Webster KR , Blagosklonny MV , Fojo T . p53 Is associated with cellular microtubules and is transported to the nucleus by dynein . Nat Cell Biol ( 2000 ) 2 ( 10 ) : 709 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35036335 90 . Peng YH , Chen LH , Li CG , Lu WG , Chen JD . Inhibition of MDM2 by hsp90 contributestomutantp53stabilization . JBiolChem ( 2001 ) 276 ( 44 ) : 40583 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M102817200 91 . Kim JH , Yoon EK , Chung HJ , Park SY , Hong KM , Lee CH , et al . p53 Acetyla - tionenhancestaxol - inducedapoptosisinhumancancercells . Apoptosis ( 2013 ) 18 ( 1 ) : 110 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10495 - 012 - 0772 - 8 92 . Lee SY , Kim JW , Jeong MH , An JH , Jang SM , Song KH , et al . Microtubule - associated protein 1B light chain ( MAP1B - LC1 ) negatively regulates the activity of tumor suppressor p53 in neuroblastoma cells . FEBS Lett ( 2008 ) 582 ( 19 ) : 2826 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2008 . 07 . 021 93 . Galmarini CM , Kamath K , Vanier - Viornery A , Hervieu V , Peiller E , Falette N , et al . Drug resistance associated with loss of p53 involves extensive alterations inmicrotubule compositionand dynamics . BrJ Cancer ( 2003 ) 88 ( 11 ) : 1793 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . bjc . 6600960 94 . Mabjeesh NJ , Escuin D , LaVallee TM , Pribluda VS , Swartz GM , Johnson MS , et al . 2ME2 inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis by disrupting micro - tubules and dysregulating HIF . Cancer Cell ( 2003 ) 3 ( 4 ) : 363 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1535 - 6108 ( 03 ) 00077 - 1 95 . Obacz J , Pastorekova S , Vojtesek B , Hrstka R . Cross - talk between HIF and p53 as mediators of molecular responses to physiological and genotoxic stresses . Mol Cancer ( 2013 ) 12 ( 1 ) : 93 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1476 - 4598 - 12 - 93 96 . IvanM , KondoK , YangHF , KimW , ValiandoJ , OhhM , et al . HIFalphatargeted forVHL - mediated destruction by proline hydroxylation : implications for O - 2 sensing . Science ( 2001 ) 292 ( 5516 ) : 464 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1059817 97 . Fang YD , Xu X , Dang YM , Zhang YM , Zhang JP , Hu JY , et al . MAP4 mecha - nism that stabilizes mitochondrial permeability transition in hypoxia : micro - tubule enhancement and DYNLT1 interaction withVDAC1 . PLoS One ( 2011 ) 6 ( 12 ) : e28052 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0028052 98 . YoonSO , ShinS , MercurioAM . Hypoxiastimulatescarcinomainvasionbysta - bilizing microtubules and promoting the Rab11 trafﬁcking of the alpha 6 beta 4 integrin . Cancer Res ( 2005 ) 65 ( 7 ) : 2761 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 04 - 4122 99 . Xu X , Zhang Q , Hu JY , Zhang DX , Jiang XP , Jia JZ , et al . Phosphorylation of DYNLT1 at serine 82 regulates microtubule stability and mitochondrial per - meabilization in hypoxia . Mol Cells ( 2013 ) 36 ( 4 ) : 322 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10059 - 013 - 0114 - x 100 . HinmanMN , LouH . Diversemolecularfunctionsof Huproteins . CellMolLife Sci ( 2008 ) 65 ( 20 ) : 3168 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 008 - 8252 - 6 101 . Katsetos CD , Del Valle L , Geddes JF , Assimakopoulou M , Legido A , Boyd JC , et al . Aberrant localization of the neuronal class III beta - tubulin in astrocytomas – a marker for anaplastic potential . Arch Pathol Lab Med ( 2001 ) 125 ( 5 ) : 613 – 24 . 102 . Frew IJ , Smole Z , Thoma CR , Krek W . Genetic deletion of the long isoform of the von Hippel - Lindau tumour suppressor gene product alters microtubule dynamics . EurJCancer ( 2013 ) 49 ( 10 ) : 2433 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejca . 2013 . 02 . 024 103 . CarbonaroM , EscuinD , O’BrateA , Thadani - MuleroM , GiannakakouP . Micro - tubulesregulatehypoxia - induciblefactor - 1alphaproteintrafﬁckingandactiv - ity implications for taxane therapy . J Biol Chem ( 2012 ) 287 ( 15 ) : 11859 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 345587 104 . CarbonaroM , O’BrateA , GiannakakouP . MicrotubuledisruptiontargetsHIF - 1 alpha mRNA to cytoplasmic P - bodies for translational repression . J Cell Biol ( 2011 ) 192 ( 1 ) : 83 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201004145 105 . Al - MehdiAB , PastukhVM , Swiger BM , Reed DJ , Patel MR , Bardwell GC , et al . Perinuclear mitochondrial clustering creates an oxidant - rich nuclear domain required for hypoxia - induced transcription . Sci Signal ( 2012 ) 5 ( 231 ) : ra47 . doi : 10 . 1126 / scisignal . 2002712 106 . Gorrini C , Harris IS , Mak TW . Modulation of oxidative stress as an anticancer strategy . Nat Rev Drug Discov ( 2013 ) 12 ( 12 ) : 931 – 47 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrd4002 107 . Cicchillitti L , Penci R , Di Michele M , Filippetti F , Rotilio D , Donati MB , et al . Proteomic characterization of cytoskeletal and mitochondrial class III beta - tubulin . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2008 ) 7 ( 7 ) : 2070 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 07 - 2370 108 . Azuma K , Sasada T , Kawahara A , Takamori S , Hattori S , Ikeda J , et al . Expres - sionof ERCC1andclassIIIbeta - tubulininnon - smallcelllungcancerpatients treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel . Lung Cancer ( 2009 ) 64 ( 3 ) : 326 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lungcan . 2008 . 09 . 002 109 . Joe PA , Banerjee A , Luduena RF . The roles of cys124 and ser239 in the func - tional properties of human beta III tubulin . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton ( 2008 ) 65 ( 6 ) : 476 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20274 110 . Eiserich JP , Estevez AG , Bamberg TV , Ye YZ , Chumley PH , Beckman JS , et al . Microtubuledysfunctionbyposttranslationalnitrotyrosinationof alpha - tubulin : a nitric oxide - dependent mechanism of cellular injury . Proc NatlAcad Sci U S A ( 1999 ) 96 ( 11 ) : 6365 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 11 . 6365 111 . Bisig CG , Purro SA , Contin MA , Barra HS , Arce CA . Incorporation of 3 - nitrotyrosine into the C - terminus of alpha - tubulin is reversible and not detri - mental to dividing cells . Eur J Biochem ( 2002 ) 269 ( 20 ) : 5037 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1432 - 1033 . 2002 . 03220 . x 112 . Cappelletti G , Maggioni MG , Ronchi C , Maci R , Tedeschi G . Protein tyrosine nitrationisassociatedwithcold - anddrug - resistantmicrotubulesinneuronal - like PC 12 cells . Neurosci Lett ( 2006 ) 401 ( 1 – 2 ) : 159 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neulet . 2006 . 03 . 009 113 . Fiore G , Di Cristo C , Monti G , Amoresano A , Columbano L , Pucci P , et al . Tubulin nitration in human gliomas . Neurosci Lett ( 2006 ) 394 ( 1 ) : 57 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neulet . 2005 . 10 . 011 114 . Kim JS , Lee JH , Jeong WW , Choi DH , Cha HJ , Kim DH , et al . Reactive oxygen species - dependent EndoG release mediates cisplatin - induced caspase - independent apoptosis in human head and neck squamous carcinoma cells . Int J Cancer ( 2008 ) 122 ( 3 ) : 672 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ijc . 23158 115 . Selimovic D , Hassan M , Haikel Y , Hengge UR . Taxol - induced mitochondr - ial stress in melanoma cells is mediated by activation of c - Jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) and p38 pathways via uncoupling protein 2 . Cell Signal ( 2008 ) 20 ( 2 ) : 311 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2007 . 10 . 015 116 . AlexandreJ , HuY , LuW , PelicanoH , HuangP . Novelactionof paclitaxelagainst cancer cells : bystander effect mediated by reactive oxygen species . Cancer Res ( 2007 ) 67 ( 8 ) : 3512 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 06 - 3914 117 . Putnam AJ , Cunningham JJ , Pillemer BB , Mooney DJ . External mechan - ical strain regulates membrane targeting of Rho GTPases by controlling microtubule assembly . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol ( 2003 ) 284 ( 3 ) : C627 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00137 . 2002 www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 15 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress 118 . Cheng G , Diebold BA , Hughes Y , Lambeth JD . Nox1 - dependent reactive oxy - gen generation is regulated by Rac1 . J Biol Chem ( 2006 ) 281 ( 26 ) : 17718 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M512751200 119 . Roediger B , Armati PJ . Oxidative stress induces axonal beading in cultured human brain tissue . Neurobiol Dis ( 2003 ) 13 ( 3 ) : 222 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0969 - 9961 ( 03 ) 00038 - X 120 . ValenG , SondenA , VaageJ , MalmE , KjellstromBT . Hydrogenperoxideinduces endothelialcellatypiaandcytoskeletondepolymerization . FreeRadicBiolMed ( 1999 ) 26 ( 11 – 12 ) : 1480 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0891 - 5849 ( 99 ) 00009 - X 121 . Hinshaw DB , Miller MT , Omann GM , Beals TF , Hyslop PA . A cellular - model of oxidant - mediated neuronal injury . Brain Res ( 1993 ) 615 ( 1 ) : 13 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0006 - 8993 ( 93 ) 91110 - E 122 . Stewart BJ , Doorn JA , Petersen DR . Residue - speciﬁc adduction of tubulin by 4 - hydroxynonenal and 4 - oxononenal causes cross - linking and inhibits poly - merization . Chem Res Toxicol ( 2007 ) 20 ( 8 ) : 1111 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1021 / tx700106v 123 . Neely MD , Boutte A , Milatovic D , Montine TJ . Mechanisms of 4 - hydroxynonenal - inducedneuronalmicrotubuledysfunction . BrainRes ( 2005 ) 1037 ( 1 – 2 ) : 90 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2004 . 12 . 027 124 . Kokubo J , Nagatani N , Hiroki K , Kuroiwa K , Watanabe N , Arai T . Mechanism of destruction of microtubule structures by 4 - hydroxy - 2 - nonenal . Cell Struct Funct ( 2008 ) 33 ( 1 ) : 51 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1247 / csf . 07038 125 . DivinskiI , Holtser - CochavM , Vulih - SchultzmanI , SteingartRA , GozesI . Pep - tide neuroprotection through speciﬁc interaction with brain tubulin . J Neu - rochem ( 2006 ) 98 ( 3 ) : 973 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 4159 . 2006 . 03936 . x 126 . Stamer K , Vogel R , Thies E , Mandelkow E , Mandelkow EM . Tau blocks trafﬁc of organelles , neuroﬁlaments , and APP vesicles in neurons and enhances oxidative stress . J Cell Biol ( 2002 ) 156 ( 6 ) : 1051 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200108057 127 . AltmanBJ , RathmellJC . Metabolicstressinautophagyandcelldeathpathways . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol ( 2012 ) 4 ( 9 ) : a008763 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a008763 128 . Saks VA , Kuznetsov AV , Khuchua ZA , Vasilyeva EV , Belikova JO , Kesvatera T , et al . Controlof cellularrespirationin - vivobymitochondrialouter - membrane and by creatine - kinase – a new speculative hypothesis – possible involve - ment of mitochondrial - cytoskeleton interactions . J Mol Cell Cardiol ( 1995 ) 27 ( 1 ) : 625 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 2828 ( 08 ) 80056 - 9 129 . Bershadsky AD , GelfandVI . ATP - dependent regulation of cytoplasmic micro - tubuledisassembly . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA ( 1981 ) 78 ( 6 ) : 3610 – 3 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 78 . 6 . 3610 130 . Infante AS , Stein MS , Zhai Y , Borisy GG , Gundersen GG . Detyrosinated ( Glu ) microtubules are stabilized by an ATP - sensitive plus - end cap . J Cell Sci ( 2000 ) 113 ( 22 ) : 3907 – 19 . 131 . Marcussen M , Larsen PJ . Cell cycle - dependent regulation of cellular ATP con - centration , and depolymerization of the interphase microtubular network induced by elevated cellularATP concentration in whole ﬁbroblasts . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton ( 1996 ) 35 ( 2 ) : 94 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ( SICI ) 1097 - 0169 ( 1996 ) 35 : 2 < 94 : : AID - CM2 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - I 132 . Nakano A , Kato H , Watanabe T , Min KD , Yamazaki S , Asano Y , et al . AMPK controls the speed of microtubule polymerization and directional cell migra - tionthroughCLIP - 170phosphorylation . NatCellBiol ( 2010 ) 12 ( 6 ) : 583 – U139 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2060 133 . Williams T , Courchet J , Viollet B , Brenman JE , Polleux F . AMP - activated pro - tein kinase ( AMPK ) activity is not required for neuronal development but regulates axogenesis during metabolic stress . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2011 ) 108 ( 14 ) : 5849 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1013660108 134 . Tuerk RD , Thali RF , Auchli Y , Rechsteiner H , Brunisholz RA , Schlattner U , et al . New candidate targets of AMP - activated protein kinase in murine brain revealed by a novel multidimensional substrate - screen for protein kinases . J Proteome Res ( 2007 ) 6 ( 8 ) : 3266 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1021 / pr070160a 135 . Sheldon KL , Maldonado EN , Lemasters JJ , Rostovtseva TK , Bezrukov SM . Phosphorylation of voltage - dependent anion channel by serine / threonine kinases governs its interaction with tubulin . PLoS One ( 2011 ) 6 ( 10 ) : e25539 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0025539 136 . Rostovtseva TK , Sheldon KL , Hassanzadeh E , Monge C , Saks V , Bezrukov SM , et al . Tubulin binding blocks mitochondrial voltage - dependent anion channel and regulates respiration . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2008 ) 105 ( 48 ) : 18746 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0806303105 137 . Carre M , Andre N , Carles G , Borghi H , Brichese L , Briand C , et al . Tubulin is an inherent component of mitochondrial membranes that interacts with the voltage - dependent anion channel . J Biol Chem ( 2002 ) 277 ( 37 ) : 33664 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M203834200 138 . Maldonado EN , Sheldon KL , DeHart DN , Patnaik J , Manevich Y , Townsend DM , et al . Voltage - dependent anion channels modulate mitochondrial metab - olismincancercells : regulationbyfreetubulinanderastin . JBiolChem ( 2013 ) 288 ( 17 ) : 11920 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 433847 139 . VertessyBG , BankfalviD , KovacsJ , LowP , LehotzkyA , OvadiJ . Pyruvatekinase as a microtubule destabilizing factor in vitro . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 1999 ) 254 ( 2 ) : 430 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 1998 . 9957 140 . Orosz F , Santamaria B , Ovadi J , Aragon JJ . Phosphofructokinase from Dic - tyostelium discoideum is a potent inhibitor of tubulin polymerization . Bio - chemistry ( 1999 ) 38 ( 6 ) : 1857 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi981350p 141 . Marmillot P , Keith T , Srivastava DK , Knull HR . Effect of tubulin on the activ - ity of the muscle isoenzyme of lactate - dehydrogenase . Arch Biochem Biophys ( 1994 ) 315 ( 2 ) : 467 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1006 / abbi . 1994 . 1526 142 . Volker KW , Knull HR . A glycolytic enzyme binding domain on tubulin . Arch Biochem Biophys ( 1997 ) 338 ( 2 ) : 237 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1006 / abbi . 1996 . 9819 143 . MuronetzVI , Wang ZX , Keith TJ , Knull HR , Srivastava DK . Binding constants and stoichiometries of glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase - tubulin complexes . Arch Biochem Biophys ( 1994 ) 313 ( 2 ) : 253 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1006 / abbi . 1994 . 1385 144 . Durrieu C , Berniervalentin F , Rousset B . Microtubules bind glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase and modulate its enzyme - activity and quater - nary structure . Arch Biochem Biophys ( 1987 ) 252 ( 1 ) : 32 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0003 - 9861 ( 87 ) 90005 - 1 145 . Tisdale EJ , Kelly C , Artalejo CR . Glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase interacts with Rab2 and plays an essential role in endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport exclusive of its glycolytic activity . J Biol Chem ( 2004 ) 279 ( 52 ) : 54046 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M409472200 146 . Aon MA , Cortassa S . Coherent and robust modulation of a metabolic net - work by cytoskeletal organization and dynamics . Biophys Chem ( 2002 ) 97 ( 2 – 3 ) : 213 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0301 - 4622 ( 02 ) 00056 - X 147 . Zala D , Hinckelmann MV , Yu H , da Cunha MM , Liot G , Cordelieres FP , et al . Vesicular glycolysis provides on - board energy for fast axonal transport . Cell ( 2013 ) 152 ( 3 ) : 479 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 12 . 029 148 . Glaser PE , Han XL , Gross RW . Tubulin is the endogenous inhibitor of the glyceraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase isoform that catalyzes membrane fusion : implications for the coordinated regulation of glycolysis and mem - brane fusion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A ( 2002 ) 99 ( 22 ) : 14104 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 222542999 149 . Tisdale EJ , Azizi F , Artalejo CR . Rab2 utilizes glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase and protein kinase c iota to associate with microtubules and to recruit dynein . J Biol Chem ( 2009 ) 284 ( 9 ) : 5876 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M807756200 150 . CueilleN , BlancCT , RiedererIM , RiedererBM . Microtubule - associatedprotein 1B binds glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase . J Proteome Res ( 2007 ) 6 ( 7 ) : 2640 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1021 / pr070081z 151 . Kovacs J , Low P , Pacz A , Horvath I , Olah J , Ovadi J . Phosphoenolpyruvate - dependent tubulin - pyruvate kinase interaction at different organizational lev - els . J Biol Chem ( 2003 ) 278 ( 9 ) : 7126 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M210244200 152 . BrinkleyBR , BarhamSS , BarrancoSC , FullerGM . Rotenoneinhibitionofspin - dlemicrotubuleassemblyinmammalian - cells . ExpCellRes ( 1974 ) 85 ( 1 ) : 41 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 74 ) 90210 - 9 153 . Dodson M , Darley - Usmar V , Zhang JH . Cellular metabolic and autophagic pathways : trafﬁc control by redox signaling . Free Radic Biol Med ( 2013 ) 63 : 207 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . freeradbiomed . 2013 . 05 . 014 154 . JinSK , WhiteE . Roleofautophagyincancer – managementofmetabolicstress . Autophagy ( 2007 ) 3 ( 1 ) : 28 – 31 . 155 . Xie R , Wang F , McKeehan WL , Liu LY . Autophagy enhanced by microtubule - and mitochondrion - associated MAP1S suppresses genome instability and hepatocarcinogenesis . Cancer Res ( 2011 ) 71 ( 24 ) : 7537 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 11 - 2170 156 . Guo JY , Xia B , White E . Autophagy - mediated tumor promotion . Cell ( 2013 ) 155 ( 6 ) : 1216 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 11 . 019 157 . Sui X , Chen R , Wang Z , Huang Z , Kong N , Zhang M , et al . Autophagy and chemotherapy resistance : a promising therapeutic target for cancer treatment . Cell Death Dis ( 2013 ) 4 : e838 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cddis . 2013 . 350 158 . Macintosh RL , Ryan KM . Autophagy in tumour cell death . Semin Cancer Biol ( 2013 ) 23 ( 5 ) : 344 – 51 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcancer . 2013 . 05 . 006 Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 16 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress 159 . Amenta JS , Sargus MJ , Baccino FM . Effect of microtubular or translational inhibitors on general cell protein degradation – evidence for a dual catabolic pathway . Biochem J ( 1977 ) 168 ( 2 ) : 223 – 7 . 160 . Fass E , Shvets E , Degani I , Hirschberg K , Elazar Z . Microtubules support pro - duction of starvation - induced autophagosomes but not their targeting and fusionwithlysosomes . JBiolChem ( 2006 ) 281 ( 47 ) : 36303 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M607031200 161 . Fengsrud M , Roos N , Berg T , Liou WL , Slot JW , Seglen PO . Ultrastructural and immunocytochemical characterization of autophagic vacuoles in isolated hepatocytes – effects of vinblastine and asparagine on vacuole distributions . Exp Cell Res ( 1995 ) 221 ( 2 ) : 504 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1006 / excr . 1995 . 1402 162 . Kochl R , Hu XW , Chan EY , Tooze SA . Microtubules facilitate autophago - someformationandfusionofautophagosomeswithendosomes . Trafﬁc ( 2006 ) 7 ( 2 ) : 129 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2005 . 00368 . x 163 . Webb JL , Ravikumar B , Rubinsztein DC . Microtubule disruption inhibits autophagosome - lysosome fusion : implications for studying the roles of aggre - somesinpolyglutaminediseases . IntJBiochemCellBiol ( 2004 ) 36 ( 12 ) : 2541 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2004 . 02 . 003 164 . Acharya BR , Bhattacharyya S , Choudhury D , Chakrabarti G . The microtubule depolymerizing agent naphthazarin induces both apoptosis and autophagy in A549 lung cancer cells . Apoptosis ( 2011 ) 16 ( 9 ) : 924 – 39 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10495 - 011 - 0613 - 1 165 . Viola G , Bortolozzi R , Hamel E , Moro S , Brun P , Castagliuolo I , et al . MG - 2477 , a new tubulin inhibitor , induces autophagy through inhibition of the Akt / mTOR pathway and delayed apoptosis in A549 cells . Biochem Pharmacol ( 2012 ) 83 ( 1 ) : 16 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bcp . 2011 . 09 . 017 166 . Kouno T , Mizuguchi M , Tanida I , Ueno T , Kanematsu T , Mori Y , et al . Solu - tion structure of microtubule - associated protein light chain 3 and identiﬁ - cation of its functional subdomains . J Biol Chem ( 2005 ) 280 ( 26 ) : 24610 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M413565200 167 . LiuLY , McKeehanWL , WangF , XieR . MAP1Senhancesautophagytosuppress tumorigenesis . Autophagy ( 2012 ) 8 ( 2 ) : 278 – 80 . doi : 10 . 4161 / auto . 8 . 2 . 18939 168 . Xie R , Nguyen S , McKeehan K , Wang F , McKeehan WL , Liu LY . Microtubule - associated protein 1S ( MAP1S ) bridges autophagic components withmicrotubules andmitochondria toaffect autophagosomalbiogenesisand degradation . J Biol Chem ( 2011 ) 286 ( 12 ) : 10367 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 206532 169 . Di Bartolomeo S , Corazzari M , Nazio F , Oliverio S , Lisi G , Antonioli M , et al . The dynamic interaction of AMBRA1 with the dynein motor com - plex regulates mammalian autophagy . J Cell Biol ( 2010 ) 191 ( 1 ) : 155 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201002100 170 . Luo SQ , Garcia - Arencibia M , Zhao R , Puri C , Toh PP , Sadiq O , et al . Bim inhibits autophagy by recruiting beclin 1 to microtubules . Mol Cell ( 2012 ) 47 ( 3 ) : 359 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2012 . 05 . 040 171 . Chen JX , Sun YJ , Wang P , Long DX , Li W , Li L , et al . Induction of autophagy by TOCP in differentiated human neuroblastoma cells lead to degradation of cytoskeletal components and inhibition of neurite outgrowth . Toxicology ( 2013 ) 310 : 92 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tox . 2013 . 05 . 012 172 . SancakY , Bar - PeledL , ZoncuR , MarkhardAL , NadaS , SabatiniDM . Ragulator - Rag complex targets mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface and is necessary for its activationbyaminoacids . Cell ( 2010 ) 141 ( 2 ) : 290 – 303 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 02 . 024 173 . KorolchukVI , SaikiS , LichtenbergM , SiddiqiFH , RobertsEA , ImarisioS , et al . Lysosomal positioning coordinates cellular nutrient responses . Nat Cell Biol ( 2011 ) 13 ( 4 ) : 453 – U242 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2204 174 . Wei YJ , Pattingre S , Sinha S , Bassik M , Levine B . JNK1 - mediated phospho - rylation of BcI - 2 regulates starvation - induced autophagy . Mol Cell ( 2008 ) 30 ( 6 ) : 678 – 88 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 06 . 001 175 . Mochizuki Y , Ohashi R , Kawamura T , Iwanari H , Kodama T , Naito M , et al . Phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphatase myotubularin - related protein 6 ( MTMR6 ) is regulated by small GTPase Rab1B in the early secretory and autophagic pathways . J Biol Chem ( 2013 ) 288 ( 2 ) : 1009 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 395087 176 . YangJY , YangWY . Bit - by - bitautophagicremovalof parkin - labelledmitochon - dria . Nat Commun ( 2013 ) 4 : 2428 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms3428 177 . Appaix F , KuznetsovAV , UssonY , Kay L , Andrienko T , Olivares J , et al . Possible role of cytoskeleton in intracellular arrangement and regulation of mitochon - dria . Exp Physiol ( 2003 ) 88 ( 1 ) : 175 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1113 / eph8802511 178 . TerasakiM , ChenLB , FujiwaraK . Microtubulesandtheendoplasmic - reticulum are highly interdependent structures . J Cell Biol ( 1986 ) 103 ( 4 ) : 1557 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 103 . 4 . 1557 179 . Aplin A , Jasionowski T , Tuttle DL , Lenk SE , Dunn WA . Cytoskeletal elements are required for the formation and maturation of autophagic vacuoles . J Cell Physiol ( 1992 ) 152 ( 3 ) : 458 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 1041520304 180 . ReunanenH , MarttinenM , HirsimakiP . Effectsof griseofulvinandnocodazole on the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in ehrlich ascites tumor - cells . Exp Mol Pathol ( 1988 ) 48 ( 1 ) : 97 – 102 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4800 ( 88 ) 90048 - 2 181 . Kimura S , Noda T , Yoshimori T . Dynein - dependent movement of autophago - somes mediates efﬁcient encounters with lysosomes . Cell Struct Funct ( 2008 ) 33 ( 1 ) : 109 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1247 / csf . 08005 182 . Luo B , Lee AS . The critical roles of endoplasmic reticulum chaperones and unfolded protein response in tumorigenesis and anticancer therapies . Onco - gene ( 2013 ) 32 ( 7 ) : 805 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2012 . 130 183 . Ma YJ , Hendershot LM . The role of the unfolded protein response in tumour development : friend or foe ? Nat Rev Cancer ( 2004 ) 4 ( 12 ) : 966 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrc1505 184 . Dong DZ , Ni M , Li JZ , Xiong SG , YeW , Virrey JJ , et al . Critical role of the stress chaperone GRP78 / BiP in tumor proliferation , survival , and tumor angiogen - esis in transgene - induced mammary tumor development . Cancer Res ( 2008 ) 68 ( 2 ) : 498 – 505 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 2950 185 . Reddy RK , Mao CH , Baumeister P , Austin RC , Kaufman RJ , Lee AS . Endo - plasmic reticulum chaperone protein GRP78 protects cells from apoptosis induced by topoisomerase inhibitors – role of ATP binding site in sup - pression of caspase - 7 activation . J Biol Chem ( 2003 ) 278 ( 23 ) : 20915 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M212328200 186 . Sun S , Lee D , Ho AS , Pu JK , Zhang XQ , Lee NP , et al . Inhibition of prolyl 4 - hydroxylase , beta polypeptide ( P4HB ) attenuates temozolomide resistance in malignant glioma via the endoplasmic reticulum stress response ( ERSR ) pathways . Neuro Oncol ( 2013 ) 15 ( 5 ) : 562 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1093 / neuonc / not005 187 . Yamada M , Tomida A , Yun JS , Cai B , Yoshikawa H , Taketani Y , et al . Cellular sensitization to cisplatin and carboplatin with decreased removal of platinum - DNA adduct by glucose - regulated stress . Cancer Chemother Pharmacol ( 1999 ) 44 ( 1 ) : 59 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s002800050945 188 . ChatterjeeS , HirotaH , BelﬁCA , BergerSJ , BergerNA . HypersensitivitytoDNA cross - linking agents associated with up - regulation of glucose - regulated stress protein GRP78 . Cancer Res ( 1997 ) 57 ( 22 ) : 5112 – 6 . 189 . Luvsandagva B , Nakamura K , Kitahara Y , Aoki H , Murata T , Ikeda S , et al . GRP78inducedbyestrogenplaysaroleinthechemosensitivityof endometrial cancer . Gynecol Oncol ( 2012 ) 126 ( 1 ) : 132 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ygyno . 2012 . 04 . 025 190 . Li JZ , Lee AS . Stress induction of GRP78 / BiP and its role in cancer . Curr Mol Med ( 2006 ) 6 ( 1 ) : 45 – 54 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 156652406775574523 191 . Liu JF , Fong YC , Chang KW , Kuo SC , Chang CS , Tang CH . FPTB , a novel CA - 4 derivative , induces cell apoptosis of human chondrosarcoma cells through mitochondrial dysfunction and endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways . J Cell Biochem ( 2011 ) 112 ( 2 ) : 453 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 22927 192 . BettJS , IbrahimAF , GargAK , KellyV , PedrioliP , RochaS , et al . TheP - bodycom - ponent USP52 / PAN2 is a novel regulator of HIF1A mRNA stability . Biochem J ( 2013 ) 451 : 185 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20130026 193 . Chernov KG , Barbet A , Hamon L , Ovchinnikov LP , Curmi PA , Pastre D . Role of microtubules in stress granule assembly - microtubule dynamical instability favorstheformationof micrometricstressgranulesincells . JBiolChem ( 2009 ) 284 ( 52 ) : 36569 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 042879 194 . Anderson P , Kedersha N . RNA granules . J Cell Biol ( 2006 ) 172 ( 6 ) : 803 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200512082 195 . Sriburi R , Jackowski S , Mori K , Brewer JW . XBP1 : a link between the unfolded protein response , lipid biosynthesis , and biogenesis of the endoplasmic reticu - lum . J Cell Biol ( 2004 ) 167 ( 1 ) : 35 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200406136 196 . SchuckS , PrinzWA , ThornKS , VossC , WalterP . Membraneexpansionalleviates endoplasmic reticulum stress independently of the unfolded protein response . J Cell Biol ( 2009 ) 187 ( 4 ) : 525 – 36 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200907074 197 . Goyal U , Blackstone C . Untangling the web : mechanisms underlying ER net - work formation . Biochim Biophys Acta ( 2013 ) 1833 ( 11 ) : 2492 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbamcr . 2013 . 04 . 009 198 . Waterman - StorerCM , SalmonED . Microtubuledynamics : treadmillingcomes around again . Curr Biol ( 1997 ) 7 ( 6 ) : R369 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 06 ) 00177 - 1 www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 17 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress 199 . Lee C , Chen LB . Dynamic behavior of endoplasmic - reticulum in living cells . Cell ( 1988 ) 54 ( 1 ) : 37 – 46 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 88 ) 90177 - 8 200 . OgburnKD , Figueiredo - PereiraME . Cytoskeleton / endoplasmicreticulumcol - lapse induced by prostaglandin J2 parallels centrosomal deposition of ubiqui - tinatedproteinaggregates . JBiolChem ( 2006 ) 281 ( 32 ) : 23274 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M600635200 201 . WettsteinG , BellayePS , MicheauO , BonniaudP . Smallheatshockproteinsand the cytoskeleton : an essential interplay for cell integrity ? Int J Biochem Cell Biol ( 2012 ) 44 ( 10 ) : 1680 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2012 . 05 . 024 202 . Ghosh JG , Houck SA , Clark JI . Interactive domains in the molecular chaper - onehumanalphaBcrystallinmodulatemicrotubuleassemblyanddisassembly . PLoS One ( 2007 ) 2 ( 6 ) : e498 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0000498 203 . Houck SA , Clark JI . Dynamic subunit exchange and the regulation of micro - tubule assembly by the stress response protein human alpha B crystallin . PLoS One ( 2010 ) 5 ( 7 ) : e11795 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0011795 204 . FujitaY , Ohto E , Katayama E , AtomiY . Alpha B - crystallin - coated MAP micro - tubule resists nocodazole and calcium - induced disassembly . J Cell Sci ( 2004 ) 117 ( 9 ) : 1719 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 01021 205 . Hino M , Kurogi K , Okubo MA , Murata - Hori M , Hosoya H . Small heat shock protein 27 ( HSP27 ) associates with tubulin / microtubules in HeLa cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 2000 ) 271 ( 1 ) : 164 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1006 / bbrc . 2000 . 2553 206 . Almeida - Souza L , Asselbergh B , De Winter V , Goethals S , Timmerman V , Janssens S . HSPB1 facilitates the formation of non - centrosomal microtubules . PLoS One ( 2013 ) 8 ( 6 ) : e66541 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0066541 207 . CasadoP , Zuazua - VillarP , PradoMA , delValleE , IglesiasJM , Martinez - Campa C , et al . Characterization of HSP27 phosphorylation induced by microtubule interferingagents : implicationofp38signallingpathway . ArchBiochemBiophys ( 2007 ) 461 ( 1 ) : 123 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . abb . 2007 . 01 . 027 208 . Sanchez C , Padilla R , Paciucci R , Zabala JC , Avila J . Binding of heat - shock protein - 70 ( hsp70 ) to tubulin . Arch Biochem Biophys ( 1994 ) 310 ( 2 ) : 428 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1006 / abbi . 1994 . 1188 209 . Welch WJ , Feramisco JR , Blose SH . The mammalian stress response and the cytoskeleton – alterations in intermediate ﬁlaments . Ann N Y Acad Sci ( 1985 ) 455 : 57 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 1985 . tb50403 . x 210 . Selimovic D , Badura HE , El - Khattouti A , Soell M , Porzig B , Spernger A , et al . Vinblastine - induced apoptosis of melanoma cells is mediated by Ras homologous A protein ( Rho A ) via mitochondrial and non - mitochondrial - dependent mechanisms . Apoptosis ( 2013 ) 18 ( 8 ) : 980 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10495 - 013 - 0844 - 4 211 . GuoSH , WhartonW , MoseleyP , ShiHL . Heatshockprotein70regulatescellu - larredoxstatusbymodulatingglutathione - relatedenzymeactivities . CellStress Chaperones ( 2007 ) 12 ( 3 ) : 245 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1379 / CSC - 265 . 1 212 . Quintá HR , Galigniana NM , Erlejman AG , Lagadari M , Piwien - Pilipuk G , Galigniana MD . Management of cytoskeleton architecture by molecular chap - erones and immunophilins . Cell Signal ( 2011 ) 23 ( 12 ) : 1907 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cellsig . 2011 . 07 . 023 213 . Hong DS , Banerji U , Tavana B , George GC , Aaron J , Kurzrock R . Targeting the molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 ( HSP90 ) : lessons learned and future directions . Cancer Treat Rev ( 2013 ) 39 ( 4 ) : 375 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ctrv . 2012 . 10 . 001 214 . Weis F , Moullintraffort L , Heichette C , Chretien D , Garnier C . The 90 - kDa heatShockproteinHsp90protectstubulinagainstthermaldenaturation . JBiol Chem ( 2010 ) 285 ( 13 ) : 9525 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 096586 215 . Pratt WB , Toft DO . Regulation of signaling protein function and trafﬁck - ing by the hsp90 / hsp70 - based chaperone machinery . Exp Biol Med ( 2003 ) 228 ( 2 ) : 111 – 33 . 216 . Pratt WB , Morishima Y , Peng HM , Osawa Y . Proposal for a role of the Hsp90 / Hsp70 - based chaperone machinery in making triage decisions when proteins undergo oxidative and toxic damage . Exp Biol Med ( 2010 ) 235 ( 3 ) : 278 – 89 . doi : 10 . 1258 / ebm . 2009 . 009250 217 . Rovini A , Savry A , Braguer D , Carre M . Microtubule - targeted agents : when mitochondriabecomeessentialtochemotherapy . BiochimBiophysActa ( 2011 ) 1807 ( 6 ) : 679 – 88 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2011 . 01 . 001 218 . Ren Y , Zhao JH , Feng J . Parkin binds to alpha / beta tubulin and increases their ubiquitination and degradation . J Neurosci ( 2003 ) 23 ( 8 ) : 3316 – 24 . 219 . Jung D , Filliol D , Miehe M , RendonA . Interaction of brain mitochondria with microtubules reconstituted from brain tubulin and MAP2 or Tau . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton ( 1993 ) 24 ( 4 ) : 245 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 970240405 220 . Maldonado EN , Patnaik J , Mullins MR , Lemasters JJ . Free tubulin modu - lates mitochondrial membrane potential in cancer cells . Cancer Res ( 2010 ) 70 ( 24 ) : 10192 – 201 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 10 - 2429 221 . Guzun R , Karu - Varikmaa M , Gonzalez - Granillo M , Kuznetsov AV , Michel L , Cottet - Rousselle C , et al . Mitochondria - cytoskeleton interaction : distribution ofbeta - tubulinsincardiomyocytesandHL - 1cells . BiochimBiophysActa ( 2011 ) 1807 ( 4 ) : 458 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbabio . 2011 . 01 . 010 222 . Andre N , Braguer D , Brasseur G , Goncalves A , Lemesle - Meunier D , Guise S , et al . Paclitaxel induces release of cytochrome c from mitochondria isolated from human neuroblastoma cells . Cancer Res ( 2000 ) 60 ( 19 ) : 5349 – 53 . 223 . Ferlini C , Raspaglio G , Mozzetti S , Distefano M , Filippetti F , Martinelli E , et al . Bcl - 2down - regulationisanovelmechanismof paclitaxelresistance . MolPhar - macol ( 2003 ) 64 ( 1 ) : 51 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1124 / mol . 64 . 1 . 51 224 . Gajate C , Barasoain I , Andreu JM , Mollinedo F . Induction of apoptosis in leukemic cells by the reversible microtubule - disrupting agent 2 - methoxy - 5 - ( 2’ , 3’ , 4’ - trimethoxyphenyl ) - 2 , 4 , 6 - cycloheptatrien - 1 - one : protectionbybcl - 2 and bcl - x ( L ) and cell cycle arrest . Cancer Res ( 2000 ) 60 ( 10 ) : 2651 – 9 . 225 . Ibrado AM , Liu L , Bhalla K . Bcl - x ( L ) overexpression inhibits progression of molecular events leading to paclitaxel - induced apoptosis of human acute myeloid leukemia HL - 60 cells . Cancer Res ( 1997 ) 57 ( 6 ) : 1109 – 15 . 226 . Esteve MA , Carre M , Bourgarel - Rey V , Kruczynski A , Raspaglio G , Ferlini C , et al . Bcl - 2 down - regulation and tubulin subtype composition are involved in resistance of ovarian cancer cells to vinﬂunine . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2006 ) 5 ( 11 ) : 2824 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 06 - 0277 227 . Knipling L , Wolff J . Direct interaction of Bcl - 2 proteins with tubulin . Biochem Biophys Res Commun ( 2006 ) 341 ( 2 ) : 433 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2005 . 12 . 201 228 . Puthalakath H , Huang DC , O’Reilly LA , King SM , Strasser A . The proapop - totic activity of the Bcl - 2 family member Bim is regulated by interaction with the dynein motor complex . Mol Cell ( 1999 ) 3 ( 3 ) : 287 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 00 ) 80456 - 6 229 . GiodiniA , Kallio MJ , Wall NR , Gorbsky GJ , Tognin S , Marchisio PC , et al . Reg - ulation of microtubule stability and mitotic progression by survivin . Cancer Res ( 2002 ) 62 ( 9 ) : 2462 – 7 . 230 . Prislei S , Mozzetti S , Filippetti F , De Donato M , Raspaglio G , Cicchillitti L , et al . Fromplasmamembranetocytoskeleton : anovelfunctionforsemaphorin 6A . Mol Cancer Ther ( 2008 ) 7 ( 1 ) : 233 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . MCT - 07 - 0390 231 . Srivastava RK , Srivastava AR , Korsmeyer SJ , Nesterova M , Cho - Chung YS , Longo DL . Involvement of microtubules in the regulation of Bcl2 phosphory - lation and apoptosis through cyclic AMP - dependent protein kinase . Mol Cell Biol ( 1998 ) 18 ( 6 ) : 3509 – 17 . 232 . Ling YH , Tornos C , Perez - Soler R . Phosphorylation of Bcl - 2 is a marker of M phase events and not a determinant of apoptosis . J Biol Chem ( 1998 ) 273 ( 30 ) : 18984 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 30 . 18984 233 . Verdier - PinardP , PasquierE , XiaoH , BurdB , VillardC , LaﬁtteD , et al . Tubulin proteomics : towards breaking the code . Anal Biochem ( 2009 ) 384 ( 2 ) : 197 – 206 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ab . 2008 . 09 . 020 234 . Hasegawa S , Miyoshi Y , Egawa C , Ishitobi M , Taguchi T , Tamaki Y , et al . Pre - diction of response to docetaxel by quantitative analysis of class I and III beta - tubulin isotype mRNA expression in human breast cancers . Clin Cancer Res ( 2003 ) 9 ( 8 ) : 2992 – 7 . 235 . Zhang HL , Ruan L , Zheng LM , Whyte D , Tzeng CM , Zhou XW . Association between class III beta - tubulin expression and response to paclitaxel / vinorebine - based chemotherapy for non - small cell lung cancer : a meta - analysis . LungCancer ( 2012 ) 77 ( 1 ) : 9 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lungcan . 2012 . 01 . 005 236 . Sève P , Lai R , Ding K , Winton T , Butts C , Mackey J , et al . Class III β - tubulin expression and beneﬁt from adjuvant cisplatin / vinorelbine chemotherapy in operable non - small cell lung cancer : analysis of NCIC JBR . 10 . Clin Cancer Res ( 2007 ) 13 ( 3 ) : 994 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 06 - 1503 237 . Reiman T , Lai R , Veillard AS , Paris E , Soria JC , Rosell R , et al . Cross - validationstudyof classIIIbeta - tubulinasapredictivemarkerforbeneﬁtfrom adjuvant chemotherapy in resected non - small - cell lung cancer : analysis of fourrandomizedtrials . AnnOncol ( 2012 ) 23 ( 1 ) : 86 – U10 . doi : 10 . 1093 / annonc / mdr033 238 . Seve P , Isaac S , Tredan O , Souquet PJ , Pacheco Y , Perol M , et al . Expression of class III beta - tubulin is predictive of patient outcome in patients with non - small cell lung cancer receiving vinorelbine - based chemotherapy . Clin Cancer Res ( 2005 ) 11 ( 15 ) : 5481 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 05 - 0285 Frontiers in Oncology | Molecular and Cellular Oncology June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 18 Parker et al . Microtubules and cellular stress 239 . Ohishi Y , Oda Y , Basaki Y , Kobayashi H , Wake N , Kuwano M , et al . Expression of beta - tubulin isotypes in human primary ovarian carcinoma . Gynecol Oncol ( 2007 ) 105 ( 3 ) : 586 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ygyno . 2007 . 01 . 044 240 . Kavallaris M , Kuo DY , Burkhart CA , Regl DL , Norris MD , Haber M , et al . Taxol - resistantepithelialovariantumorsareassociatedwithalteredexpression of speciﬁc beta - tubulin isotypes . J Clin Invest ( 1997 ) 100 ( 5 ) : 1282 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI119642 241 . De Donato M , Mariani M , Petrella L , Martinelli E , Zannoni GF , Vel - lone V , et al . Class III beta - tubulin and the cytoskeletal gateway for drug resistanceinovariancancer . JCellPhysiol ( 2012 ) 227 ( 3 ) : 1034 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 22813 242 . Su D , Smith SM , Preti M , Schwartz P , Rutherford TJ , Menato G , et al . Stathmin and tubulin expression and survival of ovarian cancer patients receiving plat - inum treatment with and without paclitaxel . Cancer ( 2009 ) 115 ( 11 ) : 2453 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cncr . 24282 243 . Aoki D , Oda Y , Hattori S , Taguchi K , Ohishi Y , Basaki Y , et al . Overexpression of class III beta - tubulin predicts good response to taxane - based chemotherapy in ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma . Clin Cancer Res ( 2009 ) 15 ( 4 ) : 1473 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1078 - 0432 . CCR - 08 - 1274 244 . ParadisoA , MangiaA , ChiriattiA , TommasiS , ZitoA , LatorreA , et al . Biomark - ers predictive for clinical efﬁcacy of taxol - based chemotherapy in advanced breast cancer . Ann Oncol ( 2005 ) 16 : 14 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1093 / annonc / mdi902 245 . Portyanko A , Kovalev P , Gorgun J , Cherstvoy E . Beta ( III ) - tubulin at the inva - sivemarginofcolorectalcancer : possiblelinktoinvasion . VirchowsArch ( 2009 ) 454 ( 5 ) : 541 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00428 - 009 - 0764 - 4 246 . RoqueDM , BelloneS , EnglishDP , BuzaN , CoccoE , GasparriniS , et al . Tubulin - beta - IIIoverexpressionbyuterineserouscarcinomasisamarkerforpoorover - allsurvivalafterplatinum / taxanechemotherapyandsensitivitytoepothilones . Cancer ( 2013 ) 119 ( 14 ) : 2582 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cncr . 28017 247 . Hwang JE , Hong JY , Kim K , Kim SH , Choi WY , Kim MJ , et al . Class III beta - tubulinisapredictivemarkerfortaxane - basedchemotherapyinrecurrentand metastaticgastriccancer . BMCCancer ( 2013 ) 13 : 431 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2407 - 13 - 431 248 . Ploussard G , Terry S , Maille P , Allory Y , Sirab N , Kheuang L , et al . Class III beta - tubulin expression predicts prostate tumor aggressiveness and patient responsetodocetaxel - basedchemotherapy . CancerRes ( 2010 ) 70 ( 22 ) : 9253 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 10 - 1447 249 . Terry S , Ploussard G , AlloryY , Nicolaiew N , Boissiere - Michot F , Maille P , et al . Increased expression of class III beta - tubulin in castration - resistant human prostate cancer . Br J Cancer ( 2009 ) 101 ( 6 ) : 951 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . bjc . 6605245 250 . Bernard - Marty C , Treilleux I , Dumontet C , Cardoso F , Fellous A , Gancberg D , et al . Microtubule - associated parameters as predictive markers of docetaxel activity in advanced breast cancer patients : results of a pilot study . Clin Breast Cancer ( 2002 ) 3 ( 5 ) : 341 – 5 . doi : 10 . 3816 / CBC . 2002 . n . 037 251 . Christoph DC , Kasper S , Gauler TC , Loesch C , Engelhard M , Theegarten D , et al . BetaV - tubulin expression is associated with outcome following taxane - based chemotherapy in non - small cell lung cancer . Br J Cancer ( 2012 ) 107 ( 5 ) : 823 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1038 / bjc . 2012 . 324 252 . Lu CH , Zhang J , He S , Wan CH , Shan AD , Wang YY , et al . Increased alpha - tubulin1bexpressionindicatespoorprognosisandresistancetochemotherapyinhepatocellularcarcinoma . Dig Dis Sci ( 2013 ) 58 ( 9 ) : 2713 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10620 - 013 - 2692 - z 253 . Caracciolo V , D’Agostino L , Draberova E , Sladkova V , Crozier - Fitzgerald C , Agamanolis DP , et al . Differential expression and cellular distribution of gamma - tubulin and beta III - tubulin in medulloblastomas and human medul - loblastoma cell lines . J Cell Physiol ( 2010 ) 223 ( 2 ) : 519 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 22077 ConﬂictofInterestStatement : Theauthorsdeclarethattheresearchwasconducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Received : 31 March 2014 ; paper pending published : 02 May 2014 ; accepted : 03 June 2014 ; published online : 18 June 2014 . Citation : Parker AL , Kavallaris M and McCarroll JA ( 2014 ) Microtubules and their role in cellular stress in cancer . Front . Oncol . 4 : 153 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fonc . 2014 . 00153 This article was submitted to Molecular and Cellular Oncology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Oncology . Copyright©2014Parker , Kavallaris andMcCarroll . Thisisanopen - accessarticledis - tributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) orlicensorarecreditedandthattheoriginalpublicationinthisjournaliscited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 4 | Article 153 | 19