Psychological Review VOLUME 92 NUMBER 3 JULY 1985 The Role of Theories in Conceptual Coherence Gregory L . Murphy Brown University Douglas L . Medin University of Illinois The question of what makes a concept coherent ( what makes its members form a comprehensible class ) has received a variety of answers . In this article we review accounts based on similarity , feature correlations , and various theories of cate - gorization . We find that each theory provides an inadequate account of conceptual coherence ( or no account at all ) because none provides enough constraints on possible concepts . We propose that concepts are coherent to the extent that they fit people ' s background knowledge or naive theories about the world . These theories help to relate the concepts in a domain and to structure the attributes that are internal to a concept . Evidence of the influence of theories on various conceptual tasks is presented , and the possible importance of theories in cognitive development is discussed . Why is a given set of objects grouped together to form a category ? That is , why is it that some groupings are informative , useful , and efficient , whereas others are vague , ab - surd , or useless ? The current surge of interest in people ' s concepts has provided much in - formation about conceptual structure and content . Yet , the central question of what makes a category seem coherent has only been sketchily addressed and incompletely answered . A somewhat unusual , but nonetheless use - ful , example arises from an old puzzle of biblical scholarship , the dietary rules asso - This research was supported by United States Public Health Service Grant MH32370 ( to DLM ) and by Na - tional Science Foundation Grant 83 - 15145 ( to GLM ) . This article is a fully collaborative venture , and the order of authorship is arbitrary . The authors wish to acknowledge the helpful comments of Lawrence Barsalou , Maureen Callanan , Eve Clark , Sarah Hampson , Reid Hastie , Robert Macauley , Barbara Malt , Glenn Nakamura , Andrew Ortony , Elissa Newport , Brian Ross , Ed Shoben , Richard Shweder , and Ed Smith on an earlier draft . Requests for reprints should be sent to Douglas Medin , Department of Psychology , University of Illinois , 603 East Daniel , Champaign , Illinois 61820 , or to Gregory Murphy , Hunter Laboratory of Psychology , Brown Uni - versity , Providence , Rhode Island 02912 . ciated with the abominations of Leviticus , which produce the categories clean animals and unclean animals . Why should camels , ostriches , crocodiles , mice , sharks , and eels be declared unclean , whereas gazelles , frogs , most fish , grasshoppers , and some locusts be clean ? What could chameleons , moles , and crocodiles have in common that they should be listed together ? That is , what is there about clean and unclean animals that makes these categories sensible or coherent ? The main thesis of this article is that current ideas , maxims , and theories concern - ing the structure of concepts are insufficient to provide an account of conceptual coher - ence . All such accounts rely directly or indi - rectly on the notion of similarity , and we argue that the notion of similarity relation - ships is not sufficiently constraining to deter - mine which concepts will be coherent or meaningful . These approaches are inadequate , in part , because they fail to represent intra - and inter - concept relations and more general world knowledge . We propose a different approach in which attention is focused on people ' s theories about the world . The keystone of our explanation is that people ' s theories of the world embody con - ceptual knowledge and that their conceptual Copyright 1985 b > the A Ps > i ; hological Association , inc . 0033 - 295X / 85 / $ 00 . 75 289 290 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN organization is partly represented in their theories . At one level , this statement is trivially true : For example , one ' s understanding of chemistry influences one ' s concept of sub - stances like water . It would be very odd for a person to believe , for example , that water is animate , and yet to understand the phase relations between water , ice , and steam . Surely there is some consistency between people ' s concepts and their understanding of interact - ing objects and forces in the world , but the connection between the two has very seldom been spelled out . We attempt to specify the connection between theoretical and concep - tual knowledge and to recast conceptual the - ory in that light . Current theories of conceptual structure , including those we have proposed ourselves , represent concepts in ways that fail to bring out this relation between conceptual and theoretical knowledge . For example , one the - ory treats concepts ' as exemplars organized around a central prototype ( see B . Cohen & Murphy , 1984 ; Osherson & Smith , 1981 ) . It is difficult to see how these concepts might be related to or constrained by one ' s knowl - edge of the world . Another influential model ( actually , a set of models ) treats concepts as collections of features of some sort ( see Smith & Medin , 1981 ) . 2 Although this model may be broad enough to involve theoretical knowledge , it does not particularly promote it , nor does it suggest what concepts people are likely to have and why . In particular , the features suggested by most theories of con - cepts have excluded the theoretical connec - tions we will discuss . In this article , we do not propose a new model of conceptual representation . Rather , we present a theory of what the glue is that holds a concept together and an account of what sorts of concepts are easy to learn , use , and remember , with the understanding that conceptual models must build appropriate structures to account for the facts discussed . When we argue that concepts are organized by theories , we use theory to mean any of a host of mental " explanations , " rather than a complete , organized , scientific account . For example , causal knowledge certainly embod - ies a theory of certain phenomena ; scripts may contain an implicit theory of the entail - ment relations between mundane events ; knowledge of rules embodies a theory of the relations between rule constituents ; and book - learned , scientific knowledge certainly con - tains theories . Although it may seem to be glorifying some of these cases to call them theories , the term connotes a complex set of relations between concepts , usually with a causal basis . Furthermore , these examples are similar to theories used in scientific expla - nation ( Achinstein , 1968 ) . Later on , we offer a list of some general properties of people ' s theories and review examples illustrating the utility of thinking of concepts as being embedded in theories . The philosopher W . V . O . Quine was one of the first to make a case for the use of theories in determining category membership . In his classic article , " Natural Kinds , " Quine ( 1977 ) argued for both a psychological and a societal progression from an innate , similar - ity - based conception of kinds to a theoretically oriented , more objective basis . Whereas early societies could only depend on perceptual and functional qualities to differentiate objects into classes , modern society can use tech - niques of chemical , physical , and genetic analysis in order to classify . Quine further argued that , in a true case of ontogeny reca - pitulating phylogeny , modern children begin with innate , perceptually based similarity metrics to define their kinds , only to have them successively replaced by scientific knowledge ( to the limits of their education and our scientific progress ) . As Quine ( 1977 , p . 171 ) puts it : One ' s sense of similarity or one ' s system of kinds develops and changes and even turns multiple as one matures , making perhaps for increasingly dependable prediction . And at length standards of similarity set in which are geared to theoretical science . This development is a development away from the immediate , subjective , animal sense of similarity to the remoter objectivity of a similarity 1 Many authors do not clearly distinguish between concepts and categories . We use concepts to refer to mental representations of a certain kind , and categories to refer to classes of objects in the world . Past writers seem to have used category to mean the mental repre - sentation of a class of objects , or both the representation and the objects themselves . However , this distinction is important to account for deviations between the two , as when someone ' s concept of animal does not actually include all animals . 2 Throughout this article , we use the terms feature , attribute , and properly interchangeably . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 291 determined by scientific hypotheses and posits and con - structs . Things are similar in the later or theoretical sense to the degree that they are interchangeable parts of the cosmic machine revealed by science . Although we do not subscribe to Quine ' s claims about societal progression ( or the view that the use of scientific theories is necessarily more objective ) , we agree with his conclusion that one ' s theories explicate the world and differentiate it into kinds . We also concur with him that the notion of similarity must be extended to include theoretical knowledge . Although we focus on explicit theories as a source of conceptual coherence , it is likely that a broader view of theoretical knowledge will be needed to provide a complete account . People use some kinds of theoretical knowl - edge implicitly , only becoming aware of doing so when confronted with a mismatch or failure of that knowledge ( as may arise in cross - cultural contact ) . Furthermore , even people ' s explicit theories may often not reach the rigor and consistency expected from a scientific theory ( Nisbett & Ross , 1980 ; A . Tversky & Kahneman , 1980 ) . Thus , the kind of theory Quine had in mind ( an explicit , scientific one ) is too narrow to fully explain coherence . The next section reviews previous approaches to conceptual coherence and their limitations . Approaches to Conceptual Coherence—The Insufficiency of Similarity We have already hinted at what we mean by a coherent category . It is one whose mem - bers seem to hang together , a grouping of objects that makes sense to the perceiver . We do not give an operational definition of co - herence because we do not wish to tie it to a particular theoretical framework . There are a number of measures that might reflect coherence , including how easily the concept is learned and used , and there may be others that are not known yet . It is important to distinguish this notion of coherence from the related one of natu - ralness , as used by Keil ( 1981 ) and others . Natural concepts are said to be those formed out of basic ontological categories , such as living thing or intelligent being . For example , a category that included only thoughts and fish would cross ontological boundaries im - properly and would therefore form an unnat - ural concept . However , as we show later , a concept that is unnatural ( according to this definition ) may be coherent because people have some theory that it plays a part in . In short , most of people ' s concepts are probably natural and coherent , but the issue of what makes a concept hang together cannot be solved solely by recourse to such ontological categories . Perhaps the most powerful explanation of conceptual coherence is that objects , events , or entities form a concept because they are similar to one another . The basic idea is that objects fall into natural clusters of similar kinds ( that are dissimilar to other clusters ) , and our concepts map onto these clusters . Thus , similarity may be the glue that makes a category learnable and useful . Although it is true that category members seem similar , Quine ( 1977 ) pointed out that using similarity as the basis for concepts may raise the very questions it was meant to answer . Without some explanation of why things seem similar , we are left with an equivalent problem ; many things appear to be similar just because they are members of the same category . In more practical terms , estimates of similarity may be influenced s by people ' s knowledge that the things being compared are in the same ( or different ) categories . To use a rough analogy , winning basketball teams have in common scoring more points than their opponents , but one must turn to more basic principles to explain why they score more points . In the same way , similarity may be a by - product of conceptual coherence rather than its determinant—having a theory that relates objects may make them seem similar . Goodman ( 1972 , p . 437 ) goes so far as to say , " Similarity , ever ready to solve philosophical problems and overcome obsta - cles , is a pretender , an imposter , a quack . It has , indeed , its place and its uses , but is more often found where it does not belong , pro - fessing powers it does not possess . " We shall argue that , at its best , similarity only provides a language for talking about conceptual coherence . Certainly , objects in a category appear similar to one another . But does this similarity explain why the category was formed ( instead of some other ) or its ease of use ? Suppose we follow A . Tversky ' s ( 1977 ) influential theory of similarity , which 292 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN defines it as a function of common and distinctive features weighted for salience or importance . If similarity is the sole explana - tion of category structure , then an immediate problem is that the similarity relations among a set of entities depend heavily on the partic - ular weights given to individual features . A barber pole and a zebra would be more similar than a horse and a zebra if the feature " striped " had sufficient weight . Of course , if these feature weights were fixed , then these similarity relations would be constrained . But as Tversky ( 1977 ) demonstrated convincingly , the relative weighting of a feature ( as well as the relative importance of common and dis - tinctive features ) varies with the stimulus context and experimental task , so that there is no unique answer to the question of how similar one object is to another . To fur - ther complicate matters , Ortony , Vondruska , Jones , and Foss ( 1984 ) argued persuasively that the weight of a feature is not independent of the entity in which it inheres . The situation begins to look very much as if there are more free parameters than degrees of freedom , making similarity too flexible to explain con - ceptual coherence . A further major complication derives from the fact that no constraints have been pro - vided on what is to count as a feature or property in analyses of similarity . Suppose that one is to list the attributes that plums and lawnmowers have in common in order to judge their similarity . It is easy to see that the list could be infinite : Both weigh less than 10 , 000 kg ( and less than 10 , 001 kg , . . . ) , both did not exist 10 , 000 , 000 years ago ( and 10 , 000 , 001 years ago , . . . ) , both cannot hear well , both can be dropped , both take up space , and so on . Likewise , the list of differ - ences could be infinite . Furthermore , there are some attributes that are true of only a small number of the category members— perhaps there are some orange plums or some lawnmowers run by robots . What is the cutoff for excluding attributes that are not universal , or must they all be included ( Murphy , 1982a ) ? The point is that any two entities can be arbitrarily similar or dissimilar by changing the criterion of what counts as a relevant attribute . Unless one can specify such criteria , then the claim that categorization is based on attribute matching is almost entirely vac - uous ( see Goodman , 1972 ) . These arguments about attributes fly in the face of perceptual experience that seems to naturally partition at least some entities into categories . Of course , there are some categorizations that blatantly contradict per - ceptual similarity ( e . g . , categorizing whales as mammals ) , which indicates that one ' s theories can override or at least select from perceptual information . Yet , it is true that the perceptual system has some built - in con - straints on what will count as an attribute and which attribute relations are salient ( see Ullman , 1979 , for elegant work that gets at some of these constraints ) . The problem with the abstract notion of similarity is that it ignores both the perceptual and theory - related constraints on concepts , when in fact they are doing most of the explanatory work . How much of our conceptual system is based on perceptually determined features and how much on theoretical features has yet to be determined . In general , people seem to be flexible about similarity ( even perceptual similarity ) , and we know relatively little about nonperceptual constraints . Thus , we attempt to provide part of the answer to how people choose relevant attributes for concepts and how they weight those attributes in their conceptual processes . However , we wish to reduce the importance of individual attributes in conceptual representations and to empha - size the interaction of concepts in theory - like mental structures . We now consider some candidate principles for category coherence that rely directly or indirectly on the notion of similarity . We begin by considering some standard maxims about what makes a good category and then turn our attention to particular categorization theories and their implications for category structure . Finally , we examine the widespread assumption that category judgments are based on some form of attribute matching that maps directly onto similarity . There are se - rious problems and limitations associated with each of these principles . The Insufficiency of Similarity - Based Measures of Category Structure Although we have already argued that sim - ilarity does not sufficiently constrain concepts , it may be that there are some general pro - CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 293 cessing principles that are based on similarity that have greater explanatory power . For ex - ample , there is considerable evidence that the most useful concepts are neither the most specific nor the most abstract , but are at an intermediate level of abstraction ( Rosch , Mervis , Gray , Johnson , & Boyes - Braem , 1976 ) . Although we would not want to equate concept coherence with these basic level con - cepts , such concepts are obviously highly coherent . Finding a metric that picks out these intermediate level categories is non - trivial . Rosch and her colleagues argued that basic - level categories maximize cue validity ( Rosch , 1978 ; Rosch et al . , 1976 ) , the conditional probability that an object is in a category , given that it has some cue ( or attribute ) associated with the category . A coherent cat - egory should have many such cues , whereas a poor category has only inconsistent cues , or very few good ones . Categories with the highest cue validity would be expected to be particularly useful in perceptual categoriza - tion . Unfortunately , this measure incorrectly predicts that superordinate ( i . e . , the most inclusive ) categories are always more coherent than any of their subordinates , inasmuch as anything that cues membership in one cate - gory also cues membership in its superordi - nates . For example , if something has feathers , it is likely to be a bird , but it is at least equally likely to be an animal . ( See Murphy , 1982a , 1982b , for details and consideration of similar measures . ) Perhaps coherent or useful categories are the ones that allow the most inferences to be made—after all , one purpose of categories is to enable inferences that may not be apparent from individual exemplars . If an object is a dog , for example , one can infer that it has ears , barks , has fur , and so forth , even if those properties have not been observed , whereas a vague category like thing or object enables few if any inferences to be made . Actually , this measure , which could be called category validity , is the reverse of cue validity , as it might be represented as the conditional probability that something has various attri - butes given its category membership . Accord - ingly , it has the reverse problem : Medin ( 1983 ) noted that the more specific a category , the more inferences it allows—individual objects being the limiting case for which one can specify the greatest number of correct " infer - ences . " It may well be possible to find measures that pick out intermediate levels of abstrac - tion . For example , some weighting function combining cue validity and maximizing in - ferences surely would ( e . g . , Jones , 1983 ) . But even here , there is little ground for confidence that we can measure coherence formally be - cause the basic level appears to change with expertise ( e . g . , Rosch et al . , 1976 ) . One could reflect such changes by adding features or modifying feature weights , but again , these additions and modifications are doing the explanatory work . Similarity may be able to describe such facts , but it does not explain them . The Insufficiency of Correlated Attributes Another organizing principle for categories is the notion of correlated attributes . Rosch et al . ( 1976 ; Rosch , 1978 ) proposed that natural categories divide the world up ac - cording to clusters of features , that they " cut the world at its joints . " That is , attributes of the world are not randomly spread across objects , but rather appear in clusters . Fur - thermore , basic categories ( which are the most useful and efficient ) are said to maximize the correlational structure of the environment by preserving these attribute clusters . Another motivation for the correlated at - tributes principle is the idea that organisms are constantly " going beyond the information given " to draw inferences and make predic - tions . For example , on the basis of seeing a round object in a gymnasium , one might predict with considerable confidence that it would bounce ( though this inference would be wrong in the case of a medicine ball ) . In general , these predictions or inferences prove to be accurate to the extent that people correctly perceive such attribute correlations . This correlational structure account implies that some version of the similarity models considered above is correct at a descriptive level because categories develop to group objects with a cluster of features and to exclude objects with different features . Yet , this account also makes a stronger claim than do those previous models : It is not undiffer - entiated similarity that holds a concept to - gether , but some more elaborated structure 294 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN of correlations . In this sense , the correlated attributes principle is deeper than are general notions of similarity . That is , an organism programmed to take advantage of attribute correlations will tend to form categories that have high within - category and low between - category similarity as a consequence of de - tecting correlations . One problem with the correlated attributes notion is that there are so many possible correlations that it is not clear how the correct ones get picked out ( see Keil , 1981 , for an elaboration of this point ) . It would seem that some additional principle is needed to provide further constraints on category cohesion ( e . g . , perhaps correlations are more readily noticed if the parts are spatially con - tiguous or subserve the same function ) . A cause and its effect may be highly correlated , but they would probably be placed in different categories . Another problem is that the mental representation of correlated features needs to be specified further , including a specific mechanism that results in their making con - cepts more coherent . We will not criticize this account because we believe that concepts that preserve corre - lations are in fact more coherent . However , we also believe that there are further principles that explain this fact—that correlated attri - butes do not prdvide a full account of con - ceptual cohesiveness . To anticipate our later arguments , we believe that feature correlations are partly supplied by people ' s theories and that the causal mechanisms contained in theories are the means by which correlational structure is represented . The Insufficiency of Categorization Theories Smith and Medin ( 1981 ) divided theories of category representation into three basic approaches : the classical view , the probabilis - tic view , and the exemplar view . It is natural to ask whether these theories imply useful constraints on concept or category goodness . For the most part , they do not . Classical view . The classical view has it that categories are defined by singly necessary and jointly sufficient features . The major problems with this view as a structural prin - ciple are that many categories may not con - form to the classical view ( see Medin & Smith , 1984 ; Mervis & Rosen , 1981 ; Smith & Medin , 1981 , for reviews ) and , equally seriously , that defining attributes do not en - sure coherence . This theory does not pick out some defining feature sets as better or more appropriate than others . For example , a category consisting of striped things that have more than one leg and that weigh be - tween 11 and 240 kg satisfies a classical view definition , but does not seem sensible or cohesive . 3 Probabilistic view . The probabilistic view denies that there is a common core of criteria ! properties and argues that concepts may be represented in terms of features that are typical or characteristic , rather than defining . First , we should note that the criticism just made for the classical theory applies here as well : Without supplementation , the probabi - listic view cannot tell which combinations of features form possible concepts and which form incoherent ones . It would not rule out the following combination of typical features : bright red , swims , has wings , eats mealworms , is found in Lapland , and is used for cleaning furniture . Clearly the mere fact that this combination is probabilistic does not mean that it is coherent ( see Murphy & Wisniewski , 1985 ) . Second , many processing models associated with the probabilistic view have the general constraint that the summary representation coupled with appropriate processing assump - tions should accept all members and reject all nonmembers . The formal term for the constraint that categories be partitionable on the basis of a summing of evidence ( i . e . , the presence of features ) is that the categories be separable by a linear discriminant function ( Sebetsyen , 1962 ) . That is , categories should 3 One might argue that this concept does not seem coherent simply because few objects actually contain all these features . ( This objection could also apply to our first criticism of the probabilistic view below . ) However , other empty concepts are fully coherent ; in fact , our culture is full of fictional or mythical concepts that are perfectly coherent without having any members . The classical view does not explain why some empty categories seem reasonable and others do not . Furthermore , if we could provide a context in which our example became coherent ( e . g . , perhaps a stage prop with those character - istics is needed ) , the classical view would have nothing to say about this change . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 295 be separable on the basis of a weighted , additive combination of their features : Cate - gories that are not linearly separable should be difficult to learn and use . Is linear separability important for actual concepts ? One way of evaluating its impor - tance is to set up two categorization tasks that are similar in major respects , except that in one task the categories are linearly sepa - rable and in the other categorization task they are not . Although this question has not received much attention , what little evidence there is is negative . In a series of four exper - iments varying instructions , category size , and stimulus materials , Medin and Schwa - nenflugel ( 1981 ) found no evidence that lin - early separable categories were easier to learn than categories that were not linearly sepa - rable . Thus , linear separability does not ap - pear to be a necessary property of " good " concepts . Exemplar view . The exemplar view agrees with the probabilistic view in holding that concepts need not have criterial properties and , further , claims that categories may be represented by their individual exemplars rather than by some unitary description of the class as a whole ( see Medin & SchafFer , 1978 ) . Obviously , such a view offers no prin - cipled account of conceptual structure be - cause it does not constrain what exemplars are concept members . Although most exem - plar theories assume that category members are similar , we have already argued that this alone is not a full explanation of coherence . In brief , it seems that none of the three major views of category representation pro - vides a principled account of category cohe - siveness . General Insufficiency of Attribute Matching and Similarity Our claim is not only that approaches to category coherence based on similarity have to date been unsuccessful , but that , in prin - ciple , they will prove to be insufficient . We see three major problems with an exclusive focus on similarity and the associated practice of breaking concepts into constituent attri - butes or components : First , it leads naturally to the assumption that categorization is based solely on attribute matching ; second , it ignores the problem of how one decides what is to count as an attribute ; and third , and more generally , it engenders a tendency to view concepts as being little more than the sum of their constituent components . All of these problems derive directly or indirectly from failing to view concepts in terms of the relations between exemplar properties and the categorization system : Human interests , needs , goals , and theories are ignored . Categorization as attribute matching . Our objection to the idea that categorization de - rives from attribute matching is that it may prove to be too limited . For example , the attributes associated with higher level concepts may be more abstract than those of lower level concepts or exemplars . Instead of attrib - ute matching , categorization may be based on an inference process ( see Collins , 1978 ) . For example , jumping into a swimming pool with one ' s clothes on is , in all probability , not associated with the concept intoxicated , yet that information might well be used to decide that a person is drunk . That is , cate - gorizing the person as intoxicated may explain his or her behavior , even though the specific behavior was not previously a component of the concept . This inference process must be fairly complex , taking into account the con - text : In our example , the behavior could imply drunkenness in one context and hero - ism in another ( e . g . , jumping into the pool to save someone from drowning ) . Concepts may represent a form of shorthand for a more elaborate theory , and a concept may be invoked when it has a sufficient explanatory relation to an object , rather than when it matches an object ' s attributes . A major respect in which attribute match - ing may be too limited is that our represen - tations may include information concerning operations , transformations , and ( indirectly ) relations among attributes ( see also Hampton , 1981 ) . Much of our reasoning about concepts may be based on contraints about operations that are permissible . Consider the following situation : 4 Suppose that all the soda cans you have come into contact with have been 7 . 5 cm in diameter and that all the silver dollars " The example is based on an idea provided by Lance Rips . 296 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN you have seen have been 4 . 0 cm in diameter . Suppose further that you are told that some entity has a diameter of 5 . 0 cm and you are asked whether it is more likely to be a soda can or a silver dollar . To our minds , it is more likely to be the can . One reason for this guess is that we know that silver dollars are mandated by law to be a particular size , whereas soda cans just happen to be of a uniform size . Alternatively , one might have made the opposite conjecture based on the knowledge that soda cans have to be a par - ticular size to fit soda machines , whereas there is little reason for the particular size of silver dollars ( other than in casinos ) . The point is that , whichever choice is made , it clearly does not derive solely from attribute matching or size similarity judgments , but rather from our knowledge about transfor - mations and operations associated with con - cepts , and this , in turn , relies heavily on our general world knowledge . This case could be recast as an example of attribute matching in which the attributes are higher order properties . For example , one ' s concept of silver dollar could have the attribute " used in machines sensitive to exact size . " Although this is technically true , it misses the important point that the explan - atory work is again being done by the theory - constrained processes that generate these complex attributes , rather than by attribute matching per se . Thus , although attribute matching could be made to be consistent with these facts , it does not explain or predict them by itself . Although we believe that theoretical factors are important in people ' s categorizations , it seems likely that people can develop automatic routines for identifying objects as members of concepts when the concepts have consistent perceptual features . For example , one prob - ably does not usually invoke much theoretical knowledge in categorizing something as a robin . The main influence of theories on perceptual categorization may be on novel objects and borderline cases , and when the categorization must be justified or explained . In short , we emphasize the theoretical aspects of categorization , but we do not mean to exclude the use of primarily perceptual in - formation . Current research on categorization gives evidence that both are important ( Kelter et al . , 1984 ; Murphy & Smith , 1982 ) . Selecting attributes . Frequently , attributes are treated as givens or at least as sufficiently transparent that all one has to do is to ask experimental subjects to list them . As we have noted , this largely ignores the problem of what can count as an attribute . The formal models of category coherence mentioned above gain credence from their precise for - mulation of coherence , but they have no precise way in which to choose or exclude the attributes that form their basis . More recently , some work has begun to be directed at this issue . Barsalou and Bower ( 1983 ) , for example , showed that two types of properties are likely to be activated during processing . First , properties that have high diagnosticity may be active inasmuch as they are useful for distinguishing instances of a conept from instances of other conepts . Sec - ond , properties relevant to how people typi - cally interact with instances of a concept are likely to be frequently active ( see also Bar - salou , 1982 , for further arguments ) . Note that forms of typical interaction themselves vary with context ( see Roth & Shoben , 1983 ) . Barsalou and Bower ' s ( 1983 ) research rein - forces our thesis that the explanatory work is on the level of determining which attributes will be selected , with similarity being at least as much a consequence as a cause of concep - tual coherence . In addition , their reference to typical interactions with objects suggests the causal schemata and scripts that we have said are important in conceptual representa - tions . The properties that distinguish concepts may be greatly determined by people ' s goals , which are linked to their theories about the objects . Concepts as equivalent to their components . The more general problem associated with viewing concepts as equivalent to the sum of their components has a long history . Consider the following quote from John Stuart Mill ( 1843 / 1965 ) : The laws of the phenomena of the mind are sometimes analogous to mechanical , but sometimes also to chemical laws . When many impressions or ideas are operating in the mind together , there sometimes takes place a process of a similar kind to chemical combination . When impres - sions have been so often experienced in conjunction , that each of them calls up readily and instantaneously the ideas of the whole group , those ideas sometimes melt and coalesce into one another , and appear not several ideas but one ; in the same manner as when the seven prismatic colors are presented to the eye in rapid succes - CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 297 sion , the sensation produced is that of white . But in this last case it is correct to say that the seven colors when they rapidly follow one another generate white , but not that they actually are white ; so it appears to me that the Complex Idea , formed by the blending together of several simpler ones , should , when it really appears simple , ( that is when the separate elements are not consciously distin - guishable in it ) be said to result from , or be generated by . the simple ideas , not to consist o / them . . . . These are cases of mental chemistry : in which it is possible to say that the simple ideas generate , rather than that they compose , the complex ones . ( p . 29 ) Although many investigators would agree that mental chemistry is a more apt metaphor for understanding concepts than is mental com - position , the core of this distinction does not appear to have taken hold . Again , one would have thought that mental chemistry would convey a concern with relations ( and con - straints associated with them ) , operations , and transformations on components , as op - posed to an exclusive focus on components ( i . e . , features ) as independent entities . One defense of the attribute - matching per - spective is that relations and operations them - selves might be treated as attributes . To take this step , however , is to concede that attributes may have a complex internal structure . Re - lations need arguments , and arguments and relations mutually constrain one another . This internal structure means that one is working with more than a list of simple attributes and that constraints and explanatory power will derive from this richer structure . It also seems likely that the listing of category attributes , although helpful for cer - tain methodological uses ( e . g . , Rosch & Mer - vis , 1975 ) , may drastically underestimate people ' s categorical knowledge , because part of their knowledge is about relations of cat - egory features to each other and of category members to the world . Thus , a person who simply memorized the attributes of some categories without knowing more about the object domain might have very different con - cepts than does a person with elaborated theories . These differences would show up in the uses of categories in language understand - ing , naming , problem solving , and other sit - uations ( some described below ) , but perhaps not in feature listings . Summary of the Two Approaches In our discussion , we have lumped together a number of accounts of concept represen - tation and categorization under the general heading of similarity - based approaches to concepts . Although they differ in many re - spects , these accounts have in common the characteristic that they treat concepts as col - lections of attributes . In our critique of this approach , we argued that it is insufficient to explain conceptual coherence and the richness of conceptual structure . ( In later sections we review more empirical data on this issue . ) We emphasize insufficient here because we do not want to imply that this approach is completely wrong or misleading . It is clear that category members seem similar to one another , but we have argued that similarity is too flexible to give any specific , natural explanation of conceptual coherence . One could see our approach as supplying the constraints missing from the similarity expla - nation , rather than simply contradicting it . Table 1 summarizes the differences of the similarity - based approach and the theory - based approach on a number of dimensions ( some of which we have yet to address ) . The entries for the similarity - based approach uses attribute as a general term for features , prop - ositions , and other simple chunks of knowl - edge . Under the theory - based approach , un - derlying principle is used to refer to the causal connections , script links , and explanatory relations that we have been invoking as parts of theories . In general , it can be seen that the similarity - based approach requires a minimum of con - ceptual organization and relations , whereas the theory - based approach emphasizes both . One way to describe this difference is to say that the theory - based approach expands the boundaries of conceptual representation : In order to characterize knowledge about and use of a concept , we must include all of the relations involving that concept and the other concepts that depend on it . To explain con - ceptual coherence , the processes that operate on a concept must be considered in addition to the information directly stored with it . Concepts as Embedded in Theories We have no illusions about having solved the problem of concept coherence . Unless one can specify constraints on what a theory is , it may not help at all to claim that conceptual coherence derives from having a 298 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN Table 1 Comparison of Two Approaches to Concepts Aspect of conceptual theory Similarity - based approach Theory - based approach Concept representation Category definition Units of analysis Categorization basis Weighting of attributes Interconceptual structure Similarity structure , attribute lists , correlated attributes . Various similarity metrics , summation of attributes . Attributes . Attribute matching . Cue validity , salience . Hierarchy based on shared attributes . Conceptual development Feature accretion . Correlated attributes plus underlying principles that determine which correlations are noticed . An explanatory principle common to category members . Attributes plus explicitly represented relations of attributes and concepts . Matching plus inferential processes supplied by underlying principles . Determined in part by importance in the underlying principles . Network formed by causal and explanatory links , as well as sharing of properties picked out as relevant . Changing organization and explanations of concepts as a result of world knowledge . theory . Table 2 lists five general properties that many theories manifest , along with some suggested roles that these properties may play in thinking about conceptual coherence . Be - cause theories are flexible , conceptual coher - ence may also be . For example , the category apple - or - prime number does not appear to be a very coherent concept . In our view , this lack would derive mainly from the lack of clear internal or external structure in a theory about such a category . The relations that apples participate in ( e . g . , eating , biological relations ) overlap very little with the relations that prime numbers participate in . One could develop a scenario , however , in which this category might make sense . 5 For example , suppose that one of our colleagues in the math department , Wilma , has only two interests : prime numbers and apple farming . We might , then , form the concept prime numbers - or - apples , which is explained as " topics of conversation with Wilma . " This explanation provides very little structure , however , so that it would probably be less coherent than the concept apples - or - oranges . By adding more explanatory links , one could make the concept more coherent . For exam - ple , one could try to explain why Wilma has only those two interests . Through reference to naive personality theory and by exploring the properties of apples and prime numbers , one could elaborate a theory about why a person would have just these interests . If this theory were consistent with one ' s other world knowledge , then it would also supply external structure to the concept . Whether this concept could ever become very coherent is an open question , depending on the status of the theory itself and the plausibility of competing theories . The point is that one might have a theory that could connect ( to some degree ) objects that seem to share very few features . The rest of this article can be viewed as an amplification of the entries in Table 2 and in the right half of Table 1 . In the following sections , we discuss how considering theories improves on the simple similarity accounts of these issues . The Role of Theories in Cognition Our claim is that representations of con - cepts are best thought of as theoretical knowl - edge or , at least , as embedded in knowledge that embodies a theory about the world . In this section , we reconsider some of the issues raised in the previous section and show how the addition of theoretical knowledge fills many of the gaps in explaining conceptual coherence . * Larry Barsalou helped to develop this example . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 299 Table 2 General Properties of Theories and Their Potential Role in Understanding Conceptual Coherence Property of theories Speculation about role in conceptual coherence " Explanations " of a sort , specified over some domain of observation . Simplify reality . Have an external structure—fit in with ( or do not contradict ) what is already known . Have an internal structure—denned in part by relations connecting properties . Interact with data and observations in some way . Constrains which properties will be included in a concept representation . Focuses on certain relationships over others in detecting feature correlations . Concepts may be idealizations that impose more structure than is " objectively " present . Stresses intercategory structure . Attributes are considered essential to the degree that they play a part in related theories ( external structures ) . Emphasizes mutual constraints among features . May suggest how concept attibutes are learned . Calls attention to inference processes in categorization and suggests that more than attribute matching is involved . Theories and Attribute Selection Earlier we raised the issue of what is to count as an attribute . One answer is to rely on consensual validation : If several experi - mental subjects list some property as an attribute of some concept , then that attribute is included in the concept . Rosch and Mervis ( 1975 ) have shown that these listed attributes can be used to predict goodness of example ratings and times to verify that an exemplar is a member of a category ( see Mervis & Rosch , 1981 , for a review ) . Although this technique has generated im - portant data for theories of categorization to explain , we may wish to consider the question of how people choose attributes to list . One might think that participants can simply re - trieve the most important features of the target concept and report them . However , there are reasons to believe that the process of generating attributes is more complex . First of all , most of the research involving attribute listing employs judge - amended tal - lies . The reason for this is that participants may list attributes at one level of abstraction and fail to include them at a lower level of abstraction . For example , they may list " two - legged " for bird , but not for robin , eagle , and other specific birds . B . Tversky and Hemen - way ( 1984 ) analyzed this behavior in terms of cooperative rules of communication ( Grice , 1975 ) and implicit contrast sets ( e . g . , " two - legged " does not distinguish between robin and eagle , and so it may not be listed ) . The idea of implicit contrast sets may also explain why " does not fly " is much more likely to be listed for penguin than for rainbow trout . Thus , the subject ' s conception of the relevant contrast set , as well as the desired level of specificity , influences the choice of which features to list . It appears , then , that attribute listings may be quite constrained by factors that are only beginning to be studied . We submit that attribute listings and the representations behind them are further con - strained by the theories that the categories are involved in . Subjects list not everything they know about a concept , but rather those features that are particularly salient and di - agnostic in their background knowledge ( and that seem most relevant in the situation , as B . Tversky & Hemenway , 1984 , noted ) . For example , most people realize , upon reflection , that the attribute , " flammable , " applies to wood , money , certain plastics , and ( sadly ) even animals . Yet , it probably would be found only in the conceptual representation ( and the listings ) for the first of these cate - gories , presumably because of the known role of wood in human activities . Some attributes are prominent in our concepts because of their importance in our other knowledge about the world , and others are excluded 300 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN because of their irrelevance to our theories . The concept money is central to our theories of economic and social interaction , in which the attribute of flammability plays no role . Thus , it is apparently not part of our repre - sentation of money even though it may easily be inferred as true of most money . Miller and Johnson - Laird ( 1976 ) also noted the importance of theories in specifying at - tributes of lexical concepts . They contrast a concept ' s core , which contains theory - based attributes , with attributes that are perceptually salient and therefore useful in identification , but with little connection to the intrinsic nature of the concept . They describe the concept ' s core as being " an organized repre - sentation of general knowledge and beliefs about whatever objects or events the words [ in a lexical field ] denote—about what they are and do , what can be done with them , how they are related , what they relate to " ( p . 291 ) . They make the explicit equation : " A conceptual core is an inchoate theory about something " ( p . 291 ) . Although it is often difficult to draw the line between core features and more peripheral features , Miller and Johnson - Laird ' s description emphasizes the importance of external and internal structure of a concept ' s features in the core . Theories and Correlated Attributes We raised the possibility earlier that coher - ent concepts have clusters of correlated fea - tures . We then raised the question of how conceptual representations take advantage of these clusters . In other words , what is the difference between representations of cate - gories with feature correlations and those without feature correlations that result in the former being more coherent than the latter ? Smith and Medin ( 1981 , pp . 84 - 86 ) dis - cussed two possibilities . One is to represent correlated features as one single feature . For example , the features " flies , " " has wings , " and " has a beak " might be combined into one global feature . Smith and Medin pointed out that this solution is unprincipled and counterintuitive , in that the compound feature really corresponds to three independent fea - tures that must be separated in other repre - sentations ( e . g . , bats and penguins have only two of the three features ) . The other possibility they mentioned is to link and label features that are correlated . So , all three pairs of the above features would have arcs labeled COR - RELATED connecting them . 6 This has more intuitive appeal—its main drawback being the explosion of feature links it would en - gender—and Smith and Medin tentatively ac - cept it . This feature - linking solution has compu - tational tractability . It can adequately repre - sent feature correlations that might be ac - cessed by processes using the concept . How - ever , this solution misses an important insight . Features in categories are not correlated by virtue of random combinations . Rather , cor - relations arise from logical and biological necessity : Animals and artifacts have struc - tural properties in order to fulfill various functions , so that some structural properties tend to occur with others , and certain struc - tures occur with certain functions . It is no accident that animals with wings often fly or that objects with walls tend to have roofs . Even less obvious correlations , such as the one between furniture being made of wood and also having a flat top ( Malt & Smith , 1984 ) , usually have clear explanations . Suppose that people are not only sensitive to feature correlations , but that they can deduce reasons for those correlations , based on their knowledge of the way the world works . Perhaps , then , the connection between those features is not a simple link , but a whole causal explanation for how the two are related . For example , one can connect " has wings " to " flies " by one ' s intuitive knowledge of the use of wings to support a body on air pressure ; " has walls " and " has a roof " are connected by their common function of pro - tection from the elements . This approach avoids the explosion of CORRELATED links because it draws on previously existing knowledge about the attributes to connect them : The links are already in memory . Furthermore , memory research has shown 6 The links would not have to be labeled as CORRE - LATED—they might simply be associations that simulta - neously activate two features , and this pattern of activation could be used to infer that the features are correlated . That is , the correlations might be computed rather than specifically stored . However , this version is also subject to the objections we raise to the more explicit represen - tation of correlated attributes . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 301 that it is difficult to remember correlated facts through simple associations ; when the facts are tied together by a theme of previous knowledge , memory interference is reduced ( Bower & Masling , 1978 ; Day & Bellezza , 1983 ; Smith , Adams , & Schorr , 1978 ) . Medin , Altom , Edelson , and Freko ( 1982 ) found in experiments with novel categories that people are , in fact , sensitive to feature correlations and that they use them in their categorization judgments ( see also L . B . Cohen & Younger , 1983 ; Younger & L . B . Cohen , 1984 ) . This was true even when overall typicality was controlled for . Thus , people do spontaneously use feature correlations to aid their judgments . Notably , during the debrief - ing , participants frequently offered reasons for why the correlation was present . They were not simply computing correlations but were developing and using theories to explain the correlations and to structure the concept . Theories and Concept Use So far , we have argued on theoretical grounds that people ' s concepts must be inte - grally tied to their theories about the world . A large part of this discussion has been somewhat abstract , dealing with various mea - sures of conceptual coherence and accounts of category structure . This approach to con - ceptual coherence also has empirical impli - cations for concept use . Although many pro - cess models of concept use involve attribute matching or similarity judgments , we argue that a number of lines of research give evi - dence of the use of causal knowledge , rules , theoretical consistency , and other theory - like knowledge . This section reviews evidence pertaining to how theories are involved in specific uses of concepts . Correlated Attributes We have already suggested that theories are necessary for people to explain feature correlations . Medin et al . ( 1982 ) showed that people are sensitive to empirical correlations of features in their category judgments , as Rosch et al . ( 1976 ) suggested they should be . However , features that are correlated in peo - ple ' s mental representations may not always reflect empirical relations in the world , but may derive instead from people ' s theories about the relations between the features . Al - though these theory - driven relationships may actually exist , people may never have empir - ical data to confirm or disconfirm their ex - pectancies . Examples of these feature pairs are amount of education and income , zodiac sign and personality , rate of speech and in - telligence , and amount of rehearsal and strength in long - term memory . Again , we rush to point out that some of these pairs may be truly correlated , but others probably are not . The property that they have in common is that they are predicted by ( some ) people ' s theories about the world , rather than being suggested by observation . In fact , some of them are so theory laden that it would be difficult to see how one could detect them without the theory to direct measurement . When a correlation is perceived to exist on the basis of one ' s theories , but has no basis in empirical fact , it is called an illusory correlation . Chapman and Chapman ( 1967 , 1969 ) pre - sented evidence that therapists and naive subjects using certain psychodiagnostic tests perceived correlations between test results and psychological disorders when in fact there were none—or even when the opposite cor - relation obtained . They concluded that peo - ple ' s expectancies prevented them from ob - jectively evaluating the relation between the test and mental illness . Other studies have confirmed the effects of theories on perception of correlations , although not always to the same degree ( Crocker , 1981 ; Wright & Mur - phy , 1984 ) . Bower and Masling ' s ( 1978 ) re - search suggested that the important factor may be that people be able to construct a causal explanation for a correlation , rather than that it match their current knowledge . Murphy and Wisniewski ( 1985 ) provided some preliminary evidence that theory - based correlations are actually used to form con - ceptual representations . One could imagine a case opposite to the illusory correlation one , in which the observer perceived a correlation but could find no explanation for it ; there might be no way to connect the two attributes in one ' s mental scheme of things . One of us ( DLM ) has recently completed a set of studies in which people were asked to sort descriptions of 302 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN entities into categories . For example , in one case , the descriptions were symptoms and the categories were hypothetical diseases . The task was set up so that people could sort on the basis of two different sets of correlated attributes . The two sets of correlated attributes differed in terms of how readily people might think of a causal association between them . Although people are flexible enough that they can link many pairs of symptoms , pilot work suggested that it is easier to link some pairs ( e . g . , dizziness to earaches , and weight gain to high blood pressure ) than others ( e . g . , dizziness to weight gain , or earaches to high blood pressure ) . People showed a strong ten - dency to cluster on the basis of correlated attributes for which a causal link could readily be made . Furthermore , subjects mentioned such linkages to justify their sorting . For example , they might say that an ear infection could disturb the vestibulary organ and pro - duce both dizziness and earaches . Thus , fea - ture correlations may be important in con - ceptual representations primarily when they can be represented as theoretical knowledge . There is also evidence that a prior theory can facilitate perception or learning of con - . tingencies and correlations . For example , in processing numerical information involving possible correlations , performance may be improved dramatically simply by the addition of meaningful labels for the variables that suggest their theoretical significance ( e . g . , Adelman , 1981 ; Camerer , 1981 ; Miller , 1971 ; Muchinsky & Dudycha , 1974 ; Wright & Murphy , 1984 ) . Camerer ( 1981 ) showed that people could learn an interaction between variables when they were labeled in accor - dance with prior beliefs ( i . e . , factors thought to affect wheat futures in the commodity market ) , but failed to learn when the same problem was given as an abstract task involv - ing arbitrary labels . Linear Separability in Categorization We mentioned earlier that linear separa - bility does not appear to be a natural con - straint on human categorization . One reason for this may be that people ' s theories , and hence their categories , typically have more internal structure than can be captured by an independent summing of evidence or by similarity to a prototype . If this is true , then if a prior theory suggests that summing or similarity matching is appropriate , linear sep - arability may in fact become important for categorization . Recent work by Wattenmaker , T . Murphy , Dewey , Edelson , and Medin ( 1984 ) supported this idea . In one study the descriptions were properties of objects , and the categories were structured such that the typical attributes for one category would all be desirable properties if one were searching for a substitute for a hammer ( e . g . , flat surface , easy to grasp ) . In one condition subjects were given the notion of hammer substitutes , and in another con - dition they were not . The idea was that a hammer would act as an ideal standard and that subjects could judge how similar exam - ples were to the hammer prototype ( through independent summing of features ) . When prior theories were developed or suggested , linearly separable categories were in fact easier to learn than were nonlinearly separable categories . The reverse held when no theory was suggested . This result depends on the theory evoked being compatible with a summing of evidence . By suggesting a different form of theory , one should be able to reverse this pattern of results . For example , if one category corresponded to psychologists , one might discourage people from summing up component information by alerting them to the fact that there are both experimental and clinical psychologists and that their traits may differ considerably . The attribute " likes computers " might predict category member - ship for experimental but not clinical psy - chologists . In a close analogue of this example , Wattenmaker et al . ( 1984 ) found a differential facilitation in learning categories that were not linearly separable . The point of these examples is quite simple . One cannot describe some abstract conceptual structure as simple or complex , independent of the form of theory that might be brought to bear on it . When theory and structure match , the task becomes simple ; when there is a mismatch between theory and structure , the task becomes difficult . Theories and Prototype Structure Assuming that most concepts have a typi - cality structure , people must discover this structure when they learn a new concept . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 303 When they encounter a new object , they must judge how typical it is of a variety of concepts . Both of these tasks may require use of a theory . Barsalou ' s ( 1983 , in press ) research on goal - derived categories presents a partic - ularly clear example in which theories are crucial to deriving conceptual structure . He investigated categories such as things to do at a convention . He found , first , that people are less likely to discover that four objects are in one of these categories when they do not know the goal that relates them ( Barsalou , 1983 , Experiment 4 ) . Second , he showed that the typicality structure of goal - derived cate - gories was not simple family resemblance ( similarity of the category members ) , but rather how well each instance satisfies the goal ( Barsalou , in press ) . The reader may wish to introspect on what the category is that includes the objects children , jewelry , portable TVs , paintings , manuscripts , and photograph albums . Furthermore , which of the items mentioned is the most typical ? Because the objects have low family resem - blance , the task is nearly impossible . However , once the theme taking things out of one ' s home during afire is known , these judgments become easy . Notice that this concept is not a " natural " one according to the criteria given by Keil ( 1981 ) , yet it does seem to hang together in its context . Such examples suggest that theories can elucidate the rela - tions among very different objects and thereby form them into a coherent category , even if they do not form a " natural " class . A third interesting aspect of Barsalou ' s ( in press ) research involves some comparisons he made between natural and goal - derived concepts . In the process of showing that the exemplars of goal - derived categories had typ - icality ratings that correlated with the degree to which they satisfied the relevant goal , Barsalou performed similar computations on common concepts . Although the underlying dimensions for natural categories were spec - ulative ( e . g . , for fruit , how much people like it ) , they proved to be significantly correlated with exemplar goodness even after the effects of frequency and family resemblance had been partialed out . This observation suggests that natural concepts may be partly organized in terms of underlying dimensions that reflect how the concept normally interacts with peo - ple ' s goals and activities . Fillmore ( 1982 ) made a related suggestion about the source of typicality structures . He argued that lexical concepts are represented in terms of idealized cognitive models . For example , the concept bachelor can be defined as an unmarried adult male , in the context of human society in which certain ( idealized ) expectations about marriage and marriageable age are realized . The existence of " poor ex - amples " of this concept—for example , Cath - olic priests , homosexual men , men cohabiting with a girlfriend—does not mean , Fillmore argued , that the concept itself is ill - defined . Rather , the claim is that the idealized cognitive model does not fit the actual world perfectly well . An entity may deviate from the concept ( i . e . , may be atypical ) either because it fails to satisfy " unmarried , adult male " or because the idealized model is imperfectly realized . Clearly , such a model is an example of what we have been calling theories , inasmuch as it provides a means of connecting many con - cepts in order to explain diverse facts . Mohr ( 1977 ) argued that this is the correct way to view Platonic universals , and Lakoff ( 1982 ) developed this notion of idealized models in some detail . In this view , the relation between concepts and exemplars is analogous to the relation between theory and data . Not only may data be somewhat noisy , but theories also typically involve simplifying assumptions that trade parsimony for power . As Kuhn ( 1962 ) argued , theories depend on a particular background of accepted beliefs and assumptions that is taken for granted—until contradictory data begin to accumulate . Fillmore ' s ( 1982 ) point was that categorizing objects also depends on background assumptions about the world , and our concepts have developed in the con - text of those assumptions . To some degree , then , it may be these simplified models that give rise to unclear cases , and when anoma - lous or unclear cases arise , our background assumptions become more salient . We may underestimate the importance of implicit theories or background assumptions about the world because of their very implic - itness . Ziff ( 1972 ) provided some delightful examples of the importance of implicit con - ceptual schemes in understanding . For ex - ample , it seems sensible to say " a cheetah can outrun a man . " But what about a 1 - day old cheetah , or an aged cheetah with arthritis , 304 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN or a healthy cheetah with a 100 - pound weight on its back ? What we mean when we say that a cheetah can outrun a man is that under some tantalizingly difficult - to - specify condi - tions , a cheetah would outrun a man . Ziff referred to this set of conditions as a concep - tual scheme and made the point that two people understand each other to the extent to which these conceptual schemes are shared . These implicit theories heavily constrain our understanding of relations among concepts . Expertise The prevailing view of expertise with regard to concepts seems to be that experts differ from novices primarily in making finer dis - tinctions ( as implicitly expressed by Dou - gherty , 1978 ; Rosch et al . , 1976 ) . In that view , experts have many more specific cate - gories than do novices , and they see those categories as being very distinct . It has often been suggested that experts should have dif - ferent concepts from novices , but few studies have actually investigated their conceptual structure . Much of the relevant work has involved cross - cultural comparisons in an - thropological studies of lexical structure ( e . g . , Berlin , Breedlove , & Raven , 1973 ; Dougherty , 1978 ; others are cited by Mervis & Rosch , 1981 ) . For example , members of agricultural societies are experts on plants and animals and have many names for specific animal concepts , whereas Berkeley undergraduates are novices and have few such names ( Dougherty , 1978 ; Rosch et al . , 1976 ) . However , there may well be differences between experts and novices besides the amount they know about a category and the number of categories they can differentiate . Certainly , experts have better developed the - ories about the domain than do novices . How would this affect their conceptual structure ? A reasonable null hypothesis would be that experts simply know more : They have more information about each category , and they know more categories . Although these quan - titative predictions seem likely , we do not believe that they are the only differences . Experts in some domain probably know more relations between the objects in the domain . They can see connections where novices no - tice none because their theories lead them to look for certain similarities , regularities , and cause - effect relations . For example , biologists notice crucial similarities between shrimps , moths , grasshoppers , spiders , and crabs , put - ting them together in one class ( the arthro - pods ) . We assume that naive observers would make more pragmatic distinctions , probably separating the flying , crawling , and water - living animals . The biologist ' s theories of evolution and physiological structures express themselves in the concept of the arthropods and would come into play explicitly when categorizing unfamiliar objects . There is increasing evidence for the view that experts make far - reaching connections that affect their concepts , in addition to having greater specific knowledge . Murphy and Wright ( 1984 ) examined the concepts of ex - perts and novices in child psychopathology . The novices were college undergraduates with no experience in abnormal psychology . Three other groups ranged in expertise from begin - ning counselors at a summer camp for dis - turbed children to clinical psychologists with extensive experience in the field . All of the subjects listed attributes of the three major categories of emotionally disturbed children . Surprisingly , experts ' concepts were not more distinctive—in fact , the more expert the sub - jects , the more their categories seemed to overlap . This result is somewhat counterintuitive because experts in clinical psychology are expected to classify people into different groups , and the more distinctive their concepts of the groups , the easier this would be . This finding points out that classification is not the only purpose for concepts . Like all psy - chologists , these experts wanted to find expla - nations for behavior , and those explanations point out commonalities to all cases of child psychopathology ( analogous to the zoologist ' s search for organizing features in biological classifications ) . For example , the professional psychologists listed " feels angry " and " feels sad " for all categories , presumably because of their theories about the motivational and cognitive concomitants of psychopathology . Novices also have theories of psychopathology , but they are apparently more superficial , accounting for surface differences between the categories . For example , they listed " feels sad " as an attribute of depressed children CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 305 only , and " feels angry " exclusively for aggres - sive children . One interpretation of these findings is to attribute them to the fuzziness or even inva - lidity of psychopathological categories . How - ever , similar evidence was reported in the realm of physics problems by Chi , Feltovich , and Glaser ( 1981 ) , who noticed that novices classify physics problems using " surface fea - tures " that are only roughly correlated with physical principles . Experts , on the other hand , apparently categorized problems on the basis of the major principles used in their solutions . Consequently , " experts are able to ' see ' the underlying similarities in a great number of different problems , whereas nov - ices ' see ' a variety of problems that they consider different " because the surface fea - tures differ ( Chi et al . , 1981 , p . 130 ) . As a result , the experts made fewer , larger classes than did the novices . Chi et al . ' s results also highlight the fact that similarity is in the eyes—and theories—of the beholder . It seems safe to assume that the physicists ' classifications were not simply fuzzier than the novices ' ( as one might argue for the clinical psychology case ) . Similarly , the biol - ogist ' s class of arthropods is accepted as valid , even though it is much more inclusive than preferred novice concepts ( see Berlin et al . , 1973 ; Rosen et al . , 1976 ) . These examples provide evidence that people ' s theories may lead them to form concepts that they would not normally have and to alter the content of other categories . Cross - Cultural Research An intriguing possible implication of the approach we have proposed has to do with cross - cultural differences in concepts . Clearly , people in different cultures have different theories about the world , which should cause them to have different concepts . In fact , there are a number of tantalizing examples of cultural differences in classification tasks ( see the review by Cole & Scribner , 1974 ) . One well - documented culturally dependent phe - nomenon is the assignment of the basic level of categorization . Rosch et al . ( 1976 ) first noted that the basic level of their American subjects was more general than that of people from agricultural , nonindustrial societies ( as described by Berlin et al . , 1972 ) . Dougherty ( 1978 ) and Geoghegan ( 1976 ) discussed these differences in depth and suggested that do - mains that are important to a culture are more fully individuated and elaborated both in the language and conceptual system . The basic level is more specific in such domains than in others . Such cultural dependence is evidence against the idea that the basic level is purely determined by features in the envi - ronment . In our view , this happens because the greater salience of a domain promotes more elaborate knowledge structures in the domain , which in turn can differentiate more specific concepts . However , these differences in salience do not exhaust the effects of cultural knowledge on concepts . One example is that the Karam of New Guinea do not consider a cassowary a bird . Bulmer ( 1967 ) argued that this is not merely because the cassowary does not fly , but because of its special role as a forest creature and its resulting participation in an elaborate antithesis in Karam thought be - tween forest and cultivation . This antithesis is further related to basic concerns with kin - ship roles and rights . Apparently , the Karam ' s theories about forest life and cultivation pro - duce different classifications than do our cul - ture ' s biological theories . ( For other similar examples , see Luria , 1976 ; Tambiah , 1969 ; and the review by Cole & Scribner , 1974 . ) For categories that are more conceptual than perceptual , cross - cultural differences may be even more evident . Shweder and Miller ( in press ) demonstrated the importance of cul - tural presuppositions in social categories in - volved in person perception , in a strong parallel to the position of this article . Linguistic Innovations and Complex Concepts Because people ' s representations of word meanings are probably closely tied to their concepts ( see E . Clark , 1983 ) , our theory should also have implications for semantic interpretation . This influence can probably best be seen in the understanding of innovative uses of language , which require modification of existing word meanings in order to be interpreted . A similar problem is the forma - tion of complex concepts , in that existing 306 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN concepts must be modified in order to create a new meaning . Clark and Clark ( 1979 ) discussed the cre - ation and interpretation of denominal verbs , which are often innovative—created for a single use by a particular speaker—rather than conventional like most word uses . Ex - amples include Max teapotted the dean , and the boy parched the newspaper , in which the concepts teapot and porch must be modified to produce verb interpretations . To explain how people understand such innovations , Clark and Clark referred to people ' s " generic theories " of objects : their physical character - istics , ontogeny , and potential roles . For ex - ample , one ' s knowledge of boys , newspapers , and porches allows one to conclude that the boy parched the newspaper refers to throwing a paper on the porch ( rather than making it into a porch or pasting it on the porch ) . The same denominal verb in a different sentence frame would involve a different interpretation , as in the builder parched the house . People ' s conceptual knowledge is heavily involved in producing and constructing interpretations of such sentences , and that knowledge appar - ently includes the origins and usual roles of such objects , as we have argued . Combining simple concepts into compound concepts may involve similar processes . 7 For example , how does one generate the concept pet fish from the concepts pet and fish ? One possibility is the " classical " method of set intersection ( Osherson & Smith , 1981 ) . For example , pet fish would be formed by taking the intersection of all things that are pets and all things that are fish . Much of the early concept acquisition literature assumes such an account . Unfortunately , this view has a great deal of trouble with many complex concepts . Consider , for example , ocean drive , expert repair , or horse race . These concepts are not intersective at all . Ocean drives are not both oceans and drives ; horse races are not both horses and races . Linguists discussing nominal compounds have argued that the meaning of these terms is determined by a mediating relation between the two nouns ( Kay & Zim - mer , 1976 ) , but there is no single relation that will construct any complex concept ( see Adams , 1973 ) . For example , a horse race is a race of horses , but an ocean drive is not a drive of oceans . An expert repair is a repair done by an expert , but an engine repair is probably not a repair done by an engine . So , no single relation ( like set intersection ) can describe all or even most compound concepts . Furthermore , the construction of complex concepts is not a simple operation on the features of the two concepts , such as feature overlap or projection . Although some of the features of finger gp \ carried over onto finger cup , considerable knowledge is needed to specify which features are affected and how they are combined with the features of cup . Whenever people form complex concepts or understand compound nouns , they must be using their background knowledge of the way the world works in order to create the correct concept . In short , the formation of complex concepts requires mental chemistry rather than the simple addition of components . B . Cohen and Murphy ( 1984 ) argued that it is impossible to explain how people form such compound concepts using only knowl - edge independent operations . That is , they said that it is impossible to say in advance what a complex concept XY means knowing only the meaning of X and Y , but that extensive knowledge relating X and Y comes into play in order to arrive at just the right compound . In the context of our discussion , this point translates into the use of people ' s implicit theories and operations on concepts . For example , one ' s knowledge of the use of vehicles , their parts and what they do , and mishaps that happen to them can lead one to combine engine and repair to get " repair of an engine . " One ' s knowledge about experts leads one to combine expert and repair dif - ferently . The interpretation of a compound concept may be thought of as a hypothesis generated by background theories . 7 It is difficult to give operational criteria to separate simple from complex concepts . One clue is whether the concept has a single - word name or requires multiple words ( Berlin et al . , 1973 ) . Yet , some compound noun phrases name unitary concepts , for example , washing machine . Rather than argue for an operational distinction here , we have used simple and complex concepts that are intuitively clear : The simple concepts are described by a single word , and they combine to form apparently complex concepts . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 307 Related Ideas The notion that people ' s concepts are tied up with their theories is not totally new to psychology ( note the earlier discussion of Miller & Johnson - Laird , 1976 ) . Rumelhart ( 1980 ) made a related analogy in describing his theory of knowledge representation . Sche - mata , he suggested , are like theories in that they embody expectations of what things co - occur and how properties are related ( pp . 37 - 38 ) . Unfortunately , the actual schemata he presented are not rich enough to express people ' s knowledge about those relations and co - occurrences . For example , the schema for buy includes agents , an object being sold , the transfer of money , and so forth , which ex - presses a simple theory about financial trans - actions . However , people ' s full understanding of buying events includes information about the motives and desires of the seller and buyer , expectations about the relation between the money and the purchase ( that they should be of near - equivalent worth ) , and a number of legal and cultural requirements . Our intent here is not to criticize Rumelhart ' s represen - tations : It is possible that a complete sche - matic representation could contain all the necessary theoretical knowledge , especially when the relations among various schemata are included . Our point is that the full knowl - edge people have about concepts goes beyond that normally given in such discussions . In memory research , the shift from em - phasis on memory traces ( the Ebbinghaus tradition ) to processes of memory construc - tion and reconstruction ( the Bartlett tradition ) has been well documented . Whereas early memory researchers investigated the passive laying down and decay of traces , more recent investigators have posited active encoding and reconstructive processes ( Bransford , Barclay , & Franks , 1972 ; Cofer , 1973 ; Jenkins , 1974 ) . These processes are based on the relation of the material to the rest of the knowledge base , rather than on abstract learning rules . In the area of judgment and inferences , A . Tversky and Kahneman ( 1980 ) considered the specific place of causal knowledge in decision making , implicating it in a number of judgment situations . Other work suggested that people give great weight to their theories about people and the world relative to s ' tatis - tical evidence ( see Nisbett & Ross , 1981 ; Wright & Murphy , 1984 , for reviews ) . In particular , abstract rules of judgment and decision making ( e . g . , Bayes ' s theorem or Luce ' s choice axiom ) apparently do not char - acterize people ' s decisions . Although this field has engendered much controversy ( e . g . , L . J . Cohen , 1981 ) , it seems clear that people use specific theories of the world , sometimes in - appropriately , to make predictions and deci - sions . In the area of language comprehension , people ' s use of theoretical knowledge has been reflected in two ways . First , there has been increasing interest in people ' s theories of communication itself ( although this factor is not usually described in this way ) . Grice ( 1975 ) first pointed out that speakers and hearers use their beliefs about the purposes of a conversation in order to make and understand implications . H . Clark and Carl - son ( 1982 ) and H . Clark and Murphy ( 1982 ) discussed how listeners and readers use their beliefs about the purposes and methods of communication to understand reference and various aspects of meaning . In essence , these discussions have dealt with how implicit the - ories of communication come into play in everyday language use ( we have already men - tioned that they may affect the listing of concept attributes ) . Second , psycholinguists have begun to emphasize how people ' s knowledge of the discourse topic allows them to fully understand the discourse . In this case , people use their theories about the domain being discussed to rule out anomalous inter - pretations and to resolve ambiguities and vagaries . Simple models of lexical decompo - sition and inference no longer seem adequate to the task of explaining the range and depth of language understanding—see Collins , Brown , and Larkin ( 1980 ) , Johnson - Laird ( 1981 ) , Rumelhart ( 1981 ) , and Schank and Abelson ( 1977 ) . Finally , the area of problem - solving has embraced the notion of mental models in people ' s reasoning about complex systems ( see articles in Centner & Stevens , 1983 ) . Content - free reasoning strategies such as means - ends analysis or logical deduction seem unable to account for the relative difficulty 308 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN of different problems or for individual differ - ences . Instead , investigators have suggested that subjects form a simplified mental model of a system and simulate its behavior in order to make a prediction or evaluation . Clearly , the subject ' s theory about the system and the domain it operates in will greatly determine his or her problem solution . Furthermore , concepts in the domain are determined to a great extent by the whole model in which they operate . Although the psychological domains we have discussed are disparate , there is a clear theme running through them . In each case , a simple model based on invariant principles of organization or process has been found too inflexible to account for human abilities . People appear to use content - specific knowl - edge or theories to process information and to represent new knowledge . The importance of these constructive , knowledge - based pro - cesses appears to be well established for these fields . It is interesting to note that procedural approaches to categorization from artificial intelligence have sometimes depended on the - ory - like structures . For example , the sorting algorithm that seems to best capture people ' s free sorting of entities into categories is not an exclusively bottom - up processor ( Michal - ski , 1983 ; Michalski , Stepp , & Diday , 1981 ) . Rather , the basic procedure of Michalski ' s program operates on the level of descriptions of clusters and aims to maximize criteria having to do with what represents a good description . These criteria include such factors as simplicity , the fit between descriptions and the entities , and a bias for conjunctive de - scriptions . Therefore , a good description can be thought of as having the character of a good theory ( the former is a consequence of the latter ) . Philosophy of science has long considered the question of whether concepts are integrally bound up with theories . Unfortunately , there is little agreement on the answer , with opin - ions ranging across the extremes . Philosophers such as Kuhn and Feyerabend argued that scientists with different theories about a do - main must have different concepts in the domain , even if their concepts have the same names . For example , physicists who held the wave theory of light had concepts of light , color , and the like that differed from those of physicists who held the particle theory . Other philosophers have downplayed this possibility or have argued that any such conceptual differences are usually insignificant ; Suppe ( 1977 ) provides a complete discussion of both sides . Although this issue remains controver - sial , it does seem clear that present - day sci - entific concepts are quite different from past understanding of the same concepts as a result of new theories and knowledge . Current work in philosophy of science focuses on the boundaries of such conceptual differences . Conceptual Development The study of children ' s concepts and se - mantic development may be a crucial area for showing the importance of theories in conceptual structure . Not only do children lack words for many of the entities , events , and situations that adults have words for , they may have quite different theories about how those entities , events , and situations are related . Although there is still no consensus on children ' s cognitive and linguistic repre - sentations , we believe that some of the ac - cepted findings speak to the issues we have raised . The most influential theory of semantic development in recent years has been Eve Clark ' s Semantic Feature Hypothesis ( E . Clark , 1973a , 1973b ; Richards , 1979 ) . Fol - lowing accepted linguistic analyses , Clark used sets of components or features as semantic representations . She suggested that children ' s first semantic representations of a word are a subset of the adult features ( although oc - casionally completely incorrect features will sneak in ) and that development consists pri - marily of adding features as they are learned . The Semantic Feature Hypothesis successfully described much of the data , including the order of acquisition of words in many do - mains and common naming errors ( see E . Clark , 1973a , 1973b , 1983 ) . For a variety of reasons , this theory is no longer widely accepted in its original form ( see Carey , 1982 ; E . Clark , 1983 ; Richards , 1979 ) , a trend that is consistent with our previous arguments about the insufficiency of feature - based models of concepts . It is not our purpose to review the literature in se - CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 309 mantic development here , but we would like to highlight the studies that shed light on how theories might influence conceptual de - velopment and that contrast with the featural view . One of the first studies was E . Clark ' s ( 1973b ) demonstration of nonlinguistic " biases . " Previous data had suggested that children learned locative prepositions in the order , in , on , under . For some time , they treated under as if it meant in or on . One explanation for these data was that all three words had the same semantic representation at first , and that with increasing experience , children added features to differentiate them . However , Clark showed that children had biases about spatial arrangements that influenced their performance in comprehension tasks . That is , if told , " Put the block under the crib , " they might put it in the crib instead , because of their knowledge of usual spatial relations . In fact , they made the same error even when imitating nonverbal actions . Clark suggested that the youngest children tested ( about 21 months old ) know only that in , on and under are spatial terms and that they use spatial strategies to respond to those words . Children depend on their knowledge of supporting surfaces and containers , and the usual ori - entation of objects to interpret utterances with locative prepositions ( see also H . Clark , 1973 ) . In a sense , they are depending on implicit theories of spatial relations to under - stand and learn new words . Semantic devel - opment , therefore , consists of coordinating one ' s conceptual knowledge with the conven - tions of word use . As E . Clark ( 1973b ) re - marked , in this view it becomes very difficult to determine when a child knows the correct meaning of a word : One must try to access linguistic knowledge separately from the con - ceptual basis , which may be impossible in practice . Carey ( 1982 ) also provided a critique of the notion of feature accretion as an expla - nation of semantic development . The acqui - sition of spatial adjectives like big , little , tall , short , thick , and thin had been taken to be evidence for the Semantic Feature Hypothesis : Big - little were analyzed as having relatively few semantic components , tall - short as having additional features specifying orientation , and thick - thin as having yet more features ( see below ) . The order of acquisition followed this analysis . Carey , however , argued that the dif - ficulty of learning thick - thin was not the mere number of features it contains , but rather that it requires attending to " theory - laden " features specifying that the dimension being referred to is " tertiary . " In order to resolve the meaning of these terms , Carey claimed that children must learn the complex spatial system we use in our culture to assign such spatial adjectives , and that this system is not part of their beginning theories about the world . Presumably , the learning of this spatial system goes hand in hand with learning the language . We would add that the child must also have extensive background knowl - edge about individual objects in order to determine their primary and tertiary dimen - sions . This knowledge is necessary to interpret the use of thick when applied to objects as diverse as doors , lines drawn on a page , people , and bicycle tires . Keil and Carroll ( 1980 ) provided a dem - onstration that children do not represent spatial terms as abstract features , but that their understanding of them was inextricably bound up in their knowledge of the world . They demonstrated that children ' s willingness to describe something as tall depended on what they believed they were naming . A child might be able to pick out the tallest of a trio of mountains , but not the tallest of a trio of blanket piles—even though the same picture was used for both . Keil and Carroll proposed that the children had not yet extracted the abstract meaning of tall , but they did know some things that tall is used to describe ( e . g . , people , houses , mountains ) . Until they learn the full meaning , they depend on some prim - itive theory of what tall things are like . The work of Ellen Markman and her col - leagues ( see Markman & Callanan , 1984 ) is also suggestive in this context . It is known that young children have difficulty learning and using superordinate concepts ( Horton & Markman , 1980 ; Mervis & Crisafi , 1982 ; Rosch et al . , 1976 ) , which is not surprising , given their loose structure . Presumably , it is difficult for children to infer the functional relationship that often characterizes super - ordinates ( furniture , tool , vehicle , weapon , etc . ) . Callanan & Markman ( 1982 ) suggested that 2 - and 3 - year - old children understand 310 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN superordinates not as classes , but as collec - tions of objects . That is , rather than thinking of furniture as a name that applies to individ - ual objects , they think of it as a name for a group or configuration of a number of objects . They may believe that furniture refers to an arrangement of chairs and couches around a table in the living room . However , children do not seem to have the same problem with most basic concepts , which are much more perceptually based ( Callanan & Markman , 1982 ) . These results are consistent with the inter - pretation that children cannot simply mem - orize that couches , chairs , tables , and bureaus are all furniture —they seem to need an ex - planation for this grouping , which might otherwise be incoherent . For them , the most reasonable explanation may be a spatial con - figuration rather than the more abstract func - tional explanation that adults use . If this is true , then it demonstrates the importance of underlying relationships in learning concepts . ( See Gentner , 1983 , for a similar claim con - cerning analogical transfer . ) Finally , in considering children ' s errors in learning noun and verb meanings , Carey ( 1982 ) argued that children ' s problems arise not from faulty linguistic abilities , but rather from an impoverished conceptual structure . For example , to fully understand a word like buy may require a sophisticated understanding of monetary exchange . But children may interpret buy merely as " get at a store . " More generally , The components revealed by semantic analyses of the adult lexicon cannot be expected to be the primitives over which the child forms his hypotheses about the meanings of words . Often those components are theoretical terms in theories the child has not yet encountered , and they therefore require theory building on his part before they are available to his conceptual system . ( Carey , 1982 , p . 374 ) Of course , the relation cuts both ways : An impoverished conceptual structure might prevent someone from learning a word fully , but in other cases , language learning influ - ences the conceptual structure . A child may learn about monetary exchanges through learning the meaning of buy and sell rather than through direct experience or lessons in economics . As the child learns about the distinction between buy , sell , trade , give , and so forth , he or she learns complex concepts that are central to understanding society . In her own studies of biological concepts ( as described in Carey , 1982 ) , Carey followed the development of concepts like animal and living thing . She attempted to empirically test Quine ' s theory that an innate similarity metric is replaced by a scientific metric as the basis of concepts . She did find some evidence for such a shift ; children first orga - nize properties of animals around their ap - plicability to humans , but later develop a more systematic organization based on bio - logical functions . However , even the youngest children ( 4 years old ) showed some use of biological knowledge in their categorizations . Adults and children both rated a toy monkey as being more similar to people than a worm was . However , adults and children also agreed that the worm was more likely to have a spleen than was the toy monkey ( a spleen was described as " a green thing inside peo - ple " ) . Apparently , even the youngest children differentiated surface similarity from category membership . Although worms may be less similar to people than are toy monkeys , they are more similar in some respects , namely , common biological functions . Carey ' s results demonstrate that it is those respects that determine category membership , rather than similarity as a whole . As Carey ( 1982 , p . 386 ) put it , " The child ' s rudimentary biolog - ical knowledge influences the structure of his concept animal in several ways , even for children as young as 4 . To that extent , animal functions as a natural kind concept by Quine ' s characterization . " A crucial question that arises in considering theories in conceptual development is when they make their first appearance . One might argue that children form their first concepts through perceptual similarity ; then , as they learn more about the world , they incorporate knowledge into their concepts , where it has increasing importance . On this view , the sim - ilarity - based accounts of coherence are correct for early concepts , at least , to the extent that we can ascertain built - in constraints on the perception of similarity . The question , then , is just when theories begin to have an effect . Our view is that theories are important very early : E . Clark ' s ( 1973b ) results showed that children under 2 years old demonstrated a CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 311 variety of spatial biases . Other researchers have found that very young children can distinguish the sorts of objects that receive proper names from those that do not , pre - sumably reflecting a theory of individuality ( Gelman & Taylor , 1984 ; Katz , Baker , & Macnamara , 1974 ) . As we argued earlier , these biases and preconceptions may be bio - logically determined to some extent through perceptual and cognitive structures ( see H . Clark , 1973 ; Keil , 1981 ) . Although young children may not have scientific theories or sophisticated schemata , they may well use their understanding of their world , or proto - theories , in forming concepts ( see Karmiloff - Smith & Inhelder , 1974 / 1975 , for more direct evidence ) . Rather than a shift from similarity - based concepts to more theoretically - based concepts , perhaps all concepts are integrated with theories , but children ' s theories change radically . Some studies of infants ' categories have shown prototype structures in children a few months old ( e . g . , L . B . Cohen & Younger , 1983 ) . The age of the children and the struc - ture of the stimuli leave little doubt that the infants are forming concepts based on per - ceptual similarity . However , as we have al - ready noted , similarity itself is not an unan - alyzable relation , and perceived similarity also changes with development ( see Kemler , 1982 ) . It is certainly possible that children ' s prototheories of the functions , relations , and importance of objects have effects quite early . Exactly when they do is an empirical question , one that we hope will get some attention . The Classical Theory of Concepts A major bone of contention in the theory of concepts has been the question of whether concepts can be specified by necessary and sufficient features . Wittgenstein ( 1953 ) sparked the debate among philosophers , which continues today among psychologists and lin - guists as well . Although this classical theory appeared to be dead ( see , e . g . , Smith & Medin , 1981 ) , a number of hybrid theories have arisen . Osherson and Smith ( 1981 ) , for example , suggested that the conceptual core is all or none , and that prototypes and other nonessential information about a concept are used mainly for identification , but are not strictly part of the concept . McNamara and Steinberg ( 1983 ) argued for a mixed theory , in which concepts are represented by both defining ( necessary and sufficient ) and char - acteristic features . We do not mean to resolve the philosoph - ical issues here . Regardless of one ' s theory of concepts , it is a fact that most people believe that there are necessary and sufficient features that define concepts . McNamara and Stern - berg ( 1983 ) documented this fact convinc - ingly , and informal questioning reveals that naive subjects are loathe to admit that there are no truly defining features , even when they cannot produce any ( Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ) . Armstrong , Gleitman , and Gleitman ( 1983 ) asked subjects whether they thought certain categories were all or none or had graded membership . For their natural cate - gories , the percentage of subjects who re - sponded " all or none " ranged from 24 % ( for vehicle ) to 71 % ( for sport ) . People apparently have a strongly held belief that there are defining attributes for categories , in spite of the failure of psychologists , linguists , and philosophers to find any . ( Suggestions for necessary features have been made , but these never seem to define the concept sufficiently ; e . g . , perhaps all trips involve motion , but this does not separate them from innumerable other events . ) What we will try to explain is , where do these beliefs come from ? A natural prediction from our previous discussion is that naive theories in a domain suggest that certain features are " defining . " We have already claimed that theoretical and conceptual knowledge are closely intertwined . Perhaps , then , the reason that people believe in a necessary basis for their concepts is that much of their knowledge of the world depends on correctly differentiating things into cate - gories . Suggesting that concepts are ill - defined or fuzzy might cast doubt on much of one ' s knowledge . However , not all features are perceived as defining ; " defining " features , on our account , are those that are most central to our under - standing of the world . In Fillmore ' s ( 1982 ) terms , those features that are most integrally involved with our idealized cognitive models will appear to be defining . For example , if it turned out that carrots weren ' t made of cells , then we would have to reconsider most of 312 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN our other beliefs about carrots as well as about plants in general ( for example , our theories of plant growth ) . Or if it turned out that some diamonds are really quite soft , then we would have to re - explain our past experiences with diamonds ( or things we believed to be diamonds ) , the numerous claims people make about diamond hardness , our beliefs about diamond formation , and anything we might have known about crystal structures . Thus , being made of cells for carrots might be considered a denning feature , as might hardness for diamonds , because these features are so closely tied to other information about those categories . If some of our characteristic features turned out to be wrong , a much smaller change in the knowledge base would be required . For example , if carrots weren ' t really orange , one could just assume they have been systemati - cally dyed by unscrupulous grocers or farmers . This new information would probably not affect our concepts of plant life in general . If diamonds weren ' t really found in below - ground mines , none of the knowledge men - tioned above would need to be reconsidered . One could assume that jewelers or diamond suppliers had lied in order to protect their market . In short , defining features are those at the meeting point of much of our knowl - edge . 8 Characteristic features are those toward the periphery of our knowledge base . More precisely , when a feature is involved in many causal links , rules , or scripts , it is perceived as " more denning " than a feature that is involved in few of them . The features at either end of the spectrum appear to be clearly denning or characteristic ; those in the middle ( involved in a moderate number of theoretical links ) are the ones that cause arguments . It is important here to separate the psy - chological question of denning and charac - teristic features from the philosophical - se - mantic issue . We think that , on reflection , most people would agree that it might be possible to find ( or make ) a soft diamond . Therefore , hardness is in some sense only a characteristic feature . Yet McNamara and Sternberg ( 1983 ) found that people say that being the hardest substance known is neces - sary for being a diamond . It seems likely that when people list such defining features , they are answering the question of which attributes are most central to their concepts , rather than which include all ( potential ) members and exclude all nonmembers . ( An examina - tion of other features given by McNamara & Sternberg ' s subjects reinforces this view . ) Even if no feature is truly denning in a semantic - theoretical sense , people may put great weight on those that are tied up with much of their knowledge . Conclusion We have been arguing that people ' s theories and knowledge of the real world play a major role in conceptual coherence . This tendency to relate concepts and theories may be such that people impose more structure on con - cepts than simple similarity would seem to license . Consider again the abominations of Leviti - cus , in which the animals that are clean and unclean for the people of Israel are listed in great detail . Over the years there have been many speculations concerning what properties of animals gave rise to their being listed as clean or unclean , as the overall similarity of the animals in each group is so low . To our minds , the most cogent speculation concern - ing this classification rule , developed in Mary Douglas ' s ( 1966 ) intriguing book , Purity and Danger , is that there should be a correlation between type of habitat , biological structure , and form of locomotion . Creatures of the water should have fins and scales , and swim ; creatures of the land should have four legs and jump or walk ; and creatures of the air should fly with feathered wings . Any class of 8 Quine ( 1961 ) used a similar line of reasoning to argue against the existence of analytic truths , that is , statements that are necessarily true by virtue of the language . A prime candidate for such analytic truths has been to ascribe denning features to a concept , like " carrots are made of cells . " Quine ( 1961 , p . 43 ) pointed out that virtually any feature can be taken away from a category ( e . g . , hardness could be taken away from dia - monds ) , but when some features are removed , a global reorganization of one ' s knowledge base is necessary . The larger this reorganization , the more analytic ( denning ) the feature is . Thus , he argued for a continuum of analytic to synthetic truths rather than a dichotomy . This philosophical argument parallels our psychological argu - ment for why people perceive some features to be denning , although the two issues are potentially independent . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 313 creature not equipped for the right kind of locomotion in its element is unclean . For example , ostriches would be unclean because they do not fly . Crocodiles are unclean be - cause their front appendages look like hands , and yet they walk on all fours . If this analysis is correct , then there was a theory of appro - priate physiological structure associated with each type of environment , and any animal that did not meet its standards was unclean . The category dean animals , then , comprises a coherent set of entities , even though the overall similarity of the members is very low . Although most categories probably have a better similarity structure than these examples , the point is clear that theories can impose coherence even when similarity is low . 9 We think that there are two components to conceptual coherence . The first component involves the internal structure of a particular conceptual domain ( see Table 2 ) . Concepts that have their features connected by struc - ture - function relationships or by causal sche - mata of one sort or another will be more coherent than those that do not . Although these correlations may be strictly empirical , in most cases they will be driven by expec - tations and hypotheses . In this way , the con - cept is integrated with the rest of the knowl - edge base . Other properties such as high within - category similarity and low between - category similarity may be by - products of this internal structure . The second component of coherence has to do with the position of the concept in the complete knowledge base , rather than its internal structure ( see Table 2 ) . This com - ponent is the question of how the concept fits into " the cosmic machine revealed by science " ( Quine , 1977 , p . 171 ) —or , more accurately , the cosmic machine represented in people ' s heads . Concepts that have no interaction with the rest of the knowledge base will be unstable and probably soon forgotten . This component is also important in the formation of new concepts . One objection to the theory - based approach that might be raised is that it is circular . How can mental theories explain concepts , the objection goes , when theories themselves are made out of concepts ? The answer is that we are not attempting to reduce issues of con - ceptual representation to theoretical repre - sentation . On the contrary , we believe that the influence is bidirectional—one cannot talk about theories or knowledge representa - tion in a domain without specifying the con - cepts people have in the domain . ( In fact , research on people ' s naive theories has typi - cally included discussion of their relevant concepts ; see Centner & Stevens , 1983 . ) Con - cepts and theories must live in harmony in the same mental space ; they therefore con - strain each other both in content and in representational format . Our point is that these constraints will provide insight into the structure of both areas , not that one can be replaced by the other . We agree that theories are made up of concepts ( to a great extent ) and urge that this fact be employed in our theories of concepts . In our criticism of similarity as the sole basis of conceptual coherence , we pointed out that similarity needs to be greatly con - strained before it makes any predictions . However , we should point out that the notion of a good theory is not yet fully constrained : We gave some idea in Tables 1 and 2 of what constitutes a good theory , but there is clearly more work to be done here . In fact , the point of this article is not to provide a complete account of the use of theories in conceptual structure , but is rather to demonstrate that theories are indeed important and to encour - age future research to detail exactly how they are involved in concept formation and use . We do not wish to suggest that previous studies on novel concepts that are divorced from real - world knowledge have no worth , nor that future such studies will be of little interest . These studies have provided the basis for our own theorizing , and they represent a necessary technique for studying conceptual structure . Our main point is that these studies and associated categorization theories relying exclusively on similarity relations are insuf - ficient to provide a theory of concepts . We have argued that a coherent concept is one that we have a good theory about and that fits well with our other knowledge . This ap - 9 We are guilty of oversimplifying here . No doubt the conceptual scheme associated with the division of clean and unclean animals is more elaborated and more inter - twined with the culture that gave rise to these concepts than this example implies . 314 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN proach raises a number of empirical ques - tions , many of them related to the question of how concepts are initially acquired and how expertise in a domain affects the concepts of that domain . The exact details of how theories affect internal and external concep - tual structure have yet to be specified . Future research on concepts and categories can help answer these questions not by controlling the effects of world knowledge and experience , but by exploiting them—by bringing the con - cepts into contact with the whole cognitive system that created them . References Achinstein , P . ( 1968 ) . Concepts of science . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins Press . Adams , V . ( 1973 ) . An introduction to modem English vtord - formation . London : Longman . Adelman , L . ( 1981 ) . The influence of formal , substantive , and contextual task properties on the relative effective - ness of different forms of feedback in multiple - cue probability learning tasks . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 27 , 423 - 442 . Armstrong , S . L . , Gleitman , L . R . , & Gleitman , H . ( 1983 ) . What some concepts might not be . Cognition , 13 . 263 - 308 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1982 ) . Context - independent and context - dependent information in concepts . Memory & Cog - nition , 10 . 82 - 93 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1983 ) . Ad hoc categories . Memory & Cognition , 11 , 211 - 227 . Barsalou , L . W . ( in press ) . Determinants of graded structure in categories Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition . Barsalou , L . W . , & Bower , G . H . ( 1983 ) . A priori deter - minants of a concept ' s highly accessible information . Unpublished manuscript , Emory University . Berlin , B . , Breedlove , D . E . , & Raven , P . H . ( 1973 ) . General principles of classification and nomenclature in folk biology . American Anthropologist , 75 , 214 - 242 . Bower , G . H . , & Masling , M . ( 1978 ) . Causal explanations as mediators for remembering correlations . Unpublished manuscript , Stanford University , Psychology Depart - ment . Bransford , i . D . , Barclay , } . R . , & Franks , J . ] . ( 1972 ) . Sentence meaning : A constructive versus interpretive approach . Cognitive Psychology , S , 193 - 209 . Buhner , R . ( 1967 ) . Why is the cassowary not a bird ? A problem of zoological taxonomy among the Karam of the New Guinea Highlands . Man , 2 , 5 - 25 . Callanan , M . A . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1982 ) . Principles of organization in young children ' s natural language hierarchies . Child Development , 53 , 1093 - 1101 . Camerer , C . F . ( 1981 ) . The validity and utility of expert judgment . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Chicago . Carey , S . ( 1982 ) . Semantic development : The state of the art . In E . Wanner & L . R . Gleitman ( Eds . ) , Language acquisition : The state of the art ( pp . 347 - 389 ) . Cam - bridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Chapman , L . J . , & Chapman , J . P . ( 1967 ) . Genesis of popular but erroneous diagnostic observations . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 72 , 193 - 204 . Chapman , L . J . , & Chapman , J . P . ( 1969 ) . Illusory correlation as an obstacle to the use of valid psycho - diagnostic signs . Journal of Abnormal Psychology , 74 , 272 - 280 . Chi , M . T , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Cate - gorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 - 152 . Clark , E . V . ( 1973a ) . What ' s in a word ? On the child ' s acquisition of semantics in his first language . In T . E . Moore ( Ed . ) , Cognitive development and the acquisition of language ( pp . 65 - 110 ) . New York : Academic Press . Clark , E . V . ( 1973b ) . Non - linguistic strategies and the acquisition of word meanings . Cognition , 2 , 161 - 182 . Clark , E . V . ( 1983 ) . Meanings and concepts . In J . H . Flavell & E . M . Markman ( Eds . ) , Manual of child psychology : Cognitive development ( Vol . 3 , pp . 787 - 840 ) . New York : Wiley . Clark , E . V . , & Clark , H . H . ( 1979 ) . When nouns surface as verbs . Language , 55 , 767 - 811 . Clark , H . H . ( 1973 ) . Space , time , semantics and the child . In T . E . Moore ( Ed . ) , Cognitive development and the acquisition of language ( pp . 28 - 63 ) . New York : Academic Press . Clark , H . H . , & Carlson , T . B . ( 1982 ) . Speech acts and hearers ' beliefs . In N . V . Smith ( Ed . ) , Mutual knowledge ( pp . 1 - 36 ) . London : Academic Press . Clark , H . H . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1982 ) . Audience design in meaning and reference . In J . - F . LeNy & W . Kintsch ( Eds . ) , Language and comprehension ( pp . 287 - 299 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Cofer , C . N . ( 1973 ) . Constructive processes in memory . American Scientist , 61 , 537 - 543 . Cohen , B . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1984 ) . Models of concepts . Cognitive Science . 8 , 27 - 58 . Cohen , L . B . , & Younger , B . A . ( 1983 ) . Perceptual categorization in the infant . In E . K . Scholwick ( Ed . ) , New trends in conceptual representation : Challenges to Piaget ' s theory ? ( yp . 197 - 220 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Cohen , L . J . ( 1981 ) . Can human irrationality be experi - mentally demonstrated ? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 4 , 317 - 370 . Cole , M . , & Scribner , S . ( 1974 ) . Culture and thought . New York : Wiley . Collins , A . ( 1978 ) . Fragments of a theory of human plausible reasoning . In D . Waltz ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the conference on Theoretical Issues in Natural Lan - guage Processing II ( pp . 194 - 201 ) . Urbana : University of Illinois Press . Collins , A . , Brown , J . S . , & Larkin , K . M . ( 1980 ) . Inferences in text understanding . In R . J . Spiro , B . C . Bruce , & W . F . Brewer ( Eds . ) , Theoretical issues in reading comprehension ( pp . 385 - 407 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Crocker , J . ( 1981 ) . Judgment of covariation by social perceivers . Psychological Bulletin , 90 , 272 - 292 . Day , J . C , & Bellezza , F . S . ( 1983 ) . The relation between visual imagery mediators and recall . Memory & Cog - nition , 11 , 251 - 257 . Dougherty , J . W . D . ( 1978 ) . Salience and relativity in classification . American Ethnologist , 5 , 66 - 80 . CONCEPTUAL COHERENCE 315 Douglas , M . ( 1966 ) . Purity and danger . London : Routledge & Regan Paul . Fillmore , C . ( 1982 ) . Towards a descriptive framework for spatial deixis . In R . J . Jarvella & W . Klein ( Eds . ) , Speech , place and action : Studies in deixis and related topics ( pp . 31 - 59 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . Oelman , S . A . , & Taylor , M . ( 1984 ) . How two - year - old children interpret proper and common names for unfamiliar objects . Chilli Development , 55 , 1535 - 1540 . Centner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 - 170 . Centner , D . , & Stevens , A . L . ( Eds . ) . ( 1983 ) . Mental models . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Geoghegan , W . H . ( 1976 ) . Polytypy in folk biological taxonomies . American Ethnologist , 3 , 469 - 480 . Goodman , N . ( 1972 ) . Seven strictures on similarity . In N . Goodman , Problems and projects ( pp . 437 - 447 ) . Indianapolis : Bobbs - Merrill . Grice , H . P . ( 1975 ) . Logic and conversation . In P . Cole & J . L . Morgan ( Eds . ) , Syntax and semantics . Vol . 1 : Speech acts ( pp . 41 - 58 ) . New York : Academic Press . Hampton , J . A . ( 1981 ) . An investigation of the nature of abstract concepts . Memory & Cognition , 9 , 149 - 156 . Horton , M . S . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1980 ) . Developmental differences in the acquisition of basic and superordinate categories . Child Development , 51 , 708 - 719 . Jenkins , J . J . ( 1974 ) . Remember that old theory of memory ? Well , forget it ! American Psvchologisl , 29 , 785 - 795 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1981 ) . Mental models of meaning . In A . K . Joshi , B . L . Webber , & I . A . Sag ( Eds . ) , Elements of discourse understanding ( pp . 106 - 126 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge University Press . Jones , G . V . ( 1983 ) . Identifying basic categories . Psycho - logical Bulletin . 94 , 423 - 428 . Karmiloff - Smith , A . , & Inhelder , B . ( 1974 / 1975 ) . If you want to get ahead , get a theory . Cognition , 3 , 195 - 212 . Katz , N . , Baker , E . , & Macnamara , J . ( 1974 ) . What ' s in a name ? A study of how children learn common and proper names . Child Development . 45 , 469 - 473 . Kay , P . , & Zimmer , K . ( 1976 ) . On the semantics of compounds and genitives in English . Sixth California Linguistics Association Proceedings ( pp . 29 - 35 ) . San Diego : Campile Press . Keil , E C . ( 1981 ) . Constraints on knowledge and cognitive development . Psychological Review , 88 , 197 - 227 . Keil , F . C , & Carroll , J . J . ( 1980 ) . The child ' s conception of " tall " : Implications for an alternative view of se - mantic development . Papers and Reports on Child Language Development , 19 . 21 - 28 . Kelter , S . , Grotzbach , H . , Freiheit , R . , Hohle , B . , Wutzig , S . , & Diesch , E . ( 1984 ) . Object identification : The mental representation of physical and conceptual at - tributes . Memory & Cognition , 12 , 123 - 133 . Kemler , D . G . ( 1982 ) . Classification in young and retarded children : The primacy of overall similarity relations . Child Development , 53 , 768 - 779 . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1962 ) . The structure of scientific revolutions . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lakoff , G . ( 1982 ) . Categories and cognitive models ( Cog - nitive Science Rep . No . 2 ) . Berkeley : University of California , Cognitive Science Program . Luria , A . R . ( 1976 ) . Cognitive development : Its cultural and social foundations . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Uni - versity Press . Malt , B . C . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1984 ) . Correlated properties in natural categories . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 23 , 250 - 269 . Markman , E . M . , & Callanan , M . A . ( 1984 ) . An analysis of hierarchical classification . In R . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( Vol . 2 , pp . 345 - 365 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . McNamara , T . P . , & Steinberg , R . ( 1983 ) . Mental models of word meaning . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 22 . 449 - 474 . Medin , D . L . ( 1983 ) . Structural principles in categori - zation . In T . J . Tighe & B . E . Shepp ( Eds . ) , Perception , cognition , and development : Interactional analyses ( pp . 203 - 230 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Medin , D . L . , Altom , M . W . , Edelson , S . M . , & Freko , D . ( 1982 ) . Correlated symptoms and simulated medical classification . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 8 , 37 - 50 . Medin , D . L . , & Schaffer , M . M . ( 1978 ) . Context theory of classification learning . Psychological Review , 85 , 207 - 238 . Medin , D . L . , & Schwanenflugel , P . L . ( 1981 ) . Linear separability in classification learning . Journal of Ex - perimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 7 , 355 - 368 . Medin , D . L . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1984 ) . Concepts and concept formation . Annual Review of Psychology , 35 , 113 - 138 . Mervis , C . B . , & Crisafi , M . A . ( 1982 ) . Order of acquisition of subordinate , basic , and superordinate level categories . Child Development , 53 , 258 - 266 . Mervis , C . B . , & Rosen , E . ( 1981 ) . Categorization of natural objects . Annual Review of Psychology , 32 , 89 - 115 . Michalski , R . S . ( 1983 ) . A theory and methodology of inductive learning . Artificial Intelligence , 20 , 111 - 161 . Michalski , R . S . , Stepp , R . E . , & Diday , E . ( 1981 ) . A recent advance in data analysis : Clustering objects into classes characterized by conjunctive concepts . In L . Ranal & A . Rosenfeld ( Eds . ) , Progress in pattern recognition ( Vol . 1 , pp . 33 - 55 ) . Amsterdam : North - Holland . Mill , J . S . ( 1965 ) . On the logic of the moral sciences . New York : Bobbs - Merrill . ( Originally published 1843 ) Miller , G . A . , & Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1976 ) . Language and perception . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Miller , P . McC . ( 1971 ) . Do labels mislead ? A multiple - cue study within the framework of Brunswik ' s proba - bilistic functionalism . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 6 , 480 - 500 . Mohr , R . D . ( 1977 ) . Family resemblance , platonism , universals . Canadian Journal of Philosophy , 7 , 593 - 600 . Muchinsky , P . M . , & Dudycha , A . L . ( 1974 ) . The influence of a suppressor variable and labeled stimuli on multiple cue probability learning . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 12 , 429 - 444 . Murphy , G . L . ( 1982a ) . Cue validity and levels of cate - gorization . Psychological Bulletin , 91 , 174 - 177 . Murphy , G . L . ( 1982b ) . Note on measures of category structure . Unpublished manuscript , Brown University , Psychology Department . 316 GREGORY L . MURPHY AND DOUGLAS L . MEDIN Murphy , G . L . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1982 ) . Basic - level supe - riority in picture categorization . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 21 , 1 - 20 . Murphy , G . L . , & Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1985 ) . Feature correlations in conceptual representations . Unpublished manuscript , Brown University , Department of Psy - chology . Murphy , G . L . , & Wright , J . C . ( 1984 ) . Changes in conceptual structure with expertise : Differences between real - world experts and novices . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 10 , 144 - 155 . Nisbett , R . , & Ross , L . ( 1980 ) . Human inference : Strat - egies and shortcomings of social judgment . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Ortony , A . , Vondruska , R . J . , Jones , L . E . , & Foss , M . A . ( 1984 ) . Salience , similes , and the asymmetry of similarity . Unpublished manuscript , University of Illi - nois , Department of Psychology . Osherson , D . N . , & Smith , E . E . ( 1981 ) . On the adequacy of prototype theory as a theory of concepts . Cognition , 9 , 35 - 58 . Quine , W . V . O ( 1961 ) . Two dogmas of empiricism . In W . V . O . Quine , From a logical point of view ( 2nd ed . , pp . 20 - 46 ) . New York : Harper & Row . Quine , W . V . O . ( 1977 ) . Natural kinds . In S . P . Schwartz ( Ed . ) , Naming , necessity , and natural kinds ( pp . 155 - 175 ) . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Richards , M . M . ( 1979 ) . Sorting out what ' s in a word from what ' s not : Evaluating Clark ' s semantic features acquisition theory . Journal of Experimental Child Psy - chology , 27 , 1 - 47 . Rosen , E . ( 1978 ) . Principles of categorization . In E . Rosch & B . B . Lloyd ( Eds . ) , Cognition and categori - zation ( pp . 27 - 48 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Rosch , E . , & Mervis , C . B . ( 1975 ) . Family resemblances : Studies in the internal structure of categories . Cognitive Psychology , 7 , 573 - 605 . Rosch , E . , Mervis , C . B . , Gray , W . D . , Johnson , D . M . , & Boyes - Braem , P . ( 1976 ) . Basic objects in natural categories . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 382 - 439 . Roth , E . M . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1983 ) . The effect of context on the structure of categories . Cognitive Psy - chology , IS , 346 - 378 . Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1980 ) . Schemata : The building blocks of cognition . In R . J . Spiro , B . C . Bruce , & W . F . Brewer ( Eds . ) , Theoretical issues in reading compre - hension ( pp . 33 - 58 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Rumelhart , D . E . ( 1981 ) . Understanding understanding ( CHIP Rep . No . 100 ) . San Diego : University of Cali - fornia , Center for Human Information Processing . Schank , R . C . , & Abelson , R . P . ( 1977 ) . Scripts , plans , goals and understanding : An inquiry into human knowledge structures . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Sebetsyen , G . S . ( 1962 ) . Decision - making processes in pattern recognition . New York : Macmillan . Shweder , R . A . , & Miller , J . G . ( in press ) . The social construction of the person : How is it possible ? In K . J . Gergen & K . Davis ( Eds . ) , The social construction of the person . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . Smith , E . E . , Adams , N . , & Schorr , D . ( 1978 ) . Fact retrieval and the paradox of interference . Cognitive Psychology , 10 , 438 - 464 . Smith , E . E . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1981 ) . Categories and concepts . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Suppe , F . ( 1977 ) . The search for philosophic understanding of scientific theories . In F . Suppe ( Ed . ) , The structure of scientific theories ( 2nd ed . , pp . 3 - 241 ) . Urbana : University of Illinois Press . Tambiah , S . J . ( 1969 ) . Animals are good to think and good to prohibit . Ethnology , S , 424 - 459 . Tversky , A . ( 1977 ) . Features of similarity . Psychological Review , 84 , 327 - 352 . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1980 ) . Causal schemas in judgments under uncertainty . In M . Fishbein ( Ed . ) , Progress in social psychology ( pp . 49 - 72 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Tversky , B . , & Hemenway , K . ( 1984 ) . Objects , parts , and categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Gen - eral , 113 , 169 - 193 . Ullman , S . ( 1979 ) . The interpretation of visual motion . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Wattenmaker , W . , Murphy , T . D . , Dewey , G . L , Edelson , S . E . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1984 ) . Linear separability , knowledge structures , and concept naturalness . Un - published manuscript , University of Illinois , Depart - ment of Psychology . Wittgenstein , L . ( 1953 ) . Philosophical investigations . New York : Macmillan . Wright , J . C . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1984 ) . The utility of theories in intuitive statistics : The robustness of theory - based judgments . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 113 , 301 - 322 . Younger , B . A . , & Cohen , L . B . ( 1984 ) . Infant perception of correlations among attributes . Child Development , 54 , 858 - 867 . / iff , P . ( 1972 ) . Understanding understanding . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Received March 28 , 1984 Revision received October 1 , 1984