Syracuse University SURFACE Center for Policy Research Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs 1997 The Changing Economic Circumstances of the Elderly : Income , Wealth , and Social Security James Follow this and additional works at : https : / / surface . syr . edu / cpr Part of the Geriatrics Commons This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at SURFACE . It has been accepted for inclusion in Center for Policy Research by an authorized administrator of SURFACE . For more information , please contact surface @ syr . edu . Recommended Citation James , " The Changing Economic Circumstances of the Elderly : Income , Wealth , and Social Security " ( 1997 ) . Center for Policy Research . 35 . https : / / surface . syr . edu / cpr / 35 S y r a c u se U n i v e r s it y Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs | Center for Policy Research Policy Brief D ISTINGUISHED L ECTURER IN A GING S ERIES The Changing Economic Circumstances of the Elderly : Income , Wealth , and Social Security James P . Smith No . 8 / 1997 1 The Changing Economic Circumstances of the Elderly : Income , Wealth , and Social Security James P . Smith How is the economic status of the elderly changing and what are their prospects for the future ? My portrait tells us how well off they are on average , but also about the vast disparities that exist among them . This description includes an often neglected measure of their economic well being—the amount of wealth they control . Amazingly little is known about how much personal wealth older people have and how and what determines its distribution . But the conventional definition of household wealth ignores two critical components of wealth : the expected income flows from pensions and Social Security . For some elderly households , Social Security represents the largest part of their wealth . I conclude with some thoughts on one of the most sensitive and critical public policy issues—the necessity of reforming Social Security . The Changing Economic Status of the Elderly This is one of the success stories of American public policy , and we should not be reluctant to tell it . Over the last three decades , the economic position of older Americans has improved dramatically and did so more rapidly than for any other age group . To illustrate this good news , Figure 1 provides poverty rates for the elderly population alongside the poverty rate for all Americans . In addition , it plots poverty rate for those at the other end of the life cycle—America’s children . When John Kennedy was elected President in 1960 , more than one in every three older Americans was poor . Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 2 Figure 1 . United States Poverty Rates by Age , 1960 - 1990 . Source : U . S . Census Bureau , Current Population Reports , Series P - 60 , No . 175 ( 1991 ) , Tables 2 and 3 . Today , only one in every eight older people is below the official poverty line . Since the 1960s , poverty has declined twice as fast among the elderly as it has for all Americans . When we started talking about the war on poverty , the image that first entered our minds was of an older person . Today it is a child . Even if we take 1970 as our starting point , poverty among the elderly has been cut in half , while that of children has risen by a third . Figure 1 understates the good news , because the real poverty rate of the elderly is certainly much lower . If we exclude taxes paid , but add in the value of non - cash benefits that the poor receive ( food stamps , Medicaid , Medicare ) , the poverty rate of those aged 65 - 74 falls by another 2 . 5 percentage points . If we also include the implicit rental value of housing , only one in every twenty of the elderly is poor today . Such adjustments are appropriate , as they more accurately measure the James P . Smith 3 real economic welfare of the elderly . Thus , instead of one in every ten older persons being in poverty ( as official statistics would suggest ) , only one in twenty of the elderly is poor when poverty is better measured . Such good news should not obscure the equal reality that many older people remain economically vulnerable . This vulnerability is often triggered by certain demographic transitions , particularly a decline into extreme poor health or the death of a spouse . For example , consider the most susceptible population—single elderly women . Using official statistics , one in every four non - married older women is poor , more than twice the rate for all older people . Among elderly widows , poverty rates now run as high as 40 percent . The prospects for older black single women are particularly bleak ; seven in every ten of them live below the poverty line . Treating the elderly as a single homogeneous group has lost whatever meaning it may have had either analytically or politically . Income Levels and Inequality This section puts forth some salient facts about the level and distribution of income of American households during their retirement years . It relies on data obtained from the Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old ( AHEAD ) study , a critically important new survey funded by the National Institute of Aging ( NIA ) . AHEAD includes 6 , 052 households ( 8 , 204 individuals ) with at least one person aged 70 and over in 1994 . Its principal purpose is to elucidate the relationship between changes in physical and cognitive health in old age and asset decline . In this survey , blacks , hispanics , and residents of the state of Florida were oversampled at a rate of two to one , and follow - ups are planned every two years . An important advantage of AHEAD is that it contains high quality income and wealth modules Aging Studies Program Policy Brief In addition to housing equity , assets were separated into the following 1 eleven categories : other real estate ; vehicles ; business equity ; IRA or Keogh ; stocks or mutual funds ; checking savings or money market funds ; CDs , government savings bonds or treasury bills ; other bonds ; other assets ; and other debt . 4 ( Smith 1997 ) . In particular , a very comprehensive and detailed set of questions were asked to measure household wealth . 1 Table 1 Mean and Median Household Incomes among the Elderly ( in 1996 dollars ) Median Mean All Families $ 15 , 624 $ 23 , 769 Race White 17 , 385 25 , 803 Black 9 , 467 13 , 250 Hispanic 8 , 943 12 , 922 Married 24 , 814 36 , 500 Female Headed 10 , 613 13 , 960 Age Groups 70 - 74 19 , 461 27 , 753 75 - 80 15 , 357 24 , 002 81 - 85 12 , 335 19 , 359 86 + 9 , 439 13 , 834 Source : Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old ( AHEAD ) , calculations by author . James P . Smith 5 Table 1 lists mean and median household incomes stratified by age groups , race , and marital status . There are many important patterns illustrated in this table . First , there exist wide disparities across racial and ethnic groups . For example , the mean income of older black households is about 51 percent as that of white households , and that of older hispanic households is slightly less . But marital status is an even sharper economic discriminator than race or ethnicity . A principal risk faced by older households is the loss of a spouse through divorce , separation , or more commonly death . Men typically die first , often leaving their wives with few economic resources . This harsh reality is reflected in the income figures among female headed families , whose mean income lags that of married families by almost two - thirds . Finally , there are large disparities across age groups , with the oldest households always faring the worst . In part , this age gradient reflects the increasing frequency of widowhood in older households . But it also results from a significant across - cohort improvement in economic well - being so that , even among the currently retired , younger age groups enjoy higher lifetime incomes than their older counterparts . There is an enormous amount of inequality among older people , far more than exists between them and the rest of the American population . The extent of inequality is best displayed by ignoring minority households completely and examining only older white households . Many older American households are doing quite well indeed . One in every ten of them receives more than $ 40 , 000 a year , almost three times the income of the median older household . These well - off households can be contrasted with those at the bottom , whose situation can still be quite stark . White elderly households in the lowest 10 percent receive only 43 percent as much as the median white elderly household . Among those over age 70 , household incomes of those in the top 5 percent are nine times larger than those in the bottom 10 percent . Although their incomes are lower at every percentile , similar levels of inequality exist among minority households . If anything , the degree of inequality is even larger among these households , where the gap between those at the top and those at the bottom is greater . Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 6 Sources of Income Most Americans receive their income largely from work . Not so for older people whose working days are long behind them . Instead , their incomes are largely formula driven , and often decided on political grounds . In addition , older households differ a great deal in the source of their incomes , a variation that depends critically on where they are in the economic hierarchy . In the American system , there are 5 principal types of income among retired households : # income from work , # two annuities : private pensions and Social Security , # a set of income conditioned government transfer programs , and # income that represents an economic return on the household’s accumulated assets . Figure 2 illustrates the fraction of total household income derived from each of these five sources . The dominant role of Social Security is readily apparent . The median household over age 70 receives about two - thirds of its income from this program . Among less well - to - do households Social Security accounts for more than 80 percent of income . Even for the median black , hispanic or female - headed household , Social Security contributes more than three - quarters of income . James P . Smith 7 Figure 2 . Household Shares of Five Income Sources by Income Decile , Head Aged 70 + . Source : AHEAD , calculations by author . The other annuity in the retirement package—private pensions—has the opposite distributional pattern , being far more important within the top economic strata . Private pensions account for about one - fifth of household income for the median older household ; they comprise about one - third of total income of those at the top . But pensions are of little consequence for the bottom third of households , or for the typical older minority household . During retirement , then , most people rely almost exclusively on a combination of Social Security and private pensions . These two annuities account for about 85 percent of all income for the median older household . The other three income sources are important only for those households at the economic extremes . Households below the median largely do not work and also derive scant income from any limited assets they might own . These low - income households receive a modest fraction of their Aging Studies Program Policy Brief This section is based on Smith ( 1995 , 1997 ) . 2 8 incomes from income - conditioned government transfers , but even those in the bottom decile obtain only one dollar of every six from this source . In contrast , roughly a quarter of all income of the top tier of households is obtained as an income flow from their considerable financial assets . Among those in the top 10 percent , this income flow from assets averages over $ 10 , 000 per year . Wealth Levels and Inequality While income remains their basic economic resource , household wealth is an important complementary measure of their command over economic resources for the elderly . While we know a good deal about income differences , until recently precious little was known about how much personal wealth older people have access to , and how and why that wealth gets distributed . To describe the wealth position of the elderly , I will first use a conventional but comprehensive definition of household wealth . 2 # Household wealth includes any equity held in all homes , the value of business and other tangible assets , and a very detailed list of financial assets . These financial assets span checking and savings accounts , stocks and bonds , CDs , IRAs and Keoghs . Table 2 displays household wealth levels at selected deciles of the full wealth distribution for the AHEAD sample . To provide some contrast with pre - retirement period , Table 2 provides parallel data for households with a member between the ages of 51 and 61 years old in 1992 , based on the Health and Retirement Survey ( HRS ) , precursor of AHEAD . Mean household wealth is almost $ 270 , 000 for those in their 50s while households over 70 years old have about $ 178 , 000 . These lower asset levels of the retired population may reflect some asset depletion at older ages . However , it mostly results from the fact that these older populations were born twenty years or more before the pre - James P . Smith 9 retirement population and therefore were members of much less prosperous cohorts . Table 2 Wealth by Deciles ( in 1996 dollars ) Ages 70 + ( AHEAD ) Ages 51 - 61 ( HRS ) Deciles Total Financial Total Financial 10 $ 162 $ 0 $ 1 , 115 $ - 1 , 338 30 30 , 311 541 45 , 705 1 , 115 50 84 , 206 8 , 659 111 , 809 15 , 607 70 166 , 682 41 , 995 222 , 950 55 , 738 90 415 , 622 175 , 341 585 , 690 208 , 459 95 669 , 974 313 , 882 964 , 259 367 , 868 Mean $ 177 , 678 $ 65 , 116 $ 269 , 946 $ 81 , 779 Source : Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old ( AHEAD ) and Health and Retirement Study ( HRS ) , calculations by author . The principal message from Table 2 lies in the extreme diversity in wealth holdings for older populations . Among those aged 70 or over , households in the top 5 percent have $ 670 , 000 in wealth , about eight times that of the average household . In contrast those retired households in the bottom 10 percent had only a few hundred dollars in household wealth , a small fraction of the average household . Due to this extreme diversity in wealth holdings , wealth among older populations is significantly overstated by the use of means . For example , in contrast to a mean wealth of $ 178 , 000 , the average or median older household ( the 50th percentile ) has only $ 84 , 000 in wealth . Similar evidence of extreme diversity in wealth holdings also characterizes pre - retirement households aged in their 50s . Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 10 A similar story of relatively modest holdings for the average household alongside widespread heterogeneity across households is even more pronounced when financial assets are examined . # Financial assets are defined as total wealth minus housing and other real property assets . Financial assets are more liquid and may thus be a better index of a household’s ability to deal with emergencies . Given that criterion , the typical older household has very few resources indeed . The average ( median ) household over age 70 has less than $ 9 , 000 in financial assets—only enough to get by for half a year . Once again there exists considerable diversity among these households . For example , among households 70 or over , those in the bottom 10 percent have no financial assets at all while those in the top 5 percent have more than $ 300 , 000 . These large disparities in wealth holdings among older households translate into correspondingly large disparities when households are stratified by their race or ethnicity . Table 3 lists mean and median levels of total and financial household wealth for white , black , and hispanic households . Race and ethnic disparities are enormous , far outdistancing the income differences within these groups . For example , for every dollar of wealth an older white household has , black households have 25 cents and hispanic households 32 cents on the dollar . These wealth gaps compare to mean racial and ethnic income ratios of about 50 percent among those aged 70 and above . These racial and ethnic disparities are even larger when we concentrate on financial assets only . Neither the average black nor the average hispanic older household has any financial assets at all . Even the bottom third of white older families have less than $ 2 , 000 in liquid assets at their disposal . Among those at least 70 years old , for example , black households have only 8 percent of the financial assets of white households . Things are little different if we look at those in their pre - retirement years . The average black or hispanic household has no financial assets at all . James P . Smith 11 Table 3 Wealth Levels by Ethnicity ( in 1996 dollars ) Total Financial Mean Median Mean Median Ages 70 + ( AHEAD ) White $ 201 , 336 $ 102 , 823 $ 76 , 286 $ 15 , 586 Black 50 , 143 18 , 957 5 , 877 0 Hispanic 64 , 091 15 , 586 9 , 126 0 Ages 51 - 61 ( HRS ) White $ 310 , 765 $ 138 , 786 $ 72 , 571 $ 23 , 410 Black 81 , 219 27 , 869 12 , 780 0 Hispanic 88 , 821 30 , 464 10 , 585 0 Source : Asset and Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old ( AHEAD ) and Health and Retirement Study ( HRS ) , calculations by author . # These then are the basic facts about wealth among older American households : modest wealth holdings by the typical older household , large inequities in wealth , and very little evidence of any prior savings behavior by poor or even middle class households . Why Does the Typical Older Household Have So Little Wealth ? One reason is that those with less income simply have less income to devote to savings . Income does a pretty good job ( though far from perfect ) of explaining wealth disparities of those at the top , but income alone explains much less of the absence of savings among those below Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 12 the median . For example , household wealth of whites in the top 5 percent are seven times that of the median white household . After controlling for all income differences , those in the top 5 percent have 1 . 8 times the wealth of the average household . In contrast , among those at the 20th percentile , households save one - seventh of the median household . Even after adjusting for their income differences , these households at the bottom save only one - fourth the amount of the average family . The empirical evidence suggests that income explains a significant part , but certainly not all of wealth disparities that exist . The rest flows from much lower savings rate for low - and middle - income households compared to those with higher incomes . Now why may this be so ? One possibility that can easily be dismissed is that these wealth disparities are simply a consequence of wealth being transmitted across generations , with the poor unable to give and the well - to - do insuring that their heirs remain at the top through financial inheritances . The vast majority of households have not received any financial inheritances . For example , two - thirds of all white households and 90 percent of all minority households had received no financial inheritances by their mid - 50s . Consequently , inequities in wealth would be about the same if we subtracted out that part of current wealth that flows from past financial inheritances . It is my belief that there are two principal reasons for this extreme heterogeneity in wealth holdings : # different ex - post rates of return to savings across households ; and # different patterns of savings across households . The argument that there are different ex - post rates of return does not assert that some households are consistently better investors than other households year after year . This would be a strong assumption for which I know of very little solid evidence . Rather , it states that James P . Smith 13 variations in rates of return , even if these returns are uncorrelated over time , will produce heterogeneity in wealth holdings over time . This argument can best be illustrated with an example . Suppose that all households start out with exactly the same wealth— $ 50 , 000 . In the next year , half the households ( randomly chosen ) have their wealth increase by 50 percent while the other half have their wealth cut in half . In the second year , we now have diversity where there was none—half the households have $ 75 , 000 and the other half have $ 25 , 000 . However , mean wealth in the second year is the same as the first— $ 50 , 000 . Now let the process repeat itself with half the households gaining $ 25 , 000 and half the households losing $ 25 , 000 . Assume further that whether they lose or gain in the third year is unrelated to whether they lost or gained in the second year . At the end of the third year , there are 25 percent of households with $ 100 , 000 , half the households with $ 50 , 000 , and the remaining quarter with no assets at all . This process then continues year after year , spreading out the distribution of wealth even though all households started out with the same amount and had the same prospects of success . Obviously some individuals may be better investors and can consistently earn high rates of return . Microsoft chairman Bill Gates may be the best current example of wealth produced by high rates of return on investments . His wealth , measured in the billions of dollars , is not the consequence of his prudent savings behavior . The second , and perhaps even more important reason , lies in different savings behavior across households . Why do households , even with the same income , save such different amounts from their income ? This question is on the frontier of current research , and a full consensus on what the reasons are and which ones rank highest in importance has not been reached . Risk aversion , rates of time preference , and liquidity constraints have all been prominently mentioned ( see Deaton 1992 ) . A particularly promising recent explanation is the disincentives to private savings provided by social Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 14 insurance programs , especially those with asset limits for program eligibility ( see Hubbard , Skinner , and Zeldes 1995 ) . Here , however , I sketch out three other possibilities—health , bequests and Social Security . Socio - Economic Status ( SES ) and Health Status A key risk to successful aging rests in a complex two - way interaction between economic status and good health . However , debates about the direction of causation have made conclusions about the relation of health and wealth or income of older populations difficult to pin down . We know that healthier households are also wealthier ones . Is that simply because higher incomes lead to better health ? Or does poor health restrict a family’s ability to accumulate assets , because of its members’ limited ability to work or through rising medical expenses ? Figure 3 indicates that the cross - sectional association between health and wealth is not trivial . This chart plots median wealth levels against self - reported health status in the sample of husband - wife families aged 70 and over . When either spouse is examined separately , those who are in excellent health have more than three times the wealth of those in poor health . Generally , each step down in health is associated with significantly lower wealth . This chart also demonstrates that the health of both spouses appear to be equally important . For example , if we compare households with both spouses in excellent health to those in which both spouses are in poor health , assets vary by a factor of almost ten to one . A decline in the health of either spouse is associated with lower levels of family wealth . James P . Smith 15 Figure 3 . Household Wealth Depends on Health of Both Spouses . Source : AHEAD , calculations by author . But it is not only current health and current wealth that are related . Based on other results from the AHEAD survey , an improvement in health over a two - year period is also correlated with a higher level of initial household wealth . That is , households that start out with the highest wealth levels appear to have the least deterioration in health two years later . Finally , changes in wealth and changes in health also exhibit a strong association . Across a two - year period , assets grow fastest among households with improving health . Similarly , the slowest rate of wealth accumulation took place among those whose health was getting worse . Does higher SES improve health or did good health increase income and wealth ? To this point , nothing in these correlations proves what causes what . Both causal pathways are equally plausible a priori so theory alone can not show us the way . Economic resources may very well have a cumulative positive effect on health . Increased wealth or income can improve health and lengthen longevity for a number of reasons—greater access to medical care , reduced risk behaviors , and better nutrition to name a few . Extreme poverty , which is often associated with little sense of escape or hope , may lead to high levels of Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 16 stress that eventually may be manifested in disease and a set of chronic conditions . Similarly , poor health could reduce income and wealth for a number of reasons . First , those in poor health are less able to work at all and , if they do work , they do so for fewer hours , resulting in lower income and consequently lower savings . These sick households also face higher medical expenses , which may deplete their past assets and further reduce their ability to save . Well which is it ? Are people healthier because they are wealthier or does good health promote wealth ? In answering this question , we are definitely on the research frontier and our answers are necessarily more tentative . But my recent research suggests that at ages 50 and over the dominant causation runs from health to economic status and not the other way around ( see Smith and Kington 1997a , 1997b ) . After age 50 , with the important exceptions of losing a job or a spouse , changes in a household’s economic prospects are relatively modest . In contrast , changes in health can be large and can impact substantially on a household’s economic circumstances . My research suggests that , at older ages , past and current health have strong impacts on household income and wealth , but changes in economic resources have little additional impact on health . The strong implication of this finding is that giving older people additional income or wealth at older ages will have little effect on their health status . In light of my earlier dismissal of inheritances as an important factor in explaining current wealth disparities , it may now seem strange to argue that future bequests play a role in current wealth accumulations . The reason why these are not inconsistent positions is that there apparently exists a strong secular trend in inheritances ( see Smith 1997 ) . While people in their 50s have received relatively modest inheritances from their parents ( and most in fact have received none ) , this pre - retirement generation currently plans on more substantial bequests to their children ( and many more will do so ) . It remains the case , however , that James P . Smith 17 the bequest motive for savings is an important empirical reality only among those in the top tier of the economic hierarchy . Now , let’s look at a third factor that may affect wealth accumulation of older people—Social Security . # Household wealth ignores two critical components of wealth that can loom large , especially for households nearing and in retirement : pensions and Social Security . Virtually , all of these pre - retirement households anticipate a flow of Social Security benefits when they retire . More than half of them are also counting on the income from their pensions . When discounted to the present , these expected income flows translate into considerable amounts of wealth . Combined , Social Security and pension wealth are as important as household wealth for the average family in their 50s ( see Smith 1995 for more details on these points ) . Total wealth is almost half a million dollars instead of the roughly quarter of a million that we saw earlier . This distortion caused by the conventional wealth concept is much larger among minority families . Among blacks and hispanics , conventional household wealth is less than a third of their total wealth . For minority households , Social Security wealth is especially critical and represents the largest part of their wealth , a subject to which I will soon return . Not surprisingly , Social Security is particularly important among low - income households . Among households that rank at the bottom ten percent in total “conventional” wealth , Social Security is the dominant , basically the only , form of wealth . Seventy percent of the wealth of these households rests in their future Social Security benefits . Very few of these pre - retirement households have any pensions in their past or their future . While less extreme , Social Security wins first place in the wealth portfolio even for the median household . The average pre - retirement Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 18 white household has more Social Security wealth than either household wealth ( including their home ) or pensions . It is not even a close call for the typical black household , which has more wealth in Social Security than household and pension wealth combined . These facts summarize the political and substantive power of Social Security : it is a highly successful redistributive system . The Need for Social Security Reform If Social Security is that successful in providing income security for the elderly , why do we have to change it ? There are basically three reasons why reform is essential : the savings effect , some by now strange distribution impacts , and the looming fiscal imbalance resulting from the changing ratio between workers and retirees . Table 4 illustrates our current Social Security system . This table lists expected income replacement rates from pensions and Social Security for pre - retirement households . These replacement rates represent the fraction of household income that will be replaced at the time they retire by pensions and Social Security . To illustrate with an example , the median household in this age group earns about $ 36 , 000 per year . This table says that it will receive about $ 17 , 000 in Social Security and pensions per year when they retire , which is 45 percent of their current annual income . James P . Smith 19 Table 4 Projected Income Replacement Rates during Retirement ( in percent ) Income Pension Social Pension and Social Percentile Security Security 5 10 . 8 81 . 6 92 . 4 10 13 . 4 59 . 1 72 . 5 20 16 . 7 42 . 1 58 . 8 50 21 . 3 24 . 1 45 . 3 80 21 . 8 15 . 4 37 . 3 90 22 . 3 11 . 3 11 . 5 95 19 . 6 9 . 4 29 . 0 Source : Health and Retirement Study ( HRS ) , calculations by author . The important news , however , is the sharply declining replacement rates with increasing income and the very high rates for low - income households . Over 90 percent of the current income of those at the bottom 5 percent will be replaced by pensions and Social Security , compared to only 29 percent of those at the top . This table understates the actual extent of replacement since it does not take into account any of the income - conditioned safety net programs available to these households when they become older , such as SSI , food stamps , Medicare , and Medicaid . It is not an exaggeration to say that these low - income households may be better off when they retire than they are now . In that sense , current public policy has overannuitized our set of transfer programs since many of these pre - retirement households would prefer more money now at the expense of a little less in the future . Most important , the incentives these Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 20 households have to save for their own retirement is almost nil . This turns some of our earlier data somewhat on its head . One reason that low - income households have accumulated little private wealth of their own is that they have little incentive to do so . Even if we did not have the oncoming fiscal crisis , Social Security is badly in need of reform . It is a program born of the Great Depression when there were double digit numbers of workers per retiree , life expectancy ( or expected years spent in retirement ) was much shorter , couples stayed married , and wives did not work . That clearly is not today’s world . To see how out of whack it often has become , consider some important results recently published by Panis and Lillard ( 1996 ) . They provide some data on the distributional consequences of Social Security for the average cohort . Social Security is , after all , a transfer program that takes resources from some households and transfers them to other households . On average , then , the winners and losers must exactly offset each other . This central point is often ignored when one concentrates on the benefits received by past or current retirees , most of whom have done very well by the program . Their net benefit is , of course , a liability for future retirees who will of necessity receive less than they pay in . Table 5 lists the difference between the present value of taxes paid compared to present value of benefits received for some important demographic subgroups . The distributional aspect of the current program is documented by the fact that high - income households lose income and low - income households gain income . However , this is by no means the only distributional consequence , and some of the other patterns are more troublesome . James P . Smith 21 Table 5 Winners and Losers from the Social Security Program ( present value of benefits - present value of taxes , in 1996 dollars ) Unmarried Benefit / Loss Married Benefit / Loss Men One - earner Couple Low income $ - 25 , 000 Low income $ + 32 , 000 Middle income - 52 , 000 Middle income + 60 , 000 High income - 72 , 000 High income + 70 , 000 Women Two - earner Couple Low income + 16 , 000 Low income - 4 , 000 Middle income + 16 , 000 Middle income - 9 , 000 High income - 15 , 000 High income - 57 , 000 Source : Based on Panis and Lillard ( 1996 ) . Unmarried men are among the big losers from Social Security largely because they have relatively low life expectancies and receive no spousal benefit . In a traditional single - income couple , the wife is entitled to a benefit equal to 50 percent of her spouse’s benefit even though she made no payments into the program . Obviously , single individuals do not receive this payment . But two - earner couples also lose out because of this spousal benefit . Two - earner couples whose combined income equals that of the single - earner couple described above both pay money into the system , but they receive lower benefits than if the wife had paid nothing at all ( Burkhauser and Smeeding 1994 ) . Who then are the big gainers from the current Social Security program ? If the TV image of Ozzie and Harriet Nelson comes to mind , you are on the right track . Ozzie pays in and both Ozzie and Harriet receive checks . This type of redistribution may have made sense in 1936 and perhaps even in 1956 , but it does not in 1997 . In addition , as the Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 22 Figure 4 . Projected Increases in the United States Population , 1995 to 2050 , by Age . Source : Smith and Edmonston 1997 . excellent work of researchers at the Center for Policy Research demonstrates , the program pays too much when both spouses are alive and too little to the surviving spouse , typically the wife ( Burkhauser and Smeeding 1994 ) . The final reason for reform is the lack of budgetary balance , especially when combined with the rising health care costs for the elderly . Given our current pay - as - you - go financing system , basic demographics and economics require reform . As the baby boom generation ages and retires , the number of retirees will skyrocket relative to the working generations who must pay the bill . Figure 4 illustrates the magnitude of these changes by plotting age - specific percentage changes in population sizes over the next half century . The smallest percent increase—about 4 percent—will take place among middle - age workers . These are the people who will be paying into the system . At the same time , the retired population will James P . Smith 23 double and the number of those aged 80 or more will more than triple . This latter increase is especially daunting since health care costs are concentrated the oldest - old . While we will have about a million and a half more workers aged 36 - 40 in the year 2050 , there will be about eight and one half million more retirees aged 66 - 70 . If that doesn’t get your attention , think about the more than twenty million additional people over age 80 . The second reason underlying budgetary imbalance is economic . Today , federal government outlays on Social Security , Medicare , and Medicaid combined are about 8 percent , measured as a fraction of Gross National Product ( GNP ) . If our current benefit system for health care and Social Security is maintained , this fraction will rise to at least 20 percent by the middle of the next century . This fraction is about equal to the current size of the federal budget . At the same time , interest on the public debt will rise to 16 percent of GNP from the current 3 percent . This clearly represents an unsustainable level . There is no question about whether or not to cut age - related entitlements . They must be cut , and eventually they will be cut . The real public policy question is how to trim age - related entitlements to protect the truly needy ( which is not synonymous with the current elderly ) and when to cut them so that people will have time to adjust . Putting aside all the camouflage , in our pay - as - you - go system , current workers pay for the retirement benefits of current retirees . The following equations summarizes the long - run fiscal balancing equation in our Social Security system , in which revenue must equal expenditures . Revenue is generated by the number of workers ( N ) multiplied by the average wage ( W ) and the average payroll tax ( t ) . Expenditures are equal to the number of retirees ( R ) times the average benefit per retiree ( B ) . Rearranging terms , we can compute the payroll tax that makes the system solvent . t = ( B / W ) * ( R / N ) Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 24 The two critical parameters determining the tax rate are the replacement rate ( B / W in this formula ) and the number of retirees per worker ( R / N ) . Our current average replacement rate is 40 percent . If we had 12 workers for every retiree , the payroll tax would have to be less than 4 percent . That’s about what we had when the system started , and the fiscal burden was low . At three and one half workers per retiree , the payroll tax rises to 12 percent ( that’s where we are now ) . If we end up with two workers for every retiree ( pretty much where we are headed ) , the payroll tax will have to rise to 20 percent . What are the Policy Options for Reform ? Reduce benefits , increase taxes , change the dependency ratio , or promote economic growth . Sounds simple enough , doesn’t it ? But there will be some big winners and losers , depending on which path we take , and the battle lines are already drawn . To have a solvent system by the middle of the next century implies either a 30 percent reduction in benefits or a 5 percent increase in payroll taxes . Who wins and who loses from each option may not be as obvious as you think . There are four frequently mentioned policy options—cutting other government expenditures , raising the payroll tax , reducing benefits , and increasing the retirement age . Placing Social Security off limits and cutting other government programs has basically been our political compromise for the last decade . To achieve long - term balance , this solution is neither realistic or equitable . It is not realistic given the size of the cuts required . If Medicaid is also left alone , these reductions would come close to completely wiping out all non - defense non - age related government programs . What is the equity in drastically cutting programs that serve low - income families while keeping completely intact a program such as Social Security where many of the benefits go to the comfortable or the well - to - do ? Within the Social Security program , then , structural changes will have to be made . In light of the heavy dependance of poor elderly people on Social Security documented above , the changes made should be progressive . But different cohorts bear the burden of reform , depending James P . Smith 25 on whether we raise taxes , cut benefits , or increase the retirement age , and these impacts tend to be ignored when selecting policy options . It should come as no surprise that current retirees prefer payroll tax increases or increases in the retirement age , the impact of which totally escape them . Even current workers in their 40s or 50s prefer a tax increase to a benefit reduction . Their taxpaying years are half over , but their benefit years lie fully before them . Those who adhere religiously to not changing the current benefit formula , and who cite equity as the reason , should be required to answer one question : What is the equity in imposing large penalties on low - and middle - income people in younger cohorts , while leaving current middle and well - to - do retirees alone ? # Gradual benefit reduction should be a central component of reform . These reductions in benefits should begin now . In that way , all cohorts will share in the cost of reform and the reduction required of any single group is manageable . However , reform of age - related entitlements in isolation is not a full public policy response . Private pension prevalence rates have already started to decline among younger households , reversing almost a century old trend . And our current Social Security promises are impossible to keep in the future . We know it , and younger generations know it . Two legs of the retirement stool are guaranteed to fall . What about the remaining leg , private savings ? Here , the early evidence is not promising . The baby - boom generations are apparently actually saving at lower rates than their predecessors ( see Juster , Smith , and Stafford 1997 ) . What can be done ? At one level , the overwhelming dimensions of the problem makes the outline of the solution clear , although we all know how politically difficult it will be to implement . For openers , we have to start making realistic promises about our public tier and focus only on ensuring a decent standard of living for the poor old . Our long - run Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 26 policy goal should be to start turning our public component of the retirement stool into a sustainable system with the twin but limited goals of reducing old age poverty and coinsuring against some multiple risks , including health . We can accomplish this through a means - tested benefit , or a universal flat benefit , but accomplish it we must . With the inevitable decline in our dependence on the pay - as - you - go public tier , we must strengthen the private sector tier though additional private savings . Given the daunting dimensions of our future problems , we must be bold . Here , too , there are legitimate disagreements about the direction to go , but the boldness requirement pushes us toward a progressive consumption tax to voluntarily encourage savings , or a mandatory provident type fund that deducts a certain percent of income for future retirement . Given how ingrained our poor savings habits appear to be nowadays , we may also have to go beyond traditional methods of providing individuals incentives to save : perhaps we need a publicly - funded information campaign to promote the value of savings . That campaign should stress over and over again the two key strategies for successful wealth accumulation—start young and stay the course . James P . Smith 27 References Burkhauser , Richard V . and Timothy M . Smeeding . 1994 . Social Security Reform : A Budget Neutral Approach to Reducing Older Women’s Disproportionate Risk of Poverty . Center for Policy Research Policy Brief No . 2 / 1994 . Syracuse , NY : Syracuse University . Deaton , Angus 1992 . Understanding Consumption . Oxford , UK : Clarenton Press . Hubbard , R . Glenn , Jonathan Skinner , and Steven Zeldes . 1995 . “Precautionary Savings and Social Insurance , ” Journal of Political Economy , No 2 , Vol 103 ( April ) , pp 360 - 399 . Juster , F . Thomas , James P . Smith , and Frank Stafford . 1997 . “Savings and Wealth , and Income : Then and Now . ” Paper presented at the Conference on Health and Retirement , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . Panis , Constantijn W . A . and Lee A . Lillard 1996 . “Social Security : Equity , Adequacy , Reforms . ” Document No . DB - 167 - NIA , Santa Monica , CA : RAND . Smith , James P . 1995 . “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth , ” Journal of Human Resources , Vol . XXX , pp . S158 - S183 . Smith , James P . 1997 . “Wealth Inequality Among Older Americans , ” Journal of Gerontology , Vol 52B ( May ) , pp . 74 - 81 . Smith , James P . and Barry Edmonston , Panel on the Demographic and Economic Impacts of Immigration , National Research Council , editors , 1997 , The New Americans : Economic , Demographic , and Fiscal Effects of Immigration , Washington , DC : National Academy Press . Aging Studies Program Policy Brief 28 Smith , James P . 1997 . “Bequests and Inheritances . ” In James P . Smith and Robert Willis , editors , Essays in Honor of F . Thomas Juster , Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press , forthcoming . Smith , James P . and Raynard S . Kington . 1997 . “Demographic and Economic Correlates of Health in Old Age , ” Demography . Vol 34 . No . 1 ( February ) , pp 159 - 170 . Smith , James P . and Raynard S . Kington . 1997 “Race , Socioeconomic Status , and Health in Late Life . ” In Linda G . Martin and Beth J . Soldo , Committee on Population , National Research Council , editors , Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Health of Older Americans , Washington , DC : National Academy Press . U . S . Bureau of the Census , 1991 . Poverty in the United States : 1990 , Current Population Reports , Series P - 60 , No . 175 , Tables 2 - 3 , Washington , DC : U . S . Government Printing Office .