Organizational Information Requirements , Media Richness and Structural Design Richard L . Daft ; Robert H . Lengel Management Science , Vol . 32 , No . 5 , Organization Design . ( May , 1986 ) , pp . 554 - 571 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0025 - 1909 % 28198605 % 2932 % 3A5 % 3C554 % 3AOIRMRA % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - O Management Science is currently published by INFORMS . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / about / terms . html . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / journals / informs . html . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long - term preservation and access to leading academic journals and scholarly literature from around the world . The Archive is supported by libraries , scholarly societies , publishers , and foundations . It is an initiative of JSTOR , a not - for - profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take advantage of advances in technology . For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . http : / / www . jstor . org Wed Feb 6 18 : 28 : 46 2008 MANAGEMENT SCIENCE Vol . 32 , No . 5 , May 1986 Prinred in U . S . A ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS , MEDIA RICHNESS AND STRUCTURAL DESIGN * RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL Department of Management , Texas A & M University , College Station , Texas 77843 Department of Management and Marketing , University of Texas , San Antonio , Texas 78285 This paper answers the question , " Why do organizations process information ? ' Uncertainty and equivocality are defined as two forces that influence information processing in organiza - tions . Organization structure and internal systems determine both the amount and richness of information provided to managers . Models are proposed that show how organizations can be designed to meet the information needs of technology , interdepartmental relations , and the environment . One implication for managers is that a major problem is lack of clarity , not lack of data . The models indicate how organizations can be designed to provide information mechanisms to both reduce uncertainty and resolve equivocality . ( INFORMATION IN ORGANIZATIONS ; STRUCTURAL DESIGN ; ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE ) 1 . Introduction Why do organizations process information ? The answer most often given in the literature is that organizations process information to reduce uncertainty . This line of reasoning began when Galbraith ( 1973 ) integrated the work of Burns and Stalker ( 1961 ) , Woodward ( 1965 ) , Hall ( 1962 ) , and Lawrence and Lorsch ( 1967 ) in terms of information processing . Galbraith explained the observed variations in organizational form based upon the amount of information needed to reduce task related uncertainty and thereby attain an acceptable level of performance . Galbraith ( 1973 ) , ( 1977 ) proposed that specific structural characteristics and behav - iors would be associated with information requirements , and a line of research and theorizing has provided support for this relationship . Studies by Tushman ( 1978 ) , ( 1979 ) , Van de Ven and Ferry ( 1980 ) , Daft and Macintosh ( 1981 ) , and Randolph ( 1978 ) support a positive relationship between task variety and the amount of informa - tion processed within work units . Van de Ven , Delbecq , and Koenig ( 1976 ) found that departmental communication increased as interdependence among participants in - creased . A number of other studies have found that either the amount or nature of information processing is associated with task uncertainty ( Meissner 1969 ; Gaston 1972 ; Bavelas 1950 ; Leavitt 1951 ; Becker and Nicholas 1969 ) . Why do organizations process information ? The organizational literature also sug - gests a second , more tentative answer : to reduce equivocality . This answer is based on Weick ' s ( 1979 ) argument that equivocality reduction is a basic reason for organizing . Equivocality seems similar to uncertainty , but with a twist . Equivocality presumes a messy , unclear field . An information stimulus may have several interpretations . New data may be confusing , and may even increase uncertainty . New data may not resolve anything when equivocality is high . Managers will talk things over , and ultimately enact a solution . Managers reduce equivocality by defining or creating an answer rather than by learning the answer from the collection of additional data ( Weick 1979 ) . * Accepted by Arie Y . Lewin ; received October 1 , 1984 . This paper has been with the authors 5f months for 1 revision . 554 0025 - 1909 / 86 / 3205 / 0554 $ 01 . 25 Copyr ~ ght 0 1986 , The Institute of Management Sciences 555 ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS Emerging research suggests that equivocality is indeed related to information pro - cessing . Daft and Macintosh ( 1981 ) found that equivocal data were preferred for ambiguous tasks , and managers used experience to interpret these cues . Putnam and Sorenson ( 1982 ) found that subjects used more rule statements and pooled diverse interpretations for equivocal than for unequivocal messages . Kreps ( 1980 ) reported that equivocal issues stimulated frequent communication feedback cycles in faculty senate meetings . Lengel and Daft ( 1984 ) reported that face - to - face media were preferred for messages containing equivocality , while written media were used for unequivocal messages . These findings suggest that when equivocality is high , organiza - tions allow for rapid information cycles among managers , typically face - to - face , and prescribe fewer rules for interpretation ( Weick 1979 ; Daft and Weick 1984 ) . Why do organizations process information ? The literature on organization theory thus suggests two answers - to reduce uncertainty and to reduce equivocality . While these answers are different , in some respects they are also similar . Both answers say something about information processing , about how organizations and managers should behave in the face of these circumstances . Both answers have implications for the type of structure an organization should adopt to meet its information processing requirements to attain an acceptable level of performance ( Lewin and Minton 1986 ) . The purpose of this paper is to integrate the equivocality and uncertainty perspec - tives on information processing . One purpose of organizational research and theory building is to understand and predict the structure that is appropriate for a specific situation ( Schoonhoven 1981 ) . The concept of information processing provides a useful tool with which to explain organizational design . The prevalent view in organi - zation theory has been that organization design enables additional data processing to reduce uncertainty ( Galbraith 1973 , 1977 ; Tushman 1978 ; Tushman and Nadler 1978 ) . This idea is important and is integrated with Weick ' s ideas about designing the organization to reduce equivocality through means other than obtaining more data . Specific organization structures are recommended depending on the extent of uncer - tainty and equivocality faced by the organization from its technology , departmental interdependence , and environment . 2 . Background and Assumptions Our approach to the study of organizations is based on several assumptions about organizations and information processing . The most basic assumption is that organiza - tions are open social systems that must process information ( Mackenzie 1984 ) , but have limited capacity . Information is processed to accomplish internal tasks , to coordinate diverse activities , and to interpret the external environment . Human social systems are more complex than lower level machine or biological systems ( Boulding 1956 ; Pondy and Mitroff 1979 ) . Many issues are fuzzy and ill - defined . The interpreta - tion of data cannot be fixed or routinized as in lower level systems ( Cohen , March and Olsen 1972 ; Weick 1976 ) . Despite the information complexity facing organizations , they have boundaries on their information capacity ( March and Simon 1958 ; Simon 1960 ; Cyert and March 1963 ) . All available information to interpret the world cannot be processed . Managers try to find decision rules , information sources , and structural designs that provide adequate understanding to cope with uncertainty . One challenge facing organizations is to develop information processing mechanisms capable of coping with variety , uncertainty , coordination , and an unclear environment . The second assumption pertains to level of analysis in organizations . Individual human beings send and receive data in organizations , yet organizational information processing is more than what occurs by individuals ( Hedberg 1981 ; Daft and Weick 556 RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL 1984 ) . One distinguishing feature of organizational information processing is sharing . An individual decision maker may interpret data in response to a problem ( Simon 1960 ; Ungson , Braunstein , and Hall 1981 ) . Information processing at the organization level , however , typically involves several managers who converge on a similar interpre - tation . Another distinguishing feature of organization information processing is the need to cope with diversity not typical of an isolated individual . Decisions are frequently made by groups so a coalition is needed . But coalition members may have different interpretations of the same event , may be pursuing different organizational priorities or goals , and hence may be in conflict with respect to data interpretation or its significance for goal attainment ( Ungson et al . 1981 ) . Information processing at the organization level must bridge disagreement and diversity quite distinct from the information activities of isolated individuals . The final assumption is that organization level information processing is influenced by the organizational division of labor ( Burton and Obel 1980 ) . Organizations are divided into subgroups or departments . Each department utilizes a specific technology that may differ from other departments ( Hall 1962 ; Van de Ven and Delbecq 1974 ; Daft and Macintosh 1981 ; Daft 1986 ) . For the organization to perform well , each department must perform its task , and the tasks must be coordinated with one another . Uncertainty and equivocality may arise from departmental technology , from coordina - tion of departments to manage interdependence , or from the external environment ( Tushman and Nadler 1978 ) . 3 . Two Information Contingencies Uncertainty Based on early work in psychology ( Miller and Frick 1949 ; Shannon and Weaver 1949 ; Garner 1962 ) , uncertainty has come to mean the absence of information . As information increases , uncertainty decreases . Uncertainty can be illustrated by a typical laboratory experiment . Laboratory subjects might play the game of 20 ques - tions , wherein they receive yes - no answers to questions about the identity of an unknown object , which can be animal , vegetable or mineral ( Bendig 1953 ; Taylor and Faust 1952 ) . The " information " obtained from each answer can be precisely calculated as the increased probability that the subject can identify the object . Improvement in identifying the object is a reduction in uncertainty . When the person identifies the object correctly , uncertainty is gone so additional questions provide no additional information . The definition of uncertainty as the absence of information persists in organization theory today ( Tushman and Nadler 1978 ; Downey and Slocum 1975 ) . Galbraith defined uncertainty as " the difference between the amount of information required to perform the task and the amount of information already possessed by the organiza - tion " ( Galbraith 1977 ) . Organizations that face high uncertainty have to ask a large number of questions and to acquire more information to learn the answers . The important assumption underlying this approach , perhaps originating in the psychology laboratory , is that the organization and its managers work in an environment where questions can be asked and answers obtained . New data can be acquired so that tasks are performed under a reduced level of uncertainty . Equivocality Equivocality means ambiguity , the existence of multiple and conflicting interpreta - tions about an organizational situation ( Weick 1979 ; Daft and Macintosh 1981 ) . High equivocality means confusion and lack of understanding . Equivocality means that asking a yes - no question is not feasible . Participants are not certain about what ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS 557 questions to ask , and if questions are posed , the situation is ill - defined to the point where a clear answer will not be forthcoming ( March and Olson 1976 ) . For example , Mintzberg et al . ( 1976 ) examined 25 organizational decisions , and in many cases did not find the type of uncertainty where alternatives could be defined and information obtained . They found instead decision making under ambiguity where almost nothing was given or easily determined . Managers had to define and figure things out for themselves . Little data could be obtained . Uncertainty as studied in the psychology laboratory did not characterize the ambiguity experienced by managers . A laboratory situation analogous to the ambiguity faced by managers would be to provide subjects with partial or contradictory instructions for the experimental game , or to leave it to subjects to figure out and create their own game . Two Forces Thus we propose that two complementary forces exist in organizations that influ - ence information processing . One force is defined as uncertainty and is reflected in the absence of answers to explicit questions as has been studied in laboratory settings ; the other force is defined as equivocality and originates from ambiguity and confusion as often seen in the messy , paradoxical world of organizational decision making . The two forces are analogous to an n - dimensional information space ( Marschak and Radner 1972 ; Baligh and Burton 1981 ) . Uncertainty is a measure of the organization ' s ignorance of a value for a variable in the space . Equivocality is a measure of the organization ' s ignorance of whether a variable exists in the space . When uncertainty is low , the organization has data that answer questions about variables in the space . When equivocality is low , the organization has defined which questions to ask by defining variables into the space . Each force has value for explaining information processing behavior , and each force leads to different behavioral outcomes . Equivocal - ity leads to the exchange of existing views among managers to define problems and resolve conflicts through the enactment of a shared interpretation that can direct future activities . Uncertainty leads to the acquisition of objective information about the world to answer specific questions . 4 . Integrating Framework The two causes of information processing are combined into a single framework in Figure 1 . The horizontal axis in Figure 1 represents organizational uncertainty . Under conditions of high uncertainty , the organization acquires data to answer a variety of High 1 . High Equivocality , Low Uncertainty 2 . High Equivocality , High Uncertainty Occasional ambiguous , unclear events , Many ambiguous , unclear events , managers define questions , develop managers define questions , also seek common grammar , gather opinions . answers , gather objective data and exchange opinions . EQUIVOCALITY 3 . Low Equivocality , Low Uncertainty 4 . Low Equivocality , High Uncertainty I Clear , well - defined situation , managers ( Many , well - defined problems , managers I I need few answers , gather routine ( ask many questions , seek explicit I objective data . answers , gather new , quantitative data . Low Low UNCERTAINTY High FIGURE 1 . Hypothesized Framework of Equivocality and Uncertainty on Information Requirements . 558 RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL objective questions to solve known problems . The vertical axis in Figure 1 represents equivocality . Under conditions of high equivocality , managers exchange opinions to clarify ambiguities , define problems , and reach agreement . As a framework for analysis and discussion , equivocality and uncertainty are treated as independent constructs in Figure 1 although they are undoubtedly related in the real world . High levels of equivocality may require some new data as well as clarification and agree - ment . Circumstances that demand new data may also generate some need for addi - tional interpretation and definition . However , as independent constructs the two dimensions in Figure 1 provide theoretical categories that can help explain both the amount and form of information processing in organizations . Cell 1 . This cell is typified by a stream of only a few events that are equivocal and poorly understood . Managers encounter occasional situations for which they may not know what questions to ask or what problem to solve . Managers rely on judgment and experience to interpret these events . They exchange views to enact a common percep - tion . Answers are obtained through subjective opinions rather than from objective data . One example would be the feasibility of acquiring Corporation X . Would it fit strategically and organizationally and accomplish the desired outcomes ? No one knows ; no data can say for sure . Managers can only discuss this equivocal issue until they define whether a problem exists and that acquiring Corporation X is their solution . Goal setting is another example . Managers from engineering , marketing , and production may disagree about goal emphasis for the company , and no outside data will resolve this issue . Approaches to resolve Cell 1 equivocality are the Delphi technique ( Delbecq , Van de Ven , and Gustafson 1975 ) and dialectical inquiry ( Mitroff and Emshoff 1979 ) . These techniques arrange for the exchange or even clash of subjective opinions when no objective data are available to predict an event or formulate strategy . Through the process of formally exchanging information , a com - mon grammar and judgment evolves , equivocality is reduced , and a common perspec - tive emerges . Cell 4 . This cell represents a situation where uncertainty is high . The equivocality of events confronting managers is low , but managers need additional information about many issues . They know what questions to ask and the source of external data . For example , if turnover among clerical employees is increasing , managers might conduct a survey of reasons for leaving . If the question pertains to the reaction of customers to certain product colors and labels , a special study may provide the answer . If inventory outages cause customer alienation , data about customer ordering patterns may lead to an algorithm for inventory management . Information processing in this situation involves data acquisition and systematic analysis . Cell 4 uncertainty repre - sents the absence of explicit information . The organization is motivated to acquire and process data to answer important questions . Cell 2 . Both equivocality and uncertainty are high in Cell 2 . Many issues are poorly understood and participants may be in disagreement . Issues also may be amenable to the gathering of new data that may influence managers ' interpretation of events . A special study might be undertaken to gather data that can be combined with discussion and managerial judgment to reduce both equivocality and uncertainty . A Cell 2 situation would probably be characterized by rapid change , unanalyzable technology , unpredictable shocks , and trial and error learning ( Daft and Weick 1984 ) . Cell 2 could occur during times of rapid technological development , within emerging industries , or during the launching of new products . Some answers can be obtained through rational data collection , and other answers require subjective experience , judgment , discussion , and enactment . Cell 3 . A Cell 3 situation represents a low level of both equivocality and uncer - tainty . New problems do not arise with sufficient frequency to require significant 559 ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS additional data . Issues are well understood , so extensive discussion is not required to resolve and clarify issues . An organization in this situation would tend to rely on a standing body of standards , procedures , policies , and precedents . Routine schedules , reports , and statistical data would be the primary information base used by the organization . A Cell 3 situation is typified by an organization that uses a routine technology in a stable environment . Figure 1 represents an attempt to combine the concepts of equivocality and uncertainty into a single framework . The quadrants in Figure 1 represent patterns of problems and issues that influence organizational information responses and ulti - mately the structural design of the organization . Structure can be designed to facilitate equivocality reduction , or to provide data to reduce uncertainty , or both , depending on organizational needs . 5 . Structuring Organizations We have argued that information processing in organizations is conceptually more than simply obtaining data to reduce uncertainty ; it also involves interpreting equivo - cal situations . The next question is how can organizations be designed to meet the needs for uncertainty and / or equivocality reduction . Organization structure is the allocation of tasks and responsibilities to individuals and groups within the organiza - tion , and the design of systems to ensure effective communication and integration of effort ( Child 1977 ) . Organization structure and internal systems facilitate interactions and communications for the coordination and control of organizational activities . Previous work by Galbraith ( 1973 ) and Tushman and Nadler ( 1978 ) has shown how organization structure and support systems can be tailored to provide the correct amount of information to reduce uncertainty . We propose to take this line of reasoning one step farther by arguing that organizational design can provide informa - tion of suitable richness to reduce equivocality as well as provide sufficient data to reduce uncertainty . Amount of Information With respect to uncertainty , structural design can facilitate the amount of informa - tion needed for management coordination and control . For example , Galbraith ( 1973 ) described how formal management information systems have greater capacity to carry useful data to managers than do standing rules and procedures . Formal systems can provide data about variables such as production work flow , employee absenteeism , productivity , and down time , and they can provide systematic data about the external environment and competition ( Parsons 1983 ) . Other structural mechanisms include task forces and liaison roles . A task force can provide a greater amount of information within an organization than can a single face - to - face meeting . Liaison personnel can actively exchange data between divisions to reduce uncertainty . A number of studies have indicated that information processing increases or decreases depending on the complexity or variety of the organization ' s task ( Tushman 1978 , 1979 ; Daft and Macintosh 1981 ; Bavelas 1950 ; Leavitt 1951 ) . Specific structural mechanisms can be implemented by the organization to facilitate the amount of information needed to cope with uncertainty and achieve desired task performance . Richness of Information With respect to reducing equivocality , structural mechanisms have to enable debate , clarification , and enactment more than simply provide large amounts of data . Man - agers work under conditions of bounded rationality and time constraints . The key factor in equivocality reduction is the extent to which structural mechanisms facilitate 560 RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL the processing of rich information ( Daft and Lengel 1984 ; Lengel and Daft 1984 ) . Information richness is defined as the ability of information to change understanding within a time interval . Communication transactions that can overcome different frames of reference or clarify ambiguous issues to change understanding in a timely manner are considered rich . Communications that require a long time to enable understanding or that cannot overcome different perspectives are lower in richness . In a sense , richness pertains to the learning capacity of a communication . Communication media vary in the capacity to process rich information ( Lengel and Daft 1984 ) . In order of decreasing richness , the media classifications are ( 1 ) face - to - face , ( 2 ) telephone , ( 3 ) personal documents such as letters or memos , ( 4 ) impersonal written documents , and ( 5 ) numeric documents . The reason for richness differences include the medium ' s capacity for immediate feedback , the number of cues and channels utilized , personalization , and language variety ( Daft and Wiginton 1979 ) . Face - to - face is the richest medium because it provides immediate feedback so that interpretation can be checked . Face - to - face also provides multiple cues via body language and tone of voice , and message content is expressed in natural language . Rich media facilitate equivocality reduction by enabling managers to overcome different frames of reference and by providing the capacity to process complex , subjective messages ( Lengel and Daft 1984 ) . Media of low richness process fewer cues and restrict feedback , and are less appropriate for resolving equivocal issues . However , an important point is that media of low richness are effective for processing well understood messages and standard data . Structural characteristics that facilitate the use of rich media are different from characteristics that facilitate a large amount of data . Rich media are personal and involve face - to - face contact between managers , while media of lower richness are impersonal and rely on rules , forms , procedures , or data bases . For example , Van de Ven , Delbecq , and Koenig ( 1976 ) found that coordination mechanisms varied along a continuum from group , personal , to impersonal . When task nonroutineness or interde - pendence were high , information processing shifted from impersonal rules to personal exchanges including face - to - face and group meetings . Lengel and Daft ( 1984 ) found that rich communications were used by managers for difficult and equivocal messages . Rich information transactions allowed for rapid feedback and multiple cues so that managers can converge on a common interpretation . When messages were unequivo - cal , media such as written memos or formal reports were sufficient to meet information needs . Finally , Daft and Macintosh ( 1981 ) found that qualitative , face - to - face tech - niques were preferred in equivocal situations . Structural Characteristics Taken together , these ideas and findings begin to suggest how organizations handle dual information needs for uncertainty and equivocality reduction , for both obtaining objective data and exchanging subjective views . We propose that seven structural mechanisms fit along a continuum with respect to their relative capacity for reducing uncertainty or for resolving equivocality for decision makers . This continuum is illustrated in Figure 2 . The continuum reflects the relative contribution of design characteristics for uncertainty reduction and equivocality resolution , and suggests that structural mechanisms may also address both needs simultaneously . 1 . Group Meetings . Group meetings include teams , task forces , and committees ( Galbraith 1973 ; Van de Ven et al . 1976 ) . Project and matrix forms of structure utilize frequent group meetings as a means of coordination . The comparative advantage of group meetings is equivocality reduction rather than data processing . Participants exchange opinions , perceptions and judgments face - to - face . Some new data are processed , but the advantage of group meetings is the capacity to reach a collective ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS I Structure facilitates Structure facilitates ' I ~ ess ~ i a ~ c h , ~ i I a ~ ich , ~ werso ~ al per & I I AIl€S F 0 d ~ ni Informaion spedal Mrect & Up EqurVOCALEY REIUmCN ( Clarify , reach agreanent , decide ach questians to ask . ) U N W m m C N ( Obtain d i t i o d data , seek ansuers to explicit questions . ) 2 . FIGURE Information Role of Structural Characteristics for Reducing Equivocality or Uncertainty . judgment . Through discussion , a cross - section of managers from different departments reach a common frame of reference ( Weick 1979 ) . Managers can converge on the meaning of equivocal cues , and are able to enact or define a solution . The strength of group meetings is the ability to overcome differences and to build understanding and agreement . Group discussion is a subjective process rather than the collection of hard data for rational analysis . 2 . Integrators . Integrators represent the assignment of an organizational position to a boundary spanning activity within the organization . Full - time integrators include product managers and brand managers ( Galbraith 1973 ; Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ) . Part - time integrators include liaison personnel whose responsibility is to carry informa - tion across departments , such as might be done by a manufacturing engineer ( Galbraith 1973 ; Reynolds and Johnson 1982 ) . The integrator role includes the transmission of data , but it is primarily a way to overcome disagreement and thereby reduce equivocality about goals , the interpretation of issues , or a course of action ( Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ) . When managers approach a problem from diverse frames of reference , equivocality is high . Integrators and boundary spanners use face - to - face and telephone meetings to resolve these differences . 3 . Direct Contact . Direct contact represents the simplest form of personal informa - tion processing . When a problem occurs , Manager A can contact Manager B for a brief discussion , such as how to get production back on schedule ( Galbraith 1977 ) . Direct contact can occur laterally among departments or vertically between hierarchi - cal levels . Direct contact often uses rich media , thus is similar to group meetings and integrator roles , although written memos and letters also are used . Direct contact allows managers to exchange views and disagree , hence this mechanism facilitates subjective information as well as objective data . Through discussion and exchange of viewpoints , equivocality is reduced . Some new data also can be exchanged to reduce uncertainty about specific questions . 4 . Planning . Planning is a dynamic process that includes elements of both equivo - cality reduction and data sharing . In the initial stages of planning , equivocality is high . Managers often meet face - to - face and in groups to decide overall targets and a general course of action ( Steiner 1983 ) . Once plans are set , equivocality is reduced , and the plans become a data processing device . Schedules can be defined and feedback mechanisms established . Comparing actual performance to targets provides managers with data to evaluate performance ( Lorange and Vancil 1976 ) . Planning is placed near the middle of the scale in Figure 2 because the ongoing process involves both 562 RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL equivocality reduction and data processing . Initial planning resolves equivocality , while plans , schedules , and feedback provide data for uncertainty reduction . 5 . Special Reports . Special reports include one - time studies and surveys . The purpose of special reports is to gather data about an issue , synthesize it , and report it to managers ( Lengel and Daft 1984 ) . This process is expected to involve some equivocality reduction , but its primary role is to obtain data , interpret it , and thereby reduce uncertainty . Managers know which question to ask before a study is initiated . Special studies tend to be undertaken for problems about which objective data are not currently available but can be obtained through systematic investigation and analysis . 6 . Formal Information Systems . Formal information systems include the periodic reports and computer data bases that make up an organization ' s information support system ( Saunders 1981 ) . Information systems include computer reports , performance evaluations , budgets , and statistical information on such things as scrap rates , credit defaults , or market share ( Daft and Macintosh 1981 ) . The purpose of these reports is to provide data to managers , and they are moderate to low in richness . The reports reduce managers ' uncertainty about how well a new product is selling , or whether scrap rates are within the standards for each machine shop . Periodic reports typically pertain to the better understood and measurable aspects of organization and , hence , do not serve to reduce equivocality . Minor disagreements about interpretation may occur , in which case managers could either request additional data or resolve the issue through discussion . 7 . Rules and Regulations . Rules and regulations are perhaps the weakest and least rich information processing device ( Galbraith 1973 ; Tushman and Nadler 1978 ) . They are generally established to provide a known response to problems that have arisen in the past . Rules and regulations typically apply to recurring , well understood phenom - ena , and they reduce the need to process data on a continuous basis . Rules and programs therefore play almost no part in equivocality reduction . Equivocality is reduced before rules and procedures are written . Rules , procedures , standards , and policies provide a fixed , objective knowledge base from which employees can learn to respond to routine organization phenomena . The placement of structural alternatives along the Figure 2 continuum is tentative and hypothetical . The information role of each structural characteristic may vary across organizations . The point of Figure 2 is to identify structural characteristics from the literature that pertain to the dual needs for equivocality and uncertainty reduction . The relationship between structure and the reduction of equivocality and uncertainty has not been empirically tested , but the Figure 2 pattern is consistent with previous research . Van de Ven et al . ( 1976 ) found group , personal , and impersonal mechanisms used according to interdependence and task nonroutineness . Daft and Macintosh ( 1981 ) reported qualitative information was used for equivocal issues and quantitative information was used for unequivocal issues . Galbraith ( 1973 ) and Tushman and Nadler ( 1978 ) argued that some mechanisms have greater information capacity . One insight from Figure 2 is that information processing mechanisms may not be readily substituted for one another . For example , task forces and management infor - mation systems both have the capacity for high levels of information processing ( Galbraith 1973 ; Tushman and Nadler 1978 ) , but the underlying purpose of each form of information processing is radically different . Management information systems provide objective data , while task forces and group meetings are a rich medium that can serve the purpose of reducing equivocality and reaching agreement . Information systems do not reduce equivocality because equivocal issues are not easily measured and communicated through impersonal systems . Likewise , task force meetings are not efficient mechanisms for disseminating large amounts of quantitative data . ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS 6 . Application to Organization Design The final step in answering the question of why organizations process information is to translate the ideas from Figures 1 and 2 into organizational applications . Three sources of organizational uncertainty and equivocality are technology , interdepart - mental relations , and the environment ( Galbraith 1977 ; Tushman and Nadler 1978 ; Daft and Macintosh 1981 ; Weick 1979 ) . These sources represent the transformation process , the linkage and coordination required between departments , and the events and problems external to the organization ( Duncan 1972 ; Weick and Daft 1983 ) . Structural mechanisms similar to those in Figure 2 can be used to reduce equivocality or uncertainty arising from the technology , interdependence , or to interpret the external environment . Technology Technology is the knowledge , tools , and techniques used to transform inputs into organizational outputs . Perrow ( 1967 ) proposed a technology model that defined two underlying task characteristics - task variety and task analyzability . Task variety is the frequency of unexpected and novel events that occur in the conversion process . High variety means that participants typically cannot predict problems or activities in advance . Task analyzability concerns the way individuals respond to problems . When the conversion process is analyzable , employees typically follow an objective , computa - tion procedure to resolve problems . When work is not analyzable , participants have Unanalyzable 1 . Unanalyzable , Low Variety 2 . Unanalyzable , High Variety ( Craft Technology ) ( Nonroutine Technology ) Structure : a . Rich media to resolve unanalyzable issues Structure : a . Rich media to resolve unanalyzable issues b . Small amount of information b . Large amount of information to handle exceptions Examples : Occasional face - to - face Examples : Frequent face - to - face and and scheduled meetings , planning , group meetings , unscheduled meetings , telephone . special studies and reports . ANALYZABILITY 3 . Analyzable , Low Variety 4 . Analyzable , High Variety ( Routine Technology ) ( Engineering Technology ) Structure : Structure : a . Media of low richness a . Media of low richness b . Small amount of information b . Large amount of information to handle frequent exceptions Examples : Rules , standard procedures , Examples : Quantitative data bases , plans , standard information system reports , schedules , statistical reports , a few memos , bulletins . meetings . Analyzable Low VARIETY High FIGURE 3 . Relationship of Department Technology with Structure and Information Required for Task Accomplishment . 564 RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL difficulty developing exact procedures , and hence rely on judgment and experience rather than on rules or computational routines . Perrow ' s model of technology is in Figure 3 , along with proposed structural methods for processing information . Based upon the work of Van de Ven et al . ( 1976 ) , Daft and Macintosh ( 1981 ) , Tushman ( 1978 ) , ( 1979 ) , Lengel and Daft ( 1984 ) , and the ideas proposed here , different modes of information processing are proposed to occur for each type of technology . For craft technology in Cell 1 , tasks are not analyzable , but few problems arise . These equivocal issues can be handled by personal contact and occasional discussions between managers . Experience is also used to interpret equivocal cues . Planning may be useful to reduce equivocality and anticipate problems . For nonrou - tine technology in Cell 2 , group meetings will be a primary source of information processing . Uncertainty is high because of frequent unanalyzable problems . People will use rich media in the form of frequent unscheduled meetings to resolve issues ad hoc , as well as scheduled meetings to coordinate departmental activities . In the case of engineering technology in Cell 4 , management information systems and special studies will be important . Tasks are analyzable , so they can be studied and problems thereby solved . Periodic reports from the formal information systems will cover many activi - ties , and special projects and surveys can be used for issues not covered by the regular information system . Management information in both written and statistical form will provide data of appropriate richness for this kind of activity . In the case of a routine technology in Cell 1 , a standard body of rules , regulations , and policies can guide the routine activities . Occasional scheduled meetings may also be relevant here , but organization design should tend to facilitate impersonal data . Of course every form of information processing will be used occasionally in each technology . But the emphasis on information form and frequency is expected to reflect the information requirements of each technology . Formal statistics and management information systems may not be of value in a basic research setting or for a craft technology , because " numbers " do not capture the intangible nature of these activities . Likewise , personal and group meetings will play a smaller role in the engineering and routine technologies where tasks are more clearly defined and quantifiable . Interdepartmental Relations The second source of uncertainty and equivocality is the need for integration across departments . Galbraith ( 1973 ) called this lateral information processing and recom - mended techniques such as direct contact , liaison roles , and integrators to achieve interdepartmental coordination . The interdepartmental characteristic that influences equivocality is differentiation ( Daft and Lengel 1984 ) . Each department develops its own functional specialization , time ' horizon , goals , frame of reference and jargon ( Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ; Shrivastava and Mitroff 1984 ) . Bridging wide differences across departments is a problem of equivocality reduction . People come to a problem with different experi - ence , cognitive elements , goals , values , and priorities . A person trained as a scientist may have a difficult time understanding the point of view of a lawyer . A common perspective does not exist . Coding schemes are dissimilar . Interdepartmental communi - cations thus can be complex , ambiguous and difficult to interpret ( Allen and Cohen 1969 ; Gruber et al . 1974 ) . Equivocality is high when differentiation is great . The structural devices should enable participants to confront and resolve disagreement and misunderstanding that can arise between departments . The characteristic that influences uncertainty and hence the need for data process - ing between departments is strength of interdependence . Interdependence means the extent to which departments depend upon each other to accomplish their tasks ( Thompson 1967 ) . Some departments work independently while other departments 565 ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS must continuously adjust to one another . Interdependence increases uncertainty be - cause action by one department can unexpectedly force adaptation by other depart - ments in the production chain . Frequent adjustments are needed when interdepen - dence is high , and hence more information must be processed ( Van de Ven et al . 1976 ) . When interdependence is low , departments experience greater autonomy , stabil - ity and certainty with respect to coordination . Figure 4 combines the dimensions of differentiation and interdependence into a framework . Differentiation is associated with equivocality reduction , and interdepen - dence with uncertainty ( Daft and Lengel 1984 ) . In Cell 1 , departments have different frames of reference but are relatively independent so information processing will be infrequent . When coordination does occur the primary aim will be to resolve equivo - cality and achieve a common grammar . For these occasional interactions , rich face - to - face or telephone discussions may resolve the issue , and some things can be handled by personal memos or anticipated in the planning process . When departments are both highly differentiated and interdependent , as in Cell 2 , all information processing mechanisms of the organization will be utilized . Wide differences must be resolved and a high volume of data must be processed to enable mutual adjustment . The organization will have to use structural mechanisms that allow both a high volume of data and rich media . Structures will include full - time integra - tors , task forces , and project teams . Direct contact in the form of coalition building may also be used to negotiate across department boundaries ( Cyert and March 1963 ; Gantz and Murray 1980 ) . Matrix organization structure may apply because it is designed to encourage frequent face - to - face meetings to ensure coordination laterally across the organization ( Davis and Lawrence 1977 ) . High 1 . High Difference , Low Interdependence 2 . High Difference , High Interdependence Structure : Structure : a . Rich media to resolve differences a . Rich media to resolve differences b . Small amount of information b . Large amount of information to handle interdependence Examples : Occasional face - to - face or Examples : Full time integrators , task telephone meetings , personal memos , forces , teams , matrix structure , special planning , self contained units . studies and projects , confrontation . DIFFERENCE BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS 3 . Low Difference , Low Interdependence 4 . Low Difference , High Interdependence Structure : Structure : a . Media of lower richness a . Media of lower richness b . Small amount of information b . Large amount of information to handle interdependence Examples : Rules , standard operating Examples : Plans , reports , update data procedures , reports , budgets . bases , formal information systems , pert charts , budgets , schedules . Low Low INTERDEPENDENCE BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS High Source : Based on R . L . Daft and R . H . Lengel ( 1984 ) . FIGURE4 . Relationship of Interdepartmental Characteristics with Structure and Information Required for Coordination . 566 RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL When differentiation is small , such as between an industrial engineering and mechanical engineering department , but interdependence is high , as in Cell 4 , a different form of coordination will apply . These departments can rely more heavily on a high volume of data processed through impersonal communications . Information can be exchanged through plans , reports , schedules , updated data bases , charts , budgets and memos . Much coordination can be achieved through less rich media because equivocality is low . Finally , in Cell 3 interdependence and differentiation are both low , so the informa - tion needed for coordination will be minimal . Cell 3 is similar to the pooled interde - pendence described by Thompson ( 1967 ) . A series of branch banks have similar perspectives and little need for interaction , so they can be coordinated through standardized rules and operating procedures . Personal or group contact is infrequent because there is little equivocality to be resolved and little need for mutual adjustment . Environment The final source of organizational information processing is interpretation of the external environment . The environment is a major factor in organizational structure and internal processes ( Duncan 1972 ; Pfeffer and Salancik 1978 ; Leblebici and Salancik 1981 ) . As an open system , an organization cannot seal itself off from the environment ( Thompson 1967 ) . The organization must have mechanisms to learn about and interpret external events . Weick ' s ( 1979 ) discussion of equivocality emphasized that many events in the environment are inherently unclear . Managers discuss these events and enact a definition and common grammar so that organizational action may follow . Likewise , data can be accumulated to reduce uncertainty about objective indicators such as market share and customer demographics . Information processing about the external environment must meet the dual needs of equivocality and uncertainty reduction . Figure 5 is adapted from Weick and Daft ( 1983 ) and illustrates the relationship between the organization ' s environment and the dual information processing needs . Equivocality is related to the analyzability of cause - effect relationships in the external environment ( Thompson 1967 ; Tung 1979 ) . When environmental relationships are clear and analyzable , equivocality is low , and managers can rely on the acquisition of explicit data to answer questions that arise . For example , research by Wilensky ( 1967 ) and Aguilar ( 1967 ) found significant differences among organizations in the extent the environment was seen as rationalized and objective data collected . When the cause - effect relationships are unclear , information processing must reduce equivocality . Managers must discuss , argue , and ultimately agree on a reasonable interpretation that makes action sensible and suggests some next steps . The variation in uncertainty along the horizontal dimension in Figure 5 is related to the amount of data collected about the external environment . Organizations range from being passive with respect to data collection to those that actively search the environment on a continuous basis ( Fahey and King 1977 ; Aguilar 1967 ) . When the environment is perceived as hostile , competitive , rapidly changing , or when the organization depends heavily on the environment for resources , the organization gathers more data about the environment ( Pfeffer and Salancik 1978 ; Wilensky 1967 ) . Organizations develop multiple lines of inquiry into the environment because man - agers feel uncertainty . Organizations in benevolent , stable , noncompetitive environ - ments have less incentive to gather data ( Wilensky 1967 ; Hedberg 1981 ) because uncertainty is low . Based upon these ideas , organizations in Cell 1 of Figure 5 do not actively seek environmental data , but do reduce equivocality . Rich media are used to interpret events , and insights are obtained from personal contacts with significant others in the 567 ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS environment . Data tend to be personal , nonroutine and informal , and are obtained as the opportunity arises . In Cell 2 , organizations are more active . Organizations combine the acquisition of new data with the creation of new interpretations about the environment . Managers may reduce equivocality through trial and error experimen - tation as well as by acquiring more data about the external environment . Frequent meetings and debates will occur . In Cell 4 , formalized search is the primary informa - tion vehicle . This organization has a well - defined environment which can be measured and analyzed through questionnaires , surveys , and other means of data collection . Managers reduce a high level of uncertainty by asking questions through management information systems , special purpose reports , and scanning departments . In Cell 3 , neither equivocality nor uncertainty is high . The organization has established rules , procedures , reports , and information systems that reduce the need for external infor - mation . The environment is not hostile and the organization has little need to collect large amounts of environmental data . 7 . Summary and Conclusion This paper began by asking the question , " Why do organizations process informa - tion ? " The proposed answer is to effectively manage both uncertainty and equivocal - ity . Uncertainty and equivocality represent two forces identified in the literature that influence the information processing required for organizations to attain adequate Cause - Effect 1 . Unanalyzable , Certain 2 . Unanalyzable , Uncertain Relationships Unanalyzable Structure : Structure : a . Rich media to resolve equivocal a . Rich media to resolve equivocal cues cues b . Small amount of information b . Large amount of information to reduce uncertainty Examples : Irregular external contacts , Examples : Send agents to field , frequent casual information , professional meetings , project teams , trial and error , associations , occasional meetings , separate scanning position or department , delphi . dialectical inquiry . ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT ENVIRONMENT 3 . Analyzable , Certain 4 . Analyzable , Uncertain Structure : Structure : a . Media of lower richness a . Media of lower richness b . Small amount of information b . Large amount of information to reduce uncertainty Examples : Regular record keeping and Examples : Special department , surveys , reports , rules , procedures , newspapers , studies , formal reports , scanning trade magazines . services , bulletins , trade magazines . Cause - Effect Relationships Analyzable Passive ORGANIZATIONAL INTRUSIVENESS Active Source : Based on K . E . Weick and R . L . Daft ( 1983 ) . FIGURE 5 . Relationship of Environmental Characteristics with Structure and Information Required for Scanning and Interpretation . RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL FIGURE Summary Model of Information Processing and Organization Design . 6 . performance . Organizations can be structured through the use of personal or imper - sonal mechanisms to manage equivocality and uncertainty . Depending on the type of the technology , degree of required interdepartmental integration , and the nature of the environment , structural mechanisms can be adopted to meet management ' s need for additional data or the need to create a common grammar and interpretation about ambiguous events . The purpose of this paper was to tie together a number of threads from the organizational literature , which are summarized in Figure 6 . The notions of uncer - tainty and equivocality , structural mechanisms to reflect information needs , media richness , and of technology , interdependence , and environment as causes of informa - tion processing , have been discussed in the literature . This paper attempted to integrate equivocality with uncertainty and argue that structural characteristics are used to help organizations cope with these two factors . Research pertaining to technology , interde - partmental relationships , and environment was shown to have common themes consis - tent with the equivocality / uncertainty framework . Figure 6 is adapted from Tushman and Nadler ( 1978 ) , and illustrates how organizational context influences uncertainty and equivocality , and that effective design will provide the appropriate amount and richness of information . This paper also offered a preliminary answer to a second and related question , " How do organizations process information ? " Figure 2 and the frameworks for technology , interdepartmental relationships , and environment in Figures 3 , 4 and 5 proposed specific structural mechanisms to enable the correct amount and type of information processing . Each structural characteristic - from rules and procedures to group meetings - was proposed to have a specific role that enabled the reduction of equivocality and uncertainty . The frameworks developed in this paper suggest specific themes about organiza - tional information processing that can be tested in future research . For example , the ambiguity confronting managers in organizations may be as important to structural design and information processing as the need to obtain explicit data to reduce uncertainty . Previous research has measured information processing by counting communication activities such as the number of letters , phone calls , or oral communi - cations , or by examining the geometry or frequency of data flow between specific points in the organization ( Tushman 1978 ; Bavelas 1950 ; Leavitt 1951 ; Allen and Cohen 1969 ) . These studies have made important contributions , but they assume a reasonably well - defined field for managers and that data flow is sufficient for under - standing information processing . The frameworks in this paper imply that data counting may oversimplify information management within organizations . A major problem for organizations is lack of clarity , not lack of explicit data . The approach to equivocality is for managers to develop and agree upon a definition of the situation . The nature of equivocality and its impact on managers represent a new and potentially important avenue of research into information processing . Some preliminary studies have already been undertaken ( Putnam and Sorenson 1982 ) , but additional research is needed to understand equivocality within organizations . 569 ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS In the case of environmental scanning , an interesting research question is how organizations obtain a clear view of where it fits within the environment and where it is going . Organizations could be simulated in a laboratory ( Cameron and Whetten 1981 ) and monitored for the types of information mechanisms that evolve to reduce ambiguity and manage uncertainty . Different levels of uncertainty and equivocality could be designed into the simulated environment . Field studies that explore how organizations scan and interpret the external environment , and how information feeds into decision making ( Huber and McDaniel 1986 ) could also make a valuable contribution . In summary , a feature that distinguishes human social systems from lower level mechanical and biological systems is equivocality ( Boulding 1956 ) . Social systems do not work with machine - like precision ; human beings have the capacity to interpret and respond to ambiguity . Yet the concept of equivocality has not been included in most studies and models of organizational design and information processing . Bringing equivocality into future studies of organizational design may provide richer and more accurate assessments of organizational behavior . Future research may be able to elaborate and test the ideas presented in this paper , and especially to define the underlying relationships between patterns of equivocality / uncertainty and their fit with organization structure and design . ' ' The preparation of this manuscript was supported by the Office of Naval Research grant N00014 - 83 - C - 0025 . We would like to thank Don Hellriegel , George Huber , Arie Lewin , and an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper . References AGUILAR , F . , Scanning the Business Environment , Macmillan , New York , 1967 . ALLEN , T . J . AND S . COHEN , " Information Flow in R & D Labs , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 14 ( 1969 ) , 12 - 19 . BALIGH , N . M . AND R . M . BURTON , " Describing and Designing Organization Structure and Processes , " Internat . J . Policy Analysis and Information Systems , 5 , 4 ( 198 l ) , 251 - 266 . BAVELAS , A , , " Communication Patterns in Task - Oriented Groups , " J . Acoustical Soc . Amer . , 22 ( 1950 ) , 725 - 730 . BECKER , S . W . AND B . NICHOLAS , " Organization Structure and Complex Problem Solving , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 14 ( 1969 ) , 260 - 27 1 . BENDIG , A . W . , " Twenty Questions : An Information Analysis , " J . Experimental Psychology , 46 ( 1953 ) , 345 - 348 . BOULDING , K . E . , " General Systems Theory : The Skeleton of a Science , " Management Sci . , 2 ( 1956 ) , 197 - 207 . BURNS , T . AND G . M . STALKER , The Management of Innovation , Tavistock Publications , London , 1961 . BURTON , R . M . AND P . OBEL , " A Computer Simulation Test of the M - Form Hypothesis , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 25 ( 1980 ) , 457 - 466 . CAMERON , " Perceptions of Organizational Effectiveness Over Organizational Life K . S . AND D . A . WHETTEN , Cycles , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 26 ( 1981 ) , 525 - 544 . CHILD , J . , Organizations : A Guide to Problems and Practice , Harper & Row , New York , 1977 . COHEN , M . D . , J . G . MARCH AND J . P . OLSEN , " A Garbage Can Model of Organizational Choice , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 17 ( 1972 ) , 1 - 25 . CYERT , R . N . AND J . G . MARCH , A Behavioral Theory of the Firm , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , N . J . , 1963 . DAFT , R . L . , Organization Theory and Design , Second ed . , West , St . Paul , MN , 1986 . - , AND R . H . LENGEL , " Information Richness : A New Approach to Manager Information Processing and Organization Design , " in Research in Organizational Behavior , B . Staw and L . L . Cummings ( Eds . ) , JAI Press , Greenwich , Conn . , 1984 . - , AND N . B . MACINTOSH , " A Tentative Exploration into the Amount and Equivocality of Information Processing in Organizational Work Units , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 26 ( 1981 ) , 207 - 224 . - - AND - - , " The Nature and Use of Formal Control Systems for Management Control and Strategy Implementation , " J . Management , 10 ( 1984 ) , 43 - 66 . - - - - - AND K . E . WEICK , " Toward a Model of Organizations as Interpretation Systems , " Acad . Manage - ment Rev . , 9 ( 1984 ) , 284 - 295 . 570 RICHARD L . DAFT AND ROBERT H . LENGEL - AND J . WIGINTON , " Language and Organization , " Acad . Management Rev . , 4 , 2 ( 1979 ) , 179 - 191 . DAVIS , S . M . AND P . R . LAWRENCE , Matrix , Addison - Wesley Publishing Co . , Reading , Mass . , 1977 . DELBECQ , A . L . , A . H . VAN DE VEN AND D . H . GUSTAFSON , Group Techniques for Program Planning , Scott , Foresman and Co . , Glenview , IL , 1975 . DOWNEY , H . K . AND J . W . SLOCUM , " Uncertainty : Measures , Research , and Sources of Variation , " Acad . Management J . , 18 ( 1975 ) , 562 - 577 . DUNCAN , R . B . , " Characteristics of Organizational Environment and Perceived Environmental Uncer - tainty , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 17 ( 1972 ) , 313 - 327 . FAHEY , L . AND W . R . KING , " Environmental Planning for Corporate Planning , " Business Horizons , 4 , 20 ( 1977 ) , 61 - 71 . GALBRAITH , J . , Designing Complex Organizations , Addison - Wesley , Reading , Mass . , 1973 . - , Organizational Design , Addison - Wesley , Reading , Mass . , 1977 . GANTZ , J . AND V . V . MURRAY , " The Experience of Workplace Politics , " Acad . Management J . , 23 ( 1980 ) , 237 - 25 1 . GARNER , W . R . , Uncertainty and Structure as Psychological Concepts , Wiley , New York , 1962 . GASTON , J . , " Communication and the Reward System of Science : A Study of National and Visible Colleges , " Sociological Rev . Monograph , 18 ( 1972 ) , 24 - 4 1 . GRUBER , W . , 0 . PONSGEN " Research on the Interface Factor in the Development of New AND F . PRAKKE , Technology , " R & D Management , 4 ( 1974 ) , 157 - 163 . HALL , R . , " Intra - organizational Structure Variation , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 7 ( 1962 ) , 295 - 308 . HEDBERG , B . , " How Organizations Learn and Unlearn , " in A Handbook of Organizational Design , T . Nystrom and W . Starbuck ( Eds . ) , Oxford University Press , New York , 1981 . HUBER , G . P . AND R . R . MCDANIEL , " The Decision Making Paradigm of Organization Design , " Manage - ment Sci . , 32 ( 1986 ) . KREPS , G . L . , " A Field Experimental Test and Revaluation of Weick ' s Model of Organizing , " in Communi - cation Yearbook , 4 , D . Nimmo ( Ed . ) , 1980 , 389 - 398 . LAWRENCE , AND " New Managerial Job : The Integrator , " Harvard Business Rev . , P . R . J . W . LORSCH , ( November - December 1967a ) , 142 - 15 1 . - - - - - - AND - - - - , Organization and Environment , Division of Research , Harvard Business School , Boston , Mass . , 1967b . LEAVITT , H . J . , " Some Effects of Certain Communication Patterns on Group Performance , " J . Abnormal and Social Psychology , 46 ( 1951 ) , 38 - 50 . LEBLEBICI , " Effects of Environmental Uncertainty on Information and Decision H . AND G . R . SALANCIK , Processes in Banks , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 26 ( 1981 ) , 578 - 596 . LENGEL , R . H . AND R . L . DAFT , " An Exploratory Analysis of the Relationship Between Media Richness and Managerial Information Processing , " Workmg Paper , Texas A & M University , 1984 . LEWIN , A . Y . AND J . W . MINTON , " Organizational Effectiveness : Another Look , and an Agenda for Research , " Management Science , 32 ( 1986 ) . LORANGE , P . AND R . F . VANCIL , " How to Design a Strategic Planning System , " Harvard Business Rev . , 54 ( September - October 1976 ) , 75 - 8 1 . MACKENZIE , K . D . , " Organizational Structures as the Primal Information System , " in Management of Office Information Systems , S . K . Chang ( Ed . ) , Plenum Publishing Corporation , New York , 1984 , 27 - 46 . MARCH , J . G . AND J . P . OLSEN , Ambiguity and Choice in Organization , Universitetsforlaget , Bergen , Norway , 1976 . - AND H . A . SIMON , Organizations , John Wiley , New York , 1958 . MARSCHAK , Economic Theory of Teams , Yale University Press , New Haven , 1972 . J . AND R . RADNER , MEISSNER , M . , Technology and the Worker , Chandler , San Francisco , 1969 . MILLER , G . A . AND F . C . FRICK , " Statistical Behaviorists and Sequences of Responses , " Psychological Rev . , 56 ( 1949 ) , 3 11 - 324 . MINTZBERG , AND A . THEORET , H . , D . RAISINGHANI " The Structure of ' Unstructured ' Decision Processes , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 21 ( 1976 ) , 246 - 275 . MITROFF , I . I . AND J . R . EMSHOFF , " On Strategic Assumption - Making : A Dialectical Approach to Policy and Planning , " Acad . Management Rev . , 4 ( 1979 ) , 1 - 12 . PARSONS , G . L . , " Information Technology : A New Competitive Weapon , " Sloan Management Rev . , 25 , 1 ( 1983 ) , 3 - 14 . PERROW , C . , " A Framework for the Comparative Analysis of Organizations , " Amer . Sociological Rev . , 32 ( 1967 ) , 194 - 208 . PFEFFER , J . AND G . R . SALANCIK , The External Control of Organizations : A Resource Dependence Perspective , Harper & Row , New York , 1978 . PONDY , L . R . AND I . I . MITROFF , " Beyond Open Systems Models of Organization , " in Research in Organizational Behavior , B . M . Staw ( Ed . ) , JAI Press , Greenwich , Conn . , 1979 . PUGH , D . , D . J . HICKSON , C . R . HININGS AND C . TURNER , " The Context of Organization Structures , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 14 ( 1969 ) , 91 - 1 14 . ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS 57 1 PUTNAM , L . L . AND R . L . SORENSON , " Equivocal Messages in Organizations , " Human Communication Res . , 8 ( 1982 ) , 114 - 132 . RANDOLPH , W . A , , " Organizational Technology and the Media and Purpose Dimensions of Organizational Communications , " J . Business Res . , 6 ( 1978 ) , 237 - 259 . REYNOLDS , E . V . AND J . D . JOHNSON , " Liaison Emergence : Relating Theoretical Perspectives , " Acad . Management Rev . , 7 ( 1982 ) , 55 1 - 559 . SAUNDERS , C . S . , " Management Information Systems , Communications , and Departmental Power : An Integrated Model , " Acad . Management Rev . , 6 ( 198 l ) , 43 1 - 442 . SCHOONHOVEN , with Contingency Theory : Testing Assumptions Hidden the C . B . , " Problems Within Language of Contingency ' Theory ' , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 26 ( 1981 ) , 349 - 377 . SHANNON , C . E . AND W . WEAVER , The Mathematical Theory of Communication , University of Illinois Press , Urbana , 1949 . SHRIVASTAVA , P . AND I . I . MITROFF , " Enhancing Organizational Research Utilization : The Role of Decision Maker ' s Assumptions , " Acad . Management Rev . , 9 ( 1984 ) , 18 - 26 . SIMON , H . A . , The New Science of Management Decision , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , N . J . , 1960 . STEINER , G . A , , " Formal Strategic Planning in the United States Today , " Long Range Planning , 16 , 3 ( 1983 ) , 12 - 17 . TAYLOR , D . W . AND W . L . FAUST , " Twenty Questions : Efficiency in Problem Solving as a Function of Size of Group , " J . Experimental Psychology , 44 ( 1952 ) , 360 - 368 . THOMPSON , J . D . , Organizations in Action , McGraw - Hill , New York , 1967 . TUNG , R . L . , " Dimensions of Organizational Environment : An Exploratory Study of Their Impact on Organization Structure , " Acad . Management J . , 22 ( 1979 ) , 672 - 693 . TUSHMAN , M . L . , " Technical Communication in R & D Laboratories : The Impact of Project Work Charac - teristics , " Acad . Management J . , 2 1 ( 1978 ) , 624 - 645 . - , " Work Characteristics and Subunit Communication Structure : A Contingency Analysis , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 24 ( 1979 ) , 82 - 98 . - AND D . A . NADLER , " Information Processing as an Integrating Concept in Organization Design , " Acad . Management Rev . , 3 ( 1978 ) , 6 13 - 624 . UNGSON , G . R . , D . N . BRAUNSTEIN P . D . HALL , " Managerial Information Processing : A Research AND Review , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 26 ( 1981 ) , 1 16 - 134 . VAN DE VEN , A . H . AND A . L . DELBECQ , " A Task Contingent Model of Work - Unit Structure , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 19 ( 1974 ) , 183 - 197 . - - AND R . KOENIG , JR . , " Determinants of Coordination Modes Within Organizations , " Amer . Sociological Rev . , 41 ( 1976 ) , 322 - 338 . - - - - - AND D . L . FERRY , Measuring and Assessing Organizations , Wiley Interscience , New York , 1980 . WEICK , K . E . , " Educational Organizations as Loosely Coupled Systems , " Admin . Sci . Quart . , 21 ( 1976 ) , 1 - 19 . - , The Social Psychology of Organizing , Addison - Wesley , Reading , Mass . , 1979 . - - - - - AND R . L . DAFT , " The Effectiveness of Interpretation Systems , " in Organizational Effectiveness : A Comparison of Multiple Models : 71 - 93 , K . S . Cameron and D . A . Whetten ( Eds . ) , Academic Press , New York , 1983 . WILENSKY , H . L . , Organizational Intelligence , Basic Books , New York , 1967 . WOODWARD , J . , Industrial Organization : Theory and Practice , Oxford University Press , London , 1965 .