An Exploratory Study of Web Foraging to Understand and Support Programming Decisions Jane Hsieh , Department of Computer Science , Oberlin College Michael Xieyang Liu , Brad A . Myers , and Aniket Kittur , Human Computer Interaction Institute , Carnegie Mellon University Programming is a cognitively demanding process involving a variety tasks such as information gathering , sensemaking and decision - making . Programmers today are becoming more reliant on the growing amount of information available . To understand the types of questions and solutions that programmers seek , we analyze Stack Overflow questions by category and assess the proportion of questions that were compatible with the comparison table – our alternative model of representation , designed to reduce the costs of sensemaking and decision - making . Finally , the usability of the comparison table as a representation model is tested using a within - subjects A / B test . A comparison table uses 3 types of collected information : • Options – rows are ways of completing a task • Criteria – columns of requirements needed for solving the problem or completing the task • Snippets – code or other relevant web content Up and down thumbs rate options according to the criteria , supported by linked snippets . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK Goal : To test whether the model improves speed and / or accuracy of the sensemaking process . Method : Within - subject A / B test • A : subjects were asked to answer comprehension questions using a comparison table • B : subjects were asked to answer comprehension questions using the original Stack Overflow page • Question and tool - use were both counterbalanced for order Subjective rating results • User’s likelihood to use the comparison table for a programming task in the future : 4 . 75 / 7 • Level of difficulty with using the table : 3 . 5 / 7 From these results we have observed initial success with the comparison table as a mental model for representing information found in question pages on Stack Overflow . Assistive tools can be developed to help facilitate and improve the user’s sensemaking and decision - making processes . Future work is needed to study to what extent decision questions like these are common in other domains besides programming , and if our proposed tools could help in those contexts as well . MODEL OF REPRESENTATION PRELIMINARY USER STUDY To gather questions from popular questions and as well as the long tail of the distribution , we formed more specific queries to find our final samples : The first sample of 92 Stack Overflow questions were classified into 4 broad categories : 1 . Methodological , tool - foraging questions where a programmer seeks methods or code snippets . 2 . Debugging questions with specific context such as error messages or step - by - step instructions . 3 . Abstract conceptual inquiries which often trigger discussions and debates or summaries of concepts 4 . Concept - specific questions where a forager seeks understand how particular methods / commands work SAMPLING AND CATEGORIZATION • Results from initial analysis : questions from the methodological and concept - specific categories are more compatible with the comparison table . Initial Queries Questions “how to answers : 10” with active filter 21 “which should views : 500000” b 20 Hot filter ( “hottest” questions today ) 20 Month filter 19 “how to” with votes filter 13 Sample Queries Compatible Questions Most viewed questions 44 / 50 88 % Questions asked on 6 / 15 / 18 with 3 or more answers 44 / 90 49 % INTRODUCTION Above comparison table was constructed using the UNAKITE tool , a Chrome extension that helps end - users capture and organize web content into comparison tables . https : / / janeon . github . io / help /