Abstract . Inositol pyrophosphates belong to the diverse family of inositol polyphosphate species that have a range of signaling functions . Since the discovery of inositol py - rophosphates in the early 1990s , enormous progress has been achieved in characterising this class of molecules , linking their biological presence to a wide range of cellu - lar functions , including vesicular trafficking , apoptosis , telomere maintenance and protein phosphorylation . The activity of inositol pyrophosphates appears to be related Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 63 ( 2006 ) 552 – 564 1420 - 682X / 06 / 050552 - 13 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 005 - 5446 - z © Birkhäuser Verlag , Basel , 2006 to their rapid turnover in cells and also to their pyrophos - phate groups , which are considered to contain high - en - ergy bonds . Together , these observations suggest that in - ositol pyrophosphates may represent a class of cellular messengers with basic and not yet fully characterised functions . This review aims at summarising the recent progress of our knowledge of this exciting class of mole - cules , from inositol pyrophosphate discovery to the de - scription of their physiological functions . Key words . Inositol pyrophosphates ; signaling ; kinase ; phosphorylation ; metabolism ; phytic acid . Introduction Inositol polyphosphates occur ubiquitously in nature , the best characterised being inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) , a molecule that acts as a second messenger and trig - gers calcium release from intracellular stores [ 1 , 2 ] . Inos - itol hexakisphosphate ( IP 6 , also known as phytic acid ) is by far the most abundant inositol polyphosphate in eu - karyotic cells , with a concentration in mammalian cells in the range of 10 – 60 m M [ 3 , 4 ] and up to 0 . 7 mM in slime moulds [ 5 ] . IP 6 is known to have housekeeping functions as a phosphate storage molecule and as an antioxidant through its metal - chelating properties [ 6 , 7 ] . More spe - cific roles attributed to IP 6 as a signaling molecule in - volve the regulation of vesicular trafficking [ 7 ] as well as several nuclear events [ 7 – 10 ] . IP 6 is also the precursor of inositol pyrophosphates , in which the fully phosphory - lated IP 6 ring is further phosphorylated to create mole - cules that contain one or two high - energy pyrophosphate bonds ( fig . 1 ) [ 11 , 12 ] . The best characterised inositol pyrophosphates are IP 7 and IP 8 , which possess one and two pyrophosphate moi - eties , respectively [ 11 , 12 ] . IP 7 and IP 8 are present in all eukaryotic cells analysed thus far , from the amoeba , Dic - tyostelium discoideum , to mammalian neurons ; more - over , the enzymes responsible for their synthesis are highly conserved throughout evolution . Under most cir - cumstances the concentrations and the relative ratios of IP 6 , IP 7 and IP 8 are stable in eukaryotic cells . This stabil - ity is , however , a function of the rapid turnover of inosi - tol pyrophosphates . As observed in cultured mammalian cells , the extent of this turnover is such that 20 – 30 % of the large IP 6 reservoir is converted every hour to inositol pyrophosphates [ 11 , 13 , 14 ] . This dynamic turnover has led to the hypothesis that IP 7 and IP 8 may be responsible for many of the signaling - related functions previously attributed to IP 6 , and that the turnover of inositol py - rophosphates may constitute a molecular switching ac - tivity [ 15 ] . Review Inositol pyrophosphates : metabolism and signaling M . Bennett , S . M . N . Onnebo , C . Azevedo and A Saiardi * Medical Research Council ( MRC ) Cell Biology Unit and Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology , Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University College London , Gower Street , London WC1E 6BT ( United Kingdom ) , Fax : + 44 20 7679 7805 , e - mail : dmcbado @ ucl . ac . uk Received 29 September 2005 ; received after revision 2 November 2005 ; accepted 16 November 2005 Online First 25 January 2006 * Corresponding author . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences Several good reviews that focus on the pathways that ul - timately lead to inositol pyrophosphate synthesis already exist [ 2 , 15 – 17 ] . Here we particularly focus on the meta - bolic and signaling pathways associated with inositol py - rophosphates . As this review is aimed at an audience un - familiar with inositol pyrophosphates , we have used a simplified nomenclature : IP 7 corresponds to diphospho - inositol pentakisphosphate and IP 8 to bis - diphosphoino - sitol tetrakisphosphate . An explanation of the scientific - ally correct chemical nomenclature is presented in table 1 and some of their chemical structures are represented in figure 1 . Inositol pyrophosphate discovery The name inositol derives from the Greek word ino mean - ing ‘sinew’ , which reflects its role as a vitamin . But we can also offer a different interpretation based on the mol - ecular ‘strength’and the metabolic stability of the inositol ring inside cells . Eukaryotic cells readily take up inositol from their extracellular media without any significant degradation . This property of inositol greatly facilitates the labeling and detection , usually with tritiated - inositol Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 553 Figure 1 . Inositol pyrophosphate chemical structure . The figure shows the structure of phytic acid with its pyrophosphate derivate IP 7 and IP 8 , as well as IP 5 , with the derivate pyrophosphates PP - IP 4 and [ PP ] 2 - IP 3 . The pyrophosphate group in IP 7 is attached to C - 5 , which repre - sents the mammalian form of this molecule . The same is assumed for PP - IP 4 . The two forms of IP 7 in Dictyostelium are present with the pyrophosphate group attached to C - 5 or C - 6 , with this last isomer being predominant . No mammalian structure is known for the bis - py - rophosphorylate inositol IP 8 and [ PP ] 2 - IP 3 . Here , we represented the Dictyostelium IP 8 resolved structure , where pyrophosphate moieties are present in positions C - 5 and C - 6 . In the figures , carbon , oxygen and phosphate atoms are coloured grey , red and green , respectively . The figures were made using myo - inositol as a starting molecule , where the C2 is in axial position , while the remaining carbons are in equa - torial positions . Table 1 . Inositol polyphosphate nomenclature . Name Alternative Scientific nomenclature used common names IP 5 Ins ( 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ) P 5 inositol pentakisphosphate IP 6 InsP 6 , Phytic acid inositol hexakisphosphate IP 7 InsP 7 , PP - InsP 5 diphosphoinositol pentakisphos - phate IP 8 InsP 8 , [ PP ] 2 - InsP 4 , bis - diphosphoinositol 2 [ PP ] - InsP 4 tetrakisphosphate PP - IP 4 PP - InsP 4 diphosphoinositol tetrakisphos - phate [ PP ] 2 - IP 3 [ PP ] 2 - InsP 3 bis - diphosphoinositol trisphos - phate PP - IP 3 – diphosphoinositol trisphosphate [ PP ] 2 - IP 2 – bis - diphosphoinositol bikisphos - phate The left column contains the inositol polyphosphate names used in this review . We simplified the suffix for inositol from ‘Ins’to ‘I’ , as done previously . We only refer to the most common of the six pos - sible IP 5 isomers , as shown in the table . Diphospho - represents the scientific correct nomenclature to indicate a pyrophosphate moiety ; however , the prefix ‘pyro’ better translates the ‘high energy’ char - acteristic of these molecules . ( [ 3 H ] inositol ) , of the different inositol polyphosphate species . Inside the cell , the [ 3 H ] inositol enters into a com - plex metabolic system that includes phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions and even the formation of lipid - bound inositol molecules . Since a full description of the pathways involved in inositol polyphosphate metabo - lism is beyond the scope of this review , we direct the read - ers to the following references [ 2 , 15 – 17 ] . After several hours or days , depending on the experimental system , the metabolism of [ 3 H ] inositol reaches equilibrium , and all the inositol polyphosphates species are in balance with [ 3 H ] inositol . The resulting inositol polyphosphates species are acid extracted and separated by strong anion exchange high - performance liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) . Examples of the [ 3 H ] inositol species eluted by anion exchange from mammalian neurons and yeast are shown in figure 2A and B , respectively . Although researchers in the early 1990s had observed in - ositol species that we now classify as pyrophosphorylated [ 18 – 20 ] , it is generally acknowledged that inositol py - rophosphates were discovered in 1993 by two independent research groups [ 11 , 20 ] characterising a chromatographic peak that eluted after , and therefore more anionic than , IP 6 . Len Stephens and co - workers , following on from their research on the stepwise phosphorylation of inositol in Dictyostelium [ 20 ] , isolated inositol pyrophosphate species [ 12 ] . To confirm the pyrophosphate component of these species , they used a combination of 1 H - 31 P nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) and enzymatic analyses . They also showed that Dictyostelium cell lysates utilised ATP to synthesise inositol pyrophosphates [ 12 ] . In mammalian cells , Stephen Shears and co - workers , using fluoride an - ions as metabolic traps to inhibit phosphatases , were also able to detect the ATP - dependent formation of [ 3 H ] ino - sitol pyrophosphates [ 11 ] . These two studies identified three inositol pyrophosphate species : IP 7 , IP 8 and PP - IP 4 . At present no inositol pyrophosphates more anionic than IP 8 have been detected under normal physiological condi - tions . However , lesser phosphorylated forms of inositol pyrophosphates , including species putatively identified as PP - IP 3 and [ PP ] 2 - IP 2 , have been seen in chromatographic separations from yeast strains defective for enzymes in - volved in the inositol polyphosphate metabolic pathway [ 21 ] . The discovery of these molecules suggests that the inositol pyrophosphate family can be expanded with the identification of other ‘lower’phosphorylated inositol py - rophosphates . The total concentration of inositol pyrophosphate species in cells is in the sub - micromolar range , accounting for less than 5 % of the IP 6 concentration . However , slime moulds such as Dictyostelium discoideum have IP 7 and IP 8 levels in the 100 – 200 m M range [ 22 ] . So great is their concentration that the IP 7 and IP 8 species have been puri - fied from Dictyostelium , and their structures elucidated by 1 H - 31 P 2D NMR spectroscopy [ 23 ] and isomeric analysis using stereospecific inositol phosphatases [ 24 ] . These structures revealed a single IP 8 isomer present as 5 , 6 - [ PP ] 2 - IP 4 and two IP 7 isomers , 5 - PP - IP 5 and 6 - PP - IP 5 [ 25 ] , with a relatively higher abundance in vivo of the 6 - pyrophosphorylated species . It would be wrong , however , to assume that all IP 7 and IP 8 species have the same chem - istry . For instance , an IP 8 species from another amoeba , Polysphondylium pallidum , has been identified as 1 , 5 - [ PP ] 2 - IP 4 [ 26 ] , and an IP 7 species from Entamoeba his - tolytica as 5 - PP - IP 5 [ 27 ] . In mammalian cells the struc - ture of only one IP 7 species has been studied and shown to be 5 - pyrophosphorylated [ 25 ] . While it is well known that myo - inositol is the most abundant inositol isomer found in organisms , pyrophosphate derivatives of other isomers exist . For instance , Entamoeba histolytica pos - sesses two neo - inositol pyrophosphate species , 2 - PP - neo - IP 5 and 2 , 5 - [ PP ] 2 - neo - IP 4 [ 27 ] . Thus , despite the great challenges in purifying the quantities of inositol pyro - phosphate species necessary for structural analyses , these results indicate that the inositol pyrophosphates are struc - turally diverse and may also suggest that organisms pos - sess multiple inositol pyrophosphate species with varied functions . Metabolism of inositol pyrophosphates Anabolism Simultaneous with the discovery of inositol pyrophos - phates , it was observed that they are rapidly metabolised 554 M . Bennett et al . Inositol pyrophosphates Figure 2 . The HPLC analysis of [ 3 H ] inositol - labeled cells . ( A ) Pri - mary rat cortical neurons were labeled for 5 days and subsequently the soluble inositols were acid extracted and analysed by strong an - ion HPLC as previously described [ 82 ] . ( B ) Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae were labeled overnight to steady state with [ 3 H ] inositol . After breaking the cell with glass beads , the soluble inositols were extracted , and HPLC was separated [ 60 ] . The elution of inositol polyphosphate standards is indicated . in cells . Shears and co - workers studying inositol py - rophosphate metabolism in a variety of mammalian cells found that about 20 % of the IP 5 pool and 50 % of the IP 6 pool are converted within 1 h to the pyrophosphate deriv - atives PP - IP 4 and IP 7 , respectively [ 11 ] . Similarly , in pri - mary hepatocytes the pool of IP 7 is turned over 10 times every 40 min , compared with 1 / 10th of the pools of IP 6 [ 13 ] . In mammalian cells , IP 8 levels are sensitive to a va - riety of pharmacological agents [ 28 ] . A single study on the variations of inositol polyphosphates with respect to the cell cycle in WRK - 1 mammalian cell has shown a twofold difference in IP 7 levels between the G1 and S phases of the cell cycle [ 29 ] . Yet perhaps the most dramatic modulation of inositol pyrophosphate levels occurs during the life cy - cle of Dictyostelium and Polysphondylium ; here , inositol pyrophosphate concentrations increase considerably as the organisms reach the stationary phase , but disappear with sporulation [ 22 ] , cyclic AMP ( cAMP ) signaling has been implicated in these changes [ 30 ] . The first enzyme able to synthesise inositol pyrophos - phates was purified to homogeneity from rat brain in Solomon Snyder’s laboratory [ 31 ] . Inositol hexakisphos - phate kinase ( IP6K ) is able to convert IP 6 plus ATP to IP 7 and ADP ; ATP cannot be substituted by other nucleotides such as CTP or GTP [ 31 ] . The same laboratory later cloned the enzyme and initially characterised one yeast and two mammalian proteins with inositol hexakisphos - phate kinase activity , called KCS1 ( Kinase C Suppressor 1 , also known as yIP6K ) , IP6K1 and IP6K2 , respectively [ 32 ] . Independently , a second group while characterising an enzyme with sequence homology to I ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 - 3Ks ( IP 3 - 3K ) – a family of enzymes that converts I ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 to I ( 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 4 – showed that IP6K2 had previously been identified as a protein called PiUS ( Phosphate inorganic Uptake Stimulator ) , which is involved in the uptake of in - organic phosphate [ 33 ] . Subsequently , a third mammalian gene , IP6K3 , was cloned [ 34 ] . All the mammalian IP6Ks phosphorylate in vitro IP 6 to IP 7 , IP 5 to PP - IP 4 and [ PP ] 2 - IP 3 [ 34 , 35 ] . The high conservation of IP6Ks throughout evolution ( fig . 3 ) has facilitated the identification of IP6K enzymes from distant organisms , including Dictyostelium dis - coideum [ 30 ] . The cloning of IP6Ks also helped to iden - tify an evolutionarily conserved family of inositol polyphosphate kinases known as inositol polyphosphate multi - kinases ( IPMKs ) [ 32 ] . Characterization of yeast IPMK , also known as Arg82 , ArgRIII and IPK2 , demon - strated that this enzyme phosphorylated a broad range of substrates to yield a variety of inositol polyposphate re - action products [ 15 , 32 , 36 , 37 ] . Subsequently , the char - acterisation of IPMKs from other organisms has con - firmed that substrate ambiguity is a general property of these enzymes [ 36 – 40 ] , and that some IPMK proteins are able to synthesise inositol pyrophosphate species [ 38 , 41 , 42 ] . The use of recently discovered plant metabolites as specific inhibitors of IP 3 - 3K and IPMK [ 43 ] will clarify the role of these proteins in regulating cell functions . Altogether , the IP6Ks , IMPKs and IP 3 - 3Ks belong to an inositol polyphosphate kinase superfamily , the IPKs ( PFAM accession number PF03770 ) , that evolved from a common ancestor ( reviewed in [ 15 , 17 ] ) . Phylogenetic analysis of their sequences predicts that IP6Ks arose first , followed by IPMKs , and lastly IP 3 - 3Ks ( fig . 3 ) . Experi - mental analysis of IPK enzymes from evolutionary dis - tant organisms will be necessary to confirm this theoret - ical prediction . At present the structural information for this superfamily is limited to the crystal structures of the catalytic domains of a rat and human IP 3 - 3KA isoform [ 44 , 45 ] . An alignment of this IP 3 - 3KA structure with the sequences of IP6Ks and IMPKs shows that these three families differ mostly with respect to their inositol bind - ing domains . In IP 3 - 3KA , the inositol binding domain consists of a four a - helices , rich in basic residues and spans a region of 60 residues , while in both IP6Ks and IMPKs , the inositol binding domain is much shorter , spanning about 30 residues [ 44 ] . This structural informa - tion combined with the phylogenetic analysis of the IPK superfamily clearly supports the hypothesis that IP 3 - 3Ks are a recent evolutionary addition [ 33 ] that may have evolved in metazoans about the same time as IP 3 receptors [ 46 ] . While this raises intriguing questions regarding the evolution of inositol pyrophosphates as an event that pre - ceded the development of inositol polyposphate signaling ( fig . 3 ) , it is worth noting that structurally the catalytic domains of IP 3 - Ks minus their relatively small inositol binding domains are highly similar to the protein kinase superfamily [ 44 ] . Despite the low sequence homology between protein kinases and the IPK superfamilies , deeper sequence analysis may reveal that the protein ki - nase superfamily and the IPK superfamily share a com - mon ancestor , as suggested [ 44 ] ; otherwise they provide an extraordinary example of convergent evolution . As will be discussed in more detail later , inositol pyrophos - phates have also been implicated in the phosphorylation of proteins . This raises the possibility of an evolutionary adaptation of the substrate specificity of a protein kinase for the synthesis of IP 7 , which in turn is able to drive pro - tein phosphorylation . Recent reports suggest that other enzymes that do not be - long to the IPK family also synthesise inositol pyrophos - phates . York’s group reported the presence of large amounts of IP 7 in yeast null for kcs1 D and ddp1 D , an en - zyme that degrades inositol pyrophosphate ( see below ) . The enzymatic activity responsible for this IP 7 synthesis has been named inositol diphosphoryl synthase 1 ( IDS1 ) [ 47 ] . The same group has recently reported the existence of a second inositol pyrophosphate synthase gene product called IPS1 [ 21 ] . However , it can’t be excluded that IDS1 and IPS1 represent the same gene product [ 21 ] . Addi - tionally , Shear and co - workers using yeast lacking the Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 555 IP6K activity ( kcs1 D ) identified a novel IP 7 - Kinase activ - ity , which is able to specifically convert IP 7 to IP 8 [ 48 ] . This situation resembles the mammalian system , where the enzyme responsible for IP 8 synthesis , IP 7 - Kinase , has been purified but not cloned [ 49 ] . Catabolism At present , almost all the research on the catabolism of inositol pyrophosphates has focused on the MutT / Nudt / Nudix superfamily of phosphohydrolases . Shears’s group originally purified and cloned an enzyme with inositol pyrophosphatase activity from rat brain and named this enzyme diphosphoinositol polyphosphate phosphohydro - lase ( DIPP ) [ 50 ] . This led to the identification of a family of inositol pyrophosphatases which possess a conserved sequence , known as the MutT or Nudix motif , first iden - tified in the E . Coli MutT protein involved in DNA repair [ 51 ] . The importance of the MutT motif for the inositol pyrophosphatase activity of these enzymes has been con - firmed by site - directed mutagenesis [ 50 , 52 ] . Each phos - phohydrolase belonging to this superfamily has varied substrate specificity . In addition to recognising inositol pyrophosphate substrates , this family of phosphatases commonly degrade diadenosine polyphosphates ( Ap x A ) , molecules whose cellular roles are still uncertain , and sugar pyrophosphates , including phosphoribosylpy - rophosphate [ 53 ] , a substrate that regulates glycolysis and the synthesis of many molecules , including nucleotides . The overlapping specificity of the Nudix hydrolases has led to the speculation that there may be co - regulation of these substrates [ 51 ] . Studies in yeast strains altered by the deletion or addition of Nudix hydrolases have shown that the concentrations of inositol pyrophosphates and dideadenosine substrates do vary , but not necessarily in an easily explainable way . For instance , disruption of Aps1 , both an inositol py - rophosphohydrolase and Ap5A / Ap6A hydrolase , in Schi - zosaccharomyces pombe , increased IP 7 concentrations threefold without affecting diadenosine polyphosphate concentrations [ 54 ] . Overexpression of Aps1 , although resulting in 60 % greater enzymatic activity in cell ex - tracts , had no effect on inositol pyrophosphate levels but caused large increases in Ap5A concentrations [ 54 ] . The substrate ambiguity of the Nudix phosphohydrolases sug - gests that there may be some co - regulation between inos - itol pyrophosphates and nucleotide synthesis . Inositol pyrophosphate functions Inositol pyrophosphates are known to influence a variety of cellular functions . For simplicity , we review the physi - ological aspects affected by inositol pyrophosphates by dividing them with respect to the organism studied . How - ever , when a specific function has been studied in differ - ent organisms we will discuss them together . Inositol pyrophosphate in plants In plants the inositol pyrophosphate precursor , phytic acid , is the major source of phosphorus in developing 556 M . Bennett et al . Inositol pyrophosphates Figure 3 . Phylogenetic tree of IPK proteins family members . Phy - logram in which the branch lengths are proportional to the amount of inferred evolutionary change was generated with CLUSTAL W [ 104 ] , using identity matrix and window size 1 from the European Bioinformatic Institute ( EBI ) website . The tree was generated util - ising the most conserved domain of this protein family . We utilised 62 aa surrounding the inositol binding region PxxxDxKxG [ 17 , 32 , 105 , 106 ] , specifically from 14 aa before to 40 aa after . The IP6K proteins are represented in red , the IPMK enzymes are indicated in green and the IP 3 - 3K members are shown in blue . The black pro - teins represent two enzymes putatively classified as IP 3 - 3K and IP6K , but due to the particular divergent sequence and localisation on the tree , an analysis of their enzymatic properties is needed to confirm these classifications . Proteins that have been biochemi - cally tested to be a specific member of each sub - family of enzyme are underlined . The following abbreviations are used : At , Ara - bidopsis thaliana ; Ce , Caenorhabditis elegans ; Dd , Dictyostelium discoideum ; Dm , Drosophila melanogaster ; Hs , Homo sapiens ; Lu , Linus utilissimum ; Os , Oryza sativa ; Sc , Saccharomyces cere - visiae ; Sp , Schizosaccharomyces pombe . seeds . Furthermore , because phytic acid is deposited in protein bodies as a mixed salt of mineral cations , it also represents the major mineral storage for K + , Mg 2 + , Ca 2 + , Zn 2 + and Fe 3 + [ 6 ] . This property makes phytic acid the number one enemy of cattle producers because the chela - tion of mineral cations reduces their dietary availability and also contributes to the eutrophication of surface wa - ters . Forms of inositol more anionic than phytic acid have been reported in duckweed , Spirodela polyrrhiza [ 55 ] , and bar - ley [ 56 , 57 ] . During turion formation in duckweed , low levels of one , and sometimes two , peaks more anionic than IP 6 , possibly IP 7 and IP 8 , have been observed . In this organism , the plant hormone abscisic acid leads to a dra - matic increase in IP 6 , while IP 7 and IP 8 levels remain un - altered or under the detection limit [ 55 ] . Studies in ma - ture and germinating barley seeds have reported the pres - ence of a species more anionic than IP 6 , likely to be IP 7 [ 56 , 57 ] . It has been suggested that in developing barley seeds , the low level of inositol pyrophosphates is a con - sequence of their rapid turnover rather than a reduced rate of synthesis [ 57 ] . Analysis of the completed Arabidopsis thaliana genome has revealed that it only possesses two members of the IPK superfamily ( AtIPK2a and AtIPK2b ) , and although these proteins are able to metabolize several inositol polyphosphates and can be classified as inositol poly - phosphate multi - kinase subfamily members ( fig . 3 ) , they do not synthesise inositol pyrophosphates [ 39 , 40 ] . There - fore , and due to the lack of structural analyses of the pu - tative IP 7 and IP 8 species present in plants , it will be es - sential to identify the kinase ( s ) that could be responsible for the conversion IP 6 to IP 7 and IP 8 . Inositol pyrophosphate signaling in yeast Most of the early information about the function of inos - itol pyrophosphates has been obtained from genetic stud - ies in the yeast Saccharomyces cervisiae . For example , a study by Huang and Symington on the mechanism un - derlying homologous recombination , which is the major mode of repairing double - stranded DNA breaks in yeast , identified a mutant with defects in protein kinase C1 ( pkc 1 - 4 ) [ 58 ] . This mutant had an increased recombina - tion rate , which was completely reversed by a second mu - tation in a gene designated Kinase C Suppressor 1 ( KCS1 ) [ 58 ] . Several years later we identified the protein encoded by KCS1 as the yeast homologue of mammalian IP6K ( yIP6K ) [ 32 ] . Subsequently , it was shown that IP 7 synthesised by KCS1 and not the KCS1 protein itself is required for controlling DNA recombination in pkc 1 - 4 yeast [ 59 ] . The cloning of the different enzymes involved in inositol pyrophosphate biosynthetic pathways has helped to elu - cidate the role of this pathway in different organisms , with the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae selected as main experimental model in several laboratories . Yeast with the IP6K gene deleted ( kcs1 D ) has been widely used to study inositol pyrophosphates and their kinases . It has been demonstrated by different groups that the enzymatic ac - tivity of KCS1 is important for inositol pyrophosphate synthesis , as kcs1 D strains have absent or close to zero steady - state levels of IP 7 and IP 8 [ 35 , 60 ] . The kcs1 D cells are twice as large as wild - type , grow slower than wild - type and are growth impaired at 37 °C . Furthermore , kcs1 D cells are also hypersensitive to salt stress but unaf - fected by osmotic challenge [ 61 ] . Complementation of kcs1 D with wild - type KCS1 resulted largely in restora - tion of IP 7 and IP 8 levels and rescued several defects , whereas transformation with a catalytic inactive form of kcs1 did not rescue the mutant phenotypes . Interestingly , arg82 D , which synthesises the precursor for inositol py - rophosphates , shows similar phenotypes as kcs1 D strain . Overexpression of KCS1 , in arg82 D cells , partially over - came this metabolic block and rescued some phenotypic defects [ 61 ] . However , although the IP 7 level it is not res - cued , there is production of some unusual inositol py - rophosphate species , such as PP - IP 2 [ 21 ] , suggesting overlapping functions for the different inositol pyrophos - phates species in cells . The completion of the sequence of Saccharomyces cer - visae genome enabled analysis of protein function and in - teractions on a genomic scale . In one such genome - wide screen aimed at examining putative protein - protein inter - actions , Uetz et al . identified KCS1 as an interacting part - ner of Bmh2p ( yeast 14 - 3 - 3 ) . Bmh2p is involved in cell differentiation , signal transduction , vesicular trafficking and chemotaxis [ 62 ] . A study in yeast based on a high - throughput mass spectrometric method to identify protein complexes also identified Bmh1p ( yeast 14 - 3 - 3 ) as a binding partner of KCS1 [ 63 ] . Interestingly , two inde - pendent studies have found that the two 14 - 3 - 3 yeast pro - teins interact with KCS1 . In yet another large - scale study in yeast , four independent approaches were applied to analyse uncharacterised proteins essential for viability but with unknown functions . Results from this study re - vealed that KCS1 interacts with a component of ubiqui - tin - protein ligase complex Cdc23p , the ubiquitin - conju - gating enzyme Qri8p , and two uncharacterized proteins , Ydr131cp and Ydr267cp [ 64 ] . Recently , two independent studies proposed new roles for inositol pyrophosphates in the regulation of telomere length and in cell death [ 47 , 65 ] . Telomeres consist of long , repetitive , protective DNA sequences at the end of chromosomes that prevent DNA degradation . Telomere removal results in activation of the DNA damage re - sponse pathway and to subsequent cell cycle arrest , senescence or cell death [ 66 , 67 ] . In yeast , the two phos - phatidylinositol 3 - kinase - related kinase ( PIKK ) mem - bers , Mec1 and Tel1 , are important for telomere mainte - Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 557 nance [ 68 , 69 ] . We observed that kcs1 D yeast are resistant to the lethal action of two known PIKK inhibitors , caf - feine and wortmannin [ 65 ] . To find out whether inositol pyrophosphates influence signaling by members of the PI3K - related protein family , the telomere lengths in dif - ferent yeast mutants were investigated . Telomere length is decreased in the tel1 D strain [ 70 ] . In contrast , kcs1 D showed increased telomere length . If KCS1 acts by gen - erating inositol pyrophosphates that in turn antagonise Tel1 activity , then yeast with elevated levels of inositol pyrophosphates should have shorter telomeres . Indeed , ipk1 D yeast , which have perturbed inositol phosphate me - tabolism but still form high levels of inositol pyrophos - phates , have reduced telomere lengths . Furthermore , complementation of kcs1 D and ipk1 D yeast with the re - spective genes leads to the reverse of the phenotypes . Thus far , the regulation of telomere length appears to be the most important specific function of KCS1 in yeast nuclei . Several studies have proposed a role for inositol polyphosphates in controlling messenger RNA ( mRNA ) nuclear export , chromatin remodelling , transcriptional regulation , DNA repair and very recently even mRNA editing [ 8 – 10 , 36 , 71 ] . These studies conclude that yeast IPMK , synthesising IP 4 , IP 5 [ 36 ] or the lipid PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 [ 72 ] , play a key role in these regulatory processes , while the ability of KCS1 to synthesise inositol pyrophosphate is not required . These findings suggest that the inositol pyrophosphates have functions distinct to those of other inositol polyphosphates . Evidence that inositol polyphosphates are involved in vesicle trafficking has been mounting over the last 15 years . In 1991 it was demonstrated that the binding of IP 6 to the clathrin complex AP2 [ 73 , 74 ] contributes to the as - sembly of clathrin - coated vesicles which are involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis at the plasma membrane [ 75 ] . Subsequently , different groups identified several proteins involved in vesicular trafficking as binding part - ners of IP 6 and IP 7 in vitro [ 76 – 78 ] . Phenotypical charac - terisation of kcs1 D yeast strains has revealed an altered vacuolar morphology with several smaller fragmented vacuoles [ 35 ] and the accumulation of membranous vesicular structures derived from the plasma membrane [ 60 ] . These vesicular structures were identified by elec - tron microscopy as stacked cisternae reminiscent of the ‘class E’multilamellar endosomal compartment [ 60 ] . Im - munogold localisation , with antibodies against proteins associated with the endosomal membranes , confirmed that these membranes were aberrant endosomal interme - diates [ 60 ] . Further evidence for the involvement of inos - itol pyrophosphates in vesicular trafficking arose with the observation that in kcs1 D yeast the endocytic pathway is affected in several ways . The endosomes show slower transit , and instead of fusing to the vacuole , they form large multilamellar intermediates ; also , ligand - dependent internalisation is slower and processing is abnormal [ 60 ] . Interestingly , kcs1 D strains possess almost normal levels of IP 6 , indicating a specific role only for inositol py - rophosphate in controlling vesicular trafficking . Two models have been proposed to explain these results . It is possible that , in the absence of IP 7 and IP 8 , epsin N - ter - minal homology ( ENTH ) domain - containing proteins bind more efficiently to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 , increasing endocytosis [ 79 ] . Alternatively , interconversion between IP 6 and IP 7 might affect the conformation of clathrin - associated pro - teins . A more detailed description of the hypothesised in - ositol pyrophosphate molecular mechanism of action will be described in the next section . Work on mammalian cells reinforces the connection be - tween inositol pyrophosphate and vesicular trafficking . GRAB was identified in a yeast two - hybrid screen as an IP6K1 binding protein [ 80 ] . GRAB is a physiological guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) for Rab3A that is involved in synaptical vesicle exocytosis . As a re - sult of competition between IP6K1 and Rab3A for bind - ing to GRAB , the ability of GRAB to promote GDP re - lease from Rab3A was reduced in cells overexpressing IP6K1 . This ability was shown to be IP 7 independent , since IP6K2 , which shows a similar capacity of synthe - sizing IP 7 and does not bind to GRAB , is unable to block binding of GRAB to Rab3A [ 80 ] . Importantly , the cat - alytically inactive form of IP6K1 is still able to block the binding of GRAB to Rab3A [ 80 ] , which weakens the au - thors’ suggestion that the IP6K blockage of GRAB bind - ing to Rab3A is linked to inositol pyrophosphate turn - over . Inositol polyphosphate functions in dictyostelium Historically , the unicellular free - living amoeba Dictyo - stelium discoideum has been one of the most popular ex - perimental models to study inositol polyphosphate sig - naling . Unlike any other organism studied to date , this amoeba contains very high amounts of IP 7 and IP 8 , facil - itating the discovery and first structural characterisation of the inositol pyrophosphates [ 12 , 20 ] . In the vegetative state , inositol pyrophosphate levels are similar to the ra - tios observed in mammalian and yeast cells , correspond - ing to only 2 – 5 % of the cellular IP 6 levels . However , IP 7 and IP 8 levels dramatically increase during chemotaxis and aggregation , events that are both dependent on cAMP signaling [ 30 ] , reaching amounts comparable to IP 6 [ 22 ] . Screening of the Dictyostelium genome reveals the exis - tence of at least four genes belonging to the IPK super - family . One of these genes , Dictybase ( http : / / dictybase . org / ) gene name I6KA , was identified as an IP6K [ 30 ] . Although the kinase activity of this protein has not been tested in vitro , disruption of I6KA by homologous recom - bination dramatically decreases IP 7 and IP 8 levels , which could be restored to wild - type levels upon complementa - 558 M . Bennett et al . Inositol pyrophosphates tion . Phenotypically , the growth of the mutant cells was normal , as was the shape and size of their fruiting body . However , starvation - induced aggregation occurred more rapidly in the mutant than in wild - type amoeba , es - pecially at the earliest stages . Moreover , mutant cells possess an increased sensitivity to chemotactants , re - sponding more rapidly to low concentrations of cAMP gradients than wild - type cells . These results suggest an alteration of chemotactic pathways in the null mutants . The authors suggest that this phenotype could be a result of IP 7 ability to compete with PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 for the pleck - strin homology ( PH ) domain binding of CRAC ( Cytoso - lic Regulator of Adenylyl Cyclase ) [ 30 ] . Membrane translocation of CRAC mediated by the PH domain ap - pears to be an essential step for directional sensing , since either decreasing the amount of PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , by disrupting PI3K genes , or abnormally increasing PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 levels by disruption of PTEN diminishes the ability of cells to orientate and to move in response to chemotactic gradi - ents [ 81 ] . The absence of IP 7 in the null mutant would free the CRAC - PH domain to bind to PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 , and its translocation to the membrane would thus increase . Dictyostelium and other slime moulds have for many years been excellent experimental models , but we are still very much in the dark in regards to the most basic ques - tion : Why do they have special needs for enormous levels of inositol pyrophosphates ? Inositol pyrophosphate signaling in mammalian cells The first study to demonstrate a close link between the turnover of inositol pyrophosphate and signal transduc - tion events was conducted by Safrany and Shears [ 82 ] . By utilising DDT 1 MF - 2 smooth muscle cells as a model to determine how fluoride anions lower IP 8 formation , these authors showed that the metabolism of IP 8 is regu - lated by b 2 - adrenergic receptors , but that IP 8 levels are not affected either by a reduction in ATP levels or by activation of phospholipase C [ 82 ] . Instead , the main mechanism by which fluoride modifies IP 8 levels is through augmented cyclic nucleotide levels , either by the phosphodiester inhibitor IBMX or after application of Bt2cAMP , Bt2cGMP or isoproterenol , which acts through the b 2 - adrenergic receptor [ 82 ] . This effect was specific , as isoproterenol did not cause a drop in the lev - els of any other inositol pyrophosphate . The effect on IP 8 metabolism was unchanged by Protein Kinase A and G ( PKA and PKG ) inhibitors , suggesting that cAMP regu - lates IP 8 turnover independent of PKA or PKG signaling . Furthermore , changes in calcium concentrations did not affect IP 8 levels , confirming that cyclic nucleotide - medi - ated depletion in IP 8 levels is not caused by any signifi - cant rise in calcium entry [ 82 ] . Unfortunately , this inter - esting signaling pathway has not been further investi - gated . Results are now emerging that environmental stress , in - cluding heat shock and hyperosmotic stress , raises IP 8 levels in mammalian cells . Two recent studies suggest that , unlike in yeast , osmotic stress affects inositol py - rophosphates in mammalian cells [ 28 , 83 ] . After induc - tion of osmotic challenge by sorbitol , there was a rapid accumulation of IP 8 , as a consequence of ERK1 / 2 and p38MAPa / B kinase activation [ 28 , 83 ] . Similarly , it was demonstrated that thermal stress in mammalian cells causes an ERK / MEK - dependent increase in IP 8 [ 48 ] . In contrast , in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , inositol pyrophos - phates are not significantly altered by osmotic imbalance , heat stress or salt toxicity [ 48 ] . However , this is in partial disagreement with our own unpublished observations in which both IP 7 and IP 8 levels show a threefold increase after heat shock in Saccharomyces cerevisiae [ M . B . and A . S . , unpublished observation ] . Several recent studies have linked inositol pyrophos - phates to mammalian cell death . IP6K2 was first identi - fied as a positive regulator of apoptosis through a techni - cal knockdown approach [ 84 ] . In ovarian carcinoma cells , IP6K2 deletions conferred protection against inter - feron alpha ( IFN - a ) - induced cell death , whereas over - ex - pression of full - length IP6K2 enhanced the degree of apoptosis induced by both IFN - a and g - irradiation . In contrast , expression of a dominant negative IP6K2 abro - gated cell death induced by these agents . IP6K2 has been further implicated in apoptosis , since its protein levels are elevated following IFN - a treatment and g - irradiation in NIH - OVCAR - 3 cells [ 84 , 85 ] . Subsequently , the same authors have demonstrated that , in addition to the expres - sion of the Apo2L / TRAIL ligand that initiates apoptosis through death - receptor signaling , nuclear localisation of IP6K2 is also required for IFN - a - induced apoptosis [ 86 ] . These data demonstrate a function for IP6K2 as a media - tor of growth control and apoptosis and suggest a role of inositol pyrophosphates as regulators of the Apo2L / TRAIL cell death pathway . These findings were extended to show that the apoptotic function of IP6K2 is not restricted to a specific cell line or apoptotic pathway [ 87 ] . Transfection with IP6K2 also increased cell death in HEK293 , HeLa , PC12 , Jurkat T and HL60 cells exposed to different cell stressors such as hydrogen peroxide , staurosporine , etoposide and hypoxic conditions , while the kinase - dead IP6K2 prevented cell death in all instances . Moreover , the cytotoxicity induced by the different cell stressors was associated with a rise in IP 6 - kinase activity and in IP 7 formation , further rein - forcing a function of inositol pyrophosphates in cell death . Interestingly , cytotoxic stimulation triggered IP6K2 translocation from the nuclei to the damaged mitochon - dria while no alterations were observed in the intracellu - lar localisation of IP6K1 or IP6K3 [ 87 ] . The authors were also able to demonstrate that all three isoforms of IP6Ks induce cell death in untreated cells , but only deletion of Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 559 IP6K2 decrease stressors induced cell death , suggesting that the regulation of apoptosis is selective for IP6K2 . Recently , it was demonstrated that there is a correlation between the transforming activity of b - catenin and the upregulation of IP6K2 in chicken embryo fibroblasts ( CEFs ) , which suggests that IP6K2 is a direct target of the lymphoid - enhancer binding factor ( LEF - 1 ) in these cells [ 88 ] . This is an interesting finding , because oncogenic transformation by b - catenin is believed to result from translocation of this protein from the cytoplasm to the nu - cleus where it combines with LEF to form transcriptional regulatory complexes that activate specific target genes [ 89 ] . In addition , nuclear accumulation of b - catenin and upregulation of LEF target genes are found in many can - cers [ 88 , 90 ] . Determining the mechanisms by which inositol py - rophosphates trigger apoptosis is an important task for re - searchers in this area . Drug resistance of cancer cells to many conventional therapeutics remains a problem , and inositol pyrophosphates have the potential to become a therapeutic tool to sensitise cancer cells for subsequent treatments . Molecular mechanisms of action Binding Binding of IP 3 , the best characterised of the inositol polyphosphates , to its receptor leads to an alteration of the tridimensional structure of the channel , which in turn allows Ca + + efflux [ 91 ] . A similar ligand binding mecha - nism , which modifies the functions of specific proteins , has been hypothesised for inositol pyrophosphates . In vitro , IP 7 was shown to bind , with high affinity , to several proteins , including proteins important in controlling vesicular trafficking such as AP3 / AP180 [ 60 , 78 ] , the Golgi coatomer [ 76 , 77 ] and the clathrin - assembly adap - tors AP2 [ 73 , 74 ] . However , these in vitro binding exper - iments , performed with this family of high negatively charged ‘ligands’ , should be viewed with caution , as pre - viously reviewed [ 7 ] . Many of these studies were per - formed either in the absence of bivalent cations , which are physiologically important in coordinating the nega - tive charge of the inositol ring [ 92 ] , or without the appro - priate controls . Furthermore , IP 6 often binds to a specific protein with an affinity only 10 times lower than IP 7 , and because IP 6 is usually a hundred times more abundant than IP 7 , it seems likely that IP 6 may represent the signif - icant physiological binding partner . In Dictyostelium , the reality is different , since the CRAC pleckstrin homology domain was shown to bind to IP 7 with 10 times higher affinity than IP 6 . In this amoeba , during cell aggregation , IP 6 and IP 7 levels are comparable , suggesting that IP 7 can compete for the PH domain of CRAC . So far , the ability of IP 7 to physiologically bind to the PH domain seems re - stricted to the Dictyostelium CRAC . A recent study in which the researchers investigated the inositol polyphos - phate binding characteristics of the PH domain of phos - phoinositide - dependent protein kinase - 1 ( PDK1 ) re - vealed that IP 6 is a plausible cytosolic binding partner for this protein [ 93 ] . PDK1 was also found to bind to IP 7 , with , however , a significantly lower affinity than IP 6 . Be - cause in mammalian cells the IP 7 concentration is much lower than IP 6 , it is unlikely that IP 7 is a physiological lig - and for the PH domain of PDK1 [ 93 ] . Phosphorylation Inositol pyrophosphates have attracted much attention because of their rapid turnover and the substantial free - energy change upon hydrolysis of b - phosphate of the diphosphate moiety . It has been theoretically calculated that the energy of hydrolysis present in the pyrophos - phate moiety of IP 7 and IP 8 , due to the release of strict electrostatic and steric constraints , is similar to the high - energy phosphate bond found in adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) [ 12 , 24 ] , leading to the idea that inositol pyro - phosphate could be important for driving phosphotrans - ferase reactions . Interestingly , several decades ago , Morton and Raison , working with wheat endosperm proteoplasts , proposed that phytate or phytate derivatives might act as a substrate in phosphotransfer reactions possibly by maintaining the optimum ATP concentration for the synthetic functions [ 94 ] . At the time , this idea was disregarded , since the stan - dard free energy of IP 6 hydrolysis is insufficient for ADP - to - ATP conversion . In light of what is known today about IP 7 functions , the idea was very original . Recently , the pyrophosphate constituent of IP 7 has been shown to act as a phosphate donor to proteins , in a non - enzymatic and temperature - dependent reaction [ 95 ] . In - terestingly , protein phosphorylation by IP 7 is eukaryotic specific , since no phosphorylation was detected in E . coli . Three potential IP 7 substrates were initially iden - tified in yeast ; NSR1 , a nucleolar protein involved in ribosome assembly and export ; YGR130c , a 98 - KDa protein of unknown function ; and SRP40 , a second nu - cleolar protein that functions as a ribosomal chaperone [ 95 ] . These three proteins show unique sequence simi - larity , as all possess stretches of serine residues sur - rounded by acidic residues . Phosphorylation mediated by IP 7 was shown to be resistant to acid , but sensitivity to alkali treatments indicated specificity to serine / threo - nine . However , the sequence characteristics of the iden - tified substrates made it experimentally difficult to identify specific phosphorylated residues . So far , these efforts were limited to deletion analysis and site - di - rected mutagenesis on specific serine and aspartate / glu - tamate residues , demonstrating the importance of these amino acids for IP 7 phosphorylation . However , these re - 560 M . Bennett et al . Inositol pyrophosphates sults must be taken with caution , as no structural data has determined the effect of the mutations on the protein conformation [ 95 ] . The observation that the surround - ing amino acids also influence the chance of a specific protein to be phosphorylated by IP 7 suggests , as pro - posed by York and Hunter , that substrate conformation assists in the reaction [ 47 ] . Recent experiments conducted in Snyder’s laboratory in - dicate that IP 7 - mediated phosphorylation requires an ini - tial modification by a factor present in eukaryotic cells but absent in bacteria [ R . Bhandari , S . Snyder personal communication ] . Proteins that are phosphorylated by IP 7 in eukaryotic cells are no longer phosphorylated if ex - pressed in bacteria , suggesting that substrate priming , through a post - translation modification , is an essential requirement for IP 7 - driven phosphorylation [ 96 ] . The IP 7 phosphorylation consensus site revealed the presence of several serine residues , and preliminary results are con - sistent with the hypothesis that an initial ATP kinase - de - pendent phosphorylation of a serine residue is necessary to trigger the subsequent non - enzymatic IP 7 - dependent phosphorylation of the remaining serines [ R . Bhandari , S . Snyder personal communication ] . However , an even more fascinating hypothesis is formally possible , namely that IP 7 may phosphorylate existing phosphoserine residues , generating pyrophosphorylation modifications of serine . The importance of this novel phosphorylation mecha - nism is also demonstrated under physiological condi - tions , since lack of IP6K activity in kcs1 D resulted in a 60 % decrease in NSR1 phosphorylation in vivo [ 95 ] . The proteins best characterised as IP 7 targets are yeast NSR1 and SRP40 , and mammalian Nopp140 and TCOF1 , all of which are localised in the nucleolus . The major function of the nucleolus is to synthesise riboso - mal RNA ( rRNA ) which is transcribed as a large pre - rRNA precursor and later cleaved to generate rRNAs 5 . 8S , 18S and 28S . The rRNAs undergo post - transcrip - tional modifications and are later assembled , with ribo - somal proteins , into ribosome subunits [ 97 ] . Interest - ingly , yeast cells lacking the enzyme that synthesises in - ositol pyrophosphates , kcs1 D , are hypersensitive to antibiotics that disrupt ribosomal function , including the aminoglycosides geneticin and hygromycin B [ A . S . unpublished results ] . This suggests that IP 7 - dependent phosphorylation of nucleolar proteins physiologically affects ribosomal biogenesis . This study has raised sev - eral questions , some of which are being addressed in our laboratory . How is the phosphate transfer activated ? Is this a phosphorylation or a pyrophosphorylation ? What are the total numbers of substrates phosphorylated by IP 7 ? Do the other inositol pyrophosphates , IP 8 , PP - InsP 4 and [ PP ] 2 - IP 4 , have the capacity to phosphorylate pro - teins ? Most important of all : What is the functional rel - evance of protein phosphorylation by IP 7 ? Perspectives : do inositol pyrophosphates link basic metabolism to signaling ? The discovery that PiUS , a protein named after its role as a stimulator of inorganic phosphate uptake [ 98 ] , was an IP6K , suggested that inositol pyrophosphates might have a role in cellular phosphate metabolism . Subsequently , it was shown that yeast deficient in kcs1 D exhibit a consid - erably reduced inorganic phosphate uptake [ 95 ] . When compared with wild - type yeast , the kcs1 D mutant also shows an increased expression of mRNAs coding for a number of genes important for regulating cellular phos - phate metabolism , collectively known as PHO genes [ 99 ] . Indeed , microarray analyses suggest that the effects of either arg82 D or kcs1 D deficiency in yeast are limited to the upregulation of certain PHO genes and to the downregulation of a number of genes involved in nitrogen catabolism . Two significant PHO genes include PHO84 , a membrane protein involved in phosphate transport , and PHO5 , an acid phosphatase . Both enzymes are consid - ered to be important for responding to low concentrations of cellular phosphate and were shown to be upregulated in inositol pyrophosphate - deficient yeast [ 99 ] . Recently , a screening of yeast deletion mutants for alter - ation in phosphate metabolism based on PHO5 activity revealed that KCS1 [ 100 , 101 ] and other proteins impor - tant for inositol pyrophosphate biosynthesis such as phos - pholipase C and ARG82 are negative regulators of the PHO pathway [ 101 ] . Moreover , arg82 D and kcs1 D null strains have reduced intracellular polyphosphate levels , suggesting that inositol pyrophosphates are necessary for inorganic polyphosphate synthesis and maintenance [ 101 ] . Together , these observations strongly implicate in - ositol pyrophosphates as sensors of the phosphate intra - cellular status . However , the mechanism by which inosi - tol pyrophosphates are able to transduce the cellular phosphate status in signaling events is unknown . One possibility is that the hyper - phosphorylation of specific proteins driven by IP 7 may be important in these events . Ribosome - mediated protein synthesis is central to cell functioning , and it is influenced by many nutrient - sensing pathways [ 102 , 103 ] . In this case , phosphorylation of pro - teins , involved in ribosomal biogenesis , by IP 7 may rep - resent the signaling mechanism . Specific investigation is required to fully address this hypothesis . Acknowledgements . We are indebted to Drs . R . Bhandari and S . Snyder for sharing unpublished results . We would like to thank Drs . A . Mudge , A . Riccio and G . Lesa for critical reading of the manu - script and Dr . A . Resnick for exciting discussions and suggestions . Our work is funded by the Medical Research Council . 1 Berridge M . J . , Lipp P . and Bootman M . D . ( 2000 ) The versa - tility and universality of calcium signaling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 1 : 11 – 21 2 Irvine R . F . ( 2003 ) 20 years of Ins ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) P3 , and 40 years be - fore . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 4 : 586 – 590 Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 561 3 Pittet D . , Schlegel W . , Lew D . P . , Monod A . and Mayr G . W . ( 1989 ) Mass changes in inositol tetrakis - and pentakisphos - phate isomers induced by chemotactic peptide stimulation in HL - 60 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 18489 – 18493 4 Szwergold B . S . , Graham R . A . and Brown T . R . ( 1987 ) Ob - servation of inositol pentakis - and hexakis - phosphates in mammalian tissues by 31P NMR . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 149 : 874 – 881 5 Martin J . B . , Foray M . F . , Klein G . and Satre M . ( 1987 ) Iden - tification of inositol hexaphosphate in 31P - NMR spectra of Dictyostelium discoideum amoebae . Relevance to intra - cellular pH determination . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 931 : 16 – 25 6 Raboy V . ( 2003 ) myo - Inositol - 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 - hexakisphosphate . Phytochemistry 64 : 1033 – 1043 7 Shears S . B . ( 2001 ) Assessing the omnipotence of inositol hexakisphosphate . Cell Signal . 13 : 151 – 158 8 Hanakahi L . A . , Bartlet - Jones M . , Chappell C . , Pappin D . and West S . C . ( 2000 ) Binding of inositol phosphate to DNA - PK and stimulation of double - strand break repair . Cell 102 : 721 – 729 9 Macbeth M . R . , Schubert H . L . , Vandemark A . P . , Lingam A . T . , Hill C . P . and Bass B . L . ( 2005 ) Inositol hexakisphosphate is bound in the ADAR2 core and required for RNA editing . Science 309 : 1534 – 1539 10 York J . D . , Odom A . R . , Murphy R . , Ives E . B . and Wente S . R . ( 1999 ) A phospholipase C - dependent inositol polyphos - phate kinase pathway required for efficient messenger RNA export . Science 285 : 96 – 100 11 Menniti F . S . , Miller R . N . , Putney J . W . Jr and Shears S . B . ( 1993 ) Turnover of inositol polyphosphate pyrophosphates in pancreatoma cells . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 3850 – 3856 12 Stephens L . , Radenberg T . , Thiel U . , Vogel G . , Khoo K . H . , Dell A . et al . ( 1993 ) The detection , purification , structural characterization and metabolism of diphosphoinositol pentak - isphosphate ( s ) and bisdiphosphoinositol tetrakisphosphate ( s ) . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 4009 – 4015 13 Glennon M . C . and Shears S . B . ( 1993 ) Turnover of inositol pentakisphosphates , inositol hexakisphosphate and diphos - phoinositol polyphosphates in primary cultured hepatocytes . Biochem . J . 293 ( Pt 2 ) : 583 – 590 14 Shears S . B . , Ali N . , Craxton A . and Bembenek M . E . ( 1995 ) Synthesis and metabolism of bis - diphosphoinositol tetrak - isphosphate in vitro and in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 10489 – 10497 15 Shears S . B . ( 2004 ) How versatile are inositol phosphate ki - nases ? Biochem . J . 377 : 265 – 280 16 Tolias K . F . and Cantley L . C . ( 1999 ) Pathways for phospho - inositide synthesis . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 98 : 69 – 77 17 Irvine R . F . and Schell M . J . ( 2001 ) Back in the water : the re - turn of the inositol phosphates . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 2 : 327 – 338 18 Europe - Finner G . N . , Gammon B . and Newell P . C . ( 1991 ) Ac - cumulation of [ 3H ] - inositol into inositol polyphosphates dur - ing development of Dictyostelium . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 181 : 191 – 196 19 Stephens L . R . , Hawkins P . T . , Stanley A . F . , Moore T . , Poyner D . R . , Morris P . J . et al . ( 1991 ) myo - inositol pentakisphos - phates . Structure , biological occurrence and phosphorylation to myo - inositol hexakisphosphate . Biochem . J . 275 ( Pt 2 ) : 485 – 499 20 Stephens L . R . and Irvine R . F . ( 1990 ) Stepwise phosphoryla - tion of myo - inositol leading to myo - inositol hexakisphosphate in Dictyostelium . Nature 346 : 580 – 583 21 Seeds A . M . , Bastidas R . J . and York J . D . ( 2005 ) Molecular definition of a novel inositol polyphosphate metabolic path - way initiated by inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - kinase activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 27654 – 27661 22 Laussmann T . , Pikzack C . , Thiel U . , Mayr G . W . and Vogel G . ( 2000 ) Diphospho - myo - inositol phosphates during the life cy - cle of Dictyostelium and Polysphondylium . Eur . J . Biochem . 267 : 2447 – 2451 23 Laussmann T . , Eujen R . , Weisshuhn C . M . , Thiel U . and Vogel G . ( 1996 ) Structures of diphospho - myo - inositol pentakispho - sphate and bisdiphospho - myo - inositol tetrakisphosphate from Dictyostelium resolved by NMR analysis . Biochem . J . 315 ( Pt 3 ) : 715 – 720 24 Laussmann T . , Reddy K . M . , Reddy K . K . , Falck J . R . and Vo - gel G . ( 1997 ) Diphospho - myo - inositol phosphates from Dic - tyostelium identified as D - 6 - diphospho - myo - inositol pentak - isphosphate and D - 5 , 6 - bisdiphospho - myo - inositol tetrak - isphosphate . Biochem . J . 322 ( Pt 1 ) : 31 – 33 25 Albert C . , Safrany S . T . , Bembenek M . E . , Reddy K . M . , Reddy K . , Falck J . et al . ( 1997 ) Biological variability in the structures of diphosphoinositol polyphosphates in Dic - tyostelium discoideum and mammalian cells . Biochem . J . 327 ( Pt 2 ) : 553 – 560 26 Laussmann T . , Hansen A . , Reddy K . M . , Reddy K . K . , Falck J . R . and Vogel G . ( 1998 ) Diphospho - myo - inositol phosphates in Dictyostelium and Polysphondylium : identification of a new bisdiphospho - myo - inositol tetrakisphosphate . FEBS Lett . 426 : 145 – 150 27 Martin J . B . , Laussmann T . , Bakker - Grunwald T . , Vogel G . and Klein G . ( 2000 ) neo - inositol polyphosphates in the amoeba Entamoeba histolytica . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 10134 – 10140 28 Safrany S . T . ( 2004 ) Protocols for regulation and study of diphosphoinositol polyphosphates . Mol . Pharmacol . 66 : 1585 – 1591 29 Barker C . J . , Wright J . , Hughes P . J . , Kirk C . J . and Michell R . H . ( 2004 ) Complex changes in cellular inositol phosphate complement accompany transit through the cell cycle . Biochem . J . 380 : 465 – 473 30 Luo H . R . , Huang Y . E . , Chen J . C . , Saiardi A . , Iijima M . , Ye K . et al . ( 2003 ) Inositol pyrophosphates mediate chemotaxis in Dictyostelium via pleckstrin homology domain - Pt - dIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 interactions . Cell 114 : 559 – 572 31 Voglmaier S . M . , Bembenek M . E . , Kaplin A . I . , Dorman G . , Olszewski J . D . , Prestwich G . D . et al . ( 1996 ) Purified inositol hexakisphosphate kinase is an ATP synthase : diphosphoinosi - tol pentakisphosphate as a high - energy phosphate donor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 : 4305 – 4310 32 Saiardi A . , Erdjument - Bromage H . , Snowman A . M . , Tempst P . and Snyder S . H . ( 1999 ) Synthesis of diphosphoinositol pentakisphosphate by a newly identified family of higher in - ositol polyphosphate kinases . Curr . Biol . 9 : 1323 – 1326 33 Schell M . J . , Letcher A . J . , Brearley C . A . , Biber J . , Murer H . and Irvine R . F . ( 1999 ) PiUS ( Pi uptake stimulator ) is an inos - itol hexakisphosphate kinase . FEBS Lett . 461 : 169 – 172 34 Saiardi A . , Nagata E . , Luo H . R . , Snowman A . M . and Snyder S . H . ( 2001 ) Identification and characterization of a novel in - ositol hexakisphosphate kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 39179 – 39185 35 Saiardi A . , Caffrey J . J . , Snyder S . H . and Shears S . B . ( 2000 ) The inositol hexakisphosphate kinase family . Catalytic flexi - bility and function in yeast vacuole biogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 24686 – 24692 36 Odom A . R . , Stahlberg A . , Wente S . R . and York J . D . ( 2000 ) A role for nuclear inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate kinase in tran - scriptional control . Science 287 : 2026 – 2029 37 Saiardi A . , Caffrey J . J . , Snyder S . H . and Shears S . B . ( 2000 ) Inositol polyphosphate multikinase ( ArgRIII ) determines nu - clear mRNA export in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . FEBS Lett . 468 : 28 – 32 38 Nalaskowski M . M . , Deschermeier C . , Fanick W . and Mayr G . W . ( 2002 ) The human homologue of yeast ArgRIII protein is an inositol phosphate multikinase with predominantly nuclear localization . Biochem . J . 366 : 549 – 556 562 M . Bennett et al . Inositol pyrophosphates 39 Stevenson - Paulik J . , Odom A . R . and York J . D . ( 2002 ) Mole - cular and biochemical characterization of two plant inositol polyphosphate 6 - / 3 - / 5 - kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 42711 – 42718 40 Xia H . J . , Brearley C . , Elge S . , Kaplan B . , Fromm H . and Mueller - Roeber B . ( 2003 ) Arabidopsis inositol polyphosphate 6 - / 3 - kinase is a nuclear protein that complements a yeast mu - tant lacking a functional ArgR - Mcm1 transcription complex . Plant Cell 15 : 449 – 463 41 Saiardi A . , Nagata E . , Luo H . R . , Sawa A . , Luo X . , Snowman A . M . et al . ( 2001 ) Mammalian inositol polyphosphate multi - kinase synthesizes inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate and an inositol pyrophosphate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 : 2306 – 2311 42 Zhang T . , Caffrey J . J . and Shears S . B . ( 2001 ) The transcrip - tional regulator , Arg82 , is a hybrid kinase with both monophosphoinositol and diphosphoinositol polyphosphate synthase activity . FEBS Lett . 494 : 208 – 212 43 Mayr G . W . , Windhorst S . and Hillemeier K . ( 2005 ) Antipro - liferative plant and synthetic polyphenolics are specific in - hibitors of vertebrate inositol - 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - kinases and inositol polyphosphate multikinase . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 13229 – 13240 44 Gonzalez B . , Schell M . J . , Letcher A . J . , Veprintsev D . B . , Irvine R . F . and Williams R . L . ( 2004 ) Structure of a human inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - kinase : substrate binding re - veals why it is not a phosphoinositide 3 - kinase . Mol . Cell 15 : 689 – 701 45 Miller G . J . and Hurley J . H . ( 2004 ) Crystal structure of the catalytic core of inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - kinase . Mol . Cell 15 : 703 – 711 46 Irvine R . F . ( 2005 ) Inositide evolution – towards turtle domi - nation ? J . Physiol . 566 : 295 – 300 47 York S . J . , Armbruster B . N . , Greenwell P . , Petes T . D . and York J . D . ( 2005 ) Inositol diphosphate signaling regulates telomere length . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 4264 – 4269 48 Choi K . , Mollapour E . and Shears S . B . ( 2005 ) Signal trans - duction during environmental stress : InsP ( 8 ) operates within highly restricted contexts . Cell Signal . 17 : 1533 – 1541 49 Huang C . F . , Voglmaier S . M . , Bembenek M . E . , Saiardi A . and Snyder S . H . ( 1998 ) Identification and purification of diphosphoinositol pentakisphosphate kinase , which synthe - sizes the inositol pyrophosphate bis ( diphospho ) inositol tetrakisphosphate . Biochemistry 37 : 14998 – 15004 50 Safrany S . T . , Caffrey J . J . , Yang X . , Bembenek M . E . , Moyer M . B . , Burkhart W . A . et al . ( 1998 ) A novel context for the ‘MutT’ module , a guardian of cell integrity , in a diphospho - inositol polyphosphate phosphohydrolase . Embo J . 17 : 6599 – 6607 51 Caffrey J . J . , Safrany S . T . , Yang X . and Shears S . B . ( 2000 ) Discovery of molecular and catalytic diversity among human diphosphoinositol - polyphosphate phosphohydrolases . An ex - panding Nudt family . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 12730 – 12736 52 Yang X . , Safrany S . T . and Shears S . B . ( 1999 ) Site - directed mutagenesis of diphosphoinositol polyphosphate phosphohy - drolase , a dual specificity NUDT enzyme that attacks di - adenosine polyphosphates and diphosphoinositol polyphos - phates . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 35434 – 35440 53 Fisher D . I . , Safrany S . T . , Strike P . , McLennan A . G . and Cartwright J . L . ( 2002 ) Nudix hydrolases that degrade dinu - cleoside and diphosphoinositol polyphosphates also have 5 - phosphoribosyl 1 - pyrophosphate ( PRPP ) pyrophosphatase activity that generates the glycolytic activator ribose 1 , 5 - bis - phosphate . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 47313 – 47317 54 Ingram S . W . , Safrany S . T . and Barnes L . D . ( 2003 ) Disrup - tion and overexpression of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe aps1 gene , and effects on growth rate , morphology and intra - cellular diadenosine 5 ¢ , 5 ¢¢¢ - P1 , P5 - pentaphosphate and diphos - phoinositol polyphosphate concentrations . Biochem . J . 369 : 519 – 528 55 Flores S . and Smart C . C . ( 2000 ) Abscisic acid - induced changes in inositol metabolism in Spirodela polyrrhiza . Planta 211 : 823 – 832 56 Brearley C . A . and Hanke D . E . ( 1996 ) Inositol phosphates in barley ( Hordeum vulgare L . ) aleurone tissue are stereochemi - cally similar to the products of breakdown of InsP6 in vitro by wheat - bran phytase . Biochem . J . 318 ( Pt 1 ) : 279 – 286 57 Dorsch J . A . , Cook A . , Young K . A . , Anderson J . M . , Bauman A . T . , Volkmann C . J . et al . ( 2003 ) Seed phosphorus and inos - itol phosphate phenotype of barley low phytic acid genotypes . Phytochemistry 62 : 691 – 706 58 Huang K . N . and Symington L . S . ( 1995 ) Suppressors of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae pkc1 mutation identify alleles of the phosphatase gene PTC1 and of a novel gene encoding a putative basic leucine zipper protein . Genetics 141 : 1275 – 1285 59 Luo H . R . , Saiardi A . , Yu H . , Nagata E . , Ye K . and Snyder S . H . ( 2002 ) Inositol pyrophosphates are required for DNA hy - perrecombination in protein kinase c1 mutant yeast . Bio - chemistry 41 : 2509 – 2515 60 Saiardi A . , Sciambi C . , McCaffery J . M . , Wendland B . and Snyder S . H . ( 2002 ) Inositol pyrophosphates regulate endo - cytic trafficking . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 14206 – 14211 61 Dubois E . , Scherens B . , Vierendeels F . , Ho M . M . , Messenguy F . and Shears S . B . ( 2002 ) In Saccharomyces cerevisiae , the inositol polyphosphate kinase activity of Kcs1p is required for resistance to salt stress , cell wall integrity , and vacuolar mor - phogenesis . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 23755 – 23763 62 Uetz P . , Giot L . , Cagney G . , Mansfield T . A . , Judson R . S . , Knight J . R . et al . ( 2000 ) A comprehensive analysis of protein - protein interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Nature 403 : 623 – 627 63 Ho Y . , Gruhler A . , Heilbut A . , Bader G . D . , Moore L . , Adams S . L . et al . ( 2002 ) Systematic identification of protein com - plexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass spectrometry . Nature 415 : 180 – 183 64 Hazbun T . R . , Malmstrom L . , Anderson S . , Graczyk B . J . , Fox B . , Riffle M . et al . ( 2003 ) Assigning function to yeast proteins by integration of technologies . Mol . Cell 12 : 1353 – 1365 65 Saiardi A . , Resnick A . C . , Snowman A . M . , Wendland B . and Snyder S . H . ( 2005 ) Inositol pyrophosphates regulate cell death and telomere length through phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - related protein kinases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 1911 – 1914 66 Meeker A . K . and De Marzo A . M . ( 2004 ) Recent advances in telomere biology : implications for human cancer . Curr . Opin . Oncol . 16 : 32 – 38 67 Rhodes D . , Fairall L . , Simonsson T . , Court R . and Chapman L . ( 2002 ) Telomere architecture . EMBO Rep . 3 : 1139 – 1145 68 Craven R . J . , Greenwell P . W . , Dominska M . and Petes T . D . ( 2002 ) Regulation of genome stability by TEL1 and MEC1 , yeast homologs of the mammalian ATM and ATR genes . Ge - netics 161 : 493 – 507 69 Mallory J . C . and Petes T . D . ( 2000 ) Protein kinase activity of Tel1p and Mec1p , two Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins re - lated to the human ATM protein kinase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 : 13749 – 13754 70 Morrow D . M . , Tagle D . A . , Shiloh Y . , Collins F . S . and Hieter P . ( 1995 ) TEL1 , an S . cerevisiae homolog of the human gene mutated in ataxia telangiectasia , is functionally related to the yeast checkpoint gene MEC1 . Cell 82 : 831 – 840 71 Steger D . J . , Haswell E . S . , Miller A . L . , Wente S . R . and O’Shea E . K . ( 2003 ) Regulation of chromatin remodeling by inositol polyphosphates . Science 299 : 114 – 116 72 Resnick A . C . , Snowman A . M . , Kang B . N . , Hurt K . J . , Sny - der S . H . and Saiardi A . ( 2005 ) Inositol polyphosphate multi - kinase is a nuclear PI3 - kinase with transcriptional regulatory activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 : 12783 – 12788 Cell . Mol . Life Sci . Vol . 63 , 2006 Review Article 563 73 Beck K . A . and Keen J . H . ( 1991 ) Interaction of phospho - inositide cycle intermediates with the plasma membrane - as - sociated clathrin assembly protein AP - 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 4442 – 4447 74 Voglmaier S . M . , Keen J . H . , Murphy J . E . , Ferris C . D . , Prest - wich G . D . , Snyder S . H . et al . ( 1992 ) Inositol hexakisphos - phate receptor identified as the clathrin assembly protein AP - 2 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 187 : 158 – 163 75 Odorizzi G . , Cowles C . R . and Emr S . D . ( 1998 ) The AP - 3 complex : a coat of many colours . Trends Cell Biol . 8 : 282 – 288 76 Ali N . , Duden R . , Bembenek M . E . and Shears S . B . ( 1995 ) The interaction of coatomer with inositol polyphosphates is conserved in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Biochem . J . 310 ( Pt1 ) : 279 – 284 77 Fleischer B . , Xie J . , Mayrleitner M . , Shears S . B . , Palmer D . J . and Fleischer S . ( 1994 ) Golgi coatomer binds , and forms K ( + ) - selective channels gated by , inositol polyphosphates . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 17826 – 17832 78 Ye W . , Ali N . , Bembenek M . E . , Shears S . B . and Lafer E . M . ( 1995 ) Inhibition of clathrin assembly by high affinity binding of specific inositol polyphosphates to the synapse - specific clathrin assembly protein AP - 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 1564 – 1568 79 Hurley J . H . and Wendland B . ( 2002 ) Endocytosis : driving membranes around the bend . Cell 111 : 143 – 146 80 Luo H . R . , Saiardi A . , Nagata E . , Ye K . , Yu H . , Jung T . S . et al . ( 2001 ) GRAB : a physiologic guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rab3A , which interacts with inositol hexakisphos - phate kinase . Neuron 31 : 439 – 451 81 Iijima M . and Devreotes P . ( 2002 ) Tumor suppressor PTEN mediates sensing of chemoattractant gradients . Cell 109 : 599 – 610 82 Safrany S . T . and Shears S . B . ( 1998 ) Turnover of bis - diphos - phoinositol tetrakisphosphate in a smooth muscle cell line is regulated by beta2 - adrenergic receptors through a cAMP - me - diated , A - kinase - independent mechanism . EMBO J . 17 : 1710 – 1716 83 Pesesse X . , Choi K . , Zhang T . and Shears S . B . ( 2004 ) Signal - ing by higher inositol polyphosphates . Synthesis of bisdiphos - phoinositol tetrakisphosphate ( ‘InsP8’ ) is selectively activated by hyperosmotic stress . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 43378 – 43381 84 Morrison B . H . , Bauer J . A . , Kalvakolanu D . V . and Lindner D . J . ( 2001 ) Inositol hexakisphosphate kinase 2 mediates growth suppressive and apoptotic effects of interferon - beta in ovarian carcinoma cells . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 24965 – 24970 85 Morrison B . H . , Bauer J . A . , Hu J . , Grane R . W . , Ozdemir A . M . , Chawla - Sarkar M . et al . ( 2002 ) Inositol hexakisphosphate kinase 2 sensitizes ovarian carcinoma cells to multiple cancer therapeutics . Oncogene 21 : 1882 – 1889 86 Morrison B . H . , Tang Z . , Jacobs B . S . , Bauer J . A . and Lind - ner D . J . ( 2005 ) Apo2L / TRAIL induction and nuclear translo - cation of inositol hexakisphosphate kinase 2 during IFN - beta - induced apoptosis in ovarian carcinoma . Biochem . J . 385 : 595 – 603 87 Nagata E . , Luo H . R . , Saiardi A . , Bae B . I . , Suzuki N . and Sny - der S . H . ( 2005 ) Inositol hexakisphosphate kinase - 2 , a physi - ologic mediator of cell death . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 1634 – 1640 88 Aoki M . , Sobek V . , Maslyar D . J . , Hecht A . and Vogt P . K . ( 2002 ) Oncogenic transformation by beta - catenin : deletion analysis and characterization of selected target genes . Onco - gene 21 : 6983 – 6991 89 Novak A . and Dedhar S . ( 1999 ) Signaling through beta - catenin and Lef / Tcf . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 56 : 523 – 537 90 Polakis P . ( 2000 ) Wnt signaling and cancer . Genes Dev . 14 : 1837 – 1851 91 Mikoshiba K . , Furuichi T . , Miyawaki A . , Yoshikawa S . , Nakade S . , Michikawa T . et al . ( 1993 ) Structure and function of inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate receptor . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 707 : 178 – 197 92 Torres J . , Dominguez S . , Cerda M . F . , Obal G . , Mederos A . , Irvine R . F . et al . ( 2005 ) Solution behaviour of myo - inositol hexakisphosphate in the presence of multivalent cations . Pre - diction of a neutral pentamagnesium species under cytosolic / nuclear conditions . J . Inorg . Biochem . 99 : 828 – 840 93 Komander D . , Fairservice A . , Deak M . , Kular G . S . , Prescott A . R . , Peter Downes C . et al . ( 2004 ) Structural insights into the regulation of PDK1 by phosphoinositides and inositol phosphates . EMBO J . 23 : 3918 – 3928 94 Morton R . K . and Raison J . K . ( 1963 ) A complete intracellu - lar unit for incorporation of amino - acid into storage protein utilizing adenosine triphosphate generated from phytate . Na - ture 200 : 429 – 433 95 Saiardi A . , Bhandari R . , Resnick A . C . , Snowman A . M . and Snyder S . H . ( 2004 ) Phosphorylation of proteins by inositol pyrophosphates . Science 306 : 2101 – 2105 96 York J . D . and Hunter T . ( 2004 ) Signal transduction . Unex - pected mediators of protein phosphorylation . Science 306 : 2053 – 2055 97 Raska I . , Koberna K . , Malinsky J . , Fidlerova H . and Masata M . ( 2004 ) The nucleolus and transcription of ribosomal genes . Biol . Cell 96 : 579 – 594 98 Norbis F . , Boll M . , Stange G . , Markovich D . , Verrey F . , Biber J . et al . ( 1997 ) Identification of a cDNA / protein leading to an increased Pi - uptake in Xenopus laevis oocytes . J . Membr . Biol . 156 : 19 – 24 99 El Alami M . , Messenguy F . , Scherens B . and Dubois E . ( 2003 ) Arg82p is a bifunctional protein whose inositol polyphosphate kinase activity is essential for nitrogen and PHO gene expres - sion but not for Mcm1p chaperoning in yeast . Mol . Microbiol . 49 : 457 – 468 100 Huang S . and O’Shea E . K . ( 2005 ) A systematic high - through - put screen of a yeast deletion collection for mutants defective in PHO5 regulation . Genetics 169 : 1859 – 1871 101 Auesukaree C . , Tochio H . , Shirakawa M . , Kaneko Y . and Ha - rashima S . ( 2005 ) Plc1p , Arg82p and Kcs1p , enzymes in - volved in inositol pyrophosphate synthesis , are essential for phosphate regulation and polyphosphate accumulation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 25127 – 25133 102 Cutler N . S . , Pan X . , Heitman J . and Cardenas M . E . ( 2001 ) The TOR signal transduction cascade controls cellular differ - entiation in response to nutrients . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 : 4103 – 4113 103 Powers T . and Walter P . ( 1999 ) Regulation of ribosome bio - genesis by the rapamycin - sensitive TOR - signaling pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 : 987 – 1000 104 Thompson J . D . , Higgins D . G . and Gibson T . J . ( 1994 ) CLUSTAL W : improving the sensitivity of progressive multi - ple sequence alignment through sequence weighting , posi - tion - specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice . Nucleic Acids Res . 22 : 4673 – 4680 105 Bertsch U . , Deschermeier C . , Fanick W . , Girkontaite I . , Hille - meier K . , Johnen H . et al . ( 2000 ) The second messenger bind - ing site of inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - kinase is centered in the catalytic domain and related to the inositol trisphosphate receptor site . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 1557 – 1564 106 Togashi S . , Takazawa K . , Endo T . , Erneux C . and Onaya T . ( 1997 ) Structural identification of the myo - inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate - binding domain in rat brain inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate 3 - kinase . Biochem . J . 326 ( Pt 1 ) : 221 – 225 564 M . Bennett et al . Inositol pyrophosphates