Force Generation by Endocytic Actin Patches in Budding Yeast Anders E . Carlsson † * and Philip V . Bayly ‡ † Department of Physics and ‡ Department of Mechanical Engineering , Washington University , St . Louis , Missouri ABSTRACT Membrane deformation during endocytosis in yeast is driven by local , templated assembly of a sequence of pro - teins including polymerized actin and curvature - generating coat proteins such as clathrin . Actin polymerization is required for successful endocytosis , but it is not known by what mechanisms actin polymerization generates the required pulling forces . To address this issue , we develop a simulation method in which the actin network at the protein patch is modeled as an active gel . The deformation of the gel is treated using a ﬁnite - element approach . We explore the effects and interplay of three different types of force driving invagination : 1 ) , forces perpendicular to the membrane , generated by differences between actin polymer - ization rates at the edge of the patch and those at the center ; 2 ) , the inherent curvature of the coat - protein layer ; and 3 ) , forces parallel to the membrane that buckle the coat protein layer , generated by an actomyosin contractile ring . We ﬁnd that with opti - mistic estimates for the stall stress of actin gel growth and the shear modulus of the actin gel , actin polymerization can generate almost enough force to overcome the turgor pressure . In combination with the other mechanisms , actin polymerization can the force over the critical value . INTRODUCTION Endocytosis is an important mechanism by which cells absorb molecules and materials from outside the cell . It is crucial for survival , because it provides for the ingestion of essential nutrients and the removal of dead or damaged cells from the body and serves as a defense against micro - organisms . Endocytosis also regulates the activity of recep - tors on the plasma membrane , which control cell growth and function . For example , cancer cell growth is regulated by growth hormone receptors , whose number is controlled by endocytosis . Furthermore , endocytosis is believed to play an important role in Alzheimer’s disease ( 1 ) . On the other hand , endocytosis can be exploited by pathogenic organisms to invade cells . Therefore , a detailed under - standing of the mechanisms of endocytosis could improve our grasp of a broad range of cellular phenomena and diseases . An important type of endocytosis is the clathrin - mediated form ( CME ) , which is used by cells to control the molecular composition of the plasma membrane . The process of CME in yeast has been studied extensively , because a wide array of molecular genetics tools are available , and because the morphology and chemistry of the process in yeast closely resemble those of endocytosis in animal cells . In addition , the small spatial scale and limited number of proteins involved enhance our ability to understand the process in detail . CME is controlled by a network of at least 60 proteins , which arrive at characteristic times and places and exert force on the membrane to pull out the endocytic invagina - tion . In yeast , the process requires actin polymerization . Before endocytosis , the plasma membrane is pushed against the cell wall by the turgor pressure . The invagina - tion process typically begins with small , curved pits on the cell surface , which collect material and then protrude into the cell interior . Next the protrusion becomes a vesicle that is pinched off and moves into the cytoplasm . Studies using live - cell ﬂuorescence microscopy ( 2 – 8 ) have converged on a single stereotypical molecular pathway for endocytosis in yeast . First , a localized assembly of clathrin and coat proteins accumulates , and this assembly deﬁnes the endo - cytic site and also recruits the cargo to be internalized . Next , nucleation promoting factors and type - I myosins arrive . Nucleation promoting factors bind and activate Arp2 / 3 complex , which nucleates new actin ﬁlaments on the sides of existing ﬁlaments , thus creating end - to - side branches . The ﬁlaments in the endocytic actin patch form a branched network ( 9 ) . Filament growth , and probably myosin motor activity , creates forces that pro - mote invagination of the membrane and extension of a tubule into the cytoplasm . This tubule recruits additional curvature - sensing and curvature - generating proteins , the neck constricts , and the endocytic vesicle is created by scission . However , neither the nature of the forces that drive mem - brane deformation in endocytosis nor their origin is well understood . The complete process requires both actin poly - merization and myosin - I activity ( 4 , 10 ) . It has generally been believed ( 3 , 6 ) that clathrin and early coat proteins cause initial membrane bending , whereas actin and later - arriving amphiphysins extend the tubule into the cytoplasm and cause scission . Two recent articles have addressed this issue , although there are discrepancies between the two sets of results . A combined electron microscopy ( EM ) - light microscopy study ( 11 ) correlated membrane shape observed via EM with protein composition assayed by ﬂuorescence Submitted December 23 , 2013 , and accepted for publication February 21 , 2014 . * Correspondence : aec @ wustl . edu Editor : Douglas Robinson . (cid:1) 2014 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 14 / 04 / 1596 / 11 $ 2 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 02 . 035 1596 Biophysical Journal Volume 106 April 2014 1596 – 1606 imaging . It was found that the membrane remains ﬂat while clathrin and early coat proteins , including curvature - gener - ating proteins , accumulate . Bending occurs only after actin arrives . Later , additional curvature - generating proteins such as amphiphysin cause the initial dimple to elongate into a tubule with parallel sides , and subsequently to pinch off . Another approach ( 12 ) used immuno - EM , which allows the presence and distribution of key proteins at different stages of deformation to be identiﬁed . These studies suggest that noticeable membrane bending is present before actin ar - rives , and , consistent with earlier work ( 10 ) , they ﬁnd that myosin - I activity is required . Because EM studies , despite their high spatial resolution , yield incomplete information and are prone to artifacts , theoretical modeling is crucial for further progress in under - standing the process by which endocytic proteins generate force to deform the membrane . A recent multistep biochem - ical model ( 13 ) of the dynamics of actin and actin - related proteins in endocytosis treated actin assembly and disas - sembly , but not the mechanics of the membrane deforma - tion . Some works ( 14 , 15 ) have treated the mechanics of particle engulfment by membranes , but did not include the active forces arising from actin polymerization . A combined chemical - mechanical model ( 16 ) treated the effects of actin polymerization forces and curvature - generating proteins on the membrane shape . Simpliﬁcation was achieved by collapsing protein modules into single representative pro - teins , and by treating actin as a two - dimensional layer , with the force density determined by the actin concentra - tion . Only pulling forces were treated , and the large magni - tude of the turgor pressure in yeast was not included . Nevertheless , this model successfully reproduced some of the mutant phenotypes seen in experiments , and it forms a springboard for our model . Finally , recent calculations using assumed distributions of actin - based forces , together with a continuum model for the membrane , have argued that verti - cal forces from the actin gel ( as described in item 1 below ) are more efﬁcient than horizontal forces in driving the early stages of invagination ( 17 ) . Possible geometries for actin - based generation of endo - cytic invagination forces proposed in the literature , re - viewed in Kaksonen et al . ( 4 ) and Galletta et al . ( 7 ) , ﬁt broadly into the three categories illustrated in Fig . 1 : 1 . Vertical forces between the actin gel and the membrane / coat proteins ( Fig . 1 a ) . These could be caused by faster actin polymerization in the outer regions of the patch than at the center . Retrograde ﬂow of the outer part of the actin network would pull the inner portion of the network with it . If polymerization at the membrane in the central part of the network is slower , invagination will result . Polymerization that is uniform over the re - gion of the patch will only lead to rearward motion of the actin gel , not to invagination . Variation of polymeri - zation over the area of the patch could result from the presence of different actin nucleators at different loca - tions on the membrane . Differential localization of nu - cleators is , in fact , suggested by electron microscopy studies , which show that the nucleator Pan1 is located centrally , at the tip of the invagination , whereas the nucleator Las17 is nucleated more peripherally , at the base of the invagination ( 18 ) . Furthermore , different yeast nucleators polymerize actin at different rates in vitro ( 10 , 19 , 20 ) . Sun and colleagues ( 10 ) found that in bulk polymerization , Las17 nucleates actin ﬁlament approximately ten times faster than does Pan1 . If this dif - ference extrapolates to their behavior in cells , this would lead to polymerization that is much slower at the center of the patch , as required by this mechanism . The outer black arrows in Fig . 1 a denote the pushing forces resulting from actin polymerization in the outer re - gion . The inner black arrows denote the pulling forces from the actin gel onto the coat protein layer that occur as the bulk of the actin patch moves away from the membrane . The gray arrows denote the corresponding opposing forces from the coat protein layer / membrane onto the actin gel , required by Newton’s third law . The turgor pressure and the forces from the cell wall are not explicitly indicated here . The turgor pressure would balance the pulling force of the actin gel onto the coat proteins / membrane at the cen - ter of the patch , whereas the force from the cell wall would balance the pushing force farther out . 2 . Spontaneous curvature of the coat protein layer ( Fig . 1 b ) . This mechanism is supported by the general belief that clathrin , a major coat component , has a spontaneous curvature . Furthermore , the protein Syp1 is believed to generate membrane curvature , and arrives before actin polymerization ( 11 ) . FIGURE 1 Schematic of proposed force - generation mechanisms for actin - driven endocytosis . Black arrows denote forces exerted by the actin network on coat - proteins / membrane , and gray arrows denote forces exerted by coat proteins / membrane on the actin network . ( a ) Vertical forces caused by actin polymerization in the outer region or actomyosin contraction in the central region . ( b ) Spontaneous bending of the coat - protein layer . ( c ) Horizontal forces resulting from contraction of actomyosin around the coat - protein layer . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 Endocytic Force Generation 1597 3 . Inward forces from actomyosin contraction that compress and buckle the coat protein layer ( Fig . 1 c ) . This mecha - nism is analogous to the contractile actomyosin ring in cytokinesis . It is supported by the observed requirement of type - 1 myosin activity for endocytosis ( 4 ) and by the localization of the type - 1 myosin Myo5 near the base of the invagination ( 18 ) . ( Note that Myo5 is not a type - V myosin , but rather a yeast type - 1 myosin ) . Furthermore , tensile stresses generated by myosin can be very large , up to about 10 6 Pa in actin bundles ( 21 ) . It is not known whether type - 1 myosins in yeast cause contraction . Acanthamoeba type - 1 myosins do cause contraction of actin networks in vitro ( 22 ) , but it is not known whether or not this occurs in cells . Furthermore , simulations have shown that contraction is a very general feature of myosins that move along actin ﬁlaments , provided that myosins on one ﬁlament are coupled to those moving on other ﬁlaments ( 23 , 24 ) . Alternatively , inward forces could result from growth of actin ﬁlaments toward the coat - protein layer . This mechanism is suggested by EM experiments ( not in yeast ) that show the growing ends of actin ﬁlaments pointing toward the clathrin coat ( 25 ) . In this article , we develop a three - dimensional simulation model of endocytic force generation by mechanism 1 and supplement it with analytic theories for the effects of mech - anisms 2 and 3 . The simulation model treats the polymer - ized actin at an endocytic site as an elastic gel , with active growth corresponding to actin polymerization and nucle - ation of actin ﬁlaments . We use this model to explore the dependence of invagination on the stall force and elastic properties of the actin gel , as well as the turgor pressure . The analytic theories for mechanisms 2 and 3 treat the coat - protein layer as an elastic plate with a given sponta - neous curvature , compressed by inward actomyosin forces acting on the boundary of the plate . We focus on the early stages of invagination , with displacements of < 20 nm , because we have found that trying to follow the whole pro - cess leads to numerical difﬁculties and also magniﬁes the effects of our simplifying approximations . We ﬁnd that for reasonable parameter values , actin poly - merization can generate forces comparable to the turgor pressure , but they are not quite large enough to overcome the turgor pressure . The coat - protein mechanical properties are not well enough known to establish the energetics of the coat bending , but we ﬁnd that if the coat - protein elastic modulus is near the threshold required to cause invagina - tion , the actin contribution can cause a substantial depth of invagination . We ﬁnd that actomyosin contraction is more likely to be important for extending the invagination than for initiating it . Finally , we ﬁnd that a fairly large actin shear modulus , and a strong attachment of actin to the plasma membrane or the coat - protein layer , is required to generate invagination . We also discuss a mechanism that might reduce the turgor pressure at endocytic sites . ASSUMPTIONS AND MATHEMATICAL MODEL Assumptions In our simulations of force generation by the actin gel , and subsequent calculations of the effect of the coat - protein layer , we make the following simplifying assumptions and approxmations : 1 . The actin network is a circularly symmetric elastic gel characterized by a shear modulus , m a , and a bulk modulus , K a . This is clearly an approximation , especially for as small a system as an endocytic actin patch . How - ever , the treatment of the actin network as a gel is well established in the literature ( 26 ) . Furthermore , the gel model is three - dimensional . It is rich enough to distin - guish between the different types of force that can be ex - erted by the actin gel on the endocytic site and to treat the interplay of the forces with elastic deformation and growth of the actin network . Finally , it allows the imple - mentation of key physical requirements , such as the cancellation of pushing and pulling forces acting on the gel ( discussed below ) . The implications of ignoring viscous ﬂow in the elastic model are described in the Discussion . 2 . Actin polymerization causes gel growth that is focused at the membrane . This assumption is supported by the gen - eral belief that polymerization is by membrane - bound nucleators ( 27 ) . 3 . The actin gel is attached to the plasma membrane and / or coat - protein assembly strongly enough to exert large pulling forces on it . This assumption is supported by experiments demonstrating actin ﬁlament attachment to Listeria ( 28 ) or plastic beads ( 29 ) . In the bead experi - ments , forces of > 1 nN were exerted by an actin tail pull - ing on a 2 m m plastic bead . 4 . The net force exerted on the actin network by the mem - brane and coat - protein layer vanishes . The total force on the actin network must be very small , since otherwise it would move very rapidly on account of its small size . For example , if we treat the actin patch as a sphere of radius R act , a force F would propel it at a speed v ¼ F = 6 ph R act , where h x 1 : 8 (cid:2) 10 (cid:3) 3 Pa (cid:3) s is the dynamic viscosity of water . If we take R act ¼ 100 nm , as suggested by the ribo - some - exclusion zone in Kukulski et al . ( 11 ) , even a force as small as 1 pN would give v ¼ 250 m m / s , orders of magnitude faster than the observed motion . The cyto - plasm is certainly more viscous than water , but even us - ing a value 100 times larger would give v ¼ 2 . 5 m m / s , still much faster than the observed motion . Therefore , we can safely assume that the total force on the actin network is negligible , even though there may be large , cancelling force densities acting in different regions . Since there is no evidence that other organelles exert force on the actin network , we must thus assume that the net force exerted by the membrane / coat proteins on Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 1598 Carlsson and Bayly the actin network vanishes . This implies , by Newton’s third law , that the total force exerted by the actin network on the membrane / coat proteins also approaches zero . 5 . The plasma membrane forms an elastic layer . The actual two - dimensional liquid form of the lipid bilayer is clearly quite different from an elastic material . However , in the early stages of deformation , the energy of deform - ing the membrane is much less than the energy required to overcome the turgor pressure . Consider , for example , a dimple deﬁned by a height proﬁle as a function of posi - tion in the membrane : z ð x ; y Þ ¼ z 0 exp (cid:1) (cid:3) (cid:3) x 2 þ y 2 (cid:4)(cid:5) 2 R 20 (cid:6) ( 1 ) Calculation of the membrane elastic energy , E el , of this pro - ﬁle using standard formulas for thin plates ( 30 ) shows that E el ¼ 11 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ð p 3 = 32 Þ p ð z 0 = R 0 Þ 2 k m , where k m is the membrane bending modulus . Taking z 0 ¼ 20 nm , R 0 ¼ 25 nm , and k m ¼ 12 : 5 k B T , from Harmandaris and Deserno ( 31 ) , gives E el ¼ 3 (cid:2) 10 (cid:3) 19 J . On the other hand , the energy P 0 V required to overcome the turgor pressure , where V is the volume of the dimple and P 0 ¼ 2 (cid:2) 10 5 Pa , is p P 0 h 0 R 20 ¼ 7 (cid:2) 10 (cid:3) 18 J , much greater than E el . Therefore , the approximations made in the membrane model will not strongly affect the results . We have tested this assumption by halving the value of the shear modulus , and found that this affects the extent of the invagination by < 2 nm . 6 . The coat protein layer forms an elastic disk . We do not know how valid this approximation is , but for this layer to exert forces large enough to overcome a signiﬁcant fraction of the turgor pressure , it must be a strong mate - rial . We have investigated the effects of varying the elastic modulus of this layer , to see how strong it must be . Mathematical model The mathematical model treats three components : an initially hemispherical actin gel of radius R act , an initially ﬂat plasma membrane of thickness h , and a ﬂat cell well . No - slip boundary conditions are imposed at the boundary between the actin gel and the inner ( cytosolic ) face of the membrane , so that the displacement is continuous from the gel to the membrane . At the cytosolic boundary of the actin gel , and at the edge of the membrane , a zero - stress boundary condition is imposed . The effects of the cell wall are included as a repulsive , short - range force experi - enced by the outer face of the cell membrane . The turgor pressure is treated as a constant force density acting at the actin - membrane boundary , opposing invagination . These boundary conditions and forces , together with the equilib - rium condition given below , completely determine the deformation at a given state of growth . Attachments be - tween the membrane and the cell wall could give an attrac - tive force opposing endocytosis . However , we are not aware of evidence for the strength of such attachments . Further - more , the fact that reduction of turgor pressure can rescue endocytosis in cells where actin is depolymerized ( 32 ) sug - gests that the turgor pressure is more important than the attachments . Subsequently , we include the effects of a spon - taneously curved coat - protein layer using an approximate analytic theory . The model calculates stresses and deformations in the actin gel and the cell membrane . These result from the turgor pressure and inhomogeneous growth of the actin gel near the membrane , caused by actin polymerization . The total deformation tensor is deﬁned by F ij ¼ v r i v R j ; ( 2 ) where ~ R is an initial point and ~ r is a ﬁnal point . It is a com - bination of the elastic deformation and growth tensors , so that b F ¼ b F e b G ; b F e ¼ b F b G (cid:3) 1 : ( 3 ) Thus , when there is no elastic deformation , b F ¼ b G . Actin polymerization is assumed to lead to gel growth in the z - direction perpendicular to the membrane . We thus take G zZ as the only nonzero element of b G . We assume that poly - merization occurs only near the membrane , away from the central part of the patch , and that it is slowed or reversed by opposing force : dG zZ dt ¼ g p a p ð R Þ b p ð z t Þ g p ð s zz Þ ; ( 4 ) where a p ð R Þ ¼ (cid:8) 1 p tan (cid:3) 1 (cid:9) R (cid:3) R 0 0 : 1 R 0 (cid:10) þ 1 2 (cid:11) 2 ; ( 5 ) b p ð z t Þ ¼ exp h (cid:3) (cid:3) z t (cid:5) z p (cid:4) 2 i ; ( 6 ) and g p ð s zz Þ ¼ 1 1 þ exp (cid:3) (cid:3) 2 h p (cid:4) þ v N 1 þ exp (cid:3) 2 h p (cid:4) ; ( 7 ) where h p ¼ 1 þ (cid:8) 1 2 ln ð(cid:3) v N Þ (cid:3) 1 (cid:11) (cid:8) 2 s zz (cid:3) s 0 s 0 (cid:11) : ( 8 ) Here , g p is the baseline growth rate , R is the radial coordi - nate parallel to the membrane , R 0 is the width of the region with reduced polymerization , z t is the distance away from the membrane , z p is the width of the polymerization region , v N is the limiting ( negative ) growth rate at large opposing Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 Endocytic Force Generation 1599 force scaled to the maximum growth rate , s zz is a component of the Cauchy stress , and s 0 is the stall stress . The functional dependences were chosen to implement the physical as - sumptions while optimizing numerical convergence proper - ties . Fig . 2 a shows the R - dependence of a p . Because we do not have a physical justiﬁcation for the mathematical form of a p , we have also treated a hyperbolic - tangent R - depen - dence of a p , with parameters chosen to have the same 50 % crossover point , and roughly the same width , as Eq . 5 . This reduced the ﬁnal value of the displacement for the case s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa and P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa ( which has the largest invagination ) by about 7 % . We also used a variant of Eq . 5 , where the crossover width is increased by 50 % . This reduced the ﬁnal displacement for the same run by ~ 2 % . Thus , the results are reasonably independent of the form assumed in Eq . 5 . Equations 7 and 8 give a hyperbolic - tangent s zz - depen - dence of g p ( Fig . 2 b ) . Previous calculations ( 33 ) have shown that such a form well describes a stochastic model of polymerization of actin ﬁlaments attached to a mem - brane . Such attachment is necessary for the generation of pulling forces . Increasing the crossover width in these equa - tions by 50 % changed the displacement for s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa and P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa by < 1 % . For practicality , we approximate z t as ZG zZ , where G zZ is evaluated at Z ¼ 0 . In Eqs . 7 and 8 , we have simpliﬁed the mathematics by using s zz rather than the component of the stress s t perpen - dicular to the membrane . We made this choice because it is not clear how to deﬁne s t for growth occurring away from the membrane . Since we focus on the initial stages of invag - ination , where the membrane is nearly parallel to the xy plane , this approximation is reasonably accurate . Of the cases studied below , the largest inclination angle q of the membrane relative to the xy plane occurs for s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa and turgor pressure P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa at time t ¼ 5 . The approximation made using s zz in Eqs . 7 and 8 will give noticeable errors only at those points where 1 ) , q is substan - tial , and 2 ) , growth is signiﬁcant . We have calculated the growth rate at the membrane using both s t and s zz . We ﬁnd that over a limited range of values of r , around r ¼ 27 nm , the growth rate using s t substantially exceeds that obtained using s zz . To evaluate the impact of this on the deformation , we performed a calculation where the growth rate at all times and all distances from the membrane was enhanced by a factor obtained by performing a Gaussian ﬁt to the increased growth . We found that this increased the displacement at t ¼ 5 by < 2 % . Finite - element implementation Our implementation of growth and elastic deformation is based on the general theory of Rodriguez et al . ( 34 ) and a subsequent ﬁnite - element implementation of that theory ( 35 ) using COMSOL Multiphysics software ( V . 4 . 3a , COMSOL , Burlington , MA ) . For a given state of deforma - tion , deﬁned by the total deformation tensor , b F , and growth tensor , b G , the elastic deformation tensor b F e is obtained from Eq . 3 . The equations of mechanical equilibrium are V / (cid:2) b s ¼ 0 ; ( 9 ) where the Cauchy stress is b s ¼ J (cid:3) 1 e b F e v U v b F Te ; ( 10 ) U is the elastic strain energy , and J e ¼ Det b F e . U has the functional form appropriate for a nearly incompressible hy - perelastic solid ( 36 ) . Equation 9 was solved numerically throughout the 2D domain describing the 3D rotationally symmetric geometry , using the general partial differential FIGURE 2 ( a ) Dependence of the actin polymerization rate factor a p on radial coordinate R . ( b ) Dependence of the actin polymerization rate factor g p on stress s zz ; v N ¼ (cid:3) 0 : 05 . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 1600 Carlsson and Bayly equation modeling tools in COMSOL . In the ﬁnal conﬁgu - ration , which solves Eq . 9 , the net force on each of the ﬁnite elements vanishes . Thus , the total force on the actin gel van - ishes as well . However , there are nonzero forces acting be - tween elements , so the membrane exerts a distribution of forces on the actin gel , and vice versa . For routine simulations , the domain was discretized into 3101 triangular elements of typical size about 2 nm ; within each element , cubic interpolation functions were used to describe the displacement ﬁeld and quadratic interpolation functions were used to describe the stress and growth ﬁelds . Quasistatic , time - dependent simulations were performed us - ing the COMSOL backward differentiation formula algo - rithm with maximum absolute error tolerance < 10 (cid:3) 7 and relative error tolerance < 10 (cid:3) 6 . At each time point , the discretized weak form of Eq . 9 was satisﬁed to within the speciﬁed tolerances , and the resulting solution was used to update temporal derivatives for subsequent iterations . The robustness of solutions with respect to discretization ( mesh size , interpolation function , and time step ) was conﬁrmed by reproducing results with varying mesh resolu - tion and error tolerances . To improve numerical convergence , the turgor pressure was linearly ramped up to its ﬁnal value over a period of one time unit . Parameter values The parameter values are given in Table 1 . In estimating un - certain parameters , we have taken the optimistic direction , favoring values that will permit the process to move for - ward . Rather than attempting to explicitly model the time dependence of the indentation process , we simply regard g p as deﬁning the basic timescale of the calculations . Since actin polymerization in patches occurs over a period of seconds ( 3 , 37 ) , g p is probably on the order of 1 s (cid:3) 1 . R 0 is chosen so that the size of the invagination roughly matches that seen in electron micrographs ( 11 ) . The actin gel radius was obtained from the ribosome exclusion zone ( 11 ) . The membrane thickness , h , is a typical value . The polymeriza - tion depth , z p , was chosen to be large enough to give reason - able numerical convergence but small in comparison with the size of the actin patch . The asymptotic depolymerization rate , v N , was chosen to be much smaller than the maximum polymerization rate . Estimates of the actin shear modulus , m a , in the literature range up to 10 4 Pa ( 28 ) . We have taken a baseline value of twice this , on the basis of the high density of actin and cross - linkers in the patches ( see Discussion ) . The large value of K a = m a is motivated by the observation that the Poisson’s ratio of actin networks is near 1 = 2 . For the membrane , the ratio K m = m m ¼ 2 is typical for close - packed materials . The baseline value of m m is obtained from the bending modulus using the relations ( 30 ) k m ¼ Y m h 3 = 12 ð 1 (cid:3) n 2 Þ , Y m ¼ 9 K m m m = ð 3 K m þ m m Þ , and n ¼ ð 3 K m (cid:3) 2 m m Þ = 2 ð 3 K m þ m m Þ . We use the estimate k m ¼ 12 : 5 k B T from Harmandaris and Deserno ( 31 ) . The turgor pressure , P 0 , is taken from Martinez de Maran˜on et al . ( 38 ) . RESULTS Simulation results for force generation by actin polymerization Growth , stress , and deformation patterns Fig . 3 shows the formation of an invagination in a three - dimensional rendering . We show results for a reduced turgor pressure , P 0 ¼ 0 : 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa , to best illustrate the deformation process . A dimple is clearly seen in this view , and the color scale illustrates the displacement as a function of depth and radial position . Fig . 4 a shows the localization of the actin growth in the r - and z - directions under the same conditions . It is seen to be localized near the membrane , with a hole in the middle . Fig . 4 b shows the corresponding stress distribution . In most of the TABLE 1 Parameter values Parameter Deﬁnition Value Comments g p Basic polymerization rate 1 Sets timescale R 0 Radius of invagination 25 nm R act Radius of actin gel 100 nm h Membrane thickness 6 nm z p Polymerization region thickness 25 nm v N Asymptotic depolymerization velocity (cid:3) 0 . 05 m a Actin shear modulus 2 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa Baseline m m Membrane shear modulus 10 6 Pa k a Actin bulk modulus 10 m a k m Membrane bulk modulus 2 m m P 0 Turgor pressure 2 (cid:2) 10 5 Pa FIGURE 3 Three - dimensional view of invagination induced by actin polymerization at time t ¼ 3 time units . Colors ( see scale at right ) denote vertical displacement , in units of 10 (cid:3) 8 m . s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa ; other parameters have baseline values ( Table 1 ) , except that P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 Endocytic Force Generation 1601 membrane , the stress is compressive ( negative ) and roughly equal to the turgor pressure of 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa . In the actin gel , the stress is mainly weakly compressive , but in the central region above the incipient invagination , it is tensile , with a magnitude of up to about 3 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa . Fig . 4 c shows the stress distribution after 3 time units . Now the tensile stress at the center of the gel has reached the value P 0 required to pull the membrane off the cell wall , and invagination begins . Fig . 5 shows the displacement as a function of time , again for the case of reduced turgor pressure . It is seen that there is no displacement until 1 . 5 time units . Then the displacement begins abruptly . Subsequently , it slows as the stress in the polymerizing region gets closer to s 0 . Effects of actin stall stress , actin shear modulus , and turgor pressure Fig . 6 a shows the dependence of the extent of indentation , D z , on the polymerization stall stress , s 0 . We deﬁne D z as the difference in z - coordinates at the gel - membrane interface between R ¼ 0 and R ¼ R act . We evaluate D z at t ¼ 5 time units . This time is long enough that more than half of the ﬁnal indentation has generally been reached , but short enough that the membrane is not too strongly distorted . For baseline pa - rameters , even at the high value of s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa , very little indentation occurs . Achieving substantial indentation re - quires going to very high values of s 0 , for example the 2 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa point indicated . Lowering m a to 10 4 Pa reduces the indentation , because the actin gel becomes less able to support the large stresses required to maintain the indentation in the face of the turgor pressure . If a much lower turgor pres - sure is assumed ( points with P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa ) , then substan - tial indentation is achieved already at s 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 3 Pa . This result can be understood qualitatively via a very simple pre - diction based on force balance . We assume that a pushing force density , s 0 , acts over a region of area p ð R 2 act (cid:3) R 20 Þ cor - responding to the actin semicirclewith the central region sub - tracted . At the threshold for invagination , a pulling - force density of magnitude P 0 is exerted over a region of area p R 20 . Balancing the pushing and pulling forces implies that s 0 ¼ P 0 R 20 = ð R 2 actin (cid:3) R 20 Þ x P 0 = 15 . This gives critical s 0 values of 1 : 3 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa for P 0 ¼ 2 (cid:2) 10 5 Pa , and 3 (cid:2) 10 3 Pa for P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa . Fig . 6 b shows the dependence of the tension exerted by the gel , at the center of the incipient indentation , on s 0 . For the baseline parameters , the tension almost reaches P 0 ¼ 2 (cid:2) 10 5 Pa for s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa . The tension scales linearly with s 0 when s 0 is small . At higher values it bends down . This occurs because the gel yields in response to the higher stresses and thus transmits less force to the central region . FIGURE 4 ( a ) Growth proﬁle in actin gel , after 1 time unit of growth . Colors ( see scale at right ) denote growth G zZ , which is dimensionless . Pa - rameters : s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa , other parameters have baseline values ( Table 1 ) , except for P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa . ( b ) Stress distribution in actin gel after 1 time unit of growth . Stress ( colors ) is given in units of 10 5 Pa . Parameters are as in a . ( c ) Same as b , but after 3 time units . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . FIGURE 5 Displacement at the center of the endocytic site as a function of time . Parameters are baseline values , except that P 0 ¼ 5 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa and s 0 ¼ 10 4 Pa . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 1602 Carlsson and Bayly The bending of the curve is more pronounced when m a is reduced to 10 4 Pa . Lowering the turgor pressure also en - hances the bending , because the yielding of the membrane reduces the force transmitted to the center . Interplay between actin polymerization forces , coat - protein forces , and actomyosin contraction The simulation results described above indicate that actin polymerization by itself , in the geometry considered , can generate stresses that are almost , but not quite , large enough to cause invagination . Thus , actin polymerization may augment contributions from coat - protein curvature ener - getics and actomyosin contraction . Kukulski et al . ( 11 ) sug - gest that these are not sufﬁcient to cause invagination by themselves . Here , we treat the effects of all three forces , to see which combination of forces is likely to be most important in the early stages of invagination . We thus use an approximate model to estimate the forces arising from the inherent curvature of the coat - protein layer and the actomyosin forces . We treat the layer as a thin elastic plate deﬁned by a curvature modulus , k c , and an equi - librium curvature , 1 = R eq . We take R eq ¼ R 0 , the radius of the actin - growth region above . We assume that the equilib - rium shape of the coat - protein layer is a hemisphere of radius R 0 , whose size is thus matched to the force - genera - tion proﬁle of the actin gel . We further assume that when ﬂattened , its proﬁle remains part of a spherical shell of radius R c , and that its area remains constant at 2 p R 20 . If we deﬁne the extent of indentation from the membrane by the quantity D z ( so that D z ¼ R 0 gives the equilibrium hemisphere ) , straightforward geometry shows that the vol - ume , V , of the indentation is p ð R c D z 2 (cid:3) D z 3 = 3 Þ , its circum - ference C is 2 p ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 R c D z (cid:3) D z 2 p , and R c ¼ R 20 = D z . Using the last relation in the ﬁrst two gives V ¼ p D z ð R 20 (cid:3) D z 2 = 3 Þ and C ¼ 2 p ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 R 2 0 (cid:3) D z 2 p . Then , by the deﬁnition of k c , the curvature energy is ð 2 p R 20 Þð k c = 2 Þð 1 = R 0 (cid:3) 1 = R c Þ 2 ¼ pk c ð 1 (cid:3) D z = R 0 Þ 2 . The energy required to overcome the turgor pressure is P 0 V . To model actomyosin contraction , we assume a thin con - tractile ring at the boundary of the coat proteins with tension T . Then the energy describing myosin contraction is TC , and the total energy as a function of D z becomes E coat ¼ pk c ð 1 (cid:3) D z = R 0 Þ 2 þ p P 0 D z (cid:3) R 20 (cid:3) D z 2 (cid:5) 3 (cid:4) þ 2 p T ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 R 20 (cid:3) D z 2 q : ( 11 ) The corresponding forces driving invagination ( derivatives of D z ) behave as follows . The coat protein layer exerts an inward force that decreases with increasing D z . The turgor pressure gives an outward force that decreases with D z . Finally , the myosin contraction term gives an inward force that initially vanishes but grows as D z increases . The area of the coat - protein layer could grow during invagination . This would impose a slowly varying prefactor on the coat - protein term , but would not change its qualitative behavior . Fig . 7 a shows the coat - protein bending energy , the turgor - pressure energy , and their sum as a function of the in - ward displacement D z . The value of k c is unknown ; to illus - trate the interplay between the different forces , we assign k c a value at which the initial slope of the coat - protein bending energy cancels that of the turgor - pressure energy , so that the total energy has zero slope . The coat - protein energy bends up slightly with increasing D z , whereas the turgor - pressure energy bends down . The total energy slowly climbs , so there is no indentation . We investigate possible effects of actin polymerization by assuming that it provides 10 5 Pa of pres - sure ( as suggested by Fig . 6 a ) , leaving only 10 5 Pa of turgor pressure to be overcome by the coat - protein layer . The re - sulting energy proﬁle ( Fig . 6 a , dot - dashed curve ) drops monotonically , indicating that the actin contribution is FIGURE 6 ( a ) Indentation distance , D z , after 5 time units of simulation , as function of actin stall stress , s 0 . ( b ) Pressure at the center of the endocytic site after 5 time units of simulation , as a function of s 0 . Parameters are base - line parameters ( Table 1 ) unless otherwise indicated . Alternate symbols show effects of decreasing turgor pressure , P 0 ( squares ) , or actin shear modulus , m a ( triangles ) . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 Endocytic Force Generation 1603 sufﬁcient to have a large impact on the invagination . Fig . 7 b shows the actomyosin contraction energy , generated using a 400 pN bundle tension measured in vitro ( 21 ) . ( Note that these measurements were for type - II myosin , so their appli - cability to the function of type - I myosin in yeast is not clear . ) Because of geometrical effects , the actomyosin en - ergy has zero slope at D z ¼ 0 , and its effect only kicks in as D z grows . Thus actomyosin contraction would appear to be more important for extending the invagination than for initiating it . This is consistent with a parallel ﬁnding in Zhang et al . ( 17 ) regarding the effect of inward forces from actin polymerization . DISCUSSION Our main ﬁnding is that if the actin stall stress is in the range of 5 (cid:2) 10 3 Pa or more , and the actin gel shear modulus is sufﬁciently large , actin polymerization can generate stresses that are near those required to cause invagination . However , it does not appear to be sufﬁcient by itself . The most likely conclusion is that actin polymerization augments contribu - tions from coat - protein curvature energetics and actomyosin contraction to reach the threshold . An alternative hypothesis is that the turgor pressure is locally lowered , reducing the force requirements . The turgor pressure , which is a manifestation of the osmotic pressure in yeast , could be reduced locally by a release of osmolytes focused around the endocytic site . The main osmolyte in yeast is glycerol , and its release is regulated by the Fps1p channel in the plasma membrane ( 39 ) . Yeast responds to hy - poosmotic shock by reducing its internal osmotic pressure via activation of Fps1p to release glycerol . If this process were localized near the endocytic site , it could lead to a local reduction of osmotic pressure . It is also possible that the hole in the actin polymerization region ( with radius R 0 ) is smaller than the value assumed here . As discussed in connection with Fig . 6 , the stress scales roughly as 1 = R 20 , so a smaller R 0 would increase the stress generated . The calculations also showed that a large actin shear modulus , on the order of 10 4 Pa , is required to generate forces on the order of the turgor pressure . This is compara - ble to the highest values that have been measured for the actin gel in Listeria comet tails ( 28 ) . These greatly exceed values measured for in vitro synthesized gels , because the latter have actin densities much lower than those in cells . A large shear modulus for actin patches is plausible , because they are dense enough to be stronger than actin networks in other cells . A recent molecular analysis of actin patches ( 37 ) found that a typical actin patch contains 200 molecules of capping protein . A study of ﬁssion yeast ( 8 ) suggested that there are 33 polymerized actin subunits per capping protein , so that 200 molecules of capping protein corre - sponds to 6600 subunits of actin , or ( using a length of 2 : 7 nm of F - actin per subunit ) 17 : 8 m m of F - actin ﬁlaments per patch . If we model the patch as a hemisphere of radius 100 nm , its volume is 0 : 0021 m m 3 , giving a density of 8500 m m of F - actin / m m 3 . This is about ﬁve times larger than a value of 1580 m m = m m 3 measured for lamellipodia in ﬁbroblasts ( 40 ) . Thus , the actin density in the patches is very high . In addition , there is a high density of cross - linkers ; measurements of absolute numbers of proteins in ﬁssion yeast found approximately one copy of the cross - linker ﬁmbrin per 10 polymerized actin subunits ( 8 ) . Both of these effects will enhance m a . The model presented here also requires the actin network to support large tensile stresses , comparable to the turgor pressure of 2 (cid:2) 10 5 Pa . We believe that this is feasible , since actin is much stronger in tension than in compression . The stringent requirements on the actin - gel elastic properties suggest that actin - based force generation would be greatly weakened in mutant cells with reduced cross - linker activity . The generation of substantial force by actin polymeriza - tion further requires that viscous relaxation occur on a timescale longer than ( or at least comparable to ) that of actin polymerization , which is on the order of seconds . FIGURE 7 ( a ) Energy change from coat - protein deformation ( dashed line ) pushing against turgor pressure ( dotted line ) , and their sum ( solid line ) . Energies are given in 10 (cid:3) 18 J . Parameters : turgor pressure , P 0 ¼ 2 (cid:2) 10 5 Pa , and k c ¼ 1 : 56 (cid:2) 10 (cid:3) 18 J are chosen so that the initial slope of total energy vanishes . Dot - dashed line gives total energy when P 0 ¼ 10 5 Pa . ( b ) Energy change from myosin contraction , with T ¼ 400 pN . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 1604 Carlsson and Bayly Estimates of the viscous relaxation time , t v , in the litera - ture range from several seconds ( 41 ) to much shorter values ( 42 ) . The high cross - linker concentration in actin patches may slow viscous relaxation enough for efﬁcient force generation . The requirements on the actin stall stress , s 0 , are also stringent , with a value of several thousand Pa required . To get an idea of how large s 0 might be for an endocytic actin patch , we assume that 90 % of the 200 ﬁlaments in the actin patch push on the membrane , over a region having area p ð R 2 act (cid:3) R 20 Þ , where R act ¼ 100 nm is the radius of the actin patch and R 0 ¼ 25 nm . If each ﬁlament has a stall force of 2 pN , the resulting estimate of s 0 would be 360 pN = p ½ð 100 nm Þ 2 (cid:3) ð 25 nm Þ 2 (cid:4) ¼ 1 : 2 (cid:2) 10 4 Pa . Thus , the required values of s 0 do not appear unreasonable . Another requirement for generating strong pulling forces from actin polymerization is that of strong attachment be - tween the actin gel and the cell membrane , which allows the central part of the gel to pull on the membrane . Such a linkage of actin ﬁlaments to the plasma membrane might be accomplished by type - 1 myosins . However , if we ima - gine the endocytic invagination as a circle of radius 25 nm , the total force on it from the turgor pressure is 400 pN . If 10 % of the 200 ﬁlaments in the patch are supply - ing this pulling force ( assuming that the rest are pushing ) , this would require a pulling force of 20 pN / ﬁlament . Because the membrane lipid bilayer is soft , an actin ﬁlament directly attached to it might detach from it by disrupting the lipid bilayer . This effect could be reduced if the ﬁlament is attached to the coat - protein layer , which is in turn attached to the lipid bilayer . If the coat - protein layer is closely packed , it should be harder than the cell membrane , and less likely to be disrupted by forces from actin ﬁlaments . The interface between the coat protein layer and the lipid bilayer would have a large number of attachment points ( much larger than the number of actin ﬁlaments ) , so each attachment point would carry a relatively small load and be less likely to rupture . Alternatively , the density of ﬁla - ments in the invagination could be enhanced , reducing the force required per ﬁlament . For the coat - protein layer to exert a force density compa - rable to the turgor pressure , we found above that it requires a curvature modulus of ~ 1 : 6 (cid:2) 10 (cid:3) 18 J ¼ 400 k B T , 30 times larger than that of the membrane . Thus , the coat - protein layer must be a material in its own right . There are no mea - surements of its mechanical properties because of its nano - scale dimensions . If we consider it to have a thickness similar to that of the membrane , it would need to have a shear modulus of 30 m m ¼ 3 (cid:2) 10 7 Pa . We see no reason why this should not be possible . For example , if the Young’s modulus , Y , of an actin ﬁlament is extracted from its measured bending modulus , k bend ¼ L p k B T x 15 m m , k B T , and approximate rod radius , R rod x 4 nm , using the formula k bend ¼ p YR 4 rod = 4 ( 43 ) , one obtains Y x 3 (cid:2) 10 8 Pa . If the interactions between coat proteins in the coat are as strong as those between actin subunits , then the coat could be as strong as an actin ﬁlament . It is in principle possible for inward forces on the coat - protein layer to come from inward - directed actin polymer - ization rather than actomyosin contraction ( 25 ) . However , this would require very high force densities from actin polymerization . As shown above , even an actomyosin tension of T ¼ 400 pN makes a fairly small contribution in the early stages of invagination . If this tension is converted to an equivalent inward force density spread over the external boundary of the coat - protein layer , and the coat - protein layer is ( generously ) assumed to have a height of h c ¼ 20 nm , the required force density is T = h c R 0 x 10 6 Pa , much higher than any current estimates of protrusion strength . However , in mammalian cells , the turgor pressure is much lower , and there this mechanism might operate . The spatial distribution of stress calculated here , with tensile stress at the center of the actin patch and compres - sive stress farther out , parallels that observed previously in actin - propelled vesicles ( 44 ) and oil drops ( 45 ) . In these systems , an initially spherical actin distribution breaks symmetry and accumulates on one side of the vesicle or drop . Then the vesicle / drop deforms into a pearlike shape , with tensile stress at the rear and compressive stress on the sides . One contribution to the tensile stress at the rear comes from the geometric requirement that under steady motion where the shape of the actin gel remains ﬁxed , polymerization at the sides must be slower than at the rear . Because actin polymerization is slowed by compres - sive stress , this corresponds to compressive stress at the sides , which must be balanced by tensile stress at the rear . This mechanism is likely not important in the initial stages of endocytosis treated here , because at the initially ﬂat membrane there is no geometric factor favoring tensile stress at the center versus compressive stress farther out . Another factor leading to tensile stress at the rear of the vesicles / droplets could be slowed growth resulting from depletion of free monomers ( 46 ) . This effect may also operate in endocytic actin patches , but should be much smaller because of their small size . The general force - generation mechanism developed here , applied in reverse , could be relevant to the initiation of pro - trusions such as ﬁlopodia . This would require polymeriza - tion to be focused at the center of the actin - gel - membrane interface . Such a distribution is plausible , since ﬁlopodia have a tip complex containing proteins that enhance actin polymerization ( 47 ) . We appreciate valuable discussions with John Cooper , Martin Lenz , Fred MacKintosh , and Ben Fabry . This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health under Grant No . R01 - GM086882 , and by the National Science foundation under Grant NO . PHY - 1066293 . We gratefully acknowledge the hospital - ity of the Aspen Center for Physics , where some of these ideas were developed . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 Endocytic Force Generation 1605 REFERENCES 1 . Wu , F . , and P . J . Yao . 2009 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis and Alz - heimer’s disease : an update . Ageing Res . Rev . 8 : 147 – 149 . 2 . Kaksonen , M . , Y . Sun , and D . G . Drubin . 2003 . A pathway for associ - ation of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell . 115 : 475 – 487 . 3 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell . 123 : 305 – 320 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 09 . 024 . 4 . Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 404 – 414 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm1940 . 5 . Kim , K . , B . J . Galletta , . , J . A . Cooper . 2006 . Actin - based motility during endocytosis in budding yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell . 17 : 1354 – 1363 . 6 . Galletta , B . J . , O . L . Mooren , and J . A . Cooper . 2010 . Actin dynamics and endocytosis in yeast and mammals . Curr . Opin . Biotechnol . 21 : 604 – 610 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . copbio . 2010 . 06 . 006 . 7 . Galletta , B . J . , and J . A . Cooper . 2009 . Actin and endocytosis : mecha - nisms and phylogeny . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 : 20 – 27 . 8 . Sirotkin , V . , J . Berro , . , T . D . Pollard . 2010 . Quantitative analysis of the mechanism of endocytic actin patch assembly and disassembly in ﬁssion yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell . 21 : 2894 – 2904 . 9 . Young , M . E . , J . A . Cooper , and P . C . Bridgman . 2004 . Yeast actin patches are networks of branched actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 166 : 629 – 635 . 10 . Sun , Y . , A . C . Martin , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . Endocytic internaliza - tion in budding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and myosin motor activity . Dev . Cell . 11 : 33 – 46 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 05 . 008 . 11 . Kukulski , W . , M . Schorb , . , J . A . Briggs . 2012 . Plasma membrane reshaping during endocytosis is revealed by time - resolved electron tomography . Cell . 150 : 508 – 520 . 12 . Idrissi , F . - Z . , A . Blasco , . , M . I . Geli . 2012 . Ultrastructural dynamics of proteins involved in endocytic budding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : E2587 – E2594 . 13 . Berro , J . , V . Sirotkin , and T . D . Pollard . 2010 . Mathematical modeling of endocytic actin patch kinetics in ﬁssion yeast : disassembly requires release of actin ﬁlament fragments . Mol . Biol . Cell . 21 : 2905 – 2915 . 14 . Gao , H . , W . Shi , and L . B . Freund . 2005 . Mechanics of receptor - medi - ated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 9469 – 9474 . 15 . Sun , S . X . , and D . Wirtz . 2006 . Mechanics of enveloped virus entry into host cells . Biophys . J . 90 : L10 – L12 . 16 . Liu , J . , Y . Sun , . , G . F . Oster . 2009 . The mechanochemistry of endo - cytosis . PLoS Biol . 7 : e1000204 . 17 . Zhang , T . , R . Sknepnek , . , J . M . Schwarz . 2013 . Private communica - tion , http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 1310 . 8652 . 18 . Idrissi , F . - Z . , H . Gro¨tsch , . , M . - I . Geli . 2008 . Distinct acto / myosin - I structures associate with endocytic proﬁles at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 1219 – 1232 . 19 . Rodal , A . A . , A . L . Manning , . , D . G . Drubin . 2003 . Negative regu - lation of yeast WASp by two SH3 domain - containing proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 : 1000 – 1008 . 20 . Toshima , J . , J . Y . Toshima , . , D . G . Drubin . 2005 . Phosphoregulation of Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly during receptor - mediated endocy - tosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 : 246 – 254 . 21 . Thoresen , T . , M . Lenz , and M . L . Gardel . 2011 . Reconstitution of con - tractile actomyosin bundles . Biophys . J . 100 : 2698 – 2705 . 22 . Fujisaki , H . , J . P . Albanesi , and E . D . Korn . 1985 . Experimental evi - dence for the contractile activities of Acanthamoeba myosins IA and IB . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 11183 – 11189 . 23 . Dasanayake , N . L . , P . J . Michalski , and A . E . Carlsson . 2011 . General mechanism of actomyosin contractility . Phys . Rev . Lett . 107 : 118101 . 24 . Dasanayake , N . L . , and A . E . Carlsson . 2013 . Stress generation by myosin miniﬁlaments in actin bundles . Phys . Biol . 10 : 036006 . 25 . Collins , A . , A . Warrington , . , T . Svitkina . 2011 . Structural organiza - tion of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 : 1167 – 1175 . 26 . Joanny , J . - F . , and J . Prost . 2009 . Active gels as a description of the actin - myosin cytoskeleton . HFSP J . 3 : 94 – 104 . 27 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . 28 . Gerbal , F . , V . Laurent , . , J . Prost . 2000 . Measurement of the elasticity of the actin tail of Listeria monocytogenes . Eur . Biophys . J . 29 : 134 – 140 . 29 . Marcy , Y . , J . Prost , . , C . Sykes . 2004 . Forces generated during actin - based propulsion : a direct measurement by micromanipulation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 5992 – 5997 . 30 . Landau , L . , and E . Lifshitz . 1986 . Theory of Elasticity , Chapter II , Sec - tion 11 . Pergamon , New York , pp . 38 – 40 . 31 . Harmandaris , V . A . , and M . Deserno . 2006 . A novel method for measuring the bending rigidity of model lipid membranes by simu - lating tethers . J . Chem . Phys . 125 : 204905 . 32 . Aghamohammadzadeh , S . , and K . R . Ayscough . 2009 . Differential re - quirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 : 1039 – 1042 . 33 . Zhu , J . , and A . E . Carlsson . 2006 . Growth of attached actin ﬁlaments . Eur Phys J E Soft Matter . 21 : 209 – 222 . 34 . Rodriguez , E . K . , A . Hoger , and A . D . McCulloch . 1994 . Stress - depen - dent ﬁnite growth in soft elastic tissues . J . Biomech . 27 : 455 – 467 . 35 . Xu , G . , A . K . Knutsen , . , L . A . Taber . 2010 . Axons pull on the brain , but tension does not drive cortical folding . J . Biomech . Eng . 132 : 071013 . 36 . Belytschko , T . , W . K . Liu , and B . Moran . 2000 . Nonlinear Finite Ele - ments for Continua and Structures . John Wiley and Sons , New York . 37 . Galletta , B . J . , A . E . Carlsson , and J . A . Cooper . 2012 . Molecular anal - ysis of Arp2 / 3 complex activation in cells . Biophys . J . 103 : 2145 – 2156 . 38 . Martinez de Maran˜on , I . , P . A . Marechal , and P . Gervais . 1996 . Passive response of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to osmotic shifts : cell volume variations depending on the physiological state . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 227 : 519 – 523 . 39 . Tama´s , M . J . , K . Luyten , . , S . Hohmann . 1999 . Fps1p controls the accumulation and release of the compatible solute glycerol in yeast osmoregulation . Mol . Microbiol . 31 : 1087 – 1104 . 40 . Abraham , V . C . , V . Krishnamurthi , . , F . Lanni . 1999 . The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys . J . 77 : 1721 – 1732 . 41 . Wottawah , F . , S . Schinkinger , . , J . Ka¨s . 2005 . Optical rheology of bio - logical cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 94 : 098103 . 42 . Bausch , A . R . , W . Mo¨ller , and E . Sackmann . 1999 . Measurement of local viscoelasticity and forces in living cells by magnetic tweezers . Biophys . J . 76 : 573 – 579 . 43 . Landau , L . , and E . Lifshitz . 1986 . Theory of Elasticity , Chapter II , Sec - tion 17 . Pergamon , New York , pp . 64 – 67 . 44 . Upadhyaya , A . , J . R . Chabot , . , A . van Oudenaarden . 2003 . Probing polymerization forces by using actin - propelled lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 4521 – 4526 . 45 . Boukellal , H . , O . Campa´s , . , C . Sykes . 2004 . Soft Listeria : actin - based propulsion of liquid drops . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 69 : 061906 . 46 . Dickinson , R . B . , and D . L . Purich . 2006 . Diffusion rate limitations in actin - based propulsion of hard and deformable particles . Biophys . J . 91 : 1548 – 1563 . 47 . Applewhite , D . A . , M . Barzik , . , G . G . Borisy . 2007 . Ena / VASP pro - teins have an anti - capping independent function in ﬁlopodia formation . Mol . Biol . Cell . 18 : 2579 – 2591 . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1596 – 1606 1606 Carlsson and Bayly