1 WHY DOES ”PARTICIPATORY” MAKE ME SHIVER ? PROPOSING A DECOLONIAL PRACTICE FOR PARTICIPATORY WORK ENGAGEMENTS , NEGOTIATIONS MARIKA HEDEMYR SCHOOL OF ARTS AND CULTURE ( K3 ) , MALMÖ UNIVERSITY , SWEDEN INFO @ MARIKAHEDEMYR . COM ABSTRACT Colonial practices often come unnoticed with participatory projects that involve people , places and economics . There are complex power structures involved , and nuances of ethics at play . But how to address this complexity in a constructive manner ? By explicitly drawing on a convergence between the challenges addressed by participatory art and participatory design , I propose a postcolonial perspective as a valuable critical practice for understanding the dynamic power structures in participatory projects . In order to decolonise a participatory project I suggest a set of concrete questions that can be asked regularly . To be the killjoy that points to the less flattering aspects of a project is never an easy position to take . But it may be necessary if the field of art and design is to raise its awareness and contribute to an ethical change . INTRODUCTION “Marika , so how do you work with participation in your project ? ” Per Linde , who posed the question at the end of his seminar , looks at me . I freeze . My stomach crunches and I shiver . Millions thoughts and memories are rushing through my mind . I realize I’m angry and want to yell “What the fuck are you imposing ? Don’t mention that word to me , don’t attach it to me ! ” But we are in a seminar . And we all behave . So I reply calmly : “I don’t . ” ( Hedemyr , 2017a ) But is this really true that I don’t ? And why this fury ? I do work with a lot of people in all my projects . I work site - specific and involve and talk to a lot of people at the location . I’m running cooperatives and I always create opportunities to involve and work together with people . So why does “participatory work” make me shiver and react so strongly every time ? And why do I avoid labelling my work as such ? It relates to power . So let’s try to unfold what it is all about . A participatory project makes me uneasy when the language used for people and places demonstrates a hidden and unspoken power - balance , or an unawareness of the power positions at play . Especially when the persons involved gets de - individualised and where someone else has decided what a certain group “need” , not the group or persons themselves . There is often a strange flipping between : participation as empowerment ; a good intention at contributing and helping others ; an exploitation of people’s perspectives and knowledge ; a real potential of co - creation , curiosity and change ; and a naïve colonial attitude . There is a complex power structure involved , and nuances of ethics at play . No 7 ( 2017 ) : Nordes 2017 : DESIGN + POWER , ISSN 1604 - 9705 . Oslo , www . nordes . org 2 On the following pages I will present why I find a postcolonial perspective a valuable critical practice for understanding the dynamic power structures in participatory projects . I will explicitly draw on a convergence between the challenges addressed by participatory art and participatory design . Postcolonial and decolonial approaches will be used to support my argument regarding power , and as an approach and practice for how to deal with power in a constructive and ethical way . A postcolonial perspective enables one to challenge the fundamental worldviews and assumptions on which a participatory project and its practices are based . In the scope of this paper I will focus on the agendas and power structures inside participatory projects , and I will suggest a set of concrete questions that can be asked as a daily decolonial practice . My argument is to be placed in the context of recent debate and critique of participatory art and design , and as a complement to the discussion on postcolonial perspectives on design by for example Dourish & Mainwaring ( 2012 ) , Irani et al ( 2010 ) , Main sah & Morrison ( 2014 ) , and Merritt & Barddzell ( 2011 ) , and as a complement to the discussion on participation and art by Bishop ( 2012 ) , Jackson ( 2011 ) , Kester ( 2011 ) . PARTICIPATION , EMPOWERMENT AND VALUE The word participatory is explained as “providing the opportunity for people to be involved in deciding how something is done” ( Merriam - Webster 2017 ) . Participatory design is an approach to design attempting to actively involve all stakeholders ( e . g . employees , partners , customers , citizens , end users ) in the design process to help ensure the result meets their needs and is usable . In art , participatory art has been a description of a wide range of projects that are created through a participatory process , and at times ( mis ) used as a label also for community - based art , interactive art , or socially - engaged art . In both design and art , there is on one hand the political dimension of user / participant empowerment , allowing different or marginalised voices to be heard and have a real impact on the development , and on the other hand an instrumental dimension where the artist / designer and the participants are used in order to create a certain value for the initiator or stakeholder . A project’s power structures are influenced by how these two perspectives ‘empowerment’ and ‘value’ are talked about , since art and design are part of both cultural and capitalist practices ( Balsamo 2011 ; Karlsson 2016 ; Eagleton 1995 ) . While cultural theory provides valuable models for understanding the ways in which culture exerts influence on social structure and life , they have to be combined with economic theory if we are to fully understand the power structures operating in contemporary participatory art and design . This combination is done in postcolonial theories . A POSTCOLONIAL PERSPECTIVE The postcolonial perspective is valuable because it describes a practice of power hierarchies and power politics that defines the relation between people , places and profit . In short : A practice of subject hood defining who is subject , who is object , who is allowed to speak and who is silenced . A practice of space politics creating “here” and “there” , a centre and periphery , and the idea of the existence of “empty spaces” . A practice of exploitation by appropriating valuable assets , instrumentalising people , and generating profit for only certain actors . Furthermore , it takes into account that all these practices are entangled , and provides an intersectional analysis of this entanglement ( Ashcroft et al , 2009 ) . The postcolonial perspective on culture aim to deconstruct material and discursive legacies of colonialism , offering an approach to think about how local practice operates in contemporary transnational contexts affected by histories , relations and logics of colonialism . Its cultural - linguistic and political economy theory approaches draw on influences from poststructuralism and Marxism . As a discipline of theory and criticism , it “seeks to understand how location , social dimensions of identity , and the global political economy differentiate between groups and the opportunities they have for development” ( Mainsah & Morriso n 2014 : 84 ) . In relation to participatory projects I’m interested in postcolonial theory beyond racism . This is evidently impossible . Racism is at the very core of colonialism and the underpinning ideology that has made European colonialism possible ( Lindqvist 2011 ) . The horrific crimes committed cannot be compared with anything else . Also , in our present times racism is not only a restaging of a colonial past but also as a traumatic contemporary reality , as for example Grada Kilomba clearly outlines in her book Plantation Memories ( 2010 ) by giving accounts of everyday racism and linking it to postcolonial theory . The reason I search for ways to discuss participatory projects through a postcolonial perspective beyond racism , is that I experience colonial acts and practices in projects that are happening for example in a Swedish city by Swedish partners . Projects that are not racist , but stage a colonial relationship between stakeholders , different neighbourhoods and partners . There are no neutral or objective positions in a participatory project and colonial practices often come unnoticed with it . When a project is presented as neutral , unaware of the power practices it embodies , and wants to stage me , as white woman and artist , in the role of the coloniser , a token , or a complicit – this is when I start to shiver . I shiver of frustration over the un - equal power positions , and the masking of the daunting play of power . I shiver when there seem to be no space for ethical and socio - political aware negotiations or critical questions . I shiver because I will be entangled in it all . To be the “killjoy” or “nasty bastard” that points to the less flattering aspects of a project is never an easy position 3 to take . But it is necessary if the field of art and design is to raise its awareness and contribute to an ethical change . Am I afraid of committing or being complicit in a colonial act ? Yes , I am . But I do not want that to refrain me from being involved in a project . As practitioner , my way out of the shivering is to make conscious choices on how to do politics and ethics in practice . A first step is to talk about the sticky issues and difficult questions that may come with a participatory project , to bring them out in the light , and find a way to work with them as part of the project . As artist or designer , one has to find a way for how to work in and with these power practices . In a participatory project , the initiator , or the artist / designer who has been engaged to go ”out there” to create something “from zero” , could be very close to commit a colonial act . As Thiong’o express it in his book Something Torn and New ( 2009 : 4 ) : “A colonial act – indeed , any act in the context of conquest and domination – is both a practice of power , intended to p acify a populace , and a symbolic act , a performance of power intended to produce docile minds” . This is especially important to have in mind if the initiator is a local government who has set aside funding for participatory projects in precarious areas . The artist / designer could also be close to commit a colonial act by “helping” a certain group of people whose “needs” someone else has defined , thereby restaging the power hierarchies of the coloniser and the colonised . THE NUANCES OF LANGUAGE When applying a postcolonial perspective there is also a call for “increased attention to the language of the texts of participatory design research [ and practice ] – the metaphors , images , allusion , fantasy and rhetoric and what types they produce about peoples and places” ( Mainsah & Morrison 2014 : 84 ) . An example of the delicate nuances of language is found in a booklet on Community Dance , produced Kultur i Väst , the cultural administration of the government of Region Västra Götaland in Sweden . The purpose is to inspire the creation of more community projects . With concrete examples from realised projects they explain that the working methods are based on a democratic and artistic exploration . But they also explain that the “dance artist starts from a place and the people there , and highlights the resident’s stories . . . In community dance the amateur gets help to depict and convey a story or issue that is important or urgent , together with professional artists . ” ( Kultur i Väst 2013 : 7 , translation and emphasis by the author ) . The booklet does not mention any financial aspects of the projects , how they have been funded or who got paid or not in the process . Thereby leaving out an important aspect of the socio - political reality of the projects . OPPORTUNITY AND EXPLOITATION Since every participatory project , to a greater or lesser extent , is part of the global neo - capitalist society in which it takes place , it is important to pay attention to how value and profit are talked about , and how it is linked to money or not . There can be a fine line between “being given an opportunity” and “being exploited” . The artist / designer could be complicit in a colonial act of exploitation when extracting valuable ideas from the “participants” in order to create value elsewhere . Or it could be the artist / designer’s creative abilities that are exploited . In 2008 I was one of eight artists selected for the AIRIS - Artists in Residence Project , initiated by TILLT in Gothenburg . During one year I worked at an ”ordinary workplace” as an opportunity to broaden my skills and try new ways of working . One day a week I worked at Paroc , a stone wool insulation factory in south Sweden with 90 employees . My fee was 500 Euro / month , a bit lower than normal because this was an “opportunity” for me as an artist . Starting from a very experimental and o pen process with no requirements of a certain outcome , the factory management , however , announced in the press that the goal of the project was to clarify the leadership , develop the staff , increase collaboration among employees and strengthen the corporate identity . We also want to strengthen the innovative thinking within the company and get the staff to feel proud to work at the company . ( TT 2008 , translation by the author ) . I used my experience as choreographer to do workshops with the employees with the aim to create a work together as film or performance , and to unfold the creative and collaborative spirit among the workers as co - creators . As the project developed , I got limited possibilities to realise any artistic expressions , apart from initiating social events outside working hours . I felt trapped by the situation , but the factory management was very pleased with the results . The general atmosphere and collaborative spirit was better and they proudly presented how the press coverage corresponded to a market campaign worth minimum 150 000 Euro . As a comparison , my fee was 5 500 Euro for the whole year . Instead of the project being an “opportunity” for me to create work together with people I normally don’t work with , I felt instrumentalised and exploited as cheap labour that could create a lot of value for money for the factory . I also felt that I betrayed the workers since we never realised any co - creation . When trying to raise these issues with the initiating organisation TILLT they had - at that time - very little understanding of my concerns , holding on to their perspective that they had given me a great “opportunity” . In these situations , it is important to clearly see the power structures at play , and not read the situation as a ”personal issue” . No 7 ( 2017 ) : Nordes 2017 : DESIGN + POWER , ISSN 1604 - 9705 . Oslo , www . nordes . org 4 Should we avoid participatory projects because of their complexity ? Of course not . Participatory projects can have a great potential for change and democratic development . But they always include worldviews and power dynamics that have to be considered and dealt with . Irani et . al ( 2010 ) in their article Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development , as well as Mainsah and Morrison ( 2014 ) in their article Participatory design through a cultural lens : insights from postcolonial theory , outlines how postcolonial theories provide useful approaches to participatory design . However , both papers refer primarily to projects where a designers or stakeholders from the so - called Western world work in projects in the so - called developing world . By only referring to projects in Africa or trans - national collaborations , there is again a colonial perspective that risk shadowing the nuanced and effective analysis of power relations on micro and macro level that postcolonial theory can provide for participatory projects in themselves . A DECOLONIAL PRACTICE So , how to deal with the entangled power dynamics and nuances of ethics at play ? I propose a set of questions to use and reflect upon in each situation , as a daily practice of decolonisation of participatory projects : • Who is funding this project and what do they want to get out of this project ? • Who has initiated this project and why is it to be done ? • Who are the subjects ? • Who in this room is paid while participating , who is not ? • What does participation actually mean in this project ? • Can a participant decline to continue ? • Are there options to re - negotiate how the project is set up ? • What am I doing here ? • Who is profiting from the knowledge production created ? • What kind of language is used for the people and places involved ? • Are my ethics and moral compatible with the project ? If not , do I stay and work for a change or do I leave ? • What is “here” , what is “there” , and which spaces are talked about as “empty” ? • Are the words empowerment or creativity used to mask a form of exploitation ? • Is this project creating a real change , or just a temporary relief and fun ? • What / who is exploited during the project ? • What does it mean to be a token in this project ? • Where do I / we get from here ? • When can I rest ? The above questions builds on a set of questions presented by Temi Odumosu at her seminar What could a decolonised approach to new media ( and its public expressions ) look like ? ( Hedemyr , 2017b ) , but here developed and expanded for the context of a participatory project . Coming back to the very first question of how I work with participation in my projects , and my response that I don’t , made me reflect on which position I actually do take . In my long term public art project The Event Series ( Hedemyr 2017 ) , I work “from the belly of the beast” , to borrow an expression from Stuart Hall ( cited in Kilomba 2010 : 36 ) . Hall uses this expression to describe the specific time and place from which he writes , as a Black intellectual in England . “Being inside the beast announces somehow the place of danger from which he writes and theorizes - , the danger of being from the margin and speaking at the centre . ” ( Kilomba , 2010 : 36 ) . In The Event Series , this is the position I take as a local artist who do critical performative works at Gothenburg’s Event District , the very heart and belly of Gothenburg - The Event City . My interaction with people is more resembling a documentary film maker , or a undercover journalism , although I’m always open with who I am and that I’m there to create a site - specific work . I use a form of “walk and talk” practice to get to know a location and its people . Therefore , I would still say that The Event Series is not a participatory project . But I do find the set of questions relevant also here because the project involves people , places , power relations and economics - just as the majority of art and design projects do . REFERENCES Ashcroft , B . , Grifftiths , G . , and Tiffin , H . ( eds ) ( 2009 ) The Post - Colonial Reader . London : Routledge . Balsamo , A . ( 2011 ) Designing Culture . Durham : Duke University Press . Bishop , C . ( 2012 ) Artificial Hells : Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship . London : Verso . Dourish , P . and Mainwaring , S . ( 2012 ) Ubicomp ' s colonial impulse . In UbiComp ' 12 : Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing , Pittsburgh , USA , 133 - 142 . Eagleton , T . ( 1995 ) “Introduction” , in Eagleton and Milner ( eds ) Marxist Literary Theory . Wiley - Blackwell . Hedemyr , M . ( 2017 ) The Event Series [ public art project ] http : / / www . marikahedemyr . com / the - event - series [ accessed 23 Jan 2017 ] . Hedemyr , M . ( 2017a ) Personal notes from PhD seminar by Per Linde , NMOG , 10 January 2017 [ Notebook ] Unpublished . 5 Hedemyr , M . ( 2017b ) Personal notes from PhD seminar by Temi Odumoso : “What could a decolonised approach to new media ( and its public expressions ) look like ? ” at Malmö University , 10 January 2017 [ Notebook ] Unpublished . Irani , L . , Vertesi , J . , Dourish , P . , Philip , K . , & Grinter , R . E . ( 2010 ) ”Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development” . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 1311 - 1320 ) . ACM . Jackson , S . ( 2011 ) Social Works : Performing Art , Supporting Publics . New York : Routledge . Kilomba , G . ( 2010 ) Plantation Memories . Episodes of Everyday Racism . UNRAST - Verlag , Münster . Kester , G . ( 2011 ) The One and the Many : Contemporary Collaborative Art in a Global Context . Durham , N . C . : Duke University Press , 2011 . Karlsson , D . ( 2016 ) ”Without Art – no culture industries” in Cogne , Ingrid and Hedemyr , Marika ( eds . ) ( 2016 ) Dansbaren – Th e Mob without Flash , Dansbyrån , , pp 163 - 173 . Kultur i Väst ( 2013 ) Communitydans : Inspireran de exempel för dig som vill arbeta med dans , delaktighet & utveckling . Kultur i Väst Skriftserie 2013 : 1 . Kultur i Väst . Lindqvist , S . ( 2007 ) Exterminate All the Brutes : One Man ' s Odyssey into the Heart of Darkness and the Origins of European Genocide . New Press . Mainsah , H . and Morrison , A . ( 2014 ) Participatory design through a cultural lens : insights from postcolonial theory . In Proceedings of the 13 th Participatory Design Conference – Volume 2 ( PDC’14 ) , Vl 2 ACM , New York , NY , USA , 83 - 86 . Merriam - Webster ( 2017 ) PARTICIPATORY Defined for English Language Learners . [ online ] Available at : https : / / www . merriam - webster . com / dictionary / participatory , [ Accessed 13 Jan 2017 ] . Merritt , S . and Bardzell , S . ( 2011 ) Postcolonial language and culture theory for HCI4D . In CHI EA ' 11 : CHI ' 11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Vancouver , BC , Canada , 1675 - 1680 . Thiong’o , N . W . ( 2009 ) Something Torn and New : an African renaissance . New York : BasicCivitas Books . TT ( 2008 ) “Kreativt med koreograf i fabriken” in Hässleholm Dagblad , 22 April 2008 . No 7 ( 2017 ) : Nordes 2017 : DESIGN + POWER , ISSN 1604 - 9705 . Oslo , www . nordes . org