1 Caveolae couple mechanical stress to integrin recycling and activation Running head : Cav1 / caveolae , integrin recycling , activation and mechanosensing Fidel - Nicolás Lolo 1 , Dácil M . Pavón 1 , ω , Araceli Grande - García 1 , ¥ , Alberto Elósegui - Artola 2 , θ , Valeria Inés Segatori 1 , Ψ , Sara Sánchez - Perales 1 , Xavier Trepat 2 , Pere Roca - Cusachs 2 and Miguel A . del Pozo 1 * . 1 Mechanoadaptation and Caveolae Biology Laboratory , Cell and developmental Biology Area . Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares ( CNIC ) . Madrid 28029 , Spain . 2 IBEC , Baldiri Reixac , 08028 Barcelona , Spain ω Current address : Allergy Therapeutics S . L . , Avda . Punto Es , 12 ( Parque Tecnológico Tecnoalcala ) , Alcalá de Henares 28805 , Spain ¥ Current address : Structural Biology Programme . Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas ( CNIO ) . Madrid 28029 , Spain θ Current address : Laboratory for Cell and Tissue Engineering , Room 415 , Engineering Sciences Lab , 58 Oxford St . Cambridge , MA 02138 Ψ Current address : Center of Molecular and Translational Oncology , Quilmes National University , Bernal , Buenos Aires Province , Argentina * Corresponding author : Miguel A . Del Pozo , MD , PhD Tel : ( + 34 ) 91 453 1200 x 1158 Email : madelpozo @ cnic . es 2 Abstract Cells are subjected to multiple mechanical inputs throughout their lives . Their ability to detect these environmental cues is called mechanosensing , a process in which integrins play an important role . During cellular mechanosensing , plasma membrane ( PM ) tension is adjusted to mechanical stress through the buffering action of caveolae ; however , little is known about the role of caveolae in early integrin mechanosensing regulation . Here , we show that Cav1KO fibroblasts increase adhesion to FN - coated beads when pulled with magnetic tweezers , as compared to wild type fibroblasts . This phenotype is Rho - independent and mainly derived from increased active  1 - integrin content on the surface of Cav1KO fibroblasts . FRAP analysis and endocytosis / recycling assays revealed that active  1 - integrin is mostly endocytosed through the CLIC / GEEC pathway and is more rapidly recycled to the PM in Cav1KO fibroblasts , in a Rab4 - dependent manner . Moreover , the threshold for PM tension - driven  1 - integrin activation is lower in Cav1KO MEFs than in wild type MEFs , through a mechanism dependent on talin activity . Our findings suggest that caveolae couple mechanical stress to integrin cycling and activation , thereby regulating the early steps of the cellular mechanosensing response . Introduction Cells constantly adjust their PM composition in response to changes in extracellular matrix ( ECM ) stiffness , which regulates many aspects of cell behavior 1 . How cells sense and react to ECM stiffness changes is critical to understanding both physiological and pathological processes 2 . The ECM is mechanically linked to the cytoskeleton through integrins , which provide a bridge between extracellular cues and downstream cellular events 3 . The mechanosensing function of integrins is well established , and much progress has been made 3 in defining the molecular details of integrin action ; for example , how α 5 β 1 and αvβ3 integrins withstand and detect forces , respectively 4 , and how differences in integrin bond dynamics contribute to tissue rigidity sensing 5 . Integrin function requires an activation step commonly achieved by binding to activator molecules , such as talin and kindlins 6 . Integrins are also activated in response to changes in membrane tension , as recently reported by Ferraris et al . 7 , 8 . However , it is unclear how these events influence mechanosensing . Tissues experiencing wide variations in PM tension , such as endothelium , muscle , fibroblasts , and adipocytes , have a high membrane density of caveolae 9 - 11 . Caveolae are 60 - 80 nm PM invaginations and are key elements in the sensing and transduction of mechanical forces . Core caveolae protein components are caveolin - 1 ( Cav1 ) and cavin - 1 ( also called PTRF ) , and lack of either results in caveolae loss 12 , 13 . Cav1 is intimately linked to integrins 11 , 14 , 15 and to molecules such as Filamin A , which links integrins to the cytoskeleton 16 . To study how integrins and caveolae interact to regulate cell mechanosensing , we used magnetic tweezers ( MT ) 17 to exert mechanical force on mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) upon their binding to magnetic beads coated with the integrin - binding protein fibronectin ( FN ) . MEFs lacking Cav1 ( Cav1KO ) showed higher adhesion to FN - coated beads than Cav1WT MEFs , through a process dependent on increased  1 - integrin surface availability in Cav1KO MEFs due to both rapid recycling of endocytosed  1 - integrin to the PM , in a Rab4 - dependent manner , and tension - mediated  1 - integrin activation driven by Talin . These results support a role for caveolae in regulating integrin mechanosensing by coupling membrane tension to integrin recycling and activation . 4 Results Genetic models for studying the role of caveolae in integrin mechanosensing To study the role of caveolae in integrin mechanosensing , we generated transgenic fibroblast lines by transducing Cav1KO MEFs with either Cav1 - or PTRF - expressing retroviral vectors ( Figure 1A - D ) . To validate the transgenic lines for the characterization of mechanosensing properties , we first analyzed the presence or absence of caveolae by electron microscopy ( EM ) , detecting caveolae only in wild type and Cav1 - reconstituted Cav1KO cells ( Figure 1E - H , black arrows ) . Next , super - resolution microscopy analysis of Cav1 topographical distribution revealed that re - expressed Cav1 localizes to the PM and does not form aberrant aggregates ( Figure 1I - L ) . Confirming the super - resolution imaging data , biochemical fractionation indicated that re - expressed Cav1 localizes to the PM ( Figure 1M ) . Western blot analysis confirmed the expected Cav1 and PTRF expression in the different MEF lines and revealed near - endogenous expression levels in Cav1 - reconstituted cells ( Figure 1N , see also Figure 1 - source data 1 - 4 ) . 5 Figure 1 . Caveolin - 1 - based genetic model characterization ( A - D ) MEF caveolae - related phenotypes : PTRF is depicted in dark blue , Cav1 in red , and PM in light blue . ( E - H ) Electron microscopy images of MEF PM regions , showing the presence of caveolae only in ( E ) wild type MEFs and ( H ) Cav1 - reconstituted Cav1KO MEFs ( black arrows ) . ( I - L ) GSD - super - resolution MEF images . Cav1 is shown in red . ( M ) Biochemical PM fractionation of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs and Cav1KO MEFs reconstituted with PTRF , empty vector , and Cav1 . Samples were immunoblotted for Cav1 and total  1 - integrin 1 integrin ( as both PM marker and loading control ) . ( N ) Western blot of total lysates from wild type , Cav1KO , and reconstituted Cav1 KO MEFs . Samples were immunoblotted for PTRF , Cav1 , and tubulin ( loading control ) . Figure 1 - source data 1 - 4 includes the full raw unedited blots ( 1 corresponding to Figure 1M , and 3 corresponding to Figure 1N ) and the uncropped blots with the relevant bands labelled ( 2 corresponding to Figure 1M , and 4 corresponding to Figure 1N ) . Cav1 modulates integrin / cytoskeleton - dependent mechanosensing via Rho - independent mechanisms To monitor the mechanosensing properties of the different transgenic lines , we used the MT technique . In this method , a pulsed magnetic force ( 1Hz , 1nN ) is applied to pull magnetic beads attached to the cell surface ( Figure 2A and 2B , and Suppl . Video 1 ) . The magnetic beads oscillate in response to the pulsed force , and the local stiffness of the bead - cell adhesion can be measured as the ratio of the applied force to the bead movement . Cells able to detect the applied force respond through a phenomenon known as reinforcement , by which they 6 progressively strengthen the cell - bead adhesion site , increasing its stiffness and thus reducing oscillation amplitude . Reinforcement can therefore be quantified as the change in adhesion stiffness over a specified time , providing a measure of cellular mechanosensing ( Figure 2C and Suppl . Table 1 ; for more details on the technique , see 4 ) . We studied forces transmitted through integrins ( adhesion strength ) by coating beads with FN . As a control , we also studied forces transmitted non - specifically through the PM using beads coated with the sugar - binding lectin concanavalin A ( ConA ) ( Figure 2D and Suppl . Video 2 and Video 3 ) . We first assessed the tethering specificity of the two coatings by mixing FN - coated beads ( prepared with non - labeled BSA ) with ConA - coated beads labeled with Alexa 546 - conjugated BSA ( Figure 2E and 2F ) . Staining for phalloidin and 9EG7 antibody ( which specifically recognizes  1 - integrin in its active conformation 18 ) revealed FN - coated beads surrounded by both signals , indicating engagement of both  1 - integrin and the cell cytoskeleton ; in contrast , ConA - coated beads were excluded from these stainings ( Figure 2E and 2F ) indicating they are only bound bulk PM , as previously reported 19 . We next analyzed the integrin / cytoskeleton - dependent mechanical response in different MEF lines . Cells were plated for 10 minutes on FN - coated coverslips . FN - or ConA - coated beads were then allowed to bind to the cell surface and subjected to magnetic pulses . Reinforcement was significantly higher in Cav1KO MEFs exposed to FN - coated beads than in wild type MEFs ( Figure 2G ) . Reconstitution of Cav1KO MEFs with recombinant Cav1 rescued the WT phenotype , supporting that the Cav1KO phenotype is specific . Reconstitution of Cav1KO MEFs with PTRF induced a partial recovery that did not reach statistical significance . In contrast , MT pulling upon binding to ConA - coated beads yielded no significant differences across genotypes ( Figure 2H ) . These results support an intrinsic role for Cav1 / caveolae in determining PM mechanical properties , through integrin - dependent pathways . 7 Figure 2 . Cav1 KO MEFs show reinforced attachment to magnetic tweezers ( A ) Reinforcement experiment scheme , indicating the fibroblast , the magnetic bead , and the magnetic tweezers apparatus . The red arrow represents the magnetic force exerted on the bead by the magnet . ( B ) Differential interference contrast ( DIC ) image showing a mouse embryonic fibroblast , the tip of the magnetic tweezers , and a magnetic bead ( white arrows ) . ( C ) Examples of bead oscillation as a function of time in two conditions : with and without reinforcement . ( D ) Representation of the two magnetic beads coatings used : FN , which binds integrins , and ConA , which binds the bulk PM . ( E and F ) Confocal microscopy images showing a mouse embryonic fibroblast attached to concanavalin A - coated beads ( red ) and fibronectin - coated beads ( gray ) . Actin staining is shown in green ( phalloidin ) , active  1 - integrin in magenta ( 9EG7 antibody ) , and DAPI in blue . Note how only fibronectin - coated beads present both phalloidin and 9EG7 staining . ( G and H ) Reinforcement increment ( relative change in reinforcement over the entire experiment , calculated as the difference between the last and initial measurements ) of different MEF genotypes for FN - coated beads ( G ) or ConA - coated beads ( H ) ; n ≥ 20 beads per genotype . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significance assigned at * P < 0 . 05 . N . S . , non - significant . 8 See also Raw Data Figures 2 and 3 which includes the raw data of experiments from Figure 2G and 2H . Integrins link extracellular matrix ( ECM ) components , notably FN , to the cytoskeleton , transducing external forces into downstream effects and regulating responses such as cell contraction 3 . We previously showed that Cav1 regulates cell contraction by controlling Rho activity through the localization of p190RhoGAP 20 within the PM 20 , 21 . In the absence of Cav1 , p190RhoGAP localization to liquid order domains increases , where it can bind and inhibit Rho activity 21 , thus attenuating cell contractility and associated ECM remodeling 20 . Figure 3 . Cav1 KO MEFs show Rho - independent reinforcement and increased fibronectin adhesion ( A and B ) Experimental schemes for ( A ) local force measurement ( magnetic tweezers experiment , reinforcement ) and ( B ) total force measurement ( traction force microscopy , total cell contraction ) . ( C ) Effect of transfection with scrambled or shp190RhoGAP shRNA on the reinforcement increment in Cav1 KO MEFs ( magnetic tweezers assay ) . Reinforcement 9 increment refers to the relative change in reinforcement over the entire experiment , calculated as the difference between the last and initial measurements ) ; n ≥ 20 beads per condition . ( D ) Effect of transfection with scrambled or shp190RhoGAP shRNA on mean total force contraction in Cav1 KO MEFs ( traction force microscopy ) ; n ≥ 12 cells per condition . ( E and F ) Relative adhesion of the indicated genotypes to plates coated with ( E ) 5ugr / ml ConA or ( F ) 5ugr / ml of FN . Measurements ( absorbance , Optical density , OD , at 595nm from retained crystal violet dye , see material and methods ) were normalized to values from adhesion to BSA - coated plates . ; n ≥ 9 adhesion independent experiments . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significance assigned at * P < 0 . 05 . N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Figures 2 and 3 which includes the raw data of experiments from Figure 3C - 3F . This reduced cell contractility contrasts with the local stiffening response observed in our MT assays . Because the specific knock down of this p190RhoGAP isoform fully rescues other biomechanical phenotypes in Cav1KO MEFs 19 , 20 , we assessed the impact of stably knocking down p190RhoGAP 21 on the increased reinforcement observed in Cav1KO cells ( Figure 3A - C and Suppl . Figure 1A , see also Figure 3 - figure supplement 1 - source data 1 and 2 ) . While traction force microscopy confirmed higher overall contractility in p190RhoGAP - depleted Cav1KO MEFs as expected 21 ( Figure 3D ) , MT measurements revealed no decreased reinforcement upon p190RhoGAP knockdown ( Figure 3C ) . These observations suggest that Cav1KO MEFs locally respond to FN - coated beads in a Rho - independent manner , as opposed to Rho - dependent whole cell contractility . Loss of Cav1 increases fibronectin adhesion and active surface  1 - integrin To explore the role of cell adhesion in Cav1KO MEF reinforcement , we first analyzed the ability of the different MEF lines to adhere to FN - or ConA - coated plates . Whereas adhesion to ConA - coated plates did not differ between genotypes ( Figure 3E ) , adhesion to FN was higher in Cav1KO MEFs and PTRF - reconstituted Cav1KO MEFs ( Figure 3F ) . Cav1 re - expression rescued 10 the wild type phenotype , supporting a specific role of Cav1 in cellular adhesion . However , PTRF reconstitution did not have a significant impact on Cav1KO MEFs adhesion , and was therefore not considered further in subsequent experiments . In additional experiments with different FN concentrations and other integrin - dependent coatings ( collagen and vitronectin ) , Cav1KO MEFs showed always higher adhesion than wild type MEFs ( Suppl . Figure 1B , 1C and 1D ) . The two major FN receptors are integrins α 5 β 1 and α v β 322 ; however , adhesion strength is mainly mediated by the clustering 4 and activation 23 , 24 of integrin α 5 β 1 . To evaluate the role of  1 - integrin in reinforcement , we imaged the active  1 - integrin pool in Cav1KO and wild type MEFs by staining with 9EG7 . The active  1 - integrin signal was consistently stronger in Cav1KO MEFs than in wild type MEFs over a range of conditions : permeabilized and non - permeabilized cells , around FN - coated beads and at different spreading time - points ( Suppl . Figure 1E - M ) . Cav1KO MEFs displayed stronger FN adhesion than wild type MEFs , a phenotype presumably derived from increased active  1 - integrin at the cell surface . 11 Supplementary Figure 1 . Related to Figure 3 ( A ) Western blot of total lysates from wild type cells , and Cav1KO cells reconstituted with either empty vector , scrambled shRNA or shRNA against p190RhoGAP . Samples were immunoblotted for p190RhoGAP , Cav1 , and tubulin ( loading control , 50kDa ) . ( B , C and D ) Relative adhesion of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs to different concentrations of fibronectin ( B ) , collagen ( C ) and vitronectin ( D ) . Measurements ( absorbance , Optical density , OD , at 595nm from retained crystal violet dye , see material and methods ) were normalized to values from wild type counterparts . ( E and F ) Confocal microscopy images of active  1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) in permeabilized wild type ( E ) MEFs or Cav1KO ( F ) MEFs . DAPI 12 counterstain is shown in blue . ( G and H ) Confocal microscopy images of active  1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) in wild type ( G ) or Cav1KO ( H ) MEFs incubated with FN - coated silica beads ( arrow ) . DAPI counterstain is shown in blue . ( I , J , L and M ) Confocal microscopy images of active  1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) in non - permeabilized wild type MEFs ( I and L ) and Cav1KO MEFs ( J and M ) after the indicated spreading times . DAPI is shown in blue . ( K ) Normalized mean bead - bound 9EG7 fluorescence intensity in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs ; n ≥ 40 beads per genotype . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significant between - group differences denoted * P < 0 . 05 . Figure 3 - figure supplement 1 - source data 1 and 2 includes the full raw unedited blot ( 1 corresponding to Suppl . Figure 1A ) and the uncropped blot with the relevant bands labelled ( 2 corresponding to Suppl . Figure 1A ) . See also Raw Data Suppl . Figures 1 and 2 which includes the raw data of experiments from Suppl . Figure 1B , 1C , 1D and 1K . Cav1KO MEFs recycle  1 - integrin faster than wild type MEFs We first hypothesized that enhanced recruitment of active  1 - integrin to FN beads in Cav1KO MEFs could be derived from increased lateral mobility . However , experiments measuring florescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) in Cav1KO and wild type MEFs expressing similar levels of GFP - fused  1 - integrin ( Figure 4A and 4B ) revealed no significant differences in fluorescence recovery between the two cell populations , indicating that lateral mobility of  1 - integrin was unaffected ( Figure 4C ) . 13 14 Figure 4 . Cav1KO MEFs show faster  1 - integrin recycling ( A and B ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs transfected with  1 - integrin - GFP expression vector . ( C ) Normalized fluorescence intensity recovery after photo bleaching of wild type MEFs ( black line ) and Cav1KO MEFs ( red line ) at the indicated time points ( the graph is representative of a minimum of 9 independent experiments in which between 8 and 10 cells were bleached per genotype ) . Statistical significance of between time - point differences was estimated by t - test ; N . S . , non - significant . ( D and E ) Experimental schemes for the analysis of endocytosis and recycling followed by ELISA ( according to 25 ) . ( F and H ) Net endocytosis of ( F ) total  1 integrin and ( H ) active  1 - integrin in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs at the time points indicated . Net endocytosis is expressed as internalized biotinylated  1 integrin ( cytosolic ) at each time point normalized to total biotinylated  1 - integrin ( internal and surface bound ; see Materials and Methods ) ; n ≥ 6 endocytosis assays per genotype . ( G and I ) Net recycling after 10 minutes endocytosis of ( G ) total and ( I ) active  1 - integrin in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs at the time points indicated . Net recycling is expressed as internal biotinylated  1 integrin ( cytosolic ) at each time point normalized to time point 0 ( which contains all the biotinylated  1 integrin internalized after 10 minutes of endocytosis , see Materials and Methods ) ; then , decreasing values mean increased recycling ; n = 10 recycling assays per genotype . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significance of between - group differences denoted * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , or * * * P < 0 . 001 . N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Figures 4 and 5 which includes the raw data of experiments from Figure 4F - 4I . TIRF videos revealed that  1 - integrins in wild type MEFs as stable , largely immobile structures ; in contrast ,  1 - integrins in Cav1KO MEFs showed a dynamic behavior , rapidly appearing and disappearing from the PM plane ( Suppl . Video 4 and Video 5 and Suppl . Figure 2A - B ) . Interestingly , integrins increased their dynamicity after treatment with high hypoosmotic pressure in wild type MEFs , mimicking Cav1KO phenotype ( Suppl . Figure 2C - F and Suppl . Videos 6 and Video 7 ) , suggesting that plasma membrane tension changes could affect integrin trafficking dynamics . In adherent cells , integrins undergo constant endocytic - exocytic shuttling to facilitate the dynamic regulation of cell adhesion 26 . 15 Supplementary Figure 2 . Related to Figure 4 ( A - A 9 ) TIRFm image sequence ( ~ 1 . 5 - second intervals ) of Cav1KO MEFs transfected with  1 - integrin - GFP ( green ) . Arrows indicate the dynamic behavior of GFP - positive vesicles in the TIRF plane . ( B - B 9 ) TIRFm image sequence ( ~ 1 . 5 - second intervals ) of wild type MEFs transfected with  1 - integrin - GFP ( green ) . Arrows indicate the stability of GFP - positive vesicles in the TIRF plane . ( C - F ) Quantification of TIRFm videos , represented as the change in normalized fluorescence integrated density , a measure of the mean fluorescence intensity in each video frame ( see material and methods for details ) . ( G and H ) Net recycling after 5 minutes endocytosis of total  1 - integrin in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs over ( G ) long time - point set or ( H ) short time - point set ( net recycling is expressed as internal biotinylated  1 integrin at 16 each time point normalized to time point 0 ( which contains all the biotinylated  1 integrin internalized after 5 minutes of endocytosis , see Materials and Methods ) ; n ≥ 6 recycling assays per genotype . ( I ) Net recycling after 10 minutes endocytosis of active  1 - integrin in Cav1KO and Cav1KO reconstituted with Cav1 MEFs at the time points indicated . Net recycling is expressed as internal biotinylated  1 integrin at each time point normalized to time point 0 ( which contains all the biotinylated  1 integrin internalized after 10 minutes of endocytosis , see Materials and Methods ) ; n = 6 recycling assays per genotype . ( J ) Quantification of the impact on surface active  1 - integrin levels in wild type MEFs of treatment with U18666A 2ugr / ml or LDL 100ugr / ml for 24h . Values are expressed as normalized to control conditions across experiments ; n ≥ 18 replicates from at least 6 independent experiments . ( K and L ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs , stained for active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) and EEA1 ( magenta ) , either non - treated ( K ) or treated with 100ug / ml LDL for 24h ( L ) . ( M ) Quantification of colocalization between EEA1 and 9EG7 , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n ≥ 25 cells per condition . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Suppl . Figures 1 and 2 which includes the raw data of experiments from Suppl . Figure 2F , 2G - 2J and 2M . To study the effect of these dynamics on  1 - integrin surface availability across our tested genotypes , we performed a series of endocytosis / recycling assays with an ELISA - based protocol 25 ( Figure 4D and 4E ) . We first analyzed the endocytic rates of total and active  1 - integrin at early time - points ( 2 , 5 and 10 minutes ) during early spreading ( 2h after seeding ) , to recapitulate the conditions used in MT experiments ( see Materials and Methods for details ) . Cav1KO and wild type MEFs showed no significant differences , indicating that  1 endocytosis is Cav1 - independent at these early time points ( Figure 4F and 4H ) . We next studied the recycling rates after allowing  1 endocytosis to proceed for 5 or 10 minutes ; recycling was tested over two time - point sets : 2 , 5 , and 10 minutes and 1 , 3 , and 5 minutes . After 5 minutes of endocytosis , wild type and Cav1KO MEFs showed no major differences in total  1 - integrin recycling rates at either time - point set ( Suppl . Figure 2G and 2H ) . In contrast , after 10 minutes endocytosis , Cav1KO MEFs recycled total and active  1 - integrin faster than wild type MEFs in the 1 - 3 - 5 minutes recycling set ( Figure 4G and 4I ) . Importantly , 17 reconstitution of Cav1KO MEFs with recombinant Cav1 rescued the WT phenotype , supporting that the Cav1KO phenotype is specific ( Suppl . Figure 2I ) . These results suggest that  1 - integrin is stabilized in the presence of Cav1 after 10 minutes endocytosis , whereas in Cav1KO MEFs its shuttling to PM is accelerated , increasing its surface availability and thus enhancing adhesion to FN - coated beads and reinforcement response . Different mechanisms could account for this stabilization , however , recent work in our lab showed increased exocytosis after loading wild type MEFs with cholesterol , phenocopying Cav1KO MEFs where cholesterol accrued in different endosomal compartments 27 . To test if cholesterol could play a role in  1 - integrin stabilization , we treated wild MEFs with either U18666A ( which promotes cholesterol accumulation in endosomal compartments 28 ) or low - density lipoproteins , LDL ( which also increases cholesterol content ) , and analyzed  1 - integrin levels by ELISA . Interestingly , both treatments induced a significant increase in surface active  1 - integrin ( Suppl . Figure 2J ) , that was also accompanied by an increased colocalization with EEA - 1 positive endosomes in LDL - treated cells ( Suppl Figure 2K - M ) . These results might be indicative of a Cav1 - dependent cholesterol threshold above which  1 - integrin trafficking is altered , phenocopying Cav1KO MEFs where both surface and intracellular active  1 - integrin levels are increased . CLIC / GEEC - dependent uptake contributes to  1 - integrin endocytosis in Cav1KO MEFs  1 - integrin endocytosis has been suggested to be Cav1 - dependent in different systems 29 , 30 ; however , we observed no differences between Cav1KO and wild type MEFs in net  1 - integrin endocytosis . This discrepancy might reflect assay timings , as we studied early time points ( 2 , 5 , and 10 minutes ) , whereas previous studies focused on endocytosis over longer time periods . To investigate how Cav1KO MEFs achieve similar levels of  1 - integrin endocytosis as 18 wild type MEFs , we decided to analyze endocytosis via Clathrin independent carriers ( CLIC ) , especially because this endocytic modality is negatively regulated by caveolar proteins , including Cav1 and PTRF 31 , 32 . Furthermore , this endocytic route is highly relevant for fibroblast trafficking dynamics—accounting for ~ 3 - fold internalized volume as compared to clathrin - mediated endocytosis—and  1 - integrin is a specific cargo 33 . Interestingly , cells lacking Cav1 increase CLIC endocytosis through the small GTPase Cdc42 activation 32 , which is known to regulate this endocytic pathway 34 . We therefore asked ourselves whether Cav1KO MEFs might preferentially endocytose  1 - integrin via this mechanism . We treated wild type and Cav1KO MEFs with the Cdc42 inhibitor ML141 35 , which inhibits the CLIC - GEEC ( clathrin independent carrier / GPI enriched endocytic compartment ) pathway of endocytosis , involved in fluid - phase uptake and the entry of many specific cargoes , including integrins 33 , 36 . ML141 significantly reduced  1 - integrin endocytosis in Cav1KO MEFs , whereas wild type MEFs were unaffected ( Figure 5A and 5B ) , indicating that  1 - integrin is partially endocytosed through the CLIC / GEEC pathway in Cav1KO MEFs . 19 Figure 5 . Cav1KO MEFs take up  1 - integrin by CLIC endocytosis ( A and B ) Net endocytosis ( normalized to Total biotinylated  1 - integrin ) at the time points indicated . ( A ) wild type MEFs treated with ML141 ( red line ) and untreated controls ( black line ) . ( B ) Cav1KO MEFs treated with ML141 ( green line ) and untreated controls ( orange line ) ; n ≥ 5 endocytosis assays per genotype . ( C - F ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs ( C and D ) and Cav1KO MEFs ( E and F ) incubated with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by incubation with dextran - Alexa 647 ( magenta ) for 3 minutes at 37 o C . White arrows in F mark colocalization between  1 - 488 – positive particles and dextran - 647 – positive particles in Cav1KO MEFs . ( G and H ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and dextran - 647 , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ( G ) or Spearman’s correlation coefficient ( H ) ; n ≥ 18 cells per genotype . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Figures 4 and 5 which includes the raw data of experiments from Figure 5A , 5B , 5G and 5H . 20 In accordance with this finding , Cav1KO MEFs displayed significantly higher uptake of the fluid - phase endocytosis marker dextran 37 , as well as elevated colocalization of dextran and Alexa - 488 - labeled  1 - integrin ( Figure 5C - 5H and Suppl . Figure 3A - C ) , as compared to wild type cells . Thus , in the absence of Cav1 , early endocytosis of  1 - integrin occurs at least in part through CLIC uptake , which provides an alternative entry route that would compensate for lack of Cav1 - dependent internalization . To further delineate the relative contribution of the different endocytic routes to beta1 integrin endocytosis , we performed a series of co - localization studies of active  1 - integrin and previously characterized markers for caveolar - dependent ( BODIPY - LacCer ) , CLIC - dependent ( CD44 ) and clathrin - dependent ( transferrin , Tnf - 568 ) endocytosis 38 - 42 . Consistent with previous results ,  1 - integrin endocytosis was mainly Cav1 - dependent in wild type MEFs as it : i ) co - localized with Cav1 and LacCer , ii ) was significantly reduced upon genistein treatment ( a caveolar endocytosis inhibitor 43 ) and iii ) was unaffected by ML141 treatment ( the CLIC inhibitor ) ( Suppl . Figure 3D - K ) . On the other hand ,  1 - integrin endocytosis was mainly CLIC - dependent in Cav1KO MEFs as it : i ) co - localized with CD44 and ii ) was significantly reduced upon ML141 treatment as compared to wild type MEFs ( Suppl . Figure 3L - P ) . Finally , no significant differences were found in clathrin - dependent beta 1 integrin endocytosis between wild type and Cav1KO MEFs ( Suppl . Figure 3Q - S ) . Altogether , these results further prove that  1 - integrin endocytosis is mainly endocytosed by CLIC - dependent mechanisms in Cav1KO MEFs . 21 Supplementary Figure 3 . Related to Figure 5 ( A ) Quantification of Dextran - 647 mean fluorescent intensity after 3 minutes of endocytosis in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs ; n ≥ 25 cells per genotype . ( B and C ) Representative confocal microscopy images of ( B ) wild type MEFs and ( C ) Cav1KO MEFs after 3 minutes of Dextran - 647 endocytosis . DAPI counterstain in shown in blue . ( D ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and Caveolin1 in wild type MEFs non - treated ( control ) or treated with ML141 inhibitor 10uM for 30 min or genistein 200uM for 2h , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by each control ; n ≥ 10 cells per genotype . ( E - H ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs either 22 non - treated ( E and G , control ) or treated with ML141 10uM for 30 min or genistein 200uM for 2h before incubation with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Caveolin1 staining is shown in red ( Cav1 ) . ( I ) Quantification of colocalization between BODIPY - LacCer and active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 ) in wild type MEFs either non - treated ( control ) or treated with genistein 200uM for 2h and Cav1KO MEFs non - treated , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by wild type control ; n = 15 cells per genotype . ( J and K ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs either non - treated ( J , control ) or treated with genistein 200uM for 2h before incubation with BODIPY - LacCer 5uM ( green ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . BODIPY - LacCer remaining at the PM was then removed by back exchange at 4 o C ( see material and methods for more details ) . Active  1 - integrin staining is shown in magenta ( 9EG7 ) . ( L ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and CD44 in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs either non - treated ( control ) or treated with ML141 inhibitor , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by wild type control ; n ≥ 30 cells per genotype . ( M - P ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs either non - treated ( M and O , control ) or treated with ML141 inhibitor 10uM for 30 minutes before incubation with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) and anti - CD44 antibody ( magenta ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . ( Q ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and Transferrin - 568 ( Tnf ) in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by wild type control ; n = 20 cells per genotype . ( R and S ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs incubated with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) and Tnf - 568 ( magenta ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Suppl . Figures 3 and 4 which includes the raw data of experiments from Suppl . Figure 3A , 3D , 3I , 3L and 1Q . Cav1 is required for Rab11 - dependent recycling of  1 - integrin  1 - integrin follows the canonical Rab21 - Rab11 - dependent endosomal trafficking route— which takes longer times to recycle back to the PM—in wild type MEFs ; while other paralogs , such as , for instance ,  3 - integrin follow a Rab4 - dependent “short” loop 44 - 46 . As stated above , this scenario is in accordance with integrin  1 being localized to Rab11 - positive endosomal comparments after 10 minutes endocytosis in wild type MEFs . In contrast , in the absence of Cav1 ,  1 - integrin is partially sorted to a CLIC - dependent endosomal compartment in Cav1KO 23 MEFs , from which it might be recycled to the PM following different dynamics . We have previously reported that integrins are rapidly delivered to nascent focal contacts in the absence of Cav1 20 . The recycling of CLIC cargo proteins is controlled by a number of factors including several Rabs such as Rab22a 47 , which has been shown to collaborate with the microtubule and tethering protein HOOK1 during this process 48 . Interestingly , knocking down HOOK1 shifts the trafficking of CLIC cargo proteins from recycling to endosomal targeting , such as the surface glicoprotein CD147 , which accumulates in the early endosomal antigen - 1 positive compartment ( EEA - 1 ) 48 . To analyze whether HOOK1 is required for active  integrin recycling , we transfected Cav1KO MEFs with siRNA against HOOK1 and studied the colocalization of EEA1 and 9EG7 ( i . e . active  integrin ) immunolabelling . Whereas HOOK1 - deficient Cav1KO MEFs showed increased CD147 and EEA1 colocalization as expected 48 , no significant differences were observed for  integrin ( Figure 6A - 6E ) . Accordingly , surface active  integrin showed similar levels in both HOOK1 - deficient and control Cav1KO MEFs , even 72h after siRNA treatment ( Suppl . Figure 4A ) . These results indicate that HOOK1 is not required for  integrin recycling in Cav1KO MEFs . We then decided to analyze the contribution of canonical Rab11 and Rab4 - dependent recycling routes , using dominant - negative ( DN ) mutants described previously : Rab11 N124I , and Rab4 S22N , respectively 45 , 49 . We first assessed the impact of disrupting ´long loop´ - dependent recycling upon expression of the Rab11 DN mutant 49 , as assessed by the degree of colocalization between the endosomal compartment ( LBPA , lysobisphosphatidic acid , a late endosomal marker ) and active  integrin ( 9EG7 label ) in either wild type or Cav1KO cells . While we observed significant differences in the colocalization of 9EG7 and LBPA labels when comparing Cav1KO cells transfected with the Rab11 DN mutant , to non - transfected Cav1KO cells , no significant differences were observed on the surface exposure of active  integrin in the same cells 24 ( Figure 6G , 6I , 6J and Suppl . Figure 4B ) . In contrast , wild type MEFs showed increased colocalization between 9EG7 and LBPA - positive vesicles ( Figure 6F , 6H and 6J ) and reduced surface active  integrin levels upon Rab11 DN transfection ( Suppl . Figure 4B ) , suggesting that this is the main recycling pathway in wild type cells . We then assessed the impact of expressing a Rab4 S22N DN mutant ( which blocks a ´short loop´ - dependent recycling 45 ) on the trafficking of active  integrin in either wild type or Cav1KO cells . Whereas no significant differences in 9EG7 - EEA1 colocalization was observed upon disrupting Rab4 - dependent trafficking in wild type MEFs , expression of the Rab4 DN mutant increased the colocalization between both labels in Cav1KO cells ( Figure 6K - 6O ) . This was consistent with a significant reduction in surface active  integrin levels in Cav1KO cells expressing the Rab4 DN mutant , as compared to non - transfected Cav1KO cells , while no difference was observed for wild type cells ( Suppl . Figure 4C ) . Taken together , these results suggest that in the absence of Cav1 ,  integrin recycling is partially switched from “slow” Rab11 - dependent , to “fast” Rab4 - dependent , recycling . 25 Figure 6 . Cav1 is required for  1 - integrin Rab11 - dependent recycling . ( A - D ) Confocal microscopy images of Cav1KO MEFs stained for CD147 ( green in A and C ) , active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green in B and D ) and EEA1 ( magenta ) , either non - treated ( A and B ) or treated with siRNA against HOOK1 for 48h ( C and D ) . ( E ) Quantification of colocalization between EEA1 and CD147 or 9EG7 normalized to control , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n ≥ 20 cells per condition . ( F - I ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type ( F and H ) or Cav1KO MEFs ( G and I ) , stained for active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) and LBPA ( magenta ) , either non - transfected ( F and G ) or transfected with Rab11 N124I dominant negative mutant for 48h ( H and I ) . ( J ) Quantification of colocalization between LBPA and 9EG7 normalized by each control , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n ≥ 20 cells per condition . ( K - N ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type ( K and M ) or Cav1KO MEFs ( L and N ) , stained for active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , 26 green ) and EEA - 1 ( magenta ) , either non - transfected ( K and L ) or transfected with Rab4 S22N dominant negative mutant for 48h ( M and N ) . ( O ) Quantification of colocalization between EEA - 1 and 9EG7 normalized to each control , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n ≥ 30 cells per condition . Colocalization was analyzed using the plugin Intensity Correlation Analysis ( Fiji 50 ) . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 ; P * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Figures 6 and 7 which includes the raw data of experiments from Figure 6E , 6J and 6O . Supplementary Figure 4 . Related to Figure 6 . ( A - C ) Quantification of the impact on surface active  1 - integrin levels in wild type or Cav1KO cells of : siRNA - mediated depletion against HOOK1 for 72h ( A ) ; expression of Rab4 S22N dominant negative mutant for 48h ( B ) ; expression of Rab11 N124I dominant negative mutant for 48h ( C ) . Values are expressed as normalized to control conditions across experiments ; n ≥ 5 independent experiments . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Suppl . Figures 3 and 4 which includes the raw data of experiments from Suppl . Figure 4A - 4C . Hypoosmotic shock increases  1 - integrin activation in Cav1KO MEFs Many studies have shown that membrane trafficking and membrane tension are tightly coupled 51 , 52 . For example , increases in membrane tension increase exocytosis from the endocytic recycling compartment 53 . Cav1KO MEFs lacking caveolae cannot buffer membrane tension properly 9 . This can lead to increased exocytosis 54 , as we observed in the specific case of  1 - integrin recycling , which in turn increases adhesion to FN - coated beads . However , PM tension can also affect adhesion more directly through increasing integrin activation 27 independently from the cytoskeleton 55 and in a ligand - independent mechanism 7 . To study the role of caveolae in membrane - tension – induced  1 - integrin activation , we exposed cells to hypoosmotic conditions . Cav1KO and wild type MEFs were incubated for 10 minutes in DMEM diluted 1 : 10 in distilled water , fixed , and stained for 9EG7 . Hypoosmotic shock sharply increased  1 - integrin activation in Cav1KO MEFs , whereas no significant change was observed in wild type MEFs ( Figure 7A - 7F ; similar results were obtained with hypoosmotic shock exposure for 30 seconds and 1 minute ; data not shown ) . We also studied the amount of active  1 - integrin around FN - coated beads before and after magnetic twisting ( Suppl . Video 8 ) , observing a significant tension - induced increase in Cav1KO MEFs ( Suppl . Figure 5A - 5J ) . We confirmed this phenotype is caveolae - dependent , Cav1 - independent , as PTRFKO MEFs ( that lack caveolae but still express Cav1 13 ) also show increased  1 - integrin activation upon hypoosmotic shock ( Suppl . Figure 5K - 5M ) . Strikingly ,  1 - integrin activation was also observed in Cav1WT MEFs after both longer hypoosmotic treatments and with higher hypoosmotic pressures ( Suppl . Figure 5N - 5W ) . This might indicate that caveolae restrict integrin activation upon changes in plasma membrane tension until their buffering capacity is exhausted , and therefore Cav1KO MEFs lack the ability to adapt integrin activation to mechanical stress . 28 29 Figure 7 . Talin is required for the enhanced adhesion and  1 - integrin activation phenotype of Cav1KO MEFs ( A - D ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs ( A and B ) and Cav1KO MEFs ( C and D ) stained for active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) after culture in standard medium ( control in A and C ) or hypoosmotic medium ( diluted 1 : 10 ; B and D ) for 10 minutes at 37 o C . DAPI is shown in blue . ( E and F ) 9EG7 mean fluorescence intensity in control and hypoosmotic shock - exposed wild type ( E ) or Cav1KO MEFs ( F ) ; n ≥ 35 cells per genotype . ( G - J ) Confocal microscopy images of active  1 - integrin staining ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) in Cav1KO MEFs subject to indicated RNAi treatments and cultured for 10 minutes at 37 o C in standard medium ( control ) or hypoosmotic medium ( diluted 1 : 10 ) . ( K and L ) Active  1 - integrin immunostaining in wild type MEFs cultured in standard ( control ) or hypoosmotic medium . DAPI counterstain is shown in blue . ( M , P and S ) Relative adhesion of MEFs of the indicated genotypes ( M and P ) or HeLa Cells ( S , wild type – control - ; knocking down Cav1 - Cav1KD - ; and knocking down both Cav1 and Talin1 - Cav1KD + siTnl1 ) to plates coated with 5 µg / ml FN ; n ≥ 18 cells in 3 independent adhesion experiments . THWT : Talin Head wild type ; THMut : Tlain Head Mutant . ( N , O , Q and R ) Confocal microscopy images of talin head domain ( N , Q ) and active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 antibody ; O , R ) in Cav1KO MEFs transfected with Tln2 shRNA and Tln1 siRNA plus either WT Talin Head ( N and O ) or Mutant Talin Head ( Q and R ) . Before immunostaining , cells were cultured for 10 minutes at 37 o C in hypoosmotic medium ( diluted 1 : 10 ) . DAPI is shown in blue . All immunostainings in this figure were performed following the extracellular staining ( see material and methods for more details ) . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Figures 6 and 7 which includes the raw data of experiments from Figure 7M , 7P and 7S , and Raw Data Suppl . Figures 5 and 6 which includes the raw data of experiments from Figure 7E and 7F pooled together in Suppl . Figure 5V and 5W . 30 Supplementary Figure 5 . Related to Figure 7 ( A - H ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs before ( A and B , C and D ) and after ( E and F , G and H ) magnetic puling with FN - coated ferromagnetic beads . Active  1 - integrin is shown in green ( 9EG7 staining ) and DAPI in blue . Arrows indicate staining around beads . ( I and J ) Mean bead - bound 9EG7 fluorescence intensity normalized by bead area of ( I ) wild type MEFs and ( J ) Cav1KO MEFs before and after magnetic pulling ; n ≥ 56 beads per genotype and condition . ( K and L ) Active  1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 , green ) in PTRFKO MEFs cultured in standard 31 ( control ) or hypoosmotic medium . ( M ) 9EG7 mean fluorescence intensity in control and hypoosmotic shock - exposed PTRFKO MEFs ; n ≥ 30 cells per condition . ( N - U ) Active  1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 , green ) in wild type ( N - Q ) or Cav1KO MEFs ( R - U ) cultured in standard ( control ) or in the different hypoosmotic conditions and time - points indicated ; n ≥ 28 cells per genotype and condition . ( V and W ) 9EG7 mean fluorescence intensity in control and hypoosmotic shock - exposed wild type ( V ) or Cav1KO ( W ) MEFs at the hypoosmotic and time - points indicated . All immunostainings in this figure were performed following the extracellular staining ( see material and methods for more details ) . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significance between groups denoted * P < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; N . S . , non - significant . See also Raw Data Suppl . Figures 5 and 6 which includes the raw data of experiments from Suppl . Figure 5I , 5J , 5M , 5V and 5W . Talin supports increased  1 - integrin activation and recycling in Cav1KO MEFs Integrin activation is controlled by a number of intracellular proteins 6 . One of them , talin , regulates integrin adhesion strength by interacting through its amino - terminal FERM domain ( the talin head domain ) 56 . This interaction is necessary and sufficient to induce inside - out integrin activation 57 , 58 . To study the possible role of talin in  1 - integrin activation in Cav1KO MEFs , we first confirmed  1 - integrin binding competence after hypoosmotic treatment . Co - localization between  1 - integrin and both soluble fibronectin and talin proved its active conformation ( Suppl . Figure 6B - 6E ) . We then analyzed the effect on adhesion and activation after silencing Tln1 and Tln2 . Interestingly , Tln2 - silencing did not significantly affect either hypoosmotic - induced  1 - integrin activation or adhesion in Cav1KO MEFs ( Figure 7G - 7I , 7K - 7M and Suppl . Figure 6A ) . In contrast , simultaneous silencing of Tln1 and Tln2 in Cav1KO MEFs reduced hypoosmotic - induced  1 activation and reduced adhesion , rescuing the wild type phenotype ( Figure 7J , 7M and Suppl . Figure 6A , see also Figure 7 - figure supplement 6 - source data 1 and 2 ) . The same result was observed in Cav1 - silenced HeLa cells ( Figure 7S ) . Surprisingly , Tln1 / 2 knockdown also affected integrin trafficking , as surface active  1 - integrin 32 was significantly reduced and consistently increased intracellularly in EEA - 1 positive endosomes ( Suppl . Figure 6F - 6M ) . Given that the talin head domain binds and activates integrins 40 , 58 , we studied the ability of the wild type talin head to rescue adhesion in Tln1 - and Tln2 - silenced Cav1KO MEFs . As a control , we transfected cells with a dominant - negative talin - head mutant ( L325R ) that does not activate integrins nor link them to the cytoskeleton 59 . Expression of the WT talin head , but not the L325R mutant , rescued both the activation and the adhesion ability of Cav1KO MEFs ( Figure 7N - 7P , 7Q and 7R ) . The talin head thus regulates adhesion and  1 - integrin activation in Cav1KO MEFs . 33 34 Supplementary Figure 6 . Related to Figure 7 ( A ) Western blot analysis of total lysates from wild type and Cav1KO MEFs , either non - treated ( Cav1KO ) , or treated with either shRNA against Talin2 alone ( shTln2 ) or a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 ( shTln2 + siTln1 or shTln2 + esiTln1 , see material and methods for details ) . Membranes were immunoblotted for Talin , Cav1 , and tubulin ( loading control , 50kDa ) . ( B - E ) Confocal microscopy images of Cav1KO MEFs culture in hypoosmotic medium ( diluted 1 : 10 ) for 10 minutes at 37 o C , stained for active  1 integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) and Fibronectin - FITC ( shown in grey , B and C ) or Talin ( shown in magenta , D and E ) . ( F and G ) Confocal microscopy images of Cav1KO MEFs , either non - treated ( F ) , or treated with a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 ( G ) , stained for active  1 integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) and EEA - 1 ( shown in magenta ) . ( H ) Quantification of colocalization between 9EG7 and EEA - 1 normalized to control , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n = 15 cells per condition . ( I and J ) Confocal microscopy images of Cav1KO MEFs , either non - treated ( I ) , or treated with a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 ( J ) for 48h before incubation with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Cells were stained for EEA - 1 ( shown in magenta ) . ( K ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and EEA - 1 normalized to control , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n ≥ 14 cells per condition . ( L ) Quantification of the impact on surface active  1 - integrin levels in Cav1KO cells of a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 . Values are expressed as normalized to control ; n = 15 replicates from at least 5 independent experiments . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significance between groups denoted * P < 0 . 05 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . ( M ) Schematic representation showing that talin activity not only regulates  1 integrin activation but also supports increased recycling in Cav1KO MEFs . Figure 7 - figure supplement 6 - source data 1 and 2 includes the full raw unedited blot ( 1 corresponding to Suppl . Figure 6A ) and the uncropped blot with the relevant bands labelled ( 2 corresponding to Suppl . Figure 6A ) . See also Raw Data Suppl . Figures 5 and 6 which includes the raw data of experiments from Suppl . Figure 6H , 6K , 6L . Discussion Cellular mechanosensing is dependent on both integrins and caveolae , but how these two are coupled in this cellular response is poorly understood , especially during early steps of mechanoadaptation . Our MT - pulling experiment results show that Cav1KO MEFs adhere more strongly than wild type MEFs to FN - coated beads . This is consistent with the higher adhesion behavior of Cav1KO MEFs as compared to wild type MEFs in substrate adhesion 35 assays . Fibronectin binds to integrins , and  1 is its main receptor . The analysis of  1 distribution revealed an increased surface pool of active  1 - integrin in Cav1KO MEFs . TIRF imaging and FRAP measurements indicated that  - integrin has a more dynamic behavior in Cav1KO MEFs , appearing at and disappearing from the membrane plane faster than in wild type MEFs , through mechanisms distinct from diffusion . This prompted us to study endocytosis / recycling rates . ELISA - based assays revealed no differences between Cav1KO and wild type MEFs in endocytosis rate at the time points analyzed , suggesting that Cav1 does not play a specific role . This finding contrasts with other reports showing that Cav1 is required for proper  1 - integrin endocytosis 26 , 30 ; however , these observations were not made in a Cav1KO background and were performed at later time points than examined in our experiments ( as we wanted to analyze specifically early integrin mechanosensing events , studied in the MT experiments ) . This time difference suggests that net integrin endocytosis at early time points , could be compensated by other mechanisms in Cav1KO MEFs . Furthermore , and in accordance with previous reports 60 , Cav1 could be restricting the endocytosis of a pool of  1 - integrin in wild type MEFs ( where it is mainly endocytosed through caveolae - dependent mechanisms ) , and becomes freed in Cav1KO MEFs to follow a different entry route . Indeed , our results indicate that  1 - integrin is partially taken up in Cav1KO MEFs through CLIC / GEEC endocytosis , which provides a fast entry route , as reported for other cargoes 31 , 32 , 61 . Interestingly , net endocytosis of active  1 - integrins is higher than that of inactive pools 62 , 63 . This is consistent with our data showing that Cav1KO MEFs display higher 9EG7 signal inside the cell , and harmonizes with our findings that Cav1 genetic deficiency enhances CLIC endocytosis . Differences between Cav1KO and wild type MEFs were apparent when we analyzed  1 - integrin recycling rates at early time points after 10 minutes of endocytosis , being faster in 36 Cav1KO MEFs . Interestingly , no differences in recycling were observed after 5 minutes of endocytosis , suggesting that in the presence of Cav1 ,  1 - integrin becomes stabilized over time . This could potentially depend on cholesterol levels as loading wild type MEFs with cholesterol increases both surface and endosomal active  1 - integrin availability , phenocopying Cav1KO MEFs phenotype . Raising endosomal cholesterol levels leads to increased exocytic activity in wild type MEFs , mirroring Cav1KO MEFs cholesterol accumulation , as work in our lab has previously demonstrated 27 . This suggests that there might be a cholesterol threshold above which  1 - integrin trafficking is dysfunctional , as it happens in the absence of Cav1 . Furthermore , our results suggest that Cav1 is required for Rab11 - dependent recycling of  1 - integrin , which takes longer to reach the PM . Interestingly , in the absence of Cav1 ,  1 - integrin accumulates preferentially at EEA - 1 - positive vesicles , following the Rab4 - dependent “short” recycling loop . This is consistent with our previous observations of Cav1 playing a role in determining the migration mode of fibroblasts 20 , alternating between persistent or random migration . Faster recycling in Cav1KO MEFs can account for the elevated  1 - integrin surface availability and therefore explain the resulting reinforcement . This interpretation is further supported by our previous findings that Cav1KO MEFs have a higher number of small focal adhesions that are rapidly turned over 20 , since short but frequent integrin - ECM contacts would strengthen adhesion over time ( ECM - coated beads in the MT experimental design ) . In the same report , we showed that Cav1KO MEFs have low Rho activity resulting in impaired actomyosin contraction 20 , a condition that alters the overall cell mechanical response , as revealed in our traction force experiments . However , in the present study , Rho appears to be dispensable for observed differences in reinforcement . Consistently , previous reports have shown initial integrin adhesion in the absence of cytoskeleton connection , suggesting that early mechanosensing could be locally 37 triggered 5 , 64 , 65 . This actomyosin - independent adhesion can derive from increased PM tension 55 , which has also been shown to induce ligand - independent integrin activation 7 . Cav1KO MEFs lack caveolae and are unable to buffer membrane tension upon mechanical stress 9 . In this condition , integrin activation at a lower force threshold might be facilitated by an easier switch of  1 - integrin to its active conformation , as we observed upon hypoosmotic treatment . This increased sensitivity to membrane tension contributes , together with increased recycling , to the higher surface availability of active β1 - integrin we observed in Cav1KO MEFs . Interestingly , we have also observed integrin activation in Cav1WT MEFs but after longer treatment times and with increased hypoosmotic pressure . These results suggest that caveolae membrane buffering is limiting integrin activation before a plasma membrane tension threshold is reached . Previous studies have shown that talin controls inside - out integrin activation 66 , 67 through its head domain 57 , 58 . Interestingly , our results show that talin expression is required both for adhesion and for integrin activation in Cav1KO MEFs . It also seems to play a role in integrin recycling , as Tln1 / 2 knockdown altered integrin trafficking . Importantly , depletion of both talin paralogs does not affect initial cell spreading 58 . This is consistent with our observation that talin depletion does not affect initial attachment of Cav1KO MEFs to the substrate ( Figure 7M and 7P , see material and methods for details ) , as cells were allowed in our adhesion assays to spread for 30min prior to measurements . In contrast , cells were allowed to spread and form attachments for at least 48 hours after reverse siRNA transfection in experiments were hypoosmotic shock was induced , and—while still attached—Cav1KO / KD cells depleted for Talins were rounder and less spread ( compare Figure 7H with 7J ) than control cells . Rescue experiments indicated that this situation is mainly supported by the talin head domain . This suggests the intriguing possibility that membrane tension could favor local integrin – talin - head interaction without force transmission in Cav1KO 38 MEFs . These observations suggest that the cellular cytoskeleton might play only a minor role in the early cellular response to mechanical stress . A similar conclusion was recently prompted by the detection of mechanical - stress – induced integrin recruitment in the absence of significant cytoskeletal changes 5 . Our results indicate that caveolae impact both integrin surface availability , through adjusting recycling , and integrin activation , through membrane tension regulation and talin activity . Cav1KO MEFs , lacking this control mechanism , show both increased  1 - integrin recycling and surface activation . This results in dysregulated early mechanosensing ( Figure 8 ) and subsequent inability to properly sense environmental stiffness , a situation known to impact tumorigenesis 68 and stem cell differentiation 25 . Mechanobiology is an emerging field , essential to understand how cells and tissues adapt to their environment in health and disease 69 . Our study provides novel insight on the role of caveolae in early integrin mechanosensing , revealing a new layer of complexity at the interface of physics and biology . 39 Figure 8 . Caveolae adjust membrane tension to integrin mechanosensing by regulating integrin cycling and activation Wild type MEFs adapt to membrane tension changes through the buffer system of caveolae , driving a physiological integrin mechanosensing ( in this case α5β1 - integrin ) . In the absence of caveolae , dysregulation of this response leads to increased PM tension , which accelerates integrin recycling and switches integrin from the inactive forms ( light blue and light red integrin subunits ) to the active forms ( dark blue and dark red integrin subunits ) . Both increased β1 - integrin recycling and activation is supported by increased talin activity in the absence of caveolae . 40 Materials and methods Cloning , cells , and reagents Caveolin - 1 Flag was excised from pCDNA3 . 1 Cav1 with BamH1 / EcoR1 , klenow treated , and ligated into the klenow blunt - ended EcoR1 site of the GFP - expressing retroviral vector MIGR1 . PTRF was excised from pIRES2 - cavin1 EGFP with BglII / BamH1 and ligated into the BglII site of MIGR1 . The C - terminally EGFP - tagged  1 - integrin was developed by Prof . Martin Humphries ( University of Manchester , UK ) and described elsewhere 70 , and was requested through the Addgene public repository under ref . num . # 69767 . All cells were cultured at 37 o C and 5 % CO 2 in DMEM ( Thermo Fisher Scientific™ ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and 1 % penicillin and streptomycin . Cav1KO MEFs were kindly provided by Michael Lisanti ( Institute of Cancer Sciences , Manchester ) . All cell cultures were routinely checked for mycoplasma contamination . To deplete talin 2 , cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding talin 2 shRNA and puromycin resistance 58 . Puromycin ( 2 µg / ml ) was added to the cells 24 h after transfection and maintained for 4 days to select transfected cells . To deplete talin 1 , talin 2 shRNA - stable cells were transfected with Tln1 esiRNA ( EMU083531 , Sigma Aldrich ) or , for rescue experiments with the talin head , with Tln1 siRNA ( Silencer® Select , Life technologies TM ) , which does not target the talin head domain . For rescue experiments , talin 2 shRNA - stable cells were co - transfected with Tln1 siRNA and EGFP - talin 1 head ( Addgene plasmid no . 32856 ) or EGFP - talin 1 L325R ( the mutant version , kindly provided by M . Ginsberg , UC San Diego , USA ) . The following primary antibodies were used : rat monoclonal anti - mouse total  1 - integrin ( clone MB1 . 2 , MAB1997 Millipore ) ; rat monoclonal anti - mouse  1 - integrin , activated ( clone 9EG7 , BD Pharmingen™ ) ; Alexa 488 conjugated anti - integrin  1 , activated ( clone HUTS - 4 , MAB2079 - AF488 Millipore ) ; rabbit polyclonal anti - mouse PTRF ( Abcam ) ; rabbit monoclonal 41 anti - mouse caveolin - 1 ( Cell Signaling , # 3238 ) ; mouse monoclonal anti - tubulin ( Abcam , clone DM1A ) ; rabbit monoclonal anti - CD147 ( Invitrogen , clone JF1 - 045 ) , mouse monoclonal anti - EEA - 1 ( BD transduction , clone 14 ) and mouse monoclonal anti - LBPA ( Echelon Z - SLBPA ) . Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor® - 488 goat anti - rat ( Thermo Fisher Scientific™ ) ; Alexa Fluor® - 647 goat anti - rat ( Thermo Fisher Scientific™ ) ; Alexa Fluor® - 488 phalloidin ( Thermo Fisher Scientific™ ) ; HRP - linked anti - biotin from Cell Signaling ( # 7075 ) ; and Alexa Fluor® - 647 phalloidin ( Thermo Fisher Scientific™ ) . EZ - Link™ SulfoNHS - SS - biotin was from Thermo Fisher Scientific ( D21331 ) , 2 - mercaptoethanesulfonic acid ( MESNA ) and iodoacetamide from Sigma Aldrich ( 63707 and I1149 ) , the Cdc42 inhibitor ML141 from Tocris Bioscience , and Alexa Fluor™ 647 - Dextran from Thermo Fisher Scientific ( D22914 ) . Silencing of p190RhoGAP was as previously described 20 . PM fractionation and western blot analysis MEFs were processed for PM isolation as described 71 . All steps were carried out at 4 o C . Cells were first washed with cold - PBS 1X and pelleted by centrifugation at 14000xg for 5 minutes . Cells were then manually homogenized with 20 strokes of a PTFE head Tissue homogenizer ( VWR® ) and centrifuged at 1000xg for 10 minutes . The post - nuclear supernatant was collected and layered atop a 30 % Percoll column . After centrifugation of the Percoll column at 84000xg for 30 minutes , the PM fraction was a visible band around 5 . 7 cm from the bottom of the centrifuge tube , was collected , further centrifuged at 105000g for 1 h to remove Percoll , separated by SDS - PAGE , and finally analyzed by western blot . Samples were immunoblotted with rabbit monoclonal anti - mouse caveolin - 1 and rat monoclonal anti - mouse total  1 - integrin ( clone MB1 . 2 , MAB1997 Millipore ) as a loading control and a marker for PM fraction . 42 Total cell lysates were separated by SDS - PAGE and analyzed by western blot with rabbit monoclonal anti - mouse Caveolin - 1 and rabbit polyclonal anti - mouse PTRF ( Abcam ) , with mouse monoclonal anti tubulin used as the loading control . Secondary antibodies were goat anti - mouse 800 and goat anti - rabbit 680 . All membranes were scanned with the Odyssey imaging system ( Li - COR® ) . Electron microscopy MEFs were processed for electron microscopy using standard procedures . Briefly , cells were fixed for 1 hour with 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 100 mM cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 4 , and then post - fixed for 3 hours with 1 % osmium tetroxide in 100mM cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 4 . The samples were dehydrated with acetone , embedded in Epon and sectioned . Ruthenium red ( 1 mg / ml ) was added during fixing and post - fixing to stain the PM . Confocal and ground state depletion microscopy Confocal images were obtained with an LSM 700 inverted confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) fitted with a 63× 1 . 4 NA objective and driven by Zen software ( Carl Zeiss ) . Superresolution imaging was performed with a GSD - TIRF microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) . Samples were prepared according to standard procedures indicated by Leica Microsystems . The primary antibody was rabbit monoclonal anti - mouse caveolin - 1 ( 1 : 100 ) and Alexa Fluor® 647 Fab1 fragment goat anti - rabbit ( Jackson Immunoresearch ; 1 : 100 ) was used as the secondary to further improve spatial resolution . Magnetic tweezers and reinforcement measurements 43 Bead coating . Carboxylated magnetic beads ( Invitrogen ) were mixed in a solution containing 500 µl 0 . 01 M sodium acetate pH 5 , 0 . 75 mg Avidin ( Invitrogen ) , and 4 mg EDAC ( Sigma ) . Beads were incubated for 2h at RT and then washed in PBS and further incubated for 30 minutes in 1 ml 50 mM ethanolamine ( Polysciences ) . The beads were then washed 3 times in PBS and left in PBS on a cold room rotator . Force measurements . Magnetic tweezers experiments were performed as described 72 , 73 . Briefly , carboxylated 3 μm magnetic beads ( Invitrogen ) were coated with biotinylated pentameric FN7 - 10 or ConA ( Sigma Aldrich ) mixed 1 : 1 with biotinylated BSA . For measurements , cells were first plated on coverslips coated with 10 μg / ml FN ( Sigma ) in Ringer’s solution ( 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM HEPES , and 2 g / L glucose , pH 7 . 4 ) for 30 minutes . FN - coated beads were then deposited on the coverslips and allowed to attach to the cells . The tip of the magnetic tweezers device was then used to apply a force of 1 nN for 2 or 3 min to beads attached to cell lamellipodia . The apparatus used to apply force to the magnetic beads was as previously described 17 . The system was then mounted on a motorized 37 °C stage on a Nikon fluorescence microscope . DIC images and videos were recorded with a 60X objective linked to a CCD camera at a frequency of 250 frames / second . Magnetic twisting Cells seeded on FN - coated coverslips were subjected to magnetic twisting as previously described 74 . After twisting , cells were fixed for 20 min in 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and then stained with 9EG7 antibody without permeabilization . Silica bead coating and staining 44 Carboxylated silica beads ( 3 μm , Kisker Biotech ) were prepared as described above except that ConA - coated beads were incubated with biotinylated BSA previously labeled with an Alexa Fluor 555 protein labeling kit ( Invitrogen ) . Unlabeled beads ( FN - coated ) and labeled beads ( ConA - coated ) were mixed in the same proportion ( 1 : 1 ) . Cells were allowed to spread for 15 min and then fixed with 4 % PFA , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton - X 100 , and incubated at room temperature for 1 h with the indicated antibodies . Only beads at the cell periphery were analyzed ( excluding cells in the ectoplasm - endoplasm border zone ) . To quantify fluorescence intensity , a 10 - pixel - diameter ring was drawn around each selected bead using ImageJ . Mean fluorescence per area was normalized and plotted . Traction force microscopy Traction force was measured as previously described 5 . Briefly , cells were seeded on polyacrylamide gels incorporating embedded fluorescent nanobeads . Cells were imaged by Phase contrast and embedded nanobeads by fluorescence . Cells were then trypsinized and bead position images were acquired in the relaxed gel state . Comparison of bead positions in gels with and without cells was used to obtain a gel deformation map 75 , 76 . Images were obtained with a Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope fitted with a 40x objective ( Numerical Aperture = 0 . 6 ) . Adhesion assay Cell adhesiveness was assessed by seeding MEFs on 96 - well plates coated with FN or ConA ( both at 5 µg / ml ) and incubating at 37°C for 30 minutes . Wells with no coating were included as negative controls . Cells were then fixed with methanol and stained with crystal violet ( Sigma Aldrich ) . Wells were washed thoroughly to remove excess dye and were finally eluted 45 with a mixture of 50 % ethanol and 50 % 0 . 1M sodium citrate ( pH 4 . 2 ) . The absorbance was read at 595 nm . FRAP Cav1KO and wild type MEFs were transfected with the  1 - GFP expression vector . Two pre - bleached events were acquired before bleaching by stimulation with the Nikkon scanner at 488 nm . Fluorescence recovery was monitored continuously until the intensity plateaued ( approximately 1 . 5 minutes ) . Fluorescence during recovery was normalized to the pre - bleach intensity . Cells were cultured in DMEM ( Thermo Fisher Scientific™ ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , and 1 % penicillin and streptomycin . Endocytosis / recycling assay  1 - integrin kinetics were analyzed after biotin labeling of cell - surface integrins followed by a capture ELISA - based assay , using a modification of a previously described protocol 25 . Cell - surface integrin biotinylation . wild type or Cav1KO MEFs ( 5x10 5 ) were seeded on 5 ( endocytosis ) or 4 ( recycling ) matrigel - coated plates * ( labeled Total , 0 minutes , 2 minutes , 5 minutes , and 10 minutes for endocytosis and 0 minutes , 1 minute , 3 minutes and 5 minutes for recycling ) . The cells were incubated in complete DMEM ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) for 2 hours at 37 o C , which was the shortest spreading time for cells to stand the assay conditions , and also matches the magnetic tweezers measurement experimental time frame . The plates were then placed on ice , washed twice with ice - cold PBS and incubated for 40 minutes at 4 o C with 0 . 25 mg / ml of EZ - Link™ SulfoNHS - SS - Biotin in Hank’s balanced salt solution ( Sigma Aldrich ) . After two further washes with ice - cold PBS , the plates were labeled for the appropriate time points and processed as described below . * Matrigel was used instead of FN 46 to mimic a more physiological environment . While different coatings can clearly affect integrin trafficking , matrigel contains , among other extracellular components , collagen and certain levels of fibronectin , which we have shown to increase Cav1KO adhesion as compared to wild type MEFs ( see Suppl . Figure 1B and 1C ) . Importantly , cells were allowed to spread for 2 hours before starting the assay in complete medium , thus ensuring an additional supply of FN . Endocytosis : The 2 , 5 , and 10 minute plates were incubated at 37 o C with 2 ml of pre - warmed DMEM ( without FBS ) for the indicated times . The Total and 0 minute plates were placed on ice with 2 ml ice - cold DMEM ( without FBS ) . All plates except Total were then washed twice with ice - cold PBS and incubated for 40 minutes at 4 o C with MESNA - containing buffer ( Sigma Aldrich ) to remove remaining surface - associated biotin . All the plates were then washed twice with ice - cold PBS and incubated with iodoacetamide for 10 minutes at 4 o C . After washing again with ice - cold PBS , cells were lysed and processed for ELISA . Recycling : The 0 , 1 , 3 , and 5 minute plates were incubated at 37 o C with 2 ml of pre - warmed DMEM ( without FBS ) for 10 minutes ( to allow time for endocytosis ) . The plates were then washed twice with ice - cold PBS and incubated for 40 minutes at 4 o C with MESNA - containing buffer to remove remaining surface - associated biotin . The 1 , 3 , and 5 minute plates were incubated at 37 o C with 2 ml of pre - warmed DMEM ( without FBS ) for the indicated times ; the 0 minute plate was placed on ice with 2 ml ice - cold DMEM ( without FBS ) . At the end of the incubation , all plates were washed twice with ice - cold PBS and incubated again with MESNA - containing buffer to remove biotin - labeled integrins that had recycled to the PM . Plates were finally washed with ice - cold PBS , incubated with iodoacetamide for 10 minutes at 4 o C , lysed , and processed for ELISA . 47 ELISA - based assay . 96 - well ELISA plates were coated overnight at 4 o C with anti - mouse total  1 - integrin ( Millipore ) or anti - mouse  1 - integrin , activated ( BD Pharmingen™ ) . The plates were then washed three times with solution A ( 0 . 02 % Tween - 20 in PBS ) , blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with solution B ( 0 . 02 % Tween - 20 , 1 % BSA in PBS ) , and incubated with cell lysates from endocytosis or recycling assays for 2 hours at room temperature or overnight at 4 o C . After washing three times with solution A , the plates were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with anti - biotin HRP - linked antibody . Plates were then washed three more times with solution A , and integrin was detected by TMB reaction ( Sigma Aldrich ) . Endocytosis results were normalized by dividing with the signal from Total wells ; graphs represent the progressive increase in the amount of total or active  1 - integrin . Recycling results were normalized by dividing with the signal from 0 - minute wells ; graphs represent the  1 - integrin remaining inside cells , so that negative curves indicate an increase in the recycling rate . To determine total cell - surface integrin , cells were processed as in the total plates . For Rab DNs and Tln siRNA experiments , cells were plated 48h before the experiment avoiding re - plating to prevent losing lesser adherent cells . For cholesterol loading experiments , cells were treated with U18666A 2ugr / ml or LDL 100ugr / ml for 24h before surface integrin quantification . Hypoosmotic treatment Cells were cultured for the indicated time points at 37 o C in DMEM diluted as indicated with distilled water . The cells were then immediately fixed for 15 minutes by adding an equal volume of 8 % PFA ( yielding a final PFA concentration of 4 % ) and then stained with 9EG7 antibody without permeabilization 48 Endocytosis experiments For dextran endocytosis : cells were first incubated for 1 hour at 4 o C ( to prevent endocytosis ) with  1 - Alexa 488 conjugated antibody , activated . Cells were then washed twice with PBS and incubated for 3 min at 37 o C with 1 mg / ml Alexa Fluor™ 647 - Dextran ( Invitrogen , REF D22914 ) without preincubation or acid stripping . Cells were then fixed with 4 % PFA and analyzed by confocal microscopy . For other endocytosis experiments please see extended material and methods . Colocalization was analyzed using the plugin Coloc 2 ( Fiji 77 ) . Extracellular staining To analyze cell - surface  1 - integrin , cells were fixed for 20 min with 4 % PFA and then stained with 9EG7 antibody without permeabilization . Statistical analysis Data are presented as mean ± s . e . m . unless otherwise indicated . Mean values were compared by two - tailed paired Student t test unless otherwise indicated . Differences were considered statistically significant at P < 0 . 05 ( * ) , < 0 . 01 ( * * ) , and < 0 . 001 ( * * * ) . Acknowledgements We thank Dr . Miguel Sánchez for critical reading of the manuscript and Simon Bartlett for scientific editing . We also thank Verónica Labrador Cantarero and Antonio M . Santos Beneit from Microscopy Unit ( CNIC ) for macro development and video editing and Dr . Martin Humphries ( The University of Manchester ) , Dr . Michael Lisanti ( Institute of Cancer Sciences , Manchester ) , Dr . M . Ginsberg ( UC San Diego , USA ) and Dr . Cristina Clemente Toribio for kindly providing reagents and cells . 49 This project received funding from the European Union Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme through Marie Sklodowska - Curie grant 641639 ; and grants from the Spanish Ministry of Economy , Industry and Competitiveness ( MINECO ; SAF2011 - 25047 , SAF2014 - 51876 - R , SAF2017 - 83130 - R , IGP - SO grant MINSEV1512 - 07 - 2016 , CSD2009 - 0016 , BFU2016 - 81912 - REDC ) , the Worldwide Cancer Research Foundation (  15 - 0404 ) , and the Asociación Española Contra el Cáncer foundation ( PROYE20089DELP ) all to MAdP . MAdP is member of the Tec4Bio consortium ( ref . S2018 / NMT¬4443 ; ´Actividades de I + D entre Grupos de Investigación en Tecnologías´ , Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid / FEDER , Spain ) , co - recipient with PR - C of grants from Fundació La Marató de TV3 ( 674 / C / 2013 and 201936 - 30 - 31 ) , and coordinator of a Health Research consortium grant from Fundación Obra Social La Caixa ( AtheroConvergence , HR20 - 00075 ) . The CNIC Unit of Microscopy and Dynamic Imaging is supported by FEDER " Una manera de hacer Europa " ( ReDIB ICTS infrastructure TRIMA @ CNIC , Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación ( MCIN ) ) . The CNIC is supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III ( ISCIII ) , the Ministerio de Ciencia , Innovación y Universidades ( MCNU ) and the Pro CNIC Foundation , and is a Severo Ochoa Center of Excellence ( SEV - 2015 - 0505 ) Author contributions Conceived and designed the experiments : F . N . L . , P . R . C . and M . A . dP . Performed the experiments : F . N . L . , D . M . P . , A . G . G . , A . E . A . , V . I . S . and S . S . P . Analyzed the data : F . N . L . and D . M . P . Contributed to manuscript drafting : F . N . L . , X . T , P . R . C . and M . A . dP . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . 50 Bibliography 1 Wells , R . G . The role of matrix stiffness in regulating cell behavior . Hepatology 47 , 1394 - 1400 , doi : 10 . 1002 / hep . 22193 ( 2008 ) . 2 Handorf , A . M . , Zhou , Y . , Halanski , M . A . & Li , W . J . Tissue stiffness dictates development , homeostasis , and disease progression . Organogenesis 11 , 1 - 15 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 15476278 . 2015 . 1019687 ( 2015 ) . 3 Schwartz , M . A . Integrins and extracellular matrix in mechanotransduction . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 , a005066 , doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005066 ( 2010 ) . 4 Roca - Cusachs , P . , Gauthier , N . C . , Del Rio , A . & Sheetz , M . P . Clustering of alpha ( 5 ) beta ( 1 ) integrins determines adhesion strength whereas alpha ( v ) beta ( 3 ) and talin enable mechanotransduction . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 , 16245 - 16250 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0902818106 ( 2009 ) . 5 Elosegui - Artola , A . et al . Rigidity sensing and adaptation through regulation of integrin types . Nat Mater 13 , 631 - 637 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat3960 ( 2014 ) . 6 Moser , M . , Legate , K . R . , Zent , R . & Fassler , R . The tail of integrins , talin , and kindlins . Science 324 , 895 - 899 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1163865 ( 2009 ) . 7 Ferraris , G . M . et al . The interaction between uPAR and vitronectin triggers ligand - independent adhesion signalling by integrins . Embo J 33 , 2458 - 2472 , doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201387611 ( 2014 ) . 8 Bottcher , R . T . & Fassler , R . Membrane tension drives ligand - independent integrin signaling . Embo J 33 , 2439 - 2441 , doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201489886 ( 2014 ) . 9 Sinha , B . et al . Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae . Cell 144 , 402 - 413 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 12 . 031 ( 2011 ) . 10 Echarri , A . & Del Pozo , M . A . Caveolae - mechanosensitive membrane invaginations linked to actin filaments . J Cell Sci 128 , 2747 - 2758 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 153940 ( 2015 ) . 11 Parton , R . G . & del Pozo , M . A . Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors , protectors and organizers . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 , 98 - 112 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3512 ( 2013 ) . 12 Rothberg , K . G . et al . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 , 673 - 682 ( 1992 ) . 13 Hill , M . M . et al . PTRF - Cavin , a conserved cytoplasmic protein required for caveola formation and function . Cell 132 , 113 - 124 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 11 . 042 ( 2008 ) . 14 del Pozo , M . A . et al . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nat Cell Biol 7 , 901 - 908 , doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1293 ( 2005 ) . 15 Del Pozo , M . A . & Schwartz , M . A . Rac , membrane heterogeneity , caveolin and regulation of growth by integrins . Trends Cell Biol 17 , 246 - 250 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2007 . 03 . 001 ( 2007 ) . 16 Muriel , O . et al . Phosphorylated filamin A regulates actin - linked caveolae dynamics . J Cell Sci 124 , 2763 - 2776 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 080804 ( 2011 ) . 17 Tanase , M . , Biais , N . & Sheetz , M . Magnetic tweezers in cell biology . Methods Cell Biol 83 , 473 - 493 , doi : 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 07 ) 83020 - 2 ( 2007 ) . 18 Lenter , M . et al . A monoclonal antibody against an activation epitope on mouse integrin chain beta 1 blocks adhesion of lymphocytes to the endothelial integrin alpha 6 beta 1 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90 , 9051 - 9055 ( 1993 ) . 19 Gauthier , N . C . , Fardin , M . A . , Roca - Cusachs , P . & Sheetz , M . P . Temporary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 , 14467 - 14472 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105845108 ( 2011 ) . 20 Grande - Garcia , A . et al . Caveolin - 1 regulates cell polarization and directional migration through Src kinase and Rho GTPases . J Cell Biol 177 , 683 - 694 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200701006 ( 2007 ) . 51 21 Goetz , J . G . et al . Biomechanical remodeling of the microenvironment by stromal caveolin - 1 favors tumor invasion and metastasis . Cell 146 , 148 - 163 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 05 . 040 ( 2011 ) . 22 Plow , E . F . , Haas , T . A . , Zhang , L . , Loftus , J . & Smith , J . W . Ligand binding to integrins . J Biol Chem 275 , 21785 - 21788 , doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . R000003200 ( 2000 ) . 23 Friedland , J . C . , Lee , M . H . & Boettiger , D . Mechanically activated integrin switch controls alpha5beta1 function . Science 323 , 642 - 644 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1168441 ( 2009 ) . 24 Lin , G . L . et al . Activation of beta 1 but not beta 3 integrin increases cell traction forces . FEBS Lett 587 , 763 - 769 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . febslet . 2013 . 01 . 068 ( 2013 ) . 25 Li , J . et al . Integrin endocytosis on elastic substrates mediates mechanosensing . J Biomech 49 , 2644 - 2654 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbiomech . 2016 . 05 . 024 ( 2016 ) . 26 Bretscher , M . S . & Aguado - Velasco , C . Membrane traffic during cell locomotion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 10 , 537 - 541 ( 1998 ) . 27 Lucas Albacete - Albacete , I . N . - L . , Juan Antonio López , Inés Martín - Padura , Alma M . Astudillo , Alessia Ferrarini , Michael Van - Der - Heyden , Jesús Balsinde , Gertraud Orend , Jesús Vázquez , Miguel Ángel del Pozo . ECM deposition is driven by caveolin - 1 – dependent regulation of exosomal biogenesis and cargo sorting . Journal of cell biology 11 , doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 202006178 ( 2020 ) . 28 Cenedella , R . J . Cholesterol synthesis inhibitor U18666A and the role of sterol metabolism and trafficking in numerous pathophysiological processes . Lipids 44 , 477 - 487 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s11745 - 009 - 3305 - 7 ( 2009 ) . 29 Shi , F . & Sottile , J . Caveolin - 1 - dependent beta1 integrin endocytosis is a critical regulator of fibronectin turnover . J Cell Sci 121 , 2360 - 2371 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 014977 ( 2008 ) . 30 Du , J . et al . Integrin activation and internalization on soft ECM as a mechanism of induction of stem cell differentiation by ECM elasticity . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 , 9466 - 9471 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1106467108 ( 2011 ) . 31 Chaudhary , N . et al . Endocytic crosstalk : cavins , caveolins , and caveolae regulate clathrin - independent endocytosis . PLoS Biol 12 , e1001832 , doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001832 ( 2014 ) . 32 Cheng , Z . J . et al . Co - regulation of caveolar and Cdc42 - dependent fluid phase endocytosis by phosphocaveolin - 1 . J Biol Chem 285 , 15119 - 15125 , doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 069427 ( 2010 ) . 33 Howes , M . T . et al . Clathrin - independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J Cell Biol 190 , 675 - 691 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201002119 ( 2010 ) . 34 Mayor , S . , Parton , R . G . & Donaldson , J . G . Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 , doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016758 ( 2014 ) . 35 Surviladze , Z . et al . in Probe Reports from the NIH Molecular Libraries Program ( 2010 ) . 36 Joseph Jose Thottacherry , A . J . K . , Alberto Elosegui - Artola , Susav Pradhan , Sumit Sharma , Parvinder P . Singh , Marta C . Guadamillas , Natasha Chaudhary , Ram Vishwakarma , Xavier Trepat , Miguel A . del Pozo , Robert G . Parton , Pramod Pullarkat , Pere Roca - Cusachs , Satyajit Mayor . Mechanochemical feedback and control of endocytosis and membrane tension ( 2017 ) . 37 Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . & Mayor , S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev Cell 2 , 411 - 423 ( 2002 ) . 38 Sabharanjak , S . , Sharma , P . , Parton , R . G . & Mayor , S . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev Cell 2 , 411 - 423 , doi : 10 . 1016 / s1534 - 5807 ( 02 ) 00145 - 4 ( 2002 ) . 39 Cheng , Z . J . et al . Distinct mechanisms of clathrin - independent endocytosis have unique sphingolipid requirements . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 3197 - 3210 , doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e05 - 12 - 1101 ( 2006 ) . 40 Singh , R . D . et al . Selective caveolin - 1 - dependent endocytosis of glycosphingolipids . Mol Biol Cell 14 , 3254 - 3265 , doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e02 - 12 - 0809 ( 2003 ) . 52 41 Harding , C . , Heuser , J . & Stahl , P . Receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin and recycling of the transferrin receptor in rat reticulocytes . J Cell Biol 97 , 329 - 339 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 97 . 2 . 329 ( 1983 ) . 42 Chaudhary , N . et al . Endocytic crosstalk : cavins , caveolins , and caveolae regulate clathrin - independent endocytosis . PLoS Biol 12 , e1001832 , doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001832 ( 2014 ) . 43 Rejman , J . , Bragonzi , A . & Conese , M . Role of clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis in gene transfer mediated by lipo - and polyplexes . Mol Ther 12 , 468 - 474 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymthe . 2005 . 03 . 038 ( 2005 ) . 44 Roberts , M . S . , Woods , A . J . , Dale , T . C . , Van Der Sluijs , P . & Norman , J . C . Protein kinase B / Akt acts via glycogen synthase kinase 3 to regulate recycling of alpha v beta 3 and alpha 5 beta 1 integrins . Mol Cell Biol 24 , 1505 - 1515 , doi : 10 . 1128 / mcb . 24 . 4 . 1505 - 1515 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 45 Roberts , M . , Barry , S . , Woods , A . , van der Sluijs , P . & Norman , J . PDGF - regulated rab4 - dependent recycling of alphavbeta3 integrin from early endosomes is necessary for cell adhesion and spreading . Curr Biol 11 , 1392 - 1402 , doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00442 - 0 ( 2001 ) . 46 Pellinen , T . et al . Small GTPase Rab21 regulates cell adhesion and controls endosomal traffic of beta1 - integrins . J Cell Biol 173 , 767 - 780 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200509019 ( 2006 ) . 47 Weigert , R . , Yeung , A . C . , Li , J . & Donaldson , J . G . Rab22a regulates the recycling of membrane proteins internalized independently of clathrin . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 3758 - 3770 , doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e04 - 04 - 0342 ( 2004 ) . 48 Maldonado - Baez , L . , Cole , N . B . , Kramer , H . & Donaldson , J . G . Microtubule - dependent endosomal sorting of clathrin - independent cargo by Hook1 . J Cell Biol 201 , 233 - 247 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201208172 ( 2013 ) . 49 White , D . P . , Caswell , P . T . & Norman , J . C . alpha v beta3 and alpha5beta1 integrin recycling pathways dictate downstream Rho kinase signaling to regulate persistent cell migration . J Cell Biol 177 , 515 - 525 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200609004 ( 2007 ) . 50 Li , Q . et al . A syntaxin 1 , Galpha ( o ) , and N - type calcium channel complex at a presynaptic nerve terminal : analysis by quantitative immunocolocalization . J Neurosci 24 , 4070 - 4081 , doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0346 - 04 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 51 Gauthier , N . C . , Masters , T . A . & Sheetz , M . P . Mechanical feedback between membrane tension and dynamics . Trends Cell Biol 22 , 527 - 535 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2012 . 07 . 005 ( 2012 ) . 52 Apodaca , G . Modulation of membrane traffic by mechanical stimuli . Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 282 , F179 - 190 , doi : 10 . 1152 / ajprenal . 2002 . 282 . 2 . F179 ( 2002 ) . 53 Gauthier , N . C . , Rossier , O . M . , Mathur , A . , Hone , J . C . & Sheetz , M . P . Plasma membrane area increases with spread area by exocytosis of a GPI - anchored protein compartment . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 3261 - 3272 , doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E09 - 01 - 0071 ( 2009 ) . 54 Osmani , N . et al . An Arf6 - and caveolae - dependent pathway links hemidesmosome remodeling and mechanoresponse . Mol Biol Cell , doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E17 - 06 - 0356 ( 2017 ) . 55 Wang , X . et al . Integrin Molecular Tension within Motile Focal Adhesions . Biophys J 109 , 2259 - 2267 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2015 . 10 . 029 ( 2015 ) . 56 Tanentzapf , G . & Brown , N . H . An interaction between integrin and the talin FERM domain mediates integrin activation but not linkage to the cytoskeleton . Nat Cell Biol 8 , 601 - 606 , doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1411 ( 2006 ) . 57 Tadokoro , S . et al . Talin binding to integrin beta tails : a final common step in integrin activation . Science 302 , 103 - 106 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1086652 ( 2003 ) . 58 Zhang , X . et al . Talin depletion reveals independence of initial cell spreading from integrin activation and traction . Nat Cell Biol 10 , 1062 - 1068 , doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1765 ( 2008 ) . 59 Wegener , K . L . et al . Structural basis of integrin activation by talin . Cell 128 , 171 - 182 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 10 . 048 ( 2007 ) . 60 Cheng , Z . J . et al . Co - regulation of caveolar and Cdc42 - dependent fluid phase endocytosis by phosphocaveolin - 1 . J Biol Chem 285 , 15119 - 15125 , doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 069427 ( 2010 ) . 53 61 Paul , N . R . , Jacquemet , G . & Caswell , P . T . Endocytic Trafficking of Integrins in Cell Migration . Curr Biol 25 , R1092 - 1105 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 09 . 049 ( 2015 ) . 62 Arjonen , A . , Alanko , J . , Veltel , S . & Ivaska , J . Distinct recycling of active and inactive beta1 integrins . Traffic 13 , 610 - 625 , doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2012 . 01327 . x ( 2012 ) . 63 Valdembri , D . et al . Neuropilin - 1 / GIPC1 signaling regulates alpha5beta1 integrin traffic and function in endothelial cells . PLoS Biol 7 , e25 , doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000025 ( 2009 ) . 64 Bakker , G . J . et al . Lateral mobility of individual integrin nanoclusters orchestrates the onset for leukocyte adhesion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 , 4869 - 4874 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1116425109 ( 2012 ) . 65 Changede , R . , Xu , X . , Margadant , F . & Sheetz , M . P . Nascent Integrin Adhesions Form on All Matrix Rigidities after Integrin Activation . Dev Cell 35 , 614 - 621 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 11 . 001 ( 2015 ) . 66 Calderwood , D . A . Talin controls integrin activation . Biochem Soc Trans 32 , 434 - 437 , doi : 10 . 1042 / BST0320434 ( 2004 ) . 67 Roca - Cusachs , P . et al . Integrin - dependent force transmission to the extracellular matrix by alpha - actinin triggers adhesion maturation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110 , E1361 - 1370 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1220723110 ( 2013 ) . 68 Lin , H . H . et al . Mechanical phenotype of cancer cells : cell softening and loss of stiffness sensing . Oncotarget 6 , 20946 - 20958 , doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 4173 ( 2015 ) . 69 Zaidel - Bar , R . Mechanosensing : From proteins to tissues . Semin Cell Dev Biol 71 , 1 - 2 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2017 . 08 . 029 ( 2017 ) . 70 Parsons , M . , Messent , A . J . , Humphries , J . D . , Deakin , N . O . & Humphries , M . J . Quantification of integrin receptor agonism by fluorescence lifetime imaging . J Cell Sci 121 , 265 - 271 , doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 018440 ( 2008 ) . 71 Smart , E . J . , Ying , Y . S . , Mineo , C . & Anderson , R . G . A detergent - free method for purifying caveolae membrane from tissue culture cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92 , 10104 - 10108 ( 1995 ) . 72 Roca - Cusachs , P . et al . Integrin - dependent force transmission to the extracellular matrix by alpha - actinin triggers adhesion maturation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A 110 , E1361 - E1370 , doi : 1220723110 [ pii ] ; 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1220723110 [ doi ] ( 2013 ) . 73 Roca - Cusachs , P . , Gauthier , N . C . , del Rio , A . & Sheetz , M . P . Clustering of  5  1 integrins determines adhesion strength whereas  v  3 and talin enable mechanotransduction . PNAS 106 , 16245 - 16250 ( 2009 ) . 74 Trepat , X . et al . Viscoelasticity of human alveolar epithelial cells subjected to stretch . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 , L1025 - 1034 , doi : 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00077 . 2004 ( 2004 ) . 75 Serra - Picamal , X . , Conte , V . , Vincent , R . , Anon , E . , Tambe , D . T . , Bazellieres , E . , Butler , J . P . , Fredberg , J . J . , and Trepat , X . . Mechanical waves during tissue expansion . Nature Physics ( 2012 ) . 76 Bazellieres , E . et al . Control of cell - cell forces and collective cell dynamics by the intercellular adhesome . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 409 - 420 , doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3135 ( 2015 ) . 77 Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 , 676 - 682 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 ( 2012 ) . Supplementary Information Figure legends , table and videos Supplementary Figure 1 . Related to Figure 3 ( A ) Western blot of total lysates from wild type cells , and Cav1KO cells reconstituted with either empty vector , scrambled shRNA or shRNA against p190RhoGAP . Samples were immunoblotted for p190RhoGAP , Cav1 , and tubulin ( loading control , 50kDa ) . ( B , C and D ) Relative adhesion of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs to different concentrations of fibronectin ( B ) , collagen ( C ) and vitronectin ( D ) . Measurements ( absorbance , Optical density , OD , at 595nm from retained crystal violet dye , see material and methods ) were normalized to values from wild type counterparts . ( E and F ) Confocal microscopy images of active 1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) in permeabilized wild type ( E ) MEFs or Cav1KO ( F ) MEFs . DAPI counterstain is shown in blue . ( G and H ) Confocal microscopy images of active 1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) in wild type ( G ) or Cav1KO ( H ) MEFs incubated with FN - coated silica beads ( arrow ) . DAPI counterstain is shown in blue . ( I , J , L and M ) Confocal microscopy images of active 1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) in non - permeabilized wild type MEFs ( I and L ) and Cav1KO MEFs ( J and M ) after the indicated spreading times . DAPI is shown in blue . ( K ) Normalized mean bead - bound 9EG7 fluorescence intensity in wild type and Cav1KO MEF s ; n ≥ 40 beads per genotype . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significant between - group differences denoted * P < 0 . 05 . Supplementary Figure 2 . Related to Figure 4 ( A - A 9 ) TIRFm image sequence ( ~ 1 . 5 - second intervals ) of Cav1KO MEFs transfected with  1 - integrin - GFP ( green ) . Arrows indicate the dynamic behavior of GFP - positive vesicles in the TIRF plane . ( B - B 9 ) TIRFm image sequence ( ~ 1 . 5 - second intervals ) of wild type MEFs transfected with  1 - integrin - GFP ( green ) . Arrows indicate the stability of GFP - positive vesicles in the TIRF plane . ( C - F ) Quantification of TIRFm videos as the change in fluorescence integrated density , a measure of the mean fluorescence intensity in each video frame ( G and H , see material and methods for details ) Net recycling after 5 minutes endocytosis of total  1 - integrin in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs over ( G ) long time - point set or ( H ) short time - point set ( net recycling is expressed as internal biotinylated  1 integrin at each time point normalized to time point 0 ( which contains all the biotinylated  1 integrin internalized after 5 minutes of endocytosis , see Materials and Methods ) ; n ≥ 6 recycling assays per genotype . ( I ) Net recycling after 10 minutes endocytosis of active  1 - integrin in Cav1KO and Cav1KO reconstituted with Cav1 MEFs at the time points indicated . Net recycling is expressed as internal biotinylated  1 integrin at each time point normalized to time point 0 ( which contains all the biotinylated  1 integrin internalized after 10 minutes of endocytosis , see Materials and Methods ) ; n = 6 recycling assays per genotype . ( J ) Quantification of the impact on surface active  1 - integrin levels in wild type MEFs of treatment with U18666A 2ugr / ml or LDL 100ugr / ml for 24h . Values are expressed as normalized to control conditions across experiments ; n ≥ 18 replicates from at least 6 independent experiments . ( K and L ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs , stained for active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) and EEA1 ( magenta ) , either non - treated ( K ) or treated with 100ug / ml LDL for 24h ( L ) . ( M ) Quantification of colocalization between EEA1 and 9EG7 , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n ≥ 25 cells per condition . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; N . S . , non - significant . Supplementary Figure 3 . Related to Figure 5 ( A ) Quantification of Dextran - 647 mean fluorescent intensity after 3 minutes of endocytosis in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs ; n ≥ 25 cells per genotype . ( B and C ) Representative confocal microscopy images of ( B ) wild type MEFs and ( C ) Cav1KO MEFs after 3 minutes of Dextran - 647 endocytosis . DAPI counterstain in shown in blue . ( D ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and Caveolin1 in wild type MEFs non - treated ( control ) or treated with ML141 inhibitor 10uM for 30 min or genistein 200uM for 2h , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by each control ; n ≥ 10 cells per genotype . ( E - H ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs either non - treated ( E and G , control ) or treated with ML141 10uM for 30 min or genistein 200uM for 2h before incubation with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Caveolin1 staining is shown in red ( Cav1 ) . ( I ) Quantification of colocalization between BODIPY - LacCer and active  1 - integrin ( 9EG7 ) in wild type MEFs either non - treated ( control ) or treated with genistein 200uM for 2h and Cav1KO MEFs non - treated , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by wild type control ; n = 15 cells per genotype . ( J and K ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type MEFs either non - treated ( J , control ) or treated with genistein 200uM for 2h before incubation with BODIPY - LacCer 5uM ( green ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . BODIPY - LacCer remaining at the PM was then removed by back exchange at 4 o C ( see material and methods for more details ) . Active  1 - integrin staining is shown in magenta ( 9EG7 ) . ( L ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and CD44 in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs either non - treated ( control ) or treated with ML141 inhibitor , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by wild type control ; n ≥ 30 cells per genotype . ( M - P ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs either non - treated ( M and O , control ) or treated with ML141 inhibitor 10uM for 30 before incubation with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) and anti - CD44 antibody ( magenta ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . ( Q ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and Transferrin - 568 ( Tnf ) in wild type and Cav1KO MEFs , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient normalized by wild type control ; n = 20 cells per genotype . ( R and S ) Representative confocal microscopy images of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs incubated with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) and Tnf - 568 ( magenta ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 N . S . , non - significant . Supplementary Figure 4 . Related to Figure 6 ( A - C ) Quantification of the impact on surface active  1 - integrin levels in wild type or Cav1KO cells of : siRNA - mediated depletion against HOOK1 for 72h ( A ) ; expression of Rab4 S22N dominant negative mutant for 48h ( B ) ; expression of Rab11 N124I dominant negative mutant for 48h ( C ) . Values are expressed as normalized to control conditions across experiments ; n ≥ 5 independent experiments . Statistical significance of differences across indicated conditions was assessed by t - test : * p < 0 . 05 P * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 N . S . , non - significant . Supplementary Figure 5 . Related to Figure 7 ( A - H ) Confocal microscopy images of wild type and Cav1KO MEFs before ( A and B , C and D ) and after ( E and F , G and H ) magnetic puling with FN - coated ferromagnetic beads . Active  1 - integrin is shown in green ( 9EG7 staining ) and DAPI in blue . Arrows indicate staining around beads . ( I and J ) Mean bead - bound 9EG7 fluorescence intensity normalized by bead area of ( I ) wild type MEFs and ( J ) Cav1KO MEFs before and after magnetic pulling ; n ≥ 56 beads per genotype and condition . ( K and L ) Active  1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 , green ) in PTRFKO MEFs cultured in standard ( control ) or hypoosmotic medium . ( M ) 9EG7 mean fluorescence intensity in control and hypoosmotic shock - exposed PTRFKO MEF s ; n ≥ 30 cells per condition . ( N - U ) Active  1 - integrin immunostaining ( 9EG7 , green ) in wild type ( N - Q ) or Cav1KO MEFs ( R - U ) cultured in standard ( control ) or in the different hypoosmotic conditions and time - points indicated ; n ≥ 28 cells per genotype and condition . ( V and W ) 9EG7 mean fluorescence intensity in control and hypoosmotic shock - exposed wild type ( V ) or Cav1KO ( W ) MEFs at the hypoosmotic and time - points indicated . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significance between groups denoted * P < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; N . S . , non - significant . Supplementary Figure 6 . Related to Figure 7 ( A ) Western blot analysis of total lysates from wild type and Cav1KO MEFs , either non - treated ( Cav1KO ) , or treated with either shRNA against Talin2 alone ( shTln2 ) or a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 ( shTln2 + siTln1 or shTln2 + esiTln1 , see material and methods for details ) . Membranes were immunoblotted for Talin , Cav1 , and tubulin ( loading control , 50kDa ) . ( B - E ) Confocal microscopy images of Cav1KO MEFs culture in hypoosmotic medium ( diluted 1 : 10 ) for 10 minutes at 37 o C , stained for active  1 integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) and Fibronectin - FITC ( shown in grey , B and C ) or Talin ( shown in magenta , D and E ) . ( F and G ) Confocal microscopy images of Cav1KO MEFs , either non - treated ( F ) , or treated with a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 ( G ) , stained for active  1 integrin ( 9EG7 antibody , green ) and EEA - 1 ( shown in magenta ) . ( H ) Quantification of colocalization between 9EG7 and EEA - 1 normalized to control , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coeffici ent ; n = 15 cells per condition . ( I and J ) Confocal microscopy images of Cav1KO MEFs , either non - treated ( I ) , or treated with a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 ( J ) for 48h before incubation with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody ( green ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Cells were stained for EEA - 1 ( shown in magenta ) . ( K ) Quantification of colocalization between active  1 - Alexa 488 and EEA - 1 normalized to control , expressed as Pearson’s correlation coefficient ; n ≥ 14 cells per condition . ( L ) Quantification of the impact on surface active  1 - integrin levels in Cav1KO cells of a combination of shRNA against Talin2 and siRNA against Talin1 . Values are expressed as normalized to control ; n = 15 replicates from at least 5 independent experiments . Statistical comparisons were by t - test , with significance between groups denoted * P < 0 . 05 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . ( M ) Schematic representation showing that talin activity not only regulates  1 integrin activation but also supports increased recycling in Cav1KO MEFs . Supplementary table 1 . Related to Figure 2 Traces of beads movement shown in Figure 2C . They represent two examples of the data used to generate the reinforcement increment shown in Figure 2G . Supplementary Video 1 . Related to Figure 2 Example magnetic tweezers experiment . Application of a pulsed magnetic force ( 1Hz , 1nN ) causes the tip of the magnetic tweezers ( black shadow to the right ) to pull a magnetic bead attached to the cell surface ( observed by DIC microscopy ) . Supplementary Video 2 . Related to Figure 2 Molecular representation video of the type of forces generated by concanavalin A - coated beads . Force is exerted on the plasma membrane . Supplementary Video 3 . Related to Figure 2 Molecular representation video of the type of forces generated by FN - coated beads . Force is exerted on integrins . Supplementary Video 4 . Related to Figure 4 TIRFm video of a Cav1WT MEF transfected with  1 - gfp expression vector . Supplementary Video 5 . Related to Figure 4 TIRFm video of a Cav1KO MEF transfected with  1 - gfp expression vector . Supplementary Video 6 . Related to Figure 4 TIRFm video of a Cav1WT MEF transfected with  1 - gfp expression vector , before hypoosmotic treatment . Supplementary Video 7 . Related to Figure 4 TIRFm video of a Cav1WT MEF transfected with  1 - gfp expression vector , during hypoosmotic treatment ( 1 : 20 DMEM dilution ) . Supplementary Video 8 . Related to Figure 7 Example magnetic twisting experiment . Note how beads move under the oscillating magnetic field . Extended Material and methods Reagents The following primary antibodies were used : mouse monoclonal anti - p190RhoGAP ( Upstate , clone D2D6 , 1 : 1000 ) ; rabbit monoclonal anti - mouse Caveolin - 1 ( Cell signaling® , 1 : 1000 ) ; mouse monoclonal anti - alpha tubulin ( ab7291 , Abcam , 1 : 10 . 000 ) , mouse monoclonal anti - Talin ( Sigma Aldrich , clone 8d4 , 1 : 200 ) and mouse anti - CD44 ( clone 5035 - 41 . 1D , Novus Biologicals ) Fibronectin and LDLs were obtained by purification from blood donors and were conjugated with FITC ( Thermo Fisher ) or used directly , respectively . U18666A was from sigma ( U3633 ) . Total internal reflection fluorescent microscopy videos TIRF microscopy was performed with a Leica AM TIRF MC microscope . TIRFm movies were acquired with a 100X _ 1 . 46 NA oil - immersion objective at 488 nm excitation and an evanescent field with a nominal penetration depth of 100 nm . Images were collected with an ANDOR iXon CCD at 300 ms per frame . Quantification of TIRF videos show normalized fluorescence integrated density ( IntDen ) over frames ( Suppl . Figure 2C - 2E ) . Graph represents the mean of the difference between normalized fluorescence integrated density of adjacent frames ( frame x - frame x - 1 ) ( Suppl . Figure 2F ) . IntDen was calculated as in the following formula : IntDen = Raw Integrated density ( sum of pixel values in selection ) x ( Area in scaled units ) / ( Area in pixels ) ) , which was then normalized by the IntDen mean of all frames analyzed . Endocytosis experiments For caveolar uptake , cells were treated , when indicated , with genistein 200uM for 2h before incubation with BODIPY - LacCer 5uM for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . BODIPY - LacCer ( Invitrogen , REF B34402 ) remaining at the PM was then removed by back exchange at 4 o C following a previous protocol 1 . Cells were then fixed with 4 % PFA , stained and analyzed by confocal microscopy . For clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CLIC ) , cells were treated , when indicated , with ML141 inhibitor 10uM ( Tocris , REF 4266 ) for 30 min before incubation with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody and anti - CD44 antibody for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Cells were then acid stripped to remove surface staining , fixed with 4 % PFA , stained and analyzed by confocal microscopy . For clathrin endocytosis , cells were incubated with anti - active  1 - Alexa 488 antibody and Tnf - 568 ( Invitrogen , REF T23365 ) for 1 hour at 4 o C followed by 3 minutes endocytosis at 37 o C . Cells were then acid stripped to remove surface staining , fixed with 4 % PFA , stained and analyzed by confocal microscopy . . Colocalization was analyzed using the plugin Coloc 2 ( Fiji 2 ) . 1 Martin , O . C . & Pagano , R . E . Internalization and sorting of a fluorescent analogue of glucosylceramide to the Golgi apparatus of human skin fibroblasts : utilization of endocytic and nonendocytic transport mechanisms . J Cell Biol 125 , 769 - 781 , doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 125 . 4 . 769 ( 1994 ) . 2 Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 , 676 - 682 , doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 ( 2012 ) .