Ca 2 + - induced movement of tropomyosin on native cardiac thin filaments revealed by cryoelectron microscopy Cristina Risi a , Jamie Eisner a , Betty Belknap a , David H . Heeley b , Howard D . White a , Gunnar F . Schröder c , d , and Vitold E . Galkin a , 1 a Department of Physiological Sciences , Eastern Virginia Medical School , Norfolk , VA 23507 ; b Department of Biochemistry , Memorial University of Newfoundland , St . John ’ s , NL , Canada A1B 3X9 ; c Institute of Complex Systems ICS - 6 , Forschungszentrum Jülich , 52425 Juelich , Germany ; and d Physics Department , Heinrich - Heine Universität Düsseldorf , 40225 Duesseldorf , Germany Edited by J . G . Seidman , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , and approved May 18 , 2017 ( received for review January 16 , 2017 ) Muscle contraction relies on the interaction of myosin motors with F - actin , which is regulated through a translocation of tropomyosin by the troponin complex in response to Ca 2 + . The current model of muscle regulation holds that at relaxing ( low - Ca 2 + ) conditions tropomyosin blocks myosin binding sites on F - actin , whereas at ac - tivating ( high - Ca 2 + ) conditions tropomyosin translocation only par - tially exposes myosin binding sites on F - actin so that binding of rigor myosin is required to fully activate the thin filament ( TF ) . Here we used a single - particle approach to helical reconstruction of fro - zen hydrated native cardiac TFs under relaxing and activating con - ditions to reveal the azimuthal movement of the tropomyosin on the surface of the native cardiac TF upon Ca 2 + activation . We dem - onstrate that at either relaxing or activating conditions tropomyosin is not constrained in one structural state , but rather is distributed between three structural positions on the surface of the TF . We show that two of these tropomyosin positions restrain actomyosin interactions , whereas in the third position , which is significantly enhanced at high Ca 2 + , tropomyosin does not block myosin binding sites on F - actin . Our data provide a structural framework for the enhanced activation of the cardiac TF over the skeletal TF by Ca 2 + and lead to a mechanistic model for the regulation of the cardiac TF . thin filament | cardiac muscle regulation | cryoelectron microscopy M uscle contraction is based on the interaction between two filamentous systems : the thick ( myosin ) and the thin ( ac - tin ) filaments . Thin filaments ( TFs ) are comprised of F - actin , tropomyosin ( Tpm ) , and troponin ( Tn ) complex . Tpm is a coiled - coil protein that geometrically complements F - actin by binding to seven successive actin subunits ( 1 ) . The Tn complex alters the position of the Tpm cable upon binding Ca 2 + ( 2 , 3 ) . The steric blocking model of muscle regulation holds that at relaxing ( low Ca 2 + ) conditions Tpm blocks myosin binding sites on the surface of F - actin , whereas Tpm moves away from the myosin binding sites at activating ( high Ca 2 + ) conditions ( 2 , 3 ) . Ki - netics , biochemical , and structural studies have suggested that there are three structural states for Tpm , termed “ blocked , ” “ closed , ” and “ myosin ” ( “ open ” ) , which correspond to relaxing , activating , and myosin - bound conditions , respectively ( 4 – 6 ) . The current model of the muscle regulation is based on the analysis of negatively stained TFs and suggests a two - step muscle activation ( 3 , 7 ) . At relaxing conditions Tn keeps Tpm constrained in the blocked state . Binding of Ca 2 + to the Tn complex releases Tpm from the blocked state so that Tpm swings by ∼ 25° from the blocked to the closed state , partially exposing myosin binding sites on F - actin . Because the myosin binding sites are not fully exposed and actomyosin interactions are con - strained , the model advocates that under activating conditions a small number of myosin molecules should strongly bind to F - actin to complete activation of the TF by swinging Tpm by an additional ∼ 10° from its closed into the myosin state . There are significant differences in the mechanisms of regulation of cardiac and skeletal TFs . Ca 2 + alone produces only ∼ 20 % of maximal activation of skeletal TF and rigor - bound myosin is re - quired to complete activation ( 8 , 9 ) , whereas Ca 2 + alone activates cardiac TFs by ∼ 70 % ( 10 ) . Presumably , significant differences between the TF proteins in cardiac muscle and skeletal muscle ( 11 – 13 ) are responsible for their different response to Ca 2 + levels . All our current structural knowledge on the Ca 2 + activation of the TF relies on the analysis of negatively stained TFs ( 3 , 5 , 14 ) . Recent studies on the interaction of F - actin with Tpm demon - strated that the position of Tpm on the surface of F - actin is different in negatively stained and frozen hydrated samples ( 15 ) . Therefore , it has been suggested that negative staining induces repulsions at the Tpm – F - actin interface which are responsible for the leftward shift of Tpm on the surface of F - actin ( 15 ) . Here we used a single - particle approach to helical reconstruction ( 16 ) of frozen hydrated native cardiac TFs under relaxing and ac - tivating conditions to reveal the azimuthal movement of the Tpm cable on the surface of F - actin upon Ca 2 + activation . Results The Canonical - Blocked Structural State of the TF Is Not Required for the Cardiac TF Inhibition at low Ca 2 + . Because most of the struc - tural studies on the Ca 2 + - dependent regulation of the TF were done using negative staining ( 3 , 5 ) , we performed 3D recon - structions of negatively stained native cardiac TFs ( SI Appendix , Significance Muscle contraction is required for critical physiological func - tions . It relies on the interaction of myosin motors with the thin filament ( TF ) , which is regulated through a translocation of tropomyosin on the surface of F - actin by the troponin complex in response to Ca 2 + . The lack of high - resolution structure of the TF under relaxing ( low - Ca 2 + ) and activating ( high - Ca 2 + ) condi - tions impairs our understanding of the mechanism of cardiac muscle regulation . Here we report high - resolution structures of the native cardiac TF under relaxing and activating conditions . Our data lead to a model for cardiac TF regulation by Ca 2 + levels that is an important step in understanding how the components of cardiac muscle work in concert to maintain healthy heart functions . Authorcontributions : H . D . W . andV . E . G . designedresearch ; C . R . , J . E . , B . B . , D . H . H . , H . D . W . , G . F . S . , andV . E . G . performedresearch ; H . D . W . , G . F . S . , andV . E . G . analyzeddata ; andV . E . G . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . Datadeposition : Theatomiccoordinatesandstructurefactorshavebeendepositedin the Protein Data Bank and Electron Microscopy Data Bank ( accession nos . 5NOG , EMD - 3665 , 5NOL , EMD - 3667 , 5NOJ , EMD - 3666 ) . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : galkinve @ evms . edu . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1700868114 / - / DCSupplemental . 6782 – 6787 | PNAS | June 27 , 2017 | vol . 114 | no . 26 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1700868114 Fig . S1 ) . In the negatively stained samples the Tn densities were readily visible ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 A , red arrowheads ) . We generated 3D reconstructions of segments of TFs that possessed well - defined Tn lumps at both low ( pCa > 8 ) and high ( pCa = 4 ) Ca 2 + levels ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 B and C , respectively ) . In agreement with previously published data ( 3 , 5 , 14 ) we found that at low Ca 2 + Tpm was in the “ canonical - blocked ” state ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 B , red ribbons ) , whereas at pCa = 4 the Tpm cable was shifted leftward into its closed state ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 C , green ribbons ) . It has been shown that in the negatively stained Tpm – F - actin complex cross - linking of Tpm to F - actin shifts the position of Tpm from the canonical blocked to the closed structural state ( 15 ) . We therefore performed 3D recon - structions of cardiac TFs cross - linked with glutaraldehyde ( CL - TF ) at low and high Ca 2 + ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 D and E , re - spectively ) . Only segments with well - defined Tn lumps were chosen for 3D reconstruction ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 A , red ar - rowheads ) . We found that in contrast to the native TFs the po - sition of Tpm in the CL - TFs at low Ca 2 + was shifted leftward from the canonical blocked to the closed structural state ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 D , green ribbons ) . At high Ca 2 + the Tpm cable was shifted leftward even further toward the myosin structural state ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 E , yellow ribbons ) . To determine whether the glutaraldehyde cross - linking alters the activation state of the native cardiac TFs in solution , we measured myosin - S1 TF - dependent activation of product dissociation from myosin - ADP - Pi at low and high Ca 2 + for both native and CL - TFs ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 ) . We found very little effect of glutaraldehyde on product activation kinetics by F - actin ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 A ) , but the effect of glutaraldehyde on the TF - dependent product dissoci - ation was more pronounced ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 B ) . At pCa > 8 , CL - TFs were partially activated , whereas at pCa = 4 CL - TFs were somewhat inhibited in comparison with their native counterparts . Nevertheless , CL - TFs retained a significant difference in their acti - vation state at low and high Ca 2 + levels , suggesting that the canonical blocked structural state which was absent in the cross - linked sample was not required per se for the inhibition of the native cardiac TF at low Ca 2 + conditions . Cryoelectron Microscopy Defines Three Structural States of Tpm on the Surface of F - Actin . Because the position of Tpm on the surface of the actin filament is altered by negative staining ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 ) , we used frozen hydrated native cardiac TFs to study the movement of the Tpm cable upon TF activation by Ca 2 + . Frozen hydrated native TFs possessed well - defined Tn densities ( Fig . 1 A , Inset ) . Because it has been shown that TFs are heteroge - neous at either low or high Ca 2 + concentrations ( 5 ) , we used cross - correlation sorting of the TF segments using three posi - tions of Tpm on the surface of F - actin , namely canonical blocked ( 14 ) , “ apo ” ( 15 ) , and myosin ( 17 ) as reference structures . These structural states of Tpm were chosen because they apparently cover the entire swing of the Tpm cable on the surface of F - actin . The resultant frequency distribution ( Fig . 1 B ) shows that the population of each class depends on both the activation state of the TF and on the presence of glutaraldehyde . Each class was independently reconstructed ( SI Appendix , Fig . S3 A ) . The cor - responding 3D reconstructions of the apo classes and myosin classes derived from native TFs imaged at either activating or relaxing conditions were indistinguishable ( SI Appendix , Fig . S3 A ) . Therefore , these classes were combined ( SI Appendix , Fig . S3 A , black boxes ) to yield better 3D maps and more reliable corresponding pseudoatomic models ( Fig . 1 C , c - closed and c - open ) . Similarly , apo and myosin classes derived from the cross - linked TFs imaged under activating or relaxing conditions were combined ( SI Appendix , Fig . S3 B , black boxes ) and the resultant maps are shown in Fig . 1 D ( c - closed and c - open ) . Segments of TFs at pCa = 4 assigned to the canonical blocked structural class ( ∼ 9 % ) gave a poor 3D reconstruction that pos - sessed Tpm in the apo structural state ( SI Appendix , Fig . S3 A , black X ) and therefore were discarded . The position of the Tpm in the 3D reconstruction of native TF segments assigned to the canonical blocked structural class ( ∼ 18 % ) ( Fig . 1 C , c - blocked and Fig . 1 E , blue surface ) was inconsistent with the canonical blocked state ( 14 ) ( Fig . 1 E , red surface ) , due to ∼ 15° leftward azimuthal rotation from the canonical blocked state ( Fig . 1 E , red surface ) toward the apo Tpm state ( Fig . 1 E , green surface ) . Because in this structural state Tpm has severe clashes with myosin head ( see below in Fig . 2 A and E ) , we termed it a “ cardiac - blocked ” ( c - blocked ) state . The 3D map calculated from segments selected as being in the apo structural state ( Fig . 1 C , c - closed ) yielded a perfect match with the proposed model of the apo state ( 15 , 18 ) . We found that the azimuthal position of Tpm on F - actin in the apo state ( 15 , 18 ) was very similar to the azimuthal position of Tpm on F - actin in the closed Fig . 1 . Three - dimensional reconstruction of frozen hydrated native and cross - linked cardiac TFs . ( A ) Electron micrograph of frozen hydrated cardiac TFs ( pCa = 4 ) shows that some filaments possess well - defined Tn densities ( black arrows ) , whereas others do not ( white arrow ) . ( Inset ) Examples of segments of native and cross - linked ( CL ) TFs at low ( pCa > 8 ) and high ( pCa = 4 ) Ca 2 + used for image analysis . Tn complexes are marked with black arrowheads . ( B ) Pseudoatomic models of the canonical - blocked ( 14 ) , apo ( 15 ) , and myosin ( 17 ) structural states of Tpm were used as reference structures in cross - correlation sorting of native and CL TFs at low ( pCa > 8 ) and high ( pCa = 4 ) Ca 2 + . ( C and D ) Three - dimensional reconstructions of native ( C ) and CL ( D ) cardiac TFs possessing Tpm in the c - blocked ( blue ribbons ) , c - closed ( green ribbons ) , or c - open ( magenta ribbons ) structural states . Density maps are shown as transparent gray surfaces , whereas actin subunits are tan ribbons . ( E ) Position of Tpm in the c - blocked state ( blue surface ) is compared with the previously observed canonical - blocked ( 14 ) ( red surface ) and apo ( 15 ) ( green surface ) positions of Tpm on F - actin . The top view shows an ∼ 10° swing of Tpm in the c - blocked state from its apo state . ( F ) Tpm position in the c - open state ( magenta surface ) is compared with the previously defined apo ( 15 ) ( green surface ) and myosin ( 17 ) ( cyan surface ) positions on F - actin . The top view shows that the c - open state is located between the apo and the myosin positions of Tpm on F - actin . Risi et al . PNAS | June 27 , 2017 | vol . 114 | no . 26 | 6783 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y structural state obtained by the negative staining protocol here ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 C ) and by others ( 3 , 5 ) . Therefore , we termed this state a “ cardiac - closed ” ( c - closed ) state . Finally , segments that yielded the best correlation with the reference having Tpm in the myosin state yielded a 3D reconstruction ( Fig . 1 C , c - open and Fig . 3 F , magenta surface ) where the Tpm cable was between the myosin ( 17 ) ( Fig . 1 F , cyan surface ) and the closed ( Fig . 1 F , green surface ) positions of Tpm on the surface of F - actin ( Fig . 1 F ) . In this structural state myosin binding sites were exposed ( see below in Fig . 2 C and G ) . Therefore , we termed this structural state a “ cardiac open ” ( c - open ) state . Therefore , the cardiac TF open and myosin structural states are not the same and differ by 5° azimuthal rotation ( Fig . 1 F ) . To summarize , we found three structural states of Tpm on the surface of F - actin in the frozen hydrated cardiac TFs ( c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open ) . To elucidate the influence of the cross - linking on the position of the Tpm on F - actin we compared 3D reconstructions of the c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open structural classes obtained from native TFs ( Fig . 1 C ) and CL - TFs ( Fig . 1 D ) . For either c - closed or c - open classes we found very little difference in the position of Tpm in the native or cross - linked TFs ( SI Appendix , Fig . S4 A ) , whereas a small leftward swing of the Tpm cable was detected upon cross - linking in the c - blocked state ( SI Appendix , Fig . S4 A , black arrow ) . This leftward movement is consistent with the partial activation of the TFs upon cross - linking ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 B ) and will be discussed below . Finally , we compared the frequencies of the three determined structural states ( e . g . , c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open ) found within the native ( Fig . 1 B , Left ) and cross - linked ( Fig . 1 B , Right ) TFs under relaxed ( Fig . 1 B , light - gray bins ) and activated ( Fig . 1 B , dark - gray bins ) conditions . At low Ca 2 + we found the ma - jority of native TF segments ( ∼ 75 % ) in either c - blocked or c - closed structural states ( Fig . 1 B , Left ) . At high Ca 2 + we did not detect any segments that yielded a reasonable 3D reconstruction of the c - blocked state ( see above ) . At the same time high Ca 2 + gave an ∼ 1 . 8 - fold boost in the frequency of the c - open structural state compared with the relaxing conditions ( Fig . 1 B , Left ) . We did not find a significant difference between the frequency dis - tributions of the three structural states of the native and cross - linked TFs at relaxing conditions ( Fig . 1 B , compare left and right panels ) . In contrast to that , we found that at activating conditions ∼ 15 % of CL - TFs were found in the c - blocked state , whereas in the absence of glutaraldehyde the c - blocked state was nonexistent ( Fig . 1 B ) . This suggests that at high Ca 2 + Tpm is not rigidly trapped in either c - closed or c - open structural states , but rather may still fluctuate . Therefore , a small fraction of the TFs in the c - blocked structural state can be trapped by glutaraldehyde so that the frequency of this otherwise rare structural state is enhanced over the time of the cross - linking . Because in the c - blocked state Tpm interferes with the actomyosin interactions ( see below ) , el - evated levels of the c - blocked state explain the slightly slower ki - netics of product dissociation from myosin - S1 - mdADP - Pi after cross - linking with glutaraldehyde ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 B ) . The Interface Between Tpm and F - Actin Suggests the Mechanism of Azimuthal Movement of Tpm upon TF Activation . We examined the contacts of Tpm with F - actin in the c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open structural states in the presence and absence of glutaraldehyde . Because Tpm is comprised of seven pseudorepeats that overlap on the surface of F - actin , helical averaging eliminates any information on the location of these pseudorepeat units on the surface of F - actin . Therefore , we replaced actual Tpm residues with a corresponding pseudoatomic model . Relatively high resolution in our cryoelec - tron microscopy ( cryoEM ) maps allowed us to determine which actin residues may be involved in the interaction with the Tpm ( Fig . 3 ) . In the 3D map of the native TFs in the c - blocked state we found a bridge of density that involves Arg335 and Pro333 ( Fig . 3 A , blue spheres ) . In the 3D map of the same structural state derived from the CL - TFs the bridge of density formed by the Pro333 / Arg335 contact ( Fig . 3 B , blue spheres ) was more prominent , sug - gesting that Lys336 located next to Pro333 and Arg335 was cross - linked to Tpm by glutaraldehyde ( Fig . 3 B , red spheres ) . We also found a contact that was absent in the native TFs presumably formed by Lys328 cross - linked to the Tpm cable ( Fig . 3 B , red Fig . 2 . Superimposition of the c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open structural states with the P i - release ( P i - R ) ( A – D ) and rigor ( E – H ) states of myosin . ( A – D ) Tpm in either c - blocked ( A ) or c - closed ( B ) positions has a severe sterical clash with myosin in the P i - R state ( large and medium red arrowheads , respectively ) , whereas in the c - open state only a minor sterical hindrance is present ( C , small red arrowhead ) . In the c - myosin state myosin and Tpm have no clashes ( D ) . ( E – H ) Inthec - blockedand c - closed structural states Tpmyielded an overwhelming sterical clash with the rigor - bound myosin head ( E and F , large and medium red arrowheads , respectively ) . In the c - open state only a small portion of loop - 4 of the myosin head clashes with Tpm ( G , small red arrowhead ) . ( H ) Atomic model of rigor myosin – Tpm – F - actin complex ( 17 ) . Fig . 3 . Contacts of Tpm with F - actin in the c - blocked ( A and B ) , c - closed ( C and D ) , and c - open ( E and F ) states of the native ( A , C , and E ) and CL ( B , D , and F ) cardiac TFs . Residues of F - actin involved in the interaction with Tpm in native TF are marked in blue ( A ) , green ( D ) , and magenta ( E ) , whereas actin residues presumably CL to Tpm by glutaraldehyde ( B , D , and F ) are marked in red . ( G ) In the native cardiac TF the Tpm interface on actin comprises residues located in SD3 of actin : 333 / 335 for the c - blocked state ( blue spheres ) , 326 / 328 / 311 for the closed state ( green spheres ) , and 307 / 311 for the c - open state ( magenta spheres ) . ( H ) The transition of the inner Tpm strand , which interacts with F - actin , betweenthec - blocked ( blueribbons ) and c - closed ( green ribbons ) state requires a 10° azimuthal movement of Tpm ( black arrow ) , whereas the transition between the c - closed ( green ribbons ) , c - open ( magenta ribbons ) , and c - myosin ( cyan ribbons ) states involves rocking movement around a common anchor point ( red arrow ) . ( I ) The outer Tpm strand , which is distal from F - actin , makes an ∼ 20° swing upon transition from the c - closed ( green ribbons ) to the c - myosin ( cyan ribbons ) structural state ( red arrow ) . Actual density maps are shown as transparent gray surfaces , whereas actin molecules are tan ribbons . 6784 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1700868114 Risi et al . spheres ) . In the c - closed state of the native TFs we found two contacts between the Tpm and F - actin – – one involved Asp311 , and the other comprised Lys326 and Lys328 ( Fig . 3 C , green spheres ) . In the 3D reconstruction of the c - closed state derived from the CL - TFs we found two bridges of density between Tpm and F - actin – – one involved Lys328 ( Fig . 3 D , green spheres ) , whereas the other contact was apparently produced by the Lys238 cross - linked to Tpm ( Fig . 3 D , red spheres ) . The comparison of the 3D recon - structions of the c - open state in the absence and presence of glu - taraldehyde revealed a significant difference in the contacts between the Tpm and F - actin in the native and cross - linked TFs ( Fig . 3 E and F ) . In the native TFs we found a bridge of density presumably comprised of Asp311 and Pro307 interacting with Tpm ( Fig . 3 E , magenta spheres ) . A set of very different contacts seemingly involving Lys238 , Lys326 , and Lys328 cross - linked to the Tpm cable was found in the presence of glutaraldehyde ( Fig . 3 F , red spheres ) . The difference in the interface between the native and the CL TFs explains a leftward shift of Tpm in the c - blocked state in the presence of glutaraldehyde ( SI Appendix , Fig . S4 A , black arrow ) . Presumably , a contact introduced by glutaraldehyde between Lys328 and Tpm pulls Tpm leftward . Such a movement of Tpm is consistent with the gradual activation of the TF by glutaraldehyde at relaxing conditions ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 B ) . Despite a signifi - cant difference in the interface between the native and the cross - linked TFs ( Fig . 3 C – F ) the positions of the Tpm cable on the surface of F - actin in either c - closed or c - open structural states are very similar ( SI Appendix , Fig . S4 A ) . The only rational explanation for this finding is that despite the difference in the contacts be - tween Tpm and F - actin in the native and CL TFs , the Tn complex oversees the position of the Tpm cable on the surface of F - actin . The actin residues that we found to be involved in the in - teraction with Tpm are in good agreement with previously published data ( 14 , 15 , 17 ) . In the c - blocked state Pro333 and Arg335 are at the interface with Tpm , confirming computational modeling results ( 14 ) . In the c - closed structural state Lys326 , Lys328 , and Asp311 interaction with Tpm is in excellent agree - ment with the structural data obtained by cryoEM ( 15 ) . Asp311 , which is at the Tpm interface with F - actin in the c - open state , has been found to bind to Tpm in cryoEM structure of myosin – Tpm – F - actin complex ( 17 ) . Because we have not found a canonical - blocked structural state ( 14 ) in our frozen hydrated TFs , Asp25 , Arg28 , and Arg147 are not involved in Tpm binding to F - actin in the native cardiac TF . Next , we analyzed the movement of Tpm cable between the three observed structural states . Each actin protomer within the TF interacts with one of the two Tpm ɑ - helical strands ( the “ in - ner ” strand ) , whereas the other strand is distal from the actin surface ( the “ outer ” strand ) . First , we calculated the trajectory of the Tmp cable in the c - blocked → c - closed transition ( Fig . 3 H , black arrow ; Movie S1 ) which appeared to be an ∼ 10° leftward azimuthal movement of both inner and outer Tpm strands . Such a movement can be achieved by either an azimuthal rotation ( roll ) or by an upward movement ( shift ) of Tpm on the surface of F - actin . In contrast to the c - blocked → c - closed Tpm movement , the trajectory of the inner and outer strands of Tpm upon c - closed → c - open and c - open → myosin transitions were different ( Movie S1 ) . First , we traced the movement of the inner Tpm strand upon the c - blocked → c - open → myosin transition , which was found to be a rocking movement around the anchor point ( Fig . 3 H , red arrow ; SI Appendix , Movie S1 ) originally predicted by Sousa et al . ( 18 ) . Next , we compared the successive movement of the outer Tpm ɑ - helical strand . We found that upon c - closed → c - open → myosin transition , the rocking movement of the inner Tpm strand around the anchor point ( Fig . 3 H , red arrow ) results in a signifi - cant ∼ 20° azimuthal movement of the distal outer Tpm strand ( Fig . 3 I , red arrow ) . Therefore , the minor repositioning of the inner Tpm strand on the surface of F - actin is greatly amplified by the dramatic movement of the outer strand . The position of the actin residues involved in the interaction with Tpm forms a compact interface on the surface of subdomain 3 ( SD3 ) of the actin molecule ( Fig . 3 G ) . Interestingly , Asp311 is involved in all of the structural states of interaction of actin with Tpm ( e . g . , c - closed , c - open , and myosin ) , except the c - blocked structural state . This suggests that residue 311 comprises the interface for a rocking movement of Tpm on F - actin . The im - portance of the Asp311 for the Tpm interaction with F - actin has been previously reported ( 19 , 20 ) . The Three Structural States of the TF Revealed by cryoEM Suggest a Novel Mechanism of TF Activation . Next , we sought to evaluate whether the c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open structural states in - terfere with the actomyosin interactions . It has been suggested that loop - 2 of myosin initiates weak binding of myosin to the TF ( 21 , 22 ) . Subsequent binding of the lower L50 domain of myosin to F - actin through the helix - turn - helix motif ( 23 ) promotes P i release ( 24 ) and completes the initial strong binding of myosin to F - actin . We approximated the initial strong binding mode of myosin using the same approach described by von der Ecken et al . ( 23 ) ( SI Appendix , Fig . S5 ) . Superimposition of the c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open structural states with myosin in the P i - R state bound to F - actin ( Fig . 2 ) revealed that Tpm in either c - blocked ( Fig . 2 A ) or c - closed ( Fig . 2 B ) positions had severe sterical clashes with myosin ( Fig . 2 A and B , red arrowheads ) . At the same time , in the c - open state only a minor sterical hindrance with the tip of the myosin loop - 4 was observed ( Fig . 2 C , small red arrowhead ) . Next , we sought to evaluate whether the c - blocked , c - closed , and c - open structural states interfere with the rigor binding of myosin ( Movie S2 ) . We therefore superimposed the pseudoatomic model of rigor actomyosin complex ( 23 ) with the models of the three structural states of the native cardiac TF ( Fig . 2 E – H ) . In the c - blocked and the c - closed structural states Tpm yielded overwhelming sterical clashes with the myosin head ( Fig . 2 E and F , red arrowheads ) . In the c - open state we found that only a small portion of loop - 4 of myosin clashed with Tpm ( Fig . 2 G , small red arrowhead ) . Therefore , we conclude that either c - closed or c - blocked structural states of Tpm should inhibit actomyosin interactions . In either P i - R or the rigor state myosin has no clashes with Tpm in the c - open structural state , except the tip of the myosin loop - 4 which is very minor . Therefore , Tpm in the c - open state is permissive for both the initial and the rigor myosin binding . In the atomic model of rigor actomyosin Asp378 of loop - 4 makes a contact with Lys325 and Lys327 of actin involved in the interaction of actin with Tpm in the c - closed structural state ( 23 ) . In the c - open structural state Lys325 and Lys327 of actin are free to in - teract with myosin Asp378 because they are not making contact with the Tpm cable anymore . Presumably , the formation of this contact between actin and myosin moves Tpm from the c - open to the myosin state ( ∼ 5° swing ) and completes the proposed isomeri - zation from the weak to the strong actomyosin bound state ( 4 ) . Stopped - Flow Kinetic Measurements of Product Dissociation from TF - Myosin - ADP - Pi . To evaluate whether enhanced frequency of the c - open state leads to the enhanced activation of the cardiac TF we used double - mixing stopped flow to determine the effect of Ca 2 + on the rates of P i dissociation from the cardiac TF - myosin - ADP - Pi under conditions similar to those used in cryoEM experiments ( SI Appendix , Figs . S6 and S7 ) . These data show that at physio - logical ionic strength cardiac TF are activated to ∼ 70 % of the maximal level by Ca 2 + in the absence of rigor - bound myosin , so that there is a relatively small additional ∼ 30 % activation of the TF by addition of rigor - bound myosin . Therefore , the enhanced frequency of the c - open structural state at high Ca 2 + ( Fig . 1 B ) corroborates with the kinetic data and provides a structural framework for enhanced activation of the cardiac TF by Ca 2 + . Risi et al . PNAS | June 27 , 2017 | vol . 114 | no . 26 | 6785 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y Discussion The mechanism of the TF activation by Ca 2 + has been studied for decades , but the lack of a high - resolution structure of the TF under relaxing and activating conditions is one of the main drawbacks in our understanding of the mechanism of muscle contraction . Almost all of the structural data on the regulation of the TF were obtained using negative staining ( 3 , 5 ) , which is incapable of yielding high - resolution density maps . Here we re - port high - resolution structures of the frozen hydrated native cardiac TF under relaxing and activating conditions . We found that in cardiac TFs Tpm can exist in three structural states on the sur - face of F - actin , two of which , namely c - blocked and c - open , have not been observed in negatively stained TFs . Importantly , cardiac - open ( c - open ) structural state is different from the canonical - open or myosin state , which represents the position of Tpm in the presence of rigor - bound myosin ( Fig . 1 F ) . In the c - open state the myosin binding sites are fully accessible except for the tip of myosin loop - 4 ( Fig . 2 C and G ) . Therefore , we distinguish between the c - open and the myosin states of Tpm in cardiac TF . In the original model derived from the 3D reconstructions of the negatively stained TFs ( Fig . 4 A ) , the Ca 2 + - induced swing of the Tpm cable upon activation of the TF is ∼ 25° , whereas rigor - bound myosin induces an additional ∼ 10° azimuthal rotation of Tpm ( 5 ) . Therefore , the overall swing of the Tpm cable is pre - dicted to be ∼ 35° . Our structural data derived from the frozen hydrated native cardiac TFs show that the maximal swing of the Tpm upon Ca 2 + - induced activation of the TF is ∼ 15° , whereas rigor - bound myosin adds an additional ∼ 5° azimuthal rotation of Tpm ( Fig . 4 B ) . Intensities measured from the low - angle X - ray fiber diagrams obtained from rabbit psoas muscle fibers showed ∼ 15° azimuthal movement of Tpm upon Ca 2 + - induced muscle activation , and ∼ 7° movement upon binding of active cross - bridges ( 6 ) . Therefore , cryoEM data are in excellent agree - ment with the X - ray fiber diffraction experiments . An ∼ 2° dif - ference in the overall Tpm swing between our data obtained from cardiac TFs and X - ray fiber diagrams obtained from skel - etal muscles may reflect the difference in the activating potential between cardiac and skeletal striated muscles ( 10 ) . It has been shown that negative staining biases the position of Tpm in the Tpm – F - actin complex so that instead of being in the apo state , as observed in frozen hydrated samples , Tpm is found in the canonical - blocked state ( 15 ) . We show here ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 ) that the native cardiac TFs behave similarly to the Tpm – F - actin complex upon negative staining and that cross - linking by glutaraldehyde prevents the movement of Tpm into the canonical - blocked state . Consistently , our kinetic measurements ( SI Appendix , Fig . S2 B ) show that the canonical - blocked state is not required per se for the cardiac TF inhibition , because cross - linked cardiac TFs that do not possess the canonical - blocked state in either negatively stained ( SI Appendix , Fig . S1 D and E ) or frozen hydrated ( Fig . 1 D ) samples retain the inhibited state in the ATPase assay . Therefore , we conclude that in native cardiac TFs the canonical - blocked structural state is induced by the negative staining protocol . At either relaxing or activating conditions Tpm is not fixed in one particular state ( Fig . 1 B ) . At relaxing conditions ∼ 75 % of the TFs are in the inhibited c - blocked and c - closed structural states , whereas ∼ 25 % TF segments are in the activated c - open state . This is consistent with the diversity of the structural com - position of the TF found using biochemical approaches ( 25 ) and explains how at low Ca 2 + conditions rigor myosin can bind and activate the TF ( 26 , 27 ) . The frequency of the activated c - open state at low Ca 2 + is higher than expected from the kinetic measurements ( SI Appendix , Figs . S6 and S7 ) and is similar to what has been observed in the analysis of negatively stained TFs ( 5 ) . This discrepancy between kinetic and EM data has yet to be resolved . At activating conditions TFs are comprised of the permissive c - open and inhibitory c - closed structural states ( Fig . 1 B ) . Presumably , at activating conditions regions of the TFs in the inhibitory c - closed structural state become fully activated by the rigor - bound myosins through a positive cooperativity in cross - bridge binding ( 28 ) . The existing steric blocking model of muscle regulation holds that at relaxing conditions Tpm in the canonical - blocked state blocks myosin binding sites on F - actin ( Fig . 4 C ) , whereas at acti - vating conditions the swing of Tpm from the canonical - blocked to the closed state partially exposes myosin binding sites on F - actin , so that binding of a small number of rigor myosins ( Fig . 4 D , green arrow ) fully activates the TF ( Fig . 4 E and F ) . Therefore , the existing model advocates for a two - step activation of the TF which relies on a subsequent binding of myosin to the Ca 2 + - activated TF . This model is in agreement with the observed activation of the skeletal TFs where Ca 2 + on its own activates the TF by ∼ 20 % and rigor - bound myosin is crucial in achieving a full TF activation ( 8 , 9 ) . In contrast to the skeletal TF , Ca 2 + induces ∼ 70 % activation of the cardiac TF ( SI Appendix , Figs . S6 and S7 ) and therefore the Fig . 4 . Model for the Ca 2 + - dependent activation of the TF . ( A ) In the ca - nonical model derived from the negatively stained TFs the swing of the Tpm cable from the canonical - blocked to the closed structural state upon Ca 2 + - induced activation of the TF is ∼ 25° ( red arrow ) , whereas rigor - bound myosin adds an additional ∼ 10° azimuthal rotation of Tpm ( black arrow ) ( 5 ) . ( B ) CryoEM - based model for the activation of the cardiac TF shows an ∼ 15° swing of Tpm upon Ca 2 + - induced activation of the cardiac TF ( red arrow ) , whereas rigor - bound myosin adds an additional ∼ 5° azimuthal rotation of the Tpm cable toward subdomain 4 of actin ( black arrow ) . ( C – I ) Comparison of the canonical model for the TF activation ( C – F ) with the model for cardiac TF activation ( G – I ) . ( C ) At low Ca 2 + Tpm in the canonical - blocked state ( red ) blocks myosin heads ( yellow ) binding to F - actin ( red arrows ) . ( D ) Upon Ca 2 + - induced activation of the TF , Tpm moves to the closed structural state ( green ) partially exposing myosin binding sites so that a few myosin mole - cules ( yellow ) can bind to the TF ( green arrow ) . ( E ) Strongly bound myosin heads locally activate the TF by switching Tpm from its closed ( green ) to myosin ( cyan ) state . ( F ) The activated myosin Tpm state cooperatively propagates along the TF . ( G ) At low Ca 2 + Tpm in the cardiac TF is in either c - blocked ( blue ) or c - closed ( green ) inhibitive states which block myosin ( yellow ) binding to F - actin ( red arrows ) . ( H ) Upon Ca 2 + - induced activation of the cardiac TF Tpm occupies either c - closed ( green ) or c - open structural state ( magenta ) . In c - open structural state myosin binding sites are almost fully exposed and myosin molecules ( yellow ) freely bind to the TF ( green arrows ) . ( I ) Strongly bound myosin heads shift Tpm further from either c - closed or c - open into the myosin ( cyan ) structural state . 6786 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1700868114 Risi et al . role of the rigor - bound cross - bridges is not as significant . In our model for the cardiac TF activation Ca 2 + - enhanced c - open structural state allows immediate binding of a large number of myosin cross - bridges ( Fig . 4 H ) , which complete the activation of the cardiac TF ( Fig . 4 I ) . Therefore , in the model for the cardiac TF regulation , the first step of TF activation by Ca 2 + overwhelms the second myosin - dependent activation step . Our data provide a structural framework for the enhanced contribution of Ca 2 + to the overall activation of the cardiac TF in comparison with the skeletal TF . Because there are significant differences between the TF proteins in cardiac muscle and skeletal muscle ( 11 , 12 , 29 , 30 ) , it is not surprising that the regulation of the skeletal and cardiac TFs is different . Analysis of frozen hydrated skeletal TFs is required to mechanistically explain the difference in the activation of skeletal and cardiac striated muscles . Materials and Methods Proteins and Buffers . Native porcine cardiac thin filaments were purified as described previously ( 10 ) . A - buffer was used for cryoEM experiments : 50 mM KAc , 10 mM Mops , 3 mM MgCl 2 , pH 7 . 0 . Cross - Linking Experiments . TF in A - buffer in activating [ 0 . 2 mM Ca 2 + ] or relaxing [ 2 mM EGTA ] conditions were incubated with 0 . 25 % ( vol ) of glu - taraldehyde for 5 min at 20 °C . To stop reaction 1 M Tris · HCl , pH 7 . 0 buffer was added into the mixture and allowed to react for an additional 5 min . KineticMeasurements . TFactivationofproductdissociationfrommyosin - ADP - Pi by TFs was measured using double - mixing stopped - flow fluorescence as described previously ( 10 ) but under the conditions similar to those used in the cryoEM experiments ( SI Appendix ) . CryoEM . Sample preparation . Samples ( 1 . 8 μ L ) of [ 1 μ M ] native or cross - linked TFs in A - buffer in activating [ 0 . 2 mM Ca 2 + ] or relaxing [ 2 mM EGTA ] conditions were applied to lacey carbon grids , blotted with Whatman # 1 filter paper for 3 s , and vitrified in a Vitrobot Mark IV ( FEI , Inc . ) . Three - dimensional reconstruction . Samples were imaged with a Titan Krios at 300 keV using the Falcon II direct electron detector . The SPIDER software package ( 31 ) was used for image processing ; in addition , CTFFIND3 software ( 32 ) was used to determine the defocus values in the micrographs . The EMAN package ( 33 ) was used to extract filament images from micrographs . Fourier shell correlation was used to estimate the resolution ( SI Appendix , Figs . S2 B and S3 B ) . Image analysis is explained in detail in SI Appendix . Modeling . The model of the Tpm – F - actin complex extracted from the myosin - Tpm - F - actin complex ( 23 ) ( Protein Data Bank ID code 5JLH ) was used as the starting model for the refinement against the cryoEM density maps . The program DireX ( 34 ) was used for the model refinement . The density maps were masked around the rigid - body docked starting model with a radius of 8 Å using a smooth edge . H bonds present in the starting structure were restrained during the refinement . All models were refined for 50 steps against a target map filtered to 8 Å , whereas the Fourier interval 6 – 8 Å was used for cross - validation to prevent overfitting . The DireX refinement was followed by 50 steps of minimization with PHENIX ( 35 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Kelly Dryden for assistance with the micros - copy at University of Virginia . This work was supported by American Heart Association Grant in Aid 560851 ( V . E . G . ) . 1 . Brown JH , Cohen C ( 2005 ) Regulation of muscle contraction by tropomyosin and troponin : How structure illuminates function . Adv Protein Chem 71 : 121 – 159 . 2 . Spudich JA , Huxley HE , Finch JT ( 1972 ) Regulation of skeletal muscle contraction . II . Structural studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin . J Mol Biol 72 : 619 – 632 . 3 . Vibert P , Craig R , Lehman W ( 1997 ) Steric - model for activation of muscle thin fila - ments . J Mol Biol 266 : 8 – 14 . 4 . McKillop DFA , Geeves MA ( 1993 ) Regulation of the interaction between actin and myosin subfragment 1 : Evidence for three states of the thin filament . Biophys J 65 : 693 – 701 . 5 . Pirani A , et al . ( 2005 ) Single particle analysis of relaxed and activated muscle thin filaments . J Mol Biol 346 : 761 – 772 . 6 . Poole KJ , et al . ( 2006 ) A comparison of muscle thin filament models obtained from electron microscopy reconstructions and low - angle X - ray fibre diagrams from non - overlap muscle . J Struct Biol 155 : 273 – 284 . 7 . Lehman W , Orzechowski M , Li XE , Fischer S , Raunser S ( 2013 ) Gestalt - binding of tropomyosin on actin during thin filament activation . J Muscle Res Cell Motil 34 : 155 – 163 . 8 . Heeley DH , Belknap B , White HD ( 2002 ) Mechanism of regulation of phosphate dis - sociation from actomyosin - ADP - Pi by thin filament proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 16731 – 16736 . 9 . Heeley DH , Belknap B , White HD ( 2006 ) Maximal activation of skeletal muscle thin filaments requires both rigor myosin S1 and calcium . J Biol Chem 281 : 668 – 676 . 10 . Houmeida A , Heeley DH , Belknap B , White HD ( 2010 ) Mechanism of regulation of native cardiac muscle thin filaments by rigor cardiac myosin - S1 and calcium . J Biol Chem 285 : 32760 – 32769 . 11 . WilkinsonJM , GrandRJ ( 1978 ) ComparisonofaminoacidsequenceoftroponinI from different striated muscles . Nature 271 : 31 – 35 . 12 . van Eerd JP , Takahshi K ( 1976 ) Determination of the complete amino acid sequence of bovine cardiac troponin C . Biochemistry 15 : 1171 – 1180 . 13 . Pearlstone JR , Carpenter MR , Smillie LB ( 1986 ) Amino acid sequence of rabbit cardiac troponin T . J Biol Chem 261 : 16795 – 16810 . 14 . LiXE , etal . ( 2011 ) TropomyosinpositiononF - actinrevealedbyEMreconstructionand computational chemistry . Biophys J 100 : 1005 – 1013 . 15 . von der Ecken J , et al . ( 2015 ) Structure of the F - actin - tropomyosin complex . Nature 519 : 114 – 117 . 16 . Egelman EH ( 2000 ) A robust algorithm for the reconstruction of helical filaments using single - particle methods . Ultramicroscopy 85 : 225 – 234 . 17 . Behrmann E , et al . ( 2012 ) Structure of the rigor actin - tropomyosin - myosin complex . Cell 150 : 327 – 338 . 18 . Sousa DR , Stagg SM , Stroupe ME ( 2013 ) Cryo - EM structures of the actin : tropomyosin filament reveal the mechanism for the transition from C - to M - state . J Mol Biol 425 : 4544 – 4555 . 19 . Debold EP , et al . ( 2010 ) Human actin mutations associated with hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies demonstrate distinct thin filament regulatory properties in vitro . J Mol Cell Cardiol 48 : 286 – 292 . 20 . Gerson JH , Bobkova E , Homsher E , Reisler E ( 1999 ) Role of residues 311 / 312 in actin - tropomyosininteraction . In vitro motility study using yeast actin mutante311a / r312a . J Biol Chem 274 : 17545 – 17550 . 21 . Joel PB , Trybus KM , Sweeney HL ( 2001 ) Two conserved lysines at the 50 / 20 - kDa junction of myosin are necessary for triggering actin activation . J Biol Chem 276 : 2998 – 3003 . 22 . Murphy CT , Spudich JA ( 1999 ) The sequence of the myosin 50 - 20K loop affects My - osin ’ s affinity for actin throughout the actin - myosin ATPase cycle and its maximum ATPase activity . Biochemistry 38 : 3785 – 3792 . 23 . von der Ecken J , Heissler SM , Pathan - Chhatbar S , Manstein DJ , Raunser S ( 2016 ) Cryo - EM structure of a human cytoplasmic actomyosin complex at near - atomic resolution . Nature 534 : 724 – 728 . 24 . Llinas P , et al . ( 2015 ) How actin initiates the motor activity of Myosin . Dev Cell 33 : 401 – 412 . 25 . Maytum R , Westerdorf B , Jaquet K , Geeves MA ( 2003 ) Differential regulation of the actomyosin interaction by skeletal and cardiac troponin isoforms . J Biol Chem 278 : 6696 – 6701 . 26 . SwartzDR , MossRL ( 1992 ) Influenceofastrong - bindingmyosinanalogueoncalcium - sensitive mechanical properties of skinned skeletal muscle fibers . J Biol Chem 267 : 20497 – 20506 . 27 . Hill TL , Eisenberg E , Greene L ( 1980 ) Theoretical model for the cooperative equilib - rium binding of myosin subfragment 1 to the actin - troponin - tropomyosin complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77 : 3186 – 3190 . 28 . Bremel RD , Weber A ( 1972 ) Cooperation within actin filament in vertebrate skeletal muscle . Nat New Biol 238 : 97 – 101 . 29 . Solaro RJ , Moir AJ , Perry SV ( 1976 ) Phosphorylation of troponin I and the inotropic effect of adrenaline in the perfused rabbit heart . Nature 262 : 615 – 617 . 30 . Collins JH , Potter JD , HornMJ , Wilshire G , Jackman N ( 1973 ) Theamino acid sequence of rabbit skeletal muscle troponin C : Gene replication and homology with calcium - binding proteins from carp and hake muscle . FEBS Lett 36 : 268 – 272 . 31 . Frank J , et al . ( 1996 ) SPIDER and WEB : Processing and visualization of images in 3D electron microscopy and related fields . J Struct Biol 116 : 190 – 199 . 32 . MindellJA , GrigorieffN ( 2003 ) Accuratedeterminationoflocaldefocusandspecimen tilt in electron microscopy . J Struct Biol 142 : 334 – 347 . 33 . Ludtke SJ , Baldwin PR , Chiu W ( 1999 ) EMAN : Semiautomated software for high - resolution single - particle reconstructions . J Struct Biol 128 : 82 – 97 . 34 . Schröder GF , Brunger AT , Levitt M ( 2007 ) Combining efficient conformational sam - plingwith adeformableelasticnetworkmodelfacilitatesstructurerefinementatlow resolution . Structure 15 : 1630 – 1641 . 35 . Adams PD , et al . ( 2010 ) PHENIX : A comprehensive Python - based system for macro - molecular structure solution . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66 : 213 – 221 . Risi et al . PNAS | June 27 , 2017 | vol . 114 | no . 26 | 6787 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y