Interpreting Input from Children : a Designerly Approach Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good Department of Informatics University of Sussex Brighton , BN1 9QJ , UK c . frauenberger @ sussex . ac . uk j . good @ sussex . ac . uk Wendy Keay - Bright Cardiff School of Art & Design , Cardiff Metropolitan University Cardiff , CF5 2YB , UK wkbright @ uwic . ac . uk Helen Pain School of Informatics University of Edinburgh Edinburgh , EH8 9AB , UK helen @ inf . ed . ac . uk ABSTRACT Involving children in the design process of interactive tech - nology can greatly enhance its likelihood of successful adop - tion . However , children’s input and ideas require careful interpretation to reach viable designs and technical speciﬁ - cations , which poses a signiﬁcant challenge to an adult de - sign research team . In this paper we discuss our approach to managing the complexity of combining concepts and ideas that were generated through participatory design work with the practical , technical , ethical and theoretical constraints of developing a technologically enhanced learning environment for children with and without Autism Spectrum Conditions . We found that the nature of this design problem did not lend itself to be rationally reduced to produce a single solution , but required an understanding of interpretive and speculative approaches for us to be able to cope with the complexity of requirements . We describe a workshop in which members of the design team used such approaches to develop a design brief that is faithful to the children’s input . By making this process transparent , we aim to contribute to the methodology of using such designerly approaches in combination with par - ticipatory and human - centred methods to develop interactive technology . Author Keywords design research ; participatory design ; children ; autism ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 2 Information Interfaces and Presentation : User Inter - faces— User - centered design General Terms Design INTRODUCTION Involving children meaningfully in the design of technology is a major challenge in the ﬁeld , but , as Druin points out [ 3 ] , as “technologies become ever more critical to our children’s lives , we need to be sure these technologies support children Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . CHI’12 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA . Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1015 - 4 / 12 / 05 . . . $ 10 . 00 . in ways that make sense for them as young learners , explor - ers , and avid technology users” . The roles children can have in a participatory design ( PD ) process range from evaluating prototype solutions as a tester to being a full design partner with rights and responsibilities equal to designers themselves [ 3 ] . Neither of these roles is without its problems . As testers , children have no direct means to of creatively contributing to the development , and are therefore restricted to giving feed - back on artefacts that were created based on adult assump - tions . At the other end of the scale , as full design partners children may be exposed to undue pressure to act as design - ers without possessing the necessary skills and intuition that most trained designers will have gained over many years of problem solving . For example , Jones et al . [ 12 ] reported on a co - design process in which the children often sought to sat - isfy the expectations of adults and had difﬁculties expressing their ideas when given too little structure and too few bound - aries within which to work . We therefore argue that even in situations where children act as full design partners , it is rele - vant for there to be an element of experienced designer inter - pretation . These effects are ampliﬁed when children have special needs , particularly when those needs affect their social and commu - nication skills . The tension between addressing the gap in perspective and context through participation , and the danger of building up undue expectations in terms of creative contri - bution to the design has troubled many design efforts in this ﬁeld ( e . g . , see [ 11 ] for an account of designing with children with severe motor impairments ) . Guha et al . developed an inclusive model of Cooperative Inquiry with three additional layers that take into account the possible level of involvement , the severity and nature of disability and the availability and intensity of support required during the design process ( [ 9 ] , also [ 2 ] ) . They argue for the careful creation of an appropri - ate environment for children with special needs that allows them to contribute in the design team . We fully agree with Guha et al . , but also recognise that often there is a gap between the contributions from young design partners and the realities of designing a technological arte - fact , particularly when the children have special needs . This gap is created by the different sources and qualities of the inputs that deﬁne the problem space . The design problem be - comes a wicked problem where aims and goals are divergent and measures of success are different depending on the lens through which we look at it [ 19 ] . The nature of those inputs is inﬁnitely variable and may range from children’s descrip - Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2377 tive drawing of what they might desire from the technology , to scientiﬁc knowledge derived from tightly controlled exper - iments in relation to the disability . This results in diverse and complex data that cannot be interpreted through typical reductionist scientiﬁc or engineering approaches to arrive at a solution . Stolterman [ 20 ] ﬁrst highlighted this difference in design complexity and scientiﬁc complexity in interaction design . He argues for interaction design processes that are guided by design practice and philosophy . Furthermore , he sees the complexity in design as a feature that should not be reduced , but embraced to creatively engage with the problem . Zimmerman et al . have also investigated the tensions be - tween the perceived fuzziness of design work and the sci - entiﬁc rigour of research in interaction design [ 23 ] . In their model of research through design they argue that designerly ways of developing HCI can and should co - exist with sci - entiﬁc inquiry and can produce great research contributions . They propose four lenses that allow for the evaluation of such contributions by design : the quality , rigour and rationale of the process ; the novelty in the outcome ; the relevance to its users , and its potential for extensibility . This implies that in order to make a research contribution , research projects have to maintain rigour and transparency in their design processes . It is our intention , through this paper , to contribute to this dis - cussion by reporting on how we employed a designerly ap - proach in order to reconcile the tensions arising from partic - ipatory design , with the highly complex technological , peda - gogical , social and philosophical ambitions of the ECHOES research project . We start by providing an overview of the ECHOES project in relation to its research aims , and follow with descriptions of the participatory approach adopted to inform these aims . In order to focus the discussion and analysis on design com - plexity we will then position the ﬁndings from the participa - tory activities undertaken with our target populations within a creative design context . We will describe a creative design workshop , undertaken with a small interdisciplinary team of ECHOES researchers , which set the challenge to interpret the input of a year’s worth of PD work and converge the many disparate and complex requirements of ECHOES into a work - able concept . We conclude by reﬂecting on this experience and ﬁnish our paper by describing how the project has moved on as a result . THE ECHOES PROJECT The work described here has been conducted as part of the ECHOES project 1 . The project aims to create a techno - logically enhanced learning environment to scaffold the so - cial skill development of typically developing children and children with high functioning Autism Spectrum Conditions ( ASC ) or Aspergers Syndrome ( AS ) . Despite having rela - tively normal language and cognitive abilities , children with high functioning ASC or AS have impaired social skills , which in turn affects their individual developmental pathway and leads to impaired social relationships [ 10 ] . Children with ASC and AS are quick to engage with computers because of the perceived predictability and reduced social complexity . 1 http : / / echoes2 . org These features of computation have provided the foundations for research into technologically enhanced learning environ - ments for this population [ 16 ] and the ﬁeld has since made signiﬁcant and promising progress ( e . g . , [ 7 ] ) . ECHOES proposes to use technology in interventions to scaf - fold the development of social skills for children aged ﬁve to seven . Furthermore , we aim to develop a methodology that allows parents and practitioners to examine difﬁculties which some children might be experiencing , and more broadly , to explore the relationship between social skills , communication and learning . The development is based on the SCERTS intervention framework ( Social Communication , Emotional Regulation and Transactional Support [ 18 ] ) and focuses on creating learning activities that support speciﬁc social skills such as joint attention . The overall approach to designing such a learning environment for a user population that has varying abilities was to evolve a participatory process that could in - clude a range of children as design partners from early con - cept development through to prototyping and evaluation . PARTICIPATORY WORK Our participatory process was inspired by the work of Keay - Bright et al . [ 13 ] on the Reactive Colours project and was comprised of the following four stages : Foundation - build - ing lasting relationships and initial observations ; Inspire - creative design activities facilitating outside - the - box think - ing , Listen - capturing and interpreting input and translating it into a design , and , Evaluate - testing design ideas with the participants . These stages were broadly employed in iterative cycles , however , they were agile enough to respond to unpre - dictable issues as they arose , particularly as working with de - manding school schedules necessitates pragmatic ﬂexibility . The following sections provide a brief overview of the initial cycle of activities we conducted in ECHOES , to enable the reader to put the subsequent description of the design work - shop , our main focus of this paper , into perspective . A full account of these design activities , including an in depth dis - cussion and reﬂection , is published in [ 6 ] . Foundations To initiate the design process , working relationships with po - tential design partners and other stakeholders had to be es - tablished . We contacted two mainstream primary schools in the region , one of which had special provisions for children with learning difﬁculties . The Special Educational Needs Co - ordinator ( SENCO ) in this school ran a weekly social skills class and agreed to work with us . Two of the three children in this class were diagnosed with high - functioning Autism , the third had undiagnosed language deﬁciencies . In the sec - ond school , we worked with a class of 30 typically devel - oping children . We produced information packs for parents and teachers explaining the goals of the project and the activ - ities we were proposing to undertake with children . Rigorous ethical procedures were followed and consent obtained from children and their parents . Meetings with teachers provided a meaningful context for participation and avoided placing un - necessary demands on teaching schedules . In addition , we at - Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2378 tended a parent support group , which provided opportunities for parents to meet us and ask any questions . Focussed ob - servations of children in their classroom routines allowed us to become more immersed in the environment and provided a starting point for our activities . These initial observations not only gave us our ﬁrst insight into the children’s world , but also provided the crucial steps towards building a strong , empathetic relationship with the children and their teachers . Sensory explorations Our ﬁrst activity explored the children’s relationships with objects , in particular , which sensory experiences are partic - ularly intriguing and what kinds of interactions they trigger . Inspired by the concept of a toolkit for expression [ 21 ] and Fictional Inquiry [ 1 ] , objects with pronounced sensory and functional properties were presented as part of a story ( ex - ploring a treasure chest on a desert island ) that aimed to en - gage children in autotelic play , motivated by curiosity , explo - ration , play and aesthetics rather than an externally deﬁned task ( [ 17 ] , p . 40 ) . Video recordings captured during these sessions provided initial links between patterns of engage - ment and the sensory qualities of objects . Learning from our observations of the children as they read - ily became absorbed in manipulating objects , we felt able to add complexity by introducing a task . Sets of three sensory objects were provided to groups of children with the task of identifying the odd one out . The objects were chosen so that many different answers could be argued for , and the analy - sis that followed revealed that children with ASC showed a greater interest in physical and perceptual detail in order to distinguish objects , while typically developing children pre - dominantly referred to function or behaviour . What surprised us about this activity was how the striking physical affor - dances of the objects could actually limit the imagination . Children’s interest in the cause and effect properties of the objects overwhelmed their ability to imagine the objects in any other context . This presented an early indicator of the difference between our adult perception and expectation , and a child’s . With the ﬁrst activity we had expected to see emergent narra - tives . However , when we reviewed this activity our analysis conﬁrmed that children were not using the properties of the objects in an imaginative way to construct their own narra - tives ; their play remained at a functional rather than a con - structive , dramatic level . Inspired by the work of [ 8 ] on so - cial stories for children with Aspergers and previous work on using comic strips [ 15 ] , we provided the children with comic strip templates . The templates were blank apart from the ﬁrst and the last frame . The framework for the narrative was a princess who had been kidnapped by a dragon and needed to be rescued by the aid of a special object , which was one of the sensory objects from the treasure chest . We were able to extract only very little from this activity in terms of design . Although the children responded with colourful stories , we overestimated their interest in expressing details in the given format . As a result , the relationship between sensory objects and the story remained largely hidden . Digital prototyping While the above activities were all low - tech , it became clear that digital mock - ups and prototypes would be vital to de - termining the possibilities for action that could arise when translating the observed sensory triggers for interaction into a digital environment . In addition , we needed to appreciate how the technology itself could impact on motivation , imagi - nation and acceptance . We chose to implement a series of prototypes around a bub - ble theme . This was inspired by the potential of balloons and bubbles to afford a range of experiences , rather than just ac - tions , as they are co - dependent on interaction and environ - mental conditions . This also built on similar experiences in the Reactive Colours project [ 13 ] . The prototypes were pre - sented on a large 40” screen with a single - touch overlay and we ﬁrst investigated physical actions such as popping , drag - ging and merging . We then moved on to more complex ac - tions such as morphing , and introduced notions of agency to extend possibilities for interaction beyond the physical world . All the prototype activities were captured on video and chil - dren provided a wealth of input either by explicitly talking us through their experiences or implicitly , through their interac - tions . DESIGN WORKSHOP As a method of bridging the divide between real world ob - servation and inspiration , and the demands of ECHOES as a technology enhanced learning environment with constituent precursors and intelligence , we organised a design workshop . This brought the participatory design researchers together over an intense two - day session with the main goal of com - bining the emotional and aesthetic qualities of the interface with the rational and intellectual requirements of the system . The paradox we face within ECHOES became very clear : user experience needed some form of modelling so that the system could function intelligently , but in adopting a par - ticipatory design approach our designs had to authentically reﬂect children’s ideas about an engaging environment . By choosing to make ECHOES an environment for playful dis - covery that could scaffold learning , we had a responsibility to ensure that it would trigger rich experiences that could be uniquely appropriated by the child . The following sections describe the workshop activities in a time ordered fashion : these ranged from initial conceptual - isation of the complexity to our efforts to communicate the outcomes of this workshop within the project . This account is intentionally written in a narrative style as it best reﬂects the process the team went through . A shared understanding of the design complexity The workshop began with the design team reviewing the re - quirements on the design from a pedagogical perspective . To this end , the team working on the educational aspects of the ECHOES system had prepared , in advance , a sequence of learning activities supporting speciﬁc learning goals . They were grounded in the psychological theory of social skills intervention and the SCERTS framework : for example , the awareness of objects and their properties , the awareness of Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2379 others , cause and effect relationships and engagement in joint attention . The activities were derived from popular tasks in the relevant research literature such as sorting tasks , puzzle - style activities or pointing and gazing tasks . The generic nature of the activities gave the design team opportunities to create an environment that was in tune with the expe - riences children described during the participatory design work . The constraint was to design the environment so that learning activities similar to those described could plausibly take place while supporting the overall , motivating and ex - ploratory theme of the interaction . In technical terms , the project had decided that the basic for - mat of the system should make use of a large , multi - touch screen as the main means of interaction , supported by visual gaze tracking and sound output . The rationale for choosing this setup was to be close to technology already available in schools and adding relatively cheap features which could pro - vide vital additional information about the state of the interac - tion . The backend technology , which processes the input and drives the output , had to be capable of constructing scenes with objects and autonomous agents , which would act as in - telligent interactional peers for the children . This artiﬁcial - intelligence ( AI ) approach required the modelling of chil - dren’s behaviour and the interactional patterns to allow the system to reason about the current state and plan future steps . The project aims to evaluate the intervention created with re - spect to its impact on the social skills development of chil - dren . To facilitate such an evaluation , the design—as a re - search tool—had to be ﬂexible and expandable to provide enough material for children to play with over several weeks . Furthermore , with the number of children being involved in such an evaluation , the design had to satisfy a wide range of preferences . On the other hand interaction had to be focused and simple enough to be able to collect data on a level that would allow meaningful analysis . It immediately becomes clear that all these forces do not nec - essarily pull the design in a single direction and it became a “wicked” problem . Neither the goals nor the expectations inherently linked to the different perspectives on developing ECHOES naturally converge . We argue that only a shared understanding of the forces at work opens up the necessary discourse , which in turn is required to overcome this and de - velop a design . What follows are designerly ways to shape the problem and deal with the design complexity . Values and Must - Haves With the purpose of making our experiences of working with our child participants more salient in the design process , we developed a set of values or must - haves that we felt the design should embody . This set of values served two purposes : ﬁrst , it made explicit certain foundations for the design process and secondly , it served as a checklist for the evaluation of design ideas . Developing these values was informed by our experience of designing with children , but naturally also reﬂected our own knowledge and understanding of the effective system . As stakeholders in the design process , we were cognisant of our responsibility to take an active role in informing the usability , usefulness and desirability of the system and to make this pro - cess transparent . The ﬁnal list of values was comprised of ex - ploration , structure , interaction , open - ended , repetition , con - textualisation , simplicity , potential for interpretation , consis - tency , no - text , rhythm , pause , reﬂection , ﬂow , irresistibility , choice , engagement , playfulness and humour . These values reﬂect various qualities that impacted on the aesthetics of the environment ( such as playful triggers for cause and effect that lead to irresistibility ) as well as the inter - action ( e . g . , ﬂow ) . Many values were also inspired by what we have learnt from the teachers and carers of children with ASC , e . g . , structure and consistency . These are qualities that were intended to speciﬁcally address common traits in ASC . Contextualisation We approached designing a concept by trying to avoid a prob - lem - solving and technical requirements - led approach . We took the point of view that for ECHOES to be an experien - tial environment , motivated by the relationship between the child , the object , another child ( an agent ) and the environ - ment itself ( its affordances and imagined meanings ) it needed to be situated—actions needed to be believable within an au - thentic setting . As we had undertaken participatory activities in school settings we felt better informed to propose themes that could be representative of the physical and social envi - ronments typical to a school . This included understanding the environment and social context of use—what the space would be like in which the ECHOES system is set up , for example , whether it was a separate , quiet study room or a corner of the classroom . We asked ourselves who else would be present around the interaction we aimed to design and what impact this would have . How would the dynamic of the interaction change if there were other children in the background ? What role would the researchers , teachers or carers have while chil - dren played with ECHOES ? The video material we collected while presenting our ﬁrst digital prototypes provided us with great insight as to how these environmental factors changed the behaviour of children . Figure 1 illustrates a typical envi - ronment in which we have found ourselves immersed . Figure 1 . A typical context in which the ECHOES system is deployed We went on to work with personas , representing different children . We based them on real children we had worked with , which allowed us to put ourselves into their shoes and to act out their reactions . In all these discussions we focussed on the ﬂow of interaction rather than properties or features , Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2380 to imagine how the interaction would unfold over time rather than collecting static requirements . Inspiration As a next step in the workshop we sought inspiration from outside the immediate context of the research . This was mainly to broaden our view of possibilities , particularly in terms of the aesthetics and the interaction styles . We created quick mood - boards , taking inspiration from ﬁne art paintings , in particular the naive style of Ivan Rabuzin , illustrations in books for children , computer games , and more traditional non - digital activities such as Fuzzy Felt c (cid:13) , an activity for cre - ating pictures from fabric shapes . Using the mood boards , we cross - referenced with input from the children . Explic - itly expressed through drawings or other forms of feedback , or implicitly given through their interaction with sensory ob - jects , their input shaped our view of the experience the design should facilitate . Figure 2 illustrates some of the inspirations we sought and shows two scenes from the Sensory Workshop in which children showed interesting objects and their prop - erties to us . We then worked separately and each member of the design team had time to reﬂect on all of the information . Each person in the team developed a scenario based on the personas and the context . As we reconvened , ideas were presented to the group and reviewed from our different perspectives . Brainstorming What followed was a rapid , iterative cycle of brainstorming and testing ideas through with personas . An initial design decision was required to settle on an overall theme—to an - swer the question about where all of these activities would take place . We felt strongly that the experience of children should be an emergent quality of the engagement with the en - vironment . The idea for situating ECHOES in a garden arose from our analysis and experimentation with all of the inspi - rational material : a garden represents a natural and playful environment that children are likely to have a positive rela - tionship with . Whilst not all group members initially agreed with this proposal , through further discussion they all became convinced that it was the most appropriate setting , and that other options ( e . g . the school playground ) might be less suit - able and have negative associations for some children . Not all children will have a garden at home , but schools often do and even in urban areas , parks are associated with leisure activi - ties . A garden is also a very versatile place with an unlimited potential for engaging with objects and social peers . It is an environment that lends itself to self - led exploration and sto - ries unfolding . We decided to further shape this playful experience by intro - ducing the notion of magic , inspired by the emergent qual - ities children described when playing with sensory objects . The digital domain allows us to extend concepts from the real world and provide additional openings for playful engage - ment . The activities with the digital prototypes further ex - plored this notion through the concept of morphing and pro - vided us with inspiration for which interactional styles could be used to evoke these magical qualities in the environment . Figure 2 . Inspirations for design : a painting by I . Rabuzin ( source : http : / / www . rabuzin . com / ) and a screenshot of LocoRoco TM . Be - low , experiences from the Sensory Workshop . Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2381 Figure 3 shows a child using different types of touch to morph bubble objects into balls and lions during these activities . Figure 3 . Exploring the concept of magic through morphing Playing these ideas through with personas , we felt that we needed a sequence to introduce this concept to the child inter - acting with the system . First , the child should be able to take ownership of the environment and second , the mode of inter - action with the environment through touch required practice as our ﬁrst digital prototypes showed . Thus , we shifted our focus to designing the interactional ﬂow . Designing sequences - interactional ﬂow To trigger initial engagement and to personalise the interac - tion for the child , we decided to start with a welcome screen that features the child’s name . A concept from intervention psychology provided the rationale for the only other element in the welcome screen : a bubble . This bubble was introduced to serve as a transactional element , an element that guides children from scene to scene and provides prominent cues that the environment is changing . In the opening scene of ECHOES , where a child chooses his / her name and starts the activities , a green bubble is static next to the name , but as soon as the child is prompted to touch the name , the bubble turns red and ﬂoats off the right side of the screensignifying a scene transition . A green bubble is the ﬁrst element the children see in the next scene , following the conventions for STOP and GO that children are familiar with in their learning routine . Right from the start , we aimed to provide transac - tional support and clear structure to the ﬂow of interaction . Figure 4 shows the early sketch with the ﬁnal implementation of this concept . The second scene is intended to familiarise the child with the mode of interaction . Children often expressed their excite - ment with bubbles and their simple yet irresistible qualities . So we created a simple bubble world in which bubbles could be popped and merged . We found from our digital proto - types that children engaged quickly with this activity and that it provided repetition , rhythm , and ﬂow , which supported the children in interacting with a touch - sensitive surface . The number of bubbles and ﬂoating speed provided a powerful means of controlling the pace of interaction and had particu - larly strong effects in terms of engagement for children with ASC . At the end of this activity , a red bubble that cannot be popped ﬂoats off to the right signifying the transition into the next scene and taking the child into the magic garden . Initially , the green transaction bubble is the only object in motion in the garden , intending to draw children into the new environment by providing a familiar sensory experience . In order to provide a coherent design we used circle shapes as a theme for other interactive objects : round ﬂower heads , bal - loons , the sun and a cloud were initially added . Albeit similar shapes , these objects provide a phenomenologically differ - ent experience and thereby provide a starting point for the children to develop the vocabulary through which they un - derstand the ECHOES environment . They all have magical qualities too and afford room for self - led exploration through the child . Figure 5 shows a sketch that was created during this phase and a ﬁrst digital implementation that was created after the workshop . Figure 5 . An initial sketch of the garden with the circle theme from the workshop and a ﬁrst digital sketch produced later Ideas in Action We played through each new aspect of the new environment with four distinct , ﬁctional personas we called David , Daisy , Simon and Lisa . David is a 7 - year - old boy with Asperger’s Syndrome . He has full language capabilities and is fairly skilled with social referencing , but whenever a situation be - comes overwhelming he retreats quickly . He avoids social in - teraction when he can and feels anxiety in situations that are new to him . Simon is the same age , diagnosed with ASC , but engages with his environment in a very different way . He is more forward and quickly plays with things he likes , but has a much shorter attention span than David and quickly loses in - terest . We envisioned the environment in which both of these children would interact with ECHOES as a calm room with Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2382 Figure 4 . The initial sketch with the ﬁnal implementation of the transition bubble concept not many other people present apart from their carer or spe - cial needs teacher . In contrast , the remaining two personas were set in a noisy , mainstream classroom with 30 other chil - dren and a teacher occupied with engaging the rest of the class while individual children play with ECHOES . Lisa is a very conﬁdent , outgoing child who expects games that work and keep her entertained . She is curious and very active and ready to explore everything that is thrown at her , but also does not waste time on something she does not like . Daisy is more reﬂective and quiet . She loves new things to play with , but explores them in her own time and crucially feels the urge to share this experience with her peers . While playing through our design ideas with these personas , we focused on the ﬂow of interaction and , as a result , we became sensitive to triggers , prompts , affordances and transi - tions that would scaffold the different interactional patterns for each child . Each context and each child had different requirements ranging from providing additional support for transactions or triggers for engagement , to the introduction of agents in the environment to pace and direct children in their exploration . The time we had spent in similar settings with similar children during our PD work became an indispens - able source for this activity . Expectations and Goals revisited At this point , the garden design was still very much a sketch with many details under - speciﬁed , such as the magical prop - erties of objects . However , we felt that we had moved towards a design that embraced the design complexity given by the different drivers described above , and was both sufﬁciently versatile and speciﬁc that we could build on it . As a way of evaluating our design ideas , we revisited the list of values and reﬂected on our goals and expectations . The garden provides an environment that naturally embodies a playful notion for most children . It lends itself to explo - ration as a variety of plausible objects can furnish a garden scene , providing a rich and engaging experience . Many sim - ple shapes can be imagined and made meaningful by being contextualised in a garden ; for example circles can become ﬂowers , balls , leaves , trees or the sun depending on their emergent behaviour . This also gives opportunities for pro - viding additional triggers through magic transformations ; for example ﬂowers turning into bubbles or balls . It is a non - textual environment that is open to interpretation and that fa - cilitates open - ended activities . There are several ways to in - ﬂuence the ﬂow of interaction , by controlling the number and magic qualities of objects in the garden or introducing an in - tentional agent . Change is supported by transactional objects , providing clear structure and predictability . The bubble world in particular provides scope for repetition and sets the rhythm for the interaction . Dissemination Participatory design requires ﬁnding shared vocabularies and demystifying design so that non - specialist as well as expert stakeholders can openly contribute and critique ideas . As mentioned earlier , the democratisation of design represents a shift in ownership and a move towards making decisions col - lectively . For the ECHOES project , as with any multidisci - plinary design research , the challenges of communicating the observations and inspirations derived through designing with children in real - world contexts are signiﬁcant . ECHOES has many constituent parts , each evolving from different disci - plines and inherent methodologies , for example technology , pedagogy , psychology , game and graphic design . These el - ements of ECHOES are interrelated and co - dependent , thus creative synergies need to be explored whereby each element can develop and be informed by authentic participatory de - sign . Herein lies the challenge . Participatory design does not yield deﬁnitive answers . Data is indicative , often sub - jective and obtained in environments that are deliberately open - ended . Designers and artists will be experienced in envisioning and interpreting a variety of informal and for - mal graphic languages , pictorial , schematic and textual . As Stolterman argues [ 20 ] , the way designers tackle complex and ill - deﬁned problem spaces differs from more traditional sci - ence approaches . Therefore , other disciplines may not feel conﬁdent in working with the kind of data participatory de - sign yields and may have expectations of design that cannot be fulﬁlled from participatory design sketches alone . Communicating the outcomes of a design process like the one described above and , more importantly , making the process Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2383 transparent for other members of the project thereby deter - mines the impact participation can have . As a way of demon - strating our working method for including children in the de - sign process , the last activity in the design workshop was to create a video that explained the process and the outcome of the workshop . We mainly used the ﬂip charts and story - boards we created to present our ideas to the camera along - side walk - throughs with our personas . Footage of our school - based activities and the design workshop has subsequently been edited and presented to other ECHOES researchers . The video captures the essence of the design experience , show - ing the school environment , artwork produced by children , free play with objects , and leading to other forms of inspi - ration from art and design and thus encompasses the ratio - nale for decision making . This video has been presented and discussed at a full project meeting together with low - ﬁdelity visual sketches and storyboards that particularly ad - dress the aesthetics of the environment . Avoiding technical sophistication at this stage enabled all the researchers to voice their concerns and ideas . The video has become a valuable resource for communicating the essence of ECHOES more widely to other groups . The immediacy of the visual language has meant that non - technical specialist informants have also been able to envision ECHOES from their own perspective and share opinions . Figure 6 . Talking through story - boards in the dissemination video DISCUSSION The context in which ECHOES is being developed presents a unique opportunity to research the process by which a very diverse , interdisciplinary group of researchers creates new technology which is based on and informed by a participa - tory design approach . The perspective presented in this pa - per focuses on the vital phase in such a process which links the outcomes and experiences of participation and a variety of other inputs with the actual design of the system – an ultimate particular as Stolterman puts it , the speciﬁc solution in the contextualised environment of the design task [ 20 ] . We argue that this phase is under - reported in the context of participatory design research and that providing details on the process and the rationale behind designs is a prerequisite for contributing knowledge to science through design research . As Zimmer - man et al . argue , the quality and the rigour of the process is in itself a major contribution of research through design [ 23 ] . They emphasise that , unlike other scientiﬁc ﬁelds , there is no expectation that reproducing the process would yield the same results , but good processes have the power to deliver genuine outcomes and insights for the given problem space . Thus , the contribution of this paper in this respect is twofold : ﬁrstly , we have aimed to document the process for researchers and practitioners to tackle similar design problems and sec - ondly , we aim to support the argument for managing design complexities such as the one presented through designerly ways of developing technology and being open about it . Reﬂecting on the process , we identiﬁed a key challenge in faithfully representing input from participants while appreci - ating the value in our own experiences . While in other con - texts , the contribution of participants is more tangible , as they are directly co - designing the output , the given context did not allow for this immediacy , and it fell to the designers to ensure that the input from our participants was upheld and shaped the outcome . However , this mediation or interpretation of input is prone to be unduly biased by the expectations and goals of the designers . To mitigate this effect , we have devel - oped a methodical approach to mindful interpretation that is grounded in the philosophical perspective of phenomenology . The notions of existential phenomenology as advocated by Heidegger or Merleau - Ponty provide a useful framework for understanding how humans make sense of the world around them . Turned around for analytical purposes , it has helped us to methodically separate the deeper phenomenological expe - riences children have described from the seemingly arbitrary details of their input . We have developed this idea further and have described its application to analysing subsequent design activities in more detail in [ 5 ] . Although the above argument shares similarities with em - pathic design and experience design [ 22 ] , the emphasis of our interpretational approach lies in generating triggers for inspiration for design in a way which is most faithful to the input of the participants . In contrast , empathic design focuses on the way the designer’s understanding of the user can in - form the design and therefore often draws on ethnographi - cally inspired ﬁeld work or probes [ 14 ] . Participatory design work , however , also exposes the designer to the more holistic world of the prospective users and thereby has a similar po - tential to generate a level of empathy that can inform design decisions . This ties in with the philosophical argument Ehn makes about the language games of user communities and participatory design [ 4 ] . Wittgenstein saw forms of life and practice being manifested in language games between people . As outsiders to a form of life we need to immerse ourselves in the world of others to learn the language game through di - alogue and thereby gain understanding about the form of life . We have found this to be a very strong driver for the design in ECHOES . The empathy that we gained through being im - mersed in the world of our child participants by conducting co - design activities had signiﬁcant impact on the way we en - visioned the ECHOES system in the workshop . It allowed us to use personas and walk - throughs with a genuine quality . As Wright and McCarthy point out in their discussion of ex - perience and empathy , a dialogical understanding of empathy embraces the notion of the designer holding on to their own perspectives while “appreciating the other’s perspective as other” [ 22 ] . This certainly was true when we developed the values and must - haves for the ECHOES system . Although we had not made this explicit at the time , these values rep - resented our own perspectives as designers as much as the Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2384 perspectives of other members of the project team , the partic - ipants and other stakeholders . Practical lessons While the above discusses the work from a theoretical an - gle , we want to highlight three key practical lessons we have learnt , in order to increase the applicability of our experiences to other contexts : 1 . Accepting the challenge : User participation in the design process can create complexities for designers , the ideas are often irrational and do not provide practical or fath - omable design solutions . However , while a traditional re - quirements engineering process is easier to manage , em - bracing this complexity promises outcomes that are mean - ingful and have real - world relevance for users . 2 . Recognising one’s role : Particularly when working with marginalised groups , the design researcher becomes an ac - tive stakeholder in the design process , contributing key skills and expertise , avoiding overburdening participants . Immersion in the life - worlds of the participants and being mindful in authentic settings enables design researchers to empathetically interpret their input and use genuine expe - riences as triggers for inspiration . 3 . Transparency : Methodological thoroughness and transpar - ency in making design decisions are key to justifying the outcomes and getting every member of a multi - disciplinary research team to embrace the design . Video recordings of the process have proven to be a powerful and appropriate medium to achieve this aim . CONCLUSION In this paper we have described our participatory design ap - proach to creating a technologically enhanced learning envi - ronment for typically developing children and children with ASC . We have provided some background on the research context and described brieﬂy some of the design activities we conducted with child participants in schools . The main focus of this paper lies with the description of a design workshop during which the design team in ECHOES aimed to develop a design that was grounded in the participatory work , but also satisﬁed the various other requirements in the project . We have argued that this resulted in an ill - deﬁned problem space , which presented us with a design complexity that required design methods rather than scientiﬁc deduction to move for - ward . This process has been described in great detail includ - ing the methods used , the design outcomes and the rationale for design decisions . In our discussion we have reﬂected on aspects of the process and have argued that this description supports the way Zimmerman et al . see research through de - sign making contributions to scientiﬁc knowledge [ 23 ] . Since the work described in this paper was conducted , the project has progressed . The basic design , however , continues to provide the generic environment for interaction with the system , and the notion of magical objects and their potential for social communication has been further explored in par - ticipatory design workshops with our children . We also ran workshops with teachers and carers who were an extremely valuable source of ideas and feedback . As a result , the garden is furnished with a number of magic objects and an animated character who acts as an interactional peer in learning activ - ities with children ( see Figure 7 ) . We believe that the work described in this paper has had a pivotal role in the imple - mentation of the project . By making this phase of interpret - ing participation transparent , we contribute to fostering the role of designerly ways of creating interactive technology and producing scientiﬁc knowledge through design research . Figure 7 . The design of the magic garden as of now , after more partici - patory design work ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank Chantry Community Primary School , Bexhill and Gattons Infant School , Burgess Hill for their on - going support and collaboration . Whilst the work presented in this paper is of the authors named , the ECHOES project is composed of a large inter - institutional team , all of whom contribute effort and ideas to the project . In addition to the authors , the team includes : Oliver Lemon , Mary - Ellen Foster , Alyssa Alcorn ( Heriot - Watt University ) ; Jingying Chan ( Edinburgh University ) ; Tim Smith ( Birkbeck , University of London ) Annalu Waller , Rachel Menzies ( Dundee University ) ; Kaska Porayska - Pomsta , Sara Bernardini and Katerina Avramides ( London Knowledge Lab ) ; Karen Guldberg ( University of Birming - ham ) ; Thusha Rajendren ( Strathclyde University ) . The ECHOES project is funded by the ESRC / EPSRC , TRLP TEL programme grant number : RES - 139 - 25 - 0395 . Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2385 REFERENCES 1 . Dindler , C . , and Iversen , O . S . Fictional Inquiry - design collaboration in a shared narrative space . CoDesign 3 , 4 ( December 2007 ) , 213 – 234 . 2 . Druin , A . Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children With Children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : the CHI is the limit , ACM Press New York , NY , USA ( 1999 ) , 592 – 599 . 3 . Druin , A . The Role of Children in the Design of New Technology . Behaviour and Information Technology 21 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 1 – 25 . 4 . Ehn , P . Work - oriented design of computer artifacts , 2nd ed . Arbetslivscentrum , Stockholm , Sweden , 1989 . 5 . Frauenberger , C . , Good , J . , and Keay - Bright , W . E . Phenomenology , a framework for Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , ACM Press ( New York , NY , USA , November 2010 ) , 187 – 190 . 6 . Frauenberger , C . , Good , J . , and Keay - Bright , W . E . Designing Technology for Children with Special Needs - Bridging Perspectives through Participatory Design . CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts 7 , 1 ( March 2011 ) , 1 – 28 . 7 . Golan , O . , Ashwin , E . , Granader , Y . , McClintock , S . , Day , K . , Leggett , V . , and Baron - Cohen , S . Enhancing emotion recognition in children with autism spectrum conditions : an intervention using animated vehicles with real emotional faces . Journal of autism and developmental disorders 40 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 269 – 279 . 8 . Gray , C . A . , and Garand , J . D . Social Stories : Improving Responses of Student with Autism with Accurate Social Information . Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 8 , 1 ( April 1993 ) , 1 – 10 . 9 . Guha , M . L . , Druin , A . , and Fails , J . A . Designing With and for Children With Special Needs : an Inclusionary Model . In IDC ’08 : Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Interaction design and children , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2008 ) , 61 – 64 . 10 . Gutstein , S . E . , and Whitney , T . Asperger Syndrome and the Development of Social Competence . Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 17 , 3 ( 2002 ) , 161 – 171 . 11 . Hornof , A . J . Designing with children with severe motor impairments . In CHI ’09 : Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2009 ) , 2177 – 2180 . 12 . Jones , C . , McIver , L . , Gibson , L . , and Gregor , P . Experiences Obtained from Designing With Children . In IDC ’03 : Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Interaction design and children , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2003 ) , 69 – 74 . 13 . Keay - Bright , W . E . The Reactive Colours Project : Demonstrating Participatory and Collaborative Design Methods for the Creation of Software for Autistic Children . Design Principles and Practices : An International Journal 1 , 2 ( 2007 ) , 7 – 16 . 14 . Mattelm¨aki , T . , and Battarbee , K . Empathy probes . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference ( 2002 ) , 266 – 271 . 15 . Moraveji , N . , Li , J . , Ding , J . , O’Kelley , P . , and Woolf , S . Comicboarding : using comics as proxies for participatory design with children . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , CHI ’07 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2007 ) , 1371 – 1374 . 16 . Murray , D . , and Lesser , M . Autism and Computing . http : / / www . autismandcomputing . org . uk , 2009 . Last checked : 25 Feb 2009 . 17 . Petersson , E . Non - formal learning through ludic engagement within interactive environments . PhD thesis , Malm¨o University , 2006 . 18 . Prizant , B . , Wetherby , A . , Rubin , E . , Laurent , A . , and Rydell , P . The SCERTS TM Model : A Comprehensive Educational Approach for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders . Brookes Publishing Company , Baltimore , MD , USA , 2005 . 19 . Rittel , H . , and Webber , M . Dilemmas in a general theory of planning . Policy sciences 4 , 2 ( 1973 ) , 155 – 169 . 20 . Stolterman , E . The Nature of Design Practice and Implications for Interaction Design Research . International Journal of Design 2 , 1 ( 2008 ) . 21 . van Rijn , H . , and Stappers , P . J . The Puzzling Life of Autistic Toddlers : Design Guidelines from the LINKX Project . Advances in Human - Computer Interaction 2008 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Wright , P . , and McCarthy , J . Empathy and experience in HCI . In Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , CHI ’08 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2008 ) , 637 – 646 . 23 . Zimmerman , J . , Forlizzi , J . , and Evenson , S . Research through design as a method for interaction design research in HCI . In CHI ’07 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2007 ) , 493 – 502 . Session : Learning with Children CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 2386