New approaches to demystifying insight Edward M . Bowden 1 , Mark Jung - Beeman 1 , Jessica Fleck 2 and John Kounios 2 1 Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 , USA 2 Department of Psychology , Drexel University , 245 N . 15th Street , MS 626 , Philadelphia , PA 19102 - 1192 , USA After a person has become stuck on a problem , they sometimes achieve a clear and sudden solution through insight – the so - called Aha ! experience . Because of its distinctive experience , the origins and characteristics of insight have received considerable attention historically in psychological research . However , despite consider - able progress in characterizing insight , the underlying mechanisms remain mysterious . We argue that research on insight could be greatly advanced by supplementing traditional insight research , which depends on a few complex problems , with paradigms common in other domains of cognitive science . We describe a large set of mini - insight problems to which multiple methods can be applied , together with subjective reports to identify insight problem - solving . Behavioral priming and neuro - imaging methods are providing evidence about what , where , and how neural activity occurs during insight . Such evidence constrains theories of component pro - cesses , and will help to demystify insight . Introduction Almost everyone has had the ‘ Aha ! ’ experience when solving a problem . After working for some time on a vexing problem , the solution comes in a sudden and unexpected ﬂash . Most of these insights are rather minor events , such as a solution to a crossword puzzle . However , there are many anecdotes – indeed , some might say a mythology – about insights involved in the solution of far more complex and important problems , such as Kekule’s discovery of the ring structure of benzene [ 1 ] and Poincare´’s discoveries in mathematics [ 2 ] . The scientiﬁc understanding of insight has grown sporadically for almost a century . Supplementing tra - ditional research with newer paradigms from the recent advances in neuroimaging would put the ﬁeld in position to make another leap forward in our understanding of insight . In this article we discuss several limitations in the way insight research is typically done , which present difﬁculties for using certain paradigms . These limitations include inconsistent efforts to determine whether insight has occurred , the assumption that ‘insight problems’ produce insight solutions , and the use of small numbers of problems . We offer a novel approach to illustrate what might be gained by attempts to overcome these limitations . What is insight ? The term ‘insight’ is used to designate the clear and sudden understanding of how to solve a problem . Insight is thought to arise when a solver breaks free of unwar - ranted assumptions , or forms novel , task - related connec - tions between existing concepts or skills . Most researchers accept insight as subjectively differ - ent from trial - and - error or algorithmic problem - solving . Despite these subjective differences , a persistent debate surrounds whether insight represents a distinct type of problem - solving involving at least some distinct cognitive mechanisms , or is merely an epiphenomenon based on the same cognitive mechanisms as non - insight solutions [ 3 – 5 ] . The two sides of the debate have been described as the ‘Special - Process’ and ‘Business - as - Usual’ views [ 6 ] . Most insight researchers subscribe to the ‘Special - Process’ view , suggesting that insight involves unique processes [ 7 ] . For example , representational - change theory proposes that insight occurs when the solver reinterprets or re - represents the problem by relaxing self - imposed constraints and / or decomposes chunked items in the problem , processes not necessary for non - insight solutions [ 8 , 9 ] . However , others subscribe to the ‘Business - as - Usual’ view arguing that insight and non - insight solutions are attained with precisely the same cognitive mechanisms . For example , progress - monitoring theory proposes that solvers try to minimize the difference between the current state of the problem and the goal state . Insight occurs only when the solver realizes that the distance to the goal is unachievable in the remaining moves and that a new set of moves must be sought . Thus , the solver must select a new move rather than form a new representation of the problem . Insight should only occur when the newly considered move brings the goal within a person’s capacity to look ahead from the current state to the goal state [ 10 , 11 ] . Limitations of classical insight research Has insight occurred ? Examining the literature makes it clear that although different theories of insight exist , there is no clear way to compare their predictions , especially given that they often address different components of the insight process . There is widespread agreement within both ‘Special - Process’ and ‘Business - as - Usual’ camps that insight solutions differ from non - insight solutions in a number of ways : Corresponding author : Bowden , E . M . ( e - bowden @ northwestern . edu ) . Available online 13 June 2005 Opinion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 9 No . 7 July 2005 www . sciencedirect . com 1364 - 6613 / $ - see front matter Q 2005 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2005 . 05 . 012 ( i ) solvers experience their solutions as sudden and obviously correct ( the Aha ! ) ( ii ) prior to producing an insight solution solvers sometimes come to an impasse , no longer progressing towards a solution ( iii ) solvers usually cannot report the processing that enables them to overcome an impasse and reach a solution [ 7 , 12 ] . In addition , performance on insight problems correlates with other cognitive abilities that do not correlate with performance on non - insight problems , such as identifying out - of - focus pictures or embedded ﬁgures [ 13 ] . Despite the agreement regarding how insight and non - insight solutions typically differ , there is no consistent set of necessary criteria to show that an individual has experienced insight . Usually the solver is not asked whether she solved a problem with insight – instead insight is assumed because an ‘insight’ problem was solved . Inconsistent efforts to determine whether insight has occurred make it extremely difﬁcult to specify the pro - cesses necessary to produce an insight solution . The ﬁeld would beneﬁt from widespread use of an agreed upon operational deﬁnition of insight solutions . To illustrate the difﬁculty , we need only compare two descriptions of insight processes . Ohlsson [ 14 ] suggests that the insight sequence is best described as impasse followed by restructuring . However , is reaching an impasse a necessary component of insight ? Does one need to restructure a problem to reach an insight ? In progress - monitoring theory it is selecting a different move rather than restructuring the problem that leads to insight [ 10 ] . It is possible that both theories are correct and that there are multiple ways in which an insight can be produced . However , without an agreed way to determine whether the solution was an insight we cannot assess the predictions of the competing theories . Which problems produce insight solutions ? A second limitation on insight research is the common assumption that ‘insight problems’ are always solved via insight . Researchers agree that the insight experience and the solution of ‘insight problems’ are not identical , yet traditional methods rely heavily on describing differences in solving attempts and success for these insight and non - insight problems [ 15 ] . The solution to a problem can be reached through analytic , if complex , non - insight processes , or with insight processes , or through a combination of both . This point is illustrated by the following problem : If you have black socks and brown socks in a drawer , mixed in a ratio of 4 to 5 , how many socks will you have to take out to make sure that you have a pair of the same color ? This problem is considered a pure insight problem [ 16 ] but can be solved without insight if the solver habitually uses a ‘What if . ’ rather than a mathematical strategy . That is , if the solver asks , ‘ What if I take out a black sock then a brown sock ? I would only need one more sock of either color to have a pair of the same color . ’ No insight is required . Furthermore , insight problems do not represent a homogeneous class of problems . They differ on so many levels that it is easier to ﬁnd differences than commonal - ities ( e . g . working - memory demands , size of problem space ) . Often , the problems used in studies of insight have been selected simply because they were used as insight problems in a previous study [ 16 ] . Chronicle , MacGregor and Ormerod [ 11 ] have identi - ﬁed three approaches to deﬁning insight problems , on the basis of : ( i ) phenomenological features ( e . g . problems for which warmth ratings do not increase until immediately before solution [ 17 ] ) ; ( ii ) the necessity for changes in conceptual knowledge for solutions to be found [ 6 , 8 ] ; and ( iii ) the processes underlying problem - solving [ 10 , 18 ] . The conceptual change and process approaches are useful in developing new problems or assessing whether to use certain existing problems . Phenomenological approaches are best used to determine which problems actually produced insight for each individual solver . Therefore , in addition to using well - deﬁned processes to classify speciﬁc problems as insight or non - insight prob - lems , researchers should focus on operational deﬁnitions of insight that can be applied independently of the problems themselves . The use of small numbers of problems Classic insight problems are often so difﬁcult that only a small percentage of participants manage to produce a solution without some assistance ( e . g . a hint ) or within a reasonable amount of time ( e . g . less than 10 min ) . The reliance on ‘classic’ insight problems has led to only a small set of problems being used in any given experiment . Participants might be asked to solve only a single problem while their moves and verbal protocols are recorded and analyzed . Although there is much that can be learned from this approach [ 19 ] , supplementing it with other methods will clearly beneﬁt the ﬁeld . Even when multiple exemplars of a given problem [ 8 ] are used , it is rare that participants have been asked to attempt more than 15 problems in an experimental session . Small numbers of problems limit both the reliability of data and the variety of techniques – such as neuroimaging , or reaction - time priming – that can be used . Furthermore , the complexity of typical insight problems can lead to the confounding of variables , which hinders the clear decomposition of the component processes of problem - solving . To take advantage of advances in neuroimaging a larger set of problems must be used . A new framework for investigating insight We have developed a framework for investigating insight that deals with the above problems . We were motivated by three factors : ( 1 ) To develop a model that speciﬁes the processes that are important for insight and link them to neural networks in the brain . ( 2 ) To be able to use techniques , such as visual - hemiﬁeld presentation , prim - ing measures , and neuroimaging that can reveal objective correlates of solvers’ subjective experiences . ( 3 ) To develop problems that require the processes speciﬁed by the model for solution and could be used with the techniques Opinion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 9 No . 7 July 2005 323 www . sciencedirect . com mentioned in ( 2 ) . These problems should also be solvable with or without insight . To test our model ( brieﬂy described below ) we developed a set of compound remote associates ( CRA ) problems that could be used in investigating insight ( see Box 1 ) . Others have used similar problems but no existing set was large enough for our needs [ 20 – 24 ] . In three of our experiments participants were provided with a description of insight and non - insight experiences and then reported whether they experienced insight on each individual problem . This procedure avoids the issue of a priori deﬁnitions of insight problems and takes into account the fact that some people might solve a problem with insight whereas others solve the same problem without insight . Although self - reports are subjective , we have tried to provide clear instructions ; the fact that participants show similar and distinct behavioral and neural patterns demonstrates that they are using consist - ent bases for reporting insight . In addition , comparisons between insight and non - insight are not confounded by potential differences in task stimuli independent of the insight / non - insight distinction ( e . g . different sets of problems are likely to differ in difﬁculty ) . Having participants make insight judgments is ana - logous to participants’ recognition judgments in the remember / know memory paradigm , in which after making a recognition judgment about an item , the participant is asked whether she actually remembered the prior occurrence of the item , or she just ‘knew’ that the item occurred before . The subjective experience is used to classify each recognition judgment [ 25 ] . Several neuro - imaging and ERP studies have used this paradigm to show different brain activations for ‘remember’ and ‘know’ judgments . The neurological model There have been very few attempts to describe the neural correlates of insight [ 26 , 27 ] . Linking the processes proposed to be important in insight to speciﬁc brain regions and / or networks thought to carry out these processes will focus theories of insight and lead to a fuller understanding of whether insight is a distinct type of problem - solving . This has been made possible by the increasing use of neuroimaging , especially event - related designs , to study complex cognition [ 28 – 30 ] , and the development of insight problems and paradigms amenable to such methods [ 31 – 33 ] . Our model of insight is based on our belief that the processes involved in problem - solving overlap with pro - cesses involved in language comprehension ; in both situations one must use general knowledge to ﬁll in information missing from the environmental stimulus , the information must be integrated into a coherent unit , much of this processing is unconscious , and the results of this processing must become available to consciousness for output [ 34 , 35 ] . Our model of insight proposes neural mechanisms for the re - representation of a problem and speciﬁes the brain areas in which they take place . All problem - solving requires a complex cortical net - work to encode the problem information , to search memory for other relevant information , evaluate this information , apply operators , and so forth . We propose that insight involves a set of problem - solving processes , which largely overlaps with the set of non - insight processes , but with some processes particularly empha - sized in , or perhaps unique to , insight . We propose that insight occurs during a conﬂuence of events : ( i ) Initial processing of the problem produces strong activation of information that is not related to solution [ 36 ] , and weak activation of information that is critical for solution ( so weak that it is unconscious or unavailable for output ) ; ( ii ) Processing that leads to solution involves inte - gration of problem elements across relations or interpre - tations that are non - dominant for the individual or contextually non - biased . This integration allows weakly activated concepts or elements to reinforce each other , strengthen , and eventually emerge into consciousness ; ( iii ) The solver must switch the focus of processing to the unconscious activation and select it for consciousness and output . [ 37 ] We have proposed that weak semantic activation of alternative interpretations is more likely to occur in the right hemisphere ( RH ) , whereas semantic activation of the dominant interpretation is more likely to occur in the left hemisphere ( LH ) [ 34 , 38 ] . According to this framework , the LH uses relatively ﬁne semantic coding , such that Box 1 . Compound remote associates problems We have developed a large set of simple problems [ 31 ] named compound remote associates or CRA problems , for research on insight . They are patterned after items in the Remote Associates Test ( RAT ) developed by Mednick [ 43 ] . Example Each of the three words in ( a ) and ( b ) below can form a compound word or two - word phrase with the solution word . The solution word can come before or after any of the problem words . a . french , car , shoe b . boot , summer , ground ( solutions appear below ) Although RAT items are not as complex as classic insight prob - lems , they exhibit three properties of insight problems ( see main text ) . Speciﬁcally , solvers are often misdirected in their solution efforts , cannot report how they overcame an impasse ( ‘ it just popped into my head ’ ) , and have an Aha ! experience when they achieve solutions . Moreover , performance on the original RAT reliably correlates with success on classic insight problems ( [ 13 ] , P . I . Dallob and R . L . Dominowski , personal communication ) . Thus , solving RAT - like problems is likely to depend on at least some of the same component processes involved in solving more complex insight problems . The CRA problems we have developed have several advantages over classic insight problems : They can be solved in a short time , so that many can be attempted in a single experimental session ; They have single - word , unambiguous solutions , which make scoring of responses easier ; They are physically compact , so that they can be presented in a small visual space or short time span . These features allow for better control and measurement of timing variables ( e . g . measuring the time between presentation and solution , controlling timing of hint presentation , or timing of solution presentation for solution - judgment tasks , etc . ) and display variables ( e . g . position of the problem and / or solution on the screen ) . These features permit the use of various paradigms ( e . g . priming , solution recognition , hemispheric - difference paradigms , and neuroimaging ) . ( Solutions : a . horn b . camp ) Opinion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 9 No . 7 July 2005 324 www . sciencedirect . com when people encounter words , the LH strongly activates a small ‘semantic ﬁeld’ of information closely related to the contextually biased interpretation . Although normally effective , this activation pattern makes the LH vulnerable to misdirecting features of insight problems . By contrast , the RH engages in relatively coarse semantic coding , and is therefore more likely to maintain diffuse activation of alternative meanings , distant associations and solution - relevant concepts ( as well as misdirected and solution - irrelevant information ) [ 39 ] . Initially , solvers may be unable to take advantage of weak solution activation – more likely to occur in the RH – because it is weak , and might be blocked or overshadowed by stronger , more focused , but misdirected , activation – likely to be stronger in the LH . The model assumes that all thinking involves com - plementary right ( RH ) and left hemisphere ( LH ) pro - cesses . That is , each hemisphere performs its own computations on input but , because information can be shared between the hemispheres , these processes are not strictly isolated from each other , and each contributes differentially to any complex behavior . We believe that RH processing plays an important role in creative thinking generally and in insight speciﬁcally . Testing the model Our model proposes differences in the processing per - formed by each hemisphere . To test this , we started by using visual - hemiﬁeld presentation and a priming para - digm ( or speed - of - solution decision ) for examining what each hemisphere ‘knew’ about the solution . We are now using neuroimaging techniques to link the proposed processes to their underlying neural networks . Behavioral ﬁndings using the framework The model predicts that activation of alternative mean - ings and more distant associations would persist in the RH whereas any misdirected activation would subside . We tested this prediction in a series of experiments . After trying to solve our compound remote associates ( CRA ) problems , participants read aloud solution or unrelated target words presented to the left visual ﬁeld / Right Hemisphere ( lvf - RH ) or right visual ﬁeld / Left Hemisphere ( rvf - LH ) . ( The optic nerves carry input from one visual hemiﬁeld to the contralateral hemisphere ) . Participants showed greater priming ( i . e . faster responses to solution target words than to unrelated target words ) for solution words presented to the lvf - RH than to the rvf - LH . In a second experiment participants showed a similar lvf - RH advantage for recognizing solutions to unsolved problems . These results demonstrate that in a problem - solving context , solution - relevant information is unconsciously activated before solving the problem , and that such activation is stronger in the RH than in the LH . Our suggestion is that this activation is useful for recognizing , and perhaps producing , solutions to insight problems [ 32 ] . We next examined the time course of hemispheric differences in activation of solutions to insight - like problems , by probing for solution - related activation after four different durations of solving effort ( from 1 s to 15 s ) . For unsolved problems , solution activation existed initially in both hemispheres , but was maintained only in the RH [ 40 ] ( Figure 1 ) . Moreover , we demonstrated that the presence and laterality of solution activation is linked to the Aha ! experience . Following unsolved problems , the participants showed greater priming for solutions that they recognized with insight , according to their own subjective ratings . This association was stronger for solutions presented to the lvf - RH than for those presented to the rvf - LH . These results tie in with the subjective experience of insight to an objective measure – semantic priming – and suggest that people have an Aha ! experience in part because they already had semantic activation that could lead them to recognize the solution quickly [ 33 ] . Neuroimaging ﬁndings These behavioral studies indicated distinct patterns of cognitive processing and hemispheric involvement for recognizing solutions with and without insight . Two neuroimaging experiments were then conducted in which participants solved CRA problems with or without insight [ 41 ] . We observed two objective neural correlates of insight . fMRI results revealed an increased signal in the right anterior superior temporal gyrus for insight relative to non - insight solutions ( Figure 2 ) . This effect probably does not reﬂect merely emotional responses to insight solutions , because the same area showed an increased signal during initial solving efforts . Additionally , scalp EEG recordings revealed a sudden burst of high - frequency ( gamma - band ) neural activity in the same region just before insight , but not non - insight , solutions . A second EEG ﬁnding was that , about 1 . 5 s before insight solutions , there was a sudden increase in power in the alpha - band frequency , suggesting a decrease in neural activity , over right visual cortex ( Figure 3 ) . These effects are not attributable to emotional responses , because the neural activity preceded the solutions . We concluded that solvers abruptly change the focus of their solving efforts just before insight solutions , allowing solution infor - mation that linked the various problem elements to emerge suddenly into consciousness . TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 1 2 7 15 Solving time ( s ) S o l u t i on p r i m i ng ( m s ) 0 20 40 60 lvf - RH rvf - LH Figure 1 . Solution priming effect ( i . e . participants read aloud solution words faster than unrelated words ) for target words presented to the right visual ﬁeld - Left Hemisphere ( rvf - LH ) ortotheleftvisualﬁeld - RightHemisphere ( lvf - RH ) , after1 , 2 , 7 , or 15 s of solving effort . Participants showed greater solution priming for lvf - RH targetsthanforrvf - LHtargetsatalltimesexcept1 s . ( Reprintedfrom [ 40 ] . Copyright 2000 Psychonomic Society , Inc . ) Opinion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 9 No . 7 July 2005 325 www . sciencedirect . com Summary ‘Insight’ occurs when someone solves a problem or discovers a solution path , by a sudden breakthrough . It has proven difﬁcult to determine precisely the mechan - isms underlying insight , partly owing to limitations of traditional insight research . Where some aspects of cognition involve mostly continuous processing , with insight at least some infor - mation is transmitted from one stage to another ( or to output ) in a discrete manner [ 18 , 42 ] . As such , insight is similar to a large domain of cognition including perception and language processing ( e . g . metaphors , garden - path sentences , jokes , etc . ) . Although all problem - solving relies on a largely shared cortical network , our research suggests that the sudden ﬂash of insight occurs when solvers engage distinct neural and cognitive processes that allow them to see connections that previously eluded them . It would not have been possible to carry out these experiments using classic insight and non - insight problems . We therefore developed a model task using a large set of problems , each of which could be solved in a short time and with or without insight , and which could be used in priming , visual - hemiﬁeld , and neuro - imaging paradigms . We also used participants’ reports of insight to classify solutions rather than categorizing the problems a priori . 1 . 0E – 10 6 . 0E – 11 2 . 0E – 11 – 1 . 0E – 10 – 6 . 0E – 11 – 2 . 0E – 11 0 0 5 . 0E – 12 1 . 5E – 11 2 . 5E – 11 – 5 . 0E – 12 – 1 . 5E – 11 – 2 . 5E – 11 A l pha i n s i gh t e ff e c t G a mm a i n s i gh t e ff e c t – 0 . 5 – 1 . 0 – 1 . 5 – 2 . 0 R Time ( s ) Alpha insight effect Gamma insight effect Figure 3 . The time course of the EEG insight effect . Alpha power ( 9 . 8 Hz at right parietal - occipital electrode PO8 ) and gamma power ( 39 Hz at right temporal electrode T8 ) for the insight effect ( i . e . correct insight solutions minus correct non - insight solutions , measured in units of volts 2 ) . The left y - axis shows the magnitude of the alpha insight effect ( blue line ) ; the right y - axis the gamma insight effect ( red line ) . The x - axis represents time ( in seconds ) . The yellow arrow and R ( at 0 . 0 s ) signify the time of the button - press response . Note the transient enhancement of alpha on insight trials ( relative to non - insight trials ) before the gamma burst . ( Reprinted from [ 41 ] ) . Insight minus noninsight Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Time ( s ) InsightNon - insight % s i gna l c h a nge – 0 . 10 0 . 00 0 . 10 0 . 20 0 . 30 0 . 40 – 2 2 4 6 8 10 – 2 2 4 6 8 10 – 2 2 4 6 8 10 ( b ) ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) Ant Post R L R L p < . 001 p < . 005 Figure2 . fMRIactivationforinsightversusnon - insightproblem - solvingintheright - hemisphereanteriorsuperiortemporalgyrus ( RH - aSTG ) ( a ) VoxelsshowinggreaterfMRI signal for insight compared with non - insight solutions , overlaidon the averaged normalizedstructural image of all subjects . The active area has a volumeof 531 mm3 ( peak t Z 4 . 89 at x , y , z coordinates 44 , 9 , 9 in Talairach space ) . ( b , c ) Group average signal change following the solution event , for insight ( red plot ) and non - insight ( blue plot ) solutions ( yellowarrowindicatesbuttonpress ) : ( b ) overentireLH - aSTGregion ; ( c ) overentireRH - aSTGregion . ( d ) Insight - solutionsignalchangeminusnon - insight - solution signal change , in RH - aSTG ( error bars show the standard error of the mean of the difference at each time point ) . ( Reprinted from [ 41 ] ) . Opinion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 9 No . 7 July 2005 326 www . sciencedirect . com We are not advocating the abandonment of classic insight problems , nor are we suggesting that CRA - like problems be used for all insight research . We are advocating that the standard techniques and problems used for insight research be supplemented with other techniques and problems , our model task being one example . Likewise , we advocate the use of solvers’ judgments of insight along with attempts to link them to objective indications of insight . Of course overt subjective measures are always vulnerable to demand characteristics ; how - ever , they have been used to great beneﬁt in psychophysics and memory research [ 25 ] and we believe they will continue to be valuable in insight research . A better understanding of the brain bases of insight will help constrain theories about the processes involved – thus helping to demystify insight ( see also Box 2 ) . Supplementing traditional research with newer para - digms would put researchers in position to make another leap forward in our understanding of insight . References 1 Findlay , A . ( 1948 ) A Hundred Years of Chemistry ( 2nd edn ) , Duckworth 2 Poincare´ , H . ( 1921 ) The Foundations of Science : Science and Hypothesis , the Value of Science , Science and Method . ( transl . Halstead , G . B . ) , Science Press 3 Weisberg , R . and Alba , J . ( 1981 ) An examination of the alleged role of ﬁxation in the solution of several ‘insight’ problems . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 110 , 169 – 192 4 Weisberg , R . ( 1986 ) Creativity : Genius and Other Myths , Freeman 5 Perkins , D . ( 1998 ) In the country of the blind an appreciation of Donald Campbell’s vision of creative thought . J . Creat . Behav . 32 , 177 – 191 6 Seifert , C . et al . ( 1995 ) Demystiﬁcation of cognitive insight : Opportunistic assimilation and the prepared - mind perspective . In The Nature of Insight ( Sternberg , R . and Davidson , J . , eds ) , pp . 65 – 124 , MIT Press 7 Sternberg , R . J . and Davidson , J . E . , eds ( 1995 ) The Nature of Insight , MIT Press 8 Knoblich , G . et al . ( 1999 ) Constraint relaxation and chunk decompo - sition in insight problem solving . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . 25 , 1534 – 1555 9 Knoblich , G . et al . ( 2001 ) An eye movement study of insight problem solving . Mem . Cogn . 29 , 1000 – 1009 10 MacGregor , J . N . et al . ( 2001 ) Information - processing and insight : A process model of performance on the nine - dot and related problems . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . 27 , 176 – 201 11 Chronicle , E . P . et al . ( 2004 ) What makes an insight problem ? The roles of heuristics , goal conception , and solution recoding in knowledge - lean problems . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . 30 , 14 – 27 12 Smith , S . M . et al . ( 1995 ) The Creative Cognition Approach , Vol . 3 , MIT Press 13 Schooler , J . W . and Melcher , J . ( 1995 ) The ineffability of insight . In The Creative Cognition Approach ( Smith , S . M . et al . , eds ) , pp . 97 – 133 , MIT Press 14 Ohlsson , S . ( 1992 ) Information - processing explanations of insight and related phenomena . In Advances in the Psychology of Thinking ( Keane , M . and Gilhooley , K . , eds ) , Harvester – Wheatsheaf 15 Smith , S . Getting into and out of mental ruts : A theory of ﬁxation , incubation , and insight . In The Nature of Insight ( Sternberg , R . and Davidson , J . eds ) , pp . 229 – 251 , MIT Press 16 Weisberg , R . ( 1995 ) Prolegomena to theories of insight in problem solving : A taxonomy of problems . In The Nature of Insight ( Sternberg , R . and Davidson , J . , eds ) , pp . 157 – 196 , MIT Press 17 Metcalfe , J . and Wiebe , D . ( 1987 ) Intuition in insight and noninsight problem solving . Mem . Cogn . 15 , 238 – 246 18 Smith , R . W . and Kounios , J . ( 1996 ) Sudden insight : All - or - none processing revealed by speed - accuracy decomposition . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . 22 , 1443 – 1462 19 Fleck , J . I . and Weisberg , R . W . ( 2004 ) The use of verbal protocols as data : An analysis of insight in the candle problem . Mem . Cogn . 32 , 990 – 1006 20 Ansburg , P . I . ( 2000 ) Individual differences in problem solving via insight . Curr . Psychol . 19 , 143 – 146 21 Bolte , A . et al . ( 2003 ) Emotion and intuition . Psychol . Sci . 14 , 416 – 421 22 Bowers , K . S . et al . ( 1990 ) Intuition in the context of discovery . Cogn . Psychol . 22 , 72 – 110 23 Smith , S . M . and Blankenship , S . E . ( 1991 ) Incubation and the persistence of ﬁxation in problem solving . Am . J . Psychol . 104 , 61 – 87 24 Wiley , J . ( 1998 ) Expertise as mental set : The effects of domain knowledge in creative problem solving . Mem . Cogn . 26 , 716 – 730 25 Gardiner , J . M . and Richardson - Klavehn , A . ( 2000 ) Remembering and knowing . In The Oxford Handbook of Memory ( Tulving , E . and Craik , F . I . M . , eds ) , pp . 229 – 244 , Oxford University Press 26 Luo , J . and Niki , K . ( 2003 ) Function of hippocampus in ‘insight’ of problem solving . Hippocampus 13 , 316 – 323 27 Mai , X . et al . ( 2004 ) ‘Aha ! ’ effects in a guessing riddle task : an event - related potential study . Hum . Brain Mapp . 22 , 261 – 270 28 Gernsbacher , M . A . and Kaschak , M . P . ( 2003 ) Neuroimaging studies of language production and comprehension . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 54 , 91 – 114 29 Wager , T . D . and Nichols , T . E . ( 2003 ) Optimization of experimental design in fMRI : a general framework using a genetic algorithm . Neuroimage 18 , 293 – 309 30 Meyer , F . G . and Chinrungrueng , J . ( 2003 ) Analysis of event - related fMRI data using best clustering bases . IEEE Trans . Med . Imaging 22 , 933 – 939 31 Bowden , E . M . and Jung - Beeman , M . ( 2003 ) Normative data for 144 compound remote associate problems . Behav . Res . Methods Instrum . Comput . 35 , 634 – 639 32 Bowden , E . M . and Jung - Beeman , M . ( 1998 ) Getting the right idea : semantic activation in the right hemisphere may help solve insight problems . Psychol . Sci . 6 , 435 – 440 33 Bowden , E . M . and Jung - Beeman , M . ( 2003 ) Aha ! Insight experience correlates with solution activation in the right hemisphere . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 10 , 730 – 737 34 Beeman , M . ( 1998 ) Coarse semantic coding and discourse comprehen - sion . In Right Hemisphere Language Comprehension : Perspectives from Cognitive Neuroscience ( Beeman , M . and Chiarello , C . , eds ) , pp . 255 – 284 , Erlbaum 35 Bowden , E . M . ( 1997 ) The effect of reportable and unreportable hints on anagram solution and the aha ! experience . Conscious . Cogn . 6 , 545 – 573 36 Kershaw , T . and Ohlsson , S . ( 2004 ) Multiple causes of difﬁculty in insight : the case of the nine - dot problem . J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . 30 , 3 – 13 37 Siegler , R . ( 2000 ) Unconscious insights . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 9 , 79 – 83 38 Fiore , S . and Schooler , J . ( 1998 ) Right hemisphere contributions to creative problem solving : Converging evidence for divergent thinking . In Right Hemisphere Language Comprehension : Perspec - tives from Cognitive Neuroscience ( Beeman , M . and Chiarello , C . , eds ) , pp . 255 – 284 , Erlbaum 39 Seger , C . A . et al . ( 2000 ) FMRI evidence for right hemisphere involvement in processing unusual semantic relationships . Neuro - psychology 14 , 361 – 369 Box 2 . Questions for future research † Will our ﬁndings transfer to other types of problems , such as problems in the visual domain ? † Is the right superior temporal gyrus the ‘insight area’ of the brain ? This is probably too simplistic , but what other areas of the brain are likely to be important for insight ? † What can be learned by investigating the relations between individual differences in attention , mood , and so forth , and the probability of insight occurring ? † Is the ‘ Aha ! ’ of self - discovery qualitatively different from the ‘ U - Duh ! ’ of having the solution presented to one ? Opinion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 9 No . 7 July 2005 327 www . sciencedirect . com 40 Jung - Beeman , M . and Bowden , E . M . ( 2000 ) The right hemisphere maintains solution - related activation for yet - to - be solved insight problems . Mem . Cogn . 28 , 1231 – 1241 41 Jung - Beeman , M . et al . ( 2004 ) Neural activity observed in people solving verbal problems with insight . PLOS Biol . 2 , 500 – 510 42 Miller , J . ( 1988 ) Discrete and continuous models of human infor - mation processing : theoretical distinctions and empirical results . Acta Psychol . ( Amst . ) 67 , 191 – 257 43 Mednick , S . A . ( 1962 ) The associative basis of the creative process . Psychol . Rev . 69 , 220 – 232 Have you contributed to an Elsevier publication ? Did you know that you are entitled to a 30 % discount on books ? A 30 % discount is available to ALL Elsevier book and journal contributors when ordering books or stand - alone CD - ROMs directly from us . To take advantage of your discount : 1 . Choose your book ( s ) from www . elsevier . com or www . books . elsevier . com 2 . Place your order Americas : TEL : + 1 800 782 4927 for US customers TEL : + 1 800 460 3110 for Canada , South & Central America customers FAX : + 1 314 453 4898 E - MAIL : author . contributor @ elsevier . com All other countries : TEL : + 44 1865 474 010 FAX : + 44 1865 474 011 E - MAIL : directorders @ elsevier . com You’ll need to provide the name of the Elsevier book or journal to which you have contributed . Shipping is FREE on pre - paid orders within the US , Canada , and the UK . If you are faxing your order , please enclose a copy of this page . 3 . Make your payment This discount is only available on prepaid orders . Please note that this offer does not apply to multi - volume reference works or Elsevier Health Sciences products . For more information , visit www . books . elsevier . com Opinion TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Vol . 9 No . 7 July 2005 328 www . sciencedirect . com