RFIMatch : Distributed Batteryless Near - Field Identiﬁcation Using RFID - Tagged Magnet - Biased Reed Switches Rong - Hao Liang ∗ Meng - Ju Hsieh † Jheng - You Ke † Jr - Ling Guo † Bing - Yu Chen § ∗ Eindhoven University of Technology † § National Taiwan University ∗ r . liang @ tue . nl † { mjhsieh , william821114 , jrling } @ cmlab . csie . ntu . edu . tw § robin @ ntu . edu . tw Figure 1 . ( a ) Each RFIMatch token module pair can be identiﬁed using a single UHF reader . ( b ) The module consists of a magnet - biased reed switch connected between the chip and antenna of a UHF RFID tag . ( c ) , ( d ) RFIMatch ﬁngerstall . ABSTRACT This paper presents a technique enabling distributed battery - less near - ﬁeld identiﬁcation ( ID ) between two passive radio frequency ID ( RFID ) tags . Each conventional ultra - high - frequency ( UHF ) RFID tag is modiﬁed by connecting its an - tenna and chip to a reed switch and then attaching a magnet to one of the reed switch’s terminals , thus transforming it into an always - on switch . When the two modules approach each other , the magnets counteract each other and turn off both switches at the same time . The coabsence of IDs thus indi - cates a unique interaction event . In addition to sensing , the module also provides native haptic feedback through mag - netic repulsion force , enabling users to perceive the system’s state eyes - free , without physical constraints . Additional vi - sual feedback can be provided through an energy - harvesting module and a light emitting diode . This speciﬁc hardware de - sign supports contactless , orientation - invariant sensing , with a form factor compact enough for embedded and wearable use in ubiquitous computing applications . Author Keywords RFID ; Batteryless ; Magnet ; Reed Switch ; Near - Field Identiﬁcation ; Wearables . ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 2 . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : User Interfaces Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspeciﬁcpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . UIST ’18 , October 14 – 17 , 2018 , Berlin , Germany c (cid:13) 2018 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5948 - 1 / 18 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3242587 . 3242620 INTRODUCTION Radio frequency identiﬁcation ( RFID ) technologies are widely used for identifying physical objects because their tags are robust , inexpensive , and easy to maintain . Ultra - high - frequency ( UHF ) RFID systems comprise at least one RFID reader that can interrogate multiple tags within a range . Because an RFID tag can be reliably recognized when em - bedded in an object , RFID systems also support contactless , occlusion - free interaction , thus preserving the physical form and function of objects [ 20 ] . However , tags within the readers signal coverage are normally on , which means that the con - tactless identiﬁcation ( ID ) familiar from everyday near - ﬁeld communications ( NFC ) is not supported natively . Studies have enabled near - ﬁeld effects , such as user input on a tag , by applying copper covers to change the signal states [ 28 ] , modifying the tag circuitry [ 15 ] , or integrating electromechanical sensors ( e . g . , switches ) into the circuitry connections between the RFID chip and antennas [ 15 , 19 , 23 ] , so that the clear presence of or signal change in ID in - formation can be utilized to indicate an input event . Re - searchers have also implemented distributed ID using a pair of tags based on electrical contacts [ 10 , 28 ] . Nonetheless , these methods require physical contact and tag alignment , thus limiting the freedom of user interaction and leaving a large marker footprint . In this work , we aim to transform passive UHF RFID tags into batteryless tag readers for distributed ID , to remove the necessity of physical contact and alignment , and to mini - mize the marker footprint , thus enabling embedded , wearable use in a ubiquitous computing context [ 31 ] . Therefore , we present RFIMatch ( Figure 1 ) , a novel hardware design en - abling these features for UHF RFID sensing . A reed switch that can be triggered by a remote magnetic ﬁeld is added be - tween the chip and antenna of an RFID tag . The key com - ponent is a biasing magnet added near one terminal of the reed switch , thus converting it into a normally closed ( on ) switch . Because the internal resistance of a closed reed switch is quite low ( < 1 Ω ) , this tagged , magnet - biased reed switch functions as a normal UHF RFID tag that is always on in the UHF readers signal coverage . Figure 2 shows the operating principle . When the two modules approach each other , the magnetic ﬁelds of the two biasing magnets counteract each other . Because their magnetic ﬁeld interactions are symmet - ric , the strength of the two magnets deteriorates equally and turns both reed switches off simultaneously ( Figure 2b ) . By contrast , when the two modules move away from each other , the magnetic ﬁeld strength of the two biasing magnets equally recovers , turning both the reed switches on simultaneously . The coabsent and copresent IDs corresponding to the state of the switches indicate which two modules are pairing ( Fig - ure 1a 1 ) and unpairing with each other , respectively . Figure 2 . Operating principle of batteryless near - ﬁeld ID . In each mod - ule , a reed switch is connected between the chip and antenna of an RFID tag , with a biasing magnet added to render the switch normally closed ( on ) . ( a ) When the two modules are distant from each other , both RFID tags remain on track . ( b ) When one module moves toward the other , symmetric magnetic interactions turn off the reed switches simultane - ously , such that both the tags are absent . The coabsence of the IDs indi - cates the identity of this pair . Because the change in the magnetic ﬁeld is coupled with a magnetic repulsion force , users can perceive a state change through haptic feedback during ID . An RFIMatch ﬁngerstall ( Figure 1c and 1d ) enables users to experience such feedback through a pointing gesture . We further present several tech - niques to enrich the interaction design space , such as adding a pushbutton to provide the module with additional input , or adding visual feedback using a light emitting diode ( LED ) - equipped module with an energy - harvesting mechanism to enhance embodiment and enable visual perception of state changes by others . Scenario : Smart Showroom Figure 3 . Display rack in a smart showroom . ( a ) An RFIMatch module is mounted behind each item . Several RFIMatch ﬁngerstalls are provided with voice guidance in different languages . ( b ) A visitor wearing the German ﬁngerstall hears the embedded audio message in German by touching the icon . ( c ) Two users wearing different ﬁngerstalls greet each other in their own languages . 1 The two tokens’ locations were not recognized . Figure 4 . Information counter in a smart showroom . ( a ) Several RFI - Match modules are embedded in the objects and underneath the table . A visitor ( b ) hears a voice instruction by pointing at the info icon with the ﬁngerstall , ( c ) places a cup on the info icon to see detailed information , and ( d ) places another cup on the checkout icon to checkout an order . Figures 3 and 4 show an example scenario called the smart showroom . Several RFIMatch modules are embedded in the walls and objects in the room , with only one UHF reader deployed for sensing . Visitors in this room wear a voice - guidance RFIMatch ﬁngerstall on their index ﬁngers . Each ﬁngerstall represents a voice - guidance language . Vis - itors hear information in their own language about items in the room by pointing to the icon printed where an RFI - Match module has been placed behind these items ( Fig - ure 3b ) . Visitors can also greet each other by touching each other’s ﬁngerstalls , similar to the famous alien - touching ges - ture in the movie E . T . . When doing so , the room plays back a “Hello” greeting in both visitors’ languages ( Figure 3c ) . The visitors then approach the information counter , where one of them hears a voice instruction by pointing at the info icon printed on the table ( Figure 4b ) , obtains detailed on - screen information by placing an item on the info icon ( Figure 4c ) , and submits an order by placing the desired item on the check - out icon ( Figure 4d ) . Beneﬁts and Contributions The showroom scenario succinctly and effectively demon - strates the object - to - object , user - to - object , and user - to - user interactions enabled by the two form factors : token and ﬁn - gerstall ( Figure 1 ) . The scenario and its interaction tech - niques are simple yet generalizable to other interactive ap - plications for payment , entertainment , and education , where RFID is widely applied in short - term interactions . The pro - posed system notably recognizes the near - ﬁeld pairing of any two modules in the room by using only one active RFID reader , inheriting all the beneﬁts from a UHF RFID system because each RFIMatch module is wireless , batteryless , and supports straightforward maintenance . Therefore , it is suit - able for large - scale deployment in such applications . Moreover , this system offers three novel , unique beneﬁts : orientation - invariant contactless sensing , small footprint , and haptic feedback . Consequently , RFIMatch modules can be completely hidden from users’ visual perception by embed - ding them into tangible or wearable objects . Their sensing mechanism does not require orientational alignment , such that user experiences are less constrained . Furthermore , re - pulsive magnetic feedback provides a haptic landmark en - abling users to perceive the system state without physical constraints , which is especially useful for eyes - free interac - tions , accessibility , and augmented or virtual reality . These three beneﬁcial features , which have not been satisfactorily achieved by other researchers [ 10 , 15 , 28 ] , not only enable embedded and wearable applications but also are essential for enhanced aesthetics and usability . The rest of paper ﬁrst explains the operating principles through an explorative study . Next , it details on the physical design and implementation of RFIMatch modules , followed by an evaluation of system performance . Finally , it discusses study limitations , related research , and future directions . REDESIGNING REED SWITCHES FOR ID Understanding Uses of a Reed Switch UHF tags are powered solely from the radio frequency energy emitted by the reader . The harvested energy should be used to operate RFID itself and thus properly maintain the tag func - tion ; in other words , the resistance of the additional mecha - nism should be as low as possible [ 5 ] . Electromechanical sen - sors , such as buttons and switches , have much lower internal resistance than do most resistive sensors . An activated elec - tromechanical sensor functions like a conductive wire , pro - viding an electrical connection with a several - milliohm resis - tance . Therefore , we opted to use electromechanical sensors for tag circuitry modiﬁcation . Figure 5 . Operating principle of a reed switch . A reed switch is ( a ) normally open , but ( b ) closed by an external magnetic ﬁeld , regardless of ( c ) polarity . A reed switch , triggered by an external magnetic ﬁeld , is an electromechanical sensor supporting remote input . Figure 5 shows the operating principle of such a switch . When a mag - net is moved close to a reed switch , its magnetic ﬁeld mag - netizes the reeds , whose mutual attraction completes an elec - trical circuit . The reeds are contained in a glass closure to preserve the sensing mechanism’s structural integrity . Figure 6 . Magnet dipole orientation and the sensing volume ( projected in 2D ) . ( a ) The switch is closed by a magnet pulled in the sensing volume . ( b ) The switch is opened by a magnet drop out the sensing volume . ( c ) The same movement is not picked up when the magnet dipole is perpen - dicular to the reeds . Figure 6 illustrates using a reed switch for detecting a mag - net’s movement . When its dipole is horizontal to the reeds , a magnet moving inside the pull - in sensing volume can mag - netize the reeds and turn the switch on ( Figure 6a ) . Because the reeds are magnetized when the switch is on , to turn the switch off , the magnet must be moved back until it is outside the drop - out sensing volume ( Figure 6b ) . However , the mag - net’s dipole orientation is relevant . Figure 6c illustrates the sensing volume of a reed switch for two different magnet ori - entations . If the dipole vector of the magnet is horizontal to the reeds , the movement of the magnet is unlikely to be de - tected . The external magnet’s orientation should be carefully ﬁxed for reliable sensing . Correlated State Change Through Magnetic Interactions As indicated previously [ 10 , 28 ] , the key to distributed ID is correlated state change . A pair of RFID - tagged reed switches must be turned on simultaneously , so that the correlated ( dis ) appearance of two RFID tags can indicate an interaction event . This is enabled by manipulating the magnetic intensity by controlling the polarity and relative distance of the two magnets . As shown in Figure 7 , the intensity of a magnet increases and decreases on attraction with and repulsion by another magnet , respectively . The change in magnetic ﬁeld intensity is proportional to the distance . When the two mag - nets are of the same strength , their interactions symmetrically result in the same amount of increasing and decreasing in - tensities . Such symmetric magnetic ﬁeld interactions enable a single movement to change the state of two reed switches simultaneously without any physical contact . Figure 7 . Symmetric magnetic ﬁeld interactions . ( a ) Magnet and mag - netic ﬁeld . ( b ) Magnetic ﬁeld intensiﬁed by attraction . ( c ) Magnetic ﬁeld deteriorated by repulsion . Figure 8 shows two plausible designs for a magnet - biased reed switch based on this principle . The magnet should be placed far enough from the reeds to keep the switch normally open ( off ) , as shown in Figure 8a , so that an attracting module approaching it can strengthen its magnetic ﬁeld and trigger it to switch on . The major limitation of this design is that it only works at a speciﬁc angle — this orientation constraint should be avoided . Figure 8 . Two mechanisms enabling correlated state changes . ( a ) Two normally open modules requiring alignment of their orientation . ( b ) Two normally closed magnet - biased switches that do not require align - ment of their orientation . By contrast , a normally closed ( i . e . , magnet - biased ) module design ( Figure 8b ) places a single axially magnetized mag - nets next to one of the terminals so that another module of the same design can repel it . The magnet should be placed close enough to keep the switch normally closed ( on ) . When an - other module approaches it , the change in the magnetic ﬁeld triggers it to switch off . This design does not require the two modules’ orientations to be aligned and opens both switches simultaneously in a single movement . Therefore , we selected a normally closed module for further implementation . Native Haptic Feedback When two normally closed switches approach each other , the pair of same - polar magnets generate repulsive magnetic forces between them ( Figure 9 ) . This force can be sensed during interaction when a user is holding or wearing the mod - ule ( s ) . Because this force is directly coupled with the mag - netic ﬁeld , it is the haptic feedback that indicates the state of the matching operation . Figure 9 . Haptic feedback between two modules . ( a ) Small repulsion force when the two modules are distant from each other . ( b ) Strong re - pulsion force when the two modules are closer to each other . EXPLORATIVE STUDY An explorative study was conducted to investigate the reed switch parameters and identify implementation challenges . Session 1 : Internal Validity of Reed Switch The ﬁrst experiment tested the internal validity of the reed switch for determining further measurement parameters . Apparatus . Figure 10a shows the laser - cut acrylic slider that was used for measurement . A 12 mm [ length ( L ) ] × 2 mm [ diameter ( D ) ] reed switch was ﬁxed parallel to the track at one of its ends . The reed switch was wire - connected to an AT - Mega32U4 microcontroller for observation . The magnet was placed on the slider with its dipole facing the reed switch . Measurements were conducted with four N35 cylindricdal neodymium magnets of following dimensions : 5 mm ( D ) × 2 mm [ thickness ( T ) ] , 5 mm ( D ) × 4 mm ( T ) , 8 mm ( D ) × 2 mm ( T ) , and 8 mm ( D ) × 4 mm ( T ) ( Figure 10b ) . Figure 10 . Experimental apparatus for the explorative study . ( a ) Sliders . ( b ) Magnets and mounters . Procedure . Figure 11 illustrates the data collection procedure . First , the magnet was placed in the start position , 50 mm from the center of the switch . Next , the slider was moved closer to the terminal until the switch turned on . This distance was recorded as D on . Then , the slider was moved away from the start position by 1 - mm increments until the switch turned off . This distance was recorded as D of f . Both poles of the mag - nets were tested . In total , 4 magnets × 2 poles × 20 iterations = 160 measurements were conducted . The measurement pro - cedure concluded within 1 hour . Figure 11 . Sensing distances of an example reed switch . ( a ) Illustration of the procedures and the measures . ( b ) Results . Results . Figure 11b presents the D on and D of f measured for the magnets . In general , stronger magnets had larger dis - tances , whereas the results for the two polarities were simi - lar . The distance between the biasing magnet and reed switch must be shorter than D on for the reed switch to recover its original state . The standard deviation of all repeated mea - surements was 0 , indicating the short - term reliability of the used reed switch . Session 2 : External Validity of Reed Switch The second experiment tested the external validity of the used reed switches . Apparatus . We used 20 reed switches with dimensions of 12 mm ( L ) × 2 mm ( D ) and 20 with dimensions of 5 mm ( L ) × 1 . 8 mm ( D ) for measurement . Each reed switch was ﬁxed to the end of the slider and connected to a microcontroller as in Session 1 . Measurement was performed using two 8 mm ( D ) × 2 mm ( T ) and 8 mm ( D ) × 4 mm ( T ) N35 cylindrical neodymium magnets , which were also used in Session 1 . Procedure . The data collection procedure was simpliﬁed from that of Session 1 ( Figure 12a ) . Only D on of the reed switch was recorded , only the south pole of the magnets was tested , and the repetition was reduced to 10 times because of the short - term reliability shown in the Session 1 results . In total , 40 reed switches × 2 magnets × 10 iterations = 800 measurements were conducted . The measurement procedure was ﬁnished within 4 hours . Figure 12 . D on of 40 reed switches . ( a ) Illustration of the procedures and the measures . ( b ) Results . Results . Figure 12b and 12c illustrate that D on of the reed switches varied . For the 8 mm ( D ) × 2 mm ( T ) magnet , the mean D on of the 12 mm ( L ) × 2 mm ( D ) reed switch was 12 . 35 mm [ standard deviation ( SD ) = 1 . 31 mm ] , whereas that of the 5 mm ( L ) × 1 . 8 mm ( D ) reed switch was 13 . 60 mm ( SD = 1 . 47 mm ) . For the 8 mm ( D ) × 4 mm ( T ) magnet , the mean D on of the 12 mm ( L ) × 2 mm ( D ) reed switch was 17 . 00 mm ( SD = 1 . 75 mm ) , whereas that of the 5 mm ( L ) × 1 . 8 mm ( D ) reed switch was 18 . 85 mm ( SD = 1 . 79 mm ) . This experiment highlights the necessity of calibration before use , so that the two reed switches close at the desired time . Results of Student’s t - test showed that the 5 mm ( L ) × 1 . 8 mm ( D ) reed switch had a signiﬁcantly ( p < 0 . 05 ) larger D on than did the 12 mm ( L ) × 2 mm ( D ) reed switch , indicating that the two types of reed switches differed in sensitivity . RFIMATCH MODULES Figure 13 shows the basic RFIMatch token module design . A normally closed module is placed inside a closure . The reed switch connects the two terminals of an antenna that has only one side connected to an RFID chip ( Figure 13b ) . By using this setting , the antenna circuit can be completed when the reed switch is turned on . The distance from the magnet to the side of the closure is minimized , such that users can feel a clear magnetic repulsion as haptic force feedback . Figure 13 . Basic token module design . ( a ) , ( b ) Overview . ( c ) Reed switch and RFID chip . ( d ) Assembled state . The dimensions of the basic token module design were 72 mm [ width ( W ) ] × 19 mm ( L ) × 11 mm [ height ( H ) ] , which was mainly determined by the antenna size [ 70 mm ( W ) × 17 mm ( L ) ] , reed switch size [ 12 mm ( L ) × 2 mm ( D ) ] , and distance between the biasing magnet [ 8 mm ( D ) × 4 mm ( T ) ] and the nearest reed switch terminal ( here , 15 mm ) . This im - plementation indicated that further miniaturization could be achieved by customizing a smaller antenna , using a smaller reed switch , and repurposing the distance between the bias - ing magnet and reed switch terminal . Figure 14 depicts a wearable RFIMatch ﬁngerstall . A thin , 8 mm ( D ) × 2 mm ( T ) magnet is ﬁxed under the ﬁngertip and a small 5 mm ( L ) × 1 . 8 mm ( D ) Coto RI - 80 reed switch 2 over the ﬁngernail . The 12 mm distance between the biasing mag - net and the reed switch terminal is converted into a 12 mm ( W ) × 12 mm ( H ) hollow cavity to enable it to be placed on a ﬁnger . The antenna ( same as that used in the basic token mod - ule ) is wrapped around the ﬁnger . By wearing this ﬁngerstall , users can sense clear haptic feedback through their ﬁngertip when identifying an RFIMatch module by a natural pointing gesture . Simultaneously , the system can recognize the user through the ﬁngerstall ID . The RFIMatch ﬁngerstall is easily wearable , completely batteryless , and easy to maintain . Figure 14 . Fingerstall module design . ( a ) Overview . ( b ) Assembled state . ( c ) Results . 2 https : / / www . comus - intl . com Figure 15 shows that an LED can be added between the reed switch and RFID tag . The LED connects through the reed switch to an ANDY100 3 chip , the additional antenna of which ampliﬁes energy - harvesting efﬁciency . As the magnet - biased reed switch is normally closed ( on ) , the LED can be lit within the RFID range by using energy harvested from the RFID an - tenna , providing the user with a visual feedforward that the module is working . When the user moves from one module to another , the two LEDs switch off simultaneously with the visual feedback . This visual feedback is directly coupled with the haptic feedback , thus increasing the level of embodiment in the interaction and enabling the module’s state to be per - ceived by other users . Figure 15 . RFIMatch module with an LED . ( a ) Overview . ( b ) LEDs are lit within signal coverage . ( c ) LEDs are switched off when two modules approach each other . Figure 16 shows that , in addition to contactless interaction , physical contact can be sensed by placing a nonferrite push - button on top of the magnet . Similar to that in other stud - ies [ 10 , 19 ] , the nonferrite pushbutton is connected between the antenna and chip of the RFID tag circuitry , such that the pressing and releasing of the button can be detected from the presence and absence of the tag ID , respectively . The button is connected to an additional RFID tag , with button input de - tected in parallel with the pairing mechanism . An additional LED and energy - harvesting mechanism can be added to this pushbutton’s circuitry . Figure 16 . Token with a pushbutton . ( a ) Overview . ( b ) Before and ( c ) after the button is pressed . System Implementation Hardware . AZ - 9662 UHF RFID tags were used for proto - typing because their conductive circuits are exposed on a thin plastic substrate surface , enabling easy circuit modiﬁcation . The antenna of each 70 mm ( W ) × 17 mm ( H ) UHF RFID tag was precisely disassembled from the tag using a vinyl cutter . The two antenna terminals were therefore exposed for inter - facing . For the ease of prototyping , a customized Alien Higgs 3 UHF RFID IC chip encapsulated with two terminals for easy soldering was used . One terminal of this chip was con - nected to one of the disassembled antenna terminals , whereas the other was connected to one side of the reed switch . Two reed switch types were used to connect the antenna to the RFID IC chip . An Impinj Speedway Revolution R420 UHF 3 http : / / www . farsens . com RFID reader 4 was used for sensing . The reader is connected to a maximum of four 445 mm ( W ) × 445 mm ( H ) × 40 mm ( T ) AANT925SMA circular polarized antenna , which oper - ates with a signal bandwidth of 902 MHz to 928 MHz and a signal amplitude of 12 dBi ; the signal coverage area of one antenna is approximately 6 m ( W ) × 6 m ( H ) . Sensing Algorithm . A simple yet effective sensing algorithm was used to manage state transitions . A lookup table T was established to record the presence or absence of each tag reg - istered in our system , with the total number of presence tags recorded as | T | . For each sample S of RFID readings , the system obtained a list of presence tags , with the total number of presence tags recorded as | S | . Sampling was performed at the ﬁxed frequency f = 1 / t , where t is the interval between two samplings . In each sampling , the system obtained a list of presence differences D between T and S and the length of list | D | . After K samples , when 1 ) | D | = 2 and 2 ) both | T | and | S | remained constant , the system identiﬁed the pairing ( | T | > | S | ) or unpairing ( | T | < | S | ) event in D and renewed lookup table T with sample S for the next updates . However , if either or both conditions were not satisﬁed , the update was regarded as invalid and ignored . An adaptive K , equivalent to 0 . 5 s according to the system’s real - time refresh rate , was used to prevent the user - perceived responsiveness from being compromised by the number of tags . PERFORMANCE EVALUATION A series of formal measurements were conducted to elucidate the proposed modules’ performance . Figure 17 shows the laser - cut acrylic slider used for measurement . Unlike the one used in the explorative study , this slider enabled the magnet - biased reed switch modules to be ﬁxed with three degrees of freedom . Figure 17 . Experimental apparatus of the performance evaluation . ( a ) Slider enables adjustments of ( b ) position and ( c ) orientation . Session 1 : Reliability The ﬁrst experiment was performed to determine the external validity of the applied reed switches . Apparatus . Four 12 mm ( L ) × 2 mm ( D ) reed switches reed switches tested as having D on = 17 mm in Session 2 of the ex - plorative study were used here . Because the four switches had the same D on , no calibration was required . Two 8 mm ( D ) × 4 mm ( T ) N35 cylindrical neodymium magnets — with sim - ilar magnetic ﬁeld intensities — were ﬁxed to the two parts of the slider . All the reed switches shared these two magnets to avoid variances caused by different magnet strengths . The reed switch was mounted with the magnets and the distance 4 https : / / www . impinj . com between each biasing magnet and the reed switch were set at D on − 1 = 16 mm . Both magnet - biased reed switches were wire - connected to an ATMega32U4 microcontroller for ob - servation . Procedure . One of the four modules was selected and ﬁxed to the end of the slider . The other three modules were then placed on the slider and tested in turn . First , the slider was moved to the start position , 50 mm from the center of the switch . Next , it was moved closer toward the terminal at 1 - mm increments until one switch was turned on . This distance was recorded as D 1 ( the distance when one of the switches was opened ) . Then , the slider was moved further toward the terminal at 1 - mm increments until both switches were turned on . This distance was recorded as D 2 ( the distance when both switches were opened ; Figure 18a ) . Iterations were per - formed so that all four modules were tested once with the other three ; therefore , C 42 = 6 measurements were performed in one iteration , with 20 iterations performed . In total , 6 trials × 20 iterations = 120 measurements were made in this ses - sion . The measurement procedure concluded within 6 hours . Results . Figure 18b and 18c illustrate stable results per itera - tion and for all pair combinations . In all measurements , mean ( M ) D 2 was 11 . 12 mm ( SD = 0 . 79 mm ) . The mean differ - ence between D 2 and D 1 was only 1 . 23 mm , demonstrating that the two reed switches were turned on at almost the same time . These results suggested a maximum distance or thick - ness of the materials between two modules to reliably ( e . g . , M − 2 SD for 95 % ) identify the pair when the two tags are perfectly aligned . Figure 18 . D 1 and D 2 of four sample pairs of two modules . ( a ) Illus - tration of procedures and measurements . ( b ) Results per iteration . ( c ) Results of all combinations of the two modules . Session 2 : Sensing Volume The second experiment elucidated the sensing volume when the two magnet - biased reed switch modules are not aligned perfectly . Apparatus . Two of the magnet - biased reed switch modules and the apparatus from Session 1 were again used here . Procedure . The data collection procedures were similar to those of Session 1 , but more dimensions were tested , as shown in Figure 19a . First , one magnet - biased reed switch was moved to the start position P ( y = 0 , θ = 0 ) = 50 mm . Then , the slider was moved toward the terminal by 1 - mm incre - ments until both switches were turned on , with D 1 and D 2 recorded for three trials . If a nonzero D 1 was measured more than once , the slider was moved to the next position P (cid:48) ( y (cid:48) = y + 2 , θ = 0 ) = 50 mm and D 1 and D 2 were measured again . Otherwise , if a D 1 = 0 mm was measured , another angle θ was tested from y = 0 mm . Eleven angles θ between − 90 ◦ and 90 ◦ were measured . The measurement procedure con - cluded within 4 hours . Figure 19b depicts a geometric repre - sentation of the measurements . Results . As shown in Figure 19c , when θ = 0 , the largest sensing range of y is 18 mm , and the difference between D 1 and D 2 was generally ≤ 2 mm when y ≤ 18 mm , indicating adequate tracking reliability in the range . However , the dif - ference between D 1 and D 2 increased with θ , indicating a decreasing tracking reliability . Nonetheless , D 2 was still ≥ 3 mm when y ≤ 6 mm and − 45 ◦ < θ < 45 ◦ , showing a level of resilience capable of handling input from various angles within such a distance . Figure 19 . Sensing volume of a sample pair of two modules . ( a ) Illustra - tion of procedures and measurements . ( b ) Geometric representation of measurements . ( c ) Results . Session 3 : Timespan The third experiment was conducted to elucidate the validity of magnet - biased reed switch modules over a long timespan . Apparatus . We used 10 magnet - biased reed switch modules , each consisting of a 8 mm ( D ) × 4 mm ( T ) N35 cylindri - cal neodymium magnet and a 12 mm ( L ) × 2 mm ( D ) reed switch . The D on , i of each reed switch i was tested with its paired magnet using the same procedures as in Session 2 . Because the D on , i of each reed switch were not identical , we set the distance between each switch i and its biasing magnet to D on , i − 1 mm as a means of calibration . The 10 modules were split into ﬁve groups of two , with one module in each group ﬁxed to the end of the track and the other ﬁxed to the slider ; both were wire - connected to an ATMega32U4 micro - controller for observation . Procedure . The data collection procedures were the same those in Session 1 , but D 2 measurement for each pair was conducted every 12 hours . The measurement procedure lasted 4 days . Results . Figure 20 illustrates that some D 2 of each pair slightly increased in the ﬁrst 24 hours but became stable with time , suggesting that a module’s sensitivity increased in a short term because the biasing magnet could further magne - tize the reeds and that this increase in sensitivity converges with time . This ﬁnding warrants further research . Another notable ﬁnding is the signiﬁcant between - group difference of D 2 , which did not appear in Session 1 of the performance evaluation because the modules tested there shared the same preselected magnets with similar magnetic ﬁeld intensities . Moreover , the individual sensitivity of each reed switch could differ as well , as suggested in Session 2 of the explorative study . Taken together , these results indicate that careful ex - amination of the magnets and reed switches is required for further performance optimization . Figure 20 . D 2 for ﬁve pairs of basic token modules over 96 hours . DISCUSSION Scalability A system employing normally closed modules may exhibit limited scalability because these modules generate large RFID read numbers when no interactions are occurring . To understand the scalability problem further , formal measure - ment was performed by placing unmodiﬁed UHF RFID tags on a supporting platform with one antenna connected to an RFID reader in a 75 m 2 empty room . We then collected 60 seconds of samples and calculated the mean RFID sensing refresh rate as the total number of records received divided by 60 seconds . The results showed that our RFID reader could simultaneously detect 350 tags at a mean frame rate of approximately 3 . 0 fps , with responsiveness increasing as the amount of tags decreased . For instance , the refresh rate increased to 6 . 1 and 24 . 7 fps when the number of tags was reduced to 200 and 50 , respectively . Scalability can be extended further by suppressing tag reads for irrelevant objects through a ﬁlter in the reader . For in - stance , objects can be sensed independently by readers de - ployed in each showroom . Using a higher - performance RFID reader could extend the capacity . However , a ﬁlter could re - duce system responsiveness slightly . Figure 21 . ( a ) Normally open token module design . ( b ) Normally closed token module for comparison . ( c ) Pairing mechanism of two normally - open token modules . Another plausible way to resolve the scalability problem is to revisit the use of normally open token modules ( Figure 8a and Figure 21a ) . Normally open modules do not generate RFID reads when no interaction occurs , thus making the system more scalable . Using normally open modules might be more constrained than the normally closed ones ( which are mainly proposed in this paper ; Figure 21b ) , but their near - ﬁeld sens - ing and small footprint still enable embedded and wearable applications . Moreover , the magnets force the alignment of both modules ( Figure 21c ) , thus retaining the sensing valid - ity . Normally closed and normally open modules require dif - ferent sensing algorithms because they do not trigger corre - lated state changes with each other . Application developers can use both module types concurrently , for example , when designing a multiuser board game comprising one set of nor - mally open tokens and slots and another of normally closed ﬁngerstalls and touch points . Nonetheless , the physical af - fordance of tag - embedded objects and the sensing algorithm should be carefully designed to disambiguate or prevent un - intended operations . Simultaneous Interaction Although this system enables a single tag reader to identify near - ﬁeld interaction in multiple locations , it only enables one user interaction at a time . The current system thus requires further solution to disambiguate simultaneous events . Ap - plying location - based segmentation is one plausible solution achieved by categorizing tags based on location , classifying advanced RF signal features ( e . g . , RSSI and phase angles ) , or using an additional camera [ 16 ] to localize an area of interest with potential user interactions . Based on such segmentation , the system can resolve these simultaneous events by handling them sequentially . Localization A reed switch only provides binary states and does not rec - ognize polarity , and therefore , has limited localization capa - bility . Nonetheless , a reed switch’s small footprint enables deploying multiple switches in a dense 2D sensor grid for lo - calization . Figure 22 shows our implementation of a 2 cm ( W ) × 2 cm ( H ) grid of 4 × 4 = 16 reed switches , which can achieve high - resolution localization using a binary bitmap . Such a reed switch grid can be used to capture subtle , pri - vate interactions in multiple degrees of freedom [ 4 ] . The reed switch grid can support batteryless identiﬁcation by using a magnet that biases all the switches to normally closed ones and connecting one UHF RFID tag to each of the switches . Future research needs to optimize the locations of the biasing magnet and the RFID tags to warrant the technical validity and practicality . Figure 22 . ( a ) A 4 × 4 grid of reed switches . ( b ) Operating principle of localization . Wearability The current ﬁngerstall prototype is uncomfortable to wear over extended periods of use . Wearability can be improved by incorporating fabrics or ﬂexible materials ( e . g . , silicon or NinjaFlex 5 ) in production . By using waterproof , heat - resistant materials ( e . g . , silicon [ 21 ] ) , durability can be in - creased further . Devices can be further miniaturized by em - ploying the user’s body as part of the RFID antenna , as men - tioned in PaperID [ 15 ] . The only requirement is a rigid struc - ture supporting positional alignment between the magnet and reed switch . Operation Limits The module mainly operates on the basis of radio fre - quency ( RF ) signals and the symmetrical magnetic interac - tions . Therefore , the RFIMatch module should not be em - bedded in metallic objects , which can block RF signals , or be attached to a ferrite surface , which can interfere with mag - netic interactions . The module pairs were not positionally matched . Moreover , although the validity of combining RFID tags with a near - zero - resistance reed switch has been demon - strated in practical applications , the extent to which the ad - ditional metals employed , such as the magnets and reeds , af - fect RFID signal quality remains unclear . Because this study aimed to enable novel RFID applications , this exploration warrants further investigation . RELATED WORK Optical tags , such as a 1D linear barcode or 2D QR code , are the ﬁrst choice for application in physical objects . These tags can be decoded using optical scanners and cameras — hand - held or stationary . These tags are scalable because they do not require training before use and reliable because of their error - correction mechanisms , but are obtrusive because they are usually visible and cover some of the object’s surface . To address this , researchers have sought to embed markers inside 3D - printed objects that enable cameras to see through the surface [ 14 ] or print markers with invisible ink [ 32 ] . How - ever , these methods still demonstrate line - of - sight defects in the cameras or require speciﬁc , expensive imaging devices for tracking [ 33 ] . These limitations become signiﬁcant when users interact with optical markers . Instrumenting cameras on users’ body parts , such as the ﬁngers [ 3 , 34 ] and wrist [ 12 ] , may bypass these limitations , but introduce additional main - tenance ( e . g . , charging ) and privacy concerns [ 9 ] . Several studies have used a sensor grid for tracking passive tags . SmartSkin [ 24 ] uses an electrode grid to detect 2D objects marked with conductive tape . TUIC [ 35 ] extended this idea by using a capacitive multitouch panel to resolve a QR code - like 2D pattern of contact points . SenseTable [ 22 ] uses an antenna to detect spatial patterns of LC tags . Gauss - Stones [ 17 ] uses an analog Hall - sensor grid to detect spatial patterns of magnets . Geckos [ 13 ] employs an IFSR [ 25 ] panel to resolve 2D pressure footprints formed by magnets attracted to a metal plate through the sensor . Although these methods can reliably decode tags without training , the ID space scale involves a tradeoff between the objects’ physical dimensions and the sensor resolution . The sensing areas of these methods are limited by the sensor dimensions , rendering large - scale deployment ( e . g . , an entire room ) cost ineffective . 5 https : / / ninjatek . com Some researchers have explored other tagging mechanisms , such as encoding a time sequence of audio signals or using the acoustic frequency spectrum . Acoustic Barcodes [ 8 ] en - code binary IDs in 1D structured patterns of physical notches on an object’s surface , and the machine then reads this se - quence of notches . Lamello [ 26 ] encodes IDs using the fre - quency spectrum , thus extending ID space from binary to lin - ear . Such audio - based methods are suitable for deployment at scale , but require a speciﬁc texture design on the object surface and physical contact with a tag to identify it . Passive RFID technologies are useful for developing tangible user interfaces [ 11 ] , particularly when deployed at scale , be - cause their batteryless tags are easy to maintain . The physical form and function of these tokens can be preserved because an RFID tag is reliably recognized when embedded in an ob - ject [ 20 ] or worn on the body ( e . g . , on the ﬁngernails ) [ 29 ] , thus enabling uncompromised aesthetics . A passive tag can further augment another passive tag with its identity [ 18 ] and enrich the input capability of batteryless e - ink displays [ 6 ] . Low maintenance requirements make passive RFID technolo - gies suitable for ubiquitous computing applications . A high - frequency ( HF ) RFID reader detects only one tag at a time but supports short - range ID , such as identifying a tag near the antenna . Such near - ﬁeld readers are being built into some cell phones to enable ID of an NFC tag within the range of a few centimeters , and the NFC antenna can deployed as a grid to enable spatial tracking [ 30 ] . Contactless distributed sensing can be enabled by instrumenting RFID reader to a user’s body [ 1 , 7 ] or deploying several HF RFID readers in a space to provide multiple access points for spatial user inter - action [ 18 ] . However , each reader requires a power supply , and the deployment cost is directly proportional to the num - ber of readers . A UHF reader has far - ﬁeld RF effects , identifying tags at distances of up to several meters from the reader’s antenna . However , tags inside the tracking range are always on ; in other words , near - ﬁeld ID is not primitively supported . Sev - eral studies have enabled near - ﬁeld effects , such as user input , on the tag by applying copper covers to change the signal states [ 28 ] , modifying the tag circuitry [ 15 ] , or integrating electromechanical sensors ( e . g . , switches ) into the circuitry connections between the RFID chip and antennas [ 15 , 19 , 23 ] , such that the clear presence of or a signal change in ID information can indicate an interaction event , such as touch - ing or tilting a tagged object . A reed switch also has been used for enabling and disabling an RFID tag for preventing it from being secretively read [ 27 ] and indicating its state [ 2 ] . However , such tags cannot identify the operator and thus do not turn passive tags into tag readers . Studies have also achieved distributed ID using a pair of cor - related ( dis ) appearing tags based on physical electrical con - tacts . RapID [ 28 ] uses a physical marker design that places a tag and a piece of copper foil side by side , such that stack - ing one marker on another ( or unstacking it ) creates a major signal change on both tags , enabling their correspondence to be recognized . This tag conﬁguration requires the foil and tag orientations to be aligned or multiple markers to be de - ployed symmetrically to facilitate alignment . RFIBricks [ 10 ] is a building - block system deploying symmetric 2D patterns of RFID contact switches on the top and bottom of each block , thus enabling passive blocks to recognize which block is stacked on which other block , as well as the stacking ori - entation . The contact switch is composed of magnetic con - nectors that force alignment of a pair of RFIDs through at - traction and form a low - ohm electrical connection , thus mak - ing distributed ID possible . However , one general limitation of RFIBricks is its contact - based electrical connection . The blocks must make contact to be identiﬁed , which requires the magnetic connectors to be exposed to the sensing sur - face . Both of these systems have considerable orientation constraints , and solutions necessitate increasing the physical marker size ( footprint ) . By contrast , RFIMatch modules support a single - point inter - action valid for every orientation , form near - zero resistance without requiring physical contact , and minimize the physi - cal marker footprint to the size of a ﬁngertip . These three fea - tures are highly advantageous for supporting embedded and wearable applications . CONCLUSION In this paper , we presented a technique enabling distributed , batteryless , near - ﬁeld ID by using RFID - tagged magnet - biased reed switches . Compared with other distributed ID systems , the proposed method eliminates the requirement of physical contact and strict alignment and minimizes the marker footprint , thus enabling embedded and wearable ap - plications . The module also provides native haptic feedback through magnetic repulsion force , providing a haptic land - mark for users to perceive the system state without physi - cal constraints . Additional visual feedback can be provided through an energy - harvesting module and an LED . These additional functions are also batteryless . The principles of sensing and sensor design have been introduced . A series of explorative and evaluative studies were also conducted to demonstrate the design outlines and limitations . We believe that future designers and developers can use these results in ubiquitous computing applications . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This research was supported in part by the Ministry of Sci - ence and Technology of Taiwan ( MOST107 - 2633 - E - 002 - 001 , 107 - 2634 - F - 002 - 007 ) , National Taiwan University , and Intel Labs . REFERENCES 1 . Eugen Berlin , Jun Liu , Kristof van Laerhoven , and Bernt Schiele . 2010 . Coming to Grips with the Objects We Grasp : Detecting Interactions with Efﬁcient Wrist - worn Sensors . In Proc . TEI ’10 . 57 – 64 . 2 . David Dale Brandt and Wayne H Wielebski . 2011 . RFID tag based discrete contact position indication . ( Aug . 9 2011 ) . US Patent 7 , 994 , 924 . 3 . Liwei Chan , Yi - Ling Chen , Chi - Hao Hsieh , Rong - Hao Liang , and Bing - Yu Chen . 2015 . CyclopsRing : Enabling Whole - Hand and Context - Aware Interactions Through a Fisheye Ring . In Proc . ACM UIST ’15 . 549 – 556 . 4 . Liwei Chan , Rong - Hao Liang , Ming - Chang Tsai , Kai - Yin Cheng , Chao - Huai Su , Mike Y . Chen , Wen - Huang Cheng , and Bing - Yu Chen . 2013 . FingerPad : Private and Subtle Interaction Using Fingertips . In Proceedings of the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 255 – 260 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2501988 . 2502016 5 . Jari - Pascal Curty , Michel Declercq , Catherine Dehollain , and Norbert Joehl . 2010 . Design and Optimization of Passive UHF RFID Systems ( 1st ed . ) . Springer Publishing Company , Incorporated . 6 . Christine Dierk , Tom´as Vega G´alvez , and Eric Paulos . 2017 . AlterNail : Ambient , Batteryless , Stateful , Dynamic Displays at Your Fingertips . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 6754 – 6759 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025924 7 . Assaf Feldman , Emmanuel Munguia Tapia , Sajid Sadi , Pattie Maes , and Chris Schmandt . 2005 . ReachMedia : On - the - move Interaction with Everyday Objects . In Proc . IEEE ISWC ’05 . 52 – 59 . 8 . Chris Harrison , Robert Xiao , and Scott Hudson . 2012 . Acoustic Barcodes : Passive , Durable and Inexpensive Notched Identiﬁcation Tags . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 563 – 568 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2380116 . 2380187 9 . Jason Hong . 2013 . Considering Privacy Issues in the Context of Google Glass . Commun . ACM 56 , 11 ( Nov . 2013 ) , 10 – 11 . 10 . Meng - Ju Hsieh , Rong - Hao Liang , Da - Yuan Huang , Jheng - You Ke , and Bing - Yu Chen . 2018 . RFIBricks : Interactive Building Blocks Based on RFID . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 189 , 10 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173763 11 . Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer . 1997 . Tangible Bits : Towards Seamless Interfaces Between People , Bits and Atoms . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’97 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 234 – 241 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 258549 . 258715 12 . David Kim , Otmar Hilliges , Shahram Izadi , Alex D . Butler , Jiawen Chen , Iason Oikonomidis , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Digits : Freehand 3D Interactions Anywhere Using a Wrist - worn Gloveless Sensor . In Proc . ACM UIST ’12 . 167 – 176 . 13 . Jakob Leitner and Michael Haller . 2011 . Geckos : Combining Magnets and Pressure Images to Enable New Tangible - object Design and Interaction . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2985 – 2994 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979385 14 . Dingzeyu Li , Avinash S . Nair , Shree K . Nayar , and Changxi Zheng . 2017 . AirCode : Unobtrusive Physical Tags for Digital Fabrication . In Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 449 – 460 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3126594 . 3126635 15 . Hanchuan Li , Eric Brockmeyer , Elizabeth J . Carter , Josh Fromm , Scott E . Hudson , Shwetak N . Patel , and Alanson Sample . 2016 . PaperID : A Technique for Drawing Functional Battery - Free Wireless Interfaces on Paper . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5885 – 5896 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858249 16 . Hanchuan Li , Peijin Zhang , Samer Al Moubayed , Shwetak N . Patel , and Alanson P . Sample . 2016 . ID - Match : A Hybrid Computer Vision and RFID System for Recognizing Individuals in Groups . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4933 – 4944 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858209 17 . Rong - Hao Liang , Han - Chih Kuo , Liwei Chan , De - Nian Yang , and Bing - Yu Chen . 2014 . GaussStones : Shielded Magnetic Tangibles for Multi - token Interactions on Portable Displays . In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( UIST ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 365 – 372 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2642918 . 2647384 18 . Rong - Hao Liang , Han - Chih Kuo , and Bing - Yu Chen . 2016 . GaussRFID : Reinventing Physical Toys Using Magnetic RFID Development Kits . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 4233 – 4237 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858527 19 . Nicolai Marquardt , Alex S . Taylor , Nicolas Villar , and Saul Greenberg . 2010 . Rethinking RFID : Awareness and Control for Interaction with RFID Systems . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2307 – 2316 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753674 20 . Einar Sneve Martinussen and Timo Arnall . 2009 . Designing with RFID . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction ( TEI ’09 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 343 – 350 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1517664 . 1517734 21 . Steven Nagels , Raf Ramakers , Kris Luyten , and Wim Deferme . 2018 . Silicone Devices : A Scalable DIY Approach for Fabricating Self - Contained Multi - Layered Soft Circuits Using Microﬂuidics . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 188 , 13 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173762 22 . James Patten , Hiroshi Ishii , Jim Hines , and Gian Pangaro . 2001 . Sensetable : A Wireless Object Tracking Platform for Tangible User Interfaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’01 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 253 – 260 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 365024 . 365112 23 . Matthai Philipose , Joshua R . Smith , Bing Jiang , Alexander Mamishev , Sumit Roy , and Kishore Sundara - Rajan . 2005 . Battery - free Wireless Identiﬁcation and Sensing . IEEE Pervasive Computing 4 , 1 ( Jan . 2005 ) , 37 – 45 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / MPRV . 2005 . 7 24 . Jun Rekimoto . 2002 . SmartSkin : An Infrastructure for Freehand Manipulation on Interactive Surfaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’02 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 113 – 120 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 503376 . 503397 25 . Ilya Rosenberg and Ken Perlin . 2009 . The UnMousePad : An Interpolating Multi - touch Force - sensing Input Pad . ACM Trans . Graph . 28 , 3 , Article 65 ( July 2009 ) , 9 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1531326 . 1531371 26 . Valkyrie Savage , Andrew Head , Bj ¨ orn Hartmann , Dan B . Goldman , Gautham Mysore , and Wilmot Li . 2015 . Lamello : Passive Acoustic Sensing for Tangible Input Components . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1277 – 1280 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702207 27 . Edwin Joseph Selker . 2005 . Manually operated switch for enabling and disabling an RFID card . ( March 8 2005 ) . US Patent 6 , 863 , 220 . 28 . Andrew Spielberg , Alanson Sample , Scott E . Hudson , Jennifer Mankoff , and James McCann . 2016 . RapID : A Framework for Fabricating Low - Latency Interactive Objects with RFID Tags . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5897 – 5908 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858243 29 . Katia Vega and Hugo Fuks . 2013 . Beauty Tech Nails : Interactive Technology at Your Fingertips . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 61 – 64 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2540930 . 2540961 30 . Nicolas Villar , Daniel Cletheroe , Greg Saul , Christian Holz , Tim Regan , Oscar Salandin , Misha Sra , Hui - Shyong Yeo , William Field , and Haiyan Zhang . 2018 . Project Zanzibar : A Portable and Flexible Tangible Interaction Platform . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , Article 515 , 13 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174089 31 . Mark Weiser . 1991 . The computer for the 21st century . Scientiﬁc american 265 , 3 ( 1991 ) , 94 – 104 . 32 . Karl D . D . Willis , Takaaki Shiratori , and Moshe Mahler . 2013 . HideOut : Mobile Projector Interaction with Tangible Objects and Surfaces . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 331 – 338 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2460625 . 2460682 33 . Karl D . D . Willis and Andrew D . Wilson . 2013 . InfraStructs : Fabricating Information Inside Physical Objects for Imaging in the Terahertz Region . ACM Trans . Graph . 32 , 4 , Article 138 ( July 2013 ) , 10 pages . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2461912 . 2461936 34 . Xing - Dong Yang , Tovi Grossman , Daniel Wigdor , and George Fitzmaurice . 2012 . Magic Finger : Always - available Input Through Finger Instrumentation . In Proc . ACM UIST ’12 . 147 – 156 . 35 . Neng - Hao Yu , Li - Wei Chan , Seng Yong Lau , Sung - Sheng Tsai , I - Chun Hsiao , Dian - Je Tsai , Fang - I Hsiao , Lung - Pan Cheng , Mike Chen , Polly Huang , and Yi - Ping Hung . 2011 . TUIC : Enabling Tangible Interaction on Capacitive Multi - touch Displays . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’11 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2995 – 3004 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1979386