A three - phase design for productive use of analogy Wolter H . Kaper & Martin J . Goedhart AMSTEL instituut , Universiteit van Amsterdam Netherlands 1 . Introduction The ability to think analogically is believed to be central to human cognition . It is thought to play an important role in scientific reasoning , as well as in guided learning processes ( Kurtz , Miao & Gentner , 2001 ; Baker & Lawson , 2001 ; Glynn & Takahashi , 1998 ) . Research into the use of analogies in teaching can be roughly divided in two , categories , according to who uses the analogy and for what purpose . In Glynn’s ( 1989 , 1998 ) “Teaching with analogies” model and Zeitouns ( 1984 ) “general model of analogy teaching” , analogies are used by teachers to convey new information . Approaches developed by Gentner ( 1983 ) , Gick & Holyoak ( 1983 ) , aim at a tool in the hands of the learner for drawing new conclusions about a little - known domain . We choose Gentners ( 1983 ) “structure mapping” theory as our point of departure , because the concept that we aim at , entropy , seems to need an already developed system of generalisations as a base domain . Gentners description of analogy as starting from an already developed network of propositions seems to be appropriate for this . In the original ( 1983 ) structure mapping theory , the process of analogical reasoning could not be adequately described . More recently , it was asserted that : “The process of analogical thinking can be usefully decomposed into several basic constituent processes . One or more relevant analogs stored in memory must be accessed . A familiar analog must be mapped to the target ( . . . ) . The resulting mapping allows analogical inferences to be made about the target analog ( . . . ) . These inferences need to be evaluated and possibly adapted ( … ) . ” ( Gentner & Holyoak , 1997 ) . However , this “decomposition” does not yet give us a time - sequence for use in education . As a hypothesis , we present the following three - phase scheme of the process of analogical reasoning : 1 ) Learners notice equal - named relations in their descriptions of both domains . This mapping of relations motivates the mapping of corresponding terms in these relations . 2 ) Some terms ( or relations ) in the base domain are noticed as not yet having corresponding terms in the target . Learners then create such missing terms and relations , by way of hypothesis . 3 ) The usefulness of the new terms or relations is evaluated against experience . We aim to answer the following questions with respect to this scheme : − Can these three phases be used to organise a process of analogical reasoning in a group of students , such that students can actively contribute to each of the phases ? − If yes , what are their contributions , and is an understanding of the target concept noticeable among these ? 2 . Methods An assignment sequence was prepared that aimed at an understanding of entropy , by analogy to falling water . This analogy has been developed for use in education by Herrmann ( 1989 ) . The assignment sequence was structured according to the three phases named above . Researchers expectations about each of the assignments were written down . Five first year undergraduate students of chemistry , while taking a one - trimester course on thermodynamics , were asked to participate . They answered the experimental assignment sequence , working in two small groups . Their discourse was audio taped . Analysis of these conversations aimed at describing students’ contributions to each of the phases . Differences between the expected and realised process were noted . 3 . Results Observations about the three phases , as realised in this case - study , can be summarized thus : 1 ) Recognising and constructing the analogy . Discussions showed that indeed the mapping of ‘objects’ is motivated by a noticed and formulated similarity in relations . Using the thermodynamic term of ‘system’ students decided to group together certain objects , drawing system - boundaries in a deliberate way such that the analogy was strengthened . 2 ) Creating new terms or relations in the target domain . Students were productive in suggesting known terms in the target domain as mapping - candidates for ‘mass of water’ in the base . Only after discussion with the teacher were students willing to try the assumption , suggested in the assignments , of a hitherto unknown quantity “X” in the target domain , and to predict relations based on this hypothesis . 3 ) Testing candidate inferences . When asked , students proposed a test for their prediction of the efficiency of a heat engine . They pronounced in advance that agreement between measured and predicted efficiency would show that “X exists” , or that “the usefulness of X is quite allright” . Analogical reasoning had lead these students to expect a quantity with some of the characteristics of entropy . 4 . Conclusions and implications In the teaching of thermodynamics , entropy is sometimes complained about as an abstract idea . We showed that students could connect entropy to experience . They could propose an experiment that would test their hypotheses about ‘X’ . A reasoning by analogy had made it possible to generate these hypotheses , without which the proposed experiment would not have had meaning . A direct implication is that entropy can be taught like this . Perhaps other “abstract” concepts lend themselves to being made understandable by analogical reasoning , organised in the three phases proposed here . 5 . Bibliography Baker , W . P . , & A . E . Lawson ( 2001 ) , “Complex instructional analogies and theoretical concept acquisition in college genetics” . Science Education 85 , 665 - 683 . Gentner , D . & K . J . Holyoak ( 1997 ) , “Reasoning and learning by analogy : Introduction” . American Psychologist 52 ( 1 ) , 32 - 34 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) , “Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy” . Cognitive Science 7 , 155 - 170 . Gick , M . L . & K . J . Holyoak ( 1983 ) , “Schema induction and analogical transfer” . Cognitive psychology 15 , 1 - 38 . Glynn , S . M . ( 1989 ) , in K . D . Muth ( ed . ) , Children’s comprehension of narrative and expository text : research into practice , Neward D . I . : International Reading Association , 185 - 204 . Glynn , S . M . , & T . Takahashi ( 1998 ) , “Learning from analogy - enhanced science text” . Journal of Research in Science Teaching 35 ( 10 ) , 1129 - 1149 . Herrmann , F . ( 1989 ) , Physik , Unterrichtshilfen . Teil 1 , Auflage November 1989 . Karlsruhe : Institut für Didaktik der Physik der Universität Karlsruhe , pp . 6 - 13 and 54 - 58 . Kurtz , K . J . , C . - H . Miao & D . Gentner ( 2001 ) , “Learning by analogical bootstrapping” . The Journal of the Learning Sciences 10 ( 4 ) , 417 - 446 . Zeitoun , H . H . ( 1984 ) , “Teaching scientific analogies : a proposed model” . Research in Science & Technological Education 2 ( 2 ) , 107 - 125 .