On Internal Merge Mark Steedman September 7 , 2023 Abstract The rule MOVE , used in various forms in generative grammars to capture dis - placement or discontinuous constituency , has recently been talked of as an “internal” version of MERGE , the operation of simple node - or set - formation . Internal merge “reconstructs” the displaced element in its original argument - structural position at the level of logical form via a “copy” , to which it has been identical throughout the derivation . Reducing MOVE to MERGE seems to be on the side of simplifying the theory of grammar , potentially eliminating the need for constraints on movement in order to limit overgeneration . The paper addresses the question of how internal merge should be deﬁned in formal terms . An account of discontinuity is proposed in which copies originate in the lexicon , as seems to be required by a strict interpretations of the Inclusiveness Condition of Chomsky ( 1995b ) , where they can be thought of as binders and variables in lexical logical form ( lf ) . Merger is deﬁned via a small number of type - dependent combinatory rules , which apply to strictly string - adjacent categories to monotonically project from the lexical array varieties of discontinuous dependencies that have been described in terms of various forms of movement , including “A” , “A” , “remnant” , “head” , “parallel” , “sideward” , “covert” , “roll - up” , and “late merge” , without any attendant “constraints on movement” other than those projected from lexical types . The analysis extends to a plethora of other discontinuous operations that have been proposed in ad - dition to or instead of MOVE , including AGREE , LABEL , TRANSFER , and DELETE , all of which are replaced by synchronous monotonic lf and pf merger of contiguous categories . The result is to eliminate structure - dependence and action - at - a - distance of all kinds from syntactic rules . * 1 Introduction The Inclusiveness Condition of Chomsky ( 1995b : 228 , 2001 : 2 , 2001 / 2004 : 109 ) prohibits rules of syntactic derivation from adding any information such as “indices , traces , syntactic categories or bar - levels , and so on” to that which has already been speciﬁed in the numeration or multiset of categories with which the derivation begins . This condition , and the related “No - Tampering” and “Extension” Conditions requiring monotonicity in rules , are sometimes sidelined as not - obviously - substantive constraints on no - tation , or as “ [ desiderata ] of efﬁcient processing” ( Chomsky , 2008 : 138 , 1993 ; 1995b : 189 - 91 ; Adger , 2003 : 95 - 96 ) . In the present paper , they are taken to constitute core characteristics of a radically lexicalized theory of grammar , requiring that all language - speciﬁc details of com - binatory potential , such as category , subcategorization , agreement , linearization , and the like , be speciﬁed at the level of the lexicon , and thereafter be only either “checked” or “projected” unchanged onto derived categories by universal , language - independent , type - dependent rules . The prevalence in all natural languages of discontinuous dependencies like the following , * Earlier versions of this paper circulated under the title “Projecting Dependency” . Thanks to David Adger , Cem Boz¸sahin , Caroline Heycock , Julia Hockenmaier , Tim Hunter , Polly Jacobson , Bob Levine , Haixia Man , Elise Newman , Geoff Pullum , Miloš Stanojevi´c , John Torr , Rob Truswell , Bonnie Webber , and the considerate reviewers for LI . The project SEMANTAX has received funding from the European Research Council ( ERC ) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme ( grant agreement No . 742137 ) . where elements that belong together in the meaning representation are separated from each other in the sentence , seems to present a major challenge to this reasonable assumption : ( 1 ) a . Mary i was ﬁred i . b . Mary i seems to sleep i . c . Mary i I think I like i . Discontinuities of this kind were originally analysed by Chomsky in terms of rules of move - ment , relating elements across potentially unbounded structures . Modern Minimalist versions of the theory distinguish two fundamental derivational operations : MERGE ( sometimes dis - tinguished as “external” merge ) , the simple combination of constituents to form a set ; and MOVE ( sometimes distinguished as “internal” merge ) , relating discontiguous elements realized as “copies” . Copies are held to be identical throughout the derivation ( Epstein et al . , 1998 ; Chomsky , 2001 / 2004 , 2019 ; Adger , 2003 ; Epstein and Seely , 2006 ) , such that merger with one simultaneously instantiates the other . More recently , this analysis has been further complicated by the introduction of ( at least ) the following asynchronous operations in addition to , or as replacements for , external / internal MERGE ( Chomsky , 2000 , 2008 ) : long - distance AGREE ( sometimes as a mechanism for internal merge ) ; LABEL ( in place of X - bar theory ) ; TRANSFER of intermediate representations to PF and LF “interfaces” ; DELETE ( possibly as a component of transfer ) ; and a criterion for distinguishing copies arising from movement from genuine repetition , possibly via the NUMERATION , or multi - set of lexical items as input to syntactic derivation ( Collins and Groat , 2018 ) . This paper inquires how internal merger can be formally uniﬁed with the standard external variety without making discontinuity an operation of the theory itself . Displacement is taken to be the phenomenon to be explained , using as little expressive power as possible beyond that of the context - free grammars that seem to be all that is needed to cover ﬁrst - order logical forms and programming language syntax . There have been other proposals for eliminating movement , such as : Generalized / Head - driven Phrase Structure Grammar ( GPSG / HPSG ) - style trace - feature passing ( Gazdar , 1981 ; Gazdar et al . , 1985 ; Neeleman and van de Koot , 2010 ) ; Categorial Grammar ( CG ) - style nonstan - dard constituency ( Ades and Steedman , 1982 ; Williams , 2003 ) ; Lexical - Functional Grammar ( LFG ) - style lexicalization of locality ( Bresnan , 1982 ; Borer , 1984 ; Manzini , 1992 ; Brody , 1995 ) ; HPSG / LFG - style structural uniﬁcation ( Kay , 1984 ; Pollard and Sag , 1994 ; Bresnan , 2001 ) ; var - ious base - generative anaphoric proposals ( Koster , 1978 ; Adger and Ramchand , 2005 ; Jacobson , 2014 ) ; or mediation via various Transition Network Grammar ( TNG ) - style HOLD registers , MOVE - boxes , or the numeration itself ( Woods , 1970 ; Fong , 2005 ; Stroik , 2009 ) . However , in practice such mechanisms have tended either to be so restrictive as to cause the grammar to collapse to the descriptively - inadequate context - free class ( CFG , as GPSG was avowedly , and as Rogers ( 1998 : 185 ) showed to be the case for a version of Government - Binding theory limited by Rizzi’s 1990 Relativized Minimality and Manzini’s lexicon , and as Kobele , 2010 shows for a related version of Minimalism ) , or to make the theory overly expressive ( Peters and Ritchie , 1973 ; Gärtner and Michaelis , 2007 ) . These alternatives typically required stipula - tion of ad hoc substantive constraints to limit over - generalization , such as “shortest move” or “path containment” conditions ( Rosenbaum , 1967 ; Pesetsky , 1982 ; Kayne , 1983 ; Rizzi , 1990 ; Chomsky , 1995b ) , many of which had to be replicated in the lexicon ( Marantz , 1997 ) . Attempts in the other direction to augment context - free theories such as GPSG or TNG to cover mul - 2 tiple discontinuities showed a similar tendency to explode expressive power and compromise explanatory adequacy . If the inclusiveness and no - tampering conditions are core principles , then the relation be - tween the pairs of structural positions corresponding to the indices in ( 1a - c ) must be established before the derivation begins , in the lexicon or the numeration derived from it . Under the present proposal , this relation is expressed at the level of lexical logical form as a binder λα and its vari - able α . As the copy theory of movement requires ( Epstein and Seely , 2006 : 16 , n . 2 , 32 ; Chomsky , 2007 : 10 ) , the two α s are literally identical : whatever value λα combines with is the value of ev - ery occurrence of α . In that sense , “Reconstruction” of α at the source ( s ) of movement follows immediately ( von Stechow , 1991 : 133 ) . In the same sense , internal merge is not distinct from external merge , since external merge with a lexicalized element Mary in ( 1a - c ) will identically instantiate the copy with which it has been lexically λ - entangled from the start . The present paper will show that the effects of movement / internal merge can be derived from a lexicalized theory of grammar of low “near - context - free” expressive power , in which categories are deﬁned syntactically and semantically as functions and / or arguments , and all discontinuities are base - generated in the logical forms associated with lexical items such as raising verbs and wh - words , using the same mechanism that earlier theories have used to treat local selection . The syntactic operations that then project lexical dependencies onto sentences are limited to strictly adjacent merger according to pure functional operations such as functional application and functional composition , without attendant constraints other than those originating in lexical speciﬁcation . Such a theory constitutes an “optimal derivational system” ( Epstein and Seely : 178 - 179 , n . 6 ) , in the sense that it is formally impossible to condition such rules on derivations or structural representations , including logical form ( lf , which in this paper is distinguished from other notions of Logical Form ( LF ) by the use of lower case ) . The remainder of the paper examines a sequence of core examples of major discontinuous constructions that have proved challenging to the standard theories of movement , numerous constraints upon which are shown to be redundant under the present approach . Otherwise , the aims of the paper are severely limited . Nothing is said about such constructions as Extraposition , Sluicing , VP - Ellipsis , and SVO Gapping , which the paper follows Emonds ( 1979 ) , Ginzburg and Sag ( 2000 ) , and Hardt and Romero ( 2004 ) , among others , in regarding as mediated at least in part by discourse anaphora and / or co - reference . For the same reason , while section 6 . 2 touches on the consequences of copy - based reconstruction for binding theory , rather little will be said otherwise about the mechanism by which pronouns actually obtain their values . The paper begins in section 2 by deﬁning a categorial “Bare Phrase Structural” notation for linguistic categories and the universal rules of contiguous merger by which they combine , includ - ing function composition , which are shown to be non - context - free . Section 3 then analyses Rais - ing and There - insertion in terms of application and function composition merger alone , without the need for derivational constraints such as the Θ - criterion . Section 4 concerns “scrambling” and word - order variation in Germanic , where the effects of Wallenberg’s 2009 constraints are similarly predicted , and introduces the categorial realization of Case as morpho - lexical “type - raising” , which gives arguments the lexical category of functions over the lexical frames that subcategorize for them , thereby deﬁning the domain of scrambling . Section 5 analyses Co - ordination , showing the Coordinate Structure Constraint and its ramiﬁcations to be predicted . Section 6 analyses Wh - extraction , addressing certain “Late Merge” constructions , together with 3 the prediction of Island effects for adjuncts ﬁrst noted by Cattell ( 1976 ) , including a brief discus - sion of some cases of apparently cyclic wh - movement in Celtic languages that might be thought to controvert the present proposal . Section 7 then considers some exceptional asymmetries be - tween leftward and rightward extraction , including the Fixed Subject Effect and its exceptions ( Bresnan , 1972 ) , and the Right Edge Restriction ( Wilder , 1999 ) , The concluding section 8 dis - cusses the combinatory theory more generally , including the trade - off between the elimination of discontinuity and derivation - dependence in rules , and the extended deﬁnition of derivational con - stituency engendered by so doing . Under this deﬁnition , all syntactic discontinuous dependency is reduced to the merger of a constituent constituting a second - order function with a contigu - ous constituent constituting a ﬁrst - order function or property . The conclusion rejects the need for action - at - a - distance and structure - dependence in rules of grammar . Once the Inclusiveness Condition is taken seriously , lexicalization and locality of selection is all that is needed . 2 Adjacent Type - dependent Merger and the Inclusiveness Condition The following assumptions are held in what follows to be constitutive of the theory of grammar : ( 2 ) The Categorial Assumption : Linguistic Categories are deﬁned syntactically and seman - tically as FUNCTIONS and / or ARGUMENTS ; ( 3 ) The Adjacency Assumption : Rules are pure FUNCTIONAL binary operations , limited to APPLICATION , COMPOSITION , and SUBSTITUTION , applying to strictly adjacent , phonologically - realized categories , which synchronously and monotonically compose logical forms ( lf ) and concatenate phonological forms ( pf ) . It will become apparent that the Minimalist conditions of Inclusiveness , Extension , and No - tampering follow immediately from these two assumptions , as formal universals , or theorems characterizing the Computation , as opposed to substantive constraints . 1 2 . 1 Categories , Linearization , and Local Agreement If we think of predicates ( such as works ) as functions , and their subjects and complements ( such as as Egon ) as arguments , then the simplest case of merger amounts to application of a function to an argument to yield a result ( such as Egon works ) . We might provisionally represent such a derivation as follows , using the notation of Categorial Grammar ( CG , Ajdukiewicz , 1935 ; Bar - Hillel , 1953 ; Lambek , 1958 ; Ades and Steedman , 1982 ; Steedman , 1987 ) , where works has the type S \ NP of an intransitive verb or function from NPs to its left into sentences S , underline indicates merger , and < identiﬁes the merger as backward application , or contiguous merger with leftward linearization : 2 ( 4 ) Egon works NP 3s S \ NP 3s < S Subscripts 3s and 3 informally represent bundles of agreement features for attributes including person and number , with the latter bundle underspeciﬁed for number , meaning that it is compat - 1 Substitution rules ( Szabolcsi , 1983 / 1989 ; Steedman , 1987 , 1996 ) will be ignored in this paper . 2 We adopt the “result leftmost” convention of Ajdukiewicz for categorial slashes , rather than the “result topmost” convention of Bar - Hillel and Lambek used in “Type - Logical” CG ( Moortgat , 1988 ; Morrill , 2011 ) . 4 ible with any value on that attribute . Such bundles can merge or “unify” ( Shieber , 1986 ; Adger , 2010 ) just in case the values on all attributes are equal , or one is less speciﬁed than the other . In the latter case , the merged value on that attribute will be the more speciﬁed one . 3 Similarly , we have the following derivation , in which “ > ” : indicates forward application or rightward - linearized contiguous merge , and “ < ” the backward / leftward version ( agr is an unspeciﬁed agreement feature compatible with any value ) : 4 ( 5 ) A woman saw a cat NP 3s / N 3s N 3s ( S \ NP agr ) / NP NP 3s / N 3s N 3s > > NP 3s NP 3s > S \ NP agr < S CG lexical categories like that of works , S \ NP 3s , and saw , ( S \ NP agr ) / NP , are of course com - parable to lexical categories in “Bare Phrase Structural” Minimalism ( Chomsky , 1995a , 2001 ) , such as the following , in which “ u N” ( for “uninterpretable N - feature” ) takes the place of both “ / NP ” and “ \ NP ” ( Adger , 2003 : 86 ) : ( 6 ) work [ V , u N ] ( “yields V ; selects N” ) ( 7 ) see [ V , u N , u N ] ( “yields V ; selects two N” ) “Uninterpretable” features such as u N must be “checked” against or “canceled” by matching “interpretable” features such as N , carried by their arguments , a process which corresponds to matching of / NP and NP under function application in derivations ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) . Minimalism can therefore be seen as a form of Categorial Grammar , with the addition of derivation - dependence and discontinuity in rules such as MOVE / INTERNAL MERGE ( Berwick and Epstein , 1995a , b ; Adger , 2003 , 2010 , 2013 ; Smith and Cormack , 2015 ) , both of which are absent from the present theory . An important further difference is that CG categories specify linearization order in language - speciﬁc lexical categories via the slash notation . 5 Crucially for the derivation below of Inclusiveness as a theorem , the direction of speciﬁcation of an argument / Y or \ Y is formally a feature - value of Y comparable to agreement 3 s or agr , grounded via variables over string - position of the functor X / Y ( X \ Y ) , requiring that its right ( left ) edge equals the left ( right ) edge of its argument Y . 6 3 It might seem more standard in Minimalist terms to write these categories as DP and TP \ DP , and the result of their merger as TP , deriving TP \ DP from a tensed head T and the stem work : = vP \ DP . However , it will become apparent that much of the motivation for the T / D notation is obviated by the form of lexicalism and Bare Phrase Structure ( Chomsky , 1995b , a ) that is implicit in Categorial Grammars . See also Bruening ( 2009 , 2020 ) ; Chomsky ( 2019 ) and Pullum and Miller ( 2022 ) on the DP hypothesis . 4 It will become apparent later that NP arguments like subjects ( and therefore , determiners ) are morpho - lexically type - raised , to become functions over predicates like verbs , and that the merger in ( 4 ) is actually forward combination of Egon with works to yield the same syntactic and semantic result . For the moment we can ignore this complication . 5 The categorially - inﬂuenced Minimalist Grammars of Harkema ( 2001 ) and Torr ( 2019 ) ; Torr et al . ( 2019 ) also lex - icalize linearity . Linearization of categories and rules is a source of strength in the present theory , for example in predicting the dependency of island effects and deletion under coordination on basic word - order ( Ross , 1967 , 1970 ) . 6 See Steedman , 1991b , 2000b : 213 - 224 for the uniﬁcation - based details , which we pass over here . It is important to be clear that this is a quite different interpretation of the slash notation to that of GPSG / HPSG , deﬁning directional selection , rather than extraction per se ( Gazdar , 1981 : 159 ) . 5 Derivations like ( 4 ) and ( 5 ) also build logical forms in synchronous lock - step , as in the following version of ( 4 ) , in which a logical form is associated with each lexical category via the separator “ : ” . Concatenation f a in lf denotes application of f to a , and “associates to the left” , so that f ab is equivalent to ( f a ) b , while the variable - binding λ operator is used to merge values like egon for the NPs with the argument - structure within the logical form of the verb , via variables like y : 7 ( 8 ) Egon works NP 3s : egon S \ NP 3s : λ y . pres ( worky ) < S : pres ( workegon ) Similarly : 8 ( 9 ) A woman saw a cat NP 3s / N 3s : a N 3s : woman ( S \ NP agr ) / NP : λ x λ y . past ( seexy ) NP 3s / N 3s : a N 3s : cat > > NP 3s : awoman NP 3s : acat > S \ NP 3s : λ y . past ( see ( acat ) y ) < S : past ( see ( acat ) ( awoman ) ) In the above English examples , λ - binding happens to be redundant , since the order of com - mand that seems to be universally required in predicate - argument structure at lf by the binding theory allows us to assume it is respected ( as the lexical substitution test implies ) in the order of lexical syntactic SVO selection . However , such is not the case in other languages . For example , in VSO languages such as Welsh , λ - binding wraps the ﬁrst ( subject ) argument around the sec - ond ( object ) argument at the level of lexical lf , so that , as in English and by assumption every other language , the former commands the latter in the predicate - argument structure . 9 ( 10 ) Gwelodd dynes gath ( S / NP ) / NP : λ y λ x . past ( seexy ) NP : awoman NP : acat > S / NP : λ x . past ( seex ( awoman ) ) > S : past ( see ( acat ) ( awoman ) ) As far as the syntactic derivations go , apart from the inclusion of lexical linearization , and the consequent elimination of head - movement from syntactic derivation , the above fragments of English and Welsh resemble a Minimalist analysis conﬁned to External Merger alone . Any dis - continuity of vP - internal predicate - argument structural dominance relations is projected from lf via the lexical category . The external merger case of Chomsky’s “labeling algorithm” ( 2008 : 145 ) 7 Again , the verb could be written in more standard Minimalist terms as TP \ DP : λ y . pres ( worky ) , derived via present tense morphology from work , vP : work . Lest it be thought that we are smuggling in movement under cover of λ - abstraction , it should be noted that the use of λ - bound variables is in every case lexically deﬁned and bounded , and non - essential : the tensed form could , at some cost to perspicuity , be written without it using a purely local composition operator ◦ ( Steedman , 1985 / 1988 ; Jacobson , 1990 ) , as TP \ DP : pres ◦ work , or using the combinatory calculus of Curry and Feys ( 1958 ) , as : TP \ DP : B preswork . 8 All logical forms are ruthlessly simpliﬁed for ease of reading . See Steedman , 2012 and section 4 on semantics of quantiﬁer determiners like a . Elementary syntactic types like S and NP are also proxies for a ﬁner - grain feature - based categorial type - system , such as that of Beavers ( 2004 ) . 9 This switch in subject - object dominance relations between derivation and predicate - argument structure has the effect of the syntactic WRAP operator used in other categorial frameworks ( Bach , 1979 , 1980 ; Jacobson , 1999 ) , which in present terms is an exclusively lexical process . 6 follows from that fact . Agreement is reduced to simple matching of ( possibly underspeciﬁed ) features like 3 s , with functors like works , S \ NP 3s , acting as “probes” , where \ NP 3s , and the corresponding λ - bound variable y at lf again correspond to “uninterpretable” features . A con - tiguous NP and its lf value then act as a “goal” , carrying “interpretable” features such as 3s and egon ( Adger , 2003 ; Radford , 2004 ) . “Checking” then reduces to matching of feature - value pairs , either or both of which may be underspeciﬁed with respect to the other ( Adger , 2010 ; Smith and Cormack , 2015 ) . “Spell - out” of such constituents is immediate , since phonology and logical form are projected in lock - step from the lexical array by the derivation , constituting the “output levels” for the articulatory and inferential systems without further structural manipulation being necessary , or even possible under the adjacency assumption ( 3 ) ( cf . Brody , 2002 : 22 , Epstein and Seely , 2006 : 12 ; Stroik , 2009 : 14 ) . 10 A further important distinction between standard Minimalism and the present theory is that logical form is the only representational level it includes . The derivation that delivers the lf / pf pair is non - representational , in the sense that no rule can be conditioned on derivation structure , and syntactic derivation itself is entirely blind to lf representation . All rules of merger are con - ditioned only on categorial type , rather than derivation structure or lf . Phenomena that have in standard Minimalist approaches been held to be dependent on derivation structure , such as Su - periority , Island effects , and Late Merge , are captured below in lexical speciﬁcational locality , projected onto derived categories by such rules , considered next . 2 . 2 Merge The only rules required for the derivations in the preceding section are the two simplest kinds of directionally - speciﬁed contiguous merge , which can be written as follows : ( 11 ) Contiguous Merge I : The Application Rules : a . Forward Application X / (cid:63) Y : f Y : a ⇒ X : f a ( > ) b . Backward Application Y : a X \ (cid:63) Y : f ⇒ X : f a ( < ) X and Y are variables over categories like S , NP 3s , and S \ NP 3s , while f and a are variables over the corresponding logical forms . It will be convenient to refer to the functor X / Y or X \ Y that determines the result - type X in such rules as the “governing category” and Y ( etc . ) as the “dependent category” . The type (cid:63) on the slashes in these rules means that only categories whose own slash - type is compatible can combine by this rule . ( This detail can be ignored for now , since the unadorned slashes we have seen so far are compatible with any rule , including these . ) 11 The above rules reﬂect the following two generalization ( Steedman , 1987 ) , which hold of all versions of merger proposed here : ( 12 ) The Principle of Consistency : All rules linearize their inputs consistently with the direc - tionality speciﬁed in the governing category . 10 The logical forms shown in ( 9 ) and ( 10 ) for English and Welsh are of course both simpliﬁed and language - speciﬁc . That is , elements like past should be thought of as themselves corresponding to more complex substructures of logical expressions of the general kind discussed by Cinque ( 2013 ) as “cartographic” , which should be deﬁned via lexical logical form , without mediation by movement or devices like unﬁlled heads ( Brody , 1995 ) . 11 Typed categorial slashes were ﬁrst proposed by Hepple ( 1990 ) . The particular type - system used here is due to Baldridge ( 2002 ) . 7 ( 13 ) The Principle of Inheritance : Any category that appears in an input that also appears in the output of a rule must be feature - identical in both , including its slash - features , if any . Rules like the following are thereby disallowed , as indicated by the non - reduction symbol (cid:54)⇒ : ( 14 ) a . Y : a X / Y : f (cid:54)⇒ X : f a b . ( X / Y ) / W : f Y : a (cid:54)⇒ X / W : λ w . f wa c . X i / Y : f Y : a (cid:54)⇒ X j : f a Consistency and Inheritance are corollaries of the Categorial and Adjacency assumptions ( 2 ) : and ( 3 ) , which also entail Inclusiveness , Extension , and No - tampering Conditions . It is natural to ask if there are any other rules for combining categories which are similarly transparent with respect to syntax and semantics . The simplest thing that you can do with a function , other than applying it , is to compose it with another function , to yield a new function . In the linearized notation used above for application - merge , rules of composition - merge can be written as follows : 12 ( 15 ) Contiguous Merge IIa : The Composition Rules ( B ) : a . Forward Composition : X / (cid:5) Y : f Y / Z : g ⇒ X / Z : λ z . f ( gz ) ( > B ) b . Backward Composition : Y \ Z : g X \ (cid:5) Y : f ⇒ X \ Z : λ z . f ( gz ) ( < B ) c . Forward Crossing Composition : X / × Y : f Y \ Z : g ⇒ X \ Z : λ z . f ( gz ) ( > B × ) d . Backward Crossing Composition : Y / Z : g X \ × Y : f ⇒ X / Z : λ z . f ( gz ) ( < B × ) The Principles of Consistency ( 12 ) and Inheritance ( 13 ) apply to the composition rules ( 15 ) : rules like the following are thereby disallowed : ( 16 ) X / (cid:5) Y : f Y / Z : g (cid:54)⇒ X \ Z : λ z . f ( gz ) ( ∗ > B ) The composition rules ( 15 ) resemble function application merge ( 11 ) in having the effect of checking or canceling Y . Like application , they are syntactically transparent to semantic functional composition at the level of their uniform logical form , λ z . f ( gz ) . The rules have the effect of abstracting over z via contiguous merger , projecting the binding of z from g over f . 13 The (cid:5) and × slash - types on the governing functor X / Y or X \ Y in the composition rules ( 15 ) , like the (cid:63) slash - type in the application rules ( 11 ) , mean that only categories whose own slash is lexically speciﬁed as compatible can compose with dependent functor categories Y / Z or Y \ Z via these rules . As in the case of application merger , we can ignore these details for now , since the plain slash categories seen so far are deﬁned as combining by any rule , including these as well as application : However , they will become important when we need to distinguish possibilities for scrambling among languages like English and German . When they apply in syntactic derivations , rules of function composition have the effect of generalizing the standard linguistic notion of constituency ( Wells , 1947 ) . For example , they 12 The index B reﬂects the combinatory notation for function composition of Curry and Feys ( 1958 ) , which could at some cost in readability be used in the logical forms , replacing λ z . f ( gz ) by variable - free B f g ( cf . note 7 ) . 13 Again , the use of λ binding in the lf notation is non - essential : the abstractions in ( 15 ) could be deﬁned in variable - free terms using a purely local composition operator ◦ or Curry’s B at lf ( cf . nn . 7 , 12 . ) 8 allow an auxiliary ( S \ NP ) / VP to compose with a transitive verb VP / NP in advance of combi - nation of the latter with an object to form a constituent of the same type as a transitive verb : 14 ( 17 ) will eat ( S \ NP ) / VP : λ p λ y . will ( py ) VP / NP : λ x λ y . eatxy > B ( S \ NP ) / NP : λ x λ y . will ( eatxy ) We will later justify more fully the non - standard view of constituency that is implicit in the above , merely noting here that , on the assumption ( to be elaborated below ) that coordination is an operation that applies to constituents of like - type , the fact that will eat can coordinate with / be substituted by lexical transitives in sentences like the following is provisional evidence for the soundness of the rule illustrated above : 15 ( 18 ) a . I cooked i and will eat i a ﬁsh i . b . a ﬁsh that i I cooked i and will eat i The combinatory Principles of Consistency , and Inheritance , together with the Inclusiveness , Extension , and No - tampering Minimalist Conditions should not be confused with substantive constraints , such as the Minimalist Shortest Move Condition . The latter is part of the deﬁnition of the Minimalist theory of grammar , whose inclusion is necessary to prevent overgeneralization by rules like MOVE , and to allow learnability by children . By contrast , the former are all formal properties constitutive of the Computation , which follow as theorems from the assumptions ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) limiting merger to pure functional operations including APPLICATION and COMPOSI - TION , and from the grounding of directional slash features in string position of section 2 . 1 , and which characterize the learning mechanism itself . They can collectively be summarized informally in the following generalization ( Steedman , 2000b ) : ( 19 ) The Combinatory Projection Principle ( CPP ) : Combinatory rules apply to contiguous categories ( “Adjacency” ) , must respect the linearization speciﬁed in the slash direction for the governing category ( “Consistency” ) , and must project unchanged onto the result - ing category any further categorial , selectional , and linearization information speciﬁed in either the governing or the dependent category ( “Inheritance” ) . If we can compose a governing X | Y into a unary dependent category Y | Z ( where “ | ” schema - tizes over “ / ” and “ \ ” ) , then since the lexicon includes binarized versions of multi - valent cate - gories like transitive and ditransitive verbs , it is reasonable to also allow composition into depen - dent functors of the form ( Y | Z ) | W , again “canceling” Y to yield a result of the form ( X | Z ) | W , where “ | ” is the same in the input and result . The full set of second - level composition rules is the following , entirely parallel to ( 15 ) : 16 14 In Steedman ( 2002 , 2018 ) , I suggested that the possibility of recruiting composition and substitution combinators to language may have arisen from a primordial use in planning , as the operator for sequencing actions , deﬁned as functions from situations to situations . 15 Coordination is of course one of the traditional tests for constituency . We will return to this point in the Conclusion . 16 In Steedman , 2014a , I suggested that the possibility of recruiting level - 2 composition rules to language was due to its prior development for planning with actions involving tools or other agents . 9 ( 20 ) Contiguous Merge IIb : The Second - level Composition Rules ( B 2 ) : a . Forward Level - 2 Composition : X / (cid:5) Y : f ( Y / Z ) | W : g ⇒ ( X / Z ) | W : λ w λ z . f ( gwz ) ( > B 2 ) b . Backward Level - 2 Composition : ( Y \ Z ) | W : g X \ (cid:5) Y : f ⇒ ( X \ Z ) | W : λ w λ z . f ( gwz ) ( < B 2 ) c . Forward Crossing Level - 2 Composition : X / × Y : f ( Y \ Z ) | W : g ⇒ ( X \ Z ) | W : λ w λ z . f ( gwz ) ( > B 2 × ) d . Backward Crossing Level - 2 Composition : ( Y / Z ) | W : g X \ × Y : f ⇒ ( X / Z ) | W : λ w λ z . f ( gwz ) ( < B 2 × ) These rules conform to the CPP principles of Adjacency , Consistency , and Inheritance , so that alternatives like the following are universally disallowed , similarly to ( 16 ) : ( 21 ) X / Y : f ( Y / Z ) / W : g (cid:54)⇒ ( X / Z ) \ W : λ w λ z . f ( gwz ) ( ∗ > B 2 ) In syntactic derivations , such rules allow compositions like the following ( 22 ) may sell ( S \ NP ) / VP : λ p λ y . may ( py ) ( VP / PP ) / NP : λ w λ x λ y . sellxwy > B 2 ( ( S \ NP ) / PP ) / NP : λ w λ x λ y . may ( sellxwy ) Such level - 2 composition mergers will be seen later to play the same role as level 1 composi - tion ( 18 ) in coordinate sentences and relative clauses like the following : ( 23 ) a . I [ may sell ] ( ( S \ NP ) / PP ) / NP and [ might give ] ( ( S \ NP ) / PP ) / NP my big pink Cadillac to my very best friend . b . A car that I [ may sell ] ( ( S \ NP ) / PP ) / NP and [ might give ] ( ( S \ NP ) / PP ) / NP to my best friend Since X in the governing category X | Y and the result ( X | Z ) | W of the second - level combina - tory rules ( 20 ) can , as in all combinatory rules , match a function of n arguments ( such as S \ NP in ( 22 ) ) , so that X | Y itself has valency n + 1 , and since the result ( X | Z ) | W has one more argu - ment than X | Y , making its valency n + 2 , and since that result can act as the governing category in a further application of level - 2 composition , it should be obvious that repeated application of the second - level rules ( 20 ) can “grow” categories of unboundedly high valency . The set of non - terminal category types is therefore unbounded . Since it is a deﬁning property of context - free grammars that the set of non - terminals is bounded , the theory of grammar we are dealing with is clearly non - context - free . 17 A further class of combinatory rules corresponding to linearized versions of the “substitu - tion” combinator S was originally proposed by Szabolcsi ( 1983 ) , and is implicated in the analysis of parasitic gaps ( Szabolcsi , 1983 / 1992 ; Steedman , 1987 , 1996 ) . These rules can be ignored for present purposes , but also constitute cases of contiguous merger , subject to the CPP conditions of Adjacency , Consistency , and Inheritance . This completes the syntactic component of the grammar . No other rules are allowed . In these rules , agreement and “transfer” to the articulatory and inference systems , or “spell - out” , are en - 17 We exemplify this power in section 4 . 2 below . The class of languages it allows is among the least expressive non - context - free class that is known—not merely “mildly context sensitive” or LCFRS ( Joshi , 1985 ) , but “near - context - free” , like Tree Adjoining Grammar ( TAG ) , to which it is only weakly equivalent ( Weir , 1988 ; Joshi et al . , 1991 ; Rogers , 2003 ; Koller and Kuhlmann , 2009 ; Stanojevi´c and Steedman , 2021 ) , rather than strongly equivalent in the original sense of that term ( Miller , 1999 ) . ( The latter is not the same as that in Schiffer and Maletti , 2021 ) . 10 tirely synchronous with merger . Despite the involvement of three distinct varieties of contiguous merger—application , composition , and the substitution variety omitted here , such an architec - ture is therefore potentially simpler than is standard in Minimalist approaches ( Jackendoff , 1997 ; Chomsky , 2001 / 2004 ) . It remains to be shown how this simplicity can be maintained in the face of the major constructions that engender discontinuous dependency , which are considered in the remainder of this paper . 3 Raising and Composition This section analyses raising and the related there - insertion construction as the ﬁrst example of the generalization argued for here , namely that all instances of long - range dependency are mediated by composition of the same categories that establish local dependencies , using only the strictly contiguous combinatory rules of merger that were presented in the preceding section . In particular , there - insertion speciﬁcally requires a rule of composition merger ( 15a ) , and offers support a priori for the unorthodox notion of constituency engendered by the composition rules . The varieties of discontinuity between predicates and their arguments that are bounded to a single tensed domain , such as the following are traditionally regarded under generative ap - proaches as falling into two groups ( Radford , 2004 : 268 - 274 ) , exempliﬁed by the following : ( 24 ) a . John seems to sleep . b . John tries to sleep . The ﬁrst , exempliﬁed by ( 24a ) , consists of the “raising” constructions , which all transformational theories have described in terms of movement of subjects like John from inﬁnitival predicates like to sleep to the speciﬁer position of Tense , which in present lexicalized terms is simply the subject argument of seemed . The second , exempliﬁed by ( 24b ) , consists of the “ ( obligatory ) control” constructions , which most recent generative accounts have viewed as mediated by an anaphoric PRO subject of non - ﬁnite predicates like “ ( to ) sleep” ( Chomsky , 1981 ; Chierchia , 1984 ; Landau , 2001 , 2015 , 2021 ) , obligatorily bound to matrix arguments such as John by a variety of mechanisms . 18 Both constructions can be analyzed by extending the set of lexical types considered so far to include certain second - order functions taking functions—more exactly , VP predicates or prop - erties of semantic type e → t as their arguments ( Chierchia , 1984 ) . Here we will only consider control insofar as it contrasts with raising . In present terms , raising and control must be expressed lexically , as in the following exem - plars , where the syntactic type XP schematizes over predicative PP , AP , NP , VP ing , VP pss ( exclud - ing VP , VP to , VP en ) —roughly , the attributive NP modiﬁers that appear elsewhere as NP \ NP : 19 18 Others , including Postal ( 1974 ) , Lasnik ( 2001 ) , Hornstein ( 1999 , 2001 ) , Boeckx et al . ( 2010 ) , and Johnson ( 2020 ) , have attributed the relation , like raising , to movement . 19 Although we largely ignore control in the examples below , it may also be helpful in connection with there - insertion to note that passivization has the effect of mapping agentive raising - to - object and object - control verbs respectively into raising - to - subject and subject - control categories : ( i ) Passive of Raising - to - object : ( be ) believed : = VP psv / VP to : λ p λ x . believe ( px ) one Passive of Object - control : ( be ) persuaded : = VP psv , + a / VP to : λ p λ x . persuade ( px ) xone 11 ( 25 ) Non - raising : think : = VP + a / S : λ s λ y . thinksy Raising - to - subject / Copula : be : = VP / XP : λ p λ y . py seem : = VP / VP to : λ p λ y . seem ( py ) likely : = AP / VP to : λ p λ y . probable ( py ) to : = VP to / VP : λ p λ y . py Raising - to - object : believe : = ( VP / VP to ) / NP : λ x λ p λ y . believe ( px ) y Subject - control : try : = VP + a / VP to : λ p λ y . try ( py ) y Object - control : persuade : = ( VP + a / VP to ) / NP : λ x λ p λ y . persuade ( px ) xy Adjunct - control : without : = ( VP \ VP ) / VP ing : λ p λ q λ y . ¬ py ∧ qy The raising and copular categories listed above have the effect of composing their lf content ( if any ) with that of their complement predicate , and are akin to Jacobson’s 1990 analysis , which restricts related categories to syntactic combination by the forward composition rule ( 15a ) , al - though function composition here is lexicalized at lf , as in Dowty , 1978 and Sag , 1982 , as shown in the following derivations , rather than syntactic . ( 26 ) Marcel seems to sleep NP : marcel ( S \ NP ) / VP to : λ p λ y . pres ( seem ( py ) ) VP to / VP : λ p λ y . py VP : λ y . sleepy > VP to : λ y . sleepy > S \ NP : λ y . pres ( seem ( sleepy ) ) < S : pres ( seem ( sleepmarcel ) ) ( 27 ) Marcel tries to sleep NP : marcel ( S + a \ NP ) / VP to : λ p λ y . pres ( try ( py ) y ) VP to / VP : λ p λ y . py VP : λ y . sleepy > VP to : λ y . sleepy > S + a \ NP : λ y . pres ( try ( sleepy ) y ) < S + a : pres ( try ( sleepmarcel ) marcel ) The distinction between raising and control verbs at the level of logical form is that , in raising in ( 26 ) , the bound variable y occurs only once as a subject variable in the predicate - argument structure , where it is bound by its λ - binder , whereas in control ( 27 ) , the bound variable occurs twice at that level , once as subject or object controller and once as controllee , forming a po - tentially unbounded cascade , a distinction parallel to that between A - movement and the PRO mechanism in the Government - Binding theory . In both cases , the traditional c - command rela - tion between raiser / controler and complement needed to support scopal operator binding is only established at the level of lf : 20 20 Landau ( 2015 ) , following Williams ( 1994 ) , draws a number of ﬁner semantic distinctions among subject - and object - control verbs that are passed over here , including a distinction between “predicative” ones like manage and begin , and “attitudinal” ones like hope , persuade , and tell , with distinctions in factivity and obligatoriness or otherwise of “de se” readings ( Lewis , 1979a ; Chierchia , 1989 ) based on scope of intensional operators at the level of logical form . The lexical 12 The categories in ( 25 ) assume in addition that raising and copular verbs and adjuncts like likely are , unlike most other verbs , lexically underspeciﬁed as to agentivity on their their com - plement and their result via a feature variable a , whose value ± they merely inherit from their complement ( which of course may also be underspeciﬁed ) , and which is left unmarked in the no - tation , to avoid clutter . By contrast , the control verbs are + a ( gentive ) . The feature a does work reminiscent of the there feature in Sag ( 1982 ) : 444 in limiting overgeneration , but plays no part in mediating discontinuity , including long - range agreement . While to keep the notation readable , we suppress such details elsewhere in the paper , its underspeciﬁcation in the raising / copular categories will be relevant to the analysis of there - insertion below . 3 . 1 Raising This section shows that the A - movement variety of internal merge involved in raising is captured by the rules of contiguous type - dependent merger set out in section 2 . 2 . In order to extend the analysis to there - insertion in the next section , we focus on raising out of the copular VP , as in : ( 28 ) Marcel seems to be asleep . NP 3s ( S \ NP 3s ) / VP to VP to / XP AP : marcel : λ p λ y . pres ( seem ( py ) ) : λ p λ y . py : λ y . asleep , y > VP to : λ y . asleepy > S \ NP 3s : λ y . pres ( seem ( asleepy ) ) < S : pres ( seem ( asleepmarcel ) ) Unlike control in ( 27 ) , raising across serial raising verbs does not create a cascade of multiple copies of the subject , which remains in situ at lf ( cf . Epstein and Seely , 2006 : § 2 . 4 ) : ( 29 ) Marcel seems to appear . . . to be dreaming NP 3s ( S \ NP 3s ) / VP to VP to / VP to VP to / XP VP ing : marcel : λ p λ y . pres ( seem ( py ) ) : λ p λ y . appear ( py ) : λ p λ y . py : λ y . prog ( dreamy ) > VP to : λ y . prog ( dreamy ) > VP to : λ y . appear ( prog ( dreamy ) ) > S to \ NP 3s : λ y . pres ( seem ( appear ( prog ( dreamy ) ) ) ) < S : pres ( seem ( appear ( prog ( dreammarcel ) ) ) ) Raising verbs can also merge by successive composition , when they form a category of the same type as a raising verb , as in the following alternative derivation for ( 29 ) : ( 30 ) Marcel seems to appear . . . to be dreaming NP 3s ( S \ NP 3s ) / VP to VP to / VP to VP to / XP VP ing : marcel : λ p λ y . pres ( seem ( py ) ) : λ p λ y . appear ( py ) : λ p λ y . py : λ y . prog ( dreamy ) > B ( S \ NP 3s ) / VP to : λ p λ y . pres ( seem ( appear ( py ) ) ) > B ( S \ NP 3s ) / XP : λ p λ y . pres ( seem ( appear ( py ) ) ) > S to \ NP 3s : λ y . pres ( seem ( appear ( prog ( dreamy ) ) ) ) < S : pres ( seem ( appear ( prog ( dreammarcel ) ) ) ) logical forms shown here are compatible with such ﬁner distinctions , but are underspeciﬁed for the present purpose . Landau , 2021 : 20 accounts for adjunct control by lexical speciﬁcation , as in ( 25 ) above . 13 More speciﬁcally , raising categories can compose with the copula to yield a category of the same type as the copula , ( S \ NP agr ) / XP . The existential there - insertion construction , considered next , applies across just such sequences of raising and copular categories . 21 3 . 2 There - insertion To understand the existential there construction , it is important to recall Carlson’s ( 1977 ) distinc - tion between “stage - level” predicates , which denote “ﬂuents” or transient properties like at the bottom of our garden , which are bounded in temporal extent , and “individual - level” predicates , which denote intrinsic properties with unspeciﬁed temporal extent , like good : 22 The existential there - insertion construction exhibits discontiguous subject agreement across potentially unbounded sequences of raising and copular categories , and is only compatible with stage - level ( transient ) predicates : 23 ( 31 ) a . Fairies are / seem to be good / at the bottom of our garden b . There are / seem to be fairies * good / at the bottom of our garden . The NP complement in the there - construction also has to be indeﬁnite : ( 32 ) a . There are fairies / some fairies / many fairies / no fairies at the bottom of our garden . b . There is * the fairy Paribanou / * every fairy / * it at the bottom of our garden . I follow Bolinger ( 1977 ) , Rando and Napoli ( 1978 ) , Abbott ( 1993 ) , and Huddleston and Pullum ( 2002 : 1392 - 1403 ) in assuming both constraints to be essentially pragmatic in origin , related to discourse “newness” ( Prince , 1981 ) : Williams ( 1984 ) and Jacobson ( 1990 ) , as well as the related G / HPSG feature - passing ap - proaches of Gazdar et al . ( 1985 ) and Levine ( 2017 : 186 ) , and the TAG - based Minimalist ap - proach of Frank ( 2002 : 113 ) , account for the existential there - construction by assigning the verbs involved an additional more specialized lexical category specifying an expletive NP there subject . The alternative approach followed here takes advantage of the fact that serial raising verbs can compose to yield a non - standard constituent with the same category as the copula , as in ( 30 ) , by making there the head of the construction , assigning it the lexical categories shown in ﬁg - ure 1a , c . 24 21 This observation is implicit in the related “raising as function composition” analysis of Jacobson , 1990 , and is related to the treatment of German “long passives” by Keine and Bhatt ( 2016 ) . 22 While in English the stage / individual - level distinction is not marked in morpho - syntax , it is in other languages . Kratzer ( 1988 / 1995 ) and Diesing ( 1992 ) ground the distinction in the semantics , where stage - level predicates include a spatio - temporally locative Davidsonian lf event - variable , which individual - level predicates lack . The present paper passes over this distinction in logical forms , to simplify . Like other aspectual distinctions , it is labile : the predicates usually found to be stage - level can in contexts requiring individual level predicates be “coerced” to the latter type , and vice versa . 23 The construction is topic - establishing , and is often to be found in the opening lines of Edwardian dramatic mono - logues ( “There’s a one - eyed yellow idol to the north of Kathmandu . . . ” ) . We pass over a further class of verbs like arrive , arise , appear , etc . which can occur in the there - construction with a similar topic - establishing effect when they are predicated of indeﬁnite and stage - level complements , and appear to bear the category of the copula : ( i ) a . There appeared a tall ship on the horizon . b . There arrived a train in the station . c . There hung a shotgun upon the wall . See Levin ( 1993 : section 6 . 1 ) , Hale and Keyser ( 2002 ) , and Deal ( 2009 ) for extensive discussion . 24 Multiple occurrences of the variable arg denote the same underspeciﬁed value . Discourse - semantic details of how the resulting category is represents indeﬁnite subjects and stage - level predicates are passed over . A further subject - 14 a . S ub j ec t t h e r e : t h e r e : = ( ( S / X P + s t g ) / N P ag r , − d e f ) / ( ( S − a \ N P ag r ) / XP ) : λ c λ y λ p . c ( p y ) b . T h e r e s ee m t o a pp ea r t o b e f a i r i e s a t t h e bo tt o m o f ou r g a r d e n . > B ∗ ( ( S / XP + s t g ) / N P ag r , − d e f ) / ( ( S − a \ N P ag r ) / XP ) ( S \ N P 3p ) / XP N P 3p PP : λ c λ y λ p . c ( p y ) : λ p λ y . p r e s ( s ee m ( app e a r ( p y ) ) ) : f a i r i e s : λ y . a t ( bo tt o m ga r d e n ) y > ( S / XP + s t g ) / N P 3p , − d e f : λ y λ p . p r e s ( s ee m ( app e a r ( p y ) ) ) > S / XP + s t g : λ p . p r e s ( s ee m ( app e a r ( ( p f a i r i e s ) ) ) ) > S : p r e s ( s ee m ( app e a r ( a t ( bo tt o m ga r d e n ) f a i r i e s ) ) ) c . O b j ec t t h e r e : t h e r e : = ( ( ( ( S \ N P ) / XP + s t g ) / N P − d e f ) / ( VP t o / XP ) ) \ ( ( ( S \ N P ) / VP t o , − a ) / N P ) : λ b λ x λ c λ y . b ( cx ) y d . I b e li e v e d t h e r e t o b e f a i r i e s a t t h e bo tt o m o f ou r g a r d e n N P ( ( S \ N P ) / VP t o ) / N P ( ( ( ( S \ N P ) / XP + s t g ) / N P − d e f ) / ( VP t o , − a / XP ) ) \ ( ( ( S \ N P ) / VP t o ) / N P ) VP t o / XP N P PP < ( ( ( S \ N P ) / XP + s t g ) / N P − d e f ) / ( VP t o , − a / XP ) > ( ( S \ N P ) / XP + s t g ) / N P − d e f > ( S \ N P ) / XP + s t g > S \ N P < S Figure 1 : There insertion 15 The category for there in ﬁgure 1a , applies to a constituent to its right bearing the type of an SVX copula compatible with the non - agentivity feature - value − a —that is , − a itself or the un - marked a of the raising and copular verbs . Composite raising / copular verbs of type ( S \ NP 3p ) / XP can be composed of unboundedly many raising elements , as in ( 30 ) . What existential there does is simply to map such compound SVX copulæ as are , seem to be , seem likely to be , seem to be believed to be etc . , onto the corresponding VSX verbal category there are , there seem to be , etc . , further specifying the subject S and complement X as respectively indeﬁnite and stage - level via the feature - values − def and + stg , on which we assume most NPs like fairies and XPs like at the bottom of our garden are underspeciﬁed or ambiguous . They are therefore shown unmarked , with undifferentiated semantics for simplicity of presentation , in the there - insertion derivation shown in ﬁgure 1b . The categories for there in ﬁgure 1a , c reject control verbs because of their positive + a ( gentivity ) . For example : ( 33 ) ∗ There try to be fairies at the bottom of our garden . > B ∗ ( ( S / XP + stg ) / NP agr , − def ) / ( ( S − a \ NP agr ) / XP ) ( S + a \ NP 3p ) / XP NP 3p PP ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ The slightly more complex category for expletive there in ﬁgure 1c inverts the rightward arguments of raising - to - object verbs like believe , to yield a category much like that in ﬁgure 1a , looking for a non - agentive to - inﬁnitival copular category such as to be / to be certain to be be - lieved to be of type VP to / XP , an ( indeﬁnite ) NP , and a ( stage - level ) predicate . as in the derivation in ﬁgure 1d . 25 The lexical categories of there in ﬁgure 1a and c prevent its application to seem or are be - lieved , because they bear non - copular raising categorial types like ( S \ NP 3p ) / VP to or ( S \ NP ) / S , rather than the copular categories speciﬁed by there , such as ( S \ NP 3p ) / XP and VP to / XP . We therefore avoid the need for ﬁlters such as the Θ - criterion or “defective intervention effects” to avoid overgeneration of examples like the following ( Chomsky , 1981 , 2000 : 129 ) : cf . Frampton and Gutmann , 2002 ; Stroik , 2009 ) : ( 34 ) a . * There seem fairies to be at the bottom of our garden . b . * There are believed fairies are at the bottom of our garden As noted earlier , verb sequences with the same type ( S \ NP ) / XP as the copula that include agen - tive verbs such as try or say inherit the speciﬁed + a ( gentive ) feature of those verbs , via uniﬁca - tion with the underspeciﬁed feature of raising and copular verbs , and are incompatible with the − a required by there , ﬁgure 1a , c , for the same reason as ( 33 ) : ( 35 ) a . * There [ seem to try to be ] ( S + a \ NP ) / XP fairies at the bottom of our garden . b . * There [ seem to say old bicycles are ] ( S + a \ NP ) / XP fairies at the bottom of our garden . In summary , the long - distance agreement ( LDA ) discontinuity induced by raising and there - insertion can be captured by lexicalizing the verbs ( etc . ) involved as functions over predicates , inversion category for there , related to ﬁgure 1c but looking to the left for the inverting copula ( ( S inv / XP ) / NP agr ) as its ﬁrst argument , is also needed to support questions like : ( i ) a . Are there ( believed to be ) fairies at the bottom of our garden ? b . Where are there ( likely to be ) fairies ? We pass over it here , in the interests of brevity . 25 Logical form and details of agreement are suppressed in ﬁgure 1 , as analogous to earlier examples . 16 representing the raising discontinuity by λ - bound variables in lexical logical forms such as λ p λ y . seem ( py ) , and projecting it onto larger domains by contiguous external merger of cate - gories of the same type as copular verbs via the composition rule ( 15a ) . 4 Scrambling , Case , and Type - raising As soon as we look beyond simple existential NPs such as proper names and indeﬁnites , and in particular to universally quantiﬁed NPs , it becomes clear that arguments must themselves be second - order “type - raised” functors of the general form X / ( X \ NP ) or X \ ( X / NP ) , where X is a variable ranging over lexical types S , S \ NP , ( S \ NP ) / NP , etc . . 4 . 1 Type - raising as case For example , for the universally - quantiﬁed subject of Everything ﬂows to take scope over the tensed domain S \ NP of its verb , it must syntactically bear the category of a functor over it , as in the following derivation : ( 36 ) Everything ﬂows S / ( S \ NP ) S \ NP : λ p . ∀ y [ thingy ⇒ py ] : λ y . pres ( ﬂowy ) > S : ∀ y [ thingy ⇒ pres ( ﬂowy ) ] Because universals can freely coordinate with other NPs , this generalization must , under the earlier assumption that coordination applies over like - types , apply to all NPs ( Montague , 1973 ) : ( 37 ) [ Every woman ] S / ( S \ NP ) and [ Harry / at least one man ] S / ( S \ NP ) [ saw a movie ] S \ NP . We must make a parallel assumption of categorial raising over the transitive verb category ( S \ NP ) / NP to allow objects to take scope over the matrix domain : 26 ( 38 ) Someone sees everything S / ( S \ NP ) ( S \ NP ) / NP ( S \ NP ) \ ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) : λ p . p ( someperson ) : λ x λ y . pres ( seexy ) : λ p λ y . ∀ x [ thingx ⇒ pxy ] < S \ NP : λ y . ∀ x [ thingx ⇒ pres ( seexy ) ] > S : ∀ x [ pres ( seex ( someperson ) ) ] It should be obvious from the above examples that type - raising leaves all the derivations seen in the earlier sections essentially unchanged , apart from reversing the direction of function appli - cation . In particular , the above derivations still use rules of strictly external merger . However , it is now the raised argument categories that project the type S of the verbal head as the category or “label” of the result of the derivation . Inspection of the lexical logical forms in the derivation also shows that it is the raised arguments that pass their values to the lf by binding a second - order variable p , rather than the verb itself , with an effect that is reminiscent of “internal” merge , and 26 It should be noted that such scope - taking is deﬁned by the lexical lf of the universal , rather than by derivation . As in Steedman , 2012 , non - universals are represented at lf in situ by under - speciﬁed Skolem terms like someperson , to be bound at some point in the derivation by a mechanism whose details are irrelevant to the present purpose . If this happens early in the derivation at line 1 of ( 38 ) , then the result is an unbound Skolem constant , analogous to a proper name . If it happens inside the lf scope of the universal , as in the last line , it is a Skolem function of x . 17 that we return to below . However , type - raised arguments also allow some additional word - orders which would not otherwise be possible , including some arising from function composition that have been attributed to “scrambling” , considered in section 4 . 2 below . The category S / ( S \ NP ) of everything in ( 36 ) limits it to only combining as a subject . It is therefore equivalent in every way to a nominative NP in a language like Latin , despite lacking any morphology to distinguishing it from everything with category ( S \ NP ) \ ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) in ( 38 ) . The latter category is similarly restricted to combining as an object , equivalent to an accusative - cased NP in Latin . In fact , under present assumptions , English differs from Latin only that case is even more ambiguous ( because not in general morphologically marked ) , and “structural” and “inherent” , that is , deﬁned semantically by the valency and logical form of the verb . In view of this ambiguity , and the fact that it is resolved in the derivation by the verb it combines with , we can assume as a matter of grammar that NPs and other argument categories are schematized in the lexicon as in the following example for someone : ( 39 ) someone : = NP ↑ : λ p λ ˙y . p ( someperson ) ˙y —where NP ↑ schematizes over NP categories raised over verbal ( etc . ) categories of the language , which are assumed to obey the Natural Serialization ( NS ) and Cross - Category Harmony ( CCH ) Principles observed by Vennemann and Harlow ( 1977 ) ; Hawkins ( 1982 ) , and Dryer ( 1991 ) , namely that arguments other than the subject are speciﬁed with directionality consistent with that of the object—that is , languages seem to be consistently VOX ∗ or OX ∗ V . In the logical form , p ranges as usual over the logical forms of such verbs ( etc . ) ; ˙ y is a ( possibly empty ) , in principle unbounded , list of further arguments of p ; and λ ˙ y is the corresponding sequence of λ - bindings . ( Because the number of arguments is unbounded , it is possible under certain circumstances for this schema to apply to derived categories of types that are not actually exempliﬁed in the lexicon itself , so long as they are consistent with NS / CCH—see discussion of ﬁgure 2b , c . ) 27 If arguments are all type - raised as NP ↑ etc . , then determiners etc . must be functors into that raised schema , of the form NP ↑ / N etc . For example , the indeﬁnite determiner category is : ( 40 ) a / an : = NP ↑ / N : λ n λ p λ ˙y . p ( an ) ˙y —where n ranges over nominal properties ; an abbreviates an under - speciﬁed Skolem term of type n as noted for ( 38 ) above ( n . 26 ) . The determiner every carries a similar set of cased syntactic categories , which can be schema - tized under the same conventions as ( 40 ) as : ( 41 ) every : = NP ↑ / N : λ n λ p λ ˙y . ∀ x [ nx → px ˙y ] , This category corresponds to a universal “Generalized Quantiﬁer” determiner ( Woods , 1968a , b ; Montague , 1970 ; Lewis , 1970 ) , in which the quantiﬁer ∀ x takes scope at the level of lf over a potentially unbounded predication over x via the variable p , allowing the homomorphism of derivation and syntactic composition to be preserved without any involvement of “covert” quan - tiﬁer movement in derivations like the following ( Steedman , 2012 ) . 28 27 For performance reasons , in practice , the valency is low—possibly as low as the maximum available to lexical verbs . This deﬁnition of type - raising does not exclude the possibility that , for example , a VOX ∗ language may also system - atically include OV categories , as appears to be the case for Mandarin ( Li and Thompson , 1975 ; Man and Steedman , 2023 ) . 28 See note 26 on scope of indeﬁnites . The Montagovian approach of Jacobson ( 2014 ) within a related Categorial framework provides an alternative . 18 ( 42 ) A woman saw every cat ( S / ( S \ NP 3s ) ) / N 3s N 3s ( S \ NP agr ) / NP ( ( S \ NP agr ) \ ( ( S \ NP agr ) / NP ) ) / N 3s N 3s : λ n λ p . p ( an ) : woman : λ x λ y . past ( seexy ) : λ n λ p λ y . ∀ x [ nx → pxy ] : cat > > S / ( S \ NP 3s ) ( S \ NP agr ) \ ( ( S \ NP agr ) / NP ) : λ p . p ( awoman ) : λ p λ y . ∀ x [ catx → pxy ] < S \ NP agr : λ y . ∀ x [ catx → past ( seexy ) ] > S : ∀ x [ catx → past ( seex ( awoman ) ) ] As Woods , Montague , Lewis , Partee ( 1976 ) , and Barwise and Cooper ( 1981 ) pointed out , the type - raised generalized quantiﬁer determiner category ( 41 ) is the only way to get universal quantiﬁers to take wide - scope monotonically , that is , without quantiﬁer - raising ( QR ) movement . However , type - raising is allowed here only as a morpho - lexical schema , not as a free combi - natory rule of syntactic derivation like those in section 2 . 2 . Derivational type - raising would increase expressive power . 29 The assumption of raised categories therefore amounts to the claim that even a morpho - logically impoverished language like English has case in exactly the same sense as a case - morphology - rich language like Latin or Icelandic , disambiguating case “structurally” , in relation to the category of the verb . 30 4 . 2 Scrambling in Germanic Most standard British and American dialects of English disfavor scrambling of NP arguments . Unlike Japanese and German cased arguments , English ( and Welsh ) case - raised NP ↑ s like pizza can be prevented from combining by crossing composition by morpho - lexically specifying their slash - type as / (cid:5) (cid:63) or \ (cid:5) (cid:63) in their lexical entries . The crossing composition rule ( 15d ) can only apply to governing categories of the form X \ × Y whose slash - type , unlike that assumed for pizza , is compatible with the feature × , so the following is blocked : 31 ( 43 ) ∗ John gave pizza a very close friend . S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) / NP ( S \ NP ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) ( S \ NP ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) ∗ < B × ∗∗∗ However , English VP adjuncts like yesterday are unrestricted , and freely allow scrambling by composing by the backward crossing rule , as in the following example of “Heavy NP - shift” : 29 Derivational type - raising is implicit in the “Reprojection” analysis of quantiﬁer scope - taking of Hornstein and Uriagereka ( 2002 ) , although they make no reference to the literature on type - raising and generalized quantiﬁers . 30 Cf . Vergnaud ( 1977 / 2006 ) . In particular , there is nothing in the present theory to prevent a language resolving case structurally for subjects bearing “quirky” non - nominative morphological case agreement , as is notoriously the case for Icelandic . The fact that scrambling / free word - order is strongly correlated with morphologically explicit case clearly reﬂects a performance - related need to ( somewhat ) limit derivational ambiguity , rather than a universal of grammar . 31 Such details of the categorial notation can often be ignored , and are often suppressed in examples . The example ( 43 ) is not as bad as its “ * ” suggests , and may be allowed in some dialects—see section 7 . 2 on Right Edge Restrictions . 19 ( 44 ) Harry saw yesterday a very close friend . S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) ( S \ NP ) / NP ( S \ NP ) \ ( S \ NP ) ( S \ NP ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) < B × ( S \ NP ) / NP < S \ NP > S Under the assumption that case - related morpho - lexical type - raising of arguments is univer - sal , its availability in verb - ﬁnal Germanic constructions correctly allows them to scramble over each other further to the left . The question considered next concerns possible limitations on such scrambling . Wallenberg ( 2009 , 2013 ) proposes the following generalization : ( 45 ) The Generalized Holmberg Condition ( GHC ) : Scrambling and object shift cannot move elements leftward past a c - commanding head . He notes that in the German example ( 46 ) , the object die Lebensmittel ( “the groceries” ) can scramble out of the VP past the adjunct , as in ( 47 ) : ( 46 ) Johann hat [ auf dem Markt ] [ die Lebensmittel gekauft ] . Johann has at the market the groceries bought . “Johann bought the groceries at the market . ” ( 47 ) Johann hat [ die Lebensmittel ] [ auf dem Markt ] gekauft . Johann has the groceries at the market bought . “Johann bought the groceries at the market . ” However , die Lebensmittel cannot scramble further to the left past the main clause auxiliary hat , which c - commands that VP : ( 48 ) * Johann [ die Lebensmittel ] hat [ auf dem Markt ] gekauft . Johann the groceries has at the market bought . “Johann bought the groceries at the market . ” ( 47 ) is possible because the PP adjunct auf dem Markt VP / VP that intervenes between the scrambled object and the verb can compose with it to yield a category VP \ NP adjacent to the case - raised object : 32 ( 49 ) Johann hat die Lebensmittel auf dem Markt gekauft Johann has the groceries at the market bought . S / ( S \ NP ) ( S main \ NP nom ) / VP VP / ( VP \ NP ) VP / VP VP \ NP acc > B × VP \ NP acc > VP > S \ NP nom > S However , if the same object is to the left of the main verb , it is no longer adjacent to a category of the required type , even though the tensed verb can compose with the residue of scrambling : 32 The same applies if the PP is taken to be a type - raised argument VP / ( VP \ PP ) . 20 ( 50 ) ∗ Johann die Lebensmittel hat auf dem Markt gekauft Johann the groceries has at the market bought . S / ( S \ NP ) VP / ( VP \ NP acc ) ( S main \ NP nom ) / VP VP / VP VP \ NP acc > B × VP \ NP acc > B × ( S main \ NP nom ) \ NP acc ∗ ∗∗∗ There is no German morpholexically cased accusative category that can combine with hat auf dem Markt gekauft , since ( S main \ NP nom ) \ NP acc is not a V2 category , and therefore not a legal German main - clause transitive . ( The Germanic subordinate clause transitive category , which accusatives are also raised over , is ( S sub \ NP nom ) \ NP acc , while the main clause topicalized ac - cusative is S t / ( S inv \ NP acc ) —cf . ( 58 ) below . ) . In fact , it is only because arguments are lexically type - raised , and ground categories like NP acc are excluded , that examples like ( 48 ) can in present terms be blocked , consistent with Wallenberg’s generalization ( 45 ) . The effect of type - raising arguments is to deﬁne the “domain of locality” for scrambling to be the argument domain of the verb they combine with . For example , the application - only derivation shown in ﬁgure 2a for the class of Swiss Ger - man object - control verbs that take bare inﬁnitival complements can be assumed to represent the unscrambled order ( Shieber , 1985 ) , resembling the corresponding English sentence , except for objects preceding their head : However , because Swiss - German object control verbs mix direc - tionality , taking their object to the left and their inﬁnitival complement to the right , composition has the effect of extending the verbal domain of locality , correctly predicting the fact that em - bedded objects can scramble leftward “past” tense , as in the derivation shown in ﬁgure 2b . The crucial ﬁrst step in this derivation , involving the second - level composition rule ( 20c ) , indexed > B 2 × , can iterate unboundedly over additional object - control verbs , allowing embedded objects like em Hans and es huus to scramble to the left past the tensed verb , leading Wallenberg to replace ( 45 ) by a more general Principle of “Conservation of C - command” ( CoCC ) . The residue of scrambling bears the category ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ NP nom ) \ NP acc ) \ NP dat ) \ NP acc , which does not seem to be a lexical type , so the deﬁnition at the beginning of section 4 . 1 of type - raising as an unbounded lexical schema obeying the principle of VOX ∗ / OX ∗ V order is essential in allowing es huus to scramble 33 Such scrambling or partial free - order of arguments in Germanic and other languages presents a problem for all theories of grammar , and has led to proposals for “verb projection rais - ing” ( Haegeman and van Riemsdijk , 1986 ; Wallenberg , 2009 ) , as well as various clause - union ( Haider , 2003 , esp . § 4 ) , or compound “roll - up” or “remnant” varieties of movement ( Koopman , 1996 ; Koopman and Szabolcsi , 2000 ) , which combinatory derivations like the above reduce to serial contiguous compositional type - dependent constituent merger . The combinatory derivations shown in ﬁgure 21a , b are essentially unaffected by the fact that the arguments are lexically type - raised by case - morphology , which as usual merely reverses the direction of function application mergers . However , the involvement of type - raising allows some 33 As noted in section 2 . 2 , the combination of crossing composition and the second - level composition rules such as ( 20c ) can “grow” categories , and makes the grammar non – context - free . The construction constituted the basis for Shieber’s 1985 proof that human languages are not even weakly context - free . In Steedman , 2020 : 646 - 7 , I examine in greater detail the scrambling possibilities under this generalization for the Germanic constructions exempliﬁed above , following Wurmbrand ( 2004 ) , and in Hungarian clause union , following Koopman and Szabolcsi . 21 a . d a s m e r d (cid:48) c h i nd l önd e m H a n s h ä l f e e s huu s aa s t r ii c h e t h a t w e - NO M t h e c h il d r e n - A CC l e t H a n s - DA T h e l p t h e hou s e - A CC p a i n t N P ↑ n o m N P ↑ a cc ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) / VP N P ↑ da t ( VP \ N P da t ) / VP N P ↑ a cc VP \ N P a cc > VP > VP \ N P da t > VP > ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc > S (cid:48) \ N P no m > S (cid:48) b . d a s m e r d (cid:48) c h i nd e m H a n s e s huu s l önd h ä l f e aa s t r ii c h e t h a t w e - NO M t h e c h il d r e n - A CC H a n s - DA T t h e hou s e - A CC l e t h e l p p a i n t N P ↑ n o m N P ↑ a cc N P ↑ da t N P ↑ a cc ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) / VP ( VP \ N P da t ) / VP VP \ N P a cc > B 2 × ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) \ N P da t ) / VP > B × ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) \ N P da t ) \ N P a cc > ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) \ N P da t > ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc > S (cid:48) \ N P no m > S (cid:48) c . d a s m e r d (cid:48) c h i nd e m H a n s e s huu s l önd h ä l f e aa s t r ii c h e t h a t w e - NO M t h e c h il d r e n - A CC H a n s - DA T t h e hou s e - A CC l e t h e l p p a i n t N P ↑ n o m N P ↑ a cc N P ↑ da t N P ↑ a cc ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) / VP ( VP \ N P da t ) / VP VP \ N P a cc : λ p . p u s : λ p . p ( t h ek i d s ) : λ p . phan s : λ p . p ( t h e hou s e ) : λ p λ x λ y . l e t ( p x ) xy : λ p λ x λ y . h e l p ( p x ) xy : λ x λ y . pa i n t xy > B > B 2 × S (cid:48) / ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) \ N P da t ) / VP : λ p . p ( t h ek i d s ) u s : λ p λ w λ x λ y . l e t ( h e l p ( p w ) w x ) xy > B > B × S (cid:48) / ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) \ N P da t ) ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) \ N P da t ) \ N P a cc : λ p . phan s ( t h ek i d s ) u s : λ v λ w λ x λ y . l e t ( h e l p ( pa i n t v w ) w x ) xy > B S (cid:48) / ( ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ N P no m ) \ N P a cc ) \ N P da t ) \ N P a cc ) : λ p . p ( t h e hou s e ) han s ( t h ek i d s ) u s > S (cid:48) : l e t ( h e l p ( pa i n t ( t h e hou s e ) han s ) han s ( t h ek i d s ) ) ( t h ek i d s ) u s Figure 2 : Swiss German : “that we let the children help Hans paint the house” ( Shieber , 1985 ) 22 further derivations for the latter word - order , because the case - raised argument categories can also compose . The derivation in ﬁgure 2c , in which the logical forms omitted in the earlier ones are included , is an example . The second - order category S (cid:48) / ( ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ NP nom ) \ NP acc ) \ NP dat ) \ NP acc ) that is built by succes - sive composition mergers in the latter derivation for the argument - cluster mer d’chind em Hans es huus , has the logical form λ p . phousehanschildrenus . This category does the work of Haegeman and van Riemsdijk’s and Wallenberg’s “verb projection” , an argument - structure which Wallen - berg derives by multiple head - movements of the verbs to adjoin to their respective vPs , leaving multiple verb traces , and then raises in its entirety to Spec of TP ( den Dikken , 1994 ; Den Dikken , 1995 ; Wallenberg , 2009 : 166 - 167 ) . The present approach differs in making a single second - order bound - variable p in that logical form do the work of their multiple head - movements at the level of lf . Since the rules of the present grammar are conditioned on syntactic type alone , rather than structure - dependent , they remain entirely blind to the derivation of the composite verb lönd hälfe aastriiche of category ( ( ( S (cid:48) \ NP nom ) \ NP acc ) \ NP dat ) \ NP acc , and to the structure of its lf λ v λ w λ x λ y . let ( help ( paintvw ) wx ) xy , which instantiates the bound variable p in the above argument - cluster lf . Their combination is instead accomplished via a single application merge , rather than via multiple movement , and without the involvement of multiple verb traces ( cf . Epstein et al . , 1998 ; Epstein and Seely , 2006 : 178 - 179 ) . The related Dutch bare inﬁnitival verbs laten , helpen , zien , etc . , are more restricted , allowing only the crossing dependencies parallel to those in ﬁgure 2b , c , and excluding the “canonical” order 2a . Their grammar can be simply captured without rule restrictions , by assuming that they bear a × restriction to crossing composition on their ﬁrst argument , as in ( VP \ NP dat ) / × VP , disallowing the applicative derivation of ﬁgure 2a . 34 The following generalization , of which Wallenberg’s condition ( 45 ) for Germanic main clauses is an extremely special case , and which can be seen as capturing his more general CoCC , is a prediction of the present theory , rather than a constraint limiting overgeneration . 35 Let X $ 1 | Z $ 2 be a ( possibly derived ) function from zero or more arguments $ 2 to a function from Z to a function of zero or more further arguments $ 1 into X . Then : ( 51 ) The Scrambling / Node - raising Generalization : An argument Z ↑ can combine contiguously with X $ 1 | Z $ 2 to yield X $ 1 $ 2 iff the order - preserving raised type X $ 1 / ( X $ 1 \ Z ) or X $ 1 \ ( X $ 1 / Z ) is among the set of morpho - lexically licensed type - raised categories { Z ↑ } for the language in question , and there is an applicable combinatory rule among those listed in section 2 . 2 as licensed by the Combinatory Projection Principle ( 19 ) . It is important to notice that the scrambled derivations allowed under this generalization , such as Swiss German ﬁgure 2b , c , resemble raising and control , as discussed in section 3 , in preserving or “reconstructing” thematic relations at the level of lf predicate - argument structure . Despite wildly nonstandard derivational constituency , the latter reﬂects more or less traditional notions of constituent structure and command . While Japanese and German main clauses are 34 This result is contrary to the observations of Kuhlmann et al . ( 2010 , 2015 ) , which reﬂect an earlier version of the theory . 35 Combinatory scrambling is not permutation - complete for more than three arguments—see Becker et al . , 1991 ; Hockenmaier and Young , 2008 ; Stanojevi´c and Steedman , 2021 for some discussion . 23 sometimes described as differing in whether scrambling can “move things out of” ﬁnite clauses , this appearance is simply a consequence of exactly which pf alignments can be captured in SOV vs . V2 lexicons . 36 In summary , morpho - lexical order - preserving type - raising of arguments such as NPs over a language’s verbal subcategorization types , interacts productively with function composition ( seen in the previous section doing the work of A movement in English ) , to achieve the effects of scrambling in free - or partially free - word - order languages . The “copies” of the movement theory are again represented in lexical logical forms by binders λα and their variables α , and are projected onto derived forms by rules of strictly contiguous merger , continuing to preserve synchrony between agreement , merger , and semantic transfer . This possibility in turn depends on directionality being speciﬁed in the lexicon and projected by rules adhering to the Combinatory Projection Principle ( CPP ) of section 2 . 2 . Despite the lexically - imposed restricted opportunities for scrambling in English , its gram - mar , like that of all languages , is profoundly affected in other ways by the inclusion of merger by composition , and of case , expressed as lexicalized order - preserving type - raising of arguments . In particular , these operations immediately allow an explanation in terms of strictly adjacent “ex - ternal” merger of constituents ( in the extended sense of that term that they engender ) for a great diversity of unbounded phenomena that have been attributed to “deletion under coordination” and “ wh - movement” ( Steedman , 1985 , passim ; Phillips , 2003 ; Boz¸sahin , 2012 ) , considered in the next two sections . 5 Coordination and Constituency Conjunctions like and carry a category ( X \ (cid:63) X ) / (cid:63) X , where X schematizes over S or functors into S with the same low bound on valency as the lexicon ( that is , three or possibly four ) . Its (cid:63) slash - types mean that it can only combine by the application rules ( 11 ) . 37 In application to the predicate S \ NP , it allows left - node - raising ﬁnite VP coordination , as in ﬁgure 3a . More interestingly , the phenomenon of right - node - raising , including the fact that it is un - bounded and can apply to multiple arguments ( Abbott , 1976 ; Gazdar , 1981 ) , is also consistent with the fact that all arguments are order - preserving cased raised types that can compose as well as apply , as we saw in ﬁgure 2c for Germanic , as in ﬁgure 3b . ( Comparison with 3a shows that structurally - cased English needs more than one raised category for objects , as do morphologically - cased languages like Latin , Japanese , and various forms of Germanic . ) 38 As in the discussion of the examples ( 36 ) and ( 38 ) that were used to introduce type - raising 36 The generalization in ( 51 ) is directionally symmetrical , so it is predicted that verb - initial languages / constructions with free word - order should allow mirror - image rightward scrambling . This appears to be the case in some Oceanic languages ( Otsuka , 2005 ) . The more widespread nature of leftward displacement in general noted by Kayne ( 1994 ) and Cinque ( 2005 ) , among others , may reﬂect an information - structural asymmetry between sentence – initial and - ﬁnal positions , rather than a hard universal constraint against rightward displacement , as noted by Abels and Neeleman ( 2012 ) . 37 This category is a necessary consequence of the logical form λ p λ q . p (cid:117) q , in which (cid:117) is the transitive closure of conjunction ∧ over bounded predicative function types of Partee and Rooth ( 1983 ) , and p and q are therefore functions of the same bounded semantic type . It is therefore assumed not to be a degree of freedom in the theory that other lexical conjunctions or other languages are free to vary ( although they may make ﬁner distinctions , as between nominal or verbal conjunction ) . 38 In this and subsequent derivations , the forward and backward applications of the conjunction are abbreviated as a single step , indexed as “ < > ” , to save space . 24 a . A li ce s a w a ca t a nd r a n S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) ( S \ N P ) / N P ( S \ N P ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S \ N P ) / N P ) ( X \ (cid:63) X ) / (cid:63) X S \ N P : λ p . pa li ce : λ x λ y . pa s t ( s eexy ) : λ p λ y . p ( a c a t ) y : λ p λ q . p (cid:117) q : λ y . pa s t ( r un y ) < > S \ N P ( S \ N P ) \ (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) : λ y . pa s t ( s ee ( a c a t ) y ) : λ q λ y . ( pa s t ( r un y ) ) ∧ ( q y ) < S \ N P : λ y . ( pa s t ( r un y ) ) ∧ ( pa s t ( s ee ( a c a t ) y ) ) > S : ( pa s t ( r una li ce ) ) ∧ ( pa s t ( s ee ( a c a t ) a li ce ) ) b . A li ce s a w a nd M a r y s a i d s h e li k e d t h e m ov i e S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) ( S \ N P ) / N P ( X \ (cid:63) X ) / (cid:63) X S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) ( S \ N P ) / S S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) ( S \ N P ) / N P S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) : λ p . pa li ce : λ x λ y . pa s t ( s eexy ) : λ p λ q . p (cid:117) q : λ p . p m a r y : λ s λ y . pa s t ( s a i d s y ) : λ p . ph e r : λ x λ y . pa s t ( li kexy ) : λ p . p ( t h e m o v i e ) > B > B > B S / N P S / S S / N P : λ x . pa s t ( s eex a li ce ) : λ s . pa s t ( s a y s m a r y ) : λ x . pa s t ( li kex h e r ) > B S / N P : λ x . pa s t ( s a y ( pa s t ( li kex h e r ) ) m a r y ) < > S / N P : λ x . ( pa s t ( s eex a li ce ) ) ∧ ( pa s t ( s a y ( pa s t ( li kex h e r ) ) m a r y ) ) < S : ( pa s t ( s ee ( t h e m o v i e ) a li ce ) ) ∧ ( pa s t ( s a y ( pa s t ( li ke ( t h e m o v i e ) h e r ) ) m a r y ) ) c . T h e W O M AN s a w a C A T L + H ∗ L H % H ∗ LL % S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) : λ p . p ( t h e w o m an ) ( S \ N P ) / N P : λ x λ y . s a w xy S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) : λ p . p ( a c a t ) > B S / N P : λ y . s a w x ( t h e w o m an ) > S : s a w ( a c a t ) ( t h e w o m an ) Figure 3 : Left - and Right - Node - Raising 25 in section 4 . 1 , the derivations in ﬁgure 3a and b involve only rules of strictly external merger and standard type - raised argument logical forms . However , in passing the values of arguments like Alice and the movie into the logical form via the second - order variable p , they again have the effect of movement or internal merger , this time as “across - the - board” or “parallel” merge ( cf . Citko and Graˇcanin - Yuksek , 2020 and see section 7 below ) . It will also be obvious from derivations like ﬁgure 2b , c and 3b that the inclusion of composi - tion and case - raising allows alternative derivations for non - coordinate sentences , with similarly unorthodox constituencies yielding the same logical form as the canonical one . For instance , the alternative derivation for ( 9 ) shown in ﬁgure 3c is one in which a woman ﬁrst composes with saw , and a cat subsequently applies to the result , yielding exactly the same lf , saw ( acat ) ( awoman ) . In the present paper , most derivations will for ease of comprehension be chosen to minimize non - standard constituency of this kind . But such derivations are still available grammatically , as is shown by the possibility of forcing derivations like 3c by applying the indicated “rise - fall - rise” intonational tune L + H * LH % to The woman saw to make it into an intonational phrase , say as part of the answer to a question such as What did the WOMAN see ? ( Jackendoff , 1972 ; Pierre - humbert and Hirschberg , 1990 ; Steedman , 1991a , 2000a , b , 2014b ) , consistent with a strong form of the MATCH hypothesis of Selkirk ( 2011 ) concerning homomorphism of syntax and prosody . It should be clear from the above example that merger by composition is a free operation of syntax , and is not contingent on movement or displacement of any kind , unlike the notation - ally similar SLASH feature - passing mechanism of GPSG / HPSG . Under the present theory , the woman saw is potentially a constituent of the canonical clause of type S / NP , on the same level as the traditional predicate of type S \ NP , rather than one of type S bearing a feature indicating the presence of a trace ( Gazdar , 1981 ; Sag , 1997 ; Jacobson , 1999 : 149 - 150 , 2014 : 232 ) . 39 However , it is important to avoid the error of assuming that non - standard structures like those in ﬁgure 3b , and c must allow reﬂexive binding anomalies , or force wide - scope read - ings of objects like every cat in the analogous derivation for ( 42 ) . Any phenomenon such as quantiﬁer - scope that reﬂects c - command must be analysed at the level of lf , where more or less standard relations of command relevant to scope of quantiﬁers , negation etc . , as revealed by bound existentials , NPIs , etc . are , as a consequence of the adjacency assumption ( 3 ) , preserved by combinatory derivation . 40 For example , in Steedman 1999 , 2000b , 2012 , I analyse existentially quantiﬁed arguments , as in ( 42 ) , as generalized Skolem terms , showing how both wide - and narrow - scope readings are predicted for some movie in the following RNR example related to ﬁgure 3b , as well as the “across the board” exclusion of “mixed” readings with narrow scope in one conjunct and wide scope in the other observed by Geach ( 1970 ) ( cf . Reinhart , 1997 , 2006 ) . 41 39 Like every other kind of ambiguity , the existence of multiple derivations for the same lf is a problem for the parsing model ( “performance” ) , albeit an entirely solved one—see Eisner , 1996 ; Hockenmaier , 2003 ; Clark and Curran , 2007 ; Lewis and Steedman , 2014 . But it is quite irrelevant to our present concern with the theory of grammar ( “competence” ) . ) 40 The above error is apparently almost irresistible—see Rothstein ( 2001 ) ; Bernardi ( 2002 , 2004 ) ; Uchida ( 2008 ) ; Barker and Shan ( 2014 ) ; Barker ( 2015 ) , passim . See section 6 . 2 below for implications concerning reconstruction . 41 See note 26 . In Steedman 1996 , I discus related issues in the grammar of reﬂexives and reciprocals , while Steedman ( 2012 ) and Jacobson ( 2014 ) discuss NPIs and scope of negation as lf phenomena in related categorial frameworks . Other phenomena that have been attributed to surface structural c - command , such as the anti - c - command condition on parasitic gaps ( Engdahl , 1983 ) and intervention effects on tough - movement ( Keine and Poole , 2017 ) are shown by Steedman ( 1987 , 1996 ) to be predicted by CPP . The results of VanLehn ( 1978 ) ; Moulton and Han ( 2018 ) and Lidz ( 2018 ) showing performance biases of surface order on accessibility of alternate readings are of course irrelevant to the present 26 ( 52 ) Every woman saw and every man said he liked some movie . ∀∃ / ∃∀ Perhaps the most convincing argument for the direct involvement of type - raising in syntax is found in examples like those in ﬁgure 4 , which have presented a problem for all theories of grammar since the observations of Ross ( 1967 , 1970 ) . They are immediately predicted to be characteristic of English ( Dowty , 1985 / 1988 ; Steedman , 1985 ) and Welsh ( Borsley et al . , 2007 : 52 ) . ( Lf is omitted in Welsh ﬁgure 4c , as being entirely parallel to English ﬁgure 4 , and the derivation of the right conjunct ( which is identical to that of the left ) is abbreviated ) : Coordinands like Mary pizza and lyfr i Mair in ﬁgure 4 have exactly the syntactic and semantic character of the raising “verb projection” that we saw for Swiss German in ﬁgure 2c . This account of coordination therefore makes strong predictions concerning the interaction of coordination with scrambling in German and Japanese . For example , the non - standard constituents in scrambled derivations like Germanic ﬁgure 2c are predicted to “feed” type - dependent coordination , subject to the restriction on valency noted at the beginning of the section , just like all the standard ones in ﬁgure 2a , and like the simpler residues of Heavy NP Shift ( 44 ) in English : ( 53 ) I [ bought from Harry and gave to Mary ] a very beautiful book . In the case of the Swiss - German sentences in ﬁgure 2 , there are further derivations for the same word - orders which can make any contiguous sub - sequence of verbs and arguments into a con - stituent that can coordinate subject to the same restriction ( Steedman , 1985 , 2000b ) , as predicted by the generalization ( 51 ) . The argument and adjunct categories that are involved in cluster coordination of this kind are simply the categories they bear in situ . Ross’s 1970 generalization to the effect that rightward ar - guments and adjuncts universally cluster - coordinate in canonical order to the right , and leftward to the left , is thereby predicted as a consequence of the CPP , 19 . The non - canonical argument sequence in the English Heavy NP Shift construction analysed at ( 44 ) , as in ( 54a ) , is not typable as a constituent , and is not predicted to coordinate : ( 54 ) a . I gave to Harry a book . b . I gave to Harry a book and to Alice a record . Nevertheless , ( 54b ) is widely accepted ( Beavers and Sag , 2004b ) , as are the related German scrambled ditransitives . Other cases of non - constituent coordination noted by Beavers and Sag ( 2004b ) are not even limited to sequences of the same type : ( 55 ) a . ? I showed [ three boys a video ] S / ( ( S / NP ) / NP ) and [ a movie to two girls ] S / ( ( S / PP ) / NP ) . b . ? I showed [ a video to three boys ] S / ( ( S / PP ) / NP ) and [ two girls a movie ] S / ( ( S / NP ) / NP ) Such examples seem to arise from less strictly type - dependent processes like gapping and strip - ping that do not seem to be purely syntactic ( Hankamer and Sag , 1976 ; Steedman , 2000b ) . Johnson ( 2017 ) follows Neijt ( 1979 ) in regarding argument / adjunct cluster coordination as arising from a rule of gapping , distinct from left - or right - node - raising . Both authors give as part of their rationale that to assume otherwise would require regarding clusters like Mary , pizza as constituents—which of course , under present assumptions is exactly what we should be do - ing . In Steedman 1990 , 2000b , I explain right - conjunct gapping as arising from exactly the same mechanism of composing order - preserving type - raised argument categories as in cluster coordi - concern with competence . 27 a . J ohn s a w M a r y t od a y a nd A li ce y e s t e r d a y S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) ( S \ N P ) / N P S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) S \ S ( X \ (cid:63) X ) / (cid:63) X S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) S \ S : λ p . p j oh n : l a m bda x λ y . pa s t ( s eexy ) : λ p . p m a r y : λ s . t oda y s : λ p λ q . p (cid:117) q : λ p . pa li ce : λ s . ye s t e r da y s > B < B < B S / N P S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) : λ x . pa s t ( s eex j ohn ) : λ p . t oda y ( p m a r y ) : λ p . ye s t e r da y ( pa li ce ) < > S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) λ p . ye s t e r da y ( pa li ce ) ∧ t oda y ( p m a r y ) < S : ye s t e r da y ( pa s t ( s ee a li ce j ohn ) ) ∧ t oda y ( pa s t ( s ee m a r y j ohn ) ) b . J ohn g a v e M a r y p i zza a nd A li ce p a s t a S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ N P ) ( ( S \ N P ) / N P ) / N P ( S / N P ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / N P ) / N P ) S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) ( X \ (cid:63) X ) / (cid:63) X ( S / N P ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / N P ) / N P ) S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / N P ) : λ p . p j ohn : λ w λ x λ y . pa s t ( g i ve w xy ) : λ p . p m a r y : λ p . pp i zz a : λ p λ q . p (cid:117) q : λ p . pa li ce : λ p . ppa s t a > B 2 < B < B ( S / N P ) / N P S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / N P ) / N P ) S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / N P ) / N P ) : λ w λ x . pa s t ( g i ve w x j ohn ) : λ p . p m a r y p i zz a : λ p . pa li ce pa s t a < > S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / N P ) / N P ) λ p . ( pa li ce pa s t a ) ∧ ( p m a r y p i zz a ) < S : pa s t ( g i ve a li ce pa s t a j ohn ) ∧ pa s t ( g i ve m a r y p i zz a j ohn ) c . R hod d a dd Gw yn l y fr i M a i r a d a r l un i M e g a n G a v e Gw yn a book t o M a i r a nd a p i c t u r e t o M e g a n < B ( ( S / PP ) / N P ) / N P ( ( S / PP ) / N P ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( ( S / PP ) / N P ) / N P ) ( S / PP ) \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / PP ) / N P ) S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S / PP ) ( X \ (cid:63) X ) / (cid:63) X S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / PP ) / N P ) < < B ( S / PP ) / N P S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / PP ) / N P ) < > S \ (cid:5) (cid:63) ( ( S / PP ) / N P ) < S Figure 4 : Argument / Adjunct Cluster Coordination 28 nation , albeit including the subject , and with a separate discourse information - based source for the gap itself . Hirsch and Wagner ( 2015 ) go further than Johnson in taking right - node raising of even a single argument as consequent upon gapping , while Hirsch ( 2017 ) seeks to reduce even VP co - ordination / conjunction reduction , ﬁgure 3a , to gapping , also consistent with subject type - raising . Morpho - lexical type - raising can therefore be thought of as offering a support for these au - thors’ claims concerning the relatedness of these constructions , without endorsing their conclu - sion that a discontinuous gapping rule per se is their common origin . Similarly , since the multiple copies of variables that the conjunction category brings to lf in derivations like ﬁgure 3a are , as noted earlier , formally equivalent to a directed acyclic graph in which they are represented as a single node , the theory can also be seen as offering a constrained mechanism for establishing multidominance , of the kind assumed by ( McCawley , 1982 , 1987 ; Ojeda and Huck , 1987 ; Phillips , 2003 ) , and Citko ( 2018 ; 2017 , n . 5 notwithstanding ) . A number of critics have pointed out that the present theory seems to predict that examples like ( 56a ) below should be grammatical , because the conjuncts Alice and Mary said that John seem both to be syntactically typable as S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) : ( 56 ) a . ? [ Alice ] S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) and [ Mary said that John ] S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) , liked the movie . b . ? [ Alice said that John ] S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) and [ Mary said that Fred ] S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) , liked the movie . However , the comparable oddity of ( 56b ) suggests that what is wrong with ( 56a ) is not the types , but some difﬁculty related to processing associated with forming constituents like ? Mary said that John , by composition into subjects , such as the fact that English subjects are locally ambiguous as to raised type until the verb is encountered . ( Such fragments also seem resistant to being marked as prosodic phrases in the manner exempliﬁed in ﬁgure 3c . ) Such a restriction might also explain the “No Embedding” constraint on medial gapping that excludes example like the following ( Hankamer , 1979 : 19—see Johnson , 2017 for discussion ) : ( 57 ) * [ Alfonse ] S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) stole the emeralds , and [ I think that Mugsy ] S / (cid:5) (cid:63) ( S \ NP ) , the pearls . As Johnson notes , this constraint does not seem to be universal . Farsi and Hungarian are verb - ﬁnal languages which allow rightward “SOV and SO” gapping . Farudi , 2013 : 75ff , Bîlbîie and Faghiri ( 2022 ) , and Lipták , 2019 : 835 show that both allow embedded rightward gapping equiva - lent to ( 57 ) . Consistent with the above conjecture , both languages are morphologically cased , so that the type of the embedded subject is disambiguated in advance of the verb , unlike English . The generalization that is captured above is that any contiguous sequence of verbs and / or their arguments and / or adjuncts that can compose to yield a category with bounded valency , in - cluding the non - standard constituents involved in there - insertion and those discussed in connec - tion with the Scrambling / Node - raising generalization ( 51 ) in section 3 and examples like those in ﬁgure 2b , are predicted to “feed” the process of coordination of constituents of the same type ( cf . Steedman , 1985 , 2000b ) . The combination of composition - merger and morpho - lexical case type - raising thereby allows a wide range of “deletions under coordination” to be analyzed purely in terms of contiguous “external” merger , of the varieties introduced in section 2 . 2 , and as con - stituent coordination ( albeit under an extended deﬁnition of constituency ) , without movement , deletion , extra - lexical copying , syntactic multidominance , “parallel merge” , or G / HPSG - style passing of features speciﬁc to extraction . 29 6 Wh - extraction The residues of right - node raising in examples like ﬁgure 3b are strikingly similar to the residues of leftward movement in relativization . To analyze unbounded Wh - movement as merger , it too must be characterized as application of a second - order function to such a residue . However , the category of Mary said she liked in ﬁgure 3b is rightward S / NP with respect to its complement NP . The CPP theorems of Consistency ( 12 ) and Inheritance ( 13 ) exclude syntactic operations that override or alter lexical directionality or its derivational projection onto S / NP , such as FLIP in Williams’s ( 2003 ) CAT version of categorial grammar . Fronted elements , unlike right - node - raised ones , must therefore bear a non - order preserving raised type of the form S (cid:48) / ( S | NP ) , where S (cid:48) is a clausal type distinct from S , such as S t , S whq , N \ N , etc . ) . As in all cases of leftward and rightward movement , the derivation achieves the effect of internal merger by ﬁrst composing the residue S | NP , which binds an object at lf , using the rules of adjacent external merger listed in section 2 . 2 , then applying the fronted raised type to it in a further external merge to “label” the result S (cid:48) . By reducing internal merger to external , the present theory avoids anything corresponding to the disjunctive deﬁnition of merger in the label - ing algorithm of Chomsky , 2008 : 145 . The latter separately stipulates that the internal merger of α with β to form the node or set { α , β } assigns it the label β , rather than the α stipulated for external merge , a distinction that “strongly suggests a generalization is being missed” ( Boeckx , 2015 : 37 ) . 6 . 1 Some Simple Cases Topicalization is the simplest case of move as external merge , where the displaced item carries a category such as S t / ( S / NP ) , licensed either by sentence - initial position / prosody , as in English , or morphologically , as in Japanese , and marking the resulting S as t ( opicalized ) ( we pass over the information structural semantics of topicalization itself in the lf ) : ( 58 ) Movies , she likes S t / ( S / NP ) : λ p . pmovies S / ( S \ NP 3s ) : λ p . pher ( S \ NP 3s ) / NP : λ x λ y . pres ( likexy ) > B S / NP : λ x . pres ( likexher ) > S : pres ( likemoviesher ) Wh - question formation is similar , apart from the fact that wh - items other than the subject specify subject - inversion , of which only auxiliaries are heads in English : ( 59 ) What does she like ? S whq / ( S inv / NP ) ( S inv / VP ) / NP 3s ( S inv / VP ) \ ( ( S inv / VP ) ) / NP 3s VP / NP : λ p λ wh . pwh : λ y λ p . pres ( py ) : λ p . pher : λ x λ y . likexy < S inv / VP : λ p . pres ( pher ) > B S inv / NP : λ x . pres ( likexher ) > S whq : λ wh . pres ( likewhher ) ( The logical form of a wh - question is simply a λ - term representing a property which is true of entities that answer the question , binding an answer - variable wh contributed by the wh - item . ) Wh - items such as relative pronouns bear similarly category - changing , non - order preserving type - raised categories . For example : 30 ( 60 ) a . who , that : = ( N agr \ N agr ) / ( S \ NP agr ) : λ p λ n λ wh . nwh ∧ pwh b . who ( m ) , that : = ( N \ N ) / ( S / NP ) : λ p λ n λ wh . nwh ∧ pwh ( 61 ) the movie that she likes NP ↑ / N N ( N \ N ) / ( S / NP ) S / ( S \ NP 3s ) ( S \ NP 3s ) / NP : λ n λ p . p ( then ) : movie : λ p λ n λ wh . nwh ∧ pwh : λ p . pher : λ x λ y . likexy > B S / NP : λ x . likexher > N \ N : λ n λ wh . nwh ∧ likewhher < N : λ wh . moviewh ∧ likewhher > NP : λ p . p ( the ( λ wh . moviewh ∧ likewhher ) ) All of these constructions are unbounded , as we saw for related right - node raising ( 52 ) , because residues like she says she likes S / NP , do you regret that you love S inv / NP , and she said that she likes S / NP , are all derivable with the same type S / NP as she likes ( see ( 62 ) below ) . In each case ( 58 - 61 ) , the logical form of the wh - item “mover” has λ - binder and variable “copies” of p , the “residue of movement” already in place , with the position of the former already speciﬁed by its syntactic category S (cid:48) / ( S | NP ) as at the left periphery of the latter ( where S (cid:48) is again S t , S whq , N \ N , etc . ) . The binder passes the lf of its argument S / NP to its result as the value of p in an expression such as papples in ( 58 ) , λ wh . pwh in ( 59 ) , and λ n λ wh . nwh ∧ pwh in ( 61 ) , It does not call for wh - movers to adjoin to a null C head of CP that is never realized at either of the output levels of phonological or logical form , as in the standard Minimalist analysis criticized by Starke ( 2001 , 2004 ) . It is in fact the same mechanism that was used in non - movement examples like ( 42 ) and ﬁgure 3c to bind in situ arguments to their theta - positions . This interpretation of copying is a therefore a theory of selection and merger in general , rather than of movement alone . 6 . 2 “Pied - piping” and “Late Merge” as Multiple Reconstruction More complex “pied - piping” wh - items like which movie or “the height of the lettering on the covers of which” inherit this category from wh words , just as ordinary nominals do from deter - miners like ( 40 ) and ( 41 ) ( Steedman , 1996 , 2012 : 89 - 91 ) . For example : ( 62 ) Which movie does she say she liked ? ( S whq / ( S inv / NP ) ) / N N ( S inv / VP ) / NP 3s NP ↑ 3sf VP / S NP ↑ 3sf ( S \ NP ) / NP : λ n λ p λ wh . nwh ∧ pwh : movie : λ p λ y . pres ( py ) : λ p . pher : λ s λ y . saysy : λ p . pher : λ x λ y . past ( likexy ) > < > B S whq / ( S inv / NP ) S inv / NP S / NP : λ p λ wh . moviewh ∧ pwh : λ p λ x . pres ( pher ) : λ x . past ( likexher ) > B S inv / S : λ s . pres ( saysher ) > B S inv / NP : λ x . pres ( say ( past ( likexher ) ) her ) > S whq : λ wh . moviewh ∧ pres ( say ( past ( likewhher ) ) her ) The logical form that results from derivation ( 62 ) results from applying the wh - item lf λ p λ wh . moviewh ∧ pwh , to the potentially unbounded lf - residue of relativization corresponding does she say she liked —that is , λ x . pres ( say ( past ( likexher ) ) her ) . The result is to “reconstruct” the λ - bound answer - variable wh as the object of like , c - commanded by both its subject and that of say , namely her . However , reconstruction in this sense does not involve the entire wh - item , as seems to be 31 standardly assumed under the copy theory . In particular , the pied - piped noun property movie is not carried along with the answer variable wh , which is separately “reconstructed” as its argu - ment , as under relativization in ( 61 ) . Von Stechow ( 1996 ) argues for a related derivational analysis , in which covert movement of wh out of the overtly - moved whose books is achieved at “an intermediate level between S - structure and LF . . . called WH - structure . . . followed by reconstruction at LF . ” ( Von Stechow’s covert movement analysis is endorsed by Sauerland and Heck ( 2003 ) and Lechner ( 2013 ) : 169 , who discuss a number of LF - Intervention effects in support . ) In present terms , von Stechow’s WH - structure and the domain of covert movement are both latent in the lexical logical form of wh - words , and the dependencies deﬁned there by λ - bound wh . The present analysis resolves a notorious difﬁculty for the binding theory . Standard recon - struction of the full moved item “which book that Harry reviewed” ( or its lf ) to object position in examples like the following would lead to a Condition C violation : ( 63 ) Which book that Harry i reviewed did he i like which book that Harry i reviewed ? This observation has led to a plethora of proposals for “optional” reconstruction , free type - lifting or “continuation - passing” , “Roll - up” movement , “Late Merge” of adjuncts , or deﬁnitions of binding in terms of “Almost C - command” , “Partially - determined Full Interpretation” , “bleed - ing” Condition C , higher - type ( ( e → t ) → t ) traces , and / or “hybrid” movement systems involv - ing both copies and traces ( Reinhart , 1983 ; Higginbotham , 1983 ; Lebeaux , 1991 , 2009 ; Jacob - son , 1994 ; Chomsky , 1995b : 200 - 204 ; Hornstein , 1995 : 108 - 111 ; Brody , 1995 : 129 - 144 ; Romero , 1998 ; Fox , 1999 , Takahashi and Hulsey , 2009 ; Barker , 2012 ; Bruening , 2014 ; Lechner , 1998 , 2018 ; Keine and Poole , 2018 ) . According to the theory proposed here , by contrast , the logical form of ( 63 ) is the following ( the derivation is suggested as an exercise ) : ( 64 ) λ wh . ( ( bookwh ) ∧ ( reviewwhharry ) ) ∧ ( likewhhim ) While the lf “reconstructs” the λ - bound answer - variable wh into argument position in the indi - vidual predications that mean the answer wh is a book , that Harry reviewed it , and he liked it , there is no sense in which him c - commands its antecedent harry at lf . 42 Of course , neither does harry command him at lf in ( 64 ) , so the way pronouns actually do access their referents remains to be explained . However , examples like ( 63 ) suggest that the relation between Harry and he is not determined by structural command or variable binding at any level , and that Condition C and its “obviation” or “bleeding” under reconstruction reﬂects possibilities for coreference to a dynamic discourse - model that have nothing directly to do with c - command or true binding of the kind seen with quantiﬁer - bound variables , of a kind proposed by Postal ( 1966 ) , Wasow ( 1972 ) , Stalnaker ( 1974 ) , Lewis ( 1979b ) , Kamp ( 1981 / 1984 ) , and Kuno ( 1987 ) , and discussed by Chierchia , Jacobson , and Bruening . Such a conclusion seems consistent with the referentiality effects on reconstruction possibilities noted by Reinhart and Reuland ( 1991 ) and Heycock ( 1995 ) , and with the resemblance of the lf conjuncts in ( 64 ) to 42 On the assumption that related examples involving complements like “Which claim that Harry i is a genius does he i endorse ? ” have lfs like the following , similar avoidance of Condition C violations is predicted for them , contra Chomsky , 1995b : 204 and Brody , 1995 : 140 : ( i ) λ wh . claim ( geniusharry ) wh ∧ endorsewhhim 32 “phases” ( Chomsky , 2001 ) . Clearly , there is more to say about this open problem than there is room for here ( cf . Büring , 2005 : 256 - 260 ; Bruening and Al Khalaf , 2019 ; Sportiche , 2019 ) . 6 . 3 Islands The various types of long - range dependency considered in the preceding sections have one char - acteristic in common : In every case , the element we think of as displaced is an argument , such as NP , albeit with a raised type such as S t / ( S / NP ) , and the residue of displacement is a function over that type , which must be derived by iterated function composition . 43 If a category is an adjunct , such as the adverbial whistling “Dixie” , VP \ VP , then the fact that adjuncts select for the VP , rather than being selected by it as an argument , means that no rule permitted by the Combinatory Projection Principle of Consistency ( 12 ) of section 2 . 2 will allow a category of the form ( X \ X ) / Y ( such as the adverbial head whistling ( VP \ VP ) / NP ) to combine with its second argument X ( such as the VP work ) to the left in advance of combination with Y ( such as the NP “Dixie” ) to the right . Under the present deﬁnition of merger , adjuncts are therefore predicted to be islands to ex - traction , as observed by Huang , 1982 : 505 , following Cattell ( 1976 ) , and many others : ( 65 ) a . ∗ What tune does Harry work whistling ? S whq / ( S inv / NP ) ( S inv / VP ) / NP 3s NP ↑ 3s VP ( VP \ VP ) / NP < ∗∗∗ S / VP ∗∗∗ b . * Who did Harry [ ﬁle the reports ] VP [ without telling ] ( VP \ VP ) / NP ? c . * Who do you know a [ man ] N [ that met ] ( N \ N ) / NP ? Because all arguments are assumed to be lexically type - raised , in most cases to the exclusion of the corresponding unraised category , and type - raised categories X ↑ are VP - adjunct - like , in the sense that they select verbs and verb - phrases as in VP | ( VP | X ) etc , we correctly predict that raised arguments including NP ↑ are also islands : 44 ( 66 ) * What do you [ doubt ] VP / NP [ the claim that he has read ] ( VP \ ( VP / NP ) ) / NP ? The possibility of explaining island effects in this way depends crucially on the fact that linear correspondence is speciﬁed in the lexicon , and that type - raising is lexical rather than syntactic . In English , S , S , and the various kinds of VP complements are the only phrasal arguments that exist in their unraised form . However , their participation in argument - cluster coordinations 43 This generalization holds for “remnant” movement , such as Germanic transitive verb - topicalization , in which the OV verb is a ( crucially , rightward ) argument of the type - raised accusative : ( i ) Essen wird er ¨Apfel Eat will he apples S t / ( S inv / ( VP \ NP ) ) ( S inv / VP ) / NP 3s ( S inv / VP ) / ( ( S inv / VP ) / NP 3s ) VP / ( VP \ NP ) < S inv / VP > B S inv / ( VP \ NP ) > S t 44 Certain constructions that look like extractions from NP and PP like the following seem to arise from lexicalized multi - word expressions or verb - particle constructions : ( i ) a . Who did they take advantage of ? b . What will you paint a picture of ? The relative weakness of “derived” subject islands such as unaccusatives found by Jurka ( 2013 ) and Polinsky et al . ( 2013 ) remains unexplained in these terms . 33 like the following , analogous to those in ﬁgure 3 , suggests that they also bear adjunct or raised categories : ( 67 ) I will tell ( VP / S ) / NP [ [ [ Donald ] [ ( that ) he is ﬁred ] ] and [ [ Ronald ] [ ( that ) he is hired ] ] ] VP \ ( ( VP / S ) / NP ) . The categorial ambiguity claimed here for English complements is clearly a lexical degree of freedom upon which languages can be expected to differ , some including sentential complements that bear only adjunct or type - raised categories , making them islands , as appears to be the case for daß - complements in many Northern dialects of German , or including different complement types , some of which are adjunct - only , and others subcategorized - for arguments , as is the case for wh / that - complements in English : ( 68 ) a . * Who were you surprised when you saw ? b . Who were you surprised that you saw ? If a language like English can arrange its lexicon so as to make certain components such as that - complements bear both adjunct / type - raised ( island ) and complement ( non - island ) cate - gories , it is clear that we must expect islands in general to appear to exhibit a continuum of extractability , from “strong” islands bearing only adjunct categories that are not subcategorized - for and completely block extraction , to “weak” islands bearing both adjunct and argument cat - egories , the latter sometimes subcategorized for by particular verbs . Those verbs and no others can therefore compose into the argument category , allowing extraction ( Cinque , 1990 ; Szabolcsi , 2007 ; Truswell , 2007b , a ; Boeckx , 2012 : 16 ) . Truswell illustrates the strong / weak distinction in minimal pairs like the following , among many others : ( 69 ) a . * What tune does John work whistling ? b . What tune did John drive Mary crazy whistling ? Example ( 69a ) , repeated from ( 65a ) , shows that VP - modiﬁers like whistling “Dixie” are not subcategorized - for by predicates like work VP , with which they can only combine as adjuncts VP \ VP , which block extraction as in ( 65 ) . However , ( 69b ) , shows that whistling “Dixie” also carries the argument category VP ing , allowing extraction past subcategorizing verbs , as in What tune is John whistling ? . In the case of ( 69b ) , this implies a category ( ( VP / VP ing ) / AP ) / NP for drive and related causatives like make , subcategorizing for VP ing , and thereby allowing ( 69b ) by composition of drive Mary crazy VP / VP ing into the other category for whistling , VP ing / NP . These observations mean that when we talk of modiﬁers like whistling “Dixie” as “weak islands” , we simply mean that they are lexically ambiguous . They are strong islands under their adjunct category , and non - islands under their argument category—but only for matrix verbs that actually specify that category . This means of course that John drives Mary crazy whistling “Dixie” is ambiguous between a ( preferred ) argument reading in which it is speciﬁcally John’s whistling “Dixie” that drives Mary crazy , and an adjunct reading analogous to John works whistling “Dixie” , where John merely happens to whistle that tune while doing whatever it is that actually drives her crazy . The exact conditions under which weak island ambiguities are resolved in favor of the com - plement category , or novel complement - specifying verbs are accommodated via the usual pro - cess of adult lexical acquisition , to permit such extractions , remain unclear . They depend upon the matrix - verb’s subcategorization ( s ) , the parsing model , and / or world knowledge , as proposed 34 in “connectionist” neural - computational terms by Dowty , 2003 : 60 and in event - semantic terms by Szabolcsi and Zwarts ( 1993 ) and Truswell , rather than upon syntax alone . 6 . 4 Celtic Complementation : Unbounded vs . Cyclic Movement Scots Gaelic , like other Celtic languages , has a relative clause marker a . However , all authorities insist that Gaelic , Irish , and Welsh a is not a relative pronoun , parallel to English wh , but a complementizer ( McCloskey , 1979 ; Gillies , 1993 ; Borsley et al . , 2007 ) . Gaelic also has neutral complementizer gu ( n ) . The two complementizers are in complemen - tary distribution : gu ( n ) never acts as a relative marker , and a cannot function as a sentential complementizer for verbs like abair ( “say” ) . When a - relativization is long - range , the embedded complementizer ( s ) must be a , not gu ( n ) . That is , gu ( n ) complements are islands , parallel to Northern German daß , and to Irish go : Adger notes the following pattern : ( 70 ) a . . . . gu ( n ) . . . gu ( n ) . . . ( complementation ) b . * . . . gu ( n ) . . . a . . . ( * ) c . . . . a . . . a . . . t ( wh - relativization ) d . * . . . a . . . gu ( n ) . . . t ( * ) McCloskey ( 1990 , 2017 ) , Adger ( 2003 ) ; Adger and Ramchand ( 2005 ) , and Boeckx ( 2008 ) have claimed that this pattern of relative clause formation , which also appears in Irish , shows that movement is necessarily cyclic and hence derivation - dependent . because unbounded movement would not be able to “notice” the presence of an island barrier gu ( n ) in pattern ( 70d ) . However , under the present account , the residue of movement must be composed by lo - cal mergers , including those involving complementizers . The fact that gu ( n ) is a barrier sim - ply means that gu ( n ) - complements are type - raised as S \ ( S / S (cid:48) ) , and hence islands , like daß - complements in many Northern German dialects . By contrast , a is an unraised complementizer S a / S , which can be composed into like English that . We pass over the further details here for reasons of space . Like any island effect , movement is blocked because the residue of relativization cannot form in the ﬁrst place . The mover a has no need to “notice” why not . 45 7 Symmetry and Asymmetry in Left - and Right - Extraction The reduction of both wh - extraction and right - node – raising to contiguous leftward or rightward adjacent merge depends on the possibility of making the residue of both into a constituent of type S | X by identical processes of function composition . The present theory , like some other Minimal - ist accounts and the earliest version of GPSG ( Gazdar , 1981 ) , therefore makes a broad prediction of symmetry for left - and right - extraction in English : whatever can undergo wh - extraction from the periphery of a typable constituent can potentially right - node – raise from it , and vice versa , broadly subject to the same constraints , as Boeckx 2015 : 38 points out . For example , both leftward and rightward extraction are predicted to be subject to the Co - ordinate Structure Constraint ( CSC ) , the “Across - the - Board” ( ATB ) exception to CSC , and the 45 The pattern in Irish is similar to Gaelic , but is complicated by the possibility of resumptive relativization . A related analysis appears to be applicable to the Germanic “ wh - copying” phenomenon discussed by Felser ( 2004 ) . 35 Same - Case Condition on the ATB exception to CSC ( Ross , 1967 ; Williams , 1978 ; Gazdar , 1981 ; Pesetsky , 1982 ; Sag et al . , 1985 ; Steedman , 1985 , 2000b ) , according to the following pattern : 46 ( 71 ) a . Which movie did she say [ she liked and Harry disliked ] ? b . * Which movie did she say [ she liked and Harry disliked the play ] ? c . * Which movie did she say [ she liked the play and Harry disliked ] ? d . * Which movie did she say [ she liked and annoyed Harry ] ? ( 72 ) a . [ She said she liked and Harry said he disliked ] the movie . b . * [ She said she liked and Harry said he disliked the play ] the movie . c . * [ She said she liked the play and Harry said he disliked ] the movie . d . * [ She said she liked and annoyed Harry ] the movie . ATB extraction has been attributed by Nunes ( 2004 : 127 - 130 ) and Zhang ( 2010 ) to sideward movement of which movie from the right conjunct to the left , although Nunes notes that this does not explain the CSC itself and the unacceptability of ( 71b , c , and d ) . Like the related phenomena of parasitic wh - movement and adjunct control ( 25 ) , which Nunes also attributes to sideward movement , the behavior illustrated in ( 71 ) follows instead , as in GPSG , from the fact that the category ( X \ (cid:63) X ) / (cid:63) X of conjunctions limits them to combining categories of like type . As for Gazdar ( 1981 ) , both the CSC and the sideward - movement / parallel - merge case - dependent ATB exception to it are therefore corollaries of the lexicalization of coordination as type - compatibility , rather than arising from structure - dependence in rules or extrinsic parallelism constraints , as proposed in Goodall , 1987 ; Zhang , 2010 ; Citko , 2012 , and Citko and Graˇcanin - Yuksek , 2020 . Nevertheless , despite the general tendency to symmetry between left - and right - extraction possibilities , there is an important difference between them . Whereas rightward movers bear the same order - preserving type - raised category as in - situ arguments , English left - extracting cat - egories such as the relative pronoun ( N \ N ) / ( S | NP ) differ in being non - order - preserving This difference permits certain exceptions to symmetry that we turn to next , all of which must under present assumptions be speciﬁed in the English lexicon , and , as such , are expected to vary across other languages . 7 . 1 Embedded Subject Extraction One very compelling left - right asymmetry arises from the fact that English embedded subjects can wh - extract from the bare complements selected by a very restricted class of verbs like think , while the corresponding rightward movement remains impossible : ( 73 ) a . Which critic did you say likes the movie ? b . * Harry thinks walks and Alice says talks , a Boojum . The possibility of ( 73a ) arises from the possibility of crossing composition of the verb into the complement : 47 46 Some apparent exceptions to ATB wh - extraction like the following were noted by Ross ( 1967 ) ; Goldsmith ( 1985 ) ; Lakoff ( 1986 ) ; Munn ( 1999 ) ; Kehler ( 2002 ) , and Asudeh et al . ( 2002 ) : ( i ) This is the stuff that those guys in the Caucasus drink all day , and live to be a hundred . They are discussed by Postal ( 1998 : Ch . 4 ) and by Steedman ( 2012 : 94 - 95 ) , who point out that the examples in question are heavily pragmatically loaded . 47 This analysis of subject extraction is different from the one presented in earlier publications since Steedman ( 1987 ) . I am indebted to Haixia Man for discussions of subject extraction in Chinese that led me to it . 36 ( 74 ) Which critic did you say likes the movie ? S whq / ( S inv \ NP 3s ) ( S inv / VP VP / S S \ NP 3s > B × VP \ NP 3s > B × S inv \ NP 3s > S whq Since the residue of embedded subject relativization bears the same category as that of root subject relativization , the possibility of ATB “left - node - raising” multiple subject extractions like the following is predicted : ( 75 ) A critic that [ [ panned the movie , ] S \ NP but [ you said liked it . ] S \ NP ] S \ NP However , the residue of embedded subject wh - movement bears the leftward - looking cate - gory S \ NP . Right node raising arguments simply bear the standard order - preserving category of rightward arguments , so RNR of embedded SVO subjects ( 73b ) remains impossible . Potential overgeneralizations like the following are ruled out for the same reason as ( 50 ) in German and the possibility of verb - fronting in English ( see note 43 ) : there is no lexical verb - type , and therefore no morpholexically cased type - raised NP , that would allow the derivations : ( 76 ) ∗ Did you Harry say likes the movie ? S inv / VP VP \ ( VP / NP ) VP / S S \ NP 3s > B × VP \ NP 3s ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ The Fixed Subject Effect ( Bresnan , 1972 ) or “that - trace ” Filter ( Chomsky and Lasnik , 1977 ) can then be captured lexically by limiting the complementizers in question using / (cid:5) (cid:63) slash - type to disallow crossing composition without appeal to any constraints such as the Empty Category Principle ( ECP ) of Chomsky ( 1981 ) , the Generalized Left - Branch Condition ( GLBC ) and related SLASH Termination Metarules of GPSG ( Gazdar , 1981 : 161 , Gazdar et al . ( 1985 ) : 161 ) , or the Trace Condition of HPSG ( Pollard and Sag , 1994 : 172 - 3 ) : ( 77 ) ∗ Which critic did you say that likes the movie ? S whq / ( S inv \ NP ) S inv / S S / (cid:5) (cid:63) S S \ NP 3s ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ Nevertheless , if sentential adverbials like in your opinion are less restricted S / S , subject extrac - tions like the following , noticed by Culicover ( 1993 ) , are correctly predicted : ( 78 ) Which critic did you say that in your opinion likes the movie ? S whq / ( S inv \ NP 3s ) S inv / S S / (cid:5) (cid:63) S S / S S \ NP 3s > B S / S > B × S \ NP 3s > B × S inv \ NP 3s > S whq The above account correctly predicts that embedded subject - object extraction asymmetries are not characteristic of verb - ﬁnal and verb - initial languages ( Chung , 1983 ; Maling and Zaenen , 37 1978 ) : either both will extract , or neither will , as in the various German dialects . 7 . 2 Right - edge Restrictions The following apparent asymmetry in English dative extraction led Wilder , 1999 : ex . ( 5 ) to pos - tulate a Right Edge Restriction ( RER ) speciﬁcally on right - node – raising ( 79a ) , from which left - ward wh - extraction ( b ) is exempt ( the judgments are Wilder’s ) : 48 ( 79 ) a . * I gave a present and congratulated all the winners . b . The man who I gave a present and congratulated . Under the current theory , according to which the residues of wh - constructions and RNR are identically formed , either both are predicted to to be in , or both out . Under the theory presented so far , the latter is the case , for reasons discussed in connection with example ( 43 ) . This prediction is consistent with early transformational accounts of the English ditransitive by North American linguists , who assumed that even the simplest wh - extraction of datives was disallowed ( Fillmore , 1965 ; Oehrle , 1976 ) , a restriction which would exclude both ( 79a ) and ( b ) . The fact that many speakers nevertheless accept dative relatives seems to suggest the availability for such speakers of an alternative , possibly deprecated , scrambling lexical category for ditransi - tives , allowing derivations like the following , and allowing both ( 79b ) and ( a ) , as well as ? I gave a present all the winners , otherwise excluded as in ( 43 ) : ( 80 ) ? The girl that I gave ﬂowers ( N \ N ) / ( S / NP ) S / ( S \ NP ) ? ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) / NP ? ( S \ NP ) \ ( ( S \ NP ) / NP ) ) λ p λ n λ x . nx ∧ px . λ p . pme λ x λ w λ y . gavewxy λ p . pﬂowers < B × ? ( S \ NP ) / NP : λ x λ y . gaveﬂowersxy > B ? S / NP : λ x . gaveﬂowersxme > ? N \ N : λ n λ x . nx ∧ gaveﬂowersxme While this analysis allows the to my ear marginal ( 79a ) , it captures the also somewhat marginal ( 79b ) , while continuing to allow Heavy NP shift examples like the following , which any more general restriction on non - peripheral rightward movement would otherwise appear to be in danger of excluding : ( 81 ) a . I saw yesterday and congratulated all the winners . b . I sold to the library and Mary donated to the museum several very valuable books . To the extent that Wilder’s asymmetry ( 79 ) is real , it may reﬂect a differing degree of seman - tic compatibility of full - arguments and wh - elements when called on to simultaneously satisfy dative and accusative rules across the two conjuncts , rather than extractability as such . 7 . 3 Asymmetric Islands There have been many claims in the literature since Wexler and Culicover ( 1980 : 299 ) that left - and right - movement are similarly asymmetrical with respect to island constraints—but in the op - posite direction to subject extraction and RER above , with RNR the more permissive ( Beavers and Sag , 2004a ; Cann et al . , 2005 ; Sabbagh , 2007 ; Citko and Graˇcanin - Yuksek , 2020 : but see 48 Related examples were the reason for GPSG abandoning Gazdar’s 1981 claim that RNR was mediated by the same mechanism as wh - extraction , and led to HPSG’s uneasy embrace of a deletion / ellipsis analysis ( Beavers and Sag , 2004a ) . 38 Postal , 1998 , Steedman , 2012 : 101 - 103 , Bachrach and Katzir , 2009 , and Kubota and Levine , 2020 : 325 - 327 for counter - arguments . ) Examples like the following are not entirely compelling ( the judgments are Beavers and Sag’s ) , especially when care is taken to make intonational prosody the same in ( a ) as in ( b ) ( Steedman , 2000a , 2012 : 103 ) : ( 82 ) a . ? ? Those unﬂattering pictures of Qaddaﬁ , Yo knows several men who buy , and Jan knows several men who sell . b . Yo knows several men who buy , and Jan knows several men who sell , those unﬂattering pictures of Qaddaﬁ . It seems possible that the asymmetries between wh - and RNR – extraction claimed ( with some degree of uncertainty ) by Citko and Graˇcanin - Yuksek ( 2020 : ch . 3 ) for Slavic languages are sim - ilarly discourse - sensitive , rather than reﬂecting any fundamental difference in the nature of the long - range dependencies involved . Sabbagh , citing an anonymous reviewer , offers the following apparent RNR exception to the adjunct island constraint : ( 83 ) Politicians win when they defend , and lose when they attack , the right of a woman to an abortion . Again , the judgment is his , but the corresponding left - extraction What right do politicians win when they defend and lose when they attack ? seems no worse , especially when the same prosody is applied . The same seems to be true of the “non - coordinate RNR” examples discussed by Hudson ( 1976 ) ; Postal ( 1994 ) , and Phillips ( 2003 ) . Bachrach and Katzir ( 2009 ) and Hirsch and Wagner ( 2015 ) discuss related examples of ATB wh - extraction out of islands . The lack noted earlier of a clear distinction between strong and weak islands , and the dependence of the latter on pragmatic factors , make it hard to draw any ﬁrm conclusion from these data . 49 8 Conclusion : On Locality The notion of locality in syntactic relations that is proposed in this paper is deﬁned lexically , as the domain of a binarized head , such as a verb , specifying a number of co - arguments , with no distinction between the extracted or in - situ status of the latter . All of the syntactic combinatory rules listed in section 2 . 2 are by deﬁnition strictly local , by virtue of the adjacency assumption ( 3 ) and the string - adjacency – based deﬁnition of the slash directionality feature in section 2 . 1 . Those rules are thereby conditioned only on the syntactic categorial types of string - adjacent contiguous constituents , rather than on their derivational structure or logical form . They need no constraints on their operation other than those projected from lexical types . Surface syntactic discontinuity in all its forms can thereby be analyzed in terms of strictly local , contiguous merger of local domains . Its appearance in natural languages arises in every case from the merger of a second - order functor , ( such as a structurally - or morphologically - 49 Beavers and Sag , 2004a also note , following Davis ( 1992 ) , that in Hausa , an SVO language with object pro - drop , while ATB object wh - extraction is allowed , RNR is not ( Davis , 15 , 16 ) . However , the availability of object pro - drop in Hausa means that phonological emptiness cannot be taken as evidence of movement per se . If Hausa “movement” is really left - dislocation with pro - drop then there may be asymmetries with respect to discourse characteristics of left - and right - dislocated elements , with the former being by deﬁnition discourse - old as required by pro , but the latter required to be new or contrastive , as in English RNR . ( This suggestion seems consistent with Davis’s own analysis of ﬁnite and non - ﬁnite verbs in Hausa ( ibid : ex . ( 22 ) ) . ) Related considerations may explain the asymmetry noted by McCloskey ( 1986 ) for Irish prepositions , which engender obligatory pro - drop , and “strand” for right - node raising , but not for wh - extraction ( although pro can act as resumptive—see Legate 1999 : ex . ( 11 ) ) . 39 cased argument , wh - item , conjunction , raising verb and / or existential there ) , with its argument , a contiguous ﬁrst - order functor deﬁning the domain of dependency projection . That domain is originally established via λ - binding in lexical logical forms . Such bindings are projected onto derived categories by a succession of contiguous mergers , possibly including composition across tensed clause - boundaries , to create potentially unbounded dependency do - mains , without requiring cyclic mediation via any COMP “escape - hatch” . The possibility of such mergers is in general entirely independent of whether extraction is involved or not . “Internal” Merger is thereby reduced at the level of syntactic derivation to adjacent or “Ex - ternal” Merger , delivering on the promise of Epstein et al . ( 1998 ) , Chomsky ( 2001 / 2004 , 2007 , 2019 ) , and Epstein and Seely ( 2006 ) to reduce MOVE to purely local contiguous merger . Such mergers build derived categories monotonically , projecting unchanged the syntactic and semantic dependencies originally established in the lexicon , in conformity with the Inclu - siveness and Extension Conditions . In contrast to related Minimalist systems such as Jackendoff ( 1997 ) and Chomsky ( 2001 / 2004 ) , the counterparts of AGREE , MERGE , and phonological and semantic composition or TRANSFER , are entirely synchronous . As well as dynamic movement , the related apparatus of “probes” , “goals” , and “valuations” can be eliminated , together with at - tendant “feature deletion” and “visibility” conditions ( Radford , 2004 : 289 ) . Both the “external” and “internal” clauses of the labeling algorithm of Chomsky , 2008 : 145 , are deterministic conse - quences of the combinatory rules and the ( ﬁrst - or second – order ) lexical types that they project , without any possibility arising for “deviant” labeling . Different varieties of movement , such as roll - up / remnant , sideward , parallel , and head varieties , are are all reduced to contiguous merger . Discontinuity is “translated” by λ - bindings in the same sense as Heim and Kratzer’s Traces rule ( 1998 : 97 ) , Fox’s λ - calculus - based Trace Conversion ( 2002 : 67 ) , and Adger and Ramchand’s abstraction mechanism ( 2005 : 170 - 173 ) . The difference is that these dependencies originate as local λ - bindings in lexical logical forms and are directly projected as a consequence of the surface - compositional derivation itself ( cf . Epstein and Seely , 2006 : 7 - 8 , 178 - 180 ) . While a vari - able α and its binder λα do the work of copies in identifying the source and target of long - range dependency , they do so simply as a projection of the mechanism that binds local in situ comple - ments to lexical heads in derivations like ( 9 ) and ( 42 ) . As a consequence , derivation structure can be entirely eliminated as a representational level , along with attendant processes of translation to logical form . The sole structural level of repre - sentation is lf , but it is a representation to which syntactic derivation itself is entirely blind . ( The results of “covert” movement , such as QR ( including “long” QR ) and antecedence , are already established at this level , having been either projected , like wh - bindings , from lexical determin - ers like ( 41 ) ( Montague , 1973 ; Steedman , 2012 ) , or established dynamically ( Chierchia , 1995 ; Jacobson , 2014 ) ) . 50 As noted earlier ( see n . 17 ) , the combinatory rules of merger are of low “near - context - free” expressive power . The problem of language acquisition is thereby simpliﬁed . The Categorial and Adjacency assumptions ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) of section 2 and their corollary the CPP ( 19 ) generate all and only the universal set of rules of application and composition listed in section 2 . 2 . Semantic bootstrapping models of language acquisition , such as those of Abend et al . ( 2017 ) and Mao et al . 50 The present theory is therefore “pure derivational” , and representationally monotonic or “nonrepresentational” , in the sense of Brody ( 2002 ) and Stroik ( 2009 : 14 ) . Since everything derivable is well - formed and there are no tranderiva - tional constrints , it is by deﬁnition “crash - proof” in the sense of Frampton and Gutmann , 2002 . ) 40 ( 2021 ) , embody those assumptions as constitutive of the Computation , using those rules directly to map ( proxies for ) universal and / or grounded lf to a language - speciﬁc lexicon and model of derivation . They are incapable of even representing grammars of any more powerful class , and in particular have no need to list those axioms as substantive constraints , Minimalist - style , in order for that restriction to apply . It is often objected that this way of reducing MOVE to MERGE , unlike those involving explicit action - at - a - distance or feature - passing , requires us to forsake traditional notions of constituency , and to admit fragments like a woman saw and even Alice pasta as constituents in their own right , without the intervention of movement or deletion , as in derivations like ﬁgures 3b and 4b . Against this objection , it should be noted that the traditional constituent types are predicted by only two of the four traditional tests for constituency ( lexical substitutability and ability to move ) , while the other two ( ability to undergo coordination , and to support prosodic phrases ) support exactly the superset predicted by categorial systems ( Miller , 1992 ; Pesetsky , 1995 ; Steedman , 2000a ; Phillips , 2003 ; Lechner , 2003 ; Jacobson , 2006 ) . 51 This apparent tension only arises because , faced with the phenomenon of discontinuous con - stituency , standard Minimalism ( like most other grammar formalisms ) has clung to the traditional inventory of constituent types , at the cost of introducing discontinuity into the syntactic rules themselves . By contrast , the combinatory alternative maintains strict locality in syntactic rules by giving up traditional notions of constituency and command in derivational syntax , relegating them to the level of logical form and predicate - argument structure , where they belong . 52 References Abbott , Barbara . 1976 . Right Node Raising as a Test for Constituenthood . Linguistic Inquiry 7 : 639 – 642 . Abbott , Barbara . 1993 . A Pragmatic Account of the Deﬁniteness Effect in Existential Sentences . Journal of Pragmatics 19 : 39 – 55 . Abels , Klaus and Ad Neeleman . 2012 . Linear Asymmetries and the LCA . Syntax 15 : 25 – 74 . Abend , Omri , Tom Kwiatkowski , Nathaniel Smith , Sharon Goldwater , and Mark Steedman . 2017 . Boot - strapping Language Acquisition . Cognition 164 : 116 – 143 . Ades , Anthony and Mark Steedman . 1982 . On the Order of Words . Linguistics and Philosophy 4 : 517 – 558 . Adger , David . 2003 . Core Syntax : A Minimalist Approach . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Adger , David . 2010 . A Minimalist Theory of Feature Structure . Features : Perspectives on a Key Notion in Linguistics , edited by A . Kibert and Greville Corbett , 185 – 218 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Adger , David . 2013 . A Syntax of Substance . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Adger , David and Gillian Ramchand . 2005 . Merge and Move : Wh - Dependencies Revisited . Linguistic Inquiry 36 : 161 – 193 . Ajdukiewicz , Kazimierz . 1935 . Die syntaktische Konnexität . Polish Logic 1920 – 1939 , edited by Storrs McCall , 207 – 231 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Trans . from Studia Philosophica , 1 , 1 - 27 . Asudeh , Ash , Richard Crouch , Miriam Butt , and Tracy Holloway King . 2002 . Coordination and Parallelism in Glue Semantics : Integrating Discourse Cohesion and the Element Constraint . Proceedings of the LFG02 Conference , edited by Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway - King , 19 – 39 . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . 51 The fact that wh - movers need to be assigned second - order categories via the language - speciﬁc lexicon explains why not everything that is a constituent can move—for example , why inﬁnitival transitive verbs can prepose in German , but not in English—cf . note 43 . 52 The present proposal can be seen as observing a “Derivational Condition on Constituency” , as an adjunct to the standard Constituent Condition on the inputs and outputs of rules ( Chomsky , 1955 / 1975 : 210 - 211 ; Chomsky , 1977 : 171 ; Steedman , 2000b : 12 - 14 ) . 41 Bach , Emmon . 1979 . Control in Montague Grammar . Linguistic Inquiry 10 : 513 – 531 . Bach , Emmon . 1980 . In Defense of Passive . Linguistics and Philosophy 3 : 297 – 341 . Bachrach , Asaf and Roni Katzir . 2009 . Right - Node Raising and Delayed Spell - out . InterPhases : Phase - Theoretic Investigations of Linguistic Interfaces , edited by Kleanthes Grohmann , 283 – 316 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Baldridge , Jason . 2002 . Lexically Speciﬁed Derivational Control in Combinatory Categorial Grammar . Doctoral dissertation , University of Edinburgh . Bar - Hillel , Yehoshua . 1953 . A Quasi - Arithmetical Notation for Syntactic Description . Language 29 : 47 – 58 . Barker , Chris . 2012 . Quantiﬁcational Binding does not Require C - Command . Linguistic Inquiry 43 : 614 – 633 . Barker , Chris . 2015 . Scope . The Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory , edited by Lappin , Shalom and Fox , Chris , 40 – 76 . Hoboken , NJ : John Wiley & Sons . Barker , Chris and Chung - Chieh Shan . 2014 . Continuations and Natural Language . Oxford University Press . Barwise , Jon and Robin Cooper . 1981 . Generalized Quantiﬁers and Natural Language . Linguistics and Philosophy 4 : 159 – 219 . Beavers , John . 2004 . Type - inheritance Combinatory Categorial Grammar . Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics , 57 – 63 . Geneva : ACL . Beavers , John and Ivan Sag . 2004a . Coordinate Ellipsis and Apparent Non - Constituent Coordination . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Head - Driven Phrase Structure Grammar , 48 – 69 . Stanford : CSLI . Beavers , John and Ivan Sag . 2004b . Some Arguments for Coordinate Ellipsis . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Head - Driven Phrase Structure Grammar , 48 – 69 . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publi - cations . Becker , Tilman , Aravind Joshi and Owen Rambow . 1991 . Long Distance Scrambling and Tree - Adjoining Grammars . Proceedings of the Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 21 – 26 . ACL . Bernardi , Raffaella . 2002 . Reasoning with Polarity in Categorial Type - Logic . Doctoral dissertation , Uni - versiteit Utrecht . Bernardi , Raffaella . 2004 . Review of Steedman 2000 , The Syntactic Process . Journal of Logic , Language , and Information 13 : 526 – 530 . Berwick , Robert and Samuel Epstein . 1995a . Computational Minimalism : The Convergence of ’Minimal - ist’ Syntax and Categorial Grammar . Algebraic Methods in Language Processing 1995 : Proceedings of the Twente Workshop on Language Technology 10 , jointly held with the First Algebraic Methodology and Soft - ware Technology ( AMAST ) Workshop on Language Processing , edited by Anton Nijholt , Giuseppe Scollo , and R . Steetkamp , Enschede , The Netherlands : Faculty of Computer Science , Universiteit Twente . Berwick , Robert and Samuel Epstein . 1995b . Merge : The Categorial Imperative . Proceedings of the First Algebraic Methodology and Software Technology ( AMAST ) Workshop on Language Processing , edited by Anton Nijholt , Giuseppe Scollo , and R . Steetkamp , Enschede , The Netherlands : Faculty of Computer Science , Universiteit Twente . Bîlbîie , Gabriela and Pegah Faghiri . 2022 . An Experimental Perspective on Embedded Gapping in Persian . The Linguistic Review . Boeckx , Cedric . 2008 . Bare Syntax . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Boeckx , Cedric . 2012 . Syntactic Islands . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Boeckx , Cedric . 2015 . Elementary Syntactic Structures : Prospects of a Feature - free Syntax . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 42 Boeckx , Cedric , Norbert Hornstein , and Jairo Nunes . 2010 . Control as Movement . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Bolinger , Dwight . 1977 . Meaning and Form . London : Longman . Borer , Hagit . 1984 . Parametric Syntax : Case Studies in Semitic and Romance Languages . Dordrecht : Foris . Borsley , Robert , Tallerman , Maggie , and Willis , David . 2007 . The Syntax of Welsh . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Boz¸sahin , Cem . 2012 . Combinatory Linguistics . Berlin : de Gruyter . Bresnan , Joan . . 1972 . Theory of Complementation in English Syntax . Doctoral dissertation , MIT . Bresnan , Joan , ed . . 1982 . The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bresnan , Joan . 2001 . Lexical - Functional Syntax . Oxford : Blackwell . Brody , Michael . 1995 . Lexico - Logical Form : A Radically Minimalist Theory . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Brody , Michael . 2002 . On the Status of Representations and Derivations . Derivation and Explanation in the Minimalist Program , edited by Samuel Epstein and Daniel Seely , 19 – 41 . Oxford : Blackwell Publishing . Bruening , Benjamin . 2009 . Selectional Asymmetries between CP and DP suggest that the DP Hypothesis is Wrong . University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 15 : 25 – 35 . Bruening , Benjamin . 2014 . Precede - and - Command Revisited . Language 90 : 342 – 388 . Bruening , Benjamin . 2020 . The Head of the Nominal is N , not D : N - to - D Movement , Hybrid Agreement , and Conventionalized Expressions . Glossa 5 . Bruening , Benjamin and Eman Al Khalaf . 2019 . No Argument - adjunct Asymmetry in Reconstruction for Binding Condition C . Journal of Linguistics 55 : 247 – 276 . Büring , Daniel . 2005 . Binding Theory . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Cann , Ronnie , Ruth Kempson , and Lutz Marten . 2005 . The Dynamics of Language . Syntax and Semantics 35 . San Diego : Elsevier Academic Press . Carlson , Greg . 1977 . Reference to Kinds in English . Doctoral dissertation , University of Massachusetts , Amherst . Cattell , Ray . 1976 . Constraints on Movement Rules . Language 18 – 50 . Chierchia , Gennaro . 1984 . Topics in the Syntax and Semantics of Inﬁnitives and Gerunds . Doctoral disser - tation , U . Mass . Amherst . Chierchia , Gennaro . 1989 . Anaphora and Attitudes de se . Semantics and Contextual Expression , edited by Renata Bartsch , Johan van Benthem , and Peter van Emde Boas , 1 – 32 . Berlin : De Gruyter Mouton . Chierchia , Gennaro . 1995 . Dynamics of Meaning . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Chomsky , Noam . 1955 / 1975 . The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Chomsky , Noam . 1977 . Essays on Form and Interpretation . Amsterdam : North Holland . Chomsky , Noam . 1981 . Lectures on Government and Binding . Dordrecht : Foris . Chomsky , Noam . 1993 . A Minimalist Program for Linguistic Theory . The View from Building 20 , edited by Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser , 1 – 52 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Reprinted in Chomsky ( 1995b ) . Chomsky , Noam . 1995a . Bare Phrase Structure . Government and Binding Theory and the Minimalist Program , edited by Gert Webelhuth , 383 – 439 . Oxford : Blackwell . Chomsky , Noam . 1995b . The Minimalist Program . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Chomsky , Noam . 2000 . Minimalist Inquiries : The Framework . Step by Step : Essays in Minimalist Syn - tax in Honor of Howard Lasnik , edited by Roger Martin , David Michaels , and Juan Uriagereka , 89 – 155 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Chomsky , Noam . 2001 . Derivation by Phase . Ken Hale : a Life in Language , edited by Michael Kenstowicz , 1 – 52 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 43 Chomsky , Noam . 2001 / 2004 . Beyond Explanatory Adequacy . Structures and Beyond : The Cartography of Syntactic Structures , edited by Adriana Belletti , 104 – 131 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Chomsky , Noam . 2007 . Approaching UG from Below . Interfaces + recursion = language ? Chomsky’s Minimalism and the View from Syntax - Semantics , edited by Uli Sauerland and Hans - Martin Gärtner , 1 – 29 . Berlin : de Gruyter . Chomsky , Noam . 2008 . On Phases . Foundational Issues in Linguistic Theory : Essays in Honor of Jean - Roger Vergnaud , edited by Robert Freidin , Carlos Otero , and Maria Luisa Zubizarreta , 133 – 166 . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Chomsky , Noam . 2019 . The UCLA Lectures . LingBuzz . Chomsky , Noam and Howard Lasnik . 1977 . Filters and Control . Linguistic Inquiry 8 : 425 – 504 . Chung , Sandra . 1983 . The ECP and Government in Chamorro . Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 1 : 207 – 244 . Cinque , Guglielmo . 1990 . Types of ¯ A - dependencies . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Cinque , Guglielmo . 2005 . Deriving Greenberg’s Universal 20 and its Exceptions . Linguistic Inquiry 36 : 315 – 332 . Cinque , Guglielmo . 2013 . Cognition , Universal Grammar , and Typological Generalizations . Lingua 130 : 50 – 65 . Citko , Barbara . 2012 . A Parallel Merge Solution to the Merchant / Johnson paradox . Ways of Structure Building , edited by Myriam Uribe - Etxebarria and Vidal Valmala , 44 – 65 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Citko , Barbara . 2017 . Right Node Raising . The Wiley Blackwell Companion to Syntax , 1 – 33 . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley , 2 edn . Citko , Barbara . 2018 . On the Relationship between Forward and Backward Gapping . Syntax 21 : 1 – 36 . Citko , Barbara and Martina Graˇcanin - Yuksek . 2020 . Merge : Binarity in ( Multidominant ) Syntax . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Clark , Stephen and James Curran . 2007 . Wide - Coverage Efﬁcient Statistical Parsing with CCG and Log - Linear Models . Computational Linguistics 33 : 493 – 552 . Collins , Chris and Erich Groat . 2018 . Distinguishing Copies and Repetitions . Ms . Available online at http : / / ling . auf . net / lingbuzz / 003809 . Culicover , Peter W . 1993 . Evidence against ECP accounts of the that - t effect . Linguistic Inquiry 557 – 561 . Curry , Haskell and Robert Feys . 1958 . Combinatory Logic : Vol . I . Amsterdam : North Holland . Davidson , Donald and Gilbert Harman , eds . . 1972 . Semantics of Natural Language . Dordrecht : Reidel . Davis , Anthony . 1992 . Missing Heads and Empty Subjects : Underspeciﬁcation in Hausa VPs . Papers from the 28th Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society , 94 – 108 . CLS . Deal , Amy . 2009 . The Origin and Content of Expletives : Evidence from “Selection” . Syntax 12 : 285 – 323 . Den Dikken , Marcel . 1995 . Particles : On the Syntax of Verb - particle , Triadic , and Causative Construc - tions . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Diesing , Molly . 1992 . Indeﬁnites . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 20 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . den Dikken , Marcel . 1994 . Minimalist Verb ( Projection ) Raising . Groninger Arbeiten zur germanistischen Linguistik 37 : 71 – 88 . Dowty , David . 1978 . Governed Transformations as Lexical Rules in a Montague Grammar . Linguistic Inquiry 9 : 393 – 426 . Dowty , David . 1985 / 1988 . Type - Raising , Functional Composition , and Nonconstituent Coordination . Cat - egorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures , edited by Richard Oehrle , Emmon Bach , and Deirdre Wheeler , 153 – 198 . Dordrecht : Reidel . Dowty , David . 2003 . The Dual Analysis of Adjuncts / Complements in Categorial Grammar . Modifying Ad - juncts , edited by Ewald Lang , Claudia Maienborn , and Cathrine Fabricius - Hansen , 33 – 66 . Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter . 44 Dryer , Matthew . 1991 . SVO Languages and the OV : VO Typology . Journal of Linguistics 27 : 443 – 482 . Eisner , Jason . 1996 . Efﬁcient Normal - Form Parsing for Combinatory Categorial Grammar . Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Santa Cruz , CA , 79 – 86 . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . Emonds , Joseph . 1979 . Appositive Relatives Have No Properties . Linguistic Inquiry 10 : 211 – 243 . Engdahl , Elisabet . 1983 . Parasitic Gaps . Linguistics and Philosophy 6 : 5 – 34 . Epstein , Samuel , Erich Groat , Ruriko Kawashima , and Hisatsugu Kitahara , 1998 . A Derivational Approach to Syntactic Relations . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Epstein , Samuel and Daniel Seely . 2006 . Derivations In Minimalism . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Farudi , Annahita . 2013 . Gapping in Farsi : A Crosslinguistic Investigation . Doctoral dissertation , U . Mass . , Amherst . Felser , Claudia . 2004 . Wh - copying , Phases , and Successive Cyclicity . Lingua 114 : 543 – 574 . Fillmore , Charles . 1965 . Indirect Object Constructions in English and the Ordering of Transformations . The Hague : Mouton . Fong , Sandiway . 2005 . Computation with Probes and Goals . UG and External Systems : Language , Brain and Computation , 311 – 334 . Amsterdam : John Benjamins . Fox , Danny . 1999 . Reconstruction , Binding Theory , and the Interpretation of Chains . Linguistic Inquiry 30 : 157 – 196 . Fox , Danny . 2002 . Antecedent - Contained Deletion and the Copy Theory of Movement . Linguistic Inquiry 33 : 63 – 96 . Frampton , John and Sam Gutmann . 2002 . Crash - Proof Syntax . Derivation and Explanation in the Mini - malist Program , edited by Samuel Epstein and Daniel Seely , 90 – 105 . Oxford : Blackwell Publishing . Frank , Robert . 2002 . Phrase Structure Composition and Syntactic Dependencies . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gärtner , Hans - Martin and Jens Michaelis . 2007 . Some Remarks on Locality Conditions and Minimal - ist Grammars . Interfaces + Recursion = Language ? Chomsky’s Minimalism and the View from Syntax - Semantics , 161 – 195 . Berlin : Walter de Gruyter . Gazdar , Gerald . 1981 . Unbounded Dependencies and Coordinate Structure . Linguistic Inquiry 12 : 155 – 184 . Gazdar , Gerald , Ewan Klein , Geoffrey Pullum , and Ivan Sag . 1985 . Generalized Phrase Structure Gram - mar . Oxford : Blackwell . Geach , Peter . 1970 . A Program for Syntax . Synthèse 22 : 3 – 17 . Reprinted as Davidson and Harman 1972 : 483 – 497 . Gillies , William . 1993 . Scottish Gaelic . The Celtic Languages , edited by Martin Ball , 145 – 227 . London : Routledge . Ginzburg , Jonathan and Ivan Sag . 2000 . Interrogative Investigations . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Goldsmith , John . 1985 . A Principled Exception to the Coordinate Structure Constraint . Proceedings of the 21st Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society . Chicago : CLS . Goodall , Grant . 1987 . Parallel Structures in Syntax . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Haegeman , Liliane and Henk van Riemsdijk . 1986 . Verb Projection Raising , Scope , and the Typology of Rules Affecting Verbs . Linguistic Inquiry 17 : 417 – 466 . Haider , Hubert . 2003 . V - clustering and Clause Union : Causes and Effects . Verb Constructions in German and Dutch , edited by Pieter Seuren and Gerhard Kempen , 91 – 126 . Amsterdam : John Benjamins . Hale , Kenneth and Samuel Jay Keyser . 2002 . Prolegomenon to a Theory of Argument Structure . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 39 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Hankamer , Jorge . 1971 . Constraints on Deletion in Syntax . Doctoral dissertation , Yale University . Pub - lished as Hankamer ( 1979 ) . 45 Hankamer , Jorge . 1979 . Deletion in Coordinate Structures . New York : Garland . Hankamer ( 1971 ) , revised . Hankamer , Jorge and Ivan Sag . 1976 . Deep and Surface Anaphora . Linguistic Inquiry 7 : 391 – 428 . Hardt , Daniel and Maribel Romero . 2004 . Ellipsis and the Structure of Discourse . Journal of Semantics 21 : 375 – 414 . Harkema , Hendrik . 2001 . Parsing Minimalist Languages . Doctoral dissertation , University of California Los Angeles . Hawkins , John . 1982 . Cross Category Harmony , ¯ X and the Predictions of Markedness . Journal of Linguis - tics 18 : 1 – 35 . Heim , Irene and Angelika Kratzer . 1998 . Semantics in Generative Grammar . Oxford : Blackwell . Hepple , Mark . 1990 . The Grammar and Processing of Order and Dependency : A Categorial Approach . Doctoral dissertation , University of Edinburgh . Heycock , Caroline . 1995 . Asymmetries in Reconstruction . Linguistic Inquiry 547 – 570 . Higginbotham , James . 1983 . Logical Form , Binding , and Nominals . Linguistic inquiry 14 : 395 – 420 . Hirsch , Aron . 2017 . A Case for Conjunction Reduction . submitted . Hirsch , Aron and Michael Wagner . 2015 . Right Node Raising , Scope , and Plurality . Proceedings of the 20th Amsterdam Colloquium , 187 – 196 . Hockenmaier , Julia . 2003 . Data and Models for Statistical Parsing with CCG . Doctoral dissertation , School of Informatics , University of Edinburgh . Hockenmaier , Julia and Peter Young . 2008 . Non - local Scrambling : The Equivalence of TAG and CCG Revisited . Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Tree - Adjoining Grammars and Related For - malisms ( TAG + 9 ) . Tübingen . Hornstein , Norbert . 1995 . Logical Form : From GB to Minimalism . Oxford : Blackwell . Hornstein , Norbert . 1999 . Movement and Control . Linguistic Inquiry 30 : 69 – 96 . Hornstein , Norbert . 2001 . Move ! A Minimalist Theory of Construal . Oxford : Blackwell Publishing . Hornstein , Norbert and Juan Uriagereka . 2002 . Reprojections . Derivation and Explanation in the Mini - malist Program edited by Samuel Epstein and Daniel Seely , 106 – 132 . Blackwell Publishing . Huang , C . - T . James . 1982 . Logical Relations in Chinese and the Theory of Grammar . Doctoral dissertation , MIT . Huddleston , Rodney and Geoffrey Pullum . 2002 . Cambridge Grammar of the English Language . Cam - bridge : Cambridge University Press . Hudson , Richard . 1976 . Conjunction Reduction , Gapping , and Right - Node Raising . Language 535 – 562 . Jackendoff , Ray . 1972 . Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jackendoff , Ray . 1997 . The Architecture of the Language Faculty . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 28 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jacobson , Pauline . 1990 . Raising as Function Composition . Linguistics and Philosophy 13 : 423 – 476 . Jacobson , Pauline . 1994 . Binding Connectivity in Copular Sentences . Semantics and Linguistic Theory , vol . 4 , 161 – 178 . Cornell University . Jacobson , Pauline . 1999 . Towards a Variable - Free Semantics . Linguistics and Philosophy 22 : 117 – 184 . Jacobson , Pauline . 2006 . Constituent Structure . The Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics , vol . 3 , edited by Keith Brown , 58 – 71 . Amsterdam : Elsevier , 2 edn . Jacobson , Pauline . 2014 . Compositional Semantics . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Johnson , Kyle . 2017 . Gapping . The Wiley Blackwell Companion to Syntax , edited by Martin Everaert and Henk van Riemsdijk , 1 – 40 . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley Online Library , 2nd edn . Johnson , Kyle . 2020 . Principle C . submitted . Joshi , Aravind . 1985 . Tree - Adjoining Grammars : How much Context - Sensitivity id Required to Provide Sensible Structural Descriptions ? Natural Language Parsing , edited by David Dowty , Lauri Karttunen , and Arnold Zwicky , 206 – 250 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 46 Joshi , Aravind , K . Vijay - Shanker , and David Weir . 1991 . The Convergence of Mildly Context - Sensitive Formalisms . Processing of Linguistic Structure , edited by Peter Sells , Stuart Shieber , and Tom Wasow , 31 – 81 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jurka , Johannes . 2013 . Subject Islands in German Revisited . Experimental Syntax and Island Effects , edited by Jon Sprouse and Norbert Hornstein , 265 – 285 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Kamp , Hans . 1981 / 1984 . A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation . Truth , Interpretation , and Information , edited by Jeroen Groenendijk , Theo Janssen , and Martin Stokhof , 1 – 41 . Dordrecht : Foris . Kay , Martin . 1984 . Functional Uniﬁcation Grammar : A Framework for Machine Translation . Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Stanford , CA , 75 – 78 . ACL Anthology . Kayne , Richard . 1983 . Connectedness and Binary Branching . Dordrecht : Foris . Kayne , Richard . 1994 . The Antisymmetry of Syntax . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kehler , Andrew . 2002 . Coherence , Reference , and the Theory of Grammar . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publica - tions . Keine , Stefan and Rajesh Bhatt . 2016 . Interpreting Verb Clusters . Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 34 : 1445 – 1492 . Keine , Stefan and Ethan Poole . 2017 . Intervention in tough - Constructions Revisited . The Linguistic Review 34 : 295 – 329 . Keine , Stefan and Ethan Poole . 2018 . Not all Reconstruction Effects are Syntactic . Ms . , University of Southern California and University of California , Los Angeles . Kobele , Gregory . 2010 . Without Remnant Movement , MGs are Context - Free . Proceedings of 11th Confer - ence on the Mathematics of Language ( MoL ) , 160 – 173 . Berlin : Springer . Koller , Alexander and Marco Kuhlmann . 2009 . Dependency Trees and the Strong Generative Capacity of CCG . Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL , 460 – 468 . Athens : ACL . Koopman , Hilda . 1996 . The Spec Head Conﬁguration . Syntax at sunset : UCLA working papers in syntax and semantics 1 . Koopman , Hilda and Anna Szabolcsi . 2000 . Verbal Complexes . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Koster , Jan . 1978 . Locality Principles in Syntax . Dordrecht : Foris . Kratzer , Angelika . 1988 / 1995 . Stage - Level and Individual - Level Predicates . The Generic Book , edited by Gregory Carlson and Geoffrey Pelletier , 125 – 175 . Chicago : Chicago University Press . Kubota , Yusuke and Robert Levine . 2020 . Type - Logical Syntax . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kuhlmann , Marco , Alexander Koller , and Giorgio Satta . 2010 . The Importance of Rule Restrictions in CCG . Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 534 – 543 . Uppsala : ACL . Kuhlmann , Marco , Alexander Koller , and Giorgio Satta . 2015 . Lexicalization and Generative Power in CCG . Computational Linguistics 41 : 187 – 219 . Kuno , Susumu . 1987 . Functional Syntax : Anaphora , Discourse , and Empathy . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Lakoff , George . 1986 . Frame Semantic Control of the Coordinate Structure Constraint . Papers from the Parasession on Pragmatics and Grammatical Theory at the 22nd Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society , edited by Anne Farley , Peter Farley , and Karl - Eric McCullough , 152 – 167 . Chicago : CLS . Lambek , Joachim . 1958 . The Mathematics of Sentence Structure . American Mathematical Monthly 65 : 154 – 170 . Landau , Idan . 2001 . Elements of Control : Structure and Meaning in Inﬁnitival Constructions . Berlin : Springer . Landau , Idan . 2015 . A Two - Tiered Theory of Control . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 47 Landau , Idan . 2021 . A Selectional Theory of Adjunct Control . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Lasnik , Howard . 2001 . Subjects , Objects , and the EPP . Objects and other Subjects , edited by William Davies and Stanley Dubinsky , 103 – 121 . Berlin : Springer . Lebeaux , David . 1991 . Relative Clauses , Licensing , and the Nature of the Derivation . Syntax and Semantics 25 : Perspectives on Phrase Structure : Heads and Licensing , 209 – 239 . San Diego : Academic Press . Lebeaux , David . 2009 . Where does Binding Theory Apply ? Cambridge , MA : Mit Press . Lechner , Winfried . 1998 . Two Kinds of Reconstruction . Studia Linguistica 52 : 276 – 310 . Lechner , Winfried . 2003 . Phrase Structure Paradoxes , Movement and Ellipsis . The Interfaces : Deriving and Interpreting Omitted Structures , edited by Kerstin Schwabe and Susanne Winkler , 177 – 203 . Amster - dam : John Benjamins . Lechner , Winfried . 2013 . Diagnosing Covert Movement : The Duke of York and Reconstruction . Diagnos - ing Syntax , edited by Lisa Cheng and Norbert Corver , 158 – 189 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Lechner , Winfried . 2018 . A Calculus for Reconstruction and Anti - Reconstruction . Reconstruction Effects in Relative Clauses , edited by Manfred Krifka and Mathias Schenner , 113 – 144 . Berlin : De Gruyter . Legate , Julie Anne . 1999 . The Morphosyntax of Irish Agreement . MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 33 : 219 – 240 . Levin , Beth . 1993 . English Verb - Classes and Alternations : A Preliminary Study . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Levine , Robert . 2017 . Syntactic Analysis : An HPSG - based Approach . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Lewis , David . 1970 . General Semantics . Synthèse 22 : 18 – 67 . Reprinted as Ch . 1 of Partee ( 1976 ) . Lewis , David . 1979a . Attitudes de dicto and de se . The philosophical review 88 : 513 – 543 . Lewis , David . 1979b . Scorekeeping in a Language Game . Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 : 339 – 359 . Lewis , Mike and Steedman , Mark . 2014 . A ∗ CCG Parsing with a Supertag - factored Model . Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 990 – 1000 . Doha , Qatar : ACL . Li , Charles and Sandra Thompson . 1975 . The Semantic Function of Word Order : A Case Study in Man - darin . Word Order and Word Order Change , edited by Charles Li , 163 – 195 . Austin , TX : University of Texas Press . Lidz , Jeffrey . 2018 . The Scope of Children’s Scope : Representation , Parsing and Learning . Glossa 3 . Lipták , Anikó . 2019 . Hungarian . The Oxford Handbook of Ellipsis , edited by Jeroen Van Craenenbroeck and Tanja Temmerman , 815 – 840 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Maling , Joan . and Annie Zaenen . 1978 . Nonuniversality of a Surface Filter . Linguistic Inquiry 9 : 475 – 497 . Man , Haixia and Mark Steedman . 2023 . Word - order and Eventuality in Chinese . in preparation . Manzini , Rita . 1992 . Locality : A Theory and some of its Empirical Consequences . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Mao , Jiayuan , Freda Shi , Jiajun Wu , Roger Levy , and Joshua Tenenbaum . 2021 . Grammar - Based Grounded Lexicon Learning . Proceedings of the Thirty - Fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 7865 – 7878 . Marantz , Alec . 1997 . No Escape from Syntax : Don’t Try Morphological Analysis in the Privacy of your own Lexicon . Proceedings of the 21st Penn Linguistics Colloquium , University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics , vol . 4 , 201 – 225 . McCawley , James . 1982 . Parentheticals and Discontinuous Constituent Structure . Linguistic Inquiry 13 : 91 – 106 . McCawley , James . 1987 . Some Additional Evidence for Discontinuity . Discontinuous Constituency , edited by Almerindo Ojeda and Geoffrey Huck , Syntax and Semantics 20 , 185 – 200 . New York : Academic Press . McCloskey , James . 1979 . Transformational Syntax and Model Theoretic Semantics : A Case Study in Modern Irish . Dordrecht : Reidel . 48 McCloskey , James . 1986 . Right Node Raising and Preposition Stranding . Linguistic Inquiry 17 : 183 – 186 . McCloskey , James . 1990 . Resumptive Pronouns , ¯A - Binding , and Levels of Representations in Irish . The Syntax of the Modern Celtic Languages , Syntax and Semantics , vol . 23 , edited by Randall Hendrick , 199 – 248 . New York : Academic Press . McCloskey , James . 2017 . New Thoughts on Old Questions – Resumption in Irish . Asking the Right Ques - tion : Essays in Honor of Sandra Chung , edited by James Ostrove , Ruth Kramer , and Joseph Sabbagh , 81 – 102 . Santa Cruz , CA : University of California . Miller , Philip . 1992 . Clitics and Constituents in Phrase Structure Grammar . New York : Garland . Miller , Philip . 1999 . Strong Generative Capacity : The Semantics of Linguistic Formalism . Stanford , CA : CSLI publications . Montague , Richard . 1970 . English as a Formal Language . Linguaggi nella Società e nella Technica , edited by Bruno Visentini , 189 – 224 . Milan : Edizioni di Communità . Reprinted as Thomason 1974 : 188 - 221 . Montague , Richard . 1973 . The Proper Treatment of Quantiﬁcation in Ordinary English . Approaches to Nat - ural Language : Proceedings of the 1970 Stanford Workshop on Grammar and Semantics , edited by Jaakko Hintikka , Julius Moravcsik , and Patrick Suppes , 221 – 242 . Dordrecht : Reidel . Reprinted in Thomason 1974 : 247 - 279 . Moortgat , Michael . 1988 . Categorial Investigations . Doctoral dissertation , Universiteit van Amsterdam . Published by Foris , Dordrecht , 1989 . Morrill , Glynn . 2011 . Categorial Grammar : Logical Syntax , Semantics , and Processing . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Moulton , Keir and Chung - Hye Han . 2018 . C - command vs . Scope : An Experimental Assessment of Bound - Variable Pronouns . Language 94 : 191 – 219 . Munn , Alan . 1999 . On the Identity Requirement of ATB Extraction . Natural Language Semantics 7 : 421 – 425 . Neeleman , Ad and Hans van de Koot . 2010 . A Local Encoding of Syntactic Dependencies and Its Conse - quences for the Theory of Movement . Syntax 13 : 331 – 372 . Neijt , Anneke . 1979 . Gapping . Dordrecht : Foris . Nunes , Jairo . 2004 . Linearization of Chains and Sideward Movement . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 43 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Oehrle , Richard . 1976 . The Grammatical Status of the English Dative Alternation . Doctoral dissertation , MIT . Ojeda , Almerindo and Geoffrey Huck , eds . . 1987 . Discontinuous Constituency . Syntax and Semantics 20 . New York : Academic Press . Otsuka , Yuko . 2005 . Scrambling and Information Focus : VSO - VOS Alternation in Tongan . The Free Word Order Phenomenon : Its Syntactic Sources and Diversity , edited by Joachim Sabel and Mamoru Saito , 243 – 280 . Berlin : Mouton de Gruyter . Partee , Barbara , ed . . 1976 . Montague Grammar . New York : Academic Press . Partee , Barbara and Mats Rooth . 1983 . Generalised Conjunction and Type Ambiguity . Meaning , Use , and Interpretation of Language , edited by Rainer Bäuerle , Christoph Schwarze , and Arnim von Stechow , 361 – 383 . Berlin : de Gruyter . Pesetsky , David . 1982 . Paths and Categories . Doctoral dissertation , MIT . Pesetsky , David . 1995 . Zero Syntax . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Peters , Stanley and Robert Ritchie . 1973 . On the Generative Power of Transformational Grammars . Infor - mation Science 6 : 49 – 83 . Phillips , Colin . 2003 . Linear Order and Constituency . Linguistic Inquiry 34 : 37 – 90 . 49 Pierrehumbert , Janet and Julia Hirschberg . 1990 . The Meaning of Intonational Contours in the Interpre - tation of Discourse . Intentions in Communication , edited by Philip Cohen , Jerry Morgan , and Martha Pollack , 271 – 312 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Polinsky , Maria , Carlos Gallo , Peter Graff , Ekaterina Kravtchenko , Adam Milton Morgan , and Anne Stur - geon . 2013 . Subject Islands are Different . Experimental Syntax and Island Effects , edited by Jon Sprouse and Norbert Hornstein , 286 – 309 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Pollard , Carl and Ivan Sag . 1994 . Head - Driven Phrase Structure Grammar . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publica - tions . Postal , Paul . 1966 . On So - called Pronouns in English . Report of the 17th Annual Round Table on Linguistics and Language Studies , edited by Francis Dinneen , 177 – 206 . Wahington , DC : Georgetown University Press . Postal , Paul . 1974 . On Raising : One Rule of English Grammar and its Theoretical Implications . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Postal , Paul . 1994 . Parasitic and Pseudoparasitic Gaps . Linguistic inquiry 25 : 63 – 117 . Postal , Paul . 1998 . Three Investigations of Extraction . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Prince , Ellen . 1981 . Towards a Taxonomy of Given - New Information . Radical Pragmatics , edited by Peter Cole , 223 – 256 . New York : Academic Press . Pullum , Geoffrey and Philip Miller . 2022 . NPs vs DPs : Why Chomsky was Right . LingBuzz / 006845 . Radford , Andrew . 2004 . Minimalist Syntax : Exploring the Structure of English . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Rando , Emily and Donna Jo Napoli . 1978 . Deﬁnites in There - Sentences . Language 300 – 313 . Reinhart , Tanya . 1983 . Anaphora and Semantic Interpretation . London : Croom Helm . Reinhart , Tanya . 1997 . Quantiﬁer Scope : How Labor is Divided between QR and Choice Functions . Linguistics and philosophy 335 – 397 . Reinhart , Tanya . 2006 . Interface Strategies : Optimal and Costly Computations . Linguistic Inquiry Mono - graph 45 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Reinhart , Tanya and Eric Reuland . 1991 . Anaphors and Logophors : An Argument Structure Perspective . Long Distance Anaphora , edited by Jan Koster and Eric Reuland , 283 – 322 . Cambridge : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Rizzi , Luigi . 1990 . Relativized Minimality . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Rogers , James . 1998 . A Descriptive Approach to Language - Theoretic Complexity . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Rogers , James . 2003 . wMSO Theories as Grammar Formalisms . Theoretical Computer Science 293 : 291 – 320 . Romero , Maribel . 1998 . Focus and Reconstruction Effects in wh - phrases . Doctoral dissertation , University of Massachusetts Amherst . Rosenbaum , Peter . 1967 . The Grammar of English Predicate Complement Constructions . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ross , John Robert . 1967 . Constraints on Variables in Syntax . Doctoral dissertation , MIT . Published as Ross 1986 . Ross , John Robert . 1970 . Gapping and the Order of Constituents . Progress in Linguistics , edited by Manfred Bierwisch and Karl Heidolph , 249 – 259 . The Hague : Mouton . Ross , John Robert . 1986 . Inﬁnite Syntax ! Norton , NJ : Ablex . Rothstein , Susan . 2001 . Predicates and their Subjects . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Sabbagh , Joseph . 2007 . Ordering and Linearizing Rightward Movement . Natural Language & Linguistic Theory 25 : 349 – 401 . Sag , Ivan . 1982 . A Semantic Theory of “NP - Movement” Dependencies . The Nature of Syntactic Repre - sentation , edited by Pauline Jacobson and Geoffrey Pullum , 427 – 466 . Dordrecht : Reidel . 50 Sag , Ivan . 1997 . English Relative Clause Constructions . Journal of linguistics 33 : 431 – 483 . Sag , Ivan , Gerald , Thomas Wasow , and Steven Weisler . 1985 . Coordination and How to Distinguish Cate - gories . Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 3 : 117 – 172 . Sauerland , Uli and Fabian Heck . 2003 . LF - Intervention Effects in Pied - piping . Proceedings of the 33rd Conference of the North Eastern Linguistics Society ( NELS ) , 347 – 366 . Schiffer , Lena Katharina and Andreas Maletti . 2021 . Strong Equivalence of TAG and CCG . Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 9 : 707 – 720 . Selkirk , Elisabeth . 2011 . The Syntax - Phonology Interface . The Handbook of Phonological Theory , edited by John Goldsmith , Jason Riggle , and Alan Yu , 435 – 483 . Oxford : Blackwell , 2nd edn . Shieber , Stuart . 1985 . Evidence against the Context - Freeness of Natural Language . Linguistics and Phi - losophy 8 : 333 – 343 . Shieber , Stuart . 1986 . An Introduction to Uniﬁcation - Based Approaches to Grammar . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Smith , Neil and Annabel Cormack . 2015 . Features from Aspects via the Minimalist Program to Combina - tory Categorial Grammar . 50 Years Later : Reﬂections on Chomsky’s Aspects , edited by Ángel Gallego and Dennis Ott , 233 – 247 . MIT Working Papers in Linguistics . Sportiche , Dominique . 2019 . Somber Prospects for Late Merger . Linguistic Inquiry 50 : 416 – 424 . Stalnaker , Robert . 1974 . Pragmatic Presuppositions . Semantics and Philosophy , edited by Milton Munitz and Peter Unger , 197 – 214 . New York : New York University Press . Stanojevi´c , Miloš and Mark Steedman . 2021 . Formal Basis of a Language Universal . Computational Linguistics 47 : 9 – 42 . Starke , Michal . 2001 . Move Dissolves into Merge : a Theory of Locality . Doctoral dissertation , Université de Genève . Starke , Michal . 2004 . On the Inexistence of Speciﬁers and the Nature of Heads . LingBuzz von Stechow , Arnim . 1991 . Syntax und Semantik . Semantik : Ein Handbuch der zeitgenössischen Forschung / Semantics : An International Handbook of Contemprorary Research , edited by Arnim von Ste - chow and Dieter Wunderlich , 90 – 148 . Berlin : de Gruyter . von Stechow , Arnim . 1996 . Against LF Pied - Piping . Natural Language Semantics 4 : 57 – 110 . Steedman , Mark . 1985 . Dependency and Coordination in the Grammar of Dutch and English . Language 61 : 523 – 568 . Steedman , Mark . 1985 / 1988 . Combinators and Grammars . Categorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures , edited by Richard Oehrle , Emmon Bach , and Deirdre Wheeler , 417 – 442 . Dordrecht : Reidel . Steedman , Mark . 1987 . Combinatory Grammars and Parasitic Gaps . Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 5 : 403 – 439 . Steedman , Mark . 1990 . Gapping as Constituent Coordination . Linguistics and Philosophy 13 : 207 – 263 . Steedman , Mark . 1991a . Structure and Intonation . Language 67 : 262 – 296 . Steedman , Mark . 1991b . Type - Raising and Directionality in Combinatory Grammar . Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 71 – 78 . Berkeley , CA : ACL . Steedman , Mark . 1996 . Surface Structure and Interpretation . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 30 . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Steedman , Mark . 1999 . Quantiﬁer Scope Alternation in CCG . Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 301 – 308 . College Park , MD : ACL . Steedman , Mark . 2000a . Information Structure and the Syntax - Phonology Interface . Linguistic Inquiry 34 : 649 – 689 . Steedman , Mark . 2000b . The Syntactic Process . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Steedman , Mark . 2002 . Plans , Affordances , and Combinatory Grammar . Linguistics and Philosophy 25 : 723 – 753 . 51 Steedman , Mark . 2012 . Taking Scope : The Natural Semantics of Quantiﬁers . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Steedman , Mark . 2014a . Evolutionary Basis for Human Language : Comment on " Toward a Computational Framework for Cognitive Biology : Unifying Approaches from Cognitive Neuroscience and Comparative Cognition " by Tecumseh Fitch . Physics of Life Reviews 11 : 382 – 388 . Steedman , Mark . 2014b . The Surface - Compositional Semantics of English Intonation . Language 90 : 2 – 57 . Steedman , Mark . 2018 . The Lost Combinator . Computational Linguistics 44 : 613 – 629 . Steedman , Mark . 2020 . A Formal Universal of Natural Language Grammar . Language 96 : 618 – 660 . Stroik , Thomas . 2009 . Locality in Minimalist Syntax . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Szabolcsi , Anna . 1983 . ECP in Categorial Grammar . Ms . , Max Planck Institute , Nijmegen . Szabolcsi , Anna . 1983 / 1989 . Bound Variables in Syntax : Are There Any ? Semantics and Contextual Expression , edited by Renate Bartsch , Johan van Benthem , and Peter van Emde Boas , 295 – 318 . Dordrecht : Foris . Szabolcsi , Anna . 1983 / 1992 . Combinatory Grammar and Projection from the Lexicon . Lexical Matters , edited by Ivan Sag and Anna Szabolcsi , 241 – 268 . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Szabolcsi , Anna . 2007 . Strong vs . Weak Islands . The Blackwell Companion to Syntax , edited by Martin Everaert and Henk van Riemsdijk , 479 – 531 . Oxford : Wiley - Blackwell . Szabolcsi , Anna and Frans Zwarts . 1993 . Weak Islands and an Algebraic Semantics for Scope Taking . Natural Language Semantics 1 : 235 – 284 . Takahashi , Shoichi and Sarah Hulsey . 2009 . Wholesale Late Merger : Beyond The A / ¯A Distinction . Lin - guistic Inquiry 40 : 387 – 426 . Thomason , Richmond , ed . . 1974 . Formal Philosophy : Papers of Richard Montague . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Torr , John . 2019 . Broad - Coverage Parsing with Minimalist Grammars . Doctoral dissertation , University of Edinburgh . Torr , John , Miloˇc Stanojevi´c , Mark Steedman , and Shay Cohen . 2019 . Wide - Coverage Neural A * Parsing for Minimalist Grammars . Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , 2486 – 2505 . ACL . Truswell , Robert . 2007a . Extraction from Adjuncts and the Structure of Events . Lingua 117 : 1355 – 1377 . Truswell , Robert . 2007b . Locality of Wh - Movement and the Individuation of Events . Doctoral dissertation , University College London . Uchida , Hiroyuki . 2008 . Scope alternation and type logical grammar . Doctoral dissertation , University of London , University College London ( United Kingdom ) . VanLehn , Kurt . 1978 . Determining the Scope of English Quantiﬁers . Master’s thesis , MIT , Cambridge , MA . AI - TR - 483 , Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory . Vennemann , Theo and Ray Harlow . 1977 . Categorial Grammar and Consistent Basic VX Serialization . Theoretical Linguistics 4 : 227 – 254 . Vergnaud , Jean Roger . 1977 / 2006 . Letter to Noam Chomsky and Howard Lasnik on “Filters and Control , ” April 17 , 1977 . Syntax : Critical Concepts in Linguistics , edited by Robert Freidin and Howard Lasnik , 21 – 34 . Oxford : Blackwell . Wallenberg , Joel . 2009 . Antisymmetry and the Conservation of c - Command : Scrambling and Phrase Struc - ture in Synchronic and Diachronic Perspective . Doctoral dissertation , University of Pennsylvania . Wallenberg , Joel . 2013 . Scrambling , LF , and Phrase Structure Change in Yiddish . Lingua 133 : 289 – 318 . Wasow , Thomas . 1972 . Anaphoric Relations in English . Doctoral dissertation , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA . Published with extensive revisions as Wasow ( 1979 ) . Wasow , Thomas . 1979 . Anaphora in Generative Grammar . Ghent : E . Story - Scientia . Weir , David . 1988 . Characterizing Mildly Context - Sensitive Grammar Formalisms . Doctoral dissertation , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia . Published as Technical Report CIS - 88 - 74 . 52 Wells , Rulon . 1947 . Immediate Constituents . Language 23 : 81 – 117 . Wexler , Kenneth and Peter Culicover . 1980 . Formal Principles of Language Acquisition . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Wilder , Chris . 1999 . Right Node Raising and the LCA . Proceedings of 18th WCCFL , 586 – 598 . Somerville MA : Cascadilla Press . Williams , Edwin . 1978 . Across - the - Board Rule Application . Linguistic Inquiry 9 : 31 – 43 . Williams , Edwin . 1984 . There - insertion . Linguistic inquiry 131 – 153 . Williams , Edwin . 1994 . Thematic Structure in Syntax . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Williams , Edwin . 2003 . Representation Theory . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Woods , William . 1968a . Procedural Semantics for a Question - Answering Machine . Proceedings of the Fall Joint Computer Conference , part I , 457 – 471 . ACM . Woods , William . 1968b . Semantics for a Question - Answering System . Doctoral dissertation , Harvard . Tech Report NSF - 19 , Harvard Computing Laboratory . Woods , William . 1970 . Transition Network Grammars for Natural Language Analysis . Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery 18 : 264 – 274 . Wurmbrand , Susi . 2004 . West Germanic Verb Clusters : The Empirical Domain . Verb clusters : A study of Hungarian , German , and Dutch , edited by Katalin É . Kiss and Henk van Riemsdijk , 43 – 85 . Amsterdam : John Benjamins . Zhang , Niina . 2010 . Coordination in Syntax . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Mark Steedman School of Informatics University of Edinburgh 10 Crichton Street Edinburgh EH8 9AB United Kingdom steedman @ inf . ed . ac . uk 53