JOURNAL OF COGNITION AND DEVELOPMENT , 2 ( 2 ) , 189 - 219 Copyright O 200 1 , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Spatial Mapping in Preschoolers : Close Comparisons Facilitate Far Mappings Jeffiey Loewenstein and Dedre Gentner Department of Psych oIogy Northwestern University To test the hypothesis that comparison processes facilitate schema extraction , we studied the effect of making comparisons on 3 - year - olds’ ability to perform mapping tasks . In 3 studies , children were tested on their ability to find a hidden toy in a model room after being shown its location in a perceptually different room . In Experiment 1 we found that seeing 2 similar hiding events - permitting a sequential comparkon - improved 3 - year - olds’ performance on the mapping task . Experiment 2 showed a more striking effect : Simply comparing the initial hiding model with another nearly identical model helped children to succeed on the subsequent mapping task . Experi - ment 3 showed that the comparison effect was not simply due to an opportunity to in - teract with 2 examples , but was specific to comparing them . We conclude that comparing examples can facilitate children’s noticing common relational schemas - in this case , a spatial relational schema - and their ability to use this system of rela - tions in subsequent tasks . 0ur central hypothesis is that the process of comparison is a major force in children’s learning and development . In this work , we test the specific claim that drawing comparisons among similar spatial arrays fosters insight into the common spatial relations , as assessed in a subsequent spatial mapping task . We tested the role of comparison in promoting relational insight by using a version of the classic spatial mapping task developed by DeLoache and her colleagues ( DeLoache , 1987 , 1989a , 1989b , 1990 , 1995 ; DeLoache , Kolstad , & Anderson , 1991 ; DeLoache , Miller , & Rosengren , 1997 ; Uttal , Schreiber , & DeLoache , 1995 ) . However , whereas prior research with this task has focused chiefly on test - Requests for reprints should be sent to JefFrey hewenstein , Department of Psychology , Northwest - em University , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 - 2710 . E - mail : loewensteh @ nwu . edu 190 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER ing children’s appreciation of symbol - referent relations , we focused on similarity relations . In the mapping task , children watched as a toy was hidden in one space , and then they were asked to find a toy hidden in the same place in a second space . This task requires children to make correspondences between the two spaces . As noted previously , there has been abundant research investigating the development of children’s understanding of symbol - referent relations : that a model stands for a room ( e . g . , Bluestein & Acredolo , 1979 ; DeLoache , 1987 , 1995 ; DeLoache et al . , 1997 ; Dow & Pick , 1992 ; Liben & Downs , 1989 ) . An equally important aspect of model use is understanding in what respects the model matches the room : how the model is similar to the room ( e . g . , Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; Blades & Spencer , 1994 ; DeLoache et al . , 1991 ; Marzolf , DeLoache , & Kolstad , 1999 ) . Similarity and symbol - referent relations are distinct notions ( Lillard , 1993 ; Perner , 199 1 ) . For instance , the Italian flag stands for , but is not similar to , the coun - try of Italy , and yet the Italian flag is similar to , but does not stand for , the Irish flag . Models and maps are interesting composites . The items and their relative positions in amodel both represent and are similar to objects and locations in the world . Our in - terest is in how children come to trace correspondences between two spaces . Gentner and Rattermann ( 1 99 1 ) focused on children’s perception of similarities in the model task and suggested that processes of structural alignment and map - ping come into play when children connect two spaces and draw inferences be - tween them ( Gentner 1983 , 1989 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ; Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . According to structure - mapping theory , the comparison pro - cess entails aligning two structured representations . Each structured representa - tion has elements that stand for objects and elements that stand for relations holding among those objects . Structure - mapping theory distinguishes between mappings based on object similarities - for example , chair I + chair 2 - from mappings based on relational similarities - for example , UNDER ( toy I , bed I ) + UNDER ( toy 2 , bed 2 ) . A related distinction between element correspondences and relational correspondences has been drawn in the spatial literature ( e . g . , Bluestein & Acredolo , 1979 ) . Liben ( 1999 ; Liben & Yekel , 1996 ) described a comparable distinction between representational correspondences ( e . g . , a picture of a house on a map looks like a real house ) and geometric correspondences ( e . g . , a picture of a house is in the same position relative to other items on the map as the real house is to its surroundings ) . Both object similarity and relational similarity can promote mapping . An ex - ample of object similarity facilitating mapping comes from DeLoache et al . ( 1 99 l ) , who showed that preschoolers performed better when the component ob - jects in two spaces were similar to each other than when they were dissimilar . An example of relational similarity facilitating mapping comes om Marzolf et al . ( 1 999 ) . They showed that preschoolers performed better when the component ob - jects in two spaces were placed in the same arrangement rather than in different arrangements . COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 191 Although young children could potentially use object and relational similarities equally to perform mapping tasks , there is evidence that they rely primarily on ob - ject similarities ( Bence & Presson , 1997 ; Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Marzolf & DeLoache , 1997 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998a , 1998b , 2001 ) . For example , Blades and Cooke ( 1994 ) asked children to map be - tween two models containing four items of furniture , including two identical items ( twins ; i . e . , ABCIC ~ + A’B’CI’C2’ ) . They reasoned that ifchildren were mapping solely on the basis of matching objects , then they should search accurately for items with unique matches ( A + A’ and B + B’ ) ; however , they should choose at random for the two twin items , which have two potential object correspondences ( Cl + Cl’ or C2’ ) . In contrast , if children are also able to align spatial relations , then they should be accurate with both the unique and twin items because they can use relative spatial position to disambiguate the twin items . Blades and Cooke found that 3 1 - through 39 - month - old children succeeded on the unique items but performed at chance on the twin items , indicating they carried out the mapping task on the basis of object matches . By 45 to 58 months of age , children performed well on the twin items , indicating that they were able to use relational correspondences . A M e r demonstration of early object - focused mapping in the model task co - mes from studies by Marzolf and DeLoache ( 1997 ) . Identical white boxes were placed on the furniture in a model , and larger white boxes were similarly placed in a matching room . Children at 38 months who succeeded on the normal model - room task - that is , could accurately find a hidden toy placed under an item of fur - niture - failed to find the toy when it was hidden in a whte box placed at an item of furniture . When children saw the toy hidden in a box in the model , they searched the boxes in the room , but they did not know which box to choose . It appears that they could perceive the object matches between the spaces ( i . e . , that the small white boxes matched the big white boxes ) , but they were unable to use the rela - tional correspondences ( i . e . , that the small white box on the small couch matched the big whte box on the big couch ) to disambiguate the multiple possible object matches . Consistent with research by Blades and Cooke ( 1994 ) , this finding sug - gests an early ability to map on the basis of object matches but not relational correspondences . These findings are consistent with prior research on analogy and similarity showing that children progress in the kinds of similarities they can appreciate within a given domain ( e . g . , Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Halford , 1992 ; Smith , 1984 ; Vosniadou , 1989 ) . One key aspect of this development is a shift from appre - ciating direct similarities between objects to appreciating similarities between the termed this progression the relational shift and suggested that it results from a deepening of domain knowledge . The claim that domain knowledge drives ana - logical development has received considerable support ( Brown , 1989 ; Chen , I I I relations that hold among objects . Gentner ( 1988 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) I 1 192 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER t Sanchez , & Campbell , 1997 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Goswami , 1992 ; Inagaki , 1989 , 1990 ; Inagalu & Hatano , 1987 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Vosniadou , 1989 ; although see Halford , 1992 , for a different ac - count ) . The idea is that early in learning a given domain , children ( and adults ) gen - erally attend to objects and their properties as the basis for similarity judgments . As children gain knowledge of relational structure , they become able to perceive similarities on the basis of common relational structures ( e . g . , Chen et al . , 1997 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ) . As noted , Gentner and Rattermann ( 1991 ) argued that the relational shift is driven by gains in domain knowledge . How do these gains come about ? Our inter - est here is in learning processes . We suggest that comparison experiences are a major contributor to the observed gains in relational insight . In the case of the model task , there is evidence for performance improvements due to previous model task experience ( Marzolf & DeLoache , 1994 ; Uttal et al . , 1995 ) . The ques - tion is exactly how this prior experience leads to improvement . We propose that the process of makmg a comparison between two spaces can promote children ' s understanding of the common spatial relational schema ; thereby facilitating performance on a later mapping task . The key to our proposal is modeling comparison as a structure - mapping process that - even if initially prompted by common perceptual features - acts to render common relational structure salient ( Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) . According to struc - ture - mapping theory , the process of comparison fust finds an initial set of local matches , including object matches , and then coalesces these commonalities into a maximal structurally consistent ' alignment ( Falkenhainer , Forbus , & Gentner , 1989 ; Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ) . An important constraint on the structural alignment process is systematicity : A predicate that is connected to other mappable predicates via higher - order relations is more likely to be mapped than an isolated predicate . Because of this systematicity preference , the structure - mapping process acts to promote common relational structure . By promoting a focus on re - lational commonalities , comparison can render a common relational system more salient and more separable & om its objects and , thus , more available for further use ( Gentner & Medina , 1997 ; Gentner & Namy , 1999 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 1997 ; Loewenstein , Thompson , & Gentner , 1999 ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 , 1997 ; Medin et al . , 1993 ; Namy & Gentner , in press ) . Indirect evidence for this claim comes from research showing that solving a pair of similar problems increases the likelihood that children will solve a fùrther similar ' A structurally consistent alignment is one that maintains a one - to - one mapping ( i . e . , an element in one representation corresponds to , at most , one element in the other representation ) and parallel COMW - tivity ( Le . , if predicates correspond across the two representations , then their arguments must corre - spond as well ) . COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 193 problem ( Brown & Kane , 1988 ; Brown , Kane , & Echols , 1986 ; Chen & Klahr , 1999 ; Chen et al . , 1997 ; Uttal et al . , 1995 ) . We have referred to the process of forming encodings based on comparison as analogical encoding ( Ferguson , 1994 ; Kurtz , Miao , & Gentner , in press ; Loewenstein et al . , 1999 ) . Here we seek more di - rect evidence that analogical encoding facilitates learning and transfer . The tack we are taking is different from that of prior research that focuses on far anulogies - comparisons between examples that share relational content but little object similarity . Without denying the value of far analogies , we suggest that for novice learners , close analogies are also informative . Comparing highly similar examples that match on both objects and relations can facilitate abstracting a schema and later perceiving purely relational commonalities . For example , Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) found that 4 - year - olds who carried out a same - di - mension similarity choice task - for example , matching symmetry in size with symmetry in size - later performed successfully on an otherwise difficult cross - di - mensional similarity choice task - for example , matching symmetry in size with symmetry in shading . These results are perhaps surprising : It may have been sup - posed that experience with hghly similar examples would lead to the formation of a narrow understanding . Our suggestion is that highly similar examples have two advantages . First , they invite comparison because of their obvious surface similar - ities . Second , because the obvious object matches lead to correct correspondences , the child is likely to arrive at the correct alignment . The process of comparison then leads children to discover further relational similarities . Thus , our hypothesis is that comparing highly similar examples will help children encode relations more explicitly . This , in turn , will help them carry out further tasks - such as mapping tasks - involving these relations . We can apply this line of reasoning to studies by Marzolf and DeLoache ( 1 994 ) . They found that children who performed a mapping task between two models of high object similarity later performed better on a mapping task with low - similarity models than children who had received low - similarity models in both sessions . These results allow for several interpretations . Experience with highly similar ex - amples could have promoted task understanding , or it may have fostered the repre - sentational insight that one space can stand for another . We suggest that comparison could be the key . The high - similarity mapping task constituted an eas - ily alignable comparison . By the account just given , the process of alignment led to greater attention to the common spatial configuration that characterized both rooms . Thus , when given a task with low object similarity ( but the same spatial configuration ) , these children were able to use relational correspondences to aug - ment the weak object matches . Our research tests this account . We ask whether comparing two similar spaces facilitates children’s ability to carry out a difficult mapping task over the same spa - tial relations . To do this , we first designed a challenging mapping task between two models . We then tested whether comparing highly similar model rooms pro - 194 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER moted successful performance on this challenging mapping task . We also tested our prediction that comparison would lead to improved encoding of spatial rela - tions by testing children’s ability to retrieve the original toy . We constructedamappingtaskthat testedchildren’s abilityto map onthe basis of object and relational commonalities . Following Blades and Cooke ( 1994 ) , both the hiding room and the finding room contained twin items - two identical stools - and unique items - a bed , a desk , and a rug . The mapping between the unique items tests children’s ability to make object matches . The mapping between the twin items tests children’s ability to use relational information to make matches . The objects in the finding room were of the same category and occupied the same relative positions as the corresponding objects in the finding room , but to increase task difficulty , they differed in shape and color . Finally , we made a high - similarity comparison room ( the Hiding 2 room ) that was nearly identical to the Hiding 1 room . Our goal was not to create a bridge but rather to create a high - similarity comparison pair . The predic - tion was that seeing two similar highly alignable rooms - Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 - would promote noticing the common system of spatial relations . In Experiment 1 , we showed children two similar hiding events , permitting a sequential comparison during the mapping task , which resulted in performance benefits relative to a control group . Experiment 2 showed a more striking effect of comparison : Simply comparing the two nearly identical hiding models initially helped children to succeed on the subsequent mapping task . Experiment 3 showed that the comparison benefit was not simply due to an opportunity to interact with two examples but was specific to comparing them . EXPERIMENT 1 This experiment tested preschoolers’ ability to solve a difficult mapping task with or without the opportunity to compare two highly similar rooms . Preschoolers are in the midst of substantial developmental changes in understanding space ( Newcombe & Huttenlocher , 2000 ) . We focused on children aged 3 and 3 % years , a range over which rapid changes take place in children’s spatial mapping abilities ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; DeLoache , 1987 , 1989b ) . The childrenplayedahiding and finding game , such as that used in the previous model studies ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; DeLoache , 1987 , 1995 ) . One half of the children were shown the hiding event in both the Hiding 1 and Hidmg 2 rooms before searching for a toy in the find - ing room ; the other halfjust saw it in the Hiding 1 room . We predicted that watching toys being hidden in both the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms would lead children to compare them , highlighting the spatial relational schema common to the rooms . A grasp of the common configuration should help children to make both the nonobvious object matches and the relational matches required to map between the Hiding 1 and finding rooms . Thus , children given an opportunity to compare the COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 195 Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms should perform better on the mapping task than a con - trol group not given such experience . We had one fürther expectation , which was based on previous results ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ) and consistent with the relational shft hypothesis . Children should perform better on the unique items , which only require object matches , than on the twin items , which require matches of both ob - jects and spatial relations . Method Participants . Participants were 44 children from middle - and upper middle - class families in the northern metropolitan Chicago area . Four of the children did not complete the task and were excluded from the analyses . The 20 younger chil - dren ranged in age from 35 to 39 months ( M = 37 . 4 , SD = l . 3 l ) . The 20 older chil - dren were aged 40 to 45 months ( M = 42 . 2 , SD = l . 32 ) . One half ofthe children were girls , and the other half were boys . Design . In each of the two age groups , one half of the children were placed in the comparison condition and one half in the control condition . Each participant had to find toys at both unique and twin items . Thus , the design was a randomized factorial mixed design with three between - subjects factors - age ( 37 and 42 months ) , comparison ( control or comparison ) , and gender - and one within - sub - ject factor - object type ( unique or twin ) . The dependent measures were the num - ber of correct responses on the placement trial , on the four search trials in the finding room , and on the four retrieval trials in the Hiding 1 room . All children were allowed to search until they found the toys , but their responses were scored correct only if they searched first at the correct location . Materials . There were three rooms , a Hiding 1 room , a Hiding 2 room , and a Findingroom . Al1theroomswere IO - fthigh x 12 . 5 - ftwide x 10 - ftdeep . Therooms had a full back wall , a full floor , and two diagonally cut side walls . There was no ceiling or front wall . Each was a different color . There were five items of fürniture in each room : a bed , a desk , a rug , and two stools ( the twin items ) . The correspond - ing objects in the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms were identical in shape and size and differed only in color . The corresponding objects in the Finding room came from the same basic - level categories but had different shapes , slightly different sizes , and were differently colored . A small , stuffed dog was placed in front of each room . Each dog had a flat , magnetic bone that the experimenter hid under items of furni - ture . Each piece of furniture had a magnet attached beneath it for this purpose ( ex - cept for the rugs , which covered the flat dog bones adequately on their own ) , set such that the bone could not be seen when hidden . The Hiding 1 , Hiding 2 , and Finding rooms could be placed in a row on top of a table , arranged so that children could see into all of them at once ( see Figure 1 ) . 196 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER Hiding1 room Hiding2 room Finding room FIGURE 1 The model rooms used in Experiment 1 To ensure that the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms were highly similar to each other and equally different from the Finding room , 10 undergraduates at North - western University ( given course credit for their participation ) wrote pairwise rat - ings of similarity and chose which room was least like the other two . All 10 participants wrote that the finding room was most different from the other two rooms , and 9 of the 10 participants rated the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms to be more alike than any other pairing . The remaining participant gave all pairings the same rating . The mean rated similarity between the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms ( M = 6 . 3 out of 7 , SD = 0 . 67 ) was significantly greater than that between the Hiding 1 and Finding rooms ( M = 4 . 6 , SD = 1 . 17 ) , t ( 9 ) = 4 . 6 3 0 , ~ < . 05 , and that between the Hiding 2 and finding rooms ( M = 4 . 5 , SD = 1 . 27 ) , t ( 9 ) = 5 . 667 , p < . 05 . These results confirmed the close similarity between the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms and lower similarity between the Hiding 1 and Finding rooms . Importantly , the Hiding 2 room was no more similar to the Finding room than was the Hiding 1 room . Thus , it could not serve as a bridge between the Hiding 1 and Finding rooms . Procedure . In both conditions , each child was first presented with a gray dog and its bone . The experimenter brought out the Hiding 1 room and a basket contain - ing fiulllture and said , “This dog has a room , and in his room he puts his furniture . ” The experimenter continued , “He’s got a bed , which he puts right here , ” while plac - ing the bed in its position in the room . Each item of hrniture was placed in the Hiding 1 room in this manner . In the comparison condition , the experimenter next brought out the Hiding 2 room , fully set up , and placed it to the right of the initial room . The experimenter said , “See , here is another dog , and he’s got a room too , and his room is just the same . ” For all children , the experimenter then brought out the finding room , hlly set up , saying , “See , here is another dog , and he’s got a room too , and his room is just the same . ” Placement trial . The children watched the experimenter perform a place - ment trial to ensure they were alerted to the relations between the rooms . The child was told , “These dogs like to put their bones in the same place . Sometimes this dog COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 197 likes to put his bone right here , ” as the experimenter placed the bone on the rug in the Hiding 1 room . In the comparison condition , a bone was also placed in the Hiding 2 room as the experimenter said , “then this dog puts his bone right here . ” For all children , the experimenter said , “then this dog puts his bone right here” while placing a dog’s bone on the rug in the finding room . The experimenter then re - moved all the bones from the rooms and said , “Another time this dog puts his bone right here , ” while placing a bone in the front lefi comer of the Hiding 1 room . In the comparison condition , the experimenter placed a bone in the same place in the Hiding 2 room , saying , “and this dog puts his bone right here . ” In both conditions , the experimenter asked the child about the finding room : “Can you put this dog’s bone in the same place in his room ? ’ If the child placed the toy in a very different place in the finding room , the experimenter asked the child ifthe bones were now in the same place but did not correct the child . Search trials . Next , the child was invited to help hide bones for the dogs . The child and the experimenter put a bone under an object in the Hiding 1 room . If the child was in the comparison condition , the experimenter put a toy in the same place in the Hiding 2 room . Then , while the child closed his eyes , the experimenter hid a bone in the finding room . The experimenter said , when the child’s eyes were open , “I hid this dog’s bone in this room in the very same place that we just put the other one ( s ) . Can you find this dog’s bone ? ’ The child searched the finding room until finding the bone , but the response was only counted as correct if the child found the toy on the fmt attempt . Four search trials were done , alternating between the unique items ( i . e . , the desk and bed ) and the twin items @ e . , the two stools ) . Ad - ditionally , a criterion was set at being correct on at least three of the four trials as a measure of high individual performance ( as in DeLoache , 1989b , and because it is , conservatively , reliably better than chance by a binomial ) . Retrieval trials . On each trial , after the bone was found in the finding room , children retrieved the bone from the Hiding 1 room as a check on their understand - ing of the location of the original toy ( DeLoache , 1987 ) . The comparison group re - trieved bones from the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms but was only scored for the frrst ( Hiding 1 ) retrieval . Results Search trials . As predicted , children in the comparison condition ( M = 0 . 69 correct , SD = . 028 ) performed better than children in the control condition ( A4 = 0 . 49 , SD = . 032 ) . The overall low performance of children in the control condition confirmed that the mapping between the Hiding 1 and Finding rooms was difficult ( see Table 1 and Figure 2 ) . The data for search trials were analyzed in a 2 ( age ) x 2 ( comparison ) x 2 ( gender ) x 2 ( object type ) mixed - measures analysis of variance 198 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER TABLE 1 Experiment 1 : Proportion Correct for the Search Trials Search Trials Group Unique Twin Overall 36 - month - olds Control Comparison 42 - month - olds Control Comparison Control Comparison All M 0 . 45 0 . 70 0 . 70 1 . O 0 . 58 0 . 85 * 0 . 71 0 . 35 0 . 40 0 . 45 0 . 58 0 . 45 0 . 58 0 . 60 0 . 80 * * 0 . 40 0 . 49 0 . 53 0 . 69 * 0 . 46 0 . 59 ( ANOVA ) . As mentioned previously , there was a main effect of comparison F ( 1 , 32 ) = 5 . 447 , ~ < . 05 . There was also a significant effect of age : Older children ( M = . 69 , SD = . 028 ) performed better than younger children ( M = . 49 , SD = . 032 ) , F ( 1 , 32 ) = 5 . 447 , ~ < . 05 . This effect was moderated by a significant Age x Gender inter - action , which showed that only girls showed an effect of age ( 36 - month - olds : M = . 40 ; 42 - month - olds : M = . 80 ; as compared to M = . 58 for both 36 - and 42 - month - old boys ) , F ( 1 , 32 ) = 5 . 447 , ~ < . 05 . Despite the overall difference in performance be - tween boys and girls , both genders showed an advantage due to comparison ( 0 . 73 vs . 0 . 43 for boys and 0 . 65 vs . 0 . 55 for girls for comparison vs . control , respec - tively ) . We found no effects of feedback or practice across trials ( consistent with Blades & Cooke’s , 1994 , findings ) , and we did not find above - chance tendencies for children to make perseverative errors . An analysis of individual performance showed a similar pattern as that of the group means . More comparison group children ( . 70 ) than control group children ( . 40 ) met a criterion of . 75 correct . This finding held for both the younger children ( comparison = . 50 ; control = . 30 ) and older children ( comparison = . 90 ; control = . 50 ) . As predicted , chldrenperformed better on the unique objects ( M = 0 . 71 correct , SD = . 019 ) than on the twin objects ( M = 0 . 46 , SD = . 009 ) , F ( 1 , 32 ) = 18 . 182 , p < . 05 . All groups performedreliably above chance ( all ts > 3 . 7 ) except the younger control group children , who performed marginally above chance ( . 20 ) , t ( 9 ) = 2 . 1 4 , ~ = . 06 . On the twin items , only the older comparison group performed reliably better than chance , 49 ) = 4 . 0 0 , ~ < . O 1 . Performance did not exceed chance for the younger con - trol group , t ( 9 ) = 1 . 4 1 , ns , and was just marginally better than chance for the younger comparison group and older control group , t ( 9 ) = 2 . 14 , p = . 06 , for both . COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 199 The effect of comparison was stronger for unique items than for twin items . On the unique items , comparison group children ( M = . 85 , SD = 0 . 33 ) performed better than the control group children ( M = . 58 , SD = 0 . 37 ) , t ( 38 ) = 2 . 476 , ~ = . O1 8 . On the twin items , the comparison group ( M = . 53 , SD = 0 . 34 ) showed only a nonsignificant tendency to perform better than the control group ( M = . 40 , SD = 0 . 35 ) , t ( 38 ) = 1 . 268 , ns . Twin items . We assessed the degree to which children in different conditions were able to make use of relational information to disambiguate the twins during search . If children base their search solely on object matches and if their object mapping were perfect , then when an object is hidden under one twin , they will choose randomly between the two twin objects . This predicts 50 % correct perfor - mance . However , because children’s object matching is not perfect , that figure must be adjusted . We can take performance on the unique items as an estimate of children’s ability to match based on object characteristics . Thus , we derive the ob - ject - only estimate - that is , how children would perform on the twin items if they based their search solely on object matches - by multiplying the probability of a correct object match ( i . e . , the proportion correct on the unique items ) by S O ( Le . , to represent random selection between the twin items ) . We can then test whether chil - dren’s performance on the twin items was significantly higher than the object - only estimate . In this study , children’s performance on the twin items was well accounted for by the object - only estimate . The 37 - month - old control group children were 35 % correct on the twin items , against an object - only estimate of 23 % ; comparison group children were 45 % correct , against an object - only estimate of 35 % . Among the 42 - month - olds , the control group children were 45 % correct against an object - only estimate of 35 % , and the comparison group children were 60 % correct against an object - only estimate of 50 % . The proportion correct did not differ sig - nificantly ffom the object - only estimate for any of the groups , all ts < 1 . 2 . 1 . 0 p 0 . 8 S e E n . e 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 O O FIGURE 2 Proportion of correct fmt searches in Ex - periment 1 . 37 mo . 42 mo . 200 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER There was an unexpected asymmetry in performance on the twin items . Children were far more likely to choose the twin item at the fiont of the room cor - rectly ( M = 0 . 65 ) than the twin item at the side of the room ( M = 0 . 28 ) . We suspect h s asymmetry was due to one of the twin items being placed at the . fiont of the rooms ( i . e . , closer to the children ) , whereas the other was placed at the side - a dis - parity we remedied in the succeeding studies . Overall , children searched ( correctly and incorrectly ) at the fiont twin item on 43 % of trials ( 20 % more than at any other item ) and at the side twin item on just 12 % of trials . Retrieval trials . The overall performance on the retrieval trials was good ( M = 0 . 76 correct , SD = 0 . 24 ) , and it was higher on the search trials ( M = 0 . 59 , SD = 0 . 3 1 ) . There was no effect of condition , suggesting that the advantage of the com - parison group on the search trials was not primarily due to differences in the chil - dren’s memory for the location of the original toy . However , there was an effect of object type : Although children performed above chance ( . 20 ) levels for both item types , all rs > 3 . 2 , children performed better on the unique items ( M = 0 . 89 , SD = 0 . 24 ) thanonthetwinitems ( M = O . 64 , SD = O . 34 ) , F ( l , 32 ) = 21 . 053 , p < . OS . The high level of performance on the unique items by all groups of children suggests that they were on task . The poorer performance on the twin items suggests a partic - ular disadvantage for encoding or recalling relational information . Consistent with this suggestion , all groups performed roughly in accord with the object - only esti - mate - all higher , but not significantly so . As with the search trials , there was an asymmetry for the twin items on the re - trieval trials . Children performed better on trials involving the front twin item ( M = 0 . 88 ) than those involving the side twin item ( M = 0 . 40 ) . Again , we suspect that the reason for the difference is that the front twin item was more easily accessible than the side twin item . Search trial results for those trials on which children successfully retrieved the original toy show the same patterns ( albeit at higher proportions ) as the results from all the search trials . The comparison group children performed better ( M = 0 . 83 ) than the control group children ( M = 0 . 59 ) , older children ( M = 0 . 80 ) per - formed better than younger chldren ( M = 0 . 62 ) , and children were more success - ful on the unique items ( M = 0 . 77 ) than on the twin items ( M = 0 . 64 ) . Placement trials . There was a significant effect of condition on the place - ment trials , with children in the comparison condition ( M = 0 . 80 correct ) placing better than those in the control condition ( M = 0 . 40 ) , F ( 1 , 32 ) = 7 . 529 , ~ < . 05 . There was an immediate effect of alignment on children’s understanding of the corre - spondences between the hiding and finding rooms . COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 201 Discussion Our main prediction was confmed : Comparison group children performed better than control group children . As predicted , comparing highly similar examples helped 3 - year - olds to subsequently make a more challenging comparison . The su - perior performance of the comparison group is not easily explained by differences in children’s memory for the location of the original toy , as children in both condi - tions performed at comparable levels on the retrieval trials . Children performed far better on the unique items than on the twin items , con - sistent with the relational shift prediction that children achieve object matches be - fore relational matches . The advantage of unique over twin items held for retrieval trials as well as search trials , suggesting that it results in part fi - om an encoding ad - vantage . That is , children did not encode the relational information necessary to distinguish the twin items . However , encoding failures are not sufficient to ac - count for children’s difficulties with the twin items . Children’s search trial perfor - mance was better for the unique items than for the twin items even on just those trials in which children later retrieved the toy correctly in the original space . Thus , children’s differential mapping performance on the twin versus unique items can - not be attributed merely to memory failure . The results of Experiment 1 are encouraging for the claim that comparison fa - cilitates encoding and mapping on the basis of relations . However , a question re - mains about the exact nature of the comparison benefit . Our hypothesis is that the advantage of the comparison group stems from comparing the highly similar Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms and atstracting the common spatial relations , but the comparison group children could also have benefited from the repetition of the hiding event . The comparison group children saw toys being hdden in both the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms , whereas the control group children saw just one hid - ing event . The comparison group’s superior performance may simply have stemmed from having two chances to view the hiding event and not fi - om any in - sight into spatial schemas . Another concern was the extent of the comparison ben - efit . Despite similar trends for the unique and twin items , effects of comparison were reliable only for the unique items . If alignment invites relational focus , there should be benefits for the twin items . EXPERIMENT 2 In Experiment 2 , we sought to hone in on the pure effects of comparing two spaces . Instead of showing the hiding event twice , we simply showed comparison group children the nearly identical rooms - Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 - before the hide - and - find task and encouraged them to point out how the two rooms were alike . A control group received initial experience with the Hiding 1 room prior to the mapping task . 202 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER To equalize the time spent looking at the hiding room , the control group was en - couraged to talk about the colors of the objects in the Hiding 1 room . After their pretask experience , all children in the study played the same hide - and - find game ; the only difference between conditions was the pretask experience children were given . In addition to removing the double - event confound , this de - sign gives the comparison group children a more focused opportunity to compare the two spaces . Because the comparison took place prior to the difficult mapping task , children could draw out a relational schema from their comparison experi - ence before needmg to apply it . Thus , it constitutes a purer test of the analogical encoding hypothesis . If comparison , and not repetition , was the major factor responsible for the ef - fects in Experiment 1 , then when children are allowed a focused comparison in Ex - periment 2 , the comparison group should outperform the control group . In particular , if comparing highly similar examples promotes the encoding and trans - fer of relational structure , then comparison group children should exceed the con - trol group children on the twin items . As before , we also had expectations about performance across object types . The relational shift hypothesis - that the ability to make object matches precedes the ability to make relational matches - predicts that children should perform better on unique items than on twin items and that age differences should be most pro - nounced on the twin items , which require some understanding of spatial relations . Method Participants . Participants were 52 children fiom the same population as in Experiment 1 . Four boys were unable to complete the task and were dropped from analysis , leaving 48 children in two age groups : 35 to 37 months ( M = 36 . 2 , SD = 0 . 4 1 ) and 40 to 44 months ( M = 42 . 3 , SD = 1 . 15 ) . One half of the participants were boys , and one halfwere girls . One half were placed in the comparison condition and one half in the control condition . Design and materials . The design , scoring , and materials were as in Exper - iment 1 , with one exception : The furniture was rearranged to equalize the salience of the two twin items . The front twin item was moved to the back of the room , be - tween the bed and the desk , and the side twin remained in place . To corroborate equal salience , we ran a pilot study with 7 children ranging in age from 39 to 49 months ( M = 4 1 months ) . The children closed their eyes while an experimenter hid a toy in the finding room , and then the children were asked to tq to find it . Each child completed four trials - one for each unique and twin item used for the search trials in Experiment 1 . The children searched for the toy equally often in the five hiding places in this new arrangement : the bed ( M = O . 18 ) ; the desk ( M = 0 . 22 ) ; the COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 203 rug ( M = O . 16 ) ; and , most important , the side stool ( M = O . 19 ) and the back stool ( M = 0 . 2 1 ) . Two children also looked under the dog ( M = 0 . 04 ; a reasonable but unex - pected guess for the location of a hidden bone ! ) . It appears that no object is consid - erably more or less salient than any other in this new arrangement . Procedure . The procedure was largely the same as in Experiment 1 , with the differences noted previously . For the comparison group , the experimenter brought out both the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms and encouraged the children to compare them . First , the experimenter set up the objects in the Hiding 1 room as in Experi - ment 1 , then the Hiding 2 room was placednext to it with its objects already fully set up . The experimenter said , “Do you see how these are the same ? Let’s see how these are the same . ” The experimenter pointed to an object in the Hiding 2 room and asked the child to point to “the one in the very same place” in the Hiding 1 room . Children were given general encouragement but no specific feedback . After the ex - perimenter and chtld went through all the objects in the room twice in this fashion , the Hiding 2 room was removed and the finding room was brought out . For the control group children , the pretask involved only the Hiding 1 room . As with the comparison group , the experimenter brought out the Hiding 1 room and set up the objects . Then , the experimenter encouraged the child to talk about the colors of all the objects in the Hiding 1 room . This color - naming task was roughly the same duration as the comparison group’s pointing task . The experimenter then brought out the finding room . From this point on , both groups received exactly the same treatment : Children carried out two placement trials and four search and retrieval trials , much like children in the control condi - tion of Experiment 1 . The two placement trials were at the front left and fiont right comers of the rooms . The four search and retrieval trials alternated between unique and twin items . Results Search trials . As predicted , the comparison experience helped children in the mapping task ( see Table 2 and Figure 3 ) . The data for search trials were ana - lyzed in a 2 ( age ) x 2 ( comparison ) x 2 ( gender ) x 2 ( object type ) ANOVA . There was a main effect of comparison : Chtldren in the comparison condition ( M = 0 . 65 correct , SD = 0 . 23 ) performed better than children in the control condition ( M = 0 . 47 , SD = 0 . 33 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 5 . 372 , p . 05 . There was a main effect of age , with older children ( M = 0 . 64 , SD = 0 . 33 ) performing better than younger children ( M = 0 . 48 , SD = 0 . 24 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 4 . 182 , ~ < . 05 . There was a marginal interaction ofAge x Comparison : The 42 - month - old comparison group performed substantially better ( M = 0 . 79 , SD = O . 14 ) than the remaining three groups ( M = 0 . 48 , SD = 0 . 30 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 3 . 14 1 , p = . 084 . There was also a marginal effect of gender : Overall , girls 204 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER TABLE 2 Experiment 2 : Proportion Correct for the Search Trials ~ ~ _ _ _ - Search Trials Group Unique Twin Overall 36 - month - olds Control . 63 . 29 . 46 Comparison . 79 . 21 . so 42 - month - olds Control . 54 . 42 . 48 Comparison . 88 * . 71 * . 79 * Control . 58 . 35 . 47 Comparison . 83 * . 46 . 65 * M . 71 . 4 1 . 56 All ( M = 0 . 63 , SD = 0 . 27 ) performed better than boys ( M = 0 . 49 , SD = 0 . 32 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 3 . 141 , p = . 084 . However , there were no interactions with gender - both girls and boys showed benefits of comparison . The pattern ofsearch trial performance by individual childrenmirroredthat ofthe group means . Few 36 - month - olds met a 0 . 75 correct criterion ( comparison = O . 17 , control = 0 . 25 ) . Among the 42 - month - olds , more than twice as many comparison group children ( 0 . 92 ) than control group children ( 0 . 42 ) met criterion . The effects of alignment experience appear to have been strongerat 42 months than at 36 months . There was a reliable effect of object type . Children performed better on the unique objects ( M = 0 . 75 correct , SD = 0 . 35 ) than on the twin objects ( M = . 41 , SD = 0 . 37 ) , F ( 1 , 47 ) = 45 . 166 , ~ < . 05 . Further validating the new fùrniture arrange - ment , children’s performance was roughly equivalent on the two twin items ( side stool : 0 . 44 correct ; back stool : 0 . 38 correct ) . There was also an Object Type x Age interaction , F ( 1 , 47 ) = 1 1 . 795 , p < . 05 . Although children performed well on the unique items regardless of age ( 36 months : M = 0 . 75 correct ; 42 months : M = 0 . 74 correct ) , only the older children showed any measure of success for the twin items ( 36 months : M = 0 . 23 ; 42 months : M = 0 . 57 ) . Comparisons with chance perfor - mance bore out this pattern of results . Although all groups performed above chance ( 0 . 20 ) on the unique items , all ts > 2 . 6 , only the older children exceeded chance on the twin items - reliably so for the older comparison group , t ( 1 1 ) = 6 . 84 , p < . 001 , and marginally so for the older control group , r ( l1 ) = 2 . 0 9 , ~ = . 06 . A key question was whether comparison promoted relational understanding sufficiently to improve performance on twin items ( see Figure 4 ) . This advantage was found for the older children . The 42 - month - olds in the comparison group ( M = 0 . 7 1 , SD = 0 . 26 ) performed better on the twin items than those in the control group COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 205 0 . 8 ' 8 ' . E n 0 . 6 - f 0 . 4 ' ( M = 0 . 42 , SD = 0 . 36 ) , t ( 22 ) = 2 . 288 , ~ < . 05 . No such advantage was found for the younger children . Additionally , only the 42 - month - old comparison group ( h4 = 0 . 7 1 , SD = 0 . 26 ) was correct on the twin items significantly more than predicted by its object - only estimate ( 0 . 44 ) , t ( l1 ) = 3 . 644 , ~ < . 05 . Making a concrete compari - son apparently led at least the older children to greater insight of relational correspondences . Comparison experience also appears to have aided children in making the ob - ject matches . Although all groups performed above chance on the unique objects , the comparison group ( h4 = 0 . 83 , SD = 0 . 28 ) performed better than the control group ( M = 0 . 58 , SD = 0 . 38 ) , ( 46 ) = 2 . 584 , ~ = . 013 . It appears that comparing highly similar examples can help children make low - similarity object matches . We suspect this happens for two reasons : First , the alignment process acts to pre - serve object commonalities as well as relational commonalities , and , second , hav - ing a f m e r grasp of relational correspondences helps children to buttress the object correspondences . - - - - - - - - Control Retrieval trials . Overall , chldren showed good memory for where the bone was hidden in the original Hiding 1 room ( M = 0 . 83 correct , SD = 0 . 21 ) , and all groups performed above chance ( 0 . 20 ) levels on both the unique and twin items , all FIGURE 3 Proportion of correct first searches in Ex - periment 2 . FIGURE 4 Proportion of correct first searches for the twin items in Experiment 2 . 1 . 0 7 " 361110 . 42 mo . J 36 rno . 42 mo . 206 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER ts > 3 . 9 . There was a marginal effect of age , with the older children performing at 89 % correct ( SD = 0 . 2 I ) , but even the younger children performed reasonably well at 78 % ( SD = 0 . 2 I ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 2 . 976 , ~ = . 092 . There was also a marginal effect of object type , as children performed better on the unique items ( M = 0 . 89 , SD = 0 . 24 ) thanonthetwinitems ( M = 0 . 78 , SD = 0 . 32 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 3 . 571 , p = . 066 . Theobject type effect suggests that the twin items present an added difficulty relative to the unique items - specifically , the need to encode spatial relations . The younger con - trol group children showed some difficulty encoding spatial relations . They did not perform significantly better than the object - only estimate ( all other groups per - formed better than the object - only estimates ) , all ts > 3 . 5 . Placement trials . Performance on the placement trials was fairly low over - all , at 43 % correct ( SD = 0 . 50 ) . The 42 - month - olds in the comparison condition did best , performing at 59 % correct , but there were no significant differences of age or condition , and there was no interaction of these factors . It is possible that the low performance was due to the location of the added placement trial , which was not clearly situated next to any one object . Discussion These results support the claim that comparing hghly similar examples can pro - mote highlighting the common relational structure , thereby facilitating a difficult relational mapping . Ofmost interest , the 42 - month - old comparison group was suc - cessful on the twin items , showing an understanding of relational correspondences . Making a comparison helped children ( at least the older children ) to grasp a spatial relational schema . The success of the comparison group children is ofparticular interest because all the children were tested on the same task . The only difference between conditions was the pretask game children experienced . Viewing one hiding space separately and tallung about the hrniture did not improve performance on the search task ( in - deed , the performance of the control group [ 47 % correct ] in Experiment 2 was com - parable to that of the control group [ 0 . 49 ] in Experiment 1 ) . However , encouraging children to compare two nearly identical spaces provided substantial help . The results of Experiment 2 also shed light on the possible interpretations of Experiment 1 . The frndings show clear benefits from comparing two spaces . Al - though they do not rule out the possibility that the comparison benefit in Experi - ment 1 simply resulted from seeing a repeated hiding event , they show that such repetition is not necessary - simply comparing the two spaces before any hiding events are shown is sufficient to achieve the comparison advantage . Another sa - lient point is that only in Experiment 2 did we find a comparison advantage on the twin items - a key measure of relational insight . The pure comparison manipula - COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 207 tion in Experiment 2 led to greater gains than the double - event technique of Exper - iment 1 ( although only for the older group ) . This gain may result from the greater opportunity to focus fully on the comparison in Experiment 2 . Overall , the results are encouraging . In both studies , comparison group children performed better than control group chldren , and yet there remains a key question . The comparison group saw two models prior to the finding task , perhaps confer - ring an extra advantage over and above comparing the rooms . That is , perhaps they simply learned the layout better as a result of interacting with two rooms instead of just one . To test this , we conducted a fùrther study in which all children saw the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms , but only those in the comparison group were encour - aged to compare them . EXPERIMENT 3 Experiment 2 found a beneficial effect of comparison on appreciating relational similarity . The goal of this study was to replicate this effect as well as to rule out the possibility that mere exposure to two rooms , rather than the opportunity for com - parison , can account for the comparison group’s success . The comparison children saw the two hiding rooms simultaneously , as in the previous study . The control children saw the two hiding rooms sequentially and were encouraged to discuss the functions of all the objects in each room , one room at a time . Thus , the control group children saw exactly the same two rooms as the comparison group children and per - formed a relatively interesting task with each . The major difference was that only the comparison group saw the rooms simultaneously and were encouraged to com - pare them . One final change from the prior study is that the twin items were changed from stools to tables for generality . Method Participants . Participants were 50 children from the same population as in the previous experiments . Two 36 - month - olds , 1 boy and 1 girl , were unable to complete the task and were dropped from analysis . The remaining younger children ranged in age from 35 to 37 months ( M = 36 . 1 , SD = 0 . 78 ) . The older children were aged 4 1 to 43 months ( M = 42 . 3 , SD = 0 . 87 ) . There were equal numbers ofboys and girls , and one half were placed in the comparison condition and one half in the con - trol condition . Design and materials . The design , scoring , and materials were identical to those of Experiment 2 , except that the stools were altered to look ldce small tables . In the Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms , the tables were round and covered with table - 208 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER TABLE 3 Experiment 3 : Proportion Correct for the Search Trials Search Trials Group Unique Twin Overall 36 - month - olds Control . 58 . 29 . 44 Comparison . 79 . 54 . 67 * * Control . 79 . 5 8 . 69 Comparison . 92 . 83 * * . 88 * * Control . 69 . 44 . 56 Comparison . 85 * * . 69 * . 77 * M . 77 . 56 . 67 42 - month - olds All cloths that draped over the edges . In the frnding rooms , the tables were short and boxy . This change provided a check on whether there was something particularly difficult about the stools we used in the previous experiments . Procedure . The procedure for comparison group children was as in Experi - ment 2 . With the two hiding rooms side by side , the experimenter pointed to objects in the Hiding 1 room , and the child pointed to the corresponding objects in the Hiding 2 room . In contrast , there were changes made in the control condition proce - dure . The experimenter frst set up the Hiding 1 room and asked the child what the dog did with each object in the room . The children could either answer verbally or demonstrate . After going through all the objects in the Hiding 1 room , the experi - menter removed that room and brought out the Hiding 2 room , fully set up . The function game was played with this room in the same fashion . For both groups , after this pretask , the experimenter removed the Hiding 2 room and set up the Hiding 1 and frnding rooms . The experimenter and child proceeded through placement , search , and retrieval trials as in Experiment 2 . Results Search trials . As in the previous studies , there were clear benefits of com - parison ( see Table 3 and Figure 5 ) . The search trial data were analyzed in a 2 ( age ) x 2 ( comparison ) x 2 ( gender ) x 2 ( object type ) ANOVA . As in the previous experi - ments , children in the comparison condition ( A4 = 0 . 77 correct , SD = 0 . 28 ) per - formed better than children in the control condition ( Ad = 0 . 56 , SD = 0 . 3 l ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 209 1 . 0 i ! O . * ' 8 0 . 6 E O ' 0 . 4 - p 0 . 2 . - = 6 . 250 , ~ < . 05 . There was amain effect of age , as the older children ( M = 0 . 78 , SD = 0 . 27 ) performed better than the younger children ( M = 0 . 55 , SD = 0 . 3 1 ) . F ( 1 , 40 ) = 7 . 563 , ~ < . 05 . There were no effects of , or interactions with , gender . There was also an effect of comparison for the number of individual children meeting the 75 % correct criterion , and this effect held for both age groups . Among 36 - month - olds , 67 % of the comparison group met criterion , as compared to 25 % in the control group . Among 42 - month - olds , 92 % of the comparison group met criterion , as compared to 67 % in the control group . As expected , performance was better on the unique objects ( M = 0 . 77 correct , SD = 0 . 34 ) than on the twin objects ( M = 0 . 56 , SD = 0 . 38 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 15 . 152 , ~ < . 05 . All groups performed above chance on the unique items , all ts > 3 . 7 . Still , there was a marginally significant tendency for children in the comparison condi - tion ( M = 0 . 85 , SD = 0 . 28 ) to outperform children in the control condition ( M = 0 . 69 , SD = 0 . 38 ) on the unique objects , t ( 46 ) = 1 . 726 , p = . 092 . On the twin items , two important differences in performance were reliable ( see Figure 6 ) . First , the comparison group ( M = 0 . 69 , SD = 0 . 38 ) performed better than the control group ( M = 0 . 44 , SD = O . 34 ) , t ( 46 ) = 2 . 847 , p = . 021 , consistent with the claim that a concrete comparison can foster relational insight . Second , older chil - dren ( M = 0 . 71 , SD = 0 . 33 ) performed better than younger children ( M = 0 . 42 , SD = 0 . 38 ) , t ( 46 ) = 2 . 847 , ~ = . 007 , consistent with the relational shift hypothesis . - ô 0 0 . 6 ' E O * Control n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . FIGURE 5 periment 3 . Proportion of correct fnst searches in Ex - T 9 ; r / c * f 0 0 & mol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . O ( 36 mo . 42 mo . FIGURE 6 twin items in Experiment 3 . Proportion of correct fmt searches for the 21 0 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER As in Experiment 2 , the older group appeared to show stronger gains in rela - tional insight than the younger group . Among the 42 - month - olds ( but not the 36 - month - olds ) , the comparison group ( M = 0 . 83 , SD = 0 . 25 ) showed a marginally significant advantage on the twin items over the control group ( M = 0 . 58 , SD = 0 . 36 ) , t ( 22 ) = 1 . 990 , ~ = . 059 . The 42 - month - old comparison group was the only group that exceeded its object - only estimate ( 0 . 46 ) , t ( 1 1 ) = 5 . 277 , ~ < . 05 . Thus , al - though comparison experience benefited both age groups , it led to clear relational gains for the older group . Retrieval trials . Childrenperformed well on the retrieval trials ( M = 0 . 80 cor - rect , SD = O . 18 ) . Allg ~ oupsperfomedabovechance ( 0 . 20 ) forbothuniqueandtwin items , all ts > 2 . 8 . Nonetheless , children in the comparison group ( M = 0 . 84 , SD = O . 18 ) performedmarginallybetterthanchildreninthecontrol group ( M = 0 . 75 , SD = O . 18 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 3 . 24 , p = . 079 , suggestinganeffectofcomparisononchildren’s ini - tial encoding of the spaces . As in the previous studies , children performed better on unique items ( M = 0 . 94 , SD = O . 17 ) than ontwin items ( M = 0 . 66 , SD = 0 . 36 ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 20 . 138 , ~ < . O0 1 . There was a trend toward better performance on the twin items in the comparison group ( M = 0 . 73 , SD = 0 . 29 ) than in the control group ( M = 0 . 58 , SD = 0 . 4 l ) , although the interaction did not reach significance . Placement trials . The 42 - month - old children ( M = 0 . 79 , SD = 0 . 41 ) per - formed better than the 36 - month - olds ( M = 0 . 44 , SD = OSO ) , F ( 1 , 40 ) = 8 . 975 , ~ < . 05 . There was no effect of comparison . Discussion This study was a strong test of the hypothesis that making a comparison improves chldren‘s understanding of relational correspondences . Although comparison and control group children saw the same two initial rooms , only comparison group chil - dren were encouraged to compare them . Ths concerted comparison experience led to high levels ofperformance , especially among the 42 - month - o1ds , who showed a clear advantage on twin items over the control group . This is evidence that compar - ing two scenes can enable children to succeed in achallenging relational mapping . FURTHER ANALYSIS OF THE TWIN ITEMS In previous studies using twin items ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; see also Marzolf & DeLoache , 1997 ) , children’s performance was tested against an estimate ofchance ( 0 . 50 ) based on the assumption that for each twin test trial , children who relied on object similarity alone would choose randomly between just the twin items . These studies maintained high object similarity across rooms , so that errors on twin trials COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 21 1 were almost always to the wrong twin item . In contrast , in our studies , the object similarity across rooms was low so that on twin trials , children often searched at other ( nontwin ) objects . Across the three studies , children showed only modest proportions of errors to the wrong twin item on the search trials ( 0 . 41 of all errors ) and retrieval trials ( 0 . 5 1 ) . These proportions of errors to the wrong twin item are consistent with those predicted by the object - only estimates ( 0 . 37 and 0 . 45 for the search and retrieval trials , respectively ) . * We camed out a Wher test of whether children could distinguish between the twin items . For each child , we took the number of correct twin searches and di - vided it by the total number of twin searches for initial hidings under a twin . The average of these scores measures whether , given that children realized that one twin or the other is involved , they could tell which twin is correct ( the few children who made no twin searches were dropped from this analysis ) . We tested this p ( correct twin and twin search ) against the 0 . 50 chance measure . This analysis revealed that in all three studies , the older children in the compari - son group selected the correct twin at above - chance levels . Furthermore , in Exper - iment 3 , the younger comparison group ( as well as the older control group ) were able to select the correct twin ( see Table 4 ) . Ths analysis provides further support for the conclusion that comparison helped 42 - month - olds to map on the basis of spatial relations . GENERAL DISCUSSION Our hypothesis is that the process of comparison - of structural alignment and mapping - an promote children’s understanding of relational structure . Spe - cifically , we hypothesized that comparison of analogous spatial configurations would gamer attention to the common spatial relations and thereby facilitate rela - tional encoding and performance in a subsequent spatial mapping task . The predic - tion was confirmed . In three studies , children who were led to compare two highly similar model rooms went on to perform better on a spatial mapping task than chil - dren not given such experience . Comparison experience was provided in two different ways in these experi - ments . In Experiment 1 , children watched two sequential hiding events before searching for a toy in the finding room . In Experiments 2 and 3 , children compared two similar hiding rooms prior to seeing the hiding event and carrying out the * Ln support of this explanation , in a recent pilot study in which 36 - month - olds performed a mapping task between the high - similarity Hiding 1 and Hiding 2 rooms , we found that children were nearly per - fect on the unique items , and nearly all ( 0 . 91 ) of children’s errors on the twin items were to choose the wrong twin item . 21 2 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER TABLE 4 Experiments 1 to 3 : Proportion Correct Among the Twin Items on Twin Hiding Trials Search Trials Group Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3 36 - month - olds Control . 44 . 56 S O Comparison . 63 . 44 , 948 42 - month - olds Control . 71 . 72 . 80a Comparison . 72a . 83a . 96a " 95 % confidence interval does not include the chance value or . 50 ( proportion ofcorrect twin searches among all twin searches ) . search task . Both sequential comparison and pretask comparison resulted in per - formance benefits . Interestingly , pretask comparison appeared to lead to greater benefits than sequential comparison , as only the former was found to support chil - dren ' s relational mapping ability . This is consistent with other evidence suggest - ing that a concerted comparison process leads to better schema abstraction than does incidental comparison ( e . g . , Kurtz et al . , in press ; Markman & Gentner , 1993 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ) . Examining children ' s performance on the retrieval trials suggests that compari - son benefits children ' s encoding of relations . Overall , children performed better on the unique than the twin items in their retrieval trials , consistent with our hypothesis that children ' s initial encodings of spatial relations were weak . However , we found that alignment experience - in particular , the opportunity for simultaneous compar - ison provided in Experiments 2 and 3 - led to benefits on the twin item retrieval tri - als . This is consistent with our claim that analogical encoding - even the aligning of highly similar rooms - can improve children ' s relational encoding . In all these studies , there were reliable benefits of comparison across both age groups . However , the effects of comparison were stronger for the older group than for the younger group . There was a reliable benefit of comparison for the older children in Experiment 2 and a marginal benefit in Experiment 3 . In contrast , the younger children only showed a marginal benefit of comparison in Experiment 3 . Furthermore , only the older group showed benefits of comparison on the twin items - the key test of relational insight . It is possible that making comparisons was of greater benefit to the older children because for comparisons to yield in - sight , children must possess at least partial knowledge ofthe examples being com - pared . An additional possible factor is that the comparison experiences provided in these studies were brief . It is possible that more intensive comparison experience may enable younger children to gain insight into relations . COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 21 3 Alignment and Relational Learning Our results suggest that many transfer fmdings can be viewed as effects of making comparisons . For example , comparison - driven abstraction processes can help ex - plain why performing an easy mapping task can facilitate performing a more chal - lenging mapping task ( Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Marzolf & DeLoache , 1994 ; Uttal et al . , 1995 ) . Furthermore , the assumption of analogical encoding processes can explain the finding that transfer is often markedly better if learners first solve two or more analogous problems , rather than just one - a result found for both chil - dren ( Brown & Kane , 1988 ; Chen et al . , 1997 ; Gholson , Dattel , Morgan , & Eymard , 1989 ; Gholson , Eymard , Morgan , 8z Kamhi , 1987 ) and adults ( Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ; Loewenstein et al . , 1999 ; Ross & Kennedy , 1990 ; Thompson , Gentner , & Loewenstein , 2000 ) . For instance , Gholson and his colleagues ( Gholson et al . , 1989 ; Gholson et al . , 1987 ) found that elementary school children could better solve a complex scheduling problem ( e . g . , the farmer’s dilemma prob - lem : ferrying a fox , a goose , and some corn across a river without leaving the fox with the goose or the goose with the corn ) if they had received two prior analogs than if they had received only one . The benefits of comparison experience can be quite durable . Chen and Klahr ( 1999 ) taught 1 O - year - olds about experimental de - sign by leading them to carry out an intensive sequence of parallel experiments @ e . , providing opportunities to compare highly similar examples ) in the context of studying mechanics . Seven months later , the children showed positive transfer to novel domains . Gentner and N a y ( 1 999 ) found a comparison advantage on a word extension task . They found that when 4 - year - olds were given a new name for apictured object ( e . g . , an apple ) and asked to extend the word to new objects , children extended the word to objects with common perceptual properties , such as shape ( e . g . , a balloon ) , rather than objects of with deeper conceptual commonalities ( e . g . , a banana ) . How - ever , ifchildren instead were shown two perceptually similarpictures with the same label ( e . g . , an apple and a pear ) and were prompted to make a comparison , they shifted to extending on the basis of relational properties , such as both being edible ( i . e . , the banana received the same label as the apple ) . Comparing highly similar ex - amples can enable children to note deep relational commonalities . Comparison and the Relational Shift The pattern of performance in our task is consistent in two respects with the rela - tional shift hypothesis that in any given arena , facility with object commonalities precedes facility with relational commonalities ( Gentner , 1988 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ) . First , in the studies reported here , childrenperformed better on the unique items than on the twin items . Second , older children performed better 21 4 LOEWENSTEIN AND GENTNER than younger children on the twin items ( which require relational encoding ) . The re - lational shift occurs at different ages in different domains ( Genmer & Rattermann , 1991 ) . It appears in tasks involving similarity , analogy , and metaphor ( e . g . , Brown , 1989 ; Gentner , 1988 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Halford , 1987 , 1992 ; Holyoak , JUM , & Billman , 1984 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998a , 2001 ) . Interestingly , recent research suggests that the relational shift may also apply to the language children use to describe models . Plumert and her col - leagues ( Plumert , Ewert , & Spear , 1995 ; Plumert & Nichols - Whitehead , 1996 ) stud - ied children’s speech about object locations by hiding objects in model rooms that contained identical pairs ofobjects . They foundthat 3 - year - olds oftenmentioned the location of a toy but typically failed to mention the secondary landmarks needed to disambiguate which of two identical referents the child had intended . In contrast , 4 - year - olds tended to mention the relation to a secondary landmark . Our studies add to evidence that the shift from an object focus to a relational fo - cus is a general pattern resulting from greater expertise ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; Brown , 1989 ; Chen et al . , 1997 ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998b ) . Prior evidence for this claim has come fiom correlations between children’s knowledge in the domain and children’s analogical abilities ( Goswami , 1992 ; Goswami & Brown , 1989 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998b ) . These studies have the drawback that it is difficult to separate gains in experience from maturational gains . Furthermore , they do not tell us what kind of experiences lead to the relational shift . In this research , we provided children with comparison learning experiences that were hypothesized to lead to gains in relational howl - edge . These experiences led directly to advantages in the ability to cany out rela - tional similarity mappings . In other words , a relational shift occurred as a direct result of learning . In addition to buttressing the knowledge - gain explanation of the relational shift , these results bear on how relational knowledge is acquired . In our studies , we did not teach new facts ; we simply encouraged comparison processing . Thus , we suggest that making comparisons is one experiential route by which chil - dren can grasp relational howledge . Relational Schemas in Learning and Development Comparison is not the only route by which children develop an understanding of domain relations . Explanation and instruction can also promote relational learning ( Bielaczyc , Pirolli , & Brown , 1995 ; Callanan , 1990 ; Coleman , Brown , & Rivkin , 1997 ; Crowley & Siegler , 1999 ; Mayer , 1992 ; Palincsar , & Brown , 1984 ) . For ex - ample , Callanan ( 1990 ) found that parents helped 2 - through 4 - year - olds notice generalizable properties of examples when teaching their children new categories . Gentner and Toupin ( 1 986 ) found in a story - mapping task that hearing a moral or causal schema that provided a higher order structure improved 9 - year - olds’ ability to retell the story with a different set of characters . Children can also profitably gen - COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 21 5 erate their own explanations : Crowley and Siegler ( 1 999 ) found that lundergarten through second grade students , who simply observed a strategy being used , were less successful at using it than were students who were also required to explain the strategy to themselves . Finally , children can capitalize on explanatory structure provided directly within learning materials . One reason explanation may facilitate learning relational knowledge is that it may provide names for specific relations . Hearing relational language leads chil - dren to high levels of performance on spatial mapping tasks ( Gentner & Loewenstein , in press ; Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 1998 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998a , 2001 ) . For instance , we found that hearing locations described with spatial prepositions enabled 44 - month - old children to succeed on a spatial mapping task in which control children performed at chance levels ( Loewenstein & Gentner , 1998 ) . Relations can be highlighted visually as well as verbally . For instance , lines on a map or graph can help make particular patterns or trends explicit ( Zacks & Tversky , 1999 ) . Uttal and his colleagues ( Tan & Uttal , 1999 ; Uttal , 2000 ; Uttal , Gregg , Tan , Chamberlin , & Sines , 2001 ) have extended the idea of structural hgh - lighting to children’s map understanding . They showed 5 - year - olds where a toy was hidden on a map , and then asked the children to find the toy in a large - scale space . Children benefited fiom seeing a map with lines connecting the hiding loca - tions . A follow - up study showed that children only benefited when the lines formed a coherent shape ( e . g . , a dog ) , rather than a meaningless figure ( e . g . , scrambled parts of a dog figure ) . Therefore , presenting a clear visual structure fa - cilitated children’s spatial mapping ability . This is consistent with Gentner’s ( 1983 ; Clement & Gentner , 1991 ) systematicity principle , according to which the comparison process is facilitated by common higher order structure . CONCLUSIONS The appreciation of relational similarities is a major achievement of development . The studies presented here suggest that the comparison process is one route to fur - thering children’s appreciation of relational similarity . An intriguing aspect of the studies is that the comparisons that helped children were among highly similar ex - amples . Studies ofanalogical learning have often focused on far analogies involving examples f ? om widely different contexts . Such far comparisons can lead to dramatic results when people create abstract schemas that incorporate the relational common - alities . However , ourresearch shows that the other end of the similarity continuum is also worth exploring . Children can gain insight fiom comparing highly similar pairs - the very kinds of comparisons they would naturally notice in the course of their own experience . The small step ofaclosecomparisonenabledthe large stepofa more distant analogy . 21 6 LOEWENSTEfN AND GENTNER ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This article was partially prepared while Dedre Gentner was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences . This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant SBR - 97203 13 and National Science Foundation - Learning and Intelligent Systems Grant SBR - 95 1 1757 to Dedre Gentner . We are grateful for the financial support provided by William T . Grant Foundation Award 95167795 . We thank Patricia Bauer , Zhe Chen , and Nora Newcombe for their thoughtful comments on the arti - cle . We also thank David Uttal , Judy DeLoache , Mark Blades , Phillip Wolff , and the Analogy and Similarity group at Northwestern University for helpful discus - sions of the issues presented in this article . REFERENCES Bence , V . M . , & Presson , C . C . ( 1 997 , April ) . The spatial basis ofyoung children’s use ofscale models . Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development , Wash - ington , DC . Bielaczyc , K . , Pirolli , P . L . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1995 ) . Training in self - explanation and self - regulation strategies : Investigating the effects of knowledge acquisition on problem solving . Cognition andln - siruction . 13 . 221 - 252 . Blades , M . , & Cooke , 2 . ( 1994 ) . Young children’s ability to understand a model as a spatial representa - tion . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 155 , 201 - 21 8 . Blades , M . , & Spencer , C . ( 1994 ) . The development of children’s ability to use spatial representations . In H . W . Reese ( Ed . ) , Advances in child development and behavior @ p . 157 - 199 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic . Bluestein , M . , & Acredolo , L . ( 1979 ) . Developmental changes in map reading skill . ChildDevelopment , Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Analogical learning and transfer : What develops ? In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarityandanalogicalreasoning ( pp . 369 - 412 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Brown , A . L . , & Kane , M . J . ( 1 988 ) . Preschool children can leam to transfer : Learning to leam and leam - ing fiom example . Cognitive Psycholoa , 20 , 493 - 523 . Brown , A . L . , Kane , M . J . , & Echols , C . H . ( 1986 ) . Young children’s mental models determine analogi - cal transfer across problems with a common goal structure . Cognitive Development , I , 103 - 121 . Callanan , M . A . ( 1990 ) . Parents’ descriptions of objects : Potential data for children’s inferences about category principles . Cognitive Development , 5 , 101 - 122 . Chen , 2 . . & Klahr , D . ( 1999 ) . All other things being equal : Acquisition and transfer of the control of variables strategy . Child Development , 70 , 1098 - 1 120 . Chen , Z . , Sanchez , R . P . , & Campbell , T . ( 1997 ) . From beyond to within their grasp : The rudiments of analogical problem solving in 10 - and 13 - month - olds . Developmenfal Psychology , 33 , 790 - 80 1 . Clement , C . A . , & GenIner , D . ( 1991 ) . Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical mapping . Cognitive Science , 15 , 89 - 132 . Coleman , E . B . , Brown , A . L . , & Rivkin , 1 . D . ( 1997 ) . The effect of instructional explanations on leam - ing fkom scientific texts . Journal of the Learning Sciences , 6 , 347 - 365 . Crowley , K . , & Siegler , R . S . ( 1 999 ) . Explanation and generalization in young children’s strategy learn - ing . Child Development , 70 , 304 - 3 16 . 50 , 691 - 697 . COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 21 7 Dehache , J . S . ( 1 987 ) . Rapid change in the symbolic functioning of very young children . Science , 238 , 15561557 . Dehache , J . S . ( 1989a ) . The development of representation in young children . In H . W . Reese ( Ed . ) , Advances in child development and behavior ( Vol . 22 , pp . 1 - 39 ) . New York Academic . Dehache , J . S . ( 1 989b ) . Young children’s understanding of the correspondence between a scale model and a larger space . Cognitive Development , 4 , 121 - 139 . Dehache , J . S . ( 1990 ) . Youngchildren’s understandingofmodels . In R . Fivush & J . A . Hudson ( Eds . ) , Knowing and remembering in young children ( pp . 94 - 126 ) . Cambridge , England : Cambridge Uni - versity Press . Dehache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Early symbol understanding and use . In D . Medin ( Ed . ) , Thepsychology of learning and motivation ( Vol . 32 , pp . 65 - 1 14 ) . New York Academic . Dehache , J . S . , Kolstad , V . , & Anderson , K . N . ( 1991 ) . Physical similarityandyoungchildren’s under - standing of scale models . Child Development , 62 , 11 1 - 126 . DehacheJ . S . , Miller , K . F . , & Rosengren , K . S . ( 1997 ) . Thecredibleshrinkingroom : Veryyoungchil - dren’sperfomancewithsymbolic andnonsymbolic relations . PsychologicalScience , 8 , 308 - 3 13 . Dow , G . A . , & Pick , H . L . ( 1992 ) . Young children’s use of models and photographs as spatial represen - tations . Cognitive Development , 7 , 35 1 - 363 . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure - mapping engine : Algorithm and examples . Artifcial Intelligence , 41 . 1 - 63 . Ferguson , R . W . ( 1994 ) . MAGI : A model of analogy - based encoding using symmetry and regularity . Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of the Cognitl’ve Science Society . Hillsdale , NJ : JAW - rence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1 995 ) . MACEAC : Amodel of similarity - basedretrieval . Cogni - tive Science , 19 , 141 - 205 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 - 1 70 . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as shucture - mapping : The relational shift . ChildDevelopment , 59 , 47 - 59 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds ) . , Simi - larity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 - 24 1 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & hewenstein , J . ( in press ) . Relational thinking and relational language . In J . Bymes & E . Amsel ( Eds . ) , Language , literacy , and cognitive development Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum As - sociates , Inc . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psy - chologist , 52 , 45 - 56 . Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1997 ) . Comparison and the development of cognition and language . Cogni - tive Studies : Bulletin of the Japanese Cognitive Science Society , 4 , 112 - 149 . Gentner , D . , & Namy , L . ( 1 999 ) . Comparison in the development of categories . Cognitive Development , Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Languageandthecar ~ rofsimilarity . InS . A . Gelman & J . P . Bymes ( E & . ) , Perspective on thought and language : Interrelations in development @ p . 225 - 277 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , IO , 277 - 300 . Gholson , B . , Dattel , A . R . , Morgan , D . , & Eymard , L . A . ( 1989 ) . Problem solving , recall , and mapping relations in isomorphic transfer and nonisomorphic transfer among preschoolers and elementary school children . Child Development , 60 , 1172 - 1 187 . Gholson , B . , Eymard , L . A . , Morgan , D . , & Kamhi , A . G . ( 1987 ) . Problem solving , recall and isomor - phic transfer among third - grade and sixth - grade children . Journal of Experimental Child Psychoi - I4 , 487 - 513 . Om , 43 , 227 - 243 . 21 8 LOEWENSTEDI AND GENTNER Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction andanalogical transfer . Cognitive Psycholog ) l , 15 , 1 - 38 . Goswami , U . ( 1 992 ) . Analogical reasoning in children . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , InC . Goswami , U . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Melting chocolate and melting snowmen : Analogical reasoning and causal relations . Cognition , 35 , 69 - 95 . Halford , G . S . ( 1 987 ) . A structure - mapping approach to cognitive development . The neo - Piagetian the - ones of cognitive development : Toward an interpretation [ Special issue ] . International Journal of Halford , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual complexity in cognitive development . Hu - man Development . 35 , 193 - 2 18 . Holyoak , K . I . , Junn , E . N . , & Billman , D . O . ( 1984 ) . Development of analogical problem - solving skill . Child Development , 55 , 2042 - 2055 . Inagaki , K . ( 1 989 ) . Developmental shift in biological inference processes : From similarity - based to cat - egory - based attribution . Human Development , 32 , 79 - 87 . Inagaki , K . ( 1990 ) . The effects of raising animals on children’s biological knowledge . British Journal of Developmental Psychology . 8 . 119 - 129 . Inagaki , K . , & Hatano , G . ( 1 987 ) . Youngchildren’s spontaneous personification as analogy . Child De - velopment , 58 , 1013 - 1020 . Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 - 2822 . Kurtz , K . J . , Miao , C . , & Gentner , D . ( in press ) . Learning by analogical bootstrapping . Journal of the Learning Sciences . Liben , L . S . ( 1999 ) . Developinganunderstandingofextemal spatial representations . Inl . E . Sigel ( Ed . ) , The development of representational thought : Theoretical perspectives ( pp . 297 - 32 1 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence ErIbaum Associates , Inc . Liben , L . S . , & Downs , R . M . ( 1989 ) . Understanding maps as symbols : The development of map con - cepts in children . In H . W . Reese ( Ed . ) , Advances in child development and behavior ( Vol . 22 , pp . 145 - 201 ) . New York : Academic . Liben , L . S . , & Yekel , C . A . ( 1996 ) . Preschoolers’ understanding ofplan and oblique maps : The role of geometric and representational corspondence . Child Development , 67 , 2780 - 2796 . Lillard , A . S . ( 1993 ) . Pretendplayskillsandthechild’stheoryofmind . ChildDevelopmeni , 64 , 348 - 37 I . hewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1 997 , April ) . Vsingcomparison to improvepreschoolers ‘spatial map - ping ability . Poster presentedat the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Develop - ment , Washington , DC . hewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . Relational language facilitates analogy in children . Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Sociely , 615 - 620 . hewenstein , I . , Thompson , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1 999 ) . Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge trans - fer in negotiation . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 6 , 586 - 597 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Structural alignment during similarity comparisons . Cognitive Psychology , 25 . 431467 . Markman , A . B . , & Gentner , D . ( 1997 ) . The effects of alignability on memory storage . Psychological Science , 8 , 363 - 367 . Marzolf , D . P . , & Dehache , J . S . ( 1 994 ) . Transfer in young children’s understanding of spatial repre - sentations . Child Development , 65 , 1 - 15 . ManoIf , D . P . , & Dehache , J . S . ( 1997 ) . Search tasks as measures of cognitive development . In N . Foreman & R . Gillett ( E & . ) , A handbook ofspatial researchparadigms and methodologies ( Vol . 1 , pp . 131 - 157 ) . Hove , England Psychology Press . Manolf , D . P . , Dehache , J . S . , & Kolstad , V . ( 1999 ) . The role of relational similarity in young chil - dren’s use of a scale model . Developmental Science , 2 , 296 - 305 . PSyChOlO ~ , 22 , 609 - 642 . COMPARISON FACILITATES MAPPING 21 9 Mayer , R . E . ( 1992 ) . Thinking , problem solving , cognition . San Francisco : Freeman . Medin , D . L . , Goldstone , R . L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , Namy , L . L . , & Gentner , D . ( in press ) . Making a silk purse out of two sow’s ears : Young children’s use Newcombe , N . S . , & Huttenlocher , J . ( 2000 ) . Makingspace : The development ofspatial representation Palincsar , A . S . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1984 ) . Reciprocal teaching of comprehension fostering and compre - Pemer , J . ( 1991 ) . Understanding the representational mind . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Plumert , J . M . , Ewert , K . , & Spear , S . J . ( 1 995 ) . The early development of children’s communication about nested spatial relations . Child Development , 66 , 959 - 969 . Plumert , J . M . , & Nichols - Whitehead , P . ( 1996 ) . Parental scaffolding of young children’s spatial com - munication . Developmental Psychology . 32 , 523 - 532 . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . The effect of language on similarity : The use ofrelationalla - bels improves young children ’s analogical mappingpeflormance . Unpublished manuscript , North - western University . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998a ) . The effect of language on similarity : The use of relational la - bels improves young children’s performance in a mapping task . In K . Holyoak , D . Genfner , & B . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , Advancesinanalog ~ research : Integrationoftheory & datafvomthecognitive , com - putational , and neural sciences ( pp . 274 - 282 ) . Sophia , Bulgaria : New Bulgarian University . Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998b ) . More evidence for a relational shift in the development of analogy : Children’s performance on acausal - mapping task . Cognitive Development , 13 , 453478 . Reeves , L . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1 994 ) . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 115 , 381 - 400 . Ross , B . H . , & Kennedy , P . T . ( 1990 ) . Generalizing from the use of earlierexamples in problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory . and Cognition , 16 , 42 - 55 . Smith , L . B . ( 1984 ) . Young children’s understanding of attributes and dimensions : A comparison of conceptual and linguistic measures . Child Development , 55 , 363 - 380 . Tan , L . S . , & Uttal , D . ( 1 999 , March ) . The development of the ability to impose a structure on a spatial pattern . Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development , Albuquerque , NM . Thompson , L . , Gentner , D . , & Loewenstein , J . ( 2000 ) . Avoiding missed opportunities in managerial life : Analogical learning improves case - based transfer . Organizational Behavior and Human Deci - sion Processes , 82 , 60 - 75 . Uttal , D . H . ( 2000 ) . Seeing the big picture : Map use and the development of spatial cognition . Develop - mental Science , 3 , 247 - 286 . Uttal , D . H . , Gregg , V . , Tan , L . S . , Chamberlin , M . , & Sines , A . ( 2001 ) . Connectingthedots : Children’s use of a systematic figure to facilitate mapping and search . Developmental Psychology , 37 , 1 - 13 . Uttal , D . H . , Schreiber , J . C . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Waitingtouseasymbo1 : Theeffectsofdelayon children’s use of models . Child Development , 66 , 1875 - 1891 . Vosniadou , S . ( 1989 ) . Analogical reasoning as a mechanism in knowledge acquisition : A developmen - tal perspective . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eh . ) , Similari @ undanalogicalreasoning ( pp . 413 - 437 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Zacks , J . , & Tversky , B . ( 1999 ) . Bars and lines : A study of graphic communication . Memov & Cogni - tion . 27 , 1073 - 1079 . 100 , 25 & 278 . of comparison in category learning . Journal of Experimental Psychologv : General . and reasoning . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . hension - monitoring activities . Cognition and Instruction , I , 117 - 175 .