http : / / arp . sagepub . com The American Review of Public Administration DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0275074005282582 2006 ; 36 ; 19 The American Review of Public Administration Frank Fischer Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment : The Cultural Politics of Discursive Space http : / / arp . sagepub . com / cgi / content / abstract / 36 / 1 / 19 The online version of this article can be found at : Published by : http : / / www . sagepublications . com On behalf of : American Society for Public Administration can be found at : The American Review of Public Administration Additional services and information for http : / / arp . sagepub . com / cgi / alerts Email Alerts : http : / / arp . sagepub . com / subscriptions Subscriptions : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsReprints . nav Reprints : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav Permissions : © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from 10 . 1177 / 0275074005282582 The American Review of Public Administration Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment The Cultural Politics of Discursive Space Frank Fischer Rutgers University , Newark , New Jersey This article argues that there is a need to enrich the theory of citizen participation and the design of deliberation practices through greater attention to the cultural politics of deliberative space . The article focuses on the ways the social valorization of political space influences basic discur - sive processes such as who speaks , how knowledge is constituted , what can be said , and who decides . From this perspective , decentralized design principles are necessary but insufficient requirements for deliberative empowerment . The point is illustrated through an analysis of the Science for the People movement in Kerala , India , a prominent example of deliberative empow - erment . The discussion shows how the movement employed cultural and pedagogical strategies to facilitate an empowered participation of local citizens in the deliberative planning process . These experiences demonstrate the importance of a deeper understanding of cultural meaning and political identity in the theory of democratic deliberation and the practice of participatory governance . Keywords : citizen participation ; deliberation ; culture ; social space ; decentralized gover - nance ; local knowledge T he shift from government to governance represents one of the important theoretical developments in political science and sociology during the past decade ( Pierre , 2000 ) . Emerging in significant part to deal with the traditional state’s inability to cope with a range of contemporary social problems , including global problems that reach beyond established state boundaries , the concept of governance has evolved to identify and explain new modes of problem solving and decision making that fill gaps created by the failure of traditional forms . Governance , given its emphasis on decentered citizen engagement , is touted for being a much more flexible and democratic way to deal with public problems . The most important actors in this new world of governance have been social movements and nongovernmental organizations ( NGOs ) that have carved out new arenas for these differ - ent forms of political engagement . Operating in the spaces between formal governmental structures and the citizenry , these activities emphasize the growing importance of civil soci - ety as a place for public deliberation and problem solving . Basic to this “subpolitics , ” to use Beck’s ( 1992 ) concept , has often been an emphasis on citizen involvement in new and more radical forms of “cultural politics , ” focusing in particular on the politics of social meaning 19 American Review of Public Administration Volume 36 Number 1 March 2006 19 - 40 © 2006 Sage Publications 10 . 1177 / 0275074005282582 http : / / arp . sagepub . com hosted at http : / / online . sagepub . com Initial Submission : April 25 , 2005 Accepted : June 30 , 2005 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from and identity . In the process , social movements and NGOs have invented and experimented with a range of new participatory mechanisms , including efforts to bring together citizens and experts in new forms of cooperative inquiry . Thanks to these efforts , particularly in envi - ronmental politics and community development , there are now a considerable number of experiences and practices in participatory governance . Many of these activities have offered significant new insights into questions that have long been ignored in traditional political analysis and in democratic theory in particular . One con - cerns the degree to which citizens are able to participate meaningfully in the complex deci - sion processes that define contemporary policy - oriented politics . Another has been the impli - cations for the nature of professional or expert practices . The discussion that follows draws out some of the lessons from one of these alternative experiences , the People’s Campaign for Decentralized Planning in Kerala , India . In an effort to better understand the practices of par - ticipatory governance more generally , the analysis seeks to elucidate the role of cultural iden - tity and local knowledge in the design and facilitation of the kinds of political spaces needed for democratic citizen deliberation . The Assent of Participation Situated in the institutional cracks of the traditional state , or what Hajer ( 2003 ) terms the “institutional void , ” the practices of participatory governance are reflected in a proliferation of new forms of social and political association . Indeed , this “association revolution , ” as Salamon ( 1993 ) calls it , has involved both the multiplication of existing kinds of participa - tory arrangements in the 1990s and , even more important , the creation of new spaces con - structed and shaped by a different brand of social actors . In both the developed and develop - ing countries , these have involved two important shifts . The most prominent shift has been from state - centered activities to a proliferation of civil society organizations that deliver ser - vices and offer various forms of support to economic and social development . These new organizational spaces have in some cases taken over public activities to such a degree that some see them as reconfiguring the public sector , supplanting states whose accountability has long been in question . The other often related shift , less prominent but every bit as inter - esting , has involved a transition from professionally dominated to more citizen - or client - based activities , often taking place within the new civic society organizations . Of particular significance among this new breed of organizations have been NGOs work - ing to represent and serve the needs of marginalized or excluded groups . In some of these spaces , excluded peoples—such as the poor , women , AIDS victims , and the disabled—have created a collective presence that permitted them to speak for themselves . The activists of many of these groups have even managed to affect the policies of mainstream institutions . In other instances , a new breed of public servant , the civil society professional , has emerged to offer assistance . Often schooled in NGOs , such professionals—as government officials or independent consultants to parallel institutions—have often played an essential role in the development and spread of participatory approaches to governance . Fundamental to the activities of many social movements and NGOs has been the creation of alternative political cultures and the participatory institutions and practices that can sus - tain them . Movements concerned with the environment , feminism , disability , and develop - ment , among others , have provided social forums—even laboratories—for experimentation with new participatory cultures , including new participatory approaches to science and 20 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from expertise . Such experimentation , emphasizing empowerment and self - help strategies , is largely designed to counter the bureaucratic and elitist tendencies that define contemporary political and organizational decision processes . Stressing the development of nonhier - archical cultures , the theorists of these movements have attempted to address a critical ques - tion : Is it possible to democratize—or at least make more democratic—the largely hierarchi - cal , often authoritarian relationships among public administrators and policy experts on one hand and citizens on the other ? Toward this end , the key target of such movement intellectu - als has been the top - down , superior - subordinate relationship that professionals maintain with their clients . Many NGOs speak of “people’s self - development , ” emphasizing the role of redistribu - tion , recognition , and rights in the development of participatory approaches ( Rahman , 1993 ) . Rather than merely speaking for poor or marginalized people’s interests and concerns , they have sought to develop people’s abilities to negotiate directly with official decision makers . Beyond institutionalizing new bodies of client or user groups , they have created new opportunities for dialogue . As a consequence of these activities , participation gained a place as a central feature of good governance across the political spectrum in the 1990s . Promoting decentralization , good governance practices have added an additional layer of local participatory institutions to an increasingly complex institutional landscape that in some cases has given rise to trans - fers of both resources and decision - making powers ( Stoker , 2000 ) . Some countries , such as India and Bolivia , have even passed national legislation mandating popular participation in local governance , including planning and budgeting . Problematizing Participation Participatory governance practices involve intermediary spaces that readjust the bound - aries between the state and its citizens , establishing new places in which the participants from both can engage each other in new ways ( Cornwall , 2002 ) . These spaces are sometimes for radical self - help activities outside of the state , but they can also have significant effects on reconfiguring the scope of formal governance institutions . Indeed , some of these new delib - erative institutions seek to colonize state power by transforming the interfaces between local citizens and higher levels of government . The picture , though , has not been all positive . The experiences have ranged across the spectrum from very impressive to disastrous , which in turn has politicized the issue . Many simply call for more participation , whereas others argue for less , often based on little more than ideological positions . This has led to various efforts to sort out the positive and negative elements contributing to such participatory projects . Toward this end , Cornwall and Jewkes ( 1995 ) suggest the need to problematize participation to learn what is good and what is bad , what works and what does not . Although we still have much to learn about participation , what we do know offers justifi - cation for optimism , although only cautious optimism . Despite much of the rhetoric sur - rounding the discussion of participation , experiences with new forms of participatory gover - nance show participation to be neither straightforward nor easy . A closer look shows that citizens can participate but that participation has to be carefully organized and facilitated , even cultivated and nurtured . Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 21 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from Facilitating participatory deliberation raises , to be sure , the question of criteria : What con - stitutes successful participation ? How do we measure or judge it ? Certain procedural charac - teristics related to the question are fairly clear . We can ask about the degree to which the dis - cussion relationship ( i . e . , a relationship for talking and listening , asking and answering questions , suggesting and accepting courses of action ) is governed by clear and fixed rules . Are the rules governing who gets to speak fair and equally distributed ? Is the discussion open ? Is the deliberative agenda transparent to all participants , or are particular elements hid - den and secretive ? To what degree are all of the participants represented ? Here also arises the question as to whether or not there is a difference between how the participants might be rep - resented and how they think they are represented . These questions depend in significant part on the equality of the power relations in the deliberative setting . Participation can also be judged in terms of three effects : instrumental , developmental , and intrinsic . Instrumental effects refer to participation designed to achieve particular goals or outcomes . People are seen to participate to achieve things that they cannot get through pri - vate efforts . Developmental effects refer to effects that participation can have on human development such as expanding the individual’s or group’s powers of education and thought , feeling and commitment , or social action . People learn from experience how the social sys - tem and surrounding environments works , come to understand diversity and tolerance , and gain political skills that help them efficaciously contribute to social change . Intrinsic skills can be understood as the internal benefits of participation . Whereas developmental effects pertain to specific action - oriented skills , intrinsic benefits refer to the less tangible internal effects that result from participation such as a sense of personal gratification , heightened self - worth , and a stronger identification with one’s community ( Nagel , 1987 ) . Given the difficulties involved in designing and managing participatory processes , it comes as no surprise to learn that citizen participation schemes rarely follow smooth path - ways . Local people may themselves be highly skeptical about the worth of investing their time and energy in participatory activities . In some situations , participation will lack imme - diate relevance ; it may carry more significance for outsiders than it does for those in the rele - vant communities . Moreover , not everyone within the communities will be able or motivated to participate . Even when there is sufficient interest in participation , there may be time barri - ers . And so on . The point is this : Without concern for both the viability and quality of partici - pation , it is better to forgo the effort . Citizen participation , in short , is a complicated and uncertain business that needs to be carefully thought out in advance ( Fischer , 2000 ) . Because of the successes of such participatory approaches , a growing number of institu - tions have successfully co - opted them for other ends . The World Bank ( 1994 ) , for example , has instrumentalized participation to generate support for its own agendas . In response to the demonstrated successes , the World Bank set up a participation program in the 1990s . Having learned the relevance of local involvement and participation from many of its third world investment failures , the World Bank has taken an interest in the advantages offered by direct local contact with the communities it seeks to assist . Not only are senior bank staff members directed to get to know a particular region through a week of total immersion in one of its vil - lages or slums , the bank has also pioneered a technique called participatory poverty assess - ment designed “to enable the poor people to express their realities themselves” ( Chambers , 1997 , p . xvi ) . It has been adapted from participatory research experiences in more than 30 countries around the world ( Norton & Stephens , 1995 ) . 22 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from To use Foucault’s ( 1986 , 1991 ) terminology , such instrumentalization of participation can be seen as a “political technology” used to manage and control projects and processes , bounding the possibilities of popular engagement and disciplining participants . Bourdieu ( 1977 ) refers to these as “officializing strategies” that domesticate participation and detract attention away from other forms of political action . Given the widespread manipulation of participatory techniques , Cooke and Kothari ( 2001 ) are led to describe participation as “the new ideology . ” Empowered Deliberative Democracy Much of the discussion in sociology and political science over participation and civil soci - ety has been—and remains—theoretical in nature . But there are practical lessons from these concrete experiences ( Rip & Pierre - Benoit , 2004 ; Skelcher , 2003 ) . An important and much discussed attempt to sort out these experiences is the work of Fung and Wright ( 2001 , 2003 ) . They have examined a range of cases designed to promote active political involvement of the citizenry and have labored to sort out what works . Acknowledging that complexity makes it difficult for anyone to participate in policy decision making , they speculate that the problem has more to do with the design of institutions than with the assignments they take on . Toward this end , they have explored a range of empirical responses to this challenge that constitute real - world experiences in the redesign of democratic institutions , innovations that elicit the energy and influence of ordinary people and often draw from the lowest strata of society in the solution of problems that plague them . In particular , they focus on five such experiments : neighborhood councils in Chicago that have substantial power over public schools and neighborhood policing ; a regional job training partnership in Wisconsin that brings together a number of organizations in an effort to provide training that helps workers turn jobs into meaningful careers ; a habitat conservation planning project under the U . S . Endangered Spe - cies Act that convenes stakeholders to empower them to develop ecosystem governance arrangements ; the participatory budgeting process of Porto Alegre , Brazil , that enables citi - zens to participate directly in determining the city budget ; and local participation reforms basic to the planning process in Kerala and West Bengal , India . Even though these reforms vary in their organizational designs , policy issues , and scope of activities , as Fung and Wright ( 2001 , 2003 ) note , they all seek to deepen the abilities of ordi - nary citizens to effectively participate in the shaping of programs and policies relevant to their own lives . From their common features , they isolate a set of characteristics that they define as “empowered deliberative democracy . ” The principles they draw from these cases are designed to enable the progressive “colonization of the state” and its agencies . Relying on the participatory capacities of empowered citizens to engage in reason - based , action - oriented decision making , the strategy and its principles are offered as a radical political step toward a more democratic society . As a product of this work , they isolate three political principles , their design characteris - tics , and one primary background condition . The background enabling condition states that there should be rough equality of power among the participants . The political principles include that ( a ) the need of such experiments is to address a particular practical problem , ( b ) the deliberation relies on the empowered involvement of ordinary citizens and the relevant , and ( c ) each experiment employs reasoned deliberation in the effort to solve the problems Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 23 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from under consideration . The institutional design characteristics specify that ( a ) the devolution of decision making and the powers of implementation power is to local action - oriented units ; ( b ) these local units be connected to one another and to the appropriate levels of state respon - sible for supervision , resource allocation , innovation , and problem solving ; and ( 3 ) the experiments “colonize and transform” state institutions in ways that lead to the restructuring of the administrative agencies responsible for dealing with these problems . The political power of these local units to implement the programmatic results of their discussions will thus come from state authorization itself . Fung and Wright ( 2001 , 2003 ) contrast these procedural features of empowered delibera - tive democracy with the more fleeting democratic experiences of elections or social move - ments that mobilize citizens for a particular purpose and then fade away . The goal , as they spell it out , is to learn how to create spaces in which citizens can meaningfully engage in shaping decisions together with state actors through durable forms of practice that advance more responsive governance . Although such procedural principles are commendable in themselves , they also have to be judged by their consequences , in particular their contribu - tions to the effectiveness of state action , social equity , and sustained participation . Toward this end , Fung and Wright set out an empirical agenda for further testing and refining the principles of deliberative design . The remainder of this article is an effort to help contribute to that research agenda by examining more specifically one of their cases—participatory gover - nance in Kerala . Seeking to further the advancement of such deliberative empowerment , it illustrates the ways such structures depend on political - cultural preconditions . The Culture of Deliberative Space : Social Meaning and Identity Politics The approach here is not to deny the importance of Fung and Wright’s ( 2001 , 2003 ) contri - bution to the discussion of participatory governance but rather to argue for the need to supple - ment the structural and procedural design principles with an examination of the underlying social and cultural realities in the political contexts to which they are applied . In addition to the institutional rules , regulations , and policies within a given territory or space , we need to understand the sociocultural practices that give meaning to these spaces for the social actors in them . Although it is important to analyze the material and procedural factors that enable participation , it should not be done at the expense of the underlying social conditions that are inherently necessary for participatory governance to work . Deeper political and subjective factors related to the intersubjective aspects of participation have to be included . As the very different literatures of both postmodernism and participatory research show , the kinds of design structures and procedures suggested by Fung and Wright can offer an opening for par - ticipatory empowerment , but they cannot ensure such participation itself . These literatures , through their emphasis on social movements , identity struggles and the politics of resistance and show successful empowerment to be determined by the kinds of intersubjective under - standings and normative politics that take place within the space . Here we discover what might be called the “microcultural politics of social space . ” This is in large part an intersubjective politics of meaning driven in significant part by a politics of social identity . The connection among political governance , identity , and space is introduced to main - stream political science by March and Olsen ( 1995 ) . In their view , political governance “is organized through the interdependent obligations of political identities” ( p . 6 ) . The gover - 24 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from nance of political space , whether large or small , is about “affecting the frameworks within which citizens and officials act and politics occurs , and which shape the identities and institu - tions of civil society” ( p . 6 ) . But even more important for the present discussion is the empha - sis of identity and space in the literatures on social movements and NGOs . In these discus - sions , the civil society , defined as the space between government and citizens , is typically the focus of discussion . It denotes “the sphere of private institutions , organizations , associations , and individuals protected by , but outside the scope of state interventions” ( Nash , 2000 , p . 273 ) . Much of the analysis concentrates on efforts to create spaces , make room for different voices to be heard , and enable people to occupy spaces that were previously denied to them . But it is in the more explicitly postmodern literature that we find the most fully developed understanding of identity politics and the creation of social space . From this view , an under - standing of the dynamics of the participation requires a more qualitative and subjective con - ceptualization of space . Political space , from this perspective , is not just filled up with competing interests but rather is understood as something that is created , opened , and shaped by social understandings . The postmodern literature more fully shifts the understanding of politics to culture , social meaning , and identity politics . Where standard political analysis focuses on the structures , practices , and methods of state institutions that organize the play of power , postmodern cul - tural politics more fundamentally emphasizes the discursive construction of the meanings and identities of the actors , institutions , and practices inherent to it ( Jordon & Weedon , 1995 ) . Through an analysis of discursive practices , it focuses , for example , on how particular discourses and narratives make some things important and others insignificant , how they include some participants and exclude or marginalize others . Thus , where traditional politi - cal analysis separates politics and culture , cultural politics denies the separation . Cultural politics , as such , examines the signifying practices through which identities , social relations , and rules are contested , subverted , and possibly transformed . It maintains that these strug - gles , although less visible and often latent , are primary concerns underlying and shaping the other more visible and manifest topics and issues under discussion . Basic here is the interplay of power and difference in the making of social spaces and the microcultural politics of the interactions within them . In this view , space is essential to the exercise of power ( Bourdieu , 1977 ; Foucault , 1986 ; Lefebvre , 1991 ) . Never socially neutral , space enables some actions—including the possibility of new actions—and blocks or con - strains others . This perspective thus calls attention to the importance of analyzing the under - lying and implicit assumptions about social and political relations that organize and consti - tute spaces for participation . 1 To speak only of structural arrangements , such as centralization and decentralization , neglects the very different kinds of understanding that can configure the construction of a decentered space . 2 More specifically , the meanings that constitute a space are carried and conveyed through discourses ; through the production and replication of power relations within institutional spaces , they serve as means for domination and control . 3 By formally or informally specify - ing whose knowledge and meanings count , the discourses in a particular space enable or hin - der what is said and how it is understood in a particular space ( Foucault , 1986 ; Fraser , 1989 ) . For example , the way participation is used and understood in a particular discourse deter - mines what “subject positions” are available for participants to take up within particular spaces , thus bounding the possibilities for both inclusion and agency . Whether they are con - structed as citizens , beneficiaries , clients , or users influences what people are perceived to be Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 25 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from entitled to know and to decide or contribute as well as the perceived obligations of those who seek to involve them . Moreover , the kinds of narratives , artifacts , analyses , and action plans emerging out of these spaces may tell , and indeed be made to tell , very different stories . A good deal of the literature on creating spaces is focused on relocating the poor within the prevailing order and elucidating the ways in which socially imposed identities can be resisted . The location of the socially marginal is taken , as such , to be a site for radical possi - bilities ; it is a space of resistance . Haraway ( 1991 ) speaks of the “marginal perspective” and local knowledge as sources of insight . Spaces that repress or marginalize people become transformed into spaces in which they recognize , assert , and expand their own identities . Social space , then , can be understood as woven together by a set of discursive relation - ships that determine the meanings and understandings of the identities within them . Through these discursive practices , the power relations of the surrounding societal context are brought into the social space . Toward this end , it is necessary to make explicate the less visible discur - sive power relations that permeate and produce these and other spaces . The first and most obvious question in the assessment of participatory initiatives is to ask who determines the form of participation that takes place in a given space—who initiates , chooses the methods , and takes part . But the second and more difficult question concerns what the people who enter these spaces bring with them . What are their thoughts and beliefs about what is really going on in the space and how they strategically orient themselves to these understandings ? Beyond official statements of intentions to participate , what do the people want to gain , what are their expectations , and how do they perceive the costs and benefits associated with the activity ? Here one needs something akin to the situational logic of phenomenology . The deliberative situation itself has to be entered to uncover these real but unspoken meanings shaped by larger political relations ( class , race , and gender relations , among others ) in society ( Scott , 1986 , 1990 ) . This sociocultural perspective on the politics of participatory deliberation demonstrates that a formal theory of design for participation is not possible . It does this by making clear that the structures themselves are social relationships interpreted by those within the spaces ; rather than something like the walls of a room , they are constructed around normative under - standings about meanings , intentions , and relationships . For this reason , the principles of design can take on different meanings in different places . Evidence for this normative under - standing of space , in fact , is found in specific cases in the literature , including those offered by Fung and Wright ( 2001 , 2003 ) . Toward this end , the discussion turns to an illustrative examination of the deliberative project in Kerala , drawing on field interviews conducted there by the author in 1999 ( Fischer , 2000 ) . The People’s Campaign in Kerala : Decentralization and Political Empowerment Located on the southwestern coast of India , Kerala has a state government that since the middle to late 1970s has pursued social and redistributive policies that have impressed many students of development ( Franke , 1993 ; Heller , 1999 ) . As a consequence , its citizens enjoy a level of social development that can be favorably compared with many more developed , mid - dle - income countries . It also has one of the highest rates of literacy among all of the states of India . To extend and deepen its reform measures , the leadership of the ruling coalition party , the Left Democratic Front ( LDF ) , turned in 1996 to the formation and institutionalization of 26 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from a decentralized system of development planning . Kerala is recognized as representing an important innovation in participatory governance and is offered by writers such as Fung and Wright ( 2001 , 2003 ) as a model of deliberative empowerment . Although Kerala’s redistribution efforts have been widely celebrated , there is far less accessible literature on its decentralized development planning . Briefly explained , the story begins with India’s efforts to reform its overly centralized political system . In 1996 , the newly elected LDF initiated a People’s Campaign for Decentralized Planning to empower the local panchayats ( roughly equivalent to a rural county in the United States ) and municipal bodies to draw up the Ninth Five - Year Plan to be submitted to the planners in New Delhi ( Isaac , 2000 ) . A primary reason that the LDF shifted its focus to governance was the opportu - nity that it offered to deal with the failure of long - term efforts on the part of the central and state governments of India to make good on an earlier federal constitutional amendment requiring decentralized planning ( Thakur , 1995 ) . Since the 1950s , India regularly engaged in a 5 - year planning process based initially on the Soviet model borrowed by Nehru . Much like the experience elsewhere , however , centralized planning proved a disappointment . In response , the central government passed a number of constitutional amendments designed to facilitate the devolution of the governing process to the local level , but there were few serious efforts at the state level to decentralize the process , and planning activities remained highly centralized and bureaucratic . There were numerous reasons for the failures of decentralization . Among them was the absence of popular representative administrative structures below the state level . Local insti - tutions , moreover , were seldom given the power or financial resources to enable serious development interventions . New Delhi also contributed to the failure by refusing to devolve more powers to the states while continuing to thrust on them one new centrally sponsored program after another . These failures gave rise to a national study commission on decentral - ized governance , which led a debate throughout India , followed by several constitutional amendments that officially empowered the local level with a mandated role in the planning process . Nonetheless , the general experience following these provisions was not encourag - ing . In many cases , the mandates were simply ignored by the local political officials , espe - cially those supported by powerful and often exploitative landowners , many of whom bene - fited both financially and politically from denying their peasant workers a voice in local affairs . In other instances , the machinery and resources to make meaningful decentralized governance possible still did not exist at the local level . Beyond the impetus of the legal mandates , the political motivations behind the LDF’s efforts are also critical to understanding its successes . 4 The LDF had already achieved a great deal of political support for its redistributional programs during its governance of the state . Indeed , these efforts achieved widespread notoriety and acclaim throughout India and inter - nationally among development experts and progressive activists ( Franke , 1993 ) . From a stra - tegic point of view , the LDF now reasoned that future gains from redistributional programs would be comparatively small given their past successes . Its leaders thus decided that decen - tralization could be a winning political strategy for extending its future political support . The strategy was especially attractive given the constitutional amendments . Formally seen , the LDF was only taking seriously the implementation of constitutional mandates long neglected by local authorities around the country . But , in the process , it could decentralize power in a way that could channel the resources of newly empowered citizens into further action for economic and social development . As a result of this structural reform , citizen action would Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 27 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from not only have new long - term benefits for the communities in a range of areas , it would in the process strengthen the coalition’s political base . In terms of instrumental benefits , the idea offered just about everything a political party could be looking for . At the same time , it offered local citizens the developmental and intrinsic benefits of empowerment through participation . The People’s Campaign , as the primary effort to implement this decentralization of power , focused formally on engaging citizen participation in the development of the state’s Five - Year Plan , later to be sent to New Delhi as part of India’s overall planning process . As a first step , the State Planning Commission made an unprecedented announcement that 35 % to 40 % of the planning activities for the Five - Year Plan would be formulated and implemented from below and allocated to the local level an equivalent share of the planning resources . To carry this out , the LDF drew on an extensive network of voluntary organizations and social movements in Kerala , often considered unique to the culture of Kerala . The goal of these organizations was to make people aware of the People’s Campaign and to motivate them to participate . It then brought citizens together with local representatives , officials in the various line departments , and governmental and nongovernmental experts relevant to the local plan - ning process . The officials of the government departments , along with relevant professionals , were instructed to decentralize their planning responsibilities and to cooperate in a new dem - ocratic project . Along with the citizen groups , they were offered extensive training programs designed to forge cooperative working relationships for the planning assignments . In the pro - cess , public administrators , civic groups , and local representatives , many of whom had here - tofore been little more that the passive objects of development planning , were mobilized to work to improve the daily lives of the average citizens of Kerala . To carry out the planning itself , the state organized a hierarchy of deliberations that moved from the local wards ( grama sabhas ) of the panchayats upward to the district level and then to the State Planning Board ( Issac & Heller , 2003 ) . In and of itself , this was an impressive achievement . Few people , whether they agree with the campaign or not , deny the significance of the popular assemblies . As argued below , however , the realization of this process was much more than a matter of calling on the citizens . It involved as well active efforts to create the political and social context that made the assemblies work . To create a political environment conducive to the process , civic organizations were enlisted to assist in mobilizing their members through publicity strategies , and a social move - ment introduced empowerment - oriented “conscientization programs” based on the work of the Brazilian educational theorist Paulo Freire ( 1970 , 1973 ) . The goal of these empowerment programs was to employ such didactic techniques to heighten the political consciousness of local community members , in particular by assisting them in understanding and interpreting their place in the social and political structures of Kerala and in developing action - oriented initiatives in their own communities . In the local areas of Kerala , this meant , among other things , understanding the forces that had been denying them a voice more generally and hindering the mandates for decentralization more specifically . At the outset , a range of electronic and print media , including a supported media center that initiated specific programs , were called on to help stimulate citizen involvement . Draw - ing on approaches developed in an earlier and highly successful campaign for total literacy , they held dances and local festivals sensitive to the local cultural milieu to interest and encourage citizens to take part , and a range of other audiovisual cultural approaches based on folk arts were employed . They also used participatory street theater based on dramatic tech - 28 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from niques for political enlightenment and agitation developed by Bertolt Brecht ( 1965 ) to advance the socialist movement in Weimar , Germany , of the 1920s and 1930s . 5 Passersby would witness the acting out of scenes in which local landowners were exploiting the local peasants , with the peasant farmers rising up to take control over their own situation ( Fischer , 2000 ) . Other practical steps to maximize participation were taken as well . The popular assem - blies were scheduled to take place on work holidays , and squads of local volunteers visited each household to explain the program and urge their participation at the assemblies . The goal was to encourage at least one member of each household to attend the meetings . The actual process , which can only be briefly summarized here , commenced with the formation of various groups to deal with specific issues such as agriculture , schools , and environment . Present in each group were trained resource persons who served as discussion facilitators to guide the deliberations . Information about the local area and its people was gathered , including the relevant local knowledge , and specific development problems were identified . The citizens were then assisted in analyzing these problems on the basis of their own social experiences , knowledge , and understandings and in making suggestions for solutions . The deliberations of each group were combined and summarized in report form for the plenary session of the local convention . The meetings concluded with the selection of representatives to take these local plans and proposals to the deliberations of the development seminar , which constituted the next higher stage . The task of the resources development seminar was to come up with integrating solutions at the district level for the various problems identified at the lower - level conventions . The district plans then constituted the bases for discussions about the overall state plan ( Isaac & Heller , 2003 , pp . 77 - 110 ) . After the plan was adopted , the state then allocated its resources to the local levels for the purposes of carrying out its implementation . The People’s Campaign , to be sure , has faced criticism . Conservative political parties have criticized or challenged it in two ways . They portrayed the campaign as a strategy on the part of the LDF to politically inculcate members of the local communities . But interviews and local journalistic accounts offered little concrete evidence that the citizens were being politi - cally manipulated . The People’s Campaign materials were free of explicit party propaganda per se ; they overtly emphasized giving local citizens a voice through the processes of empow - erment . Party leaders and social activists appeared quite aware of the dangers involved in using the program as party propaganda and cautioned against such practices . Moreover , members of the opposition showed little interest in the details of how the deliberative forums operated . The main objective was to denounce the LDF efforts on the grounds that they were the activities of a communist party , typically presented as a problem for a state that needed to attract new industries . There was also inevitable concern about the popularity of the program with the majority of the local citizens , particularly the poor . But here as well this did not seem well beyond the acceptable boundaries of normal party politics . Although there was no doubt that the LDF was attempting to garner political support , which is what a political party does , the LDF easily countered the opposition by charging it with representing the voice of the landowners who had long subjugated local citizens , an argument with considerable political resonance . Toward this end , the campaign could be legitimated as an effort to implement federal law long neglected or ignored by landholders and their political spokespersons . The second criticism pertained to corruption in the administration of the projects resulting from the local plans . Although this analysis focuses on the participatory assemblies rather Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 29 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from than the implementation of their outcomes , it is worth noting that charges of nepotism in choosing contractors and suppliers to implement the resulting programs were born out by investigations , including that of the State Planning Board itself . These misappropriations of authority and funds were judged mainly to result from inexperience and expediency . It should be noted that such abuses were not the case in all areas and , where typical , led to efforts from the top to introduce more democratic accountability , resulting in significant improvements in subsequent years . Moreover , the malpractices did not compare with the kinds of widespread corruption that had characterized local administration before the campaign ( Isaac & Heller , 2003 , pp . 103 - 104 ) . On the question of deliberative participation , the focus of concern here , the campaign by all counts offered ordinary citizens the opportunity to participate in the development of the local plans . The more than half a decade of experience with these popular forums has shown that they play a meaningful role in the governance process . Furthermore , one of the widely acknowledged successes has been the increased participation of women . Although there has been unevenness at times and places in both the representative character and the quality of the participation , something to be anticipated in such an experiment , the success at institutional - izing these assemblies has established “these popular assemblies . . . as an essential feature of Kerala’s political landscape” ( Isaac & Heller , 2003 , p . 103 ) . They are widely judged to repre - sent “a dramatic advance over the pre - Campaign period” with local government in Kerala playing “a far greater role in development than anywhere else in India” ( p . 107 ) . The remainder of the article turns to the explanation of the success of these popular assem - blies and argues for a closer understanding of the essential role of the intervening social movement , the People’s Science Movement of Kerala ( widely known as KSSP , short for Kerala Sastra Sahitya Parisha ) . The activities of KSSP were central to the animation of the decentralized structures . Although KSSP’s involvement in this story does not go unrecog - nized , the unique nature of its activities needs to be drawn out more specifically to fully grasp their significance for the process . Geared to the developmental and intrinsic benefits of empowerment , the main contribution of the KSSP was to establish the local political - cultural ownership of these deliberative spaces . KSSP : Critical Pedagogy , Deliberative Space , and Participatory Inquiry KSSP is a genuinely unique sociocultural movement . Established in 1962 , it was the prod - uct of a number of scientists and social activists in Kerala who were concerned that scientific information was basically inaccessible to the majority of the people of the state . After a decade of success in translating scientific books and articles into the local language and mak - ing them available to schools and citizens , the movement adopted the motto “Science for Revolution” and opened the door to what was to become a mass movement with some 60 , 000 members . In the process , the emphasis of KSSP shifted to more active efforts to generate a scientific questioning attitude in the population as a whole , the underlying goal of which was self - empowerment and change . As result , interest and involvement jumped , reflected in two other major efforts that drew national attention . One was the movement’s opposition to the building of a proposed hydroelectric dam , which Indira Gandhi was later compelled to can - cel , and the second was a literacy campaign in the city of Cochin that employed progressive educational techniques to dramatically increase the literacy rate in the area . In these educa - 30 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from tional efforts , both in Cochin and other parts of Kerala , people were taught to read through materials and methods that promoted a questioning attitude about their own social positions in the society , the forces that shaped their circumstances , and what might be done about it . Such methods , as developed by the practitioners of critical pedagogy , transformed an other - wise abstract or rote activity of learning to read into a project that poignantly took on relevant everyday meanings in the lives of the students , adult learners in particular . Given the impressive nature of these educational achievements , KSSP received wide - spread attention in both India and abroad . The movement was , for example , awarded the Alternative Noble Prize in 1996 by the Swedish foundation that has bestowed the prize for some years . The active role of KSSP was thus much more than another component in a com - plicated story explaining the success of the People’s Campaign . Both its skills and reputation were central factors in generating public commitment and participation . The KSSP’s early involvement in the People’s Campaign is easy to explain . Beyond its reputation generally , many members of the LDF and the State Planning Board were also members of KSSP . Turning to KSSP for assistance was for them an obvious move . To fully grasp KSSP’s activities , however , requires an understanding of the philosophy behind them . Basic here are the educational philosophy and pedagogical approach of Paulo Freire ( 1970 ) and the methods of participatory research that have been motivated by them ( Chambers , 1997 ) . Working with people who have never participated—people who typically begin with the belief that they do not have the capacities to contribute to a deliberative process—the main contribution of the approach was to make clear a basic message : These forums were for the people on their own terms . Such pedagogical praxis , emphasizing the developmental and intrinsic benefits of partici - pation , begins by drawing out the relevant community histories and local knowledge . By problematizing the social marginality of the community members , particularly peasant farm - ers , these narrative stories are then used to assist them in examining their own beliefs and identities in ways that help them reflect on established understandings of the existing social - structural relationships ( Fischer , 2000 ) . In the process of learning and discussing the symbols and artifacts through which the social order is communicated , experienced , reproduced , and explored , they are assisted in exploring the cultural politics that defines and solidifies their own subject positions in the dominant discourses of those who exercise social and political power . 6 Through the construction of alternative understandings , the participants fashion net - works of solidarity and build confidence in their own knowledge and capabilities and in the process develop a sense of their own abilities to address their interests and needs . These new understandings and senses of agency shape the assumptions that socially valorize the deliber - ative space . In Kerala , as we see in the next section , the specific vehicle for engaging these issues was the deliberative inquiry designed for the decentralized planning . Although critical pedagogy and participatory research come from different intellectual traditions than does postmodernism , both methods pursue many of the same kinds of issues associated with social space , political identity , social meaning , marginality , and resistance . These concepts are basic to the frameworks that both methods employ in their efforts to design environments for social learning . Although not postmodernist per se , participatory research can easily be described as a closely related practice for postpositivist inquiry . To facilitate the kind of openness and authenticity required for such deliberation , emphasis is placed on restructuring the professional - teacher - participant - learner relationship to mini - mize the social , emotional , and intellectual distance that typically separates professionals Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 31 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from from the participants’experiential life world . 7 Stressing the unique demands placed on those who seek to initiate such an egalitarian—even radically egalitarian—participatory process , the practitioners of such participatory inquiry work to deal with the potential problems of intellectual elitism that can undermine such projects . As one of the leading theorists of partic - ipatory research puts it , insofar as “movements for social change are normally led by intellec - tuals who are in a position to provide leadership not because of any particular aptitude but because they are privileged by their economic and social status , ” there are many dangers of relying on an elite leadership for social transformation : the dangers of inflated egos , the fragility of the commitment in the face of attractive temptations ; the problems of the growth in size of the elite class as a movement grows and the danger of attracting new adherents holding altogether different commitments ( Rahman , 1993 , p . 84 ) as well as the self - perpetuating nature of institutions established to supply such leadership . These were just the kinds of considerations that KSSP leaders insisted on keeping at the fore - front of the efforts . KSSP : Integrating Expert and Local Knowledges After the campaign’s decentralized participatory structures were developed , the project confronted a more specific question : What would be the basis of the discussions in the decen - tralized deliberations ? Much of the information needed to assess the physical and social char - acteristics of the local areas was unavailable . To deal with this , KSSP combined the methods of critical pedagogy with techniques of rural resource mapping to develop a more specific practice for gathering the information needed for the deliberations . The bridge across these two activities—pedagogy and resource mapping—was the community members’ local knowledge of their panchayats , social and physical . It became a vehicle for both the data col - lection and the cultural valorization of the political context that enlivened the deliberations of the popular assemblies . More specifically , the KSSP labored to integrate an established method of evaluating local development that offered quick but reasonably accurate assessments of rural resources—participatory rural appraisal ( or transect walks ) —with more rigorous scientific approaches and participatory pedagogical practices . Those concerned with the didactic methods worked this out with the help of the movement’s own members at the Center for Earth Science Studies ( CESS ) in Trivandrum , an institution long engaged in rigorous scien - tific research related to resource management and planning . The result was a innovative pro - cedure that combined community - based mapping techniques with the more rigorous scien - tific mapping techniques practiced by the environmental and resource planners of the CESS and that combined the local knowledge and social understandings that made the data collec - tion and planning processes relevant to the everyday life of community members ( Fischer , 2000 ) . Reflecting the pedagogical practices , the goal was described as land literacy . Approaching the mapping process as a sociocultural tool for communication among plan - ning experts and local community members , the KSSP and CESS sought to answer three basic local questions : What were the economic , environmental , and social resources in the areas ? Where were they located ? And how were they located ? In economic and environmen - tal terms , these concerns were built around questions pertaining to the terrain of the land , 32 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from water resources , and the uses of both . With regard to land , the planners sought information on the specific forms of the terrain . For example , does it slope ? What types of soil does it have ? In terms of water , they focused on characteristics such as streams or ponds , whereas land use raised questions concerned with the type of crops planted and how much land is under culti - vation . All were questions for which accurate information was unavailable . The absence of this information made it difficult to systematically think about development planning . To this end , the staff developed a base map from information gathered from local revenue maps and official documents about landholdings in each village . To these physical questions , the CESS staff overlaid the questions about the local infrastructure . That is , what had already taken place in the area ? Were there roads , schools , and other community facilities , and if so , where precisely were they located ? Once the basic design of the planning process was in place , CESS planners turned back to the KSSP , which then took over the assignment of iden - tifying community volunteers for the project and developing and offering a training program for local data collection . The approach to data collection was designed to bring the local citizens themselves into the research process and , through their activities , to initiate and animate more general contact and discussion about the community among its members themselves . Toward this end , KSSP identified a team of five to eight volunteers for each village in a particular district . In selecting the local volunteers , it was decided that formal educational background needed not be a deci - sive requirement for participation . For example , the questions about physical terrain could be formulated in ways that permitted the local characteristics to be identified through a scheme of color coding . After the training , the volunteers were sent to the village wards to be mapped . Each group chose a leader and a ward office ( usually someone’s home ) and estab - lished a schedule or work plan for the actual mapping . In addition to the physical informa - tion , the volunteers and other villagers assembled relevant social data such as numbers of people in households , earnings , and employment . Throughout the collection of both the physical and social data , the questions were presented in local rather than scientific terminol - ogy . They were formulated in ways that helped people understand in their own lay languages the findings and their economic and social implications . On completion of the physical and social mapping by the volunteers , CESS planners returned to include other parameters less visible to the naked eye that required expert mea - surement ( e . g . , the location of underground water sources ) . The results were seven sets of maps that integrated the physical and social data , five of which were constructed by the vol - unteers , two by the planners . The analytic task was to overlay these maps . Onto the physical land use maps were added relevant survey information about primary production and second - ary social sectors . At the end of the process , the approach to data collection had not only brought the local citizens themselves into the research process , it served to initiate and ani - mate discussions about the community . The result of these efforts was a development report that became the basis for community deliberations aimed at formulating an action plan that in turn served as a component of the larger planning process . Up to 100 pages in length , the development reports offered detailed pictures of local devel - opment . Their dozen chapters combined a discussion of local social and cultural history with assessments of various resources such as agriculture , education , health , energy , and water supply . An emphasis on the importance of social mobilization for community change was combined with a presentation of problems and an action plan . The action plans specifically emphasized three questions : What were the economic and social problems ? What were the Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 33 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from future prospects ? And what were the gaps between the two ? In the context of social and polit - ical understandings worked out by the communities , these issues were then discussed in the decentralized deliberative forums . From these deliberations emerged a sense of the barriers that stood in the path of solving the communities’ problems , strategies that could be devel - oped to do something about them , and a heightened sense of motivation to deal with these issues on terms relevant to the communities’own interests . In short , there were now grounds for critical discussion , especially mutual discussions among community members , the KSSP facilitators , and the planning experts . To inform and assist the local planning efforts , the state planning office made available to the panchayats information about all of the ongoing development programs in the state , and the line department offices of the government prepared a review of their respective develop - ment sector programs already being implemented in the panchayats , emphasizing in particu - lar those relevant to the development of their local plans . To further facilitate discussion about formulation of the integrated programs at the level of the development seminars , a series of manuals on topics such as watershed management , education and schools , sanita - tion , drinking water , total energy programs , and environmental protection were prepared and distributed among resource persons . To give the panchayats confidence in their practicality , care was taken in the manuals to ensure that they were based on actual local field experiences . Moreover , experts were appointed on a volunteer basis to serve in—but only in—an advisory capacity during the local deliberations . The deliberative bodies could , if they so desired , avail themselves of the advice drawn from the full range of sectors such as agriculture , education , and environment . It is also important to note that expert was defined in a very broad sense ; it not only included the civil engineer , but also the wise farmer . In an effort to spread the lessons of the project , KSSP developed in later years a guidebook for use by some 500 or more other local areas in India that have sought to implement the model or a variant of it . This material emphasizes the need to take the particular local context into consideration ; the Kerala model , it asserts , will not work everywhere . In most cases , it at least requires local adjustments . Toward this end , the guidelines point out that there can be no hard and fast blueprints for participatory governance ; any serious effort at such reform will require a good deal of trial and error and learning by doing . Continuing their own experimen - tation , it should also be added , KSSP has augmented the popular assemblies through the development of smaller neighborhood groups of 40 or 50 families into mini popular assem - blies that offer more extensive opportunities to discuss local priorities , issues , and plans than do the grama sahbas . Designed to add an additional layer of democratic governance , KSSP has in fact organized a campaign to spread these grassroots groups throughout the state as a whole . Conclusions The discussion has made clear that the decentralized design of the People’s Campaign for decentralized governance was an important—even unprecedented—political step toward participatory governance in the state of Kerala . The argument is that although structural decentralization was a political precondition for the successful implementation of the Peo - ple’s Campaign in and of itself , the specific decentralized design of the institutions cannot explain this impressive achievement . Every bit as important was the social valorization of the deliberative spaces created by decentralization . In addition to the progressive politics of the 34 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from ruling coalition , the pedagogically oriented interventions of the KSSP played a critical role in shaping the popular assemblies . The LDF coalition , as we saw , advanced the decentralized planning project statewide from the top down through party meetings , media events , street theater , and folk festivals . In the process , it emphasized the instrumental benefits of citizen participation , namely , the empow - erment of citizens to deal themselves with local developmental issues such as environmental protection , agricultural modernization , education , health care , and so on . Toward this end , the project was an explicit challenge to powerful landholders and others who had long ignored the various constitutional amendments mandating citizen participation . The mes - sage of the campaign conveyed through the media and public events was clear : It was to give a voice to community members in an effort to wrest away local political control from local landowners who had long exploited these districts with little or no opposition . The LDF sought , in short , to redistribute power to community leaders through processes anchored in state and national law . Given that the LDF had previously helped many of these poor and rela - tively uneducated peasant farmers through their earlier redistributive efforts , the vast major - ity of them were enthusiastic political supporters , which was no small consideration in generating enthusiasm and energy needed to carry out the process . Equally important , if not more so , the party turned to KSSP , the Kerala social movement dedicated to bringing literacy and science to the people , to explain the project to local citi - zens , lay the pedagogical groundwork for the inquiry process , organize the deliberative assemblies , and train resource facilitators to assist with the deliberations . Indeed the facilita - tion techniques were informed by Freireian pedagogical techniques for adult education and participatory action research . Together these efforts established a highly motivated constitu - ency that could , with the kind of local knowledge gathered through the processes of partici - patory research , meaningfully deliberate and formulate action plans for their local areas . The crucial contribution of the KSSP was thus to establish the local political ownership of these deliberative spaces , introduce innovative methods for participatory data collection , and develop the deliberative culture . As a result of these activities , the assemblies were infused with the message that they were for the local participants and to be conducted on their own terms . The materials that provided the basis for developing this context were local knowledge and community narratives , examined and reinterpreted in terms of the poor’s position and identity in the prevailing order and the political and material forces that held them there . Thus , in the same process of interpreting the local narratives , the formal and informal rules of communicative interaction were worked out . What the KSSP understood was that the participatory process had to be organized and cul - tivated . It could not simply be left to the citizens . In this respect , the Kerala project under - scored an important finding of participatory inquiry more generally , namely , the need for someone with expert skills to assist the community in organizing their struggles , to help them to understand the situation , and to develop alternative strategies ( Fischer , 2000 ) . The goal was to establish autonomous participatory practices in the local communities , but it was rec - ognized that they would first have to be cultivated before they could be successfully institutionalized . To cultivate the empowerment process , KSSP innovatively organized the participatory mapping process that not only collected local information and knowledge but cognitively built community members into the activity . The model of participatory resource mapping offered an impressive procedure for facilitating an interaction between scientific experts and Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 35 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from the local citizens . The development of the overlapping maps can be seen as an important con - tribution to the practices of both critical pedagogy and participatory research . For the subpolitics of participatory governance , it showed how the inquiry of the citizens and scien - tists can be systematically integrated in ways that augment one another and how participatory research can be built into the larger politics making structure . The Kerala State Planning Board has demonstrated how such local empowerment efforts , rather than just remaining a grassroots problem - solving strategy , can meaningfully be connected to higher level delibera - tive processes in the formation of the state plan . These contributions of People’s Campaign offer lessons from which participatory governance efforts everywhere can benefit . For deliberative empowerment , this experience suggests that a participatory project at the bottom of the political structure needs to have strong political support from above . In the case of Kerala , the government itself initiated the empowerment project and shaped a political cli - mate at both the state and local levels conducive to its successful implementation . Although detailed comparisons are beyond the scope of this article , the same phenomenon can be seen in the participatory budget project in Porto Alegre , the Brazilian city ruled by a progressive socialist party that established it ( Baiocchi , 2003 ) . It also did this , it should be noted , with the assistance of didactic methods based on the pedagogical theory and practices of Freire ( 1970 , 1973 ) . If genuine empowerment in the public sector is taken to mean transformative politics , both political support from above and the facilitation of the local activities appear as essential ingredients of success . This is not to say that other grassroots or bottom - up projects would be without effect . But in the absence of broader support , both political and pedagogical , deliberation will much more likely , if not necessarily , become another forum for strategic struggle , rather than citi - zen empowerment per se . Although the principles of deliberative empowerment offered by Fung and Wright ( 2001 , 2003 ) are presented as a strategy for colonizing the state , there are few convincing reasons to believe that deliberation in spaces created by the state would per - mit—at least not for long—the kinds of transformative or emancipatory discourses charac - teristic of decentralized deliberation in Kerala . One can easily raise this question about other case studies presented as examples of deliberative empowerment . 8 This empirical question needs to be added to the research agenda . Beyond strong support from above , there is also a need for those advancing empowerment actively to enter the discursive space itself . Even when a local participatory project has politi - cal support , it cannot be assumed that the citizens will themselves take up the opportunity and turn it into a forum for political emancipation . It is important to not only recognize that all parties at the local level will not share the same political interests or social consciousness but also see that such forums need to be organized pedagogically . Participatory facilitators need to establish the conditions and procedures that make deliberative empowerment possible . Toward this end , we need to more thoroughly research the material and cognitive conditions that make this possible as well as the practices themselves . Given the absence of political consensus supporting genuine deliberative empowerment in Western nations , such participatory projects are more likely to continue to evolve in civil society , supported in particular by social movements such as Science for the People . Given that the state exists as the product of competing political forces , the preconditions for groups with common interests and concerns to deliberate meaningfully are more likely to be found or established in civil society . Although the task will remain difficult , as much of civil society itself is beset with divisions of class , ethnicity , and race , the relative openness of civil society 36 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from offers better chances for citizens to create spaces in which they might engage in nonstrategic discourse about basic choices involved in how they want to live together , the practices of gov - ernance needed to advance and support such decisions , and the political strategies that can help to bring them about . With the exception of the presence of a socially progressive govern - ment , as in Kerala or Porto Alegre , it is mainly in civil society that social spaces can be shaped free of the kinds of implicit coercion built into official governance structures . It is a point clearly recognized in the emancipatory literatures of participatory research , empowerment , and self - governance . The progressive projects of self - governance reported there are typically to be found in spaces located outside of the formal state . Removed from the state , the function is to use pedagogy to facilitate the development of critical perspectives that can serve as the basis for solidarity and political opposition to particular state policies and practices . Indeed to think otherwise would seem to neglect the reasons for the emergence of civil society - oriented social movements and NGOs during the past decades . From this perspective , then , the pedagogical role in deliberative empowerment becomes a primary consideration . Although basic preconditions for deliberative empowerment in gov - ernment depend on broader political developments in society , the pedagogical cultivation of discursive spaces poses an important task for the social sciences . Toward this end , the peda - gogical dimension needs to receive more attention on the research agenda of empowered par - ticipatory governance . Social scientists need to examine more carefully the kinds of epistemic relationships that govern such deliberation . To move beyond the formal design of decentralized structures , there is a need to engage in experimentation about the nature of communication and learning in these settings . It is a task that should be elevated on the research agenda . A place to begin is the wealth of information from an extensive range of projects devoted to participatory research and empowerment . Notes 1 . Social relations , in this view , exist only in and through space—having no reality outside the sites in which they are lived , experienced , and practiced . Attention is drawn to how spaces come to be defined , perceived , and animated . Particular ways of thinking about society are seen to be played out in the ways that spaces are organized and occupied and in how they are conceived and perceived . The works of theorists such as Lefebvre ( 1991 ) thus callattention totheimportance ofanalyzing theunderlyingandimplicit assumptionsaboutthesocialandpolitical relations that organize and constitute spaces for participation . 2 . Especially interesting is the way Lefebvre ( 1991 ) shows how the traces of the production of a space are etched into that space . Or , as Bourdieu ( 1977 ) argues , the traces of prior interaction are so ingrained in a social space and generally unquestioned that they can be understood to be literally embodied in a particular context . Officialized spaces , to use Bourdieu’s term , such as those created for public consultation or user groups , always existalongsideunofficialspacesandthespacesofeverydaylife , justasinvitedspacesexitalongsidethoseclaimed and shaped by a range of other actors . Indeed , people bring with them into a new space the collections of associa - tions and experiences they have gained from their encounters in other spaces and employ them to decide what the new space is about and how they should orient themselves to it . 3 . Focusing on the architecture of social space , Foucault ( 1986 , 1991 ) shows how the discursive replication of the relations of power within an institutional space is a means of controlling it . To take a simple but familiar illus - tration , thewayinwhichspaceinanewlycreated arenaismanaged—sitting inrows , forexample , withthewomen at the back of the room—makes it easier for some people to speak and be heard than others . Similarly , his work makes clear that the different associations people might have of a particular place will often produce different dynamics . The participatory event held in a different location can easily produce different effects , as the introduc - tionofaprayeroranaddressbyalocalleadercan , forinstance , influencetheshapeofadeliberation . Throughsuch spatialmanipulations , political leaderscansubtlyreproducetheoldrulesofthegamewithinspaces , suchaspoliti - Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 37 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from cal committees or public consultations , restricting the engagement of people without status confidence or familiarity . 4 . The discussion of the people’s campaign is based on interviews conducted in 1999 in Trivandrum , Kerala , India . The interviews included people who were both supportive and critical of the people’s campaign . Especially helpful were Dr . John Kurien and Dr . K . J . Joseph of the Center for Development Studiesin Trivandrum , Kerala ; R . Radhakrishnan , then president of Kerala Sastra Sahitya Parisha ( KSSP ) ; N . C . Narayanan , former KSSP activ - ist ; BabuAmbatoftheCentreforEnvironmentandDevelopmentinTrivandrum ; Dr . AjaykumarVarmaoftheSci - ence , Technology , and Environment Department of the state of Kerala ; and T . M . Thomas Isaac , prominent mem - ber of the Left Democratic Front and the State Planning Board during the campaign and KSSP activist . Through interviews , related literature , and campaign documents of various sorts , they offered extensive information on both the politics and practices of the campaign . Thanks also goes to citizens who participated in the deliberative forums , staffmembers ofthe Kerala State Planning Board , andstudentsat the Center forDevelopment Studies , all of whom generously took time to explain the project as they experienced or perceived it . In addition , several local journalists made available articles that both praised and criticized the campaign . An earlier discussion of the Peo - ple’s Campaign focused more specifically on the role of expertise appeared in Fischer ( 2000 ) . 5 . Brecht ( 1965 ) did not want the audience to identify or sympathize with the characters on stage , as was the approach in the classical tradition of theater . Instead the viewerswere to think politically and socially and to judge the actions of the players accordingly . His characters confront both one another and the audience critically . Some have even described the approach as clinical . 6 . In many ways , the process is like opening up the deeper , more difficult kinds of questions that a critical anal - ysis of power would raise ( Lukes , 2005 ) . To what degree do more powerful people shape or influence the con - sciousness of inequalities of the less powerful and induce them to accept a sense of powerlessness ? Although the speakerinadeliberation isnormally expected torespondonlytowhathasbeenexplicitly said , acritical pedagogi - cal discourse includes questions about who is saying it and why . Is that person in a position to tell them what he or shetellsthem ? Doesheorshehavefirsthandknowledgeandexperience oftherealities ofthesituation ? Doesheor she actually speak for someone else ? That is , it concerns identity questions concerned with , as the phrase goes , wherethespeakeriscomingfrom . Intheprocess , itopensthediscussiontoquestionspertaining totheindividual’s orgroup’srelationstothelargersocialsystem—issuesincludingsocialstanding , money , privilege , andthelike . 7 . Such participatory inquiry , as an enlightenment strategy for raising the consciousness of ordinary citizens with common interests and concerns , emphasizes the political dimensions of knowledge production , the role of knowledge as an instrument of power and control , and the politics of the citizen - expert relationships . It takes human beings to be cocreators of their own reality through the cognitive and emotional experiences—thinking , imagining , and acting—that they gain through participation ( Reason , 1994 , p . 324 ) . 8 . FungandWright ( 2003 ) , forexample , includeintheirworkthecaseoftheHabitatProtectionProgramsetup by the U . S . Congress and a Wisconsin state industry council for job development . It is doubtful that deliberations about habitat protection in this setting would seriously entertain the discourses of radical ecology or that an indus - try council established in conjunction with a state government would be willing to accept talk about transforming the capitalist labor market . To help people turn jobs into careers in the existing industrial system is scarcely the kind of transformative discourse that might subversively colonize the state . There is good reason , given the exten - sive co - optation of participatory reforms , to suspect that the latter cases would be targets for manipulation by the state in pursuit of its own interests . These cases are thus more likely to be characterized by the kinds of hidden resistance discussed by Foucault ( 1986 , 1991 ) or Scott ( 1986 , 1990 ) than by open empowerment discourses . Such resistance is by no means unimportant , but the political limits of such a politics have to be understood and theorized differently . References Baiocchi , G . ( 2003 ) . Participation , activism , and politics : The Porto Alegre experiment . In A . Fung & E . O . Wright ( Eds . ) , Deepening democracy ( pp . 45 - 76 ) . New York : Verso . Beck , U . ( 1992 ) . The risk society . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Bourdieu , P . ( 1977 ) . Outline of a theory of practice . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Brecht , B . ( 1965 ) . Schriften zum theater [ Writings on theater ] . Ost Berlin , Germany : Aufbau Verlag . Chambers , R . ( 1997 ) . Whose reality counts ? Putting the first last . London : Intermediate Technology . 38 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from Cooke , B . , & Kothari , U . ( 2001 ) . Participation : The new tyranny ? London : Zed . Cornwall , A . ( 2002 ) . Making spaces , changing places : Situating participation in development ( Working papers 170 ) . Sussex , UK : Institute for Development Studies . Cornwall , A . , & Jewkes , R . ( 1995 ) . Whatisparticipatory research ? SocialScience andMedicine , 41 , 1667 - 1676 . Fischer , F . ( 2000 ) . Citizens , experts , and the environment : The politics of local knowledge . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . Foucault , M . ( 1986 ) . Of other spaces . Diacritics—A Review of Contemporary Criticism , 16 ( 1 ) , 22 - 27 . Foucault , M . ( 1991 ) . Governmentality . In G . Burchell , C . Gordon , & P . Miller ( Eds . ) , The Foucault effect : Studies in governmentality ( pp . 87 - 104 ) . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Franke , F . ( 1993 ) . Life is better . Boulder , CO : Westview . Fraser , N . ( 1989 ) . Unruly practices : Power , discourse , and gender in contemporary social theory . Minneapolis : University of Minnesota Press . Freire , P . ( 1970 ) . Pedagogy of the oppressed . New York : Seabury . Freire , P . ( 1973 ) . Education for critical consciousness . New York : Seabury . Fung , A . , & Wright , E . O . ( 2001 ) . Deepening democracy : Innovations in empowered local governance . Politics and Society , 29 ( 1 ) , 5 - 41 . Fung , A . , & Wright , E . O . ( Eds . ) . ( 2003 ) . Deepening democracy : Institutional innovations in empowered partici - patory governance . New York : Verso . Hajer , M . ( 2003 ) . Policy without polity : Policy analysis and the institutional void . Policy Sciences , 36 ( 2 ) , 175 - 195 . Haraway , D . ( 1991 ) . Simians , cyborgs , and women . London : Free Press . Heller , P . ( 1999 ) . The labor of development : Worker’s transformation of capitalism in Kerala , India . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University Press . Isaac , T . H . ( with Franke , R . ) . ( 2000 ) . Local democracy and development : People’s campaign for decentralized planning in India . New Delhi , India : Left World Press . Isaac , T . H . , & Heller , P . ( 2003 ) . Democracy and development : Decentralized planning in Kerala . In A . Fung & E . O . Wright ( Eds . ) , Deepening democracy ( pp . 77 - 110 ) . New York : Verso . Jordon , G . , & Weedon , C . ( 1995 ) . Cultural politics : Class , gender , race , and the postmodern world . Cambridge , MA : Blackwell . Lefebvre , H . ( 1991 ) . The production of space . London : Verso . Lukes , S . ( 2005 ) . Power : A radical view . London : Macmillan . March , J . , & Olsen , J . ( 1995 ) . Democratic governance . New York : Free Press . Nagel , J . ( 1987 ) . Participation . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Nash , K . ( 2000 ) . Contemporary political sociology . Oxford , UK : Basil Blackwell . Norton , A . , & Stephens , T . ( 1995 ) . Participation inpoverty assessment . Environmental department paperspartic - ipation series . Washington , DC : Social Policy and Resettlement Division , World Bank . Pierre , J . ( Ed . ) . ( 2000 ) . Debating governance : Authority , steering , and democracy . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Rahman , M . D . A . ( 1993 ) . People’s self - development . London : Zed . Reason , P . ( 1994 ) . Three approaches toparticipatory inquiry . InN . K . Denzin & Y . S . Lincoln ( Eds . ) , Handbookof qualitative research ( pp . 324 - 339 ) . London : Sage . Rip , R . , & Pierre - Benoit , J . ( 2004 ) . Multi - actor spaces and the governance of science and innovation in the ERA . Unpublished manuscript . Salamon , L . M . ( 1993 ) . The global associational revolution : The rise of the third sector on the worldscene ( Occa - sional papers 15 ) . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . Scott , J . C . ( 1986 ) . Weapons of the weak . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Scott , J . C . ( 1990 ) . Domination and the arts of resistance : Hidden transcripts . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press . Skelcher , C . ( 2003 , June ) . Jurisdictional integrity , polycentricism , and the design of governance . Paper presented at the Transatlantic Policy Consortium Conference on Liberalisation and Democratic Governance , German University of Administrative Sciences , Speyer , Germany . Stoker , G . ( 2000 ) . Urbanpolitical science and the challenge ofurban governance . InJ . Pierre ( Ed . ) , Debating gov - ernance : Authority , steering , and democracy ( pp . 91 - 109 ) . Oxford , UK : Oxford University Press . Thakur , R . ( 1995 ) . The government and politics of India . New York : St . Martin’s . Fischer / Participatory Governance as Deliberative Empowerment 39 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from World Bank . ( 1994 ) . The World Bank and participation . Operations Policy Department . Washington , DC : Author . Frank Fischer , a professor of political science at Rutgers University , is currently a visiting professor at the Uni - versity of Kassel , Germany . His most recent books are Citizen , Experts , and the Environment : The Politics of Local Knowledge and Reframing Public Policy : Discursive Politics and Deliberative Practices . He is currently working on the role of professional expertise in the theory and practice of deliberative democracy . 40 The American Review of Public Administration © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on April 12 , 2008 http : / / arp . sagepub . com Downloaded from