Dauntless Research and Development Investments of Deficit Senior - Star Biotech Firms in the Valley of Death Takao Fujiwara Insitute of Liberal Arts and Sciences Toyohashi University of Technology Toyohashi , Japan fujiwara , takao . tp @ tut . jp Abstract —This paper focuses on “senior - star” biotech firms as the study target instead of the recently designed NASDAQ Junior Biotechnology Index . We are more interested in the limited number of top - performing “star” players in “senior” biotech firms rather than the much younger and promising next - generation firms . In the market capitalization , these senior biotech firms comprise the top - tier elite class in the head part of the Zipf distribution . Some senior negative - profit ( N . P . ) biotech firms are willing to increase the deficits for more active investment in research and development ( R & D ) . According to the Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo analysis applied to the FY2020 US Securities and Exchange Commission dataset of the electronic data - gathering , analysis , and retrieval system , the R & D productivity of the N . P . Biotech firms are higher than their positive - profit counterparts . Thus , for senior - star biotech firms to overcome the valley of death , R & D investment can be considered a call option in real options by regarding the cash - on - hand as an underlying asset and the deficit as a strike price . Keywords—biotech entrepreneurship , valley of death , real option , Bayesian method I . I NTRODUCTION BioNTech , Moderna , and Vaccitech are key biotech startups that contribute to the development of COVID - 19 vaccines while having respective following partnerships with Pfizer , with U . S . National Institutes of Health ( N . I . H . ) , and with Oxford University and AstraZeneca . It is proof of the advantage of a biotech startup in terms of speed , cost , and flexibility for drug discovery , from basic science at universities to clinical testing and manufacturing at large pharmaceutical firms . The National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations ( NASDAQ ) designed and launched the NASDAQ Junior Biotechnology Index ( N . B . I . J . R . ) [ 1 ] as a “junior” section of the NASDAQ Biotechnology Index ( N . B . I . ) on April 30 , 2020 . The selection criteria of the component company are ( i ) A cap on market capitalization of US Dollar ( USD ) 5 billion ( bn ) , ( ii ) Minimum market capitalization of USD 200 million ( mm ) , ( iii ) Average daily trading volume of at least 100 , 000 shares , ( iv ) Classified as biotechnology & pharmaceuticals by Industry Classification Benchmark , and ( v ) NASDAQ - listed . They are interested in the intensity of research and development ( R & D ) and the promising potential of high growth in market capitalization of most negative - profit ( N . P . ) biotech companies . Most biotech startups and companies , even those listed on the capital market , usually have deficits because the drug approval process is time - consuming , requires massive R & D investment , and has the rare possibility of drug approval on the market . Therefore , this paper designated 31 companies as “senior” biotech companies by subtracting 231 components ( firms ) of N . B . I . J . R . from 262 components of N . B . I . in July 2021 . That is , we rather focus on the trend of the star players ; they have capability already approved ; even in the successful head - part , not the good but unknown long - tail part of the Zipf distribution ( i . e . , a limited number of players cover most performance as a discrete type of Pareto distribution ) of achievement measurement in market capitalization . Additionally , we are also interested in N . P . Biotech companies face a valley of death ( a deficit between basic science and commercial innovation ) . High - performing biotech companies can dare to increase deficits for R & D investment from sincere entrepreneurship . This senior biotech firm dataset includes BioNTech and Moderna . ( i ) What is the R & D productivity of these N . P . Star biotech companies compared with that of their positive - profit ( P . P . ) counterparts ? ( ii ) How can they increase the deficits to increase the R & D investment ? Here , a biotech company , especially a biotech startup , is defined as the portfolio of the real options as R & D investment regarding the “cash - on - hand” as underlying assets and the deficits as strike prices in the call - option formula . Especially the cash - on - hand as an underlying asset is especially robust under volatile conditions than the equity ; real option ( i . e . , financial engineering tools applied to real assets ) ; as a financial account for decision conditions at a biotech startup . Thus , this study aims to confirm the daring , innovative entrepreneurship of “N . P . star” biotech companies . They can increase R & D investment even with high deficits by applying Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo ( M . C . M . C . ) analysis ( a statistical approach that infers a posterior probability distribution using Monte Carlo simulation ) to the latest F . Y . ( fiscal year ) 2020 ; a dataset of the U . S . Securities and Exchange Commission ( S . E . C . ) of the electronic data - gathering , analysis , and retrieval system ( EDGAR ) [ 2 ] in R & D expenses , cash - on - hand , income , profit / loss , assets , liabilities , and shareholder value . Moreover , we got the data This work was supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science under a Grant - in - Aid for Scientific Research ( C ) 20K01822 . 2 022 I EEE 28 t h I n t e r n a t i o n a l C o n f e r e n c e o n E n g i n ee r i n g , T e c hn o l o g y a nd I nn o v a t i o n ( I C E / I T M C ) & 31 s t I n t e r n a t i o n a l A ss o c i a t i o n F o r M a n a g e m e n t o f T e c hn o l o g y ( I A M O T ) J o i n t C o n f e r e n c e | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 8817 - 4 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | D O I : 10 . 1109 / I C E / I T M C - I A M O T 55089 . 2022 . 10033192 on market capitalization from Wall Street Journal [ 3 ] . Bayesian M . C . M . C . is useful to analyze such small sample cases and infer the parameter in probability and some unknown parameters under uncertain and asymmetric information conditions . After the introduction , this paper consists of a literature review , basic theory ( e . g . , background , dataset , research question , and basic theory ) , preliminary analysis ( e . g . , R & D productivity and survival source ) , and Bayesian M . C . M . C . analysis , finding , and conclusion . II . L ITERATURE R EVIEW This section reviews existing literature about biotech startups , a translational study from science to the clinical test , and the valley of death as initial N . P . Period , real options analysis to overcome it , and Bayesian M . C . M . C . as a statistical searching tool to reduce information asymmetry between entrepreneur and investor . A . Biotech Startup In the early history of the biotechnology industry , Kenney [ 4 ] examined its growth and structure , described the basic and applied biology , university’s role , and revealed how the relationship changes the university’s educational and study role . The author also emphasized the N . P . s of almost biotech startups . Pisano [ 5 ] raised the following basic problem : “Can science be a business ? ” The current close relationship between business and science is a topic that has drawn extensive attention in academic papers , the popular press , and especially the biotech industry . The author also indicated the difficult return on investment in this industry . As a unique history , the growth of the biotech industry has depended on startups between universities and large pharmaceutical firms . For instance , Galambos et al . [ 6 ] indicated the core role of biotech startups . The pharmaceutical industry experienced the shift to molecular genetics and recombinant D . N . A . technology from only small molecule chemistry during the twentieth century . Small biotech startups played an important role in this transition . By the mid - 1990s , the leading pharmaceutical manufacturers had established significant capabilities in the new field , but they have continued working with specialized biotech startups . Additionally , from a biotech startup ecosystem perspective , Baum et al . [ 7 ] hypothesized that startups could enhance their early performance by ( i ) Forming alliances , ( ii ) Organizing them into an efficient network that provides access to diverse information and capabilities with minimum costs of redundancy , conflict , and complexity , and ( iii ) Carefully allying with potential rivals provides more learning opportunities and less risk of inside - alliance rivalry . Their analysis of Canadian biotech startups’ innovative performance supports these hypotheses . Conversely , Polidoro et al . [ 8 ] showed that corporate venture capital investment could weaken the radicalness of a startup’s innovation and undercut learning opportunities available to incumbents by startups’ frequent shifting into the domains of their corporate partners . Alternatively , Orelli [ 9 ] introduced the French crowdfunding platform “WiSEED” in October 2012 , which marked the first crowdfunding success in the biotech industry for A . N . T . A . B . I . O . , a drug discovery firm , with a profitable exit . In the U . K . , the BioIndustry Association advocates the establishment of “Citizens’ Innovation Funds” for the public to invest in innovation with a tax break deduction of 40 % of the amount invested and tax - free returns . Moreover , in the U . S . , “the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act” authorized equity - based crowdfunding . While awaiting the guidelines of S . E . C . , Alex Fair founded the New York - based “MedStartr , ” a crowdfunding platform for biotech companies . Thus , there is a new social innovation to connect basic science with clinical service . B . Translational Study In the translational study from basic science to the clinical test , Morrison [ 10 ] emphasized the importance of “proof‐of‐ concept” ( P . O . C . ) as a critical point . For instance , translating basic scientific discovery into a therapeutic innovation that can improve public health is immensely gratifying . A particular exciting time in the translation process is the early clinical test to assess whether a novel molecule is effective in humans . This P . O . C . stage has a high risk of failure and must receive a thorough test , but a positive P . O . C . is scientifically and often financially rewarding . This content is particularly true for small biotech startups where a positive P . O . C . can be a “value inflection point , ” leading to enhanced market valuation , strategic partnerships , or even acquisition . As an investor , Klausner [ 11 ] emphasized that understanding the complex ecosystem responsible for translating science into new medicines is critical in the current discussion of translational science . This system involves academia , public funders , and the biotechnology , pharmaceutical , and device industries . The modern biotechnology industry , impelled by molecular biology , represents a profound commitment to translation and remains the central venue for transforming science into medical products . Meanwhile , as a scientist and government officer , Collins [ 12 ] criticized that despite dramatic advances in the molecular pathogenesis of the disease , translation of basic biomedical research into safe and effective clinical applications remains a slow , expensive , and failure - prone endeavor . Furthermore , the author proposed that to pursue opportunities for disruptive translational innovation , the U . S . N . I . H . intends to establish a new entity , the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences ( N . C . A . T . S . ) . The mission of N . C . A . T . S . is to catalyze the generation of innovative methods and technologies that will enhance the development , testing , and implementation of diagnostics and therapeutics across various diseases and conditions . Salgaller et al . [ 13 ] emphasized the importance of “biotech entrepreneurship” because either directly ( i . e . , by starting their own companies ) or indirectly ( i . e . , by working with existing pharmaceutical and biotech companies ) , researchers are now moving an increasing number of technologies toward the marketplace . “Biotech entrepreneurship : from science to solutions” provides a real - world introduction to starting and growing life science companies . However , Ghoda et al . [ 14 ] still criticized the opportunity loss from reluctant and poor scientific entrepreneurship . Much basic research has gotten funded through federal agencies , such as N . I . H . A bonus is that some research has yielded patentable inventions that , if successfully commercialized , became a revenue stream for the institution . Nevertheless , most investigators have not actively pursued the commercialization of discoveries , leaving those responsibilities to their technology licensing offices . Hence , we will examine the valley of death as the initial N . P . Period for biotech startups between basic research and clinical development . C . Valley of Death Ehlers [ 15 ] , a scientist and politician , coined the word “valley of death” as an N . P . period that R & D projects must overcome . For example , the author proposed the following three necessities : ( i ) Stable and substantial government support for basic research , ( ii ) Encouraging active private sector participation in the research process , and ( iii ) Strengthening the national system of science and mathematics education from kindergarten through graduate school . Despite the rampant growth of fields such as biotechnology , a significant gap remains between basic and applied research . This “valley of death , ” as Ehlers [ 15 ] thought , must be better bridged if we are to sustain the overall scientific and engineering enterprise . Similarly , Auerswald and Branscomb [ 16 ] explored the hypothesis that information asymmetries and institutional gaps may systematically deter private investment into early - stage technology development by including both valley of death and “Darwinian Sea” as competitive selection stages . They describe the federal and state governments’ role in promoting the commercial transition from an invention to innovation . Moreover , they are suggesting some lessons from the Advanced Technology Program ( A . T . P . ) must be better bridged if we are to sustain the overall scientific and engineering enterprise . A few studies have insisted on the difficulty of bridging the valley of death . For instance , Frank et al . [ 17 ] compared the valley of death of the environmental and pharmaceutical industries in terms of the private financial resources , the potential public financial methods , and the governmental and private partnerships . Moran [ 18 ] highlighted that the technology transfer gap in drug discovery had widened the valley of death between the finishing points of research supported by an academic grant . Moreover , such a program industry is interested in licensing , or venture capitalists are ready to back through a startup . Pharmaceutical and biotech companies are no longer interested in basic biology . Rather , they demand proof that a target is relevant to treating disease , that it also can be modulated , and that the compounds for doing this are safe for humans . Moreover , they want this packaged gift wrapped with intellectual property rights . Hudson et al . [ 19 ] examined this interaction in the U . K . , the E . U . , and the U . S . A . using several specific examples , suggesting that cooperation is still far from perfect and that the return for academia on its research investment is relatively small . Kampers et al . [ 20 ] were apprehensive that a few biotechnology innovations succeeded in crossing the valley of death and entered the markets based on their experience with academia , technology transfer offices , and industry . Thus , the financial method is necessary for biotech startups to overcome the valley of death . D . Real Options This section examines the real options analysis to value the potential of technology and overcome the valley of death . First , as classical studies , Myers [ 21 ] defined “real option” as a growth opportunity equal to equity , that is , asset minus debt . Dixit and Pindyck [ 22 ] provided the early detailed exposition of a new theoretical approach to the capital investment decisions of firms by stressing the irreversibility of most investment decisions and the ongoing uncertainty of the economic environment in which managers made these decisions . Schwarz [ 23 ] developed and implemented a simulation approach to value patents and patent - protected R & D projects based on the real options approach . The author considers uncertainty in both the cost - to - completion of the project and cash flows generated from the project and the possibility of catastrophic events that could end the effort before it completes . It also allows for abandoning the project when costs are higher than the estimated cash inflow . Second , as an analytical framework , Remer et al . [ 24 ] examined the technological and market risks in making investment decisions and provided an overview of the potential benefits and limitations that real options thinking has on evaluating and managing risky projects , particularly concerning biotechnology companies . Miller et al . [ 25 ] provided efforts to combine decision analysis tools with financial option pricing techniques to develop a real options framework that will be accepted in the industry to make decisions in today’s fast - paced and highly competitive business environment . Third , as a more practical application , Hartmann [ 26 ] presented the results of an in - depth analysis of collected empirical data regarding the application of this new tool in the pharmaceutical sector by capturing the internal view of the pharmaceutical companies themselves and the external view from the healthcare departments of financial service firms . Ziedonis [ 27 ] found that firms are more likely to purchase option contracts for more uncertain technologies and that those that can evaluate an external technology are less likely to purchase options before licensing . Moreover , firms that are better able to “absorb” the technology during the contract period may have reduced incentives to license the invention . Using decision - tree and binomial - lattice methods , Kellogg [ 28 ] explained the reason for the high value in growth options of biotech firms with no product revenue ; the author used them to value a biotechnology company Agouron Pharmaceuticals as the sum of the values of its drug - development projects . Real options analysis is often applied to evaluate the value of flexibility against an irreversible investment under uncertainty and overcome the valley of death by changing a negative net present value ( N . P . V . ) to a positive expanded N . P . V . ( E . N . P . V . ) by adding option value . Furthermore , information asymmetry between entrepreneurs and venture capitalists can be an obstacle to accurately evaluating the option value . Then , an inference method is necessary to reduce asymmetry between them . E . Bayesian M . C . M . C . First , in their fundamental studies , Gelman et al . [ 29 ] indicated that the essential characteristic of Bayesian methods is their explicit use of probability for quantifying uncertainty in inferences based on statistical data analysis . Kruschke [ 30 ] emphasized that the method handles outliers ; moreover , the decision rule can accept the null value , unlike traditional t - tests when certainty in the estimate is high , and the method yields precise statistical power estimates . Second , conducting applicational studies , Dellaportas [ 31 ] proposed several M . C . M . C . methods for estimating probabilities of models and associated “model - averaged” posterior distributions in the presence of model uncertainty . Greyserman et al . [ 32 ] contributed to portfolio selection methodology using a Bayesian forecast of the distribution of returns by stochastic approximation . New hierarchical priors on the mean vector and covariance matrix of returns are derived . Third , demonstrating applicational software , Griffin et al . [ 33 ] implemented M . C . M . C . methods for Bayesian analysis of stochastic frontier models , using the WinBUGS package , freely available software . They presented general codes for cross - sectional and panel data and discussed various ways of summarizing posterior inference . So far , there is a research gap in that very few studies have attempted to overcome the valley of death by applying both real options and the Bayesian M . C . M . C . method . Therefore , this study expects that the Bayesian M . C . M . C . method can provide probability inference of model parameters to reduce information asymmetry or seek an unknown real - option parameter for biotech firms to overcome the valley of death . III . B ASIC T HEORY Next , we will discuss the background , dataset , research question , and basic theory to examine the research gap . A . Background , Dataset , and Framework As aforementioned , on April 30 , 2020 , the NASDAQ newly brought about the N . B . I . J . R . [ 1 ] to notice the fledging , relatively middle - sized , and potential group of biotech companies as a next - generation promising frontier . However , as of July 2021 , this study designated the 31 companies as “senior” biotech companies by subtracting the 231 components of N . B . I . J . R . from the total 262 components of N . B . I . , to focus on already proven and successful biotech companies . This paper is more interested in the head part of the Zipf distribution than the long - tail part as a measurement of achievement based on the US SEC EDGAR dataset [ 2 ] . First of all , based on the Zipf distribution in the current market capitalization sourced from market data of Wall Street Journal in July 2021 [ 3 ] , the top - performing players were designated as “star” senior biotech companies ( Fig . 1 ) . That is , they are a limited number of top - tier players even in the higher - performing senior group . Then , as a breakdown of senior biotech companies , of the positive profit 15 companies , seven firms are “P . P . star” biotech companies ( red - colored ) , and the remaining eight firms are non - star companies ( blue - colored ) . Of the 16 negative profit companies , the six firms were “N . P . star” biotech companies ( green colored ) , and the remaining 10 were non - star companies ( also blue colored ) . Then , paying particular attention to the star biotech companies that are in the deficit , we will analyze the behavior of those companies that dared to conduct R & D even in the valley of death using the following financial indicators : revenues , R & D expenses , profit and loss , assets , liabilities , shareholder value , and cash - on - hand . At present , N . P . Star biotech companies have relatively lower income and market capitalization than P . P . star companies ( Fig . 2 ) . B . Research Question When the profit / loss classifies all data , R & D expenses , and revenues , some incredibly unique companies dared invest in R & D , regardless of how the deficit expands in star biotech companies ( Figs . 3 and 5 ) . ( i ) Why do N . P . Star biotech companies dare increase R & D investment when their negative profits expand ? ( ii ) How can they survive fundamentally even with a huge deficit and increasing R & D investment ? ( iii ) What is their R & D performance compared with that of P . P . star biotech firms ? In both the P . P . and N . P . Groups , there are “quasi - star” biotech companies whose areas overlap with non - star companies ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) . In addition , some deficit quasi - star companies ( e . g . , CRISPR Therapeutics ; C . R . S . P . ) have extremely low incomes ( Fig . 5 ) . ( iv ) How can these quasi - star biotech companies connect between star and non - star biotech companies ? Fig . 1 . Zipf distribution by order ( x axis ) of market capitalization ( market cap . , y axis : $ billion ( $ BN ) ) : positive profit ( PP ) star ( red ) ; negative profit ( NP ) star ( green ) ; and non - star ( blue ) . Fig . 2 . Revenues ( x axis : $ million ( $ MM ) ) and market cap . ( y axis : $ MM ) : PP star ( black ticker ) ; NP star ( red ticker ) ; and non - star ( no ticker symbol ) . ( v ) What signaling functions do they show before shifting into “real star” biotech companies ? Thus , we must examine basic theory to find a proper perspective to answer the above research questions . C . Basic Theory Typically , drug approval in the market takes 12 years , costs USD 300 million – 1 billion , and succeed in 1 / 30 , 000 probability from compounds at the laboratory bench . Consequently , most biotech companies are in deficit , including unlisted biotech startups . They must endure and face the valley of death without any product on their hand . Myers [ 21 ] advocated that the equity is considered a call option in real options by regarding an asset as the underlying asset and debt as the exercise price based on the limited liability as follows : (cid:1) (cid:2) max(cid:6)(cid:7) (cid:8) (cid:9) , 0(cid:12) (cid:6)1(cid:12) where (cid:1) (cid:2) Equity , (cid:7) (cid:2) Asset , and (cid:9) (cid:2) Debt . The biotech startup will enable them to overcome the valley of death if its equity is sufficiently positive , even less than debt , or by its promising potential of technology . However , equity is often volatile in the valuation , subject to the turmoil in stock markets in financial crises , pandemics , or military disorders . Cash - on - hand can be a more stable underlying asset , and if we regard debt as the strike price , R & D investment as a call option can be calculated as follows : (cid:14) ≅ max(cid:6)(cid:16) (cid:8) (cid:9) , 0(cid:12) (cid:6)2(cid:12) where (cid:14) (cid:2) R & D expense in investment or equity , (cid:16) (cid:2) Cash - on - hand in underlying asset , and (cid:9) (cid:2) Deficit or negative profit in debt . IV . P RELIMINARY A NALYSIS Before discussing the Bayesian M . C . M . C . method , we examine R & D productivity and the source of survival as our preliminary analysis using the same dataset . A . R & D Productivity We assume the linear relationship of R & D productivity between the R & D investment as an independent variable and the market capitalization value ( i . e . , potential intangible assets as patents without a product ) as a dependent variable— the slope of N . P . Biotech companies are larger than P . P . companies , and hence , the productivity of N . P . companies may be higher ( Fig . 6 ) . As this preliminary analysis uses a small sample , we examine proof by applying a Bayesian M . C . M . C . method suitable to a small sample and finding an unknown parameter . When the revenue , which probably shows present outcomes , is used as a mediate variable between both variables in each profit type , the sample areas of star and non - star biotech companies are separated in the P . P . companies , but those areas overlap in the N . P . companies . Converting the intermediate variable from the “revenue” to the “cash - on - Fig . 5 . NP firms’ net income ( x axis : $ MM ) , R & D expenses ( y axis : $ MM ) , and revenues ( bubble size ) : star ( bule ) ; and non - star ( brown ) . Fig . 4 . PP firms’ net income ( x axis : $ MM ) , R & D expenses ( y axis : $ MM ) , and revenues ( bubble size ) : star ( blue ) ; and non - star ( brown ) . Fig . 3 . Net income ( x axis : $ MM ) , R & D expenses ( y axis : $ MM ) , and revenues ( bubble size ) : PP firms ( bule ) ; NP firms ( brown ) . Fig . 6 . R & D expenses ( x axis : $ MM ) , market cap . ( y axis : $ MM ) , and revenues ( bubble size ) : PP ( gray ) ; and NP ( blue ) . hand” due to high - risk robustness strengthens the existence of each map position , especially in emerging star companies ( Figs . 7 and 8 ) . The reason is that the P . P . star biotech companies are more focused on manufacturing than on R & D because of firm size ( Fig . 2 and some biotech manufactures ) . However , the N . P . counterparts need to explore the more promising R & D areas to overcome the valley of death . Hence , the R & D productivity of N . P . star firms are likely higher than that of P . P . counterpart to survive this valley of death with potential . B . Sources of Survival In particular , Gilead Sciences in the P . P . star biotech firm group and Incyte in the N . P . are respectively in a higher state of deviating from each group standard in R & D investment level . Moderna’s market capitalization is overwhelmingly high among the deficit emerging star biotech firms . The market capitalization of quasi - stars in the P . P . biotech firms is relatively high , but that of quasi - stars in the N . P . is not so high . The difference in cash - on - hand size in the leader star group is huge in both the P . P . and N . P . biotech firm groups ( Figs . 9 and 10 ) . In terms of capital structure , Amgen and Gilead Sciences have large assets in the P . P . companies , and their debt ratios are also higher than other members of the same group . Alternatively , in the deficit companies , the debt / asset ratios of Moderna and Alnylam are relatively higher in the group . The capital cost of debt is cheaper than equity ; hence , a higher debt / asset ratio means banks trust their technologies . Thus , as an underlying asset , the cash - on - hand seems to be robust and important collateral as an underlying asset for the deficit as a strike price and the R & D investment as a call – real option , thereby improving the R & D productivity with R & D investment as an independent variable and market capitalization as a dependent variable , respectively . Therefore , preliminary analyses can show the ground truth for the next section’s Bayesian M . C . M . C . analysis . V . B AYESIAN M . C . M . C . A NALYSIS We examine the application of Bayesian MCMC analysis using RStan and a hierarchy type model as follows : (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:22) ~ (cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:28)(cid:31) ! (cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:22) " # $ (cid:31) ! (cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:22) " % (cid:19) (cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:22) , & ’ ( (cid:21) (cid:2) 1 , ⋯ , (cid:24) (cid:6)3(cid:12) (cid:28) , - . / 01 . 20 (cid:20)3(cid:22) ~ (cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:28) 456 . 7 . / 01 . 20 , & . 2 ( 3 (cid:2) 1 , ⋯ , 8 $ , - . / 01 . 20 (cid:20)3(cid:22) ~ (cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30) $ 456 . 7 . / 01 . 20 , & 92 ( 3 (cid:2) 1 , ⋯ , 8 (cid:28)(cid:20) : (cid:22) ~ (cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:28) , - . / 01 . 20 (cid:31) (cid:16)2(cid:24) ; (cid:20) : (cid:22) " , & . ( : (cid:2) 1 , ⋯ , < Fig . 7 . PP firms’ R & D expenses ( x axis : $ MM ) , market cap . ( y axis : $ MM ) , and cash and cash - on - hand ( bubble size ) : star ( blue ) ; and non - star ( brown ) . Fig . 9 . PP firms’ net income ( x axis : $ MM ) , market cap . ( y axis : $ MM ) , and cash - on - hand ( bubble size ) : star ( blue ) ; and non - star ( brown ) . Fig . 10 . NP firms’ net income ( x axis : $ MM ) , market cap . ( y axis : $ MM ) , and cash - on - hand ( bubble size ) : star ( blue ) ; and non - star ( brown ) . Fig . 8 . NP firms’ R & D expenses ( x axis : $ MM ) , market cap . ( y axis : $ MM ) , and cash - on - hand ( bubble size ) : star ( blue ) ; and non - star ( brown ) . $ (cid:20) : (cid:22) ~ (cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30) $ , - . / 01 . 20 (cid:31) (cid:16)2(cid:24) ; (cid:20) : (cid:22) " , & = 9 ( : (cid:2) 1 , ⋯ , < (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:2) > (cid:18) ? : 2021 A(cid:28)(cid:26) : B ! (cid:16)(cid:28)CD ! (cid:28)(cid:29)DE(cid:28) ! D(cid:25)(cid:21) (cid:18) F : 2020 (cid:14) (cid:28)(cid:21)G (cid:9) (cid:1)HCB(cid:21)GD ! I(cid:26)BJ % (cid:19) (cid:2) > % ? : 2020 (cid:14) (cid:28)(cid:21)G (cid:9) (cid:1)HCB(cid:21)GD ! I(cid:26)BJ % F : 2020 (cid:16)(cid:28)Jℎ (cid:8) L(cid:21) (cid:8) M(cid:28)(cid:21)G where (cid:24) (cid:2) total company number , 8 (cid:2) FY2020 each positive or negative profit company number , (cid:16)2(cid:24) ; (cid:2) each 2021 star or non - star group company index belonging to FY2020 PP or NP company group , < (cid:2) 2021 star or non - star group company number in each profits type , (cid:21) , 3 , (cid:28)(cid:21)G : (cid:2) each index , and D (cid:2) 1 , 2 . Star or non - star firm was confirmed in order of market capitalization in July 2021 . However , P . P . or N . P . was sourced from the FY2020 EDGAR dataset . Therefore , the notations of both years are different . VI . F INDINGS : R ESULT , A NALYSIS , AND D ISCUSSION This section examines the results of Bayesian M . C . M . C . analysis and presents the detailed characteristics . At first , the analysis results converged because all the (cid:14)N ( Rhat ) values were less than 1 . 1 ( critical criterion ) , as shown in Tables I and II . Second , the N . P . Biotech companies have higher expected values and smaller standard deviations in the slope of R & D productivity ( model 1 ) than the P . P . biotech companies ; R & D expenses as the independent variable and market capitalization ( many biotech firms do not have products , apart from patents , as intangible assets evaluable by capital market ) as the dependent variable ( Table I and Fig . 11 ) . Especially , the NP star biotech companies have the highest expected value (cid:1)(cid:20) $ ? (cid:22) ≅ 0 . 015 and the smallest standard deviation & (cid:6) $ ? (cid:12) ≅ 0 . 004 of R & D productivity ( slope parameter type for each model : $ ? (cid:2) NP star ; $ F (cid:2) NP non - star ; $ R = PP star ; and $ S (cid:2) PP non - star ) . The star - biotech firm groups have larger expected slope values in the dependency of R & D investment on cash ( model 2 ) , linear regression with cash - on - hand as of the independent variable , and R & D expenses as the dependent variable . Furthermore , the N . P . star biotech firm group has the largest expected slope value (cid:20) $ ? (cid:22) ≅ 0 . 51 , and the standard deviation & (cid:6) $ ? (cid:12) ≅ 0 . 11 is overwhelmingly smaller for the NP biotech firms than for the PP biotech firms ( Fig . 14 and Table II ) . Quasi - star biotech companies , including those in the deficits , are different from non - star biotech companies in cash - on - hand but not in terms of revenues . The virtual potential value of market capitalization can depend on and connect with the robust asset of cash on hand . Thus , the N . P . star biotech companies exhibit strong entrepreneurship . Gilead Sciences has made relatively more R & D investments in the P . P . companies than its revenue level . Meanwhile , the market capitalizations of a true star and quasi - star biotech firms in this group are larger than those of their non - star counterparts ; alternatively , in N . P . True star biotech companies are active in the R & D investment regardless of the degree of negative - profit state , and there is a large variation in their market capitalization . The difference between the quasi - star and the non - star N . P . firms is unclear regarding the degree of willingness to invest in R & D and market capitalization . Nevertheless , all N . P . firms are supported by market capitalization , reflecting their potential , regardless of their revenues . For P / E ( price / earnings ) ratio , BioNTech is higher for the P . P . biotech companies , and so are Moderna , Novavax , and Alnylam for the N . P . Companies . Hence , the companies developing the COVID - 19 vaccine and RNAi technology are highly evaluated in the capital market . Most shortly , the author wishes to challenge the efficient search for the promising companies in the N . B . I . J . R . as a long tail . VII . C ONCLUSION This section discusses the answers to research questions , contribution to knowledge , practical implications , limitations , and future challenges . TABLE I . R & D P RODUCTIVITY WITH R & D E XPENSES ( I NPUT ) AND M ARKET C APITALIZATION ( OUTPUT ) Fig . 11 . R & D productivity with R & D expenses ( input ) and market capitalization ( output ) A . Answers to aforementioned research questions Here , we provide answers to the research questions above . • ( i ) Why do N . P . star biotech firms dare increase their & D investment when their negative profits expand ? They tend to invest in R & D to commercialize innovative ideas from universities toward a niche market , finding a promising and challenging new area based on higher R & D productivity than that of P . P . star counterparts ( Table I , Fig . 11 ) , even if it means increasing their deficits to a certain degree due to their entrepreneurship to prevent opportunity loss . • ( ii ) How can N . P . star biotech firms survive even with huge deficits and increasing R & D investment ? Based on the call - option formula , they keep the summation of the deficit as strike price and the R & D investment as a call option within “cash - on - hand” as an underlying asset ( Table II , Fig . 12 ) . Moreover , this cash - on - hand is a more robust underlying asset than equity as a real option valued on the frequently turbulent and volatile capital market as financial risk , COVID - 19 , and the Russia – Ukraine war . • ( iii ) How does N . P . star biotech firms’ performance fare with that of P . P . star counterparts ? N . P . star biotech firms’ R & D productivity and their dependency on cash - on - hand are higher than those of P . P . counterparts ( Tables I and II , Figs . 11 and 12 ) . Deficit stars are facing the valley of death by their intention . However , the P . P . counterparts are more interested in manufacturing and sales . This focus difference is considered from relatively smaller sizes of N . P . stars and their necessity for R & D intensiveness ( Fig . 2 ) • ( iv ) How can these quasi - star biotech companies connect star and non - star biotech companies ? Quasi - star biotech companies , including those in the deficits , are different from non - star biotech companies in cash - on - hand but in revenues ( Figs . 7 – 10 ) . Especially , N . P . quasi - star biotech firms are valued in cash - on - hand based on the potential valuation on the capital market rather than in real revenues based on more short - term performance . • ( v ) What kind of signaling functions do they show before shifting into “real star” biotech companies ? Moreover , N . P . quasi - star biotech companies tend to acquire and keep enough cash - on - hand to endure the valley of death ( Figs . 7 and 8 ) . Thus cash - on - hand can reflect the valuation of expected potential from the capital market ( Figs . 9 and 10 ) and become a signal function for measuring the potential and willingness to perform considerable R & D . Thus , we confirm the answers to all raised research questions—notably , N . P . star biotech firms show their entrepreneurship by keeping R & D investment as a real option and expanding their deficit as a strike price with cash - on - hand as an underlying asset . B . Contribution to Knowledge At first , the equity has usually been considered a real option to overcome the valley of death . Unfortunately , equity is not robust for long - term drug - discovery R & D , subject to the turbulent and volatile capital market . However , we confirm that the cash - on - hand is a more stable and suitable underlying asset as the collateral limit , especially for N . P . biotech firms . These firms increase R & D investment as a real option and deficit as the strike price within this cash - on - hand as underlying asset ( Tables I - II , Figs . 11 – 12 ) , the last stronghold . Second , we also confirm that the R & D productivity of N . P . star biotech firms are higher than that of P . P . star counterparts . TABLE II . R & D D EPENDENCY ON C ASH WITH C ASH - ON - HAND ( INPUT ) AND R & D E XPENSES ( OUTPUT ) . Fig . 12 . R & D dependency on cash with cash - on - hand ( input ) and R & D expenses ( output ) They must overcome the valley of death by increasing R & D investment and deficits to finish the drug discovery . Meanwhile , a criterion supporting both burdens is cash - on - hand . Alternatively , P . P . biotech firms could be more interested in manufacturing than R & D as the sizes of P . P . star biotech firms are larger in revenue and market capitalization ( Fig . 2 ) . Third , some balance exists between R & D investment as equity ( or call option ) and deficit as debt ( or exercise price ) within cash - on - hand as of the underlying asset . N . P . , on average , star biotech firms invest approximately 51 % of the cash - on - hand in R & D , whereas N . P . non - star biotech firms invest only about 15 % ( the mean values of b [ 1 – 2 ] in Table II ) , all else equal . Thus , based on star ( vs . non - star ) biotech firms’ better performance in the N . P . group , investment level of about 51 % of the cash - on - hand into R & D is reasonable , even with a deficit remaining in a portfolio . Therefore , cash - on - hand seems to signal the potential and willingness of would - be N . P . star biotech firms invest in R & D even in deficits or in the valley of death under turbulent market conditions . C . Practical Implication First , the valley of death is an important topic in practice also . Most biotech firms face the valley of death or are in deficits ( more in N . B . I . dataset ) , if including unlisted companies . Thus , the cash - on - hand as the underlying asset is more necessary to overcome the valley of death under an unstable capital market rather than the equity as a real option under steady - state market conditions . Second , the R & D productivity of N . P . Biotech firms are higher than P . P . star counterparts ( Table I , Fig . 11 ) . Therefore , the investment stance must be considered not only present income status but also future potential from a long - term return perspective . Third , cash - on - hand must maintain a balance between short - term deficit and long - term R & D investment ( Table II , Fig . 12 ) . If the increase in the deficit expands cash - on - hand , the optimal return period out of R & D investment must be considered from a perspective of market capitalization as the source of cash - on - hand . Bayesian M . C . M . C . can provide parameter estimation in probability . It will support finding the hidden real parameter values by signaling function . Especially , the signal index as cash - on - hand level to R & D investment will be useful for seeking would - be star N . P . biotech firms . D . Limitation and Challenge The dataset used here only includes listed firms’ financial information , and the unlisted biotech startups also need to be studied in the future . Moreover , the integration between financial and technological data must also be analyzed . Biotech firms , especially biotech startups , are superior in speed , cost , and flexibility to large pharmaceutical firms . However , they have limited resources and thus must endure the valley of death—the higher R & D productivity of N . P . star biotech firms can be an interesting study topic from the perspective of investors seeking the promising next investment target and policymakers for new industries . We found several star biotech firms in market capitalization even within N . P . players . Additionally , the R & D productivity of these deficit star biotech firms is often higher than that of P . P . star counterparts . Moreover , cash - on - hand as an underlying asset is more robust than equity as a usual real option even in the recent turbulent capital market under financial risk , the COVID - 19 pandemic , or military upheaval if we regard the deficit as a strike price and the R & D investment as a real ( call ) option . Bayesian M . C . M . C . analysis is a statistical method for seeking truer parameters even in unknown , uncertain , or information asymmetry conditions . Thus , it is a very useful tool for decision - makers to find the signal and infer the hidden or unknown chance and risk in biotech startup investment for radical innovation . In conclusion remark , at present , in an unseen global COVID - 19 pandemic condition , biotech startups ( e . g . , BioNTech , Moderna , and Ridgeback Biotherapeutics ) are critical drug - discovery contributors to people’s healthcare . Therefore , we can expect the idea of cash - on - hand as a real option’s underlying asset for R & D investment as a real option in increasing deficit decision as to the strike price , and the tool of Bayesian M . C . M . C . can support these small but entrepreneurial innovators . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] NASDAQ “The launch of Nasdaq Junior Biotech , ” https : / / www . nasdaq . com / articles / the - launch - of - nasdaq - junior - biotech - 2020 - 09 - 03 , since 2020 ( Access : Jan . 31 , 2022 ) [ 2 ] US SEC EDGAR ; https : / / www . sec . gov / edgar / about , since 2001 ( Access : Jul . 31 , 2021 ) [ 3 ] Wall Street Journal , Market Data ; https : / / www . wsj . com , since 1996 ( Access : Jul . 31 , 2022 ) [ 4 ] M . Kenney , Biotechnology : The University - Industrial Complex . New Haven , CT : Yale University Press , 1986 . [ 5 ] G . P . Pisano , Science Business : The Promise , the Reality , and the Future of Biotech . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press , 2006 . [ 6 ] L . Galambos and J . L . Sturchio , “ Pharmaceutical firms and the transition to biotechnology : A study in strategic innovation , ” Bus . Hist . Rev . , vol . 72 , no . 2 , pp . 250 – 278 , 2011 . [ 7 ] J . A . C . Baum , T . Calabrese , and B . S . Silverman , “Don ' t go it alone : alliance network composition and startups ' performance in Canadian biotechnology , ” Strateg . Manag . J . , vol . 21 , no . 3 , pp . 267 – 294 , 2000 . [ 8 ] F . Polidoro and W Yang , “Corporate investment relationships and the search for innovations : An examination of startups’ search shift toward incumbents , ” Organ . Sci . , vol . 32 , no . 4 , pp . 909 – 1148 , 2021 . [ 9 ] B . Orelli , “Biotech crowdfunding paves way for angels , ” Nat . Biotechnol . vol . 30 , p . 1020 , 2012 . [ 10 ] B . W . Morrison , “Biotechnology and translational medicine , ” Clin . Transl . Sci . , vol . 9 , no . 3 , pp . 125 – 127 , 2016 . [ 11 ] R . Klausner , “Science translational science : A view from a biotechnology investor , ” Sci . Transl . Med . , vol . 2 , no . 43 , p . 34ed3 , 2010 . [ 12 ] F . S . Collins , “Reengineering translational science : The time is right , ” Sci . Transl . Med . , vol . 3 , no . 90 , P . 90cm17 , 2011 . [ 13 ] M . L . Salgaller and F . M . Marincola , “Biotechnology entrepreneurship - where no research has gone before , ” J . Transl . Med . , vol . 8 , p . 102 , 2010 . [ 14 ] L . Y . Ghoda , S . T . Rosen , and L . W . Kwak , “The changing investment in translational science by academic medical centers : HOPE in the Valley of Death , ” J . Clin . Investig . , vol . 132 , no . 3 , pp . 3333 – 3335 , 2020 . [ 15 ] V . J . Ehlers , “Unlocking our future : Toward a new national science policy , ” AAI ( American Association of Immunologists ) Newsletter , pp . 3 – 4 , 1999 . [ 16 ] P . E . Auerswald and L . M . Branscomb , “Valleys of death and Darwinian seas : Financing the invention to innovation transition in the United States , ” J . Technol . Transf . , vol . , 28 , pp . 227 – 239 , 2003 . [ 17 ] C . Frank , C . Sink , L . A . Mynatt , R . R . ogers , and A . Rappazzo , “Surviving the “valley of death” : A comparative analysis , ” J . Technol . Transf . , vol . 21 , pp . 61 – 69 , 1996 . [ 18 ] N . Moran , “Public sector seeks to bridge ‘valley of death , ’” Nat . Biotechnol . , vol . 25 , no . 3 , p . 266 , 2007 . [ 19 ] J . Hudson and H . F . Khazragui , “Into the valley of death : Research to innovation , ” Drug . Discov . vol . 18 , no . 13 - 14 , pp . 610 – 613 , 2013 . [ 20 ] L . F . C . Kampers , E . Asin - Garcia , P . J . Schaap , A . Wagemakers , and V . A . P . M . dos Santos , “From innovation to application : Bridging the valley of death in industrial biotechnology , ” Trends Biotechnol . vol . 39 , no . 12 , pp . 1240 – 1242 , 2021 . [ 21 ] S . C . Myers , “Determinants of corporate borrowing , ” J . Finance . Econ . vol . 5 , no . 2 , pp . 147 – 175 , 1977 . [ 22 ] R . K . Dixit and R . S . Pindyck , Investment Under Uncertainty . Princeton , NJ : Pr inceton University Press , 1994 . [ 23 ] E . S . Schwarz , “Patents and R & D as Real Options , ” Econ . Notes , vol . 33 , no . 1 , pp . 23 – 54 , 2004 . [ 24 ] S . Remer , S . H . Ang , and C . Baden‐Fuller , “Dealing with uncertainties in the biotechnology industry : The use of real options reasoning , ” J . Commer . Biotechnol . , vol . 8 , no . 2 , pp . 95 - 105 , 2001 . [ 25 ] L . T . Miller and C . S . Park , “Decision making under uncertainty—Real options to the Rescue ? ” Eng . Econ . , vol . 47 , no . 2 , pp . 105 - 150 , 2002 . [ 26 ] M . Hartmann and A . Hassan , “Application of real options analysis for pharmaceutical R & D project valuation—Empirical results from a survey , ” Res . Policy , vol . 35 , no . 3 , pp . 343 - 354 , 2006 . [ 27 ] A . A . Ziedonis , “Real options in technology licensing , ” Manag . Sci . , vol . 53 , no . 10 , pp . 1618 - 1633 , 2007 . [ 28 ] D . Kellogg and J . M . Charnes , “Real - options valuation for a biotechnology company , ” Financial Anal . J . , vol . 56 , no . 3 , pp . 76 - 84 , 2019 . [ 29 ] A . Gelman , J . B . Carlin , H . S . Stern , and D . B . Rubin , Bayesian Data Analysis . New York , NY : Chapman and Hall / CRC , 1995 . [ 30 ] J . K . Kruschke , “Bayesian estimation supersedes the t test , ” Q . J . Exp . Psychol . ( Hove ) : General , vol . 142 , no . 2 , pp . 573 – 603 , 2013 . [ 31 ] P . Dellaportas , J . J . Forster , and I . Ntzoufras , “On Bayesian model and variable selection using MCMC , ” Stat . Comput . vol . 12 , pp . 27 – 36 , 2002 . [ 32 ] A . Greyserman , D . H . Jones , and W . E . Strawderman “Portfolio selection using hierarchical Bayesian analysis and MCMC methods , ” J . Bank . Financ . , vol . 30 , no . 2 , pp . 669 - 678 , 2006 . [ 33 ] J . E . Griffin and M . F . J . Steel , “Bayesian stochastic frontier analysis using WinBUGS , ” J . Product . Anal . , vol . 27 , pp . 163 – 176 , 200