1 PLACING KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT IN CONTEXT Mark Thompson Judge Institute of Management , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 1AG , UK Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 1223 339700 Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 1223 339701 mpat2 @ cam . ac . uk Geoff Walsham Judge Institute of Management , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 1AG , UK Tel : + 44 ( 0 ) 1223 339700 Fax : + 44 ( 0 ) 1223 339701 g . walsham @ jims . cam . ac . uk 2 ABSTRACT We welcome the increased emphasis on practice - based theories of knowing as an alternative to the more representational , knowledge - as - object approaches which have characterised many organizational attempts at ‘knowledge management’ to date . Building on the findings of a short empirical study into the‘knowledge management’ initiatives of a global software organization , which highlighted the value of rich context in the generation of meaning , we seek to shed some light on a perceived confusion about the nature of organizational context . We show such context to be an inseperable part of knowing , which it creates and by which it is defined , and re - use Blackler’s ( 1995 ) taxonomy of ’knowledge types’ to illustrate the relational interaction between shared and deeply personal components of context . Finally , we use these insights to suggest a way in which organizations may be able to derive more value from their investments in internal initiatives by increasing their ability to support knowing – and hence the generation of meaning - amongst their employees . Keywords : activity , context , knowing , knowledge management , meaning , practice , relational 3 PLACING KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT IN CONTEXT ‘KNOWLEDGE’ AND ‘CONTEXT’ In The Coming of Post - Industrial Society , Bell proposed that ‘knowledge’ could be considered as " a set of organized statements of facts or ideas , presenting a reasoned judgement or an experimental result , which is transmitted to others through some communication medium in some systematic form " ( 1973 , p . 175 ) . Since then , organizations and researchers have paid considerable attention to deepening their understanding of the processes surrounding the generation and ' management ' of organizational knowledge . One of the most influential among the latter has been Nonaka ( 1991 , 1994 ) , whose ' knowledge spiral ' explored the dynamics of the interrelationship between tacit and explicit knowledges between individuals and groups . Although Nonaka focused on the relationships of communication between such knowledge types ( via processes of ' socialisation ' , ' externalisation ' , ' combination ' , and ' internalisation ' ) , it is arguable that his view of all such knowledges as objects , able to pass between these different states , has contributed to a sense that the focus of knowledge management systems ( KMS ) should be to ' externalise ' and ' combine ' tacit forms of knowledge . Such an influence continues to be visible , for example , in Cohendet et al ' s recent attention to the " codification of experience , know - how and localised tacit knowledge " ( 1999 , p . 239 ) via these processes of conversion ; a similar dynamic underlies Crossan et al ' s ( 1999 , p . 523 ) " intuiting , interpreting , integrating , and institutionalizing " . Such approaches are understandable as reactions of organizations accustomed to accounting for shareholder value as they seek to define , measure and appropriate these mounting ' intangibles ' into their books , but they contain built - in contradictions which cannot be solved via technology . These contradictions centre around the problem that the meaning of any objective ‘knowledge’ will always remain the subjective product of the person in whose mind this is constituted , always relationally defined , and therefore does not transfer easily to others in a form which may be operationalised to the benefit of the organization . McDermott has provided powerful case examples of the emergent nature of ‘knowledge’ , conceived as the " residue of thinking " ( 1999 , p . 105 ) , which , he argues , should form the proper focus of KMS . Such a view more closely reflects the original intentions of Polanyi - whose 1967 book , ironically , was credited by Nonaka for influencing his tacit / explicit spiral : “The ideal of a strictly explicit knowledge is indeed self - contradictory ; deprived of their tacit coefficients ( personal to the individual ) , all spoken words , all formulae , all maps and graphs , are strictly meaningless” ( 1969 , p . 195 ) . Approaches to ‘knowledge management’ ( KM ) which attempt to sideline or ignore Polanyi’s critical ( if inconvenient ) insight risk , at best , a misguided capital investment and at worst , disastrous consequences for intra - organizational interaction , since they 4 often replace established , localised communication structures , cultural norms and understandings – which , as we shall argue , can be conceptualized as components of context - with , for example , an indiscriminately applied , database - driven intranet . As the ‘invisible college’ of opinion ( Star , 1992 ) of those who question representationalist views of knowledge has increased its visibility within the literature , practice - based theories of knowing , ( Blackler , 1995 ) in which objective ‘knowledge’ is reframed as intersubjective process , have appeared promising as ways “to avoid treating individuals as if they can be understood in isolation from their contexts , and the contexts as if they exist in isolation from individuals” ( Blackler , et al . 2000 ) . Such a view implies that knowing occurs via a combination of organizationally and biographically embedded contextual components , and thus demands a more sophisticated conception of context than the rather confused images which appear currently within the organizational literature , which shows a tendency to view context as either fixed , and static , or as wholly emergent , conjured , as it were , out of ‘thin air’ . Even amongst those sociological theories of emergence which adopt the more recent view of context as a process - in terms of unique , temporary configurations of knowledge and power relations – there is little further agreement as to its key characteristics . For example , ‘organisational’ activity theory , as popularised by Engestrom ( e . g . 1987 , 1990 , 1999 , 2000 ) emphasises the socially mediated , contingent and situated nature of meaningful activity – but sees cultural forms as directly incorporated into the individual’s consciousness , and focuses on the ‘emerging object of activity’ resulting from the interaction between the two , without unpacking the various shared and non - shared components to this interaction in any greater depth ( this receives a degree of acknowledgement from Engestrom , e . g . 2000 , p . 308 ) . This view of context as both medium and outcome of emergent interaction appears , of course , throughout Giddens’ thought , whose proposition that a person’s thoughts are deeply linked to structure in the mind – memory traces - underlies the theory of structuration ( e . g . Giddens 1984 ) , in which structures of signification , domination , and legitimation are continually drawn on , reproduced , and possibly altered in practice . At least in an institutional sense , therefore , the context of social interaction is held by Giddens to be instantiated at the moment in which it is drawn upon , reproduced , or possibly altered ; however , unlike Giddens’ wider work ( e . g . 1991 ) , structuration does not address fully those subjective components which contribute to a particular configuration of subjectivity and intersubjectivity at any given time : in otherwords , it arguably represents an incomplete conception of context . Weick’s sensemaking ( e . g . 1995 ) highlights a different aspect of performative context again from those which appear in activity theory and structuration . Sensemaking grew out of an ethnomethodological focus with peoples’ tendency to arrange plausible , or ‘sensible’ circumstantial conditions ( i . e . a configuration of context ) to justify - or assign meaning to - a particular outcome after the outcome itself had actually occurred . In this respect , Weick quotes Garfinkel’s ( 1967 , p . 115 ) comment that “The actor’s own actions are first order determinants of the sense that situations have , in which , literally speaking , actors find themselves” ( Weick 1995 , p . 11 , original italics ) . 5 Weick later remarks : “Thus , the concept of sensemaking is so valuable because it highlights the invention that precedes interpretation” ( 1995 , p . 14 ) . Sensemaking thus emphasises an alternative aspect of enacted context from structuration’s focus on institutional replication in individual action : the more subjective , almost phenomenological , components of the eventual contextual mix that is assigned , by people , to explain their experiences of actions and events . A still different view of performative context is taken by actor network theory , which reveals apparently fixed contextual configurations at any one moment to consist instead in emergent , enacted relationships in which entities acquire agency ( conceived as a form of power ) through their ability to enrol other entities , and to stabilise such relationships temporarily in the form of “immutable mobiles” ( Latour 1987 ) . Here , ‘context’ – seen in terms of such a temporary configuration – is only as good as its next – or continuing – enrolment of other entities within a network . Yet with the exception of certain recent attempts ( e . g . Law and Hassard 1999 ) , treatments of actor network theory , like structuration , have to date tended to address the more intersubjective , rather than , subjective , elements of which context is composed . Finally , a performative , but arguably equally incomplete , approach to context also appears in Lave and Wenger’s situated learning ( 1991 ) , which is more concerned with explaining the unfolding relational dynamics within groups - including the link between knowledge and position within the group – than ‘communities of practice’ per se , which remains little more than a phrase to describe a group of participants engaged in legitimate peripheral participation . Unfortunately , although Lave and Wenger embrace an emergent , relational view of social structure , the notion of context itself receives little explicit development , and is used in an unproblematic , situational sense ( e . g . 1991 , p . 18 ) . Significantly , however , Lave and Wenger highlight a key context - related question , to which this paper is intended to present a solution : “The question seems to be how one describes the detachability of these skills from the participatory contexts in which they were acquired” ( 1991 , p . 19 ) . Lave and Wenger’s inability to answer this question has percolated through to the secondary literature about the role of context in such theories . Thus , for example , Fox concludes that “SLT ( situated learning theory ) seems to work with a model of context both as pregiven and as emergent ” ( 1997 , p . 737 , original italics ) – picking up on Lave and Wenger’s unproblematic use of the term in both senses . In addressing this confused situation , we draw upon a recent empirical investigation into employees’ perceptions of the varying success of KM initiatives within a UK subsidiary of a global software organization . We show that those initiatives perceived as most successful were those where intersubjective communications were not separated from the encultured understandings within which they had been generated : where the ‘context’ surrounding peoples’ interaction with knowledge artifacts was 6 richer . We then build on these empirical insights , to propose a model which explains the relationships between pre - existent ‘ingredients’ to context – both of the shared , and non - shared kind ; the emergent configuration of these that is ‘context’ itself ; and the result of this process : altered ingredients to a future contextual configuration . RESEARCH METHODOLOGY An interpretive methodology has been used , grounded in the belief that ' man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has spun ' ( Geertz , 1975 , p . 5 ) to collect the empirical illustrations for this paper from the UK subsidiary of A1 Software , a major software development and consulting organization . Although subjectively defined , those issues considered by individual interviewees to be important to A1 ' s knowledge management capability were therefore treated as valid empirical objects of study . Data collection took the form of eight semi - structured interviews . Interviews were selected as the primary research instrument due to their suitability in eliciting in - depth views on a focused subject , and lasted between one and two hours over July - August 2000 , supplemented by additional material where possible ( interactive tours of A1 ' s KMS , web - based material , technical bulletins ) . Interviews were conducted with a cross - section of individuals , of varying seniority , on both sales and consulting sides of the organization : the practice head , technical consulting manager , a practice manager , two staff managers , a consultant , a senior sales manager , and a sales manager . Observations and responses were recorded in longhand , in detailed note form . In addition , we had a valuable opportunity to present our findings at a feedback and discussion session with participants following our research . Data analysis followed a ' semi - grounded ' approach , where data was separated into first and second - order concepts ( Van Maanen and Barley 1985 , Orlikowski , 1993 ) . As it became apparent that a pattern existed between types of knowledge supported by KMS initiatives and the degree of success they were considered to have enjoyed within the organization , three broad types of KMS were identified as first order concepts , and various theoretical and organizational issues were articulated in relation to these . Second order concepts – theoretical inferences made on the basis of emerging empirical patterns - included the importance of context , which we address in the penultimate section of this paper . KMS : REPOSITORIES , INFORMATION FILTERS , OR COMMUNITIES ? ' New ' organizational culture versus the Bardic Tradition A1 Software ( the names of the organizations are pseudonyms ) is a leading US - based global software supplier and consultancy offering products and services in over 145 countries . An initial analysis of the empirical data showed that A1 considers that it 7 makes use of ‘knowledge’ in several readily identifiable areas , including technical ' knowhow ' , organizational best practice , new product awareness , and project management . Additionally , more ' tacit ' forms of ‘knowledge’ were also cited , such as customer information ( considered the most important of all ) and cultural self - awareness relating to its mission , identity and working approach . Importantly , there was little or no awareness by the senior personnel interviewed of the nature of these different types , nor of the most appropriate methods for their generation and transmission . Five years prior to the research study , A1 bought Data1 , a small UK - based software house , absorbing 200 Data1 employees into the workforce , with the specific intention of ' capturing ' the specialised ‘knowledge’ possessed by Data1 employees and making this available within the wider A1 organization . Accordingly , in the following five years , several different types of ' knowledge management ' initiative have been tried by A1 with varying degrees of success . Amongst these initiatives , a strong contrast was perceived by all interviewees ( comprising both ex - Data1 employees and long - standing A1 employees ) between new , ' global ' knowledge projects , particularly large , high - budget ‘knowledge exchange systems’ , and those that exploited what several ex - Data1 employees termed the ' Bardic Tradition ' : “Before there was writing…the bard would hold all the knowledge…it would be passed on , one to one” . This latter term was used by some respondents to convey the role of certain longstanding , knowledgeable employees as ‘oral historians’ : repositories of non - written , uncodified organizational knowledge , and the sense in which such individuals create and recreate organizational culture and identity through local communicative interaction . Although the Bardic Tradition was a locally used concept , rather than a ‘theory’ of organizational interaction per se , it shares similarities with Lave and Wenger’s dynamic of legitimate peripheral participation in its linking of communication , knowledge , and identity as aspects of the same fundamental interactive , non - codified process . However , whereas larger , more technology - driven approaches were often seen as more in keeping with A1 ' s future development as a global organization ( and therefore more progressive ) , there was a tendency to view forms of interaction based on the Bardic Tradition as local and backward . A common question asked within the organization was thus how A1 might best move away from the communication of such ‘knowledge’ within localised environments to its capture and dissemination on a global scale . By making such capture and dissemination the goal of its KM initiatives , we argue that A1 was committing the error identified earlier in this paper of focusing on the wrong goal . Instead of pursuing objects ( or ‘knowledge’ ) , A1 should have been cultivating processes ( thereby focusing on peoples’ generation of meaning and value ) . This view is supported by the reactions of A1 interviewees to the various types of KM initiative which they had experienced to date . We seek to show in the next sub - section that there was an identifiable relationship between the perceived success of a KM initiative and the extent to which this was aligned with the cultivation of interactive 8 process – which combines more of the available contextual ingredients to human experience – and hence meaning - than mere abstracted text . Collecting data , codifying information , generating meaning We were able to group the KM initiatives within A1 into three categories relating to this continuum between object and process . The first category comprised those initiatives which sought to collect and archive explicit ‘knowledge’ in the form of historical data , such as ‘knowledge repositories’ , best practice , old presentation slides , reports , and documents . These initiatives tended to be ' flagship ' projects with a high budget and high corporate visibility , but interestingly none was felt to have been very successful . One interviewee commented : " A1 makes knowledge management too formal and inaccessible , with the usual cultural problems - templates produced in the US , etc . Instead of lots of processes , documentation , gateways , procedures , etc . , ( you need to ) push responsibility down to the group of people with an interest in a particular subject . There ' s a need to build recognition at an individual level in an increasingly networked , global environment , and KM represents the link that ' s required between career development and culture to achieve this . " It is possible to discern a strong sense from the above comment that much of the ' knowledge ' contained within such repositories was felt to be irrelevant to the personal circumstances of the knowledge user . Such circumstances impact both on the types of information used and on individuals ' motivations for sharing it in the first place . This meant that not only was much existing data inappropriate , but that there was a serious lack of ' qualitative ' information . For example , we were told that a customer relationship management application introduced the previous year had been scrapped because salespeople had not provided it with sufficient data ; people had been reluctant to provide essentially qualitative , subjective information regarding client relationships ( previous project successes / failures , etc ) - information which they would have been happy enough to have provided through communicative interaction : “The technical side of things is easier to document than the organizational side of things” . Some respondents felt that the appropriate way to convey such information was heavily context - dependent , and that to attempt to codify it was " asking for trouble " . This was due to its availability for subsequent access and use by others who might take it out of context and misinterpret its meaning . The second category of KM initiative identified within A1 was those approaches which sought to codify ' raw ' data into more readily useable forms of information . Examples included decision - making tools , profiles and templates intended for customisation by individuals , CASE ( computer - assisted software engineering ) tools , and ' technology - push ' reports and news . Unlike the category identified earlier , the context of the user had sometimes been successfully anticipated , and such initiatives were considered to be more meaningful . For example , in their ongoing struggle to 9 keep up with ever shorter product release cycles , salespeople and consultants specialising in a particular technology area found ' technology - push ' news bulletins to be an essential method for appraising themselves of new technical developments . It is worth mentioning that these were heavily tailored to the requirements of this limited user group , and would have been fairly indecipherable to users from another context , since an outsider would have lacked the shared vocabulary required to assign meaning to what he or she was reading . However , such ‘knowledge - filter’ initiatives were not always satisfactory , and vital , client - sensitive information of great commercial value to A1 was becoming terribly distorted through the process of being abstracted from its initial context . As an example , the sales person’s meetings with the client were written up in the form of a briefing for the consulting team tasked with eventual implementation of the product : “So consultants often have only the vaguest idea on arrival ( at the client site ) of the spec - and this idea can be completely wrong , too . The worst was at XYZ . The job sounded like ‘put in system X’ . But they really wanted a review of enterprise systems across the whole of their HQ , which would have led to a huge job . The project went dreadfully” . In this instance , context - specific , ‘between - the - lines’ customer intelligence was being lost through attempts to codify it – at some considerable cost to A1 . Despite such examples , however , some of these initiatives were felt to have been more successful than those which sought indiscriminately to collect and distribute data . For example , specialist sites on the corporate intranet were perceived as successful by the members of their clearly defined interest groups : " The Corporate Repository is little more than a subset of the intranet where ‘everything gets dumped’ . This has already become subsumed by specialist websites . For new products , the only official Knowledge Management is an email from the States saying ‘there’s a new product / release – look on this website’ . But this works well . " The third category of KM initiative identified comprised those KM initiatives which relied on continual inter - subjective communication between individuals - in other words , where groups of people were able continually to refine the context of their interaction and hence ensure the continued relevance of the knowledge being communicated : “Communication within A1 is 80 % / 20 % in favour of face to face contact . It’s always a case of knowing people” . Such initiatives included ' mentor ' relationships between new and experienced recruits , communities of practice indexes ( corporate ' yellow pages ' ) , special interest groups , email , and informal interactions of all kinds . All respondents considered these to be the most successful type of initiative , both personally and in commercial terms : 10 “For example , recently a consultant had an idea for offering universal ‘blanket’ licences to universities , whose IS departments had previously to negotiate lots of individual licences . This went down so well with academic institutions , boosting sales in this sector , that the approach has been adopted throughout Europe ; but it was all communicated by word of mouth” . There was a strong feeling that real - time ( preferably face to face ) communication occurred in a way which was appropriate to the continually evolving context in which such communication was needed , eliminating the need to ' repair ' old and inappropriate information to render it meaningful to the current environment : " There ' s lots of information out there and it ' s useful ; but it ' s often not quite what you need . It usually needs updating and making accurate… . useful documents are posted to the departmental website , but these are just documents - the real knowledge lies in consultants ' own ' toolkits ' which they build themselves . People accumulate IPR ( intellectual property rights ) on their laptops . " In addition , it is possible to discern a sense from this that what the organization really ' knew ' derived from the emergent interplay between the exchange of shared material , or ‘forms’ , and other contextual aspects involved in such inter - subjective communication : much as a well - stocked bookshelf contains ' just books ' , useful documents at A1 are described above as ‘just documents’ . They are not ' knowledge ' in the sense that they can be simply pasted into the context of a client project , since all contexts are different and require the generation of new meaning through communicative interaction . The ' new ' information on consultants ' laptops was meaningful and appropriate to the ' new ' environment , from which it continued to derive its meaning and relevance ; in short , meaning and context can be seen as two parts of a duality . Implications The implication of the findings in this section is that in building ambitious , database - driven ' knowledge management systems ' , A1 Software was decoupling ' knowledge ' or shared forms , from the very context which rendered it meaningful , and from which it derived its current value . Ironically , a cheaper and more appropriate model had existed within the organization all the time : the ' Bardic Tradition ' . More than any of the KM initiatives discussed , the value of the strongly shared , encultured identity amongst ex - Data1 employees was stressed by every individual interviewed . For example : " In learning about new products , I ' m very well connected because of the of ex - Data1 network . I feel sorry for my newer colleagues who don’t have access to this . " For many projects , members of this ' tradition ' who had spread throughout the company remained the only gatekeepers to the most sought - after network of experiential , praxis - driven , meaningful material in the organization . Rooted in 11 process , this activity was so valuable because it was based on what had actually worked in a delimited , mutually understood context , was always current , and was readily meaningful to others who shared the same strongly defined set of cultural and communicative expectations . This endurance and envied effectiveness of A1 Software ' s ' Bardic Tradition ' – really an ongoing process - is striking compared to the company’s other , more recent KM initiatives , which stripped out progressive amounts of context . Instead , those forms of ‘knowledge’ initiative which were considered successful were those which relied on human interactants , often mediated by ICTs . As we shall argue below , in such cases , communicating individuals shared information , which combined in relation to other , non - explicit contextual ingredients , to generate meaning . Meaning was not separated from the sphere of human interaction , or context , in which it had been generated ; the function of ICTs was to facilitate appropriate networks within which such interaction could occur . Ironically , such networks - pre - existing , and free - were actually the closest that A1 had come to having a ‘knowledge management’ system . Of course , the number of employees who were party to the ' Bardic Tradition ' was limited and this particular network was non - replicable within the wider organization : individuals were either ex - Data1 employees or they were not . In the next section , we thus seek to improve our understanding of the nature of context , so that this can then be applied to the generation of similar , rich context , and therefore meaning and value , within other organizations . This is achieved by developing a clearer picture of the relationship between the interaction of knowing individuals and the context which is always latent within , and transformed by , this process . UNPACKING CONTEXT The relationship between knowing and context : revisiting Blackler’s typology We have argued that , in seeking to cultivate similar ' Bardic Traditions ' , organizations need to develop a greater understanding of the dynamics underlying this kind of effective inter - subjective interaction . As implied by the A1 example , if the types of inter - subjectively defined knowing discussed in this paper are valuable because they generate meaning , and if such meaning is achieved through its continual relation to context , then the problematic of knowing is intimately connected with the ongoing generation of context ; one cannot be considered separately from the other . Moreover , since knowing is a continually emergent process , it follows that both meaning ( the ‘outcome’ of knowing ) and context ( the relationally situated ingredients through which knowing occurs ) are also both processes . The implication is that conceptions of either meaning or context as stable objects , generaliseable across organizations , are likely to prove inaccurate . In seeking to generate value from investments in knowledge management , it would thus appear important for organizations to develop their conceptual understanding of the relationship between knowing and context . A good place to start developing such an understanding is the acknowledgement that , if knowing is to occupy the foreground of our analysis , then context must 12 therefore literally comprise everything else : all the ‘background’ inputs , both shared and non - shareable , required for this process to occur . Crucially , we argue that the more such contextual inputs that are acknowledged within an organization , the richer the context which is likely to be generated , and we see A1’s Bardic Tradition as an example of the successful maintenance of such rich context . We seek to identify these contextual inputs through a re - working of Blackler’s ( 1995 ) typology of previously existing approaches to knowledge , from which he advocates a move to the activity - based concept of knowing . We have chosen Blackler’s categorization since , unlike the various theories of practice discussed at the beginning , Blackler’s typology succeeds uniquely in progressing beyond the simple ‘objective / subjective’ dichotomy common within the literature , to distinguish between types of objective and subjective phenomena . As we show below , his summary of common images of knowledge as embrained , embodied , encultured , embedded , and encoded can usefully be reconceptualised as inputs to emergent context in the sense in which we have just defined the term . We argue that all of these contextual inputs – some shared , others non - shareable – relationally combine in knowing – by which they are themselves altered - to generate meaning , and thus that KM initiatives which ‘strip out’ certain of these inputs , such as A1’s ‘knowledge repository’ , reduce the contextual richness from which meaning is generated . We believe that it is therefore important to take up Blackler’s call to start to address the relationships between these elements , but not by discarding them , as Blackler himself does , along with the concept of knowledge . Reconceptualised as components of , or inputs to , a temporary configuration of shared and non - shared context , they begin to throw light on the relational dynamics of knowing , comprising ingredients to context which is always generated in the individual , as shown in Figure 1 : 13 Intersubjective dimension Subjective dimension Embedded Embodied Encultured Embedded Encoded Embedded Embodied Encultured Embedded Encoded Context Components of context ( prior to recombination / alteration ) Altered Components of context ( post recombination / alteration ) Figure 1 : Relationship between ‘historical’ , contextual components , and context Figure 1 makes use of Blackler’s five categories to address the confusion regarding context which was identified from the literature in the first part of the paper . In this view , context is seen as a performative prism , in which shared and non - shared , historically pre - existent , components of experience fuse completely in a unique configuration , or context , to a particular experience - in - activity . In turn , such a unique fusion has historical consequences , in that all such components can be altered by the interaction ( e . g . altered memories , attitudes , skills , routines , or written material ) , in which altered form they will combine with other ingredients as inputs to the next ‘snapshot’ prism of experience . Figure 1 is also clear about the location of context : in the human mind , where subjective and intersubjective dimensions meet . In this way , a precise definition of context becomes possible : of its emergent nature ; its temporal ( historical ) positioning in relation to phenomena for which it is often mistaken ; its location – in experience - in - action ; and its composition - from shared and non - shared components . Such a definition supports “The etymology of the word ‘context’ ( which ) suggests a derivation from the Latin verb texere , ‘to weave’ . The related Latin verb contexere carries the meaning of ‘to weave together’ , ‘to interweave’ , ‘to join together’ or ‘to compose’” ( Dilley 1999 , p . 4 ) . 14 Below , we thus resurrect Blackler’s five images of knowledge – ranging in nature from personal to shared - and develop these , reconceived as historical components of emergent context . Table 1 summarises the various contextual components : Contextual component Nature of interaction Embrained Latent ‘mental potential’ Embodied Historically developed filters and routines Encultured Convergent expectations about likely intentions of others within a ‘culture’ , or group Embedded Organizational alignments coalescing around encultured context Encoded Explicit , symbolic forms , which derive meaning from their relational configuration with the other types of context , above Table 1 : Summary of contextual components Embrained Contextual components First , Blackler identifies ‘embrained knowledge’ as “knowledge that is dependent on conceptual skills and cognitive abilities” ( 1995 , p . 1023 ) , citing Fiol and Lyles’ ( 1985 ) emphasis on peoples’ higher level abilities to develop complex rules and to understand complex causations . Redefined as an embrained component to a unique configuration of context for the process of knowing , this category is a good place to emphasise the way in which knowing consists of the relational patterning of various components of context within the individual mind . Thus individuals’ physiological predispositions and aptitudes come to affect the relational patterning of context that is likely to form . This latent ‘mental potential’ can therefore itself be considered a type of contextual component , since it is an ingredient to knowing – although always expressed in relation to the other forms of context discussed below ( Chisholm , 1992 ) . Such mental predispositions and aptitudes are more than the speculation of psychologists ; neurophysiological evidence for variations in the signal - handling capacities of the brain , particularly from studies of people with brain injuries , is now well established ( Cotterill , 1998 ) . Although our limited exposure to A1 would not have allowed us to make observations regarding the embrained contextual differences between A1’s employees ( indeed , we are sure that this would not have been encouraged by the employees themselves ! ) , we believe it likely that some awareness of these differences would have existed within , for example , A1’s personnel department . The investment by many organizations in the practice of ‘psychometric’ testing of employees would suggest that they might share this view . Embodied Contextual components The second category identified by Blackler is ‘embodied knowledge’ , defined as “action oriented and…likely to be only partly explicit” ( 1995 , p . 1024 ) . To illustrate this knowledge type , Blackler cites Zuboff ( 1988 ) , who talks of such knowledge as 15 depending on “peoples’ physical presence , on sentient and sensory information , physical cues and face - to - face discussions” . We noted how , within the A1 environment , forms of face - to - face interaction ( ‘mentor’ relationships , communities of practice , special interest groups , informal interactions ) were considered by all respondents to be the most successful type of KM initiative , highlighting the importance of the continuous ‘repair work’ ( Suchman , 1987 ) - or attentiveness to the avoidance of interactional breakdown resulting from straying outside the boundaries of encultured expectations - required to maintain the contextual currency to sustain meaningful interaction . Embodied contextual components are perhaps best perceived as the physiological filters and developed sensorimotor routines ( important for the development of skills ) through which each individual sustains such physical interaction with the world . This has been emphasized by several writers including Merleau - Ponty ( 1963 ) , Bateson ( 1972 ) , Maturana and Varela ( 1987 ) , and Holland ( 1985 ) . Importantly , however , what emerges from these and other writers ( see Worthman , 1992 ; Mingers , 2001 ) is a sense that , although there are physiological limitations on perception ( two individuals may perceive different light or sound frequencies , for example ) , and differences in the way in which these are dealt with by the brain ( here we have in mind embrained components to context ) , such subjective factors are only activated in dialogue with the external world . In Holland’s words : “the human being lives in the world by means of behaviour that controls perception…Physiology both equips and limits culture , and culture both equips and limits the individual” ( 1985 , p . 145 ) . Physiologically embodied processes are therefore always relationally situated , in the sense that they are only invoked through our interaction with the world , and are already affected by our prior activities . To summarise thus far , Blackler’s concepts of ‘embrained’ and ‘embodied’ knowledge have pointed us to physiologically located components of context which are always present in , and affected by , other contextual ingredients within knowing , and which therefore have an important part to play in the generation of meaning . A similar dialectical relationship also characterises the development of cultural frames of reference within which individuals develop convergent understandings , to which we now turn . Encultured contextual components Blackler’s third knowledge category is ‘encultured knowledge’ . Possibly the most analytically problematic , this category is defined as “the process of achieving shared understandings” ( 1995 , p . 1024 ) . Blackler cites Orr’s ( 1990 ) account of maintenance technicians and Nonaka’s ( 1991 , 1994 ) ’s ‘knowledge - creating’ organizations as examples of the way in which this has been discussed in the literature . In redefining this ‘encultured’ category in a contextual sense , however , it is necessary to emphasise a different aspect : the historical “processes of socialization and acculturation” ( 1995 , p . 1024 ) through which such shared understandings are reached , and to re - emphasise that it is knowing individuals who are achieving such understandings , not groups . Encultured understandings are developed through repeated social process and are thus relational , social phenomena – yet the understandings themselves consist in the convergent expectations of the individuals of whom social process represents the sum . 16 In sharing stories , therefore , Orr’s technicians were generating meaning by comparing what they heard with their own , historically developed , conceptions of what was meaningful or relevant ( Sperber and Wilson , 1986 ) within that particular community – which were themselves the ‘residue’ of historically previous knowing events comprising all five components of context . However , the exact meaning experienced by each individual was always created each time via a unique configuration of contextual ingredients , and was therefore not only non - shareable , but also varied each time , for each individual . Although communally experienced , organizational culture therefore resides in the sum of individuals’ relational understandings at any one point in time . This was certainly the case with A1’s ‘Bardic Tradition’ , which had no ‘official’ recognition , or physical existence at all within the organization . It was simply a set of relational understandings amongst its members , understandings which were continually invoked and modified by members by combining them with the other four contextual ingredients discussed here , in the process of knowing . Like Orr’s technicians , those who were party to the ‘Bardic Tradition’ were able to engage in knowing within a frequently updated , rich interactional environment , which maintained the perceived relevance of the community . We believe that this explains why the ‘Bardic Tradition’ was so powerful within A1 . Over historical time , intersubjective communication between groups of individuals is likely to result in the emergence of similar behaviours between participants ; the desire to generate organizational value from this insight lies behind the cultivation of so - called ‘communities of practice’ ( Lave and Wenger , 1991 ) . Note that we are not talking merely about shared forms , or ‘encoded’ contextual components ( addressed below ) , but about increasingly convergent individual anticipations to , and reactions to , shared forms ( for example , Orr’s stories ) – in other words , participants are likely over time to develop increasingly similar expectations about what – and how something – is meaningful within repeated intersubjective ( or inter - relational ) exchanges . As in the case of embodied contextual ingredients , such expectations both condition , and emerge from , inter - relational activity : “’ [ S ] meant something by x’ is ( roughly ) equivalent to ‘ [ S ] intended the utterance of x to produce some effect in an audience by means of the recognition of this intention’” ( Grice 1957 , p . 58 ) . Intersubjectively formed expectations about the likely intentions of others are thus a powerful ( encultured ) contextual ingredient to the ‘sense - giving and sense - reading’ ( Polanyi , 1969 ) process of knowing . This explains the high degree of attention which has been paid in the literature to the way in which such expectations form and operate . Thus what we term encultured contextual components have been conceptualized in a number of similar ways , including Bourdieu’s habitus ( 1988 ) , Goffman’s frames ( 1974 ) , Lave and Wenger’s communities of practice ( 1991 ) , Holland’s figured worlds ( 1998 ) , Schank and Abelson’s scripts ( 1977 ) , Kant’s schema ( 1933 ) , and Leontiev’s activity ( see Wertsch , 1981 ) . The following description of a schema usefully encapsulates the dialectical operation of encultured contextual components , while also 17 illustrating their relational interaction with the ‘sensory surfaces’ of embrained and embodied ingredients to context : “A schema is that portion of the entire perpetual cycle which is internal to the perceiver , modifiable by experience , and somehow specific to what is being perceived . The schema accepts information as it becomes available at sensory surfaces and is changed by that information ; it directs movements and exploratory activities that make more information available , by which it is further modified” ( Neisser , 1976 , in Cotterill , 1998 , p . 352 ) . As no more than the relational arrangement at any one time of the convergent understandings and expectations of a group of individuals , encultured contextual components thus emerge as a remarkably strong influence on the intersubjective relevance and richness with which individuals know . The envy with which members of the ‘Bardic Tradition’ were regarded by those within A1 who were not party to the advantages of such effective relational dynamics , emerged strongly from our study . Some of the theoretical formulations listed above - in particular the writings of Bourdieu - have proved effective ways to theorise about the influence of power and exclusion on the process of knowing , showing these to be important encultured factors ( Bourdieu , 1988 ) , as well as more obviously embedded , in the sense to which we now turn . Embedded contextual components The fourth knowledge category identified by Blackler is embedded knowledge . This is “analyzable in systems terms , in the relationships between , for example , technologies , roles , formal procedures , and emergent routines” ( 1995 , p . 1024 ) , and appears to refer to visible organizational alignments which form around the type of intersubjectively experienced contextual components described above . Viewed as organizationally embedded ingredients to the context of knowing , this category enables a useful distinction to be made between forms of encultured component ( which , as we have seen , reside in peoples’ heads ) and the relational arrangement of explicit organizational components ( technology , routines , procedures , hierarchies , etc . ) that results from these , thus opening up the conceptual possibility of discussing the interrelationship between the two . Within A1 , examples of embedded contextual component included the corporate ‘yellow pages’ which had formed around communities of practice , CASE tools , customiseable document templates , and regular , targeted technology bulletins . However , as in all the other four forms of contextual components , it is important to stress that such a view of embedded components is composed of the relational arrangement between such elements , rather than any one single item . Thus , for example , technology - in - use ( ‘just’ the CASE software , or ‘just’ the template files ) divorced from its relational arrangement with other embedded contextual factors such as organizational hierarchy , adequate budget , quality control framework , etc , would not have been effective . Organizations seeking to improve , for example , their best practices , IT provision , or hierarchical organization should always therefore adjust these systemically in relation to the other identifiable components of embedded 18 context , and realize that embedded organizational forms are in turn only expressed in knowing in relation to a temporary configuration of embrained , embodied , encultured , and encoded context . To do otherwise is , once again , to clutch at empty forms , when a key source of organizational value derives , in fact , from a relational process . Encoded contextual components The final , and most ‘explicit’ , treatment of ‘knowledge’ which Blackler identifies in the literature is encoded : “information conveyed by signs and symbols” ( 1995 , p . 1025 ) . As objects which are passed between individuals in intersubjective communication , such forms are usually the focus of conscious attention and thus are most often mistaken as the actual objective of communication , hence the common use of the term ‘knowledge’ to denote a shareable form of value ( e . g . ‘knowledge assets’ ) . However , it has been argued that , viewed from an activity standpoint , there is really no such thing as ‘knowledge’ , but rather a continual , emergent process – knowing – which derives from the continual realignment of relationally activated components of context . Moreover , we have seen that the process of knowing , from which meaning derives , is composed not just of symbolic interaction , but rather from a unique and situated relational patterning of embrained , embodied , encultured , embedded , and encoded components of context . This explains why no two people can share the same meaning : because meaning is derived in relation to context , which in turn derives from the unique and temporary configuration of shared and non - shared contextual components that is generated in the heads of physiologically and biographically unique individuals ; therefore the relational patterning can never be the same . Encoded contextual ingredients therefore remain meaningless unless animated in relation to other , equally important , types of context . For this reason , ‘encoded contextual component’ is a useful categorization , since it emphasises the demotion of the importance of explicit forms relative to other inputs to knowing , describing it as just another type of contextual input . By ignoring the critical relational importance of non - encoded contextual ingredients , Nonaka’s knowledge spiral , in which individuals’ historical understandings are supposedly transformed into forms which can be shared by everyone , therefore misses its objective . This is because in venerating the false idol of ‘knowledge’ , Nonaka not only fails to comprehend knowing ( the true location of organizational value ) , but merely fastens on certain of its contextual components , believing these instead to be the main event . Organizations seeking to recreate his ‘knowledge spiral’ thus run the risk of replicating Nonaka’s conceptual error , and grasping vainly at empty forms . As an illustration , one has only to imagine the attendant loss of meaning that would have accompanied any attempt to impose Nonaka’s ‘knowledge spiral’ on Orr’s technicians , whose network would be shorn of the emergent , rich context required for knowing . We argue that the above insights go far in explaining the perceived failure , documented earlier , of A1’s various attempts to build knowledge repositories . In setting out to collect employees’ tacit knowledge’ and archive this as ‘explicit knowledge’ that could somehow be shared across the organization , Al’s IS department was fastening on McDermott’s “residue of thinking” : 19 empty symbols , removed from the systemic , relational interplay through which they had once derived meaning and organizational value . IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSION Analysing context Whilst therefore endorsing Blackler’s call for a focus on knowing , we believe that he appears in his 1995 paper to be attempting to supplant a set of quantitative categories – types of knowledge – with a set of qualitative attributes – his , in our view correct , conception of knowing as mediated , situated , provisional , pragmatic and contested . Instead , whilst we would make no claim that such categories are normatively ‘complete’ , we have argued Blackler’s five images of knowledge continue to have conceptual relevance in drawing our attention to the combined , relational context of which knowing is comprised . This is because organizations need to understand both sets of categories - the nature of knowing and the types of contextual input required for this to occur – in order to address the way in which relational interaction between the two generates meaning . But how might organizations best attempt to operationalise these insights ? In the above discussion , we hope to have shown the critical importance of some form of analysis of context in addressing the generation of meaning by people within organizations . We thus argue that such a contextual analysis is necessary if organizations are to avoid the mistakes of the past and ensure better targetting of their investments in methodologies , best practice , application software , special interest groups , and other forms of support for shared organizational endeavour so as to support the various contextual inputs required for the creation of rich context , and avoid the comparative meaninglessness of KM initiatives founded on ‘weak’ context , where just a single contextual component is supported . That the performance of some form of contextual analysis should be important in developing any organizational strategy is not so much of a new assertion as it may seem , since planning the change curve associated with any reasonably sized implementation of organizational change already incorporates explicit considerations of the types of contextual component we have discussed . For example , organizational redesign and training needs analysis reflect elements of embrained and embodied components ; business process analysis , together with change management , communication planning and communities of practice , reflect considerations of encultured components ; systems and applications architecture , methodologies , CASE tools , and other sedimentations of organizational routines are all considerations of embedded components , and data analysis and architecture , documentation of best practice and organizational routines , and other areas of the mapping , design or documentation of explicit symbols are all aspects of encoded components . It might be said , therefore , that such considerations already form a part of the planning and management of organizational change ; however , the important insight here is that these do not usually occur at present in a relational fashion ; i . e . the various contextual components are not considered simultaneously . If organizations are to 20 generate value from their often considerable investment in internal initiatives , they must ensure that such initiatives are able to support the creation of meaningful activity , by knowing individuals . We have argued that this occurs through a systemic and relational process , where five contextual components must interact . However , in the commercial experience of the authors of this paper , most organizations’ change planning and management activity is likely to reveal two important differences in this regard . First , the various types of initiative are not considered in a relational fashion such that the interaction between the five types of component is explicitly discussed ; and second , it is almost invariably embedded and encoded elements which receive the majority of analytical attention and investment . We argue that such approaches to organizational change are therefore focusing on redundant forms – weak context - rather than the valuable , relational processes required for the generation of rich context . To counteract this natural tendency ( we have argued that encoded contextual components tend to be privileged due to their visible , focal position in our consciousness ) , we suggest the inclusion of a contextual analysis exercise as an integral component of the planning of any major change initiative , which would ensure that the relational interdependence between the various types of initiative receives explicit attention . To take a particular example , contextual analysis would provide a structured way to relationally approach the procurement and organizational implementation of , say , a customer relationship management ( CRM ) application . Under most existing systems procurement methodologies , information about the required data and technical performance criteria is first gathered , and then this is combined with analyses of cost , risk and other interdependencies to create a requirements specification , from which the information systems department can then either custom - build or approach the market for an application vendor . Note the emphasis at all times on embedded and encoded contextual elements of knowing , which are taken to be the actual object of value . In contrast , the inclusion of a contextual analysis would reframe this process to include a consideration of the types of aptitudes and skillsets required to make use of the CRM ( for example , a willingness to document information , attention to detail , analytical ability – all embrained and embodied ) ; the organizational culture required for people to interact with the CRM and to find it useful ( for example , willingness to share personal customer intelligence , and to engage in dialogue with others about ways to optimize the use of the data – all encultured contextual components ) ; the sorts of software tools , techniques , methodologies , routines and best practice that would best support these activities ( embedded contextual components ) , and the raw data required to develop the sorts of indicators and reports that would be meaningful to people within the above process ( encoded contextual components ) . All these factors would be considered simultaneously – i . e . relationally to one another . This is in contrast to the majority of organizational change programmes where , if such aspects are addressed in their entirety ( which is very rare ) , this usually occurs post hoc in the form of attempts to adapt an already existing initiative into an organization . We believe that as a result of such analysis the requirements specification thus produced might look rather different , and look to broader indicators for its measurement of value . 21 Conclusion In this paper , we have attempted to show in various ways the limitations of approaches to ‘knowledge management’ which pay insufficient attention to the context within which meaningful activity is generated . In framing a much - needed dialogue about the generation of meaning within organizations , however , the ‘knowledge management’ debate has nonetheless performed a valuable function , for it has shown that all organizations should concern themselves less with the management of ‘knowledge’ as with the cultivation of knowing . However , this debate has also highlighted a current confusion within sociological and organizational circles about the nature and location of the context against which knowing occurs . We have used a theory - of - practice perspective to propose a solution to some of these questions , showing the pivotal importance of acknowledging the various components of context in generating meaningful interaction between organizational workers . It is hoped that an improvement in organizations’ understanding of their own contexts - possibly achieved via the inclusion of contextual analysis within a structured change methodology - will encourage a celebration of the diverse as well as the uniform , and the relational as well as the unitary , for it is surely their meaningful interaction in practice which generates the value they seek from their strategic initiatives . 22 REFERENCES Bateson , G . ( 1972 ) . Steps to an Ecology of Mind . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Bell , D . ( 1973 ) . The Coming of Post - industrial Society : A Venture in Social Forecasting . New York : Basic Books . Blackler , F . ( 1995 ) . ‘Knowledge , knowledge work and organizations : an overview and interpretation’ . Organization Studies , 16 , 6 , 1021 - 1046 . Blackler , F . , Crump , N . , and McDonald , S . ( 2000 ) . ‘Organizing processes in complex activity networks’ . Organization , 7 , 2 , 277 - 300 . Bourdieu , P . ( 1988 ) . Homo Academicus . Cambridge : Polity . Chisholm , J . ( 1992 ) . ‘Putting people in biology : toward a synthesis of biological and psychological anthropology’ . In New Directions in Psychological Anthropology , Schwartz , T . White , G . M . & Lutz , C . A . ( Eds . ) , Publications of the Society for Psychological Anthropology , 3 , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 125 - 149 . Cohendet , P . , Kern , F . , Mehmanpazir , B . and F . Munier ( 1999 ) . ‘Knowledge Co - ordination , Competence Creation and Integrated Networks in Globalised Firms’ . Cambridge Journal of Economics , 3 , 225 - 241 . Cotterill , R . ( 1998 ) . Enchanted Looms : Conscious networks in brains and computers . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Crossan , M . , Lane , H . , and White , R . ( 1999 ) . ‘An Organizational Learning Framework : From Intuition to Institution’ . Academy of Management Review , 24 , 3 , 522 - 537 . Dilley , R . ( 1999 ) . The Problem of Context . New York , Berghahn Books . Engestrom , Y . ( 1987 ) . Learning by Expanding : An Activity - theoretical Approach to Developmental Research . Helsinki : Oriental - Konsultit . 23 Engestrom , Y . ( 1990 ) . Learning , Working and Imagining : Twelve Studies in Activity Theory . Helsinki : Orientat Konsultit . Engestrom , Y . , Miettinen , R . , and Punamaki , R - L . ( Eds . ) , ( 1999 ) . Perspectives on Activity Theory . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Engestrom , Y . ( 2000 ) . ' A Story of Four Umpires ' , Organization 7 , 2 , 301 - 310 . Fiol , C . and Lyles , M . ( 1985 ) . ‘Organizational learning’ . Academy of Management Review , 10 , 803 - 813 . Fox , S . ( 1997 ) . ‘Situated learning theory versus traditional cognitive learning theory : why management education should not ignore management learning’ . Systems Practice , 10 , 6 , 727 - 747 . Geertz , C . ( 1975 ) . The Interpretation of Cultures . London : Hutchinson . Giddens , A . ( 1984 ) . The Constitution of Society . Cambridge : Polity Press . Giddens , A . ( 1991 ) . Modernity and Self - identity . Cambridge : Polity Press . Goffman , I . ( 1974 ) . Frame analysis : an essay on the organization of experience . New York : Harper and Row . Grice , H . ( 1957 ) . ‘Meaning’ . Philosophical Review , 66 , 377 - 88 . Holland , D . , Lachicotte , D . , Skinner , D . , and Cain , C . ( 1998 ) . Identity and Agency in Cultural Worlds . Harvard : Harvard University Press . Holland , N . ( 1985 ) . The I . New Haven : Yale University Press . Kant , I . ( 1933 ) . Critique of Pure Reason , Trans . Smith , N . London : Macmillan . 24 Latour , B . ( 1987 ) . ‘The Trouble with Actor - Network Theory’ . Philosophia 25 , 3 , 47 - 64 . Lave , J . and Wenger , E . ( 1991 ) . Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Law , J . , and Hassard , J . ( 1999 ) . Actor network theory and after . Oxford : Blackwell . Maturana , H . and Varela , F . ( 1987 ) . The tree of knowledge . Boston : Shambhala . Merleau - Ponty , M . ( 1963 ) . The Structure of Behaviour . Boston : Beacon Press . McDermott , R . ( 1999 ) . ‘Why Information Technology Inspired But Cannot Deliver Knowledge Management’ . California Management Review , 41 , 4 , 103 - 117 . Mingers , J . ( 2001 ) . ‘Embodying information systems : the contribution of phenomenology’ . Information and Organization , 11 , 103 - 128 . Nonaka , I . ( 1991 ) . ‘The Knowledge Creating Company’ . Harvard Business Review , Nov - Dec , 96 - 104 . Nonaka , I . ( 1994 ) . ‘A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation’ . Organization Science , 5 , 1 , 14 - 37 . Orr , J . ( 1990 ) . ‘Sharing Knowledge , Celebrating Identity : Community Memory in a Service Culture’ . In Middleton , D . and Edwards , D . ( Eds . ) , Collective Remembering . London : Sage , 169 - 189 . Orlikowski , W . ( 1993 ) . ‘CASE Tools as Organizational Change : Investigating Incremental and Radical Changes in Systems Development’ . MIS Quarterly , 17 , 3 , 309 - 340 . Polanyi , M . ( 1967 ) . The Tacit Dimension . New York : Anchor Books . Polanyi , M . ( 1969 ) . Knowing and Being . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul . 25 Schank , R . and Abelson , R . ( 1977 ) . Scripts , plans , goals and understanding . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Sperber , D . and Wilson , D . ( 1986 ) . Relevance : Communication and Cognition . Oxford : Blackwell . Star , S . ( 1992 ) . ‘The Trojan door : organizations , work , and the ‘open black box’’ . Systems Practice , 5 , 395 - 410 . Suchman , L . ( 1987 ) . Plans and Situated Actions : The Problem of Human - Machine Communication . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Van Maanen , J . , and Barley , S . ( 1985 ) . ‘Cultural organization : fragments of a theory’ . In Frost , P . , Moore , L . , Louis , M . , Lundberg , C . , and Martin , J . ( Eds . ) , Organizational Culture . Beverly Hills , Sage , 58 - 76 . Weick , K . ( 1995 ) . Sensemaking in Organizations . Thousand Oaks : Sage . Wertsch , J . , ( Ed ) , ( 1981 ) . The Concept of Activity in Soviet Psychology . New York : Armonk . Worthman , C . ( 1992 ) . ‘Cupid and Psyche : investigative syncretism in biological and psychosocial anthropology’ . In Schwartz , T . , White , G . , and Lutz , C . ( Eds . ) , New Directions in Psychological Anthropology . Publications of the Society for Psychological Anthropology , 3 , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 150 - 178 . Zuboff , S . ( 1988 ) . In theAage of the Smart Machine : The Future of Work and Power . New York : Basic Books .