NW12A / 2006G150 Cooperative DNA - binding and sequence - recognition mechanism of Aristaless and Clawless Ken - ichi Miyazono 1 , Yuehua Zhi 1 , Yuriko Takamura 1 , Koji Nagata 1 , Kaoru Saigo 2 , Tetsuya Kojima 3 , and Masaru Tanokura 1 * 1 Department of Applied Biological Chemistry , Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences , The University of Tokyo , 1 - 1 - 1 Yayoi , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 8657 , Japan 2 Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry , Graduate School of Science , The University of Tokyo , 7 - 3 - 1 Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 - 0033 , Japan 3 Department of Integrated Biosciences , Graduate School of Frontier Sciences , The University of Tokyo , 5 - 1 - 5 Kashiwanoha , Kashiwa - city , Chiba 277 - 8562 , Japan Introduction Homeodomain is one of the most widely spread superfamily of eukaryotic DNA - binding proteins that regulates transcription of various kinds of genes which are indispensable for development . Some homeodomain proteins bind cooperatively to specific DNA sequences to increase those binding affinities and site specificities . In this study , we focused a cooperativity of two homeodomain proteins , Aristaless and Clawless from Drosophila melanogaster . These homeodomain proteins play an important role for Drosophila leg development . In the distal - most region , homeobox genes , aristaless ( al ) , Lim1 , and clawless ( cll ) are expressed to specify the region , while a pair of Bar homeobox genes are expressed in its immediate neighbor ( distal tarsus ) . For the accurate differentiation of these regions , the expression of Bar is repressed by the cooperative mechanism of Al and Cll in the distal - most region . These two homeodomain proteins bind cooperatively to the Bar enhancer element and repress its gene expression . The EMSA experiments shows that the extended conserved sequences of the Cll homeodomain are indispensable to the cooperative DNA binding . To elucidate the structural basis for the cooperative DNA binding mechanism of Al and Cll , we determined the homeodomain structures of Al and Hox11L1 ( a human homologue of Cll ) , a binary complex structure of Al - DNA , and a ternary complex structure of Al - Cll - DNA by X - ray crystallography . Materials and Methods The Al homeodomain , Cll homeodomain , and Hox11L1 homeodomain proteins were overexpressed in E . coli using pET26b and pET28a vectors . The crystals of the Al homeodomain , Hox11L1 homeodomain , the Al - DNA complex , and the Al - Cll - DNA complex were crystallized using polyethylene glycols as precipitant , respectively . [ 1 ] The data set of each crystal was collected at NW12A beamline in Photon Factory . The diffraction data were integrated and scaled with XDS . The structures were determined by the molecular replacement method using the program Molrep and refined with Refmac5 . Results and Discussion The crystal structures of the Al homeodomain , the Hox11L1 homeodomain , the binary complex of Al - DNA , and the ternary complex of Al - Cll - DNA were determined at 1 . 00 , 1 . 54 , 2 . 25 , and 2 . 70 Å resolutions , respectively [ 1 ] . In the ternary complex structure , the Al and Cll homeodomains bind DNA with a head - to - tail orientation ( fig . 1 ) . The structure of the ternary complex shows that the extended conserved region of Cll homeodomain plays a critical role for the cooperative DNA binding mechanism . In the Al - Cll - DNA complex structure , the residues in the extended regions are used not only for the intermolecular contacts between two homeodomain proteins but also for the sequence - recognition mechanism of DNA by direct interactions . The residues in the extended N - terminal arm of Cll ( His - 10 , Tyr - 8 , and Arg - 5 ) lie within the minor groove of DNA to form direct interactions with bases , whereas the extended conserved region of the C - terminus of the homeodomain interacts with Al to stabilize and localize the third  helix of the Cll homeodomain . This structure suggests a novel mode for the cooperativity of homeodomain proteins . Fig . 1 : Crystal structure of the Al - Cll - DNA complex . ( cyan ; Cll homeodomain , red ; Al homeodomain ) Reference [ 1 ] K . Miyazono et al . , EMBO J . 29 : 1613 - 23 ( 2010 ) * amtanok @ mail . ecc . u - tokyo . ac . jp Photon Factory Activity Report 2009 # 27 Part B ( 2010 ) 204 Biological Science