Electronic Government : An International Journal , Vol . X , No . Y , xxxx 1 Digital repositories for e - government Chandra S . Amaravadi Department of IMDS , 435 Stipes Hall , Western Illinois University Macomb , IL 61455 , USA E - mail : c - amaravadi @ wiu . edu Please specify which of these two is your affiliation College of Business and Technology Western Illinois University Macomb , IL , 61455 , USA Abstract : There is a growing pressure for governments across the world to share information with the public . It is expected that digital libraries or more appropriately digital repositories will be a key technology here . Digital repositories need to respond to requests , such as the maximum hours an employee can work . A classification scheme based on DOLCE is proposed and illustrated with examples . Keywords : e - government infrastructure ; public information infrastructure ; digital repositories ; metadata ; digital libraries ; ontologies ; intelligent retrieval ; heterogenous databases ; queries in heterogenous environments . Reference to this paper should be made as follows : Amaravadi , C . S . ( xxxx ) ‘Digital repositories for e - government’ , Electronic Government : An International Journal , Vol . X , No . Y , pp . 000 – 000 . Biographical notes : Chandra S . Amaravadi is State Farm Professor of Information Systems at Western Illinois University and recipient of the £5000 best paper prize from the National Computer Center , UK , for predicting the World and Business Computing in 2051 . He holds a PhD from the University of Arizona and an MBA from the University of Minnesota . During his career he served as Consultant with Wellspring Computer Services in Minneapolis and with Dun and Bradstreet in Chennai , India . His research and consulting interests include e - government , knowledge management , executive support , data mining , office information systems , and information retrieval . This paper was previously presented at the International Conference on Advances in Infrastructure for Electronic Business , Education , Science , Medicine and Mobile Technologies on the internet , 28 July – 4 August 2003 L’Aquila , Italy . 1 Introduction Ever since the introduction of the internet there has been a growing pressure on government organisations to make agency information available online to the general public ( Wei , 2004 ; Liebowitz , 2004 ) . Falling loosely under the rubric of digital libraries , Copyright © 2005 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd . 2 C . S . Amaravadi many governments from Singapore to the USA have been announcing such online initiatives ( Atherton , 2002 ) . On December 17 , 2002 , George Bush , the President of the USA , signed the ‘E - Government Act of 2002’ to promote the use of IT resources in delivering government services ( The White House , 2004 ) . Villagers in the state of Madhya Pradesh , Northern India , are informed via digital technologies , of the schedules of water tankers which bring clean drinking water to the village ( Sharma and Yurcik , 2001 ) . A digital library is an assemblage of technologies together with the content and software to reproduce , emulate , and extend the services provided by conventional libraries based on paper and other material means of collecting , cataloging , finding , and disseminating information ( Gladney et al . , 1994 ) . Digital libraries connote document - based permanent collections of literary works , managed with information technologies and accessed by human users ( Levy and Marshall , 1995 ) . Indeed the purpose of a digital library is to collect , classify , store , and make available information items to library patrons ( Ram et al . , 1999 ) . A digital repository is perhaps a more accurate term to communicate the nature of the content found on governmental websites . This can vary from tanker schedules and firearms regulations to the per - capita meat consumption in a particular geographical region . The contents will depend on the government agency generating them . The information will not be as static as in digital libraries but will vary with time as new statistics and new regulations are introduced . There are several other characteristics of digital repositories which serve to distinguish them from Digital Libraries . First , given the large number of governmental agencies and the varied types of information generated by them , the contents will be more heterogenous than in digital libraries . Information can be in the form of documents ( e . g . , a report on crime ) , tables ( e . g . , housing starts ) , a set of values ( e . g . , acceptable emission levels ) , rulings ( Kelly and Tastle , 2004 ) ( e . g . , Smith vs . The State of California , 2001 ) , etc . Second , much of the content will be generated by governmental agencies acting more or less independently . The more the autonomy the greater the problems of interoperability ( Mackinnon et al . , 1998 ) and therefore , there is an urgent need for protocols which standardise interactions with repositories . Third , due to the complexity and volumes of data it is expected that a majority of the ‘users’ will be machine agents which are likely initiated by search engines or by other applications ( Lee , 2004 ; Moens , 2001 ) . In a futuristic scenario , a banking application dispensing farm loans could request a verification of land ownership from a property repository ( Amaravadi , 2003 ) . The use of machine agents implies that there should be a capability in the digital repository infrastructure to determine first of all if a query is feasible or not . This requires metadata or a standardised approach to summarising contents . This is the problem that we are addressing in this paper . First , we will review some research related to this area . Please provide reference 2 Brief survey of the literature The literature on digital libraries can be broadly classified into research on interface design , information access / retrieval , metadata , collection development / organisation , legal / policy issues , and applications to different domains . The interface is a key element in the usability of a digital library . Here research has focused on enhancing the interface using a number of novel approaches such as : using icons for various elements ( online databases , queries , search results ) of the interface to facilitate a ‘drag - and - drop’ style of specifying queries and subsequent actions ( Cousins , 2004 ) ; using AI techniques to Digital repositories for e - government 3 translate / decompose queries ( Tong and Holtzman , 1994 ) ; using agent technologies for carrying out various interface actions ( Sanchez and Leggett , 1997 ) ; and using natural language / speech for retrieval ( Witten et al . , 1998 ) . In the area of access and retrieval , researchers have attempted to address the issue of broadening queries by means of lexical knowledge , specifically through the use of synonyms generated from a large database ( Banerjee and Mittal , 1994 ) . A second though completely different stream in this area pertains to interoperability , the ability of digital libarary components to share information with one another ( Paepcke et al . , 1998 ) . Interoperability can be defined at various levels : at the presentation level , syntactic level , and semantic level ( Ram et al . , 1999 ; Fang et al . , 1991 ; Briukhov et al . , 1994 ) . At the interface and syntactic levels , the challenge is to query and present results of information from diverse sources when there are differences in query languages ( such as keyword - based boolean searches vs . Structured Query Language ) and data formats ( such as html , text , video , etc . ) . The usual approach is to provide mediator objects ( or ‘wrappers’ ) that will translate a query into the native language of the target collection and present it according to the format requirements of the result ( Briukhov et al . , 1994 ; Baldonado et al . , 1997 ) . At the semantic level , the challenge is working with collections that have different types of organisations . One approach is to standardise information items using a specialised representation framework ( or ontology ) to aid in the retrieval process . Attribute grammars , concept hierarchies , and philosophical frameworks have been utilised for this purpose ( Gancarski , 1994 ; Hars , 2001 ; Welty and Jenkins , 1999 ) . Semantic heterogeneity is also related to the collection development issue mentioned above . When large collections are developed , it is necessary to standardise their format so that they are retrievable by content rather than by keywords . The current push to the semantic web is concerned with marking up text with standard tags such as < city > , < author > , etc . so that search agents can index on these items ( Berners - Lee et al . , 2001 ) . The ‘metadata’ stream of research in digital libraries is also related to the issue of collection development . It provides information about the organisation , content , and purpose of the collection ( Ram et al . , 1999 ) . Metadata can be classified into four major types ( Schwartz , 2000 ; Shotton et al . , 2002 ) : Identity metadata identifies the collection ; Content metadata describes the contents at both summary and detailed levels ; Structural metadata describes the format of the contents ; and Administrative metadata is concerned with property ownership and terms and conditions of usage . We are primarily concerned with content metadata in this paper . A number of metadata formats have been developed by various organisations including the widely used ‘Dublin Core’ and ‘US MARC’ for bibliographic databases ( Ram et al . , 1999 ) . The Dublin Core defines a core set of 15 elements ( supplemented by an additional 33 elements ) , which serve to describe a digital resource in terms of its title , subject , description , coverage , publisher , date created , etc . ( Dublin Core Metadata Initiative , 2003 ) . A number of applications have utilised the Dublin Core , including the ‘Seamless U . K . ’ project , which provides the community with information on issues such as health , education , unemployment , etc . ( Atherton , 2002 ) ; the ‘Digital Museum Initiative’ in Taiwan to preserve cultural artifacts in digital form ( Chen et al . , 2002 ) and the ‘Alberta folklore and local history collection’ at the University of Alberta ( Banski , 2002 ) . The Stanford Digital Library Metadata does not assume any standard but can provide translation services to convert between the different standards . It has a number of elements such as ‘languages’ , ‘abstract’ , and ‘title’ in common with Dublin Core but in addition includes attributes for describing the type of keyword search 4 C . S . Amaravadi carried out . Thus it has elements such as ‘StopWords’ , ‘Boolean Operators’ , and ‘Word Proximity’ , which are associated only with document - based keyword searches ( Baldonado et al . , 1997 ) . Even though there have been a number of metadata efforts , there has been relatively little effort directed at the issue of describing the contents of collections and very little effort into the domain of government repositories . The Dublin Core allows for inclusion of models to describe contents but does not specify them . Shotton et al . ( 2002 ) propose a semantic metadata scheme to describe the contents of cell - biology videos . Their scheme is based on linking objects ( ‘cancer cell’ ) to events ( ‘a cytotoxic cell killing a target cell’ ) in the video , which are further linked to structural parts of the video ( i . e . , segments and frames ) . The resulting organisation allows users to search the metadata for specific objects such as brain cells or for events such as virus attacks . Our objective in this paper is very similar ; it is to develop a classification scheme for information items in digital repositories that facilitates their description and retrieval . So as to lay the groundwork , we will first describe some basic assumptions behind our metadata proposal . 3 Underlying assumptions To allow for the greatest flexibility , we will assume an architecture similar to that of the internet ( Gralla , 1999 ) . On the internet , millions of websites can exist if : the domain name is registered to the IETF ( Internet Engineering Task Force ) , the site has contents in HTML ( Hypertext Markup Language ) and it is able to respond to HTTP ( Hypertext Transport Protocol ) protocols . Once a site is registered , its name and address are updated to the DNS ( Domain Name Service ) servers . These can be consulted if there are addresses that cannot be resolved by an internet host . We assume a similar scenario , where instead of millions of websites , there are hundreds of digital repositories connected via the internet . Each repository is registered to a local digital repository register in its vicinity , which is similar in concept to a local DNS server . The register maintains the physical addresses as well as the metadata of the repositories in its region . It is assumed that the metadata will be stored in a database for efficient access . At the application level , the communication protocol on the internet is the HyperText Transport Protocol ( HTTP ) . This has formats for ‘Requests’ , ‘Responses’ , and ‘Errors’ . In the domain of libraries , such a protocol already exists . The Z39 . 50 is an application level protocol that allows a client to search and retrieve databases on a target machine ( Lynch , 1997 ) . Similar to HTTP , it prescribes the structure of interactions involving information retrieval . A search is initiated by a ‘SEARCH’ request . Progress reports on the search may be solicited or the search may be stopped altogether . Records , if any , are retrieved by a ‘PRESENT’ request . The Z39 . 50 does not make assumptions about repository information . A protocol for this scenario needs to be developed . As mentioned earlier , digital repositories will be used by machine agents that need information on whether a particular query can be carried out or not . We envision a protocol such as illustrated in Figure 1 . An intelligent application with information retrieval needs will send a prequery consisting of information about the query . It will be sent to a number of registers that will search their metadata databases to see if the query can be satisfied . If it can be satisfied , the register will forward particulars of the repository to the client . If it cannot be satisfied , an error message will be generated ( not shown ) and the request may be rerouted to other registers . If the data are available , the actual query is routed and Digital repositories for e - government 5 executed at the repository ( ‘target repository’ in Figure 1 ) that can fulfill the information need . The repository responds with results that are sent to the application originating the request . This method of search using metadata databases reduces the search overhead associated with traditional website searches . Figure 1 The environment in which digital repositories are assumed to operate Note : That prequeries and queries originate from an intelligent application and are searched in a repository register which is analogous to the concept of an internet gateway . The register responds with metadata which the application evaluates and decides whether or not to continue with the query . Digitalrepositoryregister Metadatadatabase Target repository Publicrecords Foodsanddrugs ( 1 ) Prequery ( 3 ) Query Metadatadatabase ( 2 ) Metadata ( 4 ) Query result Digitalrepositories Query Queryresult 4 The DAST metadata framework An ontology or a classification scheme is required to describe digital repositories in a uniform way . Rather than to develop one from scratch , we have adapted DOLCE ( Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering ) , a classification scheme developed by the Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technology and the National Research Council ( ISTC - CNR ) ( Masolo et al . , 2002 ) . The scope and objectives of DOLCE are broader than those planned here . They are to serve as a starting point for new ontologies and as a reference for comparing and standardising different approaches . The basic categories of entities in DOLCE are ‘endurants’ and ‘perdurants’ . Endurants have a full permanent presence at a particular point in time , regardless of circumstances , while perdurants are only partially present in time . Thus a ‘car’ would be an endurant , while its ‘repair’ , a perdurant . Bearing in mind that it is impossible to go into the full details of 6 C . S . Amaravadi DOLCE , endurants have been classified into ‘physical’ ( e . g . , car ) , ‘nonphysical’ ( e . g . , a law ) , and ‘arbitrary sum’ ( e . g . , a car and trailer ) . Perdurants have been classified into ‘Events’ and ‘Stative’ entities . Events are occurrences such as an ‘inauguration’ ; Stative entities describe a condition such as being happy . Both endurants and perdurants have qualities , which is a third root category in DOLCE . Qualities could be ‘physical’ ( e . g . , tanned leather ) , ‘temporal’ ( e . g . , during the great depression ) , or ‘abstract’ ( e . g . , effectiveness ) . There is another root category , ‘abstract’ , which is intended to modify indefinite abstract qualities , e . g . , value of a dollar and consumer confidence that do not have a fixed value . At the present time this subcategory is not fully developed . Our ontology referred to as DAST ( Data type , Action , agency , Subject , Time , location ) is simpler in scope than DOLCE and preliminary in nature . It is motivated by the vast amount of information made available by government agencies and which currently presents considerable challenges in search . The types of queries which occur are likely to be mundane ( see Table 1 ) . They could range from verification of a license ( not shown in Table 1 ) to finding out the maximum number of hours that an employee can work in a company without being eligible for benefits . In each case the unit of analysis is an information item , which could variably take the form of word processing , HTML , Adobe etc . documents . The objective of the ontology is to characterise an information item adequately such that it is uniquely determined or to achieve a close approximation to this . A single descriptor will not however be adequate and the ontology has to rely upon multiple dimensions . These are conveniently defined in DOLCE , where the basic categories are entities ( ‘endurants’ and ‘perdurants’ ) and qualities ( ‘physical’ , ‘temporal’ , and ‘abstract’ ) associated with them . To adopt the framework , we need to have an understanding of the types of items we are likely to find in governmental repositories . Some representative archetypes of information items have been drawn from various digital repositories as illustrated in the appendix . Table 1 Typical examples of queries to a digital repository Data source Typical query Data type and result Findlaw . com http : / / www . findlaw . com / casecode / supreme . html What was the ruling in USA vs . Microsoft ? Event , PDF Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) http : / / www . ftc . gov / ftc / legal . htm What are the FTC guidelines on leather and imitation leather products ? Regulatory , HTML General Services Administration ( GSA ) http : / / www . gsa . gov / Portal / selling . jsp How does one become a GSA contractor ? Procedural , HTML National Science Foundation ( NSF ) http : / / www . nsf . gov / od / gpra / start . htm What is the NSF budget for 2005 ? Descriptive , MS Word US Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) http : / / www . ers . usda . gov / publications / aer820 / What is the per - capita pork consumption in the USA ? Statistical , Table US Department of Labor ( USDOL ) http : / / www . dol . gov / dol / compliance / comp - flsa . htm What is the maximum number of hours that an employee can work in a week , including overtime hours ? Min - max values , HTML Digital repositories for e - government 7 The characteristics manifested by the samples are as follows : • Item 1 is concerned with the per capita meat consumption in the USA . Its most prominent qualities are time period and data type . The data are available by decade from 1950 – 1999 and they are statistical in nature . • Item 2 is concerned with the minimum wage and overtime pay for hourly employees . The only quality is the type of data , which is regulatory in nature . • Item 3 is concerned with the TWA flight 800 plane crash . The subject is associated with the name of an agency ( ‘TWA’ ) , a location ( ‘Atlantic Ocean near East Moriches’ ) , and a date and time ( ‘17 July 1996 , ’ 20 : 30 hours ) . Further , the item describes an ‘event’ type data . • Item 4 is concerned with labelling of tires . Information such as the load carrying capacity , number of plies , size , etc . must be displayed by the manufacturer on the tire . The only quality here is that the information is regulatory in nature . We will refer to the main topic of each item as ‘Subject’ . From the foregoing discussion , it is evident that each item is associated with multiple subjects such as plane + crash , employee + hours of work , pork + consumption , tire + labelling . In DOLCE , these would be regarded as combinations of endurants and perdurants . We will simply refer to the endurant part as ‘subject’ and the perdurant part as an ‘action’ ( rather than an ‘occurrence’ as in DOLCE ) . As in DOLCE , the subjects can be physical ( e . g . , a child seat ) or abstract ( e . g . , patent ) . Also from the preceding discussion , and supplemented by additional sampling , one can safely conclude that a certain proportion ( the extent of this needs to be determined empirically ) of information items in digital repositories can be characterised by subject and subject qualities . Here the qualities include ‘location’ , ‘time’ , and ‘agency . ’ These would be the physical and temporal qualities in DOLCE . As with the subject , one should not conclude that the values of these would be simple . For instance , the TWA crash is associated with both a general location ( Atlantic Ocean ) and a particular location ( 20 mi off the coast of East Moriches , New York ) . In addition there are also physical qualities associated with the information item such as size , format , owner , etc . , which we will not be concerned with at the present time . These are better handled in other Metadata approaches . But we will be concerned with one physical quality , which we call ‘data type’ . Data type describes the nature of the data , whether the data will be regulatory , statistical , event related , etc . The basic dimensions of the ontology are illustrated in Figure 2 and described below : • Data type This describes the fundamental nature of the data , whether it is regulatory , descriptive , statistical , ownership - related , etc . Thus information about an overseas embassy would be descriptive while the date a license was issued belongs to the subcategory of ‘ownership’ . 8 C . S . Amaravadi • Action Describes the action associated with the subject that we are interested in . If there is none , the default is ‘stative’ . Thus in ‘pork consumption’ , ‘consumption’ is an action associated with the subject . Multiple subjects will be associated with multiple actions . In queries involving regulations or ownership of property , the action would be ‘stative’ . • Agency This describes the organisation or organisations involved in the query . Examples include Microsoft , the Federal Trade Commission , National Space Center , etc . The default is ‘any’ . • Subject This describes the subject or main focus of the query and corresponds to the grammatical notion of the concept . Subjects can be abstract or physical . There can be more than one subject . • Time This attribute is used if there is a time dimension for the subject such as a license valid for a certain duration or an expiry time for a tax credit . As shown in Figure 2 , the time point could be a specific time point such as August 3 , 2004 , or a range such as 1995 – 2000 . • Location This attribute is used if there is a physical location associated with the subject . There can be more than one location associated with a subject as in a ship going to multiple ports . In application , whenever a repository item is created , a corresponding record is created in the metadata database . Whenever a machine agent has an information request , its characteristics as described by DAST are filled and used to search the digital repositories . Thus the query , “What was the cause of failure in the TWA plane crash ? ” would result in the prequery shown in Figure 3 ( a ) being sent . Here the ‘subject’ is both physical ( ‘plane’ ) and abstract ( ‘cause of failure’ ) . The ‘action’ associated with the ‘subject’ is ‘crash’ and the ‘organisation’ is ‘TWA’ . Since the location and time are not known , they are filled with a question mark . Readers must kindly note that the metadata records are also stored in a similar fashion along with the website location information . Examples of prequeries / metadata records are illustrated also for the following queries : “What is the per - capita meat consumption in the UK ? ” and “What is the maximum level of sulphur dioxide ( SO 2 ) emission ? ” Preliminary investigation shows this to be a viable approach , though uniqueness may not itself be guaranteed . For the TWA case , since the time and location has not been specified , there is a possibility that there will be multiple matches in the metadata database . In this case , all matching records are sent and the originating agent has to make the decision on selecting one or more of the results . Digital repositories for e - government 9 Figure 2 The DAST ontology . The major categories are data type , action , agency , subject , time , location . Purchase Sell Consume Own Freight Leave …… . Abstract Physical Fixed Range Descriptive Regulatory Statistical Event Standard Min - max Ownership Procedural USDA NSF Illinois Any …… Data type DAST ontology Action Agency Subject Time Note : ‘Location’ is not shown in the figure Figure 3 Examples of prequeries / metadata records Data type : event Action : crash Agency : TWA Subject : plane , cause of failure Time : ? Location : ? ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Data type : descriptive , regulatory Action : stative , training Agency : any Subject : tax credit , employee Time : NA Location : NA Data type : min - max , regulatory Action : emission Agency : any Subject : SO 2 Time : NA Location : NA Data type : statistical Action : consumption Agency : Subject : meat Time : 2004 Location : UK Note : That the ‘action’ and ‘subject’ attributes can have multiple values . Metadata records are stored in this format along with website location information 10 C . S . Amaravadi 5 Discussion and conclusion Governments will increasingly utilise digital repository technologies to provide information services to the public . Because of a repository’s need to respond to machine agents , it is necessary to know in advance if a particular query can be satisfied . The agent can then make a decision on a suitable course of action . We have developed a preliminary ontology to facilitate such information interactions in a digital repository environment . Based on DOLCE , the ontology will be used to classify information items . The basic categories in DAST are data type , action , agency , subject , time , and location . Preliminary investigation using hypothetical queries revealed that assigning values to subject characteristics ( ‘agency , ’ ‘time’ , and ‘location’ ) can be carried out unambiguously . Classification of items under a ‘data type , ’ ‘subject , ’ and ‘action’ are still ambiguous . For instance , in the query , ‘Can a company get tax credits for employee training ? ’ the data type corresponds to both ‘descriptive’ and ‘regulatory’ categories ( please refer to Figure 3b ) . The ‘subject’ concerns both ‘employee’ and ‘tax credits’ . Note also that there are two actions , one is ‘stative’ and the other is ‘training’ , corresponding to the two subjects . At the present time we simply suggest slots having multiple values . More elaborate specifications will need to be developed for each subtype and the retrieval implications of having multiple values needs to be investigated . Our approach to the subtypes has been informal , but these need to be further developed . For instance , statistical data can be in the form of a table , pie - chart etc . Multiple search results ought not to be a problem as long as they are suitably handled in the protocol . To maintain focus on the domain , we have avoided including attributes such as identification , format , file size , ownership , etc . which are better handled in the other metadata schemes discussed earlier . We will assume that these attributes are part of DAST . Specifically , we would need : an identification that provides the physical address of the digital repository , information on data / file size and data / file format . Based on the linguistic theories of DOLCE , we can reasonably make the assumption that the given categories are necessary and sufficient . An empirical investigation complemented with a system implementation would provide added support for the model . Our approach bears comparison to the ontology developed by Welty and Jenkins ( 1999 ) in connection with a project to maintain marked - up electronic versions of US civil war documents . Their ontology consists of five dimensions : ‘document type’ ( book , journal , etc . ) , ‘Modality’ ( media , format ) , ‘Event’ ( e . g . , battle , conference ) , ‘Subject’ ( e . g . , artificial intelligence , swimming , Aristotle , etc . ) , and ‘Object’ ( person , place , organisation ) . The ‘document type’ , ‘subject’ , and ‘Event’ are similar to ‘Data type’ , ‘subject’ , and ‘Action’ in DAST . The resulting ontology enables users to search for documents such as letters written by Lincoln to Andrew Johnson , the 17th President of the USA . The domain is thus concerned primarily with civil war documents while ours focuses on the area of governmental repositories . DAST assumes that the entire collection would be indexed on categories in the ontology . We have not specified how the ‘indexing’ will be carried out . It will be carried out with XML style tags . The advantage of using generic tags is that the contents are searchable not just by different types of queries but also by conventional keyword searches . In the latter case , each of the fillers in the metadata record will be utilised as a keyword . While marking up content entails a significant amount of effort , it is the price for making data readily accessible . Since government repositories are vast and are likely to further increase in size , DAST is one possible approach to the problem . The scheme Digital repositories for e - government 11 would not work unless the task of creating content and updating the metadata database were automated . A number of techniques have been developed in Computational Linguistics ( Gaizauskas and Wilks , 1998 ) to parse text into stored representations and we hope optimistically that similar techniques can be applied here . Additionally , Artificial Intelligence techniques would need to be utilised for the matching process , to carry out generalisation - specialisation of query terms . References Amaravadi , C . ( 2003 ) ‘World and business computing 2051’ , Journal of Strategic Information Systems , Vol . 12 , No . 4 , pp . 373 – 386 . Atherton , L . ( 2002 ) ‘SeamlessUK – building bridges between information islands’ , New Library World , Vol . 103 , Nos . 11 – 12 , pp . 467 – 473 . Baldonado , M . , Chang , C . , Gravano , L . and Paepcke , A . ( 1997 ) ‘The stanford digital library metadata architecture’ , International Journal of Digital Libraries , Vol . 1 , No . 2 . Banerjee , S . and Mittal , V . O . ( 1994 ) ‘On the use of linguistic ontologies for accessing and indexing distributed digital libraries’ , Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on the Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries ( DL ’94 ) , College Station , Texas , 19 – 21 June , December 2004 , Available from http : / / www . csdl . tamu . edu / DL94 / Banski , E . ( 2002 ) ‘Implementation of the dublin core at the university of alberta libraries’ , OCLC Systems and Services , Vol . 18 , No . 3 , pp . 130 – 138 . Berners - Lee , T . , Hendler , J . and Lassila , O . ( 2001 ) ‘The semantic web’ , Scientific American , Vol . 284 , No . 5 , pp . 35 – 43 . Briukhov , D . , Kalinichenko , L . , Skvortsov , N . and Tyurin , I . ( 1994 ) ‘Intermediator framework for information sources registration at heterogenous mediators’ , Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on the Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries ( DL ’94 ) , College Station , Texas , 19 – 21 June , December 2004 , Available from http : / / www . csdl . tamu . edu / DL94 / Chen , C . C . , Chen , H . H . , Chen , K . H . and Hsiang , J . ( 2002 ) ‘The design of metadata for the digital museum initiative in Taiwan’ , Online Information Review , Vol . 26 , No . 5 , pp . 295 – 306 . Cousins , S . B . ( 2004 ) ‘A task - oriented interface to a digital library’ , Stanford Digital Library Project , December 2004 , http : / / dbpubs . stanford . edu : 8090 / pub / 1995 - 60 Dublin Core Metadata Initiative ( 2003 ) DCMI Metadata Terms , December 2004 , http : / / dublincore . org / documents / 2003 / 03 / 04 / dcmi - terms / Fang , D . , Hammer , J . and McLeod , D . ( 1991 ) ‘The identification and resolution of semantic heterogeneity in multi - database systems’ , Proceedings of 1st International Workshop on Interoperability in Multidatabase Systems , Kyoto , Japan , April . Gaizauskas , R . and Wilks , Y . ( 1998 ) ‘Information extraction : beyond document retrieval’ , Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing , August , Vol . 3 , No . 2 , pp . 17 – 60 . Gancarski , A . L . ( 1994 ) ‘Using attribute grammars to uniformly represent structured documents’ , Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on the Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries ( DL ’94 ) , College Station , Texas , 19 – 21 June , December 2004 , Available from http : / / www . csdl . tamu . edu / DL94 / Gladney , H . M . , Fox , A . , Ahmed , Z . , Ashany , R . , Belkin , N . J . and Zemankova , M . ( 1994 ) ‘Digital library : gross structure and requirements : report from a march 1994 workshop’ , Proceedings of the First Annual Conference on the Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries ( DL ’94 ) , College Station , Texas , 19 – 21 June , December 2004 , Available from http : / / www . csdl . tamu . edu / DL94 / Gralla , P . ( 1999 ) ‘How the internet works’ , Que . 12 C . S . Amaravadi Hars , A . ( 2001 ) ‘Designing scientific knowledge infrastructures : the contribution of epistemology’ , Information Systems Frontiers , Vol . 3 , No . 1 , pp . 63 – 73 . Kelly , E . P . and Tastle , W . J . ( 2004 ) ‘E - government and the judicial system : online access to case information’ , Electronic Government : An International Journal , Vol . 1 , No . 2 , pp . 166 – 178 . Lee , T . B . ( 2004 ) Realizing the Full Potential of the Web , December , http : / / www . w3 . org / 1998 / 02 / Potential . html Levy , D . M . and Marshall , C . C . ( 1995 ) ‘Going digital : a look at assumptions underlying digital libraries’ , Communications of the ACM , Vol . 38 , No . 4 , pp . 77 – 84 . Liebowitz , J . ( 2004 ) ‘Will knowledge management work in the government ? ’ , Electronic Government : An International Journal , Vol . 1 , No . 3 , pp . 1 – 7 . Lynch , C . ( 1997 ) ‘The Z39 . 50 information retrieval standard’ , D - Lib Magazine , April , December 2004 , http : / / www . dlib . org / dlib / april97 / 04contents . html Author please check what is 8 in here ? Mackinnon , L . M . , Marwick , D . H . and Williams , M . H . ( 1998 ) ‘A model for query decomposition and answer construction in heterogeneous distributed database systems’ , Journal of Intelligent Information Systems , 8 , Vol . 11 , No . 1 , pp . 69 – 87 . Masolo , C . , Borgo , S . , Gangemi , A . , Guarino , N . , Oltramari , A . and Schneider , L . ( 2002 ) The WonderWeb Library of Foundational Ontologies , Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technology , Report No . D17 , August 15 , December 2004 , http : / / www . ladseb . pd . cnr . it / infor / Ontology / Ontologies . html Moens , M . F . ( 2001 ) ‘Innovative techniques for legal text retrieval’ , Artificial Intelligence and Law , Vol . 9 , No . 1 , pp . 29 – 57 . Paepcke , A . , Chang , C - C . K . Garcia - Molina , H . and Winograd , T . ( 1998 ) Interoperability for Digital Libraries Worldwide , Communications of the ACM , Vol . 41 , No . 4 , pp . 33 – 42 . Ram , S . , Park , J . and Lee , D . ( 1999 ) ‘Digital libraries for the next millennium : challenges and research directions’ , Information Systems Frontiers , Vol . 1 , No . 1 , pp . 75 – 94 . Sanchez , A . J . and Leggett , J . J . ( 1997 ) ‘Agent services for users of digital libraries’ , Journal of Network and Computer Applications , Vol . 20 , No . 1 , pp . 45 – 58 . Schwartz , C . ( 2000 ) ‘Digital libraries : an overview’ , The Journal of Academic Librarianship , Vol . 26 , No . 6 , pp . 385 – 393 . Sharma , A . and Yurcik , W . ( 2001 ) ‘The gyandoot digital library intranet’ , Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science , Vol . 27 , No . 4 , pp . 23 – 27 . Shotton , D . M . , Rodriguez , A . , Guil , N . and Trelles , O . ( 2002 ) ‘A metadata classification schema for semantic content analysis of videos’ , Journal of Microscopy , Vol . 205 , No . 1 , pp . 33 – 42 . The White House ( 2004 ) President Signs E - government Act , December , http : / / www . whitehouse . gov / news / releases / 2002 / 12 / 20021217 - 5 . html Tong , R . M . and Holtzman , D . H . ( 1994 ) ‘Knowledge - based access to heterogeneous information sources’ , Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on the Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries ( DL ’94 ) , College Station , Texas , 19 – 21 June , December 2004 , Available from http : / / www . csdl . tamu . edu / DL94 / Wei , J . ( 2004 ) ‘Global comparisons of e - government environments’ , Electronic Government : An International Journal , Vol . 1 , No . 3 , pp . 229 – 252 . Welty , C . A . and Jenkins , J . ( 1999 ) ‘Formal ontology for subject’ , Data and Knowledge Engineering , Vol . 31 , No . 2 , pp . 155 – 181 . Witten , I . H . , Nevill - Manning , C . , McNab , R . and Cunningham , S . J . ( 1998 ) ‘A public library based on full - text retrieval’ , Communications of the ACM , Vol . 41 , No . 4 , pp . 71 – 75 . Digital repositories for e - government 13 Appendix Samples of items found in digital repositories Item 1 Excerpted from the US Department of Agriculture Fact book 2000 [ http : / / www . usda . gov / news / pubs / fbook00 / contents . htm ] In the 1990’s , Americans consumed an average 57 pounds more meat per year than in the 1950’s , and a third fewer eggs . Annual averages Item 1950 – 59 1960 – 69 1970 – 79 1980 – 89 1990 – 99 1998 1999 Pounds per capita , boneless - trimmed weight Total meats 133 . 0 161 . 8 177 . 1 182 . 9 190 . 7 195 . 3 197 . 2 Red meats 102 . 3 123 . 4 129 . 4 121 . 9 113 . 3 115 . 6 113 . 9 Beef 52 . 8 69 . 1 80 . 9 71 . 8 63 . 7 64 . 9 63 . 5 Pork 41 . 0 47 . 9 45 . 0 47 . 7 48 . 0 49 . 1 49 . 1 Veal and lamb 8 . 5 6 . 4 3 . 5 2 . 4 1 . 6 1 . 6 1 . 3 Poultry 19 . 8 27 . 7 35 . 2 46 . 8 62 . 6 65 . 0 68 . 4 Chicken 16 . 2 22 . 5 28 . 4 36 . 9 48 . 5 50 . 8 54 . 4 Turkey 3 . 5 5 . 1 6 . 8 9 . 9 14 . 1 14 . 2 14 . 1 Fish and shellfish 10 . 9 10 . 7 12 . 5 14 . 2 14 . 8 14 . 8 14 . 8 Item 2 Excerpted from the US Department of Labor , Fair Labor Standards Act [ http : / / www . dol . gov / elaws / esa / flsa / screen5 . asp ] “ . . The FLSA has been amended on many occasions since 1938 . Currently , workers covered by the FLSA are entitled to the minimum wage of $ 5 . 15 per hour and overtime pay at a rate of not less than one and one - half times their regular rate of pay after 40 hours of work in a workweek…” Item 3 Excerpted from the US Department of Transportation [ http : / / www . airdisaster . com / ntsb / ] “On July 17 , 1996 , at 20 : 33 hours , Trans World Airlines , Inc . ( TWA ) flight 800 , a Boeing 747 – 131 , N93119 , crashed in the Atlantic Ocean near East Moriches , New York . TWA flight 800 was operating under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121 as a scheduled international passenger flight from John F . Kennedy International Airport ( JFK ) , New York , New York , to Charles DeGaulle International Airport , Paris , France . The flight departed JFK about 2019 , with 2 pilots , 2 flight engineers , 14 flight attendants , and 212 passengers on board . All 230 people on board were killed , and the airplane was destroyed . Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight , which operated on an instrument flight rules flight plan . The investigation revealed that the crash occurred as the result of a fuel / air explosion in the airplane’s center wing fuel tank ( CWT ) and the subsequent in - flight breakup of the airplane . ” 14 C . S . Amaravadi Item 4 Excerpted from the US Federal Trade Commission Code of Federal Regulations 16CFR228 – Sec . 228 . 1 Tire description [ http : / / frwebgate . access . gpo . gov / cgi - bin / multidb . cgi ] “The purchase of tires for a motor vehicle is an extremely important matter to the consumer . Not only are substantial economic factors involved , but in most instances the purchaser will entrust the safety of himself and others to the performance of the product . To avoid being deceived , the consumer must have certain basic information : ( i ) Load - carrying capacity of the tire . This information is essential to assure the purchaser that the tires he selects are capable of safely carrying the intended load . This information should consist of the maximum load - carrying capacity as related to various recommended air pressures and may include data which indicates the effect such varying pressures will have on the operation of the automobile . All such information shall be based on actual tests utilising adequate and technically sound procedures . The test procedures and results shall be in writing and available for inspection… ”