pubs . acs . org / jmc Published on Web 07 / 28 / 2010 r 2010 American Chemical Society J . Med . Chem . 2010 , 53 , 6811 – 6824 6811 DOI : 10 . 1021 / jm100509v Folate - Targeted Therapies for Cancer Wei Xia and Philip S . Low * Department of Chemistry , Purdue University , 560 Oval Drive , West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 Received April 26 , 2010 1 . Introduction 1 . 1 . General Strategies in the Design of Tumor Targeted Therapeutics . Today’s quest for developing tumor - targeted therapies has naturally followed two nonoverlapping strate - gies . The first strategy involves pursuing agents that can selectively block novel pathways or proteins that emerge or become overexpressed in malignant cells . These pathways are generally critical for tumor cell survival but are either not present or not needed to a similar extent by normal cells . Examples of this type of targeted therapy include Gleevec ( imatinib ) , a kinase inhibitor that targets the fusion protein bcr / abl , which arises solely from a chromosomal transloca - tion during tumorigenesis , 1 , 2 and Avastin ( bevacizumab ) , a monoclonal antibody that suppresses neoangiogenesis re - quired to nourish tumors for proliferation . 3 , 4 The pharma - ceutical industry is currently focusing its efforts almost exclusively on this type of targeted therapeutic agent . The second strategy involves the use of a homing ligand that binds specifically to a receptor that is expressed primarily on malignant cells . When linked to a therapeutic drug , this ligand can be exploited to carry the nonselective drug specifically into the cancer cell . If the drug is released only after internalization by the diseased cell , unwanted collateral damage to receptor - negative tissues can be avoided . Thus , wherever appropriately specific ligands can be identified , they can be exploited to convert nonspecific cytotoxic drugs into finely tuned tumor - specific warheads . Ligands that have been exploited for this approach totumor targetingincludemonoclonalantibodies 5 - 7 and low molecular weight receptor - binding molecules such as peptide hormones , receptor antagonists and agonists , oligo - saccharides , oligopeptides , and vitamins . 8 - 13 This article will review the use of folic acid as a ligand to target therapeutic cargos of many sizes , shapes , and mechanisms of action to tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo . For reviews of the use of folic acid to deliver attached imaging agents to malignant masses , the reader is referred to other published articles . 14 1 . 2 . Pros and Cons of Ligand - Targeted Therapies . Ligand - targeted therapies offer several advantages over the aforemen - tioned functionality - targeted therapies , the most notable being the former’s remarkable flexibility and adaptability . Almost any potent drug can be targeted to a tumor tissue if it can be linked reversibly to a targeting ligand with specificity for a pathologic cell type . A second advantage is that a cognate imagingagentcanalmostalwaysbesynthesizedusingthesametargetingligand , and this targeted imaging agent can then be employed to select for patients whose tumors overexpress the ligand’s receptor . 11 , 15 Third , ligand - targeted therapies are generally preferred for delivery of membrane - impermeable drugs because a good targeting ligand can convey its attached cargo into the target cell by receptor - mediated endocytosis , rendering an otherwise membrane impermeable drug more efficacious . 16 , 17 And finally , because overexpression of a re - ceptor on cancer cells is usually a more common event than over - reliance on an enzyme unique to cancer cells ( e . g . , bcr / abl ) , more developmentpotential may existforligand - targeted therapies than functionality - targeted therapies . Development of ligand - targeted therapies also poses several challenges that are absent from functionality - targeted and non - targeted therapies . First , because most endocytic pathways transport relatively few molecules into a cell , the ligand - targeted drug must be effective at low concentrations . This can be problematic for diseases for which few highly potent drugs have been identified . Second , delivery to the correct site does not necessarily guarantee therapeutic efficacy ; rather , the drug gen - erally not only must be internalized by the cell but also must be released within the cell . Because only a few chemical function - alities allow for facile release of a covalently attached drug after targeted cell uptake , drugs must contain at least one of a limited numberofchemicalmoieties ( - SH , - COOH , - OH , or - NH 2 ) that can be adapted for intracellular release . 18 , 19 Third , an efficient drug release mechanism must be designed into the conjugate : one thatis inert during transit to the pathologic lesion but is activated rapidly after target cell binding and internaliza - tion , enabling release of the therapeutic cargo only at the site of disease . Not all ligand - targeted conjugates lend themselves to such mechanisms . And finally , for some membrane - imperme - abledrugs , anendosomeescapestrategymustbedesigned . Thus , after receptor - mediated endocytosis , the drug will generally still need to pass through the endosomal membrane to reach its target within the pathologic cell . While much progress has been made in developing these endosomal escape mechanisms , more improvements are needed before the full potential of ligand - targeted macromolecular drugs ( suchas siRNAs , a proteins , and nanoparticles ) can be realized . 16 * Towhomcorrespondence shouldbeaddressed . Phone : þ 1 - 765 - 494 - 5273 . Fax : þ 1 - 765 - 494 - 5272 . E - mail : plow @ purdue . edu . a Abbreviations : CHEMS , cholesteryl hemisuccinate ; CTL , cytotoxic T lymphocytes ; DM1 , maytansine ; DOPE , dioleoylphosphatidylethanola - mine ; DSPE , distearoylphosphatidylethanolamine ; EGFR , epidermal growth factor receptor ; Fab , the antigen - binding fragment of an antibody ; FITC , fluorescein ; FR , folate receptor ; FRET , fluorescence resonance energy transfer ; HSV - 1 , herpes simplex virus type 1 ; LPD , liposome / protamine / DNA complex ; MRI , magnetic resonance imaging ; IC 50 , the half maximal inhibitory concentration ; IFN - R , interferon - R ; IgG , immu - noglobulin G ; IL - 2 , interleukin 2 ; ODN , oligodeoxynucleotide ; PE , phos - phatidylethanolamine ; PEG , polyethylene glycol ; PEI , polyethylenimine ; PHSM , pH - sensitive polymeric mixed micelles ; PLLA , poly - L - lactic acid ; pLys , poly - L - lysine ; RES , the reticuloendothelial system ; scFv , the single chain variable fragment of an antibody ; siRNA , small interfering RNA ; TCR , T cell receptor , TK , thymidine kinase . 6812 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 Xia and Low 1 . 3 . Folate Receptor Expression Patterns . Folic acid is a vitamin that is essential for the proliferation and mainte - nance of all cells . Because most mammalian cells obtain their normal folate requirement via a low affinity reduced folate carrier 20 or proton - coupled folate transporter , 21 accessible FRs are normally expressed in significant numbers only on cancer cells , 22 - 24 activated macrophages , 25 - 28 and the prox - imal tubule cells of the kidney . 29 Although folate conjugates display no affinity for the reduced folate carrier or proton - coupled folate transporter , they bind to folate receptors ( FRs ) on these cell types with high affinity ( K d ≈ 10 - 9 M ) and enter FR - expressing cells by receptor - mediated endocytosis . 30 , 31 Overexpression of FRs on cancer cells may have evolved as a consequence of their increased requirement for folic acid that is essential in the synthesis of nucleotide bases needed in cell proliferation . Because folate is often a limiting nutrient in human serum , up - regulation of a high affinity FR on cancer cells may enable malignant cells to compete more aggres - sively for the vitamin . Many , but not all , cancers express either the R or β isoform of FR . 22 , 23 Those cancers that most aggressively up - regulate the folate receptor include cancers of the ovary , lung , kidney , endometrium , breast , brain , colon , and myeloid cells of hematopoetic lineage ( Table 1 ) . While other tumors , such as sarcomas , lymphomas , pan - creatic cancer , testicular cancer , and cancers of the bladder , prostate , liver , head / neck , and skin , do not commonly up - regulate FR 22 ( and personal observations ) , these malignant FR - negative cells may , in contrast , up - regulate the reduced folate carrier or proton - coupled folate transporter to satisfy their heightened folate needs . 20 Expression of FR on nonmalignant hematopoietic cells ( primarily the β isoform ) appears to be limited to activated macrophages and their precursors . 25 - 28 Because activated macrophages accumulate at sites of inflammation , their uptake of folate conjugates is seen primarily in patients with inflammatory or autoimmune diseases . 25 , 27 Folate’s utility in diagnosing and treating these diseases has been reviewed elsewhere . 11 , 32 , 33 FRexpressioninthekidneyislimitedtotheapicalsurfaceof the proximal tubule where the receptor captures the vitamin ( or a folate - drug conjugate ) from the nascent urine and transcytoses it back across the kidney epithelium for release into the blood . 34 In this process , FR serves as a salvage receptor to prevent loss of folates in the urine . Because most folate conjugates are not retained in the kidneys , no renal toxicity has ever been observed in animals or humans treated with folate - chemotherapeutic agent conjugates . 35 , 36 A few other normal epithelial cells may also express FR , 29 , 37 especially alveolar epithelial cells , 38 but these FR are inacces - sible to folate and folate conjugates because of their exclusive localization on the apical surfaces of polarized epithelia ( i . e . , thesidefacingthelumenoropening ) . Consequently , inhealthy patients that do not have malignant masses or an inflamma - tory disease , measurable folate conjugate uptake is limited to the kidneys ( Figure 1 ) . 2 . Folate - Targeted Cancer Therapeutics Significant up - regulation of the folate receptor on tumor tissue has led us to hypothesize that folate - linked therapeutic agents might display reduced off - site toxicity and enhanced potency against tumor cells compared to nontargeted drugs . 17 , 22 The sections that follow describe the many applica - tions of folic acid for targeting of a variety of therapeutic agents for treatment of malignant diseases . Although many types of folate conjugates have been evaluated in animal models of human cancers , only six folate - linked drugs have been tested in the clinic to date . 15 , 39 - 42 2 . 1 . Folate - Targeted Protein Toxins . Initial efforts to build folate - linked cytotoxic drugs focused on folate - linked protein Table 1 . Folate Receptor Expression in Selected Solid Tumors Deter - mined by Either Immunohistochemistry or Imaging with EC20 , 15 a Folate - Targeted 99m Tc - Based Radioimaging Agent 22 ( Personal Observations ) cancer % FR þ number of cases examined ovarian 82 488 lung ( NSCLC : non - small - cell carcinoma ) 66 511 endometrial 64 148 renal cell carcinoma ( RCC ) 64 310 colorectal 34 314 breast 29 380 nonfunctional pituitary adenoma ( NFPA ) 100 20 thyroid 48 23 cervical 30 23 lung metastases 30 23 lung ( SCLC : small - cell lung carcinoma ) 25 24 mesothelioma 21 38 Figure 1 . Comparison of [ 111 In ] DTPA - folate uptake in a patient with stage III ovarian cancer ( left ) and a healthy volunteer ( right ) . Perspective Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 6813 toxins . A folate - Pseudomonas exotoxin ( folate - PE38 ) conju - gate was found to kill FR þ cancer cells with an IC 50 of ∼ 10 - 11 M . Interestingly , folate - PE38 demonstrated 100 - fold greater inhibition of protein synthesis and similarly increased cytotoxi - city toward cancer cells compared to folate - momordin , prob - ably because of the former protein’s built - in mechanism of endosomal escape following FR - mediated endocytosis . 43 , 44 To confirm that this difference in potency was indeed a conse - quence of a difference in endosomal escape , the mechanism of endosomal escape was selectively inhibited in folate - PE38 by blocking a critical cysteine residue . The resulting folate - toxin conjugate displayed a decrease in potency of 4 orders of magnitude , confirming the importance of endosomal release in the toxin’s mechanism of action . 43 Similar requirements for endosomal escape have been observed for other macromolecu - lar folate conjugates ( personal observations ) . 2 . 2 . Folate - Targeted Chemotherapeutic Agents . Because of its high affinity for FR , folate has often been observed to remain attached to FR as the receptor internalizes and then recycles back to the cell surface ( Figure 2 ) ; i . e . , the oxidized form of the vitamin ( folic acid ) may not normally dissociate from the receptor during FR trafficking . 31 , 45 , 46 A similar fate has been observed to compromise the potency of folate - targeted chemotherapeutic agents when the linker between the vitamin and its attached therapeutic warhead is not cleaved during FR recycling . Therefore , in an effort to ensure intracellular drug release , multiple strategies for unloading an attached therapeutic cargo within the target cell have been explored . The most prominent method to trigger intracellu - lar drug release has exploited the large difference in reducing power between the extra - and intracellular environments . In this approach , a self - immolative disulfide bridge is intro - duced between the drug and folic acid with the anticipation that an unmodified drug will be discharged once the con - jugate has entered a reducing endosome . 31 , 43 This approach was directly imaged by microscopy when folate was linked via a disulfide bond to two fluorescent dyes that engaged in fluorescence resonance energy transfer while covalently linked in the same folate conjugate 31 ( Figure 3 ) . Loss of fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) without loss of the fluorescence of either dye was taken as evidence that the disulfide bond linking one of the dyes to folate had been reduced , allowing separation of the fluorescence donor and acceptor pair . Importantly , FRET was observed to decline immediately upon internalization of the conjugate by FR - mediated endocytosis , and energy transfer was seen to completely disappear before any folate conjugates could recycle to the cell surface . 31 These data demonstrated that disulfide bond reduction begins early during endosomal trafficking and continues rapidly until all disulfide bonds are cleaved . Assuming that the released therapeutic cargo is membrane permeable , the discharged drug was hypothesized to rapidly diffuse out of the endosome and into the cyto - plasm where it could perform its function . This hypothesis was supported by observations demonstrating that disulfide - linked drugs , such as folate - maytansine DM1 and folate - camptothecin , 47 could kill a panel of FR þ cancer cells with IC 50 values between 10 - 11 and 10 - 10 M , suggesting efficient drug release following FR endocytosis . 47 The second approach to trigger endosomal release of an active drug from its folate conjugate was designed to exploit the more acidic pH values commonly encountered in late endosomes and lysosomes . 48 In an early study , a paclitaxel - 7 - polyethylene glycol - folate conjugate was designed with a pH - sensitive ester connecting the taxane to the polyethylene glycol - folate in the hope that the low endosomal pH experienced during intracellular trafficking would release the paclitaxel . 49 However , the folate conjugate was found to be 50 - fold less cytotoxic to FR þ KB cells than the free paclitaxel despite the fact that the conjugate retained high affinity for the FR . 49 Subsequent experiments examined the cause of this unexpected inactivity as well as the poor potencies of other pH sensitive folate - drug conjugates . Surprisingly , analyses of the pH in FR - containing endoso - mal compartments using folate - linked pH indicator dyes revealed that these endosomes never reached pH below 6 . 2 , suggesting thatthe pH was never sufficiently acidic to rapidly hydrolyze ester bridges ( t 1 / 2 ≈ 197 h ) . 50 More detailed studies further revealed that monovalent folate - drug conjugates recycle through endosomes with median pH of 6 . 8 and never encounter strongly acidic compartments ( Figure 4 ) . In con - trast , multivalent folate conjugates ( e . g . , liposomes with multiple folates attached ) were found to traffic to lysosomes where median pH values were near pH 5 . 48 Consequently , acid catalyzed drug release mechanisms will only be useful for delivery of multivalent folate - targeted constructs ( e . g . , nanoparticles and liposomes ) . The above differences between disulfide and pH - sensitive linkers have been confirmed on multiple folate conjugates designed to differ only in the chemistries of their linkers . One well studied example involves a matched pair of folate - desacetylvinblastine monohydrazide conjugates : 1 ( EC140 ) with an acylhydrazone ( pH - sensitive ) linker and 2 ( EC145 ) with a disulfide linker ( Figure 5 ) . As anticipated , in vivo tests have demonstrated 2 to be dramatically more potent than 1 . 39 , 51 , 52 Optimization of linker design requires not only that the bridging chemistry allow facile release of an unmodified drug following uptake by its target cell but also that the folate - drug conjugate remain intact during its brief transit in the vasculature from its site of injection to the tumor mass . Figure 2 . FR - mediated endocytosis of folate - drug conjugates . Exogenously added folate - drug conjugates bind specifically to FR with high affinity . The plasma membrane invaginates around the FR / folate conjugate complex to form an endosome . As the lumen of the maturing endosome acidifies , the receptor changes conformation and releases the conjugate , and the disulfide bond between folate and its drug cargo is reduced to release the parent drug cargo . Because the pH of FR - containing endosomes is only mildly acidic , acid - labile linkers do not release the attached drug as efficiently ( see discussion in section 2 . 2 ) . 6814 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 Xia and Low Importantly , because the sizes of most folate - chemotherapeutic agents are small , they have been found to perfuse solid tissues very rapidly , leading to saturation of all FR in solid tumors in < 5 min in mice 53 and probably < 15 min in humans following intravenous injection . Since clearance of water - soluble folate conjugates from the bloodstream is > 99 % complete in less than 20 min , the cleavable linker connecting folate to its attached drug need only be stable in the bloodstream for ∼ 15 - 20 min . Pharmacokinetic studies in both rodents and humans have revealed that this stability requirement is readily satisfied , at least for disulfide linked folate conjugates . 35 Con - sidered together with the previously established efficient release of disulfide bridged conjugates in early endosomes , our lab has decided that future monovalent folate - targeted chemothera - peuticagentsshouldbetetheredvia adisulfideratherthanapH labile linker to its targeting ligand . Moreover , all future folate - targeted drugs will be linked via the γ - carboxyl rather than R - carboxyl because the former exhibits slightly higher affinity for FR than the latter . 54 Representative examples of such γ - carboxyl derivatized disulfide - linked cytotoxic drugs ( Figure 6 ) include 2 ( IC 50 ≈ 9 nM ) , 39 , 52 folate - maytansine DM1 ( EC131 , IC 50 ≈ 16 - 25 nM ) , 55 folate - tubulysin B ( EC0305 , IC 50 ≈ 1 - 10 nM ) , 56 folate - mitomycin C ( EC72 , IC 50 ≈ 5 nM ) , 57 folate - camptothecin ( IC 50 ≈ 10 nM ) , 58 and a Figure 3 . The folate - FRET reporter changes fluorescence from red to green upon disulfide reduction . In the nonreduced folate - FRET reporter ( upper ) , excitation ofBODIPY ( 488nm ) leads torhodamine ( red , 595nm ) emissiondue toFRET from BODIPY torhodamine . Upon disulfidereduction ( lower ) , rhodamineisreleasedfromthefolate - BODIPYbackbone , leadingtolossofFRETsignalandconcurrentrecovery of BODIPY ( green , 520 nm ) fluorescence . Figure 4 . Comparison of endosomal compartment pH values encountered by monovalent and multivalent folate conjugates following their uptake by folate receptor - mediated endocytosis . Multivalent conjugates ( left ) bind simultaneously to multiple FR and traffic to acidic lysosomes following endocytosis . 48 In contrast , monovalent conjugates traffic to a mildly acidic recycling center where disulfide - linked drugs are rapidly released by disulfide reduction . 50 . Perspective Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 6815 dual warhead folate - mitomycin C / desacetylvinblastine conju - gate ( EC0225 , IC 50 ≈ 5 . 4 nM ) . 40 Because the tumor delivery capacityoftheFRendocyticpathwayislimitedprimarilybythenumberofFRexpressedonthecancercell ( usually ( 1 - 3 ) (cid:2) 10 6 / cell ) , only highly potent warheads have eventually succeeded as effective folate - targeted therapeutics . As noted in the cited articles , each of the aforementioned folate - targeted cytotoxic drugs has demonstrated remarkable activity in animal tumor models with greatly reduced off - target toxicity to healthy cells . 2 willsoonbeenteringphase3clinicaltrials , whereasseveralother folate - drug conjugates are currently undergoing testing in either phase 1 or phase 2 clinical trials . 2 . 3 . Folate - Targeted Immunotherapy . One problem with the effectiveness of traditional cancer treatments is that most tumors evolve mechanisms to evade their chemotherapies by selection of mutations that lead to drug resistance . Because most immunotherapies are designed to educate the immune system to recognize mutations that arise during tumor pro - gression , activation of humoral and / or cellular immunities against tumor cells can result in tumor cell killing and exten - sion of patient lifespan . As with chemotherapy strategies , immunotherapies can also be improved by targeting the immune stimulant to the folate receptor . To date , protocols for targeting immunotherapeutic agents to FR þ cancers have included ( 1 ) administration of unconjugated or conjugated anti - FR antibodies ( MOv18 , MOv19 ) , 59 - 62 ( 2 ) the use of folate / anti - T cell receptor ( anti - TCR IgG ) bispecific antibodies , 63 - 65 ( 3 ) transduction of T lymphocytes with FR peptides for production of cellular anti - FR immunity , 66 and ( 4 ) administrationoffolate - targetedhaptensto“paint”tumor cell surfaces with foreign / immunogenic molecules . 67 , 68 Initial immunotherapy efforts focused on the use of two murine monoclonal antibodies , MOv18 ( IgG1 κ ) and MOv19 ( IgG2a κ ) , that exhibited high affinity for ovarian cancer cells ( K A = 10 8 - 10 9 M - 1 ) . 62 , 69 , 70 MOv18 was initially exploited to deliver the therapeutic radionuclide 131 I or to redirect the cytotoxicity of activated autologous immune cells to FR þ ovarian carcinoma cells in vitro . 59 , 60 Similarly , the single - chain Fv ( scFv ) of MOv19 was used to direct conjugated interleukin - 2 ( IL - 2 ) to tumors with the hope that the IL - 2 would stimulate activation of the immune system within the tumor . 61 Prolonged release of IL - 2 / MOv19 scFv protected 60 % of mice from developing lung metastases caused by FR þ tumors . Moreover , treatment with IL - 2 / MOv19 scFv ( but not with nontargeted recombinant IL - 2 ) significantly reduced the volume of subcutaneous FR þ tumors in mice . 61 Although early human trials with these monoclonal anti - bodies failed , clinical trials using improved versions of anti - folate receptor monoclonal antibodies are currently underway and the results are very promising . 62 , 71 In order to overcome potential tumor penetration barriers that were thought to compromise the potencies of the larger intact IgGs , completely humanized antibody fragments ( Fabs ) against FR have been assembled using phage display and Figure 5 . Chemical structures of two folate - desacetylvinblastine monohydrazide conjugates . 39 Figure 6 . Chemical structures of folate - γ - carboxyl derivatized disulfide - linked cytotoxic drugs . 40 , 55 - 57 6816 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 Xia and Low epitope imprinting selection methodologies . 72 , 73 For exam - ple , a smaller Fab dimer was demonstrated with high affinity for FR and significantly improved tumor - to - blood ratios . Future development of this antibody construct for clinical applications is apparently planned . 74 Instead of using an antifolate receptor antibody to deliver an attached cargo , Kranz et al . 63 used a folate - derivatized antibody against the T cell receptor ( anti - TCR IgG ) to force T cells ( recognized by anti - TCR IgG ) to dock with FR þ cancer cells ( recognized by the folic acid ) . With an average of five folates per IgG , this folate conjugate effectively mediated lysis of FR þ tumor cells at concentrations as low as 1 pM . Importantly , the extent of tumor cell lysis was found to correlate with its level of FR expression , and cell killing was found to be completely inhibited by free folic acid . 63 For unknown reasons , this promising strategy has never been tested in the clinic . In a follow - up study , a “smaller” folate conjugate to a single - chain antibody fragment ( scFv ) of the anti - TCR IgG was constructed . Similar to IgG - folate , the scFv - folate was found to mediate lysis of FR þ tumor cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes ( CTLs ) ( with EC 50 ≈ 40 pM ) in vitro . 64 However , in vivo preclinical testing of the folate - antibody / scFv bispecific construct against human tumors was limited to immunodeficient mice that received the bispecific agent plus activated human effector T cells . Unfor - tunately , such a model does not accurately reflect a clinical scenario . Therefore , the same group developed a transgenic mouse model that would grow FR þ human KB cell tumors and induced mobilization of endogenous CTLs with a synthetic antigenic peptide recognized by the CTLs . 65 Im - portantly , the transgenic mice rejected the human tumors after treatment with the activating peptide and the scFv - folate . However , since the T cells in this model were derived from a single clone , it can be cogently argued that such an immunotherapy strategy would best be tested in a syngeneic mouse model with a normal heterogeneous immune system before advancing the methodology into the clinic . As an alternative to direct targeting of a CTL or inflam - matory cytokine to a cancer , folate has also been exploited to deliver a highly immunogenic hapten to the surface of FR þ tumors as a method of marking the tumor as “foreign . ” This “immunogenic flag” was hypothesized to render a malignant mass that had somehow escaped recognition by the immune system highly visible to immune cells ( Figure 7 ) . To test this hypothesis , tumor - bearing mice were vaccinated against fluorescein before intraperitoneal implantation of FR þ M109 tumor cells . After an adequate anti - FITC antibody titer had been induced , a combination of folate - FITC , IL - 2 , and interferon - R ( IFN - R ) was administered to simulta - neously decorate the FR - expressing tumor cells with FITC and stimulate the immune system with the cytokines . 41 Healthy FR - negative cells were found to be spared from immune attack , whereas FR þ malignant cells were observed to be rapidly destroyed by a massive influx of immune cells . 75 More importantly , this folate - hapten therapy was seen to confer long - term immunity against the same cancer . Thus , when challenged with fresh tumor cells on multiple occasions at later dates , the same mice rejected the newly implanted cells without needing any further therapy . 41 , 75 Subsequent analysis of the mechanism of this immune memory demon - strated that the sustained memory resided in the T cell population . This cancer - specific immune memory probably constitutes the chief merit of folate - targeted hapten therapy , since it prevents recurrence of the disease in patients that would otherwise relapse . Given these encouraging results , the folate - targeted hapten therapy now is in early clinical trials . 2 . 4 . Folate - Targeted Gene Therapy . Although a few re - ports exist regarding FR - targeted viral vectors for gene therapy , 76 obstacles including the immunogenicity of viral proteins and potential generation of infectious viral particles have redirected most of these efforts to folate - linked nonviral biocompatible polymeric gene carriers , such as cationic polymers , cationic peptides , cationic lipids , and so on . 77 However , because nonviral formulations lack the transfec - tion machinery inherent in many viral vectors , improved circulation times , strategies for endosomal escape , and methods for nuclear trafficking have had to be designed into the folate - targeted nonviral gene therapy vectors to render them efficacious . Cationic polymers have been utilized widely for folate - targeted gene delivery because of their ( 1 ) physiochemical versatility , ( 2 ) ease of manipulation , and ( 3 ) ability to con - dense DNA into compact complexes . Early efforts by Gottschalk et al . 78 and Reddy et al . 79 , 80 using folate - linked poly - L - lysine ( pLys ) and pLys - polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) complexes , respectively , yielded only low levels of reporter activity despite good gene delivery to FR þ cells . These early Figure 7 . Illustration of folate - hapten mediated immunotherapy . Mice previously immunized against a hapten ( e . g . , fluorescein ) are treated with a folate - hapten conjugate ( such as folate - fluorescein ) that can bind to cell surface FR . After binding of antifluorescein antibodies induced during the immunization , the cancer cell is recognized by Fc receptor - expressing immune cells , leading to cancer cell destruction by antibody - dependent cell cytotoxicity ( ADCC ) . Perspective Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 6817 studies indicated that efficient DNA delivery and gene expression required an endosomal disruption mechanism to release that DNA from its intracellular compartment . Unlike pLys , polyethylenimine ( PEI ) was known to pos - sess inherent endosomal lytic activity , serving as both a DNA - condensing agent and a proton sponge that could osmotically lyse its entrapping endosome ; 81 however , PEI also suffers from nonspecific uptake in the lungs and liver that can lead to unwanted toxicity . Thus , to achieve targeted gene delivery with minimal collateral toxicity , Benns et al . 82 linked folate to both ends of a monofunctionalized PEG and then grafted it to PEI ( FPF - g - PEI ) . The complex of FPF - g - PEI and a luciferase reporter gene achieved transfection in FR þ cancer cells in a FR - dependent manner . 82 However , because the barriers to in vivo delivery are much greater than those encountered in vitro , it will now be important to prove the utility of these complexes in tumor - bearing mice in vivo . Several cationic liposomal formulations that incorporate a lipophilic folate derivative as a targeting moiety have also been studied . In pioneering studies , Hofland et al . 83 per - formed the first in vivo folate - targeted gene transfer in a subcutaneous mouse tumor model using a folate - PEG - lipid / DNA complex . While a biodistribution analysis of the 111 In - labeled folate - targeted liposomes showed no im - provement in tumor - specific accumulation over nontargeted PEG - lipid / DNA complexes , attachment of folate - PEG to the cationic lipid / chloramphenicol acetyl transferase ( CAT ) reporter gene complex was found to significantly increase gene transfer activity in FR þ tumors while decreasing non - specific expression in the lungs 50 - to 100 - fold . 83 Although nonspecific gene transfer needs to be minimized further to generate an ideal DNA delivery formulation , the approach nonetheless provided the first in vivo proof of concept of systemically targeted gene delivery to tumors . Novel liposome / protamine / DNA formulations ( LPD ) have also been linked to folate to improve tumor - specific gene transfer . In an in vivo ascites tumor model , Reddy et al . 84 reported an 8 - to 10 - fold increase in tumor - associated gene transfer compared to a corresponding nontargeted LPD formulation . 84 Moreover , using an LPD - PEG - folate formulation to deliver the herpes simplex virus type - 1 ( HSV - 1 ) thymidine kinase ( TK ) gene into murine breast cancer cells , Bruckheimer et al . 85 demonstrated a greater reduction in mean tumor volume compared to either nontargeted LPD - PEG / TK , the vehicle alone , or an untreated control group . Significant efforts have also been devoted to optimizing folate - targeted constructs for improved gene delivery , from titrating the use of PEG , which can reduce nonspecific uptake and increase transfection efficiency , to minimization of vector size , which can improve extravasation of the vector into the tumor . Continued efforts toward these objectives should yield improved folate - targeted gene therapy vectors , as should research into enhancement of the efficiencies of endosomal escape and gene trafficking to the nucleus . 2 . 5 . Folate - Targeted Antisense Oligodeoxyribonucleotides ( ODN ) and Small Interfering RNAs ( siRNA ) . Using ODN or siRNA to ablate or modulate gene expression shows great promise as a method to arrest tumor cell growth and induce apoptosis largely because of the potential specificity of oligo - nucleotides for their complementary target mRNAs . Unfor - tunately , nonspecific activation of the immune system , 86 inadequate permeability of naked oligonucleotides to cell membranes , 87 indiscriminate uptake of cationic complexes of oligonucleotides by nonpathologic cells , 88 , 89 and insuffi - cient release of oligonucleotide complexes from endosomal compartments following uptake by endocytosis 88 , 90 have all compromised the potential of this important therapeutic strategy . While encapsulating / complexing oligonucleotides into liposomes , dendrimers , micelles , or nanoparticles has improved their pharmacokinetic properties , the same nano - complexes have generally been handicapped by reduced target cell binding and tumor specificity . 88 , 89 Thus , the major obstacle to developing antisense ODN and siRNA for use in therapeutic applications can be summarized as a problem in oligonucleotide delivery . As will be seen below , while attach - ment of folate as a targeting ligand can improve tumor - specific oligonucleotide delivery and associated gene knock - down , endosomalescapestrategieswillhavetobeimprovedto achieve the full potential of ODN and siRNA therapies . The simplest approach to folate - targeted delivery of siR - NA and ODN to solid tumors has involved direct attach - ment of one strand of the oligonucleotide to the γ - carboxyl of folic acid via some type of cleavable or releasable bridge . In one study , folate was covalently attached to a single stranded oligonucleotide that was complementary to a sin - gle - stranded overhang added to the end of the siRNA . 91 Upon base - pairing with the single stranded oligonucleotide extension , the folate - linked oligonucleotide was found to facilitate delivery of the attached siRNA into any cell expressing FR . The utility of this universal linker strategy was most clearly demonstrated in vitro by showing its ability to suppress expression of an R V integrin gene by 80 % in an FR þ cancer cell line . 91 In vivo demonstration of the ability of folate to target an attached oligonucleotide to solid tumors was achieved using a related but much simpler construct , where folate was attached to either the 3 0 - or 5 0 - end of the sense strand of an siRNA or ODN via a disulfide bond and the complementary antisense strand was labeled with a fluorescent dye ( e . g . , Dylight 647 or Cy5 ) . 16 Four hours after injecting the naked oligonucleotide into the tail vein of KB tumor - bearing mice , the mice were imaged and found to contain the fluorescent marker almost exclusively in the solid tumors ( Figure 8 ) . Since the targeting ligand ( i . e . , folate ) was not present on the strand labeled with the fluorescent dye , localization of fluorescence to the tumor demonstrated that the naked nucleotide duplex was delivered to the solid tumor intact . More sophisticated efforts to target siRNA / ODN to tumors in vivo with folate have focused on the use a cationic polymer to condense the ODN or siRNA prior to folate - targeted delivery . Citro et al . 92 covalently linked folate to a pLys chain and delivered c - myb sense and antisense ODNs to HL60 leukemia cells in vitro , reporting a down - regulation of c - myb expression and inhibition of proliferation in HL60 cells . 92 In similar fashion , Kim et al . 93 utilized a folate - targeted PEI - based cationic polymer for ODN / siRNA de - livery , which demonstrated enhanced cell uptake and more efficient green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) expression inhibi - tion in FR þ KB cells than nontargeted PEI . Importantly , the inhibitory difference between PEI - PEG - folate and non - targeted PEG - PEI disappeared when similar studies were performed in FR - negative A549 cells , suggesting an FR requirement for gene knockdown . 93 More recently , with the optimization of polymer architecture , a novel hydrophi - lic - block - cationic copolymer conjugated to folate with im - proved stability in circulation as well as fewer nonspecific side effects has been developed . 94 In vivo comparisons will 6818 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 Xia and Low obviously now be required to assess the full potentials of these and other copolymer blends for siRNA delivery . Cationic liposome - based formulations have also been investigated for improved tumor targeting via folate recep - tors . Initially , Wang et al . 95 constructed a folate - PEG - liposome formulation to deliver an ODN against epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) into KB cells . The folate - PEG - liposome complex was found to eliminate EGFR expression , alter cell morphology , and halt tumor cell growth . 95 Rait et al . 96 further showed that FR - targeted cationic liposomes ( without PEG ) were more efficient than the nonselective commercially available transfection re - agent , Lipofectin , in delivering anti - HER2 ODN into breast cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo . Notably , treatment with folate - liposome - ODN resulted in chemosensitization of the tumor cells , and inhibition of tumor growth was sustained for > 3 weeks after treatment . 96 This important publication constituted the first report of in vivo efficacy against tumors using a folate - targeted liposome delivery system for systemic ODN / siRNA therapy . Using a folate - PEG - liposome formulation , Leamon et al . 97 reported that nearly 100 000 ODN - loaded folate - targeted liposomes were taken up per KB cell in vitro during 1 h of incubation , and maximal FR loading was achieved with PEG linkers as low as 1000 Da . However , tumor - specific accumulation of the folate - targeted liposomes in vivo was unexpectedly no great - er than that of their nontargeted counterparts . 97 Somewhat related folate - linked lipid - based nanoparticles complexed with DNA have also been shown to display efficient delivery of synthetic siRNAs to tumors . 98 When HER2 siRNA was used as the test siRNA , the folate targeted formulation was found to inhibit KB tumor xenograft growth and selectively suppress HER2 protein expression significantly more than any comparable nontargeted formulation . 98 Folate - derivatized polyelectrolyte ( PEC ) micelles , whose assembly is driven by ionic interactions between a fola - te - PEG - ODN and PEI , have also been used for delivery of ODN to tumors . Biodistribution studies have revealed that these micellar ODN also concentrate in FR þ solid tumors following systemic administration . Although uptake was also high in several healthy tissues , probably due to macrophage scavenging , the data nonetheless suggest that folate - targeted micelles also exhibit potential for ODN delivery to cancer cells in vivo . 99 Most platforms employed to deliver siRNA to tumors rely on some intrinsic ability of the internalized polymer / nano - particle to escape its entrapping endosome and release its siRNA cargo into the cytoplasm . Although in vitro and in vivo studies with folate - targeted siRNAs have already de - monstrated suppression of specific genes , the extent of gene knockdown to date has generally been modest compared to the knockdown achieved with similar quantities of siRNA complexed with a cell permeabilizing agent such as lipofec - tamine . This and related comparisons suggest that most internalized oligonucleotides do not escape their endosomal compartments and enter the cytoplasm where they must function . While it is possible that optimization of nanopar - ticle size , solubility , nonspecific adsorption , and particle shape could lead to enhanced oligonucleotide potency in vivo , we believe that the greatest improvement in gene suppression will eventually be achieved when an efficient endosomal escape strategy can be developed . In our opinion , this goal should be the primary focus of future efforts in formulating siRNA and ODN delivery vehicles . 2 . 6 . Design of Folate - Targeted Nanoparticles . Nanoparti - cles can also be developed into effective delivery vehicles for chemotherapeuticagents , inpartbecausetheycan bedesigned to carry large quantities of therapeutic cargos in compart - ments characterized by a diversity of sizes , shapes , rheologic properties , and chemistries . 100 Moreover , since the vascula - ture is often incompletely / abnormally formed in solid tumors , oftendisplayinglargegapsof ∼ 300 - 800nmbetweenadjacent endothelial cells , nanoparticle extravasation and tumor accu - mulationcanbegreatlyenhancedatthesesites . 101 Thispassive accumulation of nanoparticles in solid tumors , together with thepoordrainageofthesame particles via a commonly flawed lymphatic system , can lead to significant accumulation of nanoparticles at malignant sites . How then might folate targeting be exploited to improve intratumoral delivery of nanoparticles ? In general , attach - ment of folate to nanoparticles , including liposomes , den - drimers , micelles , nanospheres , nanocapsules , nanowires , polyplexes , and lipoplexes , etc . , cannot enhance entry of the particle into a solid tumor , since the density of tumor blood vessels , the porosity of the tumor vasculature , and the compactness of the extracellular matrix will largely control perfusion pharmacokinetics of nanoparticles into tumor masses . Indeed , “binding site barrier effects” due to high affinity docking of the initial folate - labeled particles to exit a vasculature onto FR þ cancer cells directly adjacent to the blood vessels can actually reduce penetration of sub - sequent folate - targeted particles to sites further from the vasculature . 53 However , once a folate - linked nanoparticle arrives at an FR þ tumor cell , ligation of the particle to folate can only enhance its therapeutic efficacy , since folate will not only increase retention of the nanoparticle in the tumor mass Figure 8 . Folate - mediated targeting of fluorescent oligonucleo - tides to solid tumors in vivo , as visualized using a Kodak imaging station . 16 The mouse on the left was injected with nontargeted Dylight 647 - labeled siRNA , while the mouse on the right was injected with a folate - targeted version of the same siRNA . Perspective Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 6819 but also facilitate uptake of the particle by an FR - mediated endocytosis . A few examples of folate - targeted nanoparticle therapeutics will now be provided below to illustrate their potential . 2 . 6 . 1 . Folate - Targeted Liposomes . Liposomes are unila - mellar or multilamellar lipid assemblies that can entrap large quantities of hydrophilic molecules within their aqueous inter - iors or hydrophobic drugs within their hydrocarbon bilayers . Because of this diverse “carrying capacity” , as well as their desirable biocompatibility , 102 a number of liposomal drug formulationsareindevelopment , currentlyundergoingclinical trials , or already on the market . While no folate - targeted liposomes have yet achieved FDA approval , many have been employed successfully to deliver compounds to tumor cells in model systems with highly promising results . 79 , 98 , 103 - 114 The first folate - targeted liposome was prepared by attach - ing folate to the distal end of a PEG spacer that was in turn linked to the amino group of phosphatidylethanolamine ( folate - PEG - PE ) embedded in the liposome bilayer . 115 Initial binding studies with this formulation demonstrated that the length of the spacer between folate and the lipid anchor was critical , where a 250 A˚ PEG 3350 spacer yielded ∼ 37 times greater uptake than similar liposomes with a 23 A˚ maleiimidocaproyl - lysine - SH spacer . Unfortunately , these relatively “naked” liposomal formulations were found to suffer from short circulation times in vivo due to their nonspecific uptake by the reticuloendothelial system ( RES ) . Such nonspecific uptake , however , was subsequently over - come by incorporating 4 % nontargeted PEGylated lipid into the folate - targeted liposomes to mimic the commercially successful “stealth liposomes” . 103 Further improvements then emerged when it was observed that better tumor targeting could be achieved if the predominant PEGylated lipid com - prising the “stealth” coating contained a shorter PEG chain ( e . g . , PEG 2000 ) than the folate - derivatized lipid ( e . g . , PEG 3400 , PEG 5000 ) . 116 , 117 A mole fraction of 0 . 03 - 0 . 5 % folate - PEG - DSPE was then found to be optimal for effective delivery of the targeted “stealth” liposomes into FR þ cells . In fact , increasing the density of the folate ligand on the liposome surface above this mole fraction was observed to reduce net uptake of the liposome by the target cell . 84 , 103 , 116 , 117 Finally , in addition to folate - PEG - DSPE , two other lipo - philic folate derivatives have been reported to facilitate good liposome targeting to FR þ tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo . These are folate - PEG - cholesterol and folate - PEG - cholesteryl hemisuccinate ( CHEMS ) . 118 , 119 As with siRNA delivery , one obstacle found to limit the potencies of some folate - targeted liposomal drug formulations has been the poor efficiency of drug unloading following receptor - mediated uptake into FR þ cells . Because multivalent nanoparticles ( in contrast to monovalent folate - drug con - jugates ) encounter low pH endosomes during their intracellu - lar trafficking , 48 this problem has been addressed by exploring a number of pH - triggered liposome disrupting mechanisms . In one strategy , a pH sensitive membrane - destabilizing peptide has been entrapped together with the desired drug in a folate - targeted liposome . 120 , 121 Since the encapsulated peptide is designed to become fusogenic only at the low pH found in intracellular endosomes , these liposomes have been observed to unload their cargos only following internalization and trafficking to an acidic intracellular compartment . A second endosomal unloading strategy has been based on the propensity of vinyl ethers to hydrolyze at the low pH characteristic of late endosomes and lysosomes . By using such linkages toconnectthe fatty acyl component of a phospholipid to its glycerol backbone , Rui et al . 122 were able to generate diplasmenylcholine ( Figure 9 ) that would hydrolyze to lyso - lipid detergents upon trafficking to lysosomes . Employing such lipids to encapsulate cytosine arabinoside was found to increase the potency of the corresponding folate - targeted liposomal preparation 60 - fold compared to its pH - insensitive phosphatidylcholine counterpart . 80 , 122 In a third strategy , folate - linked liposomes were supple - mented with N - citraconyldioleoylphosphatidylethanolamine ( C - DOPE ) , which was shown to hydrolyze rapidly at pH 5 to yield the highly fusogenic lipid , DOPE . When incorporated with folate - PEG - DOPE into liposomes , the resulting for - mulation was found to remain stable at a neutral pH but become fusogenic at pH 5 , releasing an encapsulated plasmid intothetargetcellcytoplasm , therebyimprovingexpressionof the plasmid . 80 Finally , to improve liposome stability in the bloodstream , a novel serum - resistant pH - sensitive liposome formulation comprising egg phosphatidylcholine , CHEMS , oleyl alcohol , and Tween - 80 has been designed to deliver cytosine - b - D - arabinofuranoside ( Ara - C ) to FR þ KB cells . This interesting formulation has been reported to yield a 17 - fold improvement in cancer cell death compared to its non - pH sensitive counterpart . 123 Although each of the above mechanisms reports an im - provement in endosomal drug release , the use of different therapeutic cargos , unrelated cell lines , and distinct thera - peutic objectives has rendered a direct comparison of their efficacies impossible . Before considering any of these strate - gies for preclinical development , it will be important to compare their abilities to mediate each step of the delivery process directly in the same experimental system so that their relative strengths and weaknesses can be identified . Perhaps in this manner an optimal hybrid approach can eventually be designed that will efficiently deliver large quantities of therapeutic cargos into FR expressing cancer cells . 2 . 6 . 2 . Folate - Targeted Micelles . Over the past decade , polymeric micelles consisting of a hydrophilic shell and a hydrophobic core have become an attractive alternative delivery vehicle for hydrophobic molecules , including many anticancer drugs . 124 While maintaining some similarities with liposomal delivery systems , polymeric micelles exhibit one distinct advantage over liposomes : their much smaller size . Typically less than 50 nm in diameter , polymeric micelles can both evade RES uptake and escape renal filtration while concurrently maintaining enhanced vascular permeability and improved tumor penetration . Not surprisingly , nontar - geted micelles have been utilized extensively to deliver doxor - ubicin and paclitaxel to solid tumors through passive targeting , 125 - 127 but only recently have researchers explored the use of folate to improve the specificities of these formula - tions for tumor cells . Lee et al . 128 prepared a novel pH - sensitive polymeric mixed micelle ( PHSM ) consisting of PEG 2000 - poly - L - histi - dine ( MW = 5K ) and PEG 2000 - poly - L - lactic acid ( PLLA , Figure 9 . Chemical structure of diplasmenylcholine . 6820 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 Xia and Low MW = 3K ) block copolymers with or without folate con - jugation . When loaded with doxorubicin , the PHSM - folate micelles showed > 90 % cytotoxicity to doxorubicin - resis - tant MCF - 7 cells at 10 μ g / mL doxorubicin . 129 In mice bearing subcutaneous doxorubicin - resistant MCF - 7 / doxor - ubicin xenografts , the accumulated doxorubicin level of PHSM - folate in the solid tumors was 20 times higher than that of free doxorubicin and 3 times higher than nontargeted PHSM . Accordingly , the tumor volumes of mice treated with targeted PHSM - folate were found to be significantly smal - ler than the volumes of either control group . On the basis of other observations , it was also suggested that FR - mediated internalization of the formulation by the tumor cell followed by polyhistidine - induced micelle destabilization and drug release endowed the drug carrier with the ability to bypass multidrug efflux pumps . Although biodistribution studies indicated that some PHSM - folate also accumulated in the liver and spleen , the results nevertheless suggests that the PHSM - folate formulation warrants further explora - tion as a possible means for treating drug - resistant FR þ tumors . 129 While the above studies augur well for the future of folate - targeted micelles , a number of studies suggest that in vivo stability problems must be addressed if the formulations are to eventually reach the clinic . FRET imaging studies of dual - labeled micelles comprising a block copolymer derivatized with a fluorescence donor and an entrapped fluorescent drug mimetic revealed a 50 % decrease in FRET efficiency within 15 min of intravenous injection , implying that the micelle’s cargo is released quickly into the blood . 130 A similar FRET study has similarly shown that another diblock copolymer micelle releases its hydrophobic cargo rapidly upon contact with the plasma membrane of KB cells , significantly redu - cing the amount of cargo that is eventually delivered inside the tumor cell . 131 These studies raise the question of whether current micelle formulations can retain their cargos long enough for in vivo tumor delivery , and they suggest that future improvements to in vivo stability may be required to render such micellar drug carriers promising agents for targeted cancer therapies . 2 . 6 . 3 . Folate - Targeted Dendrimers . Dendrimers are syn - thetic , often biocompatible , nonimmunogenic , nanoscaled polymers that can be manufactured to specific sizes and reproducible surface characteristics . Because their surfaces can be densely functionalized , large amounts of diagnostic and / or therapeutic agents can be attached to these dendri - mers , rendering them highly compact drug delivery vehicles . The first folate - targeted dendrimers described in the lit - erature consisted of an ammonium - core polyamidoamine - core modified with folate as a targeting molecule and FITC as a fluorescent reporter . This targeted dendrimeric con - struct was then capped with succinic anhydride to render the remaining surface groups negatively charged to avoid non - specific cell adsorption . 132 When introduced to FR þ ery - throleukemia cells , the folate - dendrimer particle demon - strated biphasic uptake : rapid uptake within the first minutes ( attributed to the dendrimer’s initial binding to empty cell surface FR ) , followed by slower internalization attributed to endocytosis and recycling of FR back to the cell surface . Redesign of this folate - dendrimer construct to deliver an MRI contrast agent ( gadolinium ) provided good MRI con - trast both in vitro and in vivo in FR þ tumor xenografts . 132 Quintana et al . 133 then improved the folate - dendrimer de - sign by capping the dendrimer surface amines with hydroxyl and acetamide groups , which enhanced projection of the targeting ligand away from the nanoparticle surface , permit - ting greater access to cell surface FR . These dendrimers demonstrated increased capture by KB cells and better drug delivery into the same cell type . 133 Importantly , neutraliza - tion of the dendrimer’s amine surface charge was found to be essential to prevent toxicity and nonspecific uptake of the drug conjugate . Building on the above improvements , Kukowska - Latallo and co - workers 134 next evaluated the ability of folate - tar - geted , acetylated dendrimers to deliver anticancer therapeu - tics and imaging agents to human KB tumor xenografts in immune compromised mice . 134 In contrast to the corre - sponding nontargeted polymer , folate - conjugated nanopar - ticles accumulated in the tumor and liver tissue over 4 days following intravenous administration . Additionally , folate - targeting was found to both increase methotrexate’s anti - tumor activity and reduce its off - site toxicity . As proof of tumor targeting , tumor uptake of the dendrimer was shown to be attenuated by prior intravenous injection of free folic acid . 134 A later comparison of the release kinetics of a covalently conjugated methotrexate and a noncovalently complexed form of the same drug suggested that the former might be better suited for targeted drug delivery . 135 Despite their many positive properties ( including improved in vivo stability over most polymeric micelles ) , these particles suf - fered the same shortcoming as previous nontargeted den - drimers , showing significant accumulation in the liver , spleen , and heart 4 - 7 days postinjection . 134 Perhaps some type of stealth coating can eventually be designed to reduce off - target uptake while retaining the desirable size and stability characteristics of these important nanomedicines . 2 . 6 . 4 . Other Folate - Nanoparticle Drug Delivery Systems . Folate has also been conjugated to a host of other nanoparticle platforms , including superparamagnetic nanoparticles , 136 , 137 gold nanoparticles , 138 , 139 magnetite ( Fe 3 O 4 ) nanoparticles , 140 carbon nanotubes , 141 , 142 lipoprotein - based nanoplat - forms , 143 , 144 thermoresponsive microgels , 145 bovine serum al - bumin nanoparticles , 146 and virus capsid proteins . 147 , 148 Be - cause little data are available on the in vivo properties of these nanomedicines , 142 , 144 , 149 their potentials as novel drug carriers cannot be assessed at this juncture . However , in general , the design and application of such folate - targeted nanoparticles are similar to the folate - targeted nanomedicines described above in that the primary objective focuses on improved delivery of larger payloads and more hydrophobic drugs . Unfortunately , much like their better characterized counterparts , these particles may similarly suffer from compromised penetration into solid tumors and nonspecific uptake by macrophages in the liver , spleen , and other organs of the reticuloendothelial system . Use of PEGylation ( or a related coating ) to suppress macrophage recognition could conceivably reduce nonspecific uptake , but improvement of penetration into solid tumors will require creative strategies to digest or weaken the dense extracellular matrix that cements solid tumors together . 150 Further , because many nanoparticles carry their active components on their surfaces , an optimal ratio of PEG / PEG - folate / drug must still be determined to ensure adequate water solubility , good folate presentation , andmaximalRESevasion . Andincaseswherethe drug molecules are enclosed within the nanoparticle , they must still be released following target cell entry but not during transit to the tumor mass . Clearly , while tumor targeted nanoparticles offer attractive solutions to many problems plaguing small molecule delivery , they simultaneously introduce new obstacles Perspective Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 6821 oftheirownthatwillrequiresolutionsbeforetheirfullpotentialscanberealized . 3 . Conclusion and Future Directions The use of folate - conjugated drugs and drug - laden nano - formulations to treat solid tumors is poised to affect the management of many malignant diseases . While monovalent folate - drug conjugates will likely see clinical application in the verynearfuture , similartargetingstrategies maynotprove successful for delivery of many biologic therapies , including peptides , siRNA , oligodeoxyribonucleotides , gene therapy vectors , and proteins . For efficient tumor targeting of these macromolecular medicines , nanoparticulate formulations may be required . However , for nanoformulations to reach their full potential , they may have to overcome problems associated with ( 1 ) poor tumor penetration , ( 2 ) unwanted accumulation innontargeted tissues , and ( 3 ) inefficientrelease from endosomes . With improvements in these latter areas , use of folate to increase the selectivity and potency of nanoparti - culate therapeutics can also rapidly become a reality . Acknowledgment . This work was supported by a grant from Endocyte Inc . Conflict of Interest Statement : Philip S . Low is the Founder and Chief Science Officer of Endocyte Inc . , a biotechnology company dedicated to the clinical development of several of the described folate conjugates . Biographies Wei Xia received her B . S . degree in Pharmacy from Fudan University , Shanghai , China . Her graduate studies were under the direction of Dr . Philip S . Low at Purdue University , IN , where she received her Ph . D . in Chemistry . Her research inter - ests include the activities and targeting of activated immune cells in inflammatory diseases . Philip S . Low is the Ralph C . Corley Distinguished Professor of Chemistry at Purdue University , IN , and Founder and Chief Science Officer of Endocyte Inc . Dr . Low has published over 300 refereed articles and has received both of Purdue Univer - sity’s awards for outstanding research , an NIH Merit Award , and several national and international research awards . He currently serves on six editorial boards and several external advisory boards for major institutions . His research into recep - tor - targeted therapeutic and imaging agents has led to > 35 U . S . patents / patents pending , and development of these patents has yielded six targeted drugs that are currently undergoing human clinical trials for various cancers . One additional targeted drug from his research is in late preclinical development for treatment of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases . References ( 1 ) Pytel , D . ; Sliwinski , T . ; Poplawski , T . ; Ferriola , D . ; Majsterek , I . Tyrosine kinase blockers : new hope for successful cancer therapy . Anti - Cancer Agents Med . Chem . 2009 , 9 , 66 – 76 . ( 2 ) Druker , B . J . ; Tamura , S . ; Buchdunger , E . ; Ohno , S . ; Segal , G . M . ; Fanning , S . ; Zimmermann , J . ; Lydon , N . B . Effects of a selectiveinhibitorof theAbltyrosinekinaseonthegrowthofBcr - Abl positive cells . Nat . Med . 1996 , 2 , 561 – 566 . ( 3 ) Heath , V . L . ; Bicknell , R . Anticancer strategies involving the vasculature . Nat . Rev . Clin . Oncol . 2009 , 6 , 395 – 404 . ( 4 ) Finn , R . S . ; Zhu , A . X . Targeting angiogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma : focus on VEGF and bevacizumab . Expert Rev . Antic - ancer Ther . 2009 , 9 , 503 – 509 . ( 5 ) Lambert , J . M . Drug - conjugated monoclonal antibodies for the treatment of cancer . Curr . Opin . Pharmacol . 2005 , 5 , 543 – 549 . ( 6 ) Rao , A . V . ; Schmader , K . Monoclonal antibodies as targeted therapy in hematologic malignancies in older adults . Am . J . Geriatr . Pharmacother . 2007 , 5 , 247 – 262 . ( 7 ) Modjtahedi , H . ; Essapen , S . Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors in cancer treatment : advances , challenges and oppor - tunities . Anti - Cancer Drugs 2009 , 20 , 851 – 855 . ( 8 ) Garanger , E . ; Boturyn , D . ; Dumy , P . Tumor targetingwith RGD peptide ligands ; design of new molecular conjugates for imaging and therapy of cancers . Anti - Cancer Agents Med . Chem . 2007 , 7 , 552 – 558 . ( 9 ) Irache , J . M . ; Salman , H . H . ; Gamazo , C . ; Espuelas , S . Mannose - targeted systems for the delivery of therapeutics . Expert Opin . Drug Delivery 2008 , 5 , 703 – 724 . ( 10 ) Gupta , Y . ; Kohli , D . V . ; Jain , S . K . Vitamin B12 - mediated transport : a potential tool for tumor targeting of antineoplastic drugs and imaging agents . Crit . Rev . Ther . Drug Carrier Syst . 2008 , 25 , 347 – 379 . ( 11 ) Low , P . S . ; Kularatne , S . A . Folate - targeted therapeutic and imaging agents for cancer . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 2009 , 13 , 256 – 262 . ( 12 ) Carpenter , R . D . ; Andrei , M . ; Aina , O . H . ; Lau , E . Y . ; Lightstone , F . C . ; Liu , R . ; Lam , K . S . ; Kurth , M . J . Selectively targeting T - and B - cell lymphomas : a benzothiazole antagonist of alpha4 - beta1 integrin . J . Med . Chem . 2009 , 52 , 14 – 19 . ( 13 ) Kularatne , S . A . ; Wang , K . ; Santhapuram , H . K . ; Low , P . S . Prostate - specificmembraneantigentargetedimagingandtherapy of prostate cancer using a PSMA inhibitor as a homing ligand . Mol . Pharmaceutics 2009 , 6 , 780 – 789 . ( 14 ) Sega , E . I . ; Low , P . S . Tumor detection using folate receptor - targeted imaging agents . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 2008 , 27 , 655 – 664 . ( 15 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Parker , M . A . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Xu , L . C . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Vetzel , M . ; Douglas , N . Synthesisand biological evaluation ofEC20 : anewfolate - derived , ( 99m ) Tc - basedradiopharmaceutical . Bioconjugate Chem . 2002 , 13 , 1200 – 1210 . ( 16 ) Thomas , M . ; Kularatne , S . A . ; Qi , L . ; Kleindl , P . ; Leamon , C . P . ; Hansen , M . J . ; Low , P . S . Ligand - targeted delivery of small interfering RNAs to malignant cells and tissues . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 2009 , 1175 , 32 – 39 . ( 17 ) Low , P . S . ; Henne , W . A . ; Doorneweerd , D . D . Discovery and development of folic - acid - based receptor targeting for imaging andtherapyofcancerandinflammatorydiseases . Acc . Chem . Res . 2008 , 41 , 120 – 129 . ( 18 ) Tranoy - Opalinski , I . ; Fernandes , A . ; Thomas , M . ; Gesson , J . P . ; Papot , S . Design of self - immolative linkers for tumour - activated prodrug therapy . Anti - Cancer Agents Med . Chem . 2008 , 8 , 618 – 637 . ( 19 ) Ojima , I . Guided molecular missiles for tumor - targeting che - motherapy ; case studies using the second - generation taxoids as warheads . Acc . Chem . Res . 2008 , 41 , 108 – 119 . ( 20 ) Matherly , L . H . ; Hou , Z . ; Deng , Y . Humanreducedfolatecarrier : translation of basic biology to cancer etiology and therapy . Cancer Metastasis Rev . 2007 , 26 , 111 – 128 . ( 21 ) Zhao , R . ; Min , S . H . ; Wang , Y . ; Campanella , E . ; Low , P . S . ; Goldman , I . D . A role for the proton - coupled folate transporter ( PCFT - SLC46A1 ) in folate receptor - mediated endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 2009 , 284 , 4267 – 4274 . ( 22 ) Parker , N . ; Turk , M . J . ; Westrick , E . ; Lewis , J . D . ; Low , P . S . ; Leamon , C . P . Folate receptor expression in carcinomas and normal tissues determined by a quantitative radioligand binding assay . Anal . Biochem . 2005 , 338 , 284 – 293 . ( 23 ) Ross , J . F . ; Chaudhuri , P . K . ; Ratnam , M . Differential regulation offolatereceptorisoformsinnormalandmalignanttissuesinvivoandinestablishedcelllines . Physiologic and clinical implications . Cancer 1994 , 73 , 2432 – 2443 . ( 24 ) Kalli , K . R . ; Oberg , A . L . ; Keeney , G . L . ; Christianson , T . J . ; Low , P . S . ; Knutson , K . L . ; Hartmann , L . C . Folate receptor alpha as a tumor target in epithelial ovarian cancer . Gynecol . Oncol . 2008 , 108 , 619 – 626 . ( 25 ) Nakashima - Matsushita , N . ; Homma , T . ; Yu , S . ; Matsuda , T . ; Sunahara , N . ; Nakamura , T . ; Tsukano , M . ; Ratnam , M . ; Matsuyama , T . Selective expression of folate receptor beta and its possible role in methotrexate transport in synovial macrophages from patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 1999 , 42 , 1609 – 1616 . ( 26 ) van der Heijden , J . W . ; Oerlemans , R . ; Dijkmans , B . A . ; Qi , H . ; van der Laken , C . J . ; Lems , W . F . ; Jackman , A . L . ; Kraan , M . C . ; Tak , P . P . ; Ratnam , M . ; Jansen , G . Folate receptor beta as a potential delivery route for novel folate antagonists to macro - phages in the synovial tissue of rheumatoid arthritis patients . Arthritis Rheum . 2009 , 60 , 12 – 21 . ( 27 ) Xia , W . ; Hilgenbrink , A . R . ; Matteson , E . L . ; Lockwood , M . B . ; Cheng , J . X . ; Low , P . S . A functional folate receptor is induced during macrophage activation and can be used to target drugs to activated macrophages . Blood 2009 , 113 , 438 – 446 . 6822 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 Xia and Low ( 28 ) Turk , M . J . ; Breur , G . J . ; Widmer , W . R . ; Paulos , C . M . ; Xu , L . C . ; Grote , L . A . ; Low , P . S . Folate - targeted imaging of activated macrophages in rats with adjuvant - induced arthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 2002 , 46 , 1947 – 1955 . ( 29 ) Elnakat , H . ; Ratnam , M . Distribution , functionality and gene regulation of folate receptor isoforms : implications in targeted therapy . Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2004 , 56 , 1067 – 1084 . ( 30 ) Kamen , B . A . ; Smith , A . K . A review of folate receptor alpha cycling and 5 - methyltetrahydrofolate accumulation with an emphasis on cell models in vitro . Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2004 , 56 , 1085 – 1097 . ( 31 ) Yang , J . ; Chen , H . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Cheng , J . X . ; Low , P . S . Evaluation of disulfide reduction during receptor - mediated endocytosis by using FRET imaging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2006 , 103 , 13872 – 13877 . ( 32 ) Paulos , C . M . ; Turk , M . J . ; Breur , G . J . ; Low , P . S . Folate receptor - mediated targeting of therapeutic and imaging agents to activated macrophages in rheumatoid arthritis . Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2004 , 56 , 1205 – 1217 . ( 33 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Jackman , A . L . Exploitation of thefolatereceptor in the management of cancer and inflammatory disease . Vitam . Horm . 2008 , 79 , 203 – 233 . ( 34 ) Sandoval , R . M . ; Kennedy , M . D . ; Low , P . S . ; Molitoris , B . A . Uptake and trafficking of fluorescent conjugates of folic acid in intactkidneydeterminedusingintravitaltwo - photonmicroscopy . Am . J . Physiol . : Cell Physiol . 2004 , 287 , C517 – 526 . ( 35 ) Li , J . ; Sausville , E . A . ; Klein , P . J . ; Morgenstern , D . ; Leamon , C . P . ; Messmann , R . A . ; LoRusso , P . Clinical pharmacokinetics and exposure - toxicity relationship of a folate - Vinca alkaloid conjugate EC145 in cancer patients . J . Clin . Pharmacol . 2009 , 49 , 1467 – 1476 . ( 36 ) Sausville , E . A . ; LoRusso , P . ; Quinn , M . ; Forman , K . ; Leamon , C . P . ; Morgenstern , D . ; Bever , S . ; Messmann , R . A . A Phase I StudyofEC145AdministeredWeeks1and3ofa4 - WeekCyclein Patients with Refractory Solid Tumors . ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings , 2007 ; AmericanSocietyofClinicalOncology : Alexandria , VA , 2007 ; p 2577 . ( 37 ) Chancy , C . D . ; Kekuda , R . ; Huang , W . ; Prasad , P . D . ; Kuhnel , J . M . ; Sirotnak , F . M . ; Roon , P . ; Ganapathy , V . ; Smith , S . B . Expression and differential polarization of the reduced - folate transporter - 1 and the folate receptor alpha in mammalian retinal pigment epithelium . J . Biol . Chem . 2000 , 275 , 20676 – 20684 . ( 38 ) Mantovani , L . T . ; Miotti , S . ; Menard , S . ; Canevari , S . ; Raspa - gliesi , F . ; Bottini , C . ; Bottero , F . ; Colnaghi , M . I . Folate binding protein distribution in normal tissues and biological fluids from ovarian carcinoma patients as detected by the monoclonal anti - bodies MOv18 and MOv19 . Eur . J . Cancer . 1994 , 30A , 363 – 369 . ( 39 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Westrick , E . ; Parker , N . ; Nicoson , J . S . ; Vetzel , M . Comparative preclinical activity of the folate - targeted Vinca alkaloid conjugates EC140 and EC145 . Int . J . Cancer 2007 , 121 , 1585 – 1592 . ( 40 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Westrick , E . ; Dawson , A . ; Dorton , R . ; Vetzel , M . ; Santhapuram , H . K . ; Wang , Y . Preclinical antitumor activity of a novel folate - targeted dual drug conjugate . Mol . Pharmaceutics 2007 , 4 , 659 – 667 . ( 41 ) Lu , Y . ; Low , P . S . Folate targeting of haptens to cancer cell surfaces mediates immunotherapy of syngeneic murine tumors . Cancer Immunol . Immunother . 2002 , 51 , 153 – 162 . ( 42 ) Wang , S . ; Luo , J . ; Lantrip , D . A . ; Waters , D . J . ; Mathias , C . J . ; Green , M . A . ; Fuchs , P . L . ; Low , P . S . Design and synthesis of [ 111 In ] DTPA - folate for use as a tumor - targeted radiopharmaceu - tical . Bioconjugate Chem . 1997 , 8 , 673 – 679 . ( 43 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Pastan , I . ; Low , P . S . Cytotoxicity of folate - Pseudomonas exotoxinconjugatestowardtumorcells . Contribution of translocation domain . J . Biol . Chem . 1993 , 268 , 24847 – 24854 . ( 44 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Low , P . S . Cytotoxicity of momordin - folate conjugates in cultured human cells . J . Biol . Chem . 1992 , 267 , 24966 – 24971 . ( 45 ) Mayor , S . ; Sabharanjak , S . ; Maxfield , F . R . Cholesterol - dependent retention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . EMBO J . 1998 , 17 , 4626 – 4638 . ( 46 ) Kamen , B . A . ; Capdevila , A . Receptor - mediated folate accumu - lation is regulated by the cellular folate content . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1986 , 83 , 5983 – 5987 . ( 47 ) Ladino , C . A . ; Chari , R . V . ; Bourret , L . A . ; Kedersha , N . L . ; Goldmacher , V . S . Folate - maytansinoids : target - selective drugs of low molecular weight . Int . J . Cancer 1997 , 73 , 859 – 864 . ( 48 ) Lee , R . J . ; Wang , S . ; Low , P . S . Measurement of endosome pH following folate receptor - mediated endocytosis . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1996 , 1312 , 237 – 242 . ( 49 ) Lee , J . W . ; Lu , J . Y . ; Low , P . S . ; Fuchs , P . L . Synthesis and evaluation of Taxol - folic acid conjugates as targeted antineoplas - tics . Bioorg . Med . Chem . 2002 , 10 , 2397 – 2414 . ( 50 ) Yang , J . ; Chen , H . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Cheng , J . X . ; Low , P . S . Characterization of the pH of folate receptor - containing endosomes and the rate of hydrolysis of internalized acid - labile folate - drug conjugates . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 2007 , 321 , 462 – 468 . ( 51 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Kleindl , P . J . ; Vetzel , M . ; Westrick , E . Synthesis and biological evaluation of EC140 : a novel folate - targeted vinca alkaloid conjugate . Bioconjugate Chem . 2006 , 17 , 1226 – 1232 . ( 52 ) Reddy , J . A . ; Dorton , R . ; Westrick , E . ; Dawson , A . ; Smith , T . ; Xu , L . C . ; Vetzel , M . ; Kleindl , P . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Leamon , C . P . Preclinical evaluation of EC145 , a folate - vinca alkaloid conju - gate . Cancer Res . 2007 , 67 , 4434 – 4442 . ( 53 ) Vlashi , E . ; Sturgis , J . E . ; Thomas , M . ; Low , P . S . Real time , noninvasive imaging and quantitation of the accumulation of ligand - targeted drugs into receptor - expressing solid tumors . Mol . Pharmaceutics 2009 , 6 , 1868 – 1875 . ( 54 ) Wang , S . ; Lee , R . J . ; Mathias , C . J . ; Green , M . A . ; Low , P . S . Synthesis , purification , and tumor cell uptake of 67Ga - deferox - amine - folate , a potential radiopharmaceutical for tumor imaging . Bioconjugate Chem . 1996 , 7 , 56 – 62 . ( 55 ) Reddy , J . A . ; Westrick , E . ; Santhapuram , H . K . ; Howard , S . J . ; Miller , M . L . ; Vetzel , M . ; Vlahov , I . ; Chari , R . V . ; Goldmacher , V . S . ; Leamon , C . P . Folatereceptor - specificantitumoractivityof EC131 , a folate - maytansinoid conjugate . Cancer Res . 2007 , 67 , 6376 – 6382 . ( 56 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Vetzel , M . ; Dorton , R . ; Westrick , E . ; Parker , N . ; Wang , Y . ; Vlahov , I . Folate targeting enables durable and specific antitumor responses from a therapeutically null tubulysin B analogue . Cancer Res . 2008 , 68 , 9839 – 9844 . ( 57 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Vlahov , I . R . ; Vetzel , M . ; Parker , N . ; Nicoson , J . S . ; Xu , L . C . ; Westrick , E . Synthesis and biological evaluation of EC72 : a new folate - targeted chemotherapeutic . Bioconjugate Chem . 2005 , 16 , 803 – 811 . ( 58 ) Henne , W . A . ; Doorneweerd , D . D . ; Hilgenbrink , A . R . ; Kular - atne , S . A . ; Low , P . S . Synthesis and activity of a folate peptide camptothecin prodrug . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 2006 , 16 , 5350 – 5355 . ( 59 ) Crippa , F . ; Bolis , G . ; Seregni , E . ; Gavoni , N . ; Scarfone , G . ; Ferraris , C . ; Buraggi , G . L . ; Bombardieri , E . Single - dose intra - peritoneal radioimmunotherapy with the murine monoclonal antibody I - 131 MOv18 : clinical results in patients with minimal residual disease of ovarian cancer . Eur . J . Cancer 1995 , 31A , 686 – 690 . ( 60 ) Canevari , S . ; Stoter , G . ; Arienti , F . ; Bolls , G . ; Colnaghi , M . I . ; Di Re , E . M . ; Eggermont , A . M . ; Goey , S . H . ; Gratama , J . W . ; Lamers , C . H . ; Nooy , M . A . ; Parmiani , G . ; Raspagliesi , F . ; Ravagnani , F . ; Scarfone , G . ; Trimbos , J . B . ; Warnaar , S . O . ; Bolhuis , R . L . Regression of advanced ovarian carcinoma by intraperitoneal treatment with autologous T lymphocytes retar - geted by a bispecific monoclonal antibody . J . Natl . Cancer . Inst . 1995 , 87 , 1463 – 1469 . ( 61 ) Melani , C . ; Figini , M . ; Nicosia , D . ; Luison , E . ; Ramakrishna , V . ; Casorati , G . ; Parmiani , G . ; Eshhar , Z . ; Canevari , S . ; Colombo , M . P . Targeting of interleukin 2 to human ovarian carcinoma by fusion with a single - chain Fv of antifolate receptor antibody . Cancer Res . 1998 , 58 , 4146 – 4154 . ( 62 ) Spannuth , W . A . ; Sood , A . K . ; Coleman , R . L . Farletuzumab in epithelial ovarian carcinoma . Expert Opin . Biol . Ther . 2010 , 10 , 431 – 437 . ( 63 ) Kranz , D . M . ; Patrick , T . A . ; Brigle , K . E . ; Spinella , M . J . ; Roy , E . J . Conjugates of folate and anti - T - cell - receptor antibodies specifically target folate - receptor - positive tumor cells for lysis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1995 , 92 , 9057 – 9061 . ( 64 ) Cho , B . K . ; Roy , E . J . ; Patrick , T . A . ; Kranz , D . M . Single - chain Fv / folate conjugates mediate efficient lysis of folate - receptor - positive tumor cells . Bioconjugate Chem . 1997 , 8 , 338 – 346 . ( 65 ) Rund , L . A . ; Cho , B . K . ; Manning , T . C . ; Holler , P . D . ; Roy , E . J . ; Kranz , D . M . Bispecific agents target endogenous murine T cells againsthumantumorxenografts . Int . J . Cancer 1999 , 83 , 141 – 149 . ( 66 ) Knutson , K . L . ; Krco , C . J . ; Erskine , C . L . ; Goodman , K . ; Kelemen , L . E . ; Wettstein , P . J . ; Low , P . S . ; Hartmann , L . C . ; Kalli , K . R . T - Cell immunity to the folate receptor alpha is prevalent in women with breast or ovarian cancer . J . Clin . Oncol . 2006 , 24 , 4254 – 4261 . ( 67 ) Lu , Y . ; Low , P . S . Immunotherapy of folate receptor - expressing tumors : review of recent advances and future prospects . J . Con - trolled Release 2003 , 91 , 17 – 29 . ( 68 ) Yi , Y . S . ; Ayala - Lopez , W . ; Kularatne , S . A . ; Low , P . S . Folate - targeted hapten immunotherapy of adjuvant - induced arthritis : comparison of hapten potencies . Mol . Pharmaceutics 2009 , 6 , 1228 – 1236 . Perspective Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 6823 ( 69 ) Miotti , S . ; Canevari , S . ; Menard , S . ; Mezzanzanica , D . ; Porro , G . ; Pupa , S . M . ; Regazzoni , M . ; Tagliabue , E . ; Colnaghi , M . I . Characterization of human ovarian carcinoma - associated anti - gens defined by novel monoclonal antibodies with tumor - re - stricted specificity . Int . J . Cancer 1987 , 39 , 297 – 303 . ( 70 ) Coney , L . R . ; Tomassetti , A . ; Carayannopoulos , L . ; Frasca , V . ; Kamen , B . A . ; Colnaghi , M . I . ; Zurawski , V . R . , Jr . Cloning of a tumor - associated antigen : MOv18 and MOv19 antibodies recog - nize a folate - binding protein . Cancer Res . 1991 , 51 , 6125 – 6132 . ( 71 ) Smith - Jones , P . M . ; Pandit - Taskar , N . ; Cao , W . ; O’Donoghue , J . ; Philips , M . D . ; Carrasquillo , J . ; Konner , J . A . ; Old , L . J . ; Larson , S . M . Preclinical radioimmunotargeting of folate receptor alpha using the monoclonal antibody conjugate DOTA - MORAb - 003 . Nucl . Med . Biol . 2008 , 35 , 343 – 351 . ( 72 ) Coney , L . R . ; Mezzanzanica , D . ; Sanborn , D . ; Casalini , P . ; Colnaghi , M . I . ; Zurawski , V . R . , Jr . Chimeric murine - human antibodies directed against folate binding receptor are efficient mediators of ovarian carcinoma cell killing . Cancer Res . 1994 , 54 , 2448 – 2455 . ( 73 ) Figini , M . ; Marks , J . D . ; Winter , G . ; Griffiths , A . D . In vitro assemblyofrepertoiresofantibodychainsonthesurfaceofphagebyrenaturation . J . Mol . Biol . 1994 , 239 , 68 – 78 . ( 74 ) Figini , M . ; Martin , F . ; Ferri , R . ; Luison , E . ; Ripamonti , E . ; Zacchetti , A . ; Mortarino , M . ; Di Cioccio , V . ; Maurizi , G . ; Allegretti , M . ; Canevari , S . Conversion of murine antibodies to human antibodies and their optimization for ovarian cancer therapy targeted to the folate receptor . Cancer Immunol . Immun - other . 2009 , 58 , 531 – 546 . ( 75 ) Lu , Y . ; Sega , E . ; Low , P . S . Folatereceptor - targetedimmunother - apy : induction of humoral and cellular immunity against hapten - decorated cancer cells . Int . J . Cancer 2005 , 116 , 710 – 719 . ( 76 ) Douglas , J . T . ; Rogers , B . E . ; Rosenfeld , M . E . ; Michael , S . I . ; Feng , M . ; Curiel , D . T . Targeted gene delivery by tropism - modified adenoviral vectors . Nat . Biotechnol . 1996 , 14 , 1574 – 1578 . ( 77 ) El - Aneed , A . An overview of current delivery systems in cancer gene therapy . J . Controlled Release 2004 , 94 , 1 – 14 . ( 78 ) Gottschalk , S . ; Cristiano , R . J . ; Smith , L . C . ; Woo , S . L . Folate receptor mediated DNA delivery into tumor cells : potosomal disruption results in enhanced gene expression . Gene Ther . 1994 , 1 , 185 – 191 . ( 79 ) Reddy , J . A . ; Dean , D . ; Kennedy , M . D . ; Low , P . S . Optimization of folate - conjugated liposomal vectors for folate receptor - mediated gene therapy . J . Pharm . Sci . 1999 , 88 , 1112 – 1118 . ( 80 ) Reddy , J . A . ; Low , P . S . Enhanced folate receptor mediated gene therapyusinganovelpH - sensitivelipidformulation . J . Controlled Release 2000 , 64 , 27 – 37 . ( 81 ) Lungwitz , U . ; Breunig , M . ; Blunk , T . ; Gopferich , A . Polyethyle - nimine - based non - viral gene delivery systems . Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 2005 , 60 , 247 – 266 . ( 82 ) Benns , J . M . ; Maheshwari , A . ; Furgeson , D . Y . ; Mahato , R . I . ; Kim , S . W . Folate - PEG - folate - graft - polyethylenimine - based gene delivery . J . Drug Targeting 2001 , 9 , 123 – 139 . ( 83 ) Hofland , H . E . ; Masson , C . ; Iginla , S . ; Osetinsky , I . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Leamon , C . P . ; Scherman , D . ; Bessodes , M . ; Wils , P . Folate - targeted gene transfer in vivo . Mol . Ther . 2002 , 5 , 739 – 744 . ( 84 ) Reddy , J . A . ; Abburi , C . ; Hofland , H . ; Howard , S . J . ; Vlahov , I . ; Wils , P . ; Leamon , C . P . Folate - targeted , cationic liposome - mediatedgene transfer into disseminated peritoneal tumors . Gene Ther . 2002 , 9 , 1542 – 1550 . ( 85 ) Bruckheimer , E . ; Harvie , P . ; Orthel , J . ; Dutzar , B . ; Furstoss , K . ; Mebel , E . ; Anklesaria , P . ; Paul , R . In vivo efficacy of folate - targeted lipid - protamine - DNA ( LPD - PEG - folate ) complexes in an immunocompetent syngeneic model for breast adenocarcino - ma . Cancer Gene Ther . 2004 , 11 , 128 – 134 . ( 86 ) Robbins , M . ; Judge , A . ; MacLachlan , I . siRNA and innate immunity . Oligonucleotides 2009 , 19 , 89 – 102 . ( 87 ) Behlke , M . A . ProgresstowardsinvivouseofsiRNAs . Mol . Ther . 2006 , 13 , 644 – 670 . ( 88 ) Yu , B . ; Zhao , X . ; Lee , L . J . ; Lee , R . J . Targeted delivery systems for oligonucleotide therapeutics . AAPS J . 2009 , 11 , 195 – 203 . ( 89 ) Pirollo , K . F . ; Chang , E . H . Targeted delivery of small interfering RNA : approaching effective cancer therapies . Cancer Res . 2008 , 68 , 1247 – 1250 . ( 90 ) Dominska , M . ; Dykxhoorn , D . M . Breaking down the barriers : siRNAdeliveryandendosomeescape . J . CellSci . 2010 , 123 , 1183 – 1189 . ( 91 ) Zhang , K . ; Wang , Q . ; Xie , Y . ; Mor , G . ; Sega , E . ; Low , P . S . ; Huang , Y . Receptor - mediated delivery of siRNAs by tethered nucleic acid base - paired interactions . RNA 2008 , 14 , 577 – 583 . ( 92 ) Citro , G . ; Szczylik , C . ; Ginobbi , P . ; Zupi , G . ; Calabretta , B . Inhibitionofleukaemiacellproliferationbyfolicacid - polylysine - mediated introductionof c - myb antisenseoligodeoxynucleotides into HL - 60 cells . Br . J . Cancer . 1994 , 69 , 463 – 467 . ( 93 ) Kim , S . H . ; Jeong , J . H . ; Cho , K . C . ; Kim , S . W . ; Park , T . G . Target - specificgenesilencingbysiRNAplasmidDNAcomplexed with folate - modified poly ( ethylenimine ) . J . Controlled Release 2005 , 104 , 223 – 232 . ( 94 ) York , A . W . ; Zhang , Y . ; Holley , A . C . ; Guo , Y . ; Huang , F . ; McCormick , C . L . Facile synthesis of multivalent folate - block copolymer conjugates via aqueous RAFT polymerization : targeted delivery of siRNA and subsequent gene suppression . Biomacromolecules 2009 , 10 , 936 – 943 . ( 95 ) Wang , S . ; Lee , R . J . ; Cauchon , G . ; Gorenstein , D . G . ; Low , P . S . Delivery of antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides against the hu - man epidermal growth factor receptor into cultured KB cells with liposomesconjugatedtofolateviapolyethyleneglycol . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1995 , 92 , 3318 – 3322 . ( 96 ) Rait , A . S . ; Pirollo , K . F . ; Xiang , L . ; Ulick , D . ; Chang , E . H . Tumor - targeting , systemically deliveredantisense HER - 2chemo - sensitizes human breast cancer xenografts irrespective of HER - 2 levels . Mol . Med . 2002 , 8 , 475 – 486 . ( 97 ) Leamon , C . P . ; Cooper , S . R . ; Hardee , G . E . Folate - liposome - mediatedantisenseoligodeoxynucleotidetargetingtocancercells : evaluationin vitroand invivo . Bioconjugate Chem . 2003 , 14 , 738 – 747 . ( 98 ) Yoshizawa , T . ; Hattori , Y . ; Hakoshima , M . ; Koga , K . ; Maitani , Y . Folate - linked lipid - based nanoparticles for synthetic siRNA delivery in KB tumor xenografts . Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 2008 , 70 , 718 – 725 . ( 99 ) Jeong , J . H . ; Kim , S . H . ; Kim , S . W . ; Park , T . G . In vivo tumor targeting of ODN - PEG - folic acid / PEI polyelectrolyte complex micelles . J . Biomater . Sci . , Polym . Ed . 2005 , 16 , 1409 – 1419 . ( 100 ) van Vlerken , L . E . ; Amiji , M . M . Multi - functional polymeric nanoparticles for tumour - targeted drug delivery . Expert Opin . Drug Delivery 2006 , 3 , 205 – 216 . ( 101 ) Hobbs , S . K . ; Monsky , W . L . ; Yuan , F . ; Roberts , W . G . ; Griffith , L . ; Torchilin , V . P . ; Jain , R . K . Regulation of transport pathways in tumor vessels : role of tumor type and microenvironment . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 1998 , 95 , 4607 – 4612 . ( 102 ) Immordino , M . L . ; Dosio , F . ; Cattel , L . Stealthliposomes : review of the basic science , rationale , and clinical applications , existing and potential . Int . J . Nanomed . 2006 , 1 , 297 – 315 . ( 103 ) Lee , R . J . ; Low , P . S . Folate - mediated tumor cell targeting of liposome - entrapped doxorubicin in vitro . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1995 , 1233 , 134 – 144 . ( 104 ) Anderson , K . E . ; Eliot , L . A . ; Stevenson , B . R . ; Rogers , J . A . Formulation and evaluation of a folic acid receptor - targeted oral vancomycin liposomal dosage form . Pharm . Res . 2001 , 18 , 316 – 322 . ( 105 ) Pan , X . Q . ; Zheng , X . ; Shi , G . ; Wang , H . ; Ratnam , M . ; Lee , R . J . Strategy for the treatment of acute myelogenous leukemia based on folate receptor beta - targeted liposomal doxorubicin combined with receptor induction using all - trans retinoic acid . Blood 2002 , 100 , 594 – 602 . ( 106 ) Gabizon , A . ; Shmeeda , H . ; Horowitz , A . T . ; Zalipsky , S . Tumor cell targeting of liposome - entrapped drugs with phospholipid - anchored folic acid - PEG conjugates . Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2004 , 56 , 1177 – 1192 . ( 107 ) Gabizon , A . ; Horowitz , A . T . ; Goren , D . ; Tzemach , D . ; Shmeeda , H . ; Zalipsky , S . In vivo fate of folate - targeted polyethylene - glycol liposomes in tumor - bearing mice . Clin . Cancer Res . 2003 , 9 , 6551 – 6559 . ( 108 ) Ni , S . ; Stephenson , S . M . ; Lee , R . J . Folate receptor targeted delivery of liposomal daunorubicin into tumor cells . Anticancer Res . 2002 , 22 , 2131 – 2135 . ( 109 ) Saul , J . M . ; Annapragada , A . ; Natarajan , J . V . ; Bellamkonda , R . V . Controlledtargetingof liposomaldoxorubicinviathefolate receptor in vitro . J . Controlled Release 2003 , 92 , 49 – 67 . ( 110 ) Shi , G . ; Guo , W . ; Stephenson , S . M . ; Lee , R . J . Efficient intra - cellular drug and gene delivery using folate receptor - targeted pH - sensitive liposomes composed of cationic / anionic lipid combina - tions . J . Controlled Release 2002 , 80 , 309 – 319 . ( 111 ) Pan , X . Q . ; Wang , H . ; Lee , R . J . Boron delivery to a murine lung carcinoma using folate receptor - targeted liposomes . Anticancer Res . 2002 , 22 , 1629 – 1633 . ( 112 ) Stephenson , S . M . ; Yang , W . ; Stevens , P . J . ; Tjarks , W . ; Barth , R . F . ; Lee , R . J . Folate receptor - targeted liposomes as possible delivery vehicles for boron neutron capture therapy . Anticancer Res . 2003 , 23 , 3341 – 3345 . ( 113 ) Thirumamagal , B . T . ; Zhao , X . B . ; Bandyopadhyaya , A . K . ; Naranyanasamy , S . ; Johnsamuel , J . ; Tiwari , R . ; Golightly , D . W . ; Patel , V . ; Jehning , B . T . ; Backer , M . V . ; Barth , R . F . ; Lee , R . J . ; Backer , J . M . ; Tjarks , W . Receptor - targeted liposomal 6824 Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 2010 , Vol . 53 , No . 19 Xia and Low delivery of boron - containing cholesterol mimics for boron neutron capture therapy ( BNCT ) . Bioconjugate Chem . 2006 , 17 , 1141 – 1150 . ( 114 ) Henriksen , G . ; Schoultz , B . W . ; Michaelsen , T . E . ; Bruland , O . S . ; Larsen , R . H . Stericallystabilizedliposomesasacarrierforalpha - emitting radium and actinium radionuclides . Nucl . Med . Biol . 2004 , 31 , 441 – 449 . ( 115 ) Lee , R . J . ; Low , P . S . Delivery of liposomes into cultured KB cells viafolatereceptor - mediatedendocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 1994 , 269 , 3198 – 3204 . ( 116 ) Gabizon , A . ; Horowitz , A . T . ; Goren , D . ; Tzemach , D . ; Mandelbaum - Shavit , F . ; Qazen , M . M . ; Zalipsky , S . Targeting folate receptor with folate linked to extremities of poly ( ethylene glycol ) - grafted liposomes : in vitro studies . Bioconjugate Chem . 1999 , 10 , 289 – 298 . ( 117 ) Yamada , A . ; Taniguchi , Y . ; Kawano , K . ; Honda , T . ; Hattori , Y . ; Maitani , Y . Design of folate - linked liposomal doxorubicin to its antitumor effect in mice . Clin . Cancer . Res . 2008 , 14 , 8161 – 8168 . ( 118 ) Zhao , X . B . ; Muthusamy , N . ; Byrd , J . C . ; Lee , R . J . Cholesterolas a bilayer anchor for PEGylation and targeting ligand in folate - receptor - targeted liposomes . J . Pharm . Sci . 2007 , 96 , 2424 – 2435 . ( 119 ) Xiang , G . ; Wu , J . ; Lu , Y . ; Liu , Z . ; Lee , R . J . Synthesis and evaluation of a novel ligand for folate - mediated targeting lipo - somes . Int . J . Pharm . 2008 , 356 , 29 – 36 . ( 120 ) Vogel , K . ; Wang , S . ; Lee , R . J . ; Chmielewski , J . ; Low , P . S . Peptide - mediated release of folate - targeted liposome contents from endosomalcompartments . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1996 , 118 , 1581 – 1586 . ( 121 ) Turk , M . J . ; Reddy , J . A . ; Chmielewski , J . A . ; Low , P . S . Characterization of a novel pH - sensitive peptide that enhances drug release from folate - targeted liposomes at endosomal pHs . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 2002 , 1559 , 56 – 68 . ( 122 ) Rui , Y . ; Wang , S . ; Low , P . S . ; Thompson , D . H . Diplasmenylcho - line - folate liposomes : an efficient vehicle for intracellular drug delivery . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 1998 , 120 , 11213 – 11218 . ( 123 ) Sudimack , J . J . ; Guo , W . ; Tjarks , W . ; Lee , R . J . A novel pH - sensitive liposome formulation containing oleyl alcohol . Bio - chim . Biophys . Acta 2002 , 1564 , 31 – 37 . ( 124 ) Liggins , R . T . ; Burt , H . M . Polyether - polyester diblock copoly - mers for the preparation of paclitaxel loaded polymeric micelle formulations . Adv . Drug . Delivery Rev . 2002 , 54 , 191 – 202 . ( 125 ) Yokoyama , M . ; Kwon , G . S . ; Okano , T . ; Sakurai , Y . ; Seto , T . ; Kataoka , K . Preparation of micelle - forming polymer - drug conjugates . Bioconjugate Chem . 1992 , 3 , 295 – 301 . ( 126 ) Yoo , H . S . ; Lee , E . A . ; Park , T . G . Doxorubicin - conjugated biodegradable polymeric micelles having acid - cleavable linkages . J . Controlled Release 2002 , 82 , 17 – 27 . ( 127 ) Kwon , G . S . ; Okano , T . Soluble self - assembled block copolymers for drug delivery . Pharm . Res . 1999 , 16 , 597 – 600 . ( 128 ) Lee , E . S . ; Na , K . ; Bae , Y . H . Polymeric micelle for tumor pH and folate - mediated targeting . J . Controlled Release 2003 , 91 , 103 – 113 . ( 129 ) Lee , E . S . ; Na , K . ; Bae , Y . H . Doxorubicin loaded pH - sensitive polymeric micelles for reversal of resistant MCF - 7 tumor . J . Controlled Release 2005 , 103 , 405 – 418 . ( 130 ) Chen , H . ; Kim , S . ; He , W . ; Wang , H . ; Low , P . S . ; Park , K . ; Cheng , J . X . Fast release of lipophilic agents from circulating PEG - PDLLA micelles revealed by in vivo Forster resonance energy transfer imaging . Langmuir 2008 , 24 , 5213 – 5217 . ( 131 ) Chen , H . ; Kim , S . ; Li , L . ; Wang , S . ; Park , K . ; Cheng , J . X . Release of hydrophobic molecules from polymer micelles into cell mem - branes revealed by Forster resonance energy transfer imaging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2008 , 105 , 6596 – 6601 . ( 132 ) Konda , S . D . ; Wang , S . ; Brechbiel , M . ; Wiener , E . C . Biodistribu - tion of a 153 Gd - folate dendrimer , generation = 4 , in mice with folate - receptor positive and negative ovarian tumor xenografts . Invest . Radiol . 2002 , 37 , 199 – 204 . ( 133 ) Quintana , A . ; Raczka , E . ; Piehler , L . ; Lee , I . ; Myc , A . ; Majoros , I . ; Patri , A . K . ; Thomas , T . ; Mule , J . ; Baker , J . R . , Jr . Design and function of a dendrimer - based therapeutic nanodevice targetedto tumor cells through the folate receptor . Pharm . Res . 2002 , 19 , 1310 – 1316 . ( 134 ) Kukowska - Latallo , J . F . ; Candido , K . A . ; Cao , Z . ; Nigavekar , S . S . ; Majoros , I . J . ; Thomas , T . P . ; Balogh , L . P . ; Khan , M . K . ; Baker , J . R . , Jr . Nanoparticle targeting of anticancer drug im - proves therapeutic response in animal model of human epithelial cancer . Cancer Res . 2005 , 65 , 5317 – 5324 . ( 135 ) Patri , A . K . ; Kukowska - Latallo , J . F . ; Baker , J . R . , Jr . Targeted drug delivery with dendrimers : comparison of the release kinetics of covalently conjugated drug and non - covalent drug inclusion complex . Adv . Drug Delivery Rev . 2005 , 57 , 2203 – 2214 . ( 136 ) Sonvico , F . ; Mornet , S . ; Vasseur , S . ; Dubernet , C . ; Jaillard , D . ; Degrouard , J . ; Hoebeke , J . ; Duguet , E . ; Colombo , P . ; Couvreur , P . Folate - conjugated iron oxide nanoparticles for solid tumor targeting as potential specific magnetic hyperthermia mediators : synthesis , physicochemical characterization , and in vitro experi - ments . Bioconjugate Chem . 2005 , 16 , 1181 – 1188 . ( 137 ) Kohler , N . ; Sun , C . ; Wang , J . ; Zhang , M . Methotrexate - modified superparamagnetic nanoparticles and their intracellular uptake into human cancer cells . Langmuir 2005 , 21 , 8858 – 8864 . ( 138 ) Tong , L . ; Zhao , Y . ; Huff , T . B . ; Hansen , M . N . ; Wei , A . ; Cheng , J . X . Gold nanorods mediate tumor cell death by compromising membrane integrity . Adv . Mater . 2007 , 19 , 3136 – 3141 . ( 139 ) Huff , T . B . ; Tong , L . ; Zhao , Y . ; Hansen , M . N . ; Cheng , J . X . ; Wei , A . Hyperthermic effects of gold nanorods on tumor cells . Nano - medicine 2007 , 2 , 125 – 132 . ( 140 ) Zhang , J . ; Rana , S . ; Srivastava , R . S . ; Misra , R . D . On the chemical synthesis and drug delivery response of folate receptor - activated , polyethylene glycol - functionalized magnetite nanopar - ticles . Acta Biomater . 2008 , 4 , 40 – 48 . ( 141 ) Kam , N . W . ; O’Connell , M . ; Wisdom , J . A . ; Dai , H . Carbon nanotubes as multifunctional biological transporters and near - infrared agents for selective cancer cell destruction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2005 , 102 , 11600 – 11605 . ( 142 ) Zhou , F . ; Xing , D . ; Ou , Z . ; Wu , B . ; Resasco , D . E . ; Chen , W . R . Cancer photothermal therapy in the near - infrared region by using single - walled carbon nanotubes . J . Biomed . Opt . 2009 , 14 , 021009 . ( 143 ) Zheng , G . ; Chen , J . ; Li , H . ; Glickson , J . D . Reroutinglipoprotein nanoparticles to selected alternate receptors for the targeted delivery of cancer diagnostic and therapeutic agents . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 2005 , 102 , 17757 – 17762 . ( 144 ) Glickson , J . D . ; Lund - Katz , S . ; Zhou , R . ; Choi , H . ; Chen , I . W . ; Li , H . ; Corbin , I . ; Popov , A . V . ; Cao , W . ; Song , L . ; Qi , C . ; Marotta , D . ; Nelson , D . S . ; Chen , J . ; Chance , B . ; Zheng , G . Lipoprotein nanoplatform for targeted delivery of diagnostic and therapeutic agents . Mol . Imaging 2008 , 7 , 101 – 110 . ( 145 ) Nayak , S . ; Lee , H . ; Chmielewski , J . ; Lyon , L . A . Folate - mediated cell targeting and cytotoxicity using thermoresponsive microgels . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 2004 , 126 , 10258 – 10259 . ( 146 ) Zhang , L . ; Hou , S . ; Mao , S . ; Wei , D . ; Song , X . ; Lu , Y . Uptake of folate - conjugated albumin nanoparticles to the SKOV3 cells . Int . J . Pharm . 2004 , 287 , 155 – 162 . ( 147 ) Ren , Y . ; Wong , S . M . ; Lim , L . Y . Folic acid - conjugated protein cages of a plant virus : a novel delivery platform for doxorubicin . Bioconjugate Chem . 2007 , 18 , 836 – 843 . ( 148 ) Destito , G . ; Yeh , R . ; Rae , C . S . ; Finn , M . G . ; Manchester , M . Folic acid - mediated targeting of cowpea mosaic virus particles to tumor cells . Chem . Biol . 2007 , 14 , 1152 – 1162 . ( 149 ) Liu , S . Q . ; Wiradharma , N . ; Gao , S . J . ; Tong , Y . W . ; Yang , Y . Y . Bio - functional micelles self - assembled from a folate - conjugated block copolymer for targeted intracellular delivery of anticancer drugs . Biomaterials 2007 , 28 , 1423 – 1433 . ( 150 ) Perentes , J . Y . ; McKee , T . D . ; Ley , C . D . ; Mathiew , H . ; Dawson , M . ; Padera , T . P . ; Munn , L . L . ; Jain , R . K . ; Boucher , Y . In vivo imaging of extracellular matrix remodeling by tumor - associated fibroblasts . Nat . Methods 2009 , 6 , 143 – 145 .