Experimental measurement of respiratory particles dispersed by wind instruments and analysis of the associated risk of infection transmission Oliver Schlenczek a , Birte Thiede a , Laura Turco a , Katja Stieger a , b , Jana M . Kosub c , Rudolf M¨uller a , d , Simone Scheithauer c , Eberhard Bodenschatz a , b , e , ∗ , Gholamhossein Bagheri a , ∗ a Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self - Organization ( MPIDS ) , G¨ottingen 37077 , Germany b Institute for Dynamics of Complex Systems , University of G¨ottingen , G¨ottingen 37077 , Germany c Institute of Infection Control and Infectious Diseases , University Medical Center , G¨ottingen 37075 , Germany d Institute for Music and Aerosols , Bad W¨unnenberg 33181 , Germany e Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics and Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 , USA Abstract Activities such as singing or playing a wind instrument release respiratory particles into the air that may contain pathogens and thus pose a risk for in - fection transmission . Here we report measurements of the size distribution , number , and volume concentration of exhaled particles from 31 healthy mu - sicians playing 20 types of wind instruments using aerosol spectrometry and in - line holography in a strictly controlled cleanroom environment . We ﬁnd that playing wind instruments carries a lower risk of airborne disease transmission than speaking or singing . We attribute this to the fact that the resonators of wind instruments act as ﬁlters for particles > 10 µ m in diameter . We have also measured the size - dependent ﬁltering properties of diﬀerent types of ﬁlters that can be used as instrument masks . Based on these measurements , we calculated the risk of airborne transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 in diﬀerent near - and far - ﬁeld scenarios with and without masking and / or distancing . We conclude that in all cases where there is a possibility that the musician is infectious , the only safe measure to prevent airborne transmission of the disease is the use of well - ﬁtting and well - ﬁltering masks for the instrument and the susceptible person . Keywords : Aerosol , wind instrument , airborne disease , face mask , ﬁltration , transmission risk ∗ Corresponding author Email addresses : eberhard . bodenschatz @ ds . mpg . de ( Eberhard Bodenschatz ) , gholamhossein . bagheri @ ds . mpg . de ( Gholamhossein Bagheri ) Preprint submitted to arXiv May 16 , 2022 a r X i v : 2 2 05 . 06481v1 [ phy s i c s . m e d - ph ] 13 M a y 2022 1 . Introduction Numerous contagious diseases are known to spread via exhaled infectious particles that are inhaled by a susceptible , e . g . inﬂuenza , tuberculosis , Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome ( SARS ) , and most recently the Coronavirus Dis - ease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) , which is caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syn - drome CoronaVirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) ( Leung , 2021 ; Morawska and Cao , 2020 ; Nannu Shankar et al . , 2022 ) . Currently , the ongoing COVID - 19 pandemic is still considered a public health emergency of international concern ( WHO Team , 2022 ) . About 8 % of the persons tested positive for SARS - CoV - 2 with no or very mild symptoms of COVID - 19 ( Alpha strain of SARS - CoV - 2 ) had a very high viral load ( more than 10 9 genome copies of the SARS - CoV - 2 virus per swab ) , which promotes disease transmission by highly - infectious asymptomatic indi - viduals if high viral load is associated with high infectivity ( Jones et al . , 2021 ) . It is well - known that various respiratory maneuvers , like speaking and singing produce particles ( see e . g . Morawska et al . , 2009 ; P¨ohlker et al . , 2021 ; Bagheri et al . , 2021a , and references therein ) . However , the fact that wind instruments also release respiratory particles ( see e . g . Lai et al . , 2011 ; He et al . , 2021 ; K¨ahler and Hain , 2020 ; Parker and Crookston , 2020 ; Spahn et al . , 2021 ; Stockman et al . , 2021 ; Abraham et al . , 2021 ; McCarthy et al . , 2021 ; Firle et al . , 2021 ; Gantner et al . , 2022 ) indicates that band or orchestra rehearsals or concerts are also associated with an enhanced risk of airborne infection transmission ( hereafter called “infection risk” ) . Because of this potential risk , most forms of live music events were forbidden in most of 2020 in Germany and also other countries . Governmental rules forced opera houses and theatres to close , and instrument education / singing lessons could not take place as usual . This unfortunate situation is mainly due to the fact that much is unknown about the emitted amount of respiratory particles and eﬀective measures to mitigate the risk of infection during live performances of singers and wind instrument players . Among the particle emission from diﬀerent respiratory activities , not much attention was given to wind instrument players prior to the COVID - 19 pan - demic . It was found that playing a very simple brass instrument such as a vuvuzela releases much more particles than a person who is shouting ( Lai et al . , 2011 ) . A study by He et al . ( 2021 ) has shown that many wind instruments release more particles during the play in comparison to normal breathing or speaking . Instruments in the low register ( e . g . tuba , bassoon ) typically had less particle emission compared to instruments in the high register ( e . g . clarinet , trumpet ) . The selection of instruments examined by He et al . ( 2021 ) covers ap - proximately two orders of magnitude in particle emission from the lowest ( tuba ) to the highest emitter ( trumpet ) . For wind instruments with a simple geome - try , increasing loudness was associated with increasing particle emission , but the net eﬀect of loudness on the emitted particle concentration was low ( He et al . , 2021 ) . Abraham et al . ( 2021 ) also examined the pitch dependence and found negative correlation between pitch and particle emission for instruments in the low register ( in particular the bass trombone and the bassoon ) while a positive correlation was found between pitch and particle emission for instruments in 2 the high register ( clarinet , oboe , trumpet ) . Short notes played on the trumpet led to more particles compared to long notes of the same pitch . However , it is still unknown which notes or playing styles on which instrument lead to the highest emission of particles . A study by McCarthy et al . ( 2021 ) came to the conclusion that the particle size distributions from breathing and from play - ing a wind instruments are similar , and that the mean particle emission is also comparable . Stockman et al . ( 2021 ) however measured higher particle number concentration compared to the data shown in He et al . ( 2021 ) for clarinets ( 2 times more ) , bassoon ( 4 times more ) , oboe ( 4 times more ) and French horn ( 3 times more ) . The emitted particle number concentration from the trumpet measured by Stockman et al . ( 2021 ) was 3 times lower compared to He et al . ( 2021 ) . Emitted particle number concentration shown in Firle et al . ( 2021 ) is also higher for playing ﬂute or oboe compared to speaking . In all of the studies mentioned above , and also in Brosseau et al . ( 2022 ) , the conclusion was drawn that the highest number density of emitted particles from wind instruments is < 1 µ m . Furthermore , these studies ( except for Firle et al . , 2021 ) used an Aerody - namic Particle Sizer ( APS ) from TSI Inc . as the primary aerosol size spectrom - eter , which nominally measures the aerodynamic diameter of particles in a size range from 0 . 5 to 20 µ m . However , it cannot detect smaller than 0 . 5 µ m that may include a signiﬁcant number of particles containing ∼ 0 . 1 µ m SARS - CoV - 2 virions and , as pointed out in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) and other studies ( e . g . see P¨ohlker et al . , 2021 , and references therein ) , APS suﬀers from low detec - tion eﬃciency for larger 4 µ m particles . Furthermore , it is extremely important to perform measurements in a certiﬁed cleanroom with controlled relative hu - midity and temperature . For a quantitative assessment of the infection risk , either the size distribution of the dry residues or the size distribution of the particles right after emission needs to be known as described in Nordsiek et al . ( 2021 ) since particles in any state in between exhalation and fully dried would introduce huge uncertainties in the infection risk calculation . The importance of controlled measurements becomes clear when one considers that the particle volume decreases by a factor of about 90 ( almost two orders of magnitude ) from exhalation to fully dry ( Bagheri et al . , 2021a ) . In terms of infection risk , the most frequently discussed scenario is a well - mixed room with accumulation of infectious particles . The well - mixed room is recently used by several investigations ( e . g . Buonanno et al . , 2020 ; Nordsiek et al . , 2021 ; Miller et al . , 2020 ; Jimenez , 2020 ; Bagheri et al . , 2020 ; Firle et al . , 2021 ; Kriegel et al . , 2022 ) . Miller et al . ( 2020 ) as well as Kriegel et al . ( 2022 ) determined the emission rate of pathogen copies from retrospective analyses of superspreading events . This is an insightful simpliﬁcation of the dose - response model , but it remains unclear which size fraction of emitted particles drives the release of pathogen copies into the room . To give a reasonable estimation on the eﬃcacy of infection mitigation measures , the relationship between particle size and number concentration of pathogen copies needs to be known . The risk calculation done by Firle et al . ( 2021 ) was based on a constant conversion factor from pathogen copies to particle number concentration within a speciﬁed 3 diameter range . Numerical simulations carried out by Stockman et al . ( 2021 ) have shown that the well - mixed room assumption is reasonable for indoor spaces of 18 m 2 area and 63 m 3 volume if the susceptible is not standing downwind of the infectious ( i . e . the donor of pathogens ) at close distance . Apart from that , the near - ﬁeld is of particular relevance in larger indoor envi - ronments ( see Hejazi et al . , 2022 ; Bagheri et al . , 2021b , and references therein ) , for which the the horizontal and vertical spread and dilution of particles re - leased from the bell end of wind instruments becomes important . Spahn et al . ( 2021 ) investigated the airﬂow from wind instruments ( contrabassoon , bassoon , bass clarinet , English horn , tenor saxophone , clarinet , alto ﬂute , oboe , recorder , piccolo , tuba , French horn , trombone and trumpet ) played by professional mu - sicians and found that for all instruments measured the ﬂow had relaxed to that of the room at a radius of more than 1 . 5 m from the bell end . This question was also investigated by Abraham et al . ( 2021 ) , who found that the so - called aerosol inﬂuence zone ( i . e . the distance up to which the released particles were detectable above the background in the Minnesota orchestra hall ) was less than 0 . 3 m for all instruments examined . These ﬁndings suggest that the source is highly localized before the emission plume gets mixed with the ambient air , mainly due to the wide opening of the instrument bells and the resulting low air speed . As shown in the diagrams of measured wind speed and particle concentration in Abraham et al . ( 2021 ) and in the schlieren photos of Becher et al . ( 2021 ) , the approximation of the particle emission plume as a jet emanating from the bell end of a wind instrument seems reasonable . This is supported by Brosseau et al . ( 2022 ) who with Particle Image Velocimetry ( PIV ) found a jet ﬂow geometry . At a distance between 2 to 6 m , the center velocity of the air jet from the wind instruments reached room air draft level very much in agreement with the results by Spahn et al . ( 2021 ) . Particle dispersion to more than a meter away from the wind instrument was also reported by Gantner et al . ( 2022 ) . With this , the far - ﬁeld is more reasonable for larger distances and well mixed room models otherwise turbulent dispersion and transports need to be considered ( Hejazi et al . , 2022 ) . Due to low ﬂow velocity and the tendency of aerosol - laden air from the wind instrument to move vertically upwards , the usage of air puriﬁers above the instruments seems to be very eﬀective to mitigate accumulation of potentially infectious aerosol ( Abraham et al . , 2021 ) . In their computational ﬂuid dynamics ( CFD ) simulations Abraham et al . ( 2021 ) treated each particle released from a wind instrument as infectious . The reduction of infectious particles by the usage of mobile air puriﬁers was also examined by Narayanan and Yang ( 2021 ) in a music classroom . Air puriﬁers have a higher cleaning eﬃcacy at high concentration of aerosols , i . e . close to the source of the infectious particles ( Narayanan and Yang , 2021 ) . However , their disadvantage is emission of sound that may disturb the music played . The use of a ﬁlter mask at the bell end of wind instruments was shown as a possible mitigation measure by Parker and Crookston ( 2020 ) and also examined and discussed by Abraham et al . ( 2021 ) , Stockman et al . ( 2021 ) , and Firle et al . 4 ( 2021 ) . Parker and Crookston ( 2020 ) , Abraham et al . ( 2021 ) and Stockman et al . ( 2021 ) examined particle number concentration with and without a mask and report penetration for total number concentration . Neither work provided information on size - speciﬁc penetration , so it is not possible to estimate the risk of infection Nordsiek et al . ( 2021 ) ; Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) . Firle et al . ( 2021 ) found , in contrast to the results in Abraham et al . ( 2021 ) and Stockman et al . ( 2021 ) , that surgical masks on the instrument bell do not reduce the particle concentration emitted from ﬂute , oboe , clarinet or trumpet . Again , no details on mask penetration versus particle size were given and mask ﬁt to the instrument bell was not discussed . Our literature review shows that it is fair to say existing data are incon - sistent when it comes to the concentration of particles produced by a given musical instrument in diﬀerent studies , the importance of near - ﬁeld versus far - ﬁeld infection risk , and the inﬂuence of instrument masking on infection risk . In addition , it is critical to consider particle shrinkage in ambient air and its impact on risk of airborne disease transmission , as well as size - dependent ﬁltra - tion , which have not yet been considered . The importance of particle shrinkage becomes clear when one considers that particle volume can decrease by a factor of 90 in a fraction of a second , e . g . , from exhalation to measurement ( Bagheri et al . , 2021a ) . The impact of size - dependent ﬁltration on infection risk has also been shown to be extremely important Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) . These problems can be attributed in part to due to the large variability in measurement meth - ods , the diﬀerent levels of environmental control , limitations of measurement instruments , uncontrolled sampling , and / or lack of representative statistics . Our primary goal in this study is to address these issues all at once . We have studied diﬀerent types of wind instruments in a strictly controlled cleanroom and under controlled sampling conditions using aerosol spectrometry and in - line holography . We have studied the size and number concentration of particles produced in the air exhaled by 31 musicians playing a total of 20 wind instrument types . In total 300 minutes of spectrometry data and 24000 holograms to present the ﬁeld - standardized , normalized number - size distribution in the size range of 1 . 5 to 40 µ m diameter is collected . The particle shrinkage is taken into account by controlling the relative humidity of the sampling tubes and recalculating the wet diameter of the particles at the time of exhalation . We characterized 12 types of ﬁlter pieces used as instrument masks and generated size - dependent ﬁltration curves . Using these data , we performed a through analysis of the risk of transmission in the near ﬁeld according to the upper bound concept presented in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) and also in the far ﬁeld in a room for diﬀerent masking and social distancing scenarios . In the following , we ﬁrst describe the particle measurement setup , the ex - perimental procedure , data processing , information about the musicians , and the infection risk model . This is then followed by the Results and Discussion section , in which the particle size distributions measured from diﬀerent wind instruments are presented in detail and compared with particle emission during normal breathing , speaking , and singing . Finally , the upper bound of infection 5 risk is presented in diﬀerent exposure scenarios with and without social distanc - ing and / or instrument / susceptible masking in the near and far ﬁeld . In contrast to previous studies , we also estimate the the risk of infection for musicians play - ing the wind - instruments , as they are typically unable to protect themselves with face masks . The manuscripts ends with a summary of the main ﬁndings and conclusions . 2 . Materials and Methods 2 . 1 . Experimental setup and measurement procedure For measurement of the particulate matter emitted by playing wind - instruments , we use a similar setup as described in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . In contrast to pre - vious studies ( e . g . He et al . , 2021 ; McCarthy et al . , 2021 ) , we measured the size distribution of the particle residues ( dry at RH < 30 % ) and calculate the full wet size distribution at exit from the instrument from the diameter shrinkage factor derived in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) , i . e . we multiply the dried diameter by a factor of 4 . 5 to obtain the diameter at the time of production ( hereafter referred to as the exhaled diameter ) . All measurements were performed in a nominal ISO Class 6 cleanroom ( i . e . less than 1 million particles per m 3 ) . However , our measurements have shown that the cleanroom met at least ISO Class 4 criteria , i . e . less than 1000 > 0 . 3 µ m particles per m 3 . Setup The main setup consisted of two aerosol size spectrometers , which were an Optical Particle Sizer Type 3330 ( OPS ) and a Nanoscale Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer Type 3910 ( SMPS ) , both from TSI Inc . In the very beginning of the study , a third spectrometer , the Aerodynamic Particle Sizer Model 3321 ( APS ) from TSI Inc . , was also connected to the setup . The SMPS uses a ﬂow rate of 0 . 75 L min − 1 and the OPS uses 1 L min − 1 . If the APS was connected to the setup , it added 5 L min − 1 to the total ﬂow rate ( 1 L min − 1 sample ﬂow plus 4 L min − 1 sheath ﬂow ) . Both OPS and SMPS had sampling times of one minute per sample . While all experiments had valid OPS data , valid SMPS and APS data are only available for some of the measurements ( see Table 1 in Supplementary Information ( SI ) ) . In the 16 logarithmically equidistant channels of the OPS , we obtain less resolution , but better counting eﬃciency ( less losses ) for particles larger than 4 µ m compared to an APS ( see P¨ohlker et al . , 2021 , for more details ) , and we had two channels measuring particles smaller than 0 . 5 µ m . There is a reasonable agreement between OPS and APS up to 4 µ m particle diameter ( see Fig . 2 of SI ) . According to the SMPS user manual , each of the 13 SMPS channels is scanned for approximately 4 . 6 s per sample . As the sample ﬂow rate is 0 . 75 L min − 1 , the sample volume for each channel in each one - minute sample is 58 cm 3 , which yields a physical detection limit of 0 . 017 cm − 3 for the SMPS to measure one count . The spectrometers are connected via electrically conductive polytetraﬂuorethylene ( PTFE ) tubing with 6 mm inner diameter to a ﬂow splitter , which is connected via the same kind of tubing to two 6 serial diﬀusion dryers ( Grimm Model 7813 ) , ﬁlled with silica gel . The outermost diﬀusion dryer is connected via the same kind of tubing to a sampling funnel made of plastic . Via intercomparison between the particle size distributions measured with the setup described in Fig . 1 A and playing the instrument directly into the inlet nozzle of the OPS , we could verify that the material of the funnel ( non - conductive plastic ) did not introduce notable electrostatic losses ( see Fig . 3 and 4 of SI ) . Particle losses due to the diﬀusion dryers are approximately 25 % and independent of the particle size ( see Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) for more details ) . The total tube length was 4 . 2 m from the funnel to each aerosol size spectrometer . For measuring the particle size distribution from wind instruments , we used two collection funnels of diﬀerent size ( a smaller one with 100 mm diameter , and a larger one with 150 mm ) , depending on the bell diameter of the instrument . We expect acceptable inlet eﬃciency around 50 - 80 % for the setup with the collection funnel for particles < 3 . 5 µ m ( more details in Subsection 1 . 2 . and Fig . 1 in SI ) . The standard setup for measuring the particle emission at the end piece or bell end of a wind instrument is shown in Fig . 1A . During those measurements where particle leakage from the nose or embouchure ( i . e . next to the mouth ) was measured in parallel with emission at bell end , a second funnel was placed in front of mouth and nose , connected to another OPS ( see Fig . 1B ) . For instruments with tone holes , we did additional measurements as described in Fig . 1C to determine the particle leakage from the tone holes in comparison to the particles emitted from the bell end . The role of leakage from mouth and nose , and the leakage from the tone holes is discussed in detail in Subsection 2 . 5 . of the SI . Between the funnel and the bell end , there was a narrow gap for air to escape in order to operate the aerosol size spectrometers at ambient air pressure . As already studied by Bouhuys ( 1964 ) , the peak exhale volume of wind instrument players is much larger than the sampling ﬂow rate used in our setup ( up to 100 L min − 1 for a tubist compared to a maximum sample ﬂow rate of 6 . 75 L min − 1 ) , so dilution due to the small gap at the side can be assumed to be negligible . In addition to the measurements of the particle emission at the open bell end , we examined the penetration of masks made of diﬀerent materials similar to setup A in Fig . 1 . Mask penetration was also measured with dolomite test dust as described in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) to obtain better counting statistics in particular for large particles . More details about the mask materials and their penetration can be found in Subsections 2 . 13 . to 2 . 16 . of the SI . In the following we call these ﬁlter pieces “instrument - masks” . In addition to the dry particle measurements , the exhaled diameter of droplets within the ﬁrst ten centimeters from the source was measured with the same holographic setup as described in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . The subject positions the bell end of the wind instrument or the tube end of a brass mouthpiece at about 2 to 3 cm upstream of the holographic sample volume and at the same horizontal level as the laser beam . The air with the particles crosses the sample volume of the holography unit and then approaches a collection funnel with an inner diameter of 150 mm , which acts as aerosol sampling device and guides the particles that are small enough to follow the ﬂow via the two dryers 7 A : Particle emission from instrument bell end C : Particle emission from tone holes B : Particle emission from mouth / nose OPS OPS OPS SMPS SMPS collection funnels ﬂ ow splitter PTFE tubing diffusion dryer diffusion dryer diffusion dryer diffusion dryer Figure 1 : Schematics of measurement setups used inside the cleanroom for characterizing exhale particles produced by playing wind instruments . The standard conﬁguration is setup A , where a funnel is placed at the bell end of the instrument and the particle - laden air passes two diﬀusion dryers ( orange boxes ) before reaching the aerosol size spectrometers . Setup B is used to measure particle emission from mouth and nose during the play of the wind instrument , here no dryer is used . Setup C is used for some woodwind instruments to measure leakage from the tone holes without a funnel connected to the tube end . Both setups B and C were optional while setup A was used for all instrument / subject combinations . If an instrument - mask was used , the funnel in setup A was placed onto the fabric ( which covers the bell end ) to avoid cleanroom air bypassing the funnel edge . 8 to the aerosol size spectrometers . Due to the larger distance between aerosol source and collection funnel , dilution will occur and these data are used only for qualitative comparison . Results of the holographic measurements can be found in Subsection 2 . 12 . of the SI and in Subsection 3 . 3 . The view volume of the holographic setup is about 37 cm 3 and its volume sampling rate is about 13 . 6 L min − 1 . The holograms contain the diﬀraction pattern from each object in the sample volume , and via numerical reconstruction on a high performance computation ( HPC ) cluster , the size , location and shape of each particle from about 6 µ m to some mm of particle diameter can be obtained ( details in Fugal et al . , 2009 ; Schlenczek , 2018 ) . With this setup , we measured the particle size distribution and the local number density of particles > 6 µ m . Details about the size calibration of the holographic setup can be found in the Supplementary Information of Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . Measurement procedure For each experimental run the subject ( s ) as well as the examiner ( s ) were required to wear ISO 4 / 5 clean - room overalls , hoods , and overboots . If possible they also wore clean - room gloves and face masks . All papers used were clean - room certiﬁed ( details in Bagheri et al . , 2021a ) . Instruments . computers , and wind instruments were wiped with clean - room cloth to minimize contamination of the results by dust . Before the measurements in order to avoid artifacts from dust from inside the wind - instrument , they were either ﬂushed with particle - free air , or were played for at least two minutes before the actual experiment started . In contrast to measuring particle emission from mouth and nose , for wind - instruments we need to account for the time of particle transport from the mouthpiece through the wind instrument to the particle spectrometers . Thus , the activities started at least 30 s before sampling was started . This time for particle transport was increased to 90 s for wind - instruments with large volume ( e . g . B - ﬂat tuba , see Fig . 6 in SI ) . Each measurement sample was 60 s long , and each experiment consisted of at least one sample . The subject played at least one piece of music selected by themselves , some also played single long notes at diﬀerent pitch , or multiple pieces of music . 2 . 2 . Data processing For the OPS data , a detectability correction was applied . Basically , the sen - sitivity for 0 . 3 µ m and 0 . 5 µ m given in the calibration sheet was interpolated linearly to match the center diameter of the ﬁrst two OPS channels . For 0 . 3 µ m particle diameter , the sensitivity was typically around 0 . 5 , and for 0 . 5 µ m par - ticle diameter , the sensitivity was close to 1 . The sensitivity correction factor is the inverse of the sensitivity interpolated for the channel mid - points . With this sensitivity correction , a good agreement was found between optical diameter of the OPS and electrical mobility diameter of the SMPS ( an example is shown in Subsection 3 . 3 ) . Due to the fact that the particle emission is concentrated in the center region of the holographic sample volume , the sample volume used for the data analysis has been restricted to ± 3 cm in crosswise direction from the center of the 9 emission plume ( i . e . where most particles were found ) , and the outer 2 . 5 mm on both sides in streamwise and vertical direction have been cut oﬀ . The remaining sample volume is 1 . 44 cm × 6 cm × 0 . 8 cm = 6 . 9 cm 3 . We also found that the sizes below 8 µ m have reduced detectability , so the concentrations below 8 µ m particle diameter in the holography data need to be interpreted with care . From 8 µ m to larger sizes , we did not see a notable reduction in detectability . In the size range above 50 µ m , we are typically limited by counting statistics when examining human exhale particles . 2 . 3 . Subjects , instruments and music A call for participation was published via various communication channels . Flyers were displayed at the University Medical Center G¨ottingen ( UMG ) , an announcement was posted on the UMG Facebook page , music students at the Hanover University of Music , Drama and Media ( Hochschule f¨ur Musik , The - ater und Medien Hannover HMTMH ) were informed by their professors , and all staﬀ involved in the study asked their friends to participate if they played a wind - instrument . An overview of the subjects , the instruments played and the number of experiments can be found in Table S1 of the SI . A total of thirty - one musicians , ranging in age from 14 to 80 years , with an average age of 35 years , participated in the study . Five participants were from HMTMH , 8 played in a traditional German brass ensemble ( ”Blasorchester” ) , four were from a tra - ditional German wind ensemble , four participants played in a trombone choir ( ”Posaunenchor” ) , 2 played in jazz bands and one played in a marching band ( ”Spielmannszug” ) . Due to fundamental diﬀerences in instrumentation and style between international wind ensembles , we decided to use the German term below in addition to the English . At the time the study was conducted , neither point - of - care tests nor vaccinations against SARS - CoV - 2 were available . For all participants , an anamnesis was performed for possible risk situations due to close contact with persons infected with SARS - CoV - 2 or travel to risk areas or virus variant areas as deﬁned by the German Robert Koch Institute within the last 14 days , and they were asked about their health status . During all phases of the study , the study team and the participants strictly adhered to the oﬃcial regulations and the Institute’s hygiene plan . With the exception of the musi - cian whose particle emission was measured , all participants wore FFP2 masks throughout . None of the subjects felt ill on the day of the measurements and no COVID - 19 infections were traceable to the study . Participants with symptoms or people closely exposed to someone tested positive for SARS - CoV - 2 were ex - cluded from the study . The study was ethically approved by the Max Planck Society . All subjects participated voluntarily , were informed in advance about the conduct of the experiment and subsequently consented to their participa - tion . The subjects had to be legally competent and not impaired to carry out activities in this study . For participants below the age of 18 years , both the participants themselves and their legal guardians gave consent . Participation could be revoked at any time during the study . Instruments 10 For the purpose of this study we use the following categories for wind - instruments : Brass instruments are wind - instruments where the tone is gen - erated by fast opening and closing of the player’s lips within the mouthpiece . Although the instruments are typically made of brass this also includes other materials like metals , plastics , or wood . Woodwind instruments we put into three categories : edge - blown , i . e . , piccolo , ﬂute , ﬁfe , and recorder ; single - reed , i . e . , clarinet and saxophone ; and double - reed , i . e . , oboe , bassoon and chanter of bagpipes . The sound from edge - blown woodwind instruments is created by blowing a fast air stream onto a sharp edge . In a single - reed instrument , the sound is created by the fast opening and closing of the air channel between the reed and the actual mouthpiece . Double - reed instruments use the same princi - ple but the air channel is formed between both reeds . All clarinets in the study were clarinets in B - ﬂat , all trumpets were trumpets in B - ﬂat ( with piston or rotary valves ) , and all trombones were tenor slide trombones in B - ﬂat . The double horn in our study was played in B - ﬂat only . The single - reed instruments in the study are all exposed single - reed instruments ( the reed is actually in the player’s mouth ) while all double - reed instruments examined in this work are double - reeds in a windcap . An illustration of the wind instruments examined in our study is shown in Fig . 2 . Music The music pieces were chosen by the volunteers , each of whom chose some - thing comparable to what they often play and have experience with . Some played pieces for symphony orchestras or small ensembles , others played pieces from traditional music , ﬁlm music , jazz and military music . This diﬀers from He et al . ( 2021 ) , where a standardised pattern was played . In this study , we focused on music that is typically played over a long period of time , comparable to a rehearsal or concert situation for the volunteers . We chose this approach to better understand real - life music events . This allowed us to identify scenarios with lower or higher emissions . Some subjects performed a series of experiments where they played long tones at diﬀerent pitches to investigate the relationship between aerosol emission and the tone played ( see Table S1 in the SI for more details ) . 11 Figure 2 : Illustration of the wind instrument types examined in this study grouped in diﬀerent categories , namely brass instruments ( top row : piccolo trumpet , trumpet , Kuhlo horn , middle row : hunting horn , tenor trombone , tenorhorn , bottom row : double horn , F tuba , Bb tuba ) , edge - blown woodwind instruments ( top row : ﬁfe , alto recorder , bottom row : piccolo , ﬂute ) , single - reed woodwind instruments ( left : clarinet , soprano sax , middle : alto sax , right : tenor sax ) , and double - reed woodwind instruments ( from left to right : practice chanter , Great Highland Bagpipes , Scottish Smallpipes ) . 12 2 . 4 . Exposure Scenarios Though there are four possible combinations of susceptible and infectious in a person - to - person exposure scenario , here we will mainly focus on an infectious musician ( with “musician” we mean a wind instrument player ) and a susceptible other person . For the diﬀerent exposure scenarios , we need to diﬀerentiate between near - ﬁeld and far - ﬁeld exposure . The following subsections present in detail the methods and assumptions used to calculate the risk of infection from near - and far - ﬁeld exposure in our study , but ﬁrst we explain the general assumptions that apply to both exposure scenarios . For the susceptible wearing a ﬁtted FFP2 mask , we assume eﬀective penetra - tion as in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) for the “adjusted FFP2 mask” , which is ﬁtted to the face without ﬁt - test . From the diﬀerent materials tested for ﬁltering out - ﬂow of music instruments ( see Subsection 2 . 13 with Figures S11 and S12 of SI ) , we found “ﬁlter05” to have the lowest penetration and decided to use this ma - terial for the instrument - mask . The eﬀect of using other mask materials will be also discussed in the Results section . This material also had acceptable acoustic impedance according to the musicians who used it during the measurements . Size - speciﬁc penetration is taken into account by using the parameters obtained by the power - law ﬁt for penetration of dry dolomite dust in Subsection 2 . 13 . of SI . We assume that the infectious particles are already dry when they reach the mask material resulting in a lower ﬁltration eﬃciency compared to the as - sumed diameter of the exhaled particles and thus a higher risk of infection . For all scenarios we assume that the wind instrument player plays the instrument without any interruption ( i . e . no pause ) , which precludes a breakdown of the air jet emanating from the instrument bell and makes distancing less eﬀective . Eﬀects from e . g . diﬀerent breathing rates will be discussed in the respective Results subsection . 2 . 4 . 1 . Exposure Scenarios : near - ﬁeld In all near - ﬁeld scenarios , we assume that there is a distance of r 1 = 0 . 5 m between the face of the infectious musician and the bell end of the wind instru - ment . Also , we assume that there is an air - jet emanating from the nose during breathing , and from the bell end of the wind instrument during playing . It is assumed the musician is not speaking or singing . To give an upper bound on exposure , we assume that the air - jet from the nose goes horizontally towards the susceptible . In scenarios with distance , the distance between susceptible and instrument bell end will be r 2 = 1 . 5 m . We will consider three near - ﬁeld exposure scenarios , which are illustrated in Fig . 3 . • Distancing : Instrument bell end of infectious and face of susceptible are separated by a distance r 2 = 1 . 5 m and oriented face - to - face . None of the two uses a mask . • Mixed : Instrument bell end of infectious and face of susceptible are sep - arated by a distance r 2 = 1 . 5 m and oriented face - to - face . Susceptible is wearing an adjusted FFP2 mask . 13 • Masked : Instrument bell end of infectious and face of susceptible are separated by a distance r 2 = 0 m and oriented face - to - face . The instrument bell is covered with an instrument - mask and the susceptible is wearing an adjusted FFP2 mask . The air inhaled by the susceptible is primarily the undiluted air that was exhaled by the infectious through the instrument and ﬁltered by the instrument - mask . For each scenario , we will show two extremes , which are a wind instrument with a high particle - volume - concentration emission and an instrument with a low particle - volume - concentration emission . They will be highlighted by “Max” and “Min” . Particle sizes from 1 . 5 to 45 µ m exhaled diameter ( 0 . 3 µ m to 10 µ m measured dry diameter ) are taken into account . 2 . 4 . 2 . Exposure Scenarios : far - ﬁeld The far - ﬁeld scenarios are not as complicated as the near - ﬁeld scenarios because the distance between the infectious musician and the susceptible is by deﬁnition large enough to have no near - ﬁeld exposure . This allows the use of well - mixed model , where it is assumed that all particles exhaled by the infectious musicians are immediately mixed throughout the whole volume of the room as long as the room is not too large , e . g . , no larger than a classroom or small oﬃce . Here , we can examine all possible mask combinations as also shown in Fig . 4 : • Room - Unmasked : Neither infectious musician nor susceptible use or wear a instrument / face mask . • Room - Instrument - mask : Infectious musician uses an instrument - mask on the wind instrument , susceptible does not wear a mask . • Room - Mixed : Infectious musician does not use an instrument - mask , susceptible wears an adjusted FFP2 mask . • Room - Masked : Infectious musician uses an instrument - mask and sus - ceptible wears an adjusted FFP2 mask . 14 Distancing 1 . 5m 0 . 5m infectious susceptible infectious instrument - mask FFP2 mask susceptible Masked infectious FFP2 mask susceptible Mixed 0 . 5m 0 . 5m 1 . 5m Figure 3 : Exposure scenarios in the near ﬁeld with one infectious musician ( left ) and one susceptible ( right ) . Between the nose of the infectious and the instrument bell , a distance of r 1 = 0 . 5m ( in blue ) is assumed . In the distancing and mixed scenario , the susceptible keeps a distance of r 2 = 1 . 5m ( in red ) to the instrument bell . In the masked scenario , the wind instrument is covered with an instrument - mask , and the susceptible stands directly in front of the ( covered ) instrument bell , i . e . r 1 = 0 . 5m , r 2 = 0m . In the mixed and masked scenario , the susceptible wears an FFP2 mask ﬁtted manually to the face without ﬁt test as detailed in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) . 15 Room - Unmasked Room - Mixed Room - Instrument - mask infectious susceptible susceptible infectious susceptible infectious susceptible infectious Room - Masked FFP2 mask FFP2 mask instrument - mask instrument - mask Figure 4 : Illustration of the exposure scenarios in the far - ﬁeld . Distances are assumed to be large enough such that no exposure to the near - ﬁeld occurs . The scenarios are “Room - Unmasked” where neither infectious nor susceptible uses a mask , “Room - Mixed” where the susceptible wears a ﬁtted FFP2 mask , “Room - Instrument - mask” where the infectious uses a mask for the instrument , and “Room - Masked” where both use masks . The room has a speciﬁc volume and also a speciﬁc ventilation rate . 16 2 . 5 . Calculation of the risk of infection transmission By measuring the emitted particle size distribution from diﬀerent musicians playing diﬀerent wind instruments , we obtain the basis for calculating the risk of infection transmission ( hereafter “infection risk” ) of a susceptible person ( i . e . a person who is exposed to a potential pathogen and can become infected ) for SARS - CoV - 2 in a typical live music environment if the musician is considered to be the infectious , i . e . the donor of pathogen copies . We assume that we have one susceptible sitting in the audience , and one infectious musician playing a wind instrument . It is assumed that the susceptible has not absorbed any SARS - CoV - 2 copies prior to exposure . In this paper , we assume a dose - response relationship such that the absorption of a given pathogen dose by the susceptible will lead to some probability of infection . Even though individuals with some degree of immunity ( e . g . vaccinated or recovered individuals ) might not get infected at all after being exposed to a high number of pathogen copies , we assume that our susceptible individual does not have any immunity against the respective pathogen . This assumption is part of the upper bound concept as described in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) . As mentioned above , we consider both near - and far - ﬁeld infection risk in a number of scenarios . As the risk of infection is the result of a stochastic process , adding more infectious or susceptible persons to the scenario increases complexity but does not signiﬁcantly improve insight . Similar to the scenarios in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) , we examine the upper bound of infection risk for near - ﬁeld exposure , but also for the far - ﬁeld scenario . For the calculation of the risk of infection , the exponential model as described in Nordsiek et al . ( 2021 ) is used in a simpliﬁed way , i . e . the classical mono - pathogen model , as for SARS - CoV - 2 the diﬀerences to consider the poly - pathogen are negligible . The mean infection risk R I is given by Eq . 1 where µ is the absorbed dose ( which is time - dependent ) , and ID 63 . 21 is the infectious dose required for 63 . 21 % chance of infection . R I = 1 − exp ( − µ / ID 63 . 21 ) ( 1 ) Here we assume ID 63 . 21 = 200 as in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) , which is a good approximation of the infectious dose for the B . 1 . 617 . 2 ( Delta ) strain of SARS - CoV - 2 . A discussion about ID 63 . 21 and infection risk for diﬀerent strains of SARS - CoV - 2 , e . g . wild type , Delta and Omicron variants , is given in Subsec - tion 2 . 17 of SI . The absorbed dose µ depends on exposure duration t , inhaled volumetric ﬂow rate of the susceptible Q S ( which is the same as the exhaled volumetric ﬂow rate ) , the concentration of pathogen copies in the inhaled air per particle diameter n P , k , the dilution factor f d for mixing of the exhaled air with the ambient air before inhalation and the eﬀective penetration P I , k of the mask the infectious is wearing , and the eﬀective penetration P S , k of the mask the susceptible is wearing . Eﬀective penetration means that total inward leakage is taken into account . Unmasked susceptible means P S , k = 1 ∀ k and unmasked infectious means P I , k = 1 ∀ k . Also , the deposition within the respi - ratory tract D rt , k as a function of particle size needs to be known . Finally , µ can be expressed by Eq . 2 for k = 1 , 2 , . . . , K particle size channels considered . 17 We assume conservation of mass in a sense that exhalation and inhalation ﬂow rates are equal . µ = t (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) exp . time · Q S (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) inhal . susc . · f d (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) dilution · K (cid:88) k = 1 n P , k (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) path . conc . · P I , k (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) mask inf . · P S , k (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) mask susc . · D rt , k (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) dep . r . t . ( 2 ) Values for D rt , k and Q S are taken from International Commission on Radi - ological Protection ( 1994 ) while hygroscopic particle growth in the susceptible airways is also taken into account as explained in Bagheri et al . ( 2021b ) ( to be discussed later ) . To calculate n P , k for each size channel k , we need N k and also need to take into account that the particle diameter at exhale D 0 is by a factor of 4 . 5 larger than the particle diameter D dry measured after the diﬀusion dryers as described in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . We also need to know the concentration of pathogens ρ p in the airway surface liquid ( ASL ) . For D dry in µ m , ρ p in pathogen copies cm − 3 and N k in particles cm − 3 , we get Eq . 3 with n P , k in the unit of pathogen copies per liter of exhaled air . n P , k = 10 − 9 πρ p N k ( 4 . 5 D dry , k ) 3 / 6 ( 3 ) Here , N k for the respective activity needs to be used ( e . g . mean or maximum particle emission for playing a speciﬁc wind instrument ) . For ρ p , we assume a value of 10 8 . 5 cm − 3 . There is some evidence that the viral load is not the same within the entire respiratory tract ( Coleman et al . , 2021 ) . Recent knowledge points at particles < 5 µ m dry diameter ( up to 22 µ m diameter at exhalation ) carrying the majority of virions exhaled for the Delta variant but particles orig - inating from the lung are expected to have lower viral load for the Omicron variant ( see e . g . Chen et al . , 2021 ; Chan et al . , 2021 ; Halfmann et al . , 2022 ) . Coleman et al . ( 2021 ) found a high concentration of virions in the ﬁne particle fraction for phonetic activities , but it remains unclear where the main source of infectious particles is located . It could for example be saliva , or the epithelial lining ﬂuid ( ELF ) in the deep airways , or the mucus covering the vocal folds and the throat , or nasal discharge running from the nose into the throat . 2 . 5 . 1 . Calculation of the infection risk in the near - ﬁeld For a near - ﬁeld exposure scenario , the dilution factor f d depends on the distance between infectious and susceptible . For a distancing scenario , f d can be calculated via Eq . 4 where a is the aperture radius of the source ( e . g . mouth radius or radius of bell end of a wind instrument ) , r is the distance between source and susceptible , and α is the cone half - angle of the exhaled air jet as described in Yang et al . ( 2020 ) . f d = a / ( r tan ( α ) ) ( 4 ) Here we chose a = 1 . 8 cm and α = 10 ° for the emission from mouth or nose of the infectious ( same as in Bagheri et al . , 2021b ) , and a = 3 cm and α = 10 ° for 18 the emission from the wind instrument . This yields f d = 0 . 11 for the emission from the wind instrument at r = 1 . 5 m , f d = 0 . 05 for the emission from mouth and nose at r = 2 m , and f d = 0 . 2 for the emission from mouth and nose at r = 0 . 5 m . If the infectious is using a mask , we assume undiluted exhaled air ( f d = 1 ) inhaled by the susceptible . a jet ﬂow from the instrument bell and from mouth or nose of the infectious means implicitly that particle transport by convection is neglected . The role of convection is discussed for example in Hedworth et al . ( 2021 ) Also , the possibility of the susceptible being lucky as a non - zero background ﬂow carries away the infectious particles is not considered here . In terms of emission sources , we need to take into account that an infectious musician is not only playing the wind instrument ( with infectious particles re - leased mostly from the bell end ) but also breathing , with infectious particles released from mouth and nose . By taking this into account , Eq . 2 needs to be modiﬁed . As the volumetric ﬂow rate for exhalation through the wind instru - ment is typically diﬀerent from the volumetric ﬂow rate for normal breathing , we decided to take the volume - weighted average of emitted pathogen concentration at the location of the susceptible . The additional terms are the exhalation ﬂow rate Q w of the infectious through the wind instrument , the exhalation ﬂow rate Q b of the infectious breathing , the dilution factor f d , w for the exhale from the wind instrument , and f d , b for the exhale from breathing . Note that the speciﬁc emitted concentration of pathogen copies is n P , k , w for the wind instrument , and n P , k , b for breathing . Here , an instrument - mask is considered in the term P I , k , w and we assume that mouth and nose of the infectious are unmasked . Finally , µ for the near - ﬁeld exposure can be calculated via Eq . 5 . µ = tQ S K (cid:88) k = 1 ( Q w f d , w n P , k , w P I , k , w + Q b f d , b n P , k , b ) P S , k D rt , k / ( Q w + Q b ) ( 5 ) 2 . 5 . 2 . Calculation of the infection risk in the far - ﬁeld A real - world exposure scenario is expected to be somewhere in between a near - ﬁeld exposure and a far - ﬁeld exposure scenario . We examine the infection risk in the far - ﬁeld by assuming a small , well - mixed room . The room is assumed to have an area A = 12 m 2 and a ceiling height of h = 2 . 5 m , which yields a volume V = 30 m 3 . This room is assumed continuously cleaned from particles by an air puriﬁer with an equivalent clean air delivery rate ( CADR ) of 4 air - changes - per - hour ( ACH ) . Only the infectious and the susceptible are in this room . The initial concentration of pathogen copies in the room air is zero . In a well - mixed room of volume V , we use the pathogen concentration n P , k derived from the particle concentration N k and size to calculate the infection risk as explained in detail in Nordsiek et al . ( 2021 ) . The rate of change in n P , k as expressed in Eq . 6 is given by the source term ( which is the emission of pathogen copies into the room by the infectious ) and four sink term : ( i ) the removal of pathogens via inhalation by the infectious , ( ii ) the removal of pathogens via inhalation by the susceptible ( this yields the absorbed dose per 19 time for the susceptible , which determines the infection risk ) , ( iii ) the removal of pathogens due to ventilation of the room or usage of an air puriﬁer with β v in the unit of air changes per second , and ( iv ) the pathogen inactivation γ , which is approximately 0 . 64 h − 1 as described in van Doremalen et al . ( 2020 ) . A recent study by Oswin et al . ( 2022 ) shows that pathogen inactivation might depend on relative humidity and ambient CO 2 concentration and could actually be faster compared to the data in van Doremalen et al . ( 2020 ) . As we are interested in the upper bound on exposure to infectious particles , we use the more conservative inactivation rate by van Doremalen et al . ( 2020 ) . dn P , k / dt = S k (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) emission − Q I D rt , k n P , k / V (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) inhal . inf . − Q S D rt , k n P , k / V (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) inhal . sus . − β v n P , k (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) ventilation − γn P , k (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) inactiv . ( 6 ) The reduction in pathogen concentration due to inhalation by the susceptible changes if the susceptible is wearing a mask . With P S , k being the eﬀective mask penetration ( including leakage ) , we get − Q S ( 1 − P 2 S , k ( 1 − D rt , k ) ) n P , k / V as the third term in Eq . 6 . For removal of infectious particles by an air puriﬁer with a non - ideal ﬁlter , β v = Q v ( 1 − P f , k ) / V with the clean air delivery rate Q v , room volume V and size - dependent ﬁlter penetration P f , k . The source term S k may consist of multiple emission terms if there are combined activities , e . g . breathing and also playing a wind instrument . For both breathing and playing a wind instrument , we can write the source term as in Eq . 7 S k = Q I , w n P , k , w (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) path . from instrument P I , k (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) mask penetr . + Q I , b n P , k , b (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) path . from breathing ( 7 ) where Q I is the exhale volumetric ﬂow rate with w for playing wind in - strument and b for breathing , and the size - dependent emitted concentration of pathogen copies n P , k , w and n P , k , b for each activity . P I , k is the penetra - tion of an instrument - mask which covers the instrument but not mouth and nose of the infectious musician . For an upper bound on exposure , we use Q I , w from Bouhuys ( 1964 ) , and Q I , b from International Commission on Radiologi - cal Protection ( 1994 ) where we assume relaxed breathing while seated ( Q I , b = 9 L min − 1 ) . This is the same volumetric ﬂow rate as for the susceptible ( Q S ) who breathes while seated . The eﬀect of ventilation or particle removal by an air puriﬁer in this model is limited to the removal after the exhale has been mixed with the air of the entire room such that there is no concentration gradient anymore . In typical settings , however , the air cleaner or exhaust is located close to the source . If this is the case , the source term needs to be modiﬁed to allow direct capture of infectious particles , as shown in Eq . 8 . S k = ( Q I , w n P , k , w P I , k (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) instrument w / mask + Q I , b n P , k , b (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) breathing ) ( 1 − c (cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) direct capture ( 1 − P f , k ) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) air cleaner eff . ) ( 8 ) 20 Here , 0 ≤ c ≤ 1 is the fraction of particles captured directly , and P f , k is the size - dependent penetration of the ﬁlter which is used in the air cleaner . If a good ﬁlter is used ( P f , k is small for all particle sizes ) , the eﬀect of direct capture is eﬀectively a linear reduction of the source strength , so the air cleaner would act like a mask . However , the ﬂow pattern in the vicinity of an air cleaner is very complicated and it requires computational ﬂuid dynamics ( CFD ) models or experiments under very controlled conditions to assess the capture eﬃciency c as a function of distance between source and air cleaner , volumetric ﬂow rate , and inlet and outlet geometry of the air cleaner . For a real exposure scenario , this would then still be limited to situations where few people are in the room and the airﬂow from the air cleaner is not altered by persons , furniture , air inlets or outlets , and other air cleaners . 3 . Results and discussion 3 . 1 . Experimentally - measured size distribution of respiratory particles exhaled through wind instruments Normalized number concentration of exhaled particles produced during play - ing wind instruments measured by the OPS and SMPS as a function of exhale diameter D 0 are shown in Fig . 5 . Particles between 0 . 1 and 0 . 3 µ m represent between 1 % and 20 % of the total volume concentration , so the particle size distribution measured by the OPS , for which more data is available , covers 80 to 99 % of the emitted volume concentration . Apart from the recorder and the ﬂute ( second row of Fig . 5 ) , the emitted concentration of particles smaller than 1 µ m while playing a wind instrument is about an order of magnitude higher compared to normal breathing found by Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . In addition , the ﬁtted particle emission for a person speaking is shown in Fig . 5 as dashed blue lines . While the particle concentration tends to increase after 10 µ m towards larger sizes for speaking , there is a rapid decrease of particle concentration in this size range observed in the wind instrument data . As already explained in Materials and Methods , Subsection 2 . 1 , we can trust the measured particle concentrations to about 16 µ m diameter at exhalation , which is 3 . 5 µ m dry diameter . As the observable decrease in particle concentration released by wind instruments starts at smaller sizes , we think the decrease is real and caused by the wind instruments themselves acting as a ﬁlter . We know from the results discussed in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) that a substantial amount of large ( D 0 > 10 µ m ) particles is released during phonetic activities . It is only the high sampling and detection eﬃciency of the holographic setup that enables reliable characterization of such large particles . We have also conducted experiments with several wind instrument being played right into the sample volume of the holographic setup . These experiments were done with four trumpets , one tenor trombone , two clarinets , two transverse ﬂutes , one alto recorder , one soprano sax , one alto sax and two tenor saxophones . In none of the experiments , we were able to detect particles > 6 µ m at the bell end of any wind instrument with the holographic setup . These 21 results give us conﬁdence that we are not missing an important mode of the size distribution at larger sizes . In general , we found that wind instrument players release higher concentration of particles up to 10 µ m exhaled diameter when playing their instrument compared to breathing and speaking . In addition to the combined SMPS and OPS data presented in Fig . 5 , we examined the entire set of OPS data and performed multi - modal lognormal ﬁts to the mean size distributions per instrument group similar to the procedure described in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . The size distributions were ﬁtted with the function described in Eq . 9 where D i is the i - th mode diameter at exhalation , σ i is the geometric standard deviation of the i - th mode , and A i is the mode concentration . dN / dLogD 0 = n (cid:88) i = 1 A i exp ( − ( ln ( D 0 / D i ) / σ i ) 2 ) ( 9 ) To all measured size distributions , we could ﬁt a mode at D 1 = 0 . 56 µ m as in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . However , the geometric standard deviation σ 1 needed to be varied for the diﬀerent wind instrument types to achieve a good coeﬃcient of determination ( r 2 ) . To avoid overﬁtting , the ﬁrst step was to ﬁt the ﬁrst mode to the data with ﬁxed D 1 to determine A 1 and σ 1 . Then , the ﬁtted ﬁrst mode was subtracted from the data and another mode was ﬁtted to the remaining data . For most instrument types , two modes could explain the measured data very well . For some instruments ( practice chanter , Great Highland Bagpipes , Scottish Smallpipes , F tuba ) , a third mode was visible and ﬁtted to the data remaining after mode 1 and 2 were subtracted . In the ﬁnal step , all D i and σ i were ﬁxed , based on the results of the previous ﬁts , and the coeﬃcients A i were used as free parameters for the ﬁt to the original data . All ﬁt parameters and coeﬃcient of determination are shown in Table 1 . A weighting function was used for the ﬁnal ﬁt , which is deﬁned as 1 / σ ( dNdLogD 0 ) where σ ( dNdLogD 0 ) is the standard error of the data . This choice was taken to yield better agreement between the ﬁt and the measured concentration of particles > 10 µ m . It needs to be emphasized that the data presented in Fig . 5 are those data where the SMPS provided valid size distributions . Size distributions measured by the OPS , including subjects and instruments without valid SMPS data , are shown in Fig . 6 , 7 and 8 . The general trend of most wind instrument play - ers emitting much higher particle concentration when playing the instrument compared to normal breathing is also visible in Fig . 6 - 8 . We found that playing edge - blown woodwind instruments tends to produce less particle number - concentration compared to playing brass instruments or reed instruments ( see Fig . 7 ) . Both piccolo and ﬁfe had emitted size distri - butions very similar to the size distribution emitted during normal breathing in terms of shape . In direct comparison between wind instruments in Fig . 6 - 8 and phonetic activities in Fig . 8 , most brass and reed instruments emit a higher number of particles per volume in the size range from 1 . 5 to 10 µ m than a person speaking or singing ( the total volume emitted , which is most impor - tant for the risk of infection , is discussed later ) . There does not appear to be a 22 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Trumpet ( Bb ) RangeMedianMean Std error Fit breathing Fit speaking 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Trombone ( Bb ) 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Flute ( C ) 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Alto recorder ( F ) 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Clarinet ( Bb ) 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Soprano sax ( Bb ) 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dL o g D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Alto sax ( Eb ) 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 20 . 3 0 . 5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dL o g D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Tenor sax ( Bb ) Figure 5 : Normalized emitted particle concentration ( dN / dLogD 0 ) from SMPS and OPS ob - tained from two brass ( orange ) , two edge - blown woodwind ( blue ) and four single - reed wood - wind instruments ( red ) as a function of exhaled diameter D 0 . Shown are arithmetic mean and standard error ( black symbols and errorbars ) , median ( solid lines ) , and range from 25th per - centile to maximum ( shaded area ) . Dashed blue ( Fit breathing ) and red lines ( Fit speaking ) represent multi - modal log - normal ﬁts for breathing and speaking as published in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . For each wind instrument type , the base or reference note is given in parenthesis . 23 Table 1 : Parameters of the multi - modal lognormal ﬁts to the data for each instrument type . The mode diameter D 1 was ﬁxed at 0 . 56 µ m . If a third mode was ﬁtted as well , the parameters of the third mode are given in the columns of A 2 , D 2 and σ 2 in parenthesis . Instrument A 1 [ cm − 3 ] σ 1 A 2 [ cm − 3 ] D 2 [ µ m ] σ 2 r 2 Piccolo 1 . 42 1 . 03 0 . 04 2 . 6 0 . 66 0 . 96 Fife 1 . 92 1 . 15 0 . 05 3 . 8 0 . 55 0 . 96 Flute 8 . 6 0 . 96 0 . 58 2 . 7 0 . 75 0 . 97 Recorder 20 . 1 0 . 89 0 . 94 2 . 7 0 . 74 0 . 98 Clarinet 44 . 1 1 . 05 1 . 42 5 . 9 0 . 58 0 . 99 Sop . sax 14 . 5 1 . 03 0 . 47 5 . 1 0 . 71 0 . 99 Alt . sax 12 . 3 0 . 93 0 . 07 2 . 8 1 . 27 0 . 97 Ten . sax 13 . 3 0 . 90 0 . 43 3 . 3 0 . 91 0 . 99 Pr . chanter 484 0 . 82 2 . 31 ( 0 . 004 ) 2 . 9 ( 20 . 1 ) 0 . 54 ( 0 . 41 ) 0 . 98 Bagpipes 24 . 5 1 . 11 0 . 05 ( 0 . 006 ) 3 . 0 ( 27 . 0 ) 0 . 59 ( 0 . 40 ) 0 . 99 Smallpipes 1 . 86 1 . 10 0 . 08 ( 0 . 009 ) 3 . 5 ( 19 . 5 ) 0 . 81 ( 0 . 48 ) 0 . 98 P . trumpet 30 . 0 0 . 97 0 . 27 3 . 5 1 . 16 0 . 98 Trumpet 75 . 5 0 . 84 0 . 31 3 . 9 1 . 01 0 . 99 Kuhlo horn 27 . 0 1 . 02 0 . 78 5 . 9 0 . 66 0 . 99 Hunting horn 22 . 2 0 . 89 0 . 02 6 . 4 1 . 18 0 . 94 Trombone 143 0 . 95 1 . 34 5 . 0 0 . 63 0 . 99 Tenorhorn 83 . 4 0 . 80 0 . 62 1 . 8 0 . 91 0 . 99 Double horn 10 . 4 1 . 01 0 . 29 6 . 8 0 . 74 0 . 99 F tuba 49 . 5 0 . 90 1 . 96 ( 0 . 004 ) 2 . 8 ( 30 . 8 ) 0 . 75 ( 0 . 30 ) 0 . 99 Bb tuba 5 . 5 1 . 06 0 . 06 3 . 8 0 . 67 0 . 99 24 direct correlation between the instrument - tube length and the concentration of emitted particles . From Fig . 6 it can be seen that the highest number - concentration is for the tenor trombone , which has about double the tube length of a trumpet or Kuhlo horn , and four times the tube length of a piccolo trumpet . The emitted particle concentration from a F - tuba is not so much diﬀerent from the particle emission by a Kuhlo horn or a trumpet despite the tube of the tuba being three times as long . In the group of the reed instruments in Fig . 7 ( clarinet and saxophones ) we ﬁnd the highest variability in particle emission in the clarinet data . The mean emitted particle concentration from the soprano sax is somewhat lower , and the alto sax and tenor sax emit less particles than the soprano sax . For the emission by the clarinet , we found a very strong pitch dependence with lowest emission in the chalumeau register and substantially higher emission in the clarion and altissimo register ( see Subsection 2 . 11 . of SI ) . The highest average emission was found for the tenor trombone and the clarinet . However , we found that a large amount of particles is produced primarily by the vibrating lips when playing a brass mouthpiece . The eﬀect of the instrument resonator on the emitted particle size distribution is discussed in Subsection 3 . 3 . The fact that we could not detect particles with the holographic setup emitted by wind instruments is in accordance with the results by McCarthy et al . ( 2021 ) who used water - sensitive cards and also could not detect particles > 20 µ m containing water at the bell end of any wind instrument . 3 . 2 . Parameters inﬂuencing particle emission and signiﬁcance of leakage Similar to the particle emission from breathing and phonetic activities as shown in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) , we found that the emission measured from a given wind instrument also depends on the player . If a person has for example an emitted particle concentration for normal breathing which is higher than the geometric mean plus the geometric standard deviation of emitted particle concentration in the examined cohort for the same activity , this person is called a super - emitter ( see Asadi et al . , 2019 ; Bagheri et al . , 2021a ) . Our data indicate that this is also the case here , i . e . some musicians produce more respiratory particles with the same instrument and playing technique as others , just because of diﬀerent physiological properties ( see Subsection 2 . 9 . of SI for more detailed discussion ) . In addition to physiological reasons for higher or lower emission , the music that was played does also have an inﬂuence on the particle emission . We typically found higher particle emission in the high register for brass players as well as for clarinet players ( see Fig . 9 of SI ) . For other wind instruments , the results were inconclusive ( details in Subsection 2 . 11 . of SI ) . To show the combined variability for most of the instruments , we present the total emitted volume concentration of particles 1 . 3 µ m < D 0 < 45 µ m for all subject - instrument - music combinations of playing the wind instrument normal - ized to that of breathing ( the mean of more than 130 subjects aged between 5 and 80 years ) in Fig . 9 . Compared with the dashed black line , which marks a relative emitted volume concentration of 1 indicating the same volume con - centration to that of breathing , we see that most wind instruments typically 25 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Piccolo trumpet ( Bb ) RangeFitMean Std err Fit breathing Fitspeaking 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Trumpet ( Bb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Kuhlo horn ( Bb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Tenorhorn ( Bb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Tenor trombone ( Bb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Double horn ( Bb / F ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Tuba ( F / Bb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Tuba ( Bb ) Figure 6 : As in Fig . 5 for eight brass instruments in the measurement range of the OPS . Mean values and standard error are shown by the black symbols with errorbars , the black solid line represents a multi - modal lognormal ﬁt to the data . 26 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Piccolo ( D ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Fife ( Cb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Alto recorder ( F ) RangeFitMean Std err Fit breathing Fitspeaking 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Flute ( C ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Clarinet ( Bb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Soprano sax ( Bb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Alto sax ( Eb ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Tenor sax ( Bb ) Figure 7 : As in Fig . 6 for eight woodwind instruments ( edge - blown woodwinds in blue , single - reed woodwinds in red ) . 27 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Hunting horn ( Bb ) RangeFitMean Std err Fit breathing Fit speaking 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Practice chanter ( A ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Scottish Smallpipes ( A ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 15 20 30 40 D 0 [ m ] 10 - 2 10 0 10 2 d N / dLog D 0 [ c m - 3 ] Great Highland Bagpipes ( A ) Figure 8 : As in Fig . 6 for four other instruments including hunting horn ( brass , in orange ) , practice chanter ( directly mouth - blown double - reed , in green ) and two bagpipes ( indirectly mouth - blown double - reed , in green ) . 28 are above . However , the mean volume concentration produced by wind instru - ments is well below that of the speaking or singing ( if we consider only particles with D 0 < 45 µ m ) . Only the piccolo and the ﬁfe have an emitted volume con - centration that is mostly below the emitted volume concentration from normal breathing . In case of the ﬂute , the data appear to be clustered with some data points at rather low emitted volume concentration and some at high emitted volume concentration . Here we need to mention that two of the ﬂutists were super - emitters in normal breathing but only one of them had a comparably high emission when playing the ﬂute . The between - subject variability of emitted vol - ume concentration in the cohort of the ﬂutists for playing the same note on their ﬂutes was as high as a factor of 20 between the lowest and the highest emitter . On the other hand , we saw that two super - emitters in normal breathing in the cohort of trumpet players were not the subjects with the highest emission when playing the instrument . This was also the case for the clarinet , where the one super - emitter in normal breathing had much lower emission when playing the clarinet compared to the subject who had the highest emission recorded during playing clarinet . Between the diﬀerent classes of wind instruments , we saw some trends . For example , the emission measured from edge - blown woodwind instruments ( pic - colo , ﬁfe , ﬂute , recorder ) was on average lower compared to most brass instru - ments ( except for the B - ﬂat tuba ) and single - reed woodwind instruments . A possible explanation is the generation of the sound for these diﬀerent instru - ment types . Edge - blown woodwind instruments need a fast , narrow airstream with virtually no resistance to make a good sound whereas the lips of a brass player or the mouthpiece of a single - reed woodwind instrument have a notable resistance to the exhaled air . The pressure within the respiratory tract needs to be higher for playing a brass or a single - reed woodwind instrument compared to playing an edge - blown woodwind instrument and we already found an in - crease in emitted particle concentration for exhalation at higher pressure ( see Subsection 2 . 7 of SI ) . 3 . 3 . Particle origin for diﬀerent classes of wind instruments The fact that edge - blown instruments typically release less particles com - pared to reed instruments and brass instruments when being played can be explained by the air pressure that is needed to generate the sound . On the other hand , we know from Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) that the oral cavity and the lips are very important sources of particles released by a person speaking or singing . When playing a brass instrument , the sound is generated by the vibrat - ing lips . If they are wetted before they are opened and closed , they can produce a large amount of particles > 30 µ m . We investigated the production of particles by a brass player with the holographic setup and OPS - based measurements of particles that passed the mouthpiece of a trombone . To study the role of the resonator ( the trombone ) , we also measured the particle size distribution at the trombone bell end and recalculated the particle size at exhalation from the mea - sured dry diameter as shown in Fig . 10 . The size distributions are based on three subsequent experiments executed by the same subject playing the same piece of 29 Figure 9 : Relative emitted particle volume concentration from directly mouth - blown wind instruments ( blue circles , brass in top panel , woodwind in bottom panel ) compared to normal breathing ( dashed black lines ) , speaking ( dashed blue lines ) and singing ( dashed magenta lines ) . Each blue circle represents one experiment ( which is one subject - instrument - music combination at some time ) . Red squares denote the arithmetic mean for the respective wind instrument . ”Pr . chanter” is the abbreviation for ”practice chanter” . Relative volume con - centrations for singing and speaking values are from Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) for particles with 1 . 3 µ m < D 0 < 45 µ m , which are almost indistinguishable from each other in this plot . 30 music for the same duration at same dynamics , which were ( i ) “Mouthpiece @ Holo” : playing the trombone mouthpiece into the holographic sample volume ( no correction needed due to negligible drying ) , ( ii ) “Mouthpiece @ OPS” : play - ing the trombone mouthpiece into the OPS inlet ( cannot be corrected due to partial drying ) , and ( iii ) “Trombone @ Setup A” : playing the trombone into the standard setup ( corrected assuming full drying to obtain D 0 ) . As expected from the size distributions in Fig . 5 , the particle concentration emitted by the trom - bone player through the instrument is about two orders of magnitude higher than the typical emission from breathing . Around 6 µ m exhaled diameter , the ﬁtted data from the trombone mouthpiece measured by the holographic setup intersect with the corrected ( measured dry ) data from the trombone bell end measured via Setup A . Due to partial drying , it was not possible to correct the data measured by the OPS directly from the trombone mouthpiece . What we can derive from the data shown in Fig . 10 is that the trombone acts as a ﬁlter with a transmission T of ∼ 1 % for D 0 > 20 µ m and ∼ 0 . 1 % for D 0 > 30 µ m . It should be emphasized that up to 20 µ m exhaled diameter , the data obtained via Setup A are trustworthy . Moreover , it is actually possible to approximate the transmission of the trombone resonator by T ∼ exp ( − 0 . 3 ( D 0 − D 1 ) ) with D 1 = 3 . 8 µ m . This is the same functional relationship as found for penetration of non - charged melt - blown ﬁlter fabrics , the only diﬀerence is that D 1 = 0 for the ﬁlter fabrics ( see Subsection 3 . 4 and Subsection 2 . 13 of SI for more details ) . However , if these particles are captured somewhere in the resonator , they might eventually become resuspended . Also , the removal of large particles by the resonator ( most likely via wet deposition ) can explain the minimal diﬀerence in mean emitted particle volume concentration between reed and brass instru - ments . We think that the particle production mechanism for > 5 µ m exhaled diameter is the same in both brass and reed instruments . While the lips , which are usually covered with some saliva , open and close up to several hundred times per second when playing a brass instrument , the same happens with the mouth - piece of a single - reed instrument , or with a double - reed if the reed is covered with some saliva . 31 Figure 10 : Particle size distributions measured from a trombone mouthpiece directly with the holography setup ( red , uncorrected due to no drying ) . For comparison , the exhaled particle size distribution measured at the trombone bell via the standard setup ( green , fully dry and corrected ) is shown . The two ﬁrst unﬁlled data points of the holography setup indicate the size range with poor detectability . Errorbars show the variability from counting statistics . Multi - modal log - normal ﬁts to the bell end data ( solid black line ) and mouthpiece data ( dashed black line ) are shown in comparison with ﬁtted size distribution for breathing ( blue ) in Bagheri et al . ( 2021a ) . 32 3 . 3 . 1 . Leakage We found that concentration of particles leaking from the tone holes of wood - wind instruments is in some cases about as much as the that of the bell end , and they have a very much comparable particle size distribution ( see Fig . 8 and Subsection 2 . 5 . of SI ) . Brass instruments do not have leakage at the valves , but another source of infectious particles is particles released by normal breathing , either through the nose or the mouth . The particle leakage from tone holes is taken into account in our infection risk calculations by assuming the upper bound of exhalation volume ﬂow rate for professional wind instrument players given by Bouhuys ( 1964 ) for diﬀerent instrument types . For some of the brass and woodwind instrument players , we examined the size distribution of particles from mouth or nose during the play with an additional measurement setup and found that the particle size distributions were very close to the particle size dis - tributions from normal breathing ( see Fig . 7 and Subsection 2 . 5 . of SI ) . From these ﬁndings , two consequences arise : Firstly , woodwind instruments need to be covered entirely with an instrument - mask as leakage from the tone holes is an issue . Secondly , particle emission from normal breathing while playing the instrument needs to be taken into account for the calculation of infection risk . 3 . 4 . Masks for wind instruments We have also investigated the possibility of using instrument - masks to reduce dispersion of potentially infectious particles . Diﬀerent melt - blown fabrics were tested on various wind instruments and their size - dependent penetration was measured with dry dolomite dust . In Fig . 11 we show four examples of the tested fabrics . As visible in the dashed versus solid lines , charged melt - blown and uncharged melt - blown fabrics have a diﬀerent functional relationship between penetration and particle size . Penetration P as a function of particle diameter D follows either a power law as expressed by Eq . 10 if the fabric is charged , or , in case of an uncharged fabric , an exponential decay as expressed in Eq . 11 . P 0 , P 1 and β are the fabric - speciﬁc parameters . More details can be found in Subsection 2 . 13 of SI . P ( D ) = P 1 · ( D / 1 µ m ) − β ( 10 ) P ( D ) = P 0 · exp ( − β · ( D / 1 µ m ) ) ( 11 ) Due to wind instruments emitting the largest fraction of volume concentra - tion in a size range D 0 < 10 µ m ( i . e . < 2 . 2 µ m fully dried diameter ) , it is utmost important to use charged melt - blown fabric for instrument - masks . The acous - tic properties as described by the musicians can be summarized in fabrics with higher weight per area yielding higher playing resistance and stronger acous - tic attenuation . The mask materials had a typical pressure drop between 7 and 45 Pa for a mean air velocity of 7 . 3 cm s − 1 through the mask . This ve - locity corresponds to about 100 L min − 1 of breathing through a typical FFP2 mask . However , the material with lowest measured penetration was quite thick 33 ( about 120 g m − 2 ) but the sound quality was acceptable for low brass instru - ments ( trombones , tenorhorns , tubas ) . High brass instruments ( in particular trumpets ) had a notable loss of brightness in the sound due to attenuation of the high harmonics . For them , a thinner material with 55 g m − 2 ( ﬁlter03 ) was better suited . Figure 11 : Measured penetration for two uncharged fabrics ( ﬁlter06 , ﬁlter10 ) , and two charged fabrics ( ﬁlter03 and ﬁlter05 ) . Shown are mean penetration ( squares ) , standard deviation ( errorbars ) and ﬁtted penetration with parameters given in the lower left corner ( solid lines ) . 3 . 5 . Risk of airborne disease transmission With the measured emitted particle size distribution and concentration for diﬀerent wind instruments and the models introduced in Materials and Methods , Subsection 2 . 5 , we now calculate the risk of infection transmission for diﬀerent exposure scenarios . As we ﬁnd the range of emitted volume concentration for some of the instruments to be almost a factor 1000 ( e . g . clarinet ) in Fig . 9 , we need to use a conservative estimation of the emitted volume concentration when calculating the infection risk . The arithmetic mean values of emitted volume concentration from the trombone and the clarinet are almost equal ( see the red squares in Fig . 9 ) . These numbers will be used to represent a high emitter . As low emitter , we chose the piccolo . With these choices the typical emission from any wind instrument is within these two extremes . In scenarios with instrument - masks , we chose the “ﬁlter05” material as mask material . We assume that all inhalation rates are the same as the corresponding exhalation rates . Breathing rates are assumed to be Q I , w = 47 L min − 1 for the infectious 34 playing the trombone ( Max ) , Q I , w = 44 L min − 1 for the infectious playing the piccolo ( Min ) , and additional Q I , b = 9 L min − 1 for breathing . The values for the trombone and piccolo are taken from Bouhuys ( 1964 ) and the value for normal breathing is taken from International Commission on Radiological Protection ( 1994 ) . For the near - ﬁeld exposure , we use the volume averaged concentration of pathogen copies from both sources ( instrument and nose of infectious ) . The susceptible breathes with a constant volumetric ﬂow rate Q S , b = 9 L min − 1 . For the interpretation of the infection risk , it needs to be mentioned that we show the upper bound of infection risk , and that the infection risk is cumulative . An instrument lesson , band rehearsal or concert might not be the only exposure scenario during the day . So it makes sense to draw the line of an acceptable infection risk somewhere on the low end . 3 . 5 . 1 . Near - ﬁeld exposure Figure 12 shows clearly that there is already an upper bound of 50 % risk of infection transmission in the “Distancing” scenario after just 4 minutes of exposure if we consider a wind instrument with high particle emission ( solid blue line in Fig . 12 ) . As expected , the infection risk for the same time is lower if a low emission instrument is played ( dashed blue line in Fig . 12 ) . Though the infection risk is lower , the time to reach 50 % risk of infection is still only about 2 . 5 hours . In the “Mixed” scenario , the infection risk is largely reduced in comparison to the distancing scenario , but for a high emission instrument ( solid red line in Fig . 12 ) , the level of protection for the susceptible is still insuﬃcient for relatively long exposures as the infection risk is still about 50 % after 1 . 5 hours . In the masked scenario , we ﬁnd no diﬀerence between minimum and maxi - mum ( solid and dashed black line in Fig . 12 are on top of each other ) , which means that the particles emitted from mouth or nose of the infectious during breathing dominate the infection risk ( see Fig . 12 ) . Even after an exposure time of 12 hours , the infection risk is still < 5 % . This is because the instrument - mask is able to reduce the particle emission from the instrument to about 1 % of that produced by breathing . The “leakage” from breathing could actually be reduced by the infectious musician wearing an adjusted FFP2 mask with a feedthrough for the mouth - piece , but this additional protection proved to be impractical for most settings with live music ( e . g . music education , rehearsals , concerts ) . Nonetheless , given that we have calculated a very conservative upper bound , the Masked scenario can be assumed safe for up to several hours when the near - ﬁeld transmission of pathogens is considered only . The selection of the mask material has an inﬂuence on the risk of infection . If the thinnest of our examined materials without charge , which is “ﬁlter10” , is used for the instrument - mask , the “Mixed” scenario leads to about the same risk as the “Masked” scenario as the reduced distance increases the risk of infection by about the same amount as the mask reduces it ( see Subsection 2 . 18 and Fig . 17 of SI ) . This intercomparison shows what happens if low - eﬃcacy masks are used and no distance is kept between infectious and susceptible . Thus , it is 35 1 min 2 min 3 min 5 min 10 min 20 min 40 min 1 h 2 h 3 h 6 h 12 h Time 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 I n f e c t i on r i sk [ % ] Distancing Mixed Masked MinMax 0 . 5m 0 . 5m 1 . 5m 0 . 5m 1 . 5m Figure 12 : Infection risk for near - ﬁeld exposure as a function of time . Shown are the exposure scenarios as deﬁned in Fig . 3 with the “Distancing” scenario ( blue lines ) , the “Mixed” scenario ( red lines ) and the “Masked” scenario ( black lines ) . Infection risk is shown for maximum ( solid lines ) and minimum ( dashed lines ) mean particle emission by the examined wind instruments ; the instruments are explained in the text . utmost important to use charged melt - blown materials for instrument - masks . Even with a thin charged melt - blown material such as “ﬁlter03” , the “Masked” scenario is the safest of all near - ﬁeld exposure scenarios . 3 . 5 . 2 . Far - ﬁeld exposure The infection risk for the far - ﬁeld exposure is shown in Fig . 13 . While it took only 4 min to reach 50 % infection risk in the “Distancing” scenario with the high emission instrument ( see Fig . 12 ) , the exposure time for 50 % infection risk in the “Room - Unmasked” scenario in the far - ﬁeld is about 30 min ( see Fig . 13 ) . Avoiding exposure to the near - ﬁeld of an infectious increases the exposure time for the same risk by almost a factor ten , however , eliminating the risk of infection transmission associated with near - ﬁeld exposure in real world conditions is not trivial to achieve . Nonetheless , the “Room - Unmasked” scenario is the one with the highest risk of infection transmission and the “Room - Masked” scenario is the safest . The “Room - Instrument - mask” scenario yields a lower infection risk after 12 hours compared to the “Room - Mixed” scenario for the high - emission wind instrument . From Fig . 13 , it can be concluded that the “Room - Masked” scenario is associated with a low risk of infection transmission ( < 1 % ) even after 12 hours . 36 1 min 2 min 3 min 5 min 10 min 20 min 40 min 1 h 2 h 3 h 6 h 12 h Time 10 - 5 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 10 1 10 2 I n f e c t i on r i sk [ % ] MinMax Room - Unmasked Room - Mixed Room - Masked Room - Instrument - mask Figure 13 : As in Fig . 12 for far - ﬁeld exposure . Shown are “Room - Unmasked” , “Room - Mixed” , “Room - Instrument - mask” and “Room - Masked” scenario for maximum and minimum of the mean particle emission among the examined wind instruments . 3 . 6 . The HEADS web - app : investigating other far - ﬁeld scenarios For the far - ﬁeld exposure scenario , we have shown a typical example repre - sentative of some music activities in the previous section . Other scenarios , where multiple infectious and / or multiple susceptible individuals are in rooms with diﬀerent ventilation characteristics , can be studied with the HEADS ( Human Emission of Aerosol and Droplet Statistics ) web app , which has a user - friendly interface ( Bagheri et al . , 2020 ) . In HEADS , the eﬀect of room size , ventila - tion rate , number of susceptible and infectious individuals , activities , pathogen concentration , infectious dose , pathogen deactivation rate , particle deposition , intake eﬃciency of the susceptible , particle drying and their re - hydration of par - ticles in susceptible airways , and poly - pathogen aerosols on the risk of infection transmission for any airborne disease can be studied . The HEADS “Advanced View” allows also mixtures of diﬀerent activities ( for example , 80 % breathing , 10 % speaking , 10 % singing ) . Another powerful tool in HEADS is the analysis of subsequent exposure scenarios . If the relevant parameters are known , it is possible to add for example the use of public transportation to / from the con - cert . The HEADS web app is available in English , German and some other languages . 3 . 7 . Other considerations for the infection risk assessments The use of conservative estimates allowed us to calculate a situation - independent upper bound of infection risk for typical SARS - CoV - 2 input parameters that is reliable when the results are interpreted with statistical reasoning . However , there are fundamental limitations and uncertainties that need to be discussed . 37 For example , in rare situations atypical values for SARS - CoV - 2 can be expected to occur , e . g . ρ p for an individual with SARS - CoV - 2 and considered infectious ranges from about 10 6 to 10 11 cm − 3 instead of the 10 8 . 5 cm − 3 considered here . This span by itself introduces an uncertainty of ± 2 . 5 orders of magnitude ( fac - tor 300 ) for the time to exceed a given threshold of the infection risk . In other words , a given time to exceed a threshold of the risk of infection transmission of 5 minutes could actually vary between 1 second for an infectious with extremely high virus concentration , and 1 day for an infectious with low virus concentra - tion . Also , the value of ID 63 . 21 is not exactly known and could vary between 100 and 1000 virions for the wild type of SARS - CoV - 2 ( see e . g . Nordsiek et al . , 2021 ) . However , it is unlikely that the uncertainty caused by ID 63 . 21 will aﬀect the real - world application of the results presented , at least for the near - ﬁeld scenarios , since we have already used extremely conservative estimates for other parameters . Another aspect that introduces uncertainty to the model is that the dependence of ρ p on particle origin site and time during the course of the disease is not known . There is also a recent discussion about the inactivation rate for particles containing SARS - CoV - 2 , which could depend on several pa - rameters of the room air and could be higher ( Oswin et al . , 2022 ) . On the other hand , simpler models like the ones used in Miller et al . ( 2020 ) , Stockman et al . ( 2021 ) and Firle et al . ( 2021 ) have the same issues while they also do not take the size to volume ratio of the particles into account . In this regard , the upper bound we have presented for the near - ﬁeld calculations should remain valid as we have not considered the deactivation term . In addition , the volumetric ﬂow rates for exhalation are based on studies with a small number of subjects ( e . g . the paper by Bouhuys ( 1964 ) ) , however , we have used conservative estimates . Another possible limitation is the aggregation of wind instruments of the same type , e . g . the ”trumpet” class consists of several diﬀerent trumpet models in B - ﬂat with both rotary and piston valves and there is evidence that the instrument geometry and / or mouthpiece geometry can have an eﬀect on emitted particle concentration and size distribution . One trumpet player played exactly the same pieces of music on two diﬀerent trumpet models at same dynamics and tempo with the result that the mean emitted particle number concentrations diﬀered systematically by a factor 2 between the two trumpet models . The assumption of a diverging jet ﬂow is rather crude but useful to discuss the eﬀect of dilution as a function of distance between source and receiver . Finally , the limitations discussed need to be taken into account when interpreting the results of the infection risk calculation . Nevertheless , the infection risk calculations presented can provide very useful guidance for planning rehearsals , instrumental lessons , and live music events . 4 . Conclusion We have shown that playing wind instruments releases particles in a volume concentration that is typically 0 . 5 to 25 times higher than the particle release from normal breathing , which is , on average , still lower than the particle re - lease from speaking or singing . 18 out of 20 examined wind instrument types 38 had a higher mean emitted particle volume concentration compared to breath - ing . Edge - blown woodwind instruments had on average lower emitted particle volume concentration compared to single - reed or double - reed woodwind instru - ments and brass instruments . We did not observe a systematic trend in a way that for example brass instruments with a shorter tube emitted more particles than brass instruments with a longer tube . For some instruments ( most brass and also clarinets ) , higher emission was found for higher notes played . Reed and brass instruments also had similar mean emitted volume concentration , though the playing technique is much diﬀerent . We have also found that playing wind instruments can produce very low concentration of D 0 > 20 µ m , which is in stark contrast to phonetic activities like speaking or singing . More than 80 % of the particle volume emitted from wind instruments lies within a particle diameter range from 0 . 3 to 4 . 5 µ m after fully dried , i . e . D 0 ∼ 1 . 5 to 20 µ m . Diﬀerent melt - blown fabrics have been examined as candidates for instrument - masks . We found that only charged melt - blown fabrics can substantially reduce emission of infectious particles . The material penetration as a function of par - ticle size follows a power law for charged materials , and an exponential decay for uncharged materials . This explains why uncharged mask materials have such a low capture eﬃcacy for particles < 1 µ m . We tested a mask material with penetration < 10 − 4 for 1 µ m particles on several wind instruments and found mi - nor inﬂuence of the instrument - mask on the sound quality of brass instruments playing in the same tonal range as a tenor trombone or lower . A practical solu - tion for reed instruments still needs to be found as leakage from tone holes had similar particle concentration and size distribution as emission measured at the instrument bell end . The emitted particles may pose a substantial risk of infection transmission in a near - ﬁeld exposure as well as in the well - mixed room considered here if the musician is infectious . Without masks , the risk of infection transmission exceeds 50 % after 4 minutes for a high - emission instrument . Using an FFP2 mask for a susceptible at 1 . 5 m distance to the bell end of the instrument results in 50 % risk of infection transmission after 1 hour . When susceptible wears an FFP2 mask and instrument - mask is used , transmission risk in near - ﬁeld is only 5 % even after 12 hours of continuous exposure . In a well - mixed room situation ( i . e . far - ﬁeld scenarios ) like a band rehearsal ( with one wind instrument ) or private instrument lessons , the risk of infection transmission is > 50 % after 20 minutes but stays below 0 . 5 % even after 12 hours with a moderate air exchange rate ( 4 ACH ) , instrument - mask and FFP2 masks for the attendees . With the web - app HEADS ( Bagheri et al . , 2020 ) , it is possible to examine diﬀerent exposure scenarios with multiple infectious sources and susceptible in - dividuals at once , and investigate how changes in distance and masks as well as other eﬀects , such as point - of - care testing , ventilation and particle deposition , could inﬂuence the infection risk . In this paper , we limited ourselves to a few exposure scenarios representative of instrument education or band / ensemble rehearsal to characterize the risk of infection transmission in one of these events in general and evaluate possible mitigation measures . By transferring the data 39 published in this paper also to HEADS , we enable the reader to investigate diﬀerent exposure scenarios by themselves through the HEADS easy - to - use in - terface . In this work we could quantify the upper bound of infection risk and showed that universal usage of well - ﬁtting and well - ﬁltering instrument and individual masks can reduce the risk of infection transmission signiﬁcantly while distancing alone or non - universal masking are found to be high risk measures . Author contributions OS , GB and BT wrote the draft of the main paper and the Supplementary Information . OS , GB , EB , RM , SS and LT designed the experimental pro - cedures for the subject measurements . SS advised all medical aspects of the investigation . EB wrote the ethics application . OS , LT , KS , BT , JK , EB and GB conducted the experiments on human subjects . OS , KS , BT and EB did the ﬁlter penetration measurements . RM advised all musical aspects of the in - vestigation and assisted in some of the experiments on human subjects . OS , BT and GB with the help of EB analyzed and interpreted the data . OS prepared the holography data . All authors wrote the ﬁnal text . Conﬂict of Interest The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Ethics statement The non - invasive exhaled aerosol sampling study which led to this paper was approved by the Ethics Commission of the Max Planck Society ( Submis - sion 2020 23 ) . The participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study . Data availability A part of the datasets generated and analyzed for this study can be found in the HEADS web app [ https : / / aerosol . ds . mpg . de ] . Data not published within HEADS are available from the corresponding authors on reasonable request . Acknowledgments Without the great support of our volunteers , this study would not have been possible . We are grateful for all suggestions we received by some of the volun - teers , which ﬁnally enabled us to discover some of the ultra - high emission sce - narios we might have never seen otherwise . We like to thank the Posaunenwerk 40 der Landeskirche Hannovers , the Hochschule f¨ur Musik , Theater und Medien Hannover , the Blasmusikverband Nordrhein - Westfalen e . V . , and the Jacobi - Kantorei G¨ottingen for sharing the call for volunteers and encouraging their members to participate in our study . Special thanks go to the machine shop of the Max Planck Institute for Dynamic and Self - Organization , and Udo Schminke ( head of construction ) for making customized tools and adaptors needed for the aerosol measurements . We gratefully acknowledge the support by our High Per - formance Computation ( HPC ) work group to provide resources for analysis of the holographic data and keep the HPC cluster in a working state . We would also like to thank the companies producing melt - blown ﬁlter fabrics ( namely Sandler AG , Filter GmbH Preussel Langenfeld , and Brigitte Hoﬀmann Filter - produkte KG ) for providing test samples of diﬀerent ﬁlter materials . Funding We thank the Bundesministerium f¨ur Bildung und Forschung ( BMBF ) for funding within the project B - FAST ( Bundesweites Netzwerk Angewandte Surveil - lance und Teststrategie ) ( 01KX2021 ) within the NUM ( Netzwerk Universit¨atsmedizin ) , Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( project number : 469107130 ) and the Max Planck Society . The sponsors had no inﬂuence on the study design , data collec - tion and analysis , decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript . References Abraham , A . , He , R . , Shao , S . , Kumar , S . S . , Wang , C . , Guo , B . , Tri - fonov , M . , Placucci , R . G . , Willis , M . , Hong , J . , 2021 . Risk as - sessment and mitigation of airborne disease transmission in orches - tral wind instrument performance . Journal of Aerosol Science 157 , 105797 . URL : https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0021850221005292 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaerosci . 2021 . 105797 . Asadi , S . , Wexler , A . S . , Cappa , C . D . , Barreda , S . , Bouvier , N . M . , Ristenpart , W . D . , 2019 . Aerosol emission and superemission during human speech in - crease with voice loudness . Scientiﬁc Reports 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 019 - 38808 - z . Bagheri , G . , Schlenczek , O . , Turco , L . , Nordsiek , F . , Clauberg , S . , Stieger , K . , Kosub , J . M . , Scheithauer , S . , Kaba , H . , Bodenschatz , E . , 2020 . HEADS — Human Emission of Aerosol and Droplet Statistics . https : / / aerosol . ds . mpg . de . Accessed : 2021 - 12 - 08 . Bagheri , G . , Schlenczek , O . , Turco , L . , Thiede , B . , Stieger , K . , Kosub , J . M . , P¨ohlker , M . , P¨ohlker , C . , Molacek , J . , Scheithauer , S . , Bodenschatz , E . , 2021a . Exhaled particles from nanometre to millimetre and their origin in the human respiratory tract . medRxiv preprint URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 10 . 01 . 21264333 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 10 . 01 . 21264333 . version 1 , 03 Oct 2021 . 41 Bagheri , G . , Thiede , B . , Hejazi , B . , Schlenczek , O . , Bodenschatz , E . , 2021b . An upper bound on one - to - one exposure to infectious human respira - tory particles . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 . URL : https : / / www . pnas . org / content / 118 / 49 / e2110117118 , doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2110117118 . Becher , L . , Gena , A . W . , Alsaad , H . , Richter , B . , Spahn , C . , Voelker , C . , 2021 . The spread of breathing air from wind instruments and singers using schlieren techniques . Indoor Air 31 , 1798 – 1814 . URL : https : / / onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1111 / ina . 12869 , doi : 10 . 1111 / ina . 12869 . Bouhuys , A . , 1964 . Lung volumes and breathing patterns in wind - instrument players . Journal of Applied Physiology 19 , 967 – 975 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1152 / jappl . 1964 . 19 . 5 . 967 , doi : 10 . 1152 / jappl . 1964 . 19 . 5 . 967 . PMID : 14207753 . Brosseau , Q . , Ran , R . , Graham , I . , Jerolmack , D . J . , Arratia , P . E . , 2022 . Flow and aerosol dispersion from wind musical instruments . arXiv preprint doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2201 . 10386 , arXiv : 2201 . 10386 . version 1 , 25 Jan 2022 . Buonanno , G . , Stabile , L . , Morawska , L . , 2020 . Estimation of airborne viral emission : Quanta emission rate of sars - cov - 2 for infection risk assessment . Environment International 141 , 105794 . URL : https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0160412020312800 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . envint . 2020 . 105794 . Chan , M . , Hui , K . , Ho , J . , Cheung , M . , Ng , K . , Ching , R . , Lai , K . , Kam , T . , Gu , H . , Sit , K . , Hsin , M . , Au , W . , Poon , L . , Peiris , M . , Nicholls , J . , 2021 . SARS - CoV - 2 Omicron variant replication in human respiratory tract ex vivo . Research Square preprint URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21203 / rs . 3 . rs - 1189219 / v1 , doi : 10 . 21203 / rs . 3 . rs - 1189219 / v1 . version 1 , 22 Dec 2021 . Chen , J . , Wang , R . , Gilby , N . B . , Wei , G . W . , 2021 . Omicron ( B . 1 . 1 . 529 ) : Infectivity , vaccine breakthrough , and antibody resistance . arXiv preprint doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2112 . 01318 , arXiv : 2112 . 01318 . version 1 , 01 Dec 2021 . Coleman , K . K . , Tay , D . J . W . , Tan , K . S . , Ong , S . W . X . , Than , T . S . , Koh , M . H . , Chin , Y . Q . , Nasir , H . , Mak , T . M . , Chu , J . J . H . , Milton , D . K . , Chow , V . T . K . , Tambyah , P . A . , Chen , M . , Tham , K . W . , 2021 . Viral Load of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) in Respiratory Aerosols Emitted by Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) While Breathing , Talking , and Singing . Clinical Infectious Diseases URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciab691 , doi : 10 . 1093 / cid / ciab691 . ciab691 . van Doremalen , N . , Bushmaker , T . , Morris , D . H . , Holbrook , M . G . , Gamble , A . , Williamson , B . N . , Tamin , A . , Harcourt , J . L . , Thornburg , N . J . , Gerber , 42 S . I . , Lloyd - Smith , J . O . , de Wit , E . , Munster , V . J . , 2020 . Aerosol and Sur - face Stability of SARS - CoV - 2 as Compared with SARS - CoV - 1 . New Eng - land Journal of Medicine 382 , 1564 – 1567 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1056 / NEJMc2004973 , doi : 10 . 1056 / NEJMc2004973 . Firle , C . , Steinmetz , A . , Stier , O . , Stengel , D . , Ekkernkamp , A . , 2021 . Aerosol emission rates from playing wind instruments - implications for covid - 19 transmission during music performance . medRxiv preprint URL : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / early / 2021 / 12 / 11 / 2021 . 12 . 08 . 21267466 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 12 . 08 . 21267466 . version 1 , 11 Dec 2021 . Fugal , J . P . , Schulz , T . J . , Shaw , R . A . , 2009 . Practical methods for automated reconstruction and characterization of particles in digital in - line holograms . Measurement Science and Technology 20 , 075501 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 0957 - 0233 / 20 / 7 / 075501 , doi : 10 . 1088 / 0957 - 0233 / 20 / 7 / 075501 . Gantner , S . , Echternach , M . , Veltrup , R . , Westphalen , C . , K¨oberlein , M . , Kura - nova , L . , Peters , G . , Jakubaß , B . , Benthaus , T . , D¨ollinger , M . , Kniesburges , S . , 2022 . Impulse dispersion of aerosols during playing wind instruments . PLoS ONE 17 , e0262994 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0262994 . Halfmann , P . J . , Iida , S . , Iwatsuki - Horimoto , K . , Maemura , T . , Kiso , M . , Scheaf - fer , S . M . , Darling , T . L . , Joshi , A . , Loeber , S . , Singh , G . , Foster , S . L . , Ying , B . , Case , J . B . , Chong , Z . , Whitener , B . , Moliva , J . , Floyd , K . , Ujie , M . , Nakajima , N . , Ito , M . , Wright , R . , Uraki , R . , Warang , P . , Gagne , M . , Li , R . , Sakai - Tagawa , Y . , Liu , Y . , Larson , D . , Osorio , J . E . , Hernandez - Ortiz , J . P . , Henry , A . R . , Ciouderis , K . , Florek , K . R . , Patel , M . , Odle , A . , Wong , L . Y . R . , Bateman , A . C . , Wang , Z . , Edara , V . V . , Chong , Z . , Franks , J . , Jeevan , T . , Fabrizio , T . , DeBeauchamp , J . , Kercher , L . , Seiler , P . , Gonzalez - Reiche , A . S . , Sordillo , E . M . , Chang , L . A . , van Bakel , H . , Simon , V . , Alburquerque , B . , Al - shammary , H . , Amoako , A . A . , Aslam , S . , Banu , R . , Cognigni , C . , Espinoza - Moraga , M . , Farrugia , K . , van de Guchte , A . , Khalil , Z . , Laporte , M . , Mena , I . , Paniz - Mondolﬁ , A . E . , Polanco , J . , Rooker , A . , Sominsky , L . A . , Douek , D . C . , Sullivan , N . J . , Thackray , L . B . , Ueki , H . , Yamayoshi , S . , Imai , M . , Perl - man , S . , Webby , R . J . , Seder , R . A . , Suthar , M . S . , Garc´ıa - Sastre , A . , Schot - saert , M . , Suzuki , T . , Boon , A . C . M . , Diamond , M . S . , Kawaoka , Y . , Consor - tium Mount Sinai Pathogen Surveillance ( PSP ) study group , 2022 . SARS - CoV - 2 Omicron virus causes attenuated disease in mice and hamsters . Na - ture 603 , 687 – 692 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 022 - 04441 - 6 , doi : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 022 - 04441 - 6 . He , R . , Gao , L . , Trifonov , M . , Hong , J . , 2021 . Aerosol genera - tion from diﬀerent wind instruments . Journal of Aerosol Science 151 , 105669 . URL : https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0021850220301555 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaerosci . 2020 . 105669 . Hedworth , H . A . , Karam , M . , McConnell , J . , Sutherland , J . C . , Saad , T . , 2021 . Mitigation strategies for airborne disease transmission in orchestras 43 using computational ﬂuid dynamics . Science Advances 7 , eabg4511 . URL : https : / / www . science . org / doi / abs / 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abg4511 , doi : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . abg4511 . Hejazi , B . , Schlenczek , O . , Thiede , B . , Bagheri , G . , Bodenschatz , E . , 2022 . On the risk of infection by infectious aerosols in large indoor spaces . arXiv preprint doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2105 . 10357 , arXiv : 2105 . 10357 . version 3 , 24 Jan 2022 . International Commission on Radiological Protection ( Ed . ) , 1994 . Human res - piratory tract model for radiology protection : a report of a Task Group of the International Commission on Radiological Protection . Number 66 in ICRP publication . 1 . ed ed . , Pergamon , Oxford . OCLC : 832441728 . Jimenez , J . L . , 2020 . COVID - 19 Aerosol Transmission Estimator . Online , Version 3 . 4 . 19 released 2020 Oct . 27 [ Cited 2020 Nov . 26 ] . URL : https : / / tinyurl . com / covid - estimator . Jones , T . C . , Biele , G . , M¨uhlemann , B . , Veith , T . , Schneider , J . , Beheim - Schwarzbach , J . , Bleicker , T . , Tesch , J . , Schmidt , M . L . , Sander , L . E . , Kurth , F . , Menzel , P . , Schwarzer , R . , Zuchowski , M . , Hofmann , J . , Krumb - holz , A . , Stein , A . , Edelmann , A . , Corman , V . M . , Drosten , C . , 2021 . Estimating infectiousness throughout SARS - CoV - 2 infection course . Sci - ence 373 . URL : https : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / 373 / 6551 / eabi5273 , doi : 10 . 1126 / science . abi5273 . K¨ahler , C . J . , Hain , R . , 2020 . Singing in choirs and making music with wind instruments – Is that safe during the SARS - CoV - 2 pandemic ? Preprint doi : 10 . 13140 / RG . 2 . 2 . 36405 . 29926 . retrieved 26 Apr 2022 . Kriegel , M . , Hartmann , A . , Buchholz , U . , Seifried , J . , Baumgarte , S . , Gast - meier , P . , 2022 . SARS - CoV - 2 Aerosol Transmission Indoors : A Closer Look at Viral Load , Infectivity , the Eﬀectiveness of Preventive Measures and a Sim - ple Approach for Practical Recommendations . International Journal of En - vironmental Research and Public Health 19 . URL : https : / / www . mdpi . com / 1660 - 4601 / 19 / 1 / 220 , doi : 10 . 3390 / ijerph19010220 . Lai , K . M . , Bottomley , C . , McNerney , R . , 2011 . Propagation of Respira - tory Aerosols by the Vuvuzela . PLoS ONE 6 , e20086 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0020086 . Leung , N . , 2021 . Transmissibility and transmission of respiratory viruses . Na - ture Reviews Microbiology 19 , 528 – 545 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41579 - 021 - 00535 - 6 . McCarthy , L . P . , Orton , C . M . , Watson , N . A . , Gregson , F . K . A . , Haddrell , A . E . , Browne , W . J . , Calder , J . D . , Costello , D . , Reid , J . P . , Shah , P . L . , Bzdek , B . R . , 2021 . Aerosol and Droplet Generation from Performing with Woodwind and Brass Instruments . Aerosol Science and Technology 55 , 1277 – 1287 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02786826 . 2021 . 1947470 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 02786826 . 2021 . 1947470 . 44 Miller , S . L . , Nazaroﬀ , W . W . , Jimenez , J . L . , Boerstra , A . , Buonanno , G . , Dancer , S . J . , Kurnitski , J . , Marr , L . C . , Morawska , L . , Noakes , C . , 2020 . Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 by inhalation of respiratory aerosol in the Sk - agit Valley Chorale superspreading event . Indoor Air 00 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1111 / ina . 12751 . Morawska , L . , Cao , J . , 2020 . Airborne transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 : The world should face the reality . Environment International 139 , 105730 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . envint . 2020 . 105730 . Morawska , L . , Johnson , G . , Ristovski , Z . , Hargreaves , M . , Mengersen , K . , Corbett , S . , Chao , C . , Li , Y . , Katoshevski , D . , 2009 . Size distribu - tion and sites of origin of droplets expelled from the human respiratory tract during expiratory activities . Journal of Aerosol Science 40 , 256 – 269 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaerosci . 2008 . 11 . 002 . Nannu Shankar , S . , Witanachchi , C . T . , Morea , A . F . , Lednicky , J . A . , Loeb , J . C . , Alam , M . M . , Fan , Z . H . , Eiguren - Fernandez , A . , Wu , C . Y . , 2022 . SARS - CoV - 2 in residential rooms of two self - isolating persons with COVID - 19 . Journal of Aerosol Science 159 , 105870 . URL : https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0021850221006005 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jaerosci . 2021 . 105870 . Narayanan , S . R . , Yang , S . , 2021 . Airborne transmission of virus - laden aerosols inside a music classroom : Eﬀects of portable puriﬁers and aerosol injec - tion rates . Physics of Fluids 33 , 033307 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 5 . 0042474 , doi : 10 . 1063 / 5 . 0042474 . Nordsiek , F . , Bodenschatz , E . , Bagheri , G . , 2021 . Risk assessment for air - borne disease transmission by poly - pathogen aerosols . PLoS ONE 16 , 1 – 41 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0248004 . Oswin , H . P . , Haddrell , A . E . , Otero - Fernandez , M . , Mann , J . F . , Cogan , T . A . , Hilditch , T . , Tian , J . , Hardy , D . , Hill , D . J . , Finn , A . , Davidson , A . D . , Reid , J . P . , 2022 . The Dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 Infectivity with Changes in Aerosol Microenvironment . medRxiv preprint URL : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / early / 2022 / 01 / 10 / 2022 . 01 . 08 . 22268944 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 01 . 08 . 22268944 . version 1 , 10 Jan 2022 . Parker , A . S . , Crookston , K . , 2020 . Investigation into the Release of Respiratory Aerosols by Brass Instruments and Mitigation Mea - sures with Respect to Covid - 19 . medRxiv preprint URL : https : / / www . medrxiv . org / content / early / 2020 / 08 / 04 / 2020 . 07 . 31 . 20165837 , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 07 . 31 . 20165837 . version 1 , 04 Aug 2020 . P¨ohlker , M . L . , Kr¨uger , O . O . , F¨orster , J . D . , Berkemeier , T . , Elbert , W . , Fr¨ohlich - Nowoisky , J . , P¨oschl , U . , P¨ohlker , C . , Bagheri , G . , Bodenschatz , E . , Huﬀman , J . A . , Scheithauer , S . , Mikhailov , E . , 2021 . Respiratory aerosols 45 and droplets in the transmission of infectious diseases . arXiv preprint doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2103 . 01188 , arXiv : 2103 . 01188 . version 4 , 04 Aug 2021 . Schlenczek , O . , 2018 . Airborne and ground - based holographic measurement of hydrometeors in liquid - phase , mixed phase and ice clouds . University of Mainz , PhD dissertation . Spahn , C . , Hipp , A . M . , Schubert , B . , Axt , M . R . , Stratmann , M . , Schm¨older , C . , Richter , B . , 2021 . Airﬂow and Air Velocity Measurements While Play - ing Wind Instruments , with Respect to Risk Assessment of a SARS - CoV - 2 Infection . International Journal of Environmental Research and Pub - lic Health 18 , 5413 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / ijerph18105413 , doi : 10 . 3390 / ijerph18105413 . Stockman , T . , Zhu , S . , Kumar , A . , Wang , L . , Patel , S . , Weaver , J . , Spede , M . , Milton , D . K . , Hertzberg , J . , Toohey , D . , Vance , M . , Srebric , J . , Miller , S . L . , 2021 . Measurements and Simulations of Aerosol Released while Singing and Playing Wind Instruments . ACS Environmental Au 1 , 71 – 84 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acsenvironau . 1c00007 , doi : 10 . 1021 / acsenvironau . 1c00007 . WHO Team , 2022 . Statement on the tenth meeting of the International Health Regulations ( 2005 ) Emergency Committee regarding the coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) pandemic . URL : https : / / www . who . int / news / item / 19 - 01 - 2022 - statement - on - the - tenth - meeting - of - the - international - health - regulations - ( 2005 ) - emergency - committee - regarding - the - coronavirus - disease - ( covid - 19 ) - pandemic . Retrieved 20 Jan 2022 . Yang , F . , Pahlavan , A . A . , Mendez , S . , Abkarian , M . , Stone , H . A . , 2020 . To - wards improved social distancing guidelines : Space and time dependence of virus transmission from speech - driven aerosol transport between two individ - uals . Physical Review Fluids 5 , 122501 . URL : https : / / link . aps . org / doi / 10 . 1103 / PhysRevFluids . 5 . 122501 , doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevFluids . 5 . 122501 . 46