188 The Herfindahl - Hirschman Index Stephen A . Rhoades , of the Board ' s Division of Research and Statistics , prepared this technical note . The Herfindahl - Hirschman index , better known as the Herfindahl index , is a statistical measure of concentration . It has achieved an unusual degree of visibility for a statistical index because of its use by the Department of Justice and the Federal Reserve in the analysis of the competitive effects of merg - ers . The Herfindahl index can be used to measure concentration in a variety of contexts . For example , it can be used to measure the concentration of income ( or wealth ) in U . S . households and also market concentration , that is , the degree of concen - tration of the output of firms in banking or indus - trial markets . It is useful in analyzing horizontal mergers because such mergers affect market con - centration , and economic theory and considerable empirical evidence suggest that , other things equal , the concentration of firms in a market is an impor - tant element of market structure and a determinant of competition . However , despite its visibility , the Herfindahl index is sometimes not understood in terms of its use , measurement , or interpretation in merger analysis . To facilitate and simplify the application of the antitrust laws regarding mergers , in 1982 the Department of Justice published formal numerical guidelines for horizontal mergers ( those between firms operating in the same product and geographic markets ) based on the Herfindahl index ( HHI ) . 1 In 1985 , the Justice Department proposed somewhat modified numerical guidelines for mergers in the banking industry and published revised guidelines 1 . The index was developed independently by the economists A . O . Hirschman ( in 1945 ) and O . C . Herfindahl ( in 1950 ) . Hirsch - man presented the index in his book , National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade ( Berkeley : University of California Press , 1945 ) . Herfindahl ' s index was presented in his unpublished doctoral dissertation , " Concentration in the U . S . Steel Industry " ( Columbia University , 1950 ) . For more detail on the background of the index , see Albert O . Hirschman , " The Paternity of an Index , " American Economic Review ( September 1964 ) , pp . 761 - 62 . in 1992 . These numerical guidelines are used by the Federal Reserve as the first step in analyzing the effect on competition of bank mergers . The guidelines , as applied to banking , specify that if a bank merger would result ( 1 ) in a post - merger HHI in a market of less than 1 , 800 or ( 2 ) in a change in the HHI of less than 200 ( less than 50 in other industries ) , it is likely that the market structure would not reach a concentration level , or concen - tration would not increase enough , such that firms in the market would have the market power to maintain prices above the competitive level for a significant period . The HHI is only one element in the analysis of the competitive effects of bank mergers . However , because of the importance attached to market con - centration as an indicator of competition and the relative ease of calculating the HHI , this index serves as an efficient screening device for regula - tors and as a planning tool for bankers . At the Federal Reserve , the HHI is calculated by includ - ing 100 percent of the deposits of commercial banks in a market and at least 50 percent of the deposits of thrift institutions . If the post - merger HHI does not exceed the numerical guidelines , it is generally presumed that the merger would not be seriously anticompetitive , and no further analysis is conducted . If , on the other hand , the post - merger HHI exceeds the numerical guidelines , a detailed economic analysis of competition is undertaken to determine whether other factors , such as potential competition , indicate that the market would be more ( or less ) competitive than the HHI alone suggests . The HHI accounts for the number of firms in a market , as well as concentration , by incorporating the relative size ( that is , market share ) of all firms in a market . It is calculated by squaring the market shares of all firms in a market and then summing the squares , as follows : n HHI = Z ( M5 , ) 2 , i = i Digitized for FRASER http : / / fraser . stlouisfed . org / Federal Reserve Bank of St . Louis March 1993 189 where MS t represents the market share of firm i and there are n firms in the market . The following example of calculating the HHI before and after a merger illustrates the use of the formula . Assume that there are four banks in a market . Bank A holds 40 percent of bank deposits in the market , Bank B holds 30 percent , Bank C holds 20 percent , and Bank D holds 10 percent . Substituting these values in the formula gives the HHI for bank deposits in this market : ( 40 ) 2 + ( 30 ) 2 + ( 20 ) 2 + ( lO ) 2 . Completing this calculation gives the before - merger HHI : 1 , 600 + 900 + 400 + 100 = 3 , 000 . Next assume that Bank C , with 20 percent of the market , acquires Bank D , which has 10 percent of the market . The HHI after the merger would be ( 40 ) 2 + ( 30 ) 2 + ( 20 + lO ) 2 . Completing this calculation gives the post - merger HHI : 1 , 600 + 900 + 900 = 3 , 400 . The merger therefore increased the HHI by 400 , from 3 , 000 to 3 , 400 . Further examination of this example reveals that the HHI gives much heavier weight to firms with large market shares than to firms with small shares as a result of squaring the market shares . This feature of the HHI corresponds to the theoretical notion in economics that the greater the concentra - tion of output in a small number of firms ( a high HHI ) , the greater the likelihood that , other things equal , competition in a market will be weak . In contrast , if concentration is low , reflecting a large number of firms with small market shares ( a low HHI ) , competition will tend to be vigorous . The HHI reaches a maximum value of 10 , 000 when a monopoly exists in which one firm has 100 percent of the market , that is , the HHI = ( 100 ) 2 = 10 , 000 . In contrast , the HHI takes on a very small value , theoretically approaching zero , in a purely compet - itive market in which there are many firms with small market shares . For example , in a market with 100 firms that each have a 1 percent share of the market , the HHI = ( l ^ 2 + ( 1 2 ) 2 . . . ( l 100 ) 2 = 100 . The following table provides a sense of what different values of the HHI imply for the concentra - tion of a market , assuming that all firms in the market have the same market share . For example , row 2 of the table indicates that a market with five firms of equal size ( that is , each with 20 percent of the market ) would have an HHI of 2 , 000 . Number of firms Market share HHI of equal size in of each firm the market ( percent ) 1 , 000 10 10 . 0 2 , 000 5 20 . 0 3 , 300 3 33 . 3 5 , 000 2 50 . 0 In conclusion , note that , although the HHI is a useful tool in merger analysis , particularly as an initial screening device , other factors are consid - ered in an economic analysis of competition . • Digitized for FRASER http : / / fraser . stlouisfed . org / Federal Reserve Bank of St . Louis March 1993