Flourishing in the Everyday : Moving Beyond Damage - Centered Design in HCI for BIPOC Communities Alexandra To ∗ Angela D . R . Smith ∗ Dilruba Showkat Northeastern University University of Texas at Austin Northeastern University Boston , MA , USA Austin , TX , USA Boston , MA , USA a . to @ northeastern . edu angela . smith @ ischool . utexas . edu showkat . d @ northeastern . edu Adinawa Adjagbodjou Christina Harrington Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh , PA , USA Pittsburgh , PA , USA aadjagbo @ andrew . cmu . edu charring @ andrew . cmu . edu ABSTRACT Research and design in human - computer interaction centers problem - solving , causing a downstream efect of framing work with and for marginalized communities predominantly from the lens of defcit and damage . Frameworks such as assets - based design and design - ing for resilience have emerged to highlight the strengths of these communities . However , we observe an additional need to center positive aspects of humanity , such as joy , pleasure , rest , and cultural heritage , particularly for Black , Indigenous , and People of Color . In this paper , we present three case studies of existing technologies that center BIPOC fourishing to provide an alternative path for HCI . We propose six actionable tenets for designing for fourishing in the everyday : ( 1 ) seek opportunities to design for self - actualization , ( 2 ) identify and center the desire to fourish , ( 3 ) collaborate and distribute power , ( 4 ) refrain from damage - centered reductionism , ( 5 ) bring the humanity of a community into the design process , ( 6 ) and evaluate for self - sustainability . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI design and evaluation methods ; HCI theory , concepts and models ; • Social and profes - sional topics → Race and ethnicity . KEYWORDS Values , Values in Design , BIPOC ( Black , Indigenous , and People of Color ) , Design Methods , Joy , Flourishing , Case Studies ACM Reference Format : Alexandra To , Angela D . R . Smith , Dilruba Showkat , Adinawa Adjagbodjou , and Christina Harrington . 2023 . Flourishing in the Everyday : Moving Be - yond Damage - Centered Design in HCI for BIPOC Communities . In Design - ing Interactive Systems Conference ( DIS ’23 ) , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , ∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pittsburgh , PA , USA © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9893 - 0 / 23 / 07 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3596057 USA . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3563657 . 3596057 1 INTRODUCTION Human - computer interaction ( HCI ) as a computing feld has be - come more engaged with exploring the intersection of race and tech - nology as a way to defne technology’s role in humanity [ 31 , 52 , 83 ] . In this process , researchers have primarily aligned to HCI’s default problem - solving methodology - as a feld , we identify and cen - ter pain points and challenges ( often as outsiders ) and design to overcome these pain points . As one of the primary focuses of this research approach , racial and ethnic minority groups are seen more as the subject of damage - centered [ 116 ] and defcit - driven research and design . Black , Indigenous , and People of Color ( BIPOC ) are and have always been in and impacted by technology , yet they are often seen as those who need help or are defned by their problems in HCI research practices [ 19 , 81 , 81 ] . We use “BIPOC” as an inclu - sive umbrella term for people of color and to highlight Indigenous invisibility and anti - Blackness that are perpetuated under white supremacy . BIPOC is an imperfect term that can have a homog - enizing efect , and often most makes sense from a U . S . - centered lens . Our aim in using BIPOC is to open broader conversations about race that are inclusive to and center people of color - while acknowledging that 1 ) people of color have vastly diferent expe - riences and priorities and 2 ) our concept of race operates from a U . S . - centered lens . In many instances , BIPOC communities 1 are observed and studied as the focus of research eforts instead of engaged for the human - ity of their lived experiences [ 21 ] , leading to tensions between academic institutions of research and BIPOC communities that surround many of these institutions [ 30 , 31 , 50 , 51 ] . In practice , re - searchers and designers who center BIPOC communities are often asked either to recenter whiteness ( e . g . , “but how does this gener - alize ? " ) , justify the impact on BIPOC through a defcit lens , or to solve structural inequality with their research ( e . g . , “how will that solve racism or close the achievement gap ? " ) . To a certain extent , this misunderstanding of the experiences of BIPOC communities also dooms social computing researchers who center BIPOC to failure as 1 In this work , we use “BIPOC communities” or “communities of color” as umbrella terms referring to formal or informal groups and / or organizations primarily or ex - clusively comprised of people of color . These are not always “true” communities of people who know one another or have shared experiences or goals . 917 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . they are inappropriately shouldered with the burden to “fx” large systemic forces as a measure of their impact ( e . g . , as in the case of pro - labor social computing work within a capitalist system [ 122 ] ) . BIPOC communities , although vastly unique in their histories , experiences , heritage , and values , share in a collective othering that places their experiences and identities on the margins of what is deemed mainstream , particularly in technology design . We argue that these communities are deserving of initiatives and research that look beyond a defcit - based , damage - centered narrative [ 116 ] , and the defnition of design guidelines that embody other aspects of humanity which highlight positive needs and desires . HCI research has taken up adaptations of Critical Race Theory ( CRT ) ( e . g . , [ 83 , 108 , 109 ] ) and Intersectionality ( e . g . , [ 31 , 96 ] ) as central theories for understanding race . However , the origins of these frameworks lie in understanding oppression . For example , CRT contextualizes the ordinariness of racism in a U . S . context [ 20 , 24 ] , and Intersectionality - while more broadly helping us un - derstand the complexities of identity - was initially used to describe the unique and particular experiences of people holding multiple marginalized identities [ 17 , 85 ] . While these frameworks are neces - sary for understanding race in a U . S . context , utilizing only these identity frameworks in computing research almost deterministi - cally associates race with racial trauma . This does not paint the complete picture of these groups . When we adopt this approach alone , we encode an understanding that BIPOC communities are “less than , ” and there is some gap to be flled to achieve a default standard of whiteness [ 21 , 69 ] . This encoding harms both BIPOC communities ( by seeing them only through a lens of marginaliza - tion and trauma ) as well as BIPOC scholars ( by doing the same and implying their work can only focus on communities of color when the goal is to combat oppression ) . We see similar parallels in the way HCI design and research contend with race . While the interplay of race and technology is no longer a topic avoided in our discourse , we fnd that this discourse might be limited . In other words , while we have begun the necessary work of identifying the problems of a colorblind ideology ( i . e . , that race does not materially " matter " in computing [ 83 ] ) , we have over - corrected to see BIPOC communities only as problems to be fxed . In this paper , we seek to lay out a set of design lenses that value and prioritize a more holistic understanding of people of color by explicitly centering joy and fourishing . We often interchange joy and fourishing ( both derived from positive psychology [ 26 , 54 ] ) and use a more colloquial defni - tion ( e . g . , design that brings pleasure , happiness , and community ; design that is frivolous , aesthetically pleasing , distracting , thrilling , immersive , celebratory , calming , soothing , wondrous , etc . ) . HCI is a large and multidisciplinary feld , and researchers have already begun to leverage research methods that shift these perspec - tives and practices ( e . g . , asset - based approaches [ 126 ] , community - collaborative approaches to research [ 18 ] , and celebratory technol - ogy [ 48 ] ) . Others have shifted the narratives to traditionally ex - cluded communities by contesting present - day inequities through principles such as incorporating community strengths , acknowl - edging historical contexts , and building cultural competence [ 5 , 49 ] . As an extension , pluriversal design tells us that rather than seeing one center ( in this case , whiteness ) , there are multiple centers or existences and , therefore , multiple kinds of end goals for those cen - ters that facilitate truly radical innovation and allow researchers to escape from our colonized mindsets [ 34 , 65 , 110 ] . In acknowledging multiple existences , we can achieve plurality in design . Although conducted in ways that demonstrate BIPOCs’ ability to persevere and participate in technologies that were not designed for them ( e . g . , fnancial technologies , social media , etc . ) , we acknowledge and celebrate HCI researchers’ eforts in shedding light on Black joy and the lived experiences of Black communities [ 22 , 77 ] . We commend research that , for example , incorporate moments of Black joy ( e . g . , [ 4 ] ) , but we also challenge HCI to center these moments as a standalone , not as a result of trauma . We present an analysis that builds on existing pleasure - centric and celebratory frameworks . In this paper , we look to extend these design frameworks by shedding , as much as possible , the forces that require us to justify why we focus on a particular community or position resilience as the only response to historical trauma . More precisely , our analysis considers how we change defcit design perceptions to those of joy , fourishing , and a positive redefnition of design . We negotiate the tensions involved in doing research with BIPOC communities and deciding what research is valuable , potentially shifting our publication and funding models in HCI and design . At a larger level , our analysis addresses the critical question : How do we design for fourishing ? We understand the signifcance of design that addresses needs , survival , and challenges ; however , we argue for a holistic design agenda that embraces and is attuned to the fullness of BIPOC individuals . In this paper , we explore three distinct case studies of technolo - gies designed to center the fourishing of BIPOC communities . We examine specifc design decisions and features that explicitly re - center more pleasure - based existences for these communities . We grounded our approach in value - sensitive design ( VSD ) to identify better and understand the incorporation of human values in the design and development process [ 43 ] . Our goal is to discern what new design values and design goals come to the forefront in order to extrapolate a design framework that focuses on designing for joy and fourishing of BIPOC . We seek to explore : RQ1 What are the attributes and features of tools that create and support joy and fourishing for this BIPOC community ? RQ2 What spaces can be created when there is an explicit afrma - tive / joyful approach ? RQ3 How do we operationalize joy in HCI research ? This paper is organized as follows : frst , we review related work that discusses diferent BIPOC communities’ representation and relevant design frameworks in HCI research . Next , we present three case studies by sharing an overview of their features and context , a description of specifc features that contribute to the notion of “fourishing " , and an articulation of some of the values those features embody , followed by a synthesis of what it looks like to exemplify fourishing in the design of technology . Finally , we illustrate the path forward in designing for fourishing and present design tenets for BIPOC fourishing in the everyday . 2 RELATED WORK In this section , we ofer background on how historically excluded communities are represented in HCI research , followed by various theoretical and design frameworks that provided the groundwork for the theoretical development of this paper . Lastly , we provide an 918 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA overview of research that has engaged frameworks of healing and joy when dealing with BIPOC communities . 2 . 1 Defcit - Focused and Damage - Centered Research as “Othering " in HCI Powell et al . defned othering as “a set of dynamics , processes , and structures that engender marginality and persistent inequality across any of the full range of human diferences based on group identities " , [ 88 , p . 17 ] . Westerlund goes on to describe othering as that which goes against the standard [ 118 ] , thus further marginalizing certain groups who already experience marginalization by over - emphasis on what they lack . Othering can occur both at the group and indi - vidual level and is often caused by socially constructed categories or classifcations based on race , class , skin color , etc . Communities of color have experienced alienation , exclusion , marginalization , mul - tiple and intertwined inequalities , and oppression based on their intersectional identities [ 20 , 88 ] . Likewise , most research studies of - ten described and positioned historically excluded communities as “underrepresented " , “underserved " , or “disadvantaged " populations , which further perpetuates notions of oppression and marginaliza - tion . This impacts not only how these communities are represented , talked about , and engaged in research , but also it paints a picture that communities of color lack the necessary skills and cultural ca - pacities for what it takes to be seen as capable human beings [ 129 ] . To counteract some of these racialized narratives in research , design , and practice , scholars in Science and Technology Studies ( STS ) and HCI have adapted frameworks and design paradigms that draw on communities’ assets and holistic identity [ 23 , 27 , 31 , 103 ] . However many of these frameworks and paradigms still place an emphasis on aspects of identity which are defcit - focused and damage - centered . Historically , BIPOC communities have been presented as having ‘defcits’ compared to normative socio - culture . As a result , these communities have long been excluded from HCI epistemology – in other words , work concerning BIPOC is seen as niche , rather than a central knowledge source [ 3 ] . If we treat the ACM CHI conference as a representative space for HCI research , we see that race is rarely reported in HCI ( in less than 3 % of CHI papers even in recent years [ 13 , 14 ] ) , and the majority of work centers people who are ‘WEIRD’ ( Western , Educated , Industrialized , Rich , and Democratic ) ; 73 % of studies are focused on Western participant samples [ 69 ] . Nevertheless , we see an increasing adaptation and application of various Black epistemologies in various HCI design contexts ( e . g . , games , chatbots , conversational agents [ 5 , 21 , 29 , 32 , 33 , 95 , 120 , 121 ] ) and including an increased inclusion of historically ex - cluded identities in HCI discourses [ 27 , 103 ] . For instance , Rankin and Henderson [ 94 ] engaged Black youth in speech - based inter - face design as a way to resist tech - racism and showed that Black youths’ preference for personalized ( modeled as Black Matriarchs ) , culturally - aware , life coach interfaces . Further work has applied Black Feminist Thought [ 17 ] in an inclusive game design context and shows Black women’s preference for games exhibiting gen - uine cultural experiences and intersectional characters [ 95 ] . This set of works [ 95 , 121 ] serves as an inspiration for applying Black theoretical frameworks in HCI [ 17 , 20 ] . Other HCI research has focused on identifying a problem / need of marginalized identities and then implementing technologies to support that specifc need [ 60 , 112 ] . For instance , Starks et al . [ 112 ] work to support transgender and non - binary people of color’s safety , mediated through prototyping a wearable technology , presents one example . Kim et al . [ 60 ] interviewed Black Americans to identify their needs and challenges with chatbots to design their own chat - bots ( roles and features ) as a response to the disproportionate im - pact this community experienced during the COVID - 19 pandemic . Shahid et al . [ 103 ] proposed to design future technologies to sup - port children in the Global South who sufer from digital exclusion . While encouraging , most of these studies often situate historically excluded communities from a viewpoint of lack , thereby doubling the marginalization , potentially missing the opportunity to high - light moments that these communities have to be proud of or savor in joy . Thus , more work is needed that is intentional about focusing on these communities’ joy , race , culture , and heritage . 2 . 2 Design Frameworks in HCI Existing theoretical and design frameworks such as asset - based research , restorative / transformative justice frameworks , positive design frameworks , and value - sensitive design have limited poten - tial when designing for historically excluded communities’ joy and happiness . 2 . 2 . 1 Asset - Based Research . Asset - based research deeply engages with people’s assets rather than starting at their needs or defcits . Assets can be individual ( e . g . , motivation ) , community - based ( e . g . , people , businesses ) , and sometimes organizational ( e . g . , job security ) [ 126 ] . Prior work in HCI has explored various assets and utilized them in design intervention [ 57 , 58 , 84 , 123 ] . A notable example comes from Karusala et al . [ 58 ] , where authors discovered ‘care’ as a resource for design when designing for underserved slum com - munity students in the ICT learning technology context . In another work , researchers proposed centering ( health ) workers’ intersec - tional identities when designing for sustainable resilience [ 57 ] . In a recent study , O’Leary et al . [ 84 ] engaged church community mem - bers to identify their strengths and use them for designing a mobile app to promote their health and well - being . While asset - based approaches are promising , their situated na - ture and which assets to prioritize when more than one is available often raise tension . Furthermore , assets identifed for one group might not be applicable to another group [ 57 , 123 ] . Interestingly , asset - based approaches still try to focus on solving excluded com - munities’ problems by overextending limited resources and lever - aging them in the design . In that way , it reproduces the problem of marginalization , othering , and exclusion rather than fxing the root cause of it ; consequently , it does not serve in the long term [ 124 ] . 2 . 2 . 2 Restorative and Transformative Justice . Justice - oriented frame - works have been used in HCI to address harm towards historically oppressed communities using reparative actions . Restorative justice focuses on restitution or mediation practices as a means to address ( individual ) confict ( e . g . , addressing youth online harassment [ 100 ] , fostering forgiveness in the design of technology using feminist epistemology [ 56 ] ) . Meanwhile , transformative justice aims at tak - ing a preventive approach by addressing the larger issues of social inequalities and situational ( environmental ) factors which caused 919 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . the harm [ 72 , 82 ] ( e . g . , addressing domestic abuse harming Mus - lim women [ 92 ] , supporting Black and Latina girls in STEM by repairing harms of structural racism [ 32 ] ) . Transformative Justice , a descendent of Restorative Justice , is a community - based , libera - tory , political framework developed for and by historically excluded communities ( e . g . , targets of state violence [ 32 ] ) . By nature , these prior works center marginalized communities through harm repair , healing , accountability , and forgiveness . While this is essential and necessary work , we look beyond to draw on historically excluded populations’ joy , pleasure , cultural heritage , and hope [ 51 ] . 2 . 2 . 3 Positive Design and More . While existing design practices to repair harm in historically excluded communities are important , design can also beneft from other theoretical interventions that directly draw on pleasure andhappiness and supports human four - ishing [ 26 , 87 ] . For example , Desmet and Pohlmeyer [ 26 ] proposed a framework consisting of three fundamental ingredients of pos - itive design : pleasure , personal signifcance , and virtue , which are integral to individual and communities’ subjective well - being and fourishing . Several design inspirations are found in [ 26 ] such as the ‘Jazz Shower’ design that evokes the feeling of personal signif - icance for someone passionate about Jazz music . Importantly , all three fundamental ingredients in positive design must be included , though not necessarily with equally balanced priority . Similarly , prior work in HCI have attempted to design for various aspects of positive design ingredients in disparate , diferent user and socio - technical contexts . Mols et al . [ 73 ] conducted an exploratory study with students to fnd opportunities for novel media moment - capturing , such as engagement , perception and attention , and social activity . Yoon et al . [ 128 ] identifed 17 emotion regulation strategies through design and proposed three design guidelines ( capitalizing , problem - focused coping , avoidance ) for emotional well - being in the context of user - centered healthcare technology design . That said , the discussion of race , ethnicity , and identity in connection with joy , and human fourishing is almost non - existent in the positive design framework and , thus , requires further exploration . Another HCI design paradigm , celebratory technologies , closely captures the essence of positive design . Celebratory technologies “create applications that embrace the positive , pleasurable , and de - lightful aspects of food and eating as a social experience " [ 48 ] . One notable example comes from Shahid et al . [ 103 ] , where the deploy - ment of the Chorus app garnered increased participation ( including children ) , togetherness , and sensitive discussion during mealtime . Although exciting , celebratory technologies have been limited to applications in the human - food interaction context , thus , there is further potential to be gained in connecting the celebratory lens with cultural design tenets that see communities of color as whole and capable [ 51 ] . Further , researchers have challenged intersectional HCI by shift - ing the focus from users’ categories of identity ( e . g . , race or gender ) to interacting processes [ 125 ] . A focus on intersecting traits of the user’s identity , as previous work on intersectionality in HCI has adopted [ 74 , 99 ] , runs the risk of representing users and their con - text as static entities with little agency [ 78 , 90 ] , needing to be helped , whereas the focus on dynamic processes of the subject formation allows us to identify when individuals mobilize their agency to engage diferent aspects of their identity . 2 . 2 . 4 Value - Sensitive Design . Value - sensitive design ( VSD ) is an iterative , three - part , theoretically grounded approach that uses conceptual , empirical , and technical investigations to explore and incorporate human values in the design process [ 42 ] . In doing so , value - sensitive design contends with the way designers uplift or dismiss specifc values through the development of their technolog - ical designs [ 41 ] . Recognizing and integrating VSD into the design process through such an approach can more intentionally prompt discourse throughout the design process that recenter the promi - nent values at the forefront of the given context and for the given stakeholder [ 42 ] . While VSD literature has helped designers focus on the critical elements of the design situation , value - sensitive methods are not developed for culturally specifc groups of users [ 40 ] . Though it aims to align systems and their users , there is not a clear direc - tion for its application when those users are specifcally culturally complex . This framework refects on justice , welfare , trust and ac - countability , autonomy , privacy , and consent [ 39 , 106 ] . VSD’s broad interpretation of human values does not presently account for the way values are defned and complicated by the identity of culturally diverse users . Although VSD presents this approach as aspirational , it does not address the exclusion of access to particular values by specifc groups and how that can be refected in design practices . Furthermore , Value - sensitive design has been predominantly used in Western contexts ( e . g . , [ 105 ] ) . Because of this , VSD principles do not present a lens through which culturally - sensitive tensions can be accounted for and addressed through design . Looking beyond Western and colonial research , Tsosie et al . [ 115 ] presents the Six Rs of Indigenous Research as an illustrative conceptual framework : respect , relationship , relevance , reciprocity , responsibility , and representation . This framework captures forms of knowledge and inquiry that are deeply embedded in community , history , and culture that are not easily valued or accessed by main - stream design processes or academic systems . In this paper , we do not suggest that this is the single best framework for research and design centering communities of color , but instead , encourage a productive curiosity amongst designers to seek out and center value systems such as those embodied in this Indigenous research framework that are culturally - sensitive . 2 . 3 Race , Healing , and Joy Frameworks This section describes several theoretical , research , and design frameworks outside of HCI . While not exhaustive , we hope this pro - vides a fruitful set of examples to demonstrate modes of centering BIPOC in HCI . First , we will introduce healing justice frameworks that signify specifc community needs for healing from various trauma . Second , we will briefy introduce emergent strategy and pluriversal design as guidance and motivation for our own theoret - ical development . 2 . 3 . 1 Healing Justice Framework . Numerous theoretical frameworks exist that propose healing for specifc communities ( e . g . , HEART healing framework for Latinx immigrants [ 12 ] , youth of color [ 47 ] , HEAL framework in healthcare worker context [ 113 ] ) . While restorative and transformative justice focus on harm repair , frame - works that center healing such as the healing justice framework address collective harm and trauma among a community through an 920 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA approach of meditation , ritual , and other non - Western healing prac - tices [ 61 ] . Pyles [ 91 ] describes healing justice as “thinking deeply about the connection between interior life and what happens in the social world " . Youth Activist Ginwright [ 47 ] study postulated that trauma - informed care often relies on the narrative that “trauma is an individual experience , rather than a collective one " , and it fails to take into consideration the contexts associated with the envi - ronment ( e . g . , schools , neighborhood ) in which people are situated . Trauma - informed care is often driven by trauma rather than hope , possibility , and well - being . On the one hand , Ginwright [ 47 ] discusses a healing - centered ap - proach ( HCE ) as “holistic involving culture , spirituality , civic action , and collective healing " in the context of the youth of color healing , which orients itself towards asset - based strategies . Likewise , he emphasized that organizations can create opportunities for healing from racialized trauma through building caring relationships and strong social networks [ 45 ] , in that way , healing justice can play an important role in “transforming the institution and relationships that are causing harm " [ 46 , p . 7 ] . On the other hand , French et al . [ 38 ] defned “radical healing as being able to sit in a dialectic and exist in both spaces of resisting oppression and moving toward freedom " . Similarly , several other works have described the signifcance of storytelling as a feasible means of counteracting racialized trauma , i . e . , directly re - narrating trauma and acting as a source of trans - formation for communities of color [ 15 ] . We , as CRT practitioners , understand the value of participating in those dialects and story - telling as a key source for healing from racial trauma , and diferent communities ( e . g . , youth of color , Latinx community ) need diferent ways of healing . Theoretical frameworks which center healing require empirical investigation and validation to be formally deployed at the indi - vidual , family , and community levels or even adopted in HCI for technology design . Although most commonly residing in STS , HCI has recently gained momentum for committing to studying healing and cultivating hope by engaging diferent communities of color in diferent socio - technical system contexts [ 4 , 22 , 51 , 77 ] . Notably , Bosley et al . [ 4 ] leverages the healing justice framework as a way to lead to more collective and pragmatic designs . Although healing - centered frameworks such as healing justice are still responses to trauma and violence experienced by communities of color , we fnd that this orients towards a joy and pleasure - focused HCI practice . 2 . 3 . 2 Emergent Strategy for the Pluriverse . As discussed elsewhere , historically excluded communities are represented in HCI from a conservative defcit - based lens [ 51 ] . Design viewpoints like ‘univer - salism’ in which we live in a coherent single world have negatively impacted these communities in many ways . Likewise , universalism fails to capture the strengths these communities cultivate that come from joy , liberation , community building , originality , and culture . ‘Universalism’ almost replicates the harmful efect of capitalism , colonization , and western heteropatriarchal normativity where – whiteness is the norm , and ‘diference’ is unwelcomed [ 65 , 66 ] . In an efort towards mitigating such racist practices in design , research , and education , recent works have described the potential ways of imagining “worlds within many worlds " [ 65 , p . 1 ] or a pluriverse [ 34 , 63 ] . A pluriverse has more than one center to create sustain - able futures where “women , queer , trans and indigenous people can be included while holding onto their diference " [ 66 , p . 2 ] and cre - ate opportunities where multiple worlds / centers can fourish . In a pluriversal world of design , people from all centers / worlds ( es - pecially those who are historically excluded or invisible ) desires are welcomed , and they can exert their autonomy to decide what solution is ‘desirable’ – opening new worlds of possibilities and alternative ways of worldmaking . Design methods that provide specifc guidance to turn those pos - sibilities into actionable outcomes and shift the initial normative design lens from ‘needs’ to ‘desire’ are as new as the pluriverse design concept itself [ 65 , 110 ] . This being said , emergent strategy principles proposed by adrienne maree brown [ 9 ] provide one such potential design direction . Emergent strategy is based on the dy - namic ( as opposed to static ) concept of ‘emergence’ and relies on the fact that change is unavoidable , and through emerging ‘small’ adaptations , humans can attain liberation , live in harmony and love , while co - existing with many worlds . Emergent strategy uti - lizes tenets of “adaptation , interdependence and decentralization , fractal awareness , resilience and transformative justice , nonlinear and iterative change , creating more possibilities " [ 9 , p . 17 ] . These prin - ciples lay the foundation for how we can go about approaching socio - technology design practices that is inclusive , non - western , pluriversal , and culturally informed . “I am more than what happened to me , I’m not just my trauma " [ 47 ] . Just as diverse groups of people heal in myriad ways , they also experience joy and fourish in diferent ways . These diferences require further intentional research and design interrogation . To conclude , there is a general lack of research on the processes and practices that elicit joy [ 11 ] , a sense of fulfllment , and gratitude , and how these feelings transpire for communities of color [ 51 ] . Furthermore , the sources that derive and generate joy and healing are also understudied , including and covering race , intersectional identities , and lived experiences of communities of color . Inspired by and building of the aforementioned design approaches , episte - mologies , and paradigms in HCI and STS studies , this work aims to propose theoretical tenets using several real - world case studies to show technology design examples wherein historically oppressed populations are existing , thriving , and seen as wholesome and ca - pable ; we also show technology features / attributes contributing to that feeling of joy and fulfllment to inspire future design . 3 CASE STUDIES In this section , we showcase and analyze three existing digital plat - forms that are by and for BIPOC communities that center their joy : The Wave - a community platform , Liberate - a meditation app , and Never Alone - a video game . The creators of these digital platforms incorporate features of liberation , joy , leisure , positive self - identity , and representation for the communities they were designed for . Our criteria for selection were that the platforms were popular , celebrated , visible , designed by and for communities of color , and that they did not explicitly respond to a problem . The resulting digital platforms attend to the fourishing of BIPOC communities by examining the fullness of the individuals within them . As such , The Wave , Liberate , and Never Alone represent liberatory technologies or technologies that enable all communities to embody and obtain freedom , thriving , and greater access to our aliveness [ 55 ] . We identify 921 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . the values and the cultural implications that these features illumi - nate in order to understand how these values can be intentionally and sustainably incorporated in designing for fourishing . We analyze the three case studies as extensions of Pluriversal Design and Desire - based Design , Positive Design , Celebratory Tech - nology , and Emergent Strategy [ 9 , 10 , 26 , 48 , 65 ] . We observe how the application of these components results in positive and joyful experiences for users . We discuss how tenets of these paradigms are interpreted and adopted into the platform . We fnd that the designers of these platforms are attentive to virtue , personal signif - icance , pleasure , creativity , pleasure and nostalgia , gifting , family connectedness , relaxation , and attending to desires in a thoughtful exercise of connectedness . These features , which in any platform brings afrmation to its users , when carefully curated with the val - ues and collective identity of a specifc BIPOC community in mind have the potential to promote self - expression , belonging , validation , and delight . In the design of these platforms , we see a future for BIPOC technology that centers them and their cultural experiences holistically through tenets of joy , pleasure , and fourishing . Our selection of these case studies recognizes the distinctness of each of these communities and the unique attributes of the technologies we discuss , which do not signify that they are representative . These case studies do , however , illustrate design components adopted by members of diferent traditionally excluded communities that contribute to meaningfully afrming experiences . 3 . 1 Methods and Positionality We were inspired by the methodology used in the Value Sensitive Design framework [ 39 ] as well as Values at Play [ 36 , 80 ] . In the case studies , we use their method of identifying human values ( e . g . , freedom from biases , privacy , autonomy ) from the analysis of technologies in diverse domains [ 43 ] . The values reported in this work were determined through frst - person observation by the re - searchers ( at least two authors for each case study ) becoming active participants using and evaluating the technology , similar to digital ethnography ( a method for observing ofine and online groups [ 76 , 86 ] ) . We supplement these observations with testimonies from articles and interviews with users and developers of the case study technologies . The values reported in this work therefore pertain to the original designers / developers’ intentions , the community of existing users , the individual researchers in our team , and the real - time emergence of values aforded by the technology’s features ( i . e . , assemblage - “the source of values may be a hybrid assembly that combines people entangled with technologies " [ 104 , p . 2 ] ) . Our understanding of the values we present are naturally in - formed by our positions in the world and , more specifcally , as researchers of color ; we are a group of racially and ethnically di - verse women and folks representing a spectrum of cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds . Our research team comprises schol - ars and design practitioners from Computer Science , Information Science , and Design . While many of us use an Indigenous research framework and values in our work , no one on the research team is Indigenous - thus , we limit our analyses and frameworks largely to connecting what has been said by Indigenous scholars / designers . Collectively , we bring forth over a decade of research expertise in designing anti - racist technologies , promoting Black participation in design futures , community - oriented work , and contributing to computing , STEM , and inclusive technology design broadly . We bring together our community - oriented work practices , epistemo - logical lenses , and our lived experiences that shape our perception , interpretation , understanding , and presentation of the theoretical contributions we make to the DIS community . Though coming from diferent research and personal backgrounds , we all have received messaging from reviewers , funders , and / or colleagues to make our work on communities of color either more generalizable , more problem - oriented , or impossibly more impactful . We resist that messaging through this writing . Specifcally , we take the stance that while BIPOC are not a monolith and that there is value in exam - ining specifc experiences within that umbrella ( e . g . designing for the Black experience [ 51 ] ) , that 1 ) even within more specifc racial group labels such as Asian or Black there are extremely diverse group with many diferent interests , experiences , and priorities and 2 ) we have experienced tremendous and important solidarity in centering and uplifting all people of color . Designing frameworks for specifc racial groups , in this case , would be counter to our pur - pose of creating space for multiple centers ( though our approach invites others to do so ) . 3 . 2 The Wave : Community Platform 2 3 . 2 . 1 Overview . The Wave is an online digital community founded by Black Tech founders that focuses on cultivating online and real - world experiences for adult Black communities . This community platform utilizes the mobile group messaging app GroupMe to con - nect users to resources and events in their city and is spread by word of mouth and invitation . The platform features community guidelines that set the tone for a safe and inclusive online space for people that identify with the Black experience . This online digital space is positioned as a group of young , urban professionals build - ing a community of positivity through promoting a fun lifestyle of events , fellowship , and community engagement . It also serves the goal of highlighting and promoting Black businesses . It started as a way for a group of friends to communicate with each other but quickly grew to an online space for Black people to fnd each other in various cities and regions . The Wave is now available in over 35 cities with over 35 , 000 users . The founder has described The Wave as “Greenbook meets groupchat " in that it is both a way to communicate and also a helpful resource to navigate things when Black people fnd themselves in new environments . Founders of The Wave identifed a unique niche in the social networking market by designing for themselves as Black millennials who were not seen or safely accepted in other online spaces , thus ensuring inclusion and tailored features that meet the needs of other Black users . The Wave has grown into a way for younger Black adults to fnd housing , jobs , and local resources . 3 . 2 . 2 Description of Features that Contribute to BIPOC Flourishing . The Wave is an example of an online / digital space or product cre - ated to cultivate and celebrate the joy and “positivity” of the Black community . The use of an easily accessible and available messaging app speaks to connecting like - minded people through a familiar 2 http : / / thewaveusa . com / join - the - wave 922 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 1 : Landing page of Liberate meditation app displaying its key features . [ 130 ] platform . The Wave also afords users to build communities in ur - ban cities and regions where there is often a negative perception of BIPOC communities . The Wave is self - moderated , which allows users to share at their leisure but also to enforce community mod - eration and accountability . Although there is no formal entry or verifcation process for use , The Wave is spread via word of mouth and invitation to ensure that those using the platform are both interested and committed to the purpose of the platform . The Wave was designed specifcally for an audience that did not feel as if there were safe places on the internet [ 7 ] . Several key features , such as the Community Calendar and Causes Awareness , help to ensure an inclusive space but also bring attention and support to various areas of Black professionals thriving and maintaining community . 3 . 2 . 3 Articulation of Values and Cultural Implications . The Wave is an example of an online community platform that personifes positive aspects of a BIPOC community , similar to that of celebra - tory technology [ 48 ] or frameworks of positive or pleasure design [ 26 , 87 ] . By amplifying and cultivating space for the “positive and successful aspects of human behavior " , The Wave allows users to celebrate aspects of their identity through fellowship and cultural similarities . The structure of using a message board style platform to share out wins and opportunities to gather nods to the value and importance of community as well as the need and desire to be a part of a greater collective [ 120 ] , even if for no other reason than cultural familiarity . In this way , we see values of cultural wayfnding and cultivating community as in the design approach of this platform . Both Brock Jr [ 7 ] and Klassen et al . [ 62 ] highlight the success of both analog ( the original Greenbook document ) and virtual ( Black Twit - ter ) resources and spaces that have been intended to support these design aspects as they promote convenience , safety , and support for communities that may not experience these constructs in other spaces . Among these spaces and resources is a common feature of information sharing that builds on a tradition of word - of - mouth and grassroots distribution [ 101 ] . Additionally , The Wave ’s simple but efective design supports users feeling a sense of community or escape to a pluriversal space that supports fourishing in all aspects of self instead of just needs that may be associated with a perceived defcit . The Wave also allows users to step into a ( virtual ) space of an online community that centers constructs of pleasure and desire - joy , belonging , success , and fellowship . 3 . 3 Liberate : Meditation App 3 . 3 . 1 Overview . Liberate [ 130 ] is one of the most popular medita - tion apps for Black wellness and self - care to date [ 67 , 127 ] , at the time when this research was conducted ( Figure 1 ) . It is a Black - owned mobile application to support meditation practices specif - cally designed for the BIPOC community . The purpose of this app is to create a safe space for Black communities to heal and be free and practice daily meditation . Although anyone can use this app , the app developers are clear in their motivation , “Anyone is wel - come to use Liberate , we just want to be clear who we’re here for " ( i . e . , it’s an app “app for us , by us " ) . This app has over 260 + guided meditations ( three free as previews and others require payment ) created by instructors of color . The app requires users to create a profle to provide personalized experiences . Upon opening this app , the home page loads with the new and top list of meditation recommendations based on users’ experience levels ( e . g . , newbie , beginner , intermediate , advanced ) . In the settings , users can se - lect their preferred meditation level and the meditation area on which they want to focus on ( e . g . , Mindfulness , Anxiety , Self - worth , Sleep ) . The aesthetic of the app is pleasing , with light pastel - colored menus covering a wide range of meditation topics to support the well - being of Black people including ‘Race’ , ‘Love’ , and ‘Pride’ . Be - ing owned and developed by Black creators makes this app more attuned to the desires of Black communities and serves as a tool for social justice and resistance against systemic oppression [ 127 ] . 3 . 3 . 2 Description of Features that Contribute to BIPOC Flourishing . One of the most striking features of this app is the complete list of meditation categories and the topics they cover . Several notable categories include ‘Ancestors’ , ‘Sleep , ’ ‘Self - worth’ , ‘Grief’ , ‘Race’ , ‘Micro Aggressions’ , ‘Love’ , ‘Pride’ , ‘Joy’ [ 26 , 85 , 127 ] . These cate - gories validate a shared experience and cultural connection to these 923 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . Figure 2 : Nuna and Fox of Never Alone are transported from one platform to another by a Helping Spirit . [ 44 ] themes that allows users to feel seen as they practice intentional refection that goes deeper than what a " mainstream " platform not catering to a Black community might incorporate . By including some of these meditation focuses this app acknowledges the Black community’s long history of racialized oppression , thereby ofer - ing a pathway forward to resistance , freedom , and preservation . For instance , the ‘Race’ category included ( but was not limited to ) guided meditations titled ‘Healing from Racial Trauma’ , ‘Liberating Ourselves From Internalized Racism’ , and ‘Reconciling Race , Gender , Sexuality and Non - Self’ ; it also concisely included the objective for each meditation . These titles are carefully crafted to refect their purpose , further description is provided by instructors of color in the meditation description once a user clicks on it . A simple ‘PLAY NOW’ button takes users to instructors’ voiced recorded sessions to give a more meaningful and realistic experience . Indeed , images of instructors of color and voices of instructors can give the feeling of in - person meditation [ 67 ] and are one of the key distinctive features compared to other meditation apps where non - human symbolic characters are often used [ 51 , 59 ] . Furthermore , the in - app com - menting and comment - liking abilities directly enabled in the app description section allow for two - way communication between in - structors of color and communities of color . In the app description section , people often express their ask , and share curiosity , moti - vations , goals , struggles , and healing journey ( e . g . , “I felt pacifed afterward . I really released some of the weight of racist experience that I hold " - [ anonymized app user comment ] ) , and sometimes simply leaving a ‘thank you’ note to express gratitude . 3 . 3 . 3 Articulation of Values and Cultural Implications . Liberate fea - tures provide opportunities and directions for designing future interactive technologies where the explicit goal is to support joy , liberation , healing , and seeing humans as a whole and capable – by specifcally supporting Black community fourishing similar to positive design and pluriversal design framework [ 26 , 65 ] . The de - sign of this app supports human fourishing in the everyday by refecting two values : life coach and self - and - community care . Liberate serves a life coach purpose by integrating important cultural context shared by a specifc BIPOC community . The careful selection of content in meditations does not negate the negative experiences of anxiety , depression , and self - doubt that comes from being Black / Brown in the US . They also embrace these experiences and serve as a guide to help instill belief among their users that liberation and joy are possible through regular breathing exercises by teaching and guidance . In this way , meditation content , titles , and descriptions work collaboratively to acknowledge root tensions that intersect with this community’s self - actualization goals and serve as a guide , helping them provide pathways to thrive , succeed and fourish in everyday [ 26 ] . Liberation app also shifts the lens away from the individual or solitary practice of self - care to collective or Black community - oriented care practices by creating a safe space [ 65 ] . The Liberation app does that through supporting in - app commenting abilities and liking comments features ( unlike many other meditation apps that leave such opportunities in app reviews ) to further engage and allow in - app interaction between app users and meditation instructors . In this way , this app feature supports the values of self - and - community care in which BIPOC communities or app users can actively participate in self - care behavior , such as getting inspired , engaging in self - expression , practicing empathy and helping others who are like them racially through reciprocity . 3 . 4 Never Alone ( Kisima Inŋitchuŋa ) : Game 3 . 4 . 1 Overview . Never Alone ( Kisima Inŋitchuŋa ) [ 44 ] is a puzzle platformer video game developed in collaboration with the Iñupiat - an Alaskan Native people . In the game , 1 - 2 players cooperatively play as Nuna , a young Iñupiaq girl , and Fox , an arctic fox , as they traverse through a frozen tundra in order to save Nuna’s village . The game was created by Upper One Games , the frst indigenous - owned games company in the U . S . , founded with support from the Cook Inlet Tribal Council and E - Line Media 3 so that Iñupiaq elders and storytellers could work in close partnership with game developers . The game itself integrates indigenous stories and lore . At diferent points throughout the game , the player can choose 3 https : / / indiancountrytoday . com / the - press - pool / cook - inlet - tribal - councils - never - alone - video - game - receives - prestigious - peabody - award 924 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA Figure 3 : On the right above a running Nuna is a small white owl that hoots as she passes . At the bottom left of the screen the player is notifed they have unlocked a new cultural insight video titled “Caribou & Clothing . ” [ 44 ] to learn more and watch interviews and read other educational content about the Iñupiat . 3 . 4 . 2 Description of Features that Contribute to BIPOC Flourishing . Never Alone integrates indigenous culture and storytelling in all aspects of gameplay . While the main storyline focuses around a traumatic event ( the ravaging of Nuna’s village by a mysterious blizzard ) , Nuna and Fox are empowered in their quest to discover the blizzard’s source . Nuna uses a bola as a weapon to help over - come obstacles , Nuna and Fox are transported between diferent platforms by helping spirits ( Figure 2 ) , and story and gameplay inte - grate multiple folkloric stories ( e . g . , Blizzard Man , Sky People , etc . ) . The very mechanics of the game incorporate Iñupiaq values and cultural understanding ( e . g . , the continual voiceover replicating the oral tradition of storytelling [ 70 ] ) . Elizabeth LaPensée writes how the design of such Indigenous games “uplift enduring Indigenous presence " by utilizing qualities from traditional storytelling [ 64 ] . When players overcome a difcult obstacle or hit other mile - stones in gameplay , they encounter a small owl that hoots and fies of , alerting them that they have found an optional “cultural insight . ” At the bottom of the interface , they see an owl icon and an indicator that they can click a button on their controller or key - board to optionally watch a video where an Iñupiaq community member shares a story , historical context , or other cultural insight ( Figure 3 ) . Gameplay is paused and the video plays . Players can also choose to ignore the indicator and / or can open the library of unlocked videos at any other time during gameplay to watch . 3 . 4 . 3 Articulation of Values and Cultural Implications . Never Alone presents an example of gameplay that promotes a specifc commu - nity’s ( here Iñupiaq ) cultural understanding , survival strategies , and success similar to that of pluriversal design or positive design or emergent strategy for human fourishing [ 26 , 65 ] . Never Alone val - ues include indigenous traditions of storytelling , spirituality , and survivance . All voiceover and narration in the game are in the spoken Iñupiaq language with translations available in 16 languages as captions at the bottom of the screen . This choice centers Iñupiaq people as both the storyteller and main audience for the game creating a counterspace [ 8 , 89 ] . Even though the cultural insights are given as optional so players can choose the depth of their engagement , players cannot opt - out of the Indigenous core of the game as it is interwoven with the story , mechanics , and oral storytelling via continual voiceover . Never Alone also centers Iñupiaq spirituality . As Nuna and Fox traverse the game , they encounter spirit helpers . As documented by Madsen , the design of the spirit helpers was fnalized after multiple rounds of critical feedback and iteration with Iñupiaq designers [ 70 ] . Notably , early designs allowed Nuna to “call on " the spirits and summon them to her in moments of need . However , this is counter to Iñupiaq spiritual beliefs that spiritual connection is a gift that is given , not something that a person can exert control over [ 70 ] . What might appear to be a subtle change to in - game mechanics ( shifting from summoning spirits to encountering them fortuitously ) for a player more accurately represents their specifc beliefs about spirituality . Survivance lies in the intersection of survival and resistance and involves the “inheritance of the past " [ 70 ] . Survivance is a political act of resistance to erasure and genocide by placing indigenous peoples at the center and squarely in the present . The Iñupiaq spoken language is endangered . As of 2021 , there were estimated to be 13 , 500 Iñupiat people in Alaska with around 3 , 000 speakers of the Iñupiaq language [ 102 ] . Although the game story looks at the past , the digital video game medium , interviews , and widely 925 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . recognized innovative storytelling interactivity of the game place Iñupiat people as “ lead [ ers ] in the age of digitization " [ 28 ] . Never Alone is a joyful celebration of Alaskan Native peoples . Released in 2014 , “over four million downloads to date [ . . . ] means people across the world have heard an endangered language " and furthermore it has been released with a classroom guide to all school districts in Alaska [ 28 ] . Never Alone has received many awards , but particularly notable , in 2022 it was awarded a legacy Peabody award recognizing the game as a leader and innovator in digital storytelling . Even if the game did not reach the astronomical levels of success it has , the game design , mechanics , and design process center Iñupiaq people at every step . 3 . 5 Exemplifying Flourishing in Design In assessing these case studies , we fnd that The Wave and Liber - ate highlight key aspects of Pluriversal Design [ 65 ] , or design that nurtures alternative models of life , thus , supporting communities outside of the dominant culture can fourish . The Wave demon - strates how Black individuals are designing their own “life projects , which refect who they are , what they value , and who their ances - tors had been " [ 65 , p . 4 ] . The Wave creators have worked to create safe spaces that will uplift Black communities in sociotechnical platforms through cultural wayfnding and cultivating community . Similarly , Liberate ’s meditation categories and topics span a num - ber of topics acknowledging racialized oppression but center on positive aspects ( e . g . , ancestors , joy , pride , and self - worth ) . This design approach is consistent with Pluriversal Design , which allows for an emancipatory process [ 37 ] that facilitates the unlearning of the productivist objective of design in order to fnd goals and values for a diferent type of design practice that is not born out of the patriarchal - capitalist worldview [ 110 ] . In Pluriversal Design and Desire - centered Design , Leitão [ 66 ] dis - cusses the value of pleasure for those who have been historically marginalized based on race , ethnicity , or other aspects of identity . Leitao postulates the possibility of design that enables users to perceive themselves outside of the defcit lens of oppression and ex - clusion . In this way , we see that The Wave also allows users to step into a ( virtual ) space of an online community that centers on key constructs of – desire , joy , belongingness , success , and fellowship . The Wave also illustrates Black individuals’ desire for seamlessly fnding resources and safe spaces as well as the ability to gather values that are set apart from trauma and defcits . The Wave is not a unique space in that Black creators , designers , and users have continued to amplify these spaces across various technologies and social networking sites ( e . g . , Black Twitter , @ embracingblackcul - ture 4 , @ tobemelanated 5 , etc . ) as well as physical spaces ( e . g . , Historically Black Colleges and Universities , Our Family Dinner 6 ) . Desirable outcomes are also seen through the celebratory tech - nology design approach , which focuses on highlighting desirable actions rather than preventing undesirable actions ( i . e . , corrective technology ) [ 35 , 48 ] . Liberate embodies tenets of celebratory tech - nology and is a refection of the growing trend and shift in negative attitudes in the Black community toward therapy and mental health . 4 https : / / www . embracingblackculture . com / 5 https : / / www . instagram . com / tobemelanated / ? hl = en 6 https : / / www . ourfamilydinner . org / Psychotherapy helps individuals understand they have the tools to improve their situation , which can lead to changes that enhance healthy behavior – improving relationships , expressing emotions , increasing performance at work or school , or thinking positively [ 1 ] . By extension , Liberate is a technology that “celebrates the pos - itive and successful aspects of human behavior” [ 25 ] through its design aesthetics , inclusion of images of thriving and at - ease Black and Brown peoples , and spotlighting meditation leaders’ expertise . More broadly , Liberate extends the notion of celebratory technology outside of the context of human - food interaction into the context of meditation , well - being , and intersectional aspects of identity . Never Alone , Liberate , and The Wave all represents various aspects of Positive Design [ 26 , 87 ] . Namely , they design for : 1 ) pleasure ( e . g . , The Wave ’s joyful social interactions and the ability to share cultural events and activities , Never Alone ’s game - based cultural pleasure activities ) , 2 ) personal signifcance ( e . g . , Never Alone ’s indigenous history and oral storytelling ) , and 3 ) virtue ( e . g . , Liberate ’s focus on improving mental wellbeing , Never Alone ’s revival of an endan - gered language ) . As discussed elsewhere , it is the experiences and activities that determine an individual’s long - term well - being me - diated through products or designs [ 119 ] . Likewise , these platforms engaged each community they were designed for in a wide range of meaningful and culturally relevant activities that simultaneously engaged with an aspect of their identity and heritage while pro - viding a space for belongingness , validation , refection , and joy for the individual and the community . Through that , these platforms extend positive design and support these BIPOC communities in striving for sustainable subjective well - being [ 87 ] . Finally , Never Alone is a culmination of Emergent Strategy , illus - trating novel ways in which designers can ethically create a game that represents a traditionally excluded community [ 9 ] . Emergent Strategy shows us pathways for the HCI community to facilitate BIPOC fourishing in design . The game is a cultural artifact that highlights the values and traditions of Iñupiat storytelling and im - merses players in both real and virtual realms through insights , voiceovers , and other features . It provides opportunities for a com - munity to preserve its cultural heritage and amplify it among a broader audience . These principles of emergent strategy further work to reinforce elements of Positive Design , specifcally design for personal signifcance , in which we observe the social well - being of individuals and communities [ 9 ] . Never Alone demonstrates a process that is anchored on several core principles of emergent strategy : “There is a conversation in the room that only these people at this moment can have " ; “Trust the People - If you trust the people , they become trustworthy . Move at the speed of trust " [ 9 , p . 27 ] . Focus on critical connections more than critical mass — build resilience by building relationships . Never Alone ’s deep and long - term engagement resists the gaming industry norm of critical mass and successfully generated insight as to how to respectfully and appropriately tell the story of the eternal blizzard through continual consultation with elders and Iñupiaq artisans . Few games , and arguably few technologies , are as collaborative as Never Alone . The fundamental principle of this project was rooted in collaboration , the lead designer noting , “we had no interest in making a game like this if we couldn’t directly collaborate with the Alaska Native community . It wasn’t enough to just get someone from Alaska to sign of on the game , or for us to just emerge years later 926 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA with a fnished product that may or may not refect the values of the culture " [ 97 ] . While allowing the traditional needs of game design – fun , enjoyment , and challenge – to become secondary or even tertiary concerns , we are allowing for radical change by not perpetuating autobiographical design as the primary tool in which game designers create , reifying the stories of limited diversity in the gaming industry . The game designers of Never Alone trusted and allowed for the people to lead and own the conversation , shifting any technological and design elements from the forefront . 4 DISCUSSION Our three case studies illustrate how joy and human fourishing can manifest in varying aspects of technology design and how these values can be incorporated into other technologies designed for tra - ditionally excluded communities . Most importantly , they also high - light how joy and human fourishing need not stem from defcits and trauma . We would also argue that in addition to considering the most basic needs of BIPOC individuals ( e . g . , equality , safety , dignity ) , we must also incorporate joy , fourishing , fulfllment , and self - actualization in our HCI research and design praxis . 4 . 1 Designing for Flourishing : A Path Forward In order to conceptualize the best path forward for considering joy , fourishing , and other pleasure - centric constructs in design , we must frst consider how existing design frameworks , paradigms , and epistemologies have emerged and appear in current technol - ogy platforms . Our analyses of The Wave , Liberate , and Never Alone highlight the importance of a key area of design that has promise to push forward an agenda in HCI research that centers human - ity holistically : designing for fourishing . Designing for fourishing suggests that we consider the individual’s needs that are often con - sidered frivolous , mundane , or even complementary to sustaining everyday life . Leitão [ 65 ] unpacks that leading with the construct of desire in design creates an open - ended possibility for other exis - tences which do not hinge on the gap between the current reality and the desired state . Various scholars have situated that this gap is where we defne the problem space , oftentimes being examined against biological and physiological needs [ 116 ] . Much of the focus of our current research agenda in HCI , particularly when focused on BIPOC communities , has centered on basic needs ( e . g . , the bot - tom of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs where physiological needs such as food , shelter , safety , and protection are at the base [ 71 ] ) . Few eforts have examined how we design for those more pleasure - centric needs and unbounded by specifc outcomes , such as those of esteem and self - actualization , which might look like the more everyday existence that we all experience yet has no perceived transactional value . Understanding how to move forward with practices that center on principles of designing for fourishing requires us to acknowl - edge the shortcomings of current mainstream HCI practices . In order to decolonize these practices , we must challenge many of our current Westernized frameworks , epistemologies , and theories , Maslow’s hierarchy included . Identifying needs and the gaps in those needs is one of the central approaches to user - focused de - sign in HCI and looks to highlight critical problems of a user [ 98 ] , adopting in many ways an interpretation of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs [ 25 ] . This perspective adopts the idea that the frst needs are physiological needs , such as food , shelter , and followed by needs for safety [ 71 ] . Needs of belonging and esteem , according to Maslow are best addressed once these have been satisfed . [ 93 ] . We see this emphasis reproduced by a feld that only prioritizes and legitimizes design work that looks at communities for problems to fx , rather than opportunities for fourishing . By its very nature , current ap - proaches ask individuals what they need rather than what they desire in an almost paternalistic manner . Looking at modern cri - tiques of frameworks like Maslow’s we can see how this limited view of an emphasis on needs comes from a Western and colonial perspective that devalues pleasure and joy and overly emphasizes the needs of an individual over community - centered values [ 2 ] . In many instances , attempts to address the shortcomings of this outside - in approach have led to the development of methodologies such as participatory and co - design [ 75 , 111 ] . However , a damage - centered approach may prevail even when community leaders and practitioners are centered in the process . The circumstances and historical implications of being a member of a historically oppressed community and the resulting disparity of unmet foundational needs do not equate to these needs being the most central to the identity of individuals within these communities . Therefore , recognizing the importance of continuing to address these needs while going beyond them towards self - actualization and fourishing is an es - sential exercise for designers and community stakeholders alike . Individuals are not only their most basic needs and exist with and navigate all their motivations at once ; limiting design in BIPOC communities to needs that only address the bottom of the hierarchy , in turn , limits the capacity of the individual and the community to aspire to fourish . It should not merely be the goal to survive and address basic needs , but space and opportunity must be created for communities to access a full range of motivations . This notion of shifting from survival to fourishing requires intentional action and methodological change . Designing for fourishing as a research area encompasses many existing design frameworks , paradigms , and approaches both cen - tral and external to the HCI community , such as desire - centered design , pleasure activism , and celebratory technology [ 9 , 48 , 65 ] . Participatory design approaches such as the Afrofuturist Specula - tive Design Toolkit [ 6 ] that seek to decolonize design ofer tools for designers to think about this through the active participation of community designers . Not only is the concurrent addressing of basic needs and self - actualization needs constructive , BIPOC communities must envision and plan for a future in which they not only exist but fourish . The case studies analyzed in the previous section give us insight into the outcomes of designing for fourishing and ofer insight that informs approaches to replicating and amplifying the experiences of these platforms into other designs . At their core , these platforms ofer a space that is not centered on needs but broadens their hori - zons to other desires . The Wave , Liberate , and Never Alone , each provides agency to their users to explore community and individual wants and holistic aspirations and potential of those who are part of the community . 927 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . 4 . 2 Design Tenets for Flourishing in the Everyday Here , we combine design theory and methods as well as learnings from our case study analysis into six action - oriented tenets for designing for fourishing in the everyday . Further details are below . 4 . 2 . 1 Seek Opportunities for Self - Actualization , Not Prob - lems to Solve . To put BIPOC communities’ fourishing and joy at the center of the research process , we must engage in certain actions at the conception of our research by shifting the focus from needs to desires . We must discuss what fourishing and joy look like within BIPOC communities . While trends like # blackboyjoy 7 , # blackgirlmagic 8 , # blackjoy 9 provide us keen insight into how joy is manifested within Black communities on social platforms , little is known about how other traditionally excluded communi - ties connect with feelings of joy and self - actualization . Conscious , deliberate eforts are needed to explore these constructs . When designing for the pluriverse , we must prioritize desire before investigating what is necessary . We must seek opportunities for self - actualization . According to Nelson & Stolterman [ 79 ] , People desire to flourish and not just survive . They may not need music or art to survive , but they certainly desire them both . A need is a baseline condition that must be mitigated in order to support and stabilize a given situation . The hungry need to be fed and the cold need to be sheltered - but people desire to be more than “needy” creatures . Desire is the destabi - lizing trigger for transformational change , which facili - tates the emergence of new possibilities and realizations of human “being” ( p . 110 ) . For HCI to create innovative technological solutions that foster fourishing and joy , we must shift our focus from solely satisfying Maslow’s basic needs ( i . e . , physiological , safety , belonging / love ) and instead to the top of the pyramid [ 71 ] , where we can fnd self - actualization . By creating solutions that seek solely to fulfll the bottom needs , we are perpetuating that BIPOC communities do not deserve new possibilities of simply being . We must create spaces within our research practices that allow BIPOC communities to thrive . This reframe requires us to unlearn the primitive knowledge and colonial mindset of what we know of and how we interact with BIPOC communities [ 110 ] , as these habits are barriers to embracing new ways of doing . We must realize that today’s problems hail from yesterday’s “solutions " . Most importantly , we must challenge our traditional understanding of “research . ” Research methods can be collaborative in which we shift not only the focus of the study but also how methods are executed to include moments of meditation , rest , sharing , storytelling , and even incorporate people’s interests [ 4 ] , perhaps dreaming . This may impact how people outside of research institutions feel about research as an entity . 7 https : / / www . theroot . com / watch - out - loud - what - is - blackboyjoy - and - why - do - we - need - 1794180141 8 https : / / www . theguardian . com / lifeandstyle / womens - blog / 2016 / apr / 11 / how - blackgirlmagic - became - a - rallying - cry - for - women - of - colour 9 https : / / voiceofoc . org / 2021 / 02 / celebrating - black - joy - as - an - alternative - form - of - resistance - and - reclaiming - of - humanity / 4 . 2 . 2 Identify and Center the Desire to Flourish . As we saw earlier , existing research methods operate from a defcit - need - based lens . In that way , they attempt to emulate what is accepted in the normative dominant culture , thereby constraining the window of possibility , missing what can be achieved from even considering – the unaccepted . As such , when we alter our needs / defcits - based design narrative , we are required to engage in new ways of design thinking ( i . e . , to center BIPOC communities’ desires at the fore of design commitment such that they can fourish in their unique ways to create an emerging world of possibilities [ 10 , 26 , 65 ] ) . De - sire is a natural human force , however , for BIPOC communities , those desires are often unheard of or unattended to – in design and by design . Nevertheless , throughout this paper , we discussed various ways our chosen socio - technical platforms were fruitful in representing and nurturing BIPOC desires by centering them at the core of design and design processes [ 30 , 31 , 33 ] . Never Alone provides a concrete example in which specifc Iñu - piaq communities were engaged in every step of the design process from conceptualization , and iteration to fnal game design , e . g . , the notion of Spirituality feature update in the game . It created a world within many worlds by taking care of what spirituality means to the Iñupiaq community and empowering them . In an HCI context , Vigil - Hayes and collaborators use a similar approach of close collaboration with a Native community advisory board in a community - based participatory design study [ 117 ] . Similarly , Liber - ate enables Black and Brown communities in activities that promote belongingness and self - expression . This app’s exclusively designed features are carefully crafted for the Black community and intended for their subjective well - being . The Wave by design and utility also represents a concrete example of how Black communities thrive at micro ( e . g . , the self , small community social groups ) and macro ( e . g . , city and nationally ) levels . All these case studies shift away from emulating a grand narrative of the universalism of existence by centering on the community , their situated experiences , values , and beliefs . Although we were able to articulate the major features of these platforms from various design framework lenses , it is impossible that one framework would satisfy all the essential qualities consid - ering our aim to center BIPOC’s desires and fourishing in design . This being said , positive design framework ingredients [ 26 ] , in - spiration from pluriversal design to explicitly focus on a specifc community [ 65 ] , emerging , adaptive , iterative , components of emer - gent strategy [ 9 ] , and pleasure activism [ 10 ] can serve as potential starting places to design for BIPOC joy and fourishing . 4 . 2 . 3 Collaborate and Distribute Power . In the process of de - signing for fourishing every day , we must account for power hierar - chies and dynamics in community collaborations [ 52 ] . We envision highly collaborative work with the communities that should be at the center of the design . To collaborate efectively , teams need to discuss and defne clear roles , processes , and boundaries early on [ 30 , 31 ] . Here , we are inspired by some of the principles of design justice such as “designer as the facilitator , not the expert " and “every - one is an expert based on their own lived experiences " [ 19 ] , and the dynamic processes of Emergent Strategy [ 9 ] . In other words , when community members are involved in a design process , it cannot be in name alone . Each person involved has the expertise , whether it 928 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA be in design , cultural knowledge , lived experiences , art , product de - velopment , etc . , that deserve respect , agency , and decision - making autonomy . In the Never Alone example , community members had multi - ple iterative opportunities to brainstorm and share as well as pro - vide critical feedback . The development team used those ideas to produce playable game prototypes utilizing their expertise . Most importantly , the community had the power to veto design ideas that did not embody community cultural knowledge . Similarly , The Wave distributes power through self - moderation in the community . The Wave exists in groups across the country where each group curates the tone and content on the platform . The size and curation of the community mean that active participants in the community have a say about what the platform looks and feels like and what is and is not appropriate . This counters other norms on large - scale platforms where content is automatically moderated ( e . g . , by faulty AI where BIPOC communities do not have a voice to defne what racism on the platform looks like [ 107 ] ) . 4 . 2 . 4 Refrain from Reducing Communities to Damage Cen - tered Facets . Designing for fourishing requires us to challenge our outlook on an individual’s experiences and that of the commu - nities in which they take part . BIPOC communities have abundant cultural attributes , from language to values , experiences to tradi - tions , which make them multi - faceted [ 129 ] . When we diminish towards a focus on damage - centered design , we reinforce the mes - sage that the world is not made for BIPOC communities , encoding an often inappropriate savior mentality that we have to make adjust - ments on their behalf . Instead , The Wave , Never Alone , and Liberate show us how design can paint a more holistic picture that places BIPOC at the center [ 30 ] . The design might then make space for the more nuanced ways BIPOC communities express themselves , communicate , and thrive to celebrate the breadth and depth of their experiences . We see this exemplifed on The Wave with users able to expe - rience and celebrate a sense of belonging and to fnd fellowship in shared activities and successes . The Wave achieves a sense of community for its users without an assumption of the collective being a monolith and instead cultivates a social space where individ - uals of diferent intersectionalities with Blackness can experience a sense of digital safety . In designing for fourishing , we must aim to arrive at the table with a goal of facilitating this ideal , the ideal that within a space , an individual can truly see and represent them - selves as “one of one” , with all the nuances of their experiences welcomed and amplifed within that space , not reduced to or ex - pected to perform as their most simplifed version nor aggregated to the most interpretable collective , or mainstream stereotypes of their identities . In designing for fourishing , we must look at the attributes that make an individual or community unique as opportunities for am - plifying their goals and identities through creative collaboration [ 31 ] . We must continuously empower community members to tell us who they are ; how what they have experienced informs how they exist in the world , how it informs what feeling safe , joyful , fulflled , valued , and represented means to them , and in what ways we can represent these attributes in the designs we collaboratively develop [ 65 , 110 ] . 4 . 2 . 5 Bring the Humanity of the Community Into the Pro - cess . Research on and with BIPOC communities has a history of focusing on the challenges these communities experience [ 116 ] , oftentimes becoming its own traumatic experience [ 47 ] . In terms of designing for self - actualization , people want to talk about and en - gage in activities focused on more than just their problems . Thus , a critical consideration in this path towards designing for fourishing in the every day requires that we integrate the things that bring people joy , pleasure , rest , and peace into the research work that we do . As we have discussed in this paper , this may be through the subject of the research focus , but may also be done through the ap - proach of how we structure the research protocol [ 30 ] . Frameworks and approaches such as Healing Justice [ 4 , 46 , 61 ] and Emergent Strategy [ 9 ] center healing practices to cultivate community and uphold self - care for groups that have historically been framed as problems to solve . To go beyond this response to the damage - centered lens , princi - ples of Pleasure Activism [ 10 ] encourage us to tap into our emo - tional needs and embrace the things which bring us joy as a way to navigate worlds that were not built with BIPOC communities in mind . Leaning into these practices may stand to make research less daunting and formal and implore more pleasurable experiences into the research process itself [ 16 ] . Bosley et al . [ 4 ] integrated Healing Justice into HCI research methods via community design work - shops , guiding participants through meditation , refections , rests , and grounding activities that refocus more positive energy among the group throughout their design activities . Frameworks and ap - proaches such as Healing Justice and Emergent Strategy provide an opportunity for us to bring the full humanity of the community into the design and research process . Considering topics of interest and the things that make people feel whole also contributes to the ways we cultivate individuals to get something out of a research experience that is not just fnancial payment . 4 . 2 . 6 Evaluate for Self - Sustainability . Designing for fourish - ing should include a thorough integration and examination of the sustainability of its outcomes . By its nature , designing for four - ishing is a generative process whose impact has the potential to far outlast the formal design process , and as such responsible sus - tainability should be considered and embedded into the process [ 30 , 31 ] . Empowering communities with the necessary pathway to self - sustainability also means that the outcomes of the project become less limited . As communities defne and redefne their aspi - rations and self - actualization goals over time , this approach enables the community’s goals to evolve as their desires evolve , truly plac - ing the power to shape the project in their hands . This freedom and self - reliance may also engender new imaginative approaches to other base needs . Therefore , as outcomes of an intended project begin to blossom , it is important to ensure that they can be maintained after the research team has left . Although the efects of sustainability are more evident at the completion of the formal design process , it is critical for designers to be intentional in how they develop a strategy for sustainability long before they reach the end as Community - Based Participatory Research principles inform us [ 18 , 50 , 68 ] . 929 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . Doing this efectively requires defning the desired outcomes and planning for the maintenance of the project early and in con - versation with those in the community . This involves identifying if : 1 ) the appropriate resources are available and can continue to be generated , 2 ) if the right actors such as leaders , and commu - nity organizations , and are well - positioned to carry on the work or centering the work around the goals that these actors are already experienced in [ 6 ] , and 3 ) understanding where power lies at the end when the designer has left and of - boarding the project in a way that empowers the leaders that emerge . The Wave ’s platform hones in on this idea of self - sustainability through its model of self - moderation and local leaders across the platform [ 87 ] . As members extend invitations to grow the commu - nity , they also help shape the goals and vision for the community . The usability of the platform and its accessibility allow it to con - tinue to grow and be shaped by the desires of those who are part of it . It is able to sustain itself through community - elected connois - seurs across diferent domains who provide resources and connect others to that with which they are familiar but does not limit the experiences that its users may seek out on the platform . 5 CONCLUSION Problem - solving will always justifably be a core part of research and design in HCI . Focusing on designing for fourishing requires us to challenge the solutionism - oriented [ 21 , 114 ] nature of much HCI research , which can be a new orientation to get acclimated to for many researchers . Design pedagogy and practice often teach us to begin design eforts by identifying and scoping the problem , which urges researchers to seek and amplify disadvantages or defcits . It should also be stated that designing for fourishing also requires us to negotiate what constitutes joy , desire , and pleasure for some that is not harmful , undesirable , exploitative , or problematic to others ( even at times within the “same” community ) . We must also consider which elements of our fourishing may be feeting [ 65 ] and how we position design within such temporal existence of desire , pleasure , and joy . Our proposal is not to forget problem - solving , but to widen our scope and look beyond just surviving and coping . BIPOC commu - nities in particular must be seen as a whole , capable of fourishing , attaining happiness and joy , and having important desires beyond survival . With this work , our hope is to center the fullness of BIPOC communities by opening the door for designing beyond the lens of defcits , problems , and trauma . In doing so , we ask the HCI commu - nity : What is a technology that supports BIPOC dreams , glitter , and imagination ? How can we design technology that centers BIPOC’s desires and their willingness to fourish ? What existing framework could be potentially useful ? This work contributes to this continued discourse , by proposing six theoretical tenets as a starting place for design . That said , designing for joy , fourishing , and liberation by centering BIPOC desires is not reliant on any one singular design framework [ 30 ] , rather , it is constantly emerging , shredding , and evolving . System designers must be purposeful in introducing this into practice as it involves " self - refection and a dialogic process . Designing for our liberation means ( re ) designing our relationship to technology , ourselves , and our communities " [ 53 , p . 34 ] . REFERENCES [ 1 ] American Psychological Association . 2012 . Understanding Psychother - apy . https : / / www . apa . org / topics / psychotherapy / understanding # : ~ : text = Psychotherapy % 20helps % 20people % 20understand % 20that , school % 2C % 20or % 20thinking % 20more % 20positively [ 2 ] Roy Bear , Peter W Choate , Gabrielle Lindstrom , et al . 2022 . Reconsidering Maslow and the hierarchy of needs from a First Nations’ perspective . Aotearoa New Zealand Social Work Review 34 , 2 ( 2022 ) . [ 3 ] Dolores Delgado Bernal . 2002 . Critical race theory , Latino critical theory , and critical raced - gendered epistemologies : Recognizing students of color as holders and creators of knowledge . Qualitative inquiry 8 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 105 – 126 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 107780040200800107 [ 4 ] Brooke Bosley , Christina N Harrington , Susana M Morris , and Christopher A Le Dantec . 2022 . Healing Justice : A Framework for Collective Healing and Well - Being from Systemic Traumas . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 471 – 484 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533492 [ 5 ] Kirsten Bray and Christina Harrington . 2021 . Speculative Blackness : Consid - ering Afrofuturism in the Creation of Inclusive Speculative Design Probes . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 ( DIS ’21 ) . Association for Com - puting Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1793 – 1806 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3461778 . 3462002 [ 6 ] Kirsten E Bray , Christina Harrington , Andrea G Parker , N’Deye Diakhate , and Jennifer Roberts . 2022 . Radical Futures : Supporting Community - Led Design Engagements through an Afrofuturist Speculative Design Toolkit . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 452 , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3501945 [ 7 ] André Brock Jr . 2020 . Distributed blackness . In Distributed Blackness . New York University Press , USA . [ 8 ] Christopher Brooks , Erica Principe Principe Cruz , Jamie Camera , and Alexandra To . 2021 . Uplifting Us : A BIPOC Game Design Case Study . In The 16th Interna - tional Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games ( FDG ) 2021 . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3472538 . 3472585 [ 9 ] adrienne maree brown . 2017 . Emergent strategy : Shaping change , changing worlds . https : / / www . akpress . org / emergentstrategy . html [ 10 ] adrienne maree brown . 2019 . Pleasure activism . AK Press , UK . https : / / www . akpress . org / pleasure - activism . html [ 11 ] Fred B Bryant and Joseph Verof . 2017 . Savoring : A new model of positive experience . Psychology Press , USA . https : / / psycnet . apa . org / record / 2006 - 11872 - 000 [ 12 ] Nayeli Y Chavez - Dueñas , Hector Y Adames , Jessica G Perez - Chavez , and Silvia P Salas . 2019 . Healing ethno - racial trauma in Latinx immigrant communities : Cultivating hope , resistance , and action . American Psychologist 74 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / amp0000289 [ 13 ] Yiqun T . Chen , Angela D . R . Smith , Katharina Reinecke , and Alexandra To . 2022 . Collecting and Reporting Race and Ethnicity Data in HCI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI EA ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 327 , 8 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3519685 [ 14 ] Yiqun T . Chen , Angela D . R . Smith , Katharina Reinecke , and Alexandra To . 2022 . Collecting and Reporting Race and Ethnicity Data in HCI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI EA ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 327 , 8 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3519685 [ 15 ] Nkechinyelum A Chioneso , Carla D Hunter , Robyn L Gobin , Shardé Mc - Neil Smith , Ruby Mendenhall , and Helen A Neville . 2020 . Community healing and resistance through storytelling : A framework to address racial trauma in Africana communities . Journal of Black Psychology 46 , 2 - 3 ( 2020 ) , 95 – 121 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0095798420929468 [ 16 ] Tanzina Choudhury and Suzanne Clisby . 2020 . Creative Activism , Creating Pleasure : The Power of Emotion in Participatory Research . Studies on Home & Community Science 14 ( 2020 ) , 43 – 56 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 31901 / 24566780 . 2020 / 14 . 1 - 2 . 347 [ 17 ] Patricia Hill Collins . 2002 . Black feminist thought : Knowledge , con - sciousness , and the politics of empowerment . routledge , USA . https : / / www . routledge . com / Black - Feminist - Thought - Knowledge - Consciousness - and - the - Politics - of - Empowerment / Collins / p / book / 9780415964722 [ 18 ] Ned Cooper , Tifanie Horne , Gillian R Hayes , Courtney Heldreth , Michal Lahav , Jess Holbrook , and Lauren Wilcox . 2022 . A Systematic Review and Thematic Analysis of Community - Collaborative Approaches to Computing Research . In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( New Orleans , LA , USA ) ( CHI ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 73 , 18 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517716 [ 19 ] Sasha Costanza - Chock . 2020 . Design justice : Community - led practices to build the worlds we need . The MIT Press , USA . https : / / mitpress . mit . edu / 9780262043458 / design - justice / 930 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA [ 20 ] Kimberle Crenshaw . 1990 . Mapping the margins : Intersectionality , identity politics , and violence against women of color . Stan . L . Rev . 43 ( 1990 ) , 1241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1229039 [ 21 ] Jay L . Cunningham , Gabrielle Benabdallah , Daniela K . Rosner , and Alex S . Taylor . 2022 . On the Grounds of Solutionism : Ontologies of Blackness and HCI . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 30 , 2 ( aug 2022 ) , 17 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3557890 Just Accepted . [ 22 ] Jay L Cunningham , Sydney T Nguyen , Julie A Kientz , and Daniela Rosner . 2022 . The Cost of Culture : An Analysis of Cash App and the Financial Inclusion of Black American Communities . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 612 – 628 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533569 [ 23 ] Mitzi Davis , Yvonne Dias - Bowie , Katherine Greenberg , Gary Klukken , Howard R Pollio , Sandra P Thomas , and Charles L Thompson . 2004 . “A fy in the butter - milk” : Descriptions of university life by successful black undergraduate students at a predominately white southeastern university . The Journal of Higher Educa - tion 75 , 4 ( 2004 ) , 420 – 445 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00221546 . 2004 . 11772266 [ 24 ] Richard Delgado and Jean Stefancic . 2023 . Critical race theory : An introduction . Vol . 87 . NYU press , USA . [ 25 ] Pieter Desmet and Steven Fokkinga . 2020 . Beyond Maslow’s Pyramid : Introduc - ing a Typology of Thirteen Fundamental Needs for Human - Centered Design . Multimodal Technologies and Interaction 4 , 3 ( 2020 ) . https : / / www . mdpi . com / 2414 - 4088 / 4 / 3 / 38 [ 26 ] Pieter MA Desmet and Anna E Pohlmeyer . 2013 . Positive design : An introduction to design for subjective well - being . International journal of design 7 , 3 ( 2013 ) . http : / / www . ijdesign . org / index . php / IJDesign / article / view / 1666 / 595 [ 27 ] Uttaran Dutta and Swayang Das . 2016 . The digital divide at the margins : co - designing information solutions to address the needs of indigenous populations of rural India . Communication Design Quarterly Review 4 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 36 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2875501 . 2875504 [ 28 ] Ivan Encelewski . March 2019 . The Making of Never Alone ( Kisima Inŋitchuŋa ) : Celebrating a People and a Language . https : / / www . culturalsurvival . org / publications / cultural - survival - quarterly / making - never - alone - kisima - innitchuna - celebrating - people Accessed : 2022 - 11 - 09 . [ 29 ] Sheena Erete . 2021 . Designing Tools to Counter Violence and Structural Oppres - sion . In 2021 IEEE 9th International Conference on Healthcare Informatics ( ICHI ) . IEEE , IEEE , Victoria , BC , Canada , 2 – 3 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / ICHI52183 . 2021 . 00014 [ 30 ] Sheena Erete . 2021 . Using black feminist epistemologies and activist frameworks to counter structural racism in design . interactions 28 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 56 – 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3479981 [ 31 ] Sheena Erete , Aarti Israni , and Tawanna Dillahunt . 2018 . An intersectional approach to designing in the margins . Interactions 25 , 3 ( 2018 ) , 66 – 69 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3194349 [ 32 ] Sheena Erete , Karla Thomas , Denise Nacu , Jessa Dickinson , Naomi Thompson , and Nichole Pinkard . 2021 . Applying a transformative justice approach to encourage the participation of Black and Latina Girls in computing . ACM Transactions on Computing Education ( TOCE ) 21 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3451345 [ 33 ] Sheena Erete , Naomi Thompson , Miranda Standberry - Wallace , Bo Ju , Denise Nacu , and Nichole Pinkard . 2021 . Honoring Black Women’s Work : Creating a Parent and Caring Adult Community to Support Youth STEAM Engagement . In 2021 Conference on Research in Equitable and Sustained Participation in Engi - neering , Computing , and Technology ( RESPECT ) . IEEE , IEEE , Philadelphia , PA , USA , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / RESPECT51740 . 2021 . 9620550 [ 34 ] Arturo Escobar . 2020 . Pluriversal politics : The real and the possible . Duke University Press , USA . https : / / www . dukeupress . edu / pluriversal - politics [ 35 ] Hasan Shahid Ferdous , Frank Vetere , Hilary Davis , Bernd Ploderer , Kenton O’hara , Rob Comber , and Geremy Farr - Wharton . 2017 . Celebratory technology to orchestrate the sharing of devices and stories during family mealtimes . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 6960 – 6972 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025492 [ 36 ] Mary Flanagan and Helen Nissenbaum . 2014 . Values at play in digital games . MIT Press , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 2635976 [ 37 ] Paolo Freire . 1970 . Pedagogy of the Oppressed . Penguin Classics , UK . https : / / envs . ucsc . edu / internships / internship - readings / freire - pedagogy - of - the - oppressed . pdf [ 38 ] Bryana H French , Jioni A Lewis , Della V Mosley , Hector Y Adames , Nayeli Y Chavez - Dueñas , Grace A Chen , and Helen A Neville . 2020 . Toward a psycho - logical framework of radical healing in communities of color . The Counseling Psychologist 48 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 14 – 46 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0011000019843506 [ 39 ] Batya Friedman . 1997 . Human values and the design of computer technology . Number 72 in NA . Cambridge University Press , UK . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 278213 [ 40 ] Batya Friedman and David G Hendry . 2019 . Value sensitive design : Shaping technology with moral imagination . Mit Press , USA . https : / / mitpress . mit . edu / 9780262039536 / value - sensitive - design / [ 41 ] B . Friedman , D . C . Howe , and E . Felten . 2002 . Informed consent in the Mozilla browser : implementing value - sensitive design . In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , Vol . 2002 - . IEEE , USA , 10 pp . – 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 820746 . 821279 [ 42 ] Batya Friedman , Peter Kahn , and Alan Borning . 2002 . Value sensitive design : Theory and methods . University of Washington technical report 2 ( 2002 ) , 12 . https : / / faculty . washington . edu / pkahn / articles / vsd - theory - methods - tr . pdf [ 43 ] Batya Friedman , Peter H Kahn , Alan Borning , and Alina Huldtgren . 2013 . Value sensitive design and information systems . In Early engagement and new technologies : Opening up the laboratory . Springer , USA , 55 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 007 - 7844 - 3 _ 4 [ 44 ] Upper One Games . 2014 . Never alone . http : / / neveralonegame . com / game / [ 45 ] Shawn Ginwright . 2011 . Hope , healing , and care . Liberal Education 97 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 34 – 39 . https : / / www . sbh4all . org / wp - content / uploads / 2016 / 08 / hope - healing - care - article . pdf [ 46 ] Shawn Ginwright . 2015 . Hope and healing in urban education : How ur - ban activists and teachers are reclaiming matters of the heart . Routledge , UK . https : / / www . routledge . com / Hope - and - Healing - in - Urban - Education - How - Urban - Activists - and - Teachers - are / Ginwright / p / book / 9781138797574 [ 47 ] Shawn Ginwright . 2018 . The future of healing : Shifting from trauma in - formed care to healing centered engagement . Occasional Paper 25 ( 2018 ) , 25 – 32 . https : / / youthrex . com / blog / the - future - of - healing - shifting - from - trauma - informed - care - to - healing - centered - engagement / [ 48 ] Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper . 2008 . Celebratory technology : new direc - tions for food research in HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 467 – 476 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357130 [ 49 ] Christina Harrington and Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2021 . Eliciting Tech Futures Among Black Young Adults : A Case Study of Remote Speculative Co - Design . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 397 , 15 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445723 [ 50 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 3 , CSCW , Article 216 ( nov 2019 ) , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359318 [ 51 ] Christina N Harrington , Brittany Johnson , Denae Ford , and Angela D . R . Smith . 2021 . Designing for the black experience . Interactions 28 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 22 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3477095 [ 52 ] Race in HCI Collective , Angela D . R . Smith , Adriana Alvarado Garcia , Ian Arawjo , Audrey Bennett , Khalia Braswell , Bryan Dosono , Ron Eglash , Denae Ford , Daniel Gardner , Shamika Goddard , Jaye Nias , Cale Passmore , Yolanda Rankin , Naba Rizvi , Carol F . Scott , Jakita Thomas , Alexandra To , Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , and Marisol Wong - Villacres . 2021 . Keepin’ It Real about Race in HCI . Interactions 28 , 5 ( aug 2021 ) , 28 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3477097 [ 53 ] Margaret Jack and Anupriya Tuli . 2021 . Designing for liberation : our lives , mobility , and technology . Interactions 28 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 34 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3448020 [ 54 ] Matthew Kuan Johnson . 2020 . Joy : A review of the literature and suggestions for future directions . The Journal of Positive Psychology 15 , 1 ( 2020 ) , 5 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17439760 . 2019 . 1685581 [ 55 ] Pat Kane . 2022 . Liberatory technology " heals and returns us to our wholeness " and " enables equitable access to life - afrming resources " , say mobius . https : / / www . thealternative . org . uk / dailyalternative / 2022 / 9 / 26 / mobius - liberatory - technology # : ~ : text = Instead % 20of % 20widening % 20income % 20inequality , greater % 20access % 20to % 20our % 20aliveness . [ 56 ] Gopinaath Kannabiran . 2021 . I am sorry ! Interactions 28 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 14 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3477089 [ 57 ] Naveena Karusala , Isaac Holeman , and Richard Anderson . 2019 . Engaging identity , assets , and constraints in designing for resilience . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359315 [ 58 ] Naveena Karusala , Aditya Vishwanath , Arkadeep Kumar , Aman Mangal , and Neha Kumar . 2017 . Care as a resource in underserved learning environments . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( 2017 ) , 1 – 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3134739 [ 59 ] Avleen Kaur , C Estelle Smith , and Loren Terveen . 2021 . Sway Together , Stay Together : Visualizing Spiritual Support Networks Through the SoulGarden Pro - totype . In Companion Publication of the 2021 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 84 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3462204 . 3481774 [ 60 ] Junhan Kim , Jana Muhic , Lionel Peter Robert , and Sun Young Park . 2022 . De - signing Chatbots with Black Americans with Chronic Conditions : Overcoming Challenges against COVID - 19 . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3502116 [ 61 ] Kindred Southern Healing Justice Collective . 2007 . The Need . http : / / kindredsouthernhjcollective . org / wp - content / uploads / 2020 / 07 / Kindred - 931 DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA To et al . Healing - Justice - Collective - Needs - Statement - 1 - 1 . pdf [ 62 ] Shamika Klassen , Sara Kingsley , Kalyn McCall , Joy Weinberg , and Casey Fiesler . 2021 . More than a Modern Day Green Book : Exploring the Online Community of Black Twitter . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW2 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3479602 [ 63 ] Ashish Kothari , Ariel Salleh , Arturo Escobar , Federico Demaria , and Alberto Acosta . 2019 . Pluriverse : A post - development dictionary . Tulika Books and Authorsupfront , India . http : / / cup . columbia . edu / book / pluriverse / 9788193732984 [ 64 ] Elizabeth LaPensée . 2018 . Self - determination in Indigenous games . In The Routledge companion to media studies and digital humanities . Routledge , UK , 128 – 137 . https : / / www . taylorfrancis . com / chapters / edit / 10 . 4324 / 9781315730479 - 13 / self - determination - indigenous - games - elizabeth - lapens % C3 % A9e [ 65 ] Renata Leitão . 2020 . Pluriversal design and desire - based design : Desire as the impulse for human fourishing . In Pivot 2020 Conference Proceedings . DRS , USA . https : / / openresearch . ocadu . ca / id / eprint / 3180 / 1 / Leitao _ Pluriversal _ 2020 . pdf [ 66 ] Renata Leitão and Lesley Ann Noel . 2020 . DRS2020 Editorial : Pluriversal Design SIG . In DRS Conference Proceedings . DRS , Held online . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21606 / drs . 2020 . 106 [ 67 ] Jingjin Li and Gilly Leshed . 2022 . Beyond Meditation : Everyday Mindfulness and Technology Use . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491101 . 3519820 [ 68 ] Calvin A . Liang , Sean A . Munson , and Julie A . Kientz . 2021 . Embracing Four Tensions in Human - Computer Interaction Research with Marginalized People . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 28 , 2 , Article 14 ( apr 2021 ) , 47 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3443686 [ 69 ] Sebastian Linxen , Christian Sturm , Florian Brühlmann , Vincent Cassau , Klaus Opwis , and Katharina Reinecke . 2021 . How weird is CHI ? . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445488 [ 70 ] Deborah Lea Madsen . 2017 . The mechanics of survivance in indigenously - determined video - games : Invaders and never alone . Transmotion 3 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 79 – 110 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22024 / UniKent / 03 / tm . 371 [ 71 ] A . H Maslow . 1943 . A theory of human motivation . Psychological review 50 , 4 ( 1943 ) , 370 – 396 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0054346 [ 72 ] M Mingus . 2019 . Transformative justice : A brief description . Leaving Evi - dence . https : / / leavingevidence . wordpress . com / 2019 / 01 / 09 / transformative - justice - a - brief - description / [ 73 ] Ine Mols , Mendel Broekhuijsen , Elise Van Den Hoven , Panos Markopoulos , and Berry Eggen . 2015 . Do we ruin the moment ? Exploring the design of novel capturing technologies . In Proceedings of the annual meeting of the australian special interest group for computer human interaction . ACM , USA , 653 – 661 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2838739 . 2838758 [ 74 ] Allison J Morgan , Yuvay Meyers Ferguson , and Eileen M Trauth . 2015 . Consumer demographics and internet based health information search in the United States : the intersectionality of gender , race , and class . International Journal of E - Health and Medical Communications ( IJEHMC ) 6 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 58 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / IJEHMC . 2015010105 [ 75 ] Michael J Muller . 2007 . Participatory design : the third space in HCI . CRC press , USA . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5555 / 772072 . 772138 [ 76 ] Dhiraj Murthy . 2011 . Emergent digital ethnographic methods for social re - search . Handbook of emergent technologies in social research na , na ( 2011 ) , 158 – 179 . https : / / www . dhirajmurthy . com / wp - content / uploads / 2012 / 04 / Emergent - digital - ethnographic - methods - for - social - research _ Murthy3 . pdf [ 77 ] Tyler Musgrave , Alia Cummings , and Sarita Schoenebeck . 2022 . Experiences of Harm , Healing , and Joy among Black Women and Femmes on Social Media . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517608 [ 78 ] Jennifer C Nash . 2008 . Re - thinking intersectionality . Feminist review 89 , 1 ( 2008 ) , 1 – 15 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / fr . 2008 . 4 [ 79 ] Harold G . Nelson and Erik Stolterman . 2012 . The Design Way : Intentional Change in an Unpredictable World . The MIT Press , USA . https : / / mitpress . mit . edu / 9780262526708 / the - design - way / [ 80 ] Josef Nguyen and Bonnie Ruberg . 2020 . Challenges of designing consent : Consent mechanics in video games as models for interactive user agency . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376827 [ 81 ] Safya Umoja Noble . 2018 . Algorithms of oppression . In Algorithms of Oppres - sion . New York University Press , USA . https : / / nyupress . org / 9781479837243 / algorithms - of - oppression / [ 82 ] Anthony J Nocella and J Anthony . 2011 . An overview of the history and theory of transformative justice . Peace & confict review 6 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 10 . http : / / www . review . upeace . org / pdf . cfm ? articulo = 124 & ejemplar = 23 [ 83 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Angela D . R . Smith , Alexandra To , and Kentaro Toyama . 2020 . Critical race theory for HCI . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376392 [ 84 ] Teresa K O’Leary , Dhaval Parmar , Stefan Olafsson , Michael Paasche - Orlow , Timothy Bickmore , and Andrea G Parker . 2022 . Community Dynamics in Technospiritual Interventions : Lessons Learned from a Church - based mHealth Pilot . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3491102 . 3517700 [ 85 ] Lindsay Pérez Huber and Daniel G Solorzano . 2015 . Racial microaggressions as a tool for critical race research . Race Ethnicity and Education 18 , 3 ( 2015 ) , 297 – 320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13613324 . 2014 . 994173 [ 86 ] Sarah Pink , Heather Horst , John Postill , Larissa Hjorth , Tania Lewis , and Jo Tacchi . 2015 . Digital ethnography : Principles and practice . Sage , UK . https : / / uk . sagepub . com / en - gb / eur / digital - ethnography / book243111 [ 87 ] Anna Pohlmeyer and Pieter Desmet . 2017 . From good to the greater good . In Routledge handbook of sustainable product design . Routledge , USA , 469 – 486 . https : / / diopd . org / wp - content / uploads / 2018 / 07 / Pohlmeyer - Desmet - 2017 - from - good - to - greater - good . pdf [ 88 ] John A Powell and Stephen Menendian . 2016 . The problem of othering : Towards inclusiveness and belonging . Othering & Belonging 1 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 14 – 40 . https : / / www . otheringandbelonging . org / the - problem - of - othering / [ 89 ] Erica Principe Principe Cruz , Nalyn Sriwattanakomen , Jessica Hammer , and Ge - of Kaufman . 2021 . Counterspace games for BIWOC stem students . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3451811 [ 90 ] Baukje Prins . 2006 . Narrative accounts of origins : A blind spot in the intersec - tional approach ? European Journal of Women’s Studies 13 , 3 ( 2006 ) , 277 – 290 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1350506806065757 [ 91 ] Loretta Pyles . 2020 . Healing justice , transformative justice , and holistic self - care for social workers . Social work 65 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 178 – 187 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / sw / swaa013 [ 92 ] Hawra Rabaan . 2021 . Exploring Transformative Justice Principles to Inform Survivor - Centered Design for Muslim Women in the United States . In Compan - ion Publication of the 2021 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 291 – 294 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3462204 . 3481797 [ 93 ] Vernellia R . Randall . 2010 . Dying While Black in America : Maslow’s Hierarchy of Need and Racial Policy Making . Cambridge University Press , UK , 69 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511761881 . 004 [ 94 ] Yolanda A Rankin and Kallayah K Henderson . 2021 . Resisting Racism in Tech Design : Centering the Experiences of Black Youth . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449291 [ 95 ] Yolanda A Rankin and India Irish . 2020 . A Seat at the Table : Black Feminist Thought as a Critical Framework for Inclusive Game Design . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW2 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3415188 [ 96 ] Yolanda A Rankin and Jakita O Thomas . 2019 . Straighten up and fy right : Rethinking intersectionality in HCI research . Interactions 26 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 64 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3363033 [ 97 ] Reddit . 2014 . The devs of “Never Alone” , a unique and beautiful game that incorporates Iñupiat heritage , are here to answer all your ques - tions ! https : / / www . reddit . com / r / IndieGaming / comments / 2mkg00 / the _ devs _ of _ never _ alone _ a _ unique _ and _ beautiful / [ 98 ] Cory R Schafhausen and Timothy M Kowalewski . 2015 . Large - Scale Needfnd - ing : Methods of Increasing User - Generated Needs From Large Populations . Journal of mechanical design ( 1990 ) 137 , 7 ( 2015 ) , 71403 – . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4030161 [ 99 ] Ari Schlesinger , W Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : Engaging identity through gender , race , and class . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5412 – 5427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025766 [ 100 ] Sarita Schoenebeck , Carol F Scott , Emma Grace Hurley , Tammy Chang , and Ellen Selkie . 2021 . Youth Trust in Social Media Companies and Expectations of Justice : Accountability and Repair after Online Harassment . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449076 [ 101 ] National Park Service . August 2022 . Green Book Historic Context and AACRN Listing Guidance ( African American Civil Rights Net - work ) . https : / / www . nps . gov / articles / 000 / green - book - historic - context - and - aacrn - listing - guidance - african - american - civil - rights - network . htm Accessed : 2022 - 11 - 09 . [ 102 ] National Park Service . November 2021 . Indigenous Languages of Alaska : Iñupiaq . https : / / www . nps . gov / articles / 000 / indigenous - languages - of - alaska - inupiaq . htm Accessed : 2022 - 11 - 09 . [ 103 ] Suleman Shahid , Omar Mubin , Abdullah Al Mahmud , Zainab Iftikhar , and Rabiah Arshad . 2021 . Child - Computer Interaction in the Global South : Designing for Children on the Margins . In Interaction Design and Children . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 655 – 657 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 932 Flourishing in the Everyday . . . in HCI for BIPOC Communities DIS ’23 , July 10 – 14 , 2023 , Pitsburgh , PA , USA 3459990 . 3460518 [ 104 ] Katie Shilton , Jes A Koepfer , and Kenneth R Fleischmann . 2014 . How to see values in social computing : methods for studying values dimensions . In Pro - ceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 426 – 435 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531625 [ 105 ] Dilruba Showkat and Eric P . S . Baumer . 2022 . “It’s Like the Value System in the Loop” : Domain Experts’ Values Expectations for NLP Automation . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( Virtual Event , Australia ) ( DIS ’22 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 100 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533483 [ 106 ] Dilruba Showkat , Angela D . R . Smith , Wang Lingqing , and Alexandra To . 2023 . “Who is the Right Homeless Client ? ” : Values in Algorithmic Homelessness Service Provision and Machine Learning Research . In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Hamburg , Germany ) ( CHI ’23 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 394 , 21 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581010 [ 107 ] Eugenia Siapera . 2022 . AI Content Moderation , Racism and ( de ) Coloniality . International Journal of Bullying Prevention 4 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 55 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s42380 - 021 - 00105 - 7 [ 108 ] Angela D . R . Smith , Adriana Alvarado Garcia , Ian Arawjo , Audrey Bennett , Khalia Braswell , Bryan Dosono , Ron Eglash , Denae Ford , Daniel Gardner , Shamika Goddard , et al . 2021 . Keepin’it real about race in HCI . Interactions 28 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 28 – 33 . [ 109 ] Angela D . R . Smith , Ihudiya Finda Williams , and Alexandra To . 2021 . Racial Justice and Scholar - Activism . Networked Feminisms : Activist Assemblies and Digital Practices na , na ( 2021 ) , 205 . [ 110 ] Rachel Charlotte Smith , Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Daria Loi , Rogério Abreu de Paula , Asnath Paula Kambunga , Marly Muudeni Samuel , and Tariq Za - man . 2021 . Decolonizing design practices : towards pluriversality . In Ex - tended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput - ing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 5 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411763 . 3441334 [ 111 ] Clay Spinuzzi . 2005 . The methodology of participatory design . Technical com - munication 52 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 163 – 174 . https : / / repositories . lib . utexas . edu / bitstream / handle / 2152 / 28277 / SpinuzziTheMethodologyOfParticipatoryDesign . pdf [ 112 ] Denny L Starks , Tawanna Dillahunt , and Oliver L Haimson . 2019 . Designing technology to support safety for transgender women & non - binary people of color . In Companion Publication of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2019 Companion . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 289 – 294 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3301019 . 3323898 [ 113 ] Brittany Sutton . 2021 . Healing the Hearts of Healers : A Framework to Cultivate Flourishing and Combat Burnout in Healthcare . MS Thesis na , na ( 2021 ) , 1 – 51 . https : / / repository . upenn . edu / cgi / viewcontent . cgi ? article = 1218 & context = mapp _ capstone [ 114 ] Jasper Tran O’Leary , Sara Zewde , Jennifer Mankof , and Daniela K Rosner . 2019 . Who gets to future ? Race , representation , and design methods in Africatown . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . [ 115 ] Ranalda L Tsosie , Anne D Grant , Jennifer Harrington , Ke Wu , Aaron Thomas , Stephan Chase , D’Shane Barnett , Salena Beaumont Hill , Annjeanette Bel - court , Blakely Brown , et al . 2022 . The Six Rs of Indigenous Research . Tribal college journal of American Indian higher education 33 , 4 ( 2022 ) , 4 . https : / / tribalcollegejournal . org / the - six - rs - of - indigenous - research / [ 116 ] Eve Tuck . 2009 . Suspending damage : A letter to communities . Harvard educational review 79 , 3 ( 2009 ) , 409 – 428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17763 / haer . 79 . 3 . n0016675661t3n15 [ 117 ] Morgan Vigil - Hayes , Ann Futterman Collier , Shelby Hagemann , Giovanni Castillo , Keller Mikkelson , Joshua Dingman , Andrew Muñoz , Jade Luther , and Alexandra McLaughlin . 2021 . Integrating cultural relevance into a be - havioral mHealth intervention for Native American youth . Proceedings of the ACM on human - computer interaction 5 , CSCW1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 29 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3449239 [ 118 ] Bo Westerlund . 2016 . The Use of the Absent and Othering in Design and Critical Analysis of PD Activities . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops - Volume 2 ( Aarhus , Denmark ) ( PDC ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 29 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2948076 . 2948082 [ 119 ] Lisa Wiese , Anna Pohlmeyer , and Paul Hekkert . 2019 . Activities as a Gateway to Sustained Subjective Well - Being Mediated by Products . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference ( San Diego , CA , USA ) ( DIS ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 85 – 97 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3322276 . 3322297 [ 120 ] Woodrow W Winchester III . 2019 . Engaging the black ethos : afrofuturism as a design lens for inclusive technological innovation . Journal of Futures Studies 24 , 2 ( 2019 ) , 55 – 62 . https : / / jfsdigital . org / articles - and - essays / vol - 24 - no - 2 - december - 2019 / engaging - the - black - ethos - afrofuturism - as - a - design - lens - for - inclusive - technological - innovation / [ 121 ] Pamela J Wisniewski , Neha Kumar , Christine Bassem , Sarah Clinch , Susan M Dray , Geraldine Fitzpatrick , Clif Lampe , Michael Muller , and Anicia N Peters . 2018 . Intersectionality as a Lens to Promote Equity and Inclusivity within SIGCHI . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3186324 [ 122 ] Christine T Wolf , Mariam Asad , and Lynn S Dombrowski . 2022 . Designing within Capitalism . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 439 – 453 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3532106 . 3533559 [ 123 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Carl DiSalvo , Neha Kumar , and Betsy DiSalvo . 2020 . Culture in Action : Unpacking Capacities to Inform Assets - Based Design . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376329 [ 124 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Sheena Erete , Aakash Gautam , Azra Ismail , Neha Kumar , Lucy Pei , Wendy Roldan , Veronica Ahumada - Newhart , Karla Badillo - Urquiola , J Maya Hernandez , et al . 2022 . Elevating strengths and capacities : the diferent shades of assets - based design in HCI . Interactions 29 , 5 ( 2022 ) , 28 – 33 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3549068 [ 125 ] Marisol Wong - Villacres , Arkadeep Kumar , Aditya Vishwanath , Naveena Karusala , Betsy DiSalvo , and Neha Kumar . 2018 . Designing for intersections . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 45 – 58 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196794 [ 126 ] J Woodward , J South , S Coan , AM Bagnall , and S Rippon . 2021 . Asset Based Community Development : a review of current evidence . unpublished na , na ( 2021 ) , na . https : / / eprints . leedsbeckett . ac . uk / id / eprint / 7641 / [ 127 ] Janan P Wyatt and Gifty G Ampadu . 2022 . Reclaiming self - care : self - care as a social justice tool for Black wellness . Community Mental Health Journal 58 , 2 ( 2022 ) , 213 – 221 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10597 - 021 - 00884 - 9 [ 128 ] JungKyoon Yoon , Shuran Li , Yu Hao , and Chajoong Kim . 2019 . Towards emo - tional well - being by design : 17 opportunities for emotion regulation for user - centered healthcare design . In Proceedings of the 13th EAI International Con - ference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 351 – 355 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3329189 . 3329227 [ 129 ] Tara J Yosso . 2016 . Whose culture has capital ? : A critical race theory discussion of community cultural wealth . In Critical race theory in education . Routledge , USA , 113 – 136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1361332052000341006 [ 130 ] Inc . Zen Compass . 2022 . LIBERATE . CX . https : / / apps . apple . com / us / app / liberate - cx / id1451620569 Accessed version 1 . 1 . 33 : 2022 - 07 - 26 . 933