Minimal C - structure : Rethinking Projection in Phrase Structure Joseph Lovestrand University of Oxford John J . Lowe University of Oxford Proceedings of the LFG’17 Conference University of Konstanz Miriam Butt , Tracy Holloway King ( Editors ) 2017 CSLI Publications pages 285 – 305 http : / / csli - publications . stanford . edu / LFG / 2017 Keywords : constituent - structure , phrase structure , projecting nodes , non - branching nodes , XLE Lovestrand , Joseph , & Lowe , John J . ( 2017 ) . Minimal C - structure : Rethinking Projection in Phrase Structure . In Butt , Miriam , & King , Tracy Holloway ( Eds . ) : Proceedings of the LFG’17 Conference , University of Konstanz ( pp . 285 – 305 ) . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Abstract This paper addresses the formal properties of constituent structure ( c - structure ) . We demonstrate inadequacies in the formalization of traditional X (cid:48) theory by Bresnan ( 2001 ) and Bresnan et al . ( 2016 ) , and in the alternative proposal of Marcotte ( 2014 ) . We propose “minimal c - structure” as a new ap - proach to phrase structure within Lexical - Functional Grammar , which almost entirely eliminates non - branching nodes , and neatly captures the distinction between projecting and non - projecting words . Our proposal is fully formal - ized , and has been successfully tested by an XLE implementation . 1 Introduction In Lexical - Functional Grammar ( LFG ) , constraints on surface phrasal constituency are expressed in terms of phrase structure rules and represented by tree diagrams : “A commonly used representation of c - structure is the context - free phrase struc - ture tree , deﬁned by context - free phrase structure rules augmented by regular ex - pressions” ( Bresnan 2001 : 44 ) . The primitive elements in c - structure are nodes , labelled according to syntactic category and projection level . Our concern in this paper is the representation of projection level . 1 In this paper we show that ex - isting formalizations of phrase structure in LFG are both inadequate and license superﬂuous structure . We propose a new formalization of phrase structure which eliminates redundancy while also capturing the full variety of phrase structures assumed in LFG . Section 2 summarizes the formalization of X (cid:48) - theoretic phrase structure pro - posed in Bresnan ( 2001 ) , unmodiﬁed in Bresnan et al . ( 2016 ) . Section 3 reviews a recent proposal by Marcotte ( 2014 ) to remove the notion of levels of structure from the formal properties of c - structure . Section 4 proposes a new formalization of phrase structure . Section 5 discusses further implications of our approach . A partial grammar for English based on our XLE ( Crouch et al . 2011 ) implementation is provided in the appendix . 2 Current assumptions in LFG We take Bresnan ( 2001 ; unmodiﬁed in Bresnan et al . 2016 ) as representative of standard assumptions regarding the formal properties of c - structure . Bresnan ( 2001 : 100 ) describes the formal properties of c - structure nodes : “Formally , X (cid:48) categories † Thanks to Mary Dalrymple and the University of Oxford Syntax Working Group ( June 8 , 2016 ) for feedback on these ideas in their early stages , to attendees of SE - LFG23 ( 13 May 2017 ) , in par - ticular Adam Przepiórkowski , for further constructive criticism , and also to the audience at LFG17 , Konstanz ( 25 July 2017 ) , in particular Ron Kaplan , Doug Arnold , John Payne and Peter Sells . 1 Syntactic category labels , such as N ( oun ) , V ( erb ) , P ( reposition ) , D ( eterminer ) , etc . , can be treated as atomic or can be decomposed into features ( Bresnan 2001 , Dalrymple 2017 ) ; syntactic categories are not the focus of this paper , and we will assume an atomic approach for simplicity . 286 can be analyzed as triples consisting of a categorical feature matrix , a level of structure , and a third , privative feature F , which ﬂags a category as ‘function’ ( F ) or unspeciﬁed as to function ( lexical ) . ” The “level of structure” feature , which we call BAR following Andrews & Manning ( 1999 ) , has three values : 0 , 1 , 2 . These digits each correspond to a level of structure which is represented notationally us - ing the traditional X - bar symbols : X 0 for [ BAR 0 ] , X (cid:48) for [ BAR 1 ] , and XP for [ BAR 2 ] . The use of integers in this context implies that , in an endocentric projection , a mother must have a BAR value higher than its daughter . 2 The question of domi - nance is not discussed formally by Bresnan , but the familiar templatic description of X - bar principles ( 1 ) makes it clear that some additional mechanism is intended to enforce the dominance sequence . ( 1 ) a . Speciﬁer phrase structure rule XP → X (cid:48) , YP b . Complement phrase structure rule X (cid:48) → X 0 , ZP Marcotte ( 2014 ) criticizes this lack of formalization of dominance : “This dom - inance sequence is implied by the use of integers in the feature nomenclature , but does not constitute a formal requirement . ” That is , we intuitively know that 2 is above 1 , but this does not come for free in the formal system . The model put forward by Bresnan ( 2001 ) seems straightforward and intuitive , but it does not capture the diversity of structures used in descriptive analyses , and results in the postulation of unnecessary ( and undesirable ) structure , which can only be eliminated by the postulation of additional complications to the system . In the following subsections we discuss the main shortcomings of Bresnan’s proposal . 2 . 1 Non - projecting words Bresnan et al . ( 2016 ) differ in their theory of c - structure from Bresnan ( 2001 ) by incorporating the concept of non - projecting categories , as developed primarily by Toivonen ( 2003 ) . Non - projecting categories differ from projecting categories in that they do not project any levels of structure , but are similar in being ( potentially ) preterminal nodes . They are technically not endocentric , and do not license any complement or speciﬁer positions . In the current conception of non - projecting words , they only interact with the phrase structure through adjunction . Toivo - nen ( 2003 ) limits adjunction of non - projecting words to projecting heads ( X 0 ) . However , others have proposed allowing such adjunction to another non - projecting word or to a maximal phrase level ( XP ) ( Spencer 2005 , Arnold & Sadler 2013 ) . The close relation between non - projecting categories and zero - level project - ing categories is evidenced by the notation : Toivonen ( 2003 ) proposes that X 0 be 2 The formal properties of exocentric structures are not discussed by Bresnan ( 2001 ) . We provide a formal analysis of exocentric structures in § 5 . 2 . 287 used to represent a preterminal ( i . e . BAR 0 ) projecting node , ˆX to represent a non - projecting node , and X as a cover for all zero level categories . Bresnan et al . ( 2016 ) incorporate the concept and notation of non - projecting categories into the theory of c - structure , but do not revise the formal analysis of c - structure nodes to account for this new node type . What is the BAR value of a non - projecting node ? Since non - projecting nodes are preterminal , they might be considered to have a BAR value of 0 ( as implied by their grouping with X 0 under the cover X ) . But if the BAR of a non - projecting node is 0 , how is it distinguished formally from a projecting head ? Bresnan et al . ( 2016 ) provide no formal account . 2 . 2 One - level projections Some versions of X - bar theory assume that all categories project the same num - ber of levels of structure . Kornai & Pullum ( 1990 ) call this “Uniformity” . Unless otherwise stated , it is normally assumed that all categories have two levels of pro - jection . 3 In practice , Uniformity is not part of the LFG version of X - bar theory . For example , Bresnan ( 2001 : 127 ) mentions in passing that the “speciﬁer of IP is taken to be null ( omitted ) in Welsh , as a parametric choice . ” The structure given is represented in ( 2 ) . In this structure , a head X 0 is immediately dominated by a maximal projection node , XP . 4 ( 2 ) Single - level endocentric structure ( Bresnan 2001 : 127 ) : IP S I 0 This “parametric choice” of allowing one or two levels of structure in an en - docentric projection has not been formalized . The mother node of a one - level en - docentric structure must share some property with the mother node of a two - level endocentric structure ; this is represented , but not formalized , by the ‘ - P’ element of the node label . But in formal terms , what is the BAR of the XP in a one - level structure ? If its BAR is 1 , it would be formally impossible to select the class of maximal projections . Presumably , since it is represented by XP , its BAR is 2 . But this would have interesting consequences in regard to the question of dominance sequence discussed above . In this system , a node whose BAR is 0 can apparently be immediately dominated by a node whose BAR is 2 . So the dominance sequence implied by the integer values of BAR does not have to be sequential . 5 Just as there 3 The assumption that all syntactic heads must project two levels of structure appears to have become the X - bar standard assumption with the publication of Chomsky ( 1986 ) . There were a variety of earlier proposals , e . g . , three levels ( Jackendoff 1977 ) or one level for lexical categories and two levels for functional categories ( Fukui 1986 ) . See Muysken ( 1982 ) for an overview . 4 In other places , Bresnan allows similar structures as an effect of Economy of Expression ( § 2 . 3 ) . The case under discussion here involves a structure that will never have a mid - level node that could be subject to the constraints of Economy of Expression . 5 Kornai & Pullum ( 1990 : 28 ) note that many linguists have been inconsistent on this point vio - lating what they call “Succession” . 288 is a need for formal constraints on the dominance sequence ( such that [ BAR 1 ] cannot dominate [ BAR 2 ] ) , there is also a need for formal constraints that allow the non - sequential dominance sequence ( such that [ BAR 2 ] can dominate [ BAR 0 ] ) . No such constraints are proposed or formalized by Bresnan ( 2001 ) . 2 . 3 Non - branching structures In the standard approach to X (cid:48) theory , it is assumed that if a head can project struc - ture , the spine of that structure is present even when non - head elements of the struc - ture are not present . Kornai & Pullum ( 1990 ) call this assumption “Maximality” . In LFG , Maximality is enforced by phrase structure rules that only select maximal phrases ( XP ) as non - head daughters . The result of Maximality is that when a head which can potentially co - occur with a complement and speciﬁer appears alone in a constituent , its structure must be analyzed with at least two non - branching nodes , like the AP in ( 3 ) . Note that the NP in ( 3 ) also has one non - branching node since there is no complement phrase . ( 3 ) Non - branching nodes ( Bresnan et al . 2016 : 90 ) : NP N (cid:48) N 0 lions AP A (cid:48) A big Given the principled objection to empty categories in LFG , 6 Maximality re - quires the assumption that all complement and speciﬁer positions can be optional . Dalrymple et al . ( 2015 ) call this type of optionality “Daughter Omission” . Bresnan generalizes Daughter Omission over all phrase structure rules . Dalrymple et al . ( 2015 : 386 - 388 ) point out that it is problematic to generalize Daughter Omis - sion since there are cases when a daughter node is best analyzed as obligatory . In addition , Kornai & Pullum ( 1990 : 31 , 46 ) state that there is essentially no an - alytical value in assuming Maximality if those levels can have non - branching ( or empty ) nodes . The assumption of Maximality is satisﬁed with no corresponding empirically - observable content . In other words , it is a non - falsiﬁable assumption . The non - branching nodes required by Maximality are in tension with a general principle of Economy of Expression . In the context of c - structure , Economy of Expression is a principle which states that , all else being equal , the smallest licit c - structure is the optimal one . This tension is noted by Jackendoff ( 1977 : 36 ) 6 Except perhaps as a “last resort” ( Bresnan et al . 2016 : 205 ) . 289 who writes that Maximality comes “at the expense of some otherwise superﬂuous structure . ” The intuition is that the c - structure in ( 3 ) would be better if it did not have non - branching nodes that do not contain any unique grammatical information other than their BAR . Bresnan ( 2001 : 91 ) develops this intuition into what Dalrymple et al . ( 2015 ) call “X (cid:48) Elision” . X (cid:48) Elision is a process of pruning all unnecessary nodes from a well - formed c - structure so that it is as small as possible . X (cid:48) Elision is therefore a complication of the grammar : it is a derivational process that , given an initial production of c - structures which are well - formed according to the phrase structure rules , then modiﬁes those c - structures in ways that cannot be derived via the phrase structure rules . Given this complication , the position of Dalrymple et al . ( 2015 ) is that a general principle of Economy of Expression is not satisfactory motivation for incorporating X (cid:48) Elision in the grammar . Our proposed theory of c - structure improves on both of these positions by rejecting Maximality . It allows phrase structure rules to produce trees that satisfy the Economy of Expression principle without requiring a secondary operation like X (cid:48) Elision . It also removes the need to assume a generalized version of Daughter Omission . ( See § 6 for discussion of optionality in our approach . ) 2 . 4 Conclusion Some of the issues in the proposals of Bresnan ( 2001 ) could technically be resolved without fundamental changes to the system , e . g . by adding a feature to indicate whether a node is projecting or not , and adding a metaconstraint to allow non - sequential dominance sequences . However , such a solution would fail to capture the generalizations and subtleties that will be represented in the formal analysis proposed in § 4 . For example , a feature indicating non - projecting status would also occur on all nodes of level 2 , without any explanation for why non - projecting words and XP nodes form this class . In addition to providing an elegant account of the issues in § 2 . 1 and § 2 . 2 , the formal analysis of § 4 also avoids the tension between Maximality and Economy of Expression highlighted in § 2 . 3 . 3 Marcotte ( 2014 ) Marcotte ( 2014 ) reviews three formal approaches to c - structure and syntactic cate - gories with a particular interest in the passing of information between nodes , such as the shared lexical ( or functional ) category features shared by a head and its mother . That particular problem is not addressed in this paper , but Marcotte’s pro - posal is of interest because it also revises Bresnan’s formal analysis of c - structure nodes . Marcotte attempts to simplify the formal properties of the system by re - moving the BAR feature and thus “allowing a reformulation of its insights with a reduced number of theoretical primitives . . . ” ( Marcotte 2014 : 426 ) . However , this simpliﬁcation results in a system which cannot account for some basic syntactic 290 structures . Marcotte’s proposal is to remove the BAR feature , and to instead deﬁne the relationships between nodes in terms of dominance relations and shared category features , which he deﬁnes in terms of “x - structure” . There are three basic deﬁni - tions that deﬁne types of nodes in c - structure : ( 4 ) a . P ROJECTING NODE : A node projects iff its x - structure is identical with its mother’s x - structure . Proj ( ∗ ) ⇐⇒ χ ( ∗ ) = χ ( M ( ∗ ) ) b . M AXIMAL PROJECTION : A node is a maximal projection iff it is not a projecting node . Max ( ∗ ) ⇐⇒ ¬ Proj ( ∗ ) c . T ERMINAL : A node is a terminal iff no node has it as a mother . 7 Term ( ∗ ) ⇐⇒ ¬∃ n . M ( n ) = ∗ In ( 4 ) , χ is a function from nodes to x - structures . M is the mother function from a node to its mother ; ∗ represents the current node , and n represents any other node . In this system , there are four types of nodes , roughly equivalent to X 0 , X (cid:48) , XP and ˆX . A projecting head ( ≈ X 0 ) is a node that meets the deﬁnitions of P ROJECTING NODE ( it has the same category as its mother ) and T ERMINAL ( it is not the mother of any node ) . 8 A maximal projection ( ≈ XP ) meets the deﬁnition of M AXIMAL PROJECTION ( it does not have a mother with identical features ) , and is not T ERMINAL . Intermediate nodes ( ≈ X (cid:48) ) meet the deﬁnition of P ROJECTING NODE , but not of T ERMINAL . A non - projecting node ( ≈ ˆX ) is both a M AXIMAL PROJECTION and a T ERMINAL . 9 Marcotte applies his approach to c - structure to the structure - function mapping principles , deﬁning default positions for subjects , objects , heads , etc . For example ( slightly simpliﬁed ) : ( 5 ) Marcotte ( 2014 ) “Endocentric c - to f - structure mappings” a . A projecting node shares the f - structure of its mother : Proj ( ∗ ) = ⇒ ↑ = ↓ b . A SUBJ is a DP daughter of IP : Max ( ∗ ) χ = D Max ( M ( ∗ ) ) χ ( M ( ∗ ) ) = I = ⇒ ( ↑ SUBJ ) = ↓ 7 Presumably this is an accurate correction of a typographical error in the original which reads “A node is a terminal iff it [ sic ] node has it as a mother . ” 8 Marcotte uses terminal to refer to what Bresnan calls a preterminal node . The lexical information at the bottom of the tree is not considered a node . 9 This proposal is strikingly similar to that of Muysken ( 1982 ) . Muyksen proposes eliminating bar levels and instead deﬁnes relationships in an endocentric projection in terms of two binary features : [ ± projection ] , [ ± maximal ] . Muysken’s [ + maximal ] is analogous to Marcotte’s M AXIMAL PRO - JECTION , and [ − maximal ] parallels P ROJECTING NODE . Muysken’s [ − projection ] is analogous to T ERMINAL , and [ + projection ] is similar to the non - Terminals . Muysken also discusses “non - projecting minor elements” . He deﬁnes these in the same way as X 0 : [ − projection , + maximal ] . 291 Notably absent , however , is any deﬁnition of adjunction . In adjunction struc - tures , the head and the mother have identical category features , just as in endocen - tric projection structures . The crucial difference between adjunction and projection is that in the former the head and its mother also share the same level of structure , while in the latter the mother has a higher level of structure . This distinction can - not be captured in Marcotte’s ( 2014 ) proposal , because he has no equivalent to Bresnan’s “level of structure” feature . In addition , XP adjunction structures ( as illustrated in ( 6 ) ) pose a practical problem for Marcotte’s deﬁnition of maximal phrases . In XP adjunction , a max - imal phrase ( XP ) is the mother of another maximal phrase of the same category features . Such a structure is not possible in Marcotte’s proposed system because , by deﬁnition , if a node’s mother has the same category features , that node cannot be a M AXIMAL PROJECTION . It is a P ROJECTING NODE . The adjunction of non - projecting categories also poses difﬁculties for Mar - cotte’s approach . For example , Arnold & Sadler ( 2013 ) propose that a non - project - ing node can adjoin to another non - projecting node , a possibility which permits an insightful account of prenominal modiﬁcation in English ( 7 ) . However , in Mar - cotte’s system , the modiﬁers very and happy would not count as non - projecting words . For Marcotte , a non - projecting word is both T ERMINAL and M AXIMAL . A M AXIMAL PROJECTION is deﬁned as a node that does not have the same category features as its mother , but in ( 7 ) both modiﬁers have the same category as their mother , so , by deﬁnition , they are P ROJECTING , not M AXIMAL . 10 In addition , the mother of the two modiﬁers is a M AXIMAL PROJECTION in Marcotte’s terms , but it is not T ERMINAL since it has a daughter node that shares the same features . Thus this node does not meet the deﬁnition of a non - projecting node either . ( 6 ) IP IP VP IP he likes V think DP D I NP Ann ( 7 ) NP N N people Â Â happy Â very Det those These are just two examples of a number of analytical roadblocks that arise when applying Marcotte ( 2014 ) ’s system to adjunction structures . It might be pos - sible to address some of these issues by modifying his system , but it is hard to see how this could be done without compromising the formal elegance that motivates 10 This example would not be a problem if , following e . g . Payne et al . ( 2010 ) , adjectives and adverbs were treated as part of separate c - structure categories . But the point remains valid , e . g . in the phrase those really very happy people the same problem would apply to the relationship between really and very . 292 Marcotte’s proposal . At the current time , it seems doubtful that any such attempt to entirely remove reference to levels of structure from the theory of projection is likely to be successful . 4 Minimal c - structure The facts and generalizations missed by both Bresnan’s and Marcotte’s approaches can be captured in relatively simple terms . Rather than abandoning reference to level of structure , as Marcotte ( 2014 ) does , we propose to split the “level of struc - ture” feature of Bresnan ( 2001 ) into two features , the interaction of which permits us to provide an insightful and efﬁcient model of c - structure . We call this approach “minimal c - structure” since it generates c - structures with the minimal number of levels of structure required to model constituency . Following Kaplan ( 1989 ) , syntactic category information and projection level are not directly encoded in c - structure , but are projected from c - structure nodes via a projection λ . That is , the traditional representation of Bresnan ( 2001 ) in ( 8 ) must be understood as a shorthand for something like ( 9 ) . ( 8 ) IP I (cid:48) NP ( 9 ) ∗ ∗ ∗ (cid:34) CAT I BAR 2 (cid:35) (cid:34) CAT N BAR 2 (cid:35) (cid:34) CAT I BAR 1 (cid:35) λ λ λ We refer to the projection of λ as the l - structure . Instead of one BAR feature , we assume two features : LEVEL or L , which represents the projection level of a particular node in a particular structure ; and PROJECTION or P , which represents the total number of levels of structure in the projection of the node . The values of L and P are integers , i . e . 0 , 1 , 2 etc . The value 2 is a sufﬁcient maximum for English , but higher values may be required for other languages . We distinguish non - projecting words from projecting words by deﬁning the former as having no P feature . 11 We are not concerned with encoding category information via λ , only projection level information ( see fn . 1 ) . We therefore assume the following type of structures : ( 10 ) V (cid:34) L 0 / 1 / 2 P 0 / 1 / 2 (cid:35) λ 11 Unlike previous works on non - projecting words , we do not restrict non - projecting words to adjunction structures . A node with no P value can either be adjoined or selected as the speciﬁer complement of a phrase structure rule . In this way our analysis provides a systematic account of the c - structure of what are often called “minor categories” . 293 Although we understand the features L and P as features within the ‘l - structure’ projected from a node , for ease of representation we utilize an alternative notation whereby L and P values are shown as superscripts on c - structure nodes , separated by a slash . For example , V 0 / 1 refers to a node of category V whose l - structure includes the features < L , 0 > and < P , 1 > . 4 . 1 Annotated phrase structure rules and templates The L and P values for any node are determined by a combination of constraints which appear as annotations on c - structure nodes or in lexical entries . We assume that all words deﬁne their mother ( preterminal node ) as L = 0 . P values are not ( nor - mally ) determined lexically : it is not the case that a projecting head always projects the same number of levels of structure . Phrase structure rules can , but do not need to refer to L and P values directly . They can also refer to a relationship between L and P , for example by requiring that the L and P values for a particular node are identical ( our deﬁnition of a maximal projection ) . They can also specify relations between mother and daughter nodes , for example that the P value for a particu - lar node is identical to the mother node’s P value ( i . e . the head of an endocentric projection ) . There are a ﬁxed set of constraints required to model projection in c - structure , and for convenience we deﬁne these as templates , called as appropriate in the c - structure rules : ( 11 ) Basic templates : a . LP ≡ ( ∗ λ L ) = ( ∗ λ P ) g . LO ≡ ( ∗ λ L ) = 0 b . LPM ≡ ( ˆ ∗ λ L ) = ( ˆ ∗ λ P ) h . LOM ≡ ( ˆ ∗ λ L ) = 0 c . LUD ≡ ( ˆ ∗ λ L ) = ( ∗ λ L ) i . PXM ≡ ( ˆ ∗ λ P ) d . PUD ≡ ( ˆ ∗ λ P ) = ( ∗ λ P ) j . PNX ≡ ¬ ( ∗ λ P ) e . LIM ≡ ( ˆ ∗ λ L ) = 1 k . PNXM ≡ ¬ ( ˆ ∗ λ P ) f . LDOWN ≡ { ( ∗ λ L ) = 0 ∧ ( ˆ ∗ λ L ) = 1 | ( ∗ λ L ) = 1 ∧ ( ˆ ∗ λ L ) = 2 } The constraint LP requires that the node in question have identical values for L and P . LPM states the same constraint of the mother of the current node . LUD and PUD ensure that a daughter and its mother have identical L or P values respectively . LIM speciﬁes that the L value of the node’s mother has the value 1 . LDOWN models the change in projection level through an endocentric structure , ensuring that the L value of the node in question is one lower than the L value of its mother . LO and LOM specify the value 0 for the feature L respectively of a node or its mother . PXM is an existential constraint , requiring the mother of a node to have a P feature . PNX and PNXM are negative existential constraints , requiring that a node or its mother respectively do not have a P feature . These last three constraints are relevant to the analysis of non - projecting words , since we deﬁne non - projecting words as lacking P features . The deﬁnition of LDOWN ( 11f ) requires a brief comment . Intuitively , we treat L and P values as integers , with the expected ordering relation , such that the principle 294 to be captured by LDOWN is the following : ( 12 ) LDOWN ≡ ( ∗ λ L ) = ( ˆ ∗ λ L ) − 1 However , l - structures are feature structures , and values such as 0 , 1 and 2 in a fea - ture structure are symbols , not natural numbers . There are various possibilities for effecting ordering relations between symbols ; for the purposes of our XLE imple - mentation , however , we adopted the simplest approach , replicating the arithmetic in ( 12 ) by stipulation , assuming that there are only three possible values for L . 12 We also intuitively want a system where the L value is never “greater than” the P value such as : ∀∗ λ , P ≥ L . Again , since our values are not natural numbers , this is not possible . Nor is it necessary : given the constraints in ( 11 ) and the assumption that the L value of all words is 0 , our system will never create a c - structure that violates this intuitive general constraint . Particular combinations of the constraints in ( 11 ) are associated with standard phrase structure notions , such as head or speciﬁer positions . We therefore deﬁne further templates which call relevant combinations of templates from ( 11 ) : ( 13 ) Complex templates : a . HEADX ≡ @ LDOWN ∧ @ PUD b . HEADA ≡ @ LUD ∧ @ PUD c . EXT ≡ @ LPM ∧ @ LP d . INT ≡ @ LIM ∧ @ LP e . NONPRJ ≡ @ LO ∧ @ PNX f . NONPRJM ≡ @ LOM ∧ @ PNXM g . PRJM ≡ @ LOM ∧ @ PXM h . NONPADJ ≡ @ LOM ∧ @ NONPRJ HEADX is the constraint set required for heads in traditional X (cid:48) - theoretic struc - tures , i . e . in speciﬁer and complement structures : such a head has an L value one lower than that of its mother , and a P value identical to that of its mother . HEADA applies to heads in adjunction and coordination structures : such heads have the same L and P values as their mothers . 13 The constraints introduced by EXT ap - ply to speciﬁers and adjuncts ( unless nonprojecting ) : they are maximal projections ( L = P ) and are daughters of maximal projections ( that this is true for adjuncts is discussed in § 5 . 1 ) . INT applies to complement positions ( unless nonprojecting ) : they are maximal projections which are daughters of a node with an L value 1 ( and therefore sisters of a head with < L , 0 > ) . NONPRJ requires that a node be nonproject - ing : its L value is 0 and it has no P feature . NONPRJM states the same requirement 12 It is of course unproblematic to license higher values for L by simply adding additional disjunc - tions to the deﬁnition of LDOWN . Given our formalism , licensing higher values for L and P does not mean those values necessarily occur , since values are determined bottom - up . 13 The deﬁnition of HEADA in ( 13b ) works unproblematically in XLE , but would need to be com - plicated to work within the formal description of LFG given by Kaplan & Bresnan ( 1982 ) ; this is discussed further in § 5 . 2 . 295 of the mother node ; this is used in the lexical entries of nonprojecting words . PRJM states that the mother node has an L value of 0 and has a P feature ; this is used in the lexical entries of projecting words . NONPADJ applies to nonprojecting ad - juncts , which we assume can adjoin , in English , only to nodes with an L value of 0 . We can therefore represent the major types of phrase structure in the following way : ( 14 ) a . Speciﬁer rule : X → Y @ EXT X @ HEADX b . Complement rule : X → X @ HEADX Y @ INT c . ‘XP’ adjunction : X → X @ HEADA Y @ EXT d . Conjunction : X → X @ HEADA Cnj @ NONPRJ X @ HEADA e . Non - proj . adj . : X → Y @ NONPADJ X @ HEADA These complex templates also provide a mechanism for retaining the structure - function association principles of Bresnan ( 2001 ) . Nodes annotated with @ HEADX and @ HEADA are functional heads ( ↑ = ↓ ) . Complements are annotated with @ INT and can be associated with the appropriate grammatical functions . Speciﬁer and adjunct nodes are annotated with @ EXT , and can e . g . be associated with the gram - maticalized discourse functions or adjunct functions . 4 . 2 Illustration As an illustration of minimal c - structure , we give in ( 15 ) the necessary phrase struc - ture rules to derive the English sentence The small dog eats biscuits . The lexical entries supply category information and the template call @ PRJM , for projecting words , or @ NONPRJM , for nonprojecting words ( see the appendix ) . The result is the phrase structure in ( 16 ) . ( 15 ) a . I → N ( ↑ SUBJ ) = ↓ @ EXT { I ↑ = ↓ @ HEADX | V ↑ = ↓ @ INT } b . V → V ↑ = ↓ @ HEADX N ( ↑ OBJ ) = ↓ @ INT c . N → D ↑ = ↓ @ EXT N ↑ = ↓ @ HEADX 296 d . N → A ↓∈ ( ↑ ADJ ) @ NONPADJ N ↑ = ↓ @ HEADA ( 16 ) I 1 / 1 V 1 / 1 N 0 / 0 biscuits V 0 / 1 eats N 1 / 1 N 0 / 1 N 0 / 1 dog A 0 / small D 0 / 0 the This tree has only nine nodes , and no non - branching nodes , compared with a standard X (cid:48) - theoretic tree following the pattern in ( 3 ) , which would have at least 14 nodes including at least 5 non - branching nodes . The LEVEL value is determined from the bottom up , with all words specifying L = 0 of their preterminal node . The PROJECTION value is determined by the number of projection levels in the phrase . A projecting head is permitted to have two , one or even zero levels of structure in any given c - structure . Here , dog is immediately dominated by a node N 0 / 1 , while biscuits is immediately dominated by a node N 0 / 0 : the difference is that dog heads a complex phrase which includes a speciﬁer , while biscuits is the only word in its phrase . There are no superﬂuous levels of structure : the single node dominating biscuits is both the maximal projection and the preterminal node of this phrase . Non - projecting words are distinguished from projecting words by not having a PROJECTION feature . The PROJECTION value for all other nodes is determined by annotations on phrase structure rules . The ‘dominance constraint’ ( e . g . , that a node with LEVEL value 1 cannot be the mother of a head with a value of 2 ) is formally constrained in the phrase structure rules . The traditional notion of a ‘maximal projection’ remains , deﬁned as L = P ; the traditional notion of a ( pre ) terminal node remains , as L = 0 . As with biscuits in ( 16 ) , these notions are not mutually exclusive . Note that despite our radically re - duced structure , our proposal also retains the notions of speciﬁer , complement and adjunct , licensing the standard structure - function mapping principles . Interestingly , speciﬁer , complement and adjunct structures are not necessarily mutually exclusive : the top node in ( 16 ) has both a speciﬁer daughter and a com - plement daughter . Only maximal projections ( L = P ) can have speciﬁer daughters ; only nodes with the feature L = 1 can have complement daughters ; the node I 1 / 1 satisﬁes both constraints simultaneously . 14 14 Note that such possibilities have to be speciﬁcally licensed , as in ( 15a ) : they do not fall out directly from the phrase structure templates in ( 14 ) . 297 4 . 3 Nonprojecting categories A key requirement of our model is that it appropriately capture the difference be - tween projecting and non - projecting categories , something which both Bresnan ( 2001 ) and Marcotte ( 2014 ) fail to achieve . We have modelled this with respect to adjectives , assuming that prenominal adjectives in English are non - projecting , but that in other positions adjectives can project phrases . We assume that adjec - tives which can appear in both prenominal and other positions have both projecting and non - projecting variants , but that adjectives such as former are non - projecting only ( since they can only appear prenominally ) and that adjectives such as asleep are projecting only ( since they cannot appear prenominally ) . Our model correctly captures the grammaticality / ungrammaticality of the following examples : ( 17 ) a . The small dog eats biscuits . b . The dog is small . c . The former president eats biscuits . d . * The president is former . e . * The asleep dog eats biscuits . f . The dog is asleep . Note that in our model , the inability of nonprojecting words to take speciﬁers , phrasal adjuncts and complements does not have to be stipulated , but falls out of the templates given in ( 13 ) . Speciﬁers and phrasal adjuncts require their mother to have identical L and P values , while complements require their mother to have L = 1 ; nonprojecting nodes are necessarily L = 0 and lack a P value , so cannot take daughters with such requirements . 5 Two further implications of minimal c - structure In addition to providing an improved formalization of issues that have been dealt with in previous work , minimal c - structure also provides a natural explanation of why X (cid:48) adjunction is not possible , and allows a formalization of the exocentric category S . 5 . 1 X (cid:48) adjunction Adjunction is a perennial problem for X (cid:48) theoretic approaches to phrase structure . We can distinguish three different types of adjunction in traditional X (cid:48) notation : adjunction to XP , adjunction to X (cid:48) , and adjunction to X 0 . We assume adjunction to X 0 is restricted to non - projecting categories . Let us see how to translate this three - way distinction into our model . XP ad - junction means adjunction to nodes with the L / P values 2 / 2 , 1 / 1 or 0 / 0 , i . e . L = P . 15 15 And , of course , 3 / 3 etc . , if more than two levels of projection are admitted . 298 Adjunction of non - projecting categories to zero - level or non - projecting nodes is adjunction to 0 / 0 , 0 / 1 , 0 / 2 or 0 / , i . e . L = 0 . Both of these are unproblematic , and are formalized in ( 14 ) above making use of independently required templates . X (cid:48) adjunction , however , is impossible to formalize in minimal c - structure . In - tuitively , X (cid:48) adjunction prevents an adjunct from occurring closer to the head than its complement , or further from the head than its speciﬁer . It is impossible to select a set of L and P values which uniquely identiﬁes such a position . In the tree in ( 18 ) , the adjunct Q is adjoined in the equivalent of an X (cid:48) position ; the node it is adjoined to has the projection features 1 / 2 . However , this is not the only possibility . In ( 19 ) , an adjunct Q is adjoined above the complement , but no speciﬁer is present . Since the L and P values are not ﬁxed , in this structure the adjunct is adjoined to a node with the features 1 / 1 . The tree in ( 20 ) is also a type of X (cid:48) adjunction , only in this case there is no complement present ; here the adjunct attaches to a node with the features 0 / 1 . The problem is that adjunction to 1 / 1 , which is required for ( 19 ) , would be XP adjunction in ( 20 ) , since the adjunct would appear higher than the speciﬁer , and at the same time adjunction to 0 / 1 , which is required for ( 20 ) , would license adjunction between head and complement in ( 19 ) . Thus it is not possible to deﬁne a set of L / P values which would capture the intuition of ‘X (cid:48) adjunction’ . ( 18 ) X 2 / 2 Y 0 / 0 speciﬁer X 1 / 2 Q 0 / 0 adjunct X 1 / 2 Z 0 / 0 complement X 0 / 2 head ( 19 ) X 1 / 1 Q 0 / 0 adjunct X 1 / 1 Z 0 / 0 complement X 0 / 1 head ( 20 ) X 1 / 1 Y 0 / 0 speciﬁer X 0 / 1 Q 0 / 0 adjunct X 0 / 1 head We take the impossibility of ‘X (cid:48) adjunction’ as a positive result , since a wealth of research in the last 30 years has shown that there is little or no evidence for processes which make speciﬁc reference to intermediate levels . 16 We therefore follow Toivonen ( 2003 ) in assuming the principle of “adjunction identity” , that in adjunction “same adjoins to same” . 16 Early arguments in Travis ( 1984 ) , see also Carnie ( 2000 , 2010 ) . 299 5 . 2 Exocentric ‘S’ Thus far we have discussed only endocentric projections . However , exocentric categories such as S are widely utilized in LFG . Our proposal not only admits ex - ocentric categories , but even provides an insightful account of them . For illustra - tive purposes , consider a language similar to Welsh ( Sadler 1997 ) , with top - level clausal structure as in ( 2 ) . In our system , S can be introduced as a complement daughter , just like any other complement : ( 21 ) I → I ↑ = ↓ @ HEADX S ↑ = ↓ @ INT Since no daughter of S is the head , or a speciﬁer , or a complement , or indeed an adjunct , none of the templates above apply to any of the daughter nodes . We can assume that daughters of S may be speciﬁed as necessarily projecting , for example , but the point is no daughter will make any speciﬁcation about the L / P values of S . ( 22 ) S → N @ LP V @ LP or just X * @ LP In XLE , the speciﬁcation L = P is satisﬁed if ¬ L ∧ ¬ P . This results in : ( 23 ) I 1 / 1 S V 0 / 0 verb N 0 / 0 subject I 0 / 1 aux Thus as an exocentric category , S lacks L / P values . We take this to be the deﬁnition of an exocentric category in our system . 17 Since the features L and P are features to do with endocentric projection , this is intuitively satisfying . This works in XLE , but given the deﬁnition of LP in ( 11a ) , it does not work in the theory . According to Kaplan & Bresnan ( 1982 ) , a speciﬁcation like L = P requires those features to exist , and if values for those features are not found , the derivation will fail . Under those assumptions , a practical solution is simply to rede - ﬁne the template LP for languages which license exocentric structures as follows : 18 ( 24 ) LP ≡ { ( ∗ λ L ) = ( ∗ λ P ) | ¬ ( ∗ λ L ) ∧ ¬ ( ∗ λ P ) } 17 Note that multiple exocentric categories are possible , distinguished by category label ( cf . fn . 1 ) . 18 It is for the same reason that HEADA may have to be complicated , as discussed in fn . 13 . Since HEADA calls PUD , and we want this to apply even if there is no P value , we would need : HEADA ≡ @ LUD ∧ { @ PUD | [ @ PNX ∧ @ PNXM ] } . 300 6 Conclusion Minimal c - structure is a more theoretically and formally precise approach to writ - ing phrase structure rules in LFG . By writing l - structure templates below the nodes in phrase structure rules and the slash notation on nodes in c - structure trees , we can avoid the use of the outdated and formally ambiguous diacritics of previous versions of X - bar theory . Further implementation of minimal c - structure will test the coverage of the templates that have been proposed in this paper . If certain templates turn out to be universal , while others are fairly rare or language - speciﬁc , this may give us more insight into the nature of c - structure cross - linguistically . More study is still needed on the nature of optionality in minimal c - structure . Most optionality is trivial : if the complement of a verb is absent , for example , the phrase structure rule introducing it is simply not used ; there is therefore no need for the complement to be optional in the rule itself . In a binary structure of a head and one sister , this is unproblematic . In a ternary ( or larger ) structure where each sister of the head can be omitted , it is still relatively simple to avoid a non - branching structure where a head has no sisters , by means of a disjunction ( see fn . 19 ) . Optional heads and discontinuous constituents provide a further avenue for future investigation . One way to analyze optional heads is by means of disjunction , as in ( 15a ) in § 4 . 2 . While this may work well in the case of extended projections , it cannot be used to account for the type of optional heads found in discontinuous constituents . For example , Snijders ( 2012 ) analyzes an adjective separated from the noun it modiﬁes as the sole daughter of an N mother node . Here , the non - branching structure is necessary for indicating the category of the mother node , not for level of structure information . In such restricted cases , a non - branching node may be necessary , even under a minimal c - structure analysis . References Andrews , Avery D . & Christopher D . Manning . 1999 . Complex predicates and information spreading in LFG . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Arnold , Doug & Louisa Sadler . 2013 . Displaced dependent constructions . In Miriam Butt & Tracy Holloway King ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the LFG13 Con - ference , 48 – 68 . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Bresnan , Joan . 2001 . Lexical - functional syntax . Oxford : Blackwell . Bresnan , Joan , Ash Asudeh , Ida Toivonen & Stephen Wechsler . 2016 . Lexical - functional syntax . Oxford : Wiley - Blackwell . Second edition . Carnie , Andrew . 2000 . On the deﬁnition of X 0 and XP . Syntax 3 ( 2 ) . 59 – 106 . Carnie , Andrew . 2010 . Constituent structure . Oxford : Oxford University Press 2nd edn . Chomsky , Noam . 1986 . Barriers . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 301 Crouch , Dick , Mary Dalrymple , Ronald M . Kaplan , Tracy Holloway King , John T . Maxwell III & Paula Newman . 2011 . XLE documentation . Palo Alto Research Center , CA . http : / / www2 . parc . com / isl / groups / nltt / xle / doc / xle _ toc . html . Dalrymple , Mary . 2017 . Unlike phrase structure category coordination . To appear . Dalrymple , Mary , Ronald M . Kaplan & Tracy Holloway King . 2015 . Economy of expression as a principle of syntax . Journal of Language Modelling 3 ( 2 ) . 377 – 412 . Falk , Yehuda N . 2001 . Lexical - Functional Grammar : an introduction to parallel constraint - based syntax . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Fukui , N . 1986 . A theory of category projection and its applications : MIT disser - tation . Jackendoff , Ray . 1977 . ¯X Syntax : A Study of Phrase Structure . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kaplan , Ronald M . 1989 . The Formal Architecture of Lexical - Functional Gram - mar . In Chu - Ren Huang & Keh - Jiann Chen ( eds . ) , ROCLING II : Proceedings of the Computational Linguistics Conference , 3 – 18 . Tapei : The Association for Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing ( ACLCLP ) . Kaplan , Ronald M . & Joan Bresnan . 1982 . Lexical - Functional Grammar : A For - mal System for Grammatical Representation . In Joan Bresnan ( ed . ) , The Men - tal Representation of Grammatical Relations , 173 – 281 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Kornai , András & Geoffrey K . Pullum . 1990 . The X - bar theory of phrase structure . Language 66 . 24 – 50 . Marcotte , Jean - Philippe . 2014 . Syntactic categories in the correspondence archi - tecture . In Miriam Butt & Tracy Holloway King ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the LFG14 Conference , 408 – 428 . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Muysken , Pieter . 1982 . Parametrizing the notion “head” . Journal of Linguistic Research 2 ( 3 ) . 57 – 75 . Payne , John , Rodney Huddleston & Geoffrey K . Pullum . 2010 . The distribution and category status of adjectives and adverbs . Word Structure 3 ( 1 ) . 31 – 81 . Sadler , Louisa . 1997 . Clitics and the Structure - Function Mapping . In Miriam Butt & Tracy Holloway King ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the LFG97 Conference , Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Snijders , Liselotte . 2012 . Issues Concerning Constraints on Discontinuous NPs in Latin . In Miriam Butt & Tracy Holloway King ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the LFG12 Conference , 565 – 581 . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Spencer , Andrew . 2005 . Case in Hindi . In Miriam Butt & Tracy Holloway King ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the LFG05 Conference , 429 – 446 . Stanford , CA : CSLI Publications . Toivonen , Ida . 2003 . Non - projecting words : A case study of Swedish verbal parti - cles . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Travis , Lisa deMena . 1984 . Parameters and effects of word order variation : MIT dissertation . 302 Appendix To establish the viability of our “minimal” approach to c - structure , we imple - mented a mini - grammar of English in XLE . The implementation makes use of the ability to deﬁne additional projections in XLE : the projection ∗ λ we deﬁne as l : : * , with ˆ ∗ λ deﬁned as l : : M * . The implementation covers most of the basic grammatical structures of English , including embedded clauses , wh - question for - mation , copular clauses , coordination , and all kinds of modiﬁcation . It is loosely based on the English grammar in Falk ( 2001 ) , but assumes up to two levels of pro - jection for lexical categories . We give here a brief grammar for English based on our XLE implementation , and two additional c - structures , for illustration . Rules : C → N C @ EXT @ HEADX ( ↑ UDF ) = ↓ ↑ = ↓ ( ↑ UDF ) = ( ↑ UDFPATH ) C → C { I | V } @ HEADX @ INT ↑ = ↓ ↑ = ↓ I → { N | C | P } { I | V } @ EXT @ HEADX @ INT ( ↑ SUBJ ) = ↓ ↑ = ↓ ↑ = ↓ I → I V @ HEADX @ INT ↑ = ↓ ↑ = ↓ V → V ( N ) 19 ( N ) ( P ) ( C ) @ HEADX @ INT @ INT @ INT @ INT ↑ = ↓ ( ↑ OBJ ) = ↓ ( ↑ OBJ 2 ) = ↓ ( ↑ OBL ) = ↓ ( ↑ COMP ) = ↓ V → V { N | A } @ HEADX @ INT ↑ = ↓ ( ↑ PREDLINK ) = ↓ V → V { Adv | P } @ HEADA @ EXT ↑ = ↓ ↓ ∈ ( ↑ ADJ ) V → Adv V @ EXT @ HEADA ↓ ∈ ( ↑ ADJ ) ↑ = ↓ N → D N @ EXT @ HEADX ↑ = ↓ ↑ = ↓ N → N P @ HEADA @ EXT ↑ = ↓ ↓ ∈ ( ↑ ADJ ) N → Adj N @ NONPADJ @ HEADA ↓ ∈ ( ↑ ADJ ) ↑ = ↓ N → N ( P ) ( C ) @ HEADX @ INT @ INT ↑ = ↓ ( ↑ OBL ) = ↓ ( ↑ COMP ) = ↓ X → X Conj X @ HEADA @ NONPRJ @ HEADA ↓∈↑ ↑ = ↓ ↓∈↑ D → N D @ INT @ HEADX ( ↑ POSS ) = ↓ ↑ = ↓ ¬ ( ↑ SPEC ) Adj → Adj P @ HEADX @ INT ↑ = ↓ ( ↑ OBL ) = ↓ 19 Note that the optionality speciﬁed here is constrained in the XLE version so that at least one non - head daughter must appear . This is done by formulating this as a set of disjunctions : { V N ( N ) ( P ) ( C ) | V N ( P ) ( C ) | V P ( C ) | V C } . 303 Adj → Adv Adj @ NONPADJ @ HEADA ↓∈ ( ↑ ADJ ) ↑ = ↓ Adv → Adv Adv @ NONPADJ @ HEADA ↓∈ ( ↑ ADJ ) ↑ = ↓ P → P N @ HEADX @ INT ↑ = ↓ ( ↑ OBJ ) = ↓ Lexicon ( sample ) : Verbs : eat / eats V ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘eat < SUBJ , OBJ > ’ @ PRJM eating V ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘eat < SUBJ , OBJ > ’ ( ↑ VFORM ) = ING @ PRJM Copula : is / are I ( ↑ TENSE ) = PRES ( ↑ VFORM ) = c ING @ PRJM V ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘be < SUBJ , PLINK > ’ @ PRJM Auxiliaries : did I ( ↑ TENSE ) = PAST @ PRJM C ( ↑ TENSE ) = PAST ( ↑ QUEST ) = + @ PRJM Prepositions : to P ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘to < OBJ > ’ @ PRJM Conjunctions / complementizers : and Conj ( ↑ CONJFM ) = AND @ NONPRJM that C ( ↑ COMPFM ) = THAT @ PRJM Nouns : dog N ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘dog’ @ PRJM Determiners / pronouns : the D ( ↑ EXT ) = ‘the’ @ PRJM ’s D ( ↑ DEF ) = + ( ↑ POSS ) @ PRJM . what N ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘what’ @ PRJM D ( ↑ EXT ) = ‘what’ @ PRJM Adjectives : small A ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘small’ @ PRJM A ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘small’ @ NONPRJM asleep A ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘asleep’ @ PRJM former A ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘former’ @ NONPRJM Adverbs : very Adv ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘very’ @ NONPRJM quickly Adv ( ↑ PRED ) = ‘quickly’ @ PRJM 304 F i gu r e 1 : C - s t r u c t u r e s f o r f u r t h e r ill u s t r a ti o n I 1 / 1 V 1 / 1 C 1 / 1 I 2 / 2 I 1 / 2 V 1 / 1 A dv 0 / 0 A dv 0 / 0 qu i c k l y A dv 0 / v e r y V 1 / 1 N 1 / 1 N 0 / 1 b i s c u it s D 0 / t h e V 0 / 1 ea t i ng I 0 / 2 a r e N 0 / 0 N 0 / 0 dog s A 0 / fr i e nd l y C 0 / 1 t h a t V 0 / 1 b e li e v e s N 1 / 1 N 0 / 1 N 0 / 1 p r e s i d e n t A 0 / f o r m e r D 0 / t h e C 2 / 2 C 1 / 2 I 1 / 1 V 0 / 0 ea t N 1 / 1 N 1 / 1 N 0 / 1 N 0 / 1 p r e s i d e n t A 0 / f o r m e r D 0 / t h e C n j 0 / a nd N 1 / 1 N 0 / 1 N 0 / 1 dog A 0 / A 0 / s m a ll A dv 0 / v e r y D 0 / t h e C 0 / 2 d i d N 1 / 1 N 0 / 1 f ood D 0 / w h a t 305