1 Online Supplementary Material Mechanics and modeling of plant cell growth Anja Geitmann 1 , Joseph K . E . Ortega 2 1 Institut de recherche en biologie végétale , Département de sciences biologiques , Université de Montréal , Québec H1X 2B2 , Canada 2 Bioengineering Laboratory , Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Colorado Denver , Denver , Colorado 80217 - 3364 , USA Corresponding author : Geitmann , A . ( anja . geitmann @ umontreal . ca ) From Lockhart to the augmented growth equation Biophysical equations describing cell wall mechanics and expansive growth Expansive growth of algal , fungal and plant cells is the result of metabolic - mediated biochemical processes in conjunction with interrelated physical processes [ 1 ] . From a physical perspective , expansive growth of the cells of all of these evolutionary distant organisms can be viewed the same way . It is defined as a permanent increase in cell volume . Thus the cell wall must increase in surface area , A cw , and volume , V cw ( V cw = A cw τ cw , where τ cw is the wall thickness ) , because the volume of the cell wall chamber , V cwc , must equal the volume of cell contents , V cc , which it encloses . While V cw does not necessarily change at the same rate as A cw during the different developmental stages of a cell [ 2 ] , the overall tendency is a linear relationship between both parameters , as long as primary growth occurs . During expansive growth , the rate of increase in the volume of cell contents , d V cc / d t , is predominately the result of water uptake , i . e . d V cc / d t ≈ d V w / d t . The production and accumulation of active solutes within the cell membrane generates the osmotic pressure that drives the water uptake from the cell exterior to its interior . The driving force for water uptake is typically measured as the difference in the osmotic pressure inside ( π i ) and outside ( π o ) the cell membrane , i . e . , Δπ = π i - π o . The water uptake increases the volume of both the cell contents and the cell wall chamber . When the volume of the cell contents increases , the internal hydrostatic pressure ( P i ) increases because the cell wall resists being deformed . As P i increases to magnitudes larger than the external pressure ( P o ) it drives water out of the cell . The net water uptake rate is the 2 difference between the water flowing into the cell because of the osmotic pressure difference , Δπ , and the water flowing out of the cell because of the turgor pressure , P , which is defined as , P = P i – P o , i . e . Δπ - P . Thus an increase in P reduces the net water uptake rate , and at one magnitude of P the net water uptake will stop ( P = Δπ ) . The P produces stresses within the cell wall . The cell wall stretches ( deforms ) in response to these cell wall stresses and increases its surface area . The deformations are both irreversible ( plastic ) and reversible ( elastic ) . The assimilation of new cell wall materials into the deforming wall controls cell wall thickness , τ cw and increases the cell wall volume , V cw . The characteristics of the cell wall deformation , or its mechanical behavior , depend on the mechanical properties of the cell wall and its “biological” state . Equations relating expansive growth of plant cells to the rate of water uptake and cell wall extension were first published by Lockhart [ 3 ] . Equation 1 describes the relationship between the rate of increase in water volume and the net rate of water uptake ( in relative terms ) : ( d V / d t ) w / V w = L pr ( Δπ - P ) [ 1 ] ( rate of increase of water volume ) = ( net rate of water uptake ) The relative hydraulic conductance is defined as , L pr = L p A m / V w , and it is assumed that the solute reflection coefficient of the cell membrane is unity . Equation 2 describes the relationship between the rate of increase in the volume of the cell wall chamber and the rate of irreversible cell wall expansion ( in relative terms ) : ( d V / d t ) cwc / V cwc = φ ( P - P c ) [ 2 ] ( rate of increase of cell wall chamber volume ) = ( irreversible expansion rate ) The irreversible wall extensibility , φ , and the critical turgor pressure , P c , are biophysical variables to be determined for each cell . Equation 2 can be derived from the constitutive equation ( equation describing the stress - strain relationship ) for a viscous dashpot with a Bingham fluid , i . e . d e / d t = ( σ - σ c ) / μ , where d e / d t is the strain rate , σ is the stress , σ c is the critical stress , and μ is the dynamic viscosity of the Bingham fluid [ 4 ] . Recent theoretical research indicates that Eq . 2 can be obtained from the diagonal component of a more general tensor equation [ 5 ] that can model growth anisotropies such as phototropism and gravitropism [ 6 ] . During expansive growth , because the rate of increase in volume of the water is approximately equal to rate of increase in volume of the cell wall chamber , a third equation can be derived for the steady - state turgor pressure : P = ( L pr Δπ + φ P c ) / ( φ + L pr ) [ 3 ] 3 Equations 1 – 3 describe and model expansive growth of cells with walls when the turgor pressure is constant . Over the years , these equations ( Eqs 1 - 3 ) have been termed the Lockhart Equations . However , it is crucial to note that the Lockhart Equations ( Eqs 2 and 3 ) and its underlying constitutive equations ( viscous dashpot with a Bingham fluid ) cannot model the behavior exhibited in Figure S1a and S1b , because the underlying constitutive equation cannot model the observed exponential decay in stress or the associated exponential decay in turgor pressure . Subsequently , a more detailed and explicit conceptual model of the expansive growth process emerged , e . g . [ 7 , 8 ] . Experimental evidence demonstrates that during expansive growth , cell wall stresses relax ( decrease ) because ongoing biochemical processes loosen the cell wall , resulting in a decrease in stress that is observed in Figure S1a . The turgor pressure decreases ( Figure S1b ) in response to the decrease in cell wall stresses and produces an increase in net water uptake . The increase in net water uptake increases the turgor pressure , which in turn increases the cell wall stresses . Then as before , the cell wall stresses begin to relax because of ongoing cell wall loosening . This process is repeated continuously during expansive growth . The main experimental evidence that supports this iterative pressure relaxation and water uptake concept of expansive growth , is that the turgor pressure decays in growing cells with walls when the water uptake is eliminated and transpiration is suppressed ( e . g . [ 7 - 10 ] . The decay in turgor pressure ( Figure S1b ) results from a decrease in cell wall stresses by ongoing biochemical processes ( Figure S1a ) . The effect of biochemical processes on cell wall stresses can be illustrated by a pre - treatment with IAA ( auxin ) , which accelerates the decay of turgor pressure ( Figure S1b ) . This is consistent with the hormone ' s role in increasing expansive growth rate . Similarly , the stress decay rate increases in the cell wall after a light stimulus , a trigger that is known to increase the elongation growth rate [ 11 ] . Importantly , the Lockhart Equations ( Eqs 2 and 3 ) cannot model the decrease in turgor pressure ( pressure relaxation ) exhibited in Figure S1b , or the iterative pressure relaxation and water uptake process for expansive growth , because Eqs 2 and 3 are only valid for constant turgor pressure , i . e . P = constant or d P / d t = 0 . Specifically , Eq . 2 ( and its underlying viscoelastic model ) cannot model the stress relaxation and pressure relaxation results obtained from growing cells ( Figures S1a and b ) . Some excellent papers and recent reviews correctly describe the iterative pressure relaxation and water uptake conceptual model of expansive growth , and then refer to the Lockhart Equations which cannot model the pressure relaxation , i . e . the decrease in turgor 4 pressure . The Lockhart equations form the basis upon which most models are built , however , they have crucial shortcomings of being applicable only in situations when turgor is constant , and when water lost through transpiration is neglected or negligible . To model expansive growth of plant , algal and fungal cells in the more general cases , the Lockhart equations were augmented to account for changing turgor pressure and transpiration [ 4 , 12 ] . These augmented growth equations [ 13 , 14 ] have proven to be very useful in analyzing and interpreting the experimental results of growing algal cells ( e . g . [ 15 , 16 ] , fungal cells ( e . g . [ 10 , 12 , 17 - 19 ] , and plant organs ( e . g . [ 7 , 8 , 20 - 23 ] . It is apparent that a slightly more complex viscoelastic model and corresponding biophysical equation is needed . This was achieved by the biophysical equation , Eq . 4 which was derived from the constitutive equation for a Bingham - Maxwell viscoelastic model , i . e . d e / d t = ( σ - σ c ) / μ + ( d σ / d t ) / E , where E is the elastic modulus [ 4 ] . ( d V / d t ) cwc / V cwc = φ ( P - P c ) + ( 1 / ε ) d P / d t [ 4 ] ( rate of increase of cell wall chamber volume ) = ( irreversible expansion rate ) + ( elastic expansion rate ) Equation 4 is written in relative terms . The added term , ( 1 / ε ) d P / d t , describes the elastic deformation of the cell wall during expansion . Importantly , this biophysical equation accommodates the condition when the turgor pressure is changing . Hence , Equation 4 , and its corresponding constitutive equation for a Bingham - Maxwell viscoelastic model , can model the turgor pressure behavior and stress behavior exhibited by growing plant and fungal cell walls ( Figures S1a and b ) . Another biophysical equation ( in relative terms ) can be derived to account for the case when water is lost to transpiration [ 12 ] . ( d V / d t ) w / V w = L pr ( Δπ - P ) - ( d T / d t ) w / V w [ 5 ] ( rate of increase of water volume ) = ( net rate of water uptake ) – ( transpiration rate ) The volume of water lost via transpiration is T . Again , because ( d V / d t ) cwc / V cwc = ( d V / d t ) w / V w another equation can be obtained for the rate of change of turgor pressure [ 1 , 14 ] . d P / d t = ε { L pr ( Δπ - P ) - ( d T / d t ) w / V w - φ ( P - P c ) } [ 6 ] ( rate of change of P ) ∝ ( net rate of water uptake ) – ( transpiration rate ) – ( irreversible expansion rate ) Equation 6 explicitly shows how the turgor pressure changes when there is a change in the net rate of water uptake , and / or the transpiration rate , and / or the expansive growth rate . As an example of its utility , Eq . 6 explicitly shows that when the water uptake is eliminated , L pr ( Δπ - P ) = 0 , and transpiration is suppressed , ( d T / d t ) w / V w = 0 , the governing biophysical equation for d P / d t and its solution , P ( t ) , are obtained for a pressure relaxation test [ 4 , 7 ] : 5 d P / d t = - ε φ ( P - P c ) and P ( t ) = ( P i – P c ) exp ( - ε φ t ) + P c [ 7 ] The turgor pressure behavior , P ( t ) , describes the exponential pressure decay from P i to P c , and describes the pressure decay obtained experimentally for both plant and fungal cells ( Figure S1b ) . Equations 4 , 5 , and 6 have been termed the augmented growth equations [ 1 , 4 , 12 - 14 , 24 ] . Some algal , fungal , and plant cells grow predominately in length , i . e . exhibit elongation growth . Equations 4 and 5 can be adapted for elongation growth [ 1 , 15 ] : d L / d t = m ( P – P c ) + ( L o / ε L ) d P / d t [ 8 ] ( elongation rate ) = ( irreversible extension rate ) + ( elastic extension rate ) ( d L / d t ) w A c = L p A m ( Δπ – P ) – ( d T / d t ) w [ 9 ] ( rate of change in water volume ) = ( net rate of water uptake ) – ( volumetric transpiration rate ) Where L is the length of the cell , m is the longitudinal irreversible wall extensibility , L o is the initial length of the cell , and ε L is the longitudinal component of the volumetric elastic modulus ( longitudinal volumetric elastic modulus ) . It is noted that during expansive growth the rate of increase of the volume of the cell contents is essentially the rate of increase in water volume . Equation 8 was shown to describe the elongation of the internode cells of C . corallina ( Figure S1c ) and the sporangiophores of P . blakesleeanus before , during , and after a step - down and a step - up in turgor pressure . Again , it is important to note that the Lockhart Equations ( Eqs 2 and 3 ) cannot model the elongation behavior exhibited in Figure S1c . Equation 3 cannot model the step - down and step - up in turgor pressure ( Figure S1c , blue curve ) and Eq . 2 cannot model the observed recovered elastic extension ( nearly instantaneous decrease in length ) and elastic extension ( nearly instantaneous increase in length ) that is produced by the respective step - down and step - up in turgor pressure ( Figure S1c , red and green curves ) . As it is shown in Figure S1c , the second term in the augmented growth equation ( Eq . 8 ) is needed to model the elastic responses . Generally , the augmented growth equations have been used in short - scale time periods ( minutes to hours ) to analyze and interpret the experimental results of growing algal cells ( e . g . [ 15 , 16 ] , fungal cells ( e . g . [ 10 , 12 , 17 - 19 ] ) , and plant organs ( e . g . [ 7 , 8 , 20 - 23 ] ) . More recently , Lewicka [ 25 ] has extended their application to large - scale time periods ( days ) and the underlying viscoelastic models have been reviewed [ 26 ] . 6 Parameters A cw – surface area of the cell wall A m – surface area of the cell membrane e – strain d e / d t – strain rate E – longitudinal elastic modulus , or Young’s modulus L – length of the cell ( a variable ) L o – initial length of the cell ( a constant ) d L / d t – elongation rate L pr – relative hydraulic conductance of the cell membrane ; L = L p A m / V w L p – hydraulic conductivity of the cell membrane m – longitudinal irreversible wall extensibility P – turgor pressure , the difference in pressure inside and outside the cell ; P = P i – P o P c – critical turgor pressure , related to the critical stress , σ c , by geometry of the wall P i – hydrostatic pressure inside the cell P o – hydrostatic pressure outside the cell d P / d t – rate of change of turgor pressure t – time T – volume of water lost by transpiration ( d T / d t ) w – volumetric transpiration rate ( d T / d t ) w / V w – relative volumetric transpiration rate V cc – volume of the cell contents V cw – volume of the cell wall V cwc – volume of the cell wall chamber V w – volume of the water in the cell ( d V / d t ) cwc / V cwc – rate of increase of relative cell wall chamber volume ( d V / d t ) w / V w – rate of increase of relative water volume Y – yield threshold , related to the critical turgor pressure , P c ε – volumetric elastic modulus ε L – longitudinal component of the volumetric elastic modulus μ – dynamic viscosity Δπ – osmotic pressure difference inside and outside the cell ; Δπ = π i - π o π i – osmotic pressure inside the cell π o – osmotic pressure outside the cell σ – longitudinal stress σ c – critical longitudinal stress d σ / d t – longitudinal stress rate τ cw – thickness of the cell wall φ – irreversible wall extensibility Glossary Bingham fluid : A fluid that flows like a Newtonian fluid after a critical stress has been exceeded . 7 Constitutive equation : A mathematical equation relating the stress and the strain . Maxwell material : A material whose constitutive equation may be obtained from a Maxwell model which is viscous dashpot ( damper ) filled with a Newtonian fluid and an elastic spring connected in series . Newtonian fluid : Fluid whose stress versus rate of strain curve is linear and passes through the origin . The constant of proportionality is known as the dynamic viscosity . Young ' s modulus or elastic modulus : Measure of stiffness of an isotropic elastic material . The ratio of the stress and resulting strain , and can be determined experimentally from the slope of a stress - strain curve . References 1 Ortega , J . K . E . ( 2004 ) A quantitative biophysical perspective of expansive growth for cells with walls . In Recent Research Developments in Biophysics ( Pandalai , S . G . , Editor . eds . ) . pp . 297 - 324 , 2 Derbyshire , P . , Findlay , K . , McCann , M . C . , and Roberts , K . ( 2007 ) Cell elongation in Arabidopsis hypocotyls involves dynamic changes in cell wall thickness . J . Exp . Bot . 58 : 2079 – 2089 3 Lockhart , J . A . ( 1965 ) An analysis of irreversible plant cell elongation . J . Theor . Biol . 8 : 264 - 275 4 Ortega , J . K . E . ( 1985 ) Augmented equation for cell wall expansion . Plant Physiol . 79 : 318 - 320 5 Pietruszka , M . ( 2009 ) General proof of the validity of a new tensor equation of plant growth . J . Theor . Biol . 256 : 584 - 585 6 Pietruszka , M . and Lewicka , S . ( 2007 ) Anisotropic plant growth due to phototropism . J . Math . Biol . 54 : 45 - 55 7 Cosgrove , D . J . ( 1985 ) Cell wall yield properties of growing tissue ; evaluation by in vivo stress relaxation . Plant Physiol . 78 : 347 - 356 8 Cosgrove , D . J . ( 1987 ) Wall relaxation in growing stems : comparison of four species and assessment of measurement techniques . Planta 171 : 266 - 278 9 Boyer , J . , Cavalieri , A . , and Schulze , E . ( 1985 ) Control of the rate of cell enlargement : Excision , wall relaxation , and growth - induced water potentials . Planta 163 : 527 - 543 8 10 Ortega , J . K . E . , Zehr , E . G . , and Keanini , R . G . ( 1989 ) In vivo creep and stress relaxation experiments to determine the wall extensibility and yield threshold for the sporangiophores of Phycomyces . Biophys . J . 56 : 465 - 475 11 Ortega , J . K . E . ( 1976 ) Phycomyces : The mechanical and structural dynamics of cell wall growth . PhD thesis . Vol . PhD , Boulder , University of Colorado 12 Ortega , J . K . E . , Keanini , R . G . , and Manica , K . J . ( 1988 ) Pressure probe technique to study transpiration in Phycomyces sporangiophores . Plant Physiol . 87 : 11 - 14 13 Ortega , J . K . E . ( 1990 ) Governing equations for plant cell growth . Physiologia Plantarum 79 : 116 - 121 14 Ortega , J . K . E . ( 1994 ) Plant and fungal cell growth : Governing equations for cell wall extension and water transport . Biomimetics 2 : 215 - 227 15 Proseus , T . E . , Ortega , J . K . E . , and Boyer , J . S . ( 1999 ) Separating growth from elastic deformation during cell enlargement . Plant Physiol . 119 : 775 - 784 16 Proseus , T . E . , Zhu , G . L . , and Boyer , J . S . ( 2000 ) Turgor , temperature and the growth of plant cells : using Chara corallina as a model system . J . Exp . Bot . 51 : 1481 - 1494 17 Ortega , J . K . E . , Keanini , R . G . , and Manica , K . J . ( 1988 ) Phycomyces : Turgor pressure behavior during the light and avoidance growth responses . Photobiology and Photochemistry 48 : 697 - 703 18 Ortega , J . K . E . , Smith , M . E . , Erazo , A . J . , Espinosa , M . A . , Bell , S . A . , and Zehr , E . G . ( 1991 ) A comparison of cell - wall - yielding properties for two developmental stages of Phycomyces sporangiophores : Determination by in - vivo creep experiments . Planta 183 : 613 - 619 19 Ortega , J . K . E . , Smith , M . E . , and Espinosa , M . A . ( 1995 ) Cell wall extension behavior of Phycomyces sporangiophores during the pressure response . Biophys . J . 68 : 702 - 707 20 Serpe , M . and Matthews , M . ( 1992 ) Rapid changes in cell wall yielding of elongating Begonia leaves in response to changes in plant water status . Plant Physiol . 100 : 1852 - 1857 21 Serpe , M . and Matthews , M . ( 2000 ) Turgor and cell wall yielding in dicot leaf growth in response to changes in relative humidity . Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 27 : 1131 - 1140 22 Murphy , R . and Ortega , J . K . E . ( 1995 ) A new pressure probe method to determine the average volumetric elastic modulus of cells in plant tissue . Plant Physiol . 107 : 995 - 1005 23 Murphy , R . and Ortega , J . K . E . ( 1996 ) A study of the stationary volumetric elastic modulus during dehydration and rehydration of stems of pea seedlings . Plant Physiol . 110 : 1309 - 1316 24 Ortega , J . K . E . ( 1993 ) Pressure probe methods to measure transpiration in single cells . In Water deficits : Plant responses from cell to community ( Smith , J . and Griffiths , H . , Editors . eds . ) . pp . 73 - 86 , BIOS Scientific Publishers LTD , Oxford , Great Britain 25 Lewicka , S . ( 2006 ) General and analytic solutions of the Ortega equation . Plant Physiol . 142 : 1346 - 1349 26 Goriely , A . , Robertson - Tessi , M . , Tabor , M . , and Vandiver , R . ( 2008 ) Elastic growth models . In Mathematical Modelling of Biosystems ( Mondaini , R . and Pardalos , P . , Editors . eds . ) . pp . 1 - 44 , Springer - Verlag , Berlin Heidelberg Figure S1 . Schematic graphs of stress relaxation tests . ( a ) An initial extension ( longitudinal strain ) and longitudinal load ( stress ) are imposed on growing sporangiophores of Phycomyces blakesleeanus with a tension - compression machine . At constant strain , stress is monitored as a function of time . Green curve : Sporangiophore has normal turgor pressure . Cell wall stresses are imposed by the longitudinal load and the turgor . Stress eventually decays to zero . Red curve : Immediately prior to load application turgor pressure had been decreased to zero . Stress is only imposed by the load and decays to a constant value . Redrawn from [ 11 ] . ( b ) Pressure relaxation in growing tissues after removal from water source and in an environment of saturating humidity to suppress transpiration . Red curve : The presence of auxin ( in the case of pea stem tissue ; redrawn from [ 7 ] Copyright of the original figure : American Society of Plant Biologists . www . plantphysiol . org ) or the administration of a light stimulus ( sporangiophore ; redrawn from [ 11 ] ) accelerate the relaxation . ( c ) Elongation growth behavior of an internode of Chara corallina before and after a step - down and step - up in P ( blue curve ) produced with a pressure probe . At room temperature ( red curve ) cell length represents the sum of irreversible ( growth ) and elastic deformation , whereas at a colder temperature ( green curve ) , the cell does not grow and the pressure induced deformations are purely elastic . Redrawn from [ 15 ] Copyright of the original figure : American Society of Plant Biologists . www . plantphysiol . org . 9