© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A / S . Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd doi : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12315 Distinct Temporal Regulation of RET Isoform Internalization : Roles of Clathrin and AP2 Mathieu J . F . Crupi 1 , Piriya Yoganathan 1 , Leslie N . Bone 2 , Eric Lian 1 , Andrew Fetz 1 , Costin N . Antonescu 2 and Lois M . Mulligan 1 ∗ 1 Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics , Cancer Research Institute and Department of Pathology & Molecular Medicine , Queen’s University , Kingston , Ontario K7L 3N6 , Canada 2 Department of Chemistry and Biology , Ryerson University , Toronto , Ontario M5B 2K3 , Canada ∗ Corresponding author : Lois M . Mulligan , mulligal @ queensu . ca Abstract The RET receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) contributes to kidney and nervous system development , and is implicated in a number of human cancers . RET is expressed as two protein isoforms , RET9 and RET51 , with distinct interactions and signaling properties that contribute to these processes . RET isoforms are internalized from the cell surface into endosomal com - partments in response to glial cell line - derived neurotropic factor ( GDNF ) ligand stimulation but the speciﬁc mechanisms of RET trafﬁcking remain to be elucidated . Here , we used total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy to demonstrate that RET internalization occurs pri - marily through clathrin coated pits ( CCPs ) . Activated RET receptors colo - calize with clathrin , but not caveolin . The RET51 isoform is rapidly and robustly recruited to CCPs upon GDNF stimulation , while RET9 recruit - ment occurs more slowly and is less pronounced . We showed that the clathrin - associated adaptor protein complex 2 ( AP2 ) interacts directly with each RET isoform through its AP2 μ subunit , and is important for RET internalization . Our data establish that interactions with the AP2 complex promote RET receptor internalization via clathrin - mediated endocytosis but that RET9 and RET51 have distinct internalization kinet - ics that may contribute to differences in their biological functions . Keywords adaptor protein complex 2 , clathrin , internalization , RET receptor , total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy Received 12 September 2014 , revised and accepted for publication 19 August 2015 , uncorrected manuscript published online 25 August 2015 , published online 21 September 2015 In eukaryotic cells , endocytosis of receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) from the cell surface into endosomal compartments is an important mechanism regulating the duration and magnitude of signals ( 1 – 3 ) . These growth factor receptors are captured at the phospholipid bilayer in budding invaginations that are pinched off from the plasma membrane by the GTPase dynamin to form intracellular vesicles ( 4 – 7 ) . Ligand - activated RTKs are primarily internalized by clathrin - mediated endocytosis through formation and scission of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) ( 8 – 11 ) . However , RTKs can also be internal - ized by clathrin - independent mechanisms in cell type and context - dependent fashions , that can be influenced by ligand concentrations , RTK post translational mod - ifications ( e . g . ubiquitination ) , interactions with other membrane proteins ( e . g . receptors , or glycosylphos - phatidylinositol ( GPI ) - linked proteins ) or by localization to specific membrane microdomains , such as lipid rafts ( 12 – 19 ) . Although dynamin - mediated scission of vesicles from the plasma membrane has been associated with clathrin - mediated internalization , it can also be involved in clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis ( 18 – 20 ) . However , other important endocytic molecules are more specifically associated with either clathrin - dependent or - independent pathways of internalization . For example , the heterodimeric clathrin - associated adaptor protein complex 2 ( AP2 ) binds the plasma membrane phos - phoinositide phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and undergoes a conformational change that allows it to recruit cargo and facilitate accumulation of clathrin on the www . trafﬁc . dk 1155 Crupi et al . intracellular side of the membrane ( 4 , 21 – 25 ) . The AP2 μ subunit ( AP2M1 ) is known to interact with tyrosine based motifs in the cytoplasmic tails of RTKs , promoting their localization to CCPs ( 26 ) . The RET ( REarranged during Transfection ) RTK is an important contributor to kidney and enteric nervous system formation ( 27 , 28 ) . In normal development , RET signaling regulates cell proliferation , migration , survival and differentiation , but RET is also implicated in growth and spread of several human cancers ( 29 – 32 ) . Activating mutations of RET are drivers of inherited and sporadic thy - roid cancers , while expression of wild - type RET receptors in breast and pancreatic cancers has been associated with enhanced tumor invasion , metastasis and poor disease prognosis ( 29 – 31 , 33 ) . RET is activated by binding of an extracellular complex consisting of a soluble ligand of the glial cell line - derived neurotrophic factor ( GDNF ) family , and a GPI - linked cell surface co - receptor of the GDNF family receptors alpha ( GFR α ) proteins ( 29 ) . GDNF / GFR α complexes recruit RET receptors to lipid rafts , cholesterol - rich plasma membrane microdomains that act as signaling platforms , recruiting multiple downstream effectors ( 34 – 36 ) . Other membrane associated components , such as caveolin , can be recruited to lipid rafts and assist with internalization of proteins clustered in these domains ( 37 ) . RET is expressed as two major isoforms , RET9 and RET51 , that share the first 1063 amino acids but have unique 9 or 51 amino acid C - terminal tails , respectively ( 38 , 39 ) . Although both are localized to the cell surface , and activated by binding of GDNF / GFR α complexes , RET isoforms form independent signaling complexes ( 40 ) . Studies in human tissues and in transgenic animal models expressing only a single RET isoform have shown that RET9 , but not RET51 , is required for early stages of development in kidney and neural lineages ( 41 – 44 ) , suggesting that RET isoforms have complementary but distinct developmental roles . Upon activation , both RET9 and RET51 are internal - ized from the cell membrane into intracellular endocytic compartments where signaling persists and activation of the extracellular signal - regulated kinases ( ERK ) 1 / 2 path - way is enhanced ( 45 , 46 ) . We have previously shown that RET internalization from the plasma membrane requires dynamin GTPase - activity , and that endocytosis modulates the signal duration and subcellular localization of activated RET isoforms ( 45 , 46 ) . However , the relative involvement of clathrin - dependent and - independent processes in internalization of RET isoforms has not been investigated . In the present study , we have investigated the dynamics of RET9 and RET51 movement at the cell surface in response to ligand stimulation . Our data show that activated RET isoforms colocalize with clathrin , but not caveolin at the cell membrane . RET receptors are recruited to CCPs upon ligand stimulation , with RET51 localizing to CCPs more rapidly and abundantly than RET9 . Further , we showed that the clathrin adaptor AP2 interacts directly with each RET isoform , and is important for RET internalization . Our data identify differences in the kinetics of RET9 and RET51 internalization that may contribute to the func - tional differences between RET isoforms . Results RET does not colocalize with clathrin or caveolin before GDNF stimulation RET9 and RET51 proteins are synthesized in the Golgi and transported to the cell surface where , upon activation , the two RET isoforms are internalized to early endosomes ( 45 , 46 ) . However , the primary mechanisms of internal - ization of RET9 and RET51 upon ligand stimulation have not been elucidated . Here , we used total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy to visualize RET isoforms localized at the cell surface . TIRF microscopy provides an evanescent field that penetrates ∼ 100 nm deep into cells , exciting only molecules at the cell surface and not at the depth of early endosomes ( Figure S1 , Supporting Informa - tion ) . We first assessed the localization of mCherry - tagged RET9 or RET51 isoforms , and enhanced green fluo - rescent protein ( EGFP ) - tagged clathrin light chain a ( CLCa ) at the plasma membrane by TIRF microscopy . Prior to GDNF stimulation , we detected no colocaliza - tion of mCherry - tagged RET9 or RET51 isoforms with CLCa - EGFP in either HeLa cells that form CCPs and long - lived clathrin plaques ( data not shown ) ( 9 ) , or in retinal pigment epithelial ( RPE ) cells that form only CCPs ( 4 ) ( Figure S2A ) . We also assessed localization of RET iso - forms with EGFP - tagged caveolin - 1 ( CAV1 ) in HeLa cells , which have a well characterized distribution of caveolin ( 47 , 48 ) . Similarly , mCherry - tagged RET9 and RET51 were 1156 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms distributed over the cell surface and did not colocalize with CAV1 - EGFP punctate spots ( Figure S2B ) . Our data indicate that neither RET9 nor RET51 is concentrated at either clathrin or caveolin enriched structures at the plasma membrane in the absence of GDNF stimulation . Activated RET isoforms colocalize with clathrin , but not caveolin , at the plasma membrane Internalization of activated RTKs from the cell sur - face generally requires the GTPase activity of dynamin , which pinches - off CCPs from the cell membrane and has also been associated with RTK internalization involving clathrin - independent pathways ( 18 , 19 ) . To determine whether internalization of GDNF - stimulated RET isoforms from the plasma membrane involves clathrin - and / or caveolin - mediated processes , we assessed colocal - ization of activated RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry with ( i ) CLCa - EGFP , or ( ii ) CAV1 - EGFP over time by live - cell TIRF microscopy . We have confirmed that these fluorescently - tagged RET proteins were phosphorylated and could activate known downstream pathways ( e . g . ERK1 / 2 ) in response to GDNF stimulation ( 100 ng / mL ) ( data not shown ) ( 45 , 46 ) . Fluorescently - tagged RET proteins formed puncta on the cell surface . Live - cell images of RET puncta were captured after 10 min of ligand stimulation for analysis ( Figures 1 and 2 ) . This time point was selected as RET51 can be detected in early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) - positive endosomes following 5 min of GDNF stimulation , but reaches max - imal localization to endosomes by 15 min ( 46 ) . Circular regions of interest ( ROIs ) were manually selected and superimposed onto 250 puncta ( 50 ROIs per cell from five cells ) of fluorescently - tagged RET9 or RET51 in these images , or 250 randomly selected ROIs ( Figure 1B ) . ROIs were then transferred to either the correspond - ing CLCa - EGFP or CAV1 - EGFP images of these cells collected from the other fluorescence channels , and the frequency of RET9 or RET51 colocalization with CLCa or CAV1 spots was determined . The randomly selected ROIs served as control regions representing background colocalization of RET with clathrin or cave - olin . Average colocalization of CLCa - EGFP with either RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry puncta was 59 and 70 % , respectively ( p = 7 . 9 × 10 − 38 , p = 2 . 4 × 10 − 37 ) , which was significantly greater than CLCa - EGFP overlap with RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry in 250 randomly selected ROIs ( Figure 1C ) . In contrast , the average colo - calization of CAV1 - EGFP with either RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry puncta was 15 % , which was not signifi - cantly different from the frequency of CAV1 - EGFP overlap with RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry in randomly selected ROIs ( Figure 2 ; p = 0 . 067 , p = 0 . 074 , respectively ) . These data confirm that colocalization of RET with clathrin is not due to random overlap of punctate structures , but may suggest selective recruitment of RET to CCPs . To complement these qualitative analyses , we quantified the relative amounts ( average fluorescence intensity ) of cell surface RET isoforms at CLCa sites that might suggest localization of RET to cell surface regions where clathrin is concentrated , ROIs were superimposed onto 250 manually selected CLCa bright fluorescent spots ( 50 ROIs per cell from five cells ) or 250 randomly selected spots in TIRF images . ROIs selected in the green channel ( CLCa - EGFP ) were transferred to identical image locations in the corre - sponding red channel images , and fluorescence intensities of mCherry - tagged RET in each ROI quantified relative to the average fluorescence intensities of RET in random ROIs . The average fluorescence intensity of RET9 - mCherry and RET51 - mCherry within CLCa - containing ROIs was significantly higher than in randomly selected ROIs ( p = 9 . 4 × 10 − 10 , p = 7 . 4 × 10 − 13 , respectively ) ( Figure S3A ) . To further confirm the specificity of colocalization of RET and CLCa puncta , we assessed the localiza - tion of mCherry - tagged RET9 or RET51 isoforms and CAV1 - EGFP puncta at the plasma membrane . The average fluorescence intensity of RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry within CAV1 - EGFP - containing ROIs was significantly lower compared to randomly selected ROIs ( p = 1 . 2 × 10 − 13 , p = 2 . 0 × 10 − 15 , respectively ) ( Figure S3B ) . Our data indicate that , upon ligand stimulation , both RET9 and RET51 receptors colocalize with clathrin , sug - gesting that RET is internalized predominantly through clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Further , individual RET isoforms do not colocalize with caveolin , even at high GDNF concentrations , indicating that CAV1 - containing caveolae are not a major pathway for RET internalization . We further explored the movement over time of mCherry - tagged RET9 or RET51 isoforms and CLCa - EGFP in live RPE cells ( n = 5 cells per condition ) . In response to GDNF , RET and clathrin colocalized at bright puncta ( > 50 ROIs selected per cell ) and then moved Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1157 Crupi et al . Figure 1 : Activated RET isoforms colocalize with clathrin at the plasma membrane . A ) Representative dual - colour TIRF microscopy images of RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry with CLCa - EGFP in RPE cells . Images were acquired after 10 min of GDNF treat - ment . Colocalization of RET isoforms and CLCa - EGFP is shown in yellow in overlay images ( Merge ) . Scale bars = 10 μ m . Insets ( lower right ) show the indicated regions at higher magniﬁcation . B ) Circu - lar ROIs ( yellow ) were drawn around 50 puncta of RET9 - mCherry or 50 random ROIs per cell ( for ﬁve cells ) , and the ROIs collected from the red channel images were transferred onto the corresponding green channel images of EGFP - CLCa . Scale bars = 10 μ m . C ) Frequency of RET colocalization with CLCa in RET - positive or randomly selected ROIs from TIRF images ( as selected in panel B ) shows signiﬁcantly greater localization of RET9 and RET51 puncta at CLCa sites ( * p = 7 . 9 × 10 − 38 , * * p = 2 . 4 × 10 − 37 , respectively ) . The randomly selected ROIs served as control regions representing background colocalization of RET with clathrin . together out of the TIRF evanescent field ( ∼ 100 nm ) ( Figure 3 ) , suggesting localization of RET to CCPs and internalization from the membrane . Interestingly , resi - dency time of RET9 and RET51 once localized to clathrin puncta was similar ( Figure 3 ) , suggesting the kinetics of this step of internalization was similar for both isoforms . Clathrin is required for RET internalization To determine whether localization of RET with clathrin reflects a functional requirement for clathrin in RET internalization , we evaluated the effects of clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) knockdown ( KD ) on RET internaliza - tion . SH - SY5Y neuroblastoma cells , which endogenously express both RET isoforms , were transduced with lentivi - ral particles containing either empty vector ( Mock KD ) or shRNAs targeting CHC to generate polyclonal CHC KD cell lines . Expression of clathrin in CHC KD cells was reduced by over 90 % ( Figure 4A ) . Using surface protein biotinylation and internalization assays ( 49 ) and the trans - ferrin receptor ( TfR ) as a marker for clathrin - dependent endocytosis , we confirmed that CHC KD blocks this inter - nalization pathway ( Figure S4 ) . In similar biotinylation 1158 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms Figure 2 : RET isoforms at the cell surface do not colocalize with CAV1 - containing structures in response to GDNF stimulation . A ) Representative dual - colour TIRF microscopy images of RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry with CAV1 - EGFP in HeLa cells . Images were acquired after 10 min of GDNF treatment . No colocalization was detected . Scale bars = 10 μ m . Insets ( lower right ) show the indicated regions at higher magniﬁcation . B ) Frequency of RET colocalization with CAV1 in RET - positive or randomly selected ROIs ( as described in Figure 1B ) from TIRF images did not show signiﬁcant colocalization ( n . s . ) of either RET9 or RET51 puncta at CAV1 sites ( p = 0 . 067 , p = 0 . 074 , respectively ) . The randomly selected ROIs served as control regions representing background colocalization of RET with caveolin . assays , RET51 internalization was detected by 5 min of GDNF treatment in Mock KD cells , while RET9 inter - nalization was slower and detectable after approximately 15 min of GDNF treatment ( Figure 4B ) . Internalization of both RET isoforms was blocked in the CHC KD cells ( Figure 4C ) . Differential recruitment of RET isoforms to CCPs As our data suggest that RET51 is internalized more rapidly than RET9 in response to ligand stimulation , we examined whether this was due to differences in the kinet - ics of clathrin recruitment for each isoform . We assessed the localization of mCherry - tagged RET9 or RET51 iso - forms and CLCa - EGFP in live RPE cells over time in response to GDNF stimulation by TIRF microscopy . We selected ROIs containing RET puncta in images captured ( from the red channel ) before GDNF addition ( time 0 second ) and transferred these ROIs to the corresponding initial clathrin images ( from the green channel ) acquired for each cell ( 50 ROIs per cell from five cells ) and mon - itored fluorescence in each ROI for both red and green channels over time . Colocalization of clathrin and RET isoforms was detectable by 6 min after GDNF addition for RET51 and ≥ 10 min for RET9 ( Figure 5A , B ) . Consistent Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1159 Crupi et al . Figure 3 : RET isoforms and clathrin are internalized from the plasma membrane together . A ) Representative dual - colour TIRF microscopy images of RET9 - mCherry and CLCa - EGFP in RPE cells . Images were acquired at two frames per second . ROIs ( > 50 per cell , ﬁve cells analyzed ) were manually selected for individual puncta at time points when intensities for RET9 and clathrin peaked ( time 0 ) . Scale bars = 10 μ m . Images of representative puncta ( right ) show clathrin and RET9 simultaneously leaving the TIRF ﬁeld within 40 seconds . Scale bars = 2 μ m . The average ﬂuorescence intensities of RET9 - mCherry and CLCa - EGFP over time for these images are plotted below . Clathrin ( green ) and RET9 ( red ) average ﬂuorescence intensities decreased over time . B ) Representative dual - colour TIRF microscopy images of RET51 - mCherry and CLCa - EGFP in RPE cells . Images were acquired and analyzed as described above . Scale bars = 10 μ m . Images of representative puncta ( right ) show clathrin and RET51 simultaneously leaving the TIRF ﬁeld within 40 seconds . Scale bars = 2 μ m . The average ﬂuorescence intensities of RET51 - mCherry and CLCa - EGFP over time for these images are plotted below . Clathrin ( green ) and RET51 ( red ) average ﬂuorescence intensities decreased over time . 1160 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms Figure 4 : RET internalization requires clathrin . A ) shRNA KD of CHC in stable polyclonal SH - SY5Y cell lines was assessed in cell lysates by immunoblotting . Tubulin was used as a loading control . KD cells expressed signiﬁcantly less CHC than Mock KD controls ( * p = 3 . 0 × 10 − 5 , 91 % KD of CHC ) . B ) Polyclonal Mock KD cell lines were serum - starved and surface biotinylated at 4 ∘ C , before being returned to 37 ∘ C with media containing GDNF for indicated times . Cells were cooled to 4 ∘ C and the remaining surface biotin was stripped with 2 - mercaptoethane sulfonate Na ( MeSNa ) buffer . The amount of biotinylated RET remaining in each sample , indicative of internalized protein , was assessed by streptavidin pulldown ( Strep . IP ) and immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . WCL = whole cell lysate , TP = total surface protein control ( no internalization , no stripping ) , M = MeSNa stripping control ( no internalization ) . Densitometry ( in I MAGEJ ) was used to determine the average percentage of initial surface - localized and biotinylated RET recovered via pull - down on streptavidin beads at indicated times with GDNF . RET51 internalizes faster than RET9 with signiﬁcant levels detected at 5 min . All western blots are representative of three or more independent experiments . C ) Polyclonal CHC KD cell lines were serum - starved and surface biotinylated at 4 ∘ C , as described in ( B ) and RET internalization was quantiﬁed . RET internalization was completely blocked in the absence of clathrin . with our surface biotinylation studies ( Figure 4B ) , these data show that RET colocalization with clathrin increases over time in response to ligand stimulation , and suggest that maximal colocalization accumulates more rapidly for RET51 than RET9 ( Figure 5 ) . We specifically measured the total intensity of RET within CCPs in response to GDNF stimulation in RPE cells , using an automatic CCP detection and analysis method coupled to our TIRF microscopy assay ( cmeAnalysis ; MatLab ) ( 4 ) ( Figure S5A ) . The fluorescence intensities of RET9 or RET51 within detected CCPs were quantified over time ( 10 min ) in response to GDNF stimulation . RET51 was robustly recruited to CCPs upon ligand addition , with significantly increased colocalization by 6 – 10 min of GDNF treatment ( Figure 5C ) . RET51 recruitment to CCPs remained elevated past 10 min of GDNF stimulation , con - sistent with ongoing ligand - dependent clathrin - mediated Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1161 Crupi et al . Figure 5 : Cell surface RET51 localizes to clathrin structures more rapidly than RET9 in response to GDNF treatment . A and B ) Repre - sentative example images of RPE cells expressing RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry , with GFR α 1 and CLCa - EGFP acquired by dual - color TIRF microscopy at two frames per second over a 10 min time course . Time 0 = GDNF addition . Localization of cell surface clathrin and RET puncta are shown in representative cells at 2 min intervals . Colocalization of RET and clathrin ( arrows ) appears yellow in the overlays ( Merge ) . Scale bars = 5 μ m . A ) Colocalization of clathrin and RET9 was initially detected by 10 min after GDNF addition . B ) Colocalization of clathrin and RET51 was detected by 6 min after GDNF addition . C ) RET51 is robustly recruited to CCPs at early time points after GDNF addition . Wild - type RET51 - mCherry ( RET51 WT ) , kinase - dead RET51 - K758M - mCherry ( RET51 K758M ) , wild - type RET9 - mCherry ( RET9 WT ) or kinase - dead RET9 - K758M - mCherry ( RET9 K758M ) and GFR α 1 were transiently expressed in RPE cells that stably express CLCa - EGFP . Images of cells were acquired by dual - color TIRF microscopy at one frame per 1 . 5 seconds during a 10 min time course . Time 0 = GDNF addition . Images were subjected to automated detection of CCPs ( Figure S5 ) . Mean RET ﬂuorescence localized to CCPs was determined ( average of ﬁve frames per cell for each time point ) . Shown are the mean RET intensities within CCPs at indicated times , n = 4 – 5 cells per experiment . * p < 0 . 05 relative to RET51 K758M , † p < 0 . 05 relative to RET9 WT . endocytosis of RET51 . Localization of RET9 to clathrin coated pits after GDNF addition was overall less robust , and significantly more RET51 was recruited to CCPs after 6 – 10 min of ligand treatment ( p < 0 . 05 ) ( Figure 5C ) . Kinase - dead RET9 or RET51 mutants ( K758M ) did not display increased localization to CCPs in the presence of GDNF , indicating that this process was kinase - dependent ( Figure 5C ) . To further elucidate RET and clathrin dynamics at the cell surface , our time - lapse image series were subjected to cmeAnalysis to track all CCPs and RET - positive CCPs were identified for further study . RET51 was detected in 12 . 2 ± 2 . 9 % of CCPs ( n = 10 cells ) and RET9 was detected in 8 ± 2 . 8 % of CCPs ( n = 10 cells ) . To determine the timing of recruitment of clathrin and each RET isoform into the selected CCPs , the average fluorescence intensities of RET and clathrin were parsed into lifetime cohorts ( 20 – 40 , 40 – 60 and 60 – 80 seconds ) . On average , our data suggest robust and concomitant recruitment of both clathrin and RET isoforms during the initiation phase of RET - positive CCPs ( grey box , 1162 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms Figure S5B ) . This pattern of recruitment is consistent with other studies using a similar method to evaluate CCP formation for transferrin ( 50 ) and low - density lipoprotein receptors ( 51 ) . Together , our data show that RET9 and RET51 are differentially recruited to clathrin structures in response to GDNF . RET51 recruitment to CCPs occurs more rapidly and robustly and is sustained for longer , whereas RET9 recruitment is slower and less pronounced . The AP2M1 subunit interacts directly with RET isoforms to promote internalization As clathrin is not known to bind RTKs directly ( 23 ) , the interaction of receptors with clathrin scaffolds occurs through adaptor proteins such as the heterote - trameric AP2 adaptor complex . Using GST ( Glutathione S - transferase ) - pulldown assays , we showed that the AP2 μ subunit , AP2M1 , interacts with wild - type RET9 and RET51 in the presence of GDNF , but not with kinase - dead mutant ( 52 ) RET isoforms ( Figure 6A ) . We confirmed that this interaction was direct in far western assays using purified His - tagged AP2M1 C - terminal ( CT ) domain ( amino acids 160 – 435 ) . GST - tagged RET intracellular domains ( amino acids 664 - C - terminus ) , containing the RET kinase domain and C - terminal tail sequences , are constitutively phosphorylated ( Figure 6B ) ( 53 ) , and bound AP2M1 - CT and a Src homology 2 domain containing ( Shc ) - phosphotyrosine - binding ( PTB ) domain ( posi - tive control ) , but not a disabled homolog 2 ( Dab2 ) - PTB domain ( negative control ) , indicating that AP2M1 can bind RET9 and RET51 directly ( Figure 6C ) . In cell - based assays , using co - immunoprecipitations , AP2M1 interactions with RET51 but not RET9 were detected following 5 min of GDNF treatment , and with both RET isoforms after 15 min GDNF . No interaction was detected in the absence of GDNF ( Figure 6D ) . Con - sistent with these data , we showed that GDNF stimulation resulted in time - dependent localization of RET receptors to AP2 puncta at the cell surface . RPE cells transiently expressing RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry and GFR α 1 were stimulated with GDNF for 0 , 5 or 15 min and then fixed and subjected to immunofluorescence staining for AP2 ( Figures 7A and S5C ) . We detected colocalization of AP2 puncta with RET51 but not RET9 following 5 min of GDNF treatment , and with both RET isoforms after 15 min GDNF . Minimal overlap of AP2 puncta with RET was observed in the absence of GDNF ( Figures 7A and S5C ) . Further , automated detection of AP2 structures , as described above ( 4 ) , followed by systematic quantifi - cation of RET localized therein , confirmed that RET51 was recruited more rapidly than RET9 to AP2 structures following GDNF addition ( Figure 7B ) . To assess the con - tribution of AP2 to RET internalization , we generated polyclonal AP2M1 KD cell lines by shRNA lentiviral targeting in SH - SY5Y neuroblastoma cells which express endogenous RET isoforms . Expression of AP2M1 in KD cells was reduced by 85 % ( Figure 7C ) . Using surface pro - tein biotinylation assays , we confirmed that AP2M1 KD blocked TfR internalization ( Figure S4 ) . We determined the proportion of biotinylated - RET protein internalized after ligand stimulation in the AP2M1 KD cells . RET9 and RET51 internalization was decreased in AP2M1 KD cells in the presence of GDNF , relative to Mock KD con - trol ( Figure 7D ) , indicating increased RET retention at the cell surface . Our data indicate that the AP2 adaptor complex is important for internalization of both RET9 and RET51 . Discussion Internalization of RTKs is an important contributor to cell signaling by repositioning receptors in the appropriate intracellular compartment to access signaling intermedi - ates , and by sustaining or terminating signal propagation ( 2 , 8 ) . In response to ligand stimulation , receptors such as RET initiate signaling through multiple pathways in the perimembrane region , but continue to activate down - stream pathways from early endosomes after internaliza - tion ( 46 , 54 ) . Here , we assessed RET movement and asso - ciations at the cell surface using TIRF microscopy , which allowed us to distinguish caveolae and CCPs at the plasma membrane from endosome - or Golgi - localized caveolin and clathrin pools ( 55 ) . In response to GDNF stimula - tion , we showed that both the RET9 and RET51 isoforms colocalized with clathrin in multiple cell types , suggesting involvement of CCPs in RET internalization . Recruitment of RET isoforms to CCPs was kinase - dependent , as seen for other RTKs ( 9 , 56 , 57 ) . Previous studies have shown that GPI - anchored GDNF / GFR α complexes recruit RET receptors to cholesterol - rich lipid rafts at the plasma Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1163 Crupi et al . Figure 6 : Legend on next page . 1164 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms membrane ( 34 – 36 ) . Although some studies have sug - gested that GPI - proteins may be internalized by clathrin dependent or independent routes ( 58 , 59 ) , our data suggest that the clathrin - mediated pathway is likely the major route of RET internalization , as RET does not colocalize with caveolin , either before or after activation . Further , clathrin - independent pathways did not compensate for clathrin depletion in these cells to facilitate RET internal - ization . However , other endocytic pathways , such as cave - olae , Fast - Endophilin Mediated Endocytosis ( FEME ) and CLathrin - Independent Carriers / GPI - Enriched Endocytic Compartments ( CLIC / GEEC ) , may still play roles in RET internalization in other cell types or context - dependent fashions ( 18 , 19 ) . We have previously shown that the RET51 isoform receptors are internalized rapidly but a portion of these molecules can be targeted for recycling back to the membrane , maintaining high levels of the receptor at the cell surface . In contrast , RET9 is internalized more slowly and is not recycled at appreciable levels ( 46 ) . Consistent with this , we showed that upon activation , RET51 is more rapidly and abundantly recruited to CCPs than RET9 . Our data indicate that differences in RET9 and RET51 internalization occur very early in this pro - cess , affecting the rate of RET isoform recruitment to CCPs and not their residency times once localized to CCPs , although we cannot rule out additional differences in maturation of CCPs containing RET9 and RET51 . Interestingly , this trafficking pattern may lead to a rel - atively longer retention of RET51 in early endosomes , where RET51 receptors can continue to signal , notably through ERK1 / 2 , further enhancing their mitogenic signals ( 45 , 46 ) . RTKs , such as epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and the insulin receptor , are robustly concentrated in CCPs in response to ligand - mediated activation ( 60 ) , a process requiring exposed intracellular endocytic motifs that interact with clathrin adaptors ( 61 ) . The ubiquitously expressed clathrin - associated AP2 adaptor complex sorts RTKs into CCPs following recognition of tyrosine - based motifs , generally located in their cytoplasmic tails ( 8 ) . These interactions are essential for recruitment of the receptors to CCPs , as well as efficient internalization ( 9 ) . Here , we showed that upon activation , RET inter - acts directly with the μ subunit of the AP2 adaptor in a kinase - dependent fashion , as previously shown for EGFR ( 62 , 63 ) . In the absence of AP2M1 , RET9 and RET51 internalization efficiency was reduced compared to Mock KD cells . Further , RET9 and RET51 differed in timing of interaction and colocalization with AP2 in response to GDNF . Our data suggest that the isoform - specific kinetics of RET9 and RET51 internalization reflects differences in the recruitment of activated receptors to clathrin structures rather than distinct residency times for each isoform within CCPs . Together , these data suggest that AP2 is an important determinant of Figure 6 : The AP2 𝛍 subunit interacts directly with RET isoforms in a kinase - dependent manner . A ) RET9 and RET51 interact with AP2M1 in the presence of GDNF ( 15 min ) in GST - pulldowns . Whole cell lysates ( WCL ) from HEK293 cells transiently expressing RET9 or RET51 , the indicated RET kinase - dead mutant , or an empty vector control ( pcDNA3 ) , and GFR α 1 were treated with GDNF and precipitated with puriﬁed GST - tagged AP2M1 protein . Interactions were detected by western blotting for RET9 or RET51 . No interactions were detected in the absence of RET phosphorylation ( K758M mutant ) , or with a GST - alone control . Tubulin was used as a loading control . B ) GST - tagged RET intracellular domains ( amino acids 664 - C - terminus ) , containing the RET kinase domain and C - terminal tail sequences , are constitutively phosphorylated ( detected with phospho - RET Y905 antibody ) . Red arrows indicate the appropriate bands representing GST alone ( 26 kDa ) , GST - RET9 ( 72 kDa ) , and GST - RET51 ( 77 kDa ) . C ) RET interacts directly with the AP2M1 C - terminal ( CT ) domain ( amino acids 160 – 435 ) . Far western assay using puriﬁed His - tagged protein domains for AP2M1 - CT , Dab2 - PTB ( negative control ) and Shc - PTB ( positive control ) . All puriﬁed His - tagged protein domains were separated by SDS - PAGE , transferred to nitrocellulose and incubated with the indicated GST - RET - intracellular domain proteins , shown in ( B ) . Interactions were detected with an antibody to GST . Ponceau S staining of nitrocellulose membrane was used as a loading control . D ) RET51 interacts more rapidly ( at 5 min ) and more robustly than RET9 with AP2 in the presence of GDNF invivo . Whole cell lysates from HEK293 cells transiently expressing RET9 or RET51 or an empty vector control ( pcDNA3 ) , GFR α 1 , and HA - AP2M1 were co - immunoprecipitated with an anti - HA antibody . No interactions were detected with empty vector control or in the absence of RET phosphorylation ( GDNF 0 min ) . Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1165 Crupi et al . Figure 7 : Legend on next page 1166 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms RET internalization , but that additional adaptor protein interactions or protein modifications such as phospho - rylation , ubiquitination and acetylation may facilitate trafficking ( 64 ) . The distinct kinetics of RET9 and RET51 localization to CCPs suggests the possible involvement of differential internalization signals for each RET isoform . RET9 and RET51 have been shown to form independent signaling complexes and to have different patterns of phosphoryla - tion in response to ligand stimulation ( 40 ) . RET signaling is primarily mediated through interactions with key mul - tifunctional docking sites that lie in the RET C - terminal tail sequences and can differentially recruit adaptors and downstream signaling intermediates to RET9 or RET51 ( 29 ) . Our data indicate that AP2M1 interacts with both RET9 and RET51 , but not kinase - dead mutant RET isoforms , suggesting interactions with phosphorylated , tyrosine - based binding motifs may be required . Several canonical Yxx ϕ ( where x is any amino acid , and phi is a hydrophobic residue such as F , I , L , M or V ) AP2M1 binding - sequences ( 21 , 65 ) are found in both RET iso - forms . Further , our results do not exclude the possibility that the AP2 complex could be recruited to RET isoforms by binding at [ D / E ] xxxL [ L / I ] acidic - dileucine endo - cytic motifs , although these interactions are generally constitutive and thus less likely to be involved in RET internalization ( 66 , 67 ) . However , other adaptors such as GRB2 ( 68 ) , which is known to differentially bind the RET isoform C - terminal tails ( 69 ) , may also con - tribute to the process of RET recruitment to CCPs and the temporal differences between RET9 and RET51 internalization . In summary , we showed that AP2 - dependent internal - ization of RET protein isoforms is primarily clathrin - mediated and does not involve caveolae ( Figure 8 ) . Acti - vated RET receptors directly interact with AP2M1 and internalize via CCPs , with RET51 localizing more rapidly and abundantly to CCPs than RET9 at early time points after GDNF addition . While previous studies have iden - tified biological differences between RET9 and RET51 receptors in early and late development ( 41 , 70 ) , our data are the first to identify functional differences between RET isoforms that may affect their localization and the duration of signaling and ultimately contribute to the isoform - specific developmental differences observed in various cell types and tissues ( 41 , 70 ) . Figure 7 : The AP2 complex is involved in internalization of activated RET isoforms . A ) GDNF stimulation results in time - dependent localization of RET receptors to AP2 puncta . RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry and GFR α 1 were transiently expressed in parental RPE cells ( not stably expressing any ﬂuorescent proteins ) . Cells were stimulated with GDNF as indicated and then ﬁxed and subjected to immunoﬂuorescence staining for AP2 . Shown are representative micrographs obtained by TIRF microscopy ; these images correspond to magniﬁed regions of larger images shown in Figure S5C . Scale bars = 5 μ m . Arrows represent AP2 structures that localize to RET puncta . B ) Cells were subjected to automated image analysis as described in MaterialsandMethods to detect AP2 puncta using a Gaussian - based approach to model the point - spread function of diffraction - limited structures . This was followed by detection of RET ﬂuorescence intensity within these detected structures , which corresponds to the amplitude of the Gaussian model , thus allowing measurement of RET intensity relative to the local adjacent area of the image . Shown are the mean ± SE of RET ﬂuorescence intensity within AP2 puncta in each cell ( n > 10 cells , > 3000 AP2 puncta analyzed per condition ) . * p < 0 . 05 relative to 0 min GDNF . C ) shRNA KD of AP2M1 in polyclonal stable SH - SY5Y cell lines was assessed in cell lysates by immunoblotting . KD cells expressed signiﬁcantly less AP2M1 than Mock KD controls ( * p = 4 . 0 × 10 − 4 , 85 % KD of AP2M1 ) . Tubulin was used as a loading control . D ) Polyclonal AP2M1 KD cell lines were serum - starved and surface biotinylated at 4 ∘ C , before being returned to 37 ∘ C with media containing GDNF for indicated times . Cells were cooled to 4 ∘ C and the remaining surface biotin was stripped with MeSNa buffer . The amount of biotinylated RET remaining in each sample , indicative of internalized protein , was assessed by streptavidin pulldown ( Strep . IP ) and immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies . RET internalization was reduced in the absence of AP2 . WCL = whole cell lysate , TP = total surface protein control ( no internalization , no stripping ) , M / 0 = MeSNa stripping control ( no internalization , no GDNF ) . Densitometry ( in I MAGEJ ) was used to determine the average percentage of initially surface - localized and biotinylated RET recovered via pull - down on streptavidin beads at indicated time points ( right ) . All western blots are representative of three or more independent experiments . Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1167 Crupi et al . Figure 8 : RET internalization is AP2 - dependent and clathrin - mediated . Upon ligand binding and phosphorylation , activated RET9 ( blue ) and RET51 ( red ) interact directly with AP2 , which recruits clathrin , and RET isoforms are internal - ized from the cell surface via CCPs . The main entry pathway for RET receptors into the cell is clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis . RET51 internalization into AP2 - positive CCPs ( red arrow ) occurs more rapidly and abundantly than internalization of RET9 ( blue arrow ) . Materials and Methods Expression constructs and shRNA The EGFP - tagged clathrin light chain a ( CLCa - EGFP ) and caveolin - 1 ( CAV1 - EGFP ) constructs were gifts from Tomas Kirchhausen ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) ( 4 , 71 ) and Ferruccio Galbiati ( Univer - sity of Pittsburgh School of Medicine , Pittsburgh , PA ) ( 72 ) , respectively . HA - tagged AP2M1 and His - tagged AP2M1 - CT ( amino acid residues 160 – 435 ) constructs were provided by Alexander Sorkin ( University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA ) ( 73 ) and David Owen ( University of Cam - bridge , Cambridge , UK ) ( 74 ) , respectively . His - tagged Dab2 and Shc PTB - domain constructs were obtained from Gavin MacBeath ( Har - vard Medical School , Boston , MA ) ( 75 ) . Rab5 - Strawberry was gifted by Doug Richardson ( Harvard , Boston , MA ) . Expression constructs encod - ing full - length RET9 and RET51 isoforms , RET9 and RET51 tagged with mCherry , and GFR α 1 constructs have been previously described ( 46 ) . GST fusion constructs encoding human AP2M1 , RET51 ( residues 664 – 1114 ) and RET9 ( residues 664 – 1072 ) ( 53 ) were generated in a modified pGEX - 4T - 3 vector by polymerase chain reaction amplification and sequence verified . shRNAs against human CHC and AP2M1 were obtained from Open Biosystems ( Fisher Scientific ) . Cell culture HEK293 , HeLa and SH - SY5Y cells ( ATCC ) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium ( DMEM ; Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Retinoic acid ( 10 μ M ) was added to SH - SY5Y cells 24h prior to each experiment to increase RET expression . RPE cells stably expressing CLCa - EGFP ( 4 ) were cultured in DMEM / Ham’s Nutrient Mixture F12 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum . Cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Life Technologies ) according to the supplier’s instructions . Poly - clonal stableshRNA KD cell lines were prepared by transducing cells with shRNA virus , and selecting for 3 – 5days with puromycin ( 1 . 5 μ g / mL ) . RET was stimulated with 100ng / mL GDNF ( Peprotech ) for the indicated times . TIRF microscopy Live - cellexperiments Cells were serum - starved for 4h , washed and transferred to PBS to minimize photobleaching . Dual - colour , live - cell TIRF microscopy was performed using a 60 × [ NA ( numerical aperture ) 1 . 42 ] objective on an IX81 inverted microscope ( Olympus America ) and S - TIRF module ( Spectral Applied Research ) , equipped for imaging : 491 and 561nm excitation with a Borealis 5 - line laser launch . All filters were obtained from Chroma Technologies . Images were acquired with an ImagEM Enhanced C9100 - 13 , EM - CCD digital camera ( Hamamatsu Photonics ) . Green and red emissions were collected on individual channels using a ludl filter wheel , equipped with a 515nm / 30nm band - pass filter to collect green emission and a 580nm long - pass filter to collect red emission . The camera and filters were controlled by M ETA M ORPH software ( Universal Imaging ) . The 16 - bit TIRF microscopy image streams were aligned and quantified in M ETA M ORPH . Fixed - cellexperiments Cells were serum - starved for 4h before adding GDNF for indicated times . After fixation in 2 % paraformaldehyde , quenching of fixative in 100m M glycine and cell permeabilization in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , cells were blocked with 3 % milk , stained with anti - AP2 primary antibody and A488 secondary antibody ( Abcam ) , and wet mounted on glass slides in PBS for imaging . TIRF microscopy experiments were performed using a 150 × ( NA 1 . 45 ) objective on an Olympus IX81 instrument equipped with Cell TIRF modules ( Olympus Canada Inc . ) using 491nm ( 50mW ) and 561nm ( 50mW ) laser illumination and 520 / 30 , 624 / 50 emission filters . Images were acquired using a C9100 - 13 EM - CCD camera ( Hamamatsu Corporation ) . Data analysis MeasurementofRETrecruitmenttoclathrinorcaveolin SpotsofCLCa , CAV1 , RET9andRET51weremanuallyidentifiedinsingle static TIRF images by circling 8 × 8 pixel regions ( ROIs ) in M ETA M ORPH . The mean fluorescence intensities of RET and CLCa or CAV1 were 1168 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms measured within each of these ROIs , throughout the time - lapse image series . AutomatedmeasurementofRETrecruitmenttoCCPs orAP2structures Automated detection of CCPs or AP2 structures and robust analy - ses were implemented in Matlab ( MathWorks ) CMEANALYSIS software ( http : / / lccb . hms . harvard . edu / software . html ) . Briefly , this method uses a Gaussian model - based approach to detect diffraction - limited CCPs or AP2 structures ( 4 ) , in this case determined in single frames within the green ( EGFP ) channel ( ‘master’ channel ) . RET fluorescence intensities within CCPs , corresponding to the amplitude of the Gaussian model in the red ( mCherry ) channel ( ‘slave’ channel ) within detected CCPs or AP2 puncta were obtained . Average values of RET fluorescence at AP2 puncta in fixed cells are shown as means for 3000 AP2 puncta per condi - tion ( Figures 7A and S5C ) . In live cells , RET fluorescence intensities were determinedpriortoGDNFaddition ( t = 0min ) , andafterGDNFaddition atindicatedtimepoints . TheaveragevaluesofRETwithinCCPsateachof thesetimepointswasdeterminedasthemeanforeachCCPfromfivecon - secutive frames in live cells ( Figure 5C ) . To assess recruitment to CCPs , average fluorescence intensity of RET and clathrin in RET - positive CCPs wasdetermined . GiventheheterogeneityofCCPlifetimes , detectedCCPs were parsed into lifetime cohorts ( 20 – 40 , 40 – 60 and 60 – 80seconds ) to allow alignment of tracks of similar lifetimes and averaging of fluores - cence intensity of each channel ( CLCa - EGFP and RET - mCherry ) relative to CCP lifetime ( Figure S5B ) . Immunoprecipitations and western blots For immunoprecipitations , 1mg of whole cell lysate ( WCL ) and 1 μ g of antibody were incubated for 2h at 4 ∘ C with agitation , followed by addition of 40 μ L Protein A / G agarose ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) and overnight incubation at 4 ∘ C with agitation . Samples were centrifuged at 2500g , washed three times with lysis buffer and resuspended in Laemmli buffer ( 46 , 49 ) . Sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS ) - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( PAGE ) and immunoblotting were performed as previously described ( 46 , 49 ) . Aftertransferandblockingin5 % milkinTris - bufferedsalinewith 0 . 1 % Tween20 ( TBS - T ) , blots were probed with either goat anti - RET51 ( C - 20 ) , goat anti - RET9 ( C - 19 ) , mouse anti - GST , mouse anti - HA Y11 , rabbit anti - HA F7 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) ; rabbit anti - phospho Y905 - RET ( Cell Signaling Technology ) , mouse anti - AP50 ( also known as AP2M1 ) , mouse anti - CHC ( BD Transduction Laboratories ) ; mouse anti - TfR ( Invitrogen ) , or mouse anti - γ - tubulin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Blots were then washed and incubated with appropriate secondary antibod - ies : anti - mouse , anti - rabbit ( Cell Signaling ) or anti - goat ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) . Bacterial expression and puriﬁcation of tagged proteins GST - AP2M1 and GST expressed in BL21 - CodonPlus - RP Escherichia coli were harvested by centrifugation , resuspended in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and disrupted by sonication on ice . Cleared lysate was incubated with pre - washed Glutathione Sepharose beads ( GE Health - care Life Sciences ) for 2 – 4h . Beads were washed three times with 1 × PBS containing 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1m M PMSF , 10 μ g / mL aprotinin and 10 μ g / mL leupeptin . GST proteins were eluted in 50m M Tris – HCl pH 8 . 8 , 150m M NaCl , 20m M Glutathione , and dialyzed against PBS . GST - RET intracellular domain proteins were prepared as described but cells were disrupted via two passages through a French Pressure Cell at 10000psi . His - tagged AP2M1 - CT , Dab2 - PTB and Shc - PTB proteins were harvested as above by disruption in 20mL Binding Buffer ( 25m M Tris pH8 . 0 , 250m M NaCl , 8 M urea ) . The supernatant was applied to a Ni 2 + - chelating Sepharose bead column ( GE Healthcare Life Sciences ) equilibrated with Binding Buffer . The column was washed with Binding Buffer containing 10m M imidazole ( pH7 . 4 ) and bound protein eluted with Binding Buffer containing 300m M imidazole . Eluted fractions containing protein were pooled and dialyzed in PBS . GST - pulldown assays For GST - pulldowns , 5 μ g fusion protein was re - bound to 10 μ L GST - Sepharose beads and incubated with 1mg WCLs for 2 – 4h . Beads were washed four times with lysis buffer prior to the addition of Laemmli buffer and analysis by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotting . Far western blotting Purified His - tagged proteins were separated on 12 % SDS – PAGE gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes . Membranes were stained with Ponceau S and imaged prior to blocking overnight in 5 % milk in TBS - T at 4 ∘ C . Blocked membranes were incubated with GST - tagged intracellular RET proteins or GST alone for 8h at 4 ∘ C , washed in TBS - T and immunoblotted using an anti - GST tag antibody , as described above . Biotinylation assays Biotinylation of cell surface proteins for assessment of internalized RET was performed as previously described ( 46 , 49 ) . Briefly , to measure RET internalization , serum - starved SH - SY5Y cells were surface biotinylated and incubated in the absence or presence of ligand for varying times , before all remaining cell surface biotin was cleaved . To measure TfR internalization , biotinylation assays , as described above , were performed in the absence of ligand . After cell - surface biotinylation , cells were lysed , and biotinylated protein was recovered using streptavidin - coated beads ( Invitrogen ) . Collected proteins were separated by SDS – PAGE and immunoblotted . Statistical analyses Experiments were repeated independently a minimum of three times . Consistency between experimental replicates was verified using one - way ANOVA . Means and standard errors ( ± SE ) were calculated for each exper - imental condition , and significance between conditions was determined using a two - tailed Student’s t - test for α = 0 . 05 . Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1169 Crupi et al . Acknowledgments The authors thank M . Gordon and J . Mewburn at the Queen’s Confocal and Imaging Facility , as well as M . Woodside and P . Paroutis at the Hospital for Sick Children Imaging Facility for technical assistance . We also thank Drs Brandy Hyndman , Taran Gujral and Douglas Richardson for advice . This research was supported by the Cancer Research Society and the Carcinoid NeuroEndocrine Tumour Society of Canada ( L . M . M . ) . M . C . is the recipient of a Queen Elizabeth II Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology . P . Y . is the recipient of a Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation Scholarship – Ontario Region . M . C . , P . Y . , E . L . and A . F . are recipients of traineeships from the Terry Fox Foundation Training Program in Transdisciplinary Cancer Research in Partnership with Canadian Institutes of Health Research ( CIHR ) . A . F . is the recipient of a Craig Jury Memorial Studentship . C . N . A . was supported by an Operating Grant from CIHR ( no . 125854 ) . Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article : Figure S1 : TIRF microscopy selectively excites fluorescence within a depth of 100nm and not at the depth of Rab5 - positive early endo - somes . A ) Epi - fluorescence illumination ( EPI ) and total internal reflec - tionfluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopyimagesof100nmfluorescentmicro - spheres ( Bangs Laboratories Inc . ) . In an EPI image ( left ) , fluorescent microspheres indicated by red arrows have settled onto the glass cover - slip . The right panel shows a TIRF image of the identical field of view , but only the adherent microspheres ( red arrows ) are visible within the ∼ 100nmevanescentfield . Scalebars = 5 μ m . B ) EPIandTIRFmicroscopy images of live cells expressing CLCa - EGFP and Rab5 - Strawberry . EPI images show clathrin light chain and the endosomal marker Rab5 dis - persed within a retinal epithelial pigment ( RPE ) cell . The TIRF images showthatonlyCLCa - EGFPisvisibleatthecellmembrane , withinadepth of ∼ 100nm , as Rab5 - positive early endosomes lie deeper within the cell . Scale bars = 5 μ m . Figure S2 : RET isoforms at the cell surface do not colocalize with CLCa or CAV1 structures before GDNF stimulation . A ) Repre - sentative dual - colour TIRF microscopy images of RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry with CLCa - EGFP in RPE cells . No appreciable colocalization was detected in the absence of GDNF addition . Scale Bars = 10 μ m . Insets ( lower right ) show the indicated regions at higher magnification . B ) Representative dual - colour TIRF microscopy images of RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry with CAV1 - EGFP in HeLa cells . No colocalization was detected in the absence of GDNF addition . Scale bars = 10 μ m . Insets ( lower right ) show the indicated regions at higher magnification . Figure S3 : CLCa - EGFP , but not CAV1 - EGFP puncta at the cell mem - brane are enriched for RET isoforms . TIRF microscopy images of cells expressing RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry with CLCa - EGFP or CAV1 - EGFP were used to quantify RET isoform fluorescence inten - sities in the presence of GDNF ( 10min ) . Circular regions of interest were drawn around 50 puncta of ( A ) CLCa - EGFP or ( B ) CAV1 - EGFP or 50 random ROIs per cell ( for five cells ) for each condition , and the ROIs collected from the green channel images were transferred onto the cor - responding red channel images of RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry . The randomly selected ROIs served as control regions representing back - ground overlap of RET with clathrin or caveolin . A ) Significantly more RET9 - mCherry and RET51 - mCherry localized at CLCa - EGFP puncta , relative to randomly selected ROIs ( * p = 9 . 4 × 10 − 10 , * * p = 7 . 4 × 10 − 13 ) . B ) Significantly less RET9 - mCherry and RET51 - mCherry localized at CAV1 - EGFPpuncta , relativetorandomlyselectedROIs ( * p = 1 . 2 × 10 − 13 , * * p = 2 . 0 × 10 − 15 ) . Figure S4 : Clathrin and AP2M1 knockdown block clathrin - dependent endocytosis of the transferrin receptor ( TfR ) . Polyclonal Mock KD , CHC KD , or AP2M1 KD cell lines were serum - starved and surface biotinylated at 4 ∘ C , before being returned to 37 ∘ C with media for 5min . Cells were cooled to 4 ∘ C and the remaining surface biotin was stripped with MeSNa buffer . The amount of biotinylated TfR remaining in each sample , indicative of internalized protein , was assessed by streptavidin pulldown ( Strep . IP ) and immunoblotting . Constitutive internalization of TfR was blocked in the absence of either clathrin or AP2 . WCL = whole cell lysate , TP = total surface protein control ( no internalization , no strip - ping ) , M / 0 = MeSNa stripping control ( no internalization ) . Densitome - try ( in I MAGE J ) was used to determine the average percentage of initial surface - localized and biotinylated TfR recovered via pull - down on strep - tavidin beads . All western blots are representative of three or more inde - pendent experiments . Figure S5 : Fluorescence micrographs of CCPs and AP2 structures obtained by TIRF . A ) Automated detection of CCPs . Shown are repre - sentative fluorescence micrographs of cells expressing the indicated RET formintheabsenceorpresence ( 6mintreatment ) ofGDNF . Thepositions of individual CCP detections are represented by red circles . The green channel ( CLCa - EGFP ) was selected as the ‘master’ channel such that object detection occurred only for CCPs . Within these detected objects , the software then measured the intensity of RET - mCherry ( within the ‘slave’ red channel ) . The red channel was not used for object detection , and the detections represented by circles on both the CLCa - EGFP and RET - mCherry images correspond to the positions of the detected CCPs in the corresponding green channel . B ) RPE cells expressing CLCa - EGFP and GFR α 1 , with RET9 - mCherry ( bottom panels ) or RET51 - mCherry ( top panels ) were stimulated with GDNF and subjected to time - lapse TIRF microscopy with a frame rate of 0 . 5per second . Time - lapse image series were subjected to automated analysis of CCPs using cmeAnal - ysis ( see Materials and Methods ) . Average fluorescence intensities for RET ( red ) and CLCa ( green ) per lifetime cohort ( 20 – 40 , 40 – 60 and 60 – 80seconds ) , are shown for RET - positive CCPs as mean ± SE ( shaded areas ) . Grey boxes indicate the time corresponding to the initial recruit - ment of CLCa - EGFP , based on visual inspection of the traces . C ) GDNF stimulation results in time - dependent localization of RET receptors to AP2 puncta . RET9 - mCherry or RET51 - mCherry and GFR α 1 were tran - siently expressed in parental RPE cells ( not otherwise stably expressing any fluorescent proteins ) . Cells were stimulated with GDNF as indicated and then fixed and subjected to immunofluorescence staining for AP2 . WholecellimagesweresubsequentlyusedforautomateddetectionofAP2 puncta as described in Figure 7 . Shown are representative micrographs obtainedbyTIRFmicroscopy . Scalebars = 5 μ m . Regionsofinterest ( indi - cated by white boxes ) correspond to the higher magnification images shown in Figure 7A . 1170 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms References 1 . Casaletto JB , McClatchey AI . Spatial regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases in development and cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 2012 ; 12 : 387 – 400 . 2 . Sigismund S , Confalonieri S , Ciliberto A , Polo S , Scita G , Di Fiore PP . Endocytosis and signaling : cell logistics shape the eukaryotic cell plan . Physiol Rev 2012 ; 92 : 273 – 366 . 3 . Sorkin A , Fortian A . Endocytosis and endosomal sorting of receptor tyrosine kinases . In : Receptor Tyrosine Kinases : Structure , Functions and Role in Human Disease . New York : Springer ; 2015 , pp . 133 – 161 . 4 . Aguet F , Antonescu CN , Mettlen M , Schmid SL , Danuser G . Advances in analysis of low signal - to - noise images link dynamin and AP2 to the functions of an endocytic checkpoint . Dev Cell 2013 ; 26 : 279 – 291 . 5 . McMahon HT , Boucrot E . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011 ; 12 : 517 – 533 . 6 . Parton RG , del Pozo MA . Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors , protectors and organizers . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2013 ; 14 : 98 – 112 . 7 . Tomas A , Futter CE , Eden ER . EGF receptor trafﬁcking : consequences for signaling and cancer . Trends Cell Biol 2014 ; 24 : 26 – 34 . 8 . Goh LK , Sorkin A . Endocytosis of receptor tyrosine kinases . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2013 ; 5 : a017459 . 9 . Saffarian S , Cocucci E , Kirchhausen T . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS Biol 2009 ; 7 : e1000191 . 10 . Kirchhausen T . Imaging endocytic clathrin structures in living cells . Trends Cell Biol 2009 ; 19 : 596 – 605 . 11 . Grove J , Metcalf DJ , Knight AE , Wavre - Shapton ST , Sun T , Protonotarios E , Grifﬁn LD , Lippincott - Schwartz J , Marsh M . Flat Clathrin Lattices : stable features of the plasma membrane . Mol Biol Cell 2014 ; 25 : 3581 – 3594 . 12 . Mayor S , Riezman H . Sorting GPI - anchored proteins . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004 ; 5 : 110 – 120 . 13 . Sigismund S , Woelk T , Puri C , Maspero E , Tacchetti C , Transidico P , Di Fiore PP , Polo S . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 ; 102 : 2760 – 2765 . 14 . Sehat B , Andersson S , Girnita L , Larsson O . Identiﬁcation of c - Cbl as a new ligase for insulin - like growth factor - I receptor with distinct roles from Mdm2 in receptor ubiquitination and endocytosis . Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : 5669 – 5677 . 15 . Salani B , Passalacqua M , Mafﬁoli S , Briatore L , Hamoudane M , Contini P , Cordera R , Maggi D . IGF - IR internalizes with Caveolin - 1 and PTRF / Cavin in HaCat cells . PLoS One 2010 ; 5 : e14157 . 16 . Mayor S , Parton RG , Donaldson JG . Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 . 17 . Polo S , Di Fiore PP , Sigismund S . Keeping EGFR signaling in check : ubiquitin is the guardian . Cell Cycle 2014 ; 13 : 681 – 682 . 18 . Boucrot E , Ferreira AP , Almeida - Souza L , Debard S , Vallis Y , Howard G , Bertot L , Sauvonnet N , McMahon HT . Endophilin marks and controls a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Nature 2015 ; 517 : 460 – 465 . 19 . Johannes L , Parton RG , Bassereau P , Mayor S . Building endocytic pits without clathrin . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2015 ; 16 : 311 – 321 . 20 . Ferguson SM , De Camilli P . Dynamin , a membrane - remodelling GTPase . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2012 ; 13 : 75 – 88 . 21 . Jackson LP , Kelly BT , McCoy AJ , Gaffry T , James LC , Collins BM , Honing S , Evans PR , Owen DJ . A large - scale conformational change couples membrane recruitment to cargo binding in the AP2 clathrin adaptor complex . Cell 2010 ; 141 : 1220 – 1229 . 22 . Cocucci E , Aguet F , Boulant S , Kirchhausen T . The ﬁrst ﬁve seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell 2012 ; 150 : 495 – 507 . 23 . Godlee C , Kaksonen M . Review series : from uncertain beginnings : initiation mechanisms of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 2013 ; 203 : 717 – 725 . 24 . Kelly BT , Graham SC , Liska N , Dannhauser PN , Honing S , Ungewickell EJ , Owen DJ . Clathrin adaptors . AP2 controls clathrin polymerization with a membrane - activated switch . Science 2014 ; 345 : 459 – 463 . 25 . Wrighton KH . Endocytosis : Unlocking AP2 activity . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2014 ; 15 : 560 – 561 . 26 . Sorkin A . Cargo recognition during clathrin - mediated endocytosis : a team effort . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2004 ; 16 : 392 – 399 . 27 . Avantaggiato V , Dathan NA , Grieco M , Fabien N , Lazzaro D , Fusco A , Simeone A , Santoro M . Developmental expression of the RET protooncogene . Cell Growth Differ 1994 ; 5 : 305 – 311 . 28 . Schuchardt A , D’Agati V , Larsson - Blomberg L , Costantini F , Pachnis V . Defects in the kidney and enteric nervous system of mice lacking the tyrosine kinase receptor Ret . Nature 1994 ; 367 : 380 – 383 . 29 . Mulligan L . RET revisited : expanding the oncogenic portfolio . Nat Rev Cancer 2014 ; 14 : 173 – 186 . 30 . Gil Z , Cavel O , Kelly K , Brader P , Rein A , Gao SP , Carlson DL , Shah JP , Fong Y , Wong RJ . Paracrine regulation of pancreatic cancer cell invasion by peripheral nerves . J Natl Cancer Inst 2010 ; 102 : 107 – 118 . 31 . Kang J , Perry JK , Pandey V , Fielder GC , Mei B , Qian PX , Wu ZS , Zhu T , Liu DX , Lobie PE . Artemin is oncogenic for human mammary carcinoma cells . Oncogene 2009 ; 28 : 2034 – 2045 . 32 . Morandi A , Plaza - Menacho I , Isacke CM . RET in breast cancer : functional and therapeutic implications . Trends Mol Med 2011 ; 17 : 149 – 157 . 33 . Plaza - Menacho I , Morandi A , Robertson D , Pancholi S , Drury S , Dowsett M , Martin LA , Isacke CM . Targeting the receptor tyrosine kinase RET sensitizes breast cancer cells to tamoxifen treatment and reveals a role for RET in endocrine resistance . Oncogene 2010 ; 29 : 4648 – 4657 . 34 . Tansey MG , Baloh RH , Milbrandt J , Johnson EM . GFRalpha - mediated localization of RET to lipid rafts is required for effective downstream signaling , differentiation , and neuronal survival . Neuron 2000 ; 25 : 611 – 623 . 35 . Pierchala BA , Milbrandt J , Johnson EM Jr . Glial cell line - derived neurotrophic factor - dependent recruitment of Ret into lipid rafts enhances signaling by partitioning Ret from proteasome - dependent degradation . J Neurosci 2006 ; 26 : 2777 – 2787 . 36 . Paratcha G , Ledda F , Baars L , Coulpier M , Besset V , Anders J , Scott R , Ibanez CF . Released GFRalpha1 potentiates downstream signaling , neuronal survival , and differentiation via a novel mechanism of recruitment of c - Ret to lipid rafts . Neuron 2001 ; 29 : 171 – 184 . 37 . Martinez - Outschoorn UE , Sotgia F , Lisanti MP . Caveolae and signalling in cancer . Nat Rev Cancer 2015 ; 15 : 225 – 237 . Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1171 Crupi et al . 38 . Myers SM , Eng C , Ponder BAJ , Mulligan LM . Characterization of RET proto - oncogene 3’ splicing variants and polyadenylation sites : a novel C terminus for RET . Oncogene 1995 ; 11 : 2039 – 2045 . 39 . Tahira T , Ishizaka Y , Itoh F , Sugimura T , Nagao M . Characterization of ret proto - oncogene mRNAs encoding two isoforms of the protein product in a human neuroblastoma cell line . Oncogene 1990 ; 5 : 97 – 102 . 40 . Tsui - Pierchala BA , Ahrens RC , Crowder RJ , Milbrandt J , Johnson EM Jr . The long and short isoforms of Ret function as independent signaling complexes . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 34618 – 34625 . 41 . de Graaff E , Srinivas S , Kilkenny C , D’Agati V , Mankoo BS , Costantini F , Pachnis V . Differential activities of the RET tyrosine kinase receptor isoforms during mammalian embryogenesis . Genes Dev 2001 ; 15 : 2433 – 2444 . 42 . Heanue TA , Pachnis V . Ret isoform function and marker gene expression in the enteric nervous system is conserved across diverse vertebrate species . Mech Dev 2008 ; 125 : 687 – 699 . 43 . Barlow A , de Graaff E , Pachnis V . Enteric nervous system progenitors are coordinately controlled by the G protein - coupled receptor EDNRB and the receptor tyrosine kinase RET . Neuron 2003 ; 40 : 905 – 916 . 44 . Ivanchuk SM , Myers SM , Mulligan LM . Expression of RET 3’ splicing variants during human kidney development . Oncogene 1998 ; 16 : 991 – 996 . 45 . Richardson DS , Lai AZ , Mulligan LM . RET ligand - induced internalization and its consequences for downstream signaling . Oncogene 2006 ; 25 : 3206 – 3211 . 46 . Richardson DS , Rodrigues DM , Hyndman BD , Crupi MJF , Nicolescu AC , Mulligan LM . Alternative splicing results in RET isoforms with distinct trafﬁcking properties . Mol Biol Cell 2012 ; 23 : 3838 – 3850 . 47 . Mora RC , Bonilha VL , Shin BC , Hu J , Cohen - Gould L , Bok D , Rodriguez - Boulan E . Bipolar assembly of caveolae in retinal pigment epithelium . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2006 ; 290 : C832 – C843 . 48 . Ludwig A , Howard G , Mendoza - Topaz C , Deerinck T , Mackey M , Sandin S , Ellisman MH , Nichols BJ . Molecular composition and ultrastructure of the caveolar coat complex . PLoS Biol 2013 ; 11 : e1001640 . 49 . Crupi MJF , Richardson DS , Mulligan LM . Cell surface biotinylation of receptor tyrosine kinases to investigate intracellular trafﬁcking . Methods Mol Biol 2015 ; 1233 : 91 – 102 . 50 . Liu AP , Aguet F , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Local clustering of transferrin receptors promotes clathrin - coated pit initiation . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 191 : 1381 – 1393 . 51 . Mettlen M , Loerke D , Yarar D , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Cargo - and adaptor - speciﬁc mechanisms regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 188 : 919 – 933 . 52 . Plaza - Menacho I , Barnouin K , Goodman K , Martinez - Torres RJ , Borg A , Murray - Rust J , Mouilleron S , Knowles P , McDonald NQ . Oncogenic RET kinase domain mutations perturb the autophosphorylation trajectory by enhancing substrate presentation in trans . Mol Cell 2014 ; 53 : 738 – 751 . 53 . Gujral TS , Singh VK , Jia Z , Mulligan LM . Molecular mechanisms of RET receptor - mediated oncogenesis in multiple endocrine neoplasia 2B . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 10741 – 10749 . 54 . Parachoniak CA , Luo Y , Abella JV , Keen JH , Park M . GGA3 functions as a switch to promote Met receptor recycling , essential for sustained ERK and cell migration . Dev Cell 2011 ; 20 : 751 – 763 . 55 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM . Endocytic trafﬁcking of activated EGFR is AP - 2 dependent and occurs through preformed clathrin spots . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 ( Pt 9 ) : 1301 – 1305 . 56 . Lamaze C , Schmid SL . Recruitment of epidermal growth - factor receptors into coated pits requires their activated tyrosine kinase . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 129 : 47 – 54 . 57 . Mettlen M , Stoeber M , Loerke D , Antonescu CN , Danuser G , Schmid SL . Endocytic accessory proteins are functionally distinguished by their differential effects on the maturation of clathrin - coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 2009 ; 20 : 3251 – 3260 . 58 . Bitsikas V , Correa IR Jr , Nichols BJ . Clathrin - independent pathways do not contribute signiﬁcantly to endocytic ﬂux . Elife 2014 ; 3 : e03970 . 59 . Kovtun O , Tillu VA , Ariotti N , Parton RG , Collins BM . Cavin family proteins and the assembly of caveolae . J Cell Sci 2015 ; 128 : 1269 – 1278 . 60 . Kirchhausen T , Owen D , Harrison SC . Molecular structure , function , and dynamics of clathrin - mediated membrane trafﬁc . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016725 . 61 . Traub LM , Bonifacino JS . Cargo recognition in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2013 ; 5 : a016790 . 62 . Nesterov A , Kurten RC , Gill GN . Association of epidermal growth factor receptors with coated pit adaptins via a tyrosine phosphorylation - regulated mechanism . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 6320 – 6327 . 63 . Sorkin A , Mazzotti M , Sorkina T , Scotto L , Beguinot L . Epidermal growth factor receptor interaction with clathrin adaptors is mediated by the Tyr974 - containing internalization motif . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 13377 – 13384 . 64 . Goh LK , Huang F , Kim W , Gygi S , Sorkin A . Multiple mechanisms collectively regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 189 : 871 – 883 . 65 . Royle SJ , Qureshi OS , Bobanovic LK , Evans PR , Owen DJ , Murrell - Lagnado RD . Non - canonical YXXGPhi endocytic motifs : recognition by AP2 and preferential utilization in P2X4 receptors . J Cell Sci 2005 ; 118 : 3073 – 3080 . 66 . Geisler C , Dietrich J , Nielsen BL , Kastrup J , Lauritsen JP , Odum N , Christensen MD . Leucine - based receptor sorting motifs are dependent on the spacing relative to the plasma membrane . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 21316 – 21323 . 67 . Ehrlich M , Shmuely A , Henis YI . A single internalization signal from the di - leucine family is critical for constitutive endocytosis of the type II TGF - beta receptor . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 1777 – 1786 . 68 . Jiang X , Huang F , Marusyk A , Sorkin A . Grb2 regulates internalization of EGF receptors through clathrin - coated pits . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 858 – 870 . 69 . Alberti L , Borrello MG , Ghizzoni S , Torriti F , Rizzetti MG , Pierotti MA . Grb2 binding to the different isoforms of Ret tyrosine kinase . Oncogene 1998 ; 17 : 1079 – 1087 . 1172 Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 Internalization of RET Isoforms 70 . Jain S , Encinas M , Johnson EM Jr , Milbrandt J . Critical and distinct roles for key RET tyrosine docking sites in renal development . Genes Dev 2006 ; 20 : 321 – 333 . 71 . Ehrlich M , Boll W , Van Oijen A , Hariharan R , Chandran K , Nibert ML , Kirchhausen T . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 2004 ; 118 : 591 – 605 . 72 . Volonte D , Galbiati F , Lisanti MP . Visualization of caveolin - 1 , a caveolar marker protein , in living cells using green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) chimeras . The subcellular distribution of caveolin - 1 is modulated by cell - cell contact . FEBS Lett 1999 ; 445 : 431 – 439 . 73 . Nesterov A , Carter RE , Sorkina T , Gill GN , Sorkin A . Inhibition of the receptor - binding function of clathrin adaptor protein AP - 2 by dominant - negative mutant mu2 subunit and its effects on endocytosis . EMBO J 1999 ; 18 : 2489 – 2499 . 74 . Owen DJ , Evans PR . A structural explanation for the recognition of tyrosine - based endocytotic signals . Science 1998 ; 282 : 1327 – 1332 . 75 . Koytiger G , Kaushansky A , Gordus A , Rush J , Sorger PK , MacBeath G . Phosphotyrosine signaling proteins that drive oncogenesis tend to be highly interconnected . Mol Cell Proteomics 2013 ; 12 : 1204 – 1213 . Trafﬁc 2015 ; 16 : 1155 – 1173 1173