Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências ISSN : 0001 - 3765 aabc @ abc . org . br Academia Brasileira de Ciências Brasil Pelosi , Paolo ; Rocco , Patricia R . M . ; Negrini , Daniela ; Passi , Alberto The extracellular matrix of the lung and its role in edema formation Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências , vol . 79 , núm . 2 , junho , 2007 , pp . 285 - 297 Academia Brasileira de Ciências Rio de Janeiro , Brasil Available in : http : / / www . redalyc . org / articulo . oa ? id = 32779210 How to cite Complete issue More information about this article Journal ' s homepage in redalyc . org Scientific Information System Network of Scientific Journals from Latin America , the Caribbean , Spain and Portugal Non - profit academic project , developed under the open access initiative Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) : 285 - 297 ( Annals of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences ) ISSN 0001 - 3765 www . scielo . br / aabc The extracellular matrix of the lung and its role in edema formation PAOLO PELOSI 1 , PATRICIA R . M . ROCCO 2 , DANIELA NEGRINI 3 and ALBERTO PASSI 3 1 Servizio di Anestesia B , Department of Ambient , Health and Safety , University of Insubria , Ospedale di Circolo e Fondazione Macchi , viale Borri 57 , 21100 Varese , Italy 2 Laboratório de Investigação Pulmonar , Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho , Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro , Centro de Ciências da Saúde , Ilha do Fundão , 21941 - 902 Rio de Janeiro , RJ , Brasil 3 Department of Experimental , Biomedical and Clinical Sciences , University of Insubria , Via HG Dunant 5 , 21100 Varese Italy Manuscript received on March 29 , 2007 ; accepted for publication on April 24 , 2007 ; presented by L UCIA M ENDONÇA P REVIATO ABSTRACT The extracellular matrix is composed of a three - dimensional ﬁber mesh ﬁlled with different macromolecules such as : collagen ( mainly type I and III ) , elastin , glycosaminoglycans , and proteoglycans . In the lung , the extracellular matrix has several functions which provide : 1 ) mechanical tensile and compressive strength and elasticity , 2 ) low mechanical tissue compliance contributing to the maintenance of normal interstitial ﬂuid dynamics , 3 ) low resistive pathway for an effective gas exchange , d ) control of cell behavior by the binding of growth factors , chemokines , cytokines and the interaction with cell - surface receptors , and e ) tissue repair and remodeling . Fragmentation and disorganization of extracellular matrix components comprises the protective role of the extracellular matrix , leading to interstitial and eventually severe lung edema . Thus , once conditions of increased microvascular ﬁltration are established , matrix remodeling proceeds fairly rapidly due to the activation of proteases . Conversely , a massive matrix deposition of collagen ﬁber decreases interstitial compliance and therefore makes the tissue safety factor stronger . As a result , changes in lung extracellular matrix signiﬁcantly affect edema formation and distribution in the lung . Key words : collagen , glycosaminoglycans , proteoglycan , interstitial pressure . INTRODUCTION The Extracellular Matrix ( ECM ) represents the three - dimensional scaffold of the alveolar wall , which is com - posed of a layer of epithelial and endothelial cells , their basement membrane and a thin layer of interstitial space lying between the capillary endothelium and the alveolar epithelium ( West and Mathieu - Costello 1999 ) . In the segment where the epithelial and endothe - lial basement membranes are not fused , the interstitium is composed of cells , the ﬂuid phase of the ECM and a macromolecular ﬁbrous component . This ﬁbrous mesh consists mainly of collagen types I and III , which provide Correspondence to : Prof . Paolo Pelosi E - mail : ppelosi @ hotmail . com tensile strength , elastin conveying elastic recoil ( Rocco et al . 2001 , 2003 ) , and glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) , the major components of the non - ﬁbrillar interstitium com - partment ( Negrini et al . 2003 , Souza - Fernandes et al . 2006 ) . In the lung , the ECM plays several roles which provide : a ) mechanical tensile and compressive strength and elasticity ; b ) low mechanical tissue compliance con - tributing to the maintenance of normal interstitial ﬂuid dynamics ( Miserocchi et al . 1993 ) ; c ) low resistive path - way for an effective gas exchange , d ) control of cell be - havior by the binding of growth factors , chemokines , cytokines and the interaction with cell - surface receptors ( Johnson et al . 2005 ) , and e ) tissue repair and remod - eling . Although many functions of ECM are very well described ( Roberts et al . 1997 , Noble and Jiang 2006 ) An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) 286 PAOLO PELOSI et al . the role of ECM components on the maintenance of in - terstitial ﬂuid volume needs to be better clariﬁed . In this review , we will discuss the ECM organiza - tion and the relationship between ECM and lung edema . THE EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX ORGANIZATION The ECM consists of ﬁbrous proteins ( collagen and elas - tin ) and structural or adhesive proteins ( ﬁbronectin and laminin ) embeddedinahydratedpolysaccharidegelcon - taining several glycosaminoglycans . COLLAGEN Collagen ﬁbers constitute the main component of the ECM and are a ﬁbrous protein that consists of three α - chains , whichformarope - liketriplehelix , providingten - sile strength to the ECM ( Montes 1996 ) . Despite their broad diversity in the connective tissue , types I , II , III ( ﬁbrillar ) and IV , V , VI ( non ﬁbrillar or amorphous ) rep - resent the main collagen ﬁbers . Type III collagen ﬁber is more ﬂexible and susceptible to breakdown , type I collagen is comprised of thicker more cross - linked ﬁb - ril ( Rocco et al . 2001 , Santos et al . 2006 ) , whereas type IV collagen ﬁber is located mainly in basement mem - brane . Their turnover is a dynamic process , necessary to the maintenance of the normal lung architecture ( Rocco et al . 2003 ) . The ﬁnal collagen accumulation does not depend only on its synthesis , but also , on its degradation ( Rocco et al . 2001 , 2003 ) . Consequently , the ECM is a dynamic structure , and equilibrium between synthesis and degradation of ECM components is required for the maintenance of its homeostasis ( Santos et al . 2006 ) . ELASTIN Elastic ﬁbers represent another constituent of the ECM and comprise three components deﬁned according to their amount of elastin and ﬁbril orientation : 1 ) oxytalan ﬁber composed of a bundle of microﬁbrils , 2 ) elaunin ﬁbers made up of microﬁbrils and a small amount of elastin , and 3 ) fully developed elastic ﬁbers consisting of microﬁbrils and abundant elastin ( Montes 1996 ) . Many types of cells , including condroblasts , myoﬁbroblasts , and smooth muscle cells synthesize these ﬁbers . Due to their mechanical properties , elastic ﬁbers provide recoil tension to restore the parenchyma to its previous conﬁgu - rationafterstimulusforinspirationhasceased . Innormal alveolar septa , a subepithelial layer of elastic ﬁbers com - posed mainly of fully developed elastic ﬁbers , confers a great elasticity to the alveolar tissue in normal situa - tions ( Mercer and Crapo 1990 ) . Elastosis , as determined by septal inﬂammation and ﬁber fragmentation , leads to derangement of the alveolar wall architecture ( Negri et al . 2000 , Rocco et al . 2003 ) . In response to increased tissue destruction , reactivation of elastin synthesis is ob - served , resulting in signiﬁcant changes in the mechanical properties of the lung ( Rocco et al . 2001 ) . GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS AND PROTEOGLYCANS In the connective tissue , proteoglycans ( PGs ) form a gelatinous and hydrated substance embedding the ﬁb - rous proteins . Proteoglycans are constituted of a central protein bound to one or more polysaccharides , denomi - nated glycosaminoglycans ( GAGs ) . G LYCOSAMINOGLYCANS GAGs are long , linear , and heterogeneous polysaccha - rides , which consist of repeating disaccharide units . There are two main types of GAGs : 1 ) Non - sulfated GAG ( hyaluronic acid ) and 2 ) Sulfated GAGs ( heparan sulfate and heparin , chondroitin sulfate , dermatan sul - fate , and keratan sulfate ) . With the exception of hyalu - ronic acid , GAGs are usually covalently attached to a protein core , forming an overall structure referred to as proteoglycans ( Souza - Fernandes et al . 2006 ) . Non sulfated glycosaminoglycan : hyaluronic acid Hyaluronic acid is the most abundant and the largest non - sulfated GAG in the ECM . It is primarily synthe - sized by mesenchymal cells , being a necessary molecule for the assembly of a connective tissue matrix and an important stabilizing constituent of the loose connective tissue . It also participates in tissue hydration ( Tammi et al . 2002 ) , and is involved in several other functions , such as tissue repair ( Li et al . 2000 ) , and protection against infections and proteolytic granulocyte enzymes ( Cantor et al . 2000 ) . Sulfated glycosaminoglycans These other GAGs are synthesized intracellularly , sul - fated , secreted , and usually covalently bound into pro - An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX OF THE LUNG 287 teoglycans . The polyanionic nature of GAGs is the main determinant of the physical properties of PGs molecules , allowing them to resist compressive forces and to si - multaneously maintain tissue hydration . They are much smaller than HA , usually only 20 to 200 sugar residues long ( Souza - Fernandes et al . 2006 ) . Within the lung parenchyma , the most abundant sul - fated GAG is heparan sulfate , a polysaccharide that is ex - pressed in virtually every cell in the body and comprises 50 % to 90 % of the total endothelial PGs ( Whitelock and Iozzo 2005 ) . Although it is initially produced in a cell - surface - boundform , itcanalsobeshedasasolubleGAG . The mechanism of action of heparan sulfate includes a speciﬁc and non - covalent interaction with various pro - teins which affects the topographical destination , half - life , and bioactivity of the protein . Furthermore , hep - aran sulfate acts on morphogenesis , development , and organogenesis ( Whitelock and Iozzo 2005 ) . Heparan sulfate is also involved in a variety of biological pro - cesses including cell - matrix interactions and activation of chemokines , enzymes , and growth factors ( Whitelock and Iozzo 2005 ) . Heparin is the most highly modiﬁed form of hep - aran sulfate . This GAG , which can be considered an oversulfated intracellular variant of the heparan sulfate , is commonly used in patients as an anticoagulant drug ( Whitelock and Iozzo 2005 ) . Heparin and heparan sul - fate are very closely related and may share many struc - tural and functional activities . The lung is a rich na - tive source of heparin . Heparin’s abundance may be ex - plained by the fact that the lung is rich in mast cells , which may be heparin’s sole original cell . Mast cell hep - arinresidesinsecretorygranules , wheremostoftheGAG chains are linked to a core protein ( serglycin ) , forming macromolecular PGs much larger than commercial hep - arin . Very little heparin is incorporated into cell surface PG of epithelial and endothelial cells that are more likely tocontainheparansulfate , whichinturnisunder - sulfated compared with heparin . Some heparan sulfate chains of vascular endothelium contain short heparin - like se - quences . However , most native lung heparin is locked up in mast cells as large PGs . This does not necessarily mean that heparin’s physiological action occurs exclu - sively within cells , because stimulated mast cells secrete heparin outside the cell along with granule - associated mediators , such as histamine , chymase , and tryptase ( Ruoss et al . 1991 ) . P ROTEOGLYCANS In the lung , the main PGs families may be distinguished based on GAGs composition , molecular weight , and function : chondroitin sulfate - containing PG ( CS - PG : Versican ) , heparan sulfate - containing PGs ( HS - PGs : Perlecan and Glypican ) , chondroitin and heparan sulfate - containing PGs ( CS - HS - PGs : Syndecan ) , and dermatan - sulfate - containing PGs ( DS - PG : Decorin ) . They are lo - calized in different areas of the extracellular matrix : ver - sican in the pulmonary interstitium , perlecan in the vas - cular basement membrane , decorin in the interstitium and in the epithelial basement membrane linked with col - lagen ﬁbrils , syndecan and glypican in the cell surface ( Roberts et al . 1997 ) . Versican is a large molecule found around lung ﬁ - broblasts and blood vessels in regions not occupied by collagen and elastin ( Roberts et al . 1997 ) . The precise function of versican is unclear but it is thought to be in - volved in tissue hydration in mature tissues . It may form aggregates with hyaluronic acid , ﬁbronectin and various collagens , playing an important role in cell to matrix in - teraction . Versican has been shown to link with smooth muscle cells in the walls of airways and lung vessels , in - hibiting cell - matrix adhesion ( Iozzo and Murdoch 1996 ) , regulating mesenchymal cells differentiation and , stim - ulating matrix synthesis , favoring wound healing . Perlecan is the largest PG in the lung and is a typical component of vascular basement membrane ( Yurchenko and Schittny 1990 ) , although it has also been identiﬁed within the ECM of some tissues , remote from basement membrane . Certainly its complex core protein provides the potential to interact with numerous proteins . In the basement membranes it provides a ﬁltration barrier inter - acting with collagen IV limiting ﬂow of macromolecules or cells between two tissue compartments . It also regu - lates the interaction of the basic ﬁbroblast growth factors with their receptors and modulates tissue metabolism . Syndecanandglypicanareconverselymoredensely arranged in the cell surface ( Zhao et al . 1999 ) . Sinde - can´s function is commonly associated with its heparan sulfate chains playing a relevant role in wound healing ( Tumova et al . 2000 ) . An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) 288 PAOLO PELOSI et al . Decorin is the smallest dermatan - sulfate - containing PGs . The presence of decorin alters the kinetics of ﬁbril formationandthediameteroftheresultingﬁbril ( Roberts et al . 1997 ) modulating tissue remodeling . Indeed , its name was derived from its surface decoration of collagen ﬁbrils when viewed in the electron microscope . These data indicate that the function of PGs and GAGs in the lung is not limited to the maintenance of the mechanical and ﬂuid dynamic properties of the par - enchyma . These molecules are also important in tissue development and recovery after injury , interacting with inﬂammatory cells , proteases , and growth factors . Thus , the ECM transmits essential information to pulmonary cells , regulating their proliferation , differentiation , and organization . The structural integrity of the pulmonary interstitium largely depends on the balance between the regulation of synthesis and degradation of ECM components . EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX METALLOPROTEASIS Although many proteases are able to cleave ECM mo - lecules , the family of Zn + + matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) and their inhibitors are likely to be the normal physiologically relevant mediators of ECM degradation ( Lanchou et al . 2003 , Elkington and Friedland 2006 , Greenlee et al . 2007 ) . They can degrade many proteins including collagens , ﬁbronectin , laminin , proteoglycans , entactins , and elastin . In particular , they are very impor - tant in : a ) the breakdown of ECM and basement mem - brane , b ) tissue remodeling and angiogenesis , and c ) the restoration of functional connective tissue in the wound - healing process . Gelatinases ( MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 ) are the subgroup of MMPs most extensively studied in human intersti - tial lung diseases and in experimental models of lung ﬁbrosis , probably due to the facility and great sensitivity of revealing gelatinolytic activity through gelatin zymo - grams . Both gelatinases contain ﬁbronectin type II - like repeatswithintheircatalyticdomain , resultinginahigher binding afﬁnity to gelatin and elastin . The MMP - 2 is produced by ﬁbroblasts , endothelial and epithelial cells , and macrophages . MMP - 2 ( gelatinase A ) is known to be effective primarily against type IV collagen and other basement - membrane components although a weak abil - ity to degrade stromal collagens has been also reported . On the contrary MMP - 9 ( gelatinase B ) is not produced by resident cells , but under various forms of stimula - tion bronchial epithelial cells , ciliar cells , alveolar type II cells , ﬁbroblasts , smooth muscle cells , and endothelial cells may produce MMP - 9 . Alveolar type I , neuroen - docrine , and goblet cells have not yet been shown to produce MMP - 9 . Leukocytes in the lung can also be a source of MMP - 9 . Macrophages , eosinophils , mast cells , lymphocytes , and dendritic cells all can produce MMP - 9 . Because MMPs may cause signiﬁcant host dam - age , their proteolytic activity is tightly regulated . Thus , MMPs are rarely stored , but require gene transcription before secretion , with the exception of neutrophil MMP - 8 and - 9 . In fact , these are either secreted as pro - enzymes that require proteolytic cleavage or are activated intra - cellularly by pro - protein convertases such as furin . Spe - ciﬁc inhibitors of MMPs – the tissue inhibitors of met - alloproteinases ( TIMPs ) – which bind MMPs in a 1 : 1 manner are secreted to prevent enzymatic activity ; as a result the balance between MMPs and TIMPs determines matrix turnover , where either an excess of MMPs or a deﬁcit of TIMPs may result in excess ECM degradation ( Elkington and Friedland 2006 ) . The majority of MMPs are not expressed in nor - mal healthy tissues , but are expressed in diseased tis - sues , that are inﬂamed or undergoing repair and remod - eling ( Lanchou et al . 2003 ) . MMP expression may be upregulated by exogenous stimuli , cytokines , and cell - cell contact . Conversely , cytokines such as interferon ( IFN ) - γ and interleukins ( IL ) - 4 and - 10 may down reg - ulate MMP expression . Both inﬂammatory and stromal cells can express MMPs , although the proﬁle is both cell and stimulus speciﬁc . THE EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX AND THE BASAL MEMBRANE The basal lamina of pulmonary cells is extremely com - plex and it is composed of different molecules like la - minin , nidogen , and perlecan ( Fig . 1 ) ( Furuyama and Mochitate 2000 ) . 1 ) Laminin is a 100 nm long sword - shaped trimmer which self - assembles into a feltlike sheet with the help of its beta / gamma arms ( Jones et al . 2005 ) . Laminins are important in linking the cells to their An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX OF THE LUNG 289 basement membranes . The ‘sword’ tips can bind cell receptors , and the crosspieces allow laminin to bind to other laminin molecules . Other sites for nidogen and perlecan binding are also present in the molecule ; 2 ) Nidogen , also known as entactin , is a dumbbell shaped 150 kDa sulfated glycoprotein , with three domains . Nidogen connects laminin to both the col - lagen layers and perlecan in the basal lamina ; 3 ) Perlecan , which has a 400 kDa core protein with three heparan sulfate chains attached , is the pre - dominant proteoglycan in the basal lamina . It binds to collagen , laminin , nidogen , and other perlecan molecules ( Nguyen et al . 2002 ) . On one side of the cell membrane , the basal lamina is linked to the cell by means of integrins ( Tschumper - lin et al . 2004 , Ingber 2006 , ) , while on the other side it is liked to the ECM through links to collagen type IV . Integrins are adhesive membrane receptors that exist as heterodimers . They exhibit a “ Velcro” effect : i . e . they have strength in numbers , but are individually easy to disrupt . They require Ca + + or Mg + + to bind , and their job is to link the ECM to the cytoskeleton . Fibronectin reinforces the connections between the basal lamina with both the cell membrane and the other ECM components . It is likely that type IV collagen is chieﬂy responsible for the great tensile strength of the ECM and that the other moleculesplayimportantrolesinconsolidatingthestruc - ture of the ECM and its connections with overlying cells . PULMONARY INTERSTITIAL FLUID DYNAMICS The interstitial compartment of the lung is kept at a sub - atmospheric pressure in physiological conditions , with a low amount of extravascular water . In the lung , a rela - tively “ dry” interstitial space allows a minimum thick - ness of the air - blood barrier to optimize gas diffusion . A rise in extravascular lung water may occur because of an increase in the pressure gradient across the microvas - cular barrier and / or by an increase in perm - porosity of the endothelial barrier . The maintenance of the steady state interstitial ﬂuid turnover results from the balance between several fac - tors , such as : 1 ) the transendothelial ﬂuid and solutes ﬁltration , 2 ) the convective outﬂows into the lymphatic system , and 3 ) the mechanical and hydrophilic prop - erties of the solid elements of the ECM . The hydraulic pressure of the free liquid phase of the pulmonary inters - titium ( P i ) reﬂects the dynamic situation that results from the complex interaction between the factors stated above representing a key variable to understand the mechanisms which control lung ﬂuid balance ( Miseroc - chi et al . 1990 , 1997 , Negrini et al . 2003 ) . The end - expiratory P i is signiﬁcantly lower than intra - pleural ( P liq ) and extra - pleural ( P epl ) liquid pressure , indicat - ing that the lung parenchyma is relatively “ dehydrated” compared to the other two tissue compartments ( Fig . 2 ) . The P i distribution is not uniform within the lung paren - chyma , decreasing by ∼ 0 . 7 cmH 2 O / cm of lung height . The gravity – dependent P i distribution reﬂects : a ) the uneven mechanical stress developing in lung tissue at various lung heights , b ) the inhomogeneous perfusion of the lung parenchyma , in analogy with that found in the pleural space , and c ) the greater drainage of intersti - tial ﬂuid into the lymphatic system in the lower regions . During inspiration , sustained by lowered pleural surface pressure , both P liq and P i become more subatmospheric ( Miserocchi et al . 1990 , Miserocchi and Negrini 1997 , Negrini et al . 2003 ) . The ﬂuid bulk ﬂow ( J v ) between the pulmonary capillaries ( c ) and the surrounding interstitium ( i ) is de - scribed by the well - known Starling law : J v = L p · S · [ ( P c − P i ) − σ ( π c − π i ) ] ( 1 ) where P e π are the hydraulic and colloidosmotic pres - sures in the two compartments , L p is the hydraulic ﬁl - tration coefﬁcient of the pulmonary capillary endothelial layer , S is the exchange surface area and σ is the reﬂec - tion coefﬁcient of the endothelium for total proteins , a correction factor accounting for the protein to endothe - lial pore radii ratio . The factor in the square parenthe - sis gives the net pressure gradient across the membrane , (cid:5) P net . THE EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX AND LUNG EDEMA Figure 3 shows examples of hydraulic ( P ) and colloi - dosmotic ( π ) pressures from the pulmonary capillaries ( c ) and surrounding interstitial space ( i ) under normal condition , mild or severe interstitial edema . While P i is An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) 290 PAOLO PELOSI et al . Fig . 1 – Links among the cell membrane , the basal lamina , and the extracellular matrix . very negative in normal lungs , ensuring the maintenance of a net ﬂuid ﬁltration into the interstitial space , the early phase of interstitial edema is associated to an increase in P i with no signiﬁcant change in interstitial ﬂuid volume . This phenomenon is caused by the low tissue compli - ance , provided by the tight structure of the ﬁbrous ma - trix , and represents an important “ tissue safety factor” to counteract further progression of pulmonary edema . With the worsening of the edema , P i drops back to zero and subsequently remains unchanged despite a marked increase in the wet - to - dry weight ratio of the lung . The worsening of edema occurs because of an increasingly high ﬁltration rate , in spite of a progressive augment in P i and thus a reduced (cid:5) P net . Hence , at least two fac - tors interact to determine the development of pulmonary edema : 1 ) the loss of the tissue safety factor , which re - ﬂects in an increase of tissue compliance and 2 ) a rise in microvascular permeability ( Passi et al . 1998 ) . EFFECTS OF HYDRAULIC AND LESIONAL EDEMA ON ECM COMPONENTS Interstitial lung edema led to some degree of disorgan - ization of the extracellular matrix , despite its strong me - chanical resistance , particularly at the expense of pro - teoglycans ( Negrini et al . 2003 ) . These molecules are responsible for the structural integrity of pulmonary in - terstitium as they control ﬂuid dynamics through their inﬂuence on microvascular permeability and tissue com - pliance . They also are involved in cell - cell and cell - matrix interactions and in the cytokine network since they regulate the trafﬁc of the molecules within the in - terstitial space and promote interactions ( Roberts et al . 1997 ) . To better understand the relationship between pulmonary interstitial pressure and the functional state of the matrix , hydraulic and lesional edema were devel - oped in anesthetized rabbits by intravenous injection of saline solution ( 0 . 5 ml · min - 1 · kg - 1 ) ( Miserocchi et al . 1993 ) and a single bolus of pancreatic elastase ( 200 µ g , 7 IU ) ( Negrini et al . 1998 ) , respectively . In hydraulic edema the biochemical analysis of tis - sue structure reveals an initial fragmentation of chon - droitin sulfate proteoglycan due to mechanical stress and / or proteolysis . On the other hand , in lesional edema , there is a partial fragmentation of heparan sulfate proteo - glycan because of enzymatic activity . The fragmentation of proteoglycans is probably induced by increased ex - An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX OF THE LUNG 291 Fig . 2 – Schematic representation of transpleural liquid ﬂows ( arrows ) under physiological conditions . Mesothelial cells and adjoining interstitium , with embedded capillaries and lymphatics are shown . At the top , themesothelialcelldepictsthecellmechanismsinvolvedinpleuralliquidturnover [ microvilli , vesicles , electrolyte transporters ( grey circles ) ] . Arrow size is proportional to the corresponding ﬂow magnitude . Hydraulic ( P ) and colloidosmotic ( π ) pressures ( cmH 2 O ) are involved in the Starling balance . Pepl ( extrapleural interstitial pressure ) , Pliq ( intrapleural pressure ) and Pi ( lung interstitial pressure ) . Fig . 3 – Hydraulic ( P ) and colloidosmotic ( π ) pressures of the microvasculature ( cap ) and surrounding interstitial space ( int ) under normal condition , during mild , and severe interstitial edema . Grey arrow represents transendothelial ﬂow while black arrow represents trans - lymphatic ﬂow . Hydraulic ( P ) and colloidosmotic ( π ) pressures are shown as cmH 2 O . travascular water yielding tissue stress and weakness of PGs non - covalent bands with other matrix molecules or tissue metalloproteinases activation ( Passi et al . 1999 ) . Therefore , the fragmentation of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan yielded a marked increase in tissue com - pliance and a loss in tissue safety factor , while hep - An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) 292 PAOLO PELOSI et al . aran sulfate proteoglycan lesion led to an augment in microvascular permeability ( Negrini et al . 1998 ) . Early in the course of hydraulic edema there was an increase in MMP - 2 , while in lesional edema both MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 were augmented ( Passi et al . 1998 ) . Contrary to hydraulic edema , hypoxic pulmonary edema led to fragmentation of intermediate molecular weight heparin - sulfate PGs , such as perlecan of the base - ment membrane ( Miserocchi et al . 2001b ) . Recent data also suggest that the integrity of the heparan - sulfate proteoglycan components of the pulmo - nary ECM is required to maintain the three - dimensional architecture of the matrix itself , which in turn , ensures its mechanical response to increased ﬂuid ﬁltration ( Ne - grini et al . 2006 ) . In an experimental model of ﬁbrosis there was a marked reduction in the absolute volume of edema , in parallel with a reduction in lung volume , suggesting that ﬁbrosis deeply affects the distribution of edema in the lung ( Zwinkler et al . 1994 ) . EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX AND CELL PLASMA MEMBRANE The response of epithelial cells to basement membrane deformation is affected by the extracellular matrix , plasma membrane , and cell cytoskeleton . Proteins that link the extracellular matrix with stress bearing cytos - keletal biopolymers play a pivotal role in mechanosens - ing and transduction ( Geiger et al . 2001 ) . They are as - sembled in so - called focal adhesion sites , plaques , or complexes . Focal adhesions are highly plastic structures and remodel in a force - dependent manner ( Coppolino and Dedhar 2000 ) . This allows adherent cells to probe the regional impedance of the surrounding scaffolding and , in turn , provides cues for directional control of locomotion and cell shape ( Geiger et al . 2001 ) . The most extensively studied adhesion receptors involved in mechanotransduction are the integrins . After ligand - induced activation , integrins transduce matrix - depend - ent intracellular biochemical signals . Other adhesion molecules such as cadherins are also increasingly recog - nized as playing important roles in mechanotransduction and as molecular targets of deformation induced impair - ments of the epithelial and endothelial barrier function ( Cavanaugh et al . 2001 ) . The relationship between the ECM and plasma membrane has important implications in preventing lung injury . Cells experience plasma membrane stress failure when the matrix to which they adhere undergoes large deformations ( Vlahakis and Hubmayr 2005 ) . There are someadaptiveresponsesofthelipidsurfacetodeforming stress in alveolar epithelial cells : 1 ) the cell might unfold plasma membrane , thus pre - venting any increase in plasma membrane tension , 2 ) once unfolded , the plasma membrane stretches , 3 ) if these responses are overwhelmed , the plasma membrane might either undergo stress failure or further adapt its stress - bearing elements to prevent plasma membrane breaks ( Fig . 5 ) ( McNeil and Steinhardt 1997 , Akinlaja and Sachs 1998 , Liu et al . 1999 , Tschumperlin et al . 2000 ) . Lipid trafﬁcking to the cell surface is another adaptive mechanism in alveolar epithelial cells ( Vlahakis et al . 2001 ) ( Fig . 5 ) . Several observations on normal and in - jured lungs raise interest in the molecule and pathway speciﬁcity of deformation triggered vesicular trafﬁcking . When lungs suffer relatively mild forms of interstitial pulmonary edema , the lipid microdomains of lung cell surface membranes undergo a substantial reorganization ( Palestini et al . 2003 ) . The functional consequence of membrane remodeling , which is almost certainly accom - panied by changes in surface protein expression , remains to be explored . In vitro , such changes are associated with changes in cell phenotype and by inference , changes in the cells susceptibility to mechanical injury . In endothe - lial cells , ﬁbroblasts , and some epithelial cells , sphin - golipids , cholesterol , and glycosylphosphatidylinisotol - anchored proteins appear to have a preferential associ - ation with 50 - to 100 - nm pits called caveolae ( Razani et al . 2002 ) ( Fig . 5 ) . These structures play an impor - tant role in endocytosis processes and can be identiﬁed in type I alveolar epithelium cells ( Gil 1983 , Kasper et al . 1998 ) . Caveolae are plasma membrane invaginations that may unfold when laterally stressed , and may be important not only for the mechanotransduction of de - formation - induced lipid trafﬁcking , but also central for the maintenance of sublytic membrane tension . The biochemical and biophysical changes in plas - ma membranes were also related to the changes in phys - An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX OF THE LUNG 293 Fig . 4 – Changes in extracellular matrix during hydraulic and lesional edemas . Pi : interstitial pressure , W / D : wet - to - dry weight ratio , HS : Heparan sulfate , PG : Proteoglycan , CS : Chondroitin sulfate . MMP : Matrix Metalloproteasis . During hydraulic edema the prevalent lesion is the fragmentation of the CS , whilst in the lesional edema HS is damaged . ical stimuli on endothelial cell surface . The increase in tissue forces at interstitial level is a consequence of in - terstitial ﬂuid accumulation , particularly in the air - blood barrier as demonstrated by the increased thickness of the extracellular matrix . Interstitial edema causes a raise in interstitial ﬂuid pressure from the physiological value of approximately – 10 cmH 2 O up to ∼ 5 cmH 2 O ( Mise - rocchi et al . 1993 , 2001a ) . As capillary pressure remains essentially unchanged at ∼ 10 cmH 2 O in mild interstitial edema ( Negrini 1995 ) , the above condition should cause asubstantialalterationinthetransmuralpressure . Infact , in physiological conditions , the transmural pressure is relatively high , averaging 20 cmH 2 O , with the subatmo - spheric interstitial pressure pulling the basal side of the cell . Conversely , in edema the transmural pressure gra - dient is reduced to 5 cmH 2 O , and the positive interstitial pressure pushes the basal side of the cell . Furthermore , parenchymal forces exerted at focal points where cell - matrix attachments occur are expected to increase as a consequence of swelling of the extracellular matrix . Daffaraandcolleagueshypothesizeaspeciﬁc“ sens - ing” function by lung cells resulting from a perturbation in cell - matrix interaction ( Daffara et al . 2004 ) . In this context , the cell - matrix interaction may differ according to the type of edema since differences were found in the sequential degradation of PGs family and in the interac - tion properties of PGs to some matrix components ( Mis - erocchi et al . 2001a ) . Based on these considerations , Botto and coworkers described a differential response of lung endothelial cells to hydraulic and hypoxic pul - monary edema , inducing a speciﬁc cascade of cellular events from signaling - transduction to cellular functional attitude aimed at tissue repair ( Botto et al . 2006 ) . CONCLUSIONS ECM components such as the chondroitin sulfate ( ver - sican ) and the heparan sulfate ( perlecan ) proteoglycans play a major role in the maintenance of tissue ﬂuid homeostasis providing : a ) a highly restrictive perivas - An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) 294 PAOLO PELOSI et al . Fig . 5 – Extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and cell response to increased lung interstitial pressure . Springs represent ECM components . Arrowheads : the intensity of interstitial pressure . Arrows : the intensity of stress on endothelium and epithelium . A : Normal pressure in the interstitium with no cell stress or ECM lesion . Panel B : Increased pressure in the interstitium , with limited cell stress since the ECM is intact . Panel C : Duringinterstitialpressureincrease , somecomponentsofECMareruptured , plasmamembraneunfolded and stretched . Panel D : Adaptative cell response : the translocation of lipids from intracellular stores to the plasma membrane ( dashed square ) . Note the presence of caveolae ( c ) in endothelial and epithelial cells . Panel E : Even though cells sensed the stress early , with further increase in interstitial pressure , pro - inﬂammatory and ﬁbrogenic mediators were released . Panel F : Maintenance of increased stress associated withtheeffectsofpro - inﬂammatoryandﬁbrogenicmediatorscontributetothefragmentationofextracellular matrix components and epithelial and endothelial cell rupture resulting in edema . cular and interstitial sieve in relation to plasma proteins , thus modulating both interstitial protein concentration andtrans - endothelialﬂuidﬁltration ; b ) amechanicalsup - port to lymphatic vessels sustaining and modulating their draining function , and c ) a rigid three dimension low compliant scaffold opposing ﬂuid accumulation into in - terstitial space . Fragmentation of proteoglycans induced by different stimuli such as : ﬂuid overload , exposure to proteolytic or inﬂammatory agents , hypoxic or hyper - oxic gas mixtures , or increased tissue strain / stress , result in a progressive loosening of proteoglycans intermolec - ular connections with other ECM components . The loss of the proteoglycans regulatory functions compromises the protective role of the ECM , leading to interstitial and eventually severe lung edema . Thus , once conditions of increased microvascular ﬁltration are established , matrix remodeling proceeds fairly rapidly due to the activation of proteases . Interestingly enough in experimentally in - duced ﬁbrosis a massive matrix deposition would be ex - pected to decrease interstitial compliance and therefore make the tissue safety factor stronger . This possible de - fense against alveolar ﬂooding does not seem to oper - ate , so far . However , it seems that the extensive matrix remodeling led to a decreased hydraulic resistance of An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX OF THE LUNG 295 both the endothelial and the epithelial barrier and pos - sibly of the interstitial matrix . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to express our gratitude to Mr . Andre Benedito da Silva , and Mrs . Jaqueline Lima do Nasci - mento for their skillful technical assistance . Supported by : Programa de Apoio a Núcleos de Excelência – Fun - dação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa no Es - tado do Rio de Janeiro ( PRONEX - FAPERJ ) , Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientíﬁco e Tecnológico ( CNPq ) , Fundação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa no Estado do Rio de Janeiro State ( FAPERJ ) . RESUMO A matriz extracelular é um aglomerado tridimensional de macromoléculas composta por : ﬁbras colágenas ( principal - mente , tipos I e III ) , elastina , glicosaminoglicanos e proteogli - canos . No pulmão , a matriz extracelular tem várias funções , tais como : 1 ) promover estresse tensil e elasticidade tecidual , 2 ) contribuir para a manutenção da dinâmica de ﬂuidos no interstício , 3 ) propiciar efetiva troca gasosa , 4 ) controlar a função celular através de sua ligação com fatores de cresci - mento , quimiocinas , citocinaseinteraçãocomreceptoresdesu - perfície , e5 ) remodelamentoereparotecidual . Afragmentação e a desorganização da matriz extracelular pode acarretar edema intersticial e , eventualmente , edema alveolar grave . Logo , quando há aumento da ﬁltração microvascular ocorre rápido remodelamento da matriz por ativação de proteases . Destarte , a deposição de ﬁbras colágenas reduz a complacência intersti - cial limitando o edema . Em conclusão , modiﬁcações na matriz extracelular podem afetar a formação e distribuição do edema no pulmão . Palavras - chave : colágeno , glicosaminoglicanos , proteoglica - nos , pressão intersticial . REFERENCES A KINLAJA J AND S ACHS F . 1998 . The breakdown of cell membranes by electrical and mechanical stress . Biophys J 75 : 247 – 254 . B OTTO L , B ERETTA E , D AFFARA R , M ISEROCCHI G AND P ALESTINI P . 2006 . Biochemical and morpholog - ical changes in endothelial cells in response to hypoxic interstitial edema . Respir Res 7 : 7 . C ANTOR JO , S HTEYNGART B , C ERRETA JM , L IU M , A RMAND G AND T URINO GM . 2000 . The effect of hyaluronan on elastic ﬁber injury in vitro and elastase - induced airspace enlargement in vivo . Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 225 : 65 – 71 . C AVANAUGH J R KJ , O SWARI J AND M ARGULIES SS . 2001 . Role of stretch on tight junction structure in alveolar ep - ithelial cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 25 : 584 – 591 . C OPPOLINO MG AND D EDHAR S . 2000 . Bi - directional sig - nal transduction by integrin receptors . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 32 : 171 – 188 . D AFFARA R , B OTTO L , B ERETTA E , C ONFORTI E , F AINI A , P ALESTINI P AND M ISEROCCHI G . 2004 . Endothe - lial cells as early sensors of pulmonary interstitial edema . J Appl Physiol 97 : 1575 – 1583 . E LKINGTON PT AND F RIEDLAND JS . 2006 . Matrix metal - loproteinases in destructive pulmonary pathology . Thorax 61 : 259 – 266 . F URUYAMA A AND M OCHITATE K . 2000 . Assembly of the exogenous extracellular matrix during basement mem - brane formation by alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . J Cell Sci 113 : 859 – 868 . G EIGER B , B ERSHADSKY A , P ANKOV R AND Y AMADA KM . 2001 . Transmembrane crosstalk between extracellu - lar matrix - cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 : 793 – 805 . G IL J . 1983 . Number and distribution of plasmalemmal vesi - cles in the lung . Fed Proc 42 : 2414 – 2418 . G REENLEE KJ , W ERB Z AND K HERADMAND F . 2007 . Ma - trix metalloproteinases in lung : multiple , multifarious , and multifaceted . Physiol Rev 87 : 69 – 98 . I NGBER DE . 2006 . Cellular mechanotransduction : putting all the pieces together again . FASEB J 20 : 811 – 827 . I OZZO RV AND M URDOCH AD . 1996 . Proteoglycans of the extracellular environment . Clues from the gene and protein side offer novel perspective in molecular diversity and function . FASEB J 10 : 598 – 614 . J OHNSON Z , P ROUDFOOT A AND H ANDEL T . 2005 . In - teraction of chemokines and glycosaminoglycans : A new twist in the regulation of chemokine function with oppor - tunities for therapeutic interventions . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 16 : 625 – 636 . J ONES JC ET AL . 2005 . Laminin - 6 assembles into multi - molecular ﬁbrillar complexes with perlecan and partici - pates in mechanical - signal transduction via a dystro - glycan - dependent , integrin - independent mechanism . J Cell Sci 118 : 2557 – 2566 . An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) 296 PAOLO PELOSI et al . K ASPER M , R EIMANN T , H EMPEL U , W ENZEL KW , B IERHAUS A , S CHUH D , D IMMER V , H AROSKE G AND M ULLER M . 1998 . Loss of caveolin expression in type I pneumocytes as an indicator of subcellular alterations dur - ing lung ﬁbrogenesis . Histochem Cell Biol 109 : 41 – 48 . L ANCHOU J , C ORBEL M AND T ANGUY M . 2003 . Imbalance between matrix metalloproteinases ( MMP - 9 and MMP - 2 ) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases ( TIMP - 1 and TIMP - 2 ) in acute respiratory distress syndrome patients . Crit Care Med 31 : 536 – 542 . L I Y , R AHMANIAN M , W IDSTROM C , L EPPERDINGER G , F ROST GI AND H ELDIN P . 2000 . Irradiation induced ex - pressionofhyaluronan ( HA ) synthase2andhyaluronidase 2 genes in rat lung tissue accompanies active turnover of HA and induction of types I and III collagen gene expres - sion . Am J Resp Cell Mol Biol 23 : 411 – 418 . L IU M , T ANSWELL AK AND P OST M . 1999 . Mechanical force - inducedsignaltransductioninlungcells . AmJPhys - iol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 277 : L667 – L683 . M C N EIL PL AND S TEINHARDT RA . 1997 . Loss , restoration , and maintenance of plasma membrane integrity . J Cell Biol 137 : 1 – 4 . M ERCER RR AND C RAPO JD . 1990 . Spatial distribution of collagen and elastin ﬁbres in the lungs . J Appl Physiol 69 : 756 – 765 . M ISEROCCHI G AND N EGRINI D . 1997 . Pleural space : pres - sures and ﬂuid dynamics . In : C RYSTAL RG , W EST JB , W EIBEL ER AND B ARNES PJ ( Eds ) , The Lung . 2 nd ed . , Philadelphia : Lippincott - Raven , p . 1217 – 1225 . M ISEROCCHI G , N EGRINI D AND G ONANO C . 1990 . Direct measurements of interstitial pulmonary pressure in in situ lung with intact pleural space . J Appl Physiol 69 : 2168 – 2174 . M ISEROCCHI G , N EGRINI D , D EL F ABBRO M AND V EN - TUROLI D . 1993 . Pulmonary interstitial pressure in intact in situ lung : The transition to interstitial edema . J Appl Physiol 74 : 1171 – 1177 . M ISEROCCHI G , N EGRINI D , P ASSI A AND D E L UCA G . 2001a . Development of lung edema : interstitial ﬂuid dy - namics and molecular structure . News Physiol Sci 16 : 66 – 71 . M ISEROCCHI G , P ASSI A , N EGRINI D , D EL F ABBRO M AND D E L UCA G . 2001b . Pulmonary interstitial pressure and tissue matrix structure in acute hypoxia . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L881 – L887 . M ONTES GS . 1996 . Structural biology of the ﬁbres of the collagenous and elastic systems . Cell Biol Int 20 : 15 – 27 . N EGRI EM , M ONTES GS , S ALDIVA PHN AND C APPE - LOZZI VL . 2000 . Architectural remodelling in acute and chronic interstitial lung disease : ﬁbrosis or ﬁbroelastosis Histopathology 37 : 393 – 401 . N EGRINI D . 1995 . Pulmonary microvascular pressure proﬁle during development of hydrostatic edema . Microcircula - tion 2 : 173 – 180 . N EGRINI D , P ASSI A , D E L UCA G AND M ISEROCCHI G . 1998 . Proteoglycan involvement during development of lesional pulmonary edema . Am J Physiol 274 : L203 – L211 . N EGRINI D , P ASSI A , D E L UCA G AND M ISEROCCHI G . 2003 . Matrix proteoglycans in development of pulmonary edema . In : G ARG HG , R OUGHLEY PJ AND H ALES CA ( Eds ) , Proteoglycans in lung disease , New York : Marcel Dekker , p . 143 – 168 . N EGRINI D , T ENSTAD O , P ASSI A AND W IIG H . 2006 . Dif - ferential degradation of matrix proteoglycans and edema development in rabbit lung . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 290 : L470 – L477 . N GUYEN NM , B AI Y , M OCHITATE K AND S ENIOR RM . 2002 . Laminin alpha - chain expression and basement membrane formation by MLE - 15 respiratory epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 282 : L1004 – L1011 . N OBLE PW AND J IANG D . 2006 . Matrix regulation of lung injury , inﬂammation , and repair : the role of innate immu - nity . Proc Am Thorac Soc 3 : 401 – 404 . P ALESTINI P , C ALVI C , C ONFORTI E , D AFFARA R , B OTTO L AND M ISEROCCHI G . 2003 . Compositional changes in lipid microdomains of air - blood barrier plasma mem - branes in pulmonary interstitial edema . J Appl Physiol 95 : 1446 – 1452 . P ASSI A , N EGRINI D , A LBERTINI R , D E L UCA G AND M ISEROCCHI G . 1998 . Involvement of lung interstitial proteoglycans in development of hydraulic and elastase induced edema . Am J Physiol 275 : L631 – L635 . P ASSI A , N EGRINI D , A LBERTINI R , M ISEROCCHI G AND D E L UCA G . 1999 . Thesensitivityofversicanfromrabbit lung to gelatinase A ( MMP - 2 ) and B ( MMP - 9 ) and its involvement in the development of hydraulic lung edema . FEBS Lett 456 : 93 – 96 . R AZANI B , W OODMAN SE AND L ISANTI MP . 2002 . Cave - olae : from cell biology to animal physiology . Pharmacol Rev 54 : 431 – 467 . R OBERTS CR , W IGHT TN AND H ASCALL VC . 1997 . Pro - teoglycans . In : C RYSTAL RG , W EST JB , W EIBEL ER An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 ) EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX OF THE LUNG 297 AND B ARNES PJ ( Eds ) , The Lung . 2 nd ed . , Philadelphia : Lippincott - Raven , p . 757 – 767 . R OCCO PRM , N EGRI EM , K URTZ PM , V ASCONCELLOS FP , S ILVA GH , C APELOZZI VL , R OMERO PV AND Z IN WA . 2001 . Lung tissue mechanics and extracellular ma - trix in acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 164 : 1067 – 1071 . R OCCO PRM , S OUZA AB , F AFFE DS , P ASSARO CP , S ANTOS FB , N EGRI EM , L IMA JGM , C ONTADOR RS , C APELOZZI VL AND Z IN WA . 2003 . Effect of corticos - teroid on lung parenchyma remodeling at an early phase of acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 168 : 677 – 684 . R UOSS SJ , G OLD WM AND C AUGHEY GH . 1991 . Mast cell exocytosis : evidencethatgranuleproteoglycanprocessing is not coupled to degranulation . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 179 : 140 – 146 . S ANTOS FB , N AGATO LKS , B OECHEM NM , N EGRI EM , G UIMARÃ ES A , C APELOZZI VL , F AFFE DS , Z IN WA AND R OCCO PRM . 2006 . Time course of lung par - enchyma remodeling in pulmonary and extrapulmonary acute lung injury . J Appl Physiol 100 : 98 – 106 . S OUZA F ERNANDES AB , P ELOSI P AND R OCCO PRM . 2006 . Bench - to - bedsidereview : Theroleofglycosamino - glycans in respiratory disease . Critical Care 10 : 237 . T AMMI MI , D AY AJ AND T URLEY EA . 2002 . Hyaluro - nan and homeostasis : a balancing act . J Biol Chem 277 : 4581 – 4584 . T SCHUMPERLIN DJ , O SWARI J AND M ARGULIES SS . 2000 . Deformation - induced injury of alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 162 : 357 – 362 . T SCHUMPERLIN DJ ET AL . 2004 . Mechanotransduction through growth - factor shedding into the extracellular space . Nature 429 : 83 – 86 . T UMOVA S , W OODS A AND C OUCHMAN JR . 2000 . Hep - aran sulfate proteoglycans on the cell surface : versatile coordinators of cellular functions . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 32 : 269 – 288 . V LAHAKIS NE AND H UBMAYR RD . 2005 . Cellular Stress Failure in Ventilator - injured lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171 : 1328 – 1342 . V LAHAKIS NE , S CHROEDER MA , P AGANO RE AND H UB - MAYR RD . 2001 . Deformation - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L938 – L946 . W EST JB AND M ATHIEU - C OSTELLO O . 1999 . Structure , strength , failure , and remodeling of the pulmonary blood - gas barrier . Annu Rev Physiol 61 : 543 – 557 . W HITELOCK JM AND I OZZO RV . 2005 . Heparan sulfate : a complex polymer charged with biological activity . Chem Rev 105 : 2745 – 2764 . Y URCHENKO PD AND S CHITTNY JC . 1990 . Molecular ar - chitecture of basement membrane . FASEB J 4 : 1577 – 1590 . Z HAO J , S IME PJ , B RINGAS J R P , G AULDIE J AND W AR - BURTON D . 1999 . Adenovirus - mediated decorin gene transfer prevents TGF - beta - induced inhibition of lung morphogenesis . Am J Physiol Lung Mol Cell Physiol 277 : L412 – L422 . Z WINKLER MP , I ANCU D AND M ICHEL RP . 1994 . Effects of pulmonary ﬁbrosis on the distribution of edema . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 149 : 1276 – 1285 . An Acad Bras Cienc ( 2007 ) 79 ( 2 )