The Evolutionary Ecology of Technological Innovations RICARD V . SOLÉ , 1 , 2 , 3 SERGI VALVERDE , 1 , 2 MARTI ROSAS CASALS , 1 , 4 STUART A . KAUFFMAN , 3 DOYNE FARMER , 3 AND NILES ELDREDGE 5 1 ICREA - Complex Systems Lab , Universitat Pompeu Fabra , Dr Aiguader 80 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain ; 2 Institut de Biologia Evolutiva , CSIC - UPF , Passeig Maritim de la Barceloneta , 37 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain ; 3 Santa Fe Institute , 1399 Hyde Park Road , Santa Fe New Mexico 87501 ; 4 Sustainability Measurement and Modeling Lab , Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya - Barcelona Tech , EET - Campus Terrassa , 08222 , Barcelona , Spain ; and 5 Division of Paleontology , American Museum of Natural History , NewYork 10024 Received 21 November 2012 ; accepted 19 December 2012 Technological evolution has been compared to biological evolution by many authors over the last two centuries . As a parallel experiment of innovation involving economic , historical , and social components , artifacts deﬁne a universe of evolving properties that displays episodes of diversiﬁcation and extinction . Here , we critically review previous work comparing the two types of evolution . Like biological evolution , technological evolution is driven by descent with variation and selection , and includes tinkering , convergence , and contingency . At the same time , there are essential differences that make the two types of evolution quite distinct . Major distinctions are illustrated by current speciﬁc examples , including the evolution of cornets and the historical dynamics of information tech - nologies . Due to their fast and rich development , the later provide a unique opportunity to study technological evolutionatallscaleswithunprecedentedresolution . Despitethepresenceofpatternssuggestingconvergenttrends between man - made systems end biological ones , they provide examples of planned design that have no equivalent with natural evolution . © 2013Wiley Periodicals , Inc . Complexity 18 : 15 – 27 , 2013 Key Words : Technology ; evolution ; tinkering ; convergence ; information technology ; culturomics 1 . INTRODUCTION W e can look at the history of technology as a human - driven , parallel experiment of evolution [ 1 – 4 ] . So far artifacts are not capable of self - reproduction , but the Correspondence to : Ricard V . Solé , ICREA - Complex Systems Lab , Universitat Pompeu Fabra ( GRIB ) , Dr Aiguader 80 , 08003 Barcelona , Spain ( e - mail : ricard . sole @ upf . edu ) population - level dynamics of long - term technological inno - vation nonetheless resemble biological evolution in many ways . The design of new technologies is strongly inﬂuenced by existing technologies , and technological change can be viewed as a process of descent with variation and selection [ 5 – 7 ] . Both chance and the appropriate context are required for innovations to occur . Lineages of design often show rapid change and diversiﬁcation as well as exaptation . The later is illustrated by Gutenberg’s printing press , when an existing © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . , Vol . 18 , No . 4 DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx . 21436 Published online 8 February 2013 in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) C O M P L E X I T Y 15 technology ( the screw press ) that was co - opted to serve a completely novel purpose . Extinction and replacement are also common . As soon as a genuinely novel invention appears , it is typically followed by an enormous diversiﬁ - cation , followed by the extinction ( and turnover ) of most competing inventions . Moreover , technological change also displays convergence : Similar discoveries are made simulta - neously by different inventors [ 4 , 8 ] such as the more than 20 different patents involving light bulb inventions prior to Edison’s success [ 9 ] . The view that technological evolution follows similar rules to biological evolution has captured the interest of scientists , historians , and engineers alike . Despite the commonalities , technological evolution departs from biological evolution in fundamental ways . For technological change long - term goals and expectations play a leading role in which the designers seek optimality , typi - callyunderexplicitcriteriasuchasefﬁciency , cost , andspeed . Moreover , as pointed by François Jacob [ 10 – 13 ] , in contrast to artifacts , living structures are largely the result of tinker - ing , that is a widespread reuse and combination of available elementstobuildnewstructures . Technologyishighlydepen - dent on the combination of preexisting [ 2 , 4 ] inventions , but unlike biology , the introduction of new simple elements can completely reset the path of future technologies . In con - trast , in biology , once established , solutions to problems are seldom replaced . Bothbiologicalandtechnologicalinnovationsinvolvecost constraints . Thermodynamic efﬁciency can also help under - standing the origin of some structures . Allometric scaling laws provide a good illustration of how a theory of bio - logical distribution networks ( including both vascular and respiratory ones ) based on efﬁcient energy dissipation on fractal trees [ 14 ] . Efﬁciency has also been driving techno - logical improvements and marks the development of the steam engine and the bicycle [ 15 ] . The evolution of the latter can be traced as a succession of improvement steps towards increasing performance and lower metabolic cost . However , the coupling between energy costs and improvements is not a precondition for technological change to occur . On one hand , many examples illustrate a common pattern of development of a given invention : In early stages , inventions are often overly expensive and not perceived as economi - cally relevant . The barrier to diffusion can only be overcome through the vision of individuals pursuing their views and goals [ 4 ] . Is it possible to formulate a theory of technological evo - lution ? How much can we take advantage from our theoret - ical understanding of biological evolution ? Recent advances within network theory and a unique availability of the fos - sil record of human inventions might help in reaching that goal . Such theory needs to consider the existence of universal trends , the economic context [ 2 , 6 , 16 , 17 ] and history . We believe that a major effort in this direction would settle the debate on similarities versus differences . 2 . LOCK - IN AND CONTINGENCY A ﬁngerprint of biological evolution is the existence of frozen accidents in the spread and stabilization of a given trait . Similarly , economic constraints can enhance technological lock - in [ 2 , 6 ] . The QWERTY keyboard is an archetypal exam - ple , where a suboptimal conﬁguration of keys was adopted duetoaconﬂictwithtypingspeed . Evenifrationalevaluation of a technology and its alternatives reveals that the dominant technological solution is suboptimal , issues of compatibil - ity often make it impossible for better solutions to enter [ 2 , 3 , 7 , 18 ] . Videocassette recorders , aircrafts , or clocks all provide examples where choices were strongly affected by history . Thiscanbeexplainedtheoreticallybyconsideringthe positive feedback associated to the imitation dynamics char - acteristic of technological adoption of novelties [ 19 ] . A sim - ple model illustrates the path - dependent nature of choices made in a system where preferential decisions are based of majorities . Let us consider a population where users of a given tech - nologycanchoosebetweentwopossibilities A and B . Imagine that we represent individuals choosing A and B as black and white squares on a lattice . At the beginning , both alterna - tives are equally chosen and we place A ( black ) and B ( white ) agents at random over the lattice . Assuming that agents fol - low the majority rule , a given agent will change its current state , say A → B , if the majority of its neighbors is adopting the B state . For convenience , we have projected our simula - tionsonasphere . Asaconsequenceofthecontagionprocess , domains of agents adopting the same choice emerge and expand in time . If we start from a random lattice with A and B agents , small ﬂuctuations are ampliﬁed towards either all - A or all - B equilibria ( bottom spheres ) . The lattice model can be easily formalized in mathemati - calterms . If a and b indicatetherelativefractionofindividuals choosingeachstrategy . Encountersamongindividualscanbe described in a mean ﬁeld approximation by using a simple mathematical model . Let a and b deﬁne the populations of agents adopting A and B , respectively . Agents using A ( B ) will adopt technology B ( A ) provided that they perceive that some minimal number of individuals are using the alternative . The differential equation for a reads : da dt = μ a ( η − b ) − a φ ( a , b ) ( 1 ) The right - hand side of the equation described two terms . The ﬁrst corresponds to an infection process : With an efﬁciency μ and provided that the number of agents adopting B is below some threshold η . This can be interpreted as follows : There is a minimal number η of agents using B that deﬁne a critical mass able to promote the shift A → B Similarly , an equation for b is obtained as follows : db / dt = μ b ( η − a ) − b φ ( a , b ) . If a constant population constraint ( a + b = 1 ) is assumed , it is easy to show that φ ( a , b ) = μ ( η ( a + b ) − 2 ab ) . The model 16 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx becomes one - dimensional and we can write an equation for the time evolution of a : da dt = F μ ( a ) = 2 μ a ( 1 − a ) (cid:2) a − 1 2 (cid:3) ( 2 ) The term a ( 1 − a ) is just a logistic function ( with saturation when a = 1 ) . Equation ( 2 ) actually corresponds to the popu - lation dynamics of one locus and two identical alleles due to selection alone [ 20 ] . The last term in the right - hand side cap - turesthemajorityrule . If a < 1 / 2 , the A choiceisinaminority situation and a decrease in A use will occur . Instead , when a majority has adopted A ( namely a > 1 / 2 ) growth will occur . Thepreviousequationhasthreeequilibriumpoints , obtained from da / dt = 0 . These are a ∗ 0 = 0 , a ∗ 1 = 1 , and a ∗ 2 = 1 / 2 . Their stability is obtained by the sign of λ μ ( a ∗ i ) = (cid:2) ∂ F μ ( a ) ∂ a (cid:3) a = a ∗ i ( 3 ) The ﬁrst two correspond to winner - takes - all stable points , where A has failed to be adopted ( a ∗ 0 ) and has invaded the whole population . These are stable points , while the third one , associated to the coexistence between both technolo - gies , is unstable . A useful analog of the path - dependent nature of this model is obtained by computing the associated potential V μ ( a ) for the previous model [ 19 ] . The potential is linked to the dynamical equation through da dt = − ∂ ∂ a (cid:4) − (cid:5) F μ ( a ) da (cid:6) ( 4 ) where the integral within the parenthesis is the potential function . As deﬁned , it will exhibit a maximum ( minimum ) when a ∗ is unstable ( stable ) . For our example , this gives : V μ ( a ) = − μ 2 (cid:7) a 4 − 2 a 3 + a 2 (cid:8) ( 5 ) The curve V μ ( a ) is displayed in Figure 1 . The two wells sep - arated by a maximum are the accessible states and the sym - metric , unstable one ( since 0 ≤ a ≤ 1 , the values outside this domain are meaningless ) . The spheres shown as insets are lattice simulations at different time steps ( the spherical projection is used for convenience ) . Here , black and white represent A and B states . As we can see , the control parame - ter μ only affects the depth of the alternative valleys but not theirlocation . However , smaller μ valueswillbemorelikelyto be affected by stochastic ﬂuctuations and thus the symmetry breakingprocessmightbemoredifﬁcult ( orevenimpossible ) to occur . 3 . THE GENOTYPE – PHENOTYPE MAPPING : TECHNOLOGY MEETS ( SOMETIMES ) BIOLOGY The presence of suboptimal choices , as illustrated in the previous section , reminds us that nonlinear dynamics can FIGURE 1 Choosing between two given , initially equivalent choices can be repre - sented by means of a two - well function . The top of this curve deﬁnes an unstable state . A marble located on this top will rapidly roll down towardsonofthetwopossiblevalleys . Suchchoiceishighlydependent on the small ﬂuctuations happening at the beginning of the process . As a consequence , choices are highly path dependent : the original symmetry is broken . dominate over rational decisions . This effectively limits the ideal picture of man - made artifacts as optimal , purposeful designs . However , in some well - known cases , optimal solu - tions are achieved and maintained . This is illustrated by the evolution of the fork [ 21 ] . A sequence of steps knife → two - tines → three - tines → four - tines fork took place slowly and the ﬁnal design has not changed since it was adopted in the seventeenth century . Four tines provide a good compromise betweenanobjectthatperformsitsfunctionsproperly : Itpro - vides a broad surface , it ﬁts in the mouth and can hold both large and small pieces of food . A ﬁtness function (cid:6) ( N ) could be measured using a population of users playing with differ - ent designs . Here , N t is the number of tines and we would like to know how N t relates to (cid:6) ( N t ) . We can imagine a simple experiment where different people use ( repeatedly ) differ - ent forks to different conditions and provide some score for eachdesign . Theaverageoverdifferentusersprovidesanesti - mate for the N t → (cid:6) ( N t ) mapping . In this simple example , a single - peak would be present at N t = 4 . If we add the cost of fabrication to the ﬁtness ( so that performance is computed over the number of tines ) the peak would be sharper . Cost constraints can strongly limit the potential solutions associated to a given problem . As a consequence , optimal designs sometimes lead to remarkable matching between © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx C O M P L E X I T Y 17 biological and man - made solutions . As an example , the same laws associated to wiring very large scale integrated ( VLSI ) circuits under strong packing constraints [ 22 ] are followed by brains [ 23 ] . Convergence in design principles has also been reported from the study of brain circuits in the visual cortex , which obey the same basic architecture of parallel computer vision [ 24 ] . Thecloserelationshipbetweenintegratedcircuits and neural systems is provided by the so - called Rent’s rule , which deﬁnes a power law in networks that exhibit hierarchi - cal modularity . Assuming that we partition the system into subsystems of size N , the rule establishes that the number of connections C linking the subset with the rest of the system scales as C = (cid:5) k (cid:6) N p ( 6 ) where (cid:5) k (cid:6) and p are characteristic parameters . Here , (cid:5) k (cid:6) gives the average number of links per node , whereas 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 is the so - called Rent’s exponent . The later is typically lim - ited to the interval α ∈ [ 0 . 45 , 0 . 75 ] . Given the importance of the following result , it is worth to show how is this scaling law derived . Imagine a given system (cid:8) ( a network ) involv - ing N 0 elements ( gates in a circuit , neurons , or groups of neurons in a brain ) and consider a given subsystem of size 1 ≤ N ≤ N 0 . These components are connected forming a network . We indicate by (cid:5) k (cid:6) the average number of links per node and we take a subset (cid:8) k ( N ) of elements within a given area , including N components . This subset will be connected to the rest of the system (cid:8) − (cid:8) k by means of a number of links crossingitsboundaries . Letusalsoindicateas C ( N ) thenum - ber of links connecting (cid:8) k with the rest of the system . If we add additional elements to (cid:8) k , expanding it in size , new links should be expected to connect the larger subset with the rest of the network . Indicating by (cid:9) C and (cid:9) N the increase in con - nectivity and size associated to the expansion , we can expect a relationship : (cid:9) C = p ( N ) (cid:2) C N (cid:3) (cid:9) N ( 7 ) The parameter p ∈ ( 0 , 1 ) indicates a potential dependency between size and the degree of optimization involved in the circuit design . VLSI designers use a number of strategies to reduce C and in particular a modular , hierarchical system is specially For a random network where any element can connecttoanyotheronewiththesameprobability , wewould observe p = 1 . The last equation can be solved by using a continuousapproximationintermsofadifferentialequation , which gives : C ( N ) = (cid:5) k (cid:6) exp (cid:9)(cid:5) N 1 p ( N ) N dN (cid:10) ( 8 ) assuming that p ( N ) = p , we obtain the standard formu - lation of Rent’s rule . In most known systems , this constant assumption seems the correct one . FIGURE 2 Hierarchical modularity . In both circuits and neural systems , which experience cost constraints , a hierarchy of nested modules has been shown to exist , displaying some seemingly universal regularities , such as Rent’s rule . This rule establishes that the amount of connections C between elements in a subsystem of size N ( here three scales are shown ) with the rest of the system scales as C = (cid:5) k (cid:6) N p . The fact that the exponent is homogeneous tells us that , despite the scale change associated to increasing N , the rela - tive fraction of links crossing boundaries scales with system’s size in a constant way . This is characteristic of fractal objects ( where the basic pattern is repeated at different scales ) and thusanindicationofthepresenceofhierarchicalorder . When this method was applied to neural networks , a striking con - vergence was found . Both the neural web of the nematode C . elegans and human cortical maps shared a Rent’s expo - nent p close to what is the expected value for an optimally efﬁcient hierarchical system . Such convergence , that shares many properties in common with VLSI circuits , illustrates the role played by cost constrains in promoting convergent designs . A single peak deﬁnes the simplest landscape for opti - mization . But the presence of lock - in reminds us that ﬁtness landscapes are , in general , much more complicated . The ruggedness of the landscape is connected to the nature of thegenotype – phenotypemapping [ 25 – 28 ] . Thecomplexityof this mapping pervades the path - dependent character of evo - lution , howrobustdesignsareandhowevolvabletheycanbe . It is in general far from trivial to know the landscape structure that pervades a given complex system . One exception is pro - vided by those system where a discrete sequence space and a well - deﬁned phenotype space can be deﬁned and scanned . 18 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx FIGURE 3 Neutral landscapes are common in a number of biological systems . They have been shown to drive the evolution of RNA and proteins through sequence space . In ( a ) we display an idealized picture of a small piece of an RNA landscape ( Redrawn from [ 13 ] ) . Here , each node represents a given sequence , whereas links among nodes are possible paths connecting single - mutation events . Three different neutral networks are represented , associated to three different RNA folds . These landscapes are also present in technological systems . The analysis of ﬁeld programmable gate arrays or FPGAs in short [ 31 ] has shown that a similar space can be deﬁned , with given arrangements of gates as nodes and connections indicating possible transitions from one circuit to another ( see text ) . In ( b ) a rank plot distribution of these circuits is shown , using a small array ( inset , Modiﬁed from Raman and Wagner , 2012 ) . A success story in this context is the analysis of the genotype – phenotypemappinginbothRNAandproteinnetworks ( refs ) . Here , a mapping can be deﬁned between a set of sequences H ( S ) ( nucleotide chains ) and the set corresponding forms H ( F ) resulting from the folding process : (cid:10) : H ( S ) −→ H ( F ) ( 9 ) S i −→ F i ( 10 ) It was shown that , starting from a given sequence S i ∈ S it is possible to move through sequence space [ Figure 3 ( a ) ] through neutral mutations sharing the same phenotype F i ( a common fold ) . Sequence space is enormously vast . If the alphabet has size A and sequences have length L we have A L possible sequences , an already hyperastronomic number . By introducing single mutations starting from a given sequence , it is possible to see if it has an impact on the shape ( function ) or instead is neutral . A key ﬁnding was that we can travel through this vast combinatorial space by spreading through very large neutral networks of sequences folding in the same shape ( i . e . , the same phenotype ) . In the simpliﬁed example shown here , three sequences are indicated . Two of them ( S 1 and S 2 ) span ﬁnite neutral networks , whereas S 3 percolates through sequence space . The unexpected comes when we compare the previ - ous results with the corresponding mapping associated to a seemingly disparate object : electronic circuits . These are now deﬁned as sets of logic gates connected through a given wiring scheme [ 29 ] . The circuit performs a function deﬁning the phenotype : For the given set of inputs ( a ﬁxed number ) thereisaspeciﬁcoutputthatdeﬁnesthefunctionperformed . In other words , the wiring diagram is now the genotype and the Boolean function implemented the phenotype . The full list of outputs describes the Boolean function (cid:6) i , that is , the phenotype P ≡ (cid:6) i . The genotype is deﬁned as the ordered string of all weights w ij . Two different sets , (cid:6) and W describe the universe of possible functions and wirings , that is , the sets of possible phenotypes and genotypes . The set of ( genotype – phenotype ) mappings between wiring and function is deﬁned as : (cid:10) : H ( W ) −→ H ( (cid:6) ) ( 11 ) where H ( W ) is the space of all possible FFNs and H ( (cid:6) ) the corresponding space of all Boolean functions . For each W i ∈ H ( W ) , we have a genotype which maps into a given function described by a given (cid:6) i ∈ H ( (cid:6) ) . When the landscape associated to circuits performing computations [ 30 , 31 ] was analyzed , a very similar pattern was found . Here , the genotype is identiﬁed with the network © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx C O M P L E X I T Y 19 of elements and their connections , whereas the computa - tion being performed describes the function . By " amutating " the wiring diagram of a given circuit ( altering single con - nections ) , it can be shown that neutral networks are also widely present , the boundaries of which are occupied by cir - cuits able to implement a great variety of novel functions . A common statistical regularity shared by both RNA and FPGA landscapes is the broad distribution of abundances , shown in Figure 3 ( b ) . Here , we display the probability of ﬁnding a given circuit , against its rank ( see Ref . [ 31 ] for details ) . The P ( k ) rank distribution provides the relative frequency of the k th most common circuit . The distribution is highly skewed , and follows a law , the Zipf’s law , namely : p ( k ) = k − γ (cid:11) nj = 1 j − γ ( 12 ) with γ ≈ 1 . This is a highly skewed distribution , with a few sequences ( or circuits ) being highly common whereas most are rare . A major consequence of remarkably common pattern is that key structural properties of the organization of man - madedesignscanhaveanunexpectedpotentialforevolvabil - ity [ 31 ] . What these results do indicate [ 29 – 31 ] is that design principles in engineering could beneﬁt from understanding evolution on landscapes . 4 . DIVERSIFICATION , EXTINCTION , AND TECHNOLOGICAL REGIMES The rise of innovations often leads to both the decline of pre - existing solutions and the creation of new ones . An example is provided by the evolution of cornets [ 32 , 38 ] which diversi - ﬁed over a century until valve trumpets replaced them , after a radiation in styles and usages , somewhat similar to biotic replacements . Similarly , the invention of the car marked the declineandfallofcarriages , harnessshopsandbuggies , while favoring the expansion of the oil industry . Paved roads , gas stations , or motels came later . Although a given innovation occurs in a well - deﬁned economic context , novel technolo - gies can deeply transform how the economy is organized and how new economic regimes emerge . Events like the rise of electronicsandpersonalcomputersrepresentaturningpoint from which a new technological regime is born [ 34 – 37 ] . Such regimes can be described in terms of the grammar or rule - set embedded in the way a given technology must be used . They include many facets such as product standards and design and engineering practices . The resetting of a regime and its replacement by a new one share some similarities with recovery from mass extinction [ 2 , 3 , 38 ] . Properly tracing the rise and fall of technologies is not alwayspossible . Asalwaysinscience , theavailabilityofdatais an important determinant of what we know , and the data for biological versus technological evolution are very different . For many technologies , we have good anecdotal evidence on performance and prevalence through time . Data on perfor - mance can take many forms . For example , for information technologies we have reasonably good historical data for properties such as processing speed , information storage , or transmission , both in terms of cost and physical character - istics [ 39 – 41 ] . There is no corresponding historical perfor - mance data in biology—we can only guess at the strength or running speed of dinosaurs . In contrast , in biology we have a well - developed phy - logeny and rich data on the history of phyla with no tech - nological equivalent . This is not an accident—as discussed later , the phylogeny of technologies is not hierarchical , but rather is more similar to that of bacteria . While many studies havebeendoneforspeciﬁcfamiliesoftechnologies , thereare no comprehensive databases on technological change . As a result , the data we have and the inferences that we can make about biological versus technological change are very differ - ent . Two major sources of quantitative analysis helps ﬁlling this gap . 5 . TEMPORAL TRENDS AND LEARNING CURVES One of the biggest differences between technology and biol - ogy is that for technologies we have clear notions of progress . For example , in 1936 Theodore Wright conjectured that the unit cost of a given model of airplane drops as a well - deﬁned power law in the cumulative number produced . This “law” has since been observed , at varying degrees of ﬁdelity , for a large number of other technologies [ 39 – 44 ] , and the general pattern goes under the name of an experience or learning curve . An alternative hypothesis about the rate of techno - logical improvement is due to Gordon Moore , who proposed that the density of transistors for integrated circuits increases exponentially with a doubling time of about two years [ 45 ] . The rule of exponential change also holds quite well for many other aspects of information technology . An approximate exponential relationship between unit cost and other mea - sures as a function of time has recently been shown to hold for many other technologies as well [ 39 , 41 ] . Moore’s law and Wright’s law are closely related : If pro - duction increases exponentially and unit cost drops expo - nentially , thenWright’s law holds . Scaling laws are commonly observed between cost C and production z , i . e . C ( z ) ∼ z − α ( 13 ) where the scaling exponent α weights the ratio of improve - ment . Some general trends displayed by learning curves are consistent with expected trends displayed by popula - tions climbing rugged ﬁtness landscapes [ 43 , 46 – 49 ] . In this context , design structure matrices ( DSMs ) offer a promising link between technological evolution and its underlying ﬁt - ness landscape [ 50 , 51 ] . As illustrated in Figure 4 , DSM are described by an n × n matrix M = ( M ij ) with M ij (cid:11) = 0 if the component i has some cost impact on component j ( and is 20 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx FIGURE 4 Example design structure matrices ( DSMs ) with n 14 13 components . Black squares represent links . The DSM on the left was randomly gen - erated to have ﬁxed out - degree for each component . The DSM on the right represents the design of an automobile brake system . All diago - nal elements are present because a component always affects its own cost . zerootherwise ) . Theycapturetheinternalconstraintsderived from the interaction of different components , providing a representationofthegenotype – phenotypemappingandhow it is affected by epistatic interactions among units and how they affect scaling laws . A simple example illustrates the approach followed in Ref . [ 51 ] . Imagine an idealized scenario where a given tech - nology has a cost c ( t ) which can change over time as new innovations occur . For simplicity , we consider a ﬁnite range of values , to be normalized with uniform distribution f ( c ) on [ 0 , 1 ] . In other words , we have (cid:5) 1 0 f ( c ) dc = 1 ( 14 ) Cost will be reduced if chance events allow a new design to be used at a smaller cost c Õ . It can be shown that the equation describing the change of cost follows : dc dt = −(cid:5) c (cid:6) 2 P [ c (cid:12) < c ] ( 15 ) = −(cid:5) c (cid:6) 2 (cid:5) c 0 f ( c ) dc ( 16 ) = − 1 2 (cid:5) c (cid:6) 2 ( 17 ) which can be easily solved , giving a power law decay : c ( t ) = c ( 0 ) 1 + c ( 0 ) t / 2 ≈ 1 t ( 18 ) where c ( 0 ) indicates initial cost and the last term is the approximation for long times . As we can see , this simple model provides a correct prediction for the time decay of cost intechnologicalevolution . Moredetailedmodelscanbebuilt byconsideringtheinternalstructureofthetechnologicalarti - fact and how different parts affect others performance [ 51 ] . By using DSMs , an effective mapping between the network of hardware interactions and the function being performed is deﬁned . Because of this , the DSM captures pleiotropic effects and how they inﬂuence the rates of improvement and the existence of internal limitations . It has been shown [ 51 ] that the matrix connectivity pattern ( the density of links or the presence of modularity ) largely determines the speed of improvement , which can be continuous or punctuated . 6 . INNOVATION NETWORKS The assumption that combinatorics is at the heart of innova - tion provides a possible rationale for the accelerating growth of innovations . If pairs of components can be combined with some probability , the number of new designs will increase with the number of already present designs . This picture has led to the suggestion [ 52 ] that technological improve - ment leads inevitably to singularities , with the number of inventions exploding on a ﬁnite time scale . The idea that innovations happen mainly by combination [ 2 ] predicts ( assuming unlimited resources ) that the num - ber of inventions will grow in time following a hyperbolic curve [ 53 , 54 ] . Speciﬁcally , if x indicatesthenumberofinven - tionsandweassumethatcombiningpreviousdesignscreates new inventions , the time evolution of x would follow , in its simplest form , the equation dx dt = μ ( t ) x 2 ( 19 ) which says that a reaction between two given inventions is needed to create new ones . Here , μ ( t ) is the rate at which two inventions are used ( by an inventor or group of inven - tors ) to generate new ones . In general , this would be a time - dependent parameter , since it might depend on the number of inventors , economic factors or aging phenomena . The model can be easily solved , leading to x ( t ) = x ( 0 ) 1 − x ( 0 ) (cid:12) t 0 μ ( τ ) d τ ( 20 ) where x ( 0 ) would be the initial number of inventions . For the simplest scenario where μ can be considered constant , a singularity exists at a ﬁnite time τ = 1 μ x ( 0 ) ( 21 ) when x becomes inﬁnite . One consequence of such pattern is that a system where combination is easy to happen will rapidly explore the adja - centpossible [ 4 , 55 ] deﬁningthenextlayerofpotentialdesigns obtainable through combination of existing ones . Due to the immensepotentialforcombination , thediversityofpotential novel inventions could make the outcome essentially unpre - dictable [ 55 ] . However , even when very large search spaces need to be explored , solutions are nevertheless found . This © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx C O M P L E X I T Y 21 is illustrated by drug search in chemical space [ 56 ] of which only an extremely small fraction is screened . This suggests that the combinatorial potential might be strongly reduced due to the underlying syntax constraining what objects can be linked together . Despite the appeal of the previous picture , dedicated efforts using different measurements and databases suggest a more complex scenario [ 39 ] . Let us take for example the number of patents [ Figure 1 ( a ) ] over time . The inset shows a transition from the industrial revolution to the so - called second industrial revolution and characterized by the rise of mass production and the rapid growth of chemical , electri - cal , and automotive industries and the availability of energy resources . Similarly , the global record of citations has a broad accelerated trend of growth , particularly obvious in the last decades , strongly inﬂuenced by the rise of software ( colored area ) which started in the 1960s and rapidly accelerated dur - ing the 1980s . As a written description of innovations , patents provide a surrogate of technological dynamics [ 57 – 59 ] . The rapid growth in patent diversity have been compared to Phanerozoic diversity time series [ 3 ] but once again the sim - ilarity is only partially signiﬁcant . During periods of crisis or war their numbers fall . This is shown in [ Figure 5 ( a ) ] , where we indicate the starting point of only ﬁve of them using black dots . Here , we pointed : ( 1 ) American CivilWar , ( 2 ) USA enter World War I , ( 3 ) great depression , and ( 4 ) USA enters World War II . However , a different type of external trigger can also provoke a decay in patenting , as shown by Eq . ( 5 ) which indi - cates introduction of strict intellectual property legislation and higher costs for patenting rights . Such top - down control has obviously no biological counterpart . Patent inventories give us a kinetic view of innovation , but much more can be uncovered by looking at how patents are related to each other . Since a given patent must cite others from which the novel technology gets inspiration , a network linking a given patent with past ones can be deﬁned . The number of outward links starting from a patent relates it to previous inventions . Similarly , the number of incom - ing links provides a rough estimate of its importance . Using available data sets , a network of patent citations can be con - structed [ 59 ] [ Figure 5 ( b ) ] . Each node represents a patent and arrowsindicatethatacitationismadetoapreviousinvention . The central node in this case is the oldest invention . Colors indicate modules : Groups of patents that have more con - nections among them than with others within the network . These modules correlate with groups of related inventions , suggestingthatthereisconsiderablestructureinthewaynew technologies emerge . Patent networks are highly heterogeneous , with some hubsinvolvingmanycitations , whereasmostnodeshaveonly one or two [ 59 ] . This pattern can be accounted for using a rich - gets - richermechanismfavoringhighlyconnectednodes ( the popular patents ) [ 59 – 62 ] . By following the time evolu - tion of citations , it is actually possible to detect two major FIGURE 5 Patent citations and innovation by combination . In ( a ) we display the timeseriesofUSApatentsfrom1837to2009 . Dropsincitationrecords areoftenassociatedtocrashesandwars1 – 4 ) butalsoduetolegislation ( 5 ) . Acloserpictureisobtainedbylookingattheactualpatternofcross - citations among patents . This deﬁnes a network ( b ) where nodes are ﬁled patents and the ( directed ) links are citations among them . The network shown here corresponds to early inventions in tomography ( see Ref . [ 59 ] ) and colors indicate topological modules , that is , subsets of patents that share a larger number of citations among themselves compared with the rest of the dataset . Topological modules are usually related to functional subsets with specialized traits . components affecting the relative importance of an inven - tion . The ﬁrst is the rapid growth of citations often associated withthecombinatorialpotentialoftheinvention . Thesecond is an aging process : as patents get older , they tend to be less cited . This reﬂects the changing landscape of technology and the inevitable replacement of old by new designs . Can phylogenetic analyses help untangling the origins of technological change ? Unfortunately , the differences are again important . As noted in Ref . [ 33 ] the post - industrial pace of innovation is highly labyrinthine in terms of how 22 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx FIGURE 6 Lateral transfer muddies phylogeny in material cultural evolution , as illustrated here by the evolutionary tree of cornets . Vertical lines represent the periods of manufacture of distinct cornet models , here plotted against time . Red arcs indicate so called reticulations , that is , potential nonvertical instances of information transfer among makers . Here , two main groups are indicated , corresponding to the so called Stölzel ( left rectangle ) and Périnet ( unmarked right domain ) cornets ( Redrawn after Ref . [ 32 ] ) . information is exchanged between inventions and their mak - ers . It is now accepted that an appropriate approach to cultural evolution requires a network perspective : trees are clearly not enough . The dichotomous picture of branching is being replaced by reticulate phylogenies ( see below ) . In Figure6 , theproblemisillustratedwiththereconstructedhis - torical evolution of cornets [ 32 ] where the vertical branches correspond to periods of manufacture of particular models . Instruments equiped with so - called Stölzel and Périnet valve systems , respectively . Nonvertical links ( indicated by curved red lines ) are reticulations , that is , instances of information transfer among makers . The open circles at the bottom mark key innovations in cornet design , including : ( 1 ) valve num - ber , ( 2 ) shifting of the second valve slide and valve alignment , ( 3 ) changing of bell exit position and bell placement , and ( 4 ) alteration of bell shape ( trumpetization ) . The reticulated nature of the diagram is largely due to the rapid and large information exchange between makers , who introduced dif - ferent types of innovations and changes in the number and location of valves and other features . The data set provides clear illustrations of gradual evolution , stasis followed by punctuation , extinction , and selection , but also examples of a special feature of cultural evolution : the Lazarus effect . In contrast to living species , artifacts ( such as the so - called sheperd’s crook design ) can " resurrect " based on available information about them . 7 . EVOLVING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY Software systems have a relatively recent role within techno - logical evolution and are currently the most widespread and inﬂuential systems in our society and economy . They were introduced in the 1950s ( Figure 7 , colored areas ) as soon as computerhardwareandatheoryoncomputingarchitectures emerged [ 65 ] . Hardware was clearly a precondition for soft - ware to emerge , as it might have been in early life [ 66 ] but , once in place , a rapid coevolution unfolded . In spite of its relevance , software has been largely ignored in the literature on technological evolution . In many ways , software allows us to get closer to the picture of biological evolution where a genomic description is present , since software deals mainly with performing functions and is coded [ 8 , 67 ] . © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx C O M P L E X I T Y 23 FIGURE 7 The software hierarchy . At the largest scale involving the actual origins of programming languages ( a ) we can appreciate a pattern of diversiﬁcation and multiple fusion that reveals not a tree but a network of innovations . Here , we highlight the different branches associated to special classes of languages ( yellow and violet represent procedural languages , blue depicts object - oriented , green indicates an important class of languages used in artiﬁcial intelligence , and red represents system programming languages ) . Multiple branches can fuse on a single , novel programming language ( such as Javascript ) through a planned process of large - scale integration of different components . Within each language , large - scale projects can be described in terms of a network ( b , Aztec software ) connecting different subsets of functionally well - deﬁned blocks ( b ) . Here , each node in the graph for one of these large - scale programs represents one such functional block , which depend ( are linked to ) on others . A directed arrow thus indicates that a given block needs to " call " another block . Such network is scale free and modular , being dominated by a handful of hubs and having most elements just one or two links with others . Such a structure seems to be a consequence of the widespread copy - paste process of growth . The rules of reuse also explain the biased statistical presence of some special , small subgraphs known as network motifs . In ( c ) , we show some of the most common network motifs found in the graph displayed in ( b ) . The frequency of these motifs has been shown to be a byproduct of a duplication - rewiring process [ 63 , 64 ] thus not ( necessarily ) related to special advantages of given structures at the small scale . One of the greatest advantages of software is that , on all scales , its fossil record is extremely well preserved , involv - ing multiple levels of detail , from written code to the social networks of engineers that designed it . At a coarse grained scale , aphylogenyofprogramminglanguagescanbedeﬁned . Some of them are displayed in Figure 7 ( a ) . After the inven - tion of the ﬁrst programming language , new versions came up to facilitate the interactions between man and machine . In this context , software could run on different hardware thus making it much more adaptive [ 67 ] . FORTRAN in par - ticular became a standard for engineering and physics and still survives , mainly because its simplicity and its ﬁrst - move character : Libraries developed to solve general calcu - lations are constantly reused . Many other languages failed and got extinct [ 68 ] . The diagram reveals both radiations and merging . We can appreciate this in the branching from Algol - 60 , which solved some syntax problems associated to FORTRAN and was as much hardware - independent and portable as possible . Later on , other major transitions took place , including the emergence of so - called Object - Oriented Programming where instructions and data are both included within well - deﬁned structures called objects [ 67 , 68 ] . This implies a mod - ularization of the program organization that enhances their evolvability . As it happens with cornets , engineers were able to merge different parts of previous systems and incorpo - rate them into new languages . But here the scale of such events is much larger and conceptually more complex . The carefully planned merging of different structures used in different languages and their correct integration have no match in any other evolutionary trend . In this respect , the evolution of programming languages deeply differentiates 24 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx from any biological counterpart , including the evolution of language . Beyond the language programming scale , a hierarchy of levelsofsoftwareevolutionisdeﬁnedbythelong - termdevel - opment of complex networks of interacting pieces of code and data . Although software engineering is obviously an intentional , purpose - driven activity , it is strongly affected and shaped by reuse . The evolution of large programs has been shown to occur in parallel to an ever - increasing fre - quency of copy - paste [ 67 – 70 ] . An unintended consequence of this tinkering is that , as it occurs with patent networks , it spontaneously generates complex modular graphs [ Figure 7 ( b ) ] . Their patterns of organization seem to be explained through extensive cloning [ 58 , 59 ] thus questioning Jacob’s separation between technology and biological evolution in terms of the presence or absence of reuse . Even at the small - est scale the statistical pattern of network motifs , deﬁned as small subgraphs whose frequency strongly departs from ran - domexpectationscanbeaccountedforbyreuse [ Figure2 ( c ) ] . As it occurs with other systems [ 12 , 71 – 74 ] a nonadaptive interpretation of their biased frequency is obtained . 8 . DISCUSSION It seems undeniable that technological change displays numerous life - like features , suggesting a deep connection with biological evolution . This is specially well illustrated by common convergent patterns , particularly when optimiza - tion due to cost / energy constraints is at stake . But some " disanalogies " [ 75 ] are also noticeable . The coexistence of both similarities and dissimilarities occurs because techno - logicalandbiologicalchangeshareuniversaltraitsandcausal mechanisms that pervade their long - term trends , no mat - ter how different they appear at a lower scale . What is at the rootofthesepotentialuniversals ? Statisticalphysicshasbeen successful in showing that disparate systems often behave in the same way ( once they are properly scaled ) and that this universal behavior can be explained by considering only a veryreducednumberofproperties [ 76 – 78 ] . Ithasbeenfound , for example , that a magnet , a ﬂock of birds or even the stock marketbehavesimilarlyintermsofdisplayingtippingpoints , transient dynamics , or response to external stresses . This universal behavior is present in the structure of neutral land - scapes , the existence of frozen accidents or the punctuated equilibria . Any theory of technological change will require new metaphors and tools , particularly when dealing with infor - mation systems . Reticulate networks , instead of trees [ 79 – 81 ] provide the adequate test to the role played by pure combi - nation . Networks allow deﬁning modules and their relations and the success within language evolution [ 82 , 83 ] indicates that they are more appropriate when dealing with cultural dynamics . Additionally , technologicaldesigncanbeobtained through in silico Darwinian selection [ 84 – 87 ] thus deﬁning a new level of complexity . As the distance between technology FIGURE 8 A pure engineering design can be obtained by following a Darwinian selectionprocess . Usingcomputersimulations , NASAAmesresearchers evolved a population of antennas with a ﬁtness function deﬁned in terms of a signal - processing problem . The best ﬁt candidates were rather organic in their shape , as the one shown here . Image from NASA Ames Center and biology shrinks , some unexpected results emerge as hardware is itself evolved . One important message is that the results of Darwinian selection often escape from our intuition and expertise , sug - gesting that part of the design landscape is not accessible to our minds . This is illustrated by hardware design involv - ing Darwinian selection . Genetic algorithms in particular [ 73 – 75 ] allow a population - level exploration of vast parame - ter spaces . In this approach , each member of the population ismoreorlessﬁtinsolvingthegivenproblem , anditssurvival and number of offspring directly depends on its functional success . Surviving solutions are copied with mutations : small changes are introduced with some given probability . Evolved circuits , engines , game strategies , or market fore - casts can be obtained by using evolutionary programming . Often these algorithms provide improved modiﬁcations that make the previous designs more efﬁcient . However , some challenge our intuition . An example is shown in Figure 8 , whereanevolvedantennaisdisplayed . Itwasobtainedunder evolutionary dynamics to solve a difﬁcult task on a NASA mission satellite to study the Earth magnetosphere . Using a population of candidate structures and evolving them over manygenerations , eachantennawastestedagainstanumber of technical requirements that were simulated on a super - computer . The evolved structure is far from what an engineer would ever had imagined . This example offers a very interest - ing situation where the peaks in the technological landscape that solve the problem cannot be captured by the mental structure of the human designer . Another differential trait of technology is the role played by social and economic factors [ 88 ] on innovation . Networks © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx C O M P L E X I T Y 25 ofinventorsactasecosystemengineers [ 89 ] abletotransform their own innovation landscape ( see Ref . 90 ) thus chang - ing the ways other technologies will interact . Moreover , as early noticed by Robert Solow , economic growth requires the presence of innovation [ 91 ] and thus coevolution among economy and technology must be included . Similarly , we need to identify the scales at which technological hierar - chies operate . In biology , such hierarchy can be described [ 92 ] including different levels , from population dynamics to genotype – phenotypic maps . Intechnology , populationchangescanbeestimatedusing culturomics [ 93 ] , that is , exploiting the abundance of given strings of words ( the so called n - grams ) extracted from mil - lions of digitalized books . The relative frequency of these n - grams within the culturome provides a measure of their importance over time . A kinetic theory of n - grams could take advantage of useful ecological metaphors used within otherdomainsofculturalevolution , suchaslanguagechange [ 94 ] . Deﬁning appropriate mappings between genotype and phenotype is a much more difﬁcult task [ 95 ] . Once again , information technology , with all its richness and multiplicity of scales , offers our best bet to achieve this goal . There is a whole fossil record there to be unearthed . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Peter Schuster and Ricardo Haussman for useful comments . This work has been supported by research grant FIS2004 - 05422 ( RS , SV ) , by the James McDon - nell Foundation ( RS ) , the Marcelino Botin Foundation ( SV , RS ) , the TEKES Foundation of Finland ( SK ) , the National Sci - ence Foundation ( NSF ) Grant SBE0738187 ( DF ) , and by the Santa Fe institute . REFERENCES 1 . Basalla , G . The Evolution of Technology , Cambridge University Press , 1989 . 2 . Arthur , B . The Nature of Technology . What it is and How it Evolves ; Free Press , 2009 . 3 . Kelly , K . What Technology Wants ; Viking , 2010 . 4 . Johnson , S . Where Good Ideas Come From : A Natural History of Innovation ; Riverhead Press , 2010 . 5 . Sahal , D . Patterns of Technological Innovation ; Addison - Wesley , 1981 . 6 . Schuster , P . Untamable curiosity , innovation , discovery and bricolage . Complexity 2006 , 11 , 9 – 11 . 7 . Arthur , B . Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy ; Michigan University Press , 1997 . 8 . Ogburn , W . F . ; Thomas , D . Are inventions inevitable ? A note on social evolution . Polit Sci Quart 1922 , 37 , 83 – 98 . 9 . Friedel , R . ; Israel , P . Edison’s Electric Light : Biography of an Invention ; Rutgers Univercity Press , 1986 . 10 . Jacob , F . Evolution as tinkering . Science 1977 , 196 , 1161 – 1166 . 11 . Wilkins , A . Between design and bricolage : Genetic networks , levels of selection and adaptive evolution . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007 , 105 , 8590 – 8596 . 12 . Solé , R . V . ; Ferrer , R . ; Montoya , J . M . ; Valverde , S . Selection , tinkering , and emergence in complex networks . Complexity 2002 , 8 , 20 – 33 . 13 . Schuster , P . The origin and processing of biological information . In : Front . Life 2001 , 1 , 329 – 346 . 14 . Brown , J . H . ; West , G . B . Scaling in Biology ; Oxford University Press , 2000 . 15 . Minetti , A . E . ; Pinkerton , J . ; Zamparo , P . From bipedalism to bicyclism : Evolution in energetics and biomechanics of historic bicycles . Proc R Soc Lond B 2001 , 268 , 1351 – 1360 . 16 . Farmer , D . Market force , ecology and evolution . Ind Corp Change 1999 , 11 , 895 – 953 . 17 . Eldredge , N . Evolution in the marketplace . Struct Change Econ Dyn 1997 , 8 , 385 – 398 . 18 . Gould , S . J . The PandaÕs thumb of technology . Nat Hist 1987 , 96 , 14 – 23 . 19 . Solé , R . V . Phase Transitions ; Princeton University Press , 2011 . 20 . Kimura , M . Diffusion models in population genetics . J Appl Prob 1964 , 1 , 177 – 232 . 21 . Petrovski , H . The Evolution of Useful Things ; Vintage Books , 1992 . 22 . Christie , P . The interpretation and application of Rent’s rule . IEEE Trans VLSI Syst 2000 , 8 , 639 – 648 . 23 . Bassett , D . S . ; Greenﬁeld , D . L . ; Meyer - Lindenberg , A . ; Weinberger , D . R . ; Moore , S . W . ; Bullmore , E . T . Efﬁcient physical embedding of topologically complex information processing networks in brains and computer circuits . PLoS Comp Biol 2010 , 6 , e1000748 . 24 . Nelson , M . E . ; Bower , J . M . Brain maps and parallel computers . Trends Neurosci 1990 , 13 , 403 – 408 . 25 . Schuster , P . ; Fontana , W . ; Stadler , P . F . ; Hofacker , I . L . From sequences to shapes and back : A case study in RNA secondary structures . Proc R Soc Lond B 1994 , 255 , 279 – 284 . 26 . Huynen , M . A . ; Stadler , P . F . ; Fontana , W . Smoothness within ruggedness : The role of neutrality in adaptation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996 , 93 , 397 – 401 . 27 . Nimwegen , E . ; Crutchﬁeld , J . P . ; Huynen , M . Neutral evolution of mutational robustness . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 , 96 , 9716 – 9720 . 28 . Wilke , C . O . Adaptive evolution on neutral networks . Bull Math Biol 2001 , 63 , 715 – 730 . 29 . Ferrer , R . ; Janssen , C . ; Solé , R . V . Topology of technology graphs : Small world patterns in electronic circuits . Phys Rev E 2001 , 64 , 32767 . 30 . Macia , J . ; Solé , R . V . Distributed robustness in cellular networks : Insights from synthetic evolved circuits . J R Soc Interface 2009 , 6 , 393 – 400 . 31 . Raman , K . ; Wagner , A . The evolvability of programmable hardware . J R Soc Interface 2012 , 55 , 269 – 281 . 32 . Tëmkin , I . ; Eldredge , N . Phylogenetics and material cultural evolution . Curr Antrop 2007 , 48 , 146 – 153 . 33 . Eldredge , N . Paleontology and cornets : Thoughts of material cultural evolution . Evo Edu Outreach 2011 , 4 , 364 – 373 . 34 . Nelson , R . R . ; Winter , S . G . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change ; Belknap Press , 1982 . 35 . Nelson , R . R . ; Winter , S . G . In search of a useful theory of innovation . Res Policy 1977 , 6 , 36 – 76 . 36 . Rip , A . ; Kemp , R . Technological change . In : Human Choice and Climate Change , Vol . 2 ; Rainer , S . ; Malone , L . , Eds . ; Batelle Press , 1988 ; pp . 327 – 400 . 37 . Van den Ende , J . ; Kemp , R . Technological transformations in history : How the computer regime grew out of existing computing regimes . Res Policy 1999 , 28 , 833 – 851 . 38 . Arthur , B . ; Polak , W . The evolution of technology within a simple computer model . Complexity 2006 , 11 , 23 – 31 . 26 C O M P L E X I T Y © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx 39 . Nagi , B . ; Farmer , J . D . ; Trancik , J . E . ; Gonzales , J . P . Superexponential long - term trends in information technology . J Tech Forecast Soc Change 2011 , 73 , 1061 – 1083 . 40 . Koh , H . ; Magee , C . L . A functional approach for studying technological progress : Application to information technology . Tech . Forecast . Soc . Change 2006 , 73 , 1061 – 1083 . 41 . Farmer , J . D . ; Trancik , J . Dynamics of technological development in the energy sector . In : LondonAccord Final Publication ; Onstwedder , J . P . ; Mainelli , M . , Eds . , 2007 ; pp . 1 – 24 . 42 . Argote , L . ; Epple , E . Learning curves in manufacturing . Science 1990 , 247 , 920 – 924 . 43 . Auerswald , P . ; Kauffman , S . A . ; Lobo , J . ; Shell , K . The production recipes approach to modeling technological innovation : An application to learning by doing . J Econ Dyn Control 2000 , 24 , 389 – 450 . 44 . McDonald , A . ; Schrattenholzer , L . Learning rates for energy technologies . Energ Policy 2001 , 29 , 255 – 261 . 45 . Moore , G . E . Cramming more components onto integrated circuits . Electronics 1965 , 38 , 114 – 117 . 46 . Kauffman , S . A . ; Levin , S . Towards a general theory of adaptive walks on rugged landscapes . J Theor Biol 1987 , 128 , 11 – 45 . 47 . Kauffman , S . A . At Home in the Universe . Chapter 9 ; Oxford University Press . , 1995 . 48 . Frenken , K . A complexity approach to innovation networks . The case of the aircraft industry . Res Policy 2000 , 29 , 257 – 272 . 49 . Marengo , L . ; Valente , M . Industry dynamics in complex products spaces : An evolutionary model . Struct Change Econ Dyn 2010 , 21 , 5 – 16 . 50 . Baldwin , C . Y . ; Clarck , K . B . Design Rules ; MIT Press , 2000 . 51 . McNerney , J . ; Farmer , J . D . ; Redner , S . ; Trancik , J . E . Role of design complexity in technology improvement . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 , 108 , 9008 – 9013 . 52 . Kurtzweil , R . The Singularity is Near ; Viking , 2005 . 53 . Hanel , R . ; Kauffman , S . A . ; Thurner S . Phase transitions in random catalytic networks . Phys Rev E 2005 , 72 , 036117 . 54 . Hanel , R . ; Kauffman , S . A . ; Thurner , S . Towards a physics of evolution : Critical diversity dynamics at the edges of collapse and bursts of diversiﬁcation . Phys Rev E 2007 , 76 , 036110 . 55 . Kauffman , S . A . Investigations , Oxford University Press , 2000 . 56 . Lipinski , C . ; Hopkins , A . Navigating chemical space for biology and medicine . Nature 2004 , 432 , 855 – 861 . 57 . Tuomi , I . Networks of Innovation ; Oxford University Press , 2006 . 58 . Jaffe , A . B . ; Trajtenberg , M . Patents , Citations and Innovations ; MIT Press , 2003 . 59 . Valverde , S . ; Solé , R . V . ; Bedau M . ; Packard , N . Topology and evolution of technology innovation networks . Phys Rev E 2007 , 76 , 032767 . 60 . Gress , B . Properties of the USPTO patent citation network : 1963 – 2002 . World Patent Info 2010 , 32 , 3 – 21 . 61 . Bommarito II , M . J . ; Katz , D . M . ; Zelner , J . L . ; Fowler , J . H . Distance measures for dynamic citation networks . Physica A 2010 , 389 , 4201 – 4208 . 62 . Verspagen , B . Mapping technological trajectories as complex networks . Adv Complex Syst 2009 , 10 , 93 – 115 . 63 . Valverde , S . ; Ferrer , R . ; Solé , R . V . Scale - free networks from optimal design . Europhys Lett 2002 , 60 , 512 – 518 . 64 . Valverde , S . ; Solé , R . V . Network motifs in computational networks : A case study in software architecture . Phys Rev E 2005 , 72 , 026107 . 65 . Williams , M . R . A History of Computer Architecture ; Prentice - Hall , 1985 . 66 . Dyson G Darwin Among the Machines ; Addison - Wesley , 1997 . 67 . Sammet JE Programming Languages : History and Fundamentals ; Prentice - Hall , 1969 . 68 . Mens T . ; Demeyer , S Software Evolution ; Springer - Verlag , 2008 . 69 . Myers , C . R . Software systems as complex networks : Structure , function , and evolvability of software collaboration . graphs Phys Rev E 2003 , 68 , 048116 . 70 . Concas , G . ; Marchesi , M . ; Pinna , S . ; Serra , N . Power - laws in a large object - oriented software system . IEEE Trans Soft Eng 2007 , 33 , 687 – 708 . 71 . Solé , R . V . ; Valverde , S . Are network motifs the spandrels of cellular complexity ? Trends Ecol Evol 2006 , 21 , 419 – 22 . 72 . Solé , R . V . ; Valverde , S . Spontaneous emergence of modularity in cellular networks . J Roy Soc Interface 2007 , 5 , 129 – 133 . 73 . Lynch , M . The evolution of genetic networks by non - adaptive processes . Nat Rev Genet 2007 , 8 , 803 – 813 . 74 . Wagner , G . ; Pavlicev , M . ; Cheverud , J . M . The road to modularity . Nat Rev Genet 2007 , 8 , 921 – 931 . 75 . Ziman , J . Technological Innovation as an Evolutionary Process , Cambridge University Press , 2000 . 76 . Kauffman , S . A . The Origins of Order : Self - Organization and Selection in Evolution ; Oxford University Press , 1993 . 77 . Cowan , G . A . ; Pines , D . ; Meltzer , D . Complexity : Metaphors , Models and Reality ; Perseus Books , 1996 . 78 . Mitchell , M . Complexity : A Guided Tour ; Oxford University Press , 2009 . 79 . Makarenkov , V . ; Legendre , P . From phylogenetic tree to a reticulated network . J Comput Biol 2004 , 11 , 195 – 212 . 80 . Lipo , C . P . ; O’Brien , M . J . ; Collard , M . ; Shennan , S . J . Mapping our Ancestors ; Aldine Transaction Publishers , 2009 . 81 . Kunin , V . ; Goldovsky , L . ; Darzentas , N . ; Ouzounis , C . A . The net of life : Reconstructing the microbial phylogenetic network . Genome Res . 2005 , 15 , 954 – 959 . 82 . Dagan , T . ; Martin , W . Getting a better picture of microbial evolution en route to a network of genomes . Phil Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009 , 364 , 2187 – 96 . 83 . Nelson - Sathi , S . ; List , J . - M . ; Geisler , H . ; Fangerau , H . ; Gray , R . D . ; Martin , W . ; Dagan , T . Networks uncover hidden lexical borrowing in Indo - European language evolution . Proc Royal Soc London B 2011 , 278 , 1794 – 1803 . 84 . Mitchell , M . An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms ; Bradford Books , 1998 . 85 . Forrest , S . Genetic algorithms : Principles of natural selection applied to computation . Science 1993 , 261 , 872 – 878 . 86 . Koza , J . R . ; Keane , M . A . ; Streeter , M . J . Evolving inventions . Sci Am F 2003 , 882 , 52 – 59 . 87 . Long , J . Darwin’s Devices ; Basic Books , 2012 . 88 . Jones , C . G . ; Lawton , J . H . ; Shachak , M . Organisms as ecosystem engineers . Oikos 1994 , 69 , 373 – 386 . 89 . Erwin , D . H . Macroevolution of ecosystem engineering , niche construction and diversity . Trends Ecol Evol 2008 , 23 , 304 – 310 . 90 . Hidalgo , C . A . ; Klinger B . ; Barabási , A . - L . ; Hausmann , R . The product space conditions the development of nations . Science 2007 , 317 , 482 – 487 . 91 . Solow , R . A contribution to the theory of economic growth . Q J Econ 1952 , 76 , 65 – 94 . 92 . Schuster , P . How does complexity arise in evolution ? . Complexity 1996 , 2 , 22 – 30 . 93 . Michel , J . - B . ; Shen , Y . K . ; Aiden , A . P . ; Veres , A . ; Gray , M . K . ; Pickett , J . P . ; Hoiberg , D . ; Clancy , D . ; Norvig , P . ; Orwant , J . ; Pinker , S . ; Nowak , M . A . ; Aiden , E . L . Quantitative analysis of culture using millions of digitized books . Science 2011 , 33 , 176 – 182 . 94 . Solé , R . V . ; Corominas - Murtra , B . ; Fortuny , J . Diversity , competition , extinction : The ecophysics of language change . J Royal Soc Interface 2010 , 7 , 1647 – 1664 . 95 . Lobo , J . ; Miller , J . H . ; Fontana , W . Neutrality in technological landscapes ; Santa Fe Institute Working Paper , 2004 . © 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx C O M P L E X I T Y 27