ORIGINAL ARTICLE The dynamics of search , impasse , and representational change provide a coherent explanation of difﬁculty in the nine - dot problem Michael O¨llinger • Gary Jones • Gu¨nther Knoblich Received : 19 September 2012 / Accepted : 14 May 2013 / Published online : 25 May 2013 (cid:2) Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 Abstract The nine - dot problem is often used to demon - strate and explain mental impasse , creativity , and out of the box thinking . The present study investigated the interplay of a restricted initial search space , the likelihood of invoking a representational change , and the subsequent constraining of an unrestricted search space . In three experimental conditions , participants worked on different versions of the nine - dot problem that hinted at removing particular sources of difﬁculty from the standard problem . The hints were incremental such that the ﬁrst suggested a possible route for a solution attempt ; the second addition - ally indicated the dot at which lines meet on the solution path ; and the ﬁnal condition also provided non - dot loca - tions that appear in the solution path . The results showed that in the experimental conditions , representational change is encountered more quickly and problems are solved more often than for the control group . We propose a cognitive model that focuses on general problem - solving heuristics and representational change to explain problem difﬁculty . Introduction There is growing evidence that an insight to the solution of a problem can be characterized by a representational change ( Knoblich , Ohlsson , Haider , & Rhenius , 1999 ; Ohlsson , 1984a , 1992 ; O¨llinger , Jones , & Knoblich , 2008 ; Thevenot & Oakhill , 2008 ) . This evidence makes it difﬁ - cult to explain insight problem solving within the classical information - processing account ( Newell & Simon , 1972 ) , where problem solving is understood as search within a well - deﬁned problem space ( problem representation ) . The problem space account has no mechanism to implement a representational change for instances when the current search gets stuck , is insufﬁcient , or does not reduce the distance to the desired goal . There are a few accounts that attempt to remedy this omission . One suggestion is to claim that insight problems are nothing special and therefore representational change plays only a marginal role . For such explanations , problem difﬁculty relates either to the size of the problem space being overly large and preventing exhaustive search ( Kaplan & Simon , 1990 ) , or that problem solvers apply inappropriate heuristics when searching the problem space ( MacGregor , Ormerod , & Chronicle , 2001 ; Ormerod , MacGregor , & Chronicle , 2002 ) . Both accounts miss a cognitive process that addresses the change of the search space . In the ﬁrst , an additional process is necessary that re - focuses on particular areas of the search space by chang - ing the problem representation ; in the second an additional cognitive process is required that changes the search space after repeated failures of the problem - solving process . Ohlsson ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 ; Ohlsson , 1984a , b , 1992 ) provided a detailed framework that stressed the importance of a representational change for insight prob - lem solving , and identiﬁed impasse as a crucial pre - M . O¨llinger ( & ) Parmenides Center for the Study of Thinking , Parmenides Foundation , Kirchplatz 1 , 82049 Pullach by Munich , Germany e - mail : michael . oellinger @ parmenides - foundation . org M . O¨llinger Ludwig - Maximilians - University , Munich , Germany G . Jones Nottingham Trent University , Nottingham , UK G . Knoblich Central European University , Budapest , Hungary 123 Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00426 - 013 - 0494 - 8 condition . Moreover , Ohlsson ( 1992 ) identiﬁed at least three different processes that drive a representational change and thereby break an impasse : elaboration , re - encoding , and constraint relaxation . Although Ohlsson’s model ( 1992 , p . 20 ) incorporates search as a necessary process before an impasse is met , the framework mainly focuses on what processes occur to release the problem solver from impasse , without a great deal of elaboration on the particular nature of search processes before and after an impasse . Jones ( 2003 ) provided a model that elaborated Ohlsson’s notion that insight problem solving can be understood as a sequential process of different phases ( search – impasse – insight – search , see also Ash & Wiley , 2006 ) . This model suggests that there might be a concerted interplay of search and impasse , with each affecting the other . The goal of the present study is to apply an extension of this model ( see Fig . 1 ) to the famous nine - dot problem . Our general proposal is that insight problem solving is a dynamic search process that proceeds in consecutive stages . In line with Ohlsson ( 1992 ) we assume that per - ceptual processes and prior knowledge deﬁne what is and is not represented in the initial problem representation . This representation is searched and constrained by heuristics ( e . g . MacGregor et al . , 2001 ; Newell & Simon , 1972 ) . The search could be either successful , at which point the search terminates and a solution is found , or the search can lead to repeated failures and an impasse is reached ( Ohlsson , 1992 ) . The smaller the search space is , the faster the realization that no further progress is possible ( Kaplan & Simon , 1990 ; Ormerod et al . , 2002 ) . If impasse was caused by the problem representation being inadequate , then it must be overcome by a representational change . The likelihood of achieving representational change is largely governed by the difﬁculty in relaxing self - imposed prior knowledge constraints that have been placed on the prob - lem or in decomposing problem elements into their con - stituent parts ( see Knoblich et al . , 1999 for more information ) . Should representational change be achieved , 1 a new problem representation is established that subse - quently changes the problem space ( to be smaller or larger , ordinarily ) . Once again , heuristics are necessary that efﬁ - ciently search of the modiﬁed problem space . The model is an elaboration of Ohlsson’s representa - tional change theory and has similar implication : First , insight is caused by a representational change . Second , there is no particular class of insight problems that neces - sarily requires a representational change ; each problem can be solved without insight if the initial problem represen - tation is adequate and the appropriate heuristics are avail - able . Third , the difﬁculty related to attaining insight can have different causes ( Kershaw , Flynn , & Gordon , 2013 ; Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ) . Whereas previous models have highlighted the role of perception , memory , and heuristics , the present model tries to capture the interplay between these factors . Doing so , it acknowledges that for each problem there can be different combinations of causes of problem difﬁculty that have to be considered . For instance , Jones ( 2003 ) demonstrated for the car park problem that heuristics play an important role before an impasse , but breaking the impasse required a representational change . Recently , O¨llinger , Jones , Faber and Knoblich ( 2012 ) demonstrated that for different versions of the eight - coin problem ( Ormerod et al . , 2002 ) the main source of problem difﬁculty is determined by the required representational change . Nevertheless , although heuristics had no overall impact on solution rates , they still predicted the selection of coins . In the present study , we applied the above model to the nine - dot problem ( Maier , 1930 ) that has kept problem solving researchers busy over the last decades ( Burnham & Davis , 1969 ; Chronicle , Ormerod , & MacGregor , 2001 ; Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ; Lung & Dominowski , 1985 ; MacGregor et al . , 2001 ; Maier , 1930 ; Scheerer , 1963 ; Weisberg & Alba , 1981 ) . There is clear evidence for multiple causes of problem difﬁculty in this problem ( Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ) , and it thus provides an opportunity to better understand the interplay of search and 1 It does not follow that reaching impasse on a problem automatically produces a representational change ( i . e . insight ) , since this is not always the case ( Jones , 2003 ) . Equally , whether insight is achieved and if so how quickly it is achieved depends on multiple factors , such as the difﬁculty of a change to the problem representation and how large the problem space is ( Knoblich et al . , 1999 ; Kershaw et al . , 2013 ) . Fig . 1 Flow - chart of insight problem solving . Starting in the top left corner , a problem representation is established by prior knowledge and perceptual aspects , e . g . Gestalt laws , grouping , chunking . The problem representation is searched by heuristics . This can be successful : a solution is attained ; or unsuccessful : an impasse is encountered . To overcome an impasse , a change of the problem representation is likely to be necessary . A new search will then be applied to the changed problem representation Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 267 123 representational change . In the nine - dot problem , solvers need to connect nine dots that are arranged in a 3 9 3 square with four straight lines without lifting the pen off the paper ( see Fig . 2a , b ) . It has consistently been shown that giving only a few minutes of time , the problem is extremely difﬁcult to solve ( see Kershaw and Ohlsson , 2004 ) . Explaining the difﬁculty of the nine - dot problem According to the model depicted in Fig . 1 , one source of difﬁculty in the nine - dot problem is that problem solvers initially only consider moves that remain within the 3 9 3 grid ( due to a perceptually driven boundary constraint that keeps lines within the perceived 3 9 3 square ) . That is , the problem solver is working within a problem space that is overly constrained , but still too large to be exhaustively searched ( Burnham & Davis , 1969 ; MacGregor et al . , 2001 ) . After repeated failure within the overly constrained problem space , the task for the problem solver is to accomplish a representational change—thus , overcoming the boundary constraint ( Ohlsson , 1992 ; Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ) . However , relaxing the boundary constraint now leads to a problem space that is much too large , because if lines can begin and / or end , or turn at non - dot locations then there are a potentially inﬁnite number of lines that can be drawn ( see also Kaplan & Simon , 1990 ) . We believe that this is why previous research has found that even when the boundary constraint is relaxed ( Weis - berg & Alba , 1981 ) , participants still ﬁnd that solution to the nine - dot problem is evasive unless they are given fur - ther information that may constrain the problem space ( e . g . speciﬁcation of non - dot locations or speciﬁcation of the conﬁguration of the solution path ) . Consequently , we investigated the extent to which per - ceptual hints that relate to the solution path in the nine - dot problem facilitate its solution . In particular , we examined the effects of perceptual information both pre - impasse and post - impasse—ﬁrst , the amount of ( perceptual ) solution path information that is needed to restrict the initial search space to facilitate the problem solver reaching impasse and to overcome the boundary constraint ; and second , how much information is needed to constrain the subsequent post - insight problem space in order to solve the nine - dot problem . Hitherto perceptual hints have provided minimal beneﬁt in increasing the solution rate of the nine - dot problem ( Weisberg & Alba , 1981 ; Lung & Dominowski , 1985 ; Chronicle et al . 2001 ; Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ) . For example , providing explicit hints to draw lines beyond the virtual nine - dot square ( Burnham & Davis , 1969 ; Weisberg & Alba , 1981 ) and providing explicit perceptual hints that indicate that lines go beyond the virtual square ( Chronicle , et al . , 2001 ) had limited inﬂuence on solution rates . Even when two additional dots in different colours were provided at the non - dot locations , there was little effect ( Ormerod , Chronicle , & MacGregor , 1997 ; see Fig . 2c ) . Apparently , the different colour of the dots made it difﬁcult to integrate the dots into the solution , and more importantly , as Kershaw and Ohlsson ( 2004 ) showed , it is still difﬁcult to realize that a change in the direction of a line ( i . e . a non - dot turn ) is necessary at non - dot locations . That is , there are two aspects that have to be taken into account . First , achieving a representational change to overcome the boundary constraint and thereby drawing lines to non - dot locations , resulting in a relaxed search space ; and second , using efﬁcient heuristics that guide the search process in making non - dot turns within the relaxed search space . Our model suggests that—in line with Kershaw and Ohlsson ( 2004 ) —the nine - dot problem has multiple sour - ces of difﬁculty . The key reason that perceptual hints have thus far proved ineffective in the nine - dot problem is because the post - impasse search space is too large to navigate successfully within a limited time period . By using appropriate perceptual information to guide the problem solver , we hope to demonstrate how and why perceptual hints can direct attention and increase solution rates dramatically . For instance , guiding attention to the crucial problem elements signiﬁcantly increases the Fig . 2 The nine - dot problem ( a ) and its solution ( b ) , and the 11 - dot variant introduced by Ormerod et al . 1997 ( c ) 268 Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 123 solution rates of insight problems like Duncker’s ( 1945 ) tumour problem ( Grant & Spivey , 2003 ; Litchﬁeld & Ball , 2011 ; Thomas & Lleras , 2007 ) . In three different conditions we systematically increased the salience of perceptual features of the nine - dot problem . The ﬁrst two experimental conditions were in line with the work of Kaplan and Simon ( 1990 ) who showed that increasing the perceptual salience of crucial features can facilitate the solution of insight problems , because it helps in applying the appropriate heuristics that restrict the given problem space . The intention was to induce an impasse more quickly by ( a ) constraining the initial problem space by illustrating a possible solution path by presenting arrows that point to locations outside of the 3 9 3 grid ( thus suggesting that the boundary constraint needs to be relaxed ) ; and ( b ) after relaxing the constraint the arrows restrict the larger search space and indicate potential non - dot turns . In the ﬁrst condition , which we label the P condition ( P = path ) , within each dot we embedded an arrow that indicated the direction of one of the possible solutions ( see Fig . 3 ) . In the second condition , we added the particular spatial pattern of the solution ( Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ) . The solution looks like an isosceles triangle ( see Fig . 2b ) where three lines meet at the apex . We increased the salience of a particular apex dot by indicating three arrows that meet in this dot . This condition was termed the Path - Apex condition ( PA , see Fig . 3b ) . Our main predictions were that solution rates would be higher ( PA [ P [ Control Group ) and that participants would more quickly overcome the boundary constraint when more perceptual hints are available ( PA [ P [ Control Group ) . A further aim was to explicitly test Kershaw and Ohls - son’s ( 2004 ; Ohlsson , 1992 ) assumption of the necessity of a representational change . Highlighting non - dot positions in the PAN ( path / apex / non - dot turn , see Fig . 3c ) condition should further increase the likelihood to overcome the boundary constraint . The non - dot positions explicitly draw attention to visual – spatial positions outside the imposed virtual square of the nine dots ( Grant & Spivey , 2003 ) , and should help to generate a representational change . Speci - fying the non - dot points should also facilitate the solution of the nine - dot problem by constraining the post - insight problem space , because by combining the arrow informa - tion with the non - dot information , the location of the non - dot turns is given . Accordingly , we predicted the participants in the PAN condition should have the best chance to quickly overcome the boundary constraint and to quickly solve the problem . A further prediction was that for participants overcom - ing the boundary constraint in the control and experimental conditions , solution rates should be higher for the experi - mental conditions than the control group because the per - ceptual hints in the P , PA , and PAN condition should restrict the search space after the representational change . Method Participants The 136 paid participants ( 32 males , mean age 25 , range 18 – 34 ) were recruited by advertising at the University of Munich and in local newspapers and were randomly assigned to one of the four groups ( 34 per group ) . Nineteen additional participants were excluded beforehand because they reported to be familiar with the nine - dot problem . The data of one participant in the PAN condition was not analyzable and was therefore discarded . Materials and procedure Participants received a booklet that contained written instructions and ﬁve pages displaying copies of the prob - lem ( so that they could start over after failed solution attempts ) . Each dot in the problem statement was printed in Fig . 3 a P condition where solution path is indicated by arrows . b PA condition with additional information regarding the location where lines meet . c PAN condition where additional non - dot points were provided Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 269 123 gray with a surrounding black circle . Each participant was tested individually in a quiet room after reading the fol - lowing instruction ( in German ) : ‘‘Connect the nine dots drawing four connected straight lines . It is not allowed to lift the pencil from the paper and it is not allowed to retrace lines . Feel free to start over as often as you like . You have 10 min for the solution . Please indicate the sequence of lines drawn using the numbers 1 to 4—1 for the ﬁrst line , 2 for the second , etc . ’’ For all experimental conditions , the dots contained arrows as displayed in Fig . 3a – c . In addition , the PAN condition consisted of two additional dots ( ‘‘non - dots’’ ) , printed in a brighter gray and without a surrounding circle to distinguish them from those of the nine - dot problem ( see Fig . 3c ) . Data analyses The following deﬁnitions and classiﬁcations were used for analysing the data : • Move : A move was deﬁned as one straight line that connected dots and / or non - dots . • Dot moves and non - dot moves : Moves were classiﬁed as dot moves ( a line starting and ending on one of the nine dots ) or as non - dot moves ( a line starting and / or ending at a non - dot point ) . • Solution : A s olution was deﬁned as a sequence of four moves that cancelled out all nine dots . Results The results are divided into three sets of analyses . As a manipulation check , we ﬁrst analysed whether the per - ceptual hints indicating the solution path affected the move selections of participants . Second , we examined solution rates in order to assess whether and how perceptual hints facilitated the problem solution . Third , we determined how the perceptual hints inﬂuenced insight . This was achieved by ( a ) examining the pre - insight inﬂuence of the hints ( i . e . before realizing that the boundary constraint needs to be overcome ) as the number of moves required before the ﬁrst move was made that went outside of the virtual square formed by the dots ; and ( b ) examining the post - insight inﬂuence of the hints ( i . e . after overcoming the boundary constraint ) by analysing the solution rates for participants who achieved insight . Manipulation check We tested whether participants in the experimental condi - tions preferred moves that followed the direction of the arrows compared to the control group where the problem statement did not contain any directional information . To do so we examined for each individual the percentage of moves that followed the arrowed pattern depicted in the experimental conditions ( for the control group , we ana - lysed moves that involved the same dots in the arrowed pattern as a baseline comparison ) . Additionally , we asses - sed whether the pattern of solvers and non - solvers differed across the groups . As Fig . 4 illustrates , participants in all experimental conditions preferred moves that followed the direction of the arrows in the problem statement . Additionally , the ﬁgure demonstrates that solvers showed an even stronger preference for such moves than non - solvers . An ANOVA with the between factors Condition ( CG , P , PA , PAN ) and Solver ( non - solver , solver ) and the depen - dent variable mean number of moves following arrows revealed a highly signiﬁcant effect for the factor Condition , F ( 3 , 126 ) = 18 . 35 , p \ 0 . 01 , g p2 = 0 . 30 . Post hoc com - parisons ( Scheffe´ ) showed that all experimental conditions differed signiﬁcantly from the CG condition ( p \ 0 . 01 ) , and that the PAN condition differed from the P and the PA conditions ( p \ 0 . 05 ) . There was no difference between the PA and P conditions . There was also a highly signiﬁcant main effect for the factor Solver , F ( 1 , 126 ) = 10 . 52 , p \ 0 . 01 , g p2 = 0 . 08 , with solvers’ relying more strongly on arrow direction . There was no signiﬁcant interaction ( p = 0 . 08 ) . Solution rate Table 1 provides an overview of the solution rate for each of the study conditions . The data showed that all experi - mental conditions showed a higher solution rate than the CG . We analysed the inﬂuence of each additional piece of information ( e . g . providing the path plus apex rather than just the path ) on solution rates across the conditions using a Fig . 4 Mean number of biased moves across groups and separated for solvers and non - solvers in comparison with the move pattern of the CG . Standard errors are plotted 270 Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 123 binary logistic regression ( BLR ) ( Hosmer & Lemeshow , 2000 ) . BLR provides a method of analysing the inﬂuence of dichotomous , discrete , or continuous predictors on a binary outcome variable , and has already been successfully applied to the analysis of insight problem - solving experi - ments ( e . g . Kershaw et al . , 2013 ; O¨llinger et al . , 2012 ) . BLR produces B values , and odds ratios . B values indicate the direction of the relationship ; odds ratios indicate the likelihood that a participant in a particular group can be categorized as a solver , e . g . an odds ratio of 2 for a par - ticipant in a particular condition illustrates that the partic - ipant is 2 times more likely to solve the problem than for the baseline ( CG ) condition ( see Kershaw et al . , 2013 ) . Entering the three experimental conditions and the CG as baseline resulted in a signiﬁcant model , v 2 ( 3 , 135 ) = 40 . 61 that classiﬁed 74 . 8 % of solvers correctly . Table 2 shows the BLR coefﬁcient B , the Wald v 2 , and the odds ratio for each of the three conditions . The PA and PAN conditions differed signiﬁcantly from the CG , the P condition did not . The regression coefﬁcients were positive and increased with the amount of perceptual information provided . The odds ratio showed that a person in the PA group is 5 . 92 times more likely to solve the problem than a person in the CG . For the PAN group the odds ratio increases dramatically , to a value of 33 . 75 . Impact of perceptual constraints , pre - insight We determined whether providing different degrees of perceptual information resulted in a faster realization of non - dot moves . We calculated the median number of moves until a non - dot move appeared across all solvers ( Mdn = 4 ) . Accordingly , we split the solvers into partici - pants that had a fast or slow realization . Table 1 ( column 3 ) illustrates that as expected , the number of participants that had a fast realization increased monotonically with the amount of perceptual information provided . We applied a BLR , using the CG as the reference category . The model was signiﬁcant , v 2 ( 3 , 135 ) = 16 . 82 , and classiﬁed 78 . 5 % of participants correctly . Table 3 shows the BLR coefﬁ - cient B , the Wald v 2 , and the odds ratio for each of the three conditions . The data demonstrated that only the PAN condition differed signiﬁcantly from the CG . The odds ratio indicates that participants in the PAN condition are 13 . 33 times more likely to overcome the boundary con - straint within the ﬁrst four moves than for the CG . For the P and PA conditions that do not provide non - dot locations , there were no statistical differences . This shows how strong the boundary constraint is in the nine - dot problem—par - ticipants will often fail to make use of arrows that point to locations outside of the perceived 3 9 3 square unless they are also accompanied by non - dot locations . Impact of perceptual constraints , post - insight We analysed whether the post - insight problem spaces were sufﬁciently constrained by the experimental conditions such that insight and problem solution were facilitated . In doing so , we determined how the experimental conditions facilitated problem solution once the boundary constraint was relaxed . Table 1 summarizes the data and shows that once insight has been achieved , the arrows play a major role in constraining the subsequent problem space . Almost all participants in the experimental conditions who made non - dot moves eventually solved the problem , whereas in the CG only half of the participants that drew at least one line to a non - dot position were able to solve the problem . Table 1 Solution rates and non - dot moves classiﬁed according to different selection criteria Condition % and ( # ) of solvers % and ( # ) of fast realization % and ( # ) of Ps that made non - dot moves Non - dot Ps who solve , % and ( solvers / non - dot moves ) CG ( N = 34 ) 11 . 76 ( 4 ) 5 . 88 ( 2 ) 23 . 53 ( 8 ) 50 ( 4 / 8 ) P ( N = 34 ) 26 . 47 ( 9 ) 14 . 71 ( 5 ) 29 . 41 ( 10 ) 90 ( 9 / 10 ) PA ( N = 34 ) 44 . 12 ( 15 ) 20 . 59 ( 7 ) 44 . 12 ( 15 ) 100 ( 15 / 15 ) PAN ( N = 33 ) 81 . 82 ( 27 ) 45 . 45 ( 15 ) 84 . 85 ( 28 ) 96 ( 27 / 28 ) Table 2 Binary logistic regression model for the solution rates comparing all experimental conditions against the control group Predictor B SE Wald v 2 df Sig . OR 95 % CI Lower Upper Condition 29 . 75 3 0 . 01 P 0 . 99 0 . 66 2 . 27 1 0 . 13 2 . 70 0 . 74 9 . 83 PA 1 . 78 0 . 64 7 . 86 1 0 . 01 5 . 92 1 . 71 20 . 54 PAN 3 . 52 0 . 70 25 . 43 1 0 . 01 33 . 75 8 . 60 132 . 53 SE standard error , Sig . signiﬁcance ( p value ) , OR odds ratio Table 3 Binary logistic regression model for the fast realization data comparing all experimental conditions against the control group Predictor B SE Wald v 2 df Sig . OR 95 % CI Lower Upper Condition 14 . 34 3 0 . 01 P 1 . 02 0 . 88 1 . 35 1 0 . 25 2 . 76 0 . 49 15 . 33 PA 1 . 42 0 . 84 2 . 85 1 0 . 09 4 . 15 0 . 79 21 . 66 PAN 2 . 59 0 . 81 10 . 27 1 0 . 01 13 . 33 2 . 73 65 . 02 SE standard error , Sig . signiﬁcance ( p value ) , OR odds ratio Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 271 123 We tested whether the number of participants that made non - dot moves and solved the problem , and those who made non - dot moves and failed to solve the problem , varied between the conditions . With pairwise v 2 tests we found that the PA condition differed from the CG , v 2 ( 1 , 23 ) = 9 . 08 , p \ 0 . 01 , k = 0 . 50 and the PAN differed from the CG , v 2 ( 1 , 36 ) = 11 . 22 , p \ 0 . 01 , k = 0 . 38 . The P condition only marginally differed from the CG , v 2 ( 1 , 18 ) = 3 . 55 , p = 0 . 06 , k = 0 . 38 . There were no signiﬁ - cant differences between the experimental conditions ( p s [ 0 . 20 ) . Discussion The current study aimed to determine the role of problem space , search , impasse , and representational change on solution rates to the nine - dot problem . Our cognitive model hypothesized that insight problems are inﬂuenced by the size of the pre - insight search space , the difﬁculty of overcoming the impasse itself , and the size of the post - insight search space . We tested key components of our hypothesis by examining how the size of the search space inﬂuenced insight problem solving using the nine - dot problem . The pre - insight search space was constrained using arrows and additional perceptual information ( see also Kaplan & Simon , 1990 ; MacGregor et al . , 2001 ; Ormerod et al . , 2002 ) to increase the likelihood of realizing that the applied solution strategies failed . Our cognitive model suggests that this in turn should facilitate impasse with the consequence that the likelihood of representational change increases ( Ohlsson , 1992 ) . Following the repre - sentational change , the size of the nine - dot problem space increases dramatically . The perceptual information pro - vided therefore constrains this problem space , thus making problem solution more tractable . The results supported the predictions of the cognitive model , as we now discuss in detail . Achieving insight The only condition to beneﬁt from perceptual informa - tion—in terms of overcoming the boundary constraint— was the PAN condition . The combination of arrows that indicate the solution path / apex and the additional infor - mation of a strong explicit perceptual hint to apply moves to non - dot locations clearly helps to overcome the bound - ary constraint more effectively than in all other condi - tions . 28 of 33 participants ( 85 % ) overcame the constraint in the PAN condition , almost twice as many participants than in any other condition . The odds ratio indicates that in the PAN condition it was 13 . 33 more likely to overcome the boundary constraint than in the control group . This ﬁnding is important because as Chronicle et al . ( 2001 ) clearly showed , the nine - dot problem is resistant to addi - tional perceptual information concerning non - dot locations , and supports Kershaw and Ohlsson’s ( 2004 ) assumption that realizing the necessity of non - dot turns is a main source of problem difﬁculty . The provided arrows help to easily realize that a change of direction is necessary at the highlighted non - dot location . This is further supported by the number of participants whose ﬁrst four moves include one that is outside of the perceived 3 9 3 square : 45 % of participants achieve this for the PAN , more than twice as many as any other condition . The P and PA conditions showed no signiﬁcant facilitation . Thus , without an explicit indication that the solution requires moves to non - dot locations , the given path information is not helpful in overcoming the boundary constraint . Representational change and solving the nine - dot problem For the solution rate data we found that the PAN and the PA conditions differed from the control group . The PA condition provides an indication of the solution path ( as per the P condition ) , but also additional path information related to the particular spatial pattern of the solution tra - jectory by providing the apex point where three lines meet . The additional apex information increases the odds ratio for a participant to be in the solver category from 2 . 7 in the P condition to 5 . 9 in the PA condition . Given the fact that there were no differences between the P and PA groups in overcoming the boundary constraint , it seems likely that group differences arise from the additional apex informa - tion in PA inﬂuencing the post - insight problem space . However , the critical data that illustrates the problem of navigating the post - insight search space concerns the solution rates of the participants who overcame the boundary constraint . These ‘conversion rate’ data are quite remarkable ( ﬁnal column of Table 1 ) . Once insight has been achieved , [ 90 % of participants are able to ‘convert’ their insight into a solution for the nine - dot problem in all of the perceptual hint conditions ( P , PA , PAN ) , compared to 50 % in the control group . After a representational change , successful problem solvers still need to restrict the overly large problem space and this is what the perceptual hints help them to do . This ﬁnding can explain why pre - vious studies found only small effects of hints that pro - vided the information that participants have to draw lines outside the virtual boundaries either by verbal instruction or by visual cues ( Burnham & Davis , 1969 ; Chronicle et al . , 2001 ; Weisberg & Alba , 1981 ) . That is , enabling participants to overcome the boundary constraint may not be beneﬁcial to many participants who now have to navi - gate an even larger search space . As we have seen this is a 272 Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 123 complicated task that requires drawing lines to non - dot points , making turns in different directions , and conﬁguring the remaining lines in an appropriate way ( MacGregor et al . , 2001 ) . Achieving 100 % success in the nine - dot problem Even though we believe that the experimental conditions provided all of the necessary information to solve the nine - dot problem , approximately 20 % of the participants in the PAN condition were still unable to do so . A remaining challenge for participants in the PAN condition was to combine ( according to Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ) the solution path hints given by the arrows with the hints given by the non - dot locations . Clearly integrating the two dif - ferent hints is an additional source of difﬁculty that some participants were unable to master . A closer inspection of the non - dot data of the PAN condition showed that one non - solver made a total of 19 non - dot moves but was not able to combine the four lines in a way to ﬁnd the solution ( i . e . the participant was unable to combine the information given by the arrows to that given by the non - dot locations ) . The remaining four non - solvers in the PAN condition did not perform a single non - dot move ( i . e . they were unable to use the arrow and non - dot information to relax the boundary constraint ) . Apparently , these participants suffered from a strong self - imposed constraint not to move outside the given nine dots . This again speaks for the power of a perceptually induced constraint . It also raises an important problem of our manipulation . The additional information given naturally changes the nature of the nine - dot problem ( see Chronicle et al . , 2001 ) . The arrows can facilitate but also distract the problem - solving process , when participants have no idea how the provided perceptual information interplays with the task requirements . There are a few aspects of our study that extend the knowledge about the nine - dot problem , and about insight problem solving in general . Important is the insight that a representational change is necessary but not necessarily sufﬁcient for solving the problem ; furthermore , while restricting the search space in an appropriate way is important to facilitate impasse , it is even more important after a representational change than prior . Combining our ﬁndings with those of relevant previous research , the model in Fig . 5 summarizes the cognitive processes we think are required to solve the nine - dot problem . The model The new aspect of our model is that we bring existing frameworks together and explicitly test the search dynamics before and after an impasse . The model merges theories of search ( Kaplan & Simon , 1990 ; MacGregor et al . , 2001 ) and of representational change . Ohlsson ( 1992 ; see also Ohlsson , 1984b ) had already presented the dif - ferent stages , but provided no experimental work that tes - ted his assumption before and after an impasse . Moreover , a new aspect is the focus on the constraining of the search space , relaxing constraints , and again constraining Fig . 5 The different cognitive processes that are needed to solve the nine - dot problem . Before an impasse , participants apply strategies such as hill - climbing in their attempts at solving the nine - dot problem ( MacGregor et al . , 2001 ) ; that is , they attempt to connect as many dots as possible with each move . After repeatedly failing to solve the problem using standard problem - solving heuristics the problem solvers reach impasse , because the heuristics do not help to change the problem representation per se as our data clearly demonstrated . After an impasse it is crucial to have the appropriate heuristic to restrict the now even larger search space . One has to consider that heuristics help to navigate through a problem representation , but if the representation is not appropriate for attaining the goal then the heuristic is useless Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 273 123 dynamics ( see Fig . 1 ) . That is , a circular restriction and expansion dynamic that provides the search space to be explored . For the nine - dot problem , our model provides clarity to the varied and sometimes inconsistent results encountered in the literature . Of most importance here are two key points : ﬁrst , an explicit instruction to draw lines that go beyond the perceived 3 9 3 grid ( e . g . Burnham & Davis , 1969 ) will fail to dramatically increase solution rates because the resulting unconstrained search space is too large to be navigated effectively without any further hints ; second , explicitly providing non - dot locations that are not part of the problem ( i . e . as per Ormerod et al . , 1997 ; see Fig . 2c ) will not dramatically increase solution rates because non - dots alone are insufﬁcient in generating a signiﬁcant increase in relaxation of the ‘‘stubborn’’ boundary constraint . By providing arrows that restrict the direction , position and number of turns , the solution rates increase dramatically . Our study adds to previous evidence demonstrating that a representational change is necessary for the solution to the nine - dot problem ( Kershaw & Ohlsson , 2004 ) . It adds to previous ﬁndings that a solution to the nine - dot problem can be effectively cued through providing solution path information together with cues that encourage people to cross the virtual boundary of the square formed by the dots . Importantly , the ﬁndings demonstrate that , while naviga - tion of the problem space is important before a represen - tational change , it is crucial after a representational change . Although heuristics play an important role before impasse , it is also necessary to adequately focus the search space after the insight has occurred . We assume that the model can be also applied to other problems , and it should allow clear predictions as to how the search space before and after a potential impasse can be constrained in order to increase ( 1 ) the number of partici - pants who encounter impasse ; and ( 2 ) the number of par - ticipants who subsequently achieve insight and ﬁnd the solution . For many insight problems , such as the eight - coin problem ( O¨llinger et al . 2012 ; Ormerod et al . 2002 ) , problem solution becomes trivial once the insight has been realized and therefore key to such problems are the pre - impasse search heuristics and how quickly they enable impasse to be encountered . These have already been shown to inﬂuence impasse and subsequent solution rates for different initial conﬁgurations of the eight - coin problem ( Ormerod et al . 2002 ) . Of more interest are insight prob - lems where solution to the problem is not so trivial once insight is realized . One such example is the four - tree problem outlined by Kershaw et al . ( 2013 ) . The task is to arrange four trees such that each tree is located equidistant from each other . The model would predict that the problem is difﬁcult because the initial search space is relatively unconstrained because there are unlimited conﬁgurations of four objects . That is , it is unlikely or time consuming for a problem solver to encounter impasse . A ﬁrst restriction of the initial search space as Kershaw and colleagues showed is to provide conceptual information , e . g . the diagonal of a square is longer than the sides of the square . As a conse - quence , square solutions can be removed from the search space , increasing the likelihood that a problem solver encounters impasse . Additionally , the 3D constraint has to be relaxed ( i . e . that problem solvers can consider three dimensions rather than two ) . After relaxing the 3D con - straint a vast search space results . Thus , again , conceptual knowledge will be required to restrict the search space ( e . g . a tetrahedron ) . As in the nine - dot problem , both conceptual and 3D information both have to be taken into account in order to successfully solve the problem . Limitations There are some limitations to our current study . First , the stimuli and arrow information used may imply confound - ing information . 2 The arrows indicate not only the direction of the solution sequence , but also that there are diagonal lines and the position of the turns . Providing diagonal lines can facilitate the solution as Lung and Dominowski ( 1985 ) demonstrated . However , all experimental conditions pro - vided the diagonal information , and the perceptual condi - tions showed only a marginal increase of the solution rate . Second , the arrows also provide information that turns ( particularly non - dot turns ) are necessary for a solution . Our ﬁndings point out that the arrow information was particularly sufﬁcient when the position of the non - dot points was given ( PAN ) . That is , we provided in this condition at the same time the information of non - dot turns and non - dot points , and that two non - dot turns are neces - sary , a factor that plays , according to Kershaw and Ohlsson ( 2004 ) , an important role . Further work will be necessary to disentangle these aspects . In summary , our data provide strong evidence for mul - tiple sources of problem difﬁculty supporting the ﬁndings of Kershaw and Ohlsson ( 2004 ) , illustrating that the two key sources of difﬁculty in the nine - dot problem are the problem space ( the pre - insight space is too restricted , the post - insight space becomes too large ) and the required representational change . Acknowledgments This research was made possible by a grant from the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) KN - 489 / 6 – 2 . 2 This point was raised by an anonymous reviewer . 274 Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 123 References Ash , I . K . , & Wiley , J . ( 2006 ) . The nature of restructuring in insight : an individual - differences approach . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 13 , 66 – 73 . Burnham , C . , & Davis , K . ( 1969 ) . The nine - dot problem : beyond perceptual organization . Psychonomic Science , 17 , 321 – 323 . Chronicle , E . P . , Ormerod , T . C . , & MacGregor , J . N . ( 2001 ) . When insight just won’t come : the failure of visual cues in the nine - dot problem . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 54A , 903 – 919 . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On Problem - Solving ( Vol . 58 ) . Washington : American Psychological Association Inc . Grant , E . R . , & Spivey , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Eye movements and problem solving : guiding attention guides thought . Psychological Sci - ence , 14 , 462 – 466 . Hosmer , D . W . , & Lemeshow , S . ( 2000 ) . Applied logistic regression . New York : Wiley - Interscience . Jones , G . ( 2003 ) . Testing two cognitive theories of insight . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 29 , 1017 – 1027 . Kaplan , C . A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1990 ) . In search of insight . Cognitive Psychology , 22 , 374 – 419 . Kershaw , T . C . , Flynn , C . K . , & Gordon , L . T . ( 2013 ) . Multiple paths to transfer and constraint relaxation in insight problem solving . Thinking & Reasoning , 19 , 96 – 136 . Kershaw , T . C . , & Ohlsson , S . ( 2004 ) . Multiple causes of difﬁculty in insight : the case of the nine - dot problem . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 30 , 3 – 13 . Knoblich , G . , Ohlsson , S . , Haider , H . , & Rhenius , D . ( 1999 ) . Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 25 , 1534 – 1555 . Litchﬁeld , D . , & Ball , L . J . ( 2011 ) . Using another’s gaze as an explicit aid to insight problem solving . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology , 64 , 649 – 656 . Lung , C . - T . , & Dominowski , R . L . ( 1985 ) . Effects of strategy instructions and practice on nine - dot problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 804 – 811 . MacGregor , J . N . , Ormerod , T . C . , & Chronicle , E . P . ( 2001 ) . Information processing and insight : a process model of perfor - mance on the nine - dot and related problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 27 , 176 – 201 . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1930 ) . Reasoning in humans . I On direction . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 10 , 115 – 143 . Newell , A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) . Human problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Ohlsson , S . ( 1984a ) . Restructuring revisited : I . Summary and critique of the Gestalt theory of problem solving . Scandinavian Journal of Psychology , 25 , 65 – 78 . Ohlsson , S . ( 1984b ) . Restructuring revisited : II . An information processing theory of restructuring and insight . Scandinavian Journal of Psychology , 25 , 117 – 129 . Ohlsson , S . ( 1992 ) . Information - processing explanations of insight and related phenomena . In M . Keane & K . Gilhooly ( Eds . ) , Advances in the Psychology of Thinking ( pp . 1 – 44 ) . London : Harvester - Wheatsheaf . O¨llinger , M . , Jones , G . , Faber , A . H . , & Knoblich , G . ( 2012 ) . Cognitive mechanisms of insight : the role of heuristics and representational change in solving the eight - coin problem . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 39 ( 3 ) , 931 – 939 . O¨llinger , M . , Jones , G . , & Knoblich , G . ( 2008 ) . Investigating the Effect of Mental Set on Insight Problem Solving . Experimental Psychology , 55 , 269 – 282 . Ormerod , T . C . , Chronicle , E . P . , & MacGregor , J . N . ( 1997 ) . Facilitation in variants of the nine - dot problem : perceptual or cognitive mediation ? Poster presented at the 18th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Stanford : CA . Ormerod , T . C . , MacGregor , J . N . , & Chronicle , E . P . ( 2002 ) . Dynamics and constraints in insight problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology . Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 28 , 791 – 799 . Scheerer , M . ( 1963 ) . Problem - Solving . Scientiﬁc American , 208 , 118 – 128 . Thevenot , C . , & Oakhill , J . ( 2008 ) . A generalization of the representational change theory from insight to non - insight problems : the case of arithmetic word problems . Acta Psycho - logica , 129 , 315 – 324 . Thomas , L . E . , & Lleras , A . ( 2007 ) . Moving eyes and moving thought : on the spatial compatibility between eye movements and cognition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 14 , 663 – 668 . Weisberg , R . W . , & Alba , J . W . ( 1981 ) . An examination of the alleged role of ‘‘ﬁxation’’ in the solution of several ‘‘insight’’ problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 110 , 169 – 192 . Psychological Research ( 2014 ) 78 : 266 – 275 275 123