The Wisdom of the Crowd in Combinatorial Problems Sheng Kung Michael Yi , a Mark Steyvers , a Michael D . Lee , a Matthew J . Dry b a Department of Cognitive Science , University of California , Irvine b Discipline of Pharmacology , University of Adelaide Received 1 January 2010 ; received in revised form 13 June 2011 ; accepted 21 June 2011 Abstract The ‘‘wisdom of the crowd’’ phenomenon refers to the ﬁnding that the aggregate of a set of pro - posed solutions from a group of individuals performs better than the majority of individual solutions . Most often , wisdom of the crowd effects have been investigated for problems that require single numerical estimates . We investigate whether the effect can also be observed for problems where the answer requires the coordination of multiple pieces of information . We focus on combinatorial prob - lems such as the planar Euclidean traveling salesperson problem , minimum spanning tree problem , and a spanning tree memory task . We develop aggregation methods that combine common solution fragments into a global solution and demonstrate that these aggregate solutions outperform the majority of individual solutions . These case studies suggest that the wisdom of the crowd phenome - non might be broadly applicable to problem - solving and decision - making situations that go beyond the estimation of single numbers . Keywords : Wisdom of the crowd ; Problem solving ; Traveling salesman problem ; Minimum spanning tree problem 1 . Introduction When judgments are made by a group of people , the judgment obtained by aggregating their judgments is often as good as , or might even be better than , the best person in the group . This phenomenon , known as a wisdom of the crowd effect , relies on being able to sift out the noise in individual judgments to get closer to the ground truth ( see Surowiecki , 2004 , for an overview ) . The wisdom of the crowd effect has most often been demonstrated for tasks such as making continuous point estimates of physical quantities ( e . g . , the number Correspondence should be sent to Mark Steyvers , University of California , Irvine , Department of Cognitive Sciences , 2316 Social & Behavioral Sciences Gateway Building , Irvine , CA 92697 - 5100 . E - mail : mark . stey - vers @ uci . edu Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 452 – 470 Copyright (cid:2) 2012 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 0364 - 0213 print / 1551 - 6709 online DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2011 . 01223 . x of jelly beans in a jar ) or general knowledge ( e . g . , the number of people living a country ) , or providing answers to multiple choice questions ( e . g . , choosing which of a set of cities is the capital of a country ) . However , many practical forms of knowledge cannot be represented with a single contin - uous or discrete answer . An important challenge for the wisdom of the crowd research , therefore , involves its application to problems in which each answer consists of multiple ele - ments . Recently , for example , Steyvers , Lee , Miller , and Hemmer ( 2009 ) found a wisdom of the crowds effect for ordering problems , such as listing chronologically the US Presi - dents , or ranking cities according to their populations . For these sorts of combinatorially challenging problems , it is not usually possible to take a mean or mode of individual answers to obtain a group answer . Instead , Steyvers et al . ( 2009 ) developed an aggregation method that provides an account of how people solve the problem and allows for the possi - bility of individual differences . In this way , to tackle combinatorially challenging problems , modeling the wisdom of the crowds needs input from the theories and methods of cognitive science . In this article , we investigate the wisdom of the crowds in multidimensional problem - solving tasks from computer science and operations research known as the minimum span - ning tree problem ( MSTP ) and traveling salesperson problem ( TSP ) . Our goal is to develop aggregation approaches that take individual human solutions to MSTP and TSP problems and combine them into an aggregate solution . Aggregation in this domain is challenging for a number of reasons . MSTP and TSP problems are inherently high - dimensional in nature , and solutions require the coordination between many problem elements . In addition , any suitable aggregation approach that combines individual solutions needs to ensure that the aggregate solution is a valid MSTP or TSP solution obeying the task constraints . One advan - tage of using MSTPs and TSPs is that they have previously been studied in the experimental psychology literature . This means we already know something about the range of human performance , and the existence and nature of individual differences . We develop two methods for combining individual human solutions to these problems , and then measure the performance of the aggregate solutions relative to the individual solu - tions . Our primary focus is on a method that ﬁnds the local aspects of solutions that are com - mon across individuals . These common solution fragments are then combined into a valid global solution . We also explore a second aggregation approach that does not decompose the solution into parts . Instead , this method ﬁnds the individual solution that is most similar to other individual solutions , analogous to the computational problem of ﬁnding prototypes in the category learning literature ( e . g . , Estes , 1994 ; Nosofsky , 1992 ) . Because this method is constrained to select the prototypical solution from the individual human solutions , it can - not identify new solutions that were not proposed by any individual . Therefore , in contrast to the ﬁrst method , this method can never propose aggregate solutions that are better than any individual human solutions . The MSTP and TSP can both be characterized as classic optimization problems . There is a speciﬁc cost function involving the total distance of a solution path that needs to be mini - mized . For these optimization problems , there are well - known algorithms that will give opti - mal ( or near - optimal ) solution paths . Therefore , none of our aggregation approaches can S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 453 outperform the results of these optimization algorithms . Instead , the goal is to perform as closely as possible to the ideal results . In our ﬁnal study , we investigate a combinatorial problem that does not have an explicit cost function . This problem involves a short - term memory task where stimuli consist of randomly generated spanning trees . The task for the subject is to reconstruct from memory the studied stimulus at a later time . Because of the absence of an explicit cost function , there is no optimal method that can be applied . How - ever , we ﬁnd that the same aggregation approaches developed for MSTPs can be used to aggregate the reconstructed memories across individuals . Collectively , therefore , we dem - onstrate that the wisdom of the crowd effect for combinatorial problems applies both to standard optimization problems , as well as problems in which only human judgment can be used to construct the solution . 2 . The wisdom of the crowds in MSTPs and TSPs In TSPs , a set of cities or nodes must be visited in a closed cycle that visits each node once , with the goal of minimizing the distance covered over the total tour . The TSP serves as a classic example of an NP - complete problem , where computationally scalable solution methods for guaranteed optimal solutions are not known ( Applegate , Bixby , Chva´tal , & Cook , 2006 ) . As the problem size grows , optimal solution methods quickly require infeasi - ble computational resources . Instead , to get close to optimal performance , various approxi - mation algorithms are employed ( e . g . , Helsgaun , 2000 , 2009 ) . Despite the computational complexity present in TSPs , the evidence from studying human performance is that people are able to create solutions quickly while still maintaining good performance , for at least some versions of the problem . In particular , for planar Euclidean TSPs ( i . e . , those where the nodes can be represented as points in a two - dimensional space ) , people are able to complete TSPs in approximately linear time over problem sizes ( Dry , Lee , Vickers , & Hughes , 2006 ; Graham , Joshi , & Pizlo , 2000 ) . This contrasts with computational approaches , which have solution times that tend to scale at least on the order O ( n ln n ) with problem size ( Applegate et al . , 2006 ) . The solutions generated by people consistently follow some basic heuristics that pro - mote good performance . They tend to connect nodes along the convex hull and avoid making intersections in the path ( MacGregor , Chronicle , & Ormerod , 2004 ; MacGregor & Ormerod , 1996 ; van Rooij , Stege , & Schactman , 2003 ) . There is also evidence that human solvers are sensitive to proximity between nodes , generally connecting nodes with their nearest neighbors ( Vickers , Mayo , Heitmann , Lee , & Hughes , 2004 ) . TSP solutions have even been linked to the automatic perception of minimal structures and aesthetics . When people are asked to evaluate solutions to TSPs in terms of aesthetics , the solutions that are evaluated higher tend to also be those that have shorter lengths ( Vickers , Lee , Dry , Hughes , & McMahon , 2006 ) . Earlier research by Vickers , Butavicius , Lee , and Med - vedev ( 2001 ) also found similarities between solution paths created by people whose given goals were to create aesthetically pleasing circuits and paths created by subjects who performed the standard TSP task . 454 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) Despite the evidence for general principles underlying people’s solutions , there is also evidence for stable and signiﬁcant individual differences in human TSP performance . While early results gave conﬂicting accounts of the level and nature of individual differences ( e . g . , MacGregor & Ormerod , 1996 ; Vickers et al . , 2001 ) , a recent reconciliation seems to have been reached which argues for the presence of individual differences at least for sufﬁciently difﬁcult problems ( Chronicle , MacGregor , Lee , Ormerod , & Hughes , 2008 ) . The prospect of individual differences in human TSP solutions makes it a potentially fruitful application for the wisdom of the crowd idea . In particular , it raises the question of whether it is possi - ble to combine individual solutions to ﬁnd a group solution that is closer to optimal than all , or the majority , of the individual solutions . A similar combinatorial optimization task to the TSP is the MSTP . In a MSTP , a set of nodes must be linked by edges into a network such that it is possible to trace a path between any two pairs of nodes ( the graph is connected ) , with the goal of minimizing the total length of edges placed in the network . Though there has been less empirical work on human perfor - mance on MSTPs , ﬁndings again suggest the presence of individual differences in perfor - mance on the task ( Vickers et al . , 2004 ) . However , even though the MSTP is similar in description to the TSP , the optimal solution can be found using much simpler methods involving greedy algorithms ( Jarnı´k , 1930 ; Prim , 1957 ) . To demonstrate the wisdom of crowds idea for MSTPs and TSPs , we use previously collected data in which each individual independently generated a solution to a given MSTP or TSP . We propose aggregation processes that are restricted in two important ways . First , we assume that the cost function to evaluate the quality of a solution is not available until after the ﬁnal aggregate solution is proposed . Therefore , it is not possible to reﬁne the solution iteratively during the aggregation process to optimize the tour distance 1 or total edge length . This restriction is important because , otherwise , it would be possible to ignore the human solutions altogether and just directly optimize the tours or edges using computational means . The goal here is to see what information is collectively contained in the human solution , and the absence of the cost function during aggregation ensures that the human solutions are the only available source of information . Second , we assume that the aggregator does not have access to any spatial information , such as the location of cit - ies or nodes . For TSPs , we assume that the only information available is the order in which the nodes are visited on the tours proposed by a group of individuals . Similarly , for the MSTPs , we assume that the only available information is which nodes are connected in human solutions . This restriction allows us to propose relatively simple aggregation pro - cedures that analyze which nodes tend to be connected by individuals , regardless of their spatial layout . 2 . 1 . Dataset The data analyzed in this section were collected and reported by Burns , Lee , and Vickers ( 2006 ) . A brief summary of the experiment follows , and more details can be found in the original article . As part of a larger study looking at correlations between cognitive ability and performance on optimization problems , 101 individuals completed a series of three S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 455 planar Euclidean MSTPs of 30 , 60 , and 90 nodes and three planar Euclidean TSPs of 30 , 60 , and 90 nodes . Each problem was comprised of nodes placed in a square array , with each coordinate location for each node independently drawn from a uniform distribution . Individ - uals completed problems using a computer interface that allowed them to connect cities in any order , offering great ﬂexibility in the strategies they could use . The optimal path and percentage length the individual’s path exceeded that of the optimal were displayed after each problem to try and maintain task motivation . Fig . 1A shows solutions from 20 individ - uals to the 30 node MSTP . 2 . 2 . MSTP aggregation methods In traditional wisdom of the crowd research , the mean or mode of respondents’ judgments often serves as a proposal solution to the queries being presented . For problems such as spanning trees , however , such straightforward methods are inapplicable because it is , for example , possible that no two individuals propose the same tree solution . Instead , we pursue aggregation approaches that either break down the problem into common pieces ( referred to as the local decomposition method aggregation ) or identify prototypical solutions that are globally most similar to all individual human solutions ( referred to as the global similarity aggregation method ) . The local decomposition method considers how individuals tend to connect nodes locally on their tours . We expect that good local connections between nodes tend to be selected by more individuals than those connections which are part of bad solutions . A solution that includes connections that agree more with individuals , then , should have better performance than a different solution that includes connections that have lower agreement with the group . Therefore , we propose that the spanning tree that maximizes the collective agreement across edges as a good aggregate solution . Fig . 1 . Illustration of individual solutions and agreement across individuals for the 30 - node MSTP . Plot ( A ) shows 20 of the 101 individuals’ solutions ranging from the best subject on the upper left to the worst in the lower right . Plot ( B ) shows the degree of agreement across all 101 individuals , where each edge selected by at least one individual is drawn in , and edges selected by more individuals are drawn with thicker lines . 456 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) Speciﬁcally , we ﬁrst collect all individual solutions into a n · n agreement matrix , where n is the number of nodes in the problem . Each entry a ij in the matrix records the proportion of individuals that connect nodes i and j . A visualization of the agreement values for the 30 - node problem is presented in Fig . 1B . These agreement matrix values are transformed into values for a cost matrix with the function c ij = 1 ) a ij , such that edges with higher agreement are given lower costs . We can then obtain a proposal aggregate solution by solving for the MSTP over the cost matrix , thus obtaining a spanning tree that maximizes the agreement with subject solutions . Fig . 2 illustrates the optimal solutions for three MST problems and the aggregate solution found with the local decomposition method . The MSTP can be solved optimally in polynomial time through the use of simple greedy algorithms such as Prim’s algorithm ( Jarnı´k , 1930 ; Prim , 1957 ) . When edge costs are equal to Euclidean distances between nodes , the algorithm produces a network that minimizes the total length of edges . In the current context , the edge costs upon which Prim’s algorithm is applied are set using the cost matrix based on individual agreement above . The algorithm will still produce a network with minimum total cost , but in this case , the network represents the spanning tree that has the highest agreement with the participant solutions . It is this solu - tion that is generated by the aggregation method . We also develop an alternative aggregation method based on global similarity , where the goal is to ﬁnd the individual human solution that is globally most similar to the other indi - vidual solutions . We calculate similarity by the proportion of solution edges that are coinci - dent with the solution edges placed by all other individuals . We then ﬁnd the individual solution that has the highest agreement with the other individuals . This individual solution is then selected as the aggregate solution . The global aggregation method is analogous to the Kemeny – Young method used in the aggregation of rank - order data ( e . g . , Dwork , Kumar , Naor , & Sivakumar , 2001 ) where the goal is to identify rank - orderings that have the smallest summed distance to all observed rank - orderings . Note that with this aggregation strategy it is not possible to exceed the performance of the best individual for any particular problem . 2 . 3 . Results Performance of solutions given by individuals and the aggregate was computed in terms of percentage length above the optimal solution ( PAO = 100 * [ empirical length ⁄ optimal Fig . 2 . Solution paths for the local decomposition aggregate method ( thin black ) and the optimal MST ( thick gray ) for the ( A ) 30 - node , ( B ) 60 - node , and ( C ) 90 - node problems . S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 457 length ) 1 ] ) . Summary statistics for the performance of individuals and aggregation method are presented in Table 1 . For each aggregation method , a count of the number of individuals whose performance is better than , same as , or worse than the aggregate is also provided , indicated by the B , S , and W columns , respectively . For individual problems , the aggrega - tion method based on local decomposition performs much better than the average individ - ual ; in the 30 - and 90 - node problems , it is only outperformed by one individual . When performance is averaged over all problems , the local decomposition method leads to an aggregate solution that is closer to the optimal than any individual , as shown in Fig . 3 . For the aggregation method based on global similarity , we calculated the correlation between task performance and solution agreement . There is a very strong correlation between task performance and solution agreement ( r = ) . 9602 ) , justifying the intuition behind the method that good solutions are more similar to other individual’s solutions . However , per - formance for this global similarity method was not as good relative to the local decomposi - tion method . Averaged over the three problems , the PAO for this method was 0 . 786 % compared to the local decomposition method at 0 . 593 % . We next investigated the dependence of the wisdom of the crowd effect on the num - ber of individuals in the aggregate , focusing on the local decomposition method . Fig . 4 Table 1 Individual and aggregate performance on MST Problem Subject Performance Aggregation by Local Decomposition Aggregation by Global Similarity Best Mean PAO B S W PAO B S W 30 nodes 0 . 000 % 5 . 672 % 0 . 059 % 1 0 100 0 . 288 % 3 1 97 60 nodes 0 . 037 % 6 . 010 % 1 . 410 % 21 0 80 1 . 042 % 11 1 89 90 nodes 0 . 235 % 6 . 533 % 0 . 310 % 1 0 100 1 . 029 % 7 1 93 Overall 0 . 644 % 6 . 072 % 0 . 593 % 0 0 101 0 . 786 % 2 0 99 Note . MST , minimum spanning tree ; PAO , percentage length above the optimal solution . Fig . 3 . Ranked task performance of participants and aggregate methods over all MSTPs . Dashed horizontal line indicates mean participant performance . 458 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) shows aggregate performance averaged over 1 , 000 random draws at sample subject sizes 1 , 3 , 6 , 12 , 24 , 48 , 72 , and 101 ( i . e . , all subjects ) . The average performance of the aggregate quickly exceeds that of the average individual even for sample sizes as small as six . At this and larger sample sizes , performance is close to that of the best individ - ual in the sample ; on average the aggregation is only beaten by one individual at each sample size . 2 . 4 . TSP aggregation methods Similar to the methods used for the MSTP , we formed an aggregate proposal solution for the TSP by ﬁnding either a tour that maximizes the local agreement with individual solu - tions ( the local decomposition method ) or the overall similarity to the individual’s solutions Fig . 4 . Performance of the local decomposition aggregation method for MSTPs across selected sample sizes . Plot ( A ) shows average performance in terms of PAO . Error bars extend one standard deviation in each direc - tion of the mean for each sample size . Dashed line shows the expected performance of the best subject taken from a sample . Plot ( B ) shows performance as compared to the participants being sampled to create the aggre - gate solution . S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 459 ( the global similarity method ) . For the global similarity method , we again calculate the pro - portion of solution edges that are coincident with the solution edges placed by all other indi - viduals and pick the solution that has the highest agreement . For the local decomposition method , we made a number of changes to the aggregation method to construct a valid tour . Instead of the simple linear transformation from agree - ments to costs used in the MSTP , we applied a nonlinear monotonic transformation function on the agreement matrix values to transform agreements into costs for the TSP . The MSTP may be solved with greedy algorithms , so any strictly decreasing transformation function will achieve the same aggregate solution . The same does not apply for the TSP , where the increased restrictions on how tours must be constructed may result in different proposal solutions from the aggregate method depending on the cost function . Some choices of cost function may result in solutions that , when viewed in the original Euclidean problem space , are obviously suboptimal ( e . g . , containing crossings ) . We use the function c ij ¼ 1 (cid:2) I (cid:2) 1 a ij ð b 1 ; b 2 Þ , where I (cid:2) 1 a ij ð b 1 ; b 2 Þ is the inverse regularized beta function with parameters b 1 and b 2 , each taking a value of at least one . 2 A plot of our cost function for selected parameter values is shown in Fig . 5 . Costs range from 0 to 1 , with higher agreements leading to lower costs . When b 1 = b 2 = 1 , we have the same linear transformation as used in the MSTP aggregation . As we increase the parameter values , the cost function becomes more nonlinear , which allows us to threshold the agreement values ; values above some threshold are mapped to a relatively low cost and values below a Fig . 5 . Transformation functions from agreement matrix to cost matrix from the family c ij ¼ 1 (cid:2) I (cid:2) 1 a ij ð b 1 ; b 2 Þ , where I (cid:2) 1 a ij ð b 1 ; b 2 Þ is the inverse regularized beta function with parameters b 1 and b 2 , for sample values of b 1 and b 2 . 460 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) threshold are mapped to relatively high costs , with agreement values in between leading to an approximately linear mapping to cost . Ratios that favor b 1 emphasize the avoidance of edges with low agreement while ratios that favor b 2 emphasize the selection of the high - est - agreement edges ; increased values for both parameters allow both selection effects to be expressed . We obtain our aggregate solution of the local decomposition method by solving for the TSP that minimizes the total tour cost . Because the costs can be asymmetric and do not obey the regularities of Euclidian distances , this version of the TSP cannot be solved using many traditional TSP solvers . Instead , we solve for the lowest - cost paths using the LKH program , which solves TSPs using the Lin – Kernighan heuristic ( Helsgaun , 2000 , 2009 ) . While the heuristic is not guaranteed to produce the optimal solution for extremely large problems , for small problems such as those being observed in this article , the heuristic implementation is able to consistently produce the optimal solution . Examples of solutions chosen by the local decomposition aggregation method with parameter values b 1 = 2 . 8 , b 2 = 3 . 2 can be seen in Fig . 6 . 2 . 5 . Results Aggregate and individual solutions were evaluated in the same manner as for MSTPs , focusing on the PAO measure of task performance . Summary statistics of performance are presented in Table 2 . Performance of the local decomposition aggregation method solutions is drastically better than most individuals , being only outperformed by two individuals in the 30 - node problem and outperforming all individuals in the 60 - and 90 - node problems , including attainment of the optimal tour in the 90 - node problem . The average performance of the local decomposition aggregation method over all three problems is better than all individuals by a large margin , as shown in Fig . 7 , corresponding to an average PAO of 0 . 219 % . The global similarity aggregate solution did not perform as well as the local decomposition method , leading to an average PAO of 2 . 791 % , although this is still better than all individuals except one . Performance of the local decomposition aggregation method can vary signiﬁcantly depending on the parameter settings , up to 13 . 839 % PAO on the 90 - node problem and Fig . 6 . Solution paths for the best - performing aggregate method parameters ( thin black ) and the optimal TSP ( thick gray ) for the ( A ) 30 - node , ( B ) 60 - node , and ( C ) 90 - node problems . S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 461 5 . 590 % PAO overall . While there is a general improvement of the aggregate as the parame - ter values are increased , the major factor dictating performance is the ratio between the two transformation function parameters’ values . Performance is poorer when b 1 is much greater than b 2 , compared to when b 2 is much greater than b 1 , suggesting that it is more important to avoid the selection of edges with low or no agreement . Edges of moderate agreement should be acceptable for proposal solutions if the alternative of taking edges of higher agree - ment would require the addition of a low - or no - agreement edge as well . There are , how - ever , values slightly favoring b 1 that produce the best performance for the aggregate method , and in general , attention to both high - and low - agreement edges will create good proposal solutions . We found that the best performance of the local decomposition method uses parameters b 1 = 2 . 8 , b 2 = 3 . 2 . These are the parameter values used for the results reported in Table 2 and Fig . 7 . Fig . 8 shows estimates of the mean performance of the local decomposition aggrega - tion method for parameter values b 1 = b 2 = 3 for selected individual sample sizes . For sample sizes as small as 12 individuals , performance of the aggregation method can be expected to rival or exceed that of the best individual in both the sample taken as well as the full dataset . Table 2 Individual and aggregate performance on TSPs Problem Subject Performance Aggregation by Local Decomposition Aggregation by Global Similarity Best Mean PAO B S W PAO B S W 30 nodes 0 . 000 % 8 . 116 % 0 . 422 % 2 0 99 0 . 000 % 0 2 99 60 nodes 0 . 859 % 10 . 193 % 0 . 234 % 0 0 101 4 . 137 % 10 1 90 90 nodes 1 . 404 % 9 . 596 % 0 . 000 % 0 0 101 4 . 236 % 11 1 89 Overall 2 . 386 % 9 . 302 % 0 . 219 % 0 0 101 2 . 791 % 1 0 100 Note . PAO , percentage length above the optimal solution ; TSP , traveling salesperson problem . Fig . 7 . Ranked task performance of participants and aggregate methods over all TSPs . Dashed horizontal line indicates mean participant performance . 462 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 2 . 6 . Discussion Our results show that the aggregation methods we have developed and applied for MSTPs and TSPs are able to demonstrate a strong wisdom of the crowd effect . Solution paths proposed by the aggregation methods are created solely based on the combined node con - nections selected by individuals and are independent of spatial information regarding node locations . Despite the limited information available , solutions selected by the aggregation methods perform at a level that is among the best individuals on individual problems , and either exceeds the performance of the best individual when averaged over all problems ( the local decomposition method ) or exceeds the performance of the vast majority of individuals ( the global similarity method ) . The ﬁnding that the local decomposition method outperforms the global similarity method suggests that it is better to identify the local aspects of problem Fig . 8 . Performance of the local decomposition aggregation method for TSPs with parameters b 1 = b 2 = 3 across selected sample sizes . Plot ( A ) shows average performance in terms of PAO . Error bars extend one stan - dard deviation in each direction of the mean for each sample size . Dashed line shows the expected performance of the best subject taken from a sample . Plot ( B ) shows performance as compared to the participants being sam - pled to create the aggregate solution . S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 463 solutions where individuals agree and then combine these into a global solution than to iden - tify entire solutions that are most similar to other solutions . 3 . Combinatorial wisdom of crowds in the absence of a cost function Thus far , we have investigated the problem of aggregating solutions to two well - known optimization problems where there is an explicit cost function that can be evaluated . In a real - world application , however , where information about the node positions is available , one does not have to rely on an aggregation method involving human judgment to achieve good performance . Optimal ( or near - optimal ) solutions in these cases can be obtained by standard optimization algorithms , like those we have used to evaluate our aggregation meth - ods . Aggregation methods and the wisdom of the crowd effect will be more useful in situa - tions where an optimal method is unavailable and reliance on human solutions is necessary for success . Given our demonstration of wisdom of the crowds effect in human performance on the MSTP and TSP , it seems possible or likely that there may be other combinatorially chal - lenging problems in which an aggregation approach may be viable to ﬁnd good solutions . These situations involve problems that are difﬁcult to solve by computational means but nonetheless can be solved reasonably well , with some inherent variability in performance , by people . As one example of such a task , we investigate the use of aggregation in a spanning tree memory task . In this task , participants are required to perform short - term recall with non - minimum spanning tree stimuli . Without knowledge of the original stimuli , obtaining good performance from an aggregation method will need to rely on the solutions given by sub - jects for information , as knowledge of the positions of the nodes does not necessarily pro - vide any insight into the nature of the stimulus . If different people are able to recall different parts of the stimuli accurately , then there is potential for a more accurate picture to be cre - ated through aggregation than is achieved by any person alone . 3 . 1 . Method 3 . 1 . 1 . Participants Thirty volunteers from the UC Irvine Social Sciences Research Participation Pool com - pleted the spanning tree memory task and were compensated with either course credit ( 16 participants ) or $ 10 for their participation . 3 . 1 . 2 . Stimuli Stimuli in the task were comprised of randomly generated 25 - node spanning trees . In similar fashion to Vickers et al . ( 2006 ) , constraints were placed on the node locations . Nodes were randomly generated in the unit square , constrained by number of hull nodes ( 8 – 9 ) , mean distance between node pairs ( 0 . 50 – 0 . 55 ) , standard deviation of distance between node pairs ( 0 . 23 – 0 . 26 ) , and minimum distance between node pairs ( 0 . 03 ) . To create 464 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) spanning trees with properties amenable to at least partial memorization , constraints were placed on the set of edges that could be used to generate trees . A high rate of coincidence of solutions from the Burns et al . ( 2006 ) dataset with Delaunay triangulation edges ( 0 . 9916 ) , along with previous results showing that people may perceive structure in this fashion ( Dry , 2008 ; Dry , Navarro , Preiss , & Lee , 2009 ) , suggests that people will be able to quickly mem - orize random spanning tree stimuli that are subsets of the Delaunay triangulation . While the minimum spanning tree is a subset of the Delaunay triangulation , edges in the generated stimuli are only partially coincident with that of the MSTs ( mean 0 . 7899 , range 0 . 625 – 0 . 917 ) . Constraints were also placed on the path length of the generated trees . Eight prob - lems in each of PAO constraints of 0 % – 5 % , 5 % – 10 % , and 10 % – 15 % were generated for the main experimental task , with an additional two problems in each level generated as prac - tice problems to acclimate the participant to the task . Stimuli were presented in random order in each phase of the task . 3 . 1 . 3 . Procedure The spanning tree memory task was run using a computer interface programmed with MATLAB . In each trial , a blank square axis was ﬁrst presented for 2 s , followed by the presentation of the nodes for 2 s . Afterward , the spanning tree was presented for 10 s for study . The blank axis was presented for 10 s after study before the participant was given the nodes again , with the goal of recalling the edges to the best of their memory . Partici - pants added edges to their answers by sequentially clicking between two nodes and could remove edges in the same fashion . There was no time limit on the completion of each problem , and participants were not allowed to submit an answer unless it was a complete spanning tree . After submitting each solution , participants were given feedback noting the number of edges their solution matched the actual tree , including visual feedback showing the original stimulus . 3 . 2 . Results Because problem solutions were in the form of spanning trees , we can apply the same aggregation methods as used in the MSTP aggregation task . The information received by the aggregation methods remains the same as well , restricted to knowledge of the edges completed by each participant on each problem . A selection of experiment problems with the local decomposition aggregate solutions plotted against the original solutions can be found in Fig . 9 . Table 3 collects summary sta - tistics for individual and aggregate performance on the memory task . Task performance is calculated in terms of the proportion of edges placed that matched the actual stimuli . Due to the smaller number of individuals and the lower variability of their solutions , there are ﬁve problems for which the local decomposition aggregate has multiple possible solutions with the same net agreement , and evaluation measures are presented as means over these possi - bilities . Fig . 10 shows a ranking of performance for individuals and the aggregates over all problems , including a measure of how a participant would perform if he or she ignored or did not know the stimuli presented and instead replied with the minimum spanning tree as S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 465 his or her solution . Despite the fact that most individual solutions are less accurate overall than an uninformed MST , aggregating over solutions is still able to provide a substantive advantage over the majority of individuals . On average , the local decomposition aggregate is more accurate than the global similarity aggregate . In addition , the local decomposition aggregate is more accurate than most individuals on each set of problem types . Compared to Fig . 10 . Ranked task performance of participants and aggregate methods over all spanning tree memory trials . Dashed horizontal line indicates mean participant performance . Fig . 9 . Solution paths for the aggregate method ( thin black ) and the original spanning tree ( thick gray ) in the spanning tree memory task for sample problems in the ( A ) 0 % – 5 % PAO , ( B ) 5 % – 10 % PAO , and ( C ) 10 % – 15 % PAO problem types . Table 3 Individual and aggregate performance on network reconstruction task Problem Subject Performance Aggregation by Local Decomposition Aggregation by Global Similarity Best Mean Prop . Matched B S W Prop . Matched B S W 0 % – 5 % PAO 0 . 912 0 . 785 0 . 896 1 0 29 0 . 805 7 0 23 5 % – 10 % PAO 0 . 828 0 . 726 0 . 841 0 0 30 0 . 797 2 0 28 10 % – 15 % PAO 0 . 844 0 . 723 0 . 815 1 0 . 5 28 . 5 0 . 776 4 3 23 Overall 0 . 851 0 . 745 0 . 851 0 . 34 0 . 31 29 . 3 0 . 793 4 0 26 Note . PAO , percentage length above the optimal solution . 466 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) the best participant , the local decomposition aggregate is better on the harder ( 5 % – 10 % PAO , 10 % – 15 % PAO ) problems but worse on the easier ( 0 % – 5 % PAO ) problems , with per - formance on par with the best individual averaged over all problems . Performance of the local decomposition aggregate with smaller samples continues the trend observed with the MSTP and TSP , as shown in Fig . 11 . At sample size 6 , the local decomposition aggregate is able to propose solutions that signiﬁcantly improve upon the average individual . As with the full dataset , only the best individual in the full group is able to outperform the aggregate consistently . 3 . 3 . Discussion A wisdom of the crowd effect similar to that found for the MSTP and TSP datasets was observed for the spanning tree memory experiment . Using simple aggregation methods , Fig . 11 . Performance of the local decomposition aggregation method for spanning tree memory trials across selected sample sizes . Plot ( A ) shows average performance in terms of PAO . Error bars extend one standard deviation in each direction of the mean for each sample size . Dashed line shows the expected performance of the best subject taken from a sample . Plot ( B ) shows performance as compared to the participants being sampled to create the aggregate solution . S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 467 proposed solutions were obtained in a scenario where there is no optimal solution method . Instead , people’s solutions were used to reconstruct the original stimulus . Both aggregation methods , but the local decomposition method in particular , are able to produce solutions that are signiﬁcantly more accurate than the average person , and performing at approximately the same level as the best person . 4 . General discussion Most previous research in the wisdom of the crowds has focused on the situation in which responses take the form of single numeric estimates or multiple choice selections . In this article , we have demonstrated a wisdom of crowds effect for two combinatorial optimization problems and a short - term memory task with multidimensional stimuli . We have developed aggregation methods that either combine the common parts of individuals’ solutions into a global solution or identify the solution that is globally most similar to other individual solu - tions . The ﬁrst of these aggregation methods , in particular , based on local decomposition , is able to create solutions that are as good or better as those generated by people . Even for small numbers of available solutions , the local decomposition approach is able to break down the task in both problem types in a way that leads to good aggregation , despite their initial complexities . These results can potentially be extended in a number of directions . One possibility is to identify the better performed individuals and increase their contribution to the aggregate solutions . As better individuals tend to have higher agreements with the solutions of others , identiﬁcation of ‘‘experts’’ can continue to be done without explicit feedback from a cost function . The challenge is to infer and share this information about expertise across all the problems , in some sort of hierarchical model . A second possibility is to consider combinatorial problems in the context of within - individual wisdom of the crowds research , also known as ‘‘the crowd within’’ ( Vul & Pashler , 2008 ) . The basic idea is to consider multiple solutions from the same person on the same optimization problem and test whether the aggregation of these repeated solu - tions leads to better performance . One nice methodological feature of this problem is that , unlike general knowledge questions , it is relatively easy to test a person on multiple ver - sions of the same problem by applying distance - preserving transformations to the visual problem representation . Most generally , we think that our demonstration of wisdom of the crowd effects for com - binatorial problems shows a generality beyond single numerical estimates . The problems we investigate are inherently high - dimensional in which solutions require the coordination of many elements into a globally acceptable answer . We think that many or most real - world problems have these characteristics , and our results show that the wisdom of the crowds could have a role to play in understanding and improving group decision - making for these problems . 468 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) Notes 1 . Human solvers of TSPs typically do not have access to the cost function either during problem - solving . The quality of the solution becomes known only after the individual submits the ﬁnal solution . 2 . The inverse regularized beta function is the inverse of the cumulative distribution function for the beta probability distribution . Both the cdf of the beta probability dis - tribution and its inverse map the range [ 0 , 1 ] to [ 0 , 1 ] in a monotonic increasing func - tion ; the inverse is chosen for the cost function for its shape properties near the edges of the range . The qualitative properties over the range of parameter values make the function useful for investigation ; there may be other similarly shaped functions that could also provide similar properties . References Applegate , D . L . , Bixby , R . E . , Chva ´ tal , V . , & Cook , W . J . ( 2006 ) . The traveling salesman problem : A computa - tional study . Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press . Burns , N . R . , Lee , N . D . , & Vickers , D . ( 2006 ) . Are individual differences in performance on perceptual and cognitive optimization problems determined by general intelligence ? Journal of Problem Solving , 1 ( 1 ) , 5 – 19 . Chronicle , E . P . , MacGregor , J . N . , Lee , M . D . , Ormerod , T . C . , & Hughes , P . ( 2008 ) . Individual differences in optimization problem solving : Reconciling conﬂicting results . Journal of Problem Solving , 2 ( 1 ) , 41 – 49 . Dry , M . J . ( 2008 ) . Using relational structure to detect symmetry : A Voronoi tessellation based model of symme - try perception . Acta Psychologica , 128 , 75 – 90 . Dry , M . , Lee , M . D . , Vickers , D . , & Hughes , P . ( 2006 ) . Human performance on visually presented traveling salesperson problems with varying numbers of nodes . Journal of Problem Solving , 1 ( 1 ) , 20 – 32 . Dry , M . J . , Navarro , D . J . , Preiss , K . , & Lee , M . D . ( 2009 ) . The perceptual organization of point constellations . In N . Taatgen , H . van Rijn , J . Nerbonne & L . Shonmaker ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 1151 – 1156 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Dwork , S . , Kumar , R . , Naor , M . , & Sivakumar , D . ( 2001 ) . Rank aggregation methods for the web . In V . Y . Shen & N . Saito ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW ‘01 ) ( pp . 613 – 622 ) . New York : ACM . Estes , W . K . ( 1994 ) . Classiﬁcation and cognition . New York : Oxford University Press . Graham , S . M . , Joshi , A . , & Pizlo , Z . ( 2000 ) . The traveling salesman problem : A hierarchical model . Memory & Cognition , 28 ( 7 ) , 1191 – 1204 . Haxhimusa , Y . , Kropatsch , W . G . , Pizlo , Z . , & Ion , A . ( 2009 ) . Approximative graph pyramid solution of the E - TSP . Image and Vision Computing , 27 ( 7 ) , 887 – 896 . Helsgaun , K . ( 2000 ) . An effective implementation of the Lin - Kernighan traveling salesman heuristic . European Journal of Operational Research , 126 , 103 – 130 . Helsgaun , K . ( 2009 ) . General k - opt submoves for the Lin - Kernighan TSP heuristic . Mathematical Programming Computation , 1 , 119 – 163 . Jarnı´k , V . ( 1930 ) . O jiste´m proble´mu minima´lnı´m . Pra´ce Moravske´Prˇı´rodoveˇdecke´Spolecˇnosti , 6 , 57 – 63 . MacGregor , J . N . , Chronicle , E . P . , & Ormerod , T . C . ( 2004 ) . Convex hull or crossing avoidance ? Solution heu - ristics in the traveling salesman problem . Memory & Cognition , 32 , 260 – 270 . MacGregor , J . N . , & Ormerod , T . ( 1996 ) . Human performance on the traveling salesman problem . Perception & Psychophysics , 58 ( 4 ) , 527 – 539 . S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 469 Nosofsky , R . M . ( 1992 ) . Exemplars , prototypes , and similarity rules . In A . Healy , S . Kosslyn & R . Shiffrin ( Eds . ) , From learning theory to connectionist heory : Essays in honor of William K . Estes ( pp . 149 – 167 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Prim , R . C . ( 1957 ) . Shortest connection networks and some generalizations . Bell System Technical Journal , 36 , 1389 – 1401 . van Rooij , I . , Stege , U . , & Schactman , A . ( 2003 ) . Convex hull and tour crossings in the Euclidean traveling salesman problem : Implications for human performance studies . Memory & Cognition , 31 ( 2 ) , 215 – 220 . Steyvers , M . , Lee , M . D . , Miller , B . , & Hemmer , P . ( 2009 ) . The wisdom of crowds in the recollection of order information . In J . Lafferty & C . Williams ( Eds . ) , Advances in neural information processing systems , 23 ( pp . 1785 – 1793 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Surowiecki , J . ( 2004 ) . The wisdom of crowds . New York : W . W . Norton & Company , Inc . Vickers , D . , Butavicius , M . , Lee , M . , & Medvedev , A . ( 2001 ) . Human performance on visually presented travel - ing salesman problems . Psychological Research , 65 , 34 – 45 . Vickers , D . , Lee , M . D . , Dry , M . , Hughes , P . , & McMahon , J . A . ( 2006 ) . The aesthetic appeal of minimal struc - tures : Judging the attractiveness of solutions to traveling salesperson problems . Perception & Psychophysics , 68 ( 1 ) , 32 – 42 . Vickers , D . , Mayo , T . , Heitmann , M . , Lee , M . D . , & Hughes , P . ( 2004 ) . Intelligence and individual differences in performance on three types of visually presented optimization problems . Personality and Individual Dif - ferences , 36 , 1059 – 1071 . Vul , E . , & Pashler , H . ( 2008 ) . Measuring the crowd within : Probabilistic representations within individuals . Psy - chological Science , 19 ( 7 ) , 645 – 647 . 470 S . K . M . Yi et al . ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 )