Traffic2000 1 : 19 – 28 MunksgaardInternationalPublishers Review The Polymerization Motor Julie A . Theriot DepartmentofBiochemistryandDepartmentofMicrobiology & Immunology , StanfordUniversitySchoolof Medicine , Stanford , CA94305 - 5307 , USA theriot @ cmgm . stanford . edu Polymerization and depolymerization of actin ﬁlaments and microtubules are thought to generate force for movement in various kinds of cell motility , ranging from lamellipodial protrusion to chromosome segregation . This article reviews the thermodynamic and physical theories of how a nonequilibrium polymerization reac - tion can be used to transduce chemical energy into me - chanical energy , and summarizes the evidence suggesting that actin polymerization produces motile force in several biological systems . Key words : Actin , Brownian ratchet , force generation , microtubule , protein polymerization Received and accepted for publication 1 September 1999 For convenience and ﬂexibility , cells store much of their disposable chemical energy in common currencies that can be used for multiple types of cellular metabolism . Chemical energy can be stored in the form of nucleoside triphos - phates , transmembrane chemical and electrical gradients , or molecules that carry high - energy reducing electrons . Biologi - cal motors , celebrated in this inaugural issue of Trafﬁc , are protein machines that convert chemical energy to mechani - cal energy and force . A transmembrane proton gradient pow - ers the bacterial ﬂagellar rotary motor , and nucleotide hydrolysis allows molecular motors such as myosin and ki - nesin to walk in a stepwise fashion along their linear cy - toskeletal tracks , as well as allowing polymerases and helicases to run along DNA . A different type of cellular use of chemical energy to generate mechanical force uses a spe - cialized currency rather than a general one , nonequilibrium protein polymerization . Polymerization of small protein sub - units to form large - scale structures is an important general feature of biological organization in all forms of cellular life . The most striking instances of this form of organization are found in the eukaryotic cytoskeleton , particularly in micro - tubules and actin ﬁlaments . Although the term ‘motor’ usu - ally refers to discrete protein machines like myosin , kinesin , or the ﬂagellar rotor , protein polymerization can also convert chemical energy into mechanical force and can therefore be considered another type of motor . Experimental attention to the biophysical mechanism of force generation by the protein polymerization motor has lagged far behind equivalent studies of force generation by classical motor proteins such as myosin and kinesin . Over the past decade , many clever techniques have been devised to make ever more precise measurements of the amount of force generated by individual myosin and kinesin molecules ( reviewed in ( 1 – 3 ) ) . In contrast , there is only a single pub - lished report of a direct biophysical measurement of force produced by an individual growing microtubule ( 4 ) , and no equivalent measurements for individual actin ﬁlaments . Although there is a relative paucity of quantitative experimen - tal work on force generation by protein polymerization , there is a wealth of theoretical literature on this topic . The purpose of this review is to summarize the thermodynamic and phys - ical basis of force generation by protein polymerization , framed in a biological context . Biological evidence for force generation by microtubule polymerization and depolymeriza - tion has been summarized in an excellent review ( 5 ) , so here I will focus primarily on biological examples of force genera - tion by actin polymerization . The theoretical requirements outlined here , however , are relevant to both microtubules and actin . Actin’ Like a Motor Actin is one of the most abundant proteins of eukaryotic cells and has been strongly conserved throughout eukaryotic evo - lution . Actin is often associated with biological force genera - tion , either by virtue of association with a myosin ( as in muscle contraction ) or due to its own polymerization motor . A few cases where actin polymerization is thought to pro - duce force are schematized in Figure 1 . Cells that crawl across solid substrates must produce two types of force for locomotion ; protrusion force to extend the leading edge of the cell margin forward , and traction force to translocate the cell body ( 6 , 7 ) . Both protrusion and traction are actin - dependent . Since the best - studied form of actin - de - pendent movement is skeletal muscle contraction , where chemomechanical energy transduction is performed by myosin hydrolyzing ATP , the discovery of nonmuscle myosin in crawling cells engendered the proposal that force for crawling is also produced by myosin ( 8 ) . This model had to be revised after 1987 when it was found that Dictyostelium amoebae completely lacking myosin II heavy chain are capa - ble of crawling , with protrusion perfectly normal and traction only partially affected ( 9 , 10 ) . Of course , cells contain an abundance of other myosin isoforms , including some that are localized to leading edge , but knockout experiments have thus far failed to provide unequivocal evidence that any myosin isoform is required for protrusion . Drugs that prevent 19 Theriot actin ﬁlament elongation such as cytochalasin D , however , stop all common forms of cellular protrusion including exten - sion of pseudopodia , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . It is now widely believed that actin polymerization rather than myosin ATPase activity provides much of the force for protrusion ( 11 , 12 ) . Quantitative measurements of cell deformability at the leading edge are consistent with this hypothesis ( 13 ) . The fact that actin polymerization alone is capable of provid - ing sufﬁcient force to push out a lipid bilayer has been directly demonstrated in experiments where monomeric actin is enclosed in lipid vesicles and polymerization is in - duced by increasing the salt concentration . The lipid vesicles start off roughly spherical , but are drastically deformed by the polymerizing ﬁlaments , forming ﬂattened discs with ﬁlopo - dial - like protrusions ( 14 – 16 ) . These results lend credence to the proposition that similar forces are at work in cellular protrusion . Fertilization appears to be a biological function where actin polymerization is commonly harnessed for force generation . When the sperm of the sea cucumber Thyone encounters the egg jelly coat , an explosive actin polymerization reaction is initiated that pushes out an acrosomal process , enabling the sperm plasma membrane to reach and fuse with the plasma membrane of the egg ( 17 ) . A similar reaction occurs during Chlamydomonasmating . Two cells of opposite mating type ( plus and minus ) recognize each other by speciﬁc adhe - sion receptors on the ﬂagella . After this recognition has occurred , one of the two partners ( the plus mating type ) extends a fertilization tubule , a membrane - bound bundle of actin ﬁlaments that closely resembles a tiny Thyone acro - some ( 18 ) . In these cases , water inﬂux is coupled with actin polymerization and may contribute to force generation by a hydrostatic mechanism ( 19 , 20 ) . A line of evidence for direct force generation by actin poly - merization which does not involve the cell plasma membrane ( and therefore cannot involve a hydrostatic force ) comes from studies of intracellular bacterial and viral pathogens that use the host cell actin cytoskeleton for motility , the most familiar examples being Listeriamonocytogenesand Shigella ﬂexneri . These bacteria use speciﬁc virulence factors to cata - lyze local polymerization of actin ﬁlaments near their surface in an asymmetric fashion , generating an actin - rich ‘comet tail’ ( reviewed in ( 21 , 22 ) ) . Actin ﬁlament dynamics in the comet tail resemble a simpliﬁed form of actin dynamics in lamellipo - dia , where the bacteria seem to be imitating a fragment of the leading edge ( 23 ) . The rate of movement of bacteria through the cytoplasm is identical to the rate of new actin ﬁlament polymerization at the front of the comet tail ( 24 , 25 ) . No myosin isoform has yet been found associated with the comet tail and the broad - spectrum myosin ATPase inhibitor butanedione monoxime has no effect on bacterial movement ( 26 ) . Like protrusion , it is now generally accepted that actin polymerization rather than myosin ATPase activity provides the force for bacterial movement . Rigorous proof for this proposition should soon be at hand . This form of actin poly - merization - dependent motility can be accurately reconsti - tuted in vitro using cytoplasmic extracts ( 27 , 28 ) and efforts are underway in several laboratories to reconstitute move - ment using only puriﬁed proteins . Preliminary laser trap stud - ies have indicated that the amount of force that is produced by actin polymerization in this case is remarkably large , at least 90 piconewtons ( pN ) by a single comet tail ( L . Cameron , K . Visscher , S . Block and J . Theriot , unpublished results ) . A few recent reports have shown that actin - rich comet tails also form in normal , uninfected cells ( 29 , 30 ) . In cells perform - ing endocytosis , comet tails are seen pushing nascent endo - somes inward from the cell edge . The endosomes appear to Figure 1 : Schematic of systems where actin polymerization is associated with the generation of pushing force . Force is generated in the direction shown by the thick arrows . Details and references are provided in the text . Drawings are not to scale . A ) Lamellipodial and ﬁlopodial protrusion at the leading edge of a locomoting ﬁbroblast . B ) Distension of an actin - con - taining liposome after polymerization is induced . C ) Extension of the acrosomal process from Thyone ( sea cucumber ) sperm . D ) Extension of fertilization tubule from Chlamydomonascell of the plus mating type toward the minus mating type partner . E ) Actin - based movement of Listeria monocytogenes . F ) Inward movement of a nascent endosome . 20 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 The Polymerization Motor be kicking off from the membrane with a burst of actin polymerization , perhaps in order to deliver themselves to waiting microtubule tracks ( 30 ) . What all these forms of actin - based motility have in common is that force seems to be generated when an assembly of actin ﬁlaments undergo polymerization in close physical prox - imity to a barrier or load . The load may be the plasma membrane , a pathogenic bacterium , or an endosome , and the actin ﬁlament assembly may be a bundle ( in ﬁlopodia , the Thyone sperm , and Chlamydomonas ) or a crosslinked web ( in lamellipodia , pseudopodia , and comet tails ) . Myosin - de - pendent ﬁlament sliding need not be invoked for any of these cases ; ﬁlament assembly alone seems sufﬁcient to push . Pushy Polymerization What exactly is the form of the chemical energy that is transduced into mechanical pushing force by protein poly - merization ? It is stored in the difference in chemical potential ( Gibb’s free energy ) between the free monomer form and the polymer form of a protein subunit ( 31 ) . In general , protein polymerization can be thought of as a simple bimolecular binding reaction , where a free subunit binds to the end of a ﬁlament that contains n subunits to generate a ﬁlament of length n (cid:27) 1 ( Figure 2A ) . At chemical equilibrium , the rate of addition of new subunits to the ﬁlament ends is exactly balanced by the rate of subunit dissociation : k on [ C ] (cid:30) k off , where C is the concentration of free subunits . The concentra - tion of free subunits left in solution at equilibrium is fre - quently referred to as the ‘critical concentration , ’ abbreviated C c , where C c (cid:30) k off : k on . Filament elongation proceeds sponta - neously when the free energy of the subunit in solution is greater than the free energy of the subunit in the polymer ; this is the case when the concentration of subunits in solu - tion exceeds the critical concentration . Likewise , ﬁlament shrinkage proceeds spontaneously when the concentration of subunits in solution is less than the critical concentration ( Figure 2B ) . Whenever there is excess free energy ( D G ) liberated from a chemical reaction , it can in principle be harnessed and con - verted into another form of energy . To see how D G from spontaneous polymerization can be used to provide a push - ing mechanical force , consider the case of a simple ﬁlament , ﬁxed at one end , that encounters a moveable load at its other tip ( such as an actin ﬁlament that abuts a plasma membrane ) . For the ﬁlament to add a single subunit , the load must be pushed forward by a distance , d , that corresponds to the size of the protein subunit . Applying a force through a distance on the load is mechanical work . Thus , after a ﬁlament adds a subunit while it is pushing on a load , the ﬁnal free energy state of the system is higher than it would be for an equiva - lent ﬁlament that encounters no load . However , as long as the overall D G is still negative , this reaction will still proceed spontaneously ; elongation will occur and the load will be pushed forward ( Figure 2C ) . Conversely , spontaneous de - polymerization of a ﬁlament can in principle generate a Figure 2 : Thermodynamics of protein polymerization . A ) The addition reaction is characterized by a forward kinetic rate con - stant , k on ( units of sec (cid:28) 1 M (cid:28) 1 ) , and a backward kinetic rate constant , k off ( units of sec (cid:28) 1 ) . B ) Free energy diagrams for the polymerization reaction for three different starting conditions . C ) Coupling between D G released by spontaneous polymerization and mechanical work . A ﬁlament is anchored at the left end ; its right tip abuts a moveable load ( black rectangle ) . Elongation of the ﬁlament produces useful work by moving the load through a distance , d , equal to the size of the protein subunit . The pres - ence of the load normally raises the activation energy barrier for the elongation reaction as well as decreasing the ﬁnal amount of free energy released . The maximum amount of work that can be done against the load is determined by the magnitude of D G , which in turn depends on the amount of free subunit in excess over the critical concentration . pulling force if the load remains attached to the ﬁlament while the concentration of free monomers falls below C c ; it is likely that microtubule depolymerization helps to pull chromo - somes apart in the spindle in this way ( 5 ) . In 1982 , Hill and 21 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 Theriot Kirschner elaborated a comprehensive thermodynamic treat - ment of protein polymerization and depolymerization for sev - eral different physical states ( capped and uncapped ﬁlaments ; with tips free , next to moveable loads , or next to immovable barriers , with and without coupling between poly - merization and nucleotide hydrolysis ) ( 31 ) . I will summarize only the most relevant cases here . The presence of the load may affect either k on or k off , or more likely both . Intuitively , it makes sense that subunit addition will be inhibited by the presence of an object at the ﬁlament tip by simple steric hindrance , decreasing k on . Also , an object pushing on the tip may weaken the bond between the terminal subunit and its neighbor , increasing k off . The degree to which k on as opposed to k off is affected by the load can not be predicted in general , since this depends on the geometry of the interaction between the ﬁlament and the load and also on the nature of the ﬁlament involved . The ratio between k off and k on is equal to the critical concentration , so the presence of a load force has the net effect of increasing the critical concentration , regardless of the detailed mechanism . The exact amount by which a particular load force changes the critical concentration can be calculated using thermodynamic arguments ( 31 ) : C c ( loaded ) (cid:30) C c ( unloaded ) exp ( d F : kT ) where d is the length of the subunit , F is the load force , k is Boltz - mann’s constant and T is the absolute temperature . Rearranging this equation , we can calculate the maxi - mum amount of force that a polymerizing ﬁlament can generate at a given concentration of free monomers , F max (cid:30) ( kT : d ) ln ( k on [ C ] : k off ) . For actin at a concentration of 50 m M , the stall force for a single ﬁlament is about 9 pN ( 32 ) , equivalent to several molecules of myosin . Note that this type of force generation does not in any way require the ATPase activity of actin or the GTPase activity of tubulin . Mechanical force is derived solely from the chemical potential of protein polymerization . This is dramatically illus - trated in the case of sickle cell hemoglobin . In humans carrying the sickle cell mutation ( a point mutation that changes a single glutamate residue to valine on the surface of the hemoglobin b chain ) , the deoxy form of the hemoglobin is slightly stickier than normal deoxyhemoglobin and has a tendency to polymerize . The ﬁlaments formed by aggregated deoxyhemoglobin are regular helices with 14 protoﬁlaments , somewhat reminiscent of the structure of microtubules ( 33 ) . When the blood oxygen level drops , the hemoglobin polymerization reaction is initiated , deforming the membrane of the red cell to form spiky projections , exactly the same way that initiation of actin polymerization in a lipid vesicle deforms the vesicle as described above ( 14 – 16 ) . The limitation of this sort of polymerization - induced force generation is that the cell can only use it once . The polymer - ization reaction is initiated and then runs to equilibrium . At equilibrium , no more chemical energy can be extracted from polymerization and no more force can be generated . For the Thyone sperm acrosome reaction , it need only extend its process once and it is ﬁne for the polymerization motor to run down . In most forms of cell motility , however , there must be an external energy input that effectively reverses the polymerization reaction and takes it back far from chemi - cal equilibrium . In the case of sickling red cells , the external energy input can come from breathing to reoxygenate the blood . Better controlled forms of the polymerization motor , embodied by actin ﬁlaments and microtubules , are operated in continuous cycles at the expense of nucleotide hydrolysis . Nucleotide Hydrolysis Pays for Recycling Motor proteins , of course , also cycle through multiple steps of force generation by repeatedly hydrolyzing ATP , where the free energy released from phosphate hydrolysis is used to induce a large - scale conformational change in the protein . For actin and tubulin , the coupling between polymerization and nucleotide hydrolysis enables polymerization to occur constantly and steadily without ever reaching chemical equi - librium . To see how this is managed , consider a ﬁlament such as a microtubule or an actin ﬁlament where the sub - units assemble in a head - to - tail fashion , forming a ﬁlament with distinct structural polarity . This makes the two ends of each polymer different in ways that have a profound effect on their growth rates . Addition of a subunit to either end of a ﬁlament of n subunits will result in a ﬁlament of n (cid:27) 1 subunits . There can be no overall energetic difference be - tween two different pathways that generate the same prod - ucts from the same reactants , so the free energy difference and therefore the association constant ( and the critical con - centration ) must be the same for addition of subunits to both ends of the polymer . This means only that the ratio k off : k on must be identical at the two ends ; there is no similar con - straint on the absolute values of these kinetic rate constants , and they are usually different at each end ( Figure 3A ) . In structurally polar ﬁlaments , such as actin ﬁlaments and microtubules , the kinetic rate constants k on and k off are typi - cally much greater at one end than at the other . Thus if an excess of puriﬁed subunits are allowed to assemble onto marked fragments , one end can be seen to elongate much faster than the other ( 34 , 35 ) . Similarly , if ﬁlaments are rapidly diluted so that the free subunit concentration is below the critical concentration , one end will depolymerize much faster than the other ( Figure 3A ) . The more dynamic of the two ends , where both growth and shrinkage are fast , is the barbed end on actin ﬁlaments and the plus end on microtubules . Now consider what happens when the subunits are also capable of nucleotide hydrolysis . For actin and tubulin , hy - drolysis on the soluble subunits proceeds very slowly , how - ever it is accelerated when the subunits are incorporated into ﬁlaments ( 36 – 38 ) . Sometime after incorporation of an actin or tubulin subunit in a ﬁlament , hydrolysis occurs and the free phosphate group is released from each subunit . How - ever , the nucleoside diphosphate remains trapped in the 22 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 The Polymerization Motor ﬁlament structure . ( On tubulin , the nucleotide binding site lies right at the interface between two neighboring subunits ( 39 ) , whereas in actin the nucleotide is deep in a cleft near the center of the subunit ( 40 ) . ) Thus , two different types of ﬁlament structures can exist , one with the ‘T’ form of the nucleotide bound ( ATP for actin , GTP for tubulin ) , and one with the ‘D’ form bound ( Figure 3B ) . When the nucleotide is hydrolyzed , much of the free energy released by cleavage of the high - energy phosphate – phos - phate bond is stored in the polymer lattice . That is , the free energy of the D - containing polymer is higher than the free energy of the T - containing polymer . Therefore , the critical concentration C c (cid:30) k off : k on ( the dissociation equilibrium con - stant ) for the D - form of the polymer is higher than for the T - form of the same polymer . Consequently , when the actual free subunit concentration lies between these two critical concentrations , D - form polymers will shrink while T - form polymers will grow ( Figure 3B ) . In living cells , most of the free subunits are in the T form ( since the free concentrations of both ATP and GTP are much higher than those of ADP and GDP ) ( 41 ) . The more time that subunits have remained in the polymer lattice , the more likely they are to have hydrolyzed their bound nucleotide . The identity of the nucleotide at the end of a ﬁlament therefore depends on the rate of hydrolysis relative to the rate of subunit addition . If the rate of subunit addition is high , that is if the ﬁlament is growing rapidly , then it is most likely that a new subunit will add on before the nucleotide in the terminal subunit is hydrolyzed , and the tip of the polymer will remain in the T - form . However , if the rate of subunit addition is low , hydrolysis is likely to occur ﬁrst and the tip of the ﬁlament will be in the D - form . The rate of subunit addition at the end of a ﬁlament is the product of the subunit concentration in solution and k on . Remember that k on is much faster for one end of the ﬁlament ( the barbed or plus end ) than for the other end ( the pointed or minus end ) , simply because of the structural distinction of the two ends . So at intermediate subunit con - centrations , it is possible for the average rate of subunit addition to be faster than hydrolysis at the barbed end of an actin ﬁlament , but slower than hydrolysis at the pointed end . Thus , one end of the ﬁlament , the barbed end , can remain in the T conformation , while the other end , the pointed end , may be in the D conformation ( Figure 3C ) . The D - form is at a higher energy state , with a higher critical concentration , than the T - form . If the concentration of free subunits in solution is higher than the critical concentration of the T - form ( that is , the barbed end ) , but lower than the critical concentration of the D - form ( that is , the pointed end ) , the ﬁlament will add Figure 3 : Consequences of ﬁlament polarity and nucleotide hydrolysis . A ) For a structurally polar ﬁlament , the kinetic rate constants at one end ( to the right ) are greater than those at the other end ( to the left ) . For actin , these structurally distinct ends correspond to the barbed and pointed ends respectively . The principle of detailed balance dictates that the ratio between k on and k off , also known as the critical concentration , must be the same at both ends . Elongation rate as a function of protein concentration is shown at the right ; v (cid:30) d ( k on [ C ] (cid:28) k off ) where d is the size of the protein subunit and C is the concentration of free subunits in solution . At equilibrium , when C (cid:30) C c ( the critical concentration ) there is no net elongation or shrinkage at either end . Away from equilibrium , the barbed end ( solid line ) grows faster or shrinks faster than the pointed end ( dashed line ) . B ) For actin ﬁlaments and microtubules , the subunits in the ﬁlament can exist in either the NTP - bound form ( T ) or the NDP - bound form ( D ) . For each type of ﬁlament lattice , the critical concentration at the barbed and pointed ends must be identical as in A above . However , there is no requirement that the critical concentrations be identical for the two different ﬁlament types . Some of the energy released from nucleotide hydrolysis is stored in the polymer lattice , and therefore the critical concentration for the D - form ﬁlament is always higher than the critical concentration for the T - form ﬁlament . Elongation rate as a function of free subunit concentration is shown at the right . The four lines represent the curves for addition to the barbed end ( solid lines ) or pointed end ( dashed lines ) of T - form ﬁlaments ( thin lines ) or D - form ﬁlaments ( thick lines ) . C ) Kinetic consequences of coupling hydrolysis and polymerization . At the slowly growing pointed end , the rate of subunit addition is slow compared to the rate of nucleotide hydrolysis , so hydrolysis ‘catches up’ with the end and the ﬁlament tip is normally in the D form . At the rapidly growing barbed end , the rate of addition outstrips the rate of hydrolysis , and the end remains in the T form . At the right , elongation rate as a function of free subunit concentration is shown for the mixed polymer , with a T - form barbed end ( thin solid line ) and a D - form pointed end ( thick dashed line ) . In the subunit concentration range marked with a star , there will be net elongation at the barbed end and net shrinkage at the pointed end , a situation known as ‘treadmilling’ ( 42 ) . 23 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 Theriot subunits on one end while it simultaneously loses subunits on the other end . This remarkable property is called tread - milling , which was ﬁrst predicted as a consequence of nucle - otide hydrolysis by Wegner in 1976 ( 42 ) . Treadmilling has been frequently experimentally demonstrated for both actin ﬁlaments and microtubules in vitro and for microtubules it has even been seen in living cells ( 43 , 44 ) . In this way , the polymer can use the free energy of ATP or GTP hydrolysis to translate the kinetic differences between subunit addition rates at the plus and minus ends into en - ergetic differences that can potentially be exploited by the polymerization motor . At a particular intermediate subunit concentration , ﬁlament growth at the barbed end will be exactly balanced by ﬁlament shrinkage at the pointed end , so that subunits will cycle rapidly between the soluble and ﬁlamentous states while the total length of the ﬁlament remains unchanged . Thus , chemical energy is spent by the cell to disassemble ﬁlaments and regenerate the monomer pool , so that polymerization is always energetically favored and the reaction never reaches equilibrium . A treadmilling ﬁlament placed between two barriers therefore has the abil - ity to perform continuous mechanical work , for example it can carry along a weight that is attached to the middle of it like a clothesline ( 45 ) ( Figure 4A ) . Alternatively , if a tread - milling ﬁlament is ﬁxed to a surface at one point , the ﬁlament as a whole will seem to move forward even though the subunits within it are stationary ( Figure 4B ) . If the tread - milling ﬁlament abuts a moveable load such as a plasma membrane or L . monocytogenes , the load can be pushed forward indeﬁnitely while the concentration of the monomer remains constant , as long as ATP is in plentiful supply . This does appear to be the situation in the most familiar forms of force generation by actin polymerization . In both lamellipodia of rapidly moving cells and the L . monocytoge - nescomet tail , actin ﬁlaments remain stationary with respect to the substrate , growing at the front to push the load forward ( 24 , 46 ) . This thermodynamic treatment predicts that the barbed end of the ﬁlament should point forward for force generation by this mechanism ; this is also experimentally observed in both cases ( 47 – 49 ) . This important point deserves emphasis : force generation by protein polymerization does not require nucleotide hydroly - sis . The sole contribution to force generation of the ATP hydrolysis by actin , or the GTP hydrolysis by tubulin , is to allow the polymerization motor to be recycled and reused over and over in a living cell . It is clear from the thermody - namic arguments that energy for force generation is available from the polymerization motor , and likewise clear from the examples of sickling red cells and actin deforming vesicles that force is in fact generated by polymerization alone . How - ever , we cannot predict the speed or efﬁciency of this type of motor mechanism without a detailed physical model . Brownian Ratchets Oster and colleagues have proposed physical models for how chemomechanical energy transduction is carried out at the microscopic level by protein polymerization ( 32 , 50 ) . These models are variations on the theme of the ‘Brownian ratchet’ . The name comes from the perpetual motion ma - chine proposed by Feynman ( 51 ) . Feynman imagined a box full of gas that encloses an axle with vanes on it . Thermal motion of the gas molecules results in random bombardment of the vanes , causing the axle to turn in a jiggly way in both directions . Next , he hooked the axle up to a toothed wheel , a ratchet , that can turn freely in one direction but whose backward rotation is prevented by a pawl on a spring that catches on the asymmetric teeth ( Figure 5 ) . Now , when the axle tries to jiggle in one direction , the direction per - mitted by the ratchet , it turns freely , but when it tries to jiggle in the other direction , it is stopped . Step by step , the axle turns only one way , even though the thermal motion of the gas is random and undirected . In this way , thermal motion of the gas molecules in the box could be used to generate useful work such as lifting a weight attached Figure 4 : Steady - state treadmilling can be used to generate force without a net change in ﬁlament length . A ) A tread - milling ﬁlament is trapped between two rigid barriers . Subunit addition at the right is exactly balanced by subunit loss at the left . Although the amount of polymer in the system remains constant , nucleotide is continually hydrolyzed and the system does not approach equilibrium . A marked subunit within the ﬁlament would be seen to move from right to left . A small load such as a spider attached to that subunit would experience a force , moving it from right to left . B ) A treadmilling ﬁlament is stuck down to a solid substrate . Again , subunit addition at the right is exactly balanced by subunit loss at the left . Although the overall length of the ﬁlament remains unchanged , it translocates from left to right . A small load such as a spider resting at the tip would experience a force , nudging it from left to right . 24 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 The Polymerization Motor Figure 5 : Feynman’s Brownian ratchet machine . The ma - chine consists of an axle with vanes on one end and a toothed wheel ( the ratchet ) on the other end . A pawl on a spring ﬁts into the notches of the ratchet . The notches are asymmetric , allow - ing smooth movement in the clockwise direction but preventing backward slippage in the counterclockwise direction . Thermal motion of gas in the box containing the vanes will cause the axle to turn . If the temperature of the vanes ( T 1 ) is greater than the temperature of the ratchet and pawl ( T 2 ) , useful work can be extracted to lift the bug that is dangling from the axle . From ‘The Feynman Lectures on Physics , ’ volume 1 , chapter 46 . shows how random thermal motion can be harnessed with the help of an external energy source such as a temperature gradient . Large temperature gradients are essentially impos - sible to maintain over tiny cellular distances , but Feynman’s concept of the Brownian ratchet can be readily extended to other energy sources such as electric ﬁelds and nonequi - librium chemical reactions that are available to cells ( 52 ) . Brownian ratchets of all sorts share three basic characteris - tics . First , there is a discrete step or event that deﬁnes the steps of the ratchet ; a potential of some kind with periodic energy minima in space or time . Second , there is random thermal motion in some component of the system , providing looseness somewhere so that the machinery can move both ‘forward’ and ‘backward’ . Third , critically , there is an en - ergetic asymmetry , either in the periodic potential or in some other potential , that creates a preferred direction for the cycle to turn . In most interesting biological cases , the asym - metry is provided by a nonequilibrium chemical reaction . In our case , this nonequilibrium reaction is protein polymeriza - tion where monomer is in excess . It is important to recognize here that Brownian ratchet mod - els do not describe directed motion as being derived from thermal energy in a strict sense . Thermal motion is without direction . Directionality is bestowed by the asymmetric po - tential . For a cell , chemical energy must be put into the system in the form of generating and maintaining this asym - metric potential . For bacterial ﬂagella , the asymmetric poten - tial is manifest in the form of a transmembrane proton gradient . The cell uses ATP to pump protons out of the cytoplasm to maintain the chemical and electrical gradient that drives ﬂagellar rotation . For polymerization - based force , the asymmetric potential is manifest in an excess of monomer . There are two published physical models of a Brownian ratchet mechanism for the polymerization motor ( 32 , 50 ) . In both , the discrete step corresponds to addition of a single protein subunit to a ﬁlament tip . In both , the energetic asymmetry is provided by the chemical potential of protein polymerization , following the thermodynamic scheme of Hill and Kirschner ( 31 ) . The difference between the two lies in where the thermal motion comes into the system . The ﬁrst model , proposed by Peskin et al . in 1993 ( 32 ) , envisions a stationary ﬁlament that encounters a moveable load ( Figure 6A ) . As the load bounces around by thermal motion , it at - tempts to move both backward and forward . Backward diffu - sion is inhibited by the presence of the ﬁlament . Forward diffusion is uninhibited , and every so often the excursion distance is sufﬁciently large that a new protein subunit can intercalate between the ﬁlament tip and the load , ratcheting the position of the load one step further forward . This physi - cal model allows calculation of the speed at which an object can be pushed by a polymerizing ﬁlament . Since it is Brown - ian motion of the load which opens the space for intercala - tion of a new monomer , the velocity is predicted to be directly proportional to the diffusion coefﬁcient of the load object . If the load is immobile , the ﬁlament will not grow , and no force will be generated . For a ratchet of this sort operating to the axle , a clear violation of the second law of thermody - namics . Of course the machine does not actually work under these conditions . The trick lies in ignoring the fact that thermal motion affects all parts of the system , the ratchet and pawl as well as the vanes . At a temperature where collisions with the vanes are sufﬁciently energetic to turn the ratchet step by step , the pawl is also jiggling around , and every so often the pawl will bounce out of its nook , allowing the ratchet to rotate backwards . If everything is at the same temperature , the number of forward steps will be balanced on average by the number of backward slips ( 51 ) . But , Feynman’s machine will work to turn primarily in one direction if the vanes and the ratchet are at different temperatures . If the vanes are hotter than the ratchet and pawl , the machine will turn forward and could indeed lift a weight , transducing the en - ergy stored in the temperature gradient into mechanical force . If the ratchet and pawl are hotter than the vanes , the machine will turn backwards , but can still generate force . Feynman’s example was designed to demonstrate that geo - metrical asymmetry , no matter how cleverly devised , cannot be used to generate force from thermal motion in the ab - sence of an external source of energy ( here , the external energy source is used to maintain the temperature gradient ) . But if such an external energy source is available , random thermal motion can be harnessed for unidirectional motion . At the size scale of a cell or a protein assembly within a cell , Brownian motion is a major part of life . With thermal colli - sions constantly battering cellular components , it seems likely that the cell would have learned to harness some of this random motion in a directed way . Feynman’s ratchet 25 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 Theriot at optimum efﬁciency , the amount of force generated is limited only by the amount of free energy released by the polymerization reaction ; a single actin ﬁlament is predicted to be capable of generating up to 9 pN of force ( 32 ) . This simple model is a very useful starting point for thinking about the polymerization motor . But much like Feynman’s original perpetual motion machine , it ignores the fact that thermal motion must affect all components in the system , in this case , the ﬁlament as well as the load . In most biological situations , the load is much larger than the ﬁlament ( the diameter of L . monocytogenesor S . ﬂexneriis larger than an actin ﬁlament by two orders of magnitude ) , and thermal bending of the ﬁlament is much more likely to open a monomer - sized gap between the ﬁlament and the load than is diffusion of the whole load . Therefore , Mogilner and Oster described a revised ‘elastic’ Brownian ratchet model in 1996 ( 50 ) , where the load is considered to be stationary , and the ﬁlament is subject to bending ( Figure 6B ) . Here , the amount of force generated is predicted to depend on the stiffness ( Young’s modulus ) of the ﬁlament and on the angle between the ﬁlament and the load , but does not depend on the diffusion coefﬁcient of the load object . The relationship be - tween force , velocity , and angle with this more realistic model is quite complex , and must be computed numerically ( 50 ) . Mogilner and Oster derived the velocities in four limiting cases where ﬁlaments are stiff or ﬂexible , and the load force is high or low . Using parameters appropriate for actin , this model predicts that the maximum force that can be gener - ated by a single actin ﬁlament is about 1 . 8 pN , and the velocity of polymerization under these conditions is adequate to explain the rapid movement of L . monocytogenes and protruding lamellipodia . These two different models are not mutually exclusive . In reality , it is possible that both elastic bending of the ﬁlaments and thermal motion of the load object ( plasma membrane , endosome , bacterium , etc . ) can cooperate to open up the gap that allows addition of a subunit to the growing ﬁlament . Quantitative comparisons , however , seem to suggest that ﬁlament bending makes the more substantial contribution . For objects being pushed rapidly by comet tails , speed does not increase for smaller objects as predicted by the Peskin et al . model ( 53 ) . Similarly , changing the diffusion coefﬁcient of the load object does not change the speed . The presence of an intermediate ﬁlament network in ﬁbroblasts decreases the diffusion coefﬁcient of bacterium - sized objects by a fac - tor of four ( 54 ) but does not change the velocities of L . monocytogenes or S . ﬂexneri ( P . Giardini and J . Theriot , unpublished results ) . These thought - provoking models do have signiﬁcant limita - tions . An underlying assumption of both calculations is that the presence of the load force affects only k on and not k off . The models are strongly dependent on the exact nature of the interaction between the ﬁlament tip and the object being pushed . They assume that the components remain com - pletely unattached from one another and interact as smooth rigid bodies . These assumptions are oversimpliﬁcations of the real situation , but there is not yet enough quantitative experimental data in any relevant system to determine ex - actly how much these limitations affect the accuracy of the models’ predictions . Strength in Numbers Conceptually , the greatest limitation of the two Brownian ratchet models for the polymerization motor is that they are not easily generalizable to cases where multiple ﬁlaments are interacting with the same load object , which is almost always true in interesting biological situations . The interac - tions of multiple ﬁlaments have been treated theoretically in two speciﬁc cases : the multiple protoﬁlaments cooperating in a microtubule pushing against a wall and multiple actin ﬁlaments surrounding a symmetric bead . Naturally occurring cytoskeletal polymers are built from multi - ple protoﬁlaments that associate with one another laterally in order to provide enhanced stability against thermal breakage ; there are two protoﬁlaments in an actin ﬁlament , and thirteen protoﬁlaments in a microtubule . For a microtubule whose tip abuts a load object , the protoﬁlaments that are too close to the object ( less than one monomer width away ) may not be Figure 6 : Two Brownian ratchet models for the polymeriza - tion motor . A ) The ﬁlament is anchored at its left end ; the right tip abuts a moveable load ( black rectangle ) . The ﬁlament is immobile , but the load is subject to thermal motion . Diffusion toward the left is inhibited by the presence of the ﬁlament . Diffusion toward the right permits insertion of a protein subunit , ratcheting the diffusion of the load for unidirectional motion to the right . Velocity is dependent on the diffusion coefﬁcient of the load ( 32 ) . B ) Again the ﬁlament is anchored at its left end , but now it is considered free to bend as a result of thermal motion . The load does not diffuse . When the ﬁlament bends far enough away from the surface , addition of a protein subunit is permitted . The elongated ﬁlament is under an elastic strain and exerts a spring - like force on the load . If the load is not immobi - lized this will push it toward the right . Velocity is dependent on the stiffness of the ﬁlament and on the angle between the ﬁlament and the load ( 50 ) . 26 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 The Polymerization Motor able to elongate , but they can ‘subsidize’ the growth of neighboring protoﬁlaments which are further from the object by supporting a portion of the load ( 55 ) . Calculations that take this into account provide a substantially better ﬁt to the experimental data for force generated by elongating micro - tubules ( 4 ) than the simple single - ﬁlament models . When actin ﬁlaments are nucleated all around the surface of a spherical bead , a substantial number of the beads sponta - neously break symmetry and form comet tails that look and behave very much like the tails associated with L . monocyto - genes and S . ﬂexneri ( 53 , 56 ) . This experimentally observed symmetry - breaking can be explained by a model where each actin ﬁlament is a simple elastic Brownian ratchet . The pres - ence of the bead effectively couples the polymerization of different ﬁlament tips , such that ﬁlaments on the same side of the bead cooperate with one another , much like the multiple protoﬁlaments in the microtubule , while ﬁlaments on opposite sides of the bead inhibit each other’s growth . This arrangement allows for small stochastic ﬂuctuations to be ampliﬁed , so that symmetry - breaking can occur in the system as a whole ( A . van Oudenaarden and J . Theriot , manuscript submitted ) . Further generalization of multiﬁla - ment systems beyond these two special cases will certainly be an important step in understanding how the polymeriza - tion motor contributes to motility in living cells . From the Polymerization Motor to Cell Motility For a cell to maintain overall directionality in its movement , it must be able to regulate the functioning of the polymeriza - tion motor in space and time . In the case of actin - driven protrusions , regulation is performed through accessory proteins . The basic properties of the polymerization motor are consequences of inherent actin ﬁlament dynamics , but the cell controls the polymerization motor by altering ﬁlament kinetics in several ways . The site of actin - driven pushing force is determined by local activation of a nucleating com - plex ( the Arp2 : 3 complex ) that overcomes the kinetic barrier to the initial formation of a ﬁlament from soluble subunits ( 57 ) . The efﬁciency of the nucleotide - driven turnover is en - hanced by the action of depolymerizing factors such as coﬁlin , which preferentially bind to and destabilize D - form ﬁlaments ( 58 ) . In protruding lamellipodia , these two types of dynamics - enhancing factors are spatially segregated , ensur - ing that the polymerization motor continues to push in a single direction ( 59 ) . The lamellipodium structure as a whole undergoes treadmilling , with the total amount of polymer remaining constant and individual protein subunits continu - ously cycling through the ﬁlaments as ATP is continuously consumed . In order to understand the dynamic biophysical basis of cell motility , it will be necessary to bring together this type of biochemical and structural description with further biophysi - cal characterization of the polymerization motor . Classical molecular motors are also involved to some extent in most cases where the polymerization motor is functioning , includ - ing the lamellipodium and the mitotic spindle . Learning how polymerization forces and molecular motor forces interact in a living cell will continue to be a signiﬁcant challenge to cell biologists over the next several years . The thermodynamic and physical theories outlined here give us a useful perspec - tive for experimental design to address these complex is - sues ; now let us start our motors ! Acknowledgments I am grateful to Micah Dembo , Marc Kirschner , Alexander van Oude - naarden , George Oster , Alexander Mogilner , and Marileen Dogterom for stimulating conversations about the polymerization motor , and to Kevin Lustig , Lisa Cameron , and Paula Giardini for critical reading of the manuscript . Work in my laboratory is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and the David and Lucile Packard Foundation . References 1 . Simmons R . Molecular motors : single - molecule mechanics . Curr Biol 1996 ; 6 : 392 – 394 . 2 . Jiang MY , Sheetz MP . Mechanics of myosin motor : force and step size . Bioessays 1994 ; 16 : 531 – 532 . 3 . Block SM . Nanometres and piconewtons : the macromolecular me - chanics of kinesin . Trends Cell Biol 1995 ; 5 : 169 – 175 . 4 . Dogterom M , Yurke B . Measurement of the force - velocity relation for growing microtubules . Science 1997 ; 278 : 856 – 860 . 5 . Inoue S , Salmon ED . Force generation by microtubule assembly : dis - assembly in mitosis and related movements . Mol Biol Cell 1995 ; 6 : 1619 – 1640 . 6 . Elson EL , Felder SF , Jay PY , Kolodney MS , Pasternak C . Forces in cell locomotion . Biochem Soc Symp 1999 ; 65 : 299 – 314 . 7 . Oliver T , Dembo M , Jacobson K . Separation of propulsive and adhesive traction stresses in locomoting keratocytes . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 145 : 589 – 604 . 8 . Huxley HE . Muscular contraction and cell motility . Nature 1973 ; 243 : 445 – 449 . 9 . De Lozanne A , Spudich JA . Disruption of the Dictyosteliummyosin heavy chain gene by homologous recombination . Science 1987 ; 236 : 1086 – 1091 . 10 . Knecht DA , Loomis WF . Antisense RNA inactivation of myosin heavy chain gene expression in Dictyostelium discoideum . Science 1987 ; 236 : 1081 – 1086 . 11 . Lauffenburger DA , Horwitz AF . Cell migration : a physically inte - grated molecular process . Cell 1996 ; 84 : 359 – 369 . 12 . Mitchison TJ , Cramer LP . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomo - tion . Cell 1996 ; 84 : 371 – 379 . 13 . Abraham VC , Krishnamurthi V , Taylor DL , Lanni F . The actin - based nanomachine at the leading edge of migrating cells . Biophys J 1999 ; 77 : 1721 – 1732 . 14 . Cortese JD , Schwab B , Frieden C , Elson EL . Actin polymerization induces a shape change in actin - containing vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989 ; 86 : 5773 – 5777 . 15 . Miyata H , Hotani H . Morphological changes in liposomes caused by polymerization of encapsulated actin and spontaneous formation of actin bundles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992 ; 89 : 11547 – 11551 . 16 . Miyata H , Nishiyama S , Akashi K , Kinosita K Jr . Protrusive growth from giant liposomes driven by actin polymerization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 2048 – 2053 . 17 . Tilney LG , Inoue S . Acrosomal reaction of Thyone sperm . II . The kinetics and possible mechanism of acrosomal process elongation . J Cell Biol 1982 ; 93 : 820 – 827 . 18 . Wilson NF , Foglesong MJ , Snell WJ . The Chlamydomonas mating type plus fertilization tubule , a prototypic cell fusion organelle : isolation , characterization , and in vitro adhesion to mating type minus gametes . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 137 : 1537 – 1553 . 27 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 Theriot 19 . Tilney LG , Inoue S . Acrosomal reaction of the Thyonesperm . III . The relationship between actin assembly and water inﬂux during the extension of the acrosomal process . J Cell Biol 1985 ; 100 : 1273 – 1283 . 20 . Oster GF , Perelson AS . The physics of cell motility . J Cell Sci 1987 ; Suppl 8 : 35 – 54 . 21 . Theriot JA . The cell biology of infection by intracellular bacterial pathogens . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1995 ; 11 : 213 – 239 . 22 . Dramsi S , Cossart P . Intracellular pathogens and the actin cy - toskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1998 ; 14 : 137 – 166 . 23 . Theriot JA . Actin ﬁlament dynamics in cell motility . Adv Exp Med Biol 1994 ; 358 : 133 – 145 . 24 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ , Tilney LG , Portnoy DA . The rate of actin - based motility of intracellular Listeria monocytogenes equals the rate of actin polymerization . Nature 1992 ; 357 : 257 – 260 . 25 . Sanger JM , Sanger JW , Southwick FS . Host cell actin assembly is necessary and likely to provide the propulsive force for intracellular movement of Listeria monocytogenes . Infect Immun 1992 ; 60 : 3609 – 3619 . 26 . Cramer LP , Mitchison TJ . Myosin is involved in postmitotic cell spreading . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 131 : 179 – 189 . 27 . Theriot JA , Rosenblatt J , Portnoy DA , Goldschmidt - Clermont PJ , Mitchison TJ . Involvement of proﬁlin in the actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes in cells and in cell - free extracts . Cell 1994 ; 76 : 505 – 517 . 28 . Welch MD , Iwamatsu A , Mitchison TJ . Actin polymerization is in - duced by Arp2 : 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeriamonocy - togenes . Nature 1997 ; 385 : 265 – 269 . 29 . Rochlin MW , Dailey ME , Bridgman PC . Polymerizing microtubules activate site - directed F - actin assembly in nerve growth cones . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 2309 – 2327 . 30 . Merriﬁeld CJ , Moss SE , Ballestrem C , Imhof B , Giese G , Wunderlich I , Almers W . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nature Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 72 – 74 . 31 . Hill TL , Kirschner MW . Bioenergetics and kinetics of microtubule and actin ﬁlament assembly - disassembly . Int Rev Cytol 1982 ; 78 : 1 – 125 . 32 . Peskin CS , Odell GM , Oster GF . Cellular motions and thermal ﬂuctuations : the Brownian ratchet . Biophys J 1993 ; 65 : 316 – 324 . 33 . Dykes G , Crepeau RH , Edelstein SJ . Three - dimensional reconstruc - tion of the ﬁbres of sickle cell haemoglobin . Nature 1978 ; 272 : 506 – 510 . 34 . Pollard TD , Mooseker MS . Direct measurement of actin poly - merization rate constants by electron microscopy of actin ﬁlaments nucleated by isolated microvillus cores . J Cell Biol 1981 ; 88 : 654 – 659 . 35 . Pollard TD . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J Cell Biol 1986 ; 103 : 2747 – 2754 . 36 . Wegner A . The mechanism of ATP hydrolysis by polymer actin . Biophys Chem 1977 ; 7 : 51 – 58 . 37 . Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . Kinetic analysis of guanosine 5 % - triphos - phate hydrolysis associated with tubulin polymerization . Biochem - istry 1981 ; 20 : 1918 – 1924 . 38 . O’Brien ET , Voter WA , Erickson HP . GTP hydrolysis during micro - tubule assembly . Biochemistry 1987 ; 26 : 4148 – 4156 . 39 . Nogales E , Whittaker M , Milligan RA , Downing KH . High - resolution model of the microtubule . Cell 1999 ; 96 : 79 – 88 . 40 . Holmes KC , Popp D , Gebhard W , Kabsch W . Atomic model of the actin ﬁlament . Nature 1990 ; 347 : 44 – 49 . 41 . Rosenblatt J , Peluso P , Mitchison TJ . The bulk of unpolymerized actin in Xenopus egg extracts is ATP - bound . Mol Biol Cell 1995 ; 6 : 227 – 236 . 42 . Wegner A . Head to tail polymerization of actin . J Mol Biol 1976 ; 108 : 139 – 150 . 43 . Rodionov VI , Borisy GG . Microtubule treadmilling in vivo . Science 1997 ; 275 : 215 – 218 . 44 . Waterman - Storer CM , Salmon ED . Actomyosin - based retrograde ﬂow of microtubules in the lamella of migrating epithelial cells inﬂuences microtubule dynamic instability and turnover and is asso - ciated with microtubule breakage and treadmilling . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 139 : 417 – 434 . 45 . Hill TL , Kirschner MW . Subunit treadmilling of microtubules or actin in the presence of cellular barriers : possible conversion of chemical free energy into mechanical work . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1982 ; 79 : 490 – 494 . 46 . Theriot JA , Mitchison TJ . Actin microﬁlament dynamics in locomot - ing cells . Nature 1991 ; 352 : 126 – 131 . 47 . Small JV , Herzog M , Anderson K . Actin ﬁlament organization in the ﬁsh keratocyte lamellipodium . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 129 : 1275 – 1286 . 48 . Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 139 : 397 – 415 . 49 . Tilney LG , DeRosier DJ , Weber A , Tilney MS . How Listeriaexploits host cell actin to form its own cytoskeleton . II . Nucleation , actin ﬁlament polarity , ﬁlament assembly , and evidence for a pointed end capper . J Cell Biol 1992 ; 118 : 83 – 93 . 50 . Mogilner A , Oster G . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys J 1996 ; 71 : 3030 – 3045 . 51 . Feynman RP , Leighton RB , Sands M . Ratchet and Pawl . The Feyn - man Lectures on Physics , 1 . USA : Addison – Wesley , 1963 : 46 . 1 – 46 . 9 . 52 . Astumian RD . Thermodynamics and kinetics of a Brownian motor . Science 1997 ; 276 : 917 – 922 . 53 . Cameron LA , Footer MJ , van Oudenaarden A , Theriot JA . Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 4908 – 4913 . 54 . Jones JD , Ragsdale GK , Rozelle A , Yin HL , Luby - Phelps K . Diffusion of vesicle - sized particles in living cells is restricted by intermediate ﬁlaments . Mol Biol Cell 1997 ; 8 : 174a . 55 . Mogilner A , Oster G . The polymerization ratchet model explains the force - velocity relation for growing microtubules . Eur Biophys J 1999 ; 28 : 235 – 242 . 56 . Yarar D , To W , Abo A , Welch MD . The Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein directs actin - based motility by stimulating actin nucleation with the Arp2 : 3 complex . Curr Biol 1999 ; 9 : 555 – 558 . 57 . Machesky LM , Gould KL . The Arp2 : 3 complex : a multifunctional actin organizer . Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999 ; 11 : 117 – 121 . 58 . Carlier MF , Laurent V , Santolini J , Melki R , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF : coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 1997 ; 136 : 1307 – 1322 . 59 . Svitkina TM , Borisy GG . Arp2 : 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor : coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 145 : 1009 – 1026 . 28 Traffic 2000 : 1 : 19 – 28 .