Examining Technology that Supports Community Policing Sheena Lewis † and Dan A . Lewis * Technology and Social Behavior † Institute for Policy Research and School of Education and Social Policy * Northwestern University , Evanston , IL 60208 USA sheena @ u . northwestern . edu | dlewis @ northwestern . edu ABSTRACT This paper investigates how citizens use technology to sup - port community policing efforts . To explore the types of con - versations that are shared on the community web forum , we conducted a qualitative study . We analyzed 865 forum posts from a community crime web forum from April 2004 to June 2011 . We found that residents use the forum to : 1 ) build re - lationships by strengthening social ties , 2 ) discuss ways to take collective action , 3 ) share information and advice , and 4 ) regulate the social norms of the neighborhood and the web forum . Results suggest that technologies intended for crime prevention should be designed to support communication and problem - solving discussions amongst residents , as opposed to simply providing information to citizens . Author Keywords crime prevention technologies ; community policing ; crime ; collective action ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 2 . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION Crime is a major concern for many urban residents . Feel - ings of fear and anxiety are expressed by citizens who ex - perience or witness crime in their local neighborhoods [ 38 ] . Crime evokes concern for the physical safety and psycholog - ical wellbeing of self and other community members . Re - search has shown that after violence occurs in a neighbor - hood , some residents react individually to crime by trying to protect themselves using tactics that cause isolation ( e . g . , not going out , buying guns and locks ) [ 8 ] . Individual responses to crime ultimately increase fear and distrust [ 8 ] and decrease feelings of community and safety [ 33 ] . Yet , some communi - ties respond by collectively taking action to prevent violent crimes from reoccurring , which decreases fear and anxiety of becoming victimized [ 18 ] . Furthermore , community in - volvement , or collective action , effectively reduces crime and increases public conﬁdence in the police [ 36 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . CHI’12 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA . Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1015 - 4 / 12 / 05 . . . $ 10 . 00 . While criminology research suggests that collective action successfully decreases crime and anxiety , many human com - puter interaction ( HCI ) researchers and law enforcement agen - cies design crime prevention technologies that provide indi - viduals with information to lessen their chances of being vic - timized [ 4 , 5 , 30 , 37 ] . The functionality of such web tools range from providing crime maps to presenting missing per - sons and wanted criminals [ 4 , 31 ] . While these crime preven - tion technologies focus on individuals , little is known about how technology is used to support collective action against crime . What is the role of community technologies in ad - dressing crime ? What constitutes a successful design of com - munity crime prevention technology ? This paper describes the current role of technology in sup - porting citizens’ efforts to address crime in a middle - class , racially - diverse community in Chicago , IL USA . We con - ducted a preliminary study of two websites that were created to help citizens address crime : 1 ) CLEARpath , a website cre - ated by the Chicago police that provides information , and 2 ) a web forum that organically emerged from community mem - bers’ efforts to have problem - solving conversations . In our initial study , we found that residents use the community web forum to voice their community concerns more than they used the police website . Therefore , we focus on understanding the conversations between residents on the community web fo - rum . We ﬁnd that residents use the forum to 1 ) build rela - tionships by strengthening social ties , 2 ) discuss ways to take collective action , 3 ) share information and advice , and 4 ) reg - ulate norms of the community and purpose of the web fo - rum . Our ﬁndings suggest that while the police’s website was designed to provide extensive information to residents about their local community , the community website was more reg - ularly used because it allowed residents to strengthen social ties and govern social norms . Crime prevention theory sug - gests that the features of the community website , such as al - lowing local norms to be easily shared and reinforced , affords a richer interaction and places social control theory [ 18 ] at the forefront of designing crime prevention web tools . This work makes several contributions to the HCI commu - nity . First , this research deepens our understanding of the role of technology in supporting collective action within local communities . Speciﬁcally , our work builds on existing HCI research focused on citizen activism [ 9 , 16 , 17 ] . Second , this study provides HCI designers and researchers with insight into citizens’ online engagement regarding crime prevention , which can then be translated into principles for designing Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1371 crime prevention technologies that empower local commu - nities and encourage them to address issues such as crime . This extends a growing body of HCI literature on crime pre - vention tools that focuses on designing for individuals , not communities [ 4 , 5 , 30 , 42 ] . Lastly , this study provides insight into technology design that supports online communication between local communities and government organizations ( in this case , law enforcement ) , complimenting previous HCI lit - erature on the topic [ 14 , 22 ] and a CHI 2010 panel discussion on designing government websites for citizen use [ 15 ] . STUDY OBJECTIVE The objective of this paper is to examine the following re - search question : How can technology be designed to best sup - port collective action against crime ? We address our central question by answering two supporting questions : Do residents use the police or community websites more to voice their concerns ? How are people using unofﬁ - cial community websites ? This paper presents our ﬁndings to both these questions . In this paper , we deﬁne crime as physical offenses ( not “cy - ber” or online actions ) that break the law [ 8 ] . We have cho - sen to study urban communities because crime , particularly violent crime , is most prevalent in urban areas , and it is a topic that often emerges during conversations about commu - nity living and quality of life [ 21 ] . Residents of high crime areas may be concerned about the safety of themselves and family members , which takes a toll on their mental and phys - ical well - being [ 10 ] . With the decrease in government sup - port of many services ( e . g . , policing ) as a result of the recent economic decline , it is essential that we consider ways that technology can support safety . BACKGROUND Collective Action Through Community Policing In the early 1990s , major cities in the United States experi - enced the highest crime rates in decades . As a result , some city governments ( e . g . , Chicago , New York ) decided to en - gage local communities in taking collective action against crime through community - based alternative policing efforts . This approach , called “community policing , ” was one means of addressing high crime rates ; other efforts included tougher laws ( e . g , Three Strikes Law ) and increasing youth programs [ 27 ] . Community policing refers to the partnership between residents and police to address neighborhood - speciﬁc issues ( e . g . , grafﬁti , gang violence , burglaries ) , where residents are involved in decision - making processes and engage in local problem - solving [ 27 , 36 ] . Activities surrounding community policing may range from aggressive neighborhood watches by residents to neighborhood surveys that identify local prob - lems and evaluate police satisfaction . Community policing has become a vital part of the overall police strategy and often complements limited police resources [ 34 ] . The abil - ity to engage residents has proven to be crucial to combat - ing crime and decreasing residents’ fear of being victimized [ 36 ] . In fact , criminologist Wesley Skogan writes “commu - nity policing is surely one of the most important develop - ments in American policing in the past half - century” and that it has been reproduced all over the world [ 35 ] . Community Figure 1 . During a CAPS meeting , the Chicago police uses the above posters to explain the victimization theory to residents . The victimiza - tion theory ( left ) focuses on the victim , offender , and location ( or envi - ronment ) . Community policing ( right ) focuses on ﬁnding solutions and inserting them into the “crime triangle” to minimize crime . policing empowers neighborhoods to see themselves as more than helpless victims who wait for criminals to strike and then reactively call the police . Instead , residents are able to proac - tively confront incivilities ( e . g . , dilapidated buildings , grafﬁti , loitering ) in the neighborhood that reﬂect signs of neglect . As information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) have increasingly pervaded our lives , so has it transformed com - munity policing efforts . Early community policing efforts in - volved phone trees , in which neighbors would disseminate information by calling two or three assigned people in the neighborhood , who would in turn pass the information on to their assigned neighbors . Communities , however , are now appropriating various technologies ( e . g . , web forums , social networking sites ) to communicate and to further engage those who are unable to attend in - person meetings . While scholars have considered how law enforcement uses technology [ 39 ] , little is known about the extent to which communities are us - ing technology and the subsequent effect that it has on collec - tive action , speciﬁcally community policing . The objective of this study is to understand how technology is being appropri - ated in community policing strategies . Victimization Theory : Crime Prevention from the Police Perspective Two main crime prevention theories focus on understanding crime causation and prevention : victimization theory and so - cial control theory [ 18 ] . The victimization theory focuses on understanding crime as events that occur between a potential victim , offender , and the environment [ 19 ] . The victimization perspective suggests that based on the information that they have , a potential victim or offender assesses the risk of being victimized or caught , respectively . A potential victim , for ex - ample , may decide to not walk down a particular street if a friend says that it is dangerous . Law enforcement agencies , in particular , have embraced the victimization theory as a method to understand and prevent crime [ 34 ] . In fact , the police use the victimization theory to develop prevention strategies that focus on changing the be - Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1372 haviors of potential victims and offenders by impacting how they assess risk of being victimized or being caught . Figure 1 are posters that the Chicago police use to teach the commu - nity about how they address crime . Most crime prevention technologies attempt to change the be - havior by providing potential victims with information . The police , for example , have created technology solutions that they use internally to reduce crime ( e . g . , maps that identify crime hotspots ) [ 37 ] and have subsequently passed those so - lutions to the community [ 31 ] . Non - government companies also focus on providing information to citizens in hopes of decreasing crime . EveryBlock , for example , is a website that maps crime statistics in major US cities . In this paper , we initially examined CLEARpath , a Chicago police website designed to align with the victimization the - ory [ 31 ] . We found that though CLEARpath provides citi - zens with information , community residents created and use a web forum that facilitates communication . The following section provides background on the social control theory , a crime prevention theory that focuses on communication . Social Control Theory : Crime Prevention from the Com - munity Perspective In criminology , social control theory focuses on understand - ing communities as opposed to the victimization theory , which focuses on the individual . Social control theory suggests that social interactions inﬂuence criminal acts through informal enforcement of social norms [ 13 ] . This perspective suggests that the morals and values of a community are shaped by so - cial norms that in turn play a major role in determining crimi - nal behavior . Social control theory , for instance , indicates that a teenager will be less likely to post illegal grafﬁti if their par - ents , inﬂuential adults , and peers have discouraged this type of behavior since the teen was a child . Concepts from social control theory have been used to de - velop community - level analyses . Collective efﬁcacy , for ex - ample , is an analysis method that measures social cohesion among neighbors combined with their willingness to inter - vene on behalf of the common good [ 29 ] . Sampson found that high collective efﬁcacy is correlated with low crime rates [ 29 ] . Questions surrounding collective efﬁcacy focus on un - derstanding whether people believe that their neighbors will help them during an emergency and / or if they believe that crimes will be committed in their neighborhood [ 21 , 28 , 29 ] . Scholars have begun to investigate the relationship between technology and social control theory , suggesting that social norms communicated via technology affect relationships within communities [ 20 ] . However , there has not been much empir - ical investigation to support such claims . This study is one of the ﬁrst that provides empirical evidence of the relation - ship between crime , technology , and the transmission of so - cial control mechanisms within communities . HCI and Crime Prevention Technologies Crime and public safety are topics that have recently gained interest in HCI . Much of the HCI literature surrounding crime focuses on the police as the user . Chen et al . [ 7 ] created a system , COPLINK , that manages law enforcement data to in - crease effectiveness in police departments . Tullio et al . [ 41 ] examined the beneﬁts and challenges of police departments using video surveillance in their policing efforts . These stud - ies do not consider citizens as users of these technologies . HCI researchers , who have aimed to design crime prevention technologies for citizens , have taken an approach similar to the victimization theory . Speciﬁcally , crime prevention tools created by HCI researchers have focused on supplying infor - mation to individuals . Blom and colleagues [ 4 ] , for example , created a mobile phone application that allows residents to tag and share areas of the city on a virtual map where they feel unsafe . Satchell and Foth [ 30 ] created SPOT and MATE , two handheld personal safety devices that provides informa - tion about users’ safety . Blythe et al . [ 5 ] designed a wear - able technology that aims to decrease fear in older adults by broadcasting video and audio data to the police . All of these technologies were designed based on the principle that pro - viding information to users would increase feelings of safety and decrease risk of victimization by inﬂuencing user behav - ior , aligning with victimization theory . None of these studies , however , focus on communication or the transmission of so - cial norms within a community . While prior crime research in HCI focuses on designing for law enforcement agencies and individuals , this study bridges the gap by examining how local communities use technology to address crime and sug - gesting ways that criminology literature can be used to inﬂu - ence the design of effective crime prevention technologies . There has been a plethora of HCI research that aims to under - stand how geographically - bound communities use technol - ogy to address local issues . Carroll and Rossen [ 6 ] present the Blacksburg Electronic Village , a community networking website that connects residents of Blacksburg , VA . Hampton and Wellman [ 11 ] found that electronic networks positively impacted neighborhoods by affording access to information and resources , linking groups , and providing social identi - ties . While both of these studies focuses on geographically - bound communities , these technologies were not created to address a speciﬁc neighborhood issue , such as crime or vio - lence . Related to our research agenda , Redhead and Brereton [ 25 ] examined how local communities of practice use tech - nology and found a need for ICTs to enhance communication amongst residents by using large displays to share local in - formation [ 26 ] . We build on [ 25 ] by providing insight into designing for crime prevention as a community of practice . STUDY DESIGN To understand the role of technology in community policing , we selected a diverse northside Chicago community and ex - amined its online and ofﬂine discussions about crime . In this section , we provide a brief history of Chicago’s community policing strategies and describe the data collection and anal - ysis for the study . Chicago and Community Policing Chicago is the third largest city in the United States with 2 . 7 million people in the city . It is a racially diverse city with Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1373 Figure 2 . CLEARpath website created for citizens by the Chicago police . residents roughly split into a third Caucasian , African Ameri - can , and Hispanic . Socio - economic status varies widely with a household median income of approximately $ 35K but with close to 20 % of households living below the poverty line . Crime in Chicago has been a major issue over the past forty years , with violent crime such as homicides placing the city as second highest in the US in 2008 [ 1 ] . Despite the fact that Chicago has the second - largest police department in the US , state lawmakers considered bringing in the National Guard to help regulate a sudden increase in gang - related violence in 2010 [ 2 ] . Chicago is an ideal place to study community and crime because of the city’s rich history of being a criminol - ogy studies hub and the fact that Chicago “developed the most prominent big - city neighborhood - oriented [ policing ] program in the [ US ] nation” [ 34 ] . In the early 1990s , the mayor’s ofﬁce created an initiative to reduce crime by blending traditional policing with alternative policing efforts that focused on empowering local residents to “take back” their neighborhoods [ 34 ] . This partnership be - tween the police and citizens is called Chicago Alternative Policing Strategies ( CAPS ) . Chicago is divided into 25 po - lice districts and each district is furthered divided into 9 - 12 police beats - with the city totaling 279 beats . Beats are small geographic areas , mostly 30 - 40 blocks with over 20 , 000 res - idents . Police ofﬁcers are assigned to one beat and do not change for at least two years , because one of CAPS’ goals is for residents to develop a rapport with their beat ofﬁcers . CAPS meetings are typically 1 held once a month in local community centers , churches , and parks , where residents dis - cuss neighborhood problems with their beat police ofﬁcers . Police and residents also brainstorm methods to ﬁx the prob - lems , many times suggesting solutions in which residents play a vital role in successfully accomplishing the task ( e . g . , resi - dents identifying gang members ) . The Community We selected a local community - deﬁned as one city beat - to research . While the geographic boundaries of a beat are deﬁned by the police , residents used the beat to deﬁne their 1 Recent budget cuts have forced some districts to have quarterly meetings . The beat that we studied had monthly meetings . community as observed by residents’ statements in the CAPS meetings and by the self - imposed structure of the community website , where residents could have ( but did not ) redeﬁne the geographic boundaries of what constitutes their community . The community studied was one of the largest beats ( in terms of square miles ) in the city with a majority of middle class res - idents . Speciﬁcally , the beat contained more than 24 , 400 res - idents , with the median age of 39 and about 46 % male . The median income was $ 55 , 000 per year and the majority were homeowners ( 60 % ) . The community self - identiﬁed as being racially diverse with 67 % Caucasian , 12 % African American , and 8 . 2 % Latino . Compared to other beats in Chicago , the community has a medium - level of violent crime but a high number of property damage reported . We selected this beat because the demographics and crime rates are similar to many Chicago beats . Action Through Online Participation Community residents have access to CLEARpath , a police - community website created by the Chicago police to “serve as an information sharing vehicle and help to advance a broad community development agenda” [ 31 ] . CLEARpath emerged from the Citizen and Law Enforcement Analysis and Report - ing System ( CLEAR ) , a police web tool that allows them to “police smarter” [ 37 ] ( e . g . , ﬁnding crime hot spots , connect - ing to other law enforcement agencies , providing extensive mapping technology ) . Because CLEAR can only be used by the police , not by citizens , the Chicago police developed CLEARpath , which cost over $ 10 million and was developed over the course of three years ( from 2005 to 2008 ) . CLEARpath is designed to mainly provide citizens with in - formation , which aligns with victimization theory . CLEARpath is made up of 15 modules , 12 of which strictly provide in - formation and do not allow users to input or share informa - tion with the police . In the 12 modules , the police supply an array of information to communities including “maps of crime and community concerns , information about known / wanted offenders , gang awareness materials , educational in - formation about staying safe and preventing crime , and infor - mation about events and resources” [ 31 ] . The 3 user input modules allow citizens to report community concerns , tip po - lice about crimes , and compliment or complain about police conduct or behavior . In addition to CLEARpath , the community also has access to an informal community policing web forum ( a Yahoo ! Group ) that was started by local residents in 2004 , where residents discuss issues regarding crime and safety . Community mem - bers are able to join the group by submitting a request via an online sign up . A community resident , who is also a website volunteer , then responds by asking the requester where they live . If they live in the beat , their membership is approved . It is unknown how many people applied and were not accepted based on the location of their residence or how many peo - ple unsubscribed from the community web forum . As of July 2011 , there were 221 members of the community web forum . The design of the community website facilitates problem - solving discussions and other characteristics that align with social control theory . Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1374 Prestudy While CLEARpath allows residents to submit some informa - tion , our preliminary investigation of the use of the two web - sites suggests that residents used the community web forum more than the police website to share concerns . CLEARpath’s community concerns module , for example , “allows residents to report quality of life or neighborhood disorder issues di - rectly to the Chicago Police Department” [ 31 ] by completing a form online . While the community concerns module allows residents to post information directly to the police , residents in this beat have only submitted 3 concerns in the past year . 2 In a randomly - selected three - month period in the same year , 7 residents posted 10 community concerns to the community web forum . Table 1 shows the distribution of community con - cerns across ﬁve police categories for both websites . Resi - dents voice their community concerns about incivilities and neighborhood disorder on the unofﬁcial community website more than the ofﬁcial police website . Based on our ﬁndings in this preliminary investigation of our ﬁrst research ques - tion , we focused our study on deeply analyzing the commu - nity website . Data Collection To understand the role of technology in supporting commu - nity policing efforts , we conducted a combination of online qualitative content analysis for one city beat , resulting in 4425 online posts ( i . e . , text and photos ) from the web forum created by local community members . To gather the data , we de - veloped a web crawler using Python to retrieve forum posts , including metadata ( e . g . , date , subject , author ) from the com - munity web forum . We selected the forum based on what residents described as the “community crime website” during the CAPS meetings . Using the Python script , we collected 4456 forum posts that were created from April 2004 to July 2011 . After removing 31 spam posts , 4425 posts remained . The following is an example of a forum post written by a local resident : “Saw drug dealing on Saturday afternoon @ 2 : 30 while having late lunch on my front porch . I can identify the car and will look for it now that I know . . . . here’s the info : A reddish - marroon Buick ( at least 10 yrs old ) did a strange move at the stop sign as it was heading south [ . . . ] As the Buick went by me there were 3 - 4 young men sitting - I could not take the license number , but can identify the car again - very shiny ! ! ” Additionally , we observed eleven months of CAPS meetings in - person , where both police and community members par - ticipated . While we have the in - person meeting observations , in this paper , we focus on and present results from the com - munity web forum . Analysis We used qualitative methods to analyze 19 . 5 % ( 865 forum posts ) of the data set . Of the 865 forum posts selected for analysis , 443 forum posts ( roughly 10 % of the corpus ) were randomly selected in order to understand the types of conver - sations and messages that were being shared amongst com - munity members throughout the entire data set . Additionally , 2 In the past year , the median number of community concerns sub - mitted from all 279 beats was nine . CLEARpath Community Forum Gangs 1 2 Narcotics 0 0 Prostitution 0 0 Troubled Building 0 4 Other Criminal Disorder 2 4 Total 3 in365days 10 in90days Table 1 . This table displays the number of community concerns reported by local residents . The concerns are divided into ﬁve categories as de - ﬁned by the Chicago police . In one year , residents posted 3 community concerns to the police website , CLEARpath , while in a 3 - month period ( May 5 , 2011 to Aug 5 , 2011 ) , residents posted 10 community concerns on the community web forum . 470 forum posts ( roughly 12 % ) were selected to understand which topics , or threads , received the most attention based on which had the largest number of unique authors . Table 2 shows the topic titles , number of messages , and the number of authors of the threads analyzed . Due to the random selec - tion , 48 posts overlapped between the two different methods of selection , resulting in the analysis of 865 forum posts ( as opposed to 913 ) . The selected forum posts were analyzed using an inductive thematic approach [ 40 ] , where the data was coded for emerg - ing phenomena . Based on preliminary analysis , we undertook a more detailed analysis of the online conversations by coding the forum posts line by line . We iteratively coded and reﬁned the initial codes until we had a total of 33 codes that were then grouped into into higher - level categories , which eventu - ally lead to the ﬁnalized themes presented . The next section presents quotes from the forum posts as il - lustrations of the themes that repeatedly emerged in the com - munity web forum . The quotes are literal , with spelling , punc - tuation , and capitalization unaltered , unless otherwise noted . Most alterations are to protect anonymity of the community . RESULTS Four major themes emerged from our analysis of the commu - nity web forum discussions . Residents use the forum to 1 ) build relationships and strengthen social ties , 2 ) discuss ways that they can engage in collective action , 3 ) share informa - tion and advice , and 4 ) reinforce ofﬂine and online commu - nity norms . In the following sections , we discuss each of the themes in detail . Build Relationships Consistent with previous studies [ 11 ] , we ﬁnd that residents use the community policing web forum to build relationships and strengthen social ties with other community members . Expressing collective identity , demonstrating neighborhood cohesion , and simply sharing well wishes are all ways that residents exhibited relationship building . Residents demonstrate collective identity by using ﬁrst - person plural words ( e . g . , we , us , our ) and phrases in the forum posts [ 24 ] . When discussing the danger of drivers not stopping at stop signs near a local elementary school , one resident ex - plains that such trafﬁc violations are a concern for everyone by saying , “We live here so we care about these incidents . ” This resident not only expresses her concern with commu - nity issues but also recognizes that these issues interest the Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1375 community as a whole . Another common occurrence in the data was residents sharing positive thoughts using collective language . One neighbor says , “Our neighborhood is still a wonderful place to live with great neighbors like all of you who look out for one another . ” Another says , “I think we live in a reasonably safe area – over all – and we ought to continue to be good neighbors and prudent people ! ” First - person plu - ral words “has served as a measure of social integration” [ 23 ] . The use of words that supports collective identity and social integration builds relationships amongst residents by making them feel that they are a part of a group . This is especially important form of relationship building for those who may not otherwise talk to many people in the neighborhood . Neighborhood cohesion among residents was another factor in building relationships . In a discussion about a new mosque being built in the neighborhood , one resident states , “Should it turn out that this is the site chosen by Faizan - e - Madina , or if the Faizan - e - Madina people locate somewhere in [ our neighborhood ] , we should extend our hands in friendship and welcome them to join us at our monthly meetings . ” He con - tinues to say , “We should have more input from these folks and establish an open dialogue for our mutual beneﬁt . Per - haps some of us who have moslem neighbors might invite them to visit with us and become an active participant in the welfare and safety of what is also their neighborhood . They shouldn’t be ’strangers in a strange land . ’ Diversity makes us all stronger . ” This resident uses the web forum to share his desire to create a cohesive atmosphere with potential new neighbors and encourages others to invite the new neighbors into conversations about community policing . This resident encourages neighbors to build relationships with others who are not a part of the neighborhood to increase cohesion . A third method of relationship building identiﬁed in the web forum discussions are residents expressing well wishes to oth - ers within the community . For example , when one resident was hospitalized , others expressed their concern . One states , “ [ name ] so sorry to hear you were in the hospital . I hope ev - erything is well with you now . ” Another responded , “ [ name ] , Good to hear from you ! ? Recover quickly . . . everyone misses you ! ! ! ” Though the web forum focuses on crime , residents use the community website to communicate on a very human level by showing concern for their neighbors . In addition , residents demonstrated collective sympathy when a neighbor was victimized . When an elderly couple was assaulted dur - ing a home invasion , there was a large community outcry . One community member wrote , “CAPS [ beat number ] as well as the community in general are saddened that they fell victims to crime . ” These types of posts strengthen relation - ships within the community and increase cohesion . While discussions that express well wishes may not directly impact crime , studies suggest that communities with high cohesion and strong social ties have less crime than those who don’t [ 29 ] . The community website supports communication that helps strengthens these relationships . Thread Title # of Posts # of Authors Do the Police really ignore 911 calls 43 17 Suspicious neighborhood activity 46 16 Taxi Parking 33 15 How do you connect to the Web ? – a quick survey 14 14 Petition 39 14 Copper Downspouts 41 13 Tagging of house on . . . 19 13 More Graﬁtti 30 13 No more BBQ in . . . Park 32 13 Cars not stopping at stop signs . . . . . . . . . . what to do ? ? 33 13 Chinese Restaurant Delivery Robbery 20 12 Frequent questionable activity in [ . . . ] playground 26 11 Too petty ? 12 10 New Moderator 11 10 More on Blago freebies for seniors 16 10 Urgent Meeting Tomorrow 21 10 Boat parked on xx00 block of [ street ] . . . . . 34 10 Table 2 . This table displays the thread titles , number of posts , and num - ber of unique authors for the top 12 % of all posts ordered by the number of authors . Discuss Collective Action Residents used the community web forum to discuss ways to take action in their neighborhoods to reduce crime and inci - vilities . In one case , when a resident stated that there was new gang activity on her street , another resident responded , “Go out there with a cell phone and paper / pencil in hand . . . . . . take down the car plate [ . . . ] call it in . Jot down the time and day . . . . like keeping a log ! ! ” This is an example of residents encouraging others to take action . Residents also encouraged each other to take action by posting their concerns on the website and calling the police . Residents were urged by other residents , especially commu - nity volunteers who moderated discussions , to post their con - cerns on the community web forum . One moderator says , “This is your site . Don’t let it go fallow . ” Another gave a lengthy plea to residents saying , “You cared about the neigh - borhood enough to join this group – how about telling us of your concerns ? ? ? Without your input , we can’t focus on the problems you feel are important and might end up concen - trating on things you aren’t as concerned about . It’s your neighborhood ! Help us make it even better . ” People who do not normally post to the website were encouraged by regular forum contributors to share their opinions and concerns with the group . Many times residents that had already posted on the website were encouraged to post more information about their con - cerns . For example , residents reporting an increase in gang grafﬁti were encouraged to take photos and share them with the group . “If possible please take a digital picture or two of this . ” and “It would be nice if someone had a camera and took photos to pass around at the next regular CAPS Beat Meet - ing . ” Residents were urged to take action by sharing photos of incivilities online and ofﬂine . In addition , residents were encouraged to take more tradi - tional forms of action ( e . g . , calling the police when they wit - nessed a crime ) . One resident’s response to complaints about trafﬁc violations in the neighborhood that were dangerous to children was , “Get your neighbors to complain constantly . When the 911 operators know their voices by heart , maybe something will be done . ” Another resident legitimized his sug - Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1376 gestion about calling the police by mentioning that the police sergeant at the local CAPS meeting agreed . “ As Sgt . [ name ] says at CAPS meetings , keep calling , calling , calling . The more complaints , the more attention a situation gets . ’” Resi - dents were encouraged to take action by contacting the police . Share Information Information sharing was prevalent on the community website . Speciﬁcally , residents share information about local crime , advice , and concerns . Residents shared information about local crime , including re - ports from the police website . A community member , for ex - ample , sharing information gathered from CLEARpath writes , “As I report at EVERY CAPS Meeting , one of the top two problems we have in this neighborhood is ’Criminal Damage , To Vehicle . ’” He continues to list the number of incidents and concludes by saying , “This may not make you feel any better but . . . we ARE down 18 incidents this year , compared to 2005 . ” Similarly , another moderator writes , “Good news , crime is down , once again , 5th straight month this year” and “I have posted the Chicago Police Department’s Annual Report for the year 2004 in its entirety in the ’Files’ section . ” In these cases , residents gather crime reports from the police website to share with other residents . Residents also share advice . For example , a resident posts that she was having problems with gang members parking and “conducting business” in front of her home . Another commu - nity member advises her . “Our solution is to go out there and ask them why they are parked in front . . . . . . usually that’s all it takes and they go away . Sometimes we ﬁnd the illicit cou - ples / lovers lane in some states of undress too if we walk out there . . . . . so turning on all the lights , talking LOUD , making noise with other people or animals , etc . or writing down the license number - and they take their business elsewhere . ” In addition to advice , residents give warnings . When a resident says that they followed theives who had stolen property from their home , another resident responds , “Be careful though . Sometimes the group can turn on you and they may pull a gun . ” The community web forum allows residents to give and receive advice . In addition to receiving advice , residents also ask for advice . One resident saw a spike in property damage to cars on her street . She posted to the forum , “Outside of staying up all night & watching our cars for those of us who don’t have a garage , it’s almost impossible to prevent . [ . . . ] Any ideas from you will be appreciated . ” Residents use the web forum to not only post but also seek advice from their neighbors . In addition to information sharing , residents share their con - cerns on the web forum . One resident who lives near a park shares with the residents her fear of being attacked at night . “Frankly , I’m afraid to walk past it at dusk and dawn for fear that someone might jump out at me . ” Similarly , a mother ﬁrst shares her concern about the increase in youth and gang vi - olence in the area . She posts , “As the mother of a son who is starting high school in the fall , I have been grappling with the same decisions . [ . . . ] I worry now about the CTA and his route home from high school . ” In this post , the mother was afraid of her child riding public transportation to school . Residents utilize the community web forum to share informa - tion , advice , and their concerns , which is consistent with [ 6 ] . Though the other three themes we found closely align with social control theory , sharing information is a major factor in victimization theory . This demonstrates that features of the community website were not completely autonomous from victimization theory , but instead that where the information originates and how it is presented matters to citizens . Reinforce Norms Similar to prior studies [ 11 ] , we found that citizens use the website to regulate social norms . Discussions about what is acceptable behavior in the community ranged from conversa - tions about proper residential landscaping to good behavior at the neighborhood park . One resident , for example , describes what he believes is proper landscaping . “Shrubs are not to be so HUGE or thick that a person can hide when the area is lit . Lights , and attractive low shrubbery will not give a criminal the advantage . ” Another resident comments that his neigh - bors’ bushes are not cut properly and states that he is now concerned with his bushes . “Their bushes are kind of thick as is their next door neighbors’ at the corner house . Now we have to worry somewhat about how thick our front bushes are . ” Residents used the web forum to manage and regulate norms of the neighborhood . While some residents used the web forum to regulate norms in the community , others did not believe the web forum should be used to discuss those who violate neighborhood norms . One resident , for instance , expresses concern with comments about a community member’s improper landscaping . “it seems a little harsh to be criticizing our neighbors in this forum for their bushes . The [ name ] s are nice concerned neighbors who have been very involved over the years in our neighborhood doings . We should be careful how we talk here [ on the web forum ] . ” Some residents voice concern when the web forum was used to discuss neighborhood norms in a way that impli - cates a speciﬁc community member . We found that citizens also regulate online norms . The com - munity web forum , for example , was moderated by residents who volunteer to help . Such administrative tasks are some - times referred to as gatekeeping [ 3 ] . One moderator states the purpose of his position by saying , “moderators also have the responsibility and the power to back it up [ or ] to tone down discussions that get out of hand . They can , and have , imposed ‘moderated’ status to some people to calm them down during heated discussions . Sadly , in the past , we’ve also had to ban some individuals Hell bent on causing chaos . Moderators can do this , too . We don’t like to discipline anyone and only do so as last resorts . Yet , we must have a mechanism in place for those rare instances that force such actions . ” Site moderators were a vital part of the web forum , because they ensured that discussions aligned with the objectives of CAPS . Moderation occurs in many ways . Moderators sometimes gently nudged the conversation back towards the goal . After a lengthy discussion about immigration amongst a few resi - dents , for example , one moderator states , “let’s all go back to reducing crime . ” In another case , a moderator responds to Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1377 posts about politics , “While I’m all for freedom of speech and all that please let’s remember the purpose of CAPS is to in - crease police effectiveness and community policing . There - fore let’s conﬁne the discussion to that . ” Using terms like “let’s” nudges the communities to collectively attempt to stay on task and does not point out one individual as the culprit . Other forms of moderation are more forceful and direct , even addressing a particular person . After receiving a forwarded newspaper article posted by one resident , a moderator re - sponds , “Mr . [ name ] , You may be a member of our group , but you’ve violated our no commercial rule with your blatant ad for Microsoft . Therefore , you’ve been placed on modera - tion . We will not tolerate this type of posting . If this continues , you will be removed from our group . ” In this case , the moder - ator called the person by name and scolded him for violating their group rules and policies . This demonstrates what occurs when users do not abide by the “online rules . ” DISCUSSION Consistent with prior HCI literature on space - based commu - nities [ 6 , 11 ] , we ﬁnd that contributors of a “grassroots” com - munity web forum used the site to build and strengthen re - lationships , encourage collective action , share information , and reinforce ofﬂine and online norms . Though the ofﬁcial police website provides users with information ( e . g . , how to protect themselves , crime statistics , maps ) , it does not fos - ter communication amongst residents . Crime theory suggests that the police website design aligns with victimization the - ory , the traditional perspective for conceptualizing crime pre - vention . Our ﬁndings suggest that crime prevention tech - nologies that give individuals information will not necessarily increase active participation . Designers of crime prevention tools should consider not only designing for citizen - police in - teraction where informing users is the main focus , but also for citizen - citizen interaction where relationship building can occur . Crime prevention technologies should be designed to support social control , which includes facilitating problem - solving discussions and allowing citizens to regulate commu - nity norms . We present crime theories that offer the HCI community a theoretical perspective for designing effective crime preven - tion technologies . The victimization and social control theo - ries historically have been a major part of creating non - technology crime prevention solutions [ 18 ] and we use these theories to provide a theoretical basis to examine crime prevention tech - nology design . Crime prevention theories provide a valuable means of understanding the context in which we design crime prevention technologies and how such designs are situated in the broader literature ( e . g . , consequences of designing for in - dividuals as opposed to communities ) . As HCI researchers , we should consider crime theories predictions of what actu - ally decreases crime and increases feelings of safety and how these theories translate into design implications . Lastly , we encourage HCI researchers to consider the broader ecology of the crime prevention technology that they are de - signing . What is the culture of the communities , govern - ments , and cities in which the technology will be situated ? In Chicago , for example , there is a strong culture of commu - nity policing , in which residents have been heavily engaged in community policing efforts for over 20 years . Therefore , in Chicago communities , there may be less need to persuade people to engage in collective action . Furthermore , HCI de - signers should consider the subsequent effects of designing for social control . Though there are many cases where social control positively contributes to decreases in crime , there may be instances where community members exert social control that negatively impacts community morale . Exploring the ecological system may reveal that government organizations can not replicate “organic” community websites , or perhaps even design web tools that citizens heavily use because of is - sues regarding trust and ownership . HCI designers creating technologies for citizens should adhere to design practices that allow them to investigate the relationship between local communities and government organizations . Legitimacy , Trust , and Accountability Scholars have previously noted three main concerns with de - veloping information and communication technologies for com - munity policing : legitimacy , trust , and accountability [ 31 ] . In our study , we found the community residents who vol - unteered to moderate online discussions or those who were elected to be community - police liaisons at the meetings strug - gled with legitimizing the community website . This is not un - common . “Community groups , by their nature , often struggle to maintain their status and legitimacy . Thus , engaging in a partnership with the police and could undermine their role as the watchdog against government abuse or neglect” [ 31 ] . We found that moderators of the community website man - aged the legitimacy of the website by , on one hand , distanc - ing the website from the police by emphasizing that it is the community’s website , not created by the police . But on the other hand , residents used the CAPS meetings to promote the site as the community website for discussing crime and they pulled data from CLEARpath to share with others - making it clear that the data originated from the police . Technology designers should consider how legitimacy is negotiated . Historically trust between the community and the police has been a challenge , particularly for minorities [ 12 , 32 ] . Resi - dents may not have used the police website as much as the community forum because some people may not trust that their submissions to the police would indeed be anonymous or that the police would take their concerns seriously . Design - ers of community websites should consider the role of trust in the relationship between community and the police and how trust affects technology usage in community policing . Prior work suggests that accountability is essential to citi - zens who use community policing technologies [ 31 ] . In our case , residents who submit community concerns on the police website were able to use a tracking number to follow police response . The community website , on the other hand , did not have a formal method of tracking concerns , and the po - lice had little contact with the community website . In fact , when asked , the district sergeant said that while she reads posts from the community website , she does not respond or engage in online conversation with the community because of Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1378 liability issues . Yet , the fact that residents use the community website to voice their concerns about criminal activity in their neighborhoods , even though the police do not address their posts , may be indicative of what happens when concerns are shared and discussed publicly . Perhaps voicing opinions pub - licly about criminal activity and engaging in discussion with other residents satisﬁes accountability concerns . Further in - vestigation on accountability in community web forums will lead to a deeper understanding of the role that accountability plays in the design of government websites . LIMITATIONS Although this study provides insight into the role of technol - ogy in community policing and recommendations for design , there are limitations to this study . First , the community that we studied had a medium level of crime as compared to other areas of Chicago . Communities with high crime may ﬁnd al - ternative uses for community technologies or may ﬁnd more immediate technologies are more appropriate ( e . g . , text mes - sage alerts about local occurrences ) . Similarly , communities with different socio - economic statuses or racial composition may utilize technology to support community policing efforts differently . In future work , we intend to expand our research to include such factors . FUTURE RESEARCH The results of this study suggest a number of avenues for fu - ture work . First , we intend to explore the differences between online and ofﬂine engagement by comparing the conversa - tions from the community web forum and conversations ob - served during the monthly in - person meetings . Results for such a study would further inform the design of technologies that support in - person and online community policing efforts . A software application , for example , may highlight important topics from the web forum to ensure that they receive proper attention during in - person meetings with the police and the community . A second future area of study is examining those who do not have access to the web conversations because of lack of ac - cess to technology . These residents may be marginalized as neighborhood problems and solutions may be identiﬁed with - out their knowledge or input . This may be especially true in gentrifying communities where the socioeconomic status of the residents are rapidly changing . It is important to identify design guidelines that allow all community members an op - portunity to participate in problem - solving discussions about crime . Furthermore , we intend to study non - contributing members of the community web forum to examine different levels of participation , speciﬁcally how receiving information about local community concerns affects ofﬂine behavior . Though a community member may read a web post that states that uncut bushes in people’s lawns encourage burglaries and may not comment on the post , perhaps they become diligent in cutting their bushes . Exploring this would deepen our un - derstanding of how technology affects ofﬂine behavior - even amongst lurkers . CONCLUSION While information and communication technologies are in - creasingly used to support community policing efforts , de - signing web tools that provide information to citizens will not necessarily increase online participation . Our results sug - gest that web tools to support community policing should be designed to adhere to and support communication that allow residents to engage in collective problem - solving discussions and to informally regulate social norms . Using technology that facilities communication , citizens are able to share per - sonal experiences and strengthen social ties with other resi - dents while also addressing crime and local concerns . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank Ikpeme Erete , Mike Horn , and Andrea Grimes Parker for their invaluable comments on this research . This research is funded by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship . REFERENCES 1 . Chicago Murder Rate Tops New York And Los Angeles , Oct 24 2008 . http : / / www . huffingtonpost . com / 2008 / 10 / 24 / chicago - murder - rate - tops _ n _ 137488 . html . 2 . Chicago Lawmakers : Call In the National Guard , April 26 2010 . http : / / www . foxnews . com / us / 2010 / 04 / 26 / lawmakers - military - quell - chicago - violence . 3 . Barzilai - Nahon , K . Gatekeeping : A critical review . Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 43 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 1 – 79 . 4 . Blom , J . , Viswanathan , D . , Spasojevic , M . , Go , J . , Acharya , K . , and Ahonius , R . Fear and the city : role of mobile services in harnessing safety and security in urban use contexts . In Proc . CHI , ACM ( 2010 ) , 1841 – 1850 . 5 . Blythe , M . A . , Wright , P . C . , and Monk , A . F . Little brother : could and should wearable computing technologies be applied to reducing older peoples fear of crime ? Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 8 ( 2004 ) , 402 – 415 . 6 . Carroll , J . M . , and Rosson , M . B . Developing the blacksburg electronic village . Commun . ACM 39 ( 1996 ) , 69 – 74 . 7 . Chen , H . , Zeng , D . , Atabakhsh , H . , Wyzga , W . , and Schroeder , J . Coplink : Managing law enforcement data and knowledge . Commun . ACM 46 ( 2003 ) , 28 – 34 . 8 . Conklin , J . The impact of crime . Macmillan New York , NY , 1975 . 9 . DiSalvo , C . , Light , A . , Hirsch , T . , Le Dantec , C . A . , Goodman , E . , and Hill , K . Hci , communities and politics . In Proc . Ext . Abstracts CHI , ACM ( 2010 ) , 3151 – 3154 . 10 . Gehlert , S . , Sohmer , D . , Sacks , T . , Mininger , C . , McClintock , M . , and Olopade , O . Targeting health disparities : A model linking upstream determinants to downstream interventions . Health Affairs 27 , 2 ( 2008 ) , 339 – 349 . Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1379 11 . Hampton , K . , and Wellman , B . Neighboring in netville : How the internet supports community and social capital in a wired suburb . City & Community 2 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 277 – 311 . 12 . Hindelang , M . J . Public opinion regarding crime , criminal justice , and related topics . Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 11 , 2 ( 1974 ) , 101 – 116 . 13 . Hirschi , T . Causes of Delinquency . University of California Press , 1969 . 14 . Hourcade , J . P . , and Fox , J . E . Designing public government web sites . In Proc . Ext . Abstracts CHI , ACM ( 2005 ) , 2039 – 2040 . 15 . Johnson , J . , and Lazar , J . E - government : services for everyone , everywhere , eventually . In Proc . Ext . Abstracts CHI , ACM ( 2010 ) , 3139 – 3142 . 16 . Kim , S . , Robson , C . , Zimmerman , T . , Pierce , J . , and Haber , E . M . Creek watch : pairing usefulness and usability for successful citizen science . In Proc . CHI , ACM ( 2011 ) , 2125 – 2134 . 17 . Kuznetsov , S . , Odom , W . , Moulder , V . , DiSalvo , C . , Hirsch , T . , Wakkary , R . , and Paulos , E . Hci , politics and the city : engaging with urban grassroots movements for reﬂection and action . In Proc . Ext . Abstracts CHI , ACM ( 2011 ) , 2409 – 2412 . 18 . Lewis , D . A . , and Salem , G . Community crime prevention : An analysis of a developing strategy . Crime & Delinquency 27 , 3 ( 1981 ) , 405 – 421 . 19 . Lewis , D . A . , and Salem , G . Fear of crime : Incivility and the production of a social problem . Transaction Publishers , 1986 . 20 . Lewis , S . L . , and Lewis , D . A . Digitalizing crime prevention theories : How technology affects victim and offender behavior . International Journal of Criminology and Sociological Theory 4 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 756 – 769 . 21 . Morenoff , J . , Sampson , R . , and Raudenbush , S . Neighborhood inequality , collective efﬁcacy , and the spatial dynamics of urban violence * . Criminology 39 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 517 – 558 . 22 . Paris , C . , and Wan , S . Listening to the community : social media monitoring tasks for improving government services . In Proc . Ext . Abstracts CHI , ACM ( 2011 ) , 2095 – 2100 . 23 . Pennebaker , J . , and Stone , L . Words of wisdom : Language use over the life span . Journal of personality and social psychology 85 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 291 . 24 . Pennebaker , J . W . , and Graybeal , A . Patterns of natural language use : Disclosure , personality , and social integration . Current Directions in Psychological Science 10 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 90 – 93 . 25 . Redhead , F . , and Brereton , M . A qualitative analysis of local community communications . In Proc . OZCHI , ACM ( 2006 ) , 361 – 364 . 26 . Redhead , F . , and Brereton , M . Designing interaction for local communications : An urban screen study . In Proc . INTERACT , Springer - Verlag ( 2009 ) , 457 – 460 . 27 . Rosenbaum , D . The challenge of community policing : Testing the promises . Sage Publications ( 1994 ) , 336 . 28 . Sampson , R . , and Groves , W . Community structure and crime : Testing social - disorganization theory . American Journal of Sociology ( 1989 ) , 774 – 802 . 29 . Sampson , R . , Raudenbush , S . , and Earls , F . Neighborhoods and violent crime : A multilevel study of collective efﬁcacy . Science 277 , 5328 ( 1997 ) , 918 . 30 . Satchell , C . , and Foth , M . Welcome to the jungle : Hci after dark . In Proc . Ext . Abstracts CHI , ACM ( 2011 ) , 753 – 762 . 31 . Schuck , A . , and Rosenbaum , D . Building trust and a police - community website : An assessment of the clearpath planning and community engagement process . Tech . rep . , Macauthor Foundation , 2008 . 32 . Schuman , H . Racial attitudes in America : Trends and interpretations . Harvard Univ Pr , 1997 . 33 . Schwab - Stone , M . , Ayers , T . , Kasprow , W . , Voyce , C . , Barone , C . , Shriver , T . , and Weissberg , R . No safe haven : A study of violence exposure in an urban community . Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 34 ( 1995 ) , 1343 – 1352 . 34 . Skogan , W . Police and Community in Chicago : A Tale of Three Cities . Oxford University Press , 2006 . 35 . Skogan , W . An overview of community policing : Origins , concepts , and implementation . In The handbook of knowledge - based policing : current conceptions and future directions . Wiley , 2008 , 43 – 57 . 36 . Skogan , W . , and Hartnett , S . Community Policing , Chicago style . Oxford University Press , 1997 . 37 . Skogan , W . , Hartnett , S . , DuBois , J . , Bennis , J . , Kim , S . , Rosenbaum , D . , Graziano , L . , and Stephens , C . Policing smarter through it : Learning from chicagos citizen and law enforcement analysis and reporting ( clear ) system . Tech . rep . , US Department of Justice , 2004 . 38 . Skogan , W . , and Maxﬁeld , M . Coping with crime : Individual and neighborhood reactions . Sage Publications , 1981 . 39 . Skogan , W . G . , and Hartnett , S . M . The diffusion of information technology in policing . Police Practice & Research 6 , 5 ( 2005 ) , 401 – 417 . 40 . Strauss , A . , and Corbin , J . Basics of qualitative research : Grounded theory procedures and techniques . Sage Publications , Inc , 1990 . 41 . Tullio , J . , Huang , E . , Wheatley , D . , Zhang , H . , Guerrero , C . , and Tamdoo , A . Experience , adjustment , and engagement : the role of video in law enforcement . In Proc . CHI , ACM ( 2010 ) , 1505 – 1514 . 42 . Woelfer , J . P . , Iverson , A . , Hendry , D . G . , Friedman , B . , and Gill , B . T . Improving the safety of homeless young people with mobile phones : values , form and function . In Proc . CHI , ACM ( 2011 ) , 1707 – 1716 . Session : Publics & Civic Virtues CHI 2012 , May 5 – 10 , 2012 , Austin , Texas , USA 1380