Current Biology 16 , 1924 – 1930 , October 10 , 2006 ª 2006 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 07 . 054 Report A Novel Mechanism for the Formation of Actin - Filament Bundles by a Nonprocessive Formin Alphe´e Michelot , 1 Emmanuel Derivery , 1 Rajaa Paterski - Boujemaa , 1 Christophe Gue´rin , 1 Shanjin Huang , 2 Franc¸ois Parcy , 1 Christopher J . Staiger , 2 and Laurent Blanchoin 1 , * 1 Departement Re´ponse et Dynamique Cellulaire Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire Ve´ge´tale Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique Universite´ Joseph Fourier F38054 Grenoble France 2 Department of Biological Sciences and The Bindley Bioscience Center Purdue University West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 - 2064 Summary Actin - ﬁlament bundles ( or cables ) have a structural role during cell division and morphogenesis , but also serve as important ‘‘tracks’’ for the transport of mate - rials during cytokinesis and polarized cell growth . However , the dynamic formation of these longitudinal actin - ﬁlament higher - order structures is not under - stood . Recently , several lines of evidence suggest that formins provide one avenue for the initiation of ac - tin cables in vivo [ 1 – 3 ] . A popular model for the mech - anism of polymerization of actin ﬁlaments by formin involves the processive movement of formin attached at the barbed end of an elongating ﬁlament [ 4 ] . In the presentstudy , weuseaninvitrosystemtoreconstitute the dynamic formation of actin - ﬁlament bundles gen - erated by Arabidopsis FORMIN1 ( AFH1 ) . To be able to visualize individual events in such a complex system , we used real - time evanescent - wave microscopy . Sur - prisingly , we ﬁnd that AFH1 is a nonprocessive formin that moves from the barbed end to the side of an actin ﬁlament after the nucleation event . We show why this new mechanism of nucleation by a member of the for - min family is important for bundle formation . Finally , we analyze the different parameters controlling the dynamic formation of such longitudinal actin - ﬁlament bundles . Results The Fluorescent Properties of Rhodamine - and Alexa - 532 - Labeled Actins Are Different We used total - internal - reﬂection ﬂuorescence micros - copy ( TIRFM ) to study the dynamic formation of actin - ﬁlament bundles induced by Arabidopsis FORMIN1 ( AFH1 ) . We focused our study on AFH1 , proﬁlin , and actin because they are sufﬁcient to reconstitute such structures in vitro [ 5 ] . To be able to distinguish individual molecular events in this complex system , in which over - lapping reactions contribute to actin - bundle formation ( including nucleation , elongation , and bundling ) , we used ﬂuorescent actin that was labeled on lysine resi - dues with rhodamine or Alexa dyes ( Figures 1A and 1B ; Movies S1 and S2 in the Supplemental Data avail - able online ) . The Alexa - 532 - actin ﬂuorescence intensity decreased rapidly as a result of photobleaching , gener - ating actin ﬁlaments with a comet - like appearance ( Fig - ures 1B and 1C ( bottom curve ) ; Movie S2 ) where the subunits near the growing ends are always brighter ( Figure 1B ; Movie S2 ) . By comparison , actin ﬁlaments generated with rhodamine - labeled monomers main - tained a more homogenous ﬂuorescence intensity over the same period of observation ( i . e . , 20 min ; Figures 1A and 1C ( top curve ) ; Movie S1 ) . Thus , Alexa - 532 - actin appears to be a useful probe for identifying and monitor - ing polymerization at the barbed end of actin ﬁlaments . AFH1 Is a Nonprocessive Formin We used both types of ﬂuorescent actins bound to an excess of proﬁlin to study the initial steps ( i . e . , nucle - ation and elongation ) of ﬁlament assembly prior to ac - tin - bundle formation . We focused our attention on actin ﬁlaments initiated by AFH1 at the surface of the cover glass by tracking ﬁlaments that remained attached by or near their end at the initial point of nucleation ( Figures 2A and 2B ; Movies S3 and S4 ) . In this assay , it was pos - sible to visualize multiple nucleation events from the same area ( % 0 . 012 m m 2 ) of the glass slide ( red arrows , Figures 2A and 2B ) . This is characteristic of the nucleat - ing activity of AFH1 ( Figure 2 ; Movies S3 and S4 ; [ 5 ] ) . We were able to resolve each individual nucleation event when Alexa - 532 - labeled actin was polymerized in the presence of AFH1 ( red arrow , Figure 2B ; Movie S4 ) . By analysis of the ﬂuorescence intensity at the origin of nu - cleation ( Figure 2B , red arrow ) , we obtained a perfect correlation between the number of ﬂuorescent pulses ( i . e . , ﬁve ) at the origin of nucleation ( Figure 2C ) and the number of actin ﬁlaments growing from this origin ( Fig - ure 2B , yellow arrows ) . These results indicate that , in some cases , there may be more than a dimer of AFH1 at the origin of nucleation allowing the ability to nucleate multiple actin ﬁlaments . Alternatively , each dimer of AFH1 may be capable of nucleating in succession sev - eral actin ﬁlaments . The distribution of nucleation events that were from the same origin and were analyzed from TIRFM experiments is similar for two different concen - trations of AFH1 and typically ranged from 1 to 5 ( Fig - ure 2D ) , with a few larger structures representing less than 1 % of the total events . It is also instructive to consider the polarity of Alexa - 532 - labeled actin ﬁlaments generated by AFH1 . Surpris - ingly , the brightest part of actin ﬁlaments ( yellow arrows , Figure 2B ; Movie S4 ) , corresponding to the growing barbed ends , always moves away from the initial origin of nucleation ( red arrow ) as the ﬁlaments elongate at a rate of 8 . 1 6 1 . 2 m M 2 1 s 2 1 . The polarity of actin ﬁlaments * Correspondence : laurent . blanchoin @ cea . fr generated by AFH1 was identical regardless of whether a single or multiple nucleating events occurred from the same site ( data not shown ) . This is different from nucle - ation by a processive formin , such as mDia2 , where the brightest part of the ﬁlament remains at the origin of nucleation ( red arrow , Movie S5 ; e . g . , [ 6 ] ) . Indeed , with a processive formin , labeled actin monomers are contin - uously inserted between the actin - ﬁlament barbed end and the formin attached at the glass slide ( [ 6 ] ; Movies S5 and S6 ) . Moreover , all processive formins tested until now modify the rate of elongation at the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments in the presence of proﬁlin ( [ 7 , 8 ] ; Movie S6 ) . In our case , the rate of elongation at the barbed ends was similar for actin ﬁlaments nucleated in the presence or absence of AFH1 : k + = 7 . 8 6 1 . 2 m M 2 1 s 2 1 for Alexa - 532 - labeled actin bound to proﬁlin ( Figure 1B ) and k + = 8 . 1 6 1 . 2 m M 2 1 s 2 1 for Alexa - 532 - labeled actin bound to proﬁlin in presence of AFH1 ( Figure 2B ) . By comparison , the rate of elongation increased from k + = 5 . 9 6 0 . 7 m M 2 1 s 2 1 for rhodamine actin bound to proﬁlin up to k + = 24 . 5 m M 2 1 s 2 1 for rhodamine actin bound to proﬁlin in the presence of mDia1 ( Movie S6 ) . Finally , the presence of both NEM - myosin and processive for - mins ( mDia1 or mDia2 ) attached to the cover glass often induces a buckling of actin ﬁlaments ( [ 6 ] ; Movies S5 and S6 ) . No buckling events were observed for AFH1 [ 5 ] . An elongation assay performed in the presence of capped barbed ends shows that AFH1 does not bind to ﬁlament pointed ends ( Figure S2 ) . This discounts the possibility that AFH1 is nucleating like the Arp2 / 3 complex , i . e . , re - maining attached to pointed ends . Moreover , annealing events can be observed on elongating ﬁlaments gener - ated by AFH1 in agreement with AFH1 not ‘‘surﬁng’’ at the elongated barbed end of an actin ﬁlament ( Figure 2A , pink arrows ; Movie S4 ) . AFH1 Attached to the Side of a Pre - existing Actin Filament Is Able to Nucleate New Filaments The nonprocessivity of AFH1 may be explained by its high afﬁnity for the side of actin ﬁlaments ( K d = 0 . 13 m M ; [ 5 ] ) . To better understand the mechanism of action of AFH1 , we determined whether AFH1 bound to the side of an actin ﬁlament was able to nucleate new actin ﬁlaments . After the addition of rhodamine - labeled actin monomers bound to proﬁlin , we observed dense poly - merization from AFH1 bound to pre - existing ﬁlaments , whereas almost no polymerization was detected on other parts of the slide ( Figure 3A ; Movie S7 ) . This strongly suggests that AFH1 bound to actin ﬁlaments is able to nucleate new actin ﬁlaments . Using pyrene ﬂuorescence , we conﬁrmed this hypothesis by a ki - netic - polymerization assay from actin seeds . The poly - merization of pyrene - labeled actin monomers from a mixture of actin ﬁlaments or actin ﬁlaments bound to Arabidopsis VILLIN1 ( another actin - ﬁlament side - bind - ing protein but with no nucleating activity ; [ 9 ] ) elongated at the same rate ( Figure 3B ) . However , the polymeriza - tion is faster when actin ﬁlaments are incubated with AFH1 ( Figure 3B ) . This is consistent with AFH1 being an active nucleator when bound to the side of a pre - existing actin ﬁlament . The use of Alexa - 532 - labeled actin allowed us to visu - alize individual nucleation events ( red arrow , Figure 4C ) during the polymerization of actin ﬁlaments from Alexa - 532 - phalloidin - labeled actin ﬁlaments decorated with AFH1 ( Figure 4B : Movie S12 ) . Actin ﬁlaments nucleated from the side of the pre - existing ﬁlaments have their brightest ends ( yellow arrows , Figure 4B ) moving away from the origin of nucleation on the pre - existing ﬁla - ments ( red arrow , Figure 4B ) , in agreement with the nonprocessivity of AFH1 . Figure 1 . The Fluorescent Properties of Actin Filaments Labeled with Rhodamine or Alexa - 532 Fluorophores Are Different Conditions : NEM - myosin was attached to the cover glass before addition into the ﬂow cell of 0 . 75 m M rhodamine - labeled actin or Alexa - labeled actin monomer in the presence of 1 . 5 m M proﬁlin . Images were taken at the indicated time during polymerization . ( A ) Time - lapse evanescent - wave microscopy of rhodamine - labeled actinpolymerization . The stabilityof the ﬂuorophore bound toactin enabled us to visualize the whole polymerization process as well as the resulting actin ﬁlaments . ( B ) Time - lapse evanescent - wave microscopy of Alexa - 532 - labeled actin polymerization . The comet - like appearance of actin ﬁlaments is due to the photobleaching of the ﬂuorophore . We were able to follow only the newly polymerized part of the ﬁlaments . This does , however , favor the identiﬁcation of the growing barbed ends . ( C ) VariationoftheﬂuorescenceintensityovertimeforbothlabeledactinsunderTIRFM . Thetypicalphotobleachingtimescaleistentimeslonger for rhodamine actin ( top ‘‘noisy’’ curve ) than for Alexa - 532 actin ( bottom ‘‘noisy’’ curve ) as determined by the exponential decay of ﬂuorescence ( blue curve for rhodamine actin , red curve for Alexa - 532 actin ) . Scale bars represent 5 m m . Actin - Bundle Formation by Nonprocessive FORMIN1 1925 To visualize the location of AFH1 during nucleation and subsequent elongation events , we incubated rho - damine - phalloidin - labeled actin ﬁlaments with a con - struct where AFH1 is fused to green ﬂuorescence protein ( GFP ) . At steady state , GFP - AFH1 associated with actin - ﬁlament bundles at numerous locations ( Figure 3C ) . By TIRFM , we observed that GFP - AFH1 re - mains bound to the side of the pre - existing ﬁlaments after nucleation of new ﬁlaments ( Figure 3D ; Movie S8 ) , consistent with nonprocessivity and with the ability of AFH1 to simultaneously bind the side of ﬁlaments and nucleate . Figure 2 . AFH1 Is a Nonprocessive Formin Conditions : AFH1 , FH1 - FH2 - Cter ( 40 nM ) , was attached to the cover glass before addition into the ﬂow cell of 0 . 75 m M rhodamine - or Alexa - 532 - labeled actin monomer in the presence of 1 . 5 m M proﬁlin . Images were taken at the indicated time during polymerization . ( A ) Time - lapse evanescent - wave microscopy of rhodamine - labeled actin polymerization in the presence of AFH1 . The origin of nucleation by AFH1 is indicated by a red arrow . Filaments that have grown out from the origin of nucleation are indicated by yellow arrows . The rates of elon - gation for these ﬁlaments are typical of barbed - end growth ( i . e . , 8 . 1 m M 2 1 s 2 1 ) , and an annealing event is visible at the elongating barbed end of an actin ﬁlament ( pink arrows ) . ( B ) Time - lapse evanescent - wave microscopy of Alexa - 532 - actin polymerization in the presence of AFH1 . Actin - ﬁlament barbed ends ( yellow arrows ) are moving away from the initial origin of nucleation ( red arrow ) , showing the nonprocessive behavior of AFH1 . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of ﬂuorescence intensity at the origin of nucleation ( red arrow in [ B ] ) enables us to distinguish ﬁve consecutive pulses of ﬂuo - rescence corresponding to ﬁve nucleation events and the ﬁve resulting actin ﬁlaments in [ B ] . ( D ) Quantiﬁcation of the relative frequency of nucleation events from the same origin of nucleation . Differently colored bars represent two different concentrations of AFH1 attached to the cover glass in independent experiments ( orange , 40 nM AFH1 and purple , 100 nM ) . This dis - tribution was similar for AFH1 , GST - FH1 - FH2 - His , and His - FH1 - FH2 - His constructs , ruling out a possible effect of GST on the behavior of AFH1 . Scale bars in ( A ) and ( B ) represent 5 m m . Current Biology 1926 AFH1 Induces Actin - Bundle Formation by Promoting the ‘‘Zippering’’ of Actin Filaments We next studied the dynamic formation of actin bundles generated by AFH1 ( Figures 4A and 4B ; Movies S9 , S11 , and S12 ) . The bundling activity of AFH1 depends upon the presence of an FH1 domain [ 5 ] ; however , FH1 do - main alone does not bind actin monomers or ﬁlaments ( data not shown ) . Three events are particularly clear during the kinetic formation of actin bundles . First , the ﬂuorescence intensity of the original actin ﬁlament in - creased dramatically over time , in agreement with the continuous nucleation of new actin ﬁlaments by AFH1 attached to the side of the pre - existing actin ﬁlament ( Figure 4A ; Movie S9 ) . Second , the formation of actin bundles required a ‘‘zippering’’ event near the tip of growing barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 4A , Figure 3 . AFH1 Has Nucleation Activity When Bound to the Side of an Actin Filament ( A ) AFH1isabletonucleatenewﬁlamentsfromthesidesofapre - existingﬁlament . Conditions : Alexa - 532 - phalloidin - labeledactinﬁlaments ( 180 nM ) were incubated for 30 s with 50 nM AFH1 and then immobilized on the coverslip of a ﬂow cell blocked with 1 % BSA . Polymerization was initiated by the addition of 0 . 75 m M actin monomers ( rhodamine - labeled ) and 1 . 5 m M proﬁlin . Images were taken at the indicated time during polymerization . Numerous polymerization events were observed from the pre - existing ﬁlaments decorated with AFH1 , whereas almost no polymerization was observed on the surrounding part of the cover glass . ( B ) AFH1 nucleates actin - ﬁlament formation with the same efﬁciency whether it is free or bound to pre - existing ﬁlaments . To demonstrate that AFH1 bound to ﬁlaments was able to nucleate ﬁlaments with the same efﬁciency as free AFH1 , we conducted pyrene - actin polymerization assays with 2 m M actin and 2 m M proﬁlin alone ( black ) , with 10 nM AFH1 ( yellow ) , with 50 nM phalloidin ﬁlaments ( red ) , with 50 nM phalloidin ﬁlaments and 10 nM AtVILLIN1 ( green ) , or with 50 nM phalloidin ﬁlaments and 10 nM AFH1 ( blue ) . The concentration of actin - ﬁlament barbed ends generated from each experiment was 0 . 016 nM for 10 nM AFH1 alone , 0 . 014 nM for 50 nM phalloidin actin ﬁlaments , 0 . 016 nM for 50 nM phalloidin actin ﬁlaments with 10 nM AtVILLIN1 , and 0 . 034 nM for 50 nM phalloidin actin ﬁlaments with 10 nM AFH1 . ( C ) Direct visualization of actin - ﬁlament bundles decorated with GFP - AFH1 . Actin was polymerized with GFP - AFH1 for 30min in the presence of rhodamine phalloidin and then diluted to 10 nM before observation with wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopy . ( D ) GFP - AFH1 can nucleate new actin ﬁlaments when bound to theside of a pre - existing ﬁlament . Rhodamine - phalloidin - labeled actinﬁlaments ( 180nM ) werepreincubatedwith50nMGFP - AFH1andthenimmobilizedonthecoverglassoftheﬂowcellbeforeadditionof0 . 75 m Mrhodamine - labeled actin and 1 . 5 m M proﬁlin . By rapidly switching between laser illumination of the evanescent wave ( to observe polymerization ) and wide - ﬁeld ﬂuorescence microscopy ( to visualize GFP - AFH1 ) , we were able to monitor actin - ﬁlament growth ( yellow arrows ) at a rate of elonga - tion = 8 6 1 m M 2 1 s 2 1 from GFP - AFH1 ( red arrow ) bound to the side of pre - existing ﬁlaments . Scale bars represent 5 m m in ( A ) and ( C ) and 2 m m in ( D ) . Actin - Bundle Formation by Nonprocessive FORMIN1 1927 Figure 4 . Dynamic Formation of Actin - Filament Bundles by AFH1 Conditions : Rhodamine - phalloidin - labeled actin ﬁlaments ( 180 nM ) were incubated with 50 nM AFH1 and then immobilized on the coverslip of a ﬂow cell blocked with 1 % BSA . To allow ﬁlament assembly , we added 0 . 75 m M actin monomers ( rhodamine - labeled ) and 1 . 5 m M proﬁlin to the ﬂow cell . Images were taken at the indicated time during polymerization . ( A ) Time - lapse evanescent - wave microscopy ofthe formationof actin bundles by AFH1 . A wave of ﬂuorescent ﬁlaments emanates from the pre - existing actin ﬁlament consistent with actin nucleation by AFH1 bound to the original actin ﬁlament . Zippering of actin ﬁlaments occurs near the growing barbed ends ( yellow arrows ) and favors actin - ﬁlament - bundle formation . ( B ) Alexa - 532 - labeled actin allowed us to understand the mechanism of formation of actin bundles . Conditions : Alexa - 532 - phalloidin - labeled actinﬁlaments ( 180nM ) werepre - incubatedwith50nMAFH1andthenimmobilizedonthecoverslipofaﬂowcellblockedwith1 % BSA . Toallow assembly , we added 0 . 75 m M actin monomers ( Alexa - 532 - labeled ) and 1 . 5 m M proﬁlin . AFH1 favors a ‘‘clustered’’ nucleation of actin ﬁlaments ( redarrow ) thataresubsequentlyzipperedtogether ( yellowarrows ) whileelongating . Thiszipperingeffectleadstoarandomorganizationofactin ﬁlaments in the nucleation zone , but favors a parallel actin - ﬁlament organization away from the origin of nucleation . The rates of elongation for individual actin ﬁlaments before their integration into the bundle or when extending along another actin ﬁlament were the same ( i . e . , 5 . 5 6 1 . 5 m M 2 1 s 2 1 ) , suggesting that the growth of actin ﬁlaments inside the bundles was not sterically limited . Scale bars represent 5 m m . ( C ) Modelforthe dynamic formation ofactinbundles by nonprocessiveFORMIN1 ( AFH1 ) . We propose that AFH1movesfromthe endtotheside of an actin ﬁlament after nucleation by an uncharacterized mechanism ( steps 1 and 2 ) . AFH1 bound to the side of a pre - existing ﬁlament can nucleate a new actin ﬁlament ( step 3 ) and organizes actin ﬁlaments into bundles ( steps 4 and 5 ) . Thermal ﬂuctuations favor ﬁlament - ﬁlament interaction ( red arrows , step 4 ) . However , the stiffness of actin - ﬁlament structure inhibits the amplitude of the thermal ﬂuctuation ( decreased size of red arrows , step 5 ) and induces branch formation ( step 5 ) . The direction of the zippering follows actin - ﬁlament elongation ( black arrows , step 5 ) . Actin bundles are in antiparallel orientation near the origin ( pink zones , step 5 ) of nucleation and in parallel orientation away from the origin of nucleation ( blue zone , step 5 ) . Current Biology 1928 yellow arrows ; Movie S9 ) . Third , this zippering of actin ﬁlaments is promoted by AFH1 that favors a ‘‘clustered’’ nucleation of actin ﬁlaments ( Figures 4A and 4B ) and by the Brownian motion that promotes actin - ﬁlament con - tact ( Figure 4A , yellow arrows ; Movie S9 ) . Similar exper - iments done with mammalian mDia2 demonstrate that mDia2 is able to generate actin bundles , in agreement with a previous report [ 10 ] . Like AFH1 , mDia2 is able to nucleate a new actin ﬁlament when bound to the side of a pre - existing ﬁlament . Distinct from AFH1 , mDia2 generates actin ﬁlaments that buckle , consistent with it being processive while bound to the side of a pre - existing ﬁlament ( Movie S10 ) . AFH1 Organizes Actin Filaments into Antiparallel and / or Parallel Bundles The use of Alexa - 532 actin was crucial for studying the polarity of individual actin ﬁlaments during the formation of bundles . Speciﬁcally , the rapid decrease of the ﬂuo - rescence from Alexa - 532 actin enabled us to follow the growth of individual actin ﬁlaments inside or along the actin bundles ( Figure 4B , yellow arrows ; Movie S12 ) . The brightest parts of actin ﬁlaments , corresponding to the elongating barbed ends ( rate of elongation , 5 . 5 6 1 . 5 m M 2 1 s 2 1 ) , were observed to pass each other near the origin of nucleation , suggesting that some of the ac - tin ﬁlaments that form actin bundles were in antiparallel orientation ( Figure 4B ; Movie S12 ) . However , as actin ﬁl - aments elongated , all the barbed ends were growing away from the origin of nucleation generating parallel bundles ( Figure 4B ; Movie S12 ) . During the full process of actin - ﬁlament - bundle formation , no sliding of poly - merized ﬁlaments was observed , suggesting that actin ﬁlaments are crosslinked at least at the original point of nucleation . Discussion This study reports on a unique mechanism for a member of the formin family of actin nucleators . Remarkably , af - ter nucleation of an actin ﬁlament , AFH1 does not remain attached to the growing barbed end as would be ex - pected for a processive nucleator , but rather it moves to the side of the actin ﬁlament , thereby releasing the barbed end . This behavior is independent of the pres - ence of proﬁlin ( data not shown ) . We suggest that this mechanism of action is favored by the strong afﬁnity of AFH1 for the side of an actin ﬁlament ( K d = 0 . 13 m M ; [ 5 ] ) . AFH1 does bind with a higher afﬁnity to the actin - ﬁlament barbed end ( K d = 40 nM ; [ 5 ] ) ; however , the con - centration of barbed ends is at least an order of magni - tude lower than the concentration of binding sites along the side of an actin ﬁlament . AFH1 - FH1 - FH2 was unable to completely block assembly at ﬁlament barbed ends in an elongation assay or inhibit capping by Arabidopsis capping protein ( AtCP ) ( Figure S2 ; [ 5 ] ) . Moreover , its nu - cleation activity is completely abolished in the presence of an equimolar amount of capping protein , consistent with weak or transient binding to ﬁlament barbed ends [ 5 ] . From the current work , we cannot make any ﬁrm conclusions about the exact mechanism of nucleation by AFH1 , because the resolution of the TIRFM assay is around 0 . 5 m m ( about 166 subunits long ) . AFH1 may act as a processive formin in an early step ( i . e . , actin ﬁlaments less than z 100 subunits long ) and then slides to the side in a time scale not observable in our assay . Other formins including mammalian FRL1 and mDia2 [ 10 ] and yeast Bnr1 [ 11 ] have been shown to bind to the side and generate ﬁlament bundles . However , the af - ﬁnity for the interaction with the side of an actin ﬁlament varies substantially , from the tight binding of AFH1 and FRL1 , ( K d w 0 . 1 m M ; [ 12 ] ) to the weak binding of mDia1 ( K d w 3 m M ; [ 12 ] ) . Recent work suggests that FRL1 shares the same region for side binding and end binding , whereas mDia2 has different regions responsible for each activity [ 10 ] . We report here that mDia2 is still proc - essive when bound to the side of an actin ﬁlament ( Movie 10 ) . However , we cannot exclude in the case of mDia2 that the side binding may affect quantitatively its nucleating activity and / or processivity , in which case the importance of the side - binding versus proces - sive nucleation needs further investigation . Obviously more works need to be done on the structural relation - ship between ﬁlament side binding , nucleation , and processive elongation . Nevertheless , AFH1 seems to be the ﬁrst example of a formin family member that does not exhibit processive behavior at ﬁlament ends . The direct visualization with TIRFM of bundle forma - tion by AFH1 provides insight into the tight relationship between nonprocessivity and the mechanism of bundle formation . We have developed a simple model ( Fig - ure 4C ) that predicts a general mechanism for the dy - namic formation of actin bundles . The mechanism of bundle formation proposed for AFH1 is somewhat simi - lar to a model for the formation of ﬁlopodia - like bundles invitroandinvivo [ 13 , 14 ] . However , themodelforﬁlopo - dia - like bundles requires tight coordination between an activated nucleator ( Arp2 / 3 complex ) and a bundler ( fas - cin ) . Here , a single protein accomplishes both functions . Two important physical phenomena may contribute to the zippering mechanism ( Figure 4C , black arrows ) and will affect the bundling efﬁciency independent of the presence of actin - binding proteins . First , the Brownian motion , which induces thermal ﬂuctuations of the grow - ing ends , possibly favors to some extent the ﬁlament - ﬁl - ament interaction ( Figure 4C , red arrows ) . Further , we might imagine that if the thermal ﬂuctuations of actin ﬁl - amentsaretoogreat , actinﬁlamentscomingintocontact with each other may break or dissociate from the bun - dles . Second , the overall ﬂexibility of an actin ﬁlament is a potential determinant of bundle formation . Our re - sults suggest that there is a critical stiffness of actin ﬁl - aments organized into bundles above which thermal ﬂuctuationsaretooweaktoinducethezippering . There - sultingeffect isthegenerationofthick branches fromthe original bundles ( Figure 4C , Step 5 , branches 1 and 2 ) . Using Alexa - 532 - labeled actin , we determined that actin bundles have a random polarity at the origin of nu - cleation ( Figure 4C , pink zones ) , but as actin ﬁlaments elongate , all barbed ends become oriented in the same direction at both ends of the bundles ( Figure 4C , blue zone ) . The overall polarity of bundles is therefore mostly parallel . FRL1 and mDia2 generate bundles with a random orientation [ 10 ] . The use of Alexa - 532 actin in TIRFM will be of a great interest in the future to study the dynamic behavior of higher - order actin - based structures . For example , this probe could facilitate understanding of the coordination Actin - Bundle Formation by Nonprocessive FORMIN1 1929 between bundles of actin ﬁlaments generated by for - mins and actin - ﬁlament networks generated by Arp2 / 3 complex . Finally , we should pay particular attention to the role of contractile proteins in the regulation of the dynamic formation of higher - order actin - ﬁlament arrays . As a starting point , we report here that interaction of actin bundles with myosin II is a possible mechanism for bundle dissociation ( Movie S11 ) . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include Experimental Procedures , two ﬁgures , and twelve movies and are available with this article online at : http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 16 / 19 / 1924 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments We thank Dr . Robert Robinson for his advice on the model of actin - ﬁlament bundling by AFH1 . We are grateful to Dr . Henry N . Higgs for providing mammalian formins and for performing analytical ultra - centrifugation experiments with AFH1 . This work was funded through grants from the Actions The´matiques et Initiatives sur Pro - grammes et Equipes Plus ( ATIP + ) and Contract Plan Epargne Re´ - gion to L . B . and from the National Research Initiative of the USDA Cooperative State Research , Education , and Extension Service , grant number 2002 - 35304 - 12412 to C . J . S . Received : April 20 , 2006 Revised : June 28 , 2006 Accepted : July 21 , 2006 Published : October 9 , 2006 References 1 . Evangelista , M . , Zigmond , S . , and Boone , C . ( 2003 ) . Formins : Signaling effectors for assembly and polarization of actin ﬁla - ments . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 2603 – 2611 . 2 . Sagot , I . , Rodal , A . A . , Moseley , J . , Goode , B . L . , and Pellman , D . ( 2002 ) . An actin nucleation mechanism mediated by Bni1 and proﬁlin . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 626 – 631 . 3 . Kobielak , A . , Pasolli , H . A . , and Fuchs , E . ( 2004 ) . Mammalian for - min - 1 participates in adherens junctions and polymerization of linear actin cables . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 21 – 30 . 4 . Zigmond , S . H . , Evangelista , M . , Boone , C . , Yang , C . , Dar , A . C . , Sicheri , F . , Forkey , J . , and Pring , M . ( 2003 ) . Formin leaky cap al - lows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1820 – 1823 . 5 . Michelot , A . , Guerin , C . , Huang , S . , Ingouff , M . , Richard , S . , Rodiuc , N . , Staiger , C . J . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2005 ) . The formin homology 1 domain modulates the actin nucleation and bun - dlingactivityofArabidopsisFORMIN1 . PlantCell 17 , 2296 – 2313 . 6 . Kovar , D . R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2004 ) . Insertionalassembly of ac - tin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 14725 – 14730 . 7 . Romero , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2004 ) . Formin is a processive motor that re - quires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 – 429 . 8 . Kovar , D . R . , Harris , E . S . , Mahaffy , R . , Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 , 423 – 435 . 9 . Huang , S . , Robinson , R . C . , Gao , L . Y . , Matsumoto , T . , Brunet , A . , Blanchoin , L . , andStaiger , C . J . ( 2005 ) . ArabidopsisVILLIN1gen - erates actin ﬁlament cables that are resistant to depolymeriza - tion . Plant Cell 17 , 486 – 501 . 10 . Harris , E . S . , Rouiller , I . , Hanein , D . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2006 ) . Mechanistic differences in actin bundling activity of two mam - malian formins , FRL1 and mDia2 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 14383 – 14392 . 11 . Moseley , J . B . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2005 ) . Differential activities and regulation of S . cerevisiae formins Bni1 and Bnr1 by Bud6 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 28023 – 28033 . 12 . Harris , E . S . , Li , F . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2004 ) . The mouse formin , FRLalpha , slows actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation , com - petes with capping protein , accelerates polymerization from monomers , and severs ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 20076 – 20087 . 13 . Vignjevic , D . , Yarar , D . , Welch , M . D . , Peloquin , J . , Svitkina , T . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Formation of ﬁlopodia - like bundles in vitro from a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 951 – 962 . 14 . Haviv , L . , Brill - Karniely , Y . , Mahaffy , R . , Backouche , F . , Ben - Shaul , A . , Pollard , T . D . , and Bernheim - Groswasser , A . ( 2006 ) . Reconstitution of the transition from lamellipodium to ﬁlopo - dium in a membrane - free system . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 4906 – 4911 . Current Biology 1930