135 Chapter 11 Mechanical Measurements on Living Plant Cells by Micro - indentation with Cellular Force Microscopy Anne - Lise Routier - Kierzkowska and Richard S . Smith Abstract Indentation methods on the micro - and nanoscale are increasingly used to assess mechanical properties of living plant tissues . These techniques rely on recording the force resulting from indenting the cell surface with a small probe . Depending on the scale of indentation and the indenter shape , force - indentation data will reﬂ ect several factors such as cell wall elasticity , turgor pressure , cell and tip geometry , and contact angle . Cellular force microscopy is a micro - indentation method that was designed to precisely measure and apply forces on living plant cells . Here we explain how to use this method to map the apparent stiffness in single cells and tissues . Key words Plant mechanics , Micro - indentation , Turgor pressure , Primary cell wall , Elastic modulus , Stiffness , Mechanosensing 1 Introduction The variety of plant cell shape and growth patterns can be attrib - uted to two primary factors , turgor pressure and cell wall mechani - cal properties . The cell walls , which are only a few hundred nanometers thick , support large tensile stresses ( 100 – 1 , 000 atm ) created by the high internal turgor pressure , typically 3 – 10 atm [ 1 ] . Different methods have been used to measure mechanical properties of the primary cell wall and turgor pressure [ 2 , 3 ] . Indentation methods can be used to measure cellular mechanical properties by deforming the cell surface with an indenter while monitoring both force and tip displacement . These methods are used at various scales , either deforming the whole cell with a large probe or indenting the cell wall very locally with a sharp needle . Compression of whole cells is used to evaluate turgor pressure as well as cell wall elasticity and wall strength , i . e . , the force needed to rupture it [ 4 – 8 ] . Nano - indentation experiments , on the other hand , rely on very localized indentation of the cell wall with the sharp tip of an atomic force microscope ( AFM ) to deduce wall Viktor Žárský and Fatima Cvrcˇková ( eds . ) , Plant Cell Morphogenesis : Methods and Protocols , Methods in Molecular Biology , vol . 1080 , DOI 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 62703 - 643 - 6 _ 11 , © Springer Science + Business Media New York 2014 136 elasticity [ 9 – 11 ] . Micro - indentation techniques are situated in between , measuring both the effects of turgor pressure , cell wall in - plane elasticity , and local compression of the cell wall [ 12 – 19 ] . The cell geometry and tip shape also have an inﬂ uence on cell deformation and the force measured . Mechanical models are needed in order to interpret the data and untangle the contribution of different factors on the force - indentation curves [ 13 , 15 – 18 ] . Cellular force microscopy ( CFM ) has been designed for force - indentation measurements on living plant tissues [ 15 , 16 , 20 ] . CFM can be used to measure a large range of forces ( sub to hun - dreds of microNewtons ) , can make large displacements ( up to cen - timeters ) , and is well adapted to the high forces involved in the measurement of stiffness on turgid plant cells . The CFM can also be used as a plant microsurgery device by applying forces sufﬁ cient to puncture the cell wall . The robot consists of a capacitive force sensor mounted on a 3 - axis piezo positioner . The system is auto - mated and offers a high resolution in position ( nanometer scale ) and force ( sub microNewton ) . CFM can be used to scan the sam - ple surface and extract its shape , as well as measure stiffness from the analysis of force - indentation curves ( Fig . 1 ) . The setup can easily be integrated with light microscopy for simultaneous imag - ing during the measurements . Large probe length ( 1 – 2 mm ) allows measurement in liquids and increases probe access on curved sam - ples . The robot can also be used to mechanically stimulate the cells by applying a controlled force or deformation for a certain period of time . Here we will focus on stiffness measurements in single cells and tissues in liquid . During a typical measurement with CFM , the sample surface position is ﬁ rst detected , and then a force - indentation curve is acquired for the stiffness measurement . CFM offers two possibili - ties for detection of sample surface : it may be based on a change in force or stiffness . The force criterion assumes that the force is close to zero before touching the sample and rises only if there is contact with the surface . For measurements in liquid , however , the surface tension of water creates a force on the sensor tip , up to several microNewtons . In this case , a stiffness threshold can be used , with the stiffness coming from surface tension usually in the range of 0 . 01 – 0 . 1 N / m . This mode of surface detection can also be used to avoid issues due to sensor voltage drift caused by light , tempera - ture , and other environmental inﬂ uences . Once the surface has been detected , the offset on the force before contact ( e . g . , due to liquid surface tension ) can be computed and used to correct the force readout . Force - indentation data is then acquired by slowly indenting the probe into the sample until a predeﬁ ned force thresh - old or indentation depth is reached . The robotic positioner has two modes of actuation , stepping mode and scanning mode . Stepping mode involves a stick - slip movement and is used for large displacements , but it is jittery due to Anne - Lise Routier - Kierzkowska and Richard S . Smith 137 repositioning of the piezo crystal against the rails . Scanning mode is preferred for the stiffness measurements as the movement is smooth and very precise . The CFM actuator has closed loop positioning , implemented with an internal optical sensor , allowing movements towards a predeﬁ ned position , with precision in the nm range . Proper setup preparation and calibration are important factors for data quality . The force sensor is composed of four springs that deﬂ ect under load , changing the distance between pairs of combs on the sensor which act as capacitors ( Fig . 2 ) . This movement , as well as the slight deﬂ ection of other elements of the setup ( e . g . , connecting parts , probe tip ) , results in a difference between the actual displacement of the sensor tip and the position reported by the actuator itself . It is therefore necessary to quantify the inherent sensor stiffness by measuring force against displacement while indenting a very stiff sample ( e . g . , a piece of glass or metal ) . Fig . 1 Examples of data obtained with CFM on onion epidermal peels . The apparent stiffness is dependent on the angle of indentation . Comparison of stiffness values should be done only for data obtained on surfaces almost perpendicular to the sensor axis ( e . g . , angle < 10° ) Cellular Force Microscopy on Living Plant Cells 138 Sample preparation consists in immobilizing the tissue and providing experimental conditions for the sample that result in a stable turgor pressure within the cells . This will prevent move - ments during the experiments that would cause aberrant surface reconstruction and biased force measurements ( Fig . 3c , d ) . The manipulations should be as noninvasive as possible and ensure a large contact area between the sample and a stiff substrate . Be aware that samples may react to light or gravity with a fast growth response that could result in non - negligible movements and dis - turb the measurements . The choice of parameters for the experiment depends on the sample dimensions , its stiffness , and the time available before the sample starts moving . The force - indentation curves are sensitive to the indentation angle , and any comparison of results should be Fig . 2 CFM setup combined with an inverted microscope . ( a ) The force sensor is connected to a 3 - axis actuator by aluminum arms . A digital microscope is used to monitor sensor immersion into liquid from the side . ( b ) Close up on the force sensor . The tungsten needle ( on the right ) is glued to the sensor tip . Sensor cantilevers ( red arrows ) deﬂ ect when a load is applied to the tip , changing the distance between capacitor plates . Scale bar = 300 μ m . ( c ) Side view of the custom stage supporting the CFM setup , above the microscope stage . The posts are directly connected to the nonmoving part of the microscope stage , in order to minimize the total thermal expansion of elements in between the sample and sensor tip . ( d ) The whole setup is placed on an anti - vibration table , isolated by a plexiglass enclosure and illuminated with LED sources outside the box Anne - Lise Routier - Kierzkowska and Richard S . Smith 139 made only for the parts of the sample which are perpendicular to the force sensor axis . This can be achieved by performing a scan grid of the tissue surface and detecting the surface slope ( Fig . 1 ) . The grid size and lateral resolution should be sufﬁ cient to recog - nize individual cells and compute the indentation angle accurately at each point . However , too high a resolution slows down the experiment and makes it more invasive . Force - indentation curves can be acquired up to a predeﬁ ned force threshold or indentation depth . The step size in Z direction should be adjusted so that the Fig . 3 The quality of experimental data depends on sample movement during the measurements . ( a , b ) Shows correct data , for a properly immobilized onion peel . The force - indentation curve ( a ) represents 3 loading / unloading cycles of a total duration of 7 s . The height map ( b ) reﬂ ects the proper shape of the sample ( here , two adjacent cells ) . ( c , d ) Shows artifacts in data acquired along a tomato stem that was laid horizontal for the experiment . The gravitropic response induced an upward movement of the sample . Force - indentation curve ( c ) shows a drift in the position during the 3 loading - unloading cycles , in contrast with the overlapping curves of the previous example ( a ) . The distance between curves at maximal force ( 7 μ N ) shows a movement of approximately 50 nm / s ( 3 μ m / min ) . The height map ( d ) presents a characteristic zigzag shape in the XZ plane . This artifact is due to the upward movement of the sample over time while the probe goes back and forth along the X - axis to scan the surface Cellular Force Microscopy on Living Plant Cells 140 curves contain enough points for data interpretation , and the max - imal deformation should be chosen such that the indentation is not too invasive for the cells , especially if the experiments have to be repeated ( time lapse study ) . Loading and unloading curves are often different and show hysteresis , which can be due to viscoelas - tic effects and / or adhesion between the tip and the sample . If load - ing and unloading cycles are repeated , a drift in the force - indentation curves may be due to creep ( irreversible , time - dependent deforma - tion ) , viscous effects , or sample movement ( Fig . 3c ) . Overlapping curves , on the other hand , indicate reversible ( elastic ) deforma - tions and proper stabilization of the sample ( Fig . 3a ) . During data analysis , the Z position is ﬁ rst corrected to account for sensor deﬂ ection under load , using the stiffness value obtained by measuring on glass or metal [ 15 ] . Further analysis of the raw force - indentation curves will depend on the experiment purpose , and different methods can be applied . The contact point can be detected based on a force or stiffness criterion or by ﬁ tting the entire force - indentation curve . Each method relies on the fact that the force - indentation curve presents two different regimes , before and after the contact point . Typically , values of force and stiffness are low before contact and present a nearly linear increase of force with indentation ( in the order of 10 −2 – 10 −1 N / m ) which is due to surface tension of the medium . After contact , the force rises sharply with indentation depth , often in a nonlinear fashion . The contact point can be poorly detected in very soft samples which do not largely differ in stiffness compared to values measured in liquid alone . Once the contact point has been detected , force - indentation curves can be used to extract an apparent stiffness or ﬁ t model curves . The apparent stiffness is useful for qualitative comparison between cells . The stiffness can be extracted as the tangent of force - indentation curves at a particular force or indentation depth [ 15 ] . Note that in that case no particular assumption is made on the exact shape of the force - indentation curves . In quantitative studies , the experimental data are ﬁ tted to simulated force - indentation curves obtained with a mechanical model [ 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 16 – 18 ] . Unique solutions for the cell wall elastic modulus or the turgor pressure can be obtained only if enough model parameters are known , such as the cell wall thickness , cell geometry , initial stretch ratio , and Poisson’s ratio . Depending on the timescale of indentation , it may also be required to consider cell wall permeability to water [ 4 , 7 ] . 2 Materials The actuator robot is a modular system composed of three linear micro - positioners ( SmarAct GmbH , SLC - 1780 ) and controller ( SmarAct GmbH , MCS - 3D ) . The controller has knobs for the manual positioning prior to experiments and a USB interface that 2 . 1 CFM Setup Anne - Lise Routier - Kierzkowska and Richard S . Smith 141 allows automated control during experiments . The capacitive force sensor ( FemtoTools GmbH , http : / / www . femtotools . com ) is mounted on a custom aluminum arm which is ﬁ xed to the micro - robot . We used the FT - S540 - type robot , which has a force range of ±180 μ N with a gain around 90 μ N / V , to perform noninvasive measurements . FemtoTools sensors from the current line are avail - able in ± 100 , ± 1 , 000 , and ± 10 , 000 μ N ranges . The sensors can be ordered with a variety of tungsten probes glued to the tip ( Picoprobe tungsten probe tips T - 4 - 22 / T - 4 - 35 / T - 4 - 60 , GGB industries Inc . , http : / / www . ggb . com ) . The probes stick out of the sensor by 1 – 2 mm . They are thin cylinders ( diameter from 22 to 60 μ m ) with conical tip that is rounded to a diameter of approxi - mately 1 – 3 μ m . The force signal is collected throughout a data acquisition card from National Instruments ( http : / / www . ni . com ) that is connected to the computer either by USB ( NI USB - 6009 ) or PCI ( NI PCIe - 6321 ) . The CFM robot used here was mounted on a custom - made stage ( optomechanical components from Thorlabs GmbH , http : / / www . thorlabs . com ) on the top of an inverted microscope ( Olympus IMT - 2 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . The whole setup sits on an anti - vibration table ( TMC 63 - 530 series , http : / / www . techmfg . com ) and is covered with a custom plexiglass box to minimize disturbance coming from acoustic vibrations and air currents . The table and setup are also electrically grounded . The light source for the microscope was replaced with LED rings ( AmScope , http : / / www . amscope . com ) placed on the top of the plexiglass enclosure to avoid sources of heat within the box . It is important to keep in mind that the capac - itive force sensors are sensitive to light . When choosing a light source , make sure that there will be no strong gradient in light that could affect force measurements . In case of CFM on inverted microscope , imaging in reﬂ ection mode can be an issue because the light beam is concentrated through the objective . Prefer trans - mission with light sources far away from the sensor . While per - forming force measurements in liquid , it is crucial to keep the capacitor plates and electronics of the sensor dry . A high magniﬁ ca - tion digital microscope ( DigiMicro 2 . 0 , dnt GmbH , http : / / www . dnt . de ) was used to provide a side view of the sensor tip ( Fig . 2 ) and check the liquid level . Make sure that the camera focal length is long enough for use with the setup ( a few cm ) . The controlling software comes in different versions , either cus - tom applications implemented in LabVIEW ( National Instruments , http : / / www . ni . com , used in ref . [ 15 ] ) or a stand - alone C + + library currently under development . The software is freely available from the authors ( http : / / www . MorphoRobotX . org ) . Flat samples , such as epidermal peels , can be immobilized using laboratory tags ( Tough - Tags , Diversiﬁ ed Biotech , http : / / divbio . com ) . Otherwise , they can be partially embedded in 2 . 2 Biological Samples Cellular Force Microscopy on Living Plant Cells 142 high - concentration ( 2 % or more ) low - melting - point agarose ( Sigma - Aldrich , http : / / www . sigmaaldrich . com ) ; make sure that the sample surface is not below the agarose surface . Slides coated with a tissue section adhesive ( Biobond , BBInternational , http : / / www . buybbi . com ) improve adhesion of single cells , such as tobacco culture cells , on the substrate . Cell viability can be checked with propidium iodide ( 0 . 1 % ) staining ( Sigma - Aldrich , http : / / www . sigmaaldrich . com ) or , if the cells are large and transparent enough , by monitoring cytoplasmic streaming visually . 3 Methods In this section we describe how to produce stiffness maps on sam - ples immersed in liquid with a CFM setup mounted on an inverted microscope . Other applications , such as cell puncture or samples that require a horizontal setup to avoid gravitropism , are men - tioned in the notes . It is crucial to make sure that the setup and sensor are working cor - rectly before each experiment . A good practice is to position the robot , mount the sensor , arrange the lighting , and make all the necessary connections to the computer , and then let the sensor stiffness calibration run while preparing the biological samples : 1 . Let the entire system warm up in order to stabilize the tem - perature and minimize thermal expansion . Leave doors and windows closed ; turn on all lights and equipment that will be used during the experiment several hours before use . 2 . Mount the sensor ( see Note 1 for choice of sensor and tip size ) and make sure that there is as little play as possible in the sen - sor arm ( screws for the sensor are tight ) . 3 . Perform multiple stiffness measurements on a hard surface ( clean glass slide ) to check the sensor stiffness . Use a relatively large grid ( e . g . , 10 × 10 points with lateral step size 10 μ m ) . The reconstructed surface of the glass should be ﬂ at and ( nearly ) aligned with the [ x , y ] plane of the actuator . Sensor stiffness should not vary more than a few percent between the grid points , and the force - indentation curves should not present drift in successive loading - unloading cycles . The sensor stiffness should not deviate more than a few percent from when it was ﬁ rst used . A large decrease in sensor stiffness could indicate damage , as they are very fragile ( see Note 2 ) . 1 . Remove any obstacle that the sensor tip could collide with during the measurements ( e . g . , older primordia around the meristem , trichomes on the leaf surface ) . The sample surface should be clean . 3 . 1 Setup Preparation 3 . 2 Sample Preparation Anne - Lise Routier - Kierzkowska and Richard S . Smith 143 2 . Prevent sample movements in all directions ( see Subheading 2 . 2 ) . Let the sample recover from mechanical stress inﬂ icted during the preparation . In the case of epidermal peels , this can take several hours . 3 . Let the sample adapt to osmotic conditions . Changes in osmo - larity result in modiﬁ cation of the turgor pressure and cell deformation . For example , the shoot apex needs at least 30 min to reach a stable size after a change of osmolarity . Long relaxation times can be caused by viscous behavior of the cell wall or osmoregulation . Check if the sample is stable with time lapse microscopy both before and during the experiments ( e . g . , using a confocal microscope for opaque samples , or inverted microscope for transparent ones ) . 4 . Check that the sample was not damaged during preparation , for example , with PI staining , and make sure the sample and the liquid is dust - free . Dust particles on the sensor tip can disturb the measurements , and removing them is time consuming . 1 . When using a tungsten tip , only the tip itself should be immersed in water ( see Note 3 ) . The sensor probe should not touch the water during the measurements . As a rule of thumb , the tungsten tip should be only half immersed , meaning there should be around 1 mm of water above the sample . Make sure that the liquid is not too deep by using the image from the side digital microscope . 2 . The liquid surface tension will affect each force sensor in a dif - ferent way , depending on the tip size and roughness . The force or stiffness threshold used for contact detection during the measurements should be higher than values resulting from the liquid alone . The effects of surface tension have to be mea - sured for each tip , by monitoring the force while moving the tip in water without coming into contact with the sample . 3 . Turgor pressure has a large inﬂ uence on the measurements . When measuring in medium , check the solution osmolarity regularly , since it could change due to evaporation during long experiments . 1 . Choose the grid resolution depending on the size of surface details . Typically , it is good to have at least 5 – 10 points across one cell . Too ﬁ ne a grid should be avoided , as the measure - ment time will increase dramatically ( see Note 4 ) . Start by scanning small areas with a coarse grid to check if the sample is properly stabilized . 2 . The choice of indentation depth / force threshold for stiffness measurements depends on what is being measured ( turgor , cell wall elasticity , cell wall strength ) . A general rule would be to avoid too shallow indentations , which result in very small 3 . 3 Poking in Liquid Medium 3 . 4 Choice of Parameters Cellular Force Microscopy on Living Plant Cells 144 forces and noise from contact . For stiffness mapping , a maximal force of 1 – 40 μ N for an indentation depth of 500 nm – 5 μ m is a good place to start . The cell stiffness is in the order of 1 – 50 N / m . 1 . Correct the position along the vertical axis for sensor deﬂ ec - tion , using the stiffness values obtained while indenting a hard surface . For any position , the sensor deﬂ ection is equal to the force measured divided by the sensor stiffness . 2 . Detect the contact point . The value of force at the contact point can be used as an approximation of the force offset due to surface tension , sensor drift , light , etc . 3 . The stiffness can be computed in different ways . It can be extracted as the tangent of the force - indentation curves [ 12 ] at a ﬁ xed force [ 15 ] or predeﬁ ned indentation depth . If the shape of the nonlinear force - indentation curve is known a pri - ori , the function can be ﬁ tted to the data [ 5 , 7 ] . 4 . Data interpretation of stiffness measurements is easier and less prone to bias performed on the “ﬂ at” parts of the sample , i . e . , where the surface is perpendicular to sensor axis . Both the force measured and the indentation depth are inﬂ uenced by the angle under which the probe touches the surface . When comparing stiffness values , make sure that the indentation angle did not exceed a few degrees ( e . g . , 10° ) . 5 . Stiffness values do not directly reﬂ ect the cell wall elasticity or the cell wall turgor pressure . A mechanical model is needed to interpret the data to extract these quantities . 4 Notes 1 . The choice of rounded tip of sizes larger than the cell wall thickness ensures that the cell wall will not be damaged during the experiment , provided that the applied force is not too high . For cell wall puncture , use stiffer sensors ( e . g . , FT - S1000 ) and a tungsten tip with a small tip diameter ( e . g . , T4 - 22 ) . 2 . If possible , use the same sensor ( same stiffness , same gain , same tip shape ) for the whole set of experiments , in order to compare results between samples . This also allows to check the sensor state by monitoring its stiffness over successive days . 3 . Use a side camera to check if the sensor tip is not too much into the water . Dirt ﬂ oating on the water surface can also inﬂ uence the results if it adheres to the tip . This can be pre - vented by checking the surface regularly with the side camera as well . 3 . 5 Data Analysis Anne - Lise Routier - Kierzkowska and Richard S . Smith 145 4 . Check the timescale of sample growth compared to the time needed for the measurements . The CFM setup can be adapted to perform measurements horizontally instead of vertically . In case the organ presents a fast gravitropic response when laid horizontally , it can be then kept in an upright position during the experiments with a setup modiﬁ ed to measure horizontally . Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge all those involved in the development of the CFM , Dimitris Felikis , Simon Muntwyler , Felix Beyeler , Brad Nelson , Cris Kuhlemeier , and Michal Huﬂ ejt , as well as those who helped to perfect the protocol in the ﬁ rst experiments , Petra Kochova and Alain Weber . We thank Gabriella Mosca , Pierre Barbier de Reuille , and Sarah Robinson for discussions and Willi Tanner for custom machine work . This work was supported by SystemX . ch and the University of Bern . References 1 . Cosgrove DJ ( 2005 ) Growth of the plant cell wall . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6 : 850 – 861 2 . Burgert I ( 2006 ) Exploring the micromechan - ical design of plant cell walls . Am J Bot 93 : 1391 – 1401 3 . Geitmann A ( 2006 ) Experimental approaches used to quantify physical parameters at cellular and subcellular levels . Am J Bot 93 : 1380 – 1390 4 . Smith AE , Moxham KE , Middelberg APJ ( 1998 ) On uniquely determining cell - wall material properties with the compression experiment . Chem Eng Sci 53 : 3913 – 3922 5 . Smith AE , Moxham KE , Middelberg APJ ( 2000 ) Wall material properties of yeast cells . Part II . Analysis . Chem Eng Sci 55 : 2043 – 2053 6 . Blewett J , Burrows K , Thomas C ( 2000 ) A micromanipulation method to measure the mechanical properties of single tomato suspen - sion cells . Biotechnol Lett 22 : 1877 – 1883 7 . Wang CX , Wang L , Thomas CR ( 2004 ) Modelling the mechanical properties of single suspension cultured tomato cells . Ann Bot 93 : 443 – 453 8 . Wang CX , Wang L , McQueen - Mason SJ et al ( 2008 ) pH and expansin action on single suspension - cultured tomato ( Lycopersicon esculentum ) cells . J Plant Res 121 : 527 – 534 9 . Milani P , Gholamirad M , Traas J et al ( 2011 ) In vivo analysis of local wall stiffness at the shoot apical meristem in Arabidopsis using atomic force microscopy . Plant J 67 : 1116 – 1123 10 . Fernandes AN , Chen X , Scotchford CA et al ( 2012 ) Mechanical properties of epidermal cells of whole living roots of Arabidopsis thali - ana : an atomic force microscopy study . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 85 : 021916 11 . Radoti ć K , Roduit C , Simonovi ć J et al ( 2012 ) Atomic force microscopy stiffness tomography on living Arabidopsis thaliana cells reveals the mechanical properties of surface and deep cell - wall layers during growth . Biophys J 103 : 386 – 394 12 . Parre E , Geitmann A ( 2005 ) Pectin and the role of the physical properties of the cell wall in pollen tube growth of Solanum chacoense . Planta 220 : 582 – 592 13 . Bolduc J - E , Lewis LJ , Aubin C - E et al ( 2006 ) Finite - element analysis of geometrical factors in micro - indentation of pollen tubes . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 5 : 227 – 236 14 . Zerzour R , Kroeger J , Geitmann A ( 2009 ) Polar growth in pollen tubes is associated with spatially conﬁ ned dynamic changes in cell mechanical properties . Dev Biol 334 : 437 – 446 15 . Routier - Kierzkowska A - L , Weber A , Kochova P et al ( 2012 ) Cellular force microscopy for in vivo measurements of plant tissue mechanics . Plant Phys 158 : 1514 – 1522 Cellular Force Microscopy on Living Plant Cells 146 16 . Vogler H , Draeger C , Weber A et al ( 2013 ) The pollen tube : a soft shell with a hard core . Plant J . 73 : 617 – 627 17 . Hayot CM , Forouzesh E , Goel A et al ( 2012 ) Viscoelastic properties of cell walls of single living plant cells determined by dynamic nanoindentation . J Exp Bot 63 : 2525 – 2540 18 . Forouzesh E , Goel A , Mackenzie SA et al ( 2012 ) In vivo extraction of Arabidopsis cell turgor pressure using nanoindentation in con - junction with ﬁ nite element modeling . Plant J . doi : 10 . 1111 / tpj . 12042 19 . Peaucelle A , Braybrook SA , Le Guillou L et al ( 2011 ) Pectin - induced changes in cell wall mechanics underlie organ initiation in arabi - dopsis . Curr Biol 21 : 1720 – 1726 20 . Felekis D , Muntwyler S , Vogler H et al ( 2011 ) Quantifying growth mechanics of living , grow - ing plant cells in situ using microbotics . Micro Nano Lett 6 : 311 – 316 Anne - Lise Routier - Kierzkowska and Richard S . Smith