THE EFFECT OF HYPOTONIC AND HYPERTONIC SOLU - TIONS ON FIBROBLASTS OF THE EMBRYONIC CHICK HEART IN VITRO . BY MARY JANE HOGUE , Pm D . ( From the Departmen ~ of Embryology of Carnegie Institution of Waskin # on , Baltimore , Md . ) PLATE 56 . ( Received for publication , August 19 , 1919 . ) In the literature on tissue culture are reported , more or less com - pletely , experiments testing the effect of hypotonic and hypertonic solutions upon growth of cells and upon individual cell structures . It was with a view , therefore , of studying more fully the effect of solutions of different concentrations that the present work was under - taken . The experiments were performed in April , May , June , and July , when the weather was at summer heat and there was conse - quently little danger of chilling the delicate new growths , which are susceptible to any sudden change of temperature . This point is im - portant , because several investigators have stated definitely that growth is much better in the spring and summer than in the fall and winter . Carrel and Burrows were the first to try the effect of dilution and concentra - tion of the medium upon tissue cultures , using the spleen of adult chicks and of 14 and 16 day chick embryos . Distilled water was added to the plasma to make it hypotonic , and sodium chloride to make it hypertonic . They found that growth in hypertonic plasma was always less than normal , while growth in the hypotonic solution ( three volumes of plasma to two volumes of distilled water ) was greatly accelerated . In fact , this medium gave the greatest amount of growth , much more than that obtained in normal plasma , a medium which these writers admit is not the best for this purpose . Ruth found that by adding distilled water to plasma in which epithelial cells of frog skin were planted the growth was greatly increased . Later , Lambert tried diluting the plasma with serum . He got the most ex - tensive migration in plasma diluted with two parts of serum . Dilution with serum , Ringer ' s solution , and water gave about the same results . He therefore 617 618 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART concluded that " the most active migration took place in the plasma diluted with the largest quantity of fluid , and not in the medium made hypotonic by the addi - tion of distilled water . " This agrees with the work of Burrows ( 1913 ) , who used spleen and diluted the plasma with serum . Both these observers attribute the increased migration to a diminution in the amount of fibrin in the clots ; this makes a coarser meshwork which offers less resistance to the progressive move - ment of the cells . Lambert also finds that diluting the plasma affects differ - ently the various types of cells . Actively motile cells , such as those of bone marrow and spleen , show increased migration ; cells with limited power of loco - motion , like those of intestinal epithelium , are not affected by the dilution of the medium ; while cells of moderate motility , such as connective tissue cells , are only slightly influenced by it . Lambert concludes that this dilution of the medium has likewise no effect upon cell division . Ebeling used hypotonic , hypertonic , and diluted media prepared by adding Ringer ' s solution to normal chick plasma and embryonic chick extract . Each of these media at first stimulated cell proliferation , but after a few days this de - creased and ended in deatl ~ unless measures were taken to revive the cultures . Sundwall also grew tissues in hypotonic solutions , using plasma diluted with distilled water , lie found the growth to be more prolific , but the difference between this and growth in plasma was not so marked as that obtained by Carrel and Burrows . Cash used hypotonic salt solution on 3 day chick cultures and found that at once numerous vesicles appear , change shape characteristically for a short time , and then flow back into the cells . He states that it is difficult to produce these changes in younger cells ; i . e . , in growths 1 to 2 days old . Goldschmidt found that the direction of growth of the sex cells of the moth ( Samia cecropia L . ) was affected by hypertonic and hypotonic solutions . In the former the cells grew out against the follicle wall . The extent of otitgrowth depended upon two factors - - the age of the cell and the hypertonicity of the medium . The whole process was reversible without change of medium , as were also the slight changes produced by hypotonic media . Goldschmidt therefore concludes that the follicle membrane has active control of osmotic conditions inside the follicle . Lewis and Lewis ( 1914 - 15 ) note a definite effect of hypotonic and hypertonic solutions upon the mitochondria ; in the first they swell , while in the second they shrink . Cowdry states that very dilute solutions of formaldehyde cause swelling of the mitochondria , while a concentrated solution results in shrinkage . Material . For these experiments hearts of 6 , 7 , 8 , and 9 day chick embryos were used . The medium was a modification of Locke ' s , known as Locke - Lewis solution . The Locke formula was as follows : MARY JANE HOGUE 619 gmo Sodium chloride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 9 Calcium chloride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 024 Potassium chloride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 042 Sodium bicarbonate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 02 This wa ~ modified , according to Lewis ' method ( 1915 ) , by the addition of chick bouillon ( 15 cc . of bouillon and 0 . 25 gin . of dextrose to 85 cc . of Locke ' s solution ) , sterilized in clean . test - tubes in an Arnold sterilizer , and kept in a moist chamber to avoid evaporation . In order to make it hypertonic the solution was boiled down one - fourth , one - half , etc . , as required , and the amount of sodium chloride present was calculated . The hypotonic solutions were made by diluting the Locke - Lewis solution with distilled water , and in these also the amount of sodium chloride was determined . Since chick bouillon contains practically the same amount of sodium chloride as the Locke solution , the calculation of this content in the Locke - Lewis solution was made upon the same basis . It will be noted that only the amount of sodium chloride has been considered , although the other salts were present in definite amounts and always in the same proportion . Method . All the instruments and glassware used in the experiments ' were sterilized ; the instruments were sterilized in a flame continually during the preparation of the cultures , so that infection of the cultures was rare . The solution was warmed and poured into small Petri dishes . The heart was aseptically removed from the chick embryo in Locke - Lewis solution and transferred to another Petri dish con - taining about 10 co . of the medium . Here it was cut into small pieces and transferred by means of a pipette to a cover : glass , which was immediately inverted over a hard vaseline ring on a depression slide . The chance of evaporation by this method of the Lewises is very small , as the tissue can be placed on the cover - glass and sealed in a few seconds . When the tissue was to be planted in hypertonic or hypotonic solution the heart was placed in the liquid immediately after its removal from the embryo ; the tissue was therefore never in contact with other solutions that might possibly dilute the medium . 620 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART The cultures were incubated in a constant temperature box at 39°C . Many of the slides were treated with neutral red which stains certain granules and vacuoles ( Lewis , 1919 ) . Janus black No . 2 was added when the mitochondria were to be studied , but only when early results were obtained from the experiment , as the cells do not live much more than an hour after being stained with it . Normal Growth of Heart Tissue . The normal growth of heart tissue is characteristic . Two types of connective tissue cells appear - - fibroblasts and mesothelialcells . The fibroblasts ( Fig . 1 , a ) are of more frequent occurrence and show two methods of growth : ( 1 ) migratory ( Fig . 1 ) , where the cells are scattered along the transplant and out into the medium ; and ( 2 ) reticular , where the cells form a close reticular network . The latter is usually the more vigorous growth . These ceils have long , branch - ing processes , often so thin that it is impossible to follow them in their farthest wanderings and anastomoses with other cells . Hence , in most of the drawings of cells these processes are omitted , as they could not be seen with the camera lucida . The mesothelial cells ( Fig . 1 , b ) are of less frequent occurrence . They always appear in membrane formation ( Lewis and Lewis , 1912 ) , sometimes as small inclusions among the fibroblasts , and again as large growths completely surrounding the transplant . They are much larger and hardier , and withstood the action of the hypotonic and hypertonic solutions much better than the sensitive fibroblasts , with their fine , branching processes , which usually reacted at once to the new medium . For that reason , and also because they were the more common form , the fibroblasts were always used in the experiments . As controls to the other experiments 282 cultures were planted in normal Locke - Lewis solution , and of these 188 ( 66 . 6 per cent ) grew . The length of life in this medium varied . The oldest growth was 19 days old , and had been made from a 7 day chick embryo . It lived to this age without any change of the medium ; in fact it was sealed with a vaseline ring during the entire time . The cells contained very few fat globules and towards the end of the experiment they withdrew their processes , only blunt ends remaining . They then accumulated in groups of five or six all over the slide . MARY JANE IIOGUE 621 Experiments with Hypotonic Solutions . For these experiments three different solutions were employed : ( 1 ) three volumes of Locke - Lewis solution to two volumes of distilled water ; this had a sodium chloride content of 0 . 540 per cent ; ( 2 ) one volume of Locke - Lewis solution to one of distilled water ; sodium chloride content 0 . 45 per cent ; and ( 3 ) one volume of Locke - Lewis solution to three volumes of distilled water ; sodium chloride content 0 . 225 per cent . The first solution , which was the proportion used by Carrel and Burrows in their work on the spleen , was employed in two experiments with hearts of chick embryos 8 and 9 days old respectively . Out of twenty - three cultures seven gave reticular growth , thirteen migra - tion , and three showed no signs of growth . In one experiment all were dead on the 4th day , while in the other some of the cultures lived for 7 days . Migration of ceils was at first rapid as com - pared with the controls , but the latter lived a little longer . The percentage of growths in this medium is high ( 86 . 9 ) , but only two experiments were performed . On these 2 days the percentage of growth of cultures in normal Locke - Lewis solution was 81 . 8 - - only slightly less . The number of reticular growths in the two media was practically the same - - 35 per cent in hypotonic and 30 per cent in Locke - Lewis solution , although in the former the extent of growth was greater . Burrows ( 1913 ) and Lambert attribute the increased migration to a lessening of fibrin in the diluted plasma and consequent de - crease in the resistance offered to migration . Here , however , this was not the case , as there was no fibrin in any of the cultures grown in the Locke - Lewis solution . The real cause seems to me to be the search for food which acts as a stimulus , as will be seen later . Bur - rows ( 1913 ) has also observed that tissues planted in plasma diluted with water suffer early death . This he thinks is due to the hypo - tonicity . He says : " They die apparently in the plasma diluted with salt solutions from an early exhaustion of food materials . " This I believe is true , although when they die after being treated with ( not grown in ) hypotonic solution , it is possible that the ceils have taken up too much water , which of itself is known to act as a poison , 622 FIBROBLASTS OF ~ MBRYO CHICK HEART causing death . When the individual cells were examined , a few were found to be long and fusiform and often small , though many were in a vigorous condition . When neutral red and Janus black No . 2 were added to the drop of culture fluid , both stains being made up in the hypotonic fluid used for the experiment , the neutral red granules were found to be arranged around the centriole near the nucleus , just as in the cells grown in Locke - Lewis solution . The mitochondria were long , sometimes branching , and often formed a network . Sometimes they extended down the processes to a considerable length . All these forms are as one usually finds them in normal growths . The most striking point about the growths in this solution , and indeed in all hypotonic solutions , was that the cells nearest the ex - plant died first ( Fig . 2 ) . This is exactly the reverse of the condition prevailing in all Locke - Lewis cultures and in the hypertonic growths , where the cells at the outer edge of the growth die first , until finally only those next to the transplanted tissue are left . These frequently live on for days after the main part of the growth has died . In the hypertonic solutions the migration is slower . There is a greater amount of food material ( salts , etc . , from the Locke solution and chicken bouillon ) in the medium , so that the cells do not need to mi - grate so rapidly and consequently do not give off so much in the form of waste products . Hence the medium is not altered so rapidly ( Burrows , 1913 ) and migration is retarded . In short , all depends upon the mount of food in the medium . When this is small , as in hypotonic solutions , the cells must migrate more rapidly to obtain food . They then give off more waste products which alter the me - dium , thus further stimulating movement . In a short time the ac - cumulation of waste products becomes So great and the supply of food near the explant so small that the cells in that vicinity die . The same phenomenon was observed in Araceba limax cultures grown on agar ( Hogue ) . The ameba ~ nearest the old point of inoculation on the Petri dish die before those which have wandered out over the dish , where they are free from waste products and can get more food and oxygen . In the second hypotonic solution , made with one part of Locke - Lewis solution to one part of distilled water , 90 out of 202 explants grew ( 44 . 5 per cent ) . The migration was not so rapid as in the former MARY IANE HOGUE 623 medium ( 0 . 54 per cent sodium chloride ) , and consequently the cells survived longer . On one slide they lived for 12 days without a change of the solution . As a rule , the cells appeared normal , with large growths in both reticular and migratory formation . The individual cells were normal in shape and the neutral red granules were usually the same as those in tissue grown in Locke - Lewis solution . Even the mitochondria presented a normal appearance . The cells seemed to have completely adapted themselves to their hypotonic environ - ment . In this medium , as in the former one , the first cells to die were those next to the tissue explant . The third hypotonic solution ( one part of Locke - Lewis solution to three parts of distilled water , with a sodium chloride content of 0 . 225 per cent ) gave no growth whatever after 48 hours of incuba - tion . One drop of Locke - Lewis solution was added to some of the slides and the tissue again incubated in the hope of inducing migra - tion , but the cells appeared to be dead . Hypotonic Plus Hypotonic Sotution . - - The fact that excellent growths had been obtained on some slides of the Locke - Lewis 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride medium while there was none on others planted the same day , in the same medium , and from the same heart , suggested the possibility that the particular explants that grew so well may have con - tained sufficient plasma of their own to change the medium . Accord - ingly , to the 24 and 48 hour growths in this medium was added some of the same fresh solution . On many slides the cells were all dead on the following day . On others the cells at the edge of the growth , which were very flat and thin with a large surface exposed , had been killed by the new hypotonic solution , while others had migrated out over them and were still in good condition ( Fig . 3 ) , showing that they retained the power of adapting themselves to the medium . It is not possible to determine here whether the explant had taken suffi - cient plasma with it to modify the medium , or whether the resis - tance of the individual cells was greater on some slides than on others . This individual difference in the cells is a " factor always to be con - sidered . It makes experimenting with tissue cultures a difficult problem , and one must perform a large number of experiments in order to draw any trustworthy conclusions . 624 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART Effect of Hypotonic Solutions on Normal Growth . Itypotonic Solution , 0 . 225 Per Cent Sodium Chloride . - - When a nor - mal growth of 48 hours was treated with hypotonic Locke - Lewis solution with 0 . 225 per cent sodium chloride content , it was killed almost at once . The cells could therefore be stained with Janus black No . 2 without danger of interfering with the results of the ex - peximent . After the growths had been stained with neutral red and Janus black , drawings were made of certain cells and the hypotonic solution was added . All the text - figures are camera lucida drawings made from living cells which have been stained with neutral red and often also with Janus black No . 2 . The neutral red granules are represented as small circles , the mitochondria as solid lines or solid rods . TExT - FIG . 1 . A normal fibroblast from a 48 hour growth explanted from a 9 day chick embryo heart and stained to show the neutral red granules . TExT - FIGS . 2 to 4 . The same cell after treatment with Locke - Lewis solution ( 0 . 225 per cent sodium chloride content ) . Text - fig . 2 shows the cytoplasm much enlarged by the intake of water and divided into a granular and a clear area . The nucleus is swollen and has a distinct nuclear wall . A few neutral red gran - ules are still visible . In Text - figs . 3 and 4 vacuoles are appearing . In Text - fig . 4 the cell is becoming smaller . Death changes have set in . Many of the cells immediately took up a large amount of water . Text - fig . 1 shows a cell stained with neutral red , in which the gran - MARY JANE HOGUE 625 ules are grouped together around the centriole . Text - fig . 2 repre - sents the same cell 8 minutes after treatment with the Locke - Lewis sodium chloride 0 . 225 per cent solution . Here we have two kinds of cytoplasm , a granular part around the much swollen nucleus , and a clear outer area which has taken up water in the process of equaliz - ing the osmotic pressure within the cell incident to the new environ - 3 6 " . - - 7 TExT - FIG . 5 . Normal fibroblast from a 48 hour growth explanted from a 9 day chick embryo heart . TExT - FIe . 6 . The same cell 5 minutes after treatment with Locke - Lewis solution ( 0 . 225 per cent sodium chloride content ) . The mitochondria are form - ing vesicles at their ends . Vacuoles are appearing in the cytoplasm . T ~ . xT - FIG . 7 . The same cell 55 minutes after treatment . Only faintly staining vesicles remain where the mitochondria were . ment . The processes have become more distinct as they , too , are full of the absorbed water . In Text - fig . 3 the neutral red color has disappeared from the granules and the nuclear wall is very distinct - - both indications of cell death . In Text - figs . 3 and 4 vacuoles are appearing . Text - fig . 4 was drawn 4 hours , 25 minutes after the cell 626 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART was treated . Again the cell is small and most of the clear cytoplasm has been filled up with fine granules . This slide was later stained with neutral red , but the new vacuoles did not take up the stain , having undergone some death changes . When the reaction of the cell to the hypotonic solution was not too sudden the effect on the mitochondria could be followed . Text - fig . 5 shows a cell with long branching mitochondria , drawn at 3 . 17 p . m . It was treated with hypotonic Locke - Lewis 0 . 225 per cent so - dium chloride solution at 3 . 20 p . m . ; by 3 . 25 p . m . ( Text - fig . 6 ) no neutral rod granules could be seen , the nucleus had a distinct mem - brane , vacuoles were appearing , and the mitochondria were beginning TzxT - FIo . 8 . Normal fibroblast from a 9 day chick embryo heart ; 48 hours growth . TExT - FIOS . 9 and I0 . The same cell 30 and 50 minutes after treatment with Locke - Lewis solution ( 0 . 225 per cent sodium chloride content ) . All the neutral red granules have disappeared . The mitochondria arc forming vesicles . Vacu - oles have appeared in the cytoplasm and a nuclear vacuole has formed . to degenerate . In some , either one extremity or both seemed to swell ( Text - fig . 6 ) . Gradually the connection between these two small vesicles became fainter , then disappeared , and finally there remained only a faintly staining pale blue vesicle of irregular outline where a large mitochondrium had been ( Text - fig . 7 ) . The small mitochondria had disappeared entirely . This proccss is also sccn in Text - fig . 8 ( normal ) , and in Text - figs . 9 and 10 , drawn respectively 30 and 50 minutes after treatment . Not all the mitochondria in a cell form these vesicles while under - going degeneration , nor do those which do form them appear to bear any relation to thc nuclcus . Some arc ncar it , some are farther away MARY JANE HOGUE 627 near the cytoplasmic processes . In no case did I observe a swelling of the mitochondria as Lewis and Lewis ( 1914 - 15 ) and Cowdry claim occurs in hypotonic solutions . In every experiment the neutral red color disappeared from the granules almost as soon as the hypotonic solution was added . The mitochondria are much slower in disap - pearing . Hypotonic Solution , 0 . 3 Per Cent Sodium Chloride . - - When the normal ceils were treated with hypotonic Locke - Lewis solution with 0 . 3 per cent sodium chloride content , practically the same results as those recorded above were obtained . Certain mitochondria were followed and most of them simply faded from view . A few first formed a small vesicle at one end . Hypotonic Solution , 0 . 45 Per Cent Sodium Chloride . - - Hypotonic Locke - Lewis solution with 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride content was tried on normal 48 hour growths . One cell ( Text - fig . 11 ) with large , characteristic mitochondria was followed closely for 6 hours . Two large mitochondria in the anterior end were crossed ; near them was a long , slender mitochondrium extending almost to the nucleus , and in the posterior end were some shorter ones with characteristic shapes . When treated with hypotonic solution the cell reacted at once . The color in the neutral red granules soon disappeared and the nuclear wall became distinct and irregular in outline . The mitochondria did not change shape at first but gradually became fainter ( Text - fig . 12 ) . The two peripheral ends of the long crossed mitochondria seemed to come together to form a ring ( Text - fig . 13 ) . About half way down the mitochondria there ¢¢as a break and the parts nearer the nucleus became granular . About 1 p . m . it was noticed that these granular parts of the mitochondria seemed to be connected with a small clear vesicle near the nucleus , It looked as though they were forming a tubule which opened into the vesicle . During the next 3 hours there was little change in the mitochon - dria , except that they grew more slender and faint . The cytoplasm around them became more granular , so that it was difficult to follow them . At 4 . 15 p . m . they were finely granular ; this condition per - sisted for 3 days , when the slide was destroyed . The long mito - chondrium to the right of those which were crossed did not appear so granular . It seemed , like the distal ends of those which were crossed , 628 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART to become more slender as though some substance were dissolving away from it . I could not observe , however , that any of the mito - chondria became shorter . In some of the cells treated with hypotonic Locke - Lewis solution large , clear vacuoles forming around the nucleus were frequently observed ( Text - figs . 9 and 10 ) . Others would form in the cytoplasm , 11 TExT - Fla . 11 . Normal fibroblast from a 9 day chick embryo heart , 48 hours growth , showing characteristic mitochondria and neutral red granules grouped around the centriole area . T ~ xT - FIG . 12 . The same cell 2 hours later . The neutral red granules have disappeared . The nuclear wall is distinct and the mitochondria are becoming fainter . TExT - Fla . 13 . The same cell 2 hours later . The cytoplasm is granular . The two long crossed mitochondria are broken into pieces , some of which are granular . The other mitochondria are fainter or have disappeared entirely . but these did not have the regular round or oval outlines of the nuclear vacuoles where the surface tension seemed to be very great . The nucleus , which was usually swollen in these cases , had taken up more water than it could hold and had broken out to form a vacuole . The nuclear wall near the vacuole was irregular in outline . MARY ~ ANE HOGUE 629 As already stated , the cells frequently become swollen with the intake of water as soon as they have been treated with the hypotonic solution . They remain in this condition for an hour or so , until the cell has begun to undergo the changes following death , when they show shrinkage . At times all the processes at one end are with - drawn and the end of the cell rolls back on the cell itself , as though from sudden contraction ( Text - fig . 14 ) . A few experiments were tried with tissues which had failed to grow in Locke - Lewis 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride solution . To each was added a drop of normal Locke - Lewis solution and the slides were again incubated , but no migration of cells ever appeared . A similar experiment was tried with tissue that would not grow in normal Locke - Lewis solution . Distilled water was added to the slides but the tissues did not respond , even after being in the incuba - tor 48 hours . They appeared to have lost the power to migrate . They were not dead , for the pieces of heart frequently continued to contract , although cell migration could not be induced . It was found that when hypotonic Locke - Lewis 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride solution was added to normal growths it did not always kill the cells . ~ A series of general experiments with this solu - tion was tried with 24 and 48 hour growths . After thoroughly washing the cultures with the solution they were put in the constant temperature chamber at 39°C . and observed from hour to hour in a warm box . In a short time they took on a very different appear - ance from the normal . The cells were spider - like , their form com - pletely changing from the flat , triangular , and fusiform shape , with long , fine processes almost invisible at the ends . Now the processes had a definite outline and seemed to anastomose , and the ceil bodies had thickened into round or oval forms . Sometimes only the cells at one side of the explant would be thus affected , at other times those at one end , and again , all the cells . After 24 hours some of these cells would be dead , others would have recovered , and growth and migration would be going on beyond the dead cells . In one series of experiments pieces from the same heart were planted in hypotonic Locke - Lewis 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride solution and in normal Locke - Lewis solution . Growth took place in both . When the con - trols were 24 and 48 hours old they were treated with hypotonic 630 FIBROBLASTS OF E ~ BR¥O CHICK HEART TEXT - FIG . 14 . Fibroblast half an hour after treatment with Locke - Lewis solution ( 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride content ) , showing one end rolled over onto the cell as if from contraction . TEXT - FIG . 15 . Normal fibroblast from a 7 day chick embryo heart ; 4 days growth . TExT - FIGs . 16 to 21 . The same cell after treatment with Locke - Lewis solution ( 1 . 8 per cent sodium chloride content ) . Text - fig . 16 shows long fine processes and a condensation of the cytoplasm . In Text - figs . 17 and 18 the processes have been withdrawn and blebs are forming . The mitochondria are shorter and more condensed . In Text - fig . 19 , a large bleb surrounds the nucleus and granular cytoplasm . Text - figs . 20 and 21 show death processes . Vacuoles appear and the cell wall breaks down leaving only the nucleus and granular cytoplasm . MARY JANE I ' - IOGUE 631 Locke - Lewis 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride solution . Some were killed while others grew . The effects following the addition of the hypotonic . 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride solution were varied . On some slides all the cells were killed ; on others only a few , and migration went on beyond them ; on still others the solution acted as a stimulant and growth and migration were greatly accelerated . Here again the condition of the cells in the original growth must have had a great influence on the results . While I tried to take only slides which had good reticular growths , there must have been great individual differences , as even in normal Locke - Lewis solution some cultures will live much longer than others made from the same heart , in the same medium , and at the same time . Summary of Results with Hypotonic Solutions . 1 . Locke - Lewis solutions were made hypotonic by the addition of distilIed water . They were used with a sodium chloride content of 0 . 54 , 0 . 45 , 0 . 3 , and 0 . 225 per cent respectively . 2 . Tissue grew in the first two solutions , which acted as a stimulus . 3 . The tissues did not live so long in these media as in normal Locke - Lewis solution , but growth was more rapid . 4 . The cells of normal growth were killed by treatment with hypo - tonic solutions with a sodium chloride content of 0 . 3 and 0 . 225 per cent respectively . 5 . The cells absorbed much water , as did also the nucleus , which frequently formed a nuclear vacuole as an outlet for the extra amount of liquid absorbed . 6 . Neutral red vacuoles and granules soon lost their color when the ceils were treated with the hypotonic solutions that caused their death . 7 . Mitochondria were not affected by the hypotonic solutions , but as the cell died vesicles formed at the extremities and persisted after the rest of the mitochondrium had disappeared ; or the mitochondria broke up into granules or simply became more sIender until only a faint , rough outline was visible . 632 ~ ? IBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART Experiments with Hypertonic Solutions . Three grades of hypertonic Locke - Lewis solution , containing re - spectively 1 . 8 ~ 1 . 5 , and 1 . 2 per cent of sodium chloride , were used in this series of experiments . ttypertonic Solution , 1 . 8 Per Cent Sodium Chloride . - - Thirty - eight transplants were made , not one of which showed any signs of growth . It was evident that the fluid was too hypertonic to induce cell migra - tion . Next the effect of this medium was tried upon tissue that had been growing well in normal Locke - Lewis solution for 2 , 3 , and 4 days respectively . In all the ceils were killed within 3 or 4 hours , and in some within 1 hour after treatment . The effect was followed on certain individual cells which were first stained with neutral red and Janus black No . 2 . Text - fig . 15 is a cell taken from a 4 day growth of a 7 day chick heart after it had been treated with neutral red and Janus black at 11 . 15 a . m . At 11 . 20 the Locke - Lewis 1 . 8 per cent sodium chloride solution was added . By 11 . 25 the cell had begun to contract and crumple up like folds in a piece of cloth . At 11 . 30 ( Text - fig . 16 ) the body of the cell was thick , and from one side and from the ends , where there had been processes , fine , thread - like structures extended out into the me - dium . By 11 . 40 ( Text - fig . 17 ) most of these processes had been withdrawn ; by 12 . 02 p . m . ( Text - fig . 18 ) all the side processes had been withdrawn and the central granular part was surrounded by a clear , flat area . In Text - figs . 16 and 17 both mitochondria and neu - tral red granules are arranged as in normal growth . In Text - fig . 18 the mitochondria have become shorter and more concentrated in the center of the cell . At 12 . 15 ( Text - fig . 19 ) the neutral ' red gran - ules and mitochondria had disappeared and the cell was dead . Text - figs . 20 and 21 , drawn at 12 . 20 and 12 . 40 , show further death changes . In Text - fig . 20 large vacuoles are appearing in the clear areas . These later break down , leaving only the granular cytoplasm and nucleus ( Text - fig . 21 ) . Text - figs . 22 to 24 show the contraction of the cytoplasm and the concentration of the neutral red granules at the end where the nu - cleus is located . The fine processes at the large end were invisible at 10 . 07 a . m . when the cell was treated with Locke - Lewis 1 . 8 per cent MARY JANE HOGUE 633 T ~ . xT - FIGs . 22 to 24 . Cell from a 4 day growth of a 7 day chick embryo heart , stained with neutral red and treated with Locke - Lewis solution ( 1 . 8 per cent sodium chloride content ) . The processes at the anterior end have become visible in Text - fig . 22 . Text - fig . 23 shows a contraction of the cytoplasm and a partial withdrawal of the anterior end to form thread - like processes . These processes are much longer in Text - fig . 24 where neutral red channels are shown opening into neutral red vacuoles . TExT - FIG . 25 . Fibrobhst from a 7 day chick heart ; 4 days growth . TExT - FIGs . 26 and 27 . The same cell after treatment with Locke - Lewis solu - tion ( 1 . 8 per cent sodium chloride content ) . The alveolar structure of protoplasm is shown ( Text - fig . 26 ) , which 1 hour later ( Text - fig . 27 ) became finely granular . 634 ~ IBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART sodium chloride solution . By 10 . 10 ( Text - fig . 22 ) they had con - tracted until they were plainly visible . Neutral red vacuoles are scattered over the cell , a very large one being in the posterior long process , only part of which was drawn . By 11 . 45 ( Text - fig . 23 ) the cell had shrunken appreciably , the neutral red granules were concen - trated at the anterior end , and thin processes were forming . At 12 . 35 p . m . ( Text - fig . 24 ) these looked like long streamers . It appeared as though the anterior end of the cell had been attached at places to the cover - glass , and that when the cell began to shrink . from loss of water the cytoplasm was pulled out into these long processes . When the pull was too great they lost hold and were rapidly withdrawn into the cell . Coincident with the formation of these protoplasmic streamers , blebs - - clear , round cytoplasmic protrusions - - appeared behind them . Toward the center of the cell neutral red channels opened into the large neutral red vacuole . In many of the cells these channels were branching and anastomosing . This particular cellwas dead . at 1 . 45 . To those who still believe in the alveolar and reticular structure of protoplasm Text - figs . 25 and 26 will prove of interest . Text - fig . 25 shows a cell stained with Janus black and neutral red which bring out the mitochondria and the neutral red granules . At 11 . 20 a . m . the tissue was treated with Locke - Lewis 1 . 8 per cent sodium chloride solution . This cell did not contract so much as many of the ' others , nor were there formed the long , fine processes which I have found so characteristic of death in these hypertonic solutions . The cytoplasm , however , became alveolar ( Text - fig . 26 ) , small , round spaces appear - ing over the granular part of the cell by 12 . 25 p . m . The nuclear wall was very distinct , the granules no longer showed the neutral red color , and the mitochondria had disappeared - - all evidences of cell death . By 1 . 45 ( Text - fig . 27 ) these alveoli had also disappeared and the protoplasm had become granular . It would seem quite certain , therefore , that the alveolar structure described by the early cytologists was an artifact caused by the fixing solution , which was hypertonic to the protoplasm . Hypertonic Solution , 1 . 5 Per Cent Sodium Chloride . - - In spite of the fact that several authors have stated that tissues will not grow at all , or , at best , very poorly in hypertonic solutions , I have neverthe ' - ~ A ~ Y J A N E HO6U ~ 635 less grown a few in hypertonic Locke - Lewis solution with a sodium chloride content of 1 . 5 per cent . Out of 130 explants of heart tissue in this medium , twelve ( 9 per cent ) showed migration and reticular formation . One of these lived 7 days . The migration was not great , and only in a few instances were there reticular growths . I was interested in learning how the mitochondria would be affected by this new medium stained with Janus black No . 2 and neutral red . The mitochondria in many of the slides were long , irregular , and spread out normally into the processes of the cells . The neutral red granules were also arranged around the centriole and the mitochon - dria mingled with them as in normal cells . Occasionally the mito - chondria were round or slightly oblong , but this was undoubtedly due more to the generally poor condition of the growth than to the hypertonic medium . The same round mitochondria are found on slides of Locke - Lewis solution when the growth is poor , and are proba - bly due to some metabolic disturbance . In order to observe the direct effect of this solution upon the nor - mal cells I treated heart tissue , which was growing well in normal Locke - Lewis solution , with Locke - Lewis 1 . 5 per cent sodium chloride . In most cases it killed the cells . In some instances normal growths were used , other pieces of which were growing in the hypertonic 1 . 5 per cent solution , but the shock of this hypertonic solution to the delicate cells , thinly spread out on the cover - slip , was usually so great that they died . I noted especially the fate of two interesting cells ( Text - fig . 28 ) in a 48 hour growth from a 10 day chick heart , which was treated with Locke - Lewis sodium chloride 1 . 5 per cent solution at 11 . 15 a . m . The reaction was immediate ( Text - fig . 29 ) . Their clear processes were retracted and formed long , fine proc - esses on cell A , cell B contracting into an irregular mass . The fine processes on A were gradually withdrawn until all had disappeared ( Text - figs . 30 to 33 ) . B showed two distinct kinds of protoplasm - - a clear , outer part , resembling the ectoplasm of an ameba and simi - larly active ; and a denser , granular part in the center of the cell . This central mass was more stationary and the clear protoplasm flowed around it , either evenly , or forming blunt processes , which would be withdrawn and then form anew at another place , as de - scribed by Cash for cells treated with ether vapor . Later cell A 636 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART developed the same kind of movement ( Text - fig . 34 ) , but at noon was an inactive mass of cytoplasm . By 2 . 40 p . m . B had recovered completely ; A was still an irregular mass , though the outer cytoplasm was again active ( Text - fig . 35 ) . By 4 p . m . ( Text - fig . 36 ) both were active - - B normal , A abnormal . The following day the cells had migrated and changed positions , so that it was impossible to say TExT - FIG . 28 . Two normal fibroblasts , A and B , before treatment with Locke - Lewis solution ( 1 . 5 per cent sodium chloride content ) at 11 . 15 a . m . T ~ xT - FIGs . 29 to 31 . The same cells after treatment . In A is shown the formation of long fine processes , which were gradually withdrawn . B is an irregular mass showing two kinds of protoplasm , granular and clear , th : latter moving like the pseudopodia of Amceba proteus . whether these particular celis had entirely recovered . Half the num - ber of cells on the slide were normal , with stellate forms ; hence some of them had been able to withstand the shock . In another case which was followed one cell was apparently killed at once , while a larger MARY JANE ~ OGUE 637 cell with a long process remained active , going through the stage of fine process formation and finally contracting , though the long pos - terior process remained extended like the posterior end of a Vorti - cella , acting as an anchor . TExT - FIGs . 32 to 36 . Later stages of the cells shown in Text - figs . 28 to 31 . The fine processes of A were completely withdrawn and after passing through an ameboid stage it became an irregular , rather inactive mass of protoplasm . B after the ameboid stage became normal . Itypertonic Solution , 1 . 2 Per Cent Sodium Chloride . - - Growth in this solution was very good ; 32 pe r cent of the transplants grew , and one lived 15 days without being opened or treated in any way . Growth , however , was much slower than in the controls or in the hy - potonic solutions . Often the cells did not begin to migrate until the 2nd or 3rd day , and then slowly , though in growths in which they were going to form a reticulum , they had done so by the 4th 638 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CttlCK HEART day . Migration was not greater than in the hypotonic solutions but was often abundant , and the appearance of both migratory and reticular formations was that of healthy , normal cells . When these cells were stained with neutral red and Janus black No . 2 the neutral red granules were found to be present in varying amounts and were arranged around the centriole , as in the controls . Usually there were some long mitochondria , but these varied in size . Occasionally the number of migrating cells was very small and these sometimes showed abnormalities . On one slide the cells ex - tended out from the . explant like a string of beads , three or four to a string . On another slide , which was later fixed in Zenker ' s fluid and stained with Ehrlich ' s hematoxylin , most of the cells were not flat but slightly rotund . The mitochondria were all round , a few neutral red granules were present , and the nucleus in many instances was apparently budding or dividing arnitotically , in a manner similar to that shown in some of Macklin ' s figures . Some cells showed as many as three nuclei of different sizes , though all contained chroma - tin material . The metabolism of this culture had been seriously deranged , resulting in this change in the nuclear and mitochrondrial conditions . The results following the addition of Locke - Lewis 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride solution to normal growths of 1 , 2 , and 3 days were varied . The reaction was much slower than with the other hyper - tonic solutions . On three slides of 3 days growth few of the cells showed any contraction after 6 hours of treatment . Many were abnormal and contained a great number of deeply staining neutral red vacuoles . These cells lived and the vacuoles retained the neutral red stain for 1 to 3 days after treatment , or until some of the cells were 8 days old . On other slides of 2 and 3 days growth interesting changes in the cells were observed . The long , fine , straight processes were also present here . Text - fig . 37 shows a normal cell which at 10 . 45 a . rn . was treated with Locke - Lewis 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride solution . At the end of half an hour little change was noted . Within the next hour the cell contracted and a fine network of protoplasmic processes formed at one side , quite a distance from the cell , yet con - nected with it by a long strand of clear protoplasm ( Text - fig . 38 ) . MARY JANE HOGUE 639 By 2 . 10 p . m . ( Text - fig . 39 ) this network had become more intricate , the neutral red granules had almost disappeared , and the cell was practically dead . Later , large clear vacuoles formed in the central mass . In another cell wl / ich was followed the central mass contracted , leaving the clear cytoplasm in a large , thin sheet , stretching out at 39 TEXT - FIG . 37 . Normal fibroblast of a 7 day chick embryo heart ; 3 days growth . TExT - FIGs . 38 and 39 . The same cell after treatment with Locke - Lewis solu - tion ( 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride content ) , showing fine protoplasmic network developed from the processes of the cell . one side of the cell with many slender processes extending in various directions . In Text - fig . 40 can be seen the concentration of neutral red granules in one part of the cell , while in Text - fig . 41 two of the granules have been caught in one of the processes when the central mass began to contract . Here blebs are forming and the large 640 lelBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART vacuoles indicate that the cell is nearly dead . In Text - fig . 42 , from another cell , small neutral red granules are shown alongside of the processes and evidently held to them by fine protoplasmic threads , for they remain stationary though vibrating all the time with Brownian movement . Still other interesting formations are seen in Text - figs . 43 to 45 , from a 2 day growth of a 7 day chick heart . This cell was one of a T(cid:127)xT - FI6s . 40 and 41 . Fibroblast after treatment with Locke - Lewis solution ( 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride content ) , showing a contracted clear fiat area of cytoplasm where normally there were processes . In Text - fig . 41 two neutral red granules have been caught in one of the processes during contraction of the cytoplasm . group of three which had been followed after its treatment withLocke - Lewis 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride solution at 11 a . m . In Text - fig . 43 at a there is a chain of protoplasmic beads which waved back and forth ( Text - fig . 44 ) in the medium . Later , three of these beads broke away and disappeared . At b ( Text - fig . 43 ) a slightly thicker process is seen which at 2 . 40 p . m . showed light and dark areas like a striated muscle . These quickly became constricted into a chain of proto - MARY ~ ' ANE I - IOGU : E 641 O Q . 4 2 b TExT - Fro . 42 . Fibroblast treated like that in Text - fig . 40 , showing neutral red granules fastened to the cell by slender threads of cytoplasm . TExT - FxGs . 43 to 45 . Fibroblast treated with Locke - Lewis solution ( 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride content ) . Many of the fine processes showed movement . The beaded formations at a and b moved back and forth ; c was continually oscillating ; d was moving and e waved until it became attached to another fibril ( Text - fig . 44 ) ; then it moved like an undulating membrane until the cell was dead . 542 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART piasmic beads which were free moving and waved about in the surrounding medium ( Text - fig . 44 ) . At 3 . 00 the process broke loose , became entangled with the other thin processes , and disappeared , c was a round process of protoplasm attached by a fine thread , which also oscillated back and forth , d was apparently attached to a proc - ess from a neighborihg cell , and in Text - fig . 43 was only a thick process . In Text - fig . 44 it had become beaded , the beads being of different sizes , and was undulating gently . Later ( Text - fig . 45 ) it had become practically straight again , and as the cell was dying the movement gradually lessened , e always remained a thin , thread - like process . At first free moving ( Text - fig . 43 ) , it later became attached to another process ( Text - fig . 44 ) which was stationary . However , it continued to wave like an undulating membrane until nearly 4 p . m . , when motion in the processes ceased and the cell was dead , the color in the neutral red granules having also disappeared . This long , waving fiber answers the description of those grown by Baitsell in plasma . He believes that they are not outgrowths of the embedded tissue but come from fibrin in the plasma clot . His evi - dence for this is not complete , as his stains give two different results , one confirmatory of his theory , the other pointing toward the cellular origin of the fibers . In the present experiments there was no plasma and consequently no fibrin . Furthermore , this fibril is directly con - nected with the cell and remains in active motion only as long as the cell is alive . Its place of origin , the clear , protoplasmic area which contracts to form long , fine processes , is the same as that given by Lewis ( 1917 ) . She describes the formation of the fibrils of con - nective tissue from the ectoplasm of the cell . Summary of Results with Hypertonic Solutions . 1 . Hypertonic solutions were made by boiling down Locke - Lewis solution until the sodium chloride content was 1 . 2 , 1 . 5 , and 1 . 8 per cent respectively . 2 . Tissues grew in the first two of these solutions . 3 . Tissues did not live so long in these solutions as in normal Locke - Lewis solution and growth was slower . 4 . The cells of normal growth were killed by treatment with hyper - tonic solutions with a sodium chloride content of 1 . 8 and 1 . 5 per cent . MARY JANE HOGUE 643 5 . When treated with hypertonic solutions the cells usually con - tracted , their thin processes became long and thread - like and were later drawn into the body of the cell . 6 . Connective tissue fibrils formed from these thread - like processes . They moved and anastomosed with other fibrils . 7 . Neutral red channels formed in many cells . 8 . The cytoplasm frequentlybecame alveolarwhenthe death proc - ess set in . 9 . These three hypertonic solutions showed a definite gradation in their effects on the processes of the fibroblast . In Locke - Lewis solu - tion containing 1 . 8 per cent sodium chloride the processes contracted rapidly , leaving many thread - like structures in their places . These were quickly withdrawn and the cell soon died . In Locke - Lewis solution containing 1 . 5 per cent sodium chloride the thread - like proc - esses were frequently formed , but the cells did not all die ; some recovered . In Locke - Lewis solution containing 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride the processes still formed but more slowly . They also showed motion , which lasted as long as the cell was alive . Hypertonic versus Hypotonic Solutions . In comparing the growth in hypertonic with that in hypotonic media the following points may be emphasized . In the former the migration is slower than in the latter . In hypertonic solutions the optimum growth is reached on the 3rd day or later , in hypotonic solutions on the 2nd day . The growths live longer in hypertonic solutions but are , as a rule , smaller than in hypotonic solutions . Table I shows this difference of growth in the various media . TABLE I . ~ kmount of NaC in medium . per cent 1 . 8 1 . 5 1 . 2 0 . 9 0 . 54 0 . 45 0 . 225 Total No . of explauts . 38 130 100 282 23 202 12 No . that grew . 0 12 32 188 20 90 0 No . that died . 38 118 68 94 3 106 12 Growth . # er cent 0 9 32 66 . 6 86 . 9 44 . 5 0 Greatest No . of days any culture lived in the medium . 0 7 I l 15 l 19 7 12 0 644 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART There seemed to be a possibility of proving whether or not the neutral red granules and vacuoles are the product of metabolism , as Lewis ( 1919 ) believes , by an experiment in which parts of the same heart were grown respectively in Locke - Lewis normal solution , Locke - Lewis solution with sodium chloride content of 0 . 45 per cent , and with 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride content , the rate of growth being different in each of these media . Accordingly , pieces of heart from a 7 day chick embryo were planted in the three solutions and incubated for 48 hours . At the end of 24 h . ours nine of the normal Locke - Lewis cultures , eight of the 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride , and two of the 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride showed growth . . After another 24 hours of incubation eight of the Locke - Lewis , four of the 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride , and five of the 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride cultures were alive . Here is seen again the slow growth in hypertonic solutions . These cultures were stained with neutral red and Janus black No . 2 . Growth in both the Locke - Lewis solution and 1 . 2 per cent sodium chloride was good , and each showed a normal arrangement of the neutral red granules . In the hypotonic solution growth had been poor . Few cells had migrated , and in these the large neutral red vacuoles were full of deeply stained material . The cells , in their poor condition , were evidently having difficulty in getting rid of the waste products which were accumulating from metabolism . In working with hypertonic solutions , occasionally with normal Locke - Lewis solution , and in a few instances with hypotonic solutions , I observed an interesting attempt on the part of the tissue to adapt itself to the new medium . Tissues were planted in Locke - Lewis solution containing 1 . 8 and 1 . 5 per cent sodium chloride . On the following day transparent , balloon - like structures were noted , vary - ing in size from quite small to very large , which formed along the edges of the culture . Some explants had many of these balloons around the sides , others only a few large ones . Sometimes balloons of all sizes piled up in masses ( Text - fig . 46 ) , those at the top being free from the tissue . Upon close observation these structures were seen to begin as small hemispheres rising out of the explant . In time they became almost spherical and increased in size as though something from the tissue was being poured into them . Occa - ~ rARY JANE HOGUE 645 TEXT - FIG . 46 . Masses of balloons of all sizes piled up at the edge of the heart tissue which had been planted in . Locke - Lewis solution of 1 . 5 per cent sodium chloride content 48 hours before . TEXT - FIGS . 47 to 52 . The formation of a large balloon by the fusion of two small ones ( Text - figs . 47 and 48 ) . This large one elongated ( Text - fig . 49 ) , formed a stalk ( Text - fig . 50 ) , was pinched off ( Text - fig . 51 ) , and became free floating ( Text - fig . 52 ) . TEXT - FIG . 53 . Granular hills along the edge of a piece of heart planted in Locke - Lewis solution of 1 . 5 per cent sodium chloride content . TExT - FIGs . 54 and 55 . One of these granular hills enlarged and discharged its contents into the surrounding medium . 646 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART sionally two fused together , as shown in Text - figs . 47 and 48 . This particular one continued to increase in size until the pressure became so great that it elongated ( Text - fig . 49 ) . A small stalk was formed ( Text - fig . 50 ) which quickly snapped , thus freeing the balloon ( Text - fig . 51 ) . It rounded up into a ball within a few seconds ( Text - fig . 52 ) and rolled around over the tissue when the slide was tilted back and forth . It appeared to be taking in culture medium or else flat - tening out , as it continued to increase in size until one side grew faint , then disappeared , and the balloon went to pieces . Some cultures were full of these balloons floating around singly or in masses . They were frequently found being given off on the 2nd day , but were not seen to form after that , though those already formed persisted for several days . One slide 11 days old still showed masses of them , but these disappeared on the 12thday . The balloons were clear and transparent , and occasionally contained small particles like cells . There was a distinct surface tension which quickly rounded them up after they were given off . They were also very delicate structures , as evidenced by the fact that when attempts were made to transfer the cover - slip , with the culture in its hanging drop , from the depression slide with the vaseline ring to a straight slide with a large drop of the same hypertonic solution in which the tissue was planted , the balloons nearly always went to pieces , no matter how carefully the cover - slip was lowered onto the new drop of medium . Occasionally this transfer was successful , and on placing the slide under the microscope with dark - field illumination the balloons showed as small , milky white structures not only at the edges , as had appeared with the ordinary illumination , but all over the explant . There was another type of structure , which I have termed granu - lar hills , that also appeared over the explants . These were mor ~ stable and lasted as long as the cultures were kept . They grew in size , sometimes becoming quite large , though they were most fre - quently seen as small balls or hills along the edges or between the angles of the tissue ( Text - fig . 53 ) . They were very finely granular . Sometimes the surface tension would be taxed too much and the granular hill would break open at one place , pouring the fine granules into the surrounding medium ( Text - figs . 53 to 55 ) . MARY JANE HOGUE 647 Both balloons and granular hills would appear on the same explant . These explants never showed growth or migration of cells , though they would often continue to beat for several days . The structures described above were evidently a means of adjusting the tissue to its new medium . Some days every tissue planted in Locke - Lewis 1 . 8 and 1 . 5 per cent sodium chloride solutions would show the bal - loons or the granular hills , sometimes both . Again , a new medium , made in the same proportions of Locke solution , bouillon , and dex - trose , boiled down to the same volume as that used in the preceding experiments , would give few if any of these structures , and also practically no growth . The balloons and granular hills were not the large precipitations , with irregular , angular outlines , which are fre - quently observed in tissue cultures and which are much more coarsely granular . They may be the same material which Burrows and Ney - mann state is liberated from the cells when they are removed from their normal habitat to an oxygen - containing plasma or salt solution . These authors state that the substances are " almost transparent , their refraction not very different from that of the original medium , and they accumulate at the surface of the medium to form a membrane . " Perhaps the growth in plasma with a different osmotic pressure from Locke - Lewis solution may account for the membrane formation in - stead of the balloons and granular hills found in my experiments . On the other hand , they may be quite different substances , as Bur - rows and Neymann state that theirs " are liberated in large amounts from a tissue fragment rich in cells . " While the structures described above rarely appeared when there was cell migration , a few times I have found near the explant , after the cells had degenerated , granu - lar hills which had been completely covered over by the cells . BIBLIOGRAPHY . Baitsell , G . A . , Y . Exp . Med . , 1915 , xxi , 455 . Burrows , M . T . , Tr . Congr . Am . Phys . and Surg . , 1913 , ix , 77 . Burrows , M . T . , and Neymann , C . A . , J . Exp . Med . , 1917 , xxv , 93 . Carrel , A . , and Burrows , M . T . , J . Exp . Med . , 1911 , xiii , 562 . Cash , J . R . , Anat . Rec . , 1919 , xvi , 146 . Cowdry , E . V . , Carnegie Inst . Washington , Pub . No . 271 , 1918 , Contributions to embryology , viii , 39 . 648 FIBROBLASTS OF EMBRYO CHICK HEART Ebeling , A . H . , J . Exp . Med . , 1914 , xx , 130 . Goldschmidt , R . , Proc . Nat . Acad . So . , 1915 , i , 220 . Hogue , M . J . , J . Exp . Zool . , 1917 , xxii , 565 . Lambert , R . A . , J . Exp . Med . , 1914 , xix , 398 . Lewis , M . R . , Am . J . Physiol . , 1915 , xxxviii , 153 . Lewis , M . R . , Carnegie Inst . Washington , Pub . No . 226 , 1917 , Contributions to embryology , vi , 45 . Lewis , M . R . , and Lewis , W . H . , Anat . Rec . , 1912 , vi , 195 . Lewis , M . R . , and Lewis , W . H . , Am . J . Anat . , 1914 - 15 , xvii , 339 . Lewis , W . H . , Bull . Johns Hopkins Hosp . , 1919 , xxx , 81 . Macdin , C . C . , Carnegie Inst . Washington , Pub . No . 224 , 1916 , Contributions to embryology , iv , 69 . Ruth , E . S . , J . Exp . Med . , 1911 , xiii , 422 . Sundwall , J . , Bull . Hyg . Lab . , U . S . P . H . , No . 81 , 1912 . EXPLANATION OF PLATES . PLATE 56 . Fro . 1 . Photomicrograph of normal growth of chick heart tissue , showing fibroblasts at a in migration formation , and rnesothelial cell in membrane forma - tion at b . FIo . 2 . Photomicrograph of 3 day growth of chick heart tissue in hypotonic Locke - Lewis solution ( 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride ) , showing the early death of cells next to the explant . FIG . 3 . Photomicrograph of a normal 48 hour growth which was treated with hypotonic Locke - Lewis solution ( 0 . 45 per cent sodium chloride ) and incubated for 24 hours . Some of the cells next to the explant have been killed , but others are migrating out over them . THE JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL MEDICINE VOL . XXX . PLATE 56 . ( Hogue : Fibroblasts of embryo chick heart . )