University of Colorado , Boulder CU Scholar University Libraries Open Access Fund Supported Publications University Libraries Summer 6 - 17 - 2014 Less - Structured Time in Children ' s Daily Lives Predicts Self - Directed Executive Functioning Jane E . Barker University of Colorado Boulder , jane . barker @ colorado . edu Andrei D . Semenov University of Colorado Boulder Laura Michaelson University of Colorado Boulder Lindsay S . Provan University of Colorado Boulder Hannah R . Snyder University of Denver See next page for additional authors Follow this and additional works at : https : / / scholar . colorado . edu / libr _ oafund Part of the Neuroscience and Neurobiology Commons , and the Psychiatry and Psychology Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by University Libraries at CU Scholar . It has been accepted for inclusion in University Libraries Open Access Fund Supported Publications by an authorized administrator of CU Scholar . For more information , please contact cuscholaradmin @ colorado . edu . Recommended Citation Barker , Jane E . ; Semenov , Andrei D . ; Michaelson , Laura ; Provan , Lindsay S . ; Snyder , Hannah R . ; and Munakata , Yuko , " Less - Structured Time in Children ' s Daily Lives Predicts Self - Directed Executive Functioning " ( 2014 ) . University Libraries Open Access Fund Supported Publications . 7 . https : / / scholar . colorado . edu / libr _ oafund / 7 Authors Jane E . Barker , Andrei D . Semenov , Laura Michaelson , Lindsay S . Provan , Hannah R . Snyder , and Yuko Munakata This article is available at CU Scholar : https : / / scholar . colorado . edu / libr _ oafund / 7 ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE published : 17 June 2014 doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2014 . 00593 Less - structured time in children’s daily lives predicts self - directed executive functioning Jane E . Barker 1 * , Andrei D . Semenov 1 , Laura Michaelson 1 , Lindsay S . Provan 1 , Hannah R . Snyder 2 and Yuko Munakata 1 1 Department of Psychology and Neuroscience , University of Colorado Boulder , Boulder , CO , USA 2 Department of Psychology , University of Denver , Denver , CO , USA Edited by : Yusuke Moriguchi , Joetsu University of Education , Japan Reviewed by : Adele Diamond , The University of British Columbia , Canada Angeline Lillard , University of Virginia , USA * Correspondence : Jane E . Barker , Department of Psychology and Neuroscience , University of Colorado Boulder , 345 UCB , Boulder , CO 80309 , USA e - mail : jane . barker @ colorado . edu Executive functions ( EFs ) in childhood predict important life outcomes . Thus , there is great interest in attempts to improve EFs early in life . Many interventions are led by trained adults , including structured training activities in the lab , and less - structured activities implemented in schools . Such programs have yielded gains in children’s externally - driven executive functioning , where they are instructed on what goal - directed actions to carry out and when . However , it is less clear how children’s experiences relate to their development of self - directed executive functioning , where they must determine on their own what goal - directed actions to carry out and when . We hypothesized that time spent in less - structured activities would give children opportunities to practice self - directed executive functioning , and lead to beneﬁts . To investigate this possibility , we collected information from parents about their 6 – 7 year - old children’s daily , annual , and typical schedules . We categorized children’s activities as “structured” or “less - structured” based on categorization schemes from prior studies on child leisure time use . We assessed children’s self - directed executive functioning using a well - established verbal ﬂuency task , in which children generate members of a category and can decide on their own when to switch from one subcategory to another . The more time that children spent in less - structured activities , the better their self - directed executive functioning . The opposite was true of structured activities , which predicted poorer self - directed executive functioning . These relationships were robust ( holding across increasingly strict classiﬁcations of structured and less - structured time ) and speciﬁc ( time use did not predict externally - driven executive functioning ) . We discuss implications , caveats , and ways in which potential interpretations can be distinguished in future work , to advance an understanding of this fundamental aspect of growing up . Keywords : cognitive development , self - directed executive function , leisure time , unstructured activities , verbal ﬂuency INTRODUCTION Why do young children often forget ( or outright refuse ) to put on a coat before leaving the house on a snowy day ? The choice to put on a jacket may seem frustratingly obvious to parents and older siblings , but this simple decision arises from a surprisingly complex interplay of behaviors . Children must keep in mind a goal ( staying warm and dry ) that is not yet relevant in the comfort of a warm house . They must inhibit the urge to proceed with a regular sequence of tasks ( put on socks and shoes and head out the door ) , and instead modify their routine to include something new ( pulling a coat from the closet ) . Unless someone intervenes , this change in the status quo must be accomplished without any external reminders ( a visible coat , or a well - timed reminder from a caregiver ) . To accomplish each of these tasks , children must engage executive functions ( EFs ) , the cognitive control processes that regulate thought and action in support of goal - directed behav - ior . EFs develop dramatically during childhood ( e . g . , Gathercole et al . , 2004 ; Zelazo et al . , 2008 ; McAuley et al . , 2011 ; Munakata et al . , 2012 ) , and support a number of higher - level cogni - tive processes , including planning and decision - making , mainte - nance and manipulation of information in memory , inhibition of unwanted thoughts , feelings , and actions , and ﬂexible shift - ing from one task to another . Researchers have used a variety of laboratory tasks to measure child EFs , including table - top behavioral tasks ( e . g . , the classic marshmallow test , card - sorting tasks ) and computerized tasks ( e . g . , Go / No - go , Flanker ) , many of which tap multiple aspects of EF . Over the past decade , EFs have emerged as critical , early predictors of suc - cess across a range of important outcomes , including school readiness in preschoolers ( Miller et al . , 2013 ) , as well as aca - demic performance at school entry ( Blair and Razza , 2007 ; Cameron et al . , 2012 ) and beyond ( St Clair - Thompson and Gathercole , 2006 ; Best et al . , 2011 ) . Moreover , children with worse EF go on to have poorer health , wealth , and social out - comes in adulthood than children with better EF , even after www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 1 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function controlling for differences in general intelligence ( Mofﬁtt et al . , 2011 ) . Given the established links between early EFs and later life out - comes , a number of studies have investigated whether EF abilities can be changed through experience , with some notable successes . Most of this work has involved adult - led training or interventions , which allow children to practice EFs in an environment where adults provide some guidance . For example , children’s working memory , or their ability to maintain and manipulate information across a delay , can be improved through short periods of targeted training ( e . g . , Holmes et al . , 2009 ; Bergman Nutley et al . , 2011 ) . During such training , children are presented with sequences of spoken or visual stimuli . After a brief pause , the child is instructed to reproduce the sequence either in forward order ( requiring maintenance of information , but no manipulation ) or in reverse order ( requiring maintenance and manipulation ) . After training , children often show better performance in similar tasks assess - ing the same skills ( e . g . , Holmes et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Thorell et al . , 2009 ; Bergman Nutley et al . , 2011 ; reviewed in Diamond and Lee , 2011 ; Shipstead et al . , 2012 ) . In addition , children’s cogni - tive ﬂexibility , or ability to change tasks or strategies in response to new environmental demands , can be improved via interven - tions implemented in preschool curricula ( Lillard and Else - quest , 2006 ; Diamond et al . , 2007 ; Bierman et al . , 2008 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) . These curricula have ranged from partial - day , small - group sessions where children play games developed to exercise EFs ( Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) , to comprehensive , full - day imple - mentations , such as those found in Tools of the Mind ( Diamond et al . , 2007 ) and Montessori ( Lillard and Else - quest , 2006 ) class - rooms , where teachers are trained to scaffold developing EFs throughout the day . Relative to children in business - as - usual classrooms , children enrolled in such curricula have subsequently shown better performance in tasks where they must ﬂexibly shift from one rule ( e . g . , sorting cards by their shape ) to another ( e . g . , switching to sorting the cards by color ) . Altering children’s experiences with such training and inter - ventions has thus led to improvements in children’s externally - driven EF , where they are instructed on what to do ( e . g . , sort cards according to shape ; remember a sequence of digits ) , and when ( e . g . , now switch and sort according to color ; now recall the digits in reverse order ) . In the real world , children who have developed externally - driven EF might behave in a goal - directed way when given reminders . For example , a child might successfully put on a coat in the morning after a reminder from a caregiver . However , it is less clear how children’s experiences relate to their devel - opment of more self - directed executive functioning , where they must determine on their own what goal - directed actions to carry out and when . A self - directed child , for example , might put a coat on just before going outside without being told what to do . The development of self - directed EF is a critical part of grow - ing up . Self - directed EFs develop later than externally - driven forms of executive control ( Welsh et al . , 1991 ; Jacques and Zelazo , 2001 ; Smidts et al . , 2004 ; Snyder and Munakata , 2010 ; Chevalier et al . , 2011 ) , and prove to be more cognitively demanding , even in adults ( e . g . , Bryck and Mayr , 2005 ; Forstmann et al . , 2005 ; Lie et al . , 2006 ) . Tasks assessing self - directed control typically pro - vide an overall goal , but challenge participants to generate their own rules for how and when to employ EFs to achieve that goal . For example , in the verbal ﬂuency task , which is a frequently - used and longstanding measure of EF ( e . g . , Troyer et al . , 1997 , 1998 ; Henry and Crawford , 2004 ; Sauzéon et al . , 2004 ; Costafreda et al . , 2006 ; Birn et al . , 2010 ; Raboutet et al . , 2010 ; Unsworth et al . , 2010 ) , participants are given a category ( e . g . , foods ) , and asked to produce as many words falling within that category as possi - ble across a 1 - min interval . To produce many items , participants may cluster responses ( by grouping words that fall within the same semantic subcategory ) and switch between subcategories when available exemplars are in short supply ( e . g . , Troyer et al . , 1997 , 1998 ; Abwender et al . , 2001 ; Koren et al . , 2005 ) . Individuals must endogenously detect the need to switch ( e . g . , when they cannot think of more breakfast foods ) and select what to switch to ( e . g . , desserts , vegetables , or fruits ) . Each process critically relies on generation of internal cues and becomes less executively demanding when external cues are instead provided ( Randolph et al . , 1993 ; Tremblay and Gracco , 2006 ; Snyder and Munakata , 2010 ) . Consistent with this analysis of the self - directed nature of this task , switching among subcategories has been well - validated as the most executively - demanding component of verbal ﬂuency tasks : switching ( as opposed to naming items within clusters ) activates prefrontal cortex ( e . g . , Hirshorn and Thompson - Schill , 2006 ) , is impaired by prefrontal lesions ( e . g . , Troyer et al . , 1998 ) , and has the most protracted developmental course , with per - formance continuing to increase through adolescence ( e . g . , Kave et al . , 2008 ) . Young children often fail to switch from one subcate - gory to another , and instead perseverate on an initial subcategory ( e . g . , naming ﬁve different breakfast foods , and then indicating to the experimenter that they are ﬁnished ) . However , like patients with frontal lobe dysfunction , who beneﬁt from semantic cueing during verbal ﬂuency ( Randolph et al . , 1993 ; Drane et al . , 2006 ; Iudicello et al . , 2012 ) , children can improve on the task when demands on self - directed EF are reduced by providing example subcategories prior to the task ( Snyder and Munakata , 2010 ) . This body of literature highlights the role of self - directed EF in switching among subcategories in the verbal ﬂuency task . We predicted that children’s self - directed EFs might beneﬁt from participation in less structured activities , where children , rather than adults , choose what they will do and when . Such experiences could support the practice of self - directed executive functioning , and lead to beneﬁts . For example , children may prac - tice engaging self - directed forms of EF by establishing goals and carrying them out across an afternoon ( “ﬁrst I’ll read this book , then I’ll make a drawing about the book , then I’ll show every - one my drawing” ) or during a visit to a museum ( “ﬁrst I want to see the dinosaur exhibit , and then I want to learn about rocks” ) . These types of self - directed choice and planning are central to the Tools of the Mind and Montessori classrooms , although the exact form they take and the types of activities emphasized differ across these programs ( Montessori , 1976 ; Bodrova , 2003 ; Bodrova and Leong , 2007 ) . For example , extended , social pretend play ﬁgures centrally in the Tools of the Mind program . This program is based on the work of Vygotsky ( Bodrova and Leong , 2007 ) , who theorized that imaginative play supports the development of self - directed EF , in children’s transitions from other - regulated to self - regulated Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 2 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function cognitive processes ( Vygotsky , 1967 ) . During pretend play , chil - dren may practice engaging self - directed forms of EF by develop - ing and maintaining their own goals to guide their behavior , even in the presence of conﬂicting environmental signals : a child who uses a wooden spoon as a wand maintains a pretend use while inhibiting a typical use ( stirring a pot ) . Children’s pretend play , as assessed during laboratory tasks with an adult experimenter , does predict their externally - driven EFs ( Albertson and Shore , 2009 ; Kelly et al . , 2011 ; Carlson et al . , 2014 ) ; however , this relationship has been observed less reliably when pretend play is assessed dur - ing naturalistic play ( e . g . , Elias and Berk , 2002 ; Kelly et al . , 2011 ; cf . Harris and Berk , as discussed in Lillard et al . , 2013 ) . While preschool programs such as Tools of the Mind and Montessori implement the types of activities that we predict will beneﬁt self - directed EFs , and such programs improve children’s externally - driven EFs as discussed above , little work has inves - tigated the relationship between such activities and the devel - opment of self - directed EFs . One study found that 12 - year - old Montessori students were rated more highly on a measure of creativity than non - Montessori students , when writing answers to complete the prompt , “ _ _ had the best / worst day at school” ( Lillard and Else - quest , 2006 ) . While such ﬁndings are sugges - tive because open - ended writing assignments have the potential to tap self - directed EFs , the prompt completion task is not an established measure of self - directed EFs , and there is some debate about the extent to which creativity reﬂects EF ( e . g . , Groborz and Ne¸cka , 2003 ; Chrysikou and Thompson - Schill , 2011 ; Ellamil et al . , 2012 ; Jarosz et al . , 2012 ) . In addition , improved perfor - mance on this task may also reﬂect other beneﬁts from such programs to language or writing skills ; additional beneﬁts were in fact observed on this task in the Montessori students’ sentence sophistication . Moreover , it is unclear whether a broader range of less - structured activities outside of formal schooling yield EF ben - eﬁts . Investigating this question is important , given that effects observed inside formal settings with trained adults may not gen - eralize to other settings ( as in the case of the pretend play effects discussed above ) , and given that not all families have access to the school settings where effects have been observed . As a ﬁrst step in examining the question of how children’s experiences outside of formal schooling relate to EFs , we con - ducted a naturalistic , correlational study , in which we measured the time that 6 - year - old children spent in their daily lives in struc - tured and less - structured activities and tested whether it predicted performance in the lab on well - established executive function tasks , both externally - driven and self - directed . At this age , chil - dren spend some time in both structured and less - structured activities ( e . g . , Meeks and Mauldin , 1990 ; Hofferth and Sandberg , 2001a ) and show some ability in self - directed control tasks , with - out showing high levels of proﬁciency ( e . g . , Welsh et al . , 1991 ; Brocki and Bohlin , 2004 ; Kave et al . , 2008 ; Snyder and Munakata , 2010 , 2013 ) . To classify structured and less - structured activities , we relied on studies of child leisure time use ( e . g . , Meeks and Mauldin , 1990 ; Larson and Verma , 1999 ; Hofferth and Sandberg , 2001b ; Fletcher et al . , 2003 ; Osgood et al . , 2005 ) , which have attempted to discriminate between activities constituting structured , or constructive leisure , and “unstructured” leisure activities . “Unstructured” activities in this literature might be bet - ter thought of as “less - structured” activities , given that they can include some adult structuring , so we use the latter terminology throughout this paper . Most leisure time studies have identiﬁed structured leisure activities as those that are “supervised to some degree by a conventional adult , are highly structured , and pro - vide [ children ] with a clear set of conventional activities in which to engage” ( Agnew and Petersen , 1989 , p . 335 ) . Such activities “are . . . organized by adults around speciﬁc social or behavioral goals” ( Fletcher et al . , 2003 , p . 641 ) . Thus , structured time in the present study was deﬁned to include any time outside of formal schooling 1 spent in activities organized and supervised by adults ( e . g . , piano lessons , organized soccer practice , com - munity service , homework ) . Less - structured activities have been described more loosely , and generally include voluntary leisure activities where adults provide fewer guidelines or direct instruc - tions , such as activities that are “spontaneous , [ taking ] place without formal rules or direction from adult leaders , and [ fea - turing ] few goals related to skill development” ( Mahoney and Stattin , 2000 , p . 116 ) . Our coding scheme follows existing coding schemes documented in Meeks and Mauldin ( 1990 ) and Hofferth and Sandberg ( 2001b ) . In cases where these coding schemes dif - fered , we reviewed the literature to ensure that our coding was in accordance with the majority of other time use studies 2 . In the present study , less - structured activities included activities such as free play , family and social events , reading , drawing , and media time . While these classiﬁcations are imperfect ( e . g . , they do not capture the degree of structure within and across classiﬁcations— an issue we return to in the Discussion ) , they allow us to build on the existing literature , and serve as an important starting point for testing our predictions ; further analyses allow us to test the importance of particular activities within these classiﬁcations . We hypothesized that the amount of time children spent in less - structured activities would predict their self - directed EF , over and above any differences attributable to age , general vocabulary knowledge , and household income . We expected these effects to be speciﬁc , such that less - structured activities would not predict externally - driven EF and structured activities would not predict self - directed EF . METHODS PARTICIPANTS Seventy children participated in the study [ M age = 6 . 58 years ; range = ( 6 . 01 – 7 . 00 years ) ; males = 37 ] . All participants were 1 We did not classify time spent in school as “structured” because the degree of structure in school settings can vary a great deal , and parent reports are likely to be inaccurate ( since parents often do not have direct knowledge of child activities during schooling hours ) . Our deﬁnition of structured activi - ties is also consistent with past studies of structured leisure time , which have excluded time spent in school ( e . g . , Meeks and Mauldin , 1990 ; Larson and Verma , 1999 ; Mahoney and Stattin , 2000 ; Hofferth and Sandberg , 2001b ; Fletcher et al . , 2003 ; Osgood et al . , 2005 ) . 2 Hofferth and Sandberg ( 2001b ) separately identify reading , studying , and television watching as learning activities . However , we have classiﬁed read - ing and television as less - structured time , and studying as structured time , in keeping with other studies ( e . g . , Meeks and Mauldin , 1990 ; Eccles and Barber , 1999 ; Fletcher et al . , 2003 ) . www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 3 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function recruited from a database of families who had volunteered to participate in research . During subject recruitment , parents were informed that they would be asked to document child activities during the week prior to the study visit . Three participants were excluded from analyses because detailed information on their weekly activities was unavailable , either because parents did not wish to provide this information ( 2 ) , or because data were lost due to a technical error at the time of parent submission ( 1 ) . Of the remaining participants , one child did not complete the Flanker task , one child did not complete the digit span task , and two children did not complete the verbal ﬂuency task ; each of these children was excluded from the analysis of only that task . All other participants completed all study tasks . Prior to their partic - ipation , parents gave informed consent , and children gave verbal assent . Children received small gifts ( e . g . , gliders , balls ) through - out the project for their participation , and parents received $ 5 as compensation for travel . DESIGN AND PROCEDURE Children were individually tested in a single session lasting approximately 1 . 5 h , with breaks given as needed . All children completed tasks in the same order : AX - CPT , Flanker , forward digit span ( for other purposes , not discussed further in this report 3 ) , verbal ﬂuency , and the Expressive Vocabulary Test . During the child tasks , parents provided demographic infor - mation and completed surveys of children’s daily , annual , and typical schedules , as well as an exploratory “helicopter parenting” scale ( not discussed further in this report ; from Obradovic , pers . commun . , October 26 , 2011 ) . Parent questionnaires Parent survey of child time use . Parents reported all child activ - ities during the week prior to the laboratory test session using a computer - based survey . At the time that the study visit was sched - uled , parents were informed that they would complete a detailed child activity survey during their visit , and were encouraged to take notes on their child’s activities throughout the week . Parents were allowed to consult notes as they completed the survey . The survey was formatted as a 36 × 7 grid , such that each cell rep - resented a 30 - min time interval during the prior week ( intervals occurring between midnight and 5 : 30 am were excluded to reduce burden ) . In each cell , parents wrote short , open - ended descrip - tion of their child’s activities , excluding times where children were sleeping or in school ( parents indicated sleep and school sched - ules in a separate section of the survey ) . Before completing the survey , parents were asked to indicate the extent to which their family’s activities over the prior week reﬂected typical patterns of time use . Parents rated their level of agreement with the prompt , “Was your family’s schedule last week unusual or atypical ? ” via a 7 - point scale anchored by “Strongly agree” and “Strongly dis - agree . ” Parents were then given verbal and written instructions , as follows : 3 Forward digit span tasks ( where children repeat numbers in the order they are presented by an experimenter ) primarily index storage capacity , rather than combined storage and processing capacity , and therefore do not serve as a reliable measure of EF ( Daneman and Merikle , 1996 ; Engle et al . , 1999 ) . “Be as speciﬁc as possible for every activity you report . For exam - ple , for time spent in the car during a commute , rather than writing , “Drove from _ _ _ to _ _ _ , ” you could write , “Watched a DVD with his sister in the car while driving to the city for a research appointment . ” Indicate who your child was interacting with during a given activity . For example , if your child had free time to play outside between dinner and bedtime , rather than writing “Free time out - side , ” you could write , “Played tag outside with older sister and friends from the neighborhood . ” Or , if your child reads before bedtime , rather than writing , “Reading time , ” you could write , “Read aloud to mom before bed . ” Indicate simultaneous activities . For example , if your child ate a snack after school or camp while he / she had some down time , rather than writing “Snack time , ” you could write , “Ate a snack while coloring . ” As parents completed the survey , experimenters periodically reviewed responses and asked that parents modify entries that were difﬁcult to interpret or insufﬁciently detailed . Experimenters were also available during breaks between tasks to respond to parent questions about speciﬁc responses . Child activity data were coded by three independent raters who were blind to data on all other tasks during each stage of the coding process . Coders assigned a numeric code to each cell - based survey entry using an activity classiﬁcation scheme ( Table 1 ) . To ensure consistency across raters and reduce proce - dural drift , all raters independently classiﬁed each cell for the ﬁrst 35 participants . Coders then met to discuss major discrepancies and to generate additional generalizable rules . Coders categorized responses from the ﬁnal 32 participants using these agreed - upon criteria . The ﬁnal 32 subjects were used to establish inter - rater reliability ; reliabilities among pairs of coders ranged from 0 . 96 to 0 . 97 , with coders agreeing on 7942 to 8021 cells out of 8288 total ( i . e . , 2 cells per hour × 18 . 5 h / day × 7 days a week × 32 par - ticipants ) . Excluding sleep and school cells ( where there were no discrepancies between coders ) , reliabilities among pairs of coders were also high , ranging from 0 . 93 to 0 . 95 . The three coders met to discuss discrepancies and generate a ﬁnal , coded data set for each participant . After the raters generated the ﬁnal set of activity codes , each activity was further classiﬁed as either “Structured” or “Less - Structured” based on the coding scheme outlined in Table 1 , following existing coding schemes ( Meeks and Mauldin , 1990 ; Eccles and Barber , 1999 ; Mahoney and Stattin , 2000 ; Hofferth and Sandberg , 2001b ; Fletcher et al . , 2003 ; Osgood et al . , 2005 ) . All child - initiated activities ( play , spontaneous practice , reading , watching television ) and outings and events ( museum or library visits , sporting events ) were coded as “Less - Structured . ” Adult - led lessons and practices , homework and studying , religious activi - ties , and organization meetings ( e . g . , community service ) were coded as “Structured . ” Parent survey of typical child time spent in less - structured activities . In a separate survey , parents were asked to indi - cate how often their children engaged in typical play activities by using a 7 - point scale ( “Never , ” “Less than once a month , ” Once a month , ” “2 – 3 times a month , ” “Once a week , ” “2 – 3 times a week , ” “Daily” ) to rate the following items : “Surf the Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 4 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function Table 1 | Classiﬁcation of child time use ( structured , less - structured , and other activities ) . STRUCTURED ACTIVITIES Physical lessons ( e . g . , soccer practice , karate ) Non - physical lessons ( e . g . , piano lessons , art class ) Tutoring Homework and study Chores Religious activities Other formal organizational meetings and activities ( e . g . , community service ) LESS - STRUCTURED ACTIVITIES Unguided , child - initiated practice ( e . g . , playing piano or singing outside of scheduled practice times ; shooting goals outside of soccer practice ) Free play alone Free play with others Social outings Visits to family and friends Parties Camping Picnics Other group activities ( e . g . , walks , bike rides , skiing , swimming , bowling , golf ) Enrichment activities Sightseeing Aquarium and zoo visits Museums Miscellaneous educational events ( e . g . , science fair ) Other entertainment ( e . g . , live sporting events , performances , movies ) Reading Media and screen time ( e . g . , TV , internet , video games ) OTHER ACTIVITIES Sleeping Meals / eating School Care by others Personal care and hygiene Child appointments Commuting and travel time Unknown / Unreported All entries that parents provided in the child time use survey were classiﬁed into these categories , following existing coding schemes ( Meeks and Mauldin , 1990 ; Eccles and Barber , 1999 ; Mahoney and Stattin , 2000 ; Hofferth and Sandberg , 2001b ; Fletcher et al . , 2003 ; Osgood et al . , 2005 ) . internet , ” “Watch television , videos / DVD , or online media , ” “Play video games ( non - instructional ) , ” “Play interactive instructional or learning games , ” “Play with toys alone , ” “Play with toys with friends / siblings , ” “Play physical games with friends / siblings , ” “Play physical games alone , ” “Play non - physical games alone , ” “Play card or board games with family , ” “Read , ” “Help with housework or cooking , ” “Play musical instrument” , “Listen to music . ” Scores on each item ( where 1 = “Never” and 7 = “Daily” ) were summed to produce a typical less - structured activity score . Parent survey of seasonal child activities . In a separate sur - vey , parents were asked to indicate the number of hours their child spent in structured lessons during the past year . Parents responded to 18 common structured lessons ( basketball , base - ball , tennis , hockey , soccer , football , golf , swimming , dance , gymnastics , martial arts , skiing / snowboarding , ice skating , music , art , theater , and tutoring ) and were asked to write in any structured lessons that did not fall into these categories ( most commonly , religious activities , and organizational meetings ) . To reduce burden , parents provided seasonal time estimations for each activity ( e . g . , the typical hours per week a child spent partic - ipating in music lessons over the prior fall ) . Data were reviewed for accuracy to ensure that parent - reported structured activities adhered to the same coding guidelines used to evaluate the Parent Survey of Weekly Activities . Cumulative hours spent in structured activities across the year were summed to produce an annual structured hours score . Household income . Parents reported annual household income via an interval scale ( median bracket : $ 100 , 000— $ 124 , 999 ; range : < $ 25 , 000 to > $ 150 , 000 USD ) . Fourteen parents chose not to disclose income information . Child endogenous executive function measure Verbal ﬂuency . In the verbal ﬂuency task , children were asked to generate words in response to a categorical prompt . The task was presented as a game to make it more engaging for children ( as in Snyder and Munakata , 2013 ) . Children were told , “We’re going to play a game where we think of lots and lots of words . I bet you’re really good at thinking of words , aren’t you ? I’ll tell you what kinds of words to think of , and every time you tell me one , I’ll put a pom - pom in your cup . Let’s see how many pom - poms you can get before all the sand is gone ( experimenter pointed to a 1 - min sand timer children could use to estimate how much time was left ) . I’ll bet you can get a lot ! And when we are all done think - ing of words , you can trade the pom - poms for a prize . ” Before each category , the experimenter said , “This time I want you to tell me as many [ category name ] as you can think of . Can you think of lots and lots of [ category name ] ? Ready , go ! ” The exper - imenter placed a pom - pom in a clear plastic cup in front of the child for each new exemplar . If children paused for 10 s or longer between items , they were encouraged to continue ( “Good job , can you tell me some more [ category name ] ? ” ) . In the rare instance where a child stated that she / he had named all words , the experi - menter double - checked with the child ( e . g . , “Are you sure ? What other [ category name ] can you think of ? ” ) and waited with the child until the end of the block . Children completed three blocks using this procedure , each of 1 - min duration : a practice block ( with the prompt “household items” ) , and two test blocks ( with the prompts “animals” and “foods , ” which were counterbalanced across participants ) . Verbal ﬂuency data were transcribed from audio recordings , and coded by the experimenter and two independent raters blind to data on all other tasks . Coders identiﬁed clusters of items that were semantically related ( e . g . , “cookies , pie , cake” when produc - ing foods ) . Switches between clusters of related items were iden - tiﬁed and summed to generate cumulative switch scores . Switch scores were weighted by cluster size ( as in Snyder and Munakata , 2010 , 2013 ) , such that 1 point was awarded for a switch after a cluster of 2 related items , 2 points for a switch after 3 related items , 3 points for switch after 4 related items , and so on . Weighted switch scores were used because they reﬂect increasing conﬁdence as cluster size increases that children are indeed clustering and www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 5 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function switching . Unweighted scoring systems ( e . g . , Troyer et al . , 1997 ) , which count every transition between subcategories equally ( including between single , unclustered items ) , have been criti - cized for confounding switching with a failure to cluster ( e . g . , Abwender et al . , 2001 ) . Inter - rater reliabilities were high between all pairs ( > 85 % ) . To generate cumulative switch scores for each participant , weighted switch scores were averaged across coders within each prompt , and then summed . Child externally - driven executive function measures Flanker . Children completed a computerized ﬂanker task ( Eriksen and Schultz , 1979 ) assessing their ability to resolve conﬂicting visual information by appropriately responding to a central stimulus while ignoring ﬂanking stimuli . The Flanker task is a commonly - used measure of externally - directed EF in 6 - year - olds ( e . g . , Ridderinkhof and van der Molen , 1995 ; Rueda et al . , 2004 , 2005 ; McDermott et al . , 2007 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) and has been shown to be sensitive to some interventions target - ing EF in this age group ( Fisher et al . , 2011 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) . During the task , children were instructed to indicate the orientation ( left or right pointing ) of a centrally - presented target stimulus , via a corresponding button press . In congruent trials , the target stimulus ( the center ﬁsh ) was surrounded by ﬁsh with the same orientation . In incongruent trials , the target image was surrounded by ﬁsh with an opposite orientation . In neutral tri - als , only the target image was presented and was not surrounded by any ﬁsh . Following a 10 - trial practice block ( 4 congruent , 4 incongruent , 2 neutral ) , children completed three 32 - trial blocks of the task : two incongruent blocks ( for each block , incongruent trial N = 16 ; neutral trial N = 16 ) , separated by one congruent block ( congruent trial N = 16 ; neutral trial N = 16 ) . Trials were presented in random order within blocks . Reaction times were used to assess children’s ability to resolve interference among conﬂicting stimuli , as in past work with this age group ( e . g . , Rueda et al . , 2005 ; McDermott et al . , 2007 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) . Incongruent trials require children to attend to only the target middle ﬁsh and to ignore the surround - ing ﬁsh . Therefore , the ﬂanker task can be used to assess children’s ability to ﬁlter out irrelevant information . Larger interference costs ( i . e . , the difference between average response time on incon - gruent trials and average response time on neutral trials ) reﬂect greater difﬁculty ﬁltering irrelevant information . To assess ﬁlter - ing ability , we ﬁrst calculated participant mean response times for each trial type ( neutral , incongruent / congruent ) within each block across trimmed , correct trials ( trials < 100 and > 3000 ms were excluded , as well as any trials three standard deviations out - side that participant’s mean for that trial type and block ) . To generate robust estimates of possible interference effects ( as sug - gested by Lavie , 1995 , and implemented in D’Ostilio and Garraux , 2012 ) , incongruent / congruent trial mean RTs were contrasted with neutral trial mean RTs from the same block , yielding one congruent - neutral contrast and two incongruent - neutral con - trasts within each participant . Flanker conﬂict scores were gener - ated by subtracting the congruent contrast from each incongruent contrast ( yielding two conﬂict scores , one arising from each incongruent block ) . These conﬂict scores were averaged to gen - erate a summary ﬂanker conﬂict score . AX - CPT . Children completed the AX Continuous Performance Task ( AX - CPT ) , which provides a measure of proactive control , or the tendency to maintain goal - relevant information until it is needed ( Braver et al . , 2007 ) . All procedures and analyses were conducted as in Chatham et al . ( 2009 ) . In this touchscreen - based , child - friendly version , children are allowed to prepare for future circumstances ( the appearance of either “X” or “Y” image probes ) based on previous experiences ( the appearance of “A” or “B” image cues ) . Children were instructed to respond with a target response whenever the “A” context cue was followed by an “X” probe . Children were instructed to provide a non - target response to all other cue - probe sequences ( A – Y ; B – X ; B – Y ) . To improve child engagement during the task , popular cartoon characters were used as image stimuli , and the instructions took the form of char - acter preferences . For example , children were told , “Spongebob likes watermelon , so press the happy face when you see Spongebob and then the watermelon , ” and , “Blue doesn’t like the slinky , so press the sad face when you see Blue and then the slinky . ” After the experimenter explained the task rules , children com - pleted a “veriﬁcation” phase to ensure that they understood the instructions and were capable of following rules . During this phase , each cue – probe pair was presented sequentially , and par - ticipants were asked to indicate the correct response for each pair . If subjects responded incorrectly to a cue - probe pair , the experi - menter repeated the relevant rule ( “Remember , when you see [ A , B ] and then you see [ X , Y ] , tap this button [ appropriate button blinks ] as quickly as you can ! ” ) and subjects were allowed to try again . Participants then completed 7 practice trials . Cues were presented for 500 ms , followed by a 120 ms delay period , and a subsequent 6 s probe , as in test trials . Test trials were presented in four 30 - trial blocks , where 70 % of trials were target ( A – X ) trials , and 30 % were non - target trials ( A – Y ; B – X ; B – Y , appearing in equal proportion ) . Proactive children show a characteristic behavioral proﬁle that can be used to generate an RT - based measure of proactive con - trol . Children who engage proactive control generate fast RTs in BX and BY trials , since maintenance of the “B” cue supports a non - target response to the subsequent “X” probe , and slower RTs on AY trials , since active maintenance of the “A” cue leads to anticipation of an “X” probe ( due to the expectancy generated by asymmetric trial type frequencies ) . Proactive control was thus calculated using the median of trimmed RTs on correct AY and BX trials , which were entered into the formula ( AY – BX ) / ( AY + BX ) . All responses made < 200 ms after the presentation of the probe were removed from the analysis , resulting in the exclusion of < 1 % of all trials . Expressive vocabulary test . The EVT ( Pearson Assessments , Bloomington , MN ) is a standardized , nationally normed , expressive vocabulary test , which we used ( as in Snyder and Munakata , 2010 ) to control for differences in vocabulary that might have inﬂuenced verbal ﬂuency performance ( i . e . , a child with a robust vocabulary might be capable of generating larger clusters than a child with a limited vocabulary , independent of either child’s switching ability ) . On each trial of the EVT , children are shown a colored picture and are asked to name it or provide Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 6 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function a synonym ( e . g . , “Can you tell me another word for father ? ” ) . Testing continues until children incorrectly answer ﬁve items in a row , and raw scores are then converted into a standardized score based on age . RESULTS PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS APPROACH Weekly and annual / typical estimates of how children spent their time ( Figures 1A – C ) were marginally correlated , for both struc - tured activities ( r = 0 . 24 ; p < 0 . 06 ) and less - structured activities ( r = 0 . 23 ; p < 0 . 071 ) . We thus generated composite scores across weekly and annual / typical estimates to provide a more accurate and reliable measure of children’s time . Each composite measure ( for structured time , and separately for less - structured time ) was formed by summing z - scored time in prior - week activities with z - scored ratings from the parent survey of annual / typical child activities , within each participant . All analyses were conducted using standard linear regression . We included age , gender , and family income as factors in all models , given that they or related factors are often predictive of children’s EF : age ( e . g . , Welsh et al . , 1991 ; Huizinga et al . , 2006 ) , gender ( e . g . , Blair et al . , 2005 ; Diamond et al . , 2007 ) , family income Hughes et al . , 2009 ; as a component of SES : ( Farah et al . , 2006 ; Noble et al . , 2005 , 2007 ; Raver et al . , 2013 ) . Child vocabu - lary , as indexed by EVT performance , was included as a covariate in all tests of verbal ﬂuency performance . Descriptive statistics for executive function , vocabulary , and time use measures are given in Table 2 . Individual EF measures were not correlated , before or after controlling for age ( p ’s > 0 . 4 ) . For all analyses , outlying observations were identiﬁed ( Cook’s D > 3 standard deviations above the mean ) and removed . This resulted in the exclusion of no more than four cases from any analysis . CHILD TIME USE AND SELF - DIRECTED EF Less - structured time As predicted , children who spent more time in less - structured activities demonstrated better self - directed EF , as indexed by verbal ﬂuency performance [ η 2 p = 0 . 07 ; F ( 1 , 44 ) = 4 . 46 ; p < 0 . 05 ; Figure 2A ; Table 3 ] . In addition , older children and children with higher vocabulary scores demonstrated better verbal ﬂuency performance [ Age : η 2 p = 0 . 11 ; F ( 1 , 44 ) = 7 . 45 ; p < 0 . 01 ; EVT : η 2 p = 0 . 10 ; F ( 1 , 44 ) = 6 . 30 ; p < 0 . 02 ] . In subsequent tests for interactions , we found an unexpected interaction between less - structured time and age [ Less - structured time × Age : η 2 p = 0 . 08 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 5 . 48 ; p < 0 . 03 ] . Post - hoc tests indicated that additional time in less - structured activities predicted better self - directed control in most but not all children ; speciﬁcally , this ﬁnding held in both the youngest sample quartile [ M age = 6 . 38 years , Less - structured time : η 2 p = 0 . 07 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 10 . 37 ; p < 0 . 003 ] and at the median [ M age = 6 . 65 years , Less - structured time : η 2 p = 0 . 07 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 6 . 81 ; p < 0 . 02 ] , but not in the oldest quar - tile ( M age = 6 . 86 years ; p > 0 . 8 ) . When the interaction between less - structured time and age was included in the model , children from higher - income households demonstrated marginally better verbal ﬂuency performance { Income : η 2 p = 0 . 05 ; [ F ( 1 , 43 ) = 3 . 36 ; p < 0 . 08 ] } . Age , vocabulary , and time in less - structured activities also continued to predict self - directed EF [ Age : η 2 p = 0 . 12 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 5 . 76 ; p < 0 . 03 ; Vocabulary : η 2 p = 0 . 07 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 4 . 80 ; p < 0 . 04 ; Less - structured time : η 2 p = 0 . 07 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 6 . 81 ; p < 0 . 02 ] . Exploratory analyses . We next investigated whether speciﬁc kinds of less - structured activities were driving the observed rela - tionship between less - structured time and self - directed control . Composite variables representing common less - structured activ - ities were created by aggregating similar responses across prior - week and annual / typical measures 4 . This procedure yielded seven broad categories of less - structured activities : unguided practice ; play alone ; play with others ; social events with family ( includ - ing parties , camping , picnics , and other group outings , such as hiking , biking , and swimming 5 ) , enrichment events ( visits to the museum , library , aquarium , or zoo ; sightseeing ; and miscel - laneous educational events ) , other entertainment ( movies , per - formances , and live sporting events ) ; reading ; and media and screen time . Enrichment activities [ η 2 p = 0 . 11 ; F ( 1 , 44 ) = 6 . 95 ; p < 0 . 02 ] and social events [ η 2 p = 0 . 10 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 7 . 26 ; p < 0 . 01 ] signiﬁcantly predicted self - directed EF , and play with others was marginally predictive [ η 2 p = 0 . 05 ; F ( 1 , 44 ) = 3 . 42 ; p < 0 . 072 ] . Interactions with age were not signiﬁcant in these models , and were therefore excluded ( p ’s > 0 . 2 ) . No other classes of less - structured activities predicted verbal ﬂuency performance . We then considered whether the relationship between less - structured time and self - directed EF persisted when we excluded from our less - structured time composite measure , in sequential analyses : ( 1 ) media and screen time ( which might reﬂect passive , rather than self - directed leisure activity ) ; ( 2 ) activities within the less - structured time classiﬁcation that may have included more structure than other such activities ; and ( 3 ) enrichment activities that may have yielded beneﬁts spe - ciﬁc to verbal ﬂuency performance ( rather than self - directed control , per se ) . When media and screen time were excluded , less - structured time continued to demonstrate a positive relationship with self - directed EF [ η 2 p = 0 . 06 ; F ( 1 , 41 ) = 5 . 23 ; p < 0 . 03 ] . This ﬁnding persisted when we also excluded less - structured activities that may have included more structure than other such activities ( e . g . , board games played with a group ; rule - based physical games such as golf and bowling ; movies and performances ; reading with others 6 ) [ η 2 p = 0 . 06 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 6 . 17 ; p < 0 . 02 ] . As a ﬁnal step , we also excluded visits to museums , aquariums , and zoos , which may have beneﬁtted organization of semantic clusters on 4 Aggregate within - measure scores were z - scored , then summed to create cross - measure composites . 5 Social and enrichment events included only prior - week reporting , as these were not adequately identiﬁed in the annual less - structured time measure , which included only general activities ( e . g . , playing outdoor with friends ) that could occur in many contexts . 6 Here and in the following analysis , we also excluded all reading from our typical - activities measure , because this measure did not discriminate between reading alone and reading with others . www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 7 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function FIGURE 1 | Parent - reported child time use . ( A ) Activities in week prior to laboratory visit ( green , less - structured ; blue , structured ; gray , other ) . ( B ) Typical less - structured activities ( 1 , Never ; 2 , Less than once a month ; 3 , Once a month ; 4 , 2 – 3 times a month ; 5 , Once a week ; 6 , 2 – 3 times a week ; 7 , Daily ) . ( C ) Typical structured activities during a typical week ( averaged across 4 seasons ) . Prior - week and typical measures of parent - reported child time use were correlated and combined into z - scored composite estimates of structured and less - structured time . For all ﬁgures , error bars indicate standard error of the mean . the verbal ﬂuency task ( e . g . , exposure to zoo animals may have helped to organize animal clusters , and thus yielded performance beneﬁts ) . Using this fully - restricted measure of less - structured time , child time in less - structured activities continued to pre - dict better self - directed EF [ η 2 p = 0 . 06 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 6 . 23 ; p < 0 . 02 ] . Interactions with age were signiﬁcant and were included in each of these restricted analyses ( all p ’s < 0 . 05 ) . We also explored whether participation in types of less - structured activities changed with age , and whether such chang - ing patterns of time use could speak to the diminished link Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 8 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function between less - structured time and self - directed control in the old - est quartile of children in our sample . Media and screen time use was more prevalent in older children [ η 2 p = 0 . 05 ; F ( 1 , 61 ) = 5 . 15 ; p < 0 . 03 ] . Time spent in other categories of less - structured activities did not vary with age ( p ’s > 0 . 2 ) . Structured time Additional time in structured activities predicted marginally worse self - directed control [ η 2 p = 0 . 06 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 3 . 57 ; p < 0 . 07 ; Figure 2B ; Table 3 ] . Again , self - directed EF was predicted by age [ η 2 p = 0 . 13 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 4 . 43 ; p < 0 . 01 ] , and vocabulary [ η 2 p = 0 . 08 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 5 . 02 ; p < 0 . 04 ] , and marginally predicted by household income [ η 2 p = 0 . 05 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 3 . 50 ; p < 0 . 07 ] 7 . Exploratory analyses . We next examined whether the relationship between structured time and self - directed EF persisted when we 7 This ﬁnding was not driven by a negative correlation between compos - ite time in structured activities and time in less - structured activities . The less - structured and structured time composites were not signiﬁcantly related ( p > 0 . 8 ) . Table 2 | Descriptive statistics for executive function , vocabulary , and time use measures ( N ’s = 65 – 67 ) . Measure Mean ( SD ) SELF - DIRECTED EF Verbal ﬂuency combined switch score 10 . 13 ( 4 . 1 ) EXTERNALLY - DRIVEN EF AX - CPT proactive control score 0 . 094 ( 0 . 12 ) Flanker conﬂict score 164 . 5 ( 168 . 7 ) Vocabulary : EVT standardized score 112 . 9 ( 9 . 4 ) PRIOR WEEK CHILD TIME USE Structured hours 6 . 03 ( 5 . 9 ) Less - structured hours 32 . 2 ( 14 . 2 ) Typical child less - structured activities ( combined score ) 78 . 5 ( 8 . 8 ) Seasonal child structured activities ( annual hours ) 91 . 5 ( 89 . 0 ) excluded religious services and household chores , where children may have been supervised less often by adults , relative to other structured activities . Time in structured activities continued to predict worse self - directed EF when religious services and chores were excluded from the composite structured time measure [ η 2 p = 0 . 06 ; F ( 1 , 43 ) = 4 . 28 ; p < 0 . 05 ] . CHILD TIME USE AND EXTERNALLY - DRIVEN EF No measure of child time predicted any aspect of externally - driven EF ( Figures 3A – D ) . Speciﬁcally , child time spent in less - structured activities did not relate to performance on either externally - driven EF measure ( Flanker conﬂict score : p > 0 . 2 ; AX - CPT proactive control score : p > 0 . 8 ) . Similarly , time in structured activities was unrelated to externally - driven EF ( Flanker conﬂict score : p > 0 . 6 ; AX - CPT proactive control score : p > 0 . 3 ) 8 . Males demonstrated better Flanker conﬂict scores than females [ η 2 p = 0 . 10 ; F ( 1 , 46 ) = 4 . 64 ; p < 0 . 04 ] . No other variables predicted externally - directed EF 9 . DISCUSSION Our ﬁndings offer support for a relationship between the time children spend in less - structured and structured activities and the 8 Although it is not a targeted measure of conﬂict resolution , overall accuracy across all trials on the Flanker task has also been tested in prior intervention work with children ( Rueda et al . , 2005 ; Fisher et al . , 2011 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) , and is what improved in two prior intervention studies targeting EF in this age group ( Fisher et al . , 2011 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) . Overall accuracy did improve with age in our sample [ η 2 p = 0 . 16 ; F ( 1 , 47 ) = 4 . 67 ; p < 0 . 04 ] , but was not predicted by any other variables ( p (cid:2) s > 0 . 15 ) . 9 In separate analyses , we investigated whether the completeness of parent reporting of child time inﬂuenced observed relationships between child time use and EFs . For example , if parents who left fewer cells blank in the time use survey had children with higher self - directed EF , this could have contributed to the observed correlation between less - structured time and self - directed EF , since parents who left fewer cells blank might report more time in less - structured activities . However , completeness of reported time use did not affect the results : it showed no relationship with any aspect of EF performance ( verbal ﬂuency , AX - CPT , and Flanker p (cid:2) s > 0 . 3 ) , and controlling for it did not change whether or not any ﬁndings were signiﬁcant . FIGURE 2 | Children’s self - directed EF ( as measured in Verbal Fluency ) was predicted by more time spent in less - structured activities ( A ) , and marginally predicted by less time spent in structured activities , although this relationship is not apparent because the ﬁgure does not capture how the effects of age , income , gender , and EVT were controlled for in all analyses ( B ) . Outlying observations have been excluded [ N = 3 in ( A ) ; N = 2 in ( B ) ] . www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 9 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function Table 3 | Effects of age , gender , income , vocabulary and time use on child verbal ﬂuency performance . Age , income , EVT , age , income , Less - structured time + age , and gender and gender income , gender , and EVT Variable β t b P β t b P β t b P ( Intercept ) 9 . 99 22 . 48 < 0 . 001 * * * 9 . 95 22 . 13 < 0 . 001 * * * 9 . 94 22 . 67 < 0 . 001 * * * Age ( days ) 0 . 008 1 . 79 < 0 . 09 0 . 013 2 . 95 < 0 . 01 * * 0 . 011 2 . 73 < 0 . 01 * * Gender ( 1 = female ; − 1 = male ) 0 . 008 0 . 02 > 0 . 9 − 0 . 194 − 0 . 42 > 0 . 6 − 0 . 392 − 0 . 82 > 0 . 4 Household income 0 . 743 3 . 17 < 0 . 01 * * 0 . 301 1 . 13 > 0 . 2 0 . 372 1 . 48 > 0 . 1 Vocabulary ( EVT ) – – – 0 . 177 2 . 78 < 0 . 01 * * 0 . 142 2 . 51 < 0 . 05 * Less - structured time – – – – – – 0 . 713 2 . 11 < 0 . 05 * Less - structured time x age – – – – – – – – – Structured time – – – – – – – – – Model F - value 4 . 05 4 . 88 4 . 56 Model Adjusted R 2 0 . 16 0 . 24 0 . 27 Less - structured time × age Structured time + age , + income , gender , and EVT income , gender , and EVT Variable β t b P β t b P ( Intercept ) 10 . 09 23 . 86 < 0 . 001 * * * 9 . 73 21 . 97 < 0 . 001 * * * Age ( days ) 0 . 010 2 . 40 < 0 . 05 * 0 . 012 2 . 90 < 0 . 01 * Gender ( 1 = female ; − 1 = male ) − 0 . 375 − 0 . 82 > 0 . 4 − 0 . 169 − 0 . 36 > 0 . 7 Household income 0 . 442 1 . 83 < 0 . 08 0 . 487 1 . 87 < 0 . 07 Vocabulary ( EVT ) 0 . 120 2 . 19 < 0 . 05 * 0 . 128 2 . 24 < 0 . 05 * Less - structured time 0 . 854 2 . 61 < 0 . 05 * – – – Less - structured time x age − 0 . 008 − 2 . 34 < 0 . 05 * – – – Structured time – – – − 0 . 596 − 1 . 89 < 0 . 07 Model F - value 5 . 10 4 . 34 Model Adjusted R 2 0 . 33 0 . 26 Age , income , EVT scores , and less - structured and structured time composite scores are mean - centered . For each model , observations where Cook’s D > 3 standard deviations above the mean were identiﬁed and removed . N Model1 = 45 ; N Models2 – 3 = 44 ; N Models4 – 5 = 43 ; * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . development of self - directed executive function . When consider - ing our entire participant sample , children who spent more time in less - structured activities displayed better self - directed con - trol , even after controlling for age , verbal ability , and household income . By contrast , children who spent more time in structured activities exhibited poorer self - directed EF , controlling for the same factors . The observed relationships between time use and EF ability were speciﬁc to self - directed EF , as neither structured nor less - structured time related to performance on externally - driven EF measures . These ﬁndings represent the ﬁrst demonstration that time spent in a broad range of less - structured activities out - side of formal schooling predicts goal - directed behaviors not explicitly speciﬁed by an adult , and that more time spent in structured activities predicts poorer such goal - directed behav - ior . Consistent with Vygotskian developmental theory and pro - grams that build on that theory , such as Tools of the Mind , less - structured time may uniquely support the development of self - directed control by affording children with additional prac - tice in carrying out goal - directed actions using internal cues and reminders . That is , less - structured activities may give children more self - directed opportunities . From this perspective , struc - tured time could slow the development of self - directed control , since adults in such scenarios can provide external cues and reminders about what should happen , and when . Surprisingly , the relationship between less - structured time and self - directed control changed with age in our participant sam - ple , such that less - structured time predicted self - directed control in all but the oldest quartile of participants . This interaction between less - structured time and age was reliably observed across increasingly restrictive measures of less - structured time . One interpretation is that most but not all age groups within our sam - ple spent their less - structured time in activities that encourage the development of self - directed control . Indeed , despite a rela - tively limited age range , our sample demonstrated differences in the content of less - structured time across 6 – 7 years of age , with older children spending more time engaged in media and screen activities . However , time spent in unguided practice , enrichment outings , and some forms of play was the main driver of the rela - tionship between less - structured time and self - directed control in our data , and time spent in such activities did not change as a Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 10 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function FIGURE 3 | Children’s externally - driven EF ( as measured in AX - CPT and Flanker ) was not predicted by their time spent in either less - structured activities ( A , C ) or structured activities ( B , D ) . Outlying observations have been excluded [ N = 1 in ( A , B ) ; N = 2 in ( C , D ) ] . function of age . Another possibility is that children who have less developed self - directed control are more likely to beneﬁt from less - structured time ( in the same way that some interventions show the greatest beneﬁts to children who show the worst ini - tial performance , Connor et al . , 2010 ; Diamond and Lee , 2011 ; cf . Bierman et al . , 2008 ) , such that the oldest and most advanced quartile of participants showed the least beneﬁt . While promising , it will be important for the present ﬁndings to be replicated and extended to address a number of limitations . For example , our sample came primarily from an afﬂuent , subur - ban sample . This sample nonetheless included a broad enough range of incomes that income was predictive of self - directed EF , and the relationship between less - structured time and self - directed EF held even when controlling for income . However , less - structured time may be especially beneﬁcial to children in safe , quiet , resource - rich environments , so it will be important to test whether it differentially relates to self - direction in more impoverished environments . In addition , although the current test of the relationship between less - structured time and self - directed EFs emerged from a targeted hypothesis , we conducted multiple post - hoc exploratory analyses to explore the relationship between speciﬁc activities and self - directed control , which are not ideal conditions for statistical inference . Another limitation of the present study relates to our con - structions of less - structured and structured time , which are imprecise , and most likely fail to capture important differences across activities . The broad , standardized deﬁnitions of struc - tured and less - structured time adopted in this study ( e . g . , Meeks and Mauldin , 1990 ) ignore differences in the degree of indepen - dence that children experience within and across activities . In the present study , trips to museums , libraries , and sporting events are each classiﬁed as less - structured , but may vary in relative struc - ture . That is , a typical library visit , where children may select their own sections to browse and books to check out , may involve much less structure ( and more self - directed time ) than a typical sport - ing event , where attention is largely directed toward the action on the ﬁeld or court . Similarly , although any activity within the cat - egory of “media and screen time” counts as less - structured time , this category includes activities that range from passive movie - watching to self - directed internet searches to more structured video games . Even those activities that seem less - structured by deﬁnition , such as free play , can quickly become more structured when adults , older siblings , or peers impose additional rules or criteria . Indeed , many programmatic interventions have high - lighted the importance of some structure to improve the quality of children’s play and other learning experiences , and produce beneﬁts ( Schweinhart et al . , 2005 ; Lillard and Else - quest , 2006 ; Diamond et al . , 2007 ; Heckman et al . , 2010 ; Lillard , 2012 ) . We note however , that even though our classiﬁcation system based on the existing literature does not capture these variations www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 11 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function in exactly how structured various activities are , our primary ﬁnding of the relationship between less - structured time and self - directed EF holds across analyses dropping potentially more difﬁcult - to - interpret classiﬁcations ( e . g . , media and screen time , various games , movies and performances , and visits to muse - ums , aquariums and zoos ) . To generate a more precise estimate of the amount of time children spend pursuing activities in a self - directed way , one would ideally assess child time directly , possibly by supplementing parent - reported child time use data with direct observation . One possibility along these lines could be to employ experience sampling techniques ( Miller , 2012 ) , where parents are frequently queried ( via cell phone or another mobile device ) throughout the day and asked to provide speciﬁc detail about their child’s activities in the moment . Such methods would also minimize the need to rely on a parent’s memory for their child’s daily activities and experiences . We view our work as providing an important starting point for this kind of more time - intensive study of children’s time outside of formal schooling and its relationship to their self - directed EF . In addition , although we have identiﬁed links between child time use and self - directed EF , we are unable to draw ﬁrm con - clusions about whether the observed relationships were driven by activities occurring in the week preceding the test session ( as has been observed in other domains , e . g . , Berns et al . , 2013 ; Mackey et al . , 2013 ) , activities occurring over a longer period , or some combination . We used composite measures incorporating both recent and more distal / typical experiences , given that these mea - sures were correlated and in an attempt to maximize the accuracy and reliability of parental estimates . We can test which one is more predictive of self - directed EF , recent or more distal / typical expe - riences , but it is difﬁcult to make strong claims based on such analyses . For example , when examining less - structured activities and self - directed EF , we ﬁnd that recent experiences predict self - directed EF [ F ( 1 , 60 ) = 6 . 10 ; p < 0 . 02 ] , but typical experiences do not ( p > 0 . 6 ) . This ﬁnding could reﬂect the greater importance of recent experiences , or it could reﬂect the greater precision of the time - diary measure , which indexes recent experiences but is also representative of more distal / typical experiences 10 . Similarly , when examining structured activities and self - directed EF , we ﬁnd that neither recent nor annual experiences alone predict self - directed EF ( p ’s > 0 . 2 ) . This ﬁnding could reﬂect the importance of the combination of recent and distal experiences , or simply the greater robustness of using a composite measure . Therefore , while 10 Recent less - structured experiences also predict self - directed EF when con - trolling for parent - reported typicality of the prior week [ η 2 p = 0 . 02 ; F ( 1 , 57 ) = 9 . 12 ; p < 0 . 004 ; M typ = 4 ; SD = 2 . 05 ; range = 1 – 7 ] , and there is no inter - action between less - structured experiences and typicality in predicting self - directedEF ( p > 0 . 8 ) . Theseﬁndingsmightsuggestthatthepriorweek’sexpe - rience is predictive separate from the extent to which it reﬂects typical / distal experiences . However , this interpretation rests on the validity and sensitiv - ity of the typicality measure , which is unknown . Parent - reported typicality is at least internally consistent with parent - reported time use . Speciﬁcally , recent less - structured experiences predicted typical / distal experiences when parent - reported typicality of the prior week was high [ M typ = 6 ; η 2 p = 0 . 03 ; F ( 1 , 60 ) = 5 . 81 ; p < 0 . 02 ] , but not when typicality of the prior week was low ( M typ = 2 ; p > 0 . 9 ) , yielding a marginally signiﬁcant interaction [ M typ = 2 ; η 2 p = 0 . 04 ; F ( 1 , 60 ) = 2 . 92 ; p < 0 . 093 ] . we have posited that less - structured experiences allow children to practice self - directed , goal - oriented behavior , producing beneﬁts over time , we cannot discount the possibility that observed link - ages may have been driven by recent experiences which increased self - directed behavior . In either scenario , regular participation in less - structured activities would yield beneﬁts . Future investigations of the relationship between self - directed control and less - structured time would also beneﬁt from the inclusion of additional measures of self - directed control , which more closely approximate real - world child behaviors . This pro - cess may beneﬁt from the development and validation of new measures of self - directed control in children . Establishing effects using tasks tapping other forms of self - direction would also ensure generalizability . For instance , in the present study , time in less - structured activities such as family outings may have beneﬁt - ted verbal ﬂuency performance in a speciﬁc way , by fostering the development of more well - organized semantic networks , rather than by more generally improving children’s abilities to generate their own rules for how and when to employ EFs to achieve their goals . This alternative account cannot explain the full pattern of results in the link between less - structured time and self - directed EF ( e . g . , the fact that this link persists when enrichment activ - ities are excluded , and other less - structured categories such as unguided practice and play predict self - directed EF ) ; however , a broader range of measures could provide a more robust and generalizable assessment of self - directed EF . The ﬁndings of the current study are consistent with previ - ous research in showing a link between children’s experiences and EF ( Lillard and Else - quest , 2006 ; Diamond et al . , 2007 ; Bierman et al . , 2008 ; Holmes et al . , 2009 ; Bergman Nutley et al . , 2011 ; Diamond , 2012 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ; Zelazo and Lyons , 2012 ; Titz and Karbach , 2014 ) . However , while the cur - rent study found speciﬁc effects of time use on self - directed but not externally - driven EF , previous research found effects of train - ing and preschool interventions on externally - driven EF ( e . g . , see discussion in Diamond , 2012 ) , but did not evaluate self - directed EF . There are several possible reasons for this discrep - ancy . First , previous training studies that have shown beneﬁts for externally - driven EF have speciﬁcally trained children on aspects of externally - driven EF ( e . g . , working memory span tasks ; e . g . , Holmes et al . , 2009 ; Bergman Nutley et al . , 2011 ) . Likewise , while preschool and other interventions include a wide variety of expe - riences , they likely include considerable practice with externally - driven EF . In contrast , we hypothesize that less - structured time primarily affords children practice with self - directed EF , and thus may not transfer to improving externally - driven EF . Second , it is possible that differences between the current versus previ - ous studies could be accounted for by differences between the externally - driven EF tasks they employed . Many previous studies that have found effects of interventions on externally - driven EF used task - switching or working memory span tasks ( e . g . , Lillard and Else - quest , 2006 ; Diamond et al . , 2007 ; Bierman et al . , 2008 ; Holmes et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Thorell et al . , 2009 ; Bergman Nutley et al . , 2011 ; Röthlisberger et al . , 2012 ) , whereas the current study used tasks assessing proactive control ( AX - CPT ) and conﬂict resolution ( Flanker ) . It may be that speciﬁc aspects of externally - driven EF are more sensitive to children’s experiences , or that Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 12 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function speciﬁc tasks are more sensitive to individual differences in gen - eral due to better psychometric properties 11 . Future research using a more comprehensive battery of EF tasks could address these possibilities . Another key difference between our study and such prior research is the correlational nature of our study , which supports at least two alternatives to the interpretation that how children spend their leisure time shapes their EF . First , children with bet - ter self - directed EFs may engage in ( or be encouraged to engage in ) less - structured activities more often . Likewise , children with poorer self - directed control may be more likely to engage in struc - tured activities . Alternatively , the observed relationship between less - structured time and self - directed control may be driven by a third , unmeasured variable . Although we have attempted to con - trol for some characteristics that might inﬂuence both time spent in less - structured activities and verbal ﬂuency , such as household income , we have not controlled for other possibilities , such as par - ent EF and child’s ﬂuid intelligence ( which we did not assess ) . However , we did control for child vocabulary ( an index of crys - tallized intelligence ) , which may serve as a proxy for ﬂuid intelli - gence in testing relationships with EF , given that EF fully mediates the correlation between crystallized and ﬂuid intelligence in 7 - years - old ( Brydges et al . , 2012 ) 12 . Moreover , such factors might be expected to predict both children’s self - directed EF and their externally - driven EF ( Ardila et al . , 2000 ; Mahone et al . , 2002 ; Kalkut et al . , 2009 ) , and so seem unlikely to explain why less - structured time predicts only the former . Similar issues have been raised in interpreting links observed between children’s EF and pretend play : rather than reﬂecting a uniquely causal role for pre - tend play in EF , EF may instead play a causal role in supporting pretend play , or pretend play may be one of many activities pro - moting EF development in young children ( Lillard et al . , 2013 ) . An important direction for future work lies in establishing the directionality of relationships between child time use and self - directed EF , through experimental manipulation . Longitudinal studies could provide the ﬁrst step toward establishing direc - tionality . Speciﬁcally , if time spent in less - structured activities prospectively predicts change in self - directed EF , this would sug - gest that less - structured time may play a causal role in the devel - opment of self - directed EF . If , on the other hand , self - directed EF prospectively predicts changes in the amount of time children spend in less - structured activities , this would suggest that self - directed EF may play a causal role in children’s time use ( e . g . , because parents might allow children with strong self - directed EF skills to play with less supervision ) . While such longitudinal 11 Forexample , someEF - interventionshavenotimprovedperformanceonthe Flankertaskinthisagegroup ( Ruedaetal . , 2005 , 2012 ; seealsoDiamondetal . , 2007 , which introduced switching demands that did show effects of interven - tion , and included only incongruent trials so that a standard conﬂict score could not be computed ) . The Flanker task can be sensitive to minor variations in stimulus parameters ( Paquet , 2001 ) and intervention dosage in adults ( Liu - Ambrose et al . , 2012 ) . Failures to ﬁnd effects of interventions have also been attributed in part to the task’s sensitivity to practice effects in pre - post mea - sure designs ( as discussed in Rueda et al . , 2012 ) , which are not an issue in the present study . 12 We also note that there is ongoing debate regarding the inappropriateness of IQ as a control in models of cognitive processes ( Dennis et al . , 2009 ) . studies could thus provide important information about tem - poral precedence , this information is not sufﬁcient evidence of causality ( e . g . , additional unmeasured variables could actually be the causal factors ) . Thus , future research using experimental manipulations of time spent in less - structured activities is nec - essary to deﬁnitively test causality . One approach would be to attempt to randomly assign children to more structured or less structured environments , such as summer camps , where child activities could be carefully monitored via regular sampling of staff and / or on - site observation . Although this kind of work is ambitious , and poses challenges , it could be used to inform more targeted laboratory - based training studies . Finally , we hope that future explorations of the relationship between child time use and developing self - directed EFs will inform a wider question : speciﬁcally , whether societal shifts in child time use over the past 50 years have inﬂuenced devel - opment . Hours formerly devoted to less - structured , social play have been replaced by media time ( Vandewater et al . , 2007 ; Bavelier et al . , 2010 ; Hofferth , 2010 ; Johnson , 2010 ) , and struc - tured , adult - led activities ( Hofferth and Sandberg , 2001a ; Larson , 2001 ; Bianchi et al . , 2006 ) . Some commentators have warned that these changes have been to the detriment of children ( e . g . , Ginsburg , 2007 ; Milteer and Ginsburg , 2012 ) . Others have argued that children beneﬁt more from regular skill practice in structured settings ( e . g . , Chua , 2011 ; Ramdass and Zimmerman , 2011 ) . Our ﬁndings indicate that during children’s time outside of formal schooling , participation in less structured activities may bene - ﬁt the development of self - directed EFs , while participation in structured activities may hinder the development of self - directed EFs . Thorough testing of this hypothesis remains an important direction for future work . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Jane E . Barker , Andrei D . Semenov , and Yuko Munakata con - tributed to the development of the study hypothesis . All authors contributed to study design . Jane E . Barker performed the data analysis and drafted the manuscript with input from Yuko Munakata . Critical revisions were contributed by Hannah R . Snyder , Laura Michaelson , and Yuko Munakata . All authors dis - cussed the results , implications , and literature , and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript for submission . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors wish to thank Julia Stadele for her assistance in cod - ing verbal ﬂuency data and coordinating research subjects , Joe Brill for his assistance in coding time diary data , and Ryan Guild for his helpful comments on manuscript revisions . This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development ( RO1 HD37163 ) . Publication of this article was funded by the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries Open Access Fund . REFERENCES Abwender , D . A . , Swan , J . G . , Bowerman , J . T . , and Connolly , S . W . ( 2001 ) . Qualitative analysis of verbal ﬂuency output : review and comparison of several scoring methods . Assessment 8 , 323 – 338 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 107319110100800308 Agnew , R . , and Petersen , D . M . ( 1989 ) . Leisure and delinquency . Soc . Probl . 36 , 332 – 350 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 800819 www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 13 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function Albertson , K . , and Shore , C . ( 2009 ) . Holding in mind conﬂicting information : pre - tending , working memory , and executive control . J . Cogn . Dev . 9 , 390 – 410 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15248370802678240 Ardila , A . , Pineda , D . , andRosselli , M . ( 2000 ) . Correlation between intelligence test scoresandexecutivefunctionmeasures . Arch . Clin . Neuropsychol . 15 , 31 – 36 . doi : 10 . 1093 / arclin / 15 . 1 . 31 Bavelier , D . , Green , C . S . , and Dye , M . W . G . ( 2010 ) . Children , wired : for better and worse . Neuron 67 , 692 – 701 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2010 . 08 . 035 Bergman Nutley , S . , Söderqvist , S . , Bryde , S . , Thorell , L . B . , Humphreys , K . , and Klingberg , T . ( 2011 ) . Gains in ﬂuid intelligence after training non - verbal rea - soning in 4 - year - old children : a controlled , randomized study . Dev . Sci . 14 , 591 – 601 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2010 . 01022 . x Berns , G . S . , Blaine , K . , Prietula , M . J . , and Pye , B . E . ( 2013 ) . Short - and long - term effects of a novel on connectivity in the brain . Brain Connect . 3 , 590 – 600 . doi : 10 . 1089 / brain . 2013 . 0166 Best , J . R . , Miller , P . H . , and Naglieri , J . A . ( 2011 ) . Relations between exec - utive function and academic achievement from ages 5 to 17 in a large , representative national sample . Learn . Individ . Differ . 21 , 327 – 336 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2011 . 01 . 007 Bianchi , S . M . , Robinson , J . P . , and Milkie , M . A . ( 2006 ) . Changing Rhythms of American Family Life . ASA Rose Series . New York , NY : Sussell Sage . Bierman , K . L . , Nix , R . L . , Greenberg , M . T . , Blair , C . , and Domitrovich , C . E . ( 2008 ) . Executive functions and school readiness intervention : impact , mod - eration , and mediation in the Head Start REDI program . Dev . Psychopathol . 20 , 821 – 843 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0954579408000394 Birn , R . M . , Kenworthy , L . , Case , L . , Caravella , R . , Jones , T . B . , Bandettini , P . A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Neural systems supporting lexical search guided by letter and semanticcategorycues : aself - pacedovertresponsefMRIstudyofverbalﬂuency . Neuroimage 49 , 1099 – 1107 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2009 . 07 . 036 Blair , C . , and Razza , R . P . ( 2007 ) . Relating effortful control , executive function , and falsebeliefunderstandingtoemergingmathandliteracyabilityinkindergarten . Child Dev . 78 , 647 – 663 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2007 . 01019 . x Blair , C . , Granger , D . , and Peters Razza , R . ( 2005 ) . Cortisol reactivity is positively related to executive function in preschool children attending Head Start . Child Dev . 76 , 554 – 567 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2005 . 00863 . x Bodrova , E . ( 2003 ) . Vygotsky and Montessori : one dream , two visions . Montessori Life 15 , 30 – 33 . Bodrova , E . , and Leong , D . J . ( 2007 ) . Tools of the Mind . Columbus , OH : Pearson . Braver , T . S . , Gray , J . R . , andBurgess , G . C . ( 2007 ) . “Explainingthemanyvarietiesof working memory variation : dual mechanisms of cognitive control , ” in Variation inWorkingMemory , edsA . Conway , C . Jarrold , M . Kane , A . Miyake , andJ . Towse ( New York , NY : Oxford University Press ) , 76 – 106 . Brocki , K . C . , and Bohlin , G . ( 2004 ) . Executive functions in children aged 6 to 13 : a dimensional and developmental study . Dev . Neuropsychol . 26 , 571 – 593 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326942dn2602 _ 3 Bryck , R . L . , and Mayr , U . ( 2005 ) . On the role of verbalization during task set selection : switching or serial order control ? Mem . Cognit . 33 , 611 – 623 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03195328 Brydges , C . R . , Reid , C . L . , Fox , A . M . , and Anderson , M . ( 2012 ) . A unitary exec - utive function predicts intelligence in children . Intelligence 40 , 458 – 469 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2012 . 05 . 006 Cameron , C . E . , Brock , L . L . , Murrah , W . M . , Bell , L . H . , Worzalla , S . L . , Grissmer , D . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fine motor skills and executive function both contribute to kindergarten achievement . Child Dev . 83 , 1229 – 1244 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2012 . 01768 . x Carlson , S . M . , White , R . E . , and Davis - Unger , A . ( 2014 ) . Evidence for a relation between executive function and pretense representation in preschool children . Cogn . Dev . 29 , 1 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2013 . 09 . 001 Chatham , C . H . , Frank , M . J . , and Munakata , Y . ( 2009 ) . Pupillometric and behavioral markers of a developmental shift in the temporal dynamics of cognitive control . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 5529 – 5533 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0810002106 Chevalier , N . , Wiebe , S . A . , Huber , K . L . , and Espy , K . A . ( 2011 ) . Switch detection in preschoolers’ cognitive ﬂexibility . J . Exp . Child Psychol . 109 , 353 – 370 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2011 . 01 . 006 Chrysikou , E . G . , and Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2011 ) . Dissociable brain states linked to common and creative object use . Hum . Brain Mapp . 32 , 665 – 675 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 21056 Chua , A . ( 2011 ) . Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother . New York , NY : Penguin . Connor , C . M . , Ponitz , C . C . , Phillips , B . M . , Travis , Q . , Glasney , S . , and Morrison , F . J . ( 2010 ) . First graders’ literacy and self - regulation gains : the effect of individualizing student instruction . J . Sch . Psychol . 48 , 433 – 455 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsp . 2010 . 06 . 003 Costafreda , S . G . , Fu , C . H . , Lee , L . , Everitt , B . , Brammer , M . J . , and David , A . S . ( 2006 ) . A systematic review and quantitative appraisal of fMRI studies of verbal ﬂuency : role of the left inferior frontal gyrus . Hum . Brain Mapp . 27 , 799 – 810 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hbm . 20221 Daneman , M . , and Merikle , P . M . ( 1996 ) . Working memory and lan - guage comprehension : a meta - analysis . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 3 , 422 – 433 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03214546 Dennis , M . , Francis , D . J . , Cirino , P . T . , Schachar , R . , Barnes , M . A . , and Fletcher , J . M . ( 2009 ) . Why IQ is not a covariate in cognitive studies of neurodevelopmental disorders . J . Int . Neuropsychol . Soc . 15 , 331 – 343 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S1355617709090481 Diamond , A . ( 2012 ) . Activities and programs that improve children’s executive functions . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 21 , 335 – 341 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0963721412453722 Diamond , A . , Barnett , W . S . , Thomas , J . , and Munro , S . ( 2007 ) . Preschool pro - gram improves cognitive control . Science 318 , 1387 – 1388 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sci - ence . 1151148 Diamond , A . , and Lee , K . ( 2011 ) . Interventions shown to aid executive function development in children 4 - 12 years old . Science 333 , 959 – 964 . doi : 10 . 1126 / sci - ence . 1204529 D’Ostilio , K . , and Garraux , G . ( 2012 ) . Dissociation between unconscious motor response facilitation and conﬂict in medial frontal areas . Eur . J . Neurosci . 35 , 332 – 340 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 9568 . 2011 . 07941 . x Drane , D . L . , Lee , G . P . , Cech , H . , Huthwaite , J . S . , Ojemann , G . A . , Ojemann , J . G . , etal . ( 2006 ) . Structuredcueingonasemanticﬂuencytaskdifferentiatespatients with temporal versus frontal lobe seizure onset . Epilepsy Behav . 9 , 339 – 344 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yebeh . 2006 . 06 . 010 Eccles , J . S . , and Barber , B . ( 1999 ) . Student council , volunteering , basketball , or marching band : what kind of extracurricular involvement matters ? J . Adolesc . Res . 14 , 10 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0743558499141003 Elias , C . L . , and Berk , L . E . ( 2002 ) . Self - regulation in young children : is there a role for sociodramatic play ? Early Child . Res . Q . 17 , 216 – 238 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0885 - 2006 ( 02 ) 00146 - 1 Ellamil , M . , Dobson , C . , Beeman , M . , and Christoff , K . ( 2012 ) . Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process . Neuroimage 59 , 1783 – 1794 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2011 . 08 . 008 Engle , R . W . , Tuholski , S . W . , Laughlin , J . E . , and Conway , A . R . ( 1999 ) . Working memory , short - term memory , and general ﬂuid intelligence : a latent - variable approach . J . Exp . Psychol . Gen . 128 , 309 – 331 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 3445 . 128 . 3 . 309 Eriksen , C . W . , and Schultz , D . W . ( 1979 ) . Information processing in visual search : a continuous ﬂow conception and experimental results . Percept . Psychophys . 25 , 249 – 263 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03198804 Farah , M . J . , Shera , D . M . , Savage , J . H . , Betancourt , L . , Giannetta , J . M . , Brodsky , N . L . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Childhood poverty : speciﬁc associations with neurocog - nitive development . Brain Res . 1110 , 166 – 174 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2006 . 06 . 072 Fisher , A . , Boyle , J . M . , Paton , J . Y . , Tomporowski , P . , Watson , C . , McColl , J . H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Effects of a physical education intervention on cognitive function in young children : randomized controlled pilot study . BMC Pediatr . 11 : 97 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2431 - 11 - 97 Fletcher , A . C . , Nickerson , P . , and Wright , K . L . ( 2003 ) . Structured leisure activities in middle childhood : links to well - being . J . Community Psychol . 31 , 641 – 659 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcop . 10075 Forstmann , B . U . , Brass M . , Koch , I . , and von Cramon , D . Y . ( 2005 ) . Internally gen - erated and directly cued task sets : an investigation with fMRI . Neuropsychologia 43 , 943 – 952 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2004 . 08 . 008 Gathercole , S . E . , Pickering , S . J . , Ambridge , B . , and Wearing H . ( 2004 ) . The struc - ture of working memory from 4 to 15 years of age . Dev . Psychol . 40 , 177 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 40 . 2 . 177 Ginsburg , K . R . ( 2007 ) . The importance of play in promoting healthy child devel - opment and maintaining strong parent - child bonds . Pediatrics 119 , 182 – 191 . doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2006 - 2697 Groborz , M . , and Ne¸cka , E . ( 2003 ) . Creativity and cognitive control : explo - rations of generation and evaluation skills . Creat . Res . J . 15 , 183 – 197 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2003 . 9651411 Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 14 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function Heckman , J . J . , Moon . S . H . , Pinto , R . P . , Savelyev , A . , and Yavitz , A . Q . , ( 2010 ) . The rate of return to the highscope perry preschool program . J . Public Econ . 94 , 114 – 128 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jpubeco . 2009 . 11 . 001 Henry , J . D . , and Crawford , J . R . ( 2004 ) . A meta - analytic review of verbal ﬂu - ency performance following focal cortical lesions . Neuropsychology 18 , 284 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0894 - 4105 . 18 . 2 . 284 Hirshorn , E . A . , and Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2006 ) . Role of the left inferior frontal gyrus in covert word retrieval : neural correlates of switching during verbal ﬂuency . Neuropsychologia 44 , 2547 – 2557 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2006 . 03 . 035 Hofferth , S . L . ( 2010 ) . Homemediaandchildren’sachievementandbehavior . Child Dev . 81 , 1598 – 1619 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2010 . 01494 . x Hofferth , S . L . , and Sandberg , J . F . ( 2001a ) . Changes in American children’s time , 1981 - 1997 . Adv . Life Course Res . 6 , 193 – 229 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1040 - 2608 ( 01 ) 80011 - 3 Hofferth , S . L . , and Sandberg , J . F . ( 2001b ) . How American children spend their time . J . Marriage Fam . 63 , 295 – 308 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1741 - 3737 . 2001 . 00295 . x Holmes , J . , Gathercole , S . E . , and Dunning , D . L . ( 2009 ) . Adaptive training leads to sustained enhancement of poor working memory in children . Dev . Sci . 12 , 9 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2009 . 00848 . x Holmes , J . , Gathercole , S . E . , Place , M . , Dunning , D . L . , Hilton , K . A . , and Elliott , J . G . ( 2010 ) . Working memory deﬁcits can be overcome : impacts of training and medication on working memory in children with ADHD . Appl . Cogn . Psychol . 24 , 827 – 836 . doi : 10 . 1002 / acp . 1589 Hughes , C . , Ensor , R . , Wilson , A . , and Graham , A . ( 2009 ) . Tracking execu - tive function across the transition to school : a latent variable approach . Dev . Neuropsychol . 35 , 20 – 36 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 87565640903325691 Huizinga , M . , Dolan , C . V . , and van der Molen , M . W . ( 2006 ) . Age - related change in executive function : developmental trends and a latent variable anal - ysis . Neuropsychologia 44 , 2017 – 2036 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2006 . 01 . 010 Iudicello , J . E . , Kellogg , E . J . , Weber , E . , Smith , C . , Grant , I . , Drane , D . L . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Semantic cueing improves category verbal ﬂuency in persons living with HIV infection . J . Neuropsychiatr . Clin . Neurosci . 24 , 183 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1176 / appi . neuropsych . 11100301 Jacques , S . , and Zelazo , P . D . ( 2001 ) . Developmental Neuropsychology The Flexible Item Selection Task ( FIST ) : a measure of executive function in preschoolers . Dev . Neuropsychol . 20 , 573 – 591 . doi : 10 . 1207 / S15326942DN2003 _ 2 Jarosz , A . F . , Colﬂesh , G . J . , andWiley , J . ( 2012 ) . Uncorkingthemuse : alcoholintox - ication facilitates creative problem solving . Conscious . Cogn . 21 , 487 – 493 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . concog . 2012 . 01 . 002 Johnson , G . M . ( 2010 ) . Children’s Internet use at home and school : patterns and proﬁles . J . Early Child . Res . 8 , 282 – 293 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1476718X10379783 Kalkut , E . L . , Han , S . D . , Lansing , A . E . , Holdnack , J . A . and Delis , D . C . ( 2009 ) . Development of set - shifting ability from late childhood through early adulthood . Arch . Clin . Neuropsychol . 24 , 565 – 574 . doi : 10 . 1093 / arclin / acp048 Kave , G . , Kigel , S . , and Kochva , R . ( 2008 ) . Switching and clustering in verbal ﬂu - ency tasks throughout childhood . J . Clin . Exp . Neuropsychol . 30 , 349 – 359 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13803390701416197 Kelly , R . , Hammond , S . , Dissanayake , C . , and Ihsen , E . ( 2011 ) . The relationship between symbolic play and executive function in young children . Australas . J . Early Child . 36 , 1 – 27 . Koren , R . , Kofman , O . , and Berger , A . ( 2005 ) . Analysis of word clustering in verbal ﬂuency of school - aged children . Arch . Clin . Neuropsychol . 20 , 1087 – 1104 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . acn . 2005 . 06 . 012 Larson , R . W . ( 2001 ) . How US children and adolescents spend time : what it does ( and doesn’t ) tell us about their development . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 10 , 160 – 164 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8721 . 00139 Larson , R . W . , and Verma , S . ( 1999 ) . How children and adolescents spend time across the world : work , play , and developmental opportunities . Psychol . Bull . 125 , 701 – 736 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 125 . 6 . 701 Lavie , N . ( 1995 ) . Perceptual load as a necessary condition for selective attention . J . Exp . Psychol . 21 , 451 – 468 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0096 - 1523 . 21 . 3 . 451 Lie , C . , Specht , K . , Marshall , J . , and Fink , G . ( 2006 ) . Using fMRI to decompose the neural processes underlying the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test . Neuroimage 30 , 1038 – 1049 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2005 . 10 . 031 Lillard , A . , andElse - quest , N . ( 2006 ) . Evaluatingmontessorieducation . Science 313 , 1893 – 1894 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1132362 Lillard , A . S . ( 2012 ) . Preschool children’s development in classic Montessori , sup - plementedMontessori , andconventionalprograms . J . Sch . Psychol . 50 , 379 – 401 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jsp . 2012 . 01 . 001 Lillard , A . S . , Lerner , M . D . , Hopkins , E . J . , Dore , R . A . , Smith , E . D . , and Palmquist , C . M . ( 2013 ) . The impact of pretend play on children’s development : a review of the evidence . Psychol . Bull . 139 , 1 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0029321 Liu - Ambrose , T . , Nagamatsu , L . S . , Voss , M . W . , Khan , K . M . , and Handy , T . C . ( 2012 ) . Resistance training and functional plasticity of the aging brain : a 12 - month randomized controlled trial . Neurobiol . Aging 33 , 1690 – 1698 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neurobiolaging . 2011 . 05 . 010 Mackey , A . P . , Singley A . T . M . , and Bunge S . A . ( 2013 ) . Intensive reasoning train - ing alters patterns of brain connectivity at rest . J . Neurosci . 33 , 4796 – 4803 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 4141 - 12 . 2013 Mahone , M . E . , Hagelthorn , K . M . , Cutting , L . E . , Schuerholz , L . J . , Pelletier , S . F . , Rawlins , C . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Effects of IQ on executive function measures in children with ADHD . Child Neuropsychol . 8 , 52 – 65 . doi : 10 . 1076 / chin . 8 . 1 . 52 . 8719 Mahoney , J . L . , and Stattin , H . ( 2000 ) . Leisure activities and adolescent antisocial behavior : the role of structure and social context . J . Adolesc . 23 , 113 – 127 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jado . 2000 . 0302 McAuley , T . , Christ , S . E . , and White , D . A . ( 2011 ) . Mapping the development of response inhibition in young children using a modiﬁed day - night task . Dev . Neuropsychol . 36 , 539 – 551 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 87565641 . 2010 . 549871 McDermott , J . M . , Pérez - Edgar , K . , and Fox , N . A . ( 2007 ) . Variations of the ﬂanker paradigm : assessing selective attention in young children . Behav . Res . Methods 39 , 62 – 70 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03192844 Meeks , C . B . , and Mauldin , T . ( 1990 ) . Children’s time in structured and unstructured leisure activities . Lifestyles Fam . Econ . Issues 11 , 257 – 281 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00987003 Miller , G . ( 2012 ) . The smartphone psychology manifesto . Perspect . Psychol . Sci . 7 , 221 – 237 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1745691612441215 Miller , M . R . , Müller , U . , Giesbrecht , G . F . , Carpendale , J . I . M . , and Kerns , K . A . ( 2013 ) . The contribution of executive function and social understand - ing to preschoolers’ letter and math skills . Cogn . Dev . 28 , 331 – 349 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2012 . 10 . 005 Milteer , R . M . , and Ginsburg , K . R . ( 2012 ) . The importance of play in promoting healthy child development and maintaining strong parent - child bond : focus on children in poverty . Pediatrics 129 , 204 – 213 . doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2011 - 2953 Mofﬁtt , T . E . , Arseneault , L . , Belsky , D . , Dickson , N . , Hancox , R . J . , Harrington , H . , et al . ( 2011 ) . A gradient of childhood self - control predicts health , wealth , and public safety . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 2693 – 2698 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1010076108 Montessori , M . M . Jr . ( 1976 ) . Education for Human Development : Understanding Montessori . New York , NY : Schocken . Munakata , Y . , Snyder , H . R . , and Chatham , C . H . ( 2012 ) . Developing cogni - tive control : three key transitions . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 21 , 71 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0963721412436807 Noble , K . G . , McCandliss , B . D . , and Farah , M . J . ( 2007 ) . Socioeconomic gradients predict individual differences in neurocognitive abilities . Dev . Sci . 10 , 464 – 480 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2007 . 00600 . x Noble , K . G . , Norman , M . F . , and Farah , M . J . ( 2005 ) . Neurocognitive correlates of socioeconomic status in kindergarten children . Dev . Sci . 8 , 74 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2005 . 00394 . x Osgood , D . W . , Anderson , A . L . , and Shaffer , J . N . ( 2005 ) . “Unstructured leisure in the after - school hours , ” in Organized Activities as Contexts of Development : Extracurricular Activities , After - school and Community Programs , eds J . L . Mahoney , R . W . Larson , J . S . Eccles ( Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum ) , 45 – 64 . Paquet , L . ( 2001 ) . Eliminating ﬂanker effects and negative priming in the ﬂankers task : evidence for early selection . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 8 , 301 – 306 . doi : 10 . 3758 / BF03196165 Raboutet , C . , Sauzéon , H . , Corsini , M . M . , Rodrigues , J . , Langevin , S . , and N’Kaoua , B . ( 2010 ) . Performance on a semantic verbal ﬂuency task across time : dissociation between clustering , switching , and categorical exploitation pro - cesses . J . Clin . Exp . Neuropsychol . 32 , 268 – 280 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13803390902984464 Ramdass , D . , and Zimmerman , B . J . ( 2011 ) . Developing self - regulation skills : the important role of homework . J . Adv . Acad . 22 , 194 – 218 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1932202X1102200202 Randolph , C . , Braun , A . R . , Goldberg , T . E . , and Chase , T . N . ( 1993 ) . Semantic ﬂuency in Alzheimer’s , Parkinson’s , and Huntington’s disease : dissociation of www . frontiersin . org June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 15 Barker et al . Less - structured time and executive function storage and retrieval failures . Neuropsychology 7 , 82 – 88 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0894 - 4105 . 7 . 1 . 82 Raver , C . C . , Blair , C . , and Willoughby , M . ( 2013 ) . Poverty as a predictor of 4 - year - olds’ executive function : new perspectives on models of differential susceptibility . Dev . Psychol . 49 , 292 – 304 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0028343 Ridderinkhof , K . R . , andvanderMolen , M . W . ( 1995 ) . Apsychophysiologicalanal - ysis of developmental differences in the ability to resist interference . Child Dev . 66 , 1040 – 1056 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 1131797 Röthlisberger , M . , Neuenschwander , R . , Cimeli , P . , Michel , E . , and Roebers , C . M . ( 2012 ) . Improving executive function in 5 - and 6 - year - olds : evaluation of a small group intervention in prekindergarten and kindergarten children . Infant Child Dev . 21 , 411 – 429 . doi : 10 . 1002 / icd . 752 Rueda , M . R . , Checa , P . , and Cómbita , L . M . ( 2012 ) . Enhanced efﬁciency of the executive attention network after training in preschool children : immediate changes and effects after two months . Dev . Cogn . Neurosci . 2 , S192 – S204 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . dcn . 2011 . 09 . 004 Rueda , M . R . , Fan , J . , McCandliss , B . D . , Halparin , J . D . , Gruber , D . B . , Lercari , L . P . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Development of attentional networks in childhood . Neuropsychologia 42 , 1029 – 1040 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2003 . 12 . 012 Rueda , M . R . , Rothbart , M . K . , McCandliss , B . D . , Saccomanno , L . , and Posner , M . I . ( 2005 ) . Training , maturation , and genetic inﬂuences on the develop - ment of executive attention . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 14931 – 14936 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0506897102 Sauzéon , H . , Lestage , P . , Raboutet , C . , N’Kaoua , B . , and Claverie , B . ( 2004 ) . Verbal ﬂuency output in children aged 7 – 16 as a function of the production criterion : qualitative analysis of clustering , switching processes , and semantic network exploitation . Brain Lang . 89 , 192 – 202 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0093 - 934X ( 03 ) 00367 - 5 Schweinhart , L . J . , Montie , J . , Xiang , Z . , Barnett , W . S . , Belﬁeld , C . R . , and Nores , M . ( 2005 ) . Lifetime Effects : The High / Scope Perry Preschool study Through age 40 ( Monographs of the High / Scope Educational Research Foundation , 14 ) . Ypsilanti , MI : High / Scope Press . Shipstead , Z . , Redick , T . S . , and Engle , R . W . ( 2012 ) . Is working memory training effective ? Psychol . Bull . 138 , 628 – 654 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0027473 Smidts , D . P . , Jacobs , R . , and Anderson , V . ( 2004 ) . The Object Classiﬁcation Task for Children ( OCTC ) : a measure of concept generation and men - tal ﬂexibility in early childhood . Dev . Neuropsychol . 26 , 385 – 401 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326942dn2601 _ 2 Snyder , H . R . , and Munakata , Y . ( 2010 ) . Becoming self - directed : abstract represen - tations support endogenous ﬂexibility in children . Cognition 116 , 155 – 167 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2010 . 04 . 007 Snyder , H . R . , and Munakata , Y . ( 2013 ) . So many options , so little control : abstract representationscanreduceselectiondemandstoincreasechildren’sself - directed ﬂexibility . J . Exp . Child Psychol . 116 , 659 – 673 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2013 . 07 . 010 St Clair - Thompson , H . L . , and Gathercole , S . E . ( 2006 ) . Executive functions and achievements in school : shifting , updating , inhibition , and working memory . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 59 , 745 – 759 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 17470210500162854 Thorell , L . B . , Lindqvist , S . , Bergman Nutley , S . , Bohlin , G . , and Klingberg , T . ( 2009 ) . Training and transfer effects of executive functions in preschool children . Dev . Sci . 12 , 106 – 113 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2008 . 00745 . x Titz , C . , and Karbach , J . ( 2014 ) . Working memory and executive functions : effects of training on academic achievement . Psychol . Res . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00426 - 013 - 0537 - 1 . [ Epub ahead of print ] . Tremblay , P . , and Gracco , V . L . ( 2006 ) . Contribution of the frontal lobe to exter - nally and internally speciﬁed verbal responses : fMRI evidence . Neuroimage 33 , 947 – 957 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2006 . 07 . 041 Troyer , A . K . , Moscovitch , M . , and Winocur , G . ( 1997 ) . Clustering and switching as two components of verbal ﬂuency : evidence from younger and older healthy adults . Neuropsychology 11 , 138 – 146 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0894 - 4105 . 11 . 1 . 138 Troyer , A . K . , Moscovitch , M . , Winocur , G . , Alexander , M . P . , and Stuss , D . ( 1998 ) . Clustering and switching on verbal ﬂuency : the effects of focal frontal - and temporal - lobe lesions . Neuropsychologia 36 , 499 – 504 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0028 - 3932 ( 97 ) 00152 - 8 Unsworth , N . , Spillers , G . J . , and Brewer , G . A . ( 2010 ) . Variation in verbal ﬂuency : a latent variable analysis of clustering , switching , and overall performance . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 64 , 447 – 466 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 17470218 . 2010 . 505292 Vandewater , E . A . , Rideout , V . J . , Wartella , E . A . , Huang , X . , and Shim , M . ( 2007 ) . Digital childhood : electronic media and technology use among infants , tod - dlers , andpreschoolers . Pediatrics 119 , 1006 – 1015 . doi : 10 . 1542 / peds . 2006 - 1804 Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1967 ) . Play and its role in the mental development of the child . Soviet Psychology . 7 , 6 – 18 . Welsh , M . C . , Pennington , B . F . , and Groisser , D . B . ( 1991 ) . A normative - developmental study of executive function : a window on prefrontal function in children . Dev . Neuropsychol . 7 , 131 – 149 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 87565649109540483 Zelazo , P . D . , Carlson , S . M . , and Kesek , A . ( 2008 ) . “The development of executive function in childhood , ” in Handbook of Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience , 2nd Edn . eds C . Nelson and M . Luciana ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) , 553 – 574 . Zelazo , P . D . , and Lyons , K . E . ( 2012 ) . The potential beneﬁts of mindfulness training in early childhood : a developmental social cognitive neuroscience perspective . Child Dev . Perspect . 6 , 154 – 160 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1750 - 8606 . 2012 . 00241 . x Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The authors declare that the research was con - ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Received : 04 February 2014 ; accepted : 27 May 2014 ; published online : 17 June 2014 . Citation : Barker JE , Semenov AD , Michaelson L , Provan LS , Snyder HR and Munakata Y ( 2014 ) Less - structured time in children’s daily lives predicts self - directed executive functioning . Front . Psychol . 5 : 593 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2014 . 00593 This article was submitted to Developmental Psychology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Psychology . Copyright © 2014 Barker , Semenov , Michaelson , Provan , Snyder and Munakata . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , providedtheoriginalauthor ( s ) orlicensorarecreditedandthattheoriginal publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Psychology | Developmental Psychology June 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 593 | 16