Think Different : The Merits of Unconscious Thought in Preference Development and Decision Making Ap Dijksterhuis University of Amsterdam The role of unconscious and conscious thought in decision making was investigated in 5 experiments . Because of the low processing capacity of consciousness , conscious thought was hypothesized to be maladaptive when making complex decisions . Conversely , unconscious thought was expected to be highly effective . In Experiments 1 – 3 , participants were presented with a complex decision problem in which they had to choose between various alternatives , each with multiple attributes . Some participants had to make a decision immediately after being presented with the options . In the conscious thought condition , participants could think about the decision for a few minutes . In the unconscious thought condition , participants were distracted for a few minutes and then indicated their decision . Throughout the experiments , unconscious thinkers made the best decisions . Additional evidence obtained in Exper - iments 4 and 5 suggests that unconscious thought leads to clearer , more polarized , and more integrated representations in memory . When making a decision of minor importance , I have always found it advantageous to consider all the pros and cons . In vital matters however . . . the decision should come from the unconscious , from somewhere within ourselves . —Sigmund Freud A few years ago , I accepted my current job at the University of Amsterdam and shortly afterward started my quest for a place to live . My timing was awful . The housing market was incredibly tight . Apartments were very expensive and very hard to get . During those days , brokers adopted a procedure that was rather demanding for the blood pressure of buyers . A house on sale was widely advertised , and all potential buyers were invited to visit at the same time . The first person who made a bid ( provided it was reasonable ) would get the house . When I finally visited an apart - ment I thought I liked , I knew I had to make a bid quickly . Very quickly . Between the moment I first passed through the doorway of the apartment and the moment I essentially became the owner of the place , all of five minutes passed . As far as I remember , I had glanced at the bathroom for about three seconds before I commit - ted myself to a mortgage of alarming proportions . I did not sleep much that night . The problem is that it feels wrong to make such an important decision so quickly . It was not necessarily a bad decision—I can now say it was a good one—but it felt like it was poorly made . After all , psychologists , teachers , and parents have all taught us that we need to think hard before we make an important decision . Their advice is both well meant and intuitively compelling . How - ever , whether thorough conscious thinking always leads to good decisions is not clear . Freud questioned it , as did his contemporary Whitehead ( 1911 ) , who said , “It is a profoundly erroneous truism , repeated by all copybooks and by eminent people making speeches , that we should cultivate the habit of thinking about what we’re doing . The precise opposite is the case” ( p . 143 ; also quoted in Bargh , 1997 , p . 10 , and in Claxton , 1997 , p . 15 ) . It is interesting that these same parents also advised us to take our time when faced with an important decision by telling us to “sleep on it . ” This suggests another approach to making a decision . Here , people intuitively sense that letting the unconscious mull over the problem may lead to better decisions . However , whether what we may call “unconscious thought” contributes to good decisions is also not clear . Some recent treatments of the uncon - scious have been optimistic about its powers ( Bargh & Chartrand , 1999 ; Claxton , 1997 ; Wegner & Smart , 1997 ; Wilson , 2002 ) , but it has become so fashionable to view the unconscious as a rela - tively stupid system that many people will surely not expect unconscious thought to be beneficial at all . The phrase “unconscious thought” may raise eyebrows . In the present context , conscious thought and unconscious thought are defined in the following way . Conscious thought refers to the cognitive and / or affective task - relevant processes one is con - sciously aware of while attending to a task . For instance , one may compare two holiday destinations and consciously think , “The Spanish coast is cheap but I do not want to go there because it is way too crowded . ” Unconscious thought , on the other hand , refers to cognitive and / or affective task - relevant processes that take place outside conscious awareness . One may compare two holiday des - tinations and not know which one to choose . Subsequently , one This research was supported by Nederlandse Organisatie voor Weten - schappelijk Onderzoek – Vernieuwingsimpuls Grant 016 . 025 . 030 . I thank Teun Meurs for his great help throughout this project and Odin de Vries and Bregje Zwaan for the collection of the data of Experiment 3 . I benefited greatly from comments on an earlier version by Henk Aarts , Jonathan Schooler , Pamela Smith , Tim Wilson , Helma van den Berg , Karin Bongers , Yael de Liver , Kirsten Ruys , and Daniel Wigboldus . Thanks . The title of this article was inspired by the well - known “Think Differ - ent” Apple ad campaign . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Ap Dijksterhuis , Social Psychology Program , University of Amsterdam , Roetersstaat 15 , 1018 WB , Amsterdam , the Netherlands . E - mail : a . j . dijksterhuis @ uva . nl Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association 2004 , Vol . 87 , No . 5 , 586 – 598 0022 - 3514 / 04 / $ 12 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 87 . 5 . 586 586 does not consciously attend to the problem for a few days , and suddenly the thought , “It’s going to be Tuscany ! ” pops into mind . This thought itself is conscious , but the transition from indecision to a preference a few days later is the result of unconscious thought . In this article , conscious and unconscious thought are pitted against each other to answer the question , “Who is the better decision maker of the two ? ” This question is investigated with complex decision problems . When choosing between jobs , be - tween houses , between different holiday destinations , between roommates , people are faced with various alternatives , each char - acterized by many pros and cons . Making sound decisions requires integration of large amounts of information into impressions and a comparison between these impressions to arrive at a preference . To do this , two things are needed . One needs enough processing capacity to deal with large amounts of information , and one needs skills sophisticated enough to integrate information in a meaning - ful and accurate way . Processing Capacity A little introspection reveals that the processing capacity of consciousness is limited . People are not able to concentrate con - sciously on two different things simultaneously . About a half a century ago , researchers started to try to quantify the processing capacity of consciousness and the unconscious . Miller ( 1956 ) demonstrated that the maximum amount of information that can be kept under conscious scrutiny at any given time is about seven units . That is not a lot . Others who investigated the processing capacity of consciousness also drew rather sobering conclusions . Consciousness can process about 40 – 60 bits per second ( for brief reviews of this research , see Nørretranders , 1998 ; Wilson , 2002 ) . Take reading , for example . Each letter of the alphabet requires about 5 bits . This means that a random letter string of eight letters ( noahlief ) contains 40 bits . However , in real language , letters are not random ( e . g . , zzzgh never appears in English ) , so a real eight - letter word has far less than 40 bits . Taking this into account , when people read , they process about 45 bits per second , equiva - lent to a fairly short sentence . Although the number of bits con - sciousness can process is dependent on both the task and the experience ( a skilled reader can process more bits while reading than a child who is still mastering it ) , the processing capacity of consciousness is low . In contrast , the processing capacity of the entire human system , or , in other words , of conscious and unconscious processes com - bined , is enormous . The capacity of the entire system is about 11 , 200 , 000 bits . The visual system alone can deal with 10 million bits per second . It follows that the unconscious does not have a capacity problem . If the unconscious is a modern computer , con - sciousness is nothing more than an old abacus . The low capacity of consciousness suggests that it may not be up to the task of making complex decisions : The sheer amount of information involved may be too much for it to tackle . Take the example of choosing a graduate school . Different programs have different professors with different research interests , teaching eval - uations , and reputations as advisors . Some programs have a higher status than others , but this status is not always perfectly correlated with the status of the university as a whole . Different schools are also located in different cities with their own pros and cons on several dimensions . The low capacity of consciousness will likely prevent it from taking all this information into account simulta - neously , the consequence being that consciousness will only deal with a subset of information . This may come at the expense of the final decision . Indeed , it has been shown that when people can devote only a limited amount of information processing capacity to making a decision ( e . g . , when they are under time pressure ) , normative , consciously driven processes can lead to worse decisions than more heuristic strategies ( Payne , Bettman , & Johnson , 1988 ) . This is because more elaborate , normative strategies only work well when all information is taken into account . The work by Wilson , Schooler , and colleagues provides direct evidence for consciousness as a poor decision maker because of its limited capacity . Wilson and Schooler ( 1991 ; see also Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ; Schooler , Ohlsson , & Brooks , 1993 ; Wilson et al . , 1993 ) had participants evaluate objects , such as different college courses . In one condition , participants were simply asked to eval - uate the different objects . They most likely engaged in little conscious thought . In another condition , participants were pressed to carefully analyze the reasons for their evaluations before mak - ing them and to write down these reasons . They engaged in more thorough conscious thinking . This did not help them . In fact , they did a poorer job than participants who thought less . As expected , additional evidence indicated that conscious thought led people to focus on a limited number of attributes at the expense of taking into account other relevant attributes . Other evidence comes from Pelham and Neter ( 1995 ) . They asked participants to solve various problems . Some problems were transparent and easy to solve , whereas others were difficult to solve , and participants had to avoid pitfalls ( they ran the risk of heuristics leading them astray ) . Some people were simply asked to solve the problems , whereas others were strongly motivated to solve the problems accurately . This increased motivation helped participants to be more accurate on the easy problems , but it hindered solving the complex problems . If one is willing to assume that the motivated participants engaged in more conscious think - ing , the results support the notion of consciousness as a low - capacity system . Ironically , more conscious thought reduced the chance that people took crucial information into account . The Skills to Think Another important requirement for making a good decision is the integration of information in a meaningful way . Simply put , it is important to be able to “think . ” Are both consciousness and the unconscious able to associate , integrate , elaborate , weigh ? Consciousness may suffer from a power cut when too much pressure is put on its limited capacity , but as long as its capacity is enough to deal with a particular problem , it is likely to be a good thinker . For instance , consciousness can effectively moderate im - pressions that were initially made unconsciously ( e . g . , Gilbert , 1989 ) . When we see someone shout , we come to the impression that this person is aggressive , but conscious intervention can alter this impression if warranted ( “wait , he was provoked” ) . With decisions , such conscious interventions can be highly effective . Faced with the opportunity to buy an apartment with many wildly positive attributes and a single critical negative one ( it is much too 587 MERITS OF UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT expensive ) , consciousness will be good at quickly deciding against it . The question is whether the unconscious is a good thinker . If it can devote a relatively small part of its enormous processing capacity to thought , it can potentially be very useful . However , a vast processing capacity does not necessarily imply useful work . If you shut down your computer , it cannot do anything . Or , to stick to the computer metaphor , some computers are incredibly power - ful but do only one simple thing , like sorting mail by zip code . So what can the unconscious contribute to making decisions ? An area where people have devoted time and effort to investi - gating the fruits of the unconscious is the domain of creativity . Researchers have long recognized the importance of incubation , the process whereby a problem is consciously ignored for a while , after which the unconscious offers a solution . The amount of anecdotal evidence for incubation is enormous . Nobel laureates and famous artists often refer to this process as the true key to insight ( see , e . g . , Gardner , 1993 ; Ghiselin , 1952 ) . George Spencer Brown has famously said about Sir Isaac Newton that to arrive at the simplest truth , as Newton knew and practiced , requires years of contemplation . Not activity . Not reasoning . Not calculating . Not busy behavior of any kind . Not reading . Not talking . Not making an effort . Not thinking . Simply bearing in mind what it is that one needs to know . ( Quoted in Claxton , 1997 , p . 58 ) Many of us recognize processes of incubation in ourselves . We think about a paper we want to write and mull over the order in which we are going to develop our argument in the introduction . We put things to rest for a while and then suddenly , “BING , ” we feel we know it . Strong as the anecdotal evidence may be , for a long time proof of incubation was notoriously hard to establish in a research lab ( e . g . , Olton , 1979 ) . In addition , the empirical evidence for incu - bation available these days ( e . g . , Schooler & Melcher , 1995 ; Smith , 1995 ) is usually not explained by unconscious thought . Instead , incubation is seen as fruitful because one is distracted from the problem at hand . Not thinking about a problem for a while may lead people to forget wrong heuristics or inappropriate strategies in general . Distraction , then , allows people to give the problem a fresh look . The distinction between distraction , whereby the role of the unconscious is passive , and true active , unconscious thought , is discussed in the introduction to Experiments 4 and 5 below . Whereas the conclusions that can be drawn from the literature on incubation are rather sobering regarding unconscious thought , recent evidence by Betsch , Plessner , Schwieren , and Gu¨tig ( 2001 ) shows that the unconscious can integrate large amounts of infor - mation . Betsch et al . ’s participants looked at ads shown on a computer screen . They were asked to carefully look at the ads because their memory for the ads would be probed . At the same time , the numerical increases and decreases of five hypothetical shares were shown . Participants were presented with 75 units of information , all only briefly presented on the computer screen . Afterward , they were asked specific questions about each of five shares , such as what the average money returns were . They were clueless . However , when they were only asked to give their atti - tudes , they somehow knew what the best and worst shares were . Participants had developed a gut feeling toward the shares , indi - cating that they had integrated the information . If participants had failed to take into account even a small portion of the 75 units of information , this would have been impossible . Other evidence for unconscious thought processes comes from research by Bowers , Regehr , Balthazard , and Parker ( 1990 ) . Their participants were asked to identify words while from time to time they were given a hint , such as an associated word . After each hint , they were pressed to guess . When people solve such problems , they “feel” as if they suddenly know the answer . Indeed , the answer suddenly pops up in consciousness ( “ red . . . bowl . . . fresh . . . of course , they mean fruit ! ” ) . However , people’s successive guesses indicated that the process is not quite as sudden if seen from the perspective of the unconscious . Successive guesses con - verged , and the unconscious seemed to be closing in on the right answer quite a while before the answer was accessible to con - sciousness . Related findings come from research on tip - of - the - tongue phenomena . Yaniv and Meyer ( 1987 ) offered participants definitions of rare words they could not recall but felt they knew . In a lexical decision task , the target tip - of - the - tongue words were highly accessible . Although the words were inaccessible to con - sciousness , the unconscious had found and activated them . To summarize , there is enough evidence to at least assume that the unconscious continues to think about pressing matters in the absence of any conscious attention . Overview of Experiments Two hypotheses were tested in the current research . First , when making complex decisions , a brief period of unconscious thought will lead to a better decision relative to conditions under which unconscious thought is prevented . Second , when making complex decisions , conscious thought is inferior relative to unconscious thought . The first three experiments directly tested these two hypotheses . The fourth and fifth experiments were designed to shed light on the nature of unconscious thought . In the first three experiments , the same paradigm was used . Participants were presented with information about various alter - natives ( apartments in Experiments 1 and 2 , roommates in Exper - iment 3 ) . Alternatives were described by both positive and nega - tive attributes , and one was made rather desirable and another one rather undesirable . Hence , the quality of the decision is judged from a normative perspective . In the experiments , filler alterna - tives were included in order to increase the complexity of the decision problem . These fillers were constructed to be neutral . Participants indicated their preference either directly , by choos - ing an alternative ( Experiment 2 ) , or indirectly , by indicating their evaluation of each alternative ( Experiments 1 and 3 ) . In Experi - ments 1 and 3 , the dependent variable was the difference in attitude toward the desirable and the undesirable alternatives . There are two reasons for this choice . First , when choosing between alter - natives , recognizing the best alternative is obviously important . However , recognizing and rejecting a particularly unattractive alternative is in many cases just as important . The second reason is practical . A difference score between two opposite attitudes provides more statistical power than a single attitude score . In all experiments , there were three conditions . Some partici - pants were provided with the relevant information and had to decide ( or evaluate ) immediately afterward . This condition is the immediate decision condition . Participants in the conscious thought condition were given a few minutes to think about the 588 DIJKSTERHUIS information before they decided . Finally , participants in the un - conscious thought condition were distracted for a few minutes before they decided , thereby enabling them to think unconsciously while at the same time preventing conscious thought . The imme - diate decision condition can be seen as a baseline where little or no thought takes place after participants read the information about the various alternatives . The unconscious thought condition is devised in such a way as to prevent conscious thought . The first hypothesis , that unconscious thought helps to make decisions , should lead to better performance in the unconscious thought condition relative to the immediate decision condition . The conscious thought condition is a little more complex be - cause it is not purely a conscious thought condition . Making people think consciously does not stop them from thinking uncon - sciously . The second hypothesis about the relative inferiority of conscious thought should not necessarily lead to worse perfor - mance under conscious thought conditions than under immediate decision conditions , because the former group benefits from un - conscious thought . Instead , the second hypothesis implies that the conscious thought condition should show inferior performance relative to the unconscious thought condition . Experiment 1 Method Participants and design . Sixty - three undergraduate students ( 48 women and 15 men ) from the University of Amsterdam were randomly assigned to one of three conditions : an immediate decision condition , a conscious thought condition , and an unconscious thought condition . They either received course credits or money ( € 5 ; approximately US $ 6 ) for their participation . Procedure and materials . The experiment was the last in a longer session with various unrelated experiments . Participants worked in separate cubicles . The experiment was described as an experiment on decision making . Participants were told that they would be presented with informa - tion about four hypothetical apartments in Amsterdam ( labeled Apartments 1 – 4 ) . All apartments were described by positive ( e . g . , “a very nice area” ) and negative ( e . g . , “rather noisy” ) attributes . Participants were asked to form an impression of the apartments , and they were told that they would be asked to choose one of the apartments at a later stage . Information was then presented about the four apartments . Each apart - ment was described by 12 attributes , for a total of 48 pieces of information . These 48 attributes were presented in random order . Each attribute was presented for 4 s in the center of the screen , automatically followed by the next attribute . It is important to note that Apartment 2 was the most attractive apartment , with 8 positive ( e . g . , “Apartment 2 is in the city center” ) and 4 negative ( e . g . , “Apartment 2 has an unfriendly landlord” ) attributes . Apartment 4 was the worst apartment , with 4 positive and 8 negative attributes . Apartments 1 and 3 were of medium attractiveness , with 6 positive and 6 negative attributes . The last two apartments can be seen as fillers , used so participants were presented with a large amount of information . The stimulus information was assembled as follows . A large number of attributes were pretested , and all extremely negative or extremely positive attributes were excluded . When students were asked which attributes they found important , two stood out : size of the apartment and cost . These dimensions were used with care in that items were phrased to make them not too extreme ( e . g . , “Apartment 2 is fairly large” rather than “Apartment 2 is enormous” ) . No attributes were used more than once , although some attribute dimensions were used twice ( e . g . , one was in a nice area , another in a troublesome area ) . After participants read all the information , they were randomly allocated to one of three conditions . In the immediate decision condition , they were immediately asked to give their attitude toward each of the four apartments . The questions were phrased “How would you judge Apartment . . . ? ” Participants were asked to indicate their answer on a 10 - point scale ranging from 1 ( extremely negative ) to 10 ( extremely positive ) . All participants rated the apartments in numerical order , starting with Apartment 1 . In the conscious thought condition , participants were first asked to “very carefully think about what you think of each of the four apartments . ” 1 They were given 3 min . During this time , the computer screen was blank except for a clock indicating how much time they had left . After 3 min , partici - pants answered the attitude questions . In the unconscious thought condition , participants performed a distractor task aimed at preventing conscious thought : the n - back task ( e . g . , Jonides et al . , 1997 ) . In this task , participants are presented with a series of digits , and for each digit they have to decide whether it matches the digit that preceded it by n places . Here participants completed a 2 - back task . This demanding task affects executive functioning quite severely and can there - fore be expected to successfully eliminate conscious thought . Participants performed the 2 - back task for 3 min ( including a 20 - s instruction screen ) . A number between 1 and 9 appeared on the screen every second , and participants had to indicate a match by pressing the space bar . After 3 min , they were asked to complete the attitude questions . In general , participants did well on the n - back task , except for 3 participants who erred on over 10 % of the trials . These participants were not taken into account in further analyses . After completing the attitude questions , all participants were debriefed , thanked , and dismissed . Results It was first confirmed that overall , the attractive apartment was judged as more attractive than the unattractive apartment . Indeed , the overall attitude toward the attractive apartment was higher ( M (cid:1) 6 . 18 ) than the attitude toward the unattractive apartment ( M (cid:1) 5 . 38 ) , with the attitude toward the two fillers falling in between ( M s (cid:1) 5 . 74 and 5 . 69 ) . The measure of interest is how well participants could differ - entiate between the attractive apartment and the unattractive apart - ment . Hence , difference scores were calculated by subtracting the attitude toward the unattractive apartment from the attitude toward the attractive apartment . Both participants in the immediate deci - sion condition ( M (cid:1) 0 . 47 , SD (cid:1) 1 . 71 ) and in the conscious thought condition ( M (cid:1) 0 . 44 , SD (cid:1) 1 . 48 ) performed poorly . Their scores did not significantly differ from zero ( t s (cid:2) 1 . 15 ) , indicating no clear preference for the attractive apartment . Participants in the unconscious thought condition did better ( M (cid:1) 1 . 23 , SD (cid:1) 2 . 05 ) . Their score was higher than zero , t ( 21 ) (cid:1) 2 . 75 , p (cid:2) . 02 . It was expected that unconscious thought would outperform participants in the immediate decision condition . The second hy - pothesis was that conscious thought would be maladaptive , which should lead to underperformance of conscious thinkers relative to unconscious thinkers . It became clear after an inspection of the cell means that female and male participants may have responded differentially to our manipulation , so this factor was included in the analyses . A 3 ( experimental condition ) (cid:3) 2 ( sex of participant ) analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) yielded a significant effect of condition , F ( 2 , 54 ) (cid:1) 3 . 40 , p (cid:2) . 05 , and a nonsignificant two - way interaction , F ( 2 , 54 ) (cid:1) 2 . 79 , p (cid:2) . 08 . The three conditions were compared via three separate ANOVAs . As expected , a comparison 1 Original instructions were in Dutch . 589 MERITS OF UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT between the immediate decision condition and the conscious thought condition did not yield any significant results . Participants in the unconscious thought condition performed better than par - ticipants in the immediate decision condition , F ( 1 , 37 ) (cid:1) 4 . 96 , p (cid:2) . 04 . This effect was qualified by a two - way interaction of equal magnitude , F ( 1 , 37 ) (cid:1) 4 . 96 , p (cid:2) . 04 , showing that male partici - pants were especially sensitive to our manipulation . They scored very poorly in the immediate decision condition ( M (cid:1) (cid:4) 1 . 00 , SD (cid:1) 2 . 16 ) and exceptionally well in the unconscious thought condition ( M (cid:1) 2 . 00 , SD (cid:1) 1 . 83 ) . This difference was absent for female participants ( both M s (cid:1) 0 . 87 ) . Finally , a comparison be - tween the conscious and unconscious thought conditions showed the predicted main effect of condition . Participants in the uncon - scious thought condition outperformed those in the conscious thought condition , although this effect was not significant , F ( 1 , 37 ) (cid:1) 3 . 47 , p (cid:2) . 08 . No other effects were significant ( F s (cid:2) 1 ) . To summarize , participants who could only engage in uncon - scious thought were able to differentiate between the attractive apartment and the unattractive apartment , whereas participants who either were allowed to think consciously or were not allowed to think at all could not , thereby supporting the two hypotheses . Experiment 2 Experiment 2 served various purposes . One goal was to replicate the effects of Experiment 1 . However , rather than asking partici - pants to evaluate each apartment separately , they were now asked to choose one of the apartments . In addition , it is shown above that conscious thought can be maladaptive because of the low capacity of consciousness . Therefore , consciousness is not able to deal with a large amount of information and must resort to focusing on a limited subset . In concrete terms , when choosing between four apartments , each described with 12 attributes , consciousness would not be able to take all the information into account and would , by necessity , focus on only a few attributes . Unconscious thought , however , was expected not to suffer from capacity prob - lems . It should therefore be easier for unconscious thought to form a more global judgment based on all ( or almost all ) information . This possibility was investigated by asking participants , after they chose an apartment , to indicate whether their choice was based on a global impression or on only one or two specific attributes . The paradigm changed a little from Experiment 1 , in which the decision - making task was very taxing , because participants in two out of three conditions could not discriminate between the best and worst apartments . One reason for this experienced difficulty is that the information about the apartments was presented in random order . It was decided to present the information in Experiment 2 about each apartment individually in a fixed order . Method Participants and design . Ninety - four undergraduate students ( 80 women and 14 men ) from the University of Amsterdam were randomly assigned to one of three conditions : an immediate decision condition , a conscious thought condition , and an unconscious thought condition . They either received course credits or money ( € 5 ) for their participation . Procedure and materials . Participants were seated in a cubicle . The experiment was described as an experiment on decision making . Partici - pants were told that they would be presented with information about four hypothetical apartments in Amsterdam ( called Apartments 1 – 4 ) . All apart - ments were described by both positive and negative attributes . They were asked to form an impression of the four apartments , and they were told that they would be asked to choose one of the apartments at a later stage . Information was then presented about the four apartments . Each apart - ment was described by 15 attributes , for a total of 60 pieces of information . As opposed to Experiment 1 , the attributes were not presented in random order . Participants were first given the 15 attributes describing Apartment 1 . All 15 attributes appeared at once and were presented as a list . After 12 s , the list for Apartment 2 appeared to the right of the list for Apartment 1 . Again after 12 s , a third list describing Apartment 3 was added , and after a further 12 s , the list for Apartment 4 was added . The four lists remained on the screen for another 12 s , after which all the information disappeared . Apartment 3 was the most attractive apartment , with 8 positive , 4 negative , and 3 neutral attributes . Because participants were asked to choose an apartment rather than indicating their attitude toward each apartment , no particularly unattractive apartment was included . The three remaining apartments ( i . e . , Apartments 1 , 2 , and 4 ) were all characterized by 5 positive , 6 negative , and 4 neutral attributes . After participants read all the information , they were randomly allocated to one of three conditions . The conditions were the same as in Experiment 1 . Afterward , participants answered two questions . They were first asked , “If you had to choose one of the apartments , which one would you choose ? ” They indicated their answer by typing the corresponding number . The second question pertained to the way they reached their choice . They were asked , “Is your choice based on a more global judgment , or is your choice based on only one or two specific attributes ? ” Participants answered by clicking on one of two boxes , labeled “global” and “specific . ” After completing the attitude questions , participants were debriefed and dismissed . Results Because of the extremely low number of male participants ( only 3 in the unconscious thought condition ) , sex of participant was not included in the analyses . The percentages of participants choosing the attractive apartment were compared . As expected , participants in the unconscious thought condition most often made the right choice ( 59 . 3 % ) . Participants in the conscious thought condition and the immediate decision condition did not perform as well ( 47 . 1 % and 36 . 4 % made correct choices , respectively ) . Chi - square tests demonstrated that the goal to make the decision problem easier was successful . In all conditions , participants performed better than chance , all (cid:1) 2 s ( 92 , N (cid:1) 93 ) (cid:5) 5 . 19 , p s (cid:2) . 03 . Further - more , the difference between the unconscious thought condition and the immediate decision condition was significant , (cid:1) 2 ( 59 , N (cid:1) 60 ) (cid:1) 3 . 13 , p (cid:2) . 04 , one - tailed . The way participants reached their choice differed between conditions . In the immediate decision condition , 42 . 4 % of the participants indicated they made a global judgment . This percent - age was lower for participants in the conscious thought condition ( 26 . 5 % ) and higher in the unconscious thought condition ( 55 . 6 % ) . These latter two percentages differed significantly , (cid:1) 2 ( 60 , N (cid:1) 61 ) (cid:1) 6 . 69 , p (cid:2) . 01 , one - tailed . The way participants reached their choice was related to its quality . Across participants , the correla - tion between the answers on the two questions was . 22 ( p (cid:2) . 04 ) . Participants who made global judgments more often chose the attractive apartment . Experiment 3 Experiment 3 was designed to replicate the finding of superior unconscious thought with different stimulus materials . In Experi - 590 DIJKSTERHUIS ments 1 and 2 , apartments were chosen as objects in the hope that students would find them both relevant and , to some extent , appealing . In Experiment 3 , however , potential roommates were used as objects . This is as relevant , but possibly more appealing , than apartments because participants would be thinking about people . In the first two experiments , quality of judgment was evaluated from a normative perspective . One apartment was better than another because it was characterized by more positive attributes and fewer negative attributes . However , people differ as to which attributes they find most important . Some people may be willing to live in a very small apartment as long as it is in the city center , whereas others need more space and prefer to move to the suburbs . Likewise , it is easier for most people to list the appealing aspects of a holiday in Tuscany ( great cities and towns , lots of art , a beautiful countryside , great food , good wine , etc . ) than a holiday on a Spanish costa ( one can swim and choose between dozens of bars each night to get a drink ) . Still , many people prefer the Spanish costas because they are not interested in the highlights of Tuscany . In other words , to reach a sound decision people should give different attributes different , idiosyncratic weights . One may argue that this weighing of attributes of unequal importance is a task at which consciousness excels . Although intuitively logical , this remains to be seen . There are two separate assumptions behind this idea : ( a ) Consciousness is good at weigh - ing attributes , and ( b ) the unconscious is not very good at it . There is reason to disagree with both . First , is consciousness good at assigning appropriate weights to attributes ? When the decision problem is simple , consciousness is indeed likely to be good . As argued in the introduction , if one is faced with an apartment with many wildly positive attributes and a single critical negative one ( it is much too expensive ) , conscious - ness will likely be good at quickly deciding against it . However , when the situation is much more complex , the low capacity of consciousness should obstruct this weighing process . What if one finds three attributes very important , four attributes moderately important , four attributes rather unimportant , and two attributes not important at all ? A telling example comes from work by Wilson et al . ( 1993 ) . Participants were presented with five posters and asked to choose one to take home . Later , they were called and asked how satisfied they were with their choice—a wonderful measure of whether they made the right decision from a subjective point of view . Before choosing , some participants thought about the posters for a little while , whereas others were asked to carefully analyze the pros and cons of each poster . It turned out that people who carefully analyzed were less satisfied than people who merely thought about them . That is , people who pressed consciousness to carefully weigh the various attributes made relatively poor decisions . Wil - son and colleagues ( see , e . g . , Wilson , Dunn , Kraft , & Lisle , 1989 ) explained these and other findings by claiming that too much conscious reasoning increases the weight that people attach to reasons that are very accessible and easy to verbalize . These reasons are not always the ones that should receive more weight . In essence , conscious reasoning leads to a weighing process , but the weights are wrong . Levine , Halberstadt , and Goldstone ( 1996 ) obtained evidence further supporting this claim . In their work , participants were presented with 60 faces that differed on a number of dimensions . They were asked to indicate their liking for each face , either after receiving the instruction to merely rate each face or after being instructed to carefully think about the reasons for their liking . As one might expect , people’s weighing of the different dimensions in determining their liking of the faces was more variable after thinking . However , they were also decidedly more inconsistent . In light of these findings , it is not appropriate to conclude that conscious thought is necessarily good at weighing the importance of attributes . The second widely held assumption is that the unconscious is not good at weighing different attributes . However , intuitive as this assumption is , there is no evidence that the unconscious is not able to deal with subtleties such as weighing the importance of at - tributes . Conversely , there are reasons to believe it can . The evidence by Betsch et al . ( 2001 ) discussed above strongly suggests that the unconscious can weigh information . In addition , there is more general evidence that the unconscious can deal with many subtle processes quite well—indeed , often better than conscious - ness can . The unconscious can sense minor differences between stimuli that consciousness cannot ( Dijksterhuis & Aarts , 2003 ; Marcel , 1983 ; Pierce & Jastrow , 1884 ) . The unconscious can develop preferences for people and objects , whereas consciousness is not even aware of these people or objects , as shown by research on mere exposure ( e . g . , Kunst - Wilson & Zajonc , 1980 ) and sub - liminal evaluative conditioning ( Dijksterhuis , 2004 ; Krosnick , Betz , Jussim , & Lynn , 1992 ) . The unconscious can master wildly difficult tasks that consciousness cannot master at all , even if pressed ( e . g . , Hassin & Bargh , 2003 ; Lewicki , Hill , & Czyzewska , 1992 ) . The unconscious can “decide” to behave more intelligently without any conscious mediation ( Bargh , Gollwitzer , Lee - Chai , Barndollar , & Tro¨tschel , 2001 ; Dijksterhuis & van Knippenberg , 1998 ) . Finally , recent research has shown that the unconscious can force a person to behave intelligently when consciousness is trying to obstruct this ( Wegner , Fuller , & Sparrow , 2003 ) . In Experiment 3 , people’s decisions were investigated from both a normative perspective ( as in Experiments 1 and 2 ) and a sub - jective perspective . The information about the alternatives was again presented in random order , as in Experiment 1 . However , to avoid making the task too difficult , only one filler alternative was presented , rather than two as in Experiment 1 . Method Participants and design . One hundred forty - five undergraduate stu - dents ( 107 women and 38 men ) from the University of Amsterdam par - ticipated in the experiment . They were randomly assigned to one of three conditions : an immediate decision condition , a conscious thought condi - tion , and an unconscious thought condition . They either received course credits or money ( € 10 ; approximately US $ 12 ) for their participation . Procedure and materials . The experiment was the last experiment in a longer session with multiple , unrelated experiments . Participants worked in separate cubicles . The experiment was announced as an experiment on decision making . Participants were asked to imagine they would have to find a roommate to share an apartment with ( it is very common for Amsterdam undergraduates to have one or more roommates ) . They were told they would be presented with information about three hypothetical roommates that were all described by various positive and negative at - tributes . They were asked to form an impression of the three roommates and to choose between the roommates at a later stage . Each roommate was described with 12 attributes , for a total of 36 pieces of information . These 36 attributes were presented in random order . Each 591 MERITS OF UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT attribute was presented for 2 s in the center of the screen , followed , after a 0 . 5 - s pause , by the next attribute . Roommate A was the most attractive person , with 8 positive and 4 negative attributes , whereas Roommate C was the least attractive , with 4 positive and 8 negative attributes . Roommate B was of medium attractiveness , with 6 positive and 6 negative attributes . All roommates were described on the same 12 dimensions ( e . g . , how friendly , how neat ) . Roommate A and C were exact opposites . On the 8 dimensions where Roommate A was described as positive ( e . g . , “has fun friends , ” “is neat” ) , Roommate C was described as negative ( e . g . , “has annoying friends , ” “is very messy” ) , and vice versa . Roommate B partly overlapped with both of them . The choice for the attributes used was based on pilot testing aimed at assessing which attributes people find important . Only attributes that students indicated were at least moderately important were used—at least 4 . 6 on a 7 - point scale ranging from 1 ( extremely unimpor - tant ) to 7 ( extremely important ) —but they were phrased in ways that made them not too extreme . After participants read all information , they were randomly allocated to one of three conditions . In the immediate decision condition , they were immediately asked to give their attitude toward each of the three room - mates . Participants were asked to indicate their answers on 9 - point scales ranging from 1 ( extremely negative ) to 9 ( extremely positive ) . All partici - pants answered the questions in the same order , starting with Roommate A and ending with Roommate C . The conditions were the same as in Experiments 1 and 2 , except that the time people were given to think ( in the conscious thought condition ) or the time people were distracted ( in the unconscious thought condition ) was now 4 min . In the unconscious thought condition , participants were dis - tracted with an anagram task . They were presented with one anagram at a time ( e . g . , ecipbs ) ; the next anagram appeared after participants had solved the anagram ( biceps ) , or after 45 s had passed . The task was interrupted after 4 min , and participants were then asked to complete the attitude questions . After a filler task that lasted about 4 min , all participants were asked to indicate how important they found various attributes of people when trying to find a roommate . They were asked to indicate the importance of each of the 12 dimensions used in the experiment ( e . g . , “How important is it for you that a roommate is neat ? ” ) . Participants indicated their answers on 7 - point scales ranging from 1 ( very unimportant ) to 7 ( very important ) . The 12 questions were presented in random order . Results It was first confirmed that the desirable roommate was judged to be more positive than the undesirable roommate . Indeed , the overall attitude toward the desirable roommate was higher ( M (cid:1) 6 . 85 ) than that toward the undesirable ( M (cid:1) 4 . 20 ) , with the attitude toward the filler roommate falling in between ( M (cid:1) 5 . 45 ) . Difference scores were computed by subtracting the attitude toward the least attractive roommate from the attitude toward the most attractive one . As expected , participants in the unconscious thought condition scored highest ( M (cid:1) 3 . 15 , SD (cid:1) 1 . 92 ) . Partic - ipants in the immediate decision condition scored lowest ( M (cid:1) 2 . 08 , SD (cid:1) 1 . 80 ) , with the participants in the conscious thought condition falling in between ( M (cid:1) 2 . 72 , SD (cid:1) 1 . 60 ) . These scores were reliably higher than zero , as confirmed by t tests , all t s ( 50 , 47 , 45 ) (cid:5) 7 , p s (cid:2) . 01 , indicating that in all conditions participants preferred the attractive roommate . A 3 ( experimental condition ) (cid:3) 2 ( sex of participant ) ANOVA revealed a main effect of condition , F ( 2 , 133 ) (cid:1) 4 . 69 , p (cid:2) . 02 , and a nonsignificant two - way interaction , F ( 2 , 133 ) (cid:1) 2 . 34 , p (cid:2) . 13 . Participants in the unconscious thought condition did better than participants in the immediate decision condition , F ( 1 , 88 ) (cid:1) 8 . 07 , p (cid:2) . 01 , and than participants in the conscious thought condition , F ( 1 , 84 ) (cid:1) 4 . 60 , p (cid:2) . 04 . The comparison between the uncon - scious thought condition and the conscious thought condition also revealed a significant two - way interaction , F ( 1 , 84 ) (cid:1) 4 . 03 , p (cid:2) . 05 . Male participants performed poorly in the conscious thought condition ( M (cid:1) 1 . 56 ) and very well in the unconscious thought condition ( M (cid:1) 3 . 44 ) , whereas this difference was almost absent for female participants ( M s (cid:1) 3 . 00 and 3 . 06 , respectively ) . The conscious thought condition and the immediate decision condition did not differ from each other , F ( 1 , 94 ) (cid:1) 0 . 55 , but the comparison did reveal a main effect of sex of participant , F ( 1 , 94 ) (cid:1) 6 . 42 , p (cid:2) . 02 . Female participants ( M (cid:1) 2 . 69 ) outperformed male partici - pants ( M (cid:1) 1 . 65 ) . In all experiments so far , preferences were evaluated from a normative perspective . In this experiment , ratings people gave about the importance of the 12 dimensions used to describe the three roommates were used to look at subjective preferences . For each participant , the scores on the 8 dimensions on which the attractive roommate was described as positive and the unattractive roommate was described as negative were added . The scores on the 4 dimensions on which the attractive roommate was described as negative and the unattractive roommate was described as pos - itive were then subtracted . The higher the resulting score , the more favorable a participant should be about the attractive roommate and the more unfavorable a participant should be about the unat - tractive roommate . The scores were correlated with the difference score of the attitudes toward the attractive roommate and the unattractive roommate . The higher the correlation , the better the participant’s preference is from a subjective perspective . That is , the higher the correlation , the more a participant chose the one he or she should have chosen according to his or her own weighing of the attributes . The correlation in the immediate decision condition was significant , r ( 51 ) (cid:1) . 39 , p (cid:2) . 005 . The correlation in the conscious condition was nonsignificant , r ( 47 ) (cid:1) . 21 , p (cid:2) . 17 , whereas the correlation in the unconscious thought condition was the largest of the three , r ( 41 ) (cid:1) . 48 , p (cid:2) . 002 . On the basis of these data , there is no reason to assume that conscious thought helps to make better decisions from a subjective point of view , nor is there any reason to assume that unconscious thought hampers this pro - cess . The data point in the opposite direction , although it should be noted that the correlations do not differ from each other signifi - cantly . The comparison between the unconscious and conscious thought conditions failed to reach significance ( p (cid:1) . 16 ) . 2 What Is Unconscious Thought ? Experiments 4 and 5 The first three experiments show that participants in the uncon - scious thought condition generally outperform participants in the remaining two conditions . However , it is not yet clear what exactly happens during the unconscious thought period . Experiments 4 and 5 were designed to shed more light on this process . A number of different processes can take place during distrac - tion . One should distinguish between processes whereby the role of the unconscious is passive and a process whereby the uncon - 2 Another reason for being careful is that the ratings of importance of dimensions were administered after rather than before people gave their attitudes toward the different roommates . 592 DIJKSTERHUIS scious engages in active thought . Most findings in the domain of incubation are explained by processes whereby the role of the unconscious is passive . Schooler and Melcher ( 1995 ) reviewed findings showing that distraction can lead to the change of a “mental set . ” Here , the role of the unconscious is proposed to be passive . People often ap - proach a problem with wrong cues , wrong heuristics , and / or wrong information . Following a period of distraction , wrong approaches become less accessible or are forgotten altogether . The effects of distraction on a change of mental set can be either fairly strong ( such as when one tries to solve a chess problem and initially gets truly fixed in thinking along a wrong path ) or relatively subtle ( such as when distraction merely attenuates the biasing influence of primacy or recency effects ) . One could lump these processes together under the umbrella of the fresh look explanation : Putting a problem aside for a while allows for a fresh , unbiased new start . These effects notwithstanding , here it is proposed that the un - conscious also actively thinks . In the first three experiments , participants in the unconscious thought conditions were better able to distinguish an attractive alternative from an unattractive alter - native . A reasonable assumption is that the superior judgments of the unconscious thinkers were based on their representations of the various alternatives in memory . These participants were distracted for a while , and when they were asked to judge the various alternatives , they must have relied on the representations they retrieved from memory . Because their judgments were better than the judgments made by participants in the other conditions , their representations were also somehow “better” ( or at least different ) . Their representations must have changed during distraction . The hypothesis that representations change over time is akin to the idea that people engage in thought . The term to think is derived from the Latin verb cogitare , which literally means “to shake together” ( Koestler , 1964 ) . This meaning reflects the process of unconscious thought proposed here quite well . If people are pre - sented with a lot of information in a relatively short period of time , the resulting representation in memory is likely to be disorganized . Individual pieces of information still have to be associated and integrated . Unconscious thought , it is proposed , does exactly this . That is , unconscious thought is expected to turn an initial , disor - ganized set of information into a clearer and more integrated representation of information in memory . It is quite possible that the representations can change in various ways . Given the results of the experiments above , it is likely that unconscious thought leads to representations that become more polarized —that is , the representations of moderately positive alternatives become more dominated by positive aspects , whereas the representations of negative alternatives become more negative over time . A second possibility is that unconscious thought , by a process of continued associative activity , results in a more organized representation . It could lead to greater clustering , where pieces of information that load on the same dimension or pertain to the same aspect become clustered . Experiments 4 and 5 were designed to test the hypothesis that people engage in active unconscious thought and to shed light on the nature of this process . Experiment 4 was designed to test the polarization hypothesis , and Experiment 5 was designed to test the clustering hypothesis . In Experiment 4 , the same paradigm was used as in Experiment 3 , but rather than measuring people’s attitudes toward the different alternatives , recognition of the var - ious aspects was assessed . This was done to test the hypothesis of greater polarization . Is it true that unconscious thought leads to better judgment because representations become more polarized ? This should mean that positive aspects of the attractive alternative and negative aspects of the unattractive alternative should come to dominate the representation . Both accuracy and speed of recogni - tion were assessed to answer these questions . Accuracy is indica - tive of availability of information . Polarization may lead to rela - tively accurate recognition of positive aspects of the attractive alternative and negative aspects of the unattractive alternative . Speed is indicative of the accessibility of information . Polarization may lead to higher accessibility of positive aspects of the attractive alternative and negative aspects of the unattractive alternative relative to other information . Experiment 5 was designed to test the clustering hypothesis . Is it true that unconscious thought leads to better organization in memory whereby information is more meaningfully clustered ? The paradigm differs from the one used in Experiment 3 . Partic - ipants were given behavioral information about a person . In this information , three trait dimensions were “hidden . ” Some informa - tion suggested that the stimulus person was intelligent , some that the person was extroverted , and some that the person was politi - cally left - wing . If the unconscious is a better integrator of infor - mation , unconscious thought should lead participants to organize their memory more along these three trait dimensions than partic - ipants in the remaining two conditions . Experiment 4 Method Participants and design . One hundred fourteen undergraduate students ( 88 women and 26 men ) from the University of Amsterdam participated in the experiment . They were randomly assigned to one of three conditions : an immediate decision condition , a conscious thought condition , and an unconscious thought condition . They either received course credits or money ( € 10 ; approximately US $ 12 ) for their participation . Procedure and materials . Experiment 4 was exactly the same as Ex - periment 3 , with one exception . Rather than measuring attitudes , we assessed recognition . After participants read the information about the roommates ( in the immediate condition ) , or after either thinking for 4 min ( in the conscious thought condition ) or after being distracted for 4 min ( in the unconscious thought condition ) , they were presented with a recognition task . One by one , in random order , all 36 aspects of the roommates were presented to them again . This time the aspects were presented without roommate labels . Participants’ task was to quickly decide whether an aspect belonged to Roommate A , B , or C by pressing a corresponding button . Results No effects or even trends of sex of participants were obtained ( all F s (cid:2) . 43 ) , so this factor was not further investigated . Recognition accuracy . First , the proportion of correct recog - nition of positive and negative aspects for the three roommates were calculated separately . These proportions were subjected to a 3 ( condition : immediate vs . conscious thought vs . unconscious thought ) between - subjects (cid:3) 3 ( roommate : attractive vs . unattrac - tive vs . neutral filler ) (cid:3) 2 ( valence of aspect : positive vs . negative ) within - subjects ANOVA . A main effect of condition was found , F ( 2 , 111 ) (cid:1) 5 . 29 , p (cid:2) . 01 , indicating that participants in the 593 MERITS OF UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT immediate condition had higher proportions of correct recognition . This is not surprising , because these participants did not pause between information acquisition and recognition . More interesting , this main effect was qualified by a two - way interaction of Condi - tion (cid:3) Roommate , F ( 2 , 111 ) (cid:1) 2 . 91 , p (cid:2) . 03 . Superior recognition in the immediate condition accurately recognized information of all roommates , whereas participants in the other conditions showed impaired recognition of information of the neutral filler roommate . It seems that both conscious and unconscious thinkers focused on the attractive and unattractive roommate and “forgot” the irrele - vant filler . To investigate the possibility of a more polarized memory representation , the same analyses were done on the proportions of recognition for the attractive and unattractive roommate only . A 3 ( condition : immediate vs . conscious thought vs . unconscious thought ) between - subjects (cid:3) 2 ( roommate : attractive vs . unattrac - tive ) (cid:3) 2 ( valence of aspect : positive vs . negative ) within - subjects ANOVA revealed a two - way interaction of Roommate (cid:3) Valence of Aspect , F ( 1 , 111 ) (cid:1) 63 . 37 , p (cid:2) . 0001 , indicating that people polarized . Recognition of positive aspects of the attractive room - mate and negative aspects of the unattractive roommate was su - perior to memory for negative aspects of the attractive roommate and positive aspects of the unattractive roommate . It was predicted that the unconscious thinkers especially would polarize , but the three - way interaction was not significant , F ( 2 , 111 ) (cid:1) 2 . 23 , p (cid:2) . 12 . As can be seen in Figure 1 , people generally polarized , and participants in the unconscious thought condition tended to do this to an even greater degree . Pairwise contrasts were calculated to compare recognition accuracy for positive and negative aspects for each roommate in each condition . Unconscious thinkers had better recognition for positive aspects of the attractive roommate than for negative aspects of the attractive roommate ( p (cid:2) . 001 ) , whereas the reverse was true for the unattractive roommate ( p (cid:2) . 003 ) . In both other conditions , one of the two contrasts failed to reach significance ( p s (cid:5) . 05 ) . Recognition speed . In the analyses on speed of recognition , only data for aspects that were recognized accurately were used . The analyses performed on the speed data were the same as those on the accuracy data . They were first analyzed with a 3 ( condition : immediate vs . conscious thought vs . unconscious thought ) be - tween - subjects (cid:3) 3 ( roommate : attractive vs . unattractive vs . neu - tral filler ) (cid:3) 2 ( valence of aspect : positive vs . negative ) within - subjects ANOVA . The only reliable effect was the two - way interaction of Condition (cid:3) Roommate , F ( 2 , 111 ) (cid:1) 3 . 10 , p (cid:2) . 02 . Participants in the immediate condition recognized information about all three roommates with the same speed , whereas partici - pants in the other two conditions showed slower recognition of information about the neutral roommate . The same analysis was done on the speed of recognition for the attractive and unattractive roommates only . It revealed a two - way interaction of Roommate (cid:3) Valence of Aspect , F ( 1 , 111 ) (cid:1) 13 . 31 , p (cid:2) . 001 , which indeed indicated that people polarized . Recogni - tion of positive aspects of the attractive roommate and negative aspects of the unattractive roommate was clearly faster than rec - ognition of negative aspects of the attractive roommate and posi - tive aspects of the unattractive roommate . However , here the predicted three - way interaction was significant , F ( 2 , 111 ) (cid:1) 4 . 19 , p (cid:2) . 02 . As can be seen in Figure 2 , evidence for polarization was only obtained for unconscious thinkers . The evidence for polarization of representations in memory is fairly strong . Although the evidence based on recognition accuracy is suggestive , the evidence based on speed is unequivocal . There is one caveat . Throughout the presentation of this experiment , the term recognition was used even though it was essentially an allocation task . Participants did not have to recognize the aspects , but they were asked to determine ( or recognize ) the source ( Room - mate A , B , or C ) . Therefore , allocation biases played a role as well . Presented with a positive aspect , people may have allocated it to the roommate they thought to be the most positive ( “Friendly ? This must have been Roommate A , because I like him most” ) . However , an allocation bias is based on expectations ( “I like A , so he must have this positive attribute” ) , and these expectations are based on underlying representations . So although pure recognition and allocation are different processes ( one is mediated by expec - tations , whereas the other is not necessarily ) , effects in both reflect effects of the same underlying representation . If one wants to Figure 1 . Experiment 4 : Proportions of accurate recognition of positive ( Pos ) and negative ( Neg ) aspects of the attractive ( Attr ) and unattractive ( Unattr ) roommate per condition . 594 DIJKSTERHUIS explain the differences between conditions with differences in allocation bias , one still has to first assume differences in under - lying representation . Experiment 5 Experiment 5 was designed to investigate whether unconscious thought leads to more integrated representations of information in memory . To test this , a paradigm was used that was used before by Hamilton , Katz , and Leirer ( 1980 ; see also Chartrand & Bargh , 1996 ) . In their work , participants were presented with information about a stimulus person and instructions to either form an impres - sion or to memorize the information . At a later stage , participants’ recall was assessed . It is interesting to note that participants with an impression instruction recalled more information than people who were specifically asked to memorize the information . In addition , people with an impression instruction also showed a more integrated organization of information in memory , as as - sessed by the order of recall . 3 The present experiment examined whether unconscious thought contributes to this improved organization of information in mem - ory . As in Hamilton et al . ( 1980 ) , participants were presented with behavioral information about a stimulus person . Each behavioral description was indicative of one of three trait concepts . After - ward , participants were either asked to recall the information immediately , after some conscious thought , or after unconscious thought . Our hypothesis was that unconscious thinkers would have the highest clustering scores , indicative of more integrative mem - ory organization . The two different instructions ( impression vs . memory ) were included . These are not directly related to the current hypothesis ; they were kept as a tribute to the original work . Method Participants and design . Sixty - nine undergraduate students ( 58 women and 11 men ) from the University of Amsterdam participated in the experiment . They were randomly assigned to the cells of a 2 ( instruction : impression vs . memory ) (cid:3) 3 ( condition : immediate vs . conscious thought vs . unconscious thought ) design . They either received course credits or money ( € 7 ; approximately US $ 9 ) for their participation . Procedure and materials . The experiment was the last experiment in a longer session with multiple , unrelated experiments . Participants worked in separate cubicles . The experiment was announced as an experiment on person perception . Participants were told they would be presented with information about a person named “Jeroen . ” They were told that they would have to read various behavioral descriptions about Jeroen . Half the participants were asked to form an impression of him , whereas the other half were asked to memorize the information . Subsequently , 18 short sentences were presented one by one on the screen in random order . A sentence stayed on the screen for 5 s , with the next sentence appearing after a pause of 0 . 5 s . All sentences were pretested to load on one of three trait categories . Six of the sentences indicated intelligence , 6 others indicated extroversion , and the remaining 6 were indicative of Jeroen being politically left - wing . After presentation of the sentences , participants in the immediate recall condition were given the recall task , during which they had 4 min to list as many of the behavioral descriptions as possible . Participants in the con - scious thought condition were asked to think about Jeroen for 4 min prior to the recall task , whereas participants in the unconscious thought condi - tions were distracted for 4 min . The distractor task was the same as in Experiments 3 and 4 . Results The number of descriptions recalled correctly was assessed using a gist criterion ( Hamilton et al . , 1980 ) . The recall scores 3 The reason for using this paradigm rather than the paradigms used in Experiments 1 – 4 is that the dimension that people can use to cluster should not be too obvious . Underlying trait constructs are excellent , but offering people information about three individuals named A , B , and C presumably leads to very strong—and intentional—clustering on the basis of these three individuals ( “let’s begin with listing what I remember of person A” ) . Adding a second , underlying dimension is a possibility , but this would require much more stimulus material . More stimulus material , however , leads to poorer relative recall , which in turn makes clustering scores less reliable . Figure 2 . Experiment 4 : Speed of recognition ( in seconds ) of positive ( Pos ) and negative ( Neg ) aspects of the attractive ( Attr ) and unattractive ( Unattr ) roommate per condition . 595 MERITS OF UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT were subjected to a 2 ( instruction : impression vs . memory ) (cid:3) 3 ( condition : immediate vs . conscious thought vs . unconscious thought ) between - participants ANOVA . No significant effects emerged . The absence of an effect of instruction may have been caused by the fact that compared with the experiments by Hamil - ton et al . ( 1980 ) and Chartrand and Bargh ( 1996 ) , our task was easy . People were given few behavioral descriptions , and overall recall was high ( over 50 % ) . However , the immediate decision condition comes closest to the procedure in the original Hamilton et al . ( 1980 ) studies . Under these conditions , participants in the impression set condition indeed recalled more information than participants who received a memory set . This difference was not significant , F ( 1 , 20 ) (cid:1) 2 . 95 , p (cid:2) . 11 . To assess organization in memory , conditional recall probabil - ities were computed by looking at the order of recall . The number of same - trait sequences ( e . g . , an intelligent behavior recalled after another intelligent behavior ) was divided by the total number of behaviors recalled minus one . The resulting probabilities are listed in Table 1 . A 2 ( instruction : impression vs . memory ) (cid:3) 3 ( condi - tion : immediate vs . conscious thought vs . unconscious thought ) between - participants ANOVA revealed both predicted main ef - fects . First , in keeping with Hamilton et al . ( 1980 ) and Chartrand and Bargh ( 1996 ) , there was a main effect of instruction showing that participants with an impression instruction ( M (cid:1) . 44 , SD (cid:1) . 13 ) had higher clustering scores than participants with a memory instruction ( M (cid:1) . 35 , SD (cid:1) . 14 ) , F ( 1 , 63 ) (cid:1) 6 . 56 , p (cid:2) . 02 . In addition , the predicted main effect of condition was obtained , F ( 2 , 63 ) (cid:1) 4 . 32 , p (cid:2) . 02 . Participants in the unconscious thought condition had higher clustering scores ( M (cid:1) . 46 , SD (cid:1) . 11 ) than participants in the conscious thought condition ( M (cid:1) . 37 , SD (cid:1) 18 ) , F ( 1 , 43 ) (cid:1) 5 . 50 , p (cid:2) . 03 , and than participants in the immediate recall condition ( M (cid:1) . 35 , SD (cid:1) . 13 ) , F ( 1 , 42 ) (cid:1) 9 . 58 , p (cid:2) . 005 . These latter two conditions did not differ . It is interesting that recall in random order ( without meaningful clustering ) would lead to a clustering score of about . 30 . Only participants in the unconscious thought condition had scores considerably higher than . 30 . In sum , only unconscious thought led to more integrated representations in memory . General Discussion Unconscious thought improved the quality of decisions . When people were faced with complex decisions , a few minutes of distraction during which people could engage in unconscious thought—but not in conscious thought—led to superior decisions compared with circumstances under which people could not en - gage in unconscious thought or to circumstances under which people engaged in conscious thought . Moreover , a few minutes of conscious thought generally did not lead to better decisions com - pared with conditions where people did not consciously think . The relative inferiority of conscious thought was expected to be the consequence of the low processing capacity of consciousness . Some supporting evidence for this idea comes from Experiment 2 . Here , conscious thinkers reported that their decisions were often based on a few specific relevant attributes , whereas unconscious thinkers reported forming a more global judgment based on much more information . Experiments 4 and 5 were designed to shed more light on the processes underlying unconscious thought . It was shown that un - conscious thought led people to develop more polarized , clearer , and more integrated representations in memory , supporting the proposed process underlying superior unconscious decision mak - ing . It is interesting to note with respect to Experiment 5 that conscious thought almost completely prevented meaningful clus - tering . Clustering is an associative process , and it is likely that this process was disrupted because , as Wilson and others have shown ( e . g . , Wilson et al . , 1989 ; Wilson & Schooler , 1991 ; see also Experiment 2 of the current article ) , conscious thought biases people toward paying a lot of attention to very few attributes at the expense of others . This may lead to meaningful associations be - tween the few attributes that received attention , but it may hinder associative processes incorporating the other attributes . One avenue for further research concerns the goal directedness of unconscious thought . In all experiments , participants were told that they had to decide between various alternatives before they engaged in unconscious thought . Would the unconscious have engaged in relevant thinking had it not been instructed to do so ? This is likely not the case . The literature on creativity and incu - bation ( e . g . , Bowers et al . , 1990 ; Smith & Blankenship , 1989 ) has suggested that unconscious thought can be goal directed . The quote about Newton in the introduction also points in this direc - tion . He knew that he had to bear in mind what he needed to know . One could say that he gave his unconscious a clear goal . In addition , recent evidence has shown that goal activation and goal pursuit can be achieved unconsciously ( Bargh et al . , 2001 ; Char - trand & Bargh , 1996 ) . This also implies that unconscious thought processes can be goal directed . However , this has not yet been shown . A Note on Incubation As said above , empirical evidence for incubation is limited . People often have failed to find it , and the little evidence available is hard to replicate ( Olton , 1979 ) . Furthermore , most effects that were obtained could be explained by processes whereby the role of the unconscious was passive . It is possible that the nature of the problems people had to solve was responsible for this state of affairs . Researchers used insight problems—the kind of problems where the solution to a problem is very specific and often coun - terintuitive , resulting in a “eureka” experience . This choice is understandable , because incubation is studied in the context of creativity , and creativity is often ( but not always ; see Weisberg , 1995 ) the consequence of such insights . However , the unconscious may not have been given a fair chance . Solving insight problems is often like trying to find a needle in a haystack , and the uncon - scious may need more time than the amount people are given in a lab experiment . The current research points to the possibility that Table 1 Experiment 5 : Clustering Scores as a Function of Condition Instruction Condition Immediate Conscious Unconscious Memory . 29 . 35 . 41 Impression . 42 . 38 . 52 596 DIJKSTERHUIS incubation can be obtained even within minutes if more mundane , analytical problems are used rather than insight problems . Should We Stop Thinking ? Some Potential Moderators One may infer from the present work that it constitutes good news for people who dislike the hard labor of conscious thinking . The unconscious can be left to deal with making decisions while consciousness can be directed elsewhere , such as at fun things . This conclusion is clearly too bold . First of all , the findings reported here should be placed in the context of the paradigm used . Both consciousness and the unconscious had to “work” within the confines of this paradigm . Perhaps the circumstances under which consciousness had to work diverged too strongly from how con - sciousness often deals with decision problems in real life . For one thing , consciousness ( but also the unconscious ) was only given a few minutes to think . Maybe it performs better with more time . In addition , conscious thought took place after participants had read the information . Maybe conscious thought would have led to better results if the information had been visually available during thought . Hence , it is important to pit conscious and unconscious thought against each other in different paradigms before bold conclusions can be drawn . For now , it is more interesting to speculate about when conscious versus unconscious thought may be more fruitful . As to when one mode of thought may be better than the other , some educated hypotheses can be formulated . First , there are various reasons to propose the somewhat counterintuitive idea that the more complex a problem is , the less likely it becomes that conscious thought can contribute much . If a problem is complex , it by definition means that a lot of information has to be taken into account . Conscious thought is not very good at this . One could say that conscious thought is very focused but not very encompassing or inclusive . There are various ( related ) reasons for this . Con - sciousness has low capacity , and conscious reasoning biases the weights people attach to different pieces of information ( e . g . , Wilson et al . , 1989 ) . In addition , verbalizing information ( an act of consciousness ) makes these biases even worse , as the work on verbal overshadowing ( Schooler et al . , 1993 ) has demonstrated . If we are willing to assume that mundane decisions are often rela - tively simple , whereas vital matters are usually complex ( which is not always the case ) , we may conclude that Freud was right : Use consciousness for relatively simple and mundane decisions , but refrain from using it too much for more complex matters . The observation that on some occasions weighing the impor - tance of attributes is easier than in other cases may also lead to a hypothesis . Sometimes weighing is easy or even unnecessary . When someone from the support staff comes to fix a software problem , all we care about is whether she is able to do the job properly in a reasonable amount of time . On the other hand , sometimes weighing attributes is mind - boggling , such as when choosing a doctoral program . When weighing is easy , one can make decisions by first comparing how well various alternatives “score” on the one or two attributes that matter . When weighing is hard , one could start out by forming global impressions of the different alternatives and then start to compare . It is likely that conscious thought is more proficient in the former case , whereas unconscious thought is better able to do the latter . If this is true , conscious thought may be fruitful when the decision problem is well laid out with few attributes that do allow for meaningful comparisons . If not , unconscious thought should be used to work on more global or holistic impressions first . One should not infer from the present work that consciousness is rather stupid and the unconscious is smart . Rather than making such categorizations , it seems fruitful to more closely examine the strong and weak points of both systems ( see Claxton , 1997 ; Kihl - strom , Barnhardt , & Tataryn , 1992 ) . General claims such as “the unconscious is fast and consciousness is slow” or “the unconscious is stupid and consciousness is smart” do not make much sense . The unconscious automatically evaluates stimuli within milliseconds ( Bargh , Chaiken , Govender , & Pratto , 1992 ; Fazio , Sanbonmatsu , Powell , & Kardes , 1986 ) , but Newton , who contemplated for years , may not have agreed that the unconscious is fast . Likewise , in this article , much evidence has been described implying that the unconscious can be very smart , but when asked , “What is the square root of 625 ? ” your unconscious is not going to solve it . You could be given a distractor task lasting for months , but this ques - tion can only be answered ( assuming no calculator is used ) after conscious work . Likewise , consciousness is neither always smart ( as the current work shows ) nor always very slow ( it finds the square root of 625 in seconds ) . The bottom line is that both systems can be fast , slow , smart , or stupid . It all depends on what they are asked to do . Nevertheless , the current work demonstrates one thing the un - conscious is good at : making complex decisions . When faced with complex decisions such as where to work or where to live , do not think too much consciously . Instead , after a little initial conscious information acquisition , avoid thinking about it consciously . Take your time and let the unconscious deal with it . References Bargh , J . A . ( 1997 ) . The automaticity of everyday life . In R . S . Wyer Jr . ( Ed . ) , Advances in social cognition ( Vol . 10 , pp 1 – 61 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Bargh , J . A . , Chaiken , S . , Govender , R . , & Pratto , F . ( 1992 ) . The generality of the automatic evaluation effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 , 893 – 912 . Bargh , J . A . , & Chartrand , T . L . ( 1999 ) . The unbearable automaticity of being . American Psychologist , 54 , 462 – 476 . Bargh , J . A . , Gollwitzer , P . M . , Lee - Chai , A . , Barndollar , K . , & Tro¨tschel , R . ( 2001 ) . The automated will : Nonconscious activation and pursuit of behavioral goals . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 81 , 1014 – 1027 . Betsch , T . , Plessner , H . , Schwieren , C . , & Gu¨tig , R . ( 2001 ) . I like it but I don’t know why : A value - account approach to implicit attitude forma - tion . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 27 , 242 – 253 . Bowers , K . S . , Regehr , G . , Balthazard , C . , & Parker , K . ( 1990 ) . Intuition in the context of discovery . Cognitive Psychology , 22 , 72 – 110 . Chartrand , T . L . , & Bargh , J . A . ( 1996 ) . Automatic activation of impres - sion formation and memorization goals : Nonconscious goal priming reproduces effects of explicit task instructions . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 , 464 – 478 . Claxton , G . ( 1997 ) . Hare brain , tortoise mind : How intelligence increases when you think less . New York : HarperCollins . Dijksterhuis , A . ( 2004 ) . I like myself but I don’t know why : Enhancing implicit self - esteem by subliminal evaluative conditioning . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 86 , 345 – 355 . Dijksterhuis , A . , & Aarts , H . ( 2003 ) . On wildebeests and humans : The preferential detection of negative stimuli . Psychological Science , 14 , 14 – 18 . 597 MERITS OF UNCONSCIOUS THOUGHT Dijksterhuis , A . , & van Knippenberg , A . ( 1998 ) . The relation between perception and behavior , or how to win a game of Trivial Pursuit . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 865 – 877 . Fazio , R . H . , Sanbonmatsu , D . M . , Powell , M . C . , & Kardes , F . R . ( 1986 ) . On the automatic activation of attitudes . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 229 – 238 . Gardner , H . ( 1993 ) . Creating minds . New York : Basic Books . Ghiselin , B . ( 1952 ) . The creative process . New York : New American Library . Gilbert , D . T . ( 1989 ) . Thinking lightly about others : Automatic compo - nents of the social inference process . In J . S . Uleman & J . A . Bargh ( Eds . ) , Unintended thought ( pp . 189 – 211 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Hamilton , D . L . , Katz , L . B . , & Leirer , V . O . ( 1980 ) . Organizational processes in impression formation . In R . Hastie , T . M . Ostrom , E . B . Ebbesen , R . S . Wyer Jr . , D . L . Hamilton , & D . E . Carlston ( Eds . ) , Person memory : The cognitive basis of social perception ( pp . 121 – 153 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hassin , R . , & Bargh , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Implicit insight : The case for the on - line extraction of rules . Manuscript under review . Jonides , J . , Schumacher , E . H . , Smith , E . E . , Lauber , E . J . , Awh , E . , Minoshima , S . , & Koeppe , R . A . ( 1997 ) . Verbal working memory load affects regional brain activation as measured by PET . Journal of Cog - nitive Neuroscience , 9 , 462 – 475 . Kihlstrom , J . F . , Barnhardt , T . M . , & Tataryn , D . ( 1992 ) . The psycholog - ical unconscious : Found , lost , and regained . American Psychologist , 47 , 788 – 791 . Koestler , A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . London : Penguin . Krosnick , J . A . , Betz , A . L . , Jussim , L . J . , & Lynn , A . R . ( 1992 ) . Sublim - inal conditioning of attitudes . Personality and Social Psychology Bulle - tin , 18 , 152 – 162 . Kunst - Wilson , W . , & Zajonc , R . ( 1980 , February 1 ) . Affective discrimi - nation of stimuli that cannot be recognized . Science , 207 , 557 – 558 . Levine , G . M . , Halberstadt , J . B . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 1996 ) . Reasoning and the weighing of attributes in attitude judgments . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 70 , 230 – 240 . Lewicki , P . , Hill , T . , & Czyzewska , M . ( 1992 ) . Nonconscious acquisition of information . American Psychologist , 47 , 796 – 801 . Marcel , A . J . ( 1983 ) . Conscious and unconscious perception : An approach to the relations between phenomenal experience and perceptual pro - cesses . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 238 – 300 . Miller , G . A . ( 1956 ) . Information theory . Scientific American , 195 , 42 – 46 . Nørretranders , T . ( 1998 ) . The user illusion : Cutting consciousness down to size . New York : Viking . Olton , R . ( 1979 ) . Experimental studies of incubation : Searching for the elusive . Journal of Creative Behavior , 13 , 9 – 22 . Payne , J . W . , Bettman , J . R . , & Johnson , E . J . ( 1988 ) . Adaptive strategy selection in decision making . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 534 – 552 . Pelham , B . W . , & Neter , E . ( 1995 ) . The effect of motivation on judgment depends on the difficulty of the judgment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 68 , 581 – 594 . Pierce , C . S . , & Jastrow , J . ( 1884 ) . On small differences in sensation . Memoirs of the National Academy of Science , 3 , 75 – 83 . Schooler , J . W . , & Melcher , J . ( 1995 ) . The ineffability of insight . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 97 – 134 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Schooler , J . W . , Ohlsson , S . , & Brooks , K . ( 1993 ) . Thoughts beyond words : When language overshadows insight . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 122 , 166 – 183 . Smith , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Fixation , incubation , and insight in memory and creative thinking . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 135 – 156 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Smith , S . M . , & Blankenship , S . E . ( 1989 ) . Incubation effects . Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society , 27 , 311 – 314 . Wegner , D . M . , Fuller , V . A . , & Sparrow , B . ( 2003 ) . Clever hands : Uncontrolled intelligence in facilitated communication . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 85 , 5 – 19 . Wegner , D . M . , & Smart , L . ( 1997 ) . Deep cognitive activation : A new approach to the unconscious . Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy - chology , 65 , 984 – 995 . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1995 ) . Case studies of creative thinking : Reproduction versus restructuring in the real world . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 53 – 72 ) . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Whitehead , A . N . ( 1911 ) . An introduction to mathematics . New York : Henry Holt . Wilson , T . D . ( 2002 ) . Strangers to ourselves : Discovering the adaptive unconscious . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Wilson , T . D . , Dunn , D . S . , Kraft , D . , & Lisle , D . J . ( 1989 ) . Introspection , attitude change , and attitude – behavior consistency : The disruptive ef - fects of explaining why we feel the way we do . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 19 , pp . 123 – 205 ) . Orlando , FL : Academic Press . Wilson , T . D . , Lisle , D . , Schooler , J . W . , Hodges , S . D . , Klaaren , K . J . , & LaFleur , S . J . ( 1993 ) . Introspecting about reasons can reduce post - choice satisfaction . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 19 , 331 – 339 . Wilson , T . D . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 1991 ) . Thinking too much : Introspection can reduce the quality of preferences and decisions . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 60 , 181 – 192 . Yaniv , I . , & Meyer , D . E . ( 1987 ) . Activation and metacognition of inac - cessible stored information : Potential bases for incubation effects in problem solving . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Mem - ory and Cognition , 13 , 187 – 205 . Received September 2 , 2003 Revision received May 27 , 2004 Accepted June 2 , 2004 (cid:1) Wanted : Old APA Journals ! APA is continuing its efforts to digitize older journal issues for the PsycARTICLES database . Thanks to many generous donors , we have made great strides , but we still need many issues , particularly those published in the 1950s and earlier . If you have a collection of older journals and are interested in making a donation , please e - mail journals @ apa . org or visit http : / / www . apa . org / journals / donations . html for an up - to - date list of the issues we are seeking . 598 DIJKSTERHUIS