Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 13 , 238 – 250 , January 2002 Caveolae Are Highly Immobile Plasma Membrane Microdomains , Which Are not Involved in Constitutive Endocytic Trafﬁcking □ V Peter Thomsen , Kirstine Roepstorff , Martin Stahlhut , and Bo van Deurs * Structural Cell Biology Unit , Department of Medical Anatomy , The Panum Institute , DK - 2200 Copenhagen N , Denmark Submitted June 22 , 2001 ; Revised September 21 , 2001 ; Accepted October 10 , 2001 Monitoring Editor : Howard Riezman To investigate whether caveolae are involved in constitutive endocytic trafﬁcking , we expressed N - and C - terminally green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged caveolin - 1 fusion proteins in HeLa , A431 , and Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . The fusion proteins were shown by immunogold labeling to be sorted correctly to caveolae . By using confocal microscopy and photobleaching techniques , it was found that although intracellular structures labeled with GFP - tagged caveolin were dynamic , GFP - labeled caveolae were very immobile . However , after incubation with meth - yl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin , distinct caveolae disappeared and the mobility of GFP - tagged caveolin in the plasma membrane increased . Treatment of cells with cytochalasin D caused lateral movement and aggregation of GFP - labeled caveolae . Therefore , both cholesterol and an intact actin cytoskeleton are required for the integrity of GFP - labeled caveolae . Moreover , stimulation with okadaic acid caused increased mobility and internalization of the labeled caveolae . Although the calculated mobile fraction ( for t (cid:1) (cid:2) ) of intracellular , GFP - tagged caveolin - associated structures was 70 – 90 % , GFP - labeled caveolae in unstimulated cells had a mobile fraction of (cid:3) 20 % , a value comparable to that previously reported for E - cadherin in junctional complexes . We therefore conclude that caveolae are not involved in constitutive endocytosis but represent a highly stable plasma membrane compartment anchored by the actin cytoskeleton . INTRODUCTION Caveolae are 50 – 100 - nm invaginated plasma membrane do - mains present in many cell types . They are enriched in glycosphingolipids and cholesterol and characterized by the presence of the integral membrane protein caveolin . Caveo - lin - 1 and - 2 are ubiquitously expressed , whereas a third member of the caveolin family , caveolin - 3 , is found in mus - cle tissue ( Parton , 1996 ; Anderson , 1998 ; Kurzchalia and Parton , 1999 ; Smart et al . , 1999 ) . Caveolin and caveolae seem to play a role in many different cellular processes . For in - stance , cholesterol transport and homeostasis involve caveo - lin and caveolae ( Fielding and Fielding , 1997 , 2000 ; Ikonen and Parton , 2000 ; van Meer , 2001 ) and caveolin was recently found on the surface of cytoplasmic lipid droplets ( Fujimoto et al . , 2001 ; Ostermeyer et al . , 2001 ; Pol et al . , 2001 ) and in secreted lipoprotein particles ( Liu et al . , 1999 ) . Caveolin and caveolae also seem to be important for , e . g . , nitric oxide - , calcium - , H - Ras - , and nerve growth factor signaling ( Huang et al . , 1999 ; Isshiki and Anderson , 1999 ; Roy et al . , 1999 ; Smart et al . , 1999 ; Bucci et al . , 2000b ; Dessy et al . , 2000 ; Ranzani et al . , 2000 ; Stahlhut et al . , 2000 ) . Furthermore , a relationship between cell adhesion via integrins and caveo - lin signaling has been indicated ( Wary et al . , 1996 , 1998 ; Wei et al . , 1999 ) . In addition , various stimuli can lead to internalization of caveolae , and the multifaceted role of caveolae in various endocytic processes is in fact one of the most remarkable features of these membrane domains . Thus , after binding of simian virus 40 to major histocompatibility complex class I molecules on the cell surface , the virus particles become internalized in caveolae to be transported to the endoplas - mic reticulum via caveosomes , thereby bypassing the deg - radative endosomal - lysosomal route ( Stang et al . , 1997 ; Par - ton and Lindsay , 1999 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ) . This process is stimulated by the virus , and it is even possible that the virus induces the formation of new caveolae tightly wrapping the DOI : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 01 – 06 - 0317 . □ V Online version of this article contains video material in Fig - ures 3 , 5 , 7 , and 9 . Online version available at www . molbiol - cell . org . * Corresponding author . E - mail address : b . v . deurs @ mai . ku . dk . Abbreviations used : FLIP , ﬂuorescence loss in photobleach - ing ; FRAP , ﬂuorescence recovery in photobleaching ; GFP , green ﬂuorescent protein . 238 © 2002 by The American Society for Cell Biology individual virus particles . Caveolae also seem to be engaged in internalization of FimH - expressing Escherichia coli in mac - rophages and mast cells . This uptake is stimulated by bind - ing of the bacterium to the GPI - anchored protein CD48 present in caveolae and subsequent recruitment and cluster - ing of numerous caveolae , which eventually form an intra - cellular , bacterium - containing compartment ( Shin et al . , 2000 ; Shin and Abraham , 2001 ) . Another example of stimu - lated endocytosis of caveolae is the clustering and subse - quent internalization of these structures caused by the phos - phatase inhibitor okadaic acid ( Parton et al . , 1994 ) . Moreover , in endothelial cells , where caveolae are involved in transendothelial transport of , e . g . , albumin , budding of caveolae or caveolae - derived membrane has to be stimuated by interaction of the albumin - docking protein pg60 with caveolin - 1 and subsequent activation of downstream G i - coupled Src kinase signaling ( Minshall et al . , 2000 ) . It is striking that stimulated caveolar endocytic trafﬁcking often seems to bypass the conventional endocytic organelles , i . e . , endosomes and lysosomes . The signiﬁcance of this routing is at present unknown but it obviously protects invading “op - portunistic” ligands from being degraded . However , whether caveolae are also part of a constitutive endocytic pathway operating in parallel with the well - estab - lished clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway has remained elusive ( van Deurs et al . , 1993 ; Kurzchalia and Parton , 1996 ; Stahlhut et al . , 2000 ; Pfeffer , 2001 ) . In constitutive endocyto - sis , vesicles are formed without stimulation at a constant rate from the plasma membrane and what comes in is con - tinuously replaced by a corresponding outgoing trafﬁc from an intracellular pool of vesicles and coat proteins , as typiﬁed in clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . The critical parameter for maintaining such a steady - state situation is the mobile fraction of the involved vesicles ( or of their coat proteins ) . This mobile fraction has to be close to 100 % . If the population of vesicles / coat proteins has a lower mobile fraction , constitutive endocytosis will in principle be impossible , because the plasma membrane will eventually be depleted for membrane and coat proteins . To determine whether caveolae are actively involved in constitutive endocytosis or rather represent a largely immo - bile plasma membrane compartment , i . e . , to determine the mobile fraction of caveolae , we expressed N - or C - terminally GFP - tagged caveolin fusion proteins in some widely used Figure 1 . Expression of GFP - cav in transiently transfected cells . ( a ) West - ern blot showing that enhanced GFP - caveolin - 1 (cid:1) ( EGFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) ) expressed in HeLa cells can be detected as a sin - gle band of (cid:4) 50 kDa by the use of a polyclonal anti - GFP antibody ( anti - GFP ) with no signs of degradation . Pu - riﬁed recombinant GFP ( rGFP ) served as a positive control . A polyclonal anti - caveolin - 1 antibody ( anti - cav ) detects both the GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) fusion protein and the endogenous caveolin - 1 iso - forms . ( b ) 3D reconstruction based on a stack of confocal images of a HeLa cell expressing GFP - cav - 1 (cid:2) . Fluores - cent caveolae are in particular distinct at the cell periphery ( arrows ) . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . ( c – f ) Ultracryo sections of GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - transfected MDCK cells ( c and d ) and GFP - cav - 1 (cid:2) transfected HeLa cells ( e and f ) , immunogold labeled with a polyclonal antibody against GFP . The labeling is seen on caveolae ( arrows ) , which sometimes form ag - gregates ( f ) . An unlabeled clathrin - coated pit ( open arrow ) is seen in e . Bars , 100 nm . FRAP Analysis of Caveolae Vol . 13 , January 2002 239 epithelial cell lines . We found that the fusion proteins were correctly targeted to caveolae at the plasma membrane . Im - portantly , application of various photobleaching techniques revealed that caveolae are normally immobile plasma mem - brane domains kept in place by the actin cytoskeleton , and the calculated very low mobile fraction of caveolin is incom - patible with a role of caveolae in constitutive endocytic membrane trafﬁcking . MATERIALS AND METHODS Construction of Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein ( GFP ) Vector Bam HI ( blunt ) / Pst I caveolin - 1 (cid:2) and - 1 (cid:1) fragments were derived from the plasmids pAS2 – 1 - cav - 1 - 1 - 534 and pAS2 – 1 - cav - 1 - 94 - 534 , respectively ( Stahlhut and van Deurs , 2000 ) and subcloned into the Xho I ( blunt ) / Pst I sites of pEGFP - C3 ( CLONTECH , Palo Alto , CA / BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) to generate N - terminally tagged caveolin fusion proteins ( GFP - caveolin ) . The GFP - Rab7 fusion pro - tein was made as previously described ( Bucci et al . , 2000a ) . The C - terminally tagged caveolin - 1 - GFP fusion protein was a kind gift of Drs . L . Pelkmans and A . Helenius . Cell Culture and Transfection HeLa , A431 , and Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) ( strain II ) cells were grown in T25 ﬂasks ( Nalge Nunc International , Naper - ville , IL ) at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in DMEM , supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum ( 5 % for MDCK ) , 2 mM glutamine , 10 U / ml peni - cillin , and 10 (cid:3) g / ml streptomycin , all reagents from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . For transfection and ﬂuorescence microscopy , the cells were grown in 6 - cm Petri dishes ( Nalge Nunc International ) with a 4 - cm - diameter hole in the bottom covered by a round glass coverslip glued on with Epon . The cells were transfected with the plasmids by using Fugene ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals , India - napolis , IN ) and used 22 – 30 h after addition of transfection medium . The HEPES medium used for all live recordings was made of 20 mM HEPES ( H3375 ; Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , 140 mM NaCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 (cid:2) 2H 2 O , 1 mg / ml d - ( (cid:5) ) - glucose monohydrate ( art 8342 ; Merck , Copenhagen , Denmark ) , 10 mM KCl ; 5 N NaOH was added for adjustment to pH 7 . 5 . Western Blot Lysates of cells transfected with pEGFP - cav - 1 were separated on 4 – 20 % acrylamide gels ( Novex , San Diego , CA ) and transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes . Recombinant GFP ( CLON - TECH ) served as positive control for the anti - GFP antibody . Mem - branes were blocked with 5 % skim milk ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , 0 . 05 % Tween 20 . Primary and sec - ondary antibodies were applied in the same buffer as follows : polyclonal anti - GFP ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) , diluted 1 : 500 ; polyclonal anti - caveolin - 1 ( Transduction Laboratories , Lexington , KY ) , diluted 1 : 3000 ; and HRP - swine - anti - rabbit ( DAKO , Carpinte - ria , CA ) , diluted 1 : 3000 . Between incubations , membranes were rinsed three times with 0 . 05 % Tween 20 in PBS . Immunosignals were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence reagent exposing polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes on Hyperﬁlm ( Amersham Biosciences , Piscataway , NJ ) . Fluorescence Recovery in Photobleaching ( FRAP ) Analysis The confocal microscope used was a Zeiss LSM 510 confocal micro - scope equipped with a tempcontrol 37 - 2 stage , an Ar laser , and C - apochromat 40 (cid:6) / 1 , 2 W corr and Plan apochromat 100 (cid:6) / 1 . 4 oil Iris lenses . The 40 (cid:6) lens was used for analysis of the cells at lower resolution , and the 100 (cid:6) lens was used for analysis with high magniﬁcations of the thin peripheral regions of the cells . Bleaching of the outlined regions of interest ( ROIs ) was done at 37°C with an open pinhole , with the 488 - nm laser line at full power and full transmission for 1 – 7 s , depending on the number and size of the ROIs . Observation of recovery was done at full laser power and only 1 % transmission , to avoid signiﬁcant photobleaching . LSM 510 soft - ware , version 2 . 2 , was used to measure pixel intensity in the ROIs . The recovery values were normalized by dividing by the mean of Figure 2 . 4D - FLIP analysis of cells expressing GFP - cav and GFP - Rab7 . ( a and b ) Indicated region ( green circles ) was bleached six times over (cid:4) 18 min in a HeLa cell expressing GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) . The two recon - structed 3D images show the ﬂuorescence of the entire cell immediately before bleaching and at the end of the experi - ment . ( c and d ) Indicated region ( red circles ) was bleached as de - scribed above in a HeLa cell ex - pressing GFP - Rab7 . ( e ) Fluores - cence intensity of the bleach region of the GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - ex - pressing cell ( green ) and the GFP - Rab7 - expressing HeLa cell ( red ) . Note the difference in peak size showing that GFP - Rab7 diffuses much more rap - idly into the bleach ﬁeld than GFP - cav . ( f ) Fluorescence inten - sity of the entire GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) ( green ) and GFP - Rab7 – express - ing ( red ) cell . The GFP - rab7 signal can be completely removed compared with a much more limited extraction of GFP - cav , in particular from caveolae ( arrows in a and b ) . Bars , 20 (cid:3) m . P . Thomsen et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 240 prebleach values for each ROI and multiplying by 100 . The half time required for the bleached ﬂuorescence to rise to 50 % of the full recovery value ( t 1 / 2 ) and mobile fractions ( M f ) were estimated by nonlinear regression to a function for lateral diffusion , as described ( Yguerabide et al . , 1982 ) . Statistica 2000 ( Statsoft , Tulsa , OK ) was used for the nonlinear regression , and Excel 97 ( Microsoft , Red - mond , WA ) was used for subsequent calculation of the diffusion coefﬁcient ( D ) . Four - dimensional ( 4D ) Fluorescence Loss in Photobleaching ( FLIP ) Analysis Image stacks of the cells were made with intervals of 2 min and consisted each of 10 confocal images . They were acquired using a pinhole diameter of 220 (cid:3) m . Repeated bleachings were done every 10 min at full laser power and full transmission for each plane to obtain a uniform bleach cylinder through the cell . Observation of ﬂuorescence loss and subsequent recovery was done at full laser power and only 1 % transmission , to avoid signiﬁcant photobleach - ing . The stacks were merged using the LSM 510 software . The resulting three - dimensional ( 3D ) images were combined into 4D movies by using GIF Movie Gear 2 . 61 from Gamani productions . The relative ﬂuorescence intensities over time were calculated from the sum of intensities of the ROIs in each stack by using the LSM 510 software in combination with Excel 2000 from Microsoft . The stacks covered the complete z - plane of the cells , eliminating out - of - focus signals . Immunoﬂuorescence Microscopy Cells were washed twice in PBS , ﬁxed for 30 min in 2 % formalde - hyde in phosphate buffer , washed in PBS , permeabilized in incuba - tion buffer consisting of 5 % normal goat serum and 0 . 2 % saponin in PBS , and ﬁnally exposed to primary and secondary antibodies with washes in - between . The primary antibodies were mouse monoclo - nal or rabbit polyclonal anti - caveolin - 1 ( Transduction Laboratories ) , diluted 1 : 100 ; rabbit polyclonal anti - caveolin - 1 (cid:2) ( Santa Cruz Bio - technology , Santa Cruz , CA ) , diluted 1 : 100 ; mouse monoclonal anti - Lamp - 1 ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ; H4A3 ) , diluted 1 : 100 ; mouse monoclonal anti - transferrin receptor ( Roche Molecular Biochemicals ; B3 / 25 ) , diluted 1 : 100 ; rabbit polyclonal Lamp - 1 , a kind gift of Dr . S . Carlsson ( Umeå University , Umeå , Sweden ) , diluted 1 : 500 ; and rabbit - anti - TGN - 38 serum , a kind gift of Dr . M . McNiven ( Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN ) , diluted 1 : 100 . Secondary antibodies were Alexa 488 - or Alexa 568 - conjugated anti - mouse or anti - rabbit antibodies ( Molecular Probes ) , diluted 1 : 300 , or Cy5 - conjugated anti - mouse or anti - rabbit antibodies ( Amersham Bio - sciences ) , diluted 1 : 500 . The microscope described for FRAP analy - sis was also used for immunoﬂuorescence . In addition , the 543 - and 633 - nm lines from two He / Ne lasers were used . Experiments with Cyclodextrin , Cytochalasin , Okadaic Acid , and Cycloheximide Methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin , cytochalasin D , okadaic acid , and cyclohex - imide ( all from Sigma ) were used in concentrations of 10 mM , 10 (cid:3) g / ml , 1 (cid:3) M , and 10 (cid:3) g / ml , respectively , in the HEPES medium . In some experiments , okadaic acid was used in 1 . 6 (cid:6) hypertonic HEPES medium ( Parton et al . , 1994 ) . Immunogold Localization of GFP - Caveolin Nontransfected and transfected cells grown as described above but in T25 ﬂasks ( Nalge Nunc International ) were washed with PBS and Figure 3 . 4D FLIP analysis of GFP - cav – ex - pressing cells treated with cyclodextrin and cytochalasin . ( a and b ) 3D reconstructions of a GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - expressing HeLa cell immedi - ately before the ﬁrst of six bleachings ( the bleach region is indicated with a circle ) , and by the end of the experiment , after (cid:4) 60 min . ( c ) Fluorescence intensity of the bleach re - gion . Note that very little ﬂuorescence dif - fuses into the bleach region after the ﬁrst bleaching and that the appearance of caveo - lae ( arrows in a and b ) is largely unchanged even after 1 h . ( d and e ) A parallel experi - ment , in which 10 mM methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin was added 10 min before the ﬁrst bleaching . See 4D movie Figure 3 , d and e , in the online version . ( f ) Fluorescence intensity of the bleach region is shown . Note that caveolin here diffuses faster into the bleach region than in the control and that caveolae ( arrows in d ) disappear over time . ( g and h ) Experi - ment in which 10 (cid:3) g / ml cytochalasin D was added 10 min before the ﬁrst bleaching . See 4D movie Figure 3 , g and h , in the online version . ( i ) Fluorescence intensity of the bleach region . Note that the normal caveolar pattern ( arrows in g ) is changed after cy - tochalasin treatment and that the ﬂuores - cence moves into the bleach region more ef - ﬁciently than in the control . Bars , 20 (cid:3) m . FRAP Analysis of Caveolae Vol . 13 , January 2002 241 ﬁxed at room temperature in 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde and 2 % formal - dehyde in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer pH 7 . 2 . After a careful wash , the cells were scraped off the ﬂasks , pelleted , and embedded in 7 . 5 % gelatin in PBS . The pellets were incubated on ice with ﬁrst 2 . 1 M sucrose and then 2 . 3 M sucrose , and frozen in liquid nitrogen . Ultrathin sections were cut on a Reichert Ultracut S microtome ( Leica , Glostrup , Denmark ) , collected with 2 . 3 M sucrose , and mounted on Formvar - coated copper or nickel grids . Polyclonal anti - caveolin - 1 ( Transduction Laboratories ) or polyclonal anti - GFP antibody ( Molecular Probes ) 1 : 50 – 1 : 100 , followed by 10 - nm protein A - gold 1 : 50 – 1 : 100 ( purchased from Dr . G . Posthuma , Utrecht Uni - versity , The Netherlands ) were used to detect endogenous caveo - lin - 1 and the GFP - cav - 1 fusion proteins , respectively . Sections were analyzed in a Philips 100 CM electron microscope ( Philips , Eind - hoven , The Netherlands ) . Gold particles associated with caveolae and noncaveolar plasma membrane were counted in sections of cell pellets from at least two different experiments with either trans - fected or nontransfected cells . The number of caveolae per micro - meter of plasma membrane was quantiﬁed in sections from three different experiments with transfected cells . Anti - GFP immunogold labeling was used to distinguish between transfected and nontrans - fected cells in these sections . RESULTS To analyze the dynamic properties of caveolae , we con - structed two N - terminally tagged caveolin fusion proteins by using the enhanced version of GFP , GFP - caveolin - 1 (cid:2) ( aa 1 – 178 ) and - 1 (cid:1) ( aa 32 – 178 ) , and expressed them in HeLa , A431 , and MDCK cells . The functional differences between the two caveolin - 1 isoforms , which both contain the essential caveolin scaffolding domain ( aa 82 – 101 ) required for proper function , are unclear ( Scherer et al . , 1995 ; Smart et al . , 1999 ; Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ; Schlegel and Lisanti , 2000 ; ) . Western blot analysis of lysates from GFP - caveolin – expressing cells with a polyclonal anti - GFP antibody revealed one single band of (cid:4) 50 kDa ( Figure 1a ) . Therefore , GFP - caveolin seemed to be maintained as a full - length fusion protein , allowing the tracing of the caveolin part of the fusion protein with the ﬂuorescent GFP - signal . Because no appreciable dif - ferences in the localization or kinetic behavior between the two isoforms were obtained , we refer to both fusion proteins collectively as GFP - cav , unless otherwise speciﬁed . More - over , because manipulations of the caveolin N - terminus may lead to impaired sorting of the protein to the plasma membrane and caveolae ( Roy et al . , 1999 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ) we also included a recently published C - terminally tagged caveolin - 1 fusion protein ( Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ) , herein referred to as cav - GFP . GFP - cav Is Correctly Sorted to Caveolae at Plasma Membrane Expression of the fusion proteins resulted in a dotted stain - ing at the plasma membrane being most distinct at the edges of the cells ( Figure 1b ) . Moreover , a ﬂuorescence signal was obtained from structures throughout the cytoplasm , al - though mainly concentrated in the perinuclear region . Al - though ﬂuorescent structures at the edges appeared immo - bile , a proportion of the intracellular structures showed rapid movements . After ﬁxation of GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - transfected cells and subse - quent immunoﬂuorescence labeling for caveolin - 1 (cid:2) as a marker for endogeneous caveolin , a clear colocalization was obtained ( our unpublished data ) . We also examined the colocalization of the intracellular GFP - cav signal with vari - ous markers of intracellular compartments . In this way , some colocalization of GFP - cav with both TGN - 38 ( a marker for the trans - Golgi network ) and the transferrin receptor ( a marker for early endosomes ) was found , whereas only very Figure 4 . 3D reconstruction and 4D FLIP analysis of GFP - cav – ex - pressing cells stimulated with okadaic acid . ( a ) 3D reconstruc - tion of a control HeLa cell ex - pressing GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) , showing distinctly labeled caveolae ( ar - rows ) . ( b ) GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - express - ing HeLa cells stimulated for 1 h with 1 (cid:3) M okadaic acid . Endocy - tosis of caveolae is seen . ( c ) En - docytosis of caveolae in GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - expressing HeLa cells treated for 1 h with 1 (cid:3) M okadaic acid in 1 . 6 (cid:6) hypertonic medium . ( d and e ) 3D stacks from the be - ginning and the end of a FLIP experiment in which okadaic acid was added 10 min before the ﬁrst bleaching . Distinct GFP - la - beled cavolae are shown by ar - rows in d . These caveolae became internalized and were bleached within 1 h ( e ) because they readily moved into the bleach re - gion ( f ) . Bars , 20 (cid:3) m . P . Thomsen et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 242 little colocalization of GFP - cav with Lamp - 1 ( a marker of late endocytic structures / lysosomes ) was obtained ( our un - published data ) . In addition , some intracellular , GFP - cav – associated structures did not label for TGN - 38 , the trans - ferrin receptor , or Lamp - 1 . However , it was pertinent to the present study to localize the GFP - cav signal with high resolution , and we therefore used immunogold labeling with a polyclonal anti - GFP anti - body . Very little apparently free cytosolic GFP - cav labeling was seen ; virtually all gold particles were associated with membrane structures . Within the cells , some of these GFP - cav – associated membranes were part of the trans - Golgi net - work , some of the endosome system , and some of a tubulo - vesicular network . More importantly , at the cell periphery the GFP - cav labeling was almost exclusively associated with distinct caveolae close to the plasma membrane ( Figure 1 , c – f ) . Using ultracryosections of GFP - cav – transfected HeLa cells and the anti - GFP antibody followed by protein A - gold labeling , 85 % of the gold particles ( total 426 golds ) associ - ated with the plasma membrane were localized to caveolae . For comparison , in sections of nontransfected cells labeled with a polyclonal antibody against endogenous caveolin - 1 , the value was 92 % ( total 519 golds ) . Moreover , in transfected cells ( identiﬁed by immunogold labeling with anti - GFP ) , 0 . 104 caveolae per micrometer of plasma membrane was found ( total 107 caveolae ) , whereas in the neighboring non - transfected cells , 0 . 099 caveolae per micrometer was ob - tained ( total 172 caveolae ) . Both in nontransfected and in transfected cells , caveolae typically appeared in patches sep - arated by unlabeled caveolae - free plasma membrane . Taken together , these data show that the ﬂuorescent dots seen at the edges of the GFP - cav - expressing cells correspond to caveolae and that the GFP - cav is correctly sorted to caveolae at the plasma membrane . Integrity of GFP - cav and cav - GFP – associated Caveolae Depends on Cholesterol and an Intact Actin Cytoskeleton The mobility of GFP - cav – associated caveolae in cells under standard culture conditions was analyzed by FLIP record - ings in 4D ( reconstructed stacks of 10 confocal sections cov - ering the entire cell over time ) . We compared FLIP data obtained from GFP - cav – transfected cells with those from cells expressing GFP - Rab7 . Rab7 is a small GTP - binding protein cycling between late endosomal / lysosomal mem - branes and the cytosol . It is involved in the formation and maintenance of the perinuclear aggregate of late endocytic structures ( Bucci et al . , 2000a ) . Whereas only little ﬂuores - cence could be extracted from the GFP - cav – transfected cells , and most of this appeared to be from the intracellular pool of ﬂuorescence because the strongly ﬂuorescent caveolar rim of the cells was left unchanged , in the GFP - Rab7 - transfected cells a very large amount of ﬂuorescence diffused into the bleach region per bleaching cycle , and basically all ﬂuores - cence could be extracted ( Figure 2 ) . These experiments show that GFP - cav , in particular when associated with caveolae at the plasma membrane , is rather immobile . Caveolae are cholesterol - based structures that disappear after cholesterol depletion with methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin ( Chang et al . , 1992 ; Hailstone et al . , 1998 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . We therefore added methyl - (cid:1) - cyclodextrin to GFP - cav - and cav - GFP – expressing cells . This caused a gradual disappear - ance of the strongly ﬂuorescent dots and rims with ﬂuores - cent caveolin , leaving in the plasma membrane a diffuse GFP signal as seen in 4D reconstructions ( Figure 3 , d and e ) . To further visualize this effect of cholesterol depletion , we used FLIP to determine the mobility of caveolin in cholesterol - depleted cells compared with control cells . Whereas little ﬂuorescence moved into the bleach ﬁeld after each round of bleaching in untreated cells ( parallel control experiment , Figure 3c ) , leaving the peripheral rim of caveolae intact ( Figure 3 , a and b ) , a much higher mobility was observed after cholesterol depletion as indicated by the steeper peaks of the FLIP curve ( compare Figure 3 , c and f ) . It is known that depolymerization of the actin cytoskele - ton with cytochalasin D results in clustering of caveolae that are still surface connected ( Fujimoto et al . , 1995 ; van Deurs et al . , 1996 ) . Moreover , it was recently shown that the actin - binding protein ﬁlamin is a ligand for caveolin - 1 , and that activation of Rho , which leads to a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , also causes a reorganization of caveolae ( Stahlhut and van Deurs , 2000 ) . This suggests that caveolae may normally be stabilized in the membrane by the actin cytoskeleton . After cytochalasin D - treatment of GFP - cav – expressing cells , the normal ﬂuorescent caveolar pattern was disrupted and caveolae began to move laterally and cluster in the plasma membrane ( Figure 3 , g and h ) . An increased caveolae mobility was also reﬂected by the relatively large and steep peaks on the FLIP curve ( Figure 3i ) . Similar results were obtained with cells expressing cav - GFP ( our unpub - lished data ) . Taken together , these results show that GFP - cav - and cav - GFP – labeled caveolae behave like caveolae that are based on endogenous caveolin , and that they are quite stable under standard conditions . Okadaic Acid Stimulates Endocytosis of GFP - cav and cav - GFP – associated Caveolae It has previously been reported that treatment of cells with okadaic acid , in particular in combination with hypertonic medium , leads to endocytosis of caveolae ( Parton et al . , 1994 ) . To test whether this important feature of caveolae was preserved when using the N - terminally tagged caveolin con - struct , we compared the organization of GFP - cav – labeled caveolae in 3D reconstructions of untreated cells and of cells treated with okadaic acid in normal and in hypertonic me - dium . As seen in Figure 4 , a – c , this treatment causes caveo - lae to disappear from the cell surface and aggregate in the perinuclear region . Moreover , the GFP - cav mobility was also increased as shown by FLIP analysis ( Figure 4 , d – f ) and the repeated bleaching cycles led to an almost complete extraction of cellular ﬂuorescence . Similar results were ob - tained with cav - GFP ( our unpublished data ) . GFP - cav - and cav - GFP – associated Caveolae Are Stable in Nonstimulated Cells The striking immobility of the ﬂuorescent caveolar compart - ment at the plasma membrane of unstimulated cells was further examined by bleaching the entire peripheral com - partment to observe whether the ﬂuorescence would re - cover , i . e . , could be replaced by the ﬂuorescence of the intracellular GFP - associated compartment , in which numer - ous vesicular structures moved around . No measurable ex - FRAP Analysis of Caveolae Vol . 13 , January 2002 243 Figure 5 . FRAP of the entire caveolar or intracellular GFP - cav and cav - GFP compartments of control cells and cells stimulated with okadaic acid . ( a – c ) Entire peripheral caveolar compartment ( outlined in red ) of a HeLa cell expressing GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) was bleached . Images of the prebleach ﬂuorescence , the ﬂuorescence immediately after bleaching , and 15 min after bleaching is shown . See movie Figure 5 , a – c , in the online version . ( d ) Fluorescence intensity in the peripheral bleach region ( green ) and of the entire cell ( red ) after bleaching . ( e – g ) Intracellular caveolin compartment of a GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - expressing HeLa cell was bleached ( outlined in red ) . Images of the prebleach ﬂuorescence , the ﬂuorescence immediately after bleaching , and 15 min after bleaching is shown . See movie Figure 5 , e – g , in the online version . ( h ) Fluorescence intensity of the bleach region ( green ) , the nonbleached peripheral caveolae region ( blue ) , and the ﬂuorescence of the entire cell ( red ) after P . Thomsen et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 244 change took place , neither in HeLa cells transfected with GFP - cav ( Figure 5 , a – d ) nor with cav - GFP ( our unpublished data ) . The ﬂuorescence of the peripheral region did not recover , and the level of intracellular ﬂuorescence did not change , showing that no signiﬁcant exchange took place between these two cellular compartments . Alternatively , the complete GFP - cav - and cav - GFP – associated intracellular compartment was bleached to see whether the remaining peripheral ﬂuorescence would move to the interior of the cell . Only very little ﬂuorescence recovery of the bleached intracellular compartment was observed ( Figure 5 , e – h and i – l ) , showing that very little exchange with the GFP - labeled , peripheral caveolar compartment took place . Similar results were obtained using A431 and MDCK cells transfected with GFP - cav ( our unpublished data ) . Experiments with cyclo - heximide showed that the recovery of ﬂuorescence of the bleached intracellular compartment was partly due to a very low level of caveolin internalization , partly due to new synthesis of GFP - labeled caveolin ( our unpublished data ) . When the cells were treated with okadaic acid , the periph - eral rim of caveolae clearly moved into the bleached interior of the cell ( Figure 5 , m – p ) . Because the cells often tended to move , we preferred relatively short experimental times , e . g . , 15 min , as used in the experiments shown in Figure 5 , a – p . In cases where the cells did not move signiﬁcantly , it was indeed possible to follow the ﬂuorescence recovery after bleaching for longer periods of time , as shown in Figure 5 , q – t . Kinetics of Caveolae - associated and Intracellular Fluorescent Caveolin Are Different We next used FRAP to quantify the kinetic properties of the caveolar and the intracellular GFP - cav and cav - GFP com - partments simultaneously in the same living cell . One bleach region was placed on the patches and clusters of caveolae at the cell periphery , and another one on the intracellular , perinuclear compartment . Figure 6 shows an experiment with a cav - GFP – transfected cell where the ﬂuorescence re - covery was followed for 1 h . Figure 7 , a – c , shows images from a FRAP recording during 15 min obtained from a GFP - cav – transfected HeLa cell . In both Figures 6 , a – c , and 7 , a – c , it is seen that although the GFP signal from the intra - cellular compartment recovers to a high degree , the caveolar compartment at the cell periphery shows much more limited recovery . Moreover , it was striking that strongly ﬂuorescent , elongated stretches at the cell periphery next to the periph - eral bleach region ( Figure 7 , a – c ) maintained their high ﬂuorescence level in the period after bleaching and did not move into the bleach region , suggesting that only little lat - eral diffusion of ﬂuorescent caveolin or lateral movement of ﬂuorescently labeled caveolae took place . Figure 7 , d – g , shows the FRAP curves resulting from experiments performed on HeLa , A431 , and MDCK cells , after curve ﬁtting of the means of 9 – 14 independent record - ings for each cell type . From these curve ﬁts , the mobile fractions ( M f for t (cid:1) (cid:2) ) and diffusion coefﬁcients ( D ) were extracted as previously described ( see MATERIALS AND METHODS ) . The mobile fraction of the caveolar compart - ment was strikingly lower than that of the intracellular compartment ( Figure 8 , ﬁlled and open bars , respectively ) . The diffusion coefﬁcient for the mobile fraction of the fusion proteins was in the same order of magnitude ( (cid:4) 1 . 0 (cid:6) 10 (cid:7) 10 cm 2 s (cid:7) 1 ) at the cell periphery and within the cell . It should be noted that it may be inappropriate to use the term diffu - sion coefﬁcient about data obtained for intracellular caveo - lin , because part of the movement of caveolin is not true Figure 5 ( cont ) . bleaching . ( i – l ) Intracellular caveolin compartment of a cav - GFP – expressing HeLa cell was bleached ( outlined in red ) . Images and ﬂuorescence intensities presented as in e – h . Note that only very limited exchange of ﬂuorescent material takes place be - tween the caveolar and the intracellular compartment in the control cells shown in a – l . ( m – p ) Intracellular caveolin compartment of a GFP - cav - 1 (cid:2) - expressing HeLa cell treated with 1 (cid:3) M okadaic acid was bleached ( outlined in red ) . Okadaic acid was added 10 min before the bleaching . Images and ﬂuorescence intensities presented as in e – h . See movie Figure 5 , m – o , in the online version . Note that okadaic acid clearly induces internalization of caveolae . ( q – s ) Intra - cellular caveolin compartment of a cav - GFP – expressing HeLa cell ( outlined in red ) was bleached and the cell followed for 1 h . Images of the prebleach ﬂuorescence , the ﬂuorescence immediately after bleaching , and 1 h after bleaching are shown . ( t ) Fluorescence intensity of the bleach region ( green ) , the nonbleached peripheral caveolae region ( blue ) , and the ﬂuorescence of the entire cell ( red ) after bleaching . Bars , 20 (cid:3) m . Figure 6 . Example of FRAP analysis of intracellular and caveolae - associated cav - GFP . ( a – c ) Two bleach regions were selected in a cav - GFP – transfected HeLa cell , one in the cell periphery for GFP - labeled caveolae , and one for mainly intracellular , GFP - labeled structures in the perinuclear area . The two bleach regions are shown before bleaching ( a ) , immediately after bleaching ( b ) , and at the end of the experiment , after 1 h ( c ) . ( d ) Fluorescence recovery curves from the same experiment are shown for caveolae ( bottom curve ) and intracellular structures ( top curve ) . It is seen that the ﬂuorescence associated with intracellular structures recovers much more efﬁciently than that associated with caveolae . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . FRAP Analysis of Caveolae Vol . 13 , January 2002 245 lateral diffusion , but due to active transport of caveolin - containing vesicles . It would therefore be more correct to interpret these recovery data as a “mobility coefﬁcient . ” Caveolae - associated GFP - cav and cav - GFP Represent a Largely Immobile Fraction of Fusion Protein It should be stressed that the mobile fraction obtained for GFP - tagged caveolin associated with caveolae at the cell periphery most likely was overestimated in the above - men - tioned experiments . In addition to caveolae , the peripheral bleach regions include some peripheral cytoplasm contain - ing GFP - labeled vesicles with a mobility comparable to that of the intracellular compartment . In several of the bleach movies , it was evident that a weakly ﬂuorescent area imme - diately below the strongly ﬂuorescent rim of the cell actually recovered rapidly , whereas the rim itself remained largely without ﬂuorescence . It was therefore intended to analyze the kinetics of the GFP - cav - or cav - GFP – associated caveolar compartment with as little interference as possible from structures in the cyto - plasm beneath . It was also relevant to further evaluate pos - sible lateral diffusion in the plasma membrane . For this purpose , ﬁve different , small bleach regions were applied to the most peripheral GFP - cav - or cav - GFP – labeled rim of each cell for short - time micro - FRAP analysis ( Figure 9 , a – c ) . Five individual cells in each experiment ( ﬁve FRAP regions per cell ) were included . As expected , only very little recov - ery in these regions was observed after bleaching ( Figure 9 , d – k ) , and the calculated mobile fraction ( for t (cid:1) (cid:2) ) was as low as 5 – 20 % ( Figure 8 , hatched bars ) . With this approach , the diffusion coefﬁcient for the mobile fraction of GFP - la - beled caveolae was found to be (cid:4) 0 . 3 (cid:6) 10 (cid:7) 10 cm 2 s (cid:7) 1 . Figure 7 . FRAP analysis of intracel - lular and caveolae - associated GFP - cav . ( a – c ) Bleach regions selected as in Fig - ure 6 on a GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) transfected HeLa cell . The two bleach regions are shown before bleaching ( a ) , immedi - ately after bleaching ( b ) , and at the end of the experiment , after (cid:4) 15 min ( c ) . See movie Figure 7 , a – c , in the online version . Note that the strongly ﬂuores - cent caveolar rim adjacent to the pe - ripheral bleach region ( arrows in b and c ) appears unchanged during the ex - periment . ( d – g ) Curve ﬁts of mean values of ﬂuorescence intensities in the bleach regions of ﬂuorescent intracel - lular structures and caveolae , respec - tively , within the ﬁrst 800 s , obtained from 9 to 14 cells per experiment ( (cid:5) , intracellular ﬂuorescence ; o , caveolar ﬂuorescence ) . Values have been nor - malized ( % of prebleach values ) . It is seen that for all cell types and fusion proteins , the intracellular recovery is much more efﬁcient than the caveolar recovery . Bar , 20 (cid:3) m . P . Thomsen et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 246 Measurements of the total ﬂuorescence of the elongated stretches containing the ﬁve bleach regions showed that no change in ﬂuorescence intensity took place after bleaching . FRAP analysis of bleach regions of the same size within the cell typically revealed a ﬂuorescence recovery so fast that the drop in ﬂuorescence immediately after bleaching could hardly be monitored ( our unpublished data ) . DISCUSSION A combination of electron microscopical immunogold label - ing and confocal microscopy demonstrated that the N - ter - minally tagged caveolin fusion proteins , GFP - cav - 1 (cid:2) and - 1 (cid:1) , used in the present study behaved as endogenous caveo - lin - 1 . Thus , the fusion proteins were sorted to the plasma membrane where the same proportion became associated with caveolae as for endogenous caveolin . Moreover , the number of caveolae in the transfected cells and in control cells was the same . The integrity of the ﬂuorescently labeled caveolae depended on cholesterol , and cholesterol - depletion caused disappearance of caveolae as in nontransfected cells ( Chang et al . , 1992 ; Hailstone et al . , 1998 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . Depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton with cytochala - sin D led to clustering of caveolae which , however , re - mained surface - connected , as also reported for caveolae in nontransfected cells ( Fujimoto et al . , 1995 ; van Deurs et al . , 1996 ) . Treatment of the transfected cells with okadaic acid stimulated endocytosis of caveolae as also reported for non - transfected cells ( Parton et al . , 1994 ) . Finally , the N - termi - nally tagged fusion proteins behaved in all respects like a C - terminally tagged caveolin fusion protein , cav - GFP , re - cently reported to allow simian virus 40 - stimulated caveolar endocytosis ( Pelkmans et al . , 2001 ) . The existence of motile , intracellular , ﬂuorescent vesicles with a relatively high mobile fraction supports the general view that some intracellular caveolin - 1 – associated ( caveo - lae - like ) vesicles are involved in dynamic trafﬁcking be - tween the various caveolin - associated , intracellular com - partments . However , once arrived at the plasma membrane , caveolin - 1 is highly immobile under normal ( standard cul - ture ) conditions and shows very limited exchange with the intracellular pool or lateral diffusion as evidenced by the decreased mobile fraction and diffusion coefﬁcient ( Lippin - cott - Schwartz et al . , 2001 ) . In fact , this behavior of caveolin resembles that of E - cadherin . Thus , the mobile fraction of E - cadherin in cell - cell contact - free areas or in newly formed contacts is very high ( (cid:8) 90 % ) . However , when E - cadherin becomes trapped by the actin cytoskeleton to form either immobile punctate aggregates or plaques , the mobile frac - tion drops to (cid:4) 50 % and (cid:3) 10 % , repectively ( Adams et al . , 1998 ) . The diffusion coefﬁcients we obtained for the mobile fraction of caveolin by FRAP ( 1 (cid:6) and 0 . 3 (cid:6) 10 (cid:7) 10 cm 2 s (cid:7) 1 , depending on the approach ) are also in the same order of magnitude as that reported for E - cadherin ( 3 . 6 (cid:6) 10 (cid:7) 10 cm 2 s (cid:7) 1 [ Adams et al . , 1998 ] ; (cid:4) 0 . 3 (cid:6) 10 (cid:7) 10 cm 2 s (cid:7) 1 [ Kusumi et al . , 1993 ] ) . Thus , with respect to immobility caveolae resemble junctional complexes . The demonstrated very low mobile fraction of caveolin associated with caveolae is incompatible with a role of caveolae in constitutive endocytic trafﬁcking like that medi - ated by clathrin - coated pits and vesicles . Indeed , a very infrequent ( but constitutive ) internalization of caveolae can - not be excluded . On the basis of gold - labeling experiments , it has been calculated that formation of a new clathrin - coated pit takes place within 28 s , and that the entire pop - ulation of coated pits at the cell surface is turned over in (cid:4) 6 min ( De Bruyn and Cho , 1987 ) . Recent studies based on expression of GFP - clathrin and GFP - mHip1R ( an actin - bind - ing component of clathrin - coated pits ) have similarly shown that clathrin - coated pits are highly mobile structures ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . , 1999 ; Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Damer and O’Halloran , 2000 ) . Thus , within a given plasma mem - brane area , coated pits have very short lifetimes , disappear - ing and reappearing within seconds , and thereby maintain - ing a steady - state population . There seems to be only a very little , if any , immobile fraction of coated pits at the plasma membrane . Although caveolae are not involved in constitutive endo - cytosis , internalization of these plasma membrane special - izations can be stimulated in various ways , as mentioned in the INTRODUCTION . Caveolae have a tendency to cluster and fuse , and apparently also the capability to pinch off , processes that may depend on speciﬁc events leading to activation or assembly of the required molecular machinery , and which must be under tight control ( Schnitzer et al . , 1995 , 1996 ; Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 ; Gilbert et al . , 1999 ) . Our recent ﬁndings that the actin - binding protein ﬁlamin is a ligand for caveolin - 1 , and that Rho - activation and forma - tion of actin stress - ﬁbers reorganize caveolae ( Stahlhut and van Deurs , 2000 ) , and the present results showing that treat - ment of cells with cytochalasin D leads to increased mobility and clustering of caveolae , suggest that the actin cytoskele - ton could play a key role in controlling the activity of caveo - lae and keeping them in place . Moreover , the endocytic potential of caveolae may be related to the speciﬁc cell type , a notion that is relevant in particular when considering cells and tissues in situ . There is , for instance , no direct evidence that caveolae become internalized in adipocytes , one of the cell types with most caveolae . On the other hand , caveolae in Figure 8 . Mobile fractions ( M f ) of intracellular and caveolae - asso - ciated caveolin fusion proteins . M f values for GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) and cav - GFP , calculated for t (cid:1) (cid:2) , are based on the curve ﬁts shown in Figure 7 . The values for GFP - cav - 1 (cid:2) are based on similar curve ﬁts . M f for intracellular ﬂuorescent structures are shown with open bars , and for caveolae - associated ﬂuorescence with ﬁlled bars . Moreover , M f values for caveolae - associated GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) and cav - GFP , based on the micro - FRAP experiments shown in Figure 9 , as well as from micro - FRAP experiments with GFP - cav - 1 (cid:2) in HeLa cells , have been included ( hatched bars ) . SD is indicated by error bars . FRAP Analysis of Caveolae Vol . 13 , January 2002 247 Figure 9 . Micro - FRAP analysis of caveolae - associated GFP - cav and cav - GFP . ( a – c ) Five small bleach regions , indicated with different colors , were placed on the peripheral , ﬂuorescent caveolar rim of a GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - transfected HeLa cell . The ﬁrst image ( a ) represents the prebleach situation , the next image ( b ) the situation immediately after bleaching , and the last one ( c ) the end of the experiment after 1 min . See 4D movie Figure 9 , a – c , in the online version . ( d , f , h , and j ) Absolute ﬂuorescence intensities for the experiment with HeLa cells shown in a – c , as well as for a similar experiment with a cav - GFP – transfected HeLa cell , and with GFP - cav - 1 (cid:1) - transfected A431 and MDCK cells , respectively . The colors correspond to the ﬁve bleach regions used . ( e , g , i , and k ) Corresponding , normalized ﬂuorescence intensity in the bleach regions after bleaching ( mean (cid:9) SD , n (cid:1) 25 for each experiment ) . Bar , 2 (cid:3) m . P . Thomsen et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 248 endothelial cells , which represent another cell type with large amounts of caveolae , are involved in transendothelial transport of albumin . Thus , the interaction of the albumin - docking protein pg60 with caveolin - 1 and subsequent acti - vation of downstream G i - coupled Src kinase signaling trig - gers pinching off of endothelial caveolae ( Minshall et al . , 2000 ) . In endothelial cells , the often very short distance between the luminal and the abluminal surfaces ( often a few hundred nanometers only ) and the clear tendency of caveo - lae to form surface - connected , racemose clusters in these cells , may facilitate caveolae - mediated transendothelial transport . Hence , a tightly controlled fusion and ﬁssion ac - tivity between the individual components of the racemose caveolar clusters attached to either the lumenal or the ablu - minal surfaces could lead to efﬁcient transendothelial trans - port with only little , if any , caveolar mobility . In conclusion , our data indicate that caveolae under nor - mal ( standard culture ) conditions represent a largely immo - bile plasma membrane compartment not involved in consti - tutive endocytosis . The immobility depends on an intact actin cytoskeleton . Under physiological conditions , stable caveolae at the plasma membrane may serve different func - tions , for instance , as key sensors and regulators of choles - terol homeostasis , as specialized , raft - like platforms facilitat - ing the protein – protein interactions required for signaling to take place in response to changes in the cellular microenvi - ronment , or for sequestration of inactive receptors . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Ulla Hjortenberg , Mette Ohlsen , and Keld Ottosen for technical assistance . We also thank Lucas Pelkmans and Ari Hele - nius for the kind gift of caveolin - GFP . This study was supported by grants to Bo van Deurs from the Danish Cancer Society , the Danish Medical Research Council , and the Novo Nordisk Foundation . REFERENCES Adams , C . L . , Chen , Y . T . , Smith , S . J . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Mech - anisms of epithelial cell - cell adhesion and cell compaction revealed by high - resolution tracking of E - cadherin - green ﬂuorescent protein . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1105 – 1119 . Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1998 ) . The caveolae membrane system . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 67 , 199 – 225 . Bucci , C . , Thomsen , P . , Nicoziani , P . , McCarthy , J . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2000a ) . Rab7 . A key to lysosome biogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 467 – 480 . Bucci , M . , Gratton , J . - P . , Rudic , R . D . , Acevedo , L . , Roviezzo , F . , Crino , G . , and Sessa , W . C . ( 2000b ) . In vivo delivery of the caveolin - 1 scaffolding domain inhibits nitric oxide synthesis , and reduces in - ﬂammation . Nat . Med . 6 , 1362 – 1367 . Chang , W . J . , Rothberg , K . G . , Kamen , B . A . , and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1992 ) . Lowering the cholesterol content of MA104 cells inhibits receptor - mediated transport of folate . J . Cell Biol . 118 , 63 – 69 . Damer , C . K . , and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2000 ) Spatially regulated recruit - ment of clathrin to the plasma membrane during capping , and cell translocation . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 2151 – 2159 . De Bruyn , P . P . H . , and Cho , Y . ( 1987 ) . Kinetic analysis of new formation , internalization , and turnover of bristle coated pits of the myeloid sinuses . Lab . Invest . 56 , 616 – 621 . Dessy , C . , Kelly , R . A . , Balligand , J . - L . , and Feron , O . ( 2000 ) . Dy - namin mediates caveolar sequestration of muscarinic cholinergic receptors , and alteration in NO signaling . EMBO J . 19 , 4272 – 4280 . Engqvist - Goldstein , Å . E . Y . , Kessels , M . M . , Chopra , V . S . , Hayden , M . R . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1999 ) . An actin - binding protein of the Sla2 / huntingtin interacting protein 1 family is a novel component of calthrin - coated pits and vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1503 – 1518 . Fielding , C . J . , and Fielding , P . E . ( 1997 ) . Intracellular cholesterol transport . J . Lipid Res . 38 , 1503 – 1521 . Fielding , C . J . , and Fielding , P . E . ( 2000 ) . Cholesterol , and caveolae . structural and functional relationships . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1529 , 210 – 222 . Fujimoto , T . , Kogo , H . , Ishiguro , K . , Tauchi , K . , and Nomura , R . ( 2001 ) . Caveolin - 2 is targeted to lipid droplets , a new . “membrane domain” in the cell . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 1079 – 1085 . Fujimoto , T . , Kogo , H . , Nomura , R . , and Une , T . ( 2000 ) . Isoforms of caveolin - 1 , and caveolar structure . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3509 – 3517 . Fujimoto , T . , Miyawaki , A . , and Mikoshiba , K . ( 1995 ) . Inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate receptor - like protein in plasmalemmal caveolae is linked to actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 7 – 15 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . , and Keen , J . H . ( 1999 ) . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 1 – 7 . Gilbert , A . , Paccaud , J . P . , Foti , M . , Porcheron , G . , Balz , J . , and Carpentier , J . L . ( 1999 ) . Direct demonstration of the endocytic func - tion of caveolae by a cell - free assay . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 1101 – 1110 . Hailstone , D . , Sleer , L . S . , Parton , R . G . , and Stanley , K . K . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of caveolin and caveolae by cholesterol in MDCK cells . J . Lipid Res . 39 , 369 – 379 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . A . , Oswald , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . Huang , C . S . , Zhou , J . , Feng , A . K . , Lynch , C . C . , Klumperman , J . , DeArmond , S . J . , and Mobley , W . C . ( 1999 ) . Nerve growth factor signaling in caveolae - like domains at the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 36707 – 36714 . Ikonen , E . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2000 ) . Caveolins , and cellular choles - terol balance . Trafﬁc 1 , 212 – 217 . Isshiki , M . , and Anderson , R . G . ( 1999 ) . Calcium signal transduction from caveolae . Cell Calcium 26 , 201 – 208 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1996 ) . And still they are mov - ing . . . . Dynamic properties of caveolae . FEBS Lett . 389 , 52 – 54 . Kurzchalia , T . V . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1999 ) . Membrane microdomains and caveolae . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 424 – 431 . Kusumi , A . , Yasushi , S . , and Yamamoto , M . ( 1993 ) . Conﬁned lateral diffusion of membrane receptors as studied by single particle track - ing ( nanovid microscopy ) . Effects of calcium - induced differentiation in cultured epithelial cells . Biophys . J . 65 , 2021 – 2040 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Snapp , E . , and Kenworthy , A . ( 2001 ) . Study - ing protein dynamics in living cells . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 444 – 456 . Liu , P . , Li . , W . - P . , Machleidt , T . , and Anderson , R . G . W . ( 1999 ) . Identiﬁcation of caveolin - 1 in lipoprotein particles secreted by exo - crine cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 369 – 375 . Minshall , R . D . , Tiruppathi , C . , Vogel , S . M . , Niles , W . D . , Gilchrist , A . , Hamm , H . E . , and Malik , A . B . ( 2000 ) . Endothelial cell - surface gp60 activates vesicle formation , and trafﬁcking via Gi - coupled Src kinase signaling pathway . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1057 – 1069 . Oh , P . , McIntosh , D . P . , and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles FRAP Analysis of Caveolae Vol . 13 , January 2002 249 by GTP - driven fusion from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 101 – 144 . Ostermeyer , A . G . , Paci , J . M . , Zeng , Y . , Lublin , D . M . , Munro , S . , and Brown , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Accumulation of caveolin in the endoplasmic reticulum redirects the protein to lipid storage droplets . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 1071 – 1078 . Parton , R . G . ( 1996 ) . Caveolae and caveolins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 542 – 548 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . , and Simons , K . ( 1994 ) . Regulated inter - nalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 . Parton , R . G . , and Lindsay , M . ( 1999 ) . Exploitation of major histo - compatibility complex class I molecules and caveolae by simian virus 40 . Immunol . Rev . 168 , 23 – 31 . Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . , and Helenius , A . ( 2001 ) . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular transport pathway to the ER . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 473 – 483 . Pfeffer , S . R . ( 2001 ) . Caveolae on the move . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , E108 – E110 . Pol , A . , Luetterforst , R . , Lindsay , M . , Heino , S . , Ikonen , E . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2001 ) . A caveolin dominant negative mutant associates with lipid bodies and induces intracellular cholesterol imbalance . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 1057 – 1070 . Ranzani , B . , Schlegel , A . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Caveolin proteins in signaling , oncogenic transformation , and muscular dystrophy . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 2103 – 2109 . Rodal , S . K . , Skretting , G . , Garred , O . , Vilhardt , F . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - (cid:1) - cyclo - dextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 961 – 974 . Roy , S . , Luetterforst , R . , Harding , A . , Apolloni , A . , Etheridge , M . , Stang , E . , Rolls , B . , Hancock , J . F . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1999 ) . Dominant - negative caveolin inhibits H - Ras function by disrupting cholesterol - rich plasma membrane domains . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 98 – 105 . Scherer , P . E . , Tang , Z . , Chun , M . , Sargiacomo , M . , Lodish , H . F . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1995 ) . Caveolin isoforms differ in their N - terminal protein sequence and subcellular distribution . Identiﬁcation and epitope mapping of an isoform - speciﬁc monoclonal antibody probe . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 16395 – 16401 . Schlegel , A . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 2000 ) . A molecular dissection of caveolin - 1 membrane attachment and oligomerization . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 21605 – 21617 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Liu , J . , and Oh , P . ( 1995 ) . Endothelial caveolae have the molecular transport machinery for vesicle budding , docking , and fusion including VAMP , NSF , SNAP , annexins , and GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 14399 – 14404 . Schnitzer , J . E . , Oh , P . , and MacIntosh , D . P . ( 1996 ) . Role of GTP hydrolysis in ﬁssion of caveolae directly from plasma membranes . Science 274 , 239 – 242 . Shin , J . - S . , and Abraham , S . N . ( 2001 ) . Co - option of endocytic func - tions of cellular caveolae by pathogens . Immunology 102 , 2 – 7 . Shin , J . - S . , Gao , Z . , and Abraham , S . N . ( 2000 ) . Involvement of cel - lular caveolae in bacterial entry into mast cells . Science 289 , 785 – 788 . Smart , E . J . , Graf , G . A . , McNiven , M . A . , Sessa , W . C . , Engelman , J . A . , Scherer , P . E . , Okamoto , T . , and Lisanti , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Caveolins , liquid - ordered domains , and signal transduction . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7289 – 7304 . Stahlhut , M . , Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2000 ) . Caveolae : uni - form structures with multiple functions in signaling , cell growth , and cancer . Exp . Cell Res . 261 , 111 – 118 . Stahlhut , M . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2000 ) . Identiﬁcation of ﬁlamin as a novel ligand for caveolin - 1 : evidence for the organization of caveo - lin - 1 - associated membrane domains by the actin cytoskeleton . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 325 – 337 . Stang , E . , Kartenbeck , J . , and Parton , R . G . ( 1997 ) . Major histocom - patibility complex class I molecules mediate association of SV40 with caveolae . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 47 – 57 . van Deurs , B . , Holm , P . K . , Sandvig , K . , and Hansen , S . H . ( 1993 ) . Are caveolae involved in clathrin - independent endocytosis ? Trends Cell Biol . 3 , 249 – 251 . van Deurs , B . , von Bulow , F . , Vilhardt , F . , Holm , P . K . , and Sandvig , K . ( 1996 ) . Destabilization of plasma membrane structure by preven - tion of actin polymerization . Microtubule - dependent tubulation of the plasma membrame . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 1655 – 1665 . van Meer , G . ( 2001 ) . Caveolin , cholesterol , and lipid droplets ? J . Cell Biol . 152 , F29 – F34 . Wary , K . K . , Mainiero , F . , Isakoff , S . J . , Marcantonio , E . E . , and Gian - cotti , F . G . ( 1996 ) . The adaptor protein Shc couples a class of inte - grins to the control of cell cycle progression . Cell 87 , 733 – 743 . Wary , K . K . , Mariotti , A . , Zurzolo , C . , and Giancotti , F . G . ( 1998 ) . A requirement for caveolin - 1 and associated kinase Fyn in integrin signaling and anchorage - dependent cell growth . Cell 94 , 625 – 634 . Wei , Y . , Yanf , X . , Liu , Q . , Wilkins , J . A . , and Chapman , H . A . ( 1999 ) . A role for caveolin and the urokinase receptor in integrin - mediated adhesion and signaling . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1285 – 1294 . Yguerabide , J . , Schmidt , J . M . , and Yguerabide , E . E . ( 1982 ) . Lateral mobility in membranes as detected by ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching . Biophys . J . 39 , 69 – 75 . P . Thomsen et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 250