© 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 289 Gut Microbes 3 : 4 , 289 - 306 ; July / August 2012 ; © 2012 Landes Bioscience Review SpeciAL FocuS Review Introduction Mammalian genomes do not encode most of the enzymes needed to degrade the structural polysaccharides present in plant mate - rial . Instead a complex mutual dependence has developed between the mammalian host and symbiotic gut microorganisms that do possess the ability to access this abundant source of energy . Herbivorous mammals rely on resident gut microorganisms to gain energy from their main food sources , and this has entailed major changes in digestive anatomy and physiology that allow efficient microbial fermentation to take place alongside the recov - ery of dietary energy by the host . 1 Ruminants ( foregut fermen - tors ) benefit from microbial protein as well as the absorption of energy that is released by anaerobic microorganisms in the form of fermentation acids . Other herbivores and omnivores derive varying amounts of energy from microbial fermentation in the hind gut of those carbohydrates that are not digested in the upper gut . Interestingly , molecular profiles for the gut microbiota have been shown to group together for animal species that share similar nutrition and digestive anatomy . 2 While humans derive * Correspondence to : Harry J . Flint ; Email : h . flint @ abdn . ac . uk Submitted : 01 / 05 / 12 ; Revised : 02 / 28 / 12 ; Accepted : 03 / 04 / 12 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4161 / gmic . 19897 Bacteria that colonize the mammalian intestine collectively possess a far larger repertoire of degradative enzymes and metabolic capabilities than their hosts . Microbial fermentation of complex non - digestible dietary carbohydrates and host - derived glycans in the human intestine has important consequences for health . certain dominant species , notably among the Bacteroidetes , are known to possess very large numbers of genes that encode carbohydrate active enzymes and can switch readily between different energy sources in the gut depending on availability . Nevertheless , more nutritionally specialized bacteria appear to play critical roles in the community by initiating the degradation of complex substrates such as plant cell walls , starch particles and mucin . examples are emerging from the Firmicutes , Actinobacteria and verrucomicrobium phyla , but more information is needed on these little studied groups . The impact of dietary carbohydrates , including prebiotics , on human health requires understanding of the complex relationship between diet composition , the gut microbiota and metabolic outputs . Microbial degradation of complex carbohydrates in the gut Harry J . Flint , 1 , * Karen p . Scott , 1 Sylvia H . Duncan , 1 petra Louis 1 and evelyne Forano 2 1 Rowett institute of Nutrition and Health ; university of Aberdeen ; Bucksburn , Aberdeen uK ; 2 iNRA ; uR454 Microbiologie ; Saint - Genès champanelle , France Keywords : microbiota , polysaccharides , probiotics , resistant starch , dietary fiber , nutrition , human intestine a relatively small fraction ( perhaps 10 % ) of their dietary energy through the activities of intestinal microorganisms , 3 the micro - bial communities of the human intestine have important conse - quences for health and their composition and activities are known to be strongly influenced by the carbohydrate content of the diet . 4 , 5 Most of the plant - derived polysaccharides that enter the rumen and large intestine are in the form of insoluble structures , in particular plant cell wall fragments and starch particles . Early work on the rumen established that only a small subset of rumen microorganisms , that include cellulolytic bacteria , fungi and pro - tozoa , have the capacity to initiate degradation of plant cell walls . 6 The most numerous groups of rumen microorganisms however are non - cellulolytic bacteria , many of which possess the ability to grow on soluble polysaccharides that are released by the primary degraders . 7 , 8 Stratification of particle - associated microbial com - munities is evident from microscopic and fractionation studies both in the rumen and in human colon . 9 - 11 It is reasonable to assume that the most closely adherent organisms will include the primary degraders , but also that more loosely adherent organisms within the consortium will contribute to polysaccharide degrada - tion and utilization . Some primary colonizers are known to be nutritionally highly specialized ; many rumen cellulolytic bacteria for example utilize breakdown products of cellulose , but fail to utilize products of xylan breakdown despite possessing a battery of hemicellulases and pectinases that are presumably required to degrade the plant cell wall matrix surrounding the cellulose fibrils . 12 Solubilisation of the matrix polysaccharides therefore results in cross - feeding to other groups of bacteria . Metabolic cross - feeding is a central feature in anaerobic microbial commu - nities that involves products of fermentation such as hydrogen and lactate as well as partial substrate degradation products . 13 , 14 On the other hand , many other dominant gut bacteria show remarkable nutritional flexibility . The human intestinal species Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron for example encodes a huge repertoire of carbohydrate degrading activities 15 and has the ability to switch between diet - and host - derived carbohydrates . 16 The expression of genes involved in the degradation of complex carbohydrates by many gut bacteria is tightly regulated not only in response to the availability of specific substrates , but also in response to the host and other bacteria within the gut community . 17 This review will focus mainly on the microbial ecology of carbohydrate degradation in the human large intestine , but for comparison also considers the degradation of plant structural polysaccharides in the rumen where this process is both more © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 290 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 Enzyme Families , Genomics and Metagenomics In total 130 families of glycoside hydrolases ( GH ) , 22 of polysaccharide lyases ( PL ) and 16 of carbohydrate esterases ( CE ) have now been described from all life forms and a high propor - tion of these are found to be encoded in micro - bial genomes ( www . cazy . org ) . 18 These include catalytic domains that degrade plant structural polysaccharides ( cellulose , β - glucan , xylan , mannan and pectin ) and storage carbohydrates ( Fig . 1 ) and a wide variety of host - derived gly - cans . In addition there are currently 64 families of carbohydrate binding modules ( CBMs ) that are frequently found to be associated with the catalytic domains of extracellular degradative enzymes . Draft genomes are now available for several rumen bacteria and for 50 – 100 species of commensal human intestinal bacteria ( with more projected ) and these provide important information on the potential polysaccharide - degrading enzyme repertoire of each strain ( Table 1 ) . Metagenomic approaches have the potential to identify novel enzymes and enzyme families involved in carbohydrate breakdown through functional screening 19 - 21 as well as cataloguing the abundance of known genes via high - throughput sequencing . 22 Metagenomic sequencing applied to the human gut microbiota has detected a large panel of carbohydrate active enzymes ( CAZymes ) . 23 However , the great majority of these potential enzymes remain to be characterized and their regulation studied . It is important to keep in mind also that organ - isms depend on complex interacting systems of degradative enzymes , transport functions and regulatory circuits in order to utilize complex carbohydrate substrates . For this reason the fol - lowing sections will concentrate on examining function - based information that has so far been obtained mainly from cultured anaerobic gut bacteria . Plant Cell Wall Degradation by Rumen Bacteria Plant cell walls consist of cellulose fibrils embed - ded in a matrix of hemicellulose ( xylan , mannan , xyloglucan and β - glucan ) and pectin , with lignin also present in secondary walls ( Fig . 2 ) . Cellulose consists of linear chains of β ( 1 , 4 ) - linked glucose units that form microfibrils through hydrogen bonding . Highly crystalline cellulose is particularly recalcitrant to enzymatic Figure 1 . Major diet - derived polysaccharides and microbial carbohydrate - degrading enzyme activities . The enzyme families most associated with particular activities in gut bacteria are indicated as follows : GH glycoside hydrolase ; pL polysaccharide lyase ; ce car - bohydrate esterase . [ For details refer to the cAZY website ( / www . cazy . org / ) ] . G , glucose ; F , fructose ; X , xylose ; A , arabinose ; Galu , galacturonic acid ; Glau , glucuronic acid . efficient and better studied . We also consider briefly some of the consequences of carbohydrate fermentation for human health . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 291 R . albus 8 , 32 however and both of these species of ruminococci produce prominent GH48 enzymes 33 that are assumed to play a key role in cellulose hydrolysis , as related enzymes function as exo - acting cellobiohydrolases in Clostridium spp . 24 Adhesion to the insoluble plant cell wall substrate involves multiple CBMs within enzyme subunits , together with cellulose binding pili in R . albus 34 and a specific attachment protein in R . flavefaciens . 35 In contrast , F . succinogenes is highly unusual among anaerobic cellulolytic bacteria in lacking dockerin sequences and in lacking a GH48 exo - cellulase , although processive GH9 cellulases may fulfil the same role . 12 , 36 The organization of fibrolytic enzymes in this species , which achieves highly efficient degradation of crys - talline cellulose , remains unclear . Prevotella spp are among the most abundant bacteria within the rumen community ; while none is cellulolytic , other plant cell wall polysaccharides can be utilized by many species . P . bryantii ( formerly P . ruminicola ) B 1 4 grows well on water - soluble , but not on water - insoluble , xylans . 37 Two gene clusters are now known to play an important role in xylan - utilizing Prevotella spp One includes a GH10 xylanase and GH43 β - xylosidase that contrib - ute most of the assayable xylanase activity in cell extracts and whose expression is induced in response to xylo - oligosaccha - rides by a linked hybrid two component regulator ( HTCS ) . 37 - 39 Subsequent transcriptomic studies have revealed more than 50 genes whose expression is significantly higher during growth on xylans as compared with xylose and arabinose in P . bryantii B 1 4 . 40 The most highly induced genes belonged to a second clus - ter ( xus ) that includes two susC and two susD paralogs ( discussed further below ) in tandem , and an endoxylanase gene ( xyn10C ) . Xyn10C is unusual in carrying CBM sequences within the cata - lytic domain 41 , 42 and is thought to be responsible for cleavage of xylan molecules at the cell surface . The related P . ruminicola 23 has been shown to encode at least 16 esterases that are involved in de - acetylation and de - methylation of xylans and pectins , as well as removing ester - linked phenolic acids . 43 , 44 degradation , whereas amorphous forms are more accessible . Xylan is a heterogenous polymer of β ( 1 , 4 ) - linked xylose residues substituted with acetyl , arabinosyl and 4 - O - methyl - glucuronyl residues ; ester cross linkages can also occur between arabinosyl substituents and ferulic acid present in lignin . Pectins are a family of complex polysaccharides that contain α ( 1 , 4 ) - linked d - galact - uronic acid or rhamnogalacturonan backbones . Plant cell wall composition and structure , and consequently its digestibility and fermentability in the gut , however varies considerably between plant species , varieties and tissues . Only actively cellulolytic rumen species have been found to cause extensive solubilisation of plant cell wall material in pure culture . 6 The two main groups of cellulose - degrading bacteria that have been isolated , Gram - positive ruminococci and Gram - negative Fibrobacter spp , possess contrasting fibrolytic enzyme systems . Ruminococcus flavefaciens is the only gut bacterium so far shown to produce a cellulosome - type enzyme complex , where the assembly of protein subunits depends on specific interac - tions between dockerin and cohesin modules found in the pro - tein subunits . 24 The genome of R . flavefaciens FD1 encodes 220 dockerin - containing proteins that are potential cellulosome subunits together with multiple cohesin - containing scaffolding proteins , four of which are encoded by the sca gene cluster . 25 - 27 The dockerin - containing proteins include diverse GH , CE and PL domains as well as CBMs and peptidases , but the functions of around 30 % of the associated domains remain unknown . 27 The cellulosomal xylanases in this species display remarkably complex structures 28 , 29 with as many as five distinct catalytic domains and CBMs ( Fig . 3 ) , and include some that are upregu - lated more than 50 - fold by growth on cellulose . 27 , 30 The whole complex is anchored to a small protein that is bound to the bacte - rial cell surface by a sortase - mediated linkage . 31 Dockerins , but not cohesins , have been found in the related R . albus , leaving it unclear how enzymes are organized in that species . Multidomain organization is also seen for non - cellulosomal xylanases of Table 1 . predicted cAZymes encoded by the genomes of selected fibrolytic gut bacteria Ecosystem Phylum ( family ) Bacterium Total CAZymes GH GT PL CE Total CBMs Human colon Bacteroidetes Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron vpi - 5482 B . xylanisolvens XB1A * B . vulgatus ATcc - 8482 B . fragilis 638R 386 349 279 223 263 224 177 138 87 81 78 78 16 22 7 1 20 22 17 6 31 26 18 26 Firmicutes : ( Lachnospiraceae ) ( Ruminococcaceae ) Roseburia intestinalis XB6B4 * Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens 16 / 4 * Ruminococcus champanellensis 18p13 * 175 115 87 115 75 54 46 37 12 0 0 9 14 3 12 11 31 34 Actinobacteria Bifidobacterium adolescentis ATcc15703 94 54 37 0 3 6 Rumen Fibrobacteres / Acidobacteria Fibrobacter succinogenes S85 183 100 54 12 17 73 Bacteroidetes Prevotella ruminicola 23 P . bryantii 215 203 133 107 60 53 3 14 19 19 16 un Firmicutes : ( Ruminococcaceae ) Ruminococcus albus 7 R . flavefaciens FD1 145 140 + 96 101 24 un 7 13 18 26 128 68 ( GH , glycoside hydrolases ; GT , glycosyl transferases ; pL , polysaccharide lyases ; ce , carbohydrate esterases ; cBM , carbohydrate binding modules ) * For these strains , data were provided by the pathogen Genomics group at the wellcome Trust Sanger institute and can be obtained from http : / / www . sanger . ac . uk / resources / downloads / bacteria / metahit / ; The information presented is available from the cAZY website , except in the case of R . flavefaciens FD1 27 , 30 and P . bryantii . 44 un , information not available . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 292 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 children and Firmicutes in Italian children . An association between a Prevotella - dominated microbiota and fiber intake , and between a Bacteroides - dominated microbiota and protein intake , has also been noted in adults . 48 Major inter - individual variation in microbiota com - position is also evident however and this can strongly affect individual responses to dietary carbohydrate . 4 , 49 It has recently been proposed that inter - individual variation in the microbiota can be classified into three discrete enterotypes across the healthy human population . 50 There is limited information on the spatial distribution of bacteria in the human intes - tine , with most information being available from fecal samples that are assumed mainly to reflect events in the distal colon . In human fecal material , Firmicutes , in particular cer - tain Ruminococcaceae , have been shown to be enriched in the particulate fraction , with Bacteroides more prevalent in the liquid phase . 10 This is likely to reflect different eco - logical niches and roles in substrate breakdown . Relatively little is known about the small intestinal microbiota in humans , but passage rates are more rapid and microbial concentrations lower than in the large intestine , making it unlikely that this is a signif - icant site for microbial fiber degradation . Some reports indicate that the distal ileum harbors a community somewhat similar in composition to that of the proximal colon , 51 but the major energy sources appear to be simple carbohydrates . 52 Early phenotypic surveys revealed that members of the Bacteroides genus harbor very broad saccharolytic potential , with some strains able to target dozens of different complex gly - cans . 53 , 54 Gram - positive bacteria ( especially the Firmicutes ) have received far less attention and their importance in polysaccha - ride breakdown is only now beginning to emerge . 16S rRNA sequences from human colonic bacteria attaching to wheat bran , resistant starch and mucin in a fermentor system were shown to include high proportions of Firmicutes ( 75 % , 51 % and 44 % , respectively ) . 55 Degradation of diet - derived carbohydrates . It is estimated that around 20 – 60 g of dietary carbohydrates reach the colon each day 56 , 57 having escaped digestion by host enzymes . The main categories are resistant starches , plant cell wall polysaccha - rides and non - digestible oligosaccharides , although some di - and mono - saccharides ( e . g . , sugar alcohols ) also show limited diges - tion and / or absorption . Resistant starch . While the majority of ingested dietary starch is completely digested in the small intestine , a variable fraction survives to reach the large intestine . 56 - 58 This fraction is referred to as “resistant starch” and for most diets it is estimated to provide the single largest source of diet - derived energy for colonic bacte - ria . 59 Dietary starch can be resistant because of protection from plant cell wall polymers ( type 1 ) , granular structure ( type 2 ) , retrogradation ( resulting from heating and cooling ) ( type 3 ) or chemical cross - linking ( type 4 ) . It is also likely however that Metagenome surveys of rumen contents have tended to detect a low number of CBMs and a high % of GH domains that are typically associated with the utilization of soluble polysaccha - rides ( e . g . , 32 % of glycoside hydrolases detected in rumen fiber fractions by Brulc et al . 22 were related to GH2 or GH3 glycosi - dases ) . It is not clear whether this primarily reflects the difficulty of recovering DNA from tightly adherent cellulolytic species or low populations of those bacteria that have so far been identi - fied as fiber - degraders . A recent metatranscriptome analysis of the muskox rumen that targeted mRNA of eukaryotic origin , however , yielded very high numbers of glycosyl hydrolase genes . 45 This emphasizes the important and distinctive contribution that is made by anaerobic eukaryotic microorganisms , fungi and pro - tozoa , to fiber degradation in the rumen . Degradation of Complex Carbohydrates by the Human Intestinal Microbiota Microbial diversity in the human colon . Recent analyses of directly amplified 16S rRNA genes 4 , 46 together with metage - nomic surveys 47 have helped to define those phylotypes ( spe - cies defined by sequencing ) that are most abundant within the human fecal microbiota . Perhaps not surprisingly , many of the dominant phylotypes correspond to cultured species , whereas only around 30 % of the less abundant phylotypes are represented by cultures 4 ( Fig . 4 ) . The dominant bacterial phyla in healthy subjects are the Bacteroidetes , Firmicutes and Actinobacteria , together with Verrucomicrobia and Proteobacteria . The compo - sition of the human fecal microbiota responds to dietary carbohy - drate intake in the short - term 4 and apparently also in the longer term . 5 , 48 De Filippo et al . 5 ascribed the differences they observed in fecal microbiota composition between two groups of children to different intakes of fiber and starch , with Bacteroidetes , espe - cially Prevotella spp , being favored in a group of rural African Figure 2 . plant cell wall structure . Diagrammatic representation of the major structural polysaccharide components of a “typical” primary plant cell wall . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 293 polymer comprising α ( 1 , 6 ) - linked maltotriose residues , provides a useful test substrate for enzymatic activity . Catalytic domains that hydrolyze α ( 1 , 4 ) linkages ( mainly α amylases ) and α ( 1 , 6 ) - linkages ( e . g . , type 1 pullulanases ) in starches are mostly found within GH family 13 , while binding domains belonging to sev - eral different families can be responsible for binding starch mole - cules . It is important to note that the preparation of starches both in cooking and in laboratory experimentation strongly influences their fermentability , as well as digestibilility , with autoclaved starches generally being more fermentable by amylolytic human gut bacteria than boiled or raw , starches . 61 Plant cell wall polysaccharides . By comparison with the rumen , discussed above , understanding of the fibrolytic microbial more rapid oro - cecal transit , and perhaps meals that provide a particularly high starch intake , may result in more digest - ible starch reaching the large intestine . The fraction of dietary starch that is resistant will therefore vary with diet composition and intake , cooking methods and even between individuals . Resistant starch has been suggested to confer a number of human health benefits that may result from its fermentation and stimula - tion of microbial growth in the colon . 59 Dietary starch typically comprises a mixture of amylose ( linear chains of α ( 1 , 4 ) - linked glucose residues ) and amylopectin ( amylose chains connected by α ( 1 , 6 ) - linked side branches ) ( Fig . 1 ) . Cereal starches that have a higher content of amylose often show greater resistance to host amylases than those with more amylopectin . 60 Pullulan , a repeat Figure 3 . examples of cell surface organization of carbohydrate - degrading enzymes in anaerobic Gram - positive gut bacteria . ( A and c ) show the domain structures and organization of two major cell - surface anchored amylases from two human intestinal anaerobes ( Numbering refers to the enzyme family ( as in Fig . 1 ) or carbohydrate binding module ( cBM ) family ) . ( B ) shows the domain structures of six examples of cellulosomal polysac - charidases from the rumen bacterium Ruminococcus flavefaciens FD1 . ( D ) shows the likely organization of the cellulosome in R . flavefaciens FD1 ; scae , scaB , scaA and scac are structural proteins encoded by the sca gene cluster that interact with each - other and with the cellulosomal enzyme subunits via a series of specific , non - covalent dockerin : cohesin pairings ( shown , in gray ) . The arrows in ( c and D ) indicate sortase - mediated anchoring to the bacterial cell wall ( also indicated by cross - hatching in A ) . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 294 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 thus among cellulolytic isolates , Ruminococcus sp were predomi - nant in methane excretors and Bacteroides in the non - methane excretors . 65 It was hypothesized that these differences might be linked to H 2 transfer between H 2 - producing cellulolytic bacte - ria ( the ruminococci ) and methanogenic archaea 65 although gut transit also tends to be slower in methanogenic individuals . 67 Inulin , oligosaccharides and prebiotics . There is a strong interest in optimising the colonic microbiota through dietary manipu - lation . A prebiotic has been defined as “a selectively fermented ingredient that allows specific changes , both in the composition and / or activity in the gastrointestinal microflora that confers benefits upon host well - being and health” . 68 , 69 Currently used prebiotics are mainly low digestible carbohydrates that are found naturally in foods . These include xylo - oligosaccharides ( XOS ) , galacto - oligosaccharides ( GOS ) and fructans , including inulin and fructo - oligosaccharides ( FOS ) . 70 , 71 Any dietary substrate that remains undigested in the upper GIT , and that may have community of the human large intestine remains somewhat lim - ited . The digestibility of cellulose and hemicellulose in a group of seven women on a standardised diet was estimated at 70 % and 72 % respectively , 62 showing that there is extensive degradation of these polysaccharides in dietary plant cell wall material dur - ing passage through the human intestine . The type of cellulose appears to be critical , however , since in the same study only 8 % of an added refined cellulose ( Solka Floc ) was digested . 62 Whereas bacteria able to grow on sources of hydrated , amorphous cellulose , such as spinach cell walls , can apparently be isolated from most individuals , bacteria able to degrade largely crystalline cellulose substrates , such as milled filter paper , are not always recover - able . 63 - 65 Cellulolytic strains isolated from human feces have been classified as Ruminococcus sp , Clostridium sp , Eubacterium sp and Bacteroides sp . 63 - 66 Interestingly , it has been suggested that the structure and activity of the cellulose - degrading community varies according to the methanogenic - status of the individual ; Figure 4 . Dominant bacterial species identified by analysis of 16S rRNA sequences in fecal samples from six individuals . Data are from walker et al . ( 2011 ) , 4 and represent the mean of 26 fecal samples from six obese male volunteers ( 4 , or in one case 6 , samples per person ) taken during a 12 week controlled dietary study . phylotypes corresponding to the 25 most abundant cultured bacterial species , that accounted for almost 50 % of all sequences , are shown in descending order of abundance on the right hand side . The gray area on the left represents the 295 additional phylotypes ( both cultured and uncultured organisms ) that were detected . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 295 from A . muciniphila , indicating a high proportion of exported products that include many with a likely role in mucin degrada - tion . 78 Sugars are also present on gut epithelial surface glycocon - jugates . Bacterial cells able to use endogenously derived substrates as an energy source are likely to have a competitive advantage during periods of reduced dietary intake . Human Colonic Bacteroides Early work showed that human Bacteroides species were able to degrade diverse plant polysaccharides , including pectin , galactomannan , arabinogalactan , alginate , laminarin and xylans , 53 , 79 , 80 while more recent work has extended this to include xyloglucan , rhamnogalacturonans I and II , β - glucans and glucomannan . 81 Bacteroides ovatus , B . thetaiotaomicron and B . uniformis ferment a particularly wide range of polysaccha - rides , and this versatility may help to explain their prevalence as dominant species in the colon . 4 , 46 , 47 The xylanolytic micro - biota was recently re - investigated , yielding new isolates belong - ing to B . intestinalis , B . ovatus , B . dorei , B . cellulosilyticus and B . xylanisolvens . 82 Furthermore , the direct cloning of xylanase genes has suggested that other as yet uncultivated xylanolytic Bacteroides and Prevotella exist in the human intestine . 83 The main cellulose - degrading bacteria isolated recently from non - methane - excreting subjects belonged to the new species B . cel - lulosilyticus , which is the only cellulolytic Bacteroides described to date . 65 , 84 Cellulases have not yet been characterized however from any human Bacteroides strain . Among hemicellulose - degrading activities , enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of xylans , mannans and galactomannans were characterized in B . ovatus . 85 , 86 Polygalacturonases from B . the - taiotaomicron were also characterized . 79 All of the enzymes or activities identified in these Bacteroides species were found cell - associated rather than extracellular , and their production appeared highly regulated by the substrate . For most of them , the cellular location was either in the outer membrane or in the periplasm . 79 , 85 Xylan utilization has been studied more recently in B . xylanisolvens , which has proved to be the most active of several newly described xylanolytic Bacteroides species . 87 , 88 Starch utilization and the Sus paradigm . The organization of starch - degrading enzymes was first studied in B . thetaiotao - micron , which can utilize various forms of starch , including amylose , amylopectin and pullulan as well as the corresponding malto - oligosaccharides . 53 Salyer’s group showed that the starch degradation enzymes are cell - associated and that the binding of the polysaccharide to the cell surface is the first step in the deg - radation process . 89 The starch binding activity and the degrada - tive enzymes are maltose inducible , with these functions encoded by an operon of eight genes ( susRABCDEFG ) . 90 Gene - disruption analysis enabled roles to be assigned to the proteins encoded by the different genes . Salyers proposed the original model for the highly efficient «Starch Utilization System» of B . thetaiotaomi - cron , that has recently been reviewed in reference 91 ( Fig . 5 ) . SusCDEFG are localized at the cell surface and bind , degrade and import soluble starch molecules . 92 - 94 SusDEFG are lipo - proteins anchored at the outer membrane of the cell . SusD is beneficial effects , is however a potential prebiotic . The health benefits attributed to various prebiotics , including FOS and GOS , have been extensively reviewed in references 70 and 71 . Most of the available information on prebiotics has focused on fructans which were the first carbohydrates to be used to increase the abundance of bifidobacteria in the human colon . The inulin type fructans are present in foods such as onions , gar - lic and bananas that are linear polymers of β ( 2 , 1 ) - linked fructose residues , with terminal glucose residues ( Fig . 1 ) . Oligofructose has a DP ( degree of polymerisation ) of between two and eight units and inulin has a DP of up to 65 . Bacterial utilization of fructans is dependent on the presence of β - fructofuranosidases . Different bacterial β - fructofuranosidases vary in their ability to cleave the β ( 2 , 1 ) bonds in sucrose , FOS and inulin . 72 Galacto - oligosaccharides ( GOS ) are chains of galactose residues ( DP 3 – 10 ) with a terminal glucose residue . GOS can be formed by treating lactose with β - galactosidase , and the final GOS product has a range of linkages ( β ( 1 , 2 ) ; β ( 1 , 3 ) ; β ( 1 , 4 ) ) depending on the production conditions . One of the most abundant natural sources of GOS is human milk , and this has led to the develop - ment of GOS - enriched formula milk . Prebiotics are also used in conjunction with probiotics , the so - called “synbiotic” approach . In a group of elderly patients given a double probiotic mixture of Bifidobacterium bifidum and B . lactis , the inclusion of an inulin / FOS prebiotic enhanced the survival of the introduced bifidobacteria , and increased numbers of native bifidobacterial populations in some volunteers . 73 Whereas earlier work to investigate the effects of prebiotics on the gut micro - biota tended to focus entirely on the intended target organisms ( normally Bifidobacterium spp ) , it is now possible , and certainly desirable , to monitor the response of the whole community so as to assess the selectivity of different prebiotics . Utilization of prebiotic carbohydrates is proving to be more widespread among phylogenetically diverse bacteria than was originally considered . 74 Utilization of host - derived glycans . From birth most infants are exposed to oligosaccharides , present at concentrations of around 10 g / L in human breast milk , that consist mainly of l - fucose , d - glucose or d - galactose residues . Bifidobacterium spp usually dominate in the feces of breast fed babies and this is thought to be due to their abilities to utilize oligosaccharides in breast milk . 75 In total , human milk contains around 200 differ - ent oligosaccharides , with as many as 130 in milk from a single mother . 76 Since none of these can be metabolised by infant diges - tive enzymes , the reason for their production is assumed to be the selective stimulation of particular bacteria . The major host - derived source of glycans entering the gut throughout life is mucin , a group of glycoproteins that are pro - duced continuously in large amounts by the gut epithelium . A limited number of microbial species appear able to digest mucin ; these include the recently described bacterium Akkermansia muciniphila , a member of the Verrucomicrobium phylum , which can comprise as much as 3 % of gut bacteria detected in feces of adults . 77 Comparing the genome sequence of A . muciniphila with those of other Verrucomicrobia reveals the presence of relatively more genes involved in carbohydrate transport and metabolism . 78 Signal peptides were detected in 26 % of the predicted proteome © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 296 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 also controlled by the regulatory protein MalR . 98 The Sus sys - tem thus appears to be a very efficient and well controlled selfish system for the capture , sequestration and degradation of starch , giving B . thetaiotaomicron an ecological advantage in a very com - petitive ecosystem . Polysaccharide utilization loci . Since the discovery of the Sus complex , 88 similar Sus - like Polysaccharide Utilization Loci ( PULs ) have been identified , representing 18 % of the B . thetaiotaomicron genome . 16 , 99 , 100 35 of these have been reported to degrade mucin or other host - derived glycans and include enzymes that target glycan decorations such as sulfatases and acetyl - esterases . 99 , 100 The other PULs are probably involved in the degradation of plant polysaccharides , ten of them being dedicated to pectins . 81 PULs have also been identified for the utilization of FOS and levans . 101 Recent studies using B . thetaiotaomicron - associated gnotobiotic mice and bacterial genome transcriptional profiling have shown that this species has evolved mechanisms to adapt glycan utilization to nutrient availability within the eco - system . When dietary polysaccharides were supplied to the mice , B . thetaiotaomicron expanded its niche from host derived glycans to accommodate the additional diet - derived nutrients . 99 When the dietary polysaccharides became less available , the bacterium turned to the utilization of the host mucins . In addition , in the gut of suckling mice , B . thetaiotaomicron relied on host - derived mucosal polysaccharides in addition to mono and oligosaccha - rides present in mother’s milk , but after weaning , the bacterium expanded its metabolism to exploit abundant , plant - derived dietary polysaccharides . 102 All these mechanisms of adaptation are based on the regulation of the expression of the different PULs , which very efficiently sense the substrates available . More generally , Sus - like complexes appear as a paradigm for glycan uptake in bacteria belonging to the phylum Bacteroidetes , and have been identified in other human gut Bacteroides as well as in ruminal Prevotella and in environmental Bacteroidetes . 103 , 104 More than 50 Bacteroides genomes are currently available in the NCBI database , and these confirm that gut - associated Bacteroidetes possess an extensive repertoire of genes predicted to encode CAZymes . PULs have been identified that target pectins and hemicelluloses such as xylans ( the xus cluster ) and galacto - mannans . 41 , 103 , 104 Although it was first thought that PULs were adapted only to soluble or well - hydrated polysaccharides , PULs have also been found associated with genes coding CAZymes tar - geting insoluble polysaccharides . 105 Although different PULs encode different repertoires of pro - teins involved in the utilization of specific polysaccharides , they are all organized in a manner similar to the sus operon of B . the - taiotaomicron ( Fig . 5 ) , and comprise SusC - like TBDT and SusD paralogs , as well as CAZymes adapted to the substrate , located at the cell surface and in the periplasm . The susC - like and susD - like genes are the central units of substrate - specific PULs . For example , B . thetaiotaomicron possesses 108 paralogs of susC , of which 101 are paired to a susD - like gene , and 88 of these pairs are associated with CAZyme genes . 15 , 99 , 103 Pairs of susC / susD - like genes often appear in tandem , possibly as a result of gene dupli - cation . In conclusion , the PUL system appears to be a generic responsible for the binding of starch to the cell surface , and this binding appears to be driven by recognition of the overall three - dimensional shape of the starch molecule . 95 SusE and SusF are also likely to be involved in starch binding . 91 , 92 SusC is a piv - otal protein in the system : it is a TonB - dependent transporter ( TBDT ) , a group of outer - membrane - spanning β - barrel proteins that sense and transport various molecules in Gram negative bac - teria . 96 Unlike the other TBDT characterized to date , SusC can - not bind the ligand alone and requires the starch - binding protein SusD for starch import . Therefore , SusD likely plays a critical role in targeting polymeric starch to the Sus complex and may facilitate movement of linear oligosaccharides to SusC . SusG is a GH13 α - amylase that may have evolved to work as part of a carbohydrate - processing / import complex rather than just as an outer - membrane amylase . susG deletion mutants could still bind starch at the cell surface , but could not grow on starch , 92 , 93 suggesting that SusG is essential for the metabolism of starch , despite the presence of four other predicted amylases in B . the - taiotaomicron genome . The proposed mechanism is as follows : 91 starch molecules are held on the surface of the bacteria through multiple interactions with SusD proteins . This anchors the poly - saccharide in close proximity to SusG , and enables the enzyme to hydrolyze the starch . The cleaved maltooligosaccharides still bound to SusD are then presented to the entrance of the SusC porin ( Fig . 5 ) . The maltooligosaccharides are translocated by SusC and released in the periplasm where they are broken down by SusA and SusB , a periplasmic GH13 α - amylase and a GH 97 α - glucosidase , respectively . 97 The small saccharides produced can then be transported into the cytoplasm ( Fig . 4 ) . The sus cluster is regulated by the transcriptional regulator SusR in response to maltooligosaccharides , amylose , amylopectin and pullulan but is Figure 5 . Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron sus system . ( A ) shows the order of genes in the sus cluster that is responsible for starch utilization in this species . ( B ) shows the inferred organization of gene products on or near the bacterial cell surface ( oM outer membrane , cM cytoplasmic membrane ) . Starch molecules are shown as sugar chains , at various stages of hydrolysis . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 297 food - associated environmental bacteria . 108 Thus , acquisition of selectively advantageous genes by successive HGT events could explain how gut symbionts acquired CAZymes involved in the degradation of plant polysaccharides . Actinobacteria This phylum of high percentage G + C Gram - positive bac - teria includes the highly abundant Collinsella aerofaciens and Atopobium spp , but by far the greatest amount of work has been focused on Bifidobacterium spp . Many bifidobacterial genes are conserved between species , creating a “core genome” and of the conserved genes , 6 . 5 % are concerned with carbohydrate metab - olism . 110 Approximately 8 % of the genome of B . longum subsp longum is dedicated to carbohydrate metabolism , with many genes organized into clusters containing a LacI - type of repres - sor protein . 111 These sugar - responsive regulators , which carry sugar - binding motifs , presumably permit a rapid response to changes in the availability of different substrates . 111 B . longum subsp infantis contains more unique genes than other sequenced Bifidobacterium spp , 112 many of which are located in a large clus - ter of carbohydrate utilization genes with both enzymatic and transport activities . Many of these genes were found to be specific for mammalian derived carbohydrates and were absent in bifido - bacterial species normally associated with adults . 113 Starch utilization . Bifidobacterium spp have been reported to be particularly effective degraders of high amylose starches 58 and some strains are known to be able to attach to starch particles . 55 , 114 Degradation of RS and of pullulan appears to be associated with particular strains and species , especially B . breve and B . adoles - centis . 115 Detailed work on B . breve has identified a major cell surface anchored enzyme that comprises distinct α ( 1 , 4 ) amylase and type 1 pullulanase domains together with multiple CBMs ( Fig . 3 ) . Deletion of this one gene abolished growth on starch , pullulan and glycogen 116 although multiple GH13 genes are found in the genomes of B . adolescentis and B . breve . Other plant polysaccharides and prebiotics . Tannock et al . 117 reported that , in addition to Bifidobacterium spp , C . aerofaciens increased in fecal samples from volunteers consuming FOS , and another human study found that numbers of Bifidobacterium and Atopobium were increased by long chain inulin ( average Dp > 55 ) . 118 Two types of β - fructofuranosidase have been identified in Bifidobacterium spp : those that are more active against the β ( 2 , 1 ) glucose - fructose bonds , releasing only the terminal glucose residue for growth 119 and those that are more active against β ( 2 , 1 ) fructose - fructose links . 120 Both types of β - fructofuranosidase however had only low activities against long - chain inulin mol - ecules . 119 - 121 Only eight out of 55 Bifidobacterium strains tested , from five different species , were able to grow on long chain inu - lin , although all grew well on FOS . 122 It appears that bifidobac - teria can be split into clusters : those unable to use any fructan ( B . bifidum and B . breve ) ; those able to use only short chain FOS ( 7 species ) ; and those able to use scFOS and short chain inulin . 123 Fructan - utilizing ability was not species - specific , with strains of B . longum for instance falling into different clusters . 123 The chain length of the substrate is therefore likely to be critical to its feature of carbohydrate nutrient acquisition by gut and environ - mental Bacteroidetes . Regulation . PULs also include regulators belonging to the hybrid two - component histidine kinase response regulators and Extra Cytoplasmic Function ( ECF - type ) sigma factors and anti - sigma factors , which participate in trans - envelope signaling . 106 In B . thetaiotaomicron , at least 18 of the 88 susC / susD clusters contain ECF - sigma factors and adjacent anti - sigma factors . 103 Analysis of the TBDT sequences in B . fragilis genome indicated that most of them were associated to CAZymes and possessed an N - terminal extension identifying them as putative trans - ducers . 106 Protein contacts are made in the periplasm ( TBDT / anti - σ interaction ) and then at the cytoplasmic face of the inner membrane ( anti - σ / ECF - σ interaction ) . The signal is transduced across the entire bacterial cell envelope and results in activation of the ECF - σ transcription factor which activates the PULs . The protein interactions were experimentally demonstrated for some of the B . thetaiotaomicron PULs , in particular mucin O - glycan signaling . 104 B . thetaiotaomicron also contains an expanded col - lection of 32 hybrid two - component systems ( HTCS ) , of which 17 are adjacent to susC / susD genes . 107 HTCS are proteins that incorporate all domains found in classical two - component envi - ronmental sensors into one polypeptide . Twenty eight of the 32 B . thetaiotaomicron HTCS reside within loci that are induced transcriptionally in response to modified polysaccharide content of the host mice diet , suggesting the contribution of these sys - tems to glycan sensing . 99 The various HTCS and anti - σ / ECF - σ factors might sense specifically the glycan ligand released in the cytoplasm by their associated TBDTs allowing the induction of the corresponding genes or operons . This allows a sophisticated integrated control of the carbohydrate hydrolytic and metabolic machinery of the cell in response to the availability of nutrients in the gut environment . Evidence for horizontal transfer of polysaccharide utilization genes . Horizontal transfer within the gut microbiota , but also from microbes living outside the gut and ingested with the food , has probably played an important role in the diversification of the degrading - activity of each species . 21 , 108 The plasticity of Bacteroidetes genomes appears to be driven by frequent genetic rearrangements , gene duplications and horizontal gene trans - fers ( HGT ) between species . Using a phylogenetic approach , around 5 . 5 % of the genes in gut Bacteroidetes genomes were inferred to be laterally acquired from non gut - associated bacte - ria , among which glycosyltransferases ( GT ) where significantly over - represented . 103 In addition , the convergence of GT and GH repertoires in gut Bacteroidetes was due mainly to massive HGT rather than gene duplications . 109 Recently , a porphyran / agar degradation locus was discovered and characterized in a member of the marine Bacteroidetes . 108 Surprisingly , homologs were found in the human gut bacterium B . plebeius that was iso - lated from Japanese individuals who are used to eat seaweeds . 108 Comparative gut metagenome analysis show that porphyranases and agarases are frequent in the Japanese population while they are absent in metagenomic data from North Americans . 108 The authors concluded that gut bacteria were able to acquire new functions via transfer of a complete degradation pathway from © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 298 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 samples from healthy human adults based on 16S rRNA analy - ses . These include some highly oxygen - sensitive organisms and are seriously underrepresented by available cultured isolates , but they are responsible for some of the key metabolic conversions within the intestinal community . 13 They include for example the major butyrate - producing species , 49 , 135 , 136 as well as species that convert lactate to butyrate or propionate 137 and species that per - form reductive acetogenesis . 138 , 139 Emerging evidence suggests that these and other Firmicutes play key roles in polysaccharide degradation . Starch utilization . Three recent studies have reported an increase in Ruminococcus bromii - related bacteria in volunteers consuming diets enriched with RS . 4 , 140 , 141 This group was also prominent among fecal bacteria shown by stable isotope probing to utilize 13 C labeled starch in vitro . 142 Walker et al . 4 saw a mean increase of > 4 - fold ( from 3 . 8 % to 17 % ) in the overall propor - tion of cluster IV Ruminococcus - related 16S rRNA sequences detected by qPCR in 14 obese volunteers when consuming a diet containing 26 g / day of type 3 RS compared with a low RS , wheat bran - enriched diet . The fractional increase was greater for sequences > 98 % related to R . bromii ( 0 . 4 % to 5 % ) . qPCR analysis indicated that further uncultured phylotypes among the Ruminococcaceae also responded to the RS diet . Remarkably , two of the 14 individuals showed no detectable ruminococci in their fecal samples and these were the only two individuals to give low estimates for starch fermentation . 4 Additional evidence has now been obtained that supports the view that R . bromii - related organisms may indeed play a ‘keystone’ role in the initial stages of breakdown of particulate resistant starch . 61 R . bromii showed a much greater ability to degrade raw or boiled RS2 and RS3 starches than B . thetaiotaomicron , and non - growing R . bro - mii cells were found to greatly enhance the utilization of these starches by three other prominent human amylolytic species , B . thetaiotaomicron , E . rectale or B . adolescentis . 61 By contrast , a second , highly abundant group of Ruminococcaceae related to Faecalibacterium prausnitzii apparently does not utilize starch , based on the cultured strains currently available . 143 The enzyme systems that allow R . bromii to efficiently utilize particulate starch have not yet been fully investigated . In contrast to other abundant amylolytic bacteria found in the human colon R . bro - mii fails to grow on glucose , and grows more rapidly on malto - oligosaccharides than on maltose . 61 Among the Lachnospiraceae , the ability to utilize starch has been reported for most members of the Roseburia / Eubacterium rectale group of butyrate - producing bacteria . 144 Furthermore the population of this group in fecal samples has been found to increase on average in human volunteers on RS - enriched diets 4 and to decrease on diets low in total carbohydrate . 145 Roseburia spp produce a major , high molecular weight ( > 180 kDa ) amy - lase that is detectable by zymogram analysis . The enzyme from R . inulinivorans , Amy13A , includes a GH13 amylase and two or more CBMs and is able to cleave α ( 1 , 4 ) linkages in amylose , amy - lopectin and pullulan . 146 The pre - protein carries an N - terminal signal peptide and a C - terminal sortase - mediated anchoring sequence indicating that it becomes anchored to the cell wall but extrudes into the extracellular matrix ( Fig . 3 ) . R . inulinivorans subsequent effect on the composition of the microbial commu - nity . None of the Bifidobacterium sp tested were active against inulin chains longer than 20 units long . 123 Complex cross - feed - ing interactions have been demonstrated for co - cultures between human colonic B . thetaiotaomicron and Bifidobacterium spp that have different abilities to utilize fructan molecules of different chain length . 124 Meanwhile other bifidobacteria can be involved in cross - feeding with butyrate - producing bacteria either by releas - ing oligo - and mono - saccharides from complex substrates , or via the utilization of acidic fermentation products . 14 Studies in adults consuming GOS ( 5 g per day ) revealed that there was more than a 100 - fold increase in abundance of Bifidobacterium populations in fecal samples . Only 50 % of the subjects were responders however , thereby revealing a con - siderable degree of inter - individual variation . 125 Doses below 5 g GOS per day were not sufficient to induce a response while 10 g per day gave an even greater increase in bifidobacteria in some volunteers suggesting a dose - response effect . 126 Analysis of the pyrosequencing data revealed that GOS enriched for par - ticular Bifidobacterium - related OTUs . B . bifidum possesses four distinct β - galactosidases , which seem to act in complementary ways on different substrate bonds , thus contributing to efficient substrate degradation . 127 It has also been shown that substrate responses occur at a spe - cies - specific level . B . adolescentis was elevated in response to FOS / inulin in humans 74 and in humanised rats . 128 Bifidobacterium spp are also reported to have some ability to utilize arabinoxylans and arabinogalactan , but benefit from initial substrate breakdown of the complex polymers by other bacteria . 129 Supplementation with the novel prebiotic long - chain arabinoxylan significantly increased numbers of bifidobacteria in humanised rats , particu - larly boosting B . longum . 128 Host - derived carbohydrates . The plethora of genes spe - cific for degradation of mammalian derived carbohydrates in B . longum subsp infantis presumably reflects the adaptation of this species to use human milk oligosaccharides ( HMOs ) for growth . Only B . bifidum and B . longum subsp infantis were able to grow well on HMOs , with other Bifidobacterial species hav - ing variable abilities . 130 B . longum subsp infantis expresses spe - cific genes in direct response to the composition of the milk ; with fucosidases only detected during growth on HMOs . 131 The B . longum subsp infantis genome is also enriched in family 1 sol - ute binding proteins ( F1SBPs ) that are particularly associated with oligosaccharide uptake . Different classes of F1SBPs were induced specifically during growth on different substrates . 132 In a separate study B . breve was found to be prevalent in breast - fed babies and not in those fed on formula milk . 133 The genome sequence of B . bifidum also contains many genes involved in the degradation of host - derived glycans , in particular the O - linked glycans attached to mucin , which appear to be co - regulated . 134 Firmicutes Two families of Firmicutes , Lachnospiraceae and the Ruminococcaceae , are particularly abundant in the human large intestine , typically accounting for 50 – 70 % of bacteria in fecal © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 299 oligosaccharides and FOS 153 while inulin enhanced the survival of R . inulinivorans against a background of total fecal bacteria in a fermentor system designed to simulate the proximal colon . 154 Increased production of butyric acid has been noted with FOS supplementation , although the intended targets , bifidobac - teria , do not produce butyrate . 153 This may be explained in part by reduced pH favoring butyrogenic bacteria 155 , 156 and in part by the ability of butyrate - producing bacteria such as R . inulinivorans and F . prausnitzii to metabolise fructans including long chain inulins . 74 , 143 , 147 , 154 Humanised rats fed with a FOS / inulin mixture had increased cecal concentrations of butyrate , which correlated with a higher incidence of butyrate producing bacteria in the Roseburia / E . rectale group . 128 In addition , bifidobacteria form acetate and lactate as major end products and these products can be co - metabolised by cross - feeders including Anaerostipes spp and Eubacterium hallii to form butyrate . 137 Host - derived carbohydrates . Certain Lachnospiraceae , nota - bly R . torques , have been identified as mucin - degraders . 157 Strains of F . prausnitzii were recently shown to utilize N - acetyl glucos - amine for growth , although none was able to utilize mucin . 143 The sugar fucose is found extensively in host glycoconjugates and can be utilized by R . inulinivorans as a growth substrate . 158 Interestingly B . thetaiotaomicron can only partially utilize fucose for growth , 159 whereas R . inulinivorans can convert the propane - 1 , 2 - diol intermediate into propionate and propanol via the toxic propionaldehyde intermediate . 158 A similar metabolic route for fucose metabolism has been described in the gut pathogen Salmonella serovar Typhimurium LT2 . The fucose utilization genes in R . inulinivorans A2 – 194 are strongly upregulated dur - ing growth on fucose . 158 Genome searching indicates that other species of Lachnospiraceae normally found in the human colon , R . obeum and R . gnavus , also possess homologs of the key R . inu - linivorans fucose utilization genes , including those involved in the synthesis of a polyhedral body required for propane - 1 , 2 - diol metabolism . This indicates that these bacteria may employ a sim - ilar pathway for fucose utilization . Metabolic Consequences of Carbohydrate Fermentation in the Human Colon Impact on the gut environment . Addition of any non - digest - ible but fermentable , carbohydrate to the diet will increase fer - mentative activity , especially in the proximal colon , resulting in increased acid production . This tends to decrease luminal pH , with important consequences for the composition of the micro - biota and the balance of microbial metabolites . In vitro studies indicate that Bacteroides populations are likely to be curtailed , while butyrate - producing Firmicutes are favored , within the community at mildly acidic pH . 155 , 160 Reduced overall intake of complex dietary carbohydrates by obese subjects on weight loss diets was found to decrease short chain fatty acid forma - tion , with a disproportionate decrease in fecal butyrate . 145 , 161 , 162 Interestingly , the major butyrate - producing bacteria detected on high carbohydrate diets were the starch - utilizing Roseburia spp and E . rectale and the decrease in fecal butyrate on diets very low in carbohydrates was associated with a major decrease in this Amy13A is induced by growth on starch , along with expression of flagella that are characteristic of this group of bacteria and that may perhaps help cells to migrate toward particulate substrates . 147 Genome sequences indicate 9 to 13 GH13 genes in Roseburia spp and in the related species E . rectale , but the roles of the dif - ferent gene products have not been elucidated . E . rectale was less active against boiled or raw RS than R . bromii . 61 Although GH13 genes are present in most sequenced representatives of the Lachnospiraceae , the contribution of other species to starch degra - dation in the colon is currently unknown . Plant cell wall polysaccharides . Salyers et al . 53 , 54 reported finding a lower frequency of plant polysaccharide utilizers among Gram - positive anaerobes than among the Bacteroides spp tested . Subsequent evidence , both from molecular studies and new isola - tions , has however suggested that Firmicutes play a significant role in the degradation of complex plant carbohydrates . In par - ticular , Ruminococcus champanellensis , a new species related to R . flavefaciens , is the only human colonic bacterium so far reported to degrade microcrystaline cellulose . 148 Human colonic strains related to R . albus were reported to utilize galactomannan . 54 A shortage of cultured organisms from the Ruminococcaceae means that information on this group remains limited , especially for the human gut , but many appear to be closely associated with particulate material . 10 Among the Lachnospiraceae , cellulolytic activity was reported in the acetogenic bacterium Bryantella for - matexigens on first isolation , but apparently proved unstable . 149 Xylan - utilization has been reported for Roseburia intestinalis 82 , 150 and also for the human B . fibrisolvens strain 16 / 4 , which was iso - lated from a wheat bran enrichment . 151 The distribution of the two main families of endoxylanases ( GH10 and GH11 ) appears limited among other human intestinal Firmicutes for which draft genome sequences are available . The highly abundant species F . prausnitzii is now known to include strains able to utilize apple pectin for growth . 143 The only other pectin - utilizing Firmicutes species identified so far from the human colon are Eubacterium eligens 54 and Lachnospira pectinoschiza . Prebiotics . Relatively little attention has been paid to the uti - lization of prebiotic oligosaccharides by Firmicutes . It is clear however that many species can utilize FOS , while some utilize long chain inulin . F . prausnitzii , E . rectale and R . inulinivorans for example are abundant butyrate - producing species 4 , 49 that include strains able to grow on inulin and FOS in pure culture . R . inulinivorans encodes a β - fructofuranosidase that acts against short and long chain length molecules . 147 The genes for the major β - fructofuranosidase and a linked ABC sugar transport system in R . inulinivorans are upregulated during growth on inulin com - pared with starch . 147 In a human study where a FOS / inulin mixture was supple - mented to the diet , numbers of both Bifidobacterium spp and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii were significantly increased . 74 GOS consumption has also been reported to increase F . prausnit - zii . 126 In human flora - associated rats , Lachnospiraceae numbers increased following dietary supplementation with either an inu - lin / FOS mixture or inulin alone , but no effect was observed with FOS alone . 152 Increases have also been reported in the numbers of Lachnospiraceae upon in vitro fermentation of both pectic © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 300 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 The finding that germ - free animals were apparently protected from developing diet - induced obesity 175 has recently been bal - anced by a study reporting the opposite effect . 176 These effects were thus shown to be highly dependent on the type of high - fat diet fed to germ - free mice , and were also found to be linked to differences in energy expenditure . 176 Potential links between the gut microbiota and metabolic disease have also been under intense investigation in recent years . 177 - 179 Serum levels of lipo - polysaccharide ( LPS ) , derived from Gram - negative bacteria , are reported to increase in obese , diabetic or high - fat fed subjects and reproduction of similar LPS levels by chronic injection lead to a loss of insulin sensitivity in animals . 178 The increased LPS levels may result from a decrease in the gut barrier function . It was shown that the administration of prebiotics ( FOS ) improved gut barrier function , which was strongly correlated with reduced portal plasma LPS levels . The effect seems to be mediated by the gut hormone glucacon - like peptide - 2 . 178 Physiological impact of SCFA . Besides supplying energy to the host , SCFA , along with other microbial metabolic products , have wider effects on host physiology . The gut microbiota may influ - ence the expression of host peptides and hormones by production of short - chain fatty acids via their interaction with free fatty acid receptors FFA2 and FFA3 , thus influencing host energy metab - olism and appetite regulation . 180 Propionate has been shown to increase satiety and improve glucose homeostasis also when taken orally . 181 The effect of butyrate on the host has received much attention due to its anti - inflammatory and anti - carcinogenic effects , but it also appears to be involved in the regulation of other host functions . 182 A recent study found that oral administration of butyrate to mice fed a high - fat diet prevented development of insulin resistance and obesity . This effect was not due to a reduced food intake , but to increased energy expenditure . 183 Butyrate con - centrations in plasma were only increased by approximately 1 . 6 - fold compared with control animals , therefore manipulation of the microbiota to increase systemic butyrate levels via the colonic route could possibly be achieved , despite the fact that most bacte - rially produced butyrate is consumed in the colonic wall . Another potential route linking microbial activity with the host is via the gut - brain axis , a bi - directional communication system based on neural , endocrine and immunological mecha - nisms . There is increasing evidence that there may indeed be a link between the gut microbiota and the brain . 184 Recent rodent studies indicated that changes in the microbiota composition led to behavioral changes and altered levels of brain - derived neuro - tropic factor ( BDNF ) in different brain regions . 185 These changes did not appear to be mediated by gut inflammation , specific enteric neurotransmitters or the autonomic nervous system , and it was hypothesized that microbial products acting on the central nervous system are likely to be involved , with butyrate being one potential candidate . 185 The immune system is influenced by microbial metabolic products , but can also recognize a diverse range of microbial cell components . This leads to complex interactions between the species composition of the microbiota and the host’s innate and adaptive immune systems that are thought to underlie many pro - biotic effects . 186 group , with F . prausnitzii becoming the main butyrate producer . Dietary complex carbohydrates also decrease the levels of poten - tially harmful metabolites that arise from proteolytic activity in the colon . 162 Separately De Preter et al . 163 demonstrated in in vitro studies that there was a dose dependent stimulation of saccharo - lytic fermentation when fructans were included in their growth medium concomitant with a decrease in toxic peptide fermenta - tion metabolites . Increased SCFA concentrations may also increase the solu - bility of certain minerals such as calcium , and enhance absorp - tion and expression of calcium - binding proteins . 164 Changes in intestinal microbial metabolism following the consump - tion of inulin fructans have also been shown to benefit bone health by increasing calcium absorption while β - glucans may lower total cholesterol levels . 165 High fiber diets increase fecal bulking , short chain fatty acid production and transit rates along the large intestine . 166 , 167 Slow transit rates will encourage growth of the slower growing microorganisms such as some of the hydrogen - utilizers including methanogens , that are present in approximately 50 % of the population . Methane has been shown to slow gut transit in animal studies 168 and the presence of methanogens is also associated with slower gut transit in humans . 67 Digestion of plant fiber also results in the release of phenolic compounds . Epidemiological studies suggest that there is an inverse association between the intake of polyphe - nol - rich diets and the incidence of cardiovascular disease , dia - betes and cancer 169 but it is unclear at present what proportion of absorbed bioactive phenolic compounds can be ascribed to microbial activity . Recovery of energy from dietary carbohydrates : consequences for obesity , weight loss and metabolic health . A high proportion of the SCFA produced by microbial fermentation of indigestible carbohydrates in the large intestine is absorbed by the host . Thus microbial activity contributes energy to the host ( estimated to be around 10 % of calories obtained from the diet 3 ) that would oth - erwise be lost through excretion of undegraded substrate in the feces . On the other hand , the calories that are obtained from a sugar via fermentation , followed by absorption and metabolism of SCFA , are estimated to be less than half the amount that would be gained by direct absorption of the same amount of sugar in the small intestine . 170 The net effect of replacing consumption of a digestible carbohydrate in the diet with consumption of the same amount of fermentable , non - digestible carbohydrate is therefore to reduce the calories acquired from the diet . The possible involvement of the gut microbiota in the devel - opment of obesity is proving far more complex than was first proposed . Variation in microbiota composition has the poten - tial to influence “energy harvest” from fiber 171 if it affects key groups involved in energy release and recovery , but factors such as gut transit and absorption seem likely to be more important 172 ( Fig . 6 ) . Phylum level differences in the gut microbiota in obese vs . lean individuals have been reported in some studies , but not in others , and it appears that differences in dietary intake are mainly responsible for microbiota changes . 173 , 174 Interestingly , however , microbiota composition also has the potential to influ - ence satiety ( and thus dietary intake ) and energy expenditure . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 301 Firmicutes phylum , should be a priority for future research . Finally , the impact of dietary carbohydrates , including prebiot - ics , on health in man requires further progress in understand - ing of the relationship between diet composition , gut microbiota and metabolic outputs . This demands , in addition to mechanis - tic understanding , systems - based approaches 187 to integrate and model the many complex interactions between functional groups . Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge support from the Scottish Government ( RESAS ) . References 1 . Van Soest PJ . Nutritional Ecology of the Ruminant . Cornell Univ Press USA 2004 ; 2 . 2 . Ley RE , Hamady M , Lozupone C , Turnbaugh PJ , Ramey RR , Bircher JS , et al . Evolution of mammals and their gut microbes . Science 2008 ; 320 : 1647 - 51 ; PMID : 18497261 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1155725 . 3 . McNeil NI . The contribution of the large intestine to energy supplies in man . Am J Clin Nutr 1984 ; 39 : 338 - 42 ; PMID : 6320630 . 4 . Walker AW , Ince J , Duncan SH , Webster LM , Holtrop G , Ze X , et al . Dominant and diet - responsive groups of bacteria within the human colonic microbiota . ISME J 2011 ; 5 : 220 - 30 ; PMID : 20686513 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ismej . 2010 . 118 . Conclusions Bacteria that colonize the mammalian intestine collectively pos - sess a far wider diversity of genes and a larger repertoire of deg - radative enzymes and metabolic capabilities than their hosts . Fermentation of complex carbohydrates in the intestine involves interactions between community members that include both nutritionally specialized and widely adapted species . Certain dominant species , notably among the Bacteroidetes , possess very large numbers of genes encoding carbohydrate active enzymes ( CAZymes ) . This allows them to switch readily between differ - ent energy sources in the gut depending on availability , using sophisticated sensing and regulatory mechanisms to control gene expression . Other groups encode fewer CAZymes and are clearly more specialized , but some of these organisms appear to play critical roles in the community by initiating the degrada - tion of complex substrates such as plant cell walls , starch particles and mucin . Identification of these ‘keystone’ groups and their roles , particularly among members of the under - investigated Figure 6 . energy intake and expenditure . The diagram summarizes the potential of gut microorganisms to influence energy gain and expenditure in a mono - gastric animal such as man . 168 The energy arising from microbial fermentation via the absorption of short chain fatty acids may be influenced by microbiota composition , but more especially by gut transit , affecting the efficiency of substrate breakdown , digestion and absorption . other poten - tially important , but little understood , influences however include possible effects of microbial products on satiety and energy expenditure . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 302 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 34 . Rakotoarivonina H , Larson MA , Morrison M , Girardeau JP , Gaillard - Martinie B , Forano E , et al . The Ruminococcus albus pilA1 - pilA2 locus : expression and putative role of two adjacent pil genes in pilus forma - tion and bacterial adhesion to cellulose . Microbiology 2005 ; 151 : 1291 - 9 ; PMID : 15817796 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1099 / mic . 0 . 27735 - 0 . 35 . Rincon MT , Čepeljnik T , Martin JC , Barak Y , Lamed R , Bayer EA , et al . A novel cell surface - anchored cellulose - binding protein encoded by the sca gene cluster of Ruminococcus flavefaciens . J Bacteriol 2007 ; 189 : 4774 - 83 ; PMID : 17468247 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 00143 - 07 . 36 . Wilson DB . Microbial diversity of cellulose hydro - lysis . Curr Opin Microbiol 2011 ; 14 : 259 - 63 ; PMID : 21531609 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . mib . 2011 . 04 . 004 . 37 . Miyazaki K , Martin JC , Marinsek - Logar R , Flint HJ . Degradation and utilization of xylans by the rumen anaerobe Prevotella bryantii ( formerly P . rumi - nicola subsp . brevis ) B ( 1 ) 4 . Anaerobe 1997 ; 3 : 373 - 81 ; PMID : 16887612 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / anae . 1997 . 0125 . 38 . Gasparic A , Martin J , Daniel AS , Flint HJ . A xylan hydrolase gene cluster from Prevotella ruminicola B ( 1 ) 4 : sequence relationships , synergistic interactions and oxy - gen sensitivity of a novel enzyme with exoxylanase and beta - ( 1 , 4 ) xylosidase activities . Appl Environ Microbiol 1995 ; 61 : 2958 - 64 ; PMID : 7487028 . 39 . Miyazaki K , Miyamoto H , Mercer DK , Hirase T , Martin JC , Kojima Y , et al . Involvement of the mul - tidomain regulatory protein XynR in positive control of xylanase gene expression in the ruminal anaerobe Prevotella bryantii B ( 1 ) 4 . J Bacteriol 2003 ; 185 : 2219 - 26 ; PMID : 12644492 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 185 . 7 . 2219 - 26 . 2003 . 40 . Dodd D , Moon YH , Swaminathan K , Mackie RI , Cann IK . Transcriptomic analyses of xylan degrada - tion by Prevotella bryantii and insights into energy acquisition by xylanolytic bacteroidetes . J Biol Chem 2010 ; 285 : 30261 - 73 ; PMID : 20622018 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 141788 . 41 . Dodd D , Mackie RI , Cann IKO . Xylan degradation , a metabolic property shared by rumen and human colon - ic Bacteroidetes . Mol Microbiol 2011 ; 79 : 292 - 304 ; PMID : 21219452 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2958 . 2010 . 07473 . x . 42 . Flint HJ , Whitehead TR , Martin JC , Gasparic A . Interrupted catalytic domain structures in xylanases from two distantly related strains of Prevotella rumi - nicola . Biochim Biophys Acta 1997 ; 1337 : 161 - 5 ; PMID : 9048892 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 4838 ( 96 ) 00213 - 0 . 43 . Kabel MA , Yeoman CJ , Han Y , Dodd D , Abbas CA , de Bont JA , et al . Biochemical characterization and relative expression levels of multiple carbohydrate esterases of the xylanolytic rumen bacterium Prevotella ruminicola 23 grown on an ester - enriched substrate . Appl Environ Microbiol 2011 ; 77 : 5671 - 81 ; PMID : 21742923 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 05321 - 11 . 44 . Purushe J , Fouts DE , Morrison M , White BA , Mackie RI , Coutinho PM , et al . ; North American Consortium for Rumen Bacteria . Comparative genome analysis of Prevotella ruminicola and Prevotella bryan - tii : insights into their environmental niche . Microb Ecol 2010 ; 60 : 721 - 9 ; PMID : 20585943 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00248 - 010 - 9692 - 8 . 45 . Qi M , Wang P , O’Toole N , Barboza PS , Ungerfeld E , Leigh MB , et al . Snapshot of the eukaryotic gene expression in muskoxen rumen—a metatran - scriptomic approach . PLoS One 2011 ; 6 : 20521 ; PMID : 21655220 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0020521 . 46 . Tap J , Mondot S , Levenez F , Pelletier E , Caron C , Furet JP , et al . Towards the human intestinal microbiota phy - logenetic core . Environ Microbiol 2009 ; 11 : 2574 - 84 ; PMID : 19601958 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2009 . 01982 . x . 20 . Ferrer M , Golyshina OV , Chernikova TN , Khachane AN , Reyes - Duarte D , Santos VA , et al . Novel hydrolase diversity retrieved from a metagenome library of bovine rumen microflora . Environ Microbiol 2005 ; 7 : 1996 - 2010 ; PMID : 16309396 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2005 . 00920 . x . 21 . Tasse L , Bercovici J , Pizzut - Serin S , Robe P , Tap J , Klopp C , et al . Functional metagenomics to mine the human gut microbiome for dietary fiber catabolic enzymes . Genome Res 2010 ; 20 : 1605 - 12 ; PMID : 20841432 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gr . 108332 . 110 . 22 . Brulc JM , Antonopoulos DA , Miller ME , Wilson MK , Yannarell AC , Dinsdale EA , et al . Gene - centric metage - nomics of the fiber - adherent bovine rumen microbiome reveals forage specific glycoside hydrolases . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 ; 106 : 1948 - 53 ; PMID : 19181843 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0806191105 . 23 . Kurokawa K , Itoh T , Kuwahara T , Oshima K , Toh H , Toyoda A , et al . Comparative metagenomics revealed commonly enriched gene sets in human gut microbi - omes . DNA Res 2007 ; 14 : 169 - 81 ; PMID : 17916580 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / dnares / dsm018 . 24 . Bayer EA , Lamed R , White BA , Flint HJ . From cel - lulosomes to cellulosomics . Chem Rec 2008 ; 8 : 364 - 77 ; PMID : 19107866 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tcr . 20160 . 25 . Ding SY , Rincon MT , Lamed R , Martin JC , McCrae SI , Aurilia V , et al . Cellulosomal scaffoldin - like proteins from Ruminococcus flavefaciens . J Bacteriol 2001 ; 183 : 1945 - 53 ; PMID : 11222592 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 183 . 6 . 1945 - 53 . 2001 . 26 . Jindou S , Borovok I , Rincon MT , Flint HJ , Antonopoulos DA , Berg ME , et al . Conservation and divergence in cellulosome architecture between two strains of Ruminococcus flavefaciens . J Bacteriol 2006 ; 188 : 7971 - 6 ; PMID : 16997963 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 00973 - 06 . 27 . Rincon MT , Dassa B , Flint HJ , Travis AJ , Jindou S , Borovok I , et al . Abundance and diversity of dockerin - containing proteins in the fiber - degrading rumen bacterium , Ruminococcus flavefaciens FD - 1 . PLoS One 2010 ; 5 : 12476 ; PMID : 20814577 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0012476 . 28 . Flint HJ , Martin JC , McPherson CA , Daniel AS , Zhang JX . A bifunctional enzyme , with separate xyla - nase and beta ( 1 , 3 - 1 , 4 ) - glucanase domains , encoded by the xynD gene of Ruminococcus flavefaciens . J Bacteriol 1993 ; 175 : 2943 - 51 ; PMID : 8491715 . 29 . Aurilia V , Martin JC , McCrae SI , Scott KP , Rincon MT , Flint HJ . Three multidomain esterases from the cellulolytic rumen anaerobe Ruminococcus flave - faciens 17 that carry divergent dockerin sequences . Microbiology 2000 ; 146 : 1391 - 7 ; PMID : 10846217 . 30 . Berg Miller ME , Antonopoulos DA , Rincon MT , Band M , Bari A , Akraiko T , et al . Diversity and strain specificity of plant cell wall degrading enzymes revealed by the draft genome of Ruminococcus flavefaciens FD - 1 . PLoS One 2009 ; 4 : 6650 ; PMID : 19680555 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0006650 . 31 . Rincon MT , Cepeljnik T , Martin JC , Lamed R , Barak Y , Bayer EA , et al . Unconventional mode of attachment of the Ruminococcus flavefaciens cellulo - some to the cell surface . J Bacteriol 2005 ; 187 : 7569 - 78 ; PMID : 16267281 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 187 . 22 . 7569 - 78 . 2005 . 32 . Moon YH , Iakiviak M , Bauer S , Mackie RI , Cann IK . Biochemical analyses of multiple endoxylanases from the rumen bacterium Ruminococcus albus 8 and their synergistic activities with accessory hemicel - lulose - degrading enzymes . Appl Environ Microbiol 2011 ; 77 : 5157 - 69 ; PMID : 21666020 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 00353 - 11 . 33 . Devillard E , Goodheart DB , Karnati SK , Bayer EA , Lamed R , Miron J , et al . Ruminococcus albus 8 mutants defective in cellulose degradation are deficient in two processive endocellulases , Cel48A and Cel9B , both of which possess a novel modular architecture . J Bacteriol 2004 ; 186 : 136 - 45 ; PMID : 14679233 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 186 . 1 . 136 - 45 . 2004 . 5 . De Filippo C , Cavalieri D , Di Paola M , Ramazzotti M , Poullet JB , Massart S , et al . Impact of diet in shap - ing gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in children from Europe and rural Africa . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 ; 107 : 14691 - 6 ; PMID : 20679230 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1005963107 . 6 . Morris EJ , van Gylswyk NO . Comparison of the action of rumen bacteria on cell walls from Eragrostis tef . J Agric Sci Camb 1980 ; 95 : 313 - 23 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0021859600039332 . 7 . Dehority BA . Effects of microbial synergism on fibre digestion in the rumen . Proc Nutr Soc 1991 ; 50 : 149 - 59 ; PMID : 1661009 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1079 / PNS19910026 . 8 . Flint HJ , Bayer EA , Rincon MT , Lamed R , White BA . Polysaccharide utilization by gut bacteria : poten - tial for new insights from genomic analysis . Nat Rev Microbiol 2008 ; 6 : 121 - 31 ; PMID : 18180751 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrmicro1817 . 9 . McAllister TA , Bae HD , Jones GA , Cheng KJ . Microbial attachment and feed digestion in the rumen . J Anim Sci 1994 ; 72 : 3004 - 18 ; PMID : 7730196 . 10 . Walker AW , Duncan SH , Harmsen HJM , Holtrop G , Welling GW , Flint HJ . The species composition of the human intestinal microbiota differs between particle - associated and liquid phase communities . Environ Microbiol 2008 ; 10 : 3275 - 83 ; PMID : 18713272 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2008 . 01717 . x . 11 . Swidsinski A , Loening - Baucke V , Verstraelen H , Osowska S , Doerffel Y . Biostructure of fecal micro - biota in healthy subjects and patients with chronic idiopathic diarrhea . Gastroenterology 2008 ; 135 : 568 - 79 ; PMID : 18570896 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1053 / j . gastro . 2008 . 04 . 017 . 12 . Suen G , Weimer PJ , Stevenson DM , Aylward FO , Boyum J , Deneke J , et al . The complete genome sequence of Fibrobacter succinogenes S85 reveals a cellulolytic and metabolic specialist . PLoS One 2011 ; 6 : 18814 ; PMID : 21526192 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0018814 . 13 . Flint HJ , Duncan SH , Scott KP , Louis P . Interactions and competition within the microbial community of the human colon : links between diet and health . Environ Microbiol 2007 ; 9 : 1101 - 11 ; PMID : 17472627 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2007 . 01281 . x . 14 . Belenguer A , Duncan SH , Calder AG , Holtrop G , Louis P , Lobley GE , et al . Two routes of meta - bolic cross - feeding between Bifidobacterium adoles - centis and butyrate - producing anaerobes from the human gut . Appl Environ Microbiol 2006 ; 72 : 3593 - 9 ; PMID : 16672507 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 72 . 5 . 3593 - 9 . 2006 . 15 . Xu J , Bjursell MK , Himrod J , Deng S , Carmichael LK , Chiang HC , et al . A genomic view of the human - Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron symbiosis . Science 2003 ; 299 : 2074 - 6 ; PMID : 12663928 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1080029 . 16 . Sonnenburg JL , Xu J , Leip DD , Chen CH , Westover BP , Weatherford J , et al . Glycan foraging in vivo by an intestine - adapted bacterial symbiont . Science 2005 ; 307 : 1955 - 9 ; PMID : 15790854 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1109051 . 17 . Mahowald MA , Rey FE , Seedorf H , Turnbaugh PJ , Fulton RS , Wollam A , et al . Characterizing a model human gut microbiota composed of members of its two dominant bacterial phyla . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 ; 106 : 5859 - 64 ; PMID : 19321416 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0901529106 . 18 . Cantarel BL , Coutinho PM , Rancurel C , Bernard T , Lombard V , Henrissat B . The Carbohydrate - Active EnZymes database ( CAZy ) : an expert resource for Glycogenomics . Nucleic Acids Res 2009 ; 37 : 233 - 8 ; PMID : 18838391 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / nar / gkn663 . 19 . Hess M , Sczyrba A , Egan R , Kim TW , Chokhawala H , Schroth G , et al . Metagenomic discovery of bio - mass - degrading genes and genomes from cow rumen . Science 2011 ; 331 : 463 - 7 ; PMID : 21273488 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1200387 . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 303 77 . Derrien M , Collado MC , Ben - Amor K , Salminen S , de Vos WM . The Mucin degrader Akkermansia muciniph - ila is an abundant resident of the human intesti - nal tract . Appl Environ Microbiol 2008 ; 74 : 1646 - 8 ; PMID : 18083887 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 01226 - 07 . 78 . van Passel MWJ , Kant R , Zoetendal EG , Plugge CM , Derrien M , Malfatti SA , et al . The genome of Akkermansia muciniphila , a dedicated intestinal mucin degrader , and its use in exploring intestinal metage - nomes . PLoS One 2011 ; 6 : 16876 ; PMID : 21390229 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0016876 . 79 . McCarthy RE , Kotarski SF , Salyers AA . Location and characteristics of enzymes involved in the breakdown of polygalacturonic acid by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron . J Bacteriol 1985 ; 161 : 493 - 9 ; PMID : 3968032 . 80 . Bayliss CE , Houston AP . Characterization of plant polysaccharide - and mucin - fermenting anaerobic bac - teria from human feces . Appl Environ Microbiol 1984 ; 48 : 626 - 32 ; PMID : 6093693 . 81 . Martens EC , Lowe EC , Chiang H , Pudlo NA , Wu M , McNulty NP , et al . Recognition and degradation of plant cell wall polysaccharides by two human gut sym - bionts . PLoS Biol 2011 ; 9 : 1001221 ; PMID : 22205877 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001221 . 82 . Chassard C , Goumy V , Leclerc M , Del’homme C , Bernalier - Donadille A . Characterization of the xylan - degrading microbial community from human faeces . FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2007 ; 61 : 121 - 31 ; PMID : 17391327 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1574 - 6941 . 2007 . 00314 . x . 83 . Hayashi H , Abe T , Sakamoto M , Ohara H , Ikemura T , Sakka K , et al . Direct cloning of genes encoding novel xylanases from the human gut . Can J Microbiol 2005 ; 51 : 251 - 9 ; PMID : 15920623 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1139 / w04 - 136 . 84 . Robert C , Chassard C , Lawson PA , Bernalier - Donadille A . Bacteroides cellulosilyticus sp nov . , a cel - lulolytic bacterium from the human gut microbial community . Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2007 ; 57 : 1516 - 20 ; PMID : 17625186 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1099 / ijs . 0 . 64998 - 0 . 85 . Gherardini FC , Salyers AA . Characterization of an outer membrane mannanase from Bacteroides ovatus . J Bacteriol 1987 ; 169 : 2031 - 7 ; PMID : 3553153 . 86 . Weaver J , Whitehead TR , Cotta MA , Valentine PC , Salyers AA . Genetic analysis of a locus on the Bacteroides ovatus chromosome which contains xylan utilization genes . Appl Environ Microbiol 1992 ; 58 : 2764 - 70 ; PMID : 1444385 . 87 . Mirande C , Kadlecikova E , Matulova M , Capek P , Bernalier - Donadille A , Forano E , et al . Dietary fibre degradation and fermentation by two xylanolytic bacteria Bacteroides xylanisolvens XB1A and Roseburia intestinalis XB6B4 from the human intestine . J Appl Microbiol 2010 ; 109 : 451 - 60 ; PMID : 20105245 . 88 . Mirande C , Mosoni P , Béra - Maillet C , Bernalier - Donadille A , Forano E . Characterization of Xyn10A , a highly active xylanase from the human gut bacte - rium Bacteroides xylanisolvens XB1A . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2010 ; 87 : 2097 - 105 ; PMID : 20532756 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00253 - 010 - 2694 - 0 . 89 . Anderson KL , Salyers AA . Biochemical evidence that starch breakdown by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron involves outer membrane starch - binding sites and peri - plasmic starch - degrading enzymes . J Bacteriol 1989 ; 171 : 3192 - 8 ; PMID : 2722747 . 90 . Reeves AR , Wang GR , Salyers AA . Characterization of four outer membrane proteins that play a role in utilization of starch by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron . J Bacteriol 1997 ; 179 : 643 - 9 ; PMID : 9006015 . 91 . Martens EC , Koropatkin NM , Smith TJ , Gordon JI . Complex glycan catabolism by the human gut micro - biota : the Bacteroidetes Sus - like paradigm . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 24673 - 7 ; PMID : 19553672 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . R109 . 022848 . 63 . Wedekind KJ , Mansfield HR , Montgomery L . Enumeration and isolation of cellulolytic and hemi - cellulolytic bacteria from human feces . Appl Environ Microbiol 1988 ; 54 : 1530 - 5 ; PMID : 3415224 . 64 . Robert C , Bernalier - Donadille A . The cellulolytic microflora of the human colon : evidence of microcrys - talline cellulose - degrading bacteria in methane - excret - ing subjects . FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2003 ; 46 : 81 - 9 ; PMID : 19719585 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0168 - 6496 ( 03 ) 00207 - 1 . 65 . Chassard C , Delmas E , Robert C , Bernalier - Donadille A . The cellulose - degrading microbial community of the human gut varies according to the presence or absence of methanogens . FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2010 ; 74 : 205 - 13 ; PMID : 20662929 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1574 - 6941 . 2010 . 00941 . x . 66 . Bétian HG , Linehan BA , Bryant MP , Holdeman LV . Isolation of a cellulolytic Bacteroides sp from human feces . Appl Environ Microbiol 1977 ; 33 : 1009 - 10 ; PMID : 869523 . 67 . Oufir LE , Barry JL , Flourié B , Cherbut C , Cloarec D , Bornet F , et al . Relationships between transit time in man and in vitro fermentation of dietary fiber by fecal bacteria . Eur J Clin Nutr 2000 ; 54 : 603 - 9 ; PMID : 10951507 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / sj . ejcn . 1600687 . 68 . Gibson GR , Roberfroid MB . Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota : introducing the concept of prebiotics . J Nutr 1995 ; 125 : 1401 - 12 ; PMID : 7782892 . 69 . Van Loo J . The specificity of the interaction with intes - tinal bacterial fermentation by prebiotics determines their physiological efficacy . Nutr Res Rev 2004 ; 17 : 89 - 98 ; PMID : 19079918 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1079 / NRR200377 . 70 . Macfarlane GT , Steed H , Macfarlane S . Bacterial metabolism and health - related effects of galacto - oli - gosaccharides and other prebiotics . J Appl Microbiol 2008 ; 104 : 305 - 44 ; PMID : 18215222 . 71 . Roberfroid MB . Introducing inulin - type fructans . Br J Nutr 2005 ; 93 : 13 - 25 ; PMID : 15877886 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1079 / BJN20041350 . 72 . Warchol M , Perrin S , Grill JP , Schneider F . Characterization of a purified beta - fructofuranosidase from Bifidobacterium infantis ATCC 15697 . Lett Appl Microbiol 2002 ; 35 : 462 - 7 ; PMID : 12460425 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1046 / j . 1472 - 765X . 2002 . 01224 . x . 73 . Bartosch S , Woodmansey EJ , Paterson JCM , McMurdo MET , Macfarlane GT . Microbiological effects of con - suming a synbiotic containing Bifidobacterium bifi - dum , Bifidobacterium lactis and oligofructose in elderly persons , determined by real - time polymerase chain reaction and counting of viable bacteria . Clin Infect Dis 2005 ; 40 : 28 - 37 ; PMID : 15614689 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 426027 . 74 . Ramirez - Farias C , Slezak K , Fuller Z , Duncan A , Holtrop G , Louis P . Effect of inulin on the human gut microbiota : stimulation of Bifidobacterium ado - lescentis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii . Br J Nutr 2009 ; 101 : 541 - 50 ; PMID : 18590586 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0007114508019880 . 75 . Harmsen HJM , Wildeboer - Veloo ACM , Raangs GC , Wagendorp AA , Klijn N , Bindels JG , et al . Analysis of intestinal flora development in breast - fed and formula - fed infants by using molecular identifica - tion and detection methods . J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2000 ; 30 : 61 - 7 ; PMID : 10630441 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1097 / 00005176 - 200001000 - 00019 . 76 . German JB , Freeman SL , Lebrilla CB , Mills DA . Human milk oligosaccharides : evolution , structures and bioselectivity as substrates for intestinal bac - teria . Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Pediatr Program 2008 ; 62 : 205 - 18 ; PMID : 18626202 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1159 / 000146322 . 47 . Qin J , Li R , Raes J , Arumugam M , Burgdorf KS , Manichanh C , et al . ; MetaHIT Consortium . A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing . Nature 2010 ; 464 : 59 - 65 ; PMID : 20203603 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature08821 . 48 . Wu GD , Chen J , Hoffmann C , Bittinger K , Chen YY , Keilbaugh SA , et al . Linking long - term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes . Science 2011 ; 334 : 105 - 8 ; PMID : 21885731 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / sci - ence . 1208344 . 49 . Louis P , Young P , Holtrop G , Flint HJ . Diversity of human colonic butyrate - producing bacteria revealed by analysis of the butyryl - CoA : acetate CoA - transferase gene . Environ Microbiol 2010 ; 12 : 304 - 14 ; PMID : 19807780 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2009 . 02066 . x . 50 . Arumugam M , Raes J , Pelletier E , Le Paslier D , Yamada T , Mende DR , et al . ; MetaHIT Consortium . Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome . Nature 2011 ; 473 : 174 - 80 ; PMID : 21508958 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09944 . 51 . Wang M , Ahrne S , Jeppsson B , Molin G . Comparison of bacterial diversity along the human intestinal tract by direct cloning and sequencing of 16S rRNA genes . FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2005 ; 54 : 219 - 31 ; PMID : 16332321 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . fem - sec . 2005 . 03 . 012 . 52 . Zoetendal EG , Raes J , van den Bogert B , Arumugam M , Booijink CCGM , Troost FJ , et al . The human small intestinal microbiota is driven by rapid uptake and conversion of simple carbohydrates . ISME J 2012 ; In press ; PMID : 22258098 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ismej . 2011 . 212 . 53 . Salyers AA , Vercellotti JR , West SE , Wilkins TD . Fermentation of mucin and plant polysaccharides by strains of Bacteroides from the human colon . Appl Environ Microbiol 1977 ; 33 : 319 - 22 ; PMID : 848954 . 54 . Salyers AA , West SEH , Vercellotti JR , Wilkins TD . Fermentation of mucins and plant polysaccharides by anaerobic bacteria from the human colon . Appl Environ Microbiol 1977 ; 34 : 529 - 33 ; PMID : 563214 . 55 . Leitch ECM , Walker AW , Duncan SH , Holtrop G , Flint HJ . Selective colonization of insoluble sub - strates by human faecal bacteria . Environ Microbiol 2007 ; 9 : 667 - 79 ; PMID : 17298367 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2006 . 01186 . x . 56 . Cummings JH , Macfarlane GT . The control and conse - quences of bacterial fermentation in the human colon . J Appl Bacteriol 1991 ; 70 : 443 - 59 ; PMID : 1938669 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2672 . 1991 . tb02739 . x . 57 . Silvester KR , Englyst HN , Cummings JH . Ileal recovery of starch from whole diets containing resistant starch measured in vitro and fermentation of ileal effluent . Am J Clin Nutr 1995 ; 62 : 403 - 11 ; PMID : 7625349 . 58 . Macfarlane GT , Englyst HN . Starch utilization by the human large intestinal microflora . J Appl Bacteriol 1986 ; 60 : 195 - 201 ; PMID : 2423494 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2672 . 1986 . tb01073 . x . 59 . Nugent AP . Health properties of resistant starch . BNF Nutrition Bulletin 2005 ; 30 : 27 - 54 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 3010 . 2005 . 00481 . x . 60 . Le Leu RK , Hu Y , Brown IL , Young GP . Effect of high amylose maize starches on colonic fermentation and apoptotic response to DNA - damage in the colon of rats . Nutr Metab ( Lond ) 2009 ; 6 : 11 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / 1743 - 7075 - 6 - 11 ; PMID : 19267935 . 61 . Ze X , Duncan SH , Louis P , Flint HJ . Ruminococcus bromii is a keystone species for the degradation of resistant starch in the human colon . ISME J 2012 ; In press ; PMID : 22343308 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ismej . 2012 . 4 . 62 . Slavin JL , Brauer PM , Marlett JA . Neutral detergent fiber , hemicellulose and cellulose digestibility in human subjects . J Nutr 1981 ; 111 : 287 - 97 ; PMID : 6257867 . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 304 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 120 . Janer C , Rohr LM , Peláez C , Laloi M , Cleusix V , Requena T , et al . Hydrolysis of oligofructoses by the recombinant β - fructofuranosidase from Bifidobacterium lactis . Syst Appl Microbiol 2004 ; 27 : 279 - 85 ; PMID : 15214632 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1078 / 0723 - 2020 - 00274 . 121 . Ehrmann MA , Korakli M , Vogel RF . Identification of the gene for β - fructofuranosidase of Bifidobacterium lactis DSM10140 ( T ) and characterization of the enzyme expressed in Escherichia coli . Curr Microbiol 2003 ; 46 : 391 - 7 ; PMID : 12732943 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00284 - 002 - 3908 - 1 . 122 . Rossi M , Corradini C , Amaretti A , Nicolini M , Pompei A , Zanoni S , et al . Fermentation of fructooligosaccha - rides and inulin by bifidobacteria : a comparative study of pure and fecal cultures . Appl Environ Microbiol 2005 ; 71 : 6150 - 8 ; PMID : 16204533 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 71 . 10 . 6150 - 8 . 2005 . 123 . Falony G , Lazidou K , Verschaeren A , Weckx S , Maes D , De Vuyst L . In vitro kinetic analysis of fermentation of prebiotic inulin - type fructans by Bifidobacterium species reveals four different phenotypes . Appl Environ Microbiol 2009 ; 75 : 454 - 61 ; PMID : 19011052 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 01488 - 08 . 124 . Falony G , Calmeyn T , Leroy F , De Vuyst L . Coculture fermentations of Bifidobacterium species and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron reveal a mechanistic insight into the prebiotic effect of inulin - type fructans . Appl Environ Microbiol 2009 ; 75 : 2312 - 9 ; PMID : 19251883 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 02649 - 08 . 125 . Davis LMG , Martínez I , Walter J , Hutkins R . A dose dependent impact of prebiotic galactooligosaccharides on the intestinal microbiota of healthy adults . Int J Food Microbiol 2010 ; 144 : 285 - 92 ; PMID : 21059476 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijfoodmicro . 2010 . 10 . 007 . 126 . Davis LMG , Martínez I , Walter J , Goin C , Hutkins RW . Barcoded pyrosequencing reveals that consump - tion of galactooligosaccharides results in a highly specific bifidogenic response in humans . PLoS One 2011 ; 6 : 25200 ; PMID : 21966454 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0025200 . 127 . Goulas T , Goulas A , Tzortzis G , Gibson GR . Comparative analysis of four beta - galactosidases from Bifidobacterium bifidum NCIMB41171 : purification and biochemical characterization . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2009 ; 82 : 1079 - 88 ; PMID : 19099301 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00253 - 008 - 1795 - 5 . 128 . Van den Abbeele P , Gérard P , Rabot S , Bruneau A , El Aidy S , Derrien M , et al . Arabinoxylans and inu - lin differentially modulate the mucosal and luminal gut microbiota and mucin - degradation in human - ized rats . Environ Microbiol 2011 ; 13 : 2667 - 80 ; PMID : 21883787 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2011 . 02533 . x . 129 . van den Broek LAM , Hinz SWA , Beldman G , Vincken JP , Voragen AGJ . Bifidobacterium carbohydrases - their role in breakdown and synthesis of ( poten - tial ) prebiotics . Mol Nutr Food Res 2008 ; 52 : 146 - 63 ; PMID : 18040988 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mnfr . 200700121 . 130 . Barboza M , Sela DA , Pirim C , Locascio RG , Freeman SL , German JB , et al . Glycoprofiling bifidobacte - rial consumption of galacto - oligosaccharides by mass spectrometry reveals strain - specific , preferential consumption of glycans . Appl Environ Microbiol 2009 ; 75 : 7319 - 25 ; PMID : 19801485 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 00842 - 09 . 131 . LoCascio RG , Ninonuevo MR , Freeman SL , Sela DA , Grimm R , Lebrilla CB , et al . Glycoprofiling of bifidobacterial consumption of human milk oligo - saccharides demonstrates strain specific , preferential consumption of small chain glycans secreted in early human lactation . J Agric Food Chem 2007 ; 55 : 8914 - 9 ; PMID : 17915960 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / jf0710480 . 107 . Sonnenburg ED , Sonnenburg JL , Manchester JK , Hansen EE , Chiang HC , Gordon JI . A hybrid two - component system protein of a prominent human gut symbiont couples glycan sensing in vivo to car - bohydrate metabolism . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006 ; 103 : 8834 - 9 ; PMID : 16735464 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0603249103 . 108 . Hehemann JH , Correc G , Barbeyron T , Helbert W , Czjzek M , Michel G . Transfer of carbohydrate - active enzymes from marine bacteria to Japanese gut micro - biota . Nature 2010 ; 464 : 908 - 12 ; PMID : 20376150 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature08937 . 109 . Lozupone CA , Hamady M , Cantarel BL , Coutinho PM , Henrissat B , Gordon JI , et al . The convergence of carbohydrate active gene repertoires in human gut microbes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008 ; 105 : 15076 - 81 ; PMID : 18806222 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0807339105 . 110 . Bottacini F , Medini D , Pavesi A , Turroni F , Foroni E , Riley D , et al . Comparative genomics of the genus Bifidobacterium . Microbiology 2010 ; 156 : 3243 - 54 ; PMID : 20634238 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1099 / mic . 0 . 039545 - 0 . 111 . Schell MA , Karmirantzou M , Snel B , Vilanova D , Berger B , Pessi G , et al . The genome sequence of Bifidobacterium longum reflects its adaptation to the human gastrointestinal tract . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002 ; 99 : 14422 - 7 ; PMID : 12381787 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 212527599 . 112 . Sela DA , Chapman J , Adeuya A , Kim JH , Chen F , Whitehead TR , et al . The genome sequence of Bifidobacterium longum subsp . infantis reveals adapta - tions for milk utilization within the infant micro - biome . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008 ; 105 : 18964 - 9 ; PMID : 19033196 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0809584105 . 113 . Zivkovic AM , German JB , Lebrilla CB , Mills DA . Human milk glycobiome and its impact on the infant gastrointestinal microbiota . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 4653 - 8 ; PMID : 20679197 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1000083107 . 114 . Crittenden R , Laitila A , Forssell P , Mättö J , Saarela M , Mattila - Sandholm T , et al . Adhesion of bifidobacteria to granular starch and its implications in probiotic technologies . Appl Environ Microbiol 2001 ; 67 : 3469 - 75 ; PMID : 11472921 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 67 . 8 . 3469 - 75 . 2001 . 115 . Ryan SM , Fitzgerald GF , van Sinderen D . Screening for and identification of starch - , amylopectin - and pullulan - degrading activities in bifidobacterial strains . Appl Environ Microbiol 2006 ; 72 : 5289 - 96 ; PMID : 16885278 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 00257 - 06 . 116 . O’Connell Motherway M , Fitzgerald GF , Neirynck S , Ryan S , Steidler L , van Sinderen D . Characterization of ApuB , an extracellular type II amylopullulanase from Bifidobacterium breve UCC2003 . Appl Environ Microbiol 2008 ; 74 : 6271 - 9 ; PMID : 18689518 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 01169 - 08 . 117 . Tannock GW , Munro K , Bibiloni R , Simon MA , Hargreaves P , Gopal P , et al . Impact of consump - tion of oligosaccharide - containing biscuits on the fecal microbiota of humans . Appl Environ Microbiol 2004 ; 70 : 2129 - 36 ; PMID : 15066805 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 70 . 4 . 2129 - 36 . 2004 . 118 . Costabile A , Kolida S , Klinder A , Gietl E , Bäuerlein M , Frohberg C , et al . A double - blind , placebo - controlled , cross - over study to establish the bifidogenic effect of a very - long - chain inulin extracted from globe artichoke ( Cynara scolymus ) in healthy human subjects . Br J Nutr 2010 ; 104 : 1007 - 17 ; PMID : 20591206 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0007114510001571 . 119 . Ryan SM , Fitzgerald GF , van Sinderen D . Transcriptional regulation and characterization of a novel beta - fructofuranosidase - encoding gene from Bifidobacterium breve UCC2003 . Appl Environ Microbiol 2005 ; 71 : 3475 - 82 ; PMID : 16000751 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 71 . 7 . 3475 - 82 . 2005 . 92 . Shipman JA , Berleman JE , Salyers AA . Characterization of four outer membrane proteins involved in binding starch to the cell surface of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron . J Bacteriol 2000 ; 182 : 5365 - 72 ; PMID : 10986238 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 182 . 19 . 5365 - 72 . 2000 . 93 . Shipman JA , Cho KH , Siegel HA , Salyers AA . Physiological characterization of SusG , an outer membrane protein essential for starch utilization by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron . J Bacteriol 1999 ; 181 : 7206 - 11 ; PMID : 10572122 . 94 . Tancula E , Feldhaus MJ , Bedzyk LA , Salyers AA . Location and characterization of genes involved in binding of starch to the surface of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron . J Bacteriol 1992 ; 174 : 5609 - 16 ; PMID : 1512196 . 95 . Koropatkin NM , Martens EC , Gordon JI , Smith TJ . Starch catabolism by a prominent human gut symbi - ont is directed by the recognition of amylose helices . Structure 2008 ; 16 : 1105 - 15 ; PMID : 18611383 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2008 . 03 . 017 . 96 . Schauer K , Rodionov DA , de Reuse H . New substrates for TonB - dependent transport : do we only see the ‘tip of the iceberg’ ? Trends Biochem Sci 2008 ; 33 : 331 - 8 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibs . 2008 . 04 . 012 . 97 . D’Elia JN , Salyers AA . Contribution of a neopullula - nase , a pullulanase and an α - glucosidase to growth of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron on starch . J Bacteriol 1996 ; 178 : 7173 - 9 ; PMID : 8955399 . 98 . Cho KH , Cho D , Wang GR , Salyers AA . New regula - tory gene that contributes to control of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron starch utilization genes . J Bacteriol 2001 ; 183 : 7198 - 205 ; PMID : 11717279 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 183 . 24 . 7198 - 205 . 2001 . 99 . Martens EC , Chiang HC , Gordon JI . Mucosal glycan foraging enhances fitness and transmission of a sac - charolytic human gut bacterial symbiont . Cell Host Microbe 2008 ; 4 : 447 - 57 ; PMID : 18996345 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2008 . 09 . 007 . 100 . Benjdia A , Martens EC , Gordon JI , Berteau O . Sulfatases and a radical S - adenosyl - L - methionine ( AdoMet ) enzyme are key for mucosal foraging and fit - ness of the prominent human gut symbiont , Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron . J Biol Chem 2011 ; 286 : 25973 - 82 ; PMID : 21507958 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M111 . 228841 . 101 . Sonnenburg ED , Zheng H , Joglekar P , Higginbottom SK , Firbank SJ , Bolam DN , et al . Specificity of polysaccharide use in intestinal bacteroides species determines diet - induced microbiota alterations . Cell 2010 ; 141 : 1241 - 52 ; PMID : 20603004 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 05 . 005 . 102 . Bjursell MK , Martens EC , Gordon JI . Functional genomic and metabolic studies of the adaptations of a prominent adult human gut symbiont , Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron , to the suckling period . J Biol Chem 2006 ; 281 : 36269 - 79 ; PMID : 16968696 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M606509200 . 103 . Xu J , Mahowald MA , Ley RE , Lozupone CA , Hamady M , Martens EC , et al . Evolution of symbiotic bacteria in the distal human intestine . PLoS Biol 2007 ; 5 : 156 ; PMID : 17579514 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050156 . 104 . Martens EC , Roth R , Heuser JE , Gordon JI . Coordinate regulation of glycan degradation and polysaccharide capsule biosynthesis by a prominent human gut symbiont . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 18445 - 57 ; PMID : 19403529 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 008094 . 105 . McBride MJ , Xie G , Martens EC , Lapidus A , Henrissat B , Rhodes RG , et al . Novel features of the poly - saccharide - digesting gliding bacterium Flavobacterium johnsoniae as revealed by genome sequence analy - sis . Appl Environ Microbiol 2009 ; 75 : 6864 - 75 ; PMID : 19717629 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 01495 - 09 . 106 . Koebnik R . TonB - dependent trans - envelope signal - ling : the exception or the rule ? Trends Microbiol 2005 ; 13 : 343 - 7 ; PMID : 15993072 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tim . 2005 . 06 . 005 . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e www . landesbioscience . com Gut Microbes 305 158 . Scott KP , Martin JC , Campbell G , Mayer CD , Flint HJ . Whole - genome transcription profiling reveals genes upregulated by growth on fucose in the human gut bacterium “ Roseburia inulinivorans ” . J Bacteriol 2006 ; 188 : 4340 - 9 ; PMID : 16740940 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / JB . 00137 - 06 . 159 . Hooper LV , Xu J , Falk PG , Midtvedt T , Gordon JI . A molecular sensor that allows a gut commensal to control its nutrient foundation in a competitive ecosystem . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 ; 96 : 9833 - 8 ; PMID : 10449780 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 17 . 9833 . 160 . Duncan SH , Louis P , Thomson JM , Flint HJ . The role of pH in determining the species composition of the human colonic microbiota . Environ Microbiol 2009 ; 11 : 2112 - 22 ; PMID : 19397676 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2009 . 01931 . x . 161 . Brinkworth GD , Noakes M , Clifton PM , Bird AR . Comparative effects of very low - carbohydrate , high - fat and high - carbohydrate , low - fat weight - loss diets on bowel habit and faecal short - chain fatty acids and bacterial populations . Br J Nutr 2009 ; 101 : 1493 - 502 ; PMID : 19224658 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0007114508094658 . 162 . Russell WR , Gratz SW , Duncan SH , Holtrop G , Ince J , Scobbie L , et al . High - protein , reduced - carbohydrate weight - loss diets promote metabolite profiles likely to be detrimental to colonic health . Am J Clin Nutr 2011 ; 93 : 1062 - 72 ; PMID : 21389180 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3945 / ajcn . 110 . 002188 . 163 . De Preter V , Falony G , Windey K , Hamer HM , De Vuyst L , Verbeke K . The prebiotic , oligofructose - enriched inulin modulates the faecal metabolite profile : an in vitro analysis . Mol Nutr Food Res 2010 ; 54 : 1791 - 801 ; PMID : 20568238 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mnfr . 201000136 . 164 . Scholz - Ahrens KE , Ade P , Marten B , Weber P , Timm W , Açil Y , et al . Prebiotics , probiotics and synbi - otics affect mineral absorption , bone mineral con - tent and bone structure . J Nutr 2007 ; 137 : 838 - 46 ; PMID : 17311984 . 165 . Smith KN , Queenan KM , Thomas W , Fulcher RG , Slavin JL . Physiological effects of concentrated barley beta - glucan in mildly hypercholesterolemic adults . J Am Coll Nutr 2008 ; 27 : 434 - 40 ; PMID : 18838533 . 166 . Lewis SJ , Heaton KW . Increasing butyrate concentra - tion in the distal colon by accelerating intestinal transit . Gut 1997 ; 41 : 245 - 51 ; PMID : 9301506 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / gut . 41 . 2 . 245 . 167 . Lampe JW , Slavin JL , Melcher EA , Potter JD . Effects of cereal and vegetable fiber feeding on potential risk factors for colon cancer . Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1992 ; 1 : 207 - 11 ; PMID : 1339081 . 168 . Pimentel M , Lin HC , Enayati P , van den Burg B , Lee HR , Chen JH , et al . Methane , a gas produced by enter - ic bacteria , slows intestinal transit and augments small intestinal contractile activity . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006 ; 290 : 1089 - 95 ; PMID : 16293652 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1152 / ajpgi . 00574 . 2004 . 169 . Hertog MGL , Hollman PCH , Katan MB , Kromhout D . Intake of potentially anticarcinogenic flavanoids and their determinants in adults in the Netherlands . Nutr Cancer - . Int J 1993 ; 20 : 21 - 9 . 170 . Roberfroid MB . Caloric value of inulin and oligofruc - tose . J Nutr 1999 ; 129 : 1436 - 7 ; PMID : 10395615 . 171 . Turnbaugh PJ , Ley RE , Mahowald MA , Magrini V , Mardis ER , Gordon JI . An obesity - associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy harvest . Nature 2006 ; 444 : 1027 - 31 ; PMID : 17183312 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature05414 . 172 . Flint HJ . Obesity and the gut microbiota . J Clin Gastroenterol 2011 ; 45 : 128 - 32 ; PMID : 21992951 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1097 / MCG . 0b013e31821f44c4 . 173 . Duncan SH , Lobley GE , Holtrop G , Ince J , Johnstone AM , Louis P , et al . Human colonic microbiota associ - ated with diet , obesity and weight loss . Int J Obes ( Lond ) 2008 ; 32 : 1720 - 4 ; PMID : 18779823 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ijo . 2008 . 155 . 145 . Duncan SH , Belenguer A , Holtrop G , Johnstone AM , Flint HJ , Lobley GE . Reduced dietary intake of carbohydrates by obese subjects results in decreased concentrations of butyrate and butyrate - producing bac - teria in feces . Appl Environ Microbiol 2007 ; 73 : 1073 - 8 ; PMID : 17189447 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 02340 - 06 . 146 . Ramsay AG , Scott KP , Martin JC , Rincon MT , Flint HJ . Cell - associated alpha - amylases of butyrate - producing Firmicute bacteria from the human colon . Microbiology 2006 ; 152 : 3281 - 90 ; PMID : 17074899 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1099 / mic . 0 . 29233 - 0 . 147 . Scott KP , Martin JC , Chassard C , Clerget M , Potrykus J , Campbell G , et al . Substrate - driven gene expression in Roseburia inulinivorans : importance of inducible enzymes in the utilization of inulin and starch . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 4672 - 9 ; PMID : 20679207 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1000091107 . 148 . Chassard C , Delmas E , Robert C , Lawson PA , Bernalier - Donadille A . Ruminococcus champanellensis sp nov . , a cellulose - degrading bacterium from human gut microbiota . Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2012 ; 62 : 138 - 43 ; PMID : 21357460 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1099 / ijs . 0 . 027375 - 0 . 149 . Wolin MJ , Miller TL , Collins MD , Lawson PA . Formate - dependent growth and homoacetogenic fer - mentation by a bacterium from human feces : descrip - tion of Bryantella formatexigens gen . nov . , sp nov . Appl Environ Microbiol 2003 ; 69 : 6321 - 6 ; PMID : 14532100 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 69 . 10 . 6321 - 6 . 2003 . 150 . Duncan SH , Hold GL , Barcenilla A , Stewart CS , Flint HJ . Roseburia intestinalis sp nov . , a novel sac - charolytic , butyrate - producing bacterium from human faeces . Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002 ; 52 : 1615 - 20 ; PMID : 12361264 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1099 / ijs . 0 . 02143 - 0 . 151 . Rumney CJ , Duncan SH , Henderson C , Stewart CS . Isolation and characteristics of a wheatbran - degrading Butyrivibrio from human faeces . Lett Appl Microbiol 1995 ; 20 : 232 - 6 ; PMID : 7766117 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1472 - 765X . 1995 . tb00435 . x . 152 . Kleessen B , Hartmann L , Blaut M . Oligofructose and long - chain inulin : influence on the gut microbial ecol - ogy of rats associated with a human faecal flora . Br J Nutr 2001 ; 86 : 291 - 300 ; PMID : 11502244 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1079 / BJN2001403 . 153 . Manderson K , Pinart M , Tuohy KM , Grace WE , Hotchkiss AT , Widmer W , et al . In vitro deter - mination of prebiotic properties of oligosaccharides derived from an orange juice manufacturing by - prod - uct stream . Appl Environ Microbiol 2005 ; 71 : 8383 - 9 ; PMID : 16332825 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 71 . 12 . 8383 - 9 . 2005 . 154 . Duncan SH , Scott KP , Ramsay AG , Harmsen HJM , Welling GW , Stewart CS , et al . Effects of alter - native dietary substrates on competition between human colonic bacteria in an anaerobic fermentor system . Appl Environ Microbiol 2003 ; 69 : 1136 - 42 ; PMID : 12571040 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 69 . 2 . 1136 - 42 . 2003 . 155 . Walker AW , Duncan SH , McWilliam Leitch EC , Child MW , Flint HJ . pH and peptide supply can radi - cally alter bacterial populations and short - chain fatty acid ratios within microbial communities from the human colon . Appl Environ Microbiol 2005 ; 71 : 3692 - 700 ; PMID : 16000778 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 71 . 7 . 3692 - 700 . 2005 . 156 . Scott KP , Duncan SH , Louis P , Flint HJ . Nutritional influences on the gut microbiota and the consequences for gastrointestinal health . Biochem Soc Trans 2011 ; 39 : 1073 - 78 ; PMID : 21787350 . 157 . Hoskins LC . Mucin degradation in the human gastro - intestinal tract and its significance to enteric microbial ecology . Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1993 ; 5 : 205 - 13 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1097 / 00042737 - 199304000 - 00004 . 132 . Garrido D , Kim JH , German JB , Raybould HE , Mills DA . Oligosaccharide binding proteins from Bifidobacterium longum subsp . infantis reveal a prefer - ence for host glycans . PLoS One 2011 ; 6 : 17315 ; PMID : 21423604 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0017315 . 133 . Boesten R , Schuren F , Ben Amor K , Haarman M , Knol J , de Vos WM . Bifidobacterium population analysis in the infant gut by direct mapping of genomic hybrid - ization patterns : potential for monitoring temporal development and effects of dietary regimens . Microb Biotechnol 2011 ; 4 : 417 - 27 ; PMID : 21375714 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1751 - 7915 . 2010 . 00216 . x . 134 . Turroni F , Bottacini F , Foroni E , Mulder I , Kim JH , Zomer A , et al . Genome analysis of Bifidobacterium bifidum PRL2010 reveals metabolic pathways for host - derived glycan foraging . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 ; 107 : 19514 - 9 ; PMID : 20974960 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1011100107 . 135 . Barcenilla A , Pryde SE , Martin JC , Duncan SH , Stewart CS , Henderson C , et al . Phylogenetic rela - tionships of butyrate - producing bacteria from the human gut . Appl Environ Microbiol 2000 ; 66 : 1654 - 61 ; PMID : 10742256 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 66 . 4 . 1654 - 61 . 2000 . 136 . Louis P , Flint HJ . Diversity , metabolism and micro - bial ecology of butyrate - producing bacteria from the human large intestine . FEMS Microbiol Lett 2009 ; 294 : 1 - 8 ; PMID : 19222573 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1574 - 6968 . 2009 . 01514 . x . 137 . Duncan SH , Louis P , Flint HJ . Lactate - utilizing bacte - ria , isolated from human feces , that produce butyrate as a major fermentation product . Appl Environ Microbiol 2004 ; 70 : 5810 - 7 ; PMID : 15466518 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 70 . 10 . 5810 - 7 . 2004 . 138 . Bernalier A , Willems A , Leclerc M , Rochet V , Collins MD . Ruminococcus hydrogenotrophicus sp nov . , a new H 2 / CO 2 - utilizing bacterium from human feces . Arch Microbiol 1996 ; 166 : 176 - 83 ; PMID : 8703194 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s002030050373 . 139 . Rey FE , Faith JJ , Bain J , Muehlbauer MJ , Stevens RD , Newgard CB , et al . Dissecting the in vivo metabolic potential of two human gut acetogens . J Biol Chem 2010 ; 285 : 22082 - 90 ; PMID : 20444704 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 117713 . 140 . Abell GCJ , Cooke CM , Bennett CN , Conlon MA , McOrist AL . Phylotypes related to Ruminococcus bromii are abundant in the large bowel of humans and increase in response to a diet high in resistant starch . FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2008 ; 66 : 505 - 15 ; PMID : 18616586 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1574 - 6941 . 2008 . 00527 . x . 141 . Martínez I , Kim J , Duffy PR , Schlegel VL , Walter J . Resistant starches types 2 and 4 have differential effects on the composition of the fecal microbiota in human subjects . PLoS One 2010 ; 5 : 15046 ; PMID : 21151493 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0015046 . 142 . Kovatcheva - Datchary P , Egert M , Maathuis A , Rajilic - Stojanovic M , de Graaf AA , Smidt H , et al . Linking phylogenetic identities of bacteria to starch fermenta - tion in an in vitro model of the large intestine by RNA - based stable isotope probing . Environ Microbiol 2009 ; 11 : 914 - 26 ; PMID : 19128319 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1462 - 2920 . 2008 . 01815 . x . 143 . Lopez - Siles M , Khan TM , Duncan SH , Harmsen HJM , Garcia - Gil LJ , Flint HJ . Cultured representa - tives of two major phylogroups of human colonic Faecalibacterium prausnitzii can utilize pectin , uronic acids and host - derived substrates for growth . Appl Environ Microbiol 2012 ; 78 : 420 - 8 ; PMID : 22101049 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 06858 - 11 . 144 . Aminov RI , Walker AW , Duncan SH , Harmsen HJM , Welling GW , Flint HJ . Molecular diversity , cultivation and improved detection by fluorescent in situ hybridiza - tion of a dominant group of human gut bacteria related to Roseburia spp or Eubacterium rectale . Appl Environ Microbiol 2006 ; 72 : 6371 - 6 ; PMID : 16957265 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / AEM . 00701 - 06 . © 2012 Lande s B i o sc i en c e . D o no t d i s t r i bu t e 306 Gut Microbes volume 3 issue 4 181 . Arora T , Sharma R , Frost G . Propionate . Anti - obesity and satiety enhancing factor ? Appetite 2011 ; 56 : 511 - 5 ; PMID : 21255628 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . appet . 2011 . 01 . 016 . 182 . Canani RB , Costanzo MD , Leone L , Pedata M , Meli R , Calignano A . Potential beneficial effects of butyr - ate in intestinal and extraintestinal diseases . World J Gastroenterol 2011 ; 17 : 1519 - 28 ; PMID : 21472114 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3748 / wjg . v17 . i12 . 1519 . 183 . Gao Z , Yin J , Zhang J , Ward RE , Martin RJ , Lefevre M , et al . Butyrate improves insulin sensitivity and increases energy expenditure in mice . Diabetes 2009 ; 58 : 1509 - 17 ; PMID : 19366864 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2337 / db08 - 1637 . 184 . Bienenstock J , Collins S . 99 th Dahlem conference on infection , inflammation and chronic inflamma - tory disorders : psycho - neuroimmunology and the intestinal microbiota : clinical observations and basic mechanisms . Clin Exp Immunol 2010 ; 160 : 85 - 91 ; PMID : 20415856 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2249 . 2010 . 04124 . x . 185 . Bercik P , Denou E , Collins J , Jackson W , Lu J , Jury J , et al . The intestinal microbiota affect cen - tral levels of brain - derived neurotropic factor and behavior in mice . Gastroenterology 2011 ; 141 : 599 - 609 ; PMID : 21683077 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1053 / j . gastro . 2011 . 04 . 052 . 186 . Jarchum I , Pamer EG . Regulation of innate and adap - tive immunity by the commensal microbiota . Curr Opin Immunol 2011 ; 23 : 353 - 60 ; PMID : 21466955 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . coi . 2011 . 03 . 001 . 187 . Muñoz - Tamayo R , Laroche B , Walter E , Doré J , Leclerc M . Mathematical modelling of carbohydrate degradation by human colonic microbiota . J Theor Biol 2010 ; 266 : 189 - 201 ; PMID : 20561534 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2010 . 05 . 040 . 174 . Jumpertz R , Le DS , Turnbaugh PJ , Trinidad C , Bogardus C , Gordon JI , et al . Energy - balance stud - ies reveal associations between gut microbes , caloric load and nutrient absorption in humans . Am J Clin Nutr 2011 ; 94 : 58 - 65 ; PMID : 21543530 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3945 / ajcn . 110 . 010132 . 175 . Bäckhed F , Ding H , Wang T , Hooper LV , Koh GY , Nagy A , et al . The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat storage . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004 ; 101 : 15718 - 23 ; PMID : 15505215 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0407076101 . 176 . Fleissner CK , Huebel N , Abd El - Bary MM , Loh G , Klaus S , Blaut M . Absence of intestinal microbiota does not protect mice from diet - induced obesity . Br J Nutr 2010 ; 104 : 919 - 29 ; PMID : 20441670 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0007114510001303 . 177 . Delzenne NM , Cani PD . Gut microbiota and the pathogenesis of insulin resistance . Curr Diab Rep 2011 ; 11 : 154 - 9 ; PMID : 21431853 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s11892 - 011 - 0191 - 1 . 178 . Cani PD , Delzenne NM . The gut microbiome as therapeutic target . Pharmacol Ther 2011 ; 130 : 202 - 12 ; PMID : 21295072 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . phar - mthera . 2011 . 01 . 012 . 179 . Vrieze A , Holleman F , Zoetendal EG , de Vos WM , Hoekstra JB , Nieuwdorp M . The environment within : how gut microbiota may influence metabolism and body composition . Diabetologia 2010 ; 53 : 606 - 13 ; PMID : 20101384 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00125 - 010 - 1662 - 7 . 180 . Sleeth ML , Thompson EL , Ford HE , Zac - Varghese SE , Frost G . Free fatty acid receptor 2 and nutrient sensing : a proposed role for fibre , fermentable carbohydrates and short - chain fatty acids in appetite regulation . Nutr Res Rev 2010 ; 23 : 135 - 45 ; PMID : 20482937 ; http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0954422410000089 .