Analogical Processes in Children’s Understanding of Spatial Representations Lei Yuan , David Uttal , and Dedre Gentner Northwestern University We propose that map reading can be construed as a form of analogical mapping . We tested 2 predictions that follow from this claim : First , young children’s patterns of performance in map reading tasks should parallel those found in analogical mapping tasks ; and , second , children will benefit from guided alignment instructions that help them see the relational correspondences between the map and the space . In 4 experiments , 3 - year - olds completed a map reading task in which they were asked to find hidden objects in a miniature room , using a corresponding map . We manipulated the availability of guided alignment ( showing children the analogical mapping between maps and spaces ; Experiments 1 , 2 , and 3a ) , the format of guided alignment ( gesture or relational language ; Experiment 2 ) , and the iconicity of maps ( Experiments 3a and 3b ) . We found that ( a ) young children’s difficulties in map reading follow from known patterns of analogical development—for example , focusing on object similarity over relational similarity ; and ( b ) guided alignment based on analogical reasoning led to substantially better performance . Results also indicated that children’s map reading performance was affected by the format of guided alignment , the iconicity of the maps , and the order of tasks . The results bear on the developmental mechanisms underlying young children’s learning of spatial representations and also suggest ways to support this learning . Keywords : analogy , symbol , iconicity , map reading , developmental An important characteristic of human spatial cognition is the ability to create and use spatial representations ( Bluestein & Acredolo , 1979 ; Liben & Downs , 1989 , 1993 ) . External representations such as maps and models allow us to acquire spatial information beyond the bound - aries of our personal experiences and substantially augment the ca - pacities of our spatial cognition ( Liben , 2009 ; Uttal , 2000 ; Wood & Fels , 1992 ) . However , studies have shown that young children are often unable to use spatial representations , such as maps and scale models , to locate hidden objects in a corresponding space ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; DeLoache , 1987 , 1989 ; DeLoache , Kolstad , & Ander - son , 1991 ; but see Huttenlocher , Newcombe , & Vasilyeva , 1999 ; Shusterman , Lee , & Spelke , 2008 ; Winkler - Rhoades , Carey , & Spelke , 2013 ) . Even some adults have difficulty using maps to nav - igate in unfamiliar environments ( Liben , 2009 ) . It is therefore impor - tant to understand how the ability to comprehend maps and other spatial representations emerges during development . Spatial representations , such as maps , use the spatial rela - tionships among perceptual symbols to represent the spatial relationships among physical places in the corresponding envi - ronment ( DeLoache , 1989 ; Liben , 1999 ; Plumert & Nichols - Whitehead , 2007 ; Vosmik & Presson , 2004 ) . For example , two black dots on a map of the United States can stand for New York and Chicago , as long as the relative spatial relation between these two cities is preserved on the map , even though these dots share no object similarity with the real cities . Even the actual distance between two cities on a map does not match the distance in the referent space ; however , what matters is that the relative distance is preserved : If Chicago is twice as far from a third city as is New York in the space , then the same relative distance will be true in the map . In other words , the essential resemblance between a map and its referent space is in the relational similarity between the spatial structure of the map and that of the space ( Gattis , 2002 ) . However , young children often do not appreciate this fundamental characteristic of spatial representations , instead relying on object similarity when draw - ing connections between spatial symbols and their referents . Research on children’s map reading has shown that children initially focus on the object similarity between maps and spaces , even though most maps involve the use of noniconic symbols—representations that do not directly resemble their referent spaces ( Werner & Kaplan , 1963 ) . For instance , Liben and Downs ( 1989 ) asked children to identify features on maps or aerial photographs of geographic areas ( e . g . , a map of Pennsylvania or an aerial photograph of Chicago ) . They found that children often focused on object matches : For example , one child claimed that a line on a map could not represent a road , because the line was too narrow to accommodate a car . Hence , a critical conceptual leap that children have to achieve in understanding maps and other spatial representations is to shift focus from object similarity to relational similarity . It is thus important to understand when and how children can use these different kinds of similarities to establish correspondences be - tween spatial representations and spaces ( Loewenstein & Gent - ner , 2001 ) . This article was published Online First March 30 , 2017 . Lei Yuan , David Uttal , and Dedre Gentner , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University . This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant SBE - 1041707 to the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center ( SILC ) . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Lei Yuan , who is now at Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences , Indiana University , 1101 East 10th Street , Bloomington , IN 47405 . E - mail : leiyuan @ indian . edu T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Developmental Psychology © 2017 American Psychological Association 2017 , Vol . 53 , No . 6 , 1098 – 1114 0012 - 1649 / 17 / $ 12 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / dev0000302 1098 In this work , we adopt the theoretical framework of analogical mapping to explain how children establish different kinds of correspondences between maps and their referents . We propose that map reading involves a process of analogical reasoning , dur - ing which a map - reader aligns the relative spatial structure of the map with the relative spatial structure of the space . If so , then applying theory and research on the development of analogical comparison can shed light on when and how young children connect ( or fail to connect ) maps with their referent spaces ; this approach can also suggest ways to support children’s map learn - ing . Thus , our chief hypothesis is that analogical processes are centrally involved in connecting a map with its referent space . Two sets of predictions follow from this general hypothesis . First , we would expect the development of map reading to show the same patterns as in the development of analogical mapping more gen - erally . Second , we would expect that guiding children to establish a relational alignment between maps and spaces should improve their understanding of maps . We next review analogical develop - ment , and then turn to the idea of guided alignment . Analogical Development Research on the development of analogy and similarity has revealed that children initially rely on object similarity to establish correspondences and only gradually start to appreciate relational similarity ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Richland , Morrison , & Holyoak , 2006 ) . Although young chil - dren 1 —even 3 - year - olds—can show sensitivity to relational in - formation in some contexts ( Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 ; Mar - zolf , DeLoache , & Kolstad , 1999 ) , this ability is fragile and is strongly influenced by whether there are also object matches . In general , research on young children’s relational reasoning shows a developmental pattern that gradually changes from relying on object similarity to appreciating relational similarity , a phenome - non that has been termed the relational shift ( Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Medina , 1998 ) . Further , children who can succeed in a relational mapping under ideal circumstances often fail when there are inconsistent object matches ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Paik & Mix , 2006 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) . This early reliance on object matches manifests itself in three ways : the overall similarity effect , the cross - mapping effect , and the progressive alignment effect . Both of the first two effects can be seen in a story - mapping task conducted by Gentner and Toupin ( 1986 ) . Six - and 9 - year - old children were told a story and acted it out with stuffed animals . They were then asked to retell the story with new animals , which varied in similarity to the first three . Both age groups were highly accurate in the overall similarity condition , in which the new characters resembled the corresponding initial characters ( e . g . , the initial “hero” was a goose and the new one was a swan ) . Their performance was worse when the three new animals were totally dissimilar from the first set . But the worst perfor - mance was in the cross - mapping condition , in which similar ob - jects occupied different relational roles : for example , goose (cid:2) raccoon , panda (cid:2) monkey , and chimpanzee (cid:2) swan . In a cross - mapping task , object similarity and relational similarity are pitted against each other , so if children rely on object matches to estab - lish correspondences , they would perform poorly in this condition . As predicted , younger children performed extremely poorly in the cross - mapping condition ; they were unable to set aside object similarity and attend to the plot structure . Older children were better able to achieve a relational mapping despite the competing object matches . This study illustrates a general point about analogical develop - ment : Early in learning , children’s performance benefits from having similar objects in similar roles , and is harmed by having similar objects in different relational roles ( cross - mapping ) . These patterns are also seen in perceptual analogy tasks . For example , Gentner and Rattermann ( 1991 ) gave 3 - , 4 - , and 5 - year - olds a perceptual analogy task ( see Figure 1 ) in which the experimenter and the child each had a set of three objects , arranged in order of size ( e . g . , large , medium , and small clay pots ) . Children watched the experimenter hide a sticker under one of the objects in her set ; then , they searched for their own sticker , which was always hidden under the relationally corresponding object ( i . e . , the object with the same relative size ) . Three - year - olds succeeded when identical objects occupied the same relational roles ( Figure 1 , bottom row ) , but performed poorly in the cross - mapping condition ( Figure 1 , top row ) , in which identical objects occupied different relational roles . Despite being shown the correct answer after every trial , children often chose on the basis of object similarity , rather than mapping on the basis of relational role ( relative size ) . As predicted by the relational shift hypothesis , 4 - and 5 - year - olds were better able to map on the basis of relational similarity . However , when 3 - year - olds were invited to think about the decreasing size relational pattern within each set ( by describing both sets as “Daddy , Mommy , Baby” ) , their performance was dramatically better ( Rat - termann & Gentner , 1998 ) —evidence for the importance of rela - tional knowledge in bringing about the relational shift . The third important pattern concerning children’s early reliance on object matches in relational thinking is progressive alignment ( Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . This refers to the phenomenon whereby children who carry out an overall similarity match ( in which object similarity supports the relational alignment ) are then better able to succeed on a purely relational match with the same underlying structure than children who have not had this experi - ence ( Goldstone & Son , 2005 ; Haryu , Imai , & Okada , 2011 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 ) . For example , Kotovsky and Gentner ( 1996 ) found that children who first compared patterns that were symmetric on the same dimen - sion , such as size ( as in X Œ X and (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) ) , subsequently performed better on less similar examples of symmetry , such as a cross - dimensional match between size symmetry and color symmetry ( as in X Œ X and (cid:2) □ (cid:2) ) . This suggests that the close comparisons , which are easy to align , can render the common relational structure more salient , making it easier to perceive that common structure in more dissimilar examples . Guided Alignment Our second set of predictions is that helping children to establish a relational alignment between maps and spaces can support their 1 The ability to abstract a common relational pattern from a series of alignable examples is present even in 7 - to 9 - month - old infants ( Ferry , Hespos , & Gentner , 2015 ) ; however , only much later are children able to carry out a relational mapping between pairs of items without prior op - portunity to abstract the relation from multiple alignable examples . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1099 ANALOGY AND MAP READING understanding of maps . Previous research has shown that young children have considerable difficulty in interpreting maps . For example , children often do not spontaneously rotate maps that are misaligned with their referent spaces ( Vosmik & Presson , 2004 ) , even though they find it difficult to interpret misaligned maps ( Bluestein & Acredolo , 1979 ; Liben & Yekel , 1996 ; Uttal , Gregg , Tan , Chamberlin , & Sines , 2001 ) , suggesting that they may not understand the need to establish correspondences between the map and the space . Even when a map is physically aligned with the referent space , young children may fail to establish alignment on the basis of common spatial relations ( Liben , 1999 ; Liben & Downs , 1993 ; see also Blades & Cooke , 1994 ; DeLoache , 1987 , 1989 ) . However , research has shown that children can benefit from adults’ guidance in these kinds of complex learning situations ( Honomichl & Chen , 2006 , 2012 ) . Thus , in the current study , we designed a novel intervention— guided alignment —to help chil - dren carry out the analogy between maps and space . According to the structure - mapping theory ( Forbus , Ferguson , Lovett , & Gent - ner , 2016 ; Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) , two key characteristics of analogical mapping are ( a ) one - to - one corre - spondence between the elements of the two analogs , and ( b ) parallel relational structure between the two representations . This suggests two ways to support the alignment between maps and spaces : ( a ) by showing the correspondences between symbols in the map and objects in the space , and ( b ) by showing the parallel relational structure between the map and the space . In the studies that follow , we explore ways to use gesture and language to achieve these two aims ( see Table 1 ) . To help children establish correspondences between the map and space , we used gestures in Experiments 1 and 3a and language in Experiment 2 . Prior research suggests that the effective use of gesture can facilitate relational reasoning . For example , Richland , Zur , and Holyoak ( 2007 ) provided correlational evidence that gesture can be effective in promoting understanding of analogies . They analyzed videotapes of math classes from the United States , Hong Kong , and Japan , and found that differences in the degree to which teachers used gestures and other means of clarifying the correspondences between analogous math problems were predic - tive of students’ performance . In particular , teachers often use gestures ( e . g . , pointing ) to link related ideas in classroom instruc - tions ( Alibali et al . , 2014 ) . Research has suggested that this type of linking gesture can provide visual cues to help learners see the connection between two analogs ( Alibali et al . , 2014 ; Richland & McDonough , 2010 ; Richland & Simms , 2015 ) . Thus , the current study deployed a type of gesture that we will call a correspondence gesture —pointing back and forth between the corresponding ele - ments within the analogs to highlight the correspondences . An - other way to help children establish analogical correspondences is through language ( Gentner , Anggoro , & Klibanoff , 2011 ; Ratter - mann & Gentner , 1998 ) —for example , by using the same term for the map symbol ( e . g . , “road” ) as for the referent object . The second aspect of analogical mapping is establishing parallel relational structure . Here , too , language can be helpful in guiding children . There is considerable evidence that relational language can help children notice and encode spatial relations ( Casasola , 2005 ; Gentner , Özyürek , Gürcanli , & Goldin - Meadow , 2013 ; Hermer - Vazquez , Spelke , & Katsnelson , 1999 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ; Son & Goldstone , 2010 ; see Gentner & Christie , 2010 , for a review ) . For example , in the Gentner and Rattermann’s ( 1991 ) perceptual analogy task discussed earlier , 3 - year - olds per - formed far better on a challenging mapping task when each set was described in the same relational language—“Daddy , Mommy , Baby . ” It seems likely that this language conferred two benefits . First , as discussed above , hearing the same term ( e . g . , “Daddy” ) for objects in both sets may have helped children establish object correspondences . Second , applying the familiar relational pattern Figure 1 . Stimulus sets used in Gentner and Rattermann ( 1991 ) . The numbers indicate identical objects ; the circle shows the correct mapping , given that the experimenter had chosen the middle object . Adapted from “Language and the Career of Similarity ( p . 246 ) , ” by D . Gentner and M . J . Rattermann , 1991 , in S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 – 277 ) , New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Table 1 Guided Structural Alignment : Techniques for Fostering Parallel Relational Structure and One - to - One Correspondence Across the Three Studies Experiment Conditions One - to - one correspondence Parallel relational structure E1 Guided alignment Correspondence gestures “Between” “First , second , third” “First , second , third” Control None None E2 Gesture Correspondence gestures Relational gestures Language “First , second , third” “Between” ; “First , second , third” E3a Guided alignment Correspondence gestures Relational gestures Control None None T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1100 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER ( “Daddy , Mommy , Baby” ) might have helped children encode the parallel relational structure of decreasing size . Gesture is another symbolic tool that has been shown to help children focus on a relational pattern within a single representation ( Novack , Congdon , Hemani - Lopez , & Goldin - Meadow , 2014 ) . For example , Goldin - Meadow , Cook , and Mitchell ( 2009 ) helped elementary school students to solve mathematical equivalence problems by using an abstract gesture ( producing a V - point gesture to the two numbers on the left side of an equation followed by a point at the blank on the right side ) . This abstract gesture high - lighted the critical relational structure embedded in the problems to children , leading to better performance on the tasks . Studies have also shown that adults can use newly learned relational gestures to infer the meaning of novel relational gestures ( Gattis , 2004 ) . In the current studies , we tested whether using parallel relational gesture in map and space can serve to highlight their common spatial structure . Current Study Our chief hypothesis is that analogical processes are centrally involved in children’s understanding of maps . In Experiment 1 , we tested two predictions that follow from this central hypothesis . First , early in learning , children should focus strongly on objects , and therefore they should have great difficulty when the object matches between the map and the space are inconsistent with the relational alignment ( i . e . , cross - mapping ) compared with the case when the object matches are consistent with the relational align - ment . Second , children’s map understanding can be improved by guiding them through the analogical mapping between the map and the space . To test these predictions , in Experiment 1 , we gave children maps varying in predicted difficulty and varied whether the children received guided - alignment training . In subsequent studies , we also asked what kinds of gestural and linguistic support were most effective for this purpose , across maps of different levels of iconicity . Experiment 1 Method We gave children two different mapping tasks varying in diffi - culty . Both tasks were intended to be somewhat challenging , to permit testing the efficacy of guided alignment . In the first task ( identical - items task ) , we used iconic map symbols that resembled their referents in the space ( Figure 2 , Set A1 ) . All three objects in the room were alike ( and hence the three map symbols were also identical to each other ) . If we had used three distinctive objects and their iconic symbols , children could have relied on object similar - ity to draw correspondences ( Blades & Cooke , 1994 ) . Thus , our design allowed us to determine whether children could connect the maps and spaces on the basis of relational similarity . In the second task ( cross - mapping task ) , the elements on the map were cross - mapped with those in the room ; that is , each element on the map resembled a noncorresponding object in the room ( Figure 2 , Set A2 ) . To minimize the influence of other factors ( e . g . , scaling , rotation ) on children’s understanding , we used maps of the same size as their referent environment ( miniature rooms ) and presented maps and rooms physically aligned . Children were asked to search for hidden objects in the room after the experimenter showed their locations on the map . The second factor in this study was guided alignment . We contrasted a guided alignment group , which received guided align - ment based on correspondence gestures and relational language , with a control group that received the same mapping task without Figure 2 . Proportion of correct responses for the identical - items task and the cross - mapping task across all experiments , with their corresponding room and map ( Sets A1 and A2 were for Experiments 1 and 2 ; Sets B1 and B2 were for Experiment 3a and 3b ) . Exp (cid:2) experiment ; Identical (cid:2) identical - items task ; Xmap (cid:2) cross - mapping task . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1101 ANALOGY AND MAP READING this intervention . Table 1 shows how different interventions were used to foster one - to - one correspondence and parallel relational structure . Both groups were given the same two tasks , in the same order : the identical - items task followed by the cross - mapping task . 2 We hypothesized that children in the guided - alignment condition would perform better in the search tasks than those in the control condition . Thus , the design was 2 ( condition , between - subject ) (cid:3) 2 ( task , within - subject ) . In the guided - alignment condition , we aimed to convey two essential properties of analogical mapping : one - to - one correspon - dences between map elements and space elements , and parallel relational structure ( see Table 1 ) . To convey the correspondences , we used back - and - forth gestures , as illustrated below . To convey the parallel relational structure in map and space , we used rela - tional language . Our choice of relational language was based on several considerations . We did not use spatial terms such as left and right to convey the left - middle - right spatial pattern , because the correct use of left and right does not emerge until about 7 years of age ( Clark & Klonoff , 1990 ; Craton , Elicker , Plumert , & Pick , 1990 ; Rigal , 1994 ; Shusterman et al . , 2008 ) . Instead , we used the spatial term between , which denotes the spatial relationship be - tween a target object and two referents . Although only a few studies have investigated children’s understanding of the term “between , ” there is some evidence suggesting that 3 - year - olds can identify target objects upon hearing descriptions using the word “between” ( Durkin , 1983 ; Foster & Hund , 2012 ; Simms & Gent - ner , 2008 ; Washington & Naremore , 1978 ) . We also used the numeral terms first , second , and third to convey the left - middle - right order of elements in the map and the room . There is evidence that 3 - year - old children know the count list at least as far as 1 , 2 , 3 ( Carey , 1998 ; Fuson , 1988 ; Wynn , 1990 ) , and that they can apply this ordinal structure to a spatial array ( Gentner & Christie , 2006 ) . Miller , Marcovitch , Boseovski , and Lewkowicz ( 2015 ) recently showed that young children can use ordinal terms ( first , second , third ) to encode locations in a spatial memory task , al - though performance was better using labels that emphasized fea - ture information ( e . g . , color ) . Even though studies have suggested that children do not have to fully understand the meaning of spatial terms to utilize the relational structures they convey in encoding spatial relations ( Dessalegn & Landau , 2008 ) , we caution that preschoolers are still in the process of acquiring many relational terms , which may limit the effectiveness of relational language in conveying spatial structures . Participants . The participants were 35 preschool children ( 16 boys and 19 girls ) , with an average age of 38 months ( range (cid:2) 35 – 43 months ) . Children were randomly assigned to either the guided - alignment condition ( n (cid:2) 17 ; male (cid:2) 7 ) or the control condition ( n (cid:2) 18 ; male (cid:2) 9 ) . A prior power analysis was conducted using G (cid:2) Power 3 . 1 ( Faul , Erdfelder , Lang , & Buchner , 2007 ) , suggesting that a sample size of 30 participants is adequate to achieve 80 % power with a medium effect size . Materials . The study took place in a laboratory designed for testing young children . Children sat on a chair in front of a small table on which the miniature rooms and maps were presented . The experimenter sat on the diagonal side of the table and always gave instructions from the perspective of the child . Two miniature rooms and their corresponding maps were used ( see Figure 2 ) : Room A1 for the identical - items task and Room A2 for the cross - mapping task . The rooms were made from foam core board with a dimension of 12 in . (cid:3) 12 in . , and a height of 1 in . Three identical chairs were placed in Room A1 , each roughly 3 in . tall and 2 in . wide . The corresponding map for Room A1 was roughly the same size as the room ( 12 in . (cid:3) 12 in . ) , with three identical chairs as well . The chairs on the map , made from photographs of the chairs in Room A1 , were the same color and size as the real chairs in the room . In Room A2 , there were three pieces of furniture from different categories—a chair , a nightstand , and a table . The furniture was roughly 3 in . tall and 2 in . wide . The spatial locations of these three pieces of furniture were mis - matched with their identities between Room A2 and its corre - sponding map . Specifically , on the map of Room A2 , the three pieces of furniture from left to right were nightstand , table , and chair , whereas the order in the room was chair , nightstand , and table ( see Figure 2 ) . Two magnetic sheets were cut to resemble the shape of bones , and six other magnetic sheets were glued at the bottom of all pieces of furniture to provide hiding locations . A stuffed dog was used to introduce the background story . Procedure . Orientation . An experimenter introduced a stuffed dog to the child and told the child that the doggie liked to hide his bones underneath the furniture in the room . She then invited the child to play a hide - and - find game—she would show them on the map where the doggie had hidden his bone , and the child would help to find the bone in the room . Learning phase . Children in the guided - alignment group learned about the maps of the rooms ( both Room A1 and Room A2 ) through guided alignment , whereas the control group did not . Guided - alignment condition . The experimenter first intro - duced Room A1 3 to the children using ordered numerical language ( “first , second , third” ) . Specifically , the experimenter said , “There are three chairs in the room—the first chair , the second chair , and the third chair , ” while pointing to each of them in sequence . The experimenter then invited children to examine the bottom of each chair by saying , “Let’s look at the first ( second / third ) chair—does it have a bone underneath it ? ” After this , the experimenter intro - duced the map , by saying , “There are three chairs on the map , too—the first map chair , the second map chair , and the third map chair , ” while pointing to each of them in sequence ( see Figure 3 for an illustration of these and other procedures , and the Appendix for all instructions ) . 2 In the first three studies , the identical - items task ( which was predicted to be easier ) preceded the cross - mapping task ( which was predicted to be difficult ) . This was done to allow testing the prediction that the cross - mapping task would be more difficult than the identical - items task . Be - cause the two tasks involve the same relational mapping , the second task should be boosted by progressive alignment . Thus , had the identical - items task come second , any advantage found for this task over the cross - mapping task would have been uninterpretable—it could stem from the inherent difficulty of the tasks , or from their order in the sequence . By placing the cross - mapping task second ( so that it gains the advantage of progressive alignment ) , we can interpret a decrement in performance from identical - items to cross - mapping as evidence for the greater difficulty of cross - mapping over identical - items . 3 In this and all other studies , we first introduced the room with its three items , and then the map with its three symbols . After that , in giving the more detailed connections between the map and the room , we always began with the map . This was done in order to better fit the child’s ( later ) task , which was to project from the map to the room . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1102 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER Next , the experimenter used a combination of back - and - forth correspondence gestures and relational language to show the one - to - one correspondence and parallel relational structure between the map and the room ( see Table 1 ) . For example , the experimenter said , “The first ( second / third ) map chair goes with the first ( sec - ond / third ) chair in the room , ” while pointing to each of them in sequence . The experimenter also used the relational term “be - tween” to further show the parallel spatial structure between the map and the room . Specifically , the experimenter said , “The sec - ond map chair is in between the first map chair and the third map chair on the map , and the second chair is in between the first chair and the third chair in the room , too , ” while pointing and gesturing to the respective spaces . To show the one - to - one correspondences , the experimenter then used back - and - forth correspondence ges - tures : “Do you see , this chair [ pointing to the middle chair on the map ] and this chair [ pointing to the middle chair in the room ] are in the very same place ? ” [ pointing back - and - forth ] . To make sure that children understood the instructions , the experimenter then asked , “Where does this one go in the room ? ” for two of the items ( first and third map chair ) . The experimenter corrected children no more than three times if they answered incorrectly . Only one child failed . Control condition . The experimenter introduced the room by saying , “There are three chairs in this room—here , here , and here , ” while pointing to each of them . As in the guided - alignment condition , the experimenter invited children to ex - amine each chair to see if there was a bone underneath . The experimenter then introduced the map of the room by saying , “There are three chairs on the map , too , here , here and here . The map looks just like the room . ” Although the experimenter did not point out the structural alignment between the map and the room , they were always physically aligned in front of the children ( see Figure 4 ) . Test phase . The experimenter showed children where a bone was on the map and asked them to search for the bone in the room by saying , “Remember they are always hidden in the same places . ” Children were asked to cover their eyes while the experimenter was hiding the bone . The experimenter also used a curtain to prevent children from peeking . Children from both conditions were asked to complete six trials of the identical - items task . Then , Figure 3 . A schematic illustration of the instructions for children in the guided - alignment condition in Experiment 1 ( following the sequence of a – f ) . Verbal instructions are quoted in the textbox . A single hand indicates pointing gesture . A one - way arrow indicates pointing to two items involved in a sequence once . Two - way arrows indicate pointing to two items back - and - forth several times . Degraded hands indicate sequential gestures . We illustrate the procedures using the cross - mapping task , but the same procedures were used in the identical - items task . See the online article for the color version of this figure . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1103 ANALOGY AND MAP READING children were introduced to Room A2 ( the cross - mapped room ) . Both groups were given the same introduction and training as they had been given for Room A1 . They then completed six trials of the cross - mapping task . Each hiding location was tested twice with a total of six trials . The order of hiding locations was counterbal - anced across subjects , with the constraint that no hiding location was tested twice in a row . Scoring . Children were scored as correct on a search trial only if they searched at the correct location on their first attempt . If children searched incorrectly , the experimenter revealed the cor - rect location to them before moving on to the next trial . The main dependent variable was the proportion of correct responses across six search trials . During the cross - mapping task , we also coded children’s object - matching errors . An object - matching error was scored if the child searched under the item that had the same physical appearance as the map element but occupied a different spatial position . As reviewed earlier , the relational shift hypothesis predicts that young children are likely to focus on object similarity and overlook relational correspondence , and hence are prone to object - matching errors . We predicted that children in the guided - alignment condition would make fewer object - matching errors than those in the control condition . Results A 2 ( condition ) (cid:3) 2 ( task ) mixed repeated - measure ANOVA revealed a main effect of task , F ( 1 , 33 ) (cid:2) 14 . 50 , p (cid:2) . 001 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:2) . 31 ( see Figure 2 ) . As predicted , children performed worse in the cross - mapping task ( M (cid:2) 39 % , SD (cid:2) 34 % ) than in the identical - items task ( M (cid:2) 70 % , SD (cid:2) 31 % ) , consistent with the prediction that conflicting object matches would disrupt the analogical map - ping between the map and room . There was also a significant main effect of condition , F ( 1 , 33 ) (cid:2) 7 . 56 , p (cid:2) . 01 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:2) . 19 . Overall , the guided - alignment group ( M (cid:2) 64 % , SD (cid:2) 21 % ) performed significantly better than the control group ( M (cid:2) 45 % , SD (cid:2) 18 % ) . There was no interaction between condition and task , F ( 1 , 33 ) (cid:2) 1 . 48 , p (cid:2) . 23 , suggesting that support for structural alignment improved performance in both tasks . Both the guided - alignment group and the control group per - formed reliably above chance level ( 33 % ) in the identical - items task , t s ( 16 , 17 , respectively ) (cid:5) 4 . 21 , p s (cid:6) . 002 . However , in the cross - mapping task , only the guided - alignment group ( M (cid:2) 53 % , SD (cid:2) 35 % ) performed above chance , t ( 16 ) (cid:2) 2 . 35 , p (cid:2) . 03 ; the control group ( M (cid:2) 25 % , SD (cid:2) 27 % ) failed to do so , t ( 17 ) (cid:2) 1 . 25 , p (cid:2) . 23 . The two groups also differed in their proportion of object - matching errors , t ( 33 ) (cid:2) 2 . 15 , p (cid:2) . 04 . The proportion of object - matching errors was above chance for the control group ( M (cid:2) 64 % , SD (cid:2) 34 % ) , t ( 17 ) (cid:2) 3 . 81 , p (cid:2) . 001 , but not for the guided - alignment group ( M (cid:2) 38 % , SD (cid:2) 36 % ) , t ( 16 ) (cid:2) . 6 , p (cid:2) . 56 . To examine whether children were learning across trials , we compared the proportion of correct responses for the first and last three trials . Children in the control condition averaged 24 % for the first three and 26 % for the last three trials , t ( 17 ) (cid:2) . 32 , p (cid:2) . 76 ; children in the guided - alignment condition averaged 49 % for the first three trials and 54 % for the last three trials , t ( 16 ) (cid:2) 1 . 29 , p (cid:2) . 22 . Although neither group showed significant learning across trials , those in the guided - alignment group were able to connect the maps and spaces throughout the trials . Discussion Overall , the results of Experiment 1 bear out our predictions . First , the results parallel those found in analogical mapping . Children in the control group performed better with neutral identical objects than they did in the cross - mapping task ; and they frequently made object - matching errors in the cross - mapping task . Our results also bear out the idea that guided alignment can foster 3 - year - olds’ map understanding—children in the guided - alignment condition performed significantly bet - ter than those in the control group on the cross - mapping task . However , our guided - alignment manipulation involved a num - ber of different facets , including the use of relational language and gestures . It is not clear which aspects of our manipulation were most effective in improving children’s understanding . In Experi - ment 2 , we sought to tease apart the effects of gesture and rela - tional language on children’s map reading . Figure 4 . A schematic illustration of the instructions for children in the control condition in Experiment 1 ( following the sequence of a – c ) . Verbal instructions are quoted in the textbox . A single hand indicates pointing gesture . Degraded hands indicate sequential gestures . See the online article for the color version of this figure . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1104 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER Experiment 2 Method We contrasted two conditions designed to support guided align - ment : a gesture condition and a language condition . Both condi - tions included interventions designed to convey parallel relational structure and to clarify one - to - one correspondences . Thus , the purpose of Experiment 2 was to investigate how to best achieve guided alignment : whether gestural or linguistic support would be more effective for young children . Children were randomly as - signed to one of the two conditions , and both groups were given the same two tasks , in the same order : the identical - items task followed by the cross - mapping task . In the language condition ( as in Experiment1 ) , parallel relational structure was conveyed through the spatial term “between” and the numerical terms “first , second , third” ( see below and Figure 5 ) . To convey the correspondences , we used the same numerical terms ( “first , second , third” ) in the map as in the room . That is , when the numerical terms are used as common labels , they should convey correspondences between the map and room . ( In addition , their common numerical order should also convey parallel spatial rela - tional structure . ) No back - and - forth gestures were used to rein - force the object correspondences in this condition . In the gesture condition , we used a novel arcing gesture to convey parallel relational structure between the map and the room ( see below and Figure 6 ) . As in Experiment 1 , one - to - one corre - spondences were conveyed with back - and - forth correspondence gestures . No relational language was used in this condition . Participants . Thirty children participated ( average age (cid:2) 39 months ; range (cid:2) 35 – 44 months ) . Children were randomly as - signed to either the language condition ( n (cid:2) 16 ; male (cid:2) 10 ) or the gesture condition ( n (cid:2) 14 ; male (cid:2) 9 ) . A prior power analysis was conducted using G (cid:2) Power 3 . 1 ( Faul et al . , 2007 ) , suggesting that a sample size of 30 participants is adequate to achieve 80 % power with a medium effect size . Materials . The materials were identical to those of Experi - ment 1 . Procedure . As in Experiment 1 , children were invited to play a hide - and - find game , in which they used a map to find hidden objects in the room . All procedures were identical to those in Experiment 1 , except for the training given to children in the two conditions . Language condition . The experimenter introduced the room to children using ordered numerical language ( “first , second , Figure 5 . A schematic illustration of the instructions for children in the language condition in Experiment 2 ( following the sequence of a – e ) . Verbal instructions are quoted in the textbox . A single hand indicates pointing gesture . Degraded hands indicate sequential gestures . See the online article for the color version of this figure . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1105 ANALOGY AND MAP READING third” ) : “There are three chairs in the room—the first chair , the second chair , and the third chair , ” while pointing to each of them ( see Figure 5 ) . As in Experiment 1 , children were invited to examine the bottom of each chair to reinforce the ordinal words , “Is there a bone underneath the first / second / third chair ? ” The experimenter then introduced the map : “There are three chairs on the map , too—the first map chair , the second map chair , and the third map chair , ” while pointing to each of them . She used the spatial term “between” in both the map and the room : “The second map chair is in between the first map chair and the third map chair on the map . The second chair is in between the first chair and the third chair in the room , too” . She then further conveyed the parallel relational structure by pointing out “Do you see , this chair [ pointing to the middle chair on the map ] and this chair [ pointing to the middle chair in the room ] are in the very same place ? ” No back - and - forth gestures were used . Gesture condition . The experimenter did not use any rela - tional language ( “first , second , and third” or “between” ) . She introduced the room by saying , “There are three chairs in this room—here , here , and here , ” while pointing to each of them . As in the language condition , children were invited to examine each chair : “Let’s look at this chair . Is there a bone underneath it ? ” The experimenter then introduced the map : “There are three chairs on the map too—here , here and here . ” To show the correspondences between items on the map and those in the room , the experimenter used a correspondence gesture : “This chair [ pointing to the left chair on the map ] goes with this chair [ pointing to the left chair in the room ] . ” The experimenter repeated this correspondence gesture for both the middle and right chairs . Next , to convey parallel relational structure , the experimenter used identical arcing gestures to highlight the common spatial structures among the items on the map and those in the room ( see Figure 6 ) : “Look , this goes here , and goes here , ” while pointing to each object on the map in a left – right sequence with an arcing movement between each contiguous pair of objects . She repeated the same gestures and Figure 6 . A schematic illustration of the instructions for children in the gesture condition in Experiment 2 ( following the sequence of a – f ) . Verbal instructions are quoted in the textbox . A single hand indicates pointing gesture . A one - way arrow indicates pointing to two items involved in a sequence once . Two - way arrows indicate pointing to two items back - and - forth several times . Curved arrows indicate arcing gesture ( pointing to each object on the map in a left – right sequence with an arcing movement between each contiguous pair of objects ) . Degraded hands indicate sequential gestures . See the online article for the color version of this figure . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1106 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER instructions in the room . The experimenter then focused on the chair in the middle ; while pointing back and forth , she asked , “Do you see , this chair [ pointing to the middle chair on the map ] and this chair [ pointing to the middle chair in the room ] are in the very same place ? ” Results A 2 ( condition ) (cid:3) 2 ( task ) mixed repeated - measure ANOVA showed a significant main effect of task , F ( 1 , 28 ) (cid:2) 32 . 41 , p (cid:2) . 001 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:2) . 54 ( see Figure 2 ) . As predicted , children performed worse on the cross - mapping task ( M (cid:2) 37 % , SD (cid:2) 30 % ) than on the identical - items task ( M (cid:2) 72 % , SD (cid:2) 26 % ) . There was no main effect of condition , F ( 1 , 28 ) (cid:2) 1 . 71 , p (cid:2) . 20 . However , there was a significant interaction between condition and task , F ( 1 , 28 ) (cid:2) 10 . 08 , p (cid:2) . 004 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:2) . 27 . Planned comparisons showed that on the identical - items task , there was no significant difference between children in the language condition ( M (cid:2) 77 % , SD (cid:2) 27 % ) and the gesture condition ( M (cid:2) 68 % , SD (cid:2) 26 % ) , t ( 28 ) (cid:2) . 97 , p (cid:2) . 34 . However , a significant difference emerged on the cross - mapping task , t ( 28 ) (cid:2) 2 . 97 , p (cid:2) . 006 : The gesture group chose the correct location on 52 % of the trials ( SD (cid:2) 29 % ) , whereas children in the language condition chose the correct location on only 23 % of the trials ( SD (cid:2) 25 % ) . Both the gesture group and the language group performed reliably above chance levels ( 33 % ) in the identical - items task , t s ( 13 , 15 , respectively ) (cid:5) 5 . 04 , p s (cid:6) . 001 . However , only the gesture group performed above chance on the cross - mapping task , t ( 13 ) (cid:2) 2 . 48 , p (cid:2) . 03 . The two groups also differed in their proportion of object - matching errors , t ( 28 ) (cid:2) 2 . 13 , p (cid:2) . 04 . The proportion of object - matching errors among children in the gesture condition ( M (cid:2) 34 % , SD (cid:2) 27 % ) did not differ from chance , t ( 13 ) (cid:2) . 22 , p (cid:2) . 83 . In contrast , children in the language condition ( M (cid:2) 56 % , SD (cid:2) 29 % ) made significantly more object - matching errors than expected by chance ( 33 % ) , t ( 15 ) (cid:2) 3 . 14 , p (cid:2) . 007 . This pattern suggests that guided alignment based on gestures was more helpful in the difficult cross - mapping task than that based on language . This fact that gesture was more helpful than language might simply mean that children are not sufficiently familiar with the relational language used here . However , it could also have resulted from the spatial nature of gesture ; gesture may be partic - ularly well suited for helping children understand similar spatial relational structures . Experiment 3a Method In Experiments 1 and 2 , we examined the influence of guided alignment on 3 - year - olds’ map reading using maps with highly iconic symbols . In Experiment 3a , we asked how these techniques would apply to more typical maps , in which the elements on the map do not closely resemble the items in the referent space . To do so , we gave children abstract maps with dots indicating spatial locations . There were two versions of the task , parallel to the two tasks in the prior studies . In the identical - items task , all the objects in the room were identical and all the dots in the map were identical . In the cross - mapping task , the objects in the room were distinctive in shape and color , and the three dots in the map were of the same three colors as the items in the room , but arranged in noncorresponding order 4 ( see Figure 2 ) . This set of materials allows us to test a further prediction of the analogical processing account of map understanding—that the difficulty of the cross - mapping task should be greater for maps with iconic symbols than those with abstract symbols . This means that the advantage of the identical - items task over the cross - mapping task should be reduced in Experiment 3a ( in which the map icons were dots ) compared with Experiments 1 and 2 ( in which the map icons were photographs that closely matched ob - jects in the room ) . As in the prior studies , there were two groups : a guided - alignment group and a control group . Because of the effectiveness of the gesture condition in Experiment 2 , we used this same technique in the guided - alignment condition of Experiment 3a . Participants . Thirty - four children participated in the study ( average age (cid:2) 38 months ; range (cid:2) 34 – 42 months ) . Children were randomly assigned to either the guided - alignment condition ( n (cid:2) 17 ; male (cid:2) 9 ) or the control condition ( n (cid:2) 17 ; male (cid:2) 9 ) . A prior power analysis was conducted using G (cid:2) Power 3 . 1 ( Faul et al . , 2007 ) , suggesting that a sample size of 30 participants is adequate to achieve 80 % power with a medium effect size . Materials . The hiding rooms were identical to those of Ex - periment 1 ; however , instead of iconic photographs , the maps contained colored dots . In the identical - items task , the colors of the dots in the map were all identical , as were the colors of the chairs in the room . In the cross - mapping task , the colors of the dots ( blue , purple , and yellow ) and those of the furniture were cross - mapped—items of the same color occupied different locations in the map and the room ( see Figure 2 ) . Procedure . The instructions for the guided - alignment condi - tion were the same as those in the gesture condition in Experiment 2 . The instructions for the control condition were identical to the control condition in Experiment 1 . Results and Discussion A 2 ( condition ) (cid:3) 2 ( task ) mixed repeated - measure ANOVA showed a significant main effect of task , F ( 1 , 32 ) (cid:2) 7 . 23 , p (cid:2) . 01 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:2) . 18 ( see Figure 2 ) . Surprisingly , in contrast to the prior studies , children performed significantly better on the cross - mapping task ( M (cid:2) 73 % , SD (cid:2) 29 % ) than on the identical - items task ( M (cid:2) 60 % , SD (cid:2) 33 % ) . We speculate that performing the easier alignment task ( the identical - items task ) first , in combina - tion with the use of low - iconicity symbols , helped children to succeed in the more difficult cross - mapping task . ( We tested this explanation in the next experiment . ) There was no main effect of condition : The difference between the guided - alignment condition ( M (cid:2) 74 % , SD (cid:2) 29 % ) and the control condition ( M (cid:2) 59 % SD (cid:2) 32 % ) failed to reach signifi - cance , F ( 1 , 32 ) (cid:2) 2 . 63 , p (cid:2) . 11 . The interaction between task and condition was also nonsignificant , F ( 1 , 32 ) (cid:2) 1 . 2 , p (cid:2) . 28 . Given the unexpected result that children performed better on the cross - mapping task than on the identical - items task , we conducted a 4 As in the prior studies , we did not test the straightforward case in which the furniture items were distinctive and the colored dots were arranged in corresponding order . This was because we needed the maps to be chal - lenging enough to allow us to test the efficacy of guided alignment . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1107 ANALOGY AND MAP READING planned comparison between the guided - alignment group and the control group on the first identical - items task only . The difference between the guided - alignment condition ( M (cid:2) 70 % , SD (cid:2) 30 % ) and the control condition ( M (cid:2) 50 % , SD (cid:2) 33 % ) was marginally significant , t ( 32 ) (cid:2) 1 . 87 , p (cid:2) . 07 . It appears that guided - alignment training was effective in promoting children’s understanding of maps with abstract symbols as well as those with iconic symbols . To examine the effect of rich , iconic object matches on chil - dren’s performance , we compared the performance of the control groups from Experiments 1 and 3a . A 2 ( experiment ) (cid:3) 2 ( task ) mixed repeated - measure ANOVA revealed a marginally signifi - cant main effect of experiment , F ( 1 , 33 ) (cid:2) 3 . 27 , p (cid:2) . 08 , and a marginally significant main effect of task , F ( 1 , 33 ) (cid:2) 3 . 01 , p (cid:2) . 09 ( see Figure 7 ) . Importantly , there was a significant interaction between experiment and task , F ( 1 , 33 ) (cid:2) 18 . 73 , p (cid:2) . 001 , (cid:4) p2 (cid:2) . 36 . When the map symbols were iconic ( Experiment 1 ) , children performed better on the identical - items task ( M (cid:2) 67 % , SD (cid:2) 34 % ) than on the cross - mapping task ( M (cid:2) 25 % , SD (cid:2) 28 % ) , t ( 17 ) (cid:2) 3 . 53 , p (cid:2) . 003 . However , when the map symbols were abstract ( Experiment 3a ) , children performed better on the cross - mapping task ( M (cid:2) 69 % , SD (cid:2) 29 % ) than on the identical - items task ( M (cid:2) 50 % , SD (cid:2) 33 % ) , t ( 16 ) (cid:2) 2 . 66 , p (cid:2) . 017 . Although not specifically predicted , this result fits with prior findings on analogical mapping . Having rich , iconic object matches improves performance when the local matches are con - sistent with the relational alignment , but harms performance in a cross - mapping task , when the local matches are inconsistent with the relational alignment ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ; Kaminski & Sloutsky , 2013 ; Loewenstein & Gent - ner , 2001 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) . In Experiment 3b , we tested this possibility . Experiment 3b Method The results of Experiment 3a contrast strongly with those of the first two studies , in that children performed better on the cross - mapping task than on the identical - items task . Applying known patterns from research on analogical processes leads us to consider two factors that may have led to this finding . First , the effect of cross - mapping should be lower in Experiment 3a , because the map symbols were low in iconicity , in contrast to the rich , iconic symbols used in Experiments 1 and 2 . Second , children in Exper - iment 3a may have benefited from receiving the identical - items task first . Many studies ( Goldstone & Son , 2005 ; Haryu et al . , 2011 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ; McNeil & Fyfe , 2012 ) have found that learners often perform better on a difficult analogical mapping after performing an easier mapping with the same kind of relational structure—a phenomenon referred to as progressive alignment 5 ( Gentner , 2003 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . Thus , children’s performance on the second task ( cross - mapping ) in Experiment 3a might have benefited from the easier alignment on the first task ( identical - items ) , because the task order permitted a progressive alignment from easy to abstract mapping . If so , then performance on the cross - mapping task should suffer if children receive this task first , without the aid of a prior easier alignment task . We tested this hypothesis in Experiment 3b by switching the order of the tasks , presenting the cross - mapping task first and the identical - items task second . Two predictions follow from our hypothesis : ( a ) Performance on the cross - mapping task should be worse in Experiment 3b than in Experiment 3a , and ( 2 ) there would be no increase in performance from the first to the second task in Experiment 3b—in contrast to Experiment 3a ; that is , we expected to see an interaction between task and experiment . Participants . Seventeen children ( male (cid:2) 9 ) participated in the study ( average age (cid:2) 39 months , range (cid:2) 35 – 42 months ) . Materials and procedures . The materials and procedures were identical to those in the control condition in Experiment 3a , except that the cross - mapping task was presented before the identical - items task . Results A cross - experiment ( Experiment 3a control condition vs . Ex - periment 3b ) analysis was conducted to test the progressive align - ment hypothesis—we expected to see an interaction between task ( identical - items vs . cross - mapping ) and task order ( Experiment 3a vs . Experiment 3b ) . A 2 ( task ) (cid:3) 2 ( experiment ) mixed repeated - measure ANOVA showed no main effect of experiment , F ( 1 , 32 ) (cid:2) 1 . 53 , p (cid:2) . 23 , but a marginally significant main effect of task , F ( 1 , 32 ) (cid:2) 3 . 44 , p (cid:2) . 07 ( see Figure 8 ) . Importantly , as predicted , there was a significant interaction between experiment and task , F ( 1 , 32 ) (cid:2) 6 . 03 , p (cid:2) . 02 , (cid:4) 2 (cid:2) 0 . 16 . Planned comparisons revealed the following : Children from Experiment 3a ( M (cid:2) 69 % , SD (cid:2) 29 % ) performed significantly better than their counterparts from Experiment 3b ( M (cid:2) 47 % , SD (cid:2) 28 % ) on the cross - mapping task , t ( 32 ) (cid:2) 2 . 33 , p (cid:2) . 03 ; however , there was no significant difference in children’s perfor - mance on the identical - items task between Experiments 3a ( M (cid:2) 50 % , SD (cid:2) 33 % ) and 3b ( M (cid:2) 50 % , SD (cid:2) 24 % ) , t ( 32 ) (cid:6) 0 . 01 , p (cid:2) 1 . These results are consistent with the progressive alignment prediction derived from the structure - mapping theory : Carrying 5 As discussed earlier , the same reasoning applies in Experiments 1 and 2 , but in those studies , the progressive alignment advantage for the second ( cross - mapping ) task was outweighed by the difficulty of the cross - mapping task with iconic symbols . Figure 7 . Proportion of correct responses in the identical - items task and the cross - mapping task for the control conditions from Experiments 1 ( iconic maps ) and 3a ( abstract maps ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1108 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER out a relatively easy alignment task can allow a child to see the common relational structure , and this can potentiate subsequent performance on a more difficult alignment task . No such advan - tage is predicted for the reverse order . General Discussion We hypothesized that map reading involves analogical process - ing—that is , map reading involves a process of relational align - ment and inference between the map and the space . In four experiments , we tested predictions that follow from this central hypothesis . The first line of prediction is that the development of map understanding would show patterns similar to those of ana - logical development in general . Prior work on analogical devel - opment shows that early in learning , children focus on object similarity , and only later come to appreciate relational similarity . If map understanding follows the same pattern , young children should perform better when the local object similarities between the map and the space are consistent with the relational alignment ( as in the identical - items task ) than when they are inconsistent ( as in the cross - mapping task ) . This prediction was borne out in Experiments 1 and 2 : In both studies , children performed better on the identical - items task than on the cross - mapping task , even though the cross - mapping task came second , and might have benefitted from the prior task . A second prediction derived from analogical development is that ( especially for young learners ) rich object matches should improve performance when the object matches are consistent with the relational alignment , but should harm performance when the object matches are inconsistent with the relational alignment ( as in a cross - mapping task ) . This prediction was tested through a cross - experiment comparison between the con - trol groups from Experiments 1 and 3a . Consistent with the analogical mapping account , children performed better on the identical - items task than on the cross - mapping task when the maps were iconic ( Experiment 1 ) , but the reverse occurred when the maps were abstract ( Experiment 3a ) . A third prediction concerns progressive alignment—performing easily aligned analogies facilitates later understanding of more chal - lenging analogies that have the same relational structure ( Gentner , 2003 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . If children’s map reading follows the same principle , they should perform better on a difficult mapping task when they first experience an easier mapping task than when they receive the difficult task first . This prediction was borne out in the contrast between Experiments 3a and 3b . Children’s performance on the cross - mapping task was far better when it was presented after the easier identical - items task ( Experiment 3a ) than when it was pre - sented before the identical - items task ( Experiment 3b ) . Consistent with the principle of progressive alignment , this pattern suggests that carrying out the easy identical - items match involved an alignment of relational structure that paved the way for a more difficult match involving the same relational pattern . We note that there might have been a progressive alignment effect in Experiments 1 and 2 as well , in that children might have benefitted from the first easier identical - items task when performing the more difficult cross - mapping task . How - ever , consistent with the second prediction above , the relative diffi - culty of the cross - mapping task was greater for iconic symbols ( as in Experiments 1 and 2 ) than for abstract symbols ( as in Experiments 3a and 3b ) . Structure Mapping Between Maps and Spaces Following from the central hypothesis that map reading is accom - plished via analogical processing , our second prediction was that guiding children through the process of structure mapping between maps and spaces can help them to better understand maps . We tested this prediction by asking whether guided - alignment training—de - signed to reveal one - to - one correspondences and parallel relational structure—would improve children’s map understanding , especially for more difficult maps . In Experiment 1 , children who received guided alignment were more successful than a control group . Whereas Experiment 1 had used a combination of gesture and language in the guided - alignment condition , in Experiment 2 , we contrasted a gesture condition with a language condition . We found no difference between these two conditions in the identical - items task ; however , there was an advantage of gesture over language in the difficult cross - mapping task ( possibly because of the effectiveness of the back - and - forth gesture used to indicate the correspondences ) . In Experiment 3a , we applied the guided - alignment technique ( using gestures , as in Experiment 2 ) to maps with abstract symbols ( dots indicating spatial locations ) . We found the predicted advantage of the guided - alignment condition over the control condition in the identical - items task . Interestingly , children from both groups performed surprisingly well on the cross - mapping task . Two factors may have contributed to this result : ( a ) Color mismatching in Experiment 3a may be a less distracting factor to children than whole object mismatching in Experiments 1 and 2 , and ( b ) children may have benefited from the earlier easier task , as predicted by the principle of progressive alignment . Overall , we found that guided - alignment training improved chil - dren’s map reading performance . We suggest that the benefit of guided alignment stems from two essential components of analog - ical mapping—one - to - one correspondence and parallel relational structure ( Gattis , 2002 , 2004 ; Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Markman , 1997 ; Liben , 2009 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 ; Uttal , Gentner , Liu , & Lewis , 2008 ; Uttal & Yuan , 2014 ) . One - to - one correspon - dence helps children to understand that a symbol on a map corre - sponds to a specific location in the space . Although more explo - ration is needed , our results suggest that the correspondences between maps and spaces were conveyed more effectively ( at least Figure 8 . Proportion of correct responses in the identical - items task and the cross - mapping task for the control conditions from Experiments 3a and 3b . E3a (cid:2) experiment 3a ; E3b (cid:2) experiment 3b . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1109 ANALOGY AND MAP READING to 3 - year - olds ) with back - and - forth correspondence gestures than by using identical linguistic labels for symbols and referents . These findings are consistent with Richland and McDonough’s ( 2010 ) suggestion that gestures can provide strong visual cues to draw learners’ attention to the correspondences between two rep - resentations . More broadly , our results are consistent with the idea that gestures can spatialize important conceptual information ( Ali - bali , 2005 ; Goldin - Meadow , 1999 ) , including analogical structures ( Cooperrider , Gentner , & Goldin - Meadow , 2016 ) . The second support of analogical reasoning is parallel relational structure , which can help children to understand that the spatial relations among objects in the space correspond to the spatial relations among icons on a map . It appears that both relational gesture ( the arcing movement that emphasized parallel spatial relations ) and relational language ( the spatial term “between” and the numerical terms “first , second , third” ) supported children’s understanding of parallel relational structure . However , the effect of relational language on children’s understanding of spatial rep - resentations was not as strong as anticipated ( Miller et al . , 2015 ) . Prior studies have shown that relational language can help children understand the spatial structure of a domain and thereby improve their ability to carry out mapping tasks ( Casasola , 2005 ; Gentner & Christie , 2006 ; Gentner et al . , 2013 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) . It is possible that a different set of linguistic terms would be more effective in promoting relational thinking in this task ( Plumert & Nichols - Whitehead , 2007 ) . Future studies should in - vestigate the effects of different kinds of relational language ( e . g . , spatial , ordinal , feature ) on children’s relational thinking . Although we argue that the patterns observed here are best explained by an analogical mapping account , we acknowledge that multiple factors may be at play in the current studies . For example , one interesting alternative perspective would be an activation model framework , which would provide a more fine - grained way of accounting for performance ( Diamond , 2013 ; Marcovitch & Zelazo , 2009 ; Munakata et al . , 2011 ; Zelazo et al . , 2003 ) . One way to think about children’s performance across experiments is that the strength of the object match is influenced by similarities in shape , color , and position between the symbols in the map and those in the space . In Experiments 1 and 2 , both shape and color matched , resulting in high performance on the identical - items task and poor performance on the cross - mapping task ( in which object correspondence was the misleading strategy ) . In contrast , when objects on the map and those in the room had the same color but different shape ( Experiment 3 ) , object matching was less strongly activated , resulting in a stronger spatial correspondence and better performance on the cross - mapping task . Our account is compatible with this perspective , which seems to provide a plausible expla - nation for children’s performance from the baseline conditions . However , a unique contribution of the current study is the dem - onstration that guided alignment based on analogical reasoning led to better performance for children in the training conditions . An important direction for future work is to specify how gesture and language lead young children to shift focus from object matching to relational mapping . Prior studies have suggested that this change can be driven both by gains in relational knowledge ( Gentner , 2003 , 2010 ; Gentner et al . , 2011 ; Rattermann & Gentner , 1998 ) , and by increases in working memory and executive control capacity ( Halford , 1992 ; Morrison , Doumas , & Richland , 2011 ; Richland & Burchinal , 2013 ; Thibaut , French , & Vezneva , 2010 ) . Although the current work did not set out to test these accounts , multiple factors may be at work in the development of the rela - tional shift . Future work in this regard would be helpful in spec - ifying the mechanisms of change in relational thinking . Implications for Development Consistent with several prior studies ( Chen , 1996 ; Gattis , 2002 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 , 2005 ; Uttal et al . , 2001 , 2008 ) , our research suggests that structure - mapping processes are a crucial learn - ing mechanism through which children develop understanding of spatial representations ( Gentner , 2010 ) . Prior research has shown that children initially judged photographs to be similar to their referents on the basis of surface object similarity , and only gradually began to appreciate their relational similarity ( Uttal et al . , 2008 ) , consistent with the relational shift seen in analogical development ( Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Richland et al . , 2006 ) . We also draw on evidence that techniques that aid children’s insight into the common relational structure between two spaces , such as encouraging children to com - pare two model rooms ( Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 ) or providing them with spatial relational language ( Loewenstein & Gentner , 2005 ) , can improve children’s performance in spatial search tasks . Building on these prior studies , we extended the research on analogical map - ping and learning of spatial representations to the domain of map reading . Our research highlights the important role analogy plays in children’s understanding of spatial representations and relational thinking in general . We have shown that ( a ) children’s map reading follows the same pattern as analogical reasoning in general , and ( b ) interventions that are designed to facilitate the process of analogical mapping can promote children’s ability to extract relational patterns and carry out relational mappings . Our findings also shed light on the role of iconicity in children’s understanding of maps and other symbolic representations . Iconicity refers to the perceptual similarity between symbols and their referents ( DeLoache , 1995 ; Frishberg , 1975 ; Wilcox , 2004 ) . Many theories of cognitive development have emphasized that children benefit from iconic symbols that share a high degree of object similarity with their referents ( Piaget , 1951 ; Werner & Kaplan , 1963 ) . However , recent studies have shown that iconic representations can sometimes be detrimental to learning ( Goldstone & Sakamoto , 2003 ; Kaminski & Sloutsky , 2013 ; Uttal , Liu , & DeLoache , 2006 ) . Our research adds another perspective on the role of iconicity in symbolic understand - ing . We compared maps with iconic symbols ( photographs of real objects ) to maps with abstract symbols ( dots ) . Children performed better with iconic symbols when object similarity between maps and spaces was consistent with the relational alignment ( identical - items task ) ; however , this same iconicity made it difficult for children to establish relational correspondence when object similarity competed with the correct structural alignment ( cross - mapping task ) . Children were more likely to make object - matching errors when the cross - mapped objects were iconic ( Experiment 1 ) than when they were abstract ( Experiment 3a ) . Viewed within the theoretical context of analogy and comparison , iconic symbols that are consistent with the relational alignment can help children to establish a successful map - ping , but iconic matches that are inconsistent with the relational alignment will make it more difficult for them to establish relational correspondences . Because relational correspondences are essential in maps and many other spatial representations , the potential drawbacks T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1110 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER and benefits of highly iconic symbols need to be considered in research and education . Although understanding the analogical mapping between maps and spaces is an important foundation , map reading ability undergoes considerable changes throughout development ( Presson , 1982 ) . One crucial capacity is being able to establish alignment between maps and spaces . Previous research suggests that young children often do not rotate maps when they were misaligned with their referent space , resulting in many egocentric errors ( Bluestein & Acredolo , 1979 ) . It is not until Age 5 or 6 that children spontaneously rotate misaligned maps ( Presson , 1982 ) . The issue of alignment is not only important for viewing maps statically , but perhaps even more so , when one uses maps for navigation ; moving in the environment requires the constant update of one’s position in relation to other landmarks , completing necessary rotation to align the map with the world , as well as planning routes according to the information on the map ( Sandberg & Hutten - locher , 2001 ) . Research shows a marked developmental difference in children’s ability to use maps in navigation with children as young as Age 3 can use simple maps to follow easy routes but also considerable development over time ( Blades & Spencer , 1986 ; Sandberg & Hut - tenlocher , 2001 ) . Another important capacity that is crucial to connecting maps to their referent spaces is the understanding of scaling ( Huttenlocher , Vasilyeva , Newcombe , & Duffy , 2008 ; Jirout & Newcombe , 2014 ; Liben & Downs , 1989 ; Presson , 1982 ) . Frick and Newcombe ( 2012 ) demonstrated that children’s performance at a scaling task decreases with an increase in scaling disparity ( e . g . , map to space ratio from 1 : 2 to 1 : 4 ) . There is also a marked age effect , with adults and older children ( 5 - and 6 - year - olds ) performing better than young children ( 3 - and 4 - year - olds ) . The difficulty as well as the malleability of scaling skills can also been seen from studies on other related forms of spatial representations . For example , many college students have difficulty understanding the magnitude of time between large - time - scale geological events ( Libarkin , Kurd - ziel , & Anderson , 2007 ) . Resnick , Shipley , Newcombe , Massey , and Wills ( 2012 ) found that prompting structural alignment across representations of geological time at different time scales helped students perform better at connecting small - scale representations to the very large time scale of geological events . Resnick et al . ’s ( 2012 ) findings dovetail with our findings in suggesting that tech - niques based on comparison and alignment may benefit adults as well as children , especially for challenging tasks that involve large scaling disparities . Thus , the extant research on reading maps , in particular , and other spatial representations , in general , entails a protracted development with marked age difference and individual difference that can be improved with training and a better under - standing of the processes involved in the tasks ( Uttal et al . , 2012 ) . Conclusions Our findings add to a growing body of literature ( Gattis , 2002 ; Gattis & Holyoak , 1996 ; Loewenstein & Gentner , 2001 , 2005 ; Resnick et al . , 2012 ; Uttal et al . , 2008 ) suggesting that the mech - anisms of analogical mapping may underlie the learning and use of spatial representations . Children’s map reading follows the same learning trajectory as their understanding of analogical process - ing—children learn to establish correspondences between maps and spaces based on object similarity before they can do so based on relational similarity . Interventions designed to foster the estab - lishment of one - to - one correspondence and parallel relational structures are effective in helping children understand and use maps . Furthermore , these results help to clarity how iconicity contributes to children’s understanding of symbolic representa - tions . Theories of analogical reasoning therefore offer a general framework through which we can better understand the develop - mental mechanism underlying children’s emerging ability to un - derstand and make use of spatial representations . References Alibali , M . W . ( 2005 ) . Gesture in spatial cognition : Expressing , commu - nicating , and thinking about spatial information . Spatial Cognition and Computation , 5 , 307 – 331 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15427633 scc0504 _ 2 Alibali , M . W . , Nathan , M . J . , Wolfgram , M . S . , Church , R . B . , Jacobs , S . A . , Johnson Martinez , C . , & Knuth , E . J . ( 2014 ) . How teachers link ideas in mathematics instruction using speech and gesture : A corpus analysis . Cognition and Instruction , 32 , 65 – 100 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2013 . 858161 Blades , M . , & Cooke , Z . ( 1994 ) . Young children’s ability to understand a model as a spatial representation . The Journal of Genetic Psychology : Research and Theory on Human Development , 155 , 201 – 218 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00221325 . 1994 . 9914772 Blades , M . , & Spencer , C . ( 1986 ) . Map use by young children . Geography , 71 , 47 – 52 . Bluestein , N . , & Acredolo , L . ( 1979 ) . Developmental changes in map - reading skills . Child Development , 50 , 691 – 697 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1128934 Carey , S . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge of number : Its evolution and ontogeny . Science , 282 , 641 – 642 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 282 . 5389 . 641 Casasola , M . ( 2005 ) . Can language do the driving ? The effect of linguistic input on infants’ categorization of support spatial relations . Develop - mental Psychology , 41 , 183 – 192 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 41 . 1 . 183 Chen , Z . ( 1996 ) . Children’s analogical problem solving : The effects of superficial , structural , and procedural similarity . Journal of Experimen - tal Child Psychology , 62 , 410 – 431 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jecp . 1996 . 0037 Clark , C . M . , & Klonoff , H . ( 1990 ) . Right and left orientation in children aged 5 to 13 years . Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychol - ogy , 12 , 459 – 466 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01688639008400993 Cooperrider , K . , Gentner , D . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2016 ) . Spatial anal - ogies pervade complex relational reasoning : Evidence from spontaneous gestures . Cognitive Research : Principles and Implications , 1 , 28 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s41235 - 016 - 0024 - 5 Craton , L . G . , Elicker , J . , Plumert , J . M . , & Pick , H . L . , Jr . ( 1990 ) . Children’s use of frames of reference in communication of spatial location . Child Development , 61 , 1528 – 1543 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1130762 DeLoache , J . S . ( 1987 ) . Rapid change in the symbolic functioning of very young children . Science , 238 , 1556 – 1557 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 2446392 DeLoache , J . S . ( 1989 ) . Young children’s understanding of the correspon - dence between a scale model and a larger space . Cognitive Development , 4 , 121 – 139 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0885 - 2014 ( 89 ) 90012 - 9 DeLoache , J . S . ( 1995 ) . Early understanding and use of symbols : The model model . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 4 , 109 – 113 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8721 . ep10772408 DeLoache , J . S . , Kolstad , V . , & Anderson , K . N . ( 1991 ) . Physical simi - larity and young children’s understanding of scale models . Child Devel - opment , 62 , 111 – 126 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1130708 Dessalegn , B . , & Landau , B . ( 2008 ) . More than meets the eye : The role of language in binding and maintaining feature conjunctions . Psychologi - T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1111 ANALOGY AND MAP READING cal Science , 19 , 189 – 195 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2008 . 02066 . x Diamond , A . ( 2013 ) . Executive functions . Annual Review of Psychology , 64 , 135 – 168 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 113011 - 143750 Durkin , K . ( 1983 ) . Children’s comprehension of complex sentences con - taining the preposition between . Child Study Journal , 13 , 133 – 147 . Faul , F . , Erdfelder , E . , Lang , A . G . , & Buchner , A . ( 2007 ) . G (cid:2) Power 3 : A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social , behavioral , and biomedical sciences . Behavior Research Methods , 39 , 175 – 191 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03193146 Ferry , A . L . , Hespos , S . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2015 ) . Prelinguistic relational concepts : Investigating analogical processing in infants . Child Develop - ment , 86 , 1386 – 1405 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cdev . 12381 Forbus , K . D . , Ferguson , R . W . , Lovett , A . , & Gentner , D . ( 2016 ) . Ex - tending SME to handle large - scale cognitive modeling . Cognitive Sci - ence . Advance online publication . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12377 Foster , E . K . , & Hund , A . M . ( 2012 ) . The impact of scaffolding and overhearing on young children’s use of the spatial terms between and middle . Journal of Child Language , 39 , 338 – 364 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0305000911000158 Frick , A . , & Newcombe , N . S . ( 2012 ) . Getting the big picture : Develop - ment of spatial scaling abilities . Cognitive Development , 27 , 270 – 282 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cogdev . 2012 . 05 . 004 Frishberg , N . ( 1975 ) . Arbitrariness and iconicity : Historical change in American Sign Language . Language , 51 , 696 – 719 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 412894 Fuson , K . C . ( 1988 ) . Children’s counting and concepts of number . New York , NY : Springer . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4612 - 3754 - 9 Gattis , M . ( 2002 ) . Structure mapping in spatial reasoning . Cognitive De - velopment , 17 , 1157 – 1183 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0885 - 2014 ( 02 ) 00095 - 3 Gattis , M . ( 2004 ) . Mapping relational structure in spatial reasoning . Cog - nitive Science , 28 , 589 – 610 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709 cog2804 _ 4 Gattis , M . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1996 ) . Mapping conceptual to spatial relations in visual reasoning . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 22 , 231 – 239 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 22 . 1 . 231 Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s1551 6709cog0702 _ 3 Gentner , D . ( 2003 ) . Why we’re so smart . In D . Gentner & S . Goldin - Meadow ( Eds . ) , Language in mind : Advances in the study of language and thought ( pp . 195 – 235 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Bootstrapping the mind : Analogical processes and symbol systems . Cognitive Science , 34 , 752 – 775 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2010 . 01114 . x Gentner , D . , Anggoro , F . K . , & Klibanoff , R . S . ( 2011 ) . Structure mapping and relational language support children’s learning of relational catego - ries . Child Development , 82 , 1173 – 1188 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2011 . 01599 . x Gentner , D . , & Christie , S . ( 2006 ) . Using numbers to structure space . In R . Sun & N . Miyake ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Twenty - Eighth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 267 – 272 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Christie , S . ( 2010 ) . Mutual bootstrapping between language and analogical processing . Language and Cognition , 2 , 261 – 283 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1515 / langcog . 2010 . 011 Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 52 . 1 . 45 Gentner , D . , & Medina , J . ( 1998 ) . Similarity and the development of rules . Cognition , 65 , 263 – 297 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0010 - 0277 ( 98 ) 00002 - X Gentner , D . , Ozyürek , A . , Gürcanli , O . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2013 ) . Spatial language facilitates spatial cognition : Evidence from children who lack language input . Cognition , 127 , 318 – 330 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2013 . 01 . 003 Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of simi - larity . In S . A . Gelman & J . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought ( pp . 225 – 277 ) . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511983689 . 008 Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1003 _ 2 Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 1999 ) . The role of gesture in communication and thinking . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 3 , 419 – 429 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1364 - 6613 ( 99 ) 01397 - 2 Goldin - Meadow , S . , Cook , S . W . , & Mitchell , Z . A . ( 2009 ) . Gesturing gives children new ideas about math . Psychological Science , 20 , 267 – 272 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9280 . 2009 . 02297 . x Goldstone , R . L . , & Sakamoto , Y . ( 2003 ) . The transfer of abstract princi - ples governing complex adaptive systems . Cognitive Psychology , 46 , 414 – 466 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0010 - 0285 ( 02 ) 00519 - 4 Goldstone , R . L . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2005 ) . The transfer of scientific principles using concrete and idealized simulations . Journal of the Learning Sci - ences , 14 , 69 – 110 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls1401 _ 4 Halford , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual complexity in cognitive development . Human Development , 35 , 193 – 217 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1159 / 000277167 Haryu , E . , Imai , M . , & Okada , H . ( 2011 ) . Object similarity bootstraps young children to action - based verb extension . Child Development , 82 , 674 – 686 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8624 . 2010 . 01567 . x Hermer - Vazquez , L . , Spelke , E . S . , & Katsnelson , A . S . ( 1999 ) . Sources of flexibility in human cognition : Dual - task studies of space and language . Cognitive Psychology , 39 , 3 – 36 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / cogp . 1998 . 0713 Honomichl , R . D . , & Chen , Z . ( 2006 ) . Learning to align relations : The effects of feedback and self - explanation . Journal of Cognition and Development , 7 , 527 – 550 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327647 jcd0704 _ 5 Honomichl , R . D . , & Chen , Z . ( 2012 ) . The role of guidance in children’s discovery learning . WIREs Cognitive Science , 3 , 615 – 622 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wcs . 1199 Huttenlocher , J . , Newcombe , N . , & Vasilyeva , M . ( 1999 ) . Spatial scaling in young children . Psychological Science , 10 , 393 – 398 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 9280 . 00175 Huttenlocher , J . , Vasilyeva , M . , Newcombe , N . , & Duffy , S . ( 2008 ) . Developing symbolic capacity one step at a time . Cognition , 106 , 1 – 12 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cognition . 2006 . 12 . 006 Jirout , J . J . , & Newcombe , N . S . ( 2014 ) . Mazes and maps : Can young children find their way ? Mind , Brain , and Education , 8 , 89 – 96 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / mbe . 12048 Kaminski , J . A . , & Sloutsky , V . M . ( 2013 ) . Extraneous perceptual infor - mation interferes with children’s acquisition of mathematical knowl - edge . Journal of Educational Psychology , 105 , 351 – 363 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0031040 Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 – 2822 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1131753 Libarkin , J . C . , Kurdziel , J . P . , & Anderson , S . W . ( 2007 ) . College student conceptions of geological time and the disconnect between ordering and scale . Journal of Geoscience Education , 55 , 413 – 422 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5408 / 1089 - 9995 - 55 . 5 . 413 Liben , L . S . ( 1999 ) . Developing an understanding of external spatial representations . In I . E . Sigel ( Ed . ) , Development of mental representa - tion : Theories and application ( pp . 297 – 321 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1112 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER Liben , L . S . ( 2009 ) . The road to understanding maps . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 18 , 310 – 315 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8721 . 2009 . 01658 . x Liben , L . S . , & Downs , R . ( 1989 ) . Understanding maps as symbols : The development of map concepts in children . In H . W . Reese ( Eds . ) , Advances in child development and behavior ( Vol . 22 , pp . 146 – 201 ) . New York , NY : Academic Press . Liben , L . S . , & Downs , R . M . ( 1993 ) . Understanding person , space , map relations : Cartographic and developmental perspectives . Developmental Psychology , 29 , 739 – 752 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 29 . 4 . 739 Liben , L . S . , & Yekel , C . A . ( 1996 ) . Preschoolers’ understanding of plan and oblique maps : The role of geometric and representational correspon - dence . Child Development , 67 , 2780 – 2796 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1131752 Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2001 ) . Spatial mapping in preschoolers : Close comparisons facilitate far mappings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 2 , 189 – 219 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327647 JCD0202 _ 4 Loewenstein , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . Relational language and the de - velopment of relational mapping . Cognitive Psychology , 50 , 315 – 353 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cogpsych . 2004 . 09 . 004 Marcovitch , S . , & Zelazo , P . D . ( 2009 ) . A hierarchical competing systems model of the emergence and early development of executive function . Developmental Science , 12 , 1 – 18 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2008 . 00754 . x Marzolf , D . P . , DeLoache , J . S . , & Kolstad , V . ( 1999 ) . The role of relational similarity in young children’s use of a scale model . Develop - mental Science , 2 , 296 – 305 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 7687 . 00075 McNeil , N . M . , & Fyfe , E . R . ( 2012 ) . “Concreteness fading” promotes transfer of mathematical knowledge . Learning and Instruction , 22 , 440 – 448 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2012 . 05 . 001 Miller , S . E . , Marcovitch , S . , Boseovski , J . J . , & Lewkowicz , D . J . ( 2015 ) . Young children’s ability to use ordinal labels in a spatial search task . Merrill - Palmer Quarterly , 61 , 345 – 361 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 13110 / merrpalmquar1982 . 61 . 3 . 0345 Morrison , R . G . , Doumas , L . A . A . , & Richland , L . E . ( 2011 ) . A compu - tational account of children’s analogical reasoning : Balancing inhibitory control in working memory and relational representation . Developmental Science , 14 , 516 – 529 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2010 . 00999 . x Novack , M . A . , Congdon , E . L . , Hemani - Lopez , N . , & Goldin - Meadow , S . ( 2014 ) . From action to abstraction using the hands to learn math . Psychological Science , 25 , 903 – 910 . Munakata , Y . , Herd , S . A . , Chatham , C . H . , Depue , B . E . , Banich , M . T . , & O’Reilly , R . C . ( 2011 ) . A unified framework for inhibitory control . Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 15 , 453 – 459 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2011 . 07 . 011 Paik , J . H . , & Mix , K . S . ( 2006 ) . Preschoolers’ use of surface similarity in object comparisons : Taking context into account . Journal of Experimen - tal Child Psychology , 95 , 194 – 214 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2006 . 06 . 002 Piaget , J . ( 1951 ) . Play , dreams and imitation in childhood . London , Eng - land : Heinemann . Plumert , J . M . , & Nichols - Whitehead , P . ( 2007 ) . Developmental differ - ences in preferences for using color , size , and location information to disambiguate hiding places . Journal of Cognition and Development , 8 , 427 – 454 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15248370701612977 Presson , C . C . ( 1982 ) . The development of map - reading skills . Child Development , 53 , 196 – 199 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 1129653 Rattermann , M . J . , & Gentner , D . ( 1998 ) . More evidence for a relational shift in the development of analogy : Children’s performance on a causal - mapping task . Cognitive Development , 13 , 453 – 478 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0885 - 2014 ( 98 ) 90003 - X Resnick , I . , Shipley , T . , Newcombe , N . , Massey , C . , & Wills , T . ( 2012 ) . Examining the representation and understanding of large magnitudes using the hierarchical alignment model of analogical reasoning . In N . Miyake , D . Peebles , & R . P . Cooper ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 917 – 922 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Richland , L . E . , & Burchinal , M . R . ( 2013 ) . Early executive function predicts reasoning development . Psychological Science , 24 , 87 – 92 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0956797612450883 Richland , L . E . , & McDonough , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Learning by analogy : Discriminating between potential analogs . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 35 , 28 – 43 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cedpsych . 2009 . 09 . 001 Richland , L . E . , Morrison , R . G . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2006 ) . Children’s development of analogical reasoning : Insights from scene analogy prob - lems . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 94 , 249 – 273 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2006 . 02 . 002 Richland , L . E . , & Simms , N . ( 2015 ) . Analogy , higher order thinking , and education . WIREs Cognitive Science , 6 , 177 – 192 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wcs . 1336 Richland , L . E . , Zur , O . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Cognitive supports for analogies in the mathematics classroom . Science , 316 , 1128 – 1129 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1142103 Rigal , R . ( 1994 ) . Right - left orientation : Development of correct use of right and left terms . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 79 , 1259 – 1278 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2466 / pms . 1994 . 79 . 3 . 1259 Sandberg , E . H . , & Huttenlocher , J . ( 2001 ) . Advanced spatial skills and advance planning : Components of 6 - year - olds’ navigational map use . Journal of Cognition and Development , 2 , 51 – 70 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15327647JCD0201 _ 3 Shusterman , A . , Lee , S . A . , & Spelke , E . S . ( 2008 ) . Young children’s spontaneous use of geometry in maps . Developmental Science , 11 , F1 – F7 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2007 . 00670 . x Simms , N . , & Gentner , D . ( 2008 ) . Spatial language and landmark use : Can 3 - , 4 - , and 5 - year - olds find the middle ? In B . C . Love , K . McRae , & V . M . Sloutsky ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 191 – 196 ) . Washington , DC : Cognitive Science Society . Son , J . Y . , & Goldstone , R . L . ( 2010 ) . Relational words as handles : They bring along baggage . The Journal of Problem Solving , 3 , 52 – 92 . Thibaut , J . - P . , French , R . , & Vezneva , M . ( 2010 ) . The development of analogy making in children : Cognitive load and executive functions . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 106 , 1 – 19 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jecp . 2010 . 01 . 001 Uttal , D . H . ( 2000 ) . Seeing the big picture : Map use and the development of spatial cognition . Developmental Science , 3 , 247 – 264 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 7687 . 00119 Uttal , D . H . , Gentner , D . , Liu , L . L . , & Lewis , A . R . ( 2008 ) . Developmental changes in children’s understanding of the similarity between photo - graphs and their referents . Developmental Science , 11 , 156 – 170 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2007 . 00660 . x Uttal , D . H . , Gregg , V . H . , Tan , L . S . , Chamberlin , M . H . , & Sines , A . ( 2001 ) . Connecting the dots : Children’s use of a systematic figure to facilitate mapping and search . Developmental Psychology , 37 , 338 – 350 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0012 - 1649 . 37 . 3 . 338 Uttal , D . H . , Liu , L . L . , & DeLoache , J . S . ( 2006 ) . Concreteness and symbolic development . In L . Balter & C . S . Tamis - LeMonda ( Eds . ) , Child psychology : A handbook of contemporary issues ( pp . 167 – 184 ) . New York , NY : Psychology Press . Uttal , D . H . , Meadow , N . G . , Tipton , E . , Hand , L . L . , Alden , A . R . , Warren , C . , & Newcombe , N . S . ( 2012 ) . The malleability of spatial skills : A meta - analysis of training studies . Psychological Bulletin , 139 , 352 – 402 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0028446 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1113 ANALOGY AND MAP READING Uttal , D . H . , & Yuan , L . ( 2014 ) . Using symbols : Developmental perspectives . WIREs Cognitive Science , 5 , 295 – 304 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / wcs . 1280 Vosmik , J . R . , & Presson , C . C . ( 2004 ) . Children’s response to natural map misalignment during wayfinding . Journal of Cognition and Develop - ment , 5 , 317 – 336 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327647jcd0503 _ 2 Washington , D . S . , & Naremore , R . C . ( 1978 ) . Children’s use of spatial prepositions in two - and three - dimensional tasks . Journal of Speech & Hearing Research , 21 , 151 – 165 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1044 / jshr . 2101 . 151 Werner , H . , & Kaplan , B . ( 1963 ) . Symbol formation . New York , NY : Wiley . Wilcox , S . ( 2004 ) . Cognitive iconicity : Conceptual spaces , meaning , and gesture in signed language . Cognitive Linguistics , 15 , 119 – 148 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1515 / cogl . 2004 . 005 Winkler - Rhoades , N . , Carey , S . C . , & Spelke , E . S . ( 2013 ) . Two - year - old children interpret abstract , purely geometric maps . Developmental Sci - ence , 16 , 365 – 376 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / desc . 12038 Wood , D . , & Fels , J . ( 1992 ) . The power of maps . New York , NY : Guilford Press . Wynn , K . ( 1990 ) . Children’s understanding of counting . Cognition , 36 , 155 – 193 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0277 ( 90 ) 90003 - 3 Zelazo , P . D . , Müller , U . , Frye , D . , Marcovitch , S . , Argitis , G . , Boseovski , J . , . . . Sutherland , A . ( 2003 ) . The development of executive function in early childhood . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 68 , vii – 137 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 0037 - 976X . 2003 . 00269 . x Appendix Detailed Description of the Scripts and Experimental Procedures Order Procedure E1 : Guided alignment condition 1 “There are three chairs in the room , the first chair , the second chair , and the third chair” [ pointing to each chair in sequence from left to right ] . 2 “There are three chairs on the map too , the first map chair , the second map chair , and the third map chair” [ pointing to each chair in sequence from left to right ] . 3 “The first map chair [ pointing to the left chair on the map ] goes with the first chair [ pointing to the left chair in the room ] . ” Repeat the same procedure for the middle and right chair . 4 “The second map chair is in between the first map chair and the third map chair on the map” [ pointing to each chair while referring to it ] . 5 “The second chair is in between the first chair and the third chair in the room too” [ pointing to each chair while referring to it ] . 6 “Do you see , this chair [ pointing to the middle chair on the map ] and this chair [ pointing to the middle chair in the room ] are in the very same place ? ” [ pointing back - and - forth between them ] E2 & E3a : Gesture condition 1 “There are three chairs in the room , here , here , and here” [ pointing to each chair in sequence from left to right ] . 2 “There are three chairs on the map too , here , here , and here” [ pointing to each chair in sequence from left to right ] . 3 “This chair [ pointing to the left chair on the map ] goes with this chair [ pointing to the left chair in the room ] . ” Repeat the same procedure for the middle and right chair . 4 “Look , this goes here , and goes here” [ pointing to each object on the map in a left - right sequence with an arcing movemen t between each contiguous pair of objects ] . 5 “Look , this goes here , and goes here” [ pointing to each object in the room in a left - right sequence with an arcing movemen t between each contiguous pair of objects ] . 6 “Do you see , this chair [ pointing to the middle chair on the map ] and this chair [ pointing to the middle chair in the room ] are in the very same place ? ” [ pointing back - and - forth between them ] . E2 : Language condition 1 “There are three chairs in the room , the first chair , the second chair , and the third chair” [ pointing to each chair in sequence from left to right ] . 2 “There are three chairs on the map too , the first map chair , the second map chair , and the third map chair” [ pointing to each chair in sequence from left to right ] . 3 “The second map chair is in between the first map chair and the third map chair on the map” [ pointing to each chair while referring to it ] . 4 “The second chair is in between the first chair and the third chair in the room too” [ pointing to each chair while referring to it ] . 5 “Do you see , this chair [ pointing to the middle chair on the map ] and this chair [ pointing to the middle chair in the room ] are in the very same place ? ” Note . Bolded are the essential techniques used to convey one - to - one correspondence and parallel relational structure . Received October 20 , 2015 Revision received December 16 , 2016 Accepted February 28 , 2017 (cid:3) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 1114 YUAN , UTTAL , AND GENTNER