Power transduction of actin filaments ratcheting in vitro against a load Damien Démoulin a , 1 , Marie - France Carlier b , Jérôme Bibette a , and Jean Baudry a a Laboratoire Colloïdes et Matériaux Divisés , Institute of Chemistry , Biology and Innovation ( CBI ) , ESPCI ParisTech / CNRS UMR 8231 / PSL * Research University , 75005 Paris , France ; and b Laboratoire d ’ Enzymologie et Biologie Structurales , CNRS UPR 3082 , 91190 Gif - sur - Yvette , France Edited by Alex Mogilner , New York University , New York , NY , and accepted by the Editorial Board October 30 , 2014 ( received for review July 25 , 2014 ) The actin cytoskeleton has the unique capability of producing pushing forces at the leading edge of motile cells without the implication of molecular motors . This phenomenon has been ex - tensively studied theoretically , and molecular models , including the widely known Brownian ratchet , have been proposed . However , supporting experimental work is lacking , due in part to hardly accessible molecular length scales . We designed an experiment to directly probe the mechanism of force generation in a setup where a population of actin filaments grows against a load applied by magnetic microparticles . The filaments , arranged in stiff bundles by fascin , are constrained to point toward the applied load . In this protrusion - like geometry , we are able to directly measure the velocity of filament elongation and its dependence on force . Using numerical simulations , we provide evidence that our experimental data are consistent with a Brownian ratchet - based model . We further demonstrate the existence of a force regime far below stalling where the mechanical power transduced by the ratcheting filaments to the load is maximal . The actin machinery in migrating cells may tune the number of filaments at the leading edge to work in this force regime . cell motility | force generation | lamellipodium | filopodium T he actin cytoskeleton forms a signal - responsive protein sys - tem made of filaments that undergo constant remodeling via directional assembly and disassembly processes . At the leading edge of a migrating cell , protrusive force results from insertional polymerization of actin filament barbed ends against the mem - brane , pushing it forward ( 1 , 2 ) . A wealth of regulatory proteins adapts the organization of the filaments and their mechanical properties to the movement the cell needs to make . At the single filament level , Hill was the first to propose that the free energy of polymerization could be transduced into mechanical work against the membrane ( 3 ) . Oster and colleagues transcribed Hill ’ s conceptual model into a mechanistic one coined Brownian ratchet ( 4 ) , later refined in the tethered ratchet ( 5 ) . They showed that a single filament can push against a load because thermal fluctuations of either the load ( 4 ) or the filament ( 5 ) allow for stochastic insertion of monomers at the polymerizing tip . The amplitude of the fluctuations are force dependent , making the elongation velocity of the filament force dependent as well . The whole force - velocity profile of a single actin filament was never measured experimentally . However , the stalling force of a filament , at which the elongation velocity drops to zero , could be estimated to a few piconewtons ( 6 – 8 ) . Comparatively , forces of a few nanonewtons are required to stall the migration of cells ( 9 , 10 ) or Listeria comet tails ( 11 ) . This difference of three orders of magnitude points to the need for a large number of cooperating filaments to generate high forces in protrusive struc - tures . Exploring the cooperation within an assembly of filaments polymerizing together against a load remains a hard task for experimentalists . Actin gels ( 12 – 14 ) or brushes ( 15 ) have been reconstituted in vitro to measure the amount of force they can generate . In these complex structures , regulatory proteins can cause tethering of the filaments to the load ( 14 ) , rearrangements under force ( 16 ) , or variations of filaments number in reaction to force ( 17 ) . These phenomena shed light on the strong influence of regulatory proteins on force production but impede to draw in - formation on the physical mechanism of force generation . Here we present an experimental setup that was designed to closely resemble the conceptual view of an array of about 100 independent filaments polymerizing perpendicularly to a load , their tip remaining nontethered to that load . Because the num - ber of parameters affecting the force generation is minimal , we are able to concentrate on the physical interaction of filaments with the load and show that it is compatible with the Brownian ratchet . However , if the Brownian ratchet model is relevant to describe force generation at the single filament level , it gives no information about the collective behavior of the filaments pop - ulation . This collective aspect of force production is further de - veloped using an analytical model , revealing that filaments cooperation is optimal in a specific regime which ensures maxi - mum transduction of mechanical power to the load . Experimental Design We use 3 - μ m - diameter superparamagnetic beads as a tool to simultaneously manipulate actin filaments , apply forces to them , and measure their reaction to force . The beads are functional - ized with a controlled density of gelsolin molecules that act as polymerization primers inducing pointed - end growth of the actin filaments . On applying a magnetic field , a magnetic dipolar at - traction force is induced between the beads and holds them or - ganized into chains . Some of the particles in the chain are not coated with primers . These interspersed probe beads provide rigid surfaces against which actin filaments have to push to elongate , thus mimicking a protrusive structure ( Fig . 1 A ) . When Significance How the continuous polymerization of actin filaments pushes the cell membrane forward in migrating cells is an intriguing issue that has yet to be fully understood . Molecular mechanisms were proposed , but testing them experimentally is a challenge , due to hardly accessible length scales and to the influence of regulatory proteins constantly changing the mechanical properties of poly - merizing filaments . We present an experimental setup designed to minimize the number of parameters influencing filament growth to focus on the mechanism of force generation . We demonstrate that it is consistent with the Brownian ratchet model . Furthermore , we define a criterion for cell migration ef - ficiency and quantify the number of filaments that need to push the membrane to maximize this efficiency . Author contributions : D . D . , M . - F . C . , J . Bibette , and J . Baudry designed research ; D . D . performed research ; D . D . , M . - F . C . , and J . Baudry contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; D . D . and J . Baudry analyzed data ; and D . D . and J . Baudry wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . A . M . is a guest editor invited by the Editorial Board . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : damien . demoulin @ espci . fr . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1414184111 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1414184111 PNAS Early Edition | 1 of 6 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S the magnetic field is turned off , the probe beads freely diffuse out of the magnetic chains . By measuring the magnetic field and the interparticle distance within a pair composed of a probe bead and a primer coated one , the magnetic force opposed to the filaments can be calculated . According to the action - reaction principle , it is equal to the actin growth pressure ( Materials and Methods ) . In the following , we call surface - to - surface distance the gap between actin covered beads and probe beads , averaged over all the pairs in a magnetic chain . Force measurements based on this technique have been successfully used to study electro - static forces ( 18 ) , the stiffness of DNA molecules ( 19 ) , or the elasticity of cross - linked actin gels ( 20 ) . Our experiments are designed to ensure that actin nucleation in bulk is negligible , which is achieved by working close to the actin critical concentration in low salt conditions and by keeping the duration of the experiments within a few tens of minutes . We thus assume that actin polymerization only occurs on the beads . Because the concentration of beads is very low , depletion of the actin monomer pool is negligible , and growth rates remain constant throughout each experiment . The corresponding velocity of free elongation in solution is v o = δ ð k on C − k off Þ = 0 : 42 nm = s , where δ is the size of a monomer , C is the actin monomer con - centration , and k on C ( respectively , k off ) is the rate of monomer attachment ( respectively , detachment ) at the tip of a polymeriz - ing filament ( Materials and Methods ) . We check later in this ar - ticle ( Fig . 2 ) that when filaments are subjected to very small forces , their elongation velocity v tends toward v o . Gelsolin molecules are anchored to the beads via a 3 - nm spacer arm ( Materials and Methods ) acting as a hinge around which filaments can freely pivot ( Fig . 1 D ) . In previous work ( 21 ) , we demonstrated that the loss of rotational freedom of the filaments close to a neighboring bead can generate forces whose origin is entropic . We called this force generation mechanism the entropic model . However , such a soft structure in which fila - ments can rearrange by rotation is not likely to form in vivo where cytoskeleton filaments are generally cross - linked or bundled . To make our system more realistic , our assay is here supple - mented with fascin , a filament bundling protein present at a high concentration in filopodia . The effect of fascin on the organi - zation of the filaments in our setup is visualized by confocal microscopy with fluorescent actin growing on a nonfluorescent isolated bead . In the absence of fascin ( Fig . 1 B ) , single filaments cannot be resolved because of rotational fluctuations around their anchoring point ( Fig . 1 D and SI Text ) . However , in the presence of fascin , static bundles are clearly observed ( Fig . 1 C ) . This presence of bundles is consistent with an energetic balance ( SI Text and Fig . S1 ) showing that in our geometry , it is fa - vorable for filaments to form bundles with fascin , even though they have to bend slightly for bundling to occur ( Fig . 1 E ) . It is thus reasonable to assume that no individual filament coexists with the bundles . Authors have observed that for a molar ratio [ fascin ] / [ actin ] > 0 . 25 , which is the case here , the number of filaments in a bundle saturates to 20 ( 22 , 23 ) . Because about 45 bundles are visible in the image of Fig . 1 C and assuming that the image depth of field is 1 μ m , the total number of filaments per bead N tot can be estimated to be 16 , 000 . When the actin bundles polymerize from the surface of mag - netic beads in a chain , the surface - to - surface distance is in - creasing with time . The relationship between the bead separation velocity that we measure and the filament elongation velocity that we seek to study must be clearly established . For that , we need to ensure that no buckling , reorganization , or damage occurs on exposure to force applied with magnetic probe beads . We first submit the bundles to rapid force ramps and find that B C 3 µm 3 µm 3 µm A D E B Fig . 1 . ( A ) Composite optical microscopy image of a typical experiment . Here , actin polymerizes from primer coated beads ( black ) against fluo - rescently labeled probe beads ( red ) under a magnetic force of 4 . 6 pN ( 2 μ M actin and 2 μ M fascin ) . Cyan arrows indicate the pairs considered for analysis . After 11 min of polymerization , the average surface - to - surface distance is 0 . 30 μ m . ( B and C ) Differences in the organization of actin filaments caused by fascin . Fluorescent filaments growing on a nonfluorescent bead without magnetic field are observed by confocal microscopy . Images are taken in the equatorial plane of the bead after 3 h of polymerization of ( B ) 6 μ M actin ; ( C ) 6 μ M actin and 2 μ M fascin . ( D and E ) Schemes of the organization of the filaments ( green ) anchored to the surface of magnetic beads by flexible primers ( pink ) corresponding , respectively , to B and C . 0 . 45 0 . 40 0 . 35 0 . 30 0 . 25 S u r f a c e t o s u r f a c e d i s t an c e ( µ m ) 250 200 150 100 50 0 Time ( s ) 0 . 5 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 S epa r a t i on v e l o c i t y ( n m / s ) 100 75 50 25 0 Force ( pN ) Fig . 2 . Force - velocity profile of the filaments . Each experimental data point ( blue circles ) corresponds to a single experiment with 2 μ M actin and 2 μ M fascin . Experimental data can be well reproduced by numerical simulation with N = 130 filaments ( red line ) . This force - velocity profile is intermediate between perfect mechanical work sharing v = δ (cid:1) k on Ce − F δ Nk B T − k off (cid:3) ( plain purple line ) and no mechanical work sharing v = δ (cid:1) k on Ce − F δ k B T − k off (cid:3) ( broken purple line ) . ( Inset ) Reproduction of the experiments performed to obtain four of the data points in the force - velocity profile . A linear fit ( gray line ) to the time evolution of the surface - to - surface distance is performed while the force is kept constant : pink circles , F = 3 . 9 pN , v = 0 . 48 nm / s ; black circles , F = 4 . 5 pN , v = 0 . 23 nm / s ; green circles , F = 24 pN , v = 0 . 11 nm / s ; orange circles , F = 98 pN , v = 0 . 02 nm / s . 2 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1414184111 Démoulin et al . their mechanical properties are not altered : they only undergo a slight elastic deformation under compression ( Figs . S2 and S3 and SI Text ) . Second , we check the absence of polymerization - induced reorganization under force by applying to the bundles a long sequence of low - high - low forces ( Fig . S4 and SI Text ) . Under high force , bead separation pauses , and the filaments are kept abutting the surface of the probe bead facing them without elongating . When force is subsequently lowered , filaments re - sume growth with a history - independent velocity . From these geometrical and mechanical characterization ex - periments , it can be concluded that bundled actin filaments be - have in our setup as an array of stiff rods pointing toward the load applied to them over a large range of forces , without un - dergoing any reorganization , buckling , or mechanical damage for the duration of the experiments . As a consequence , the mea - sured bead separation velocity directly equals the filament elongation velocity . Investigation of the Force Generation Mechanism The dynamics of the filaments growing under load from the surface of magnetic beads can now be characterized . Under constant magnetic force , the surface - to - surface distance grows linearly with time , so that the elongation velocity of the filaments can be easily derived ( Fig . 2 , Inset ) . Renewing the experiment with different values of the force allows us to construct the force - velocity profile characterizing the dynamic properties of the fil - aments ( Fig . 2 ) . The obtained profile has a convex shape very similar to the one obtained in the case of the entropic model ( 21 ) . However , the entropic model applies in a configuration where reorganization and rotation of filaments can take place under force , allowing them to grow at a force - insensitive velocity . In contrast here , the force dependence of the elongation velocity suggests that a ratcheting mechanism is at play . In the framework of the Brownian ratchet model , the ex - pression of the elongation velocity for a single filament has the form v = δ (cid:1) k on Ce − F δ k B T − k off (cid:3) ( 4 ) . The corresponding curve lies well below our experimental force - velocity profile ( Fig . 2 ) , indicating that filaments in our setup cooperate to share the mechanical work of moving the load . A simple hypothesis to characterize this cooperation is to assume that the mechanical work is perfectly shared by the N filaments , so that in the above expression of the velocity , F can be replaced by F = N . Schaus and Borisy ( 24 ) demonstrated that this scenario represents the maximum performance a population of filaments can theoreti - cally attain . In our setup , among the 16 , 000 filaments on one bead , only a number N = 120 are actually able to push the neighbor bead ( Materials and Methods ) . Comparing the expres - sion of maximum performance for this value of N with our ex - perimental data clearly shows that mechanical work sharing among the filaments is not optimal ( Fig . 2 ) . No mechanistic model exists to describe the cooperation within an assembly of filaments polymerizing together against a load . To predict the behavior of such an assembly , authors resort to numerical simulations based on the Brownian ratchet at the single filament level ( 25 – 27 ) and on one of different work sharing scenarios ( 24 ) . Integrating a large range of parameters into the simulations has allowed to improve the understanding of the biochemical functioning of the cytoskeleton ( 28 – 30 ) . To support our experimental findings , we adapted the numer - ical model developed by van Doorn et al . ( 25 ) to our spherical geometry ( Materials and Methods and SI Text ) . The numerical simulations well reproduce the force - velocity measurements ( Fig . 2 ) and also the low - high - low force experimental results of Fig . S4 ( Fig . S5 ) . The main assumptions of the model are that ( i ) bundling has negligible effects on polymerization kinetics ( 31 ) ; ( ii ) filaments are incompressible ; and ( iii ) filaments have staggered initial length ( Fig . S6 ) . The latter hypothesis accounts for the beads surface roughness . If the number of filaments is large enough , it is equivalent to assuming random initial lengths ( see SI Text for a detailed discussion of the hypotheses and results of the simu - lations ) . The only parameters in the simulations are k on , k off , the bead radius R b , and the number of filaments able to push the neighbor bead N . They are all determined by independent experiments ( Materials and Methods ) except N . A least - square minimization test yields N = 130 for an optimal fit of the data . This number is close to the value of N = 120 derived from the confocal microscopy observations of Fig . 1 C . Altogether , the geometry of the actin filaments population , the dynamic properties of growth under load , and the numerical simu - lations give a signature of the molecular mechanism of force pro - duction that is consistent with the Brownian ratchet . The numerical simulations allow us to predict the level of cooperation among the filaments , which is intermediate between perfect work sharing and no work sharing . Starting from this observation , we now seek to better quantify the performance of a population of filaments by measuring the mechanical power transmitted to the load . Optimal Regime of Force Transduction Motile cells can tune the mechanical power transmitted by actin filaments to the membrane either by changing the poly - merization kinetic rates ( e . g . , sequestration of monomers and processive polymerization ) or by adjusting the number of filament tips at the leading edge ( e . g . , branching , capping , and severing ) ( 2 ) . Which combination of these parameters results in optimal motility ? One may argue that motility is most efficient when filaments elongate at maximum speed , i . e . , when they virtually feel no load . However , this regime is irrelevant because there is no power transduction in this case . Alternatively , the thermo - dynamic efficiency for N filaments is maximum at the stalling force F stall = Nk B T δ ln (cid:1) k on C k off (cid:3) , at which all of the chemical energy of polymerization is transduced into mechanical work ( 3 ) but the velocity drops to zero . Thus , cell motility has to operate far from these two limits to both maintain a significant speed and a sig - nificant power transduction . In our experimental setup , the mechanical power P transduced from the filaments to the load can be directly measured . Because the elongation velocity of the filaments equals the bead separa - tion velocity , v , P is simply the product of v by the applied force F ( Fig . 3 ) . As anticipated , the data exhibit a maximum in the in - termediate force regime . To interpret this maximum , we derive an analytical expression for P within the same framework as in our numerical simulations ( Materials and Methods ) . The impor - tant physical ingredients in the derivation are that ( i ) the me - chanical properties of the filaments and their lateral interactions due to bundling are neglected , to focus on the geometrical in - teraction of the filaments with the wall ; and ( ii ) actin polymerization is assumed to operate at steady state , so that the distribution of filament tip distances to the load is stationary . We find that P ∼ v o = δ k B T F δ + F δ Nk B T ; [ 1 ] where P is in units of k B T . In the conditions of our experiments with N = 130 , we find good agreement with the experimental data ( Fig . 3 ) but also with the corresponding numerical simulations ( Fig . S7 ) . The slope at the origin P o = Fv o k B T denotes an ideal regime in which filaments polymerize without feeling the influence of the load . At low forces , P remains close to this ideal regime , indicating that transduced power is limited by the intrinsic growth rate and that essentially one filament bears the load , whereas the others lag behind . However , due to the fast decrease of v in this regime of forces ( Fig . 2 ) , P comes to a maximum when Démoulin et al . PNAS Early Edition | 3 of 6 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S a majority of filaments have reached the load ( SI Text ) , at a force that equals F P max = ﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p k B T δ : [ 2 ] In the conditions of our experiments , F P max = 17 pN . Interestingly , F P max is independent of the kinetic parameters . Only the velocity reached at F P max depends on them : we find that v ð F P max Þ = v o = 2 . Moreover , F P max is only slightly sensitive to the number of fila - ments compared with the stalling force that is directly propor - tional to N and thus has a much higher value ( F stall = 210 pN in our system ) . The expression of the power transduced to the load in the case of ideal work sharing among the filaments is P id = F δ k B T (cid:1) k on Ce − F δ Nk B T − k off (cid:3) . The corresponding values of P max and F P max are five times higher than the experimental data ( Fig . 3 , Inset ) , indicating that filaments in our setup work up to about 20 % of their maximum performance ( see SI Text for further discussion of this low yield caused by the stochastic nature of monomer insertion against the load ) . In our system , N is fixed , and the force can be changed to measure the resulting power transduction . In contrast , in vivo , the number of filament tips at the leading edge of a migrating cell can be adjusted by regulatory proteins , whereas the force F opposing their polymerization is fixed by external parameters , mainly the membrane tension . Assuming that our model can be transposed to actin - based cellular motility despite the different biochemical conditions , Eq . 2 suggests that the actin machinery in a motile cell reacts to the amount of force applied at the leading edge by tuning the number of filament tips so that an efficient power transduction is maintained . This finding adds another piece of evidence to the argument that mechanical feedbacks play an essential role in cell motility ( 17 ) . Discussion and Conclusion In this work , we designed an experimental system of actin fila - ments growing in a geometry that closely resembles the con - ceptual view of incompressible filaments polymerizing against a rigid wall . We provided direct evidence that the mechanism by which the wall is pushed forward is a Brownian ratchet at the single filament level . At the level of the whole population of filaments , we estab - lished that transduction of mechanical power by the filaments to the wall is optimal far from the stalling force , when the ampli - tude of thermal fluctuations is large . Importantly , we evidenced that the critical parameter for force production by polymerizing filaments is the square root of the number of filaments times the characteristic Brownian ratchet force . This finding brings up two remarks . First , the kinetic parameters and the mechanical properties of the cytoskeleton play only a secondary role in this step of cell migration . Second , the fact that F P max saturates as ﬃﬃﬃﬃ N p suggests that such polymerization in - duced force transduction cannot be scaled up to forces larger than a few tens of piconewtons . This consideration is consistent with the observation that radically different strategies using molecular motors are used by nature to produce larger forces . The present study characterizes the mechanism of force gen - eration by filaments constrained to polymerize insertionally against a load . We demonstrated in previous work ( 21 ) that when this constraint is relaxed and filaments polymerize freely , the mecha - nism changes . However , in both cases , fluctuations remain the motor of force production and polymerization remains the energy source of this motor . It would thus be interesting to mix pop - ulations of fluctuating and nonfluctuating filaments to compare the respective contribution of the two mechanisms to the me - chanical power . Alternatively , filaments can be further constrained by transient tethering to the load to polymerize processively , which is the case in the presence of formin in filopodia or N - WASP ( neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ) in lamellipodia . It is likely that the Brownian ratchet - based model presented in this article still holds in this situation , with the only effect of tethering being to alter the amplitude of the fluctuations and thus the kinetic parameters , so that F P max remains unchanged . Materials and Methods Proteins and Buffers . Actin was purified from rabbit skeletal muscle as previously described ( 32 ) and labeled with Alexa488 succinimidyl ester . Ca - ATP - G - actin was converted to Mg - ATP - G - actin before each experiment by incubation in 0 . 02 mM MgCl 2 and 0 . 25 mM EGTA . Recombinant human gelsolin was expressed and stored as previously described ( 21 ) . Before prep - aration of each new batch of beads , gelsolin was first dialyzed against 10 mM PBS buffer containing 1 mM EGTA and 0 . 01 wt % NaN 3 and then biotinylated with sulfo - NHS - LC - LC - biotin ( EZ - Link Reagent , spacer arm length , 3 . 05 nm ; Thermo Scientific ) for 45 min at room temperature at a biotin : actin molar ratio of 15 : 1 . The reaction is almost complete ( 21 ) , but a second dialysis was performed to eliminate the unreacted biotins . Bio - tinylated gelsolin was used immediately after preparation . Recombinant human fascin was expressed and purified as previously described ( 33 ) and stored at − 80 °C in Tris buffer [ 50 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM DTT ] . G - buffer contained 5 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 8 ) , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM DTT , F - 127 0 . 5 wt % , and NaN 3 0 . 01 wt % . Polymerization buffer was made by adding 40 mM KCl and 0 . 6 mM MgCl 2 to G - buffer . Actin Kinetics and Thermodynamic Parameters . Critical concentration C crit and rate of monomer attachment k on and detachment k off at the pointed end in our salt conditions were derived elsewhere ( 21 ) from pyrene fluorescence assays ( 34 ) . Results yielded C crit = 0 : 7 μ M , k on = 0 : 12 μ M − 1 · s − 1 , and k off = k on C crit = 0 : 084 s − 1 . From our working concentration of G - actin , C = 2 μ M , the elongation velocity of filaments from the pointed end in solution is v o = k on δ ð C − C crit Þ = 0 : 42nm = s . Sample Preparation . To prepare probe particles , superparamagnetic beads ( Dynabeads M - 270 Carboxylic Acid ; Dynal Life Technologies ) of 2 . 92 μ m in diameter ( see below ) were coated with Alexa488 fluorophores . Thirty microliters of 0 . 3 wt % beads was incubated with 0 . 13 μ M Alexa488 hydroxy - lamine ( Molecular Probes , Life Technologies ) for 2 h under agitationat60°C in 10 mM PBS . Beads were then washed five times in G - buffer and stored at 4 °C in the same buffer . Each batch of gelsolin - coated particles was prepared as previously described ( 21 ) from 10 μ g streptavidin - covered superparamagnetic beads ( Dynabeads M - 270 streptavidin ; Dynal Life Technologies ) of 3 . 04 μ m in 1 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 M e c han i c a l po w e r ( k T s - 1 ) 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Force ( pN ) 4 3 2 1 0 200 100 0 Fig . 3 . Cluster plot of the mechanical power transmitted by the filaments to the neighboring probe bead ( gray disks , data points ; open squares , cluster centroids ; n = 34 ; errors bars , SD ) . Dataset used is the same as in Fig . 2 . A good agreement with the analytical expression of P ( red line ) is obtained . At low forces , the curve remains very close to the intrinsic growth rate - limited regime P o ( blue line ) . ( Inset ) The ideal work sharing model ( green line ) yields values of P max and F P max far above our experimental data . 4 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1414184111 Démoulin et al . diameter ( see below ) and 1 . 5 pmol freshly biotinylated gelsolin , stored at 0 °C in G - buffer and used within 24 h . Before each experiment , 0 . 025 wt % coated beads and 0 . 01 wt % probe beads were mixed in polymerization buffer with G - actin and fascin . The obtained solution was rapidly transferred to a capillary tube ( Vitrocom ) sealed at both ends and attached to a microscope slide . Typically , a single experiment lasted 30 min , and no more than 10 experiments were performed with one batch of gelsolin - coated particles . Force and Distance Measurements . Our experimental setup , made of an inverted optical microscope equipped with a motorized stage and two magnetic coils , was described elsewhere ( 21 ) . A homemade particle tracking routine automatically detected the fluorescent probe beads and averaged the interparticle distance between the relevant pairs of particles in real time . Ten minutes after actin po - lymerization was initiated , a magnetic field of 3 mT ( F ∼ 3 pN ) was applied to form the chains of particles . Next , between 1 and 4 min was necessary to find an appropriate chain ( i . e . , with a large number of interspersed probe beads ) . Only then was a dynamic measurement started , corresponding to time 0 on the graphs . Interparticledistancewasmeasuredevery10s , allowingforthecorrection of magnetic field to keep the magnetic force constant . For mechanical mea - surements , the magnetic field was lowered to 1 mT ( F ∼ 0 : 5 pN ) after formation of the chains and in between the application of force ramps . Each interparticle distance data point was an average over 30 images taken every 100 ms . Calculation of the Surface - to - Surface Distance . Our particle tracking routine measured the beads ’ centroid - to - centroid distance . Surface - to - surface dis - tance was then derived by subtracting the radius of one gelsolin - coated bead and of one probe bead . Radii were determined by applying a very strong magnetic field to a sample of M - 270 streptavidin ( respectively , M - 270 carboxylic acid ) in polymerization buffer . Assuming that particles were in contact , the radius was approximated by half the measured average cen - troid - to - centroid distance . Numerical Simulations . We performed Gillepsie algorithm - based 3D simu - lations of N filaments growing on a bead , perpendicularly to its surface ( 25 ) . A force F was applied to them by a probe bead . We made the following assumptions about the filaments : ( i ) they are rigidly anchored on the surface of the beads ; ( ii ) they are independent , i . e . , the rate k on ( respectively , k off ) of actin monomer attachment ( respectively , detachment ) at the tip of a poly - merizing filament is not modified by bundling ; ( iii ) they are incompressible ; and ( iv ) they have staggered initial lengths within the size δ of a monomer . The system is rotation - invariant around the axis of the pair of beads . Thus , the relevant parameter is the angle θ filaments form with that axis ( Fig . S8 ) . At time t = 0 , the probe bead was positioned as close as possible to the actin covered one without penetrating the filaments . The concentration of G - actin was C = 2 μ M . In these conditions , the relation k on C (cid:2) 2 D = δ 2 ( with D ∼ 1 μ m 2 · s − 1 as the diffusion coefficient of a bead ) is satisfied , which means that the movement of the probe bead is limited by the reaction rate of monomers at the polymerizing tip and not by diffusion ( 4 ) . At each time step , d τ , we randomly chose N times one filament and calculated its distance L i to the probe bead . If L i ≥ δ , a monomer of size δ could attach to filament i with a probability k on Cd τ and detach with a probability k off d τ , with no effect on the position of the probe bead . If L i < δ , monomer attachment probability became k on C exp ½ − F ð δ − L i Þ cos θ i = k B T (cid:3) d τ , and detachment probability was unchanged . In the case of net elongation of filament i , the probe bead was repelled of a distance ð δ − L i Þ cos θ i . In the particular case of L i = 0 and net shortening , the probe bead was moved as close as possible to the actin cov - ered one without penetrating the filaments . At the end of each time step , the surface - to - surface distance was calculated . This situation corresponds to a partial load - sharing scenario in the classification of ref . 24 , characterized in that filaments can push the load a fraction of a monomer forward ( Fig . S6 ) . Analytical Model of Force Transduction by Ratcheting Filaments . Our model is based on the work by van Doorn et al . ( 25 ) , who developed a description valid only at the stalling force . We extended it to a larger range of forces by in - troducing a hypothesis of steady state , which is valid if the force applied to the filaments is well above the characteristic Brownian ratchet force : F (cid:4) k B T = δ . We considered a protrusion of N independent parallel filaments rigidly an - chored at one end and polymerizing at the other end against a movable load . Each filament has a unique initial length i δ = N , i ∈ ½ 1 ; N (cid:3) . The load is positioned to abut the tip of the longest filament . Filaments are thus always situated at distancesgiven by multiples of δ = N from the load , and only one filament can be in contact with it . Only the filaments within a length δ from the load can add length to the protrusion ( Fig . S6 C ) , resulting in an average velocity v + = X N n = 1 k on Cp n ð N − n Þ δ N exp (cid:5) − ð N − n Þ δ N F k B T (cid:6) , [ 3 ] where p n is the probability to find a filament at distance n δ = N from the load . One needs also to consider the decrease of length of the polymer , due to depolymerization of the longest filament , occurring with an average velocity v − = k off δ Np 1 + k off δ N X N n = 2 " np n ∏ n − 1 j = 1 (cid:1) 1 − p j (cid:3) # + k off δ ∏ N − 1 j = 1 (cid:1) 1 − p j (cid:3) : [ 4 ] So that the velocity of the load is v = v + − v − . To decipher the expression of p n , we considered , at a distance n δ = N from the load , the flux of subunits going in the direction of the load Φ + n and in the opposite direction Φ − n . Summing the different contributions from all the filaments , we obtained Φ + n = k on C p n + N − p n v δ and Φ − n = k off p n . The steady - state hypothesis imposes that Φ + n = Φ − n , leading to the following recursion : p n + iN = (cid:7) k off + v = δ k on C (cid:8) i p n ∀ n < N , ∀ i ∈ N [ 5 ] The condition that a given filament can only be found at distances that are multiples of δ = N can be expressed as X ∞ i = 0 = p n + iN = 1 ∀ n < N , [ 6 ] leading to p n + iN = v o − v δ k on C (cid:7) k off + v = δ k on C (cid:8) i , [ 7 ] with v o = δ ð k on C − k off Þ as the elongation velocity of free filaments in solu - tion . p n + iN is independent of n so that the average density of filaments is constant within the intervals ½ i δ ; ð i + 1 Þ δ (cid:3) . The system of equations f v = v + − v − ; v + = f ½ p n ð v Þ(cid:3) ; v − = f ½ p n ð v Þ(cid:3)g can be exactly solved . However , to highlight the main physical ingredients of our model , we made the as - sumption that v (cid:2) v o so that v ∼ v + and arrived at v ∼ v o 1 + 1 N (cid:7) F δ k B T (cid:8) 2 : [ 8 ] The force - velocity profile calculated with this expression is very similar to the one obtained by numerical simulations , all parameters being equal ( Fig . S7 ) . Themechanical powertransmitted totheload , expressedinunitsof k B T , is P = Fv k B T ∼ v o = δ k B T F δ + F δ Nk B T : [ 9 ] This description was derived in planar geometry . The good agreement with the experimental data ( Figs . 2 and 3 ) shows that , in first approximation , one needs not take into account the sphericity of the beads . Number of Filaments Involved in Force Generation . Only a fraction of the fila - mentsonabeadareinvolvedinforcegeneration . Theyareincludedinthecone whose apex is the center of a gelsolin - coated bead and the base is defined by the intersection of filament tips growing freely in solution with the neigh - boring probe bead ( see ref . 21 for the derivation of the geometrical calcula - tion ) . Here with 16 , 000 filaments per bead , we obtain N = 120 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank Olivia du Roure , Julien Heuvingh , David Lacoste , and Guillaume Romet - Lemonne for fruitful discussions and Antoine Jegou , Guillaume Romet - Lemonne , and Bérengére Guichard for preparation and transport of proteins and assistance with using them . This work was supported by Grant ANR - 09 - PIRI - 0001 Actimag from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche . M . - F . C . acknowledges support from the European Research Council ( Advanced Grant ERC 2009 - 249982 - Forcefulactin ) and the Euro - pean Union 7th Framework Program ( System Biology of Mitosis , MitoSys ; Grant 241548 ) . Démoulin et al . PNAS Early Edition | 5 of 6 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S 1 . Pantaloni D , Le Clainche C , Carlier MF ( 2001 ) Mechanism of actin - based motility . Science 292 ( 5521 ) : 1502 – 1506 . 2 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG ( 2003 ) Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 ( 4 ) : 453 – 465 . 3 . Hill TL ( 1981 ) Microfilament or microtubule assembly or disassembly against a force . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 78 ( 9 ) : 5613 – 5617 . 4 . Peskin CS , Odell GM , Oster GF ( 1993 ) Cellular motions and thermal fluctuations : The Brownian ratchet . Biophys J 65 ( 1 ) : 316 – 324 . 5 . Mogilner A , Oster G ( 2003 ) Force generation by actin polymerization II : The elastic ratchet and tethered filaments . Biophys J 84 ( 3 ) : 1591 – 1605 . 6 . Kovar DR , Pollard TD ( 2004 ) Insertional assembly of actin filament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 ( 41 ) : 14725 – 14730 . 7 . Footer MJ , Kerssemakers JWJ , Theriot JA , Dogterom M ( 2007 ) Direct measurement of force generation by actin filament polymerization using an optical trap . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 ( 7 ) : 2181 – 2186 . 8 . CojocD , etal . ( 2007 ) Propertiesoftheforceexertedbyfilopodiaandlamellipodiaand the involvement of cytoskeletal components . PLoS ONE 2 ( 10 ) : e1072 . 9 . Oliver T , Dembo M , Jacobson K ( 1995 ) Traction forces in locomoting cells . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 31 ( 3 ) : 225 – 240 . 10 . Heinemann F , Doschke H , Radmacher M ( 2011 ) Keratocyte lamellipodial protrusion is characterized by a concave force - velocity relation . Biophys J 100 ( 6 ) : 1420 – 1427 . 11 . McGrathJL , etal . ( 2003 ) Theforce - velocityrelationshipfortheactin - basedmotilityof Listeria monocytogenes . Curr Biol 13 ( 4 ) : 329 – 332 . 12 . Marcy Y , Prost J , Carlier MF , Sykes C ( 2004 ) Forces generated during actin - based propulsion : A direct measurement by micromanipulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 ( 16 ) : 5992 – 5997 . 13 . Parekh SH , Chaudhuri O , Theriot JA , Fletcher DA ( 2005 ) Loading history determines the velocity of actin - network growth . Nat Cell Biol 7 ( 12 ) : 1219 – 1223 . 14 . Mueller J , et al . ( 2014 ) Electron tomography and simulation of baculovirus actin comet tails support a tethered filament model of pathogen propulsion . PLoS Biol 12 ( 1 ) : e1001765 . 15 . Greene GW , Anderson TH , Zeng H , Zappone B , Israelachvili JN ( 2009 ) Force amplifi - cation response of actin filaments under confined compression . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 ( 2 ) : 445 – 449 . 16 . Chaudhuri O , Parekh SH , Fletcher DA ( 2007 ) Reversible stress softening of actin net - works . Nature 445 ( 7125 ) : 295 – 298 . 17 . Abu Shah E , Keren K ( 2013 ) Mechanical forces and feedbacks in cell motility . Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 ( 5 ) : 550 – 557 . 18 . Dreyfus R , Lacoste D , Bibette J , Baudry J ( 2009 ) Measuring colloidal forces with the magnetic chaining technique . Eur Phys J E Soft Matter 28 ( 2 ) : 113 – 123 . 19 . Li DC , Lam CN , Biswal SL ( 2010 ) Measuring short - range repulsive forces by imaging directed magnetic - particle assembly . Soft Matter 6 ( 2 ) : 239 – 242 . 20 . Pujol T , du Roure O , Fermigier M , Heuvingh J ( 2012 ) Impact of branching on the elasticity of actin networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 ( 26 ) : 10364 – 10369 . 21 . Brangbour C , et al . ( 2011 ) Force - velocity measurements of a few growing actin fila - ments . PLoS Biol 9 ( 4 ) : e1000613 . 22 . Ishikawa R , Sakamoto T , Ando T , Higashi - Fujime S , Kohama K ( 2003 ) Polarized actin bundles formed by human fascin - 1 : Their sliding and disassembly on myosin II and myosin V in vitro . J Neurochem 87 ( 3 ) : 676 – 685 . 23 . Claessens MMAE , Semmrich C , Ramos L , Bausch AR ( 2008 ) Helical twist controls the thickness of F - actin bundles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 ( 26 ) : 8819 – 8822 . 24 . Schaus TE , Borisy GG ( 2008 ) Performanceof a populationof independentfilaments in lamellipodial protrusion . Biophys J 95 ( 3 ) : 1393 – 1411 . 25 . van Doorn GS , Tanase C , Mulder BM , Dogterom M ( 2000 ) On the stall force for growing microtubules . Eur Biophys J 29 ( 1 ) : 2 – 6 . 26 . Tsekouras K , Lacoste D , Mallick K , Joanny JF ( 2011 ) Condensation of actin filaments pushing against a barrier . New J Phys 13 ( 10 ) : 103032 . 27 . Ramachandran S , Ryckaert JP ( 2013 ) Compressive force generation by a bundle of living biofilaments . J Chem Phys 139 ( 6 ) : 064902 . 28 . Carlsson AE ( 2001 ) Growth of branched actin networks against obstacles . Biophys J 81 ( 4 ) : 1907 – 1923 . 29 . Lee KC , Liu AJ ( 2009 ) Force - velocity relation for actin - polymerization - driven motility from Brownian dynamics simulations . Biophys J 97 ( 5 ) : 1295 – 1304 . 30 . SchreiberCH , StewartM , DukeT ( 2010 ) Simulationofcellmotilitythatreproducesthe force - velocity relationship . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 ( 20 ) : 9141 – 9146 . 31 . Krawczyk J , Kierfeld J ( 2011 ) Stall force of polymerizing microtubules and filament bundles . Europhysics Letters 93 ( 2 ) : 28006 . 32 . Spudich JA , Watt S ( 1971 ) The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J Biol Chem 246 ( 15 ) : 4866 – 4871 . 33 . Ono S , et al . ( 1997 ) Identification of an actin binding region and a protein kinase C phosphorylation site on human fascin . J Biol Chem 272 ( 4 ) : 2527 – 2533 . 34 . Ditsch A , Wegner A ( 1994 ) Nucleation of actin polymerization by gelsolin . Eur J Biochem 224 ( 1 ) : 223 – 227 . 6 of 6 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1414184111 Démoulin et al . Supporting Information Démoulin et al . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1414184111 SI Text Fluctuations of the Filaments on the Beads . In this section , we justify that single filaments cannot be resolved on confocal microscopy images without fascin . For that , we consider the diffusional degrees of freedom of the filaments . Assuming that the poly - merization reaction has reached equilibrium , the filaments are at most 9 μ m long ( Materials and Methods ) , which is of the same order of magnitude as the persistence length of actin ( 1 ) . Contour fluctuations are thus negligible compared with the orientational fluctuations of the filaments about their anchoring point on the beads . Considering in a first approximation the bulk rotational diffusion coefficient of a rigid rod ( 2 ) , one finds D θ ∼ 0 : 06 s − 1 . During the exposure time t = 1 s of the image , the root mean square angular displacement is ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 D θ t p ∼ 0 : 35 rad , corresponding to an arc of 2 . 8 μ m described by the tip of a filament . This simple calculation shows that it is not possible to resolve single filaments in the image . Energetic Cost of Bundles Formation . To demonstrate that the for - mation of bundles is energetically favored in presence of fascin , we compare here the energetic cost of bending filaments to assemble them to the energetic gain of bundling . Ferrer et al . ( 3 ) measured a dissociation energy of two actin filaments bundled together by filamin W = 4 k B T per 20 nm . We assume here the same value for fascin . To evaluate the energetic cost of bending , we consider two filaments in the situation depicted in Fig . S1 ( 4 ) . One filament bends with a radius R on a length s to catch the other one , which remains straight . The total length of the filaments is L = l 1 + l 2 . The bundling energy thus writes U f = − W ð L − l 1 Þ . Geometrical considerations lead to the relation h 2 = R 2 ð 1 − 2cos θ + cos 2 θ Þ . Hence an expression of R can be derived R = h 2 + l 21 2 h ∼ l 21 2 h if h (cid:2) l 1 : [ S1 ] Also if h (cid:2) l 1 , s = R θ ∼ l 1 . The bending energy U b then writes U b = Z λ p k B T R 2 ds ∼ 4 λ p k B Th 2 l 31 : [ S2 ] The balance between U b and U f expresses how much the fil - ament bends to catch the other one . Thus , at equilibrium ∂ (cid:3) U b + U f (cid:4) ∂ l 1 = 0 ⇔ − 12 λ p k B Th 2 l 41 + W = 0 : [ S3 ] With N tot = 16 ; 000 filaments per bead , the mean distance h between two filaments on a bead is given by the expres - sion for the random close packing Φ of disks on a sphere : Φ = N tot π h 2 = 4 8 π R 2bead = 0 : 85 , yielding h ∼ 44 nm . With λ p = 9 μ m ( 1 ) , one obtains a numerical value of l 1 l 1 = (cid:5) 12 λ p k B Th 2 W (cid:6) 1 = 4 ∼ 180 nm : [ S4 ] The hypothesis h (cid:2) l 1 is verified . Filaments growing with the velocity of elongation in solution v o = 0 : 42 nm / s reach the length l 1 after 7 min of polymerization . In all experiments , filaments grow at v o during 10 min before the magnetic field is turned on . Thus , it is reasonable to assume that all filaments are assembled into bundles at all times in the measurements . To create a bigger bundle , filaments further apart on the surface of the bead assemble together , having to bend more and more . Because the number of filaments in a bundle saturates to 20 ( 5 , 6 ) , we can assume that the derivation above is valid for a whole bundle with only a slight deviation of the different parameters . Static Mechanical Properties of the Actin Filaments Populations . A rapid ascending then descending force ramp is applied after 20 and 35 min of polymerization ( Fig . S2 ) . The whole measurement takes 100 s to complete , which is fast enough to consider the length of the filaments as constant . For each curve , the two branches corresponding to the ascending and descending force ramps are almost superimposed , indicating that the filaments are not irreversibly damaged by the force . However , the descending branch is always slightly below the ascending one . This behavior is reproducible ( Fig . S3 ) and may be due to slowly relaxing inter - actions with the surface of probe beads . We notice that at forces below 1 pN , the surface - to - surface distance is similar to the fil - ament length , suggesting that filament growth is not affected by very low load . In the absence of fascin , filaments pivot about their anchoring point to decrease their average angle with the facing probe particle . This way they can accommodate increasingly higher loads . As a consequence , the surface - to - surface distance almost drops to 0 , indicating that the actin corona can be compressed almost 100 % ( 7 ) . In contrast , in the bundled configuration , fil - aments only undergo a 30 – 40 % compression at equivalent loads . The Elongation Velocity of the Filaments Depends on Force . Here we observe the growth of filaments subjected to alternating periods of low and high force to show that their elongation velocity di - rectly depends on the force applied to them ( Fig . S4 ) . Filaments grow at high velocity under low force ( phase A ) . As expected , when the applied force increases , the velocity decreases ( phase B ) . Finally in phase C of low force , the velocity is restored to a similar value as the one measured in phase A . The small difference of 0 . 04 nm / s is not significant compared with the noise in the force - velocity profile ( Fig . 2 ) : for F = 5 : 3 ± 0 : 6 pN , v = 0 : 22 ± 0 : 06 nm / s ( six data points , mean ± SD ) . The velocity thus depends only on applied force and not on the history of the system . The surface - to - surface distance decreases slightly at the be - ginning of phase B because of elastic deformation ( Fig . S2 ) . After phase B , the surface - to - surface distance is restored to a compa - rable value as the one at the end of phase A . Again , the small difference observed ( 30 nm ) is not significant because it is similar to the hysteresis observed in mechanical measurement ( Fig . S2 ) . This result indicates that growth is almost stopped during the high force phase B , with the filaments kept abutting the opposing bead surface . In contrast , in the absence of fascin , previous observa - tions ( 7 ) showed that reorganization and rotation of filaments take place under high force , allowing them to grow in phase B at a force - insensitive velocity , so that they resume growth in phase C at the position that is extrapolated from the data points in phase A ( arrow in Fig . S4 ) . Density of Filaments on the Beads . We show here that the number of filaments on the beads is not modified by the presence of fascin ( e . g . , bundling could impede the growth of some filaments ) . For that , we let fluorescent actin grow on the beads without a magnetic Démoulin et al . www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 1414184111 1 of 5 field and compare the fluorescent intensity around beads in both the free and bundled configurations . The polymerization time ( 3 h ) is long enough to assume the reaction has reached equilibrium . Protein concentrations are 6 μ M Alexa488 - labeled actin in the free configuration and 6 μ M Alexa488 - labeled actin and 2 μ M fascin in the bundled configuration . Fluorescence intensity is measured with Image J software for four beads randomly chosen from dif - ferent batches in each configuration . Fluorescence intensity ( arbi - trary units ) is found to be 11 , 500 ± 3 , 300 in the free configuration and 11 , 600 ± 4 , 600 in the bundled configuration ( mean ± SD ) . These results highlight a relatively large difference in the density of filaments from bead to bead but reveal no statistical difference between the two configurations . Numerical Simulations . Here we discuss in more details the hy - potheses and results of the numerical simulations from which we concluded that the extension of the filaments in our system proceeds by a Brownian ratchet mechanism at the single filament level . As stated in the description of the principle of the simu - lations ( Materials and Methods ) , the system is rotation - invariant around the axis of the pair of beads and the relevant parameter is the angle θ i between a filament i and that axis ( Fig . S8 E ) . The bigger the θ i , the smaller the work filament i has to produce to extend of a monomer length δ . Thus , the average k on ð i Þ increases with θ i , causing the filaments to elongate with different velocities and the actin corona to adopt the shape of the neighbor bead ( Fig . S8 A – D ) . Our numerical simulations neglect the effect of ATP hydrolysis . Indeed , contrary to the barbed end , the elongation velocity of actin filaments from the pointed end varies linearly in a wide range of monomer concentrations from below to above the critical concentration ( 8 ) , which means that ( i ) either the dis - sociation speeds of ATP - actin and ADP - actin are equal at the pointed end or ( ii ) ATP - actin caps are never observed at growing pointed ends , at least in the region of monomer concentrations close to the critical concentration ( in which we are working ) where the elongation velocity is small . This would imply that hydrolysis systematically occurs quickly after the slow association of ATP - actin monomers . Another important hypothesis in our simulations is that lateral attractive interactions between monomers due to bundling are neglected . Taking them into account could alter the distribution of filament tip distances to the load and thus the efficiency of force generation . Krawczyk and Kierfield ( 9 ) showed that , although bundling does alter the thermodynamic constants of filament po - lymerization , it has little influence on the simulated force - velocity profile . We thus expect the behavior of bundled filaments and stiff unbundled filaments to be hard to discriminate , and for this reason , we chose to neglect lateral attractive interactions in our model . During the simulations , after allowing the filaments to grow in the same conditions as in the dynamic experiments , a linear fit to the surface - to - surface distance vs . time data is performed to construct the force - velocity profile . All parameters in the simu - lations are determined by kinetics measurements ( Materials and Methods ) except N , which is set to 130 after a least - square minimization test ( Fig . S7 ) . With all parameters fixed , we finally submit our model to a sequence of forces corresponding to the experimental conditions ( Fig . S5 ) . Due to the incompressibility hypothesis , the simulation does not predict the compression at high force . Apart from that , it reproduces every feature of the experimental curve . In particular , the separation velocity is in - sensitive to the history of force and the surface - to - surface dis - tance remains almost constant during the period of high force . We conclude that the mechanism of force generation in our system is compatible with the Brownian ratchet . Cooperation of Ratcheting Filaments Against the Load . To get more insight into the physics underlying the existence of a maximum in the power curve in Fig . 3 , we calculate the average work h w + i that is done each time a monomer is added to a polymerizing tip situated at a distance less than δ from the load . Knowing that p n is constant on the distance ½ 0 ; δ (cid:3) from the load ( Materials and Methods ) , one obtains h w + i = P Ni = 1 p i F i δ N e − iF δ Nk B T P Ni = 1 p i e − iF δ Nk B T = F δ N Ne − N + 1 N F δ k B T + 1 − ð N + 1 Þ e − F δ k B T (cid:7) 1 − e − F δ Nk B T (cid:8)(cid:7) 1 − e − F δ k B T (cid:8) : [ S5 ] For N (cid:4) 1 and F (cid:4) k B T = δ , the expression simplifies into h w + i ∼ k B T . The average effective distance on which the load is pushed at each monomer addition is thus h x + i ∼ k B T = F . This result means that the fraction of filaments N eff that can effectively push the load are situated at a distance δ − k B T = F from it N eff = X k B T F δ i = 1 p i = v o δ k on C (cid:5) N k B T F δ + F δ k B T (cid:6) N = P k on C : [ S6 ] We can thus give the following interpretation for the shape of the power curve . At forces below F P max , the energetic cost of moving the load by big steps is rather low , so that a few filaments push the load , whereas the rest are lagging behind ( Fig . S6 A and B ) . The power transduction is close to its maximum given by the slope at the origin P o = Fv o k B T , showing that this regime is limited by polymerization speed . In contrast , the regime of forces higher than F P max is limited by thermal fluctuations of the load . A majority of filament tips accumulate close to the wall ( 10 , 11 ) ( Fig . S6 C ) . In the perfect work sharing scenario , any monomer addition to a filament tip produces work and moves the load of a distance δ = N ( 12 ) ( Fig . S6 D ) . The power transduced in this case is P id = F δ k B T (cid:7) k on Ce − F δ Nk B T − k off (cid:8) . In our experimental system , some mono - mer additions result in a big step forward of the load and a large amount of work transduced , whereas others result in no move - ment of the load ( Fig . S6 E ) . As demonstrated by Schaus and Borisy , the efficiency of such a system is significantly lower ( 12 ) . 1 . Isambert H , et al . ( 1995 ) Flexibility of actin filaments derived from thermal fluctua - tions . Effect of bound nucleotide , phalloidin , and muscle regulatory proteins . J Biol Chem 270 ( 19 ) : 11437 – 11444 . 2 . BrennerH ( 1974 ) Rheologyof a dilute suspension of axisymmetric brownianparticles . Int J Multiph Flow 1 ( 2 ) : 195 – 341 . 3 . Ferrer JM , et al . ( 2008 ) Measuring molecular rupture forces between single actin fil - aments and actin - binding proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 ( 27 ) : 9221 – 9226 . 4 . Kuhne T , Lipowsky R , Kierfeld J ( 2009 ) Zipping mechanism for force generation by growing filament bundles . Europhysics Letters 86 ( 6 ) : 68002 . 5 . Ishikawa R , Sakamoto T , Ando T , Higashi - Fujime S , Kohama K ( 2003 ) Polarized actin bundles formed by human fascin - 1 : Their sliding and disassembly on myosin II and myosin V in vitro . J Neurochem 87 ( 3 ) : 676 – 685 . 6 . Claessens MMAE , Semmrich C , Ramos L , Bausch AR ( 2008 ) Helical twist controls the thickness of F - actin bundles . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 ( 26 ) : 8819 – 8822 . 7 . Brangbour C , et al . ( 2011 ) Force - velocity measurements of a few growing actin fila - ments . PLoS Biol 9 ( 4 ) : e1000613 . 8 . Carlier MF , Criquet P , Pantaloni D , Korn ED ( 1986 ) Interaction of cytochalasin D with actin filaments in the presence of ADP and ATP . J Biol Chem 261 ( 5 ) : 2041 – 2050 . 9 . Krawczyk J , Kierfeld J ( 2011 ) Stall force of polymerizing microtubules and filament bundles . Europhysics Letters 93 ( 2 ) : 28006 . 10 . van Doorn GS , Tanase C , Mulder BM , Dogterom M ( 2000 ) On the stall force for growing microtubules . Eur Biophys J 29 ( 1 ) : 2 – 6 . 11 . Tsekouras K , Lacoste D , Mallick K , Joanny JF ( 2011 ) Condensation of actin filaments pushing against a barrier . New J Phys 13 ( 10 ) : 103032 . 12 . Schaus TE , Borisy GG ( 2008 ) Performanceof a populationof independentfilaments in lamellipodial protrusion . Biophys J 95 ( 3 ) : 1393 – 1411 . Démoulin et al . www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 1414184111 2 of 5 θ s h l 1 l 2 R Fig . S1 . Simplified geometry of a bundle of actin filaments considered for energy calculations . 1 10 100 F o r c e ( p N ) 1 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 Surface to surface distance ( µm ) Fig . S2 . Static mechanical properties of the actin filaments populations . Measurements are performed on the same chain of particles after 20 ( red ) and 35 min ( blue ) of polymerization in the free configuration ( broken lines , 2 μ M actin ) and in the bundled configuration ( plain lines , 2 μ M actin and 2 μ M fascin ) . Ar - rowheads indicate the ascending and descending ramps . Length of the filaments calculated from bulk kinetics measurements : 480 nm ( red ) and 840 nm ( blue ) . 4 6 1 2 4 6 10 2 4 6 100 F o r c e ( p N ) 0 . 90 0 . 80 0 . 70 0 . 60 0 . 50 Surface to surface distance ( µm ) Fig . S3 . Successive ascending then descending ramps of force applied to the same chain of beads in the bundled configuration ( 2 μ M actin and 1 μ M fascin ) . The first ramp ( red line ) is applied after 37 min of polymerization , corresponding to a filaments length of 890 nm . After 30 s of rest , a new ramp is applied ( blue line ) . Arrowheads indicate ascending and descending ramps . Démoulin et al . www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 1414184111 3 of 5 0 . 4 0 . 35 0 . 3 0 . 25 0 . 2 0 . 15 0 . 1 0 . 05 0 S u r f a c e t o s u r f a c e d i s t an c e ( µ m ) 800 600 400 200 0 Time ( s ) 5 . 3pN 0 . 29nm / s 55pN 0 . 05nm / s 5 . 1pN 0 . 25nm / s A B C Fig . S4 . Evolution of the surface - to - surface distance during the application of alternating phases of low and high forces to a chain of beads with 2 μ M actin and 2 μ M fascin . For each phase in the sequence , the value of the force is given , as well as the separation velocity derived from a linear fit to the data ( plain gray lines ) . Colors distinguish the phases of low force ( blue ) and high force ( red ) . 0 . 35 0 . 3 0 . 25 0 . 2 0 . 15 0 . 1 0 . 05 0 S u r f a c e t o s u r f a c e d i s t an c e ( µ m ) 800 600 400 200 0 Time ( s ) 5pN 55pN 5pN Fig . S5 . Numerical simulation of the surface - to - surface distance evolution during a force sequence ( red line ) . Experimental data for the bundled configuration are added to the figure ( blue circles ) . For comparison with an incompressible situation , experimental data for the last two periods have been shifted by 70 nm ( light blue circles ) . δ δ δ 1 234 12 34 1 23 4 C D E δ 1 2 34 B δ 1 234 A Fig . S6 . Different scenarios for force production by staggered filaments . Only the filaments whose tip is at a distance less than δ from the wall can produce work . ( A and B ) For F < F P max , essentially one filament supports the load , whereas the rest are lagging behind , resulting in the load moving by big steps . ( C ) For F > F P max , filaments accumulate near the wall . ( D ) In an ideal ratchet , monomer attachment always occurs from the filament whose polymerization causes the minimal advance of the wall , so that each monomer addition produces work . ( E ) In a real system , sometimes a filament close to the wall can produce a big amount of work ( e . g . , filament 2 ) , allowing subsequent monomer additions to occur without producing work ( e . g . , filaments 3 and 4 ) and decreasing the overall efficiency of the system . Démoulin et al . www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 1414184111 4 of 5 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 1 0 S epa r a t i on v e l o c i t y ( n m / s ) 100 75 50 25 0 Force ( pN ) Fig . S7 . Comparison of the experimental force - velocity profile ( blue circles ) with the simulated one ( green line ) and the one calculated with the expression v = v o = h 1 + 1 N (cid:3) F δ k B T (cid:4) 2 i derived from our analytical model ( red line ) . In both the numerical and the analytical model , the number of filaments able to push the neighbor bead is N = 130 . F = 0 pN F = 5 pN F = 20 pN F = 80 pN A E D C B θ i i Fig . S8 . ( A – D ) Cross - sectional views in the equatorial plane of the pair of particles considered in the 3D numerical simulations after filaments have poly - merized 1 , 000 s under constant force . Filaments ( green lines ) are drawn to scale . The black circle represents the average length L filaments would reach if they were growing in solution : L = v o t = 420 nm . ( E ) Diagram depicting how the elongation of the filaments is computed ( see SI Text ) . Démoulin et al . www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 1414184111 5 of 5