rsta . royalsocietypublishing . org Research Cite this article : Gorecki J , Gizynski K , Guzowski J , Gorecka JN , Garstecki P , Gruenert G , Dittrich P . 2015 Chemical computing with reaction – diffusion processes . Phil . Trans . R . Soc . A 373 : 20140219 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rsta . 2014 . 0219 Accepted : 29 April 2015 One contribution of 13 to a Theo Murphy meeting issue ‘Heterotic computing : exploiting hybrid computational devices’ . Subject Areas : chemical physics , hybrid computing , complexity Keywords : mutual information , Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction , microfuidic reactor , evolutionary algorithm Author for correspondence : J . Gorecki e - mail : jgorecki @ ichf . edu . pl Chemical computing with reaction – diffusion processes J . Gorecki 1 , K . Gizynski 1 , J . Guzowski 1 , J . N . Gorecka 2 , P . Garstecki 1 , G . Gruenert 3 and P . Dittrich 3 1 Institute of Physical Chemistry , Polish Academy of Sciences , Kasprzaka 44 / 52 , 01 - 224 Warsaw , Poland 2 Institute of Physics , Polish Academy of Sciences , Aleja Lotnikow 36 / 42 , 02 - 668 Warsaw , Poland 3 Department of Mathematics and Computer Science , Friedrich Schiller University Jena , 07743 Jena , Germany Chemical reactions are responsible for information processing in living organisms . It is believed that the basic features of biological computing activity are reﬂected by a reaction – diffusion medium . We illustrate the ideas of chemical information processing considering the Belousov – Zhabotinsky ( BZ ) reaction and its photosensitive variant . The computational universality of information processing is demonstrated . For different methods of information coding constructions of the simplest signal processing devices are described . The function performed by a particular device is determined by the geometrical structure of oscillatory ( or of excitable ) and non - excitable regions of the medium . In a living organism , the brain is created as a self - grown structure of interacting nonlinear elements and reaches its functionality as the result of learning . We discuss whether such a strategy can be adopted for generation of chemical information processing devices . Recent studies have shown that lipid - covered droplets containing solution of reagents of BZ reaction can be transported by a ﬂowing oil . Therefore , structures of droplets can be spontaneously formed at speciﬁc non - equilibrium conditions , for example forced by ﬂows in a microﬂuidic reactor . We describe how to introduce information to a droplet structure , track the information ﬂow inside it and optimize medium evolution to achieve the maximum reliability . Applications of droplet structures for classiﬁcation tasks are discussed . 2015TheAuthor ( s ) PublishedbytheRoyalSociety . Allrightsreserved . 2 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 . Introduction In daily life , everybody can observe the success of information processing based on semiconductor devices . It can be measured by Moore’s law [ 1 ] saying that the circuit complexity , and thus its functionality doubles in less than 2 years time . On the other hand , it is obvious that the trend predicted by Moore’s law cannot be sustained indeﬁnitely . Therefore , despite fantastic progress of the microprocessor industry , there is a motivation to study alternative methods of computing . Unconventional computing [ 2 – 6 ] is a ﬁeld of research dedicated to chemistry , physics or biology inspired computational strategies , structures and substrates . In contrast to the conventional computer technology based on von Neumann concept of computer architecture [ 7 ] , unconventional computing interprets the natural time evolution of a medium as a series of information processing operations . Of course , in a spatially distributed medium , the time evolution of all regions proceeds simultaneously . As a consequence , typical algorithms executed on an unconventional computer are highly parallel . It is believed that chemical reactions stand behind information processing performed by living organisms . One can expect that substrates and algorithms used by nature are highly optimized . Mankind is smart , but it is hard to compare less than a century of the progress in computer science with a billion years of continuous optimization of information processing strategies adopted by nature . A naive representation of an animal brain describes it as a structure composed of active centres ( nerve cells ) that are able to integrate , process and transmit information coded in electrochemical signals . The structure of interconnected cells is crucial for brain functionality . Although brain cells self - develop during embryo evolution , the brain reaches its full functionality after the process of training , when interconnections between cells are established . Let us focus our attention on a few aspects of information processing strategy mentioned above . In order to follow nature in creation of an information processing device that transforms information coded in concentrations of reagents , we need a chemical medium with highly nonlinear properties that can integrate incoming signals in a non - trivial way . Next , we have to discover non - equilibrium conditions , at which a structure of the medium , useful for information processing applications , can self - develop . And ﬁnally , we have to identify factors that modify interactions in the medium and can be used in the process of learning . Of course , it would be ideal if in the laboratory we are able to use the same biochemical processes that are responsible for information processing in an animal brain . However , such approach would be difﬁcult and expensive . Chemical reactions showing qualitatively similar evolution as nerve cells [ 8 ] have been studied for many years . In this paper , we imitate the chemical information processing activity considering the well known Belousov – Zhabotinsky ( BZ ) reaction [ 9 ] . Among the reagents of this reaction , one can distinguish activator ( HBrO 2 ) , the concentration of which can grow autocatalytically at the appropriate conditions , and inhibitors responsible for suppressing the production of activator . The reaction is relatively simple for both modelling and experiment because different states of the medium , corresponding to the oxidized and the reduced forms of the catalyst , have different colours . For properly selected initial concentrations of reagents , BZ medium can show simple or complex oscillations or exhibit excitability [ 9 ] . Excitation of a medium , seen as a rapid increase in concentration of the activator and next of the inhibitor , can occur when the concentration of reaction activator exceeds a threshold value or concentration of inhibitor falls below a certain level . For a spatially distributed medium , propagating pulses or different types of spatio - temporal structures can be observed [ 10 ] . If a perturbation leading to a high activator concentration is local , then activator diffuses around . Excitation at a neighbouring point can occur if activator concentration at this point becomes sufﬁciently large . Subsequent excitations of the neighbouring points lead to formation of a propagating pulse of excitation ( a spike ) . A spike dissipates the chemical energy of the medium . In a typical excitable medium , spike shape converges to a stable form independent of the initial conditions . Its velocity approaches a stable value [ 11 ] . Many computational applications of a nonlinear medium relate information with the presence of spikes at selected points of the medium . Having in mind that reaction and diffusion determine 3 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) Figure 1 . Image transformations observed during the time evolution of oscillating medium with Ru - catalysed BZ reaction . ( a ) Initially projected image ; ( b – f ) a sequence of snapshots showing image processing during a typical time evolution ( J . Szymanski 2008 , personal communication ) . Initial phase differences are sharp . They decrease in the following cycles as the result of reagent diffusion smoothing out contours of subsequent images . the time evolution of excitations , the information processing with such a system is called reaction – diffusion computing [ 4 ] . A version of BZ reaction catalysed with a ruthenium complex can be efﬁciently controlled with illumination [ 9 ] , because the blue light activates such a catalyst and leads to production of Br − ions that inhibit the reaction [ 12 ] . Under illumination , the excitability of BZ medium decreases . If an unilluminated medium is self - excitable ( oscillatory ) , then oscillation period increases with light intensity . For larger illuminations , the medium becomes excitable . It has a stable steady state directly attracting all small perturbations . However , if a perturbation exceeds a threshold value , then it can grow signiﬁcantly during the relaxation towards the stable state . For yet larger illumination , the medium becomes sub - excitable . Now spikes can propagate , but are no longer stable and can disappear after a ﬁnite time . Finally , a highly illuminated medium does not respond to external excitations and does not allow for wave propagation . Two successful information processing applications , proposed over two decades ago , increased the interest in computing with BZ medium . One of them is the direct application of oscillatory , light - sensitive BZ reaction for image processing [ 13 , 14 ] . The algorithm is very simple : take a spatially distributed BZ medium , for example in a form of a membrane soaked with the solution of reagents . Project the processed image on the medium for about a minute . Next , switch the illumination off and observe the time evolution of the medium . Initial illumination of regions corresponding to black , grey or white parts of the image are different ( cf . ﬁgure 1 ) . Therefore , at illumination stage , concentrations of reagents in the corresponding parts of the medium are different which means that the initial phases of chemical oscillations differ . In an oscillating BZ 4 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A B Figure2 . PulsesofexcitationpropagatinginalabyrinthobservedinanexperimentwithRu - catalysedBZreaction . Theexcitable areas are dark , the non - excitable light . Pulses of excitation can be seen as light lines at the dark background . The source of a train of pulses ( a tip of a silver wire with diameter 1 mm ) is placed at the point A . reaction , the medium colour is related to the phase . As a result , during the natural evolution of the medium such operations like colour inversion , contour enhancement or image smoothing are performed . An example of the time evolution that returns a sequence of transformed images is presented in ﬁgure 1 . After local excitation , spikes expand through the whole excitable medium . Therefore , propagating excitation pulses can be used to track the shortest distance between two points in a labyrinth [ 15 , 16 ] . The idea is presented in ﬁgure 2 . The structure of the labyrinth is projected on the membrane soaked with reagents of photosensitive BZ reaction . The unilluminated labyrinth channels are excitable and support propagating excitation pulses . The illumination outside the channels is so intense that in those regions the medium is non - excitable . The illuminated medium is characterized by a single strongly attractive stable state , so excitations of the illuminated part are quickly damped . Let us consider two points inside the labyrinth ( e . g . A and B in ﬁgure 2 ) . In order to verify if there is a path in the labyrinth with length shorter than L , one can excite the medium at the point A and observe if the excitation at the point B appears before time t = L / v , where v is the velocity of an excitation pulse . The problem is decided within a time that does not depend on the labyrinth complexity . A recent modiﬁcation of the algorithm [ 17 ] allows one to track the shortest path linking the selected points . The computational applications of BZ medium mentioned above have motivated further studies in the ﬁeld . In typical applications , a membrane with non - homogeneous chemical properties has been considered . Computational properties of the medium are determined not only by the kinetics of chemical processes , but also by the structure of the medium [ 18 ] . Geometries of excitable and non - excitable regions that deﬁne the basic logic gates have been described [ 19 – 25 ] . In § 2 , we recall some results illustrating information processing with compartmentalized BZ medium and brieﬂy discuss the construction of XOR gate . However , the structures of presented devices have to be developed by an intelligent designer and there is no room for self - generation of them ( although teaching of devices with stiff geometrical structures is possible if feedback is introduced [ 26 ] ) . Quite recently , the interest in computing with BZ reaction has shifted towards 5 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . more ﬂexible media in which the structure of medium can be transformed in time [ 27 , 28 ] . One interesting approach considers droplets containing solution of BZ reagents ( BZ droplets ) surrounded by a solution of lipids in an organic phase . BZ droplets form a stable structure of interacting nonlinear centres [ 28 ] . An excitation can propagate from one droplet to another through a lipid bilayer , thus information coded in excitation pulses can be transmitted between droplets . Moreover , BZ droplets located on a liquid substrate can move . In § 3 , we discuss how to generate ensembles of BZ droplets in microﬂuidic reactors , how to code information in oscillation frequency and how to select the strategy of droplet teaching . 2 . Information processing with compartmentalized excitable Belousov – Zhabotinsky medium Devices that process information with BZ reaction have been studied both experimentally and in computer simulations . The majority of numerical models of BZ reaction kinetics were derived as simpliﬁcations of the Field – Koros – Noyes reaction mechanism [ 29 , 30 ] . Simulation results presented in the majority of recently published papers are based on the four - variable model [ 31 ] and on two - or three - variable Oregonator - type models [ 32 , 33 ] . The simplest , yet showing a reasonable agreement with experiment , model of a photosensitive , Ru - catalysed BZ reaction is the two - variable Oregonator model [ 12 ] : ∂ u ∂ t = 1 (cid:3) · (cid:2) u − u 2 − ( f · v + φ ) u − q u + q (cid:3) + D u ∇ 2 u ( 2 . 1 ) and ∂v ∂ t = u − v + D v ∇ 2 u . ( 2 . 2 ) Here , u and v denote the dimensionless concentrations of bromous acid HBrO 2 and of the oxidized form of the catalyst Ru ( bpy ) 3 + 3 that acts as reaction inhibitor . Model parameters ( (cid:3) , f , q ) are selected such that the numerical results look qualitatively similar to the experimental data . In equation ( 2 . 1 ) , φ describes the rate of bromide production and is proportional to the applied illumination . Typical experimental conditions are selected such that the unilluminated medium ( φ = 0 ) oscillates . For low light intensity , it becomes excitable so the system of equations ( 2 . 1 ) and ( 2 . 2 ) should allow for propagation of spikes . A very careful tuning of medium parameters ( φ ) produces wave fragments that do not shrink or expand while propagating over short distances and their shapes depend on initial perturbations [ 34 ] . If the medium is exposed to high intensity of light , then it exhibits no nonlinear behaviour , because for φ > > 0 the system of equations ( 2 . 1 ) and ( 2 . 2 ) has a strongly attractive stable state . In the majority of studies on information processing with BZ reaction , a compartmentalized excitable medium composed of excitable and non - excitable ( highly illuminated ) regions was considered [ 18 , 25 ] . Attention was focused on an excitable medium because there are obvious qualitative analogies between the evolution of such medium and of nerve cells . If a perturbation of such medium does not exceed the threshold value , then the system remains at its stationary state and shows no activity that can be interpreted as information processing . Local perturbations that are sufﬁciently strong can generate spikes propagating through the medium . Of course , the active elements of an animal brain are separated by passive region non - penetrable for the nerve impulses . In reaction – diffusion computing medium , compartmentalization means that apart from the excitable parts , the system also contains non - excitable regions that separate the excitable parts . Such regions can correspond to highly illuminated areas . If excitable and non - excitable parts of the medium are differentiated by illumination level only , then all reagents can freely diffuse between these parts . In simulation , the required structure of excitable and non - excitable parts is deﬁned by space - dependent illumination φ ( r ) in equation ( 2 . 1 ) , whereas all other parameters of the model do not depend on the space variable . If diffusion of activator is allowed , then non - excitable barriers separating the excitable regions can play an active role in transformations of trains of spikes . A pulse of excitation can pass 6 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 ( a ) ( b ) 0 . 151 0 . 515 0 . 545 0 . 419 0 . 451 0 . 451 0 . 484 Figure 3 . Snapshots from the experimental realization of a distance sensor [ 38 ] . ( a ) The source : 1 mm thick silver wire placed 2 mm away from the sensor ; ( b ) the source was 12 mm away . The firing numbers are given next to the corresponding channels . from one excitable region to another if the barrier is narrow . Obviously , a wide barrier is non - penetrable . However , there is a range in barrier widths for which spike penetration is a complex process depending on the angle between spike wavevector and the normal to the barrier boundary . A spike with wavevector normal to the boundary can cross a wider barrier than a spike that propagates parallel to it [ 22 ] . It was observed that for a speciﬁc range of barrier widths , a frequency transformation occurs , i . e . only a certain fraction of spikes reaching the barrier is able to cross it [ 35 – 37 ] . The most stable transformation returns the signal at half of the original frequency , but the other ﬁring numbers were also observed . The fact that a ﬁring number is very sensitive to all parameters of the wave train can be used for sensing distance between the source of excitation and a sensor formed by a set of channels . Experimental results are shown in ﬁgure 3 [ 38 ] . The medium is composed of an excitable part ( dark—non - illuminated ) separated from four excitable channels by a non - excitable gap ( light— illuminated ) . The channels operate as a distance sensor . If the gap width is properly selected , then by comparing the frequency of signals in the channels one can extract information on the distance from the source of periodic excitations located somewhere in the excitable part . If the source ( a silver wire seen in the left part of the photo ) is far away , then the angles between the gap boundaries and wavevectors of excitation rings expanding from the source are almost the same for all gaps . As a result , we observe similar frequencies of signals in all channels . If the source is close to the set of channels , then angles are signiﬁcantly different , and so are the frequencies of transmitted trains of spikes . As a result , the structure of excitable channels can sense a distance from a source of excitations without measuring it . A reaction – diffusion medium is also able to integrate signals . As demonstrated in [ 39 ] , two excitations produce a stronger perturbation than a single one . A gap separating two excitable channels can be selected such that two pulses propagating in opposite directions along a gap inside the input channel and annihilating after collision can excite the medium in the output channel . On the other hand , a single pulse propagating in the input channel does not produce an excitation at the output [ 39 ] . This property can be generalized and we can ﬁnd parameters of the medium such that an output signal appears only after a certain number of inputs is active . Figure 4 illustrates simulated evolution of spikes , exciting neuron - like structure . The parameters were selected such that this chemical neuron becomes activated only if three or more of its inputs are excited [ 40 ] . 7 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 ( a ) ( b ) 0 20 25 15 10 5 5 10 15 20 25 0 . 5 0 20 25 15 10 5 5 10 15 20 25 0 . 5 0 20 25 15 10 5 5 10 15 20 25 0 . 5 0 20 25 15 10 5 5 10 15 20 25 0 . 5 20 15 y ( a r b . un it s ) x ( arb . units ) 10 5 5 2 1 C A 3 4 25 20 15 10 Figure 4 . Numerical simulations of an artificial chemical neuron constructed with structured excitable medium . ( a ) The geometry of excitable ( dark ) and non - excitable areas ( white ) ; ( b ) the time evolution of neuron excitation by three arriving stimuli . The medium parameters have been selected such that the neuron is excited by any three stimuli , but no combination of two stimuli can trigger excitation [ 40 ] . The sensor presented in ﬁgure 3 illustrates the case where reaction – diffusion medium detects the distance from the source without numerical representation of the result . Applications of chemical media for digital information processing are also popular . The binary representation is the simplest information coding that can be implemented in a chemical excitable medium . A high concentration of the reagent responsible for excitation observed at a given point of space and at 8 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a given time represents the logical TRUE state . A concentration below the assumed threshold is interpreted as the logical FALSE . Such binary coding has been considered in the majority of publications on information processing with an excitable BZ reaction [ 18 , 22 , 25 ] . Within such interpretation , a propagating excitation pulse represents a bit of information travelling in space and information is processed in regions of space where pulses interact . An important benchmark for the usefulness of unconventional computing medium is its ability to produce the logic gates [ 22 , 25 ] . Logic gates are the physical embodiment of Boolean logic operations that form the foundation for digital information processing . Circuits of logic gates can be connected to create machines capable of performing universal computation [ 41 ] . Therefore , the demonstration that a functionally complete set of logic gates can be constructed proves that the considered medium can be used to build a universal computer . Studies on logic operations executed by excitation pulses have a long history . Toth & Showalter [ 19 ] described logic gates with BZ waves travelling along thin capillary tubes . Steinbock et al . [ 21 ] implemented logic gates by ‘printing’ a catalyst of the BZ reaction onto a facilitating medium . In simulation studies [ 22 , 23 ] , the construction of logic gates relies upon geometric patterns of non - excitable regions imposed on an excitable area . The gates based on excitable medium and information coded in the presence of excitation pulses can be concatenated to perform complex information processing operations . Time synchronization of input signals can be achieved by adjustment of lengths of interconnecting channels . Adamatzky presented alternative designs by combining the principles of collision - based computing on a precipitating chemical substrate [ 24 , 42 ] . Figure 5 illustrates the interactions between excitation pulses in a structure of excitable and non - excitable regions that form the XOR gate . The gap widths have been selected such that only the pulses propagating perpendicularly to the gap can penetrate it , whereas the ones moving along the gap cannot activate the medium behind . This example shows that in information processing applications , the geometrical structure of medium is equally as important as the kinetics of reactions involved [ 18 , 25 ] . Complex information processing operations can be performed even for relatively simple reaction kinetics if the geometrical distribution of regions with high or low excitability level is carefully prepared . In a series of recent papers , Adamatzky and co - workers considered the logic gates , as well as some selected arithmetic operations , executed by a system of sub - excitable discs [ 34 , 43 – 46 ] . Their simulation results were supported by experiments with Ru - catalysed BZ reaction in which the catalyst was immobilized on a membrane and the membrane was placed in a solution of the other reagents of BZ reaction [ 46 ] . Areas of low - intensity illumination formed sub - excitable interiors of discs . A transition from rectangular channels forming a logic gate like that in ﬁgure 5 to discs was motivated by research on ensembles of droplets as an information processing medium [ 47 ] . 3 . Information processing with Belousov – Zhabotinsky droplets Devices described in § 2 were based on the geometry of excitable and non - excitable areas invented by a human designer . However , structures interesting for information processing applications can spontaneously appear in a ternary system at speciﬁc concentrations of oil , water solution of BZ reagents and surfactant . For example , double - diamond structure represents a set of centres connected with four nearest neighbours and resembles a simple neural network . Such structure can self - generate at speciﬁc thermodynamic conditions . At the conditions where this phase is the only thermodynamically stable one , it will expand through the whole medium . Moreover , the thermodynamic stability guarantees that broken connections between centres are re - established . If we ﬁnd a computing application of a chemical medium in a double - diamond structure , then the resulting system will have properties of self - growth and self - repairing . However , as far as we know , no computing application of such structure has been reported yet . Nevertheless , the idea of using a multicomponent medium containing an active component , a non - excitable organic phase and a stabilizing surfactant sounds so attractive that studies in this direction have been carried out for many years . Here , we concentrate our attention on the simplest system of that kind : droplets containing solution of BZ reagents in an organic phase . 9 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) O I1 I2 time Figure5 . Numericalsimulationsofexcitationpropagationinastructureofexcitablechannels ( black ) illustratedin ( a ) . I1andI2 are the input channels and O is the output . ( b ) The evolution for spikes arriving from both input channels . The spikes annihilate in the central area and no output pulse is produced . ( c ) The evolution in the case when one of the input channels is excited . In this case , a spike appears in the output [ 18 ] . Experiments on micelles and droplets encapsulating BZ medium [ 48 – 51 ] started a new trend in chemical information processing . The presence of a lipid layer does not change the kinetics of millimetre - size BZ droplets with mallonic acid as a reactant . It has been observed that droplets stabilized by lipids or surfactants can communicate [ 28 , 49 – 52 ] and their time evolution resembles operations performed by an artiﬁcial neural network . If asolectin lipids are used , then excitatory coupling is observed . Information between droplets is transmitted by excitation pulses that can propagate through a separating lipid bilayer [ 28 ] . Arrays of millimetre - size BZ droplets can be assembled by hand - pipetting ; however modern microﬂuidic devices offer more efﬁcient droplet generation methods . ( a ) Generation of Belousov – Zhabotinsky droplets in microfluidic reactors Microﬂuidics facilitates massive production and precise manipulation of droplets inside microchannels from nanolitres up to microlitres in volume . Recently developed techniques [ 53 , 54 ] enable generation of droplets on - demand by using valves to control the ﬂows on a chip in real time . This method allows for formulation of arbitrary sequences of droplets with speciﬁed 10 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . BZ ( A ) oil carrier ( a ) ( b ) BZ ( B ) outlet Figure 6 . ( a ) Layout of the microfluidic chip for generation of a double emulsion with BZ solution as the encapsulated phase and oil as the shell phase . The two different components BZ ( A : sulfuric acid , malonic acid , ruthenium complex and potassium bromide ) and BZ ( B : sodium bromate and bathoferroin ) mix on the chip which prevents precipitation of gas bubbles . The sequence of BZ droplets is encapsulated at the first T - junction , gets carried downstream at the second T - junction and relaxes towards final structure in the long and wide outlet chamber . ( b ) An example of a multiple droplet containing nine aqueous BZ cores generated in the microfluidic reactor . ( Online version in colour . ) volumes and for assembling them into structures of well - deﬁned topology ( networks ) [ 54 , 55 ] . In our experiments , we used a combination of ﬂow control and conﬁnement to generate structures of a few droplets . We used a recently reported method [ 54 ] of encapsulation of multiple droplets containing aqueous solution ( cores ) inside a single oil capsule ( shell ) . The layout of microﬂuidic chip is illustrated in ﬁgure 6 a . Two narrow channels supplying immiscible phases met at a T - junction at which the aqueous phase broke into droplets inside the oil phase ( 5mgml − 1 solution of asolectin in hexadecane ) . This segmented ﬂow was subsequently cut and transported as a plug downstream by the third carrier phase ( ﬂuorinated ﬂuid 3M Novec 7500 ; in order to prevent wetting of the walls by both water and oil we used a commercial coating of 3M Novec 1720 ) , immiscible with both water and oil . Encapsulation of the aqueous phase by oil occurred spontaneously due to complete wetting of water by oil occurring because of sufﬁciently low water – oil and oil – carrier interfacial tensions ( as compared with water – carrier tension ) . The channel downstream of the junction diverged in width such that the cores inside the plug moved closer towards each other and ﬁnally touched as the plug moved downstream . We chose the volume of the cores to be large enough as compared with the width of the outlet channel so that all the droplets always touched the walls of the channel and maintained their linear order without rearranging towards a more compact three - dimensional structure . Injecting the BZ solution directly into the channels on the chip resulted in immediate precipitation of bubbles of gas as a side product of the reaction . Compression and decompression of the bubbles occurring due to jumps in pressure caused by opening and closing of the valves resulted in residual ﬂows impossible to control or predict . This in turn spoiled control over the generation of droplets . However , the precipitation of gas stopped as soon as the droplets got encapsulated inside the oil phase . Accordingly , we decided to split the substrates of the BZ 11 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . reaction into two separate streams ( ﬁgure 6 a ) which mixed on the chip just upstream of the junction such that the solution got in contact with oil almost immediately after mixing . By using this method , we never observed bubbles and recovered full control over formation of droplets . ( b ) Frequency coding of information in Belousov – Zhabotinsky medium The construction of logic gates with compartmentalized excitable medium described in the previous section can be applied to BZ droplets , but the recent experiments performed within the NEUNEU project [ 47 ] have shown that it is difﬁcult to control a stable network with excitable BZ droplets . On the other hand , it is relatively easy to make a structure composed of interacting droplets containing oscillatory medium . It is also easy to ﬁx required period of oscillations by selecting proper concentrations of reagents . These experimental facts encouraged us to introduce a new concept of information coding based on frequency of local oscillations . Numerical simulations conﬁrmed by experiments predict that high - frequency oscillations can expand through the medium composed of oscillatory droplets analogously to expansion of excitations in an excitable medium [ 56 ] . The phenomenon is illustrated in ﬁgure 7 where the time evolutions for different sets of droplets generated in a microﬂuidic reactor are shown . It is known that frequency of oscillations depends on the droplet size [ 56 , 57 ] . It seems that a few different phenomena can be responsible for this effect . In [ 57 ] , the effect is explained by reactions between organic radicals and oxygen diffusing from the oil phase . Our experiments on the inﬂuence of droplet size on oscillation period in separated droplets were performed for different concentrations of BZ reagents and another type of oil ( decane ) . We observed a signiﬁcant increase in oscillation period for droplets with diameters below 1mm . The same effect was observed in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions . In the latter case , decane was argonated for 30 min and the experiment was performed in an argon atmosphere . Therefore , we believe that in our experiments , activator diffusion into the oil phase was responsible for the decrease in oscillation frequency . The escape of activator decreases its concentration inside a droplet . The process becomes more important for large surface - to - volume ratio . As a result , if a droplet is small then the time to reach activator concentration necessary for self - excitation is longer . There is a range of droplet sizes in which smaller droplets oscillate with a lower frequency than the larger ones . Figure 7 shows space – time plots for a sequence of droplets encapsulated inside a single plug of oil ( hexadecane ) . In order to analyse time evolution inside them , we plotted the observed intensity of a blue colour along the horizontal line connecting the centres of the droplets , indicated in ﬁgure 7 a , as a function of time . Initially , the droplets oscillated independently and with different periods . After approximately 10 min , the chemical connections between the droplets were established and the chemical waves started propagating through the structure , i . e . the oscillations of all the droplets became synchronized . Seemingly , the droplet with the shortest period of oscillation initiated the train of pulses propagating through the medium . The results shown in ﬁgure 7 a correspond to droplets with equal volumes . In the second experiment ( ﬁgure 7 b ) , we modiﬁed the structure such that the droplet on the right had a volume two times larger than the remaining ones . In this case , we also observed initially independent oscillations followed by gradual synchronization of all droplets . After approximately 15 min of the experiment , we observed a stationary state , i . e . waves initiated by the large droplet propagated through the whole structure . The dominance of the large droplet was observed to be independent of its position in the structure ( ﬁgure 7 c ) . In the case of two large droplets placed at both ends of the chain ( ﬁgure 7 d ) , we observed a stationary state ( or quasi - stationary ) in which independent waves were simultaneously initiated at both ends . The waves met approximately at the middle of the droplet sequence and annihilated . These examples demonstrate that interconnected droplets ﬁnally oscillate with the same frequency imposed by the fastest oscillating unit . Having in mind the analogies between expansion of high - frequency oscillations between oscillatory droplets and spike propagation in an excitable medium , we can introduce frequency - based Boolean information coding . High - frequency oscillations at a point of a medium 12 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( a ) ( b ) 1 0 m i n ( c ) ( d ) Figure 7 . Space ( horizontal ) – time ( vertical ) plots of observed time evolution of spikes in linear chains of BZ droplets , encapsulatedinathinshellofoilandconfinedbythesidewallsofthechamber . Thewidthofthechannelinallcaseswas2 mm . The structure of droplets is illustrated above the corresponding space – time plot . The black line in ( a ) indicates the position wherecolourofthemediumwasmeasured . Fourdifferentcasesareshown : ( a ) sevendropletsofequalvolume , ( b , c ) onedroplet two times larger than the others and ( d ) two large droplets at the ends . Note that in case ( c ) , one of the connections ( with the rightmostdroplet ) wasnotestablished . Thepositionsoflargerdropletsin ( b – d ) areindicatedbyarrows . Incase ( d ) , thestructure drifted slowly along the channel during the first 5 min of experiment , which leads to a slight perturbation of the space – time diagram ( tilting of the dark lines representing connections between droplets ) . correspond to the logic TRUE state , whereas low - frequency oscillations represent logic FALSE . It has been shown that the logic gates for signals coded in oscillation frequency can be constructed [ 56 ] . Therefore , such coding is universal and can be applied to any oscillatory medium . Obviously , processing information coded in frequency is much slower than in the case of information coding with the presence of excitation pulses . In the second case , the output state is known immediately after an excitation pulse arrives , whereas the output of the system in which information is coded in frequency of oscillations should be observed for a number of periods to decode its state . Despite its slowness , the frequency coding allows one to process information with oscillatory medium , where the coding based on the presence or absence of excitation pulses does not work . ( c ) Strategy of training for Belousov – Zhabotinsky droplet - based classifiers Although it was shown that chemical processing of information is universal , and all logic gates can be constructed from a reaction – diffusion medium , neither the speed of such gates nor their size can compete with modern silicon computers . Here , we focus on chemical computers that can perform a complex classiﬁcation function , i . e . that can discriminate a class from a number of input 13 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . parameters . Usually , a classiﬁcation problem is related with a database that includes a fraction of the possible cases . Each logic gate can be seen as a classiﬁcation problem for which the database is complete and the class is the gate output . We demonstrate that chemical classiﬁers can be formed by individual training applied to a common structure of interacting , nonlinear centres . In a classiﬁcation problem , an object is assigned to a given output class ( category ) based on a set of attributes called predictors . The predictor values are provided as inputs to an algorithm performing the classiﬁcation task and the algorithm’s result indicates to which output class the input data belong . A high - accuracy classiﬁcation algorithm can be obtained as the result of teaching process . Typically , a dataset contains a number of test cases with known output classes that can be used to test the progress of the training . This approach is mainly used in machine learning techniques where the ﬁnal algorithm is implemented for standard , silicon computers . In the following , we demonstrate that a similar training strategy can be adopted for designing reliable chemical classiﬁers . A chemical classiﬁer can be implemented in a network of interconnected oscillatory BZ droplets . In such a system , the values of predictors describing a single test case are translated to input signals applied to droplets working as inputs of the network using an external factor controlling the BZ reaction ( e . g . light illumination ) . Then , interactions between chemical excitations in the medium are responsible for information processing . The time evolution of chemical activity inside the network can be traced and used as the output signal . Due to the continuous , spatial and temporal character of chemical excitations , a large number of different interactions between the droplets are possible and the output signal can be very complex . Therefore , the system answer in such a form can be difﬁcult to interpret . In order to reduce the complexity of the signal , the time evolution in a single droplet is transformed into a discrete form as shown in ﬁgure 8 . In such an approach , time is divided into a series of intervals ( frames ) with length (cid:5) t . The frames in which a droplet was in the excited state are marked with symbol 1 , whereas the other ones , corresponding to the reduced droplet state , are labelled as 0 . Note that usually , the concentrations of BZ reagents do not change uniformly in the whole droplet volume and thus also spatial discretization should be applied . In the simplest scenario , one can assume that a droplet in which a chemical excitation propagates ( even if it covers only a small area ) is assigned to be in the excited state , whereas the absence of excitation corresponds to the reduced state . Such an approximation accurately describes a network of small droplets ( less than 1mm ) in which the changes of concentrations are uniform . For larger droplets , more complicated discretization types can be considered . Finally , the discretized signal is represented by a string of symbols 0 and 1 , called an excitation pattern . The quality of a droplet - based classiﬁer is measured by a ﬁtness function , which takes the answer from all the test cases of the considered dataset as an argument . Deﬁning a ﬁtness function in a system with complex output signals can be an intricate task . In the case of a droplet network , to extract the result of computations , typically one has to determine ﬁrst how the information is coded in the excitations . This can be difﬁcult to predict , as we do not know how the network performs its computations . A solution for this problem can be an encoding - independent ﬁtness function , based on the concept of mutual information originated from information theory . In such an approach , the ﬁtness of a chemical classiﬁer is deﬁned as the mutual information between the output signal and the expected output of the dataset . Let us deﬁne a probability distribution of discretized excitation patterns in a droplet ( i ) as P i and the distribution of output classes in the considered dataset as P o . Then , the mutual information between the signal from the droplet and the dataset is calculated with following equation : I ( P i : P o ) = H ( P i ) + H ( P o ) − H ( P i , P o ) , where H ( P i ) and H ( P o ) are the Shannon entropies of the spike pattern distribution in droplet ( i ) and the distribution of output classes in the considered dataset , respectively . H ( P i , P o ) is the joint entropy of both distributions . The droplet with the highest correlation with the dataset becomes the output of the classiﬁer . It means that the signal appearing in this droplet contains the maximum information about the cases from dataset , and thus it can be used for classiﬁcation . 14 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . c on c e n t r a ti on o f B Z i nh i b it o r t ( s ) time frame 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 D t 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 Figure8 . AnexampleoftemporaldiscretizationoftimeevolutioninasingleBZdroplet . Thetotaltimeofexperimentisdivided into a series of frames with length (cid:5) t . The moments of time at which the level of BZ inhibitor grows rapidly correspond to chemical excitations in the medium . Time frames in which the droplet was excited are marked with symbol 1 , whereas the others are labelled with 0 . ( Online version in colour . ) The fact that one ﬁnds a droplet giving the best answer does not solve the problem completely . An additional effort needs to be made by the observer to interpret this signal and to ﬁnd a useful classiﬁcation rule which can be difﬁcult [ 58 ] . Note that in the approach presented here , the output of the network is limited , for simplicity , to a single droplet . However , for more complicated classiﬁcation problems , one can consider signals combined from multiple droplets . In a randomly selected classiﬁer , one can expect random interactions between droplets so that no useful computation is expected . In order to implement a certain functionality into the network ( like the classiﬁcation ability ) , one has to adjust the parameters of the network using external factors inﬂuencing the chemical excitations . Here , we assume that each droplet of the network can be individually controlled by inhibiting the reaction inside in a speciﬁed time interval [ 0 , t ( inh ) ] . In this interval , a droplet cannot self - excite or be triggered by its neighbours . Note that here the inhibition is applied from the beginning of droplet evolution , however one can consider a more complicated scenario where also the start of the inhibition is a separate control parameter . One can apply different control methods with large numbers of parameters depending on the considered dataset complexity . Note also that this approach allows one to keep the geometry of the classiﬁer constant , whereas its function can be determined only by a proper selection of control parameters . Let us consider a network composed of N droplets . If each droplet is controlled only by one parameter , then its functionality is described by the set of continuous parameters G = (cid:4) t ( 1 ) ( inh ) , . . . , t ( N ) ( inh ) (cid:5) , called network genotype . Note that even for small N , the number of possible combinations within one genotype is enormous and thus it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd an optimal system 15 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . using standard engineering techniques . Therefore , it seems reasonable to choose a teaching strategy based on evolutionary techniques . In such an approach , at the beginning an initial population of networks ( individuals ) with randomly generated control parameters is created . Then , the ﬁtness of each network is evaluated and the individuals with the highest ﬁtness are copied into the parental population , whereas the others are discarded . Next , a number of randomly selected parents replicate , i . e . their control parameters are combined to create an offspring individual . In the next step , some of the control parameters of the offspring are mutated randomly in order to avoid quick convergence towards the closest local maximum . Repeating the recombination and mutation operations a number of times yields an offspring population and the evaluation process starts again . The whole evolution scheme is repeated until a termination criterion is fulﬁlled , for example a certain ﬁtness is obtained or the maximal number of generations is reached . Here , we demonstrate an implementation of a BZ droplet classiﬁer as a two - dimensional network , composed of 25 photosensitive BZ droplets arranged in a 5 × 5 grid as shown in ﬁgure 9 . In order to modify the functionality of the network , an optical control is incorporated . Using blue light illumination , excitations in each droplet are inhibited individually in a time interval [ t 0 , t ( illum ) ] . Note , however , that in the approach presented below , not only t illum but also the number and positions of the input droplets are used as control parameters so the ﬁnal genotype is G = (cid:4) t 1illum , . . . , t 25illum , D in (cid:5) , where D in is a vector containing information about the inputs . In the network , we consider three droplet types : input , normal and output ( ﬁgure 9 b ) . They are distinguished according to their functionality in the network . Each droplet is assigned either an input or a normal type . For a droplet i of the normal type , t 0 = 0 and the excitations inside are inhibited during the illumination time t ( i ) illum . For an input droplet , the control parameter t ( i ) illum is not used and its illumination time is proportional to the value of the corresponding predictor . The output droplet is the one that shows the maximum value of I ( P i : P o ) . By adjusting the illumination of normal - type droplets and by a proper selection of inputs , the network is trained to correctly classify the maximum number of test cases from a given dataset . During evolution , networks with different genotypes are selected , recombined , mutated and evaluated . A typical result of the ﬁtness evolution of a BZ droplet classiﬁer is presented in ﬁgure 9 a . Here , we used the CANCER database from [ 59 ] . This database contains 699 records , with 458 ( 65 . 5 % ) benign and 241 ( 34 . 5 % ) malignant cases . One can observe that the amount of mutual information increases quickly in the initial part of the evolution and stabilizes after a certain number of generations . The evolved network that allows for the successful classiﬁcation of the considered dataset is presented in ﬁgure 9 b . Proper interpretation of the signals registered at the output droplet gives a high classiﬁcation accuracy , exceeding 90 % . 4 . Conclusion Nature has integrated chemistry - based computing activity performed by living organisms with data inﬂow and execution of output actions . From the human viewpoint , reaction – diffusion computing nicely ﬁts into the ﬁeld of heterotic computing , because information is processed by chemical reactions , whereas input , readout and teaching are executed through external factors that can control reaction rates or extract information on concentrations of reagents involved . In this paper , we summarized a couple of ideas on applications of reaction – diffusion computing with a nonlinear medium . It seems that a multiphase medium , with self - organized structure of active centres is the most promising . For experiments with compartmentalized medium , we need structures composed of many droplets with controlled sizes and compositions . Thus , future research in this ﬁeld should most likely beneﬁt from the progress in microﬂudic techniques . At the moment , there is probably no other experimental technique that can produce a multi - droplet structure with required properties of individual droplets . It sounds nice to claim universality of reaction – diffusion computing ; however chemical logic gates will probably never reach the speed of modern semiconductor circuits . Similarly , the brain 16 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . 95 ( a ) ( b ) 0 . 90 0 . 85 0 . 80 0 . 75 0 . 70 0 . 65 0 . 600 10 20 best individual average over population generation f it n e ss 30 40 50 0 s 100 s in3 in3 in2 in2 in1 in1 in1 Figure 9 . ( a ) The trajectory of the fitness values at the best individual droplet ( the thick line ) and the average fitness for the population ( the thin line ) . ( b ) Illumination pattern for a 25 droplet network evolved as a classifier of cancer cells . The test dataset ( CANCER ) containing 699 test cases was downloaded from [ 59 ] . Circles represent droplets in a network . The brightness of blue colour is proportional to the time at which a droplet was illuminated . The relation between illumination time and blue colour intensity is shown on the vertical bar . If no blue colour is visible , then the droplet was active from the beginning of the experiment , whereas high intensity corresponds to illumination time close to the total simulation time . The amount of mutual information contained in each droplet is marked with a red colour in the form of a pie chart where the sector size is normalized to the maximal value of mutual information that can be obtained from employed inputs . The output droplet is marked with a wide , black border and the numbers of the input droplets correspond to the predictor number in the dataset . does not compete with the simplest calculator in multiplication speed , but still outperforms the fastest computers in three - dimensional orientation applications . We believe that classiﬁers based on chemical processes belong to the class of applications where chemistry - based computing seems especially important . Here ( ﬁgure 9 ) , we have illustrated that an arbitrarily selected structure of droplets can reasonably perform a classifying function after a proper teaching procedure is applied . We can imagine a smart drug with a chemical classiﬁer built into the surrounding membrane . If a number of signals from sensors send warnings about the presence of an infected cell in its neighbourhood , then the classiﬁer generates an output signal that opens the membrane and releases the drug . Note that such chemistry - based classiﬁcation computers are able to integrate various types of information from several sources , while typical sensors used in medicine are sensitive only to a value of a single parameter . Chemical engineering is another ﬁeld of potential applications for the classiﬁcation computers . Many catalytic reactions proceed at high temperatures , where silicon technology does not work . It is known that some catalytic reactions 17 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . are highly nonlinear and show oscillations , excitability and complex spatio - temporal evolution . These phenomena can be used for information processing [ 60 ] . Therefore , one can imagine a smart catalyst that , besides its primary function , has the ability to control the conditions under which it operates and sends a warning signal when necessary . Of course , the future developments of reaction – diffusion computing depend on solution of many problems . For example , each BZ droplet can be regarded as a batch reactor whose activity terminates when reagents are consumed . For a sustained operation , the inﬂow of reactants and the outﬂow of products should be ensured . The chemical reactions considered in this paper are missing the START / STOP switch . Thinking about real applications , we should add such control on information processing activity . But it seems that nature has also not solved this problem yet . . . Funding . This work was supported by the NEUNEU project sponsored by the European Community within FP7 - ICT - 2009 - 4 ICT - 4 - 8 . 3 - FET Proactive 3 : Biochemistry - based Information Technology ( CHEM - IT ) programme ( project no . 248992 ) and by the supplementary grant from the Polish Ministry of Science 2187 / 7 . PRUE / 2011 / 2 . The work of K . G . was ﬁnanced within the International PhD Projects Program of the Foundation for Polish Science ( MPD / 2009 / 1 / styp14 ) , P . G . acknowledges the European Research Council Starting grant 279647 and J . G . was supported by the Iuventus Plus IP2012 / 012472 grant from the Polish Ministry of Science . References 1 . Moore GE . 1965 Cramming more components onto integrated circuits . Electronics , pp . 114 – 117 , 19 April . For recent data see for example http : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Moore’s _ law . 2 . Gramss T , Bornholdt S , Gross M , Mitchell M , Pellizzari T . 1998 Non - standard computation : molecular computation , cellular automata , evolutionary algorithms , quantum computers . Weinheim , Germany : Wiley - VCH . 3 . Calude C , Paun G . 2000 Computing with cells and atoms : an introduction to quantum , DNA and membrane computing . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . 4 . Adamatzky A , De Lacy Costello B , Asai T . 2005 Reaction – diffusion computers . New York , NY : Elsevier . 5 . Adamatzky A , De Lacy Costello B , Bull L , Stepney S , Teuscher C ( eds ) . 2007 Unconventional computing . Bristol , UK : Luniver . 6 . Suzuki Y , Hagiya M , Umeo H , Adamatzky A ( eds ) . 2009 Natural computing . Tokyo , Japan : Springer . 7 . Feynman RP . 1996 The Feynman lectures on computation ( eds AJG Hey , RW Allen ) , ch . 1 . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . 8 . Haken H . 2002 Brain dynamics , synchronization and activity patterns in pulse - coupled neural nets with delays and noise . Berlin , Germany : Springer . 9 . Epstein IR , Pojman JA . 1998 An introduction to nonlinear chemical dynamics : oscillations , waves , patterns , and chaos . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . 10 . Field RJ , Burger M . 1985 Oscillations and traveling waves in chemical systems . New York , NY : Wiley . 11 . Tyson JJ . 1994 What everyone should know about the Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction . In Frontiers in mathematical biology ( ed . SA Levin ) , pp . 569 – 587 . Berlin , Germany : Springer . 12 . Kuhnert L . 1986 A new optical photochemical memory device in a light - sensitive chemical active medium . Nature 319 , 393 – 394 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 319393a0 ) 13 . Kuhnert L , Agladze KI , Krinsky VI . 1989 Image processing using light - sensitive chemical waves . Nature 337 , 244 – 247 . ( doi : 10 . 1038 / 337244a0 ) 14 . Rambidi NG , Maximychev AV . 1997 Towards a biomolecular computer . Information processing capabilities of biomolecular nonlinear dynamic media . BioSystems 41 , 195 – 211 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0303 - 2647 ( 96 ) 01678 - 4 ) 15 . Steinbock O , Toth A , Showalter K . 1995 Navigating complex labyrinths—optimal paths from chemical waves . Science 267 , 868 – 871 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 267 . 5199 . 868 ) 16 . Agladze K , Magome N , Aliev R , Yamaguchi T , Yoshikawa K . 1997 Finding the optimal path with the aid of chemical wave . Phys . D 106 , 247 – 254 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 2789 ( 97 ) 00049 - 3 ) 17 . Vazquez - Otero A , Faigl J , Munuzuri AP . 2011 Path planning based on reaction – diffusion process . See http : / / www . usc . es / export / sites / default / en / investigacion / grupos / gfnl / documents / papers / Vazquez _ Otero _ 2012 . pdf . 18 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 . Gorecki J , Gorecka JN . 2009 Computing in geometrical constrained excitable chemical systems . In Encyclopedia of complexity and systems science ( ed . RA Meyers ) , pp . 1352 – 1375 . Berlin , Germany : Springer . 19 . Toth A , Showalter K . 1995 Logic gates in excitable media . J . Chem . Phys . 103 , 2058 – 2066 . ( doi : 10 . 1063 / 1 . 469732 ) 20 . Steinbock O , Toth A , Showalter K . 1995 Navigating complex labyrinths—optimal paths from chemical waves . Science 267 , 868 – 871 . ( doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 267 . 5199 . 868 ) 21 . Steinbock O , Kettunen P , Showalter K . 1996 Chemical wave logic gates . J . Phys . Chem . 100 , 18970 – 18975 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jp961209v ) 22 . Motoike IN , Yoshikawa K . 1999 Information operations with an excitable ﬁeld . Phys . Rev . E 59 , 5354 – 5360 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 59 . 5354 ) 23 . Sielewiesiuk J , Gorecki J . 2001 Logical functions of a cross junction of excitable chemical media . J . Phys . Chem . A 105 , 8189 – 8195 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jp011072v ) 24 . Adamatzky A , De Lacy Costello B . 2002 Experimental logical gates in a reaction - diffusion medium : the XOR gate and beyond . Phys . Rev . E 66 , 046112 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / Phys RevE . 66 . 046112 ) 25 . Yoshikawa K , Motoike IN , Ichino T , Yamaguchi T , Igarashi Y , Gorecki J , Gorecka JN . 2009 Basic information processing operations with pulses of excitation in a reaction - diffusion system . Int . J . Unconv . Comput . 5 , 3 – 37 . 26 . Gorecki J , Gorecka JN . 2006 Information processing with chemical excitations—from instant machines to an artiﬁcial chemical brain . Int . J . Unconv . Comput . 2 , 321 – 336 . 27 . Vanag VK , Epstein IR . 2001 Pattern formation in a tunable medium : the Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction in an aerosol OT microemulsion . Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 228301 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 87 . 228301 ) 28 . Szymanski J , Gorecka JN , Igarashi Y , Gizynski K , Gorecki J , Zauner KP , de Planque M . 2011 Droplets with information processing ability . Int . J . Unconv . Comput . 7 , 185 – 200 . 29 . Field RJ , Koros E , Noyes RM . 1972 Oscillations in chemical systems . II . Thorough analysis of temporal oscillation in the bromate - cerium - malonic acid system . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 94 , 8649 – 8664 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / ja00780a001 ) 30 . Field RJ , Noyes RM . 1974 Oscillations in chemical systems . IV . Limit cycle behavior in a model of a real chemical reaction . J . Chem . Phys . 60 , 1877 – 1884 . ( doi : 10 . 1063 / 1 . 1681288 ) 31 . Vanag VK , Epstein IR . 2009 A model for jumping and bubble waves in the Belousov – Zhabotinsky - aerosol OT system . J . Chem . Phys . 131 , 104512 . ( doi : 10 . 1063 / 1 . 3231488 ) 32 . Rovinsky AB , Zhabotinsky AM , Irving R . 1984 Mechanism and mathematical model of the oscillating bromate – ferroin – bromomalonic acid reaction . J . Phys . Chem . 88 , 6081 – 6084 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / j150669a001 ) 33 . Gorecki J , Szymanski J , Gorecka JN . 2011 Realistic parameters for simple models of the Belousov – Zhabotinsky reaction . J . Phys . Chem . A 115 , 8855 – 8859 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jp203220g ) 34 . Adamatzky A , De Lacy Costello B , Bull L , Holley J . 2011 Towards arithmetic circuits in sub - excitable chemical media . Isr . J . Chem . 51 , 56 – 66 . ( doi : 10 . 1002 / ijch . 201000046 ) 35 . Suzuki K , Yoshinobu T , Iwasaki H . 2000 Unidirectional propagation of chemical waves through microgaps between zones with different excitability . J . Phys . Chem . A 104 , 6602 – 6608 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jp0007078 ) 36 . Sielewiesiuk J , Gorecki J . 2002 Passive barrier as a transformer of ‘chemical signal’ frequency . J . Phys . Chem . A 106 , 4068 – 4076 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jp013844t ) 37 . Sielewiesiuk J , Gorecki J . 2002 On the response of simple reactors to regular trains of pulses . Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 4 , 1326 – 1333 . ( doi : 10 . 1039 / b109522f ) 38 . Gorecki J , Gorecka JN , Yoshikawa K , Igarashi Y , Nagahara H . 2005 Sensing the distance to a source of periodic oscillations in a nonlinear chemical medium with the output information coded in frequency of excitation pulses . Phys . Rev . E 72 , 046201 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 72 . 046201 ) 39 . Gorecki J , Yoshikawa K , Igarashi Y . 2003 On chemical reactors that can count . J . Phys . Chem . A 107 , 1664 – 1669 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jp0210417 ) 40 . Gorecka JN , Gorecki J . 2006 Multiargument logical operations performed with excitable chemical medium . J . Chem . Phys . 124 , 084101 . ( doi : 10 . 1063 / 1 . 2170076 ) 41 . Turing A . 1936 On computable numbers , with an application to Entscheidungsproblem . Proc . Lond . Math . Soc . 42 , 230 – 265 . 42 . Adamatzky A . 2004 Collision - based computing in Belousov – Zhabotinsky medium . Chaos Solitons Fractals 21 , 1259 – 1264 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chaos . 2003 . 12 . 068 ) 19 r s t a . r o y a l s o c i e t y p u b l i s h i n g . o r g P h il . T r a n s . R . S o c . A 3 7 3 : 2 0 1 4 0 2 1 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 . Adamatzky A , De Lacy Costello B , Bull L . 2011 On polymorphic logical gates in subexcitable chemical medium . Int . J . Bifurcation Chaos 21 , 1977 – 1986 . ( doi : 10 . 1142 / S0218127411029574 ) 44 . Adamatzky A , Holley J , Bull L , De Lacy Costello B . 2011 On computing in ﬁne - grained compartmentalised Belousov – Zhabotinsky medium . Chaos Solitons Fractals 44 , 779 – 790 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chaos . 2011 . 03 . 010 ) 45 . Holley J , Adamatzky A , Bull L , De Lacy Costello B , Jahan I . 2011 Computational modalities of Belousov – Zhabotinsky encapsulated vesicles . Nano Commun . Netw . 2 , 50 – 61 . ( doi : 10 . 1016 / j . nancom . 2011 . 02 . 002 ) 46 . Holley J , Jahan I , De Lacy Costello B , Bull L , Adamatzky A . 2011 Logical and arithmetic circuits in Belousov – Zhabotinsky encapsulated disks . Phys . Rev . E 84 , 056110 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 84 . 056110 ) 47 . NeuNeu Project . Artiﬁcial wet neuronal networks from compartmentalised excitable chemical media . See http : / / neu - n . eu . 48 . Vanag VK , Epstein IR . 2003 Segmented spiral waves in a reaction - diffusion system . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 14635 – 14 638 . ( doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2534816100 ) 49 . Toiya M , Vanag VK , Epstein IR . 2008 Diffusively coupled chemical oscillators in a microﬂuidic assembly . Angew . Chem . 47 , 7753 – 7755 . ( doi : 10 . 1002 / anie . 200802339 ) 50 . Toiya M , Gonzalez - Ochoa HO , Vanag VK , Fraden S , Epstein IR . 2010 Synchronization of chemical micro - oscillators . J . Phys . Chem . Lett . 1 , 1241 – 1246 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jz100238u ) 51 . Thutupalli S , Herminghaus S . 2013 Tuning active emulsion dynamics via surfactants and topology . Eur . Phys . J . E 36 , 91 . ( doi : 10 . 1140 / epje / i2013 - 13091 - 2 ) 52 . Vanag VK , Epstein IR . 2011 Excitatory and inhibitory coupling in a one - dimensional array of Belousov – Zhabotinsky micro - oscillators : theory . Phys . Rev . E 84 , 066209 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 84 . 066209 ) 53 . Churski K , Korczyk PM , Garstecki P . 2010 High - throughput automated droplet microﬂuidic system for screening of reaction conditions . Lab Chip 10 , 816 – 818 . ( doi : 10 . 1039 / b925500a ) 54 . Guzowski J , Jakiela S , Korczyk PM , Garstecki P . 2013 Custom tailoring multiple droplets one - by - one . Lab Chip 13 , 4308 – 4311 . ( doi : 10 . 1039 / c3lc50841b ) 55 . Holden MA , Needham D , Bayley H . 2007 . Functional bionetworks from nanoliter water droplets . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 129 , 8650 – 8655 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / ja072292a ) 56 . Gorecki J , Gorecka JN , Adamatzky A . 2014 Information coding with frequency of oscillations in Belousov – Zhabotinsky encapsulated disks . Phys . Rev . E 89 , 042910 . ( doi : 10 . 1103 / Phys RevE . 89 . 042910 ) 57 . Steinbock O , Müller SC . 1998 . Radius - dependent inhibition and activation of chemical oscillations in small droplets . J . Phys . Chem . A 102 , 6485 – 6490 . ( doi : 10 . 1021 / jp981421u ) 58 . Thurber D . 1992 Catﬁsh are off the hook after Tokyo ends 16 - year earthquake prediction study . Los Angeles Times , 26 April 1992 . See http : / / articles . latimes . com / 1992 - 04 - 26 / news / mn - 1403 _ 1 _ major - earthquake . 59 . Bache K , Lichman M . 2013 UCI Machine Learning Repository . University of California , Irvine , School of Information and Computer Sciences . 60 . Gorecka JN , Gorecki J . 2005 On one dimensional chemical diode and frequency generator constructed with an excitable surface reaction . Phys . Chem . Chem . Phys . 7 , 2915 – 2920 . ( doi : 10 . 10 39 / b504621a )