A Cultural Lens on Interpersonal Conflict and Creativity in Multicultural Environments Susannah B . F . Paletz University of Maryland Ella Miron - Spektor Technion – Israel Institute of Technology , Haifa , Israel Chun - Chi Lin National Taiwan University The literature on the effects of cultural diversity on conflict and team performance has been dominated by the information processing and social categorization theories . This article adds to the existing literature by adopting a dynamic constructivist approach detailing the effects of interpersonal conflict on cognition in multicultural environments . The fulcrum of this model is whether the conflict is interpreted as a threat . We describe the relationships between multicultural environments and perceived conflict ; perceived conflict and the perception of threat ; and the perception of threat on individual creativity via prevention or promotion orientations . Drawing from the dynamic constructivist approach to culture , this model highlights how culture , as shared mental models and shared meanings , may moderate these relationships . Cultural meanings may influence whether a situation is perceived as a conflict , whether conflict is interpreted as a threat , and individuals’ tolerance for conflict . This model points out how culture may be used to impact the relationship between multicultural environments and creativity . Keywords : culture , creativity , diversity , group processes , conflict To compete in the global market , address a growing need for innovation and creativity , and solve worldwide problems , many organizations are increasingly becoming international , integrating diverse knowledge and a multicultural workforce ( e . g . , Kidwell & Langholtz , 1998 ) . This growing trend has given rise to multicul - tural environments , which occur when individuals from multiple cultures interact . In the United States , 17 % of science and engi - neering workers report collaborating with individuals located in other countries during a specific week ( National Science Board , 2012 ) . Adding that to existing ethnic , geographic , religious , class , and other subculture differences within many countries , and work life and other public activities have quietly become multicultural . The opportunities and challenges of increasing multiculturalism have captured the attention of businesspeople , policymakers , and academics . Although the challenges of multiculturalism are being addressed practically , research and theory on these issues have also grown . Over the past 20 years , research on workplace demography , in - cluding demographic and cultural value diversity , has multiplied , revealing mixed and complex findings for the effects of diversity on team performance , creativity , and conflict ( e . g . , Chatman , Pol - zer , Barsade , & Neale , 1998 ; Earley & Mosakowski , 2000 ; Gon - calo & Staw , 2006 ; Joshi & Roh , 2009 ; Joshi , Liao , & Roh , 2011 ; Paletz , Peng , Erez , & Maslach , 2004 ; Stahl , Maznevski , Voigt , & Jonsen , 2010 ) . Multicultural experiences and interactions may increase individuals’ creativity ( e . g . , A . K . - Y . Leung & Chiu , 2010 ; A . K . - Y . Leung , Maddux , Galinsky , & Chiu , 2008 ; Maddux , Adam , & Galinsky , 2010 ; Maddux & Galinsky , 2009 ) , but multi - cultural settings are more likely to increase interpersonal conflict ( Ayub & Jehn , 2010 ; Stahl et al . , 2010 ) . Despite its importance to growing workplace diversity , research on conflict and creativity in multicultural environments is scarce , with many researchers pointing out gaps in our knowledge in the broader domains of culture and creativity ( e . g . , Paletz & Peng , 2008 ; Shalley , Zhou , & Oldham , 2004 ; Zhou & Su , 2010 ) . Indeed , existing research on the effect of conflict on individual creativity has yielded inconsistent findings . On the one hand , conflict in - This article was published Online First April 7 , 2014 . Susannah B . F . Paletz , Center for Advanced Study of Language , Uni - versity of Maryland ; Ella Miron - Spektor , William Davidson Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management , Technion – Israel Institute of Technology , Hafi , Israel ; Chun - Chi Lin , Department of Psychology , Na - tional Taiwan University , Taipei , Taiwan . This research was supported in part by the United States National Science Foundation Grant # SBE - 1064083 through the Science of Science and Innovation Policy Program to the first author when she was at the Learning Research and Development Center at the University of Pitts - burgh . We are grateful to Joel Chan and Matt Cronin for comments on previous versions of this model . An earlier version of this article was presented at the 2012 conference of the Interdisciplinary Network of Group Research ( INGRoup ) in Chicago , Illinois ; the authors are also grateful to the audience for their comments . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Susannah B . F . Paletz , Center for Advanced Study of Language , University of Maryland , 7005 52nd Avenue , College Park , MD 20742 . E - mail : sbfpaletz @ gmail . com T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts © 2014 American Psychological Association 2014 , Vol . 8 , No . 2 , 237 – 252 1931 - 3896 / 14 / $ 12 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / a0035927 237 creases the tendency to scrutinize and explore different alterna - tives , which contributes to creative thinking ( e . g . , Nemeth , 1986 ; Nemeth , Personnaz , Personnaz , & Goncalo , 2004 ) . A sense of conflict and disorientation , resulting from exposure to different cultures and values , can foster creativity ( e . g . , A . K . - Y . Leung & Chiu , 2010 ; Miron - Spektor , Gino , & Argote , 2011 ) . On the other hand , conflict can be threatening and elicit a motivation to avoid similar unpleasant social interactions . Threat and a prevention regulatory focus hinder individuals’ ability to deal with complexity and to solve creative problems , even when a conflict is only observed ( R . S . Friedman & Forster , 2000 , 2001 , 2005 ; Miron - Spektor , Efrat - Treister , Rafaeli , & Schwartz - Cohen , 2011 ) . To bridge gaps in the literature and reconcile these findings , specifically in culturally diverse settings , we present a dynamic constructivist theoretical model on the effects of interpersonal conflict on individuals’ creativity in multicultural environments ( see Figure 1 ) . Our model contributes to the literature on intrateam conflict and creativity by detailing an important mediator of the conflict – creativity connection , threat , and several possible mod - erators related to culture , here defined as mental models shared across groups ( not just national groups ) . Most of the existing intrateam literature has focused on heter - ogeneous versus homogeneous cultural team composition ( e . g . , Mannix & Neale , 2005 ; Williams & O’Reilly , 1998 ) , leaving unknown the broader case of multicultural environments , individ - ual perceptions of interpersonal conflict , and individual creativity . Although our model examines this broader case , teams , by their nature , involve interaction , and so the existing literature is infor - mative to our model . The literature on team diversity has focused , perhaps too exclusively , on two theoretical traditions : informa - tion processing and social categorization ( van Knippenberg & Schippers , 2007 ; Williams & O’Reilly , 1998 ) . The information - processing approaches focus on the cognitive benefits of diver - sity . These approaches assume that backgrounds of almost any type ( e . g . , ethnic , age , disciplines ) bring with them a variety of experiential information ( van Knippenberg & Schippers , 2006 ) . Cultural diversity can go beyond simple surface diversity to deeper , attitudinal , value , and schema differences ( e . g . , Harrison , Price , & Bell , 1998 ) . This “deeper” diversity ( e . g . , Harrison et al . , 1998 ) of background information may , under certain circum - stances , lead to greater task conflict as well ( e . g . , Jehn , Northcraft , & Neale , 1999 ; Mannix & Neale , 2005 ; Pelled , Eisenhardt , & Xin , 1999 ) . However , this diversity also carries the potential for greater creativity , as a broader knowledge base can result in more creative combinations ( Nijstad & Stroebe , 2006 ; Paletz & Schunn , 2010 ) . In contrast , social categorization approaches assume that the dif - ferences between individuals’ ethnicities and other characteristics will spark intergroup processes , such as subgrouping , generally to the detriment of team outcomes such as social cohesion ( Mannix & Neale , 2005 ; Williams & O’Reilly , 1998 ) . This theory focuses on the negative affective outcomes associated with diversity based on differences in social identity , such as more conflicts . Although these theoretical traditions have spawned useful re - search ( e . g . , Chatman et al . , 1998 ) , the past decade has seen Multicultural Environments Perception of and Actual Conflict more likely Cultural Meanings ( e . g . , values , implicit theories of face , etc . ) A D Tolerance for Conflict F - 1 E F - 2 Perception of Threat ? B1 more likely yes no Prevention Orientation , Avoidance Motivation Creativity B2 C1 C2 Figure 1 . Dynamic constructivist model of culture , interpersonal conflict , and threat on individual creativity in multicultural settings ( negative relationships are dotted lines ) . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 238 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN theories and variables that do not fit neatly into those two tradi - tions ( e . g . , Paletz et al . , 2004 ; Swann , Kwan , Polzer , & Milton , 2003 ) or examine the interaction between them ( e . g . , Homan , van Knippenberg , Van Kleef , & De Dreu , 2007 ) . Multicultural envi - ronments may also lead to conflict for cultural psychological reasons that have little to do with either social categorization processes or differing background knowledge , and the effects of conflict on creativity are dependent on the interpretation of that conflict . This article thus also makes a contribution to psychological theory by proposing a broader , third model drawing on dynamic constructivist cultural theory . It helps to reconcile prior mixed findings on the impact of conflict on creativity . This model goes beyond the social categorization and information processing mod - els , synthesizes elements from disparate topics within psychology , and explicitly blends cognitive and affective factors . This article attempts to tackle three problems with past litera - ture . First , research on the effect of experienced conflict on indi - vidual creativity is scarce , especially in multicultural environments ( e . g . , Shalley et al . , 2004 ; Zhou & Su , 2010 ) . Most research on conflict focuses on team conflict and team conflict management ( De Dreu & Weingart , 2003 ; Lovelace , Shapiro , & Weingart , 2001 ) . Much less is known about the effects of cultural context and related factors on different , individual - level perceptions of conflict ( de Wit , Greer , & Jehn , 2012 ) . Second , the few studies that examined the effect of conflict on creativity revealed mixed find - ings ( Gelfand , Erez , & Aycan , 2007 ; Stahl et al . , 2010 ) , suggesting that the effect of conflict on creativity can vary under different situations and conditions . We contribute to theory by going beyond team outputs to examine individual creative cognition . As has been requested ( van Knippenberg & Schippers , 2007 ) , we identify mod - erating and mediating conditions and factors that shape the effect of diverse environments on experienced conflict and then on individual creativity . Specifically , our dynamic constructivist model assumes that individuals in multicultural settings are more likely than those in unicultural settings to experience conflict , either as something they encounter directly or observe , compared with those who work in culturally homogeneous settings . Whether they will benefit from conflict or be stymied by it depends on the relevant cultural meanings , or the lens through which individuals make sense of the world . Cultural meanings influence both the extent to which indi - viduals perceive specific social interactions as conflict and the degree to which individuals can tolerate conflicts . Greater toler - ance of conflicts , regardless of heterogeneous versus homogeneous cultural setting , can mitigate against perceived conflicts becoming perceived threats . When a perceived conflict becomes a perceived threat , a prevention orientation ( the motivation to avoid pain and seek security ) is often a consequence . A prevention orientation then leads individuals to draw on their well - known reactions and avoid risks , resulting in less creativity . If , however , there is a high tolerance for conflict , perceived conflict may increase cognitive complexity and stimulate creative thinking . Like many social psychological models , ours crosses individual and interpersonal levels : It is a model of how a social context ( multicultural envi - ronments ) encourages interpersonal conflict ( an interpersonal , so - cial process ) , and how that interpersonal conflict affects individual cognition as moderated and mediated by individual perceptions , culture , and assumptions . In the next section , we discuss culture as meanings . We then describe our model , after which we end with a discussion of the theoretical and practical implications of our model . Culture as Meanings We draw upon cross - cultural psychology to define culture . The implicit theories of culture tradition , which examines culture as unspoken assumptions , has emphasized that culture exists psycho - logically within individuals’ minds ( Peng , Ames , & Knowles , 2001 ) . Culture is defined as an imperfectly shared system of learned , transmitted meanings ( Rohner , 1984 ) . Although it can include explicit knowledge , we emphasize the aspects that are implicit . By this definition , cultural differences are not limited to nations or global regions but can include differences between any subgroup ( e . g . , profession , ethnicity , family , organization ) . The dynamic constructivist theory , an extension of this ap - proach , goes beyond descriptions of national or ethnic differences to give a cognitive account of culture as it affects social perception generally ( Betancourt & Lopez , 1993 ; Hong , Morris , Chiu , & Benet - Martinez , 2000 ; Morris & Gelfand , 2004 ) . Hong and col - leagues ( 2000 ) asserted in their dynamic constructivist theory that culture acts , specifically , as shared mental models within the mind , serving as a lens through which the world is interpreted . A mental model is an internal representation of actions , situations , people , or objects ( Johnson - Laird , 1980 ) . Mental models include both the structure and relationship between knowledge constructs and the content of knowledge itself , such as unspoken assumptions and heuristics . Shared mental models occur when the mental represen - tations of individuals overlap , with more overlap indicating greater similarity , and hence a more similar understanding of a situation ( Klimoski & Mohammed , 1994 ; Mohammed , Ferzandi , & Ham - ilton , 2010 ) . Rather than being a singular fixed structure within the mind , one or more cultural meanings can be internalized as loose networks of categories and assumptions . Bicultural individuals can therefore switch frames when primed by relevant elements remind - ing them of the applicable culture , such as national flags and other icons ( Hong , Benet - Martinez , Chiu , & Morris , 2003 ; Hong et al . , 2000 ) . These culture primes can activate goals , procedural knowl - edge ( mind - sets ) , and / or declarative knowledge , so long as the cultural structure already exists in the mind ( Oyserman & Lee , 2008 ) . As with other mental models , cultural meanings can influ - ence how individuals perceive the world , including social situa - tions , and are created from learning ( Rohner , 1984 ) . Cultural meanings are thus cocreated by individuals and live within the mind , being activated by relevant information and aiding in the interpretation of experiences ( Hong et al . , 2000 , 2003 ; Oyserman , 2011 ) . The overlapping mental models that represent culture can be shared not only between individuals of the same ethnicity or nation but also by other mutual social characteristics , such as socioeconomic class , geographic region , discipline , occupation , religion , and work organization . Past research on cultural implicit theories has demonstrated the effect of cultural meanings on social perception . For example , Nisbett and colleagues ( Nisbett , Peng , Choi , & Norenzayan , 2001 ; Peng & Nisbett , 1999 ) examined cognitive differences in what they termed analytic versus holistic thinking . Analytic cognitive styles involve a greater focus on objects rather than the context ( field independence ) , and the tendency to attribute other’s behavior T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 239 CULTURE , INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT , AND CREATIVITY to internal traits rather than the situation ( Morris & Peng , 1994 ) . The holistic cognitive style , held more on average by East Asians , involves a greater focus on the context ( field dependence ) and a greater inclination , when compared with Caucasian Americans , to attribute the causes of behavior to the situation rather than the actor ( I . Choi , Dalal , Kim - Prieto , & Park , 2003 ) . For example , Morris and Peng ( 1994 ) found that participants differently anthropomor - phized the behavior of an individual animated fish swimming separately from a school of fish in line with their different cultural lenses . Chinese participants were more likely to attribute the fish’s behavior to external forces , whereas Americans were more likely to make internal attributions . Culture can also influence individuals’ ability to solve problems . Goncalo and Staw ( 2006 ) demonstrated how the activation of collectivistic or individualistic orientations can affect whether gen - erated solutions to a given problem are creative or practical . Individualism and collectivism are cultural dimensions that reflect differences in the tendency to focus on in - groups and the power of social context . People from individualistic cultures , on average , are more likely to emphasize self - determination and autonomy , con - ceptualize people as independent individuals , and prioritize one’s own importance over the group’s interests when the two are in conflict . On the other hand , members of collectivistic cultures are more likely to conceptualize individuals as inherently part of collectives and prioritize groups’ interests over their own ( e . g . , Hofstede , 1980 , 1983 ; Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Triandis , 1989 , 1990 ; Triandis & Gelfand , 1998 ) . When asked to be creative , teams of participants primed with an individualistic mental model generated a greater number of ideas , more unique ideas , and more creative ideas than participants primed with a collectivistic mental model ( Goncalo & Staw , 2006 ) . Thus , cross - cultural psychological theories offer many ways in which individuals will hold different types of cultural meanings within their minds , which may then impact their cognition . When people who hold different , unshared sets of cultural meanings come together , the relevant social context is diverse teams or , more broadly , multicultural work and leisure environments . Our model examines culture from these two different perspectives : multicul - tural environments as a social context and as the differing cultural meanings encapsulated therein . Dynamic Constructivist Model In this section , we describe the theoretical model and suggested propositions ( also see Table 1 ) . The relationships , as illustrated in Figure 1 , are drawn in part as a decision tree and not simply as a model of proposed relationships . Multicultural Environments and Perceived Conflict ( Path A ) Conflict is inherent to interaction , collaboration , and teamwork ( De Dreu & Gelfand , 2008 ) . The construct of conflict has been used at different levels of analysis to mean many things , from disagreement to bullying to riots and war ( e . g . , De Dreu & Gel - fand , 2008 ; Jehn & Bendersky , 2003 ) . For the purposes of this model , we focus on conflict as interpersonal disagreement , which exists when “parties think that a divergence of values , needs , interests , opinions , goals , or objectives exists” ( Barki & Hartwick , 2004 , p . 232 ) , rather than intrapersonal conflict ( e . g . , Maslow , 1943 ) or intergroup conflict ( e . g . , Fiske , 2002 ) . Importantly , we are examining disagreement in the context of broadly cooperative settings ( e . g . , work settings and teams ) , as opposed to in the context of competition ( e . g . , De Dreu & Nijstad , 2008 ) . Conflict here can include negative affect and / or conflict - relevant expressed behavior ( e . g . , debate , competition , aggression , hostility ; Barki & Hartwick , 2004 ) , and should be perceived by the parties involved ( Jehn & Bendersky , 2003 ) . However , individuals from different cultures might perceive conflict differently based on different cognitive frames ( e . g . , Gelfand et al . , 2001 ) . We focus on how conflict is experienced by individuals within multiperson settings ( e . g . , teams , dyads ) , rather than as a team - level construct , although a different model could examine conflict and collective creativity ( Brophy , 1998 , 2006 ) . Our model examines the individual - level experience of conflict , assuming that asymmetries in the percep - tion of conflict can exist within multicultural teams and settings ( e . g . , Jehn , Rispens , & Thatcher , 2010 ) . A recent meta - analysis showed that although cultural diversity was positively related to creativity generated by individuals within the team , it was also positively associated with individually per - ceived task conflict and negatively associated with social integra - tion within the team ( Stahl et al . , 2010 ) . Individuals who work in multicultural settings are more likely to experience conflict , either as something they encounter directly or observe , compared with those who work in nationally homogeneous settings ( Ayub & Jehn , 2010 ; Stahl et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , multinational diversity resulted in similar , relatively high levels of conflict , whether the diversity involved subgroups within countries or cultures between countries . We contend this finding generalizes from multicultural , diverse teams to broader multicultural settings . This finding sug - gests that it is culturally diverse environments in general , rather Table 1 Summary of Model Propositions Proposition 1 : Interpersonal conflict will be more common in multicultural environments , particularly if the mental model gaps are large and about relevant issues . Proposition 2 : Interpersonal conflict may be interpreted as a threat , depending on exacerbator features of the situation and the conflict itself ( e . g . , negative affect , relationship conflict , relationship conflict confounded with task conflict , rude communication ) , and minimizing features of the conflict and situation ( e . g . , psychological safety , trust , team emotional regulation processes ) . Proposition 3 : If a conflict is perceived as a threat , a prevention focus and avoidance motivation will result . Proposition 4 : A prevention focus will hinder creativity . Proposition 5 : Nonthreatening interpersonal conflict will enhance creativity , mediated by a promotion focus . Proposition 6 : Culture will moderate whether a social interaction or exchange in a multicultural setting is perceived as a conflict , such that cultural norms regarding implicit theories of conflict and the appropriate expression and manner of conflict will enable individuals to perceive an encounter as a conflict or not . Proposition 7 : Culture will moderate whether a conflict is viewed as a threat , specifically via cultural norms involving face and / or status : Counternormative conflicts , conflicts that make individuals lose face , and conflicts that arise from individuals of lower status are more likely to be viewed as threats , particularly in face cultures and cultures that value hierarchy , respectively . Proposition 8 : The moderation effect of culture ( Proposition 7 ) will be mediated by a tolerance for conflict . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 240 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN than multi national diversity specifically , that drive the increase in individual - level perceptions of conflict compared with culturally homogeneous settings . In other words , it is the diversity of cultural meanings , not simply national diversity , which has an impact on conflict . To explain this more nuanced finding , we draw from the dy - namic constructivist approach . We propose that multicultural en - vironments , made up of individuals with different culturally based ways of interpreting social information , will represent a greater number of ( or distance in ) gaps in the individuals’ mental models than environments made up of individuals from the same cultural background . Representational gaps exist when problems are con - ceived of differently between team members ( Cronin & Weingart , 2007 ) . Furthermore , representational gaps and other differences in shared mental models may predict conflict ( Bearman , Paletz , Orasanu , & Thomas , 2010 ; Cronin & Weingart , 2007 ) . Applying this research to multicultural environments , individuals in these environments are thus more likely to have less overlap in their mental models due to differences in assumptions , heuristics , and other cultural knowledge . The amount of conflict should depend on the size and number of these gaps and whether these gaps are on critical or relevant issues . For instance , conceptions of appropriate polite behavior will be more important to a multicultural team working on software de - sign , or to multicultural shopkeeper – customer interactions , than would be cultural differences in color categorization ( e . g . , whether magenta is purple or red ) . As an example of how differences in specific cultural values may promote conflict , imagine a manager who decides to reward the best employee in the team ( a very common policy in more individualistic companies ) . Coworkers who observe this behavior who originate from more collectivistic cultures may feel uncomfortable or slighted . If , however , the entire team is rewarded for one individual’s success , more individualistic team members may become dissatisfied . An individualistic person who feels the success was due to his or her lone effort may be particularly irritated . The conflict here is thus the disagreement concerning how to go about rewarding effort , as well as the resulting negative affect . Thus , our proposition shares some of the elements of the information - processing approach , but uses dy - namic constructivist theory to explain why such diversity can lead to conflict ( Figure 1 , Path A ) , rather than simply leading to added benefits . Proposition 1 : Interpersonal conflict will be more common in multicultural environments , particularly if the mental model gaps are large and about relevant issues . The Effect of Perceived Conflict on Prevention Orientation via Threat ( Paths B1 and B2 , and the Perception of Threat Decision Diamond ) Research seeking a clear effect of perceived conflict on indi - viduals’ creative thinking has resulted in mixed findings , requiring moderators and mediators . On the one hand , a robust body of research has argued that disagreement arising from a minority opinion holder causes divergent and original thinking in other individuals ( e . g . , Nemeth , 1986 ; Nemeth & Kwan , 1985 ; Nemeth & Wachtler , 1983 ) . Similarly , a sense of conflict and disorientation can enhance creativity ( Miron - Spektor , Gino , et al . , 2011 ) . On the other hand , research on anger and rude behavior , which is often seen in interpersonal conflict , suggests that interacting with ( or witnessing ) a rude person hinders performance on creative tasks ( Porath & Erez , 2007 , 2009 ) . Unfortunately , the research on the effects of conflict on individual creativity is limited to mainly these two research paradigms . This model takes into account an important mediator : whether the perceived conflict , be it observed or engaged in by the indi - vidual , was interpreted as a threat ( Rispens & Jehn , 2010 ) . The gray diamond in Figure 1 is a decision point for whether the conflict is perceived as a threat or not . Most past research on interpersonal conflict both theoretically and methodologically con - founds perception of conflicts and threat . Threat is defined here as the perception of an impending loss or cost to an individual ( Staw , Sandelands , & Dutton , 1981 ) . Features of the interpersonal conflict itself may affect whether the conflict is perceived as a threat . This section describes some of the ways in which features of the conflict itself may impact whether the conflict is viewed as a threat . The team conflict literature is a rich source of complex empir - ical findings . Our model provides mediating variables ( e . g . , threat ) to help explain some of the findings from that literature . In that literature , conflict is a team - level variable generally measured at the individual , perceived level and aggregated ( e . g . , De Dreu & West , 2001 ; exceptions being research on asymmetries , e . g . , Jehn et al . , 2010 ) and then associated with team - level composition inputs and / or performance outputs . In our model , interpersonal conflict is a social context within which the individual exists , perceives , and interacts . Although these two approaches examine different levels of analysis , they are relevant to each other . A widely used categorization system in team conflict breaks conflict into ( at least ) three types ( e . g . , Jehn , 1997 ) : task conflict , process conflict and relationship conflict . Task conflict revolves around the work itself , process conflict involves scheduling and delegation , and relationship conflict is about issues of interper - sonal incompatibility ( Jehn , 1995 , 1997 ; Jehn & Bendersky , 2003 ) . Similarly , Amason ( 1996 ) distinguished between cognitive con - flict , or disagreements regarding tasks and how to achieve com - mon objectives , and affective conflict , or emotional conflicts fo - cused on personal incompatibilities . Most of the negative effects for interpersonal conflict are thought to occur in affective , process , and relationship conflict , compared with cognitive and task con - flict ( e . g . , Amason , 1996 ; de Wit et al . , 2012 ; Jehn , 1997 ) . Whereas researchers have argued that task conflict can be benefi - cial , particularly for creativity and innovation ( e . g . , De Dreu & West , 2001 ; Jehn , 1997 ; Jehn & Mannix , 2001 ; Kurtzberg & Mueller , 2005 ; Nemeth , 1986 ; Pelled et al . 1999 ; West , 2002 ) , a famous meta - analysis suggested that even task conflict impedes team performance ( De Dreu & Weingart , 2003 ) . Although an updated meta - analysis confirmed the stable , negative relationships between process / relationship conflict and performance , it revealed no significant association between task conflict and team perfor - mance ( de Wit et al . , 2012 ) . The latter relationship depended on moderators : Importantly , the association between task conflict and performance was positive when the association between task and relationship conflict was weak . That finding suggests that if task conflict can be kept separate from relationship conflict , it may have positive team outcomes ( Jehn , 1997 ) . Teams in which dif - ferent members perceive and report different levels of conflict in T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 241 CULTURE , INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT , AND CREATIVITY their group are also likely to have lower performance and creativ - ity , mediated through social processes ( e . g . , Jehn et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , team - level asymmetries can also impact team creativity and performance . What does this literature mean for individual perceptions of conflict and individual creativity ? One of the reasons why affec - tive , process , and relationship conflicts are more likely to have negative consequences may be because they are more likely to be perceived by team members as threats . Indeed , negative affect is seen as an exacerbator of the negative consequences of conflict , process conflict is thought to make individuals feel personally attacked , and relationship conflict , more so than task conflict , is thought to limit cognitive processes ( Jehn & Bendersky , 2003 ) . Relationship conflict is also significantly associated with destruc - tive reactions ( Ayoko , Callan , & Hartel , 2008 ) . Thus , we contend that some of the factors that make a conflict more likely to be perceived as a threat are the content and features of the interper - sonal conflict itself , namely , whether it entails relationship or process conflict or negative affect ( see Figure 1 , Decision Dia - mond for Perception of Threat ) . Communication style , politeness , and perceived intentions of the conflict communication can also influence whether a conflict is perceived as a threat . Some disagreements may be longer lasting and more difficult to resolve , whereas others may be too minor or brief to register as a problem or threat ( Paletz , Schunn , & Kim , 2011 ) . Lovelace et al . ( 2001 ) found that conflict could lead to innovation positively ( or at least not be negatively related ) if disagreements were communicated collaboratively rather than contentiously and if team members felt free to express doubts . In his analysis of student conversations , Chiu ( 2008 ) found that whereas recent disagreements yielded greater microcreativity in student groups than agreements , rude disagreements resulted in less creativity than polite disagreements and questions . Similarly , dissent by a minority opinion holder elicits divergent thinking , whereas dissent by a majority—a more threatening and stressful situation—causes more convergent thinking ( Nemeth , 1986 ) . Positive interpersonal processes can also prevent a conflict from being perceived as a threat . Conflict can beget conflict , creating a spiral of negative feelings and behaviors , unless trust is present ( Peterson & Behfar , 2003 ) . Just as intragroup trust helps keep task conflict from turning into relationship conflict ( Simons & Peter - son , 2000 ) , psychological safety may be a mediator influencing innovation ( Nishii & Goncalo , 2008 ; Post , 2012 ) . Effective team emotional regulation processes can lessen relationship conflict ( Ayoko et al . , 2008 ; Curs¸eu , Boros¸ , & Oerlemans , 2012 ) . Simi - larly , emotional regulation processes can keep task and relation - ship conflict unrelated ( Curs¸eu et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , it follows that emotional regulation , intragroup trust , and psychological safety can aid in keeping experienced interpersonal conflict from being perceived as a threat . Proposition 2 : Interpersonal conflict may be interpreted as a threat , depending on exacerbator features of the situation and the conflict itself ( e . g . , negative affect , relationship conflict , relationship conflict confounded with task conflict , rude com - munication ) , and minimizing features of the conflict and sit - uation ( e . g . , psychological safety , trust , team emotional regu - lation processes ) . Once a conflict is perceived as a threat , a prevention orientation may be activated ( Figure 1 , Path B2 ) . A prevention orientation is defined as the motivation to avoid pain and seek security ( Higgins , 1997 ) . When under threat , individuals are likely to take a preven - tion motivational focus and utilize avoidance strategies . A preven - tion orientation is automatically activated in situations that imply a threat to safety , and call to mind one’s duties and potential losses ( Neubert , Kacmar , Carlson , Chonko , & Roberts , 2008 ) . A preven - tion orientation may be activated either because an individual is directly involved in a conflict or because the individual observes a conflict between others ( Miron - Spektor , Efrat - Treister , et al . , 2011 ) . Proposition 3 : If a conflict is perceived as a threat , a preven - tion focus and avoidance motivation will result . Prevention Orientation , Avoidance Motivation , and Creativity ( Paths C1 and C2 ) A prevention orientation helps individuals adapt to and survive in their environment by narrowing the scope of attention and focusing on information that is relevant to the task ( Derryberry & Tucker , 1994 ) . Threat - rigidity theory suggests that , when faced with a threat , individuals react by restricting information process - ing and behaving using their dominant response ( Staw et al . , 1981 ) . Threats lead to a restricting of focus and motivate individ - uals and groups to respond to that threat , which can have ( mainly negative ) implications for creativity ( Turner & Virick , 2008 ) . When a situation is appraised as a challenge , cognitive flexibility may be the response , whereas threats may limit cognitive flexibil - ity ( Gutnick , Walter , Nijstad , & De Dreu , 2012 ) . In other words , individuals fall back upon well - learned heuristics and expecta - tions , attend to dominant cues , and respond in well - learned ways , even if these ways do not fit a new situation . Creativity , which is generally tied to cognitive flexibility , is thought to have two inherent qualities : novelty / originality and usefulness , appropriateness , or relevance ( Amabile , 1983 , 1996 ; Mayer , 1999 ; Plucker , Beghetto , & Dow , 2004 ) . Creativity is often operationalized as the ability to come up with many ideas , but also often incorporates the idea of originality , or rare / novel ideas . It is not sufficient for an idea to be original , however ; it must also fit the situation or be appropriate in some way . These two qualities are commonly essential in the conceptualization of creativity . In a cross - cultural study of the implicit theories of creativity , novelty was seen as equally important to creativity in China , Japan , and the United States ; appropriateness was seen as more important in Japan and the United States ; and novel products were more ap - preciated generally in China than in the other countries ( Paletz & Peng , 2008 ) . Nevertheless , novelty and appropriateness were both vital to conceptions of creativity in all three countries . Creativity has been operationalized in many different ways , including as a personality trait , feature of an environment , and a range of psychological processes such as problem finding , insight , analogy , mental simulation , and evaluation ( Reiter - Palmon , Mum - ford , O’Connor Boes , & Runco , 1997 ; Rhodes , 1961 ; Ward , Smith , & Finke , 1999 ; Ward , Smith , & Vaid , 1997 ) . Creativity can be observed in eminent people , professional experts , part of nor - mal learning , and in everyday process ( Beghetto & Kaufman , 2007 ; Kaufman & Beghetto , 2009 ) . For this article , we focus on T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 242 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN creativity as an outcome of an everyday process . Even creative outputs can be judged on a variety of dimensions , such as fluency ( number of ideas ) , flexibility ( number of higher - level categories ) , originality / novelty , and elaboration ( detail and richness of the idea ; M . M . Mumford , 2001 ; Torrance , 1966 ) . These dimensions mea - sure divergence , whereas outcomes with one right answer , like insight tasks such as the Remote Associates Task ( RAT ) , are related to convergent thinking ( Cropley , 2006 ) . In a series of experiments , Friedman and Forster ( e . g . , R . S . Friedman and Forster , 2000 , 2001 , 2002 , 2005 ) found that when individuals take a prevention focus and / or are primed with avoid - ance heuristics , creativity suffers ( Figure 1 , Path C2 ) . In conditions encouraging promotion motivational states and approach behav - iors , creativity may be enhanced . These effects of a prevention focus on creativity were replicated among uninvolved third parties who merely observed a conflict between others ( Miron - Spektor , Efrat - Treister , et al . , 2011 ) . Reviews of the literature similarly suggest that threatening and avoidance cues focus attention ( R . S . Friedman & Forster , 2010 ) , and that negative activating moods with a prevention focus ( e . g . , fear ) are associated with lower creativity ( Baas , De Dreu , & Nijstad , 2008 ) . Thus , a prevention focus and / or avoidance motivation may hurt creativity ( Path C2 ) . Proposition 4 : A prevention focus will hinder creativity . This model goes beyond that finding , however , to suggest the alternate path : Conflict that is not interpreted as a threat may encourage creativity ( Path C1 ) . Dissent without threat—say , with psychological safety and trust—may be a situation of promotion and challenge , leading to free expression and creativity ( Figure 1 , Path C1 ; Gutnick et al . , 2012 ; Nishii & Goncalo , 2008 ; Post , 2012 ; Rispens & Jehn , 2010 ) . Even the response to threat can be com - plex : For instance , if anger is a response , anger may actually result in an approach , rather than an avoidance , motivation ( Carver & Harmon - Jones , 2009 ) . Indeed , under certain circumstances , con - flict may be perceived not simply as a neutral interpersonal situ - ation , but as an opportunity to solve problems collaboratively or prove one’s self - worth ( e . g . , Lun , Oishi , Coan , Akimoto , & Miao , 2010 ) . These circumstances depend on the features of the conflict , individual factors , and the situation itself ( as noted in Proposition 2 ) ; the cultural meanings and schema within the individual ( see Paths E , F - 1 , and F - 2 ) ; and other factors beyond the scope of this article , such as individual state and trait factors ( e . g . , aggression ) . When conflict is seen as an opportunity , it may be more likely to elicit a promotion approach and lead to high - activation , promotion - oriented emotions . This promotion , activation approach in turn increases creativity ( e . g . , R . S . Friedman & Forster , 2001 ) . Similarly , a large meta - analysis suggested that promotion - related , activating moods and affect ( e . g . , happiness , anger ) enhance cre - ativity ( Baas et al . , 2008 ) . Proposition 5 : Nonthreatening interpersonal conflict will en - hance creativity , mediated by a promotion focus . In sum , if a conflict situation , be it in a multicultural environ - ment or not , becomes a threat ( Path B1 ) , a cascade of cognitive effects occurs such that creativity is minimized ( Path C2 ) . How - ever , if the conflict is not perceived as a treat , it may benefit creativity ( C1 ) . The Moderating Role of Cultural Meanings on the Perception of Conflict ( Path D ) Culture impacts conflict as a moderator at several points in our model : It influences whether interpersonal conflict is perceived as such and whether a conflict will elicit a threat reaction and pre - vention orientation ( see Figure 1 ) . Researchers of culture have long understood that the norms surrounding conflict differ in different cultures ( e . g . , Brett , 2010 ; Gibson & McDaniel , 2010 ) . Cultural meanings can impact whether an event is perceived as conflict ( Path D ) because of differences in implicit theories of conflict ( in other words , what a conflict is ) , and the manner by which conflict is communicated . These differences may cause asymmetries in the perception of conflict , which prior research has shown to be detrimental to creativity ( Jehn et al . , 2010 ) . Culture and implicit theories of conflict . Whether a conflict is perceived as such may depend on an individual’s cultural frames ( e . g . , Gelfand et al . , 2001 ) . Just as the meaning of creativity may have different and similar aspects in different cultures ( e . g . , Niu & Sternberg , 2002 ; Paletz & Peng , 2008 ) , so , too , may the construct of conflict have different nuances . For instance , in one study , Japanese and Americans described conflict incidents , and another sample of Japanese and Americans sorted and rated those incidents into dimensions ( Gelfand et al . , 2001 ) . Although both sets of participants viewed all the conflicts as containing a compromise versus win dimension , Japanese participants viewed both Ameri - can and Japanese conflict examples as involving the dimension of duty to repay obligations versus the duty of maintaining one’s own reputation . On the other hand , Americans , but not Japanese , were more likely to perceive both Japanese and American conflicts as involving an intellectual versus emotional dimension . In addition , in evaluating the same American - generated conflict incidents , the Americans perceived the conflicts as involving infringements to the self , whereas the Japanese perceived issues about how the self was differentiated from others . Thus , although there are some similarities , different salient issues may be tied to the cultural meanings of what constitutes a conflict . In this example , the meaning of what constitutes a conflict itself can vary . Individuals from different cultures may interpret the same event in different ways , with some considering behavior to be indicative of conflict and others considering it nonconflict . Culture and manner of conflict . Cultural schema and mean - ings can also be related to the manner of expressing disagreement . How people choose to confront each other involves both the claimant and the respondents’ norms , which are essentially knowl - edge structures that are differentially available , accessible , and activated ( Brett , 2010 ) . In terms of manner , indirect rather than direct confrontation may be more acceptable in some cultures ( Brett , 2010 ; Gelfand et al . , 2007 ) . For example , cultural differ - ences exist regarding the degree to which implicit cues are ex - pressed and interpreted , with Americans less attuned to indirect messages in work settings compared with East Asians ( Sanchez - Burks et al . , 2003 ) . Similarly , Westerners , on average , considered the direct exchange of opinions and articulation of problems to be competent communication during conflicts , whereas East Asians preferred tact and patience , considering smoothing tactics to be most appropriate during conflict scenarios ( Brew , Tan , Booth , & Malik , 2011 ) . What is considered an appropriate solution to a conflict may differ as well . In a study of dyadic negotiations , T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 243 CULTURE , INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT , AND CREATIVITY American dyads were more likely to reach an integrative solution than Hong Kong Chinese , in part because of stronger norms about expressing underlying interests and synthesizing issues ( Tinsley & Brett , 2001 ) . For Hong Kong Chinese , the norms about resolving conflict were more likely to emphasize concern for authority , which then resulted in conflicts that were more likely to appeal to upper management ( Tinsley & Brett , 2001 ) . When faced with the “wrong” kind of manner or approach to resolving conflict , an individual may not know how to interpret the behavior , or may perceive it negatively . If an East Asian is subtly signaling to an American that she is disagreeing with something , the American , interpreting such signals through his cultural lens , may not understand that those signals indicate conflict at all . Proposition 6 : Culture will moderate whether a social inter - action or exchange in a multicultural setting is perceived as a conflict , such that cultural norms regarding implicit theories of conflict , and the appropriate expression and manner of con - flict , will enable individuals to perceive an encounter as a conflict or not ( Figure 1 , Path D ) . Culture Moderates the Perception of Threat in Conflict ( Paths E , F1 , and F2 ) Cultural meanings may also determine the perceived intensity of a conflict . Depending on cultural frames and norms , the same conflict may be perceived as more or less deeply threatening—or even as an opportunity . Cultural meanings can impact the percep - tion of a conflict as a threat both directly , in terms of what is considered threatening to the self , due to norms surrounding face and status ( i . e . , Path E ) , and indirectly via impacting the individ - ual’s tolerance for conflict ( i . e . , Path F - 1 , F - 2 ) . Culture , face , and threat . Cultural differences in reactions to conflict are related to the concept of face ( J . Y . Kim & Nam , 1998 ; K . Leung , Koch , & Lu , 2002 ) . “Face” refers to implicit theories of what is considered personally threatening and embarrassing in social situations . Individuals’ face represents the kinds of positive social images that they want to claim , maintain , or enhance in front of others . Research suggests that individuals have a universal need toward face concern ( Brown & Levinson , 1987 ; Goffman , 1967 ; Ho , 1976 ; Ting - Toomey & Kurogi , 1998 ; Zane & Yeh , 2002 ) and that people often , either on purpose or not , act to threaten other people’s face . For example , a negative message ( e . g . , disagree - ment , criticism ) in public may be considered a threat to the recipient’s face . Therefore , peoples’ daily face experiences can have significant psychological consequences on one’s emotions and self - esteem ( Lin & Yamaguchi , 2011 ) . Culture also determines the types of face that are important in social interactions and , thus , the degree of sensitivity to the content of a conflict ( J . Y . Kim & Nam , 1998 ) . For example , S . C . Choi and Lee ( 2002 ) argue that face in individualistic cultures ( e . g . , North America ) is typically associated with a person’s personal achievement , whereas face in collectivistic cultures ( e . g . , China ) is particularly focused on a person’s social hierarchy . Conflicts con - cerning a person’s ability or achievement may therefore be per - ceived as more threatening in individualistic cultures . On the other hand , conflicts related to one’s status or social position may be more threatening in collectivistic cultures . Y . H . Kim , Cohen , and colleagues have detailed three types of cultural mind - sets that may influence how individuals respond to face threats ( Y . H . Kim & Cohen , 2010 ; Y . H . Kim , Cohen , & Au , 2010 ; A . K . - Y . Leung & Cohen , 2010 ) . In face - oriented cultures ( e . g . , harmony - focused , hierarchical , collectivistic cultures ) , face is based on personal external attributes , such as one’s role ( Ho , 1976 ) and how closely individuals cleave to socially accepted norms ( J . Y . Kim & Nam , 1998 ) . Individuals from face cultures change their self - definitions based on how others see them ( Y . H . Kim et al . , 2010 ) . On the other hand , individuals from a culture of dignity ( which tends to be individualistic ) change their self - definitions based on internal factors , with others’ judgments seen as a threat to autonomy ( Y . H . Kim et al . , 2010 ) . Both of these cultural mind - sets are differentiated from a culture of honor , in which individuals gain face through challenge and thus claim their face from others ( A . K . - Y . Leung & Cohen , 2010 ) . These different cultural meanings—both the dimensions of in - dividualism and collectivism , and the cultural mind - sets of face , honor , and dignity cultures—influence whether a conflict is threat - ening by regulating the focus of face concerns and strategies of facework . For example , people who are from individualistic cul - tures and high in independent self - construal tend to focus on their own face , and thus assert their interests when handling conflict , whereas people who are from collectivistic cultures and high in interdependent self - construal tend to focus on other people’s face or mutually shared face ( and the relationship ) , and thus tend to compromise or to avoid conflict ( R . Friedman , Chi , & Liu , 2006 ; Oetzel & Ting - Toomey , 2003 ; Ting - Toomey & Kurogi , 1998 ) . Certain types of conflict may be seen as opportunities for people from dignity cultures to individuate themselves , or for people from honor cultures to demonstrate their knowledge or talents . It is plausible that a conflict that endangers someone else’s face is more threatening in some collectivistic cultures than in individualistic cultures . As a specific example , Brett ( 2010 ) describes an Amer - ican student in Thailand who purchased defective speakers . Instead of confronting the shop owner directly , she told him she was having trouble understanding how to set them up . When he tried to show her , it was obvious to him that they did not work , and he offered her another set in exchange . Her American and Thai friends had told the student that there was no way to make the seller take back defective speakers , but by using indirect , face - saving ( and face - giving ) tactics , she both enabled the seller to demonstrate his integrity and expertise , and she ended up with working speakers . Further , individuals from honor cultures are more likely to react with assertiveness , whereas individuals from face cultures may try to maintain harmony and feel shame , even if they are both threat - ened by the loss of face ( Y . H . Kim et al . , 2010 ; Leung & Cohen , 2010 ) . For instance , Miron - Spektor , Lin , and Paletz ( 2013 ) found a complex relationship between face threat and creativity , moder - ated by culture and mediated by prevention focus . In their Study 3 , participants from an honor culture ( Israel ) responded with less prevention focus and more creativity to experimentally manipu - lated face threat , whereas Japanese responded with greater preven - tion focus , and Americans ( a dignity culture ) did not experience an effect of face threat on prevention focus at all . Thus , whether the conflict is viewed as a threat , and whether the conflict is viewed as an opportunity to rise to the challenge or not , will influence whether a prevention orientation will result . In sum , an individual’s implicit theory of face , which is inherently a set of cultural meanings , may influence the perception of conflict as T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 244 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN threatening or not ( e . g . , neutral , or even an opportunity ) by deter - mining whether the content of conflict is sensitive ( in other words , whether it is relevant to face ) and by what kinds of negotiation strategies would be adopted . Culture and the context of conflict with regards to status . The context of a conflict can also have an effect , particularly when different cultural frames “read” different contexts differently . A disagreement coming from someone higher or lower within a status hierarchy may be perceived differently , depending on how important hierarchy is within one’s culture ( e . g . , depending on the horizontal and vertical elements of individualism – collectivism ; Triandis & Gelfand , 1998 ) . In aviation , for example , it was noted that some major accidents could have been averted if the first officer ( junior pilot ) could have been able to successfully chal - lenge the captain ( Kanki , Helmreich , & Anca , 2010 ) . As a result , aviation companies trained their junior pilots to raise problems to senior pilots and to challenge them ( Kanki et al . , 2010 ) . Unfortu - nately , this training was not as well received outside the United States in cultural contexts that value status and hierarchy ( Helm - reich & Merritt , 1988 ; Helmreich , Merritt , & Wilhelm , 1999 ) . A context that values status and hierarchy ( e . g . , high on power distance ; Hofstede , 1980 ; Merritt , 2000 ) makes it more difficult for a low - status employee to question and challenge the senior em - ployee , and more likely for a senior employee to perceive ques - tions coming from low - status employees as threats . Furthermore , in such a context , individuals in higher status positions may be less likely to accept information that is perceived as a challenge from individuals in lower status positions . Proposition 7 : Culture will moderate whether a conflict is viewed as a threat , specifically via cultural norms involving face and / or status : Counternormative conflicts , conflicts that make individuals lose face , and conflicts that arise from indi - viduals of lower status are more likely to be viewed as threats , particularly in face cultures and cultures that value hierarchy , respectively . Culture and tolerance of conflict . Cultural meanings can also filter and impact one’s tolerance for conflict ( Path F - 1 ) , which then can moderate whether a conflict is interpreted as a threat ( Path F - 2 ) . An individual with a high tolerance for conflict may perceive an event as a conflict , but not feel personally threatened by most conflict in general , thus not activating a prevention orientation . Cross - cultural research has examined cultural differences in the tolerance of conflict , often via examining cultural differences and approaches in conflict management styles ( e . g . , Morris et al . , 1998 ; Tjosvold & Sun , 2002 ) . In East Asia ( e . g . , China ) , conflict is less tolerated in general , in that a broad range of avoidant conflict management styles are more common than in the United States , where survey participants ( relatively ) preferred competitive con - flict management styles ( e . g . , Gelfand et al . , 2007 ; Morris et al . , 1998 ; Ting - Toomey et al . , 1991 ; Trubisky , Ting - Toomey , & Lin , 1991 ) . In addition , in more collectivist countries ( i . e . , Mexico and Taiwan ) , there is a greater focus on conflict resolution styles that include a concern for the outcomes of others ( i . e . , accommodation and collaboration ) compared with the United States ( Gabrielidis , Stephan , Ybarra , Dos Santos Pearson , & Villareal , 1997 ; Trubisky et al . , 1991 ) . In a study examining two separate harmony factors , disintegration avoidance and harmony enhancement , Chinese scored higher on both than did Anglo - Australians ( K . Leung , Brew , Zhang , & Zhang , 2011 ) . Further , Gelfand and colleagues’ ( 2001 ) finding that Americans , but not Japanese , conceptualized a dimension of intellectual versus emotional conflict suggests that affective / relationship conflicts and cognitive / task conflicts may be more confounded for Japanese than for Americans , such that conflict may be more threatening for Japanese . These studies imply that in a hypothetical multicultural setting involving East Asians and North Americans or Anglo - Australians , the Westerners will be more likely to tolerate or overlook conflict in general , making it less threatening , but that East Asians will be more threatened by the conflict and attempt to smooth over differences they do perceive . Even within the same country , there are often cultural differences in the tolerance of conflict and disagreement , based on different organizational or disciplinary norms . Proposition 8 : The moderation effect of culture ( Proposition 7 ) will be mediated by a tolerance for conflict . Summary In summary ( see Table 1 ) , cultural meanings may affect the perception of conflict ( Path D ) , whether conflict is a threat ( Path E ) , and the tolerance of conflict ( Path F - 1 ) , which then may influence how threatening a conflict seems ( Path F - 2 ) . As a way to make sense of the world and social situations , culture impacts the experience of conflict via expectations regarding the manner by which the conflict is communicated , the context within which it occurs , and the content of what is under disagreement . In a multicultural setting , all of these differences in cultural meaning may differentially influence the experience of conflict and threat within individuals . Discussion Multicultural teamwork is becoming an increasingly normal part of work and leisure life . Scholars have called for diversity research to learn from cross - cultural psychology research and vice versa ( Ferdman & Sagiv , 2012 ) . Our model extends previous literature by utilizing the dynamic constructivist theory from cross - cultural psychology to explain how observed or experienced conflict in multicultural environments may inhibit creativity in individuals . First , we highlight the importance of cultural meanings and the tolerance of conflict as potential moderators to reconcile mixed findings of the conflict – creativity relationship . By emphasizing the perception and tolerance of conflict , this model helps to explain differences between studies on conflict and creativity based on self - report surveys and research on dissent and creativity . We maintain that conflict can cause trouble in multicultural environ - ments , but it is how that conflict is reacted to and interpreted that may have direct , immediate cognitive consequences for individu - als . Second , we bring in mediating psychological mechanisms ( i . e . , perception of threat , prevention orientation ) that can explain the different effects of the perception and tolerance of conflict on creativ - ity in multicultural settings . Third , our model advances existing liter - ature by going beyond the typical social categorization / information - processing perspectives of the effects of diversity on creativity . By drawing on research on cross - cultural psychology , we propose a nuanced approach to culture and creativity . Indeed , we make a T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 245 CULTURE , INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT , AND CREATIVITY novel connection between cross - cultural psychology and the con - flict and cognition literature . Finally , by focusing on multicultural environments broadly , rather than simply as heterogeneous or homogeneous team composition , we provide a model with greater reach . Theoretical and Practical Implications This model suggests some immediate practical and theoreti - cal implications for individuals in multicultural settings . With regard to developing theory , by integrating disparate literatures , we capitalize on established psychological findings to unpack possible psychological processes in individuals in multicultural settings . Tying face theory to creativity has only rarely been done theoretically , let alone empirically ( e . g . , Chiu , 2008 ; Miron - Spektor et al . , 2013 ) . In fact , regulatory focus can be applied to any number of cross - cultural situations and team processes , such as miscommunications and intergroup conflict . These environments can be better understood when the cultur - ally moderated effects of regulatory focus are taken into ac - count . We also provide a novel link between culture and creativity . Although there exists a broad literature on creativity cross - culturally , it has focused either on differences between cultures on creativity tests and tasks ( e . g . , Khaleefa , Erdos , & Ashria , 1996 ; Torrance , 1968 ; Torrance & Sato , 1979 ) , differences in how cre - ativity may be valued in different cultures ( e . g . , Khaleefa , Erdos , & Ashria , 1997 ) , differences in lay theories of what it means to be a creative person or product ( e . g . , Niu & Sternberg , 2002 ; Paletz & Peng , 2008 ; Paletz , Peng , & Li , 2011 ; Rudowicz & Yue , 2000 ; Runco & Johnson , 2002 ) , and / or the creativity of biculturals or people with cross - cultural experience ( e . g . , A . K . - Y . Leung & Chiu , 2010 ; Maddux & Galinsky , 2009 ) . One exception is Goncalo and Staw’s ( 2006 ) study , which examined the effect of cultural values on group creativity . We refer to culture as cultural mean - ings , which influence an individual’s perception of conflict and reaction to it , above and beyond any cultural differences in con - ceptions or values related directly to creativity . Thus , we extend the reach of cross - cultural psychology into theories of the ante - cedents of creativity . In addition , this model goes beyond prior research on team conflict and creativity to encompass multicultural settings and interactions more generally . A relevant situation could be , for example , an interaction between a customer service represen - tative and a customer from a different culture ( Miron - Spektor , Efrat - Treister , et al . , 2011 ) . Given the increased reliance on offshored services and geographically remote service centers , multicultural interactions and conflicts are not limited to teams . This model conceptualizes culture as shared mental models , and not simply as ethnic or national differences ( even though the literature currently focuses on these differences ) . Pilots versus academic economists versus design engineers in different orga - nizations may also have different cultural norms and meanings regarding the proper expression , tolerance , and interpretation of conflict . Further , this model has broader theoretical implications about the nature of the conflict – creativity relationship . Although this model focuses on multicultural settings , it has implications for homogenous settings as well . A homogenous group of individuals from an honor versus a face culture may respond differently to conflict , in terms of their prevention focus , based on whether that conflict is perceived to be a threat and culture - specific responses to threat . Taking this logic even further , this model has implications for the conflict to creativity relationship more generally . Additional factors may influence whether individuals interpret a conflict as a threat and how they respond . For example , low - income boys were more aggressive when they had lower verbal intelligence and / or ineffective self - regulatory skills , with these two factors interacting with each other ( Ayduk , Rodriguez , Mischel , Shoda , & Wright , 2007 ) . In addition to personality traits that may express across situations , individuals can also consistently react to certain situa - tions more aggressively than other situations ( e . g . , a child who tends to respond to adults with aggression vs . less aggression with peers , e . g . , Mischel , Shoda , & Mendoza - Denton , 2002 ; Shoda , Mischel , & Wright , 1994 ) . These more individual factors may represent individual mental models , but they may be created by factors above and beyond culture . Practically , the combination of the broadening global economy and economic turmoil means that creativity in multicultural set - tings has become a pressing issue . Rather than taking emotional conflict in multinational teams as inevitable ( von Glinow , Shapiro , & Brett , 2004 ) , our model suggests that the key points of leverage in multicultural groups are preventing individuals within those groups from feeling threatened by conflict . Different types of discourse can change conflict from destructive to productive ( Ay - oko , Hartel , & Callan , 2002 ) . The success of specific communi - cation techniques such as checking understanding ( Ayoko et al . , 2002 ) may well be because they lessen the likelihood that a disagreement will be interpreted as a threat . Once a conflict has been perceived as a threat and becomes emotional , some argue that talking about the conflict may not be an effective strategy in multicultural teams ( von Glinow et al . , 2004 ) . On the other hand , suggestions for sensitizing members of multicultural teams to conflict ( e . g . , von Glinow et al . , 2004 ) may have the effect of promoting a tolerance for any sort of conflict , be it task or emotional , such that threat does not occur . Learning new cultural schema may not be easy , but managers can be well motivated to avoid having their employees turn con - flict into threat . We recommend that rather than attempting to erase previous schema ( which may not be possible ) , new cultural mean - ings could be introduced via training and organizational norms with the goal of creating , essentially , biculturals with regard to conflict . Much as national biculturals can shift their cultural frames ( Benet - Martinez , Leu , Lee , & Morris , 2002 ) , a newly learned system of meanings regarding conflict may be activated instead of an older schema . These new meanings should be designed to decrease a sense of threat and increase tolerance of conflict . The greater diversity of background knowledge that researchers as - sume is held by multicultural teams may then help creativity ( e . g . , van Knippenberg & Schippers , 2007 ) . The implication is that interpersonal disagreement without threat would lead to even greater creativity than in homogeneous settings . In short , if these key aspects of culture are indeed leverage points for turning team conflict into threats , we have identified areas in which interven - tions can be useful in preventing the interpretation of threat . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 246 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN Future Research and Theorizing Scholars of multicultural settings are right in ending their arti - cles with calls for more empirical studies ( Hinds , Liu , & Lyon , 2011 ) . Research on naturalistic multicultural environments is rare because it is so difficult . Diversity itself is not a unitary construct . For instance , heterogeneous groups can differ in terms of which cultures are numerically or socially dominant ( e . g . , Paletz et al . , 2004 ) . Cultural diversity could mean a small or large variety of different cultures or a broad difference between cultural values ( separation ; Harrison & Klein , 2007 ) . The factors examined in this model could be examined using self - report surveys , but we rec - ommend using experiments that activate cultural frames ( e . g . , Hong et al . , 2000 ; Miron - Spektor et al . , 2013 ; Oyserman & Lee , 2008 ) , nuanced interpretations of scenarios ( e . g . , Gelfand et al . , 2001 ; Paletz & Peng , 2008 ) , and actual multicultural interactions in the field . Retrospective self - report surveys using standard in - struments , such as those often used in conflict studies ( e . g . , De Dreu & Weingart , 2003 ) , will not likely unpack nuanced cultural differences in the perception and tolerance of conflict alone . To take cultural differences into account , researchers should compare self - reported perceived conflict impressions with observable con - flict interactions , assuming that self - reports themselves are trust - worthy representations of perceptions . Such comparisons can tease apart what types of behaviors are considered normal conflict behaviors to which participants . In real - world situations , the rele - vant cultural schemas will be complex , numerous , and nuanced . For instance , a heterogeneous work group that includes individuals from face , honor , and dignity cultures , all of whom have different tolerances for conflict , triggers for face loss , and norms for ex - pressing conflict , may all respond differently to the same ex - change , with some exchanges increasing prevention and others decreasing it . The challenge for such studies is to document the relevant schema using a combination of retrospective ( perhaps open - ended ) self - report and observational methods coded by cul - tural experts . Scenario methods can also shed light on what indi - viduals think are appropriate responses to a range of situations . Parts of this model ( not including the conditional if – then piece ; Figure 1 ) could also be tested using structural equation modeling . This article focused on the effects of experienced and perceived conflict on perceptions threat and on individual creativity , but not on intrapersonal conflict ( e . g . , Maslow , 1943 ) , intergroup conflict ( e . g . , Fiske , 2002 ) , or how this affects interactions with others in multicultural environments . Any two given individuals , even from different cultures , may have face concern , and both the level of face concern and the multicultural setting will affect how they interact . For instance , Liu , Friedman , Barry , Gelfand , and Zhang ( 2012 ) found that high levels of aggregated , dyadic concern for face resulted in greater consensus ( bringing together of mental models ) and joint gains in intercultural negotiators from China and the United States compared with intracultural negotiators . Thus , high team levels of face sensitivity can motivate team members to come to a consensus . Even more importantly , this model relies on existing research with creativity as a dependent variable , which , in these studies , has been operationalized in different but incoherent ways . Research testing this model can also unpack different types of creativity more systematically . Friedman and Forster’s experiments ( e . g . , R . S . Friedman & Forster , 2000 , 2005 ) did not distinguish between that many types of creativity . Creative ideas can vary in the extent to which they deviate from existing knowledge and solutions , ranging from radical to incremental ( Dewar & Dutton , 1986 ; Madjar , Greenberg , & Chen , 2011 ; M . D . Mumford & Gustafson , 1988 ) . Given that Friedman and Forster operationalized creativity using insight and alternate uses tasks , even incremental creativity may be harmed by a prevention orientation . It is reasonable to predict that a prevention orientation may have an even stronger suppression effect on radical creativity . In addition , a prevention orientation may have a different impact on different types of creative processes—for example , idea generation versus idea eval - uation versus problem structuring and finding ( e . g . , Herman & Reiter - Palmon , 2011 ) . In addition , this model focused on individual creativity , not collective creativity ( e . g . , Brophy , 1998 , 2006 ) . Different creativ - ity tasks have different implications for individual - versus team - level creativity ( Brophy , 1998 ) . Individual efforts within a team versus collective team efforts may be further affected by cultural norms such as individualism and collectivism , and by how those norms dictate conflict and disagreement in those different task settings . Even within individual creativity , creativity can arise from different levels of eminence and expertise ( Kaufman & Beghetto , 2009 ) . Future research could continue to examine whether the type of creativity and creative tasks serve as a mod - erator for the effects of a prevention orientation . Further , as noted previously , there are cultural differences ( and similarities ) in conceptions of creativity ( Niu & Sternberg , 2002 ; Paletz & Peng , 2008 ; Paletz , Peng , et al . , 2011 ; Runco & Johnson , 2002 ) and how creativity may be valued in different cultures ( e . g . , Khaleefa et al . , 1997 ) . These provide potential additional cultural moderators in the conflict to creativity link . Even if disparate cultures find both novelty and appropriateness important to cre - ativity ( Paletz & Peng , 2008 ) , if the particular activities considered to be creative differ across cultures ( e . g . , Khaleefa et al . , 1997 ; Paletz , Peng , et al . , 2011 ) , then creative responses to a lower prevention and greater promotion focus may also differ . These differences in approaches to creativity highlight the need for broader , cross - cultural research . Taking this point further , there is a deeper , but unfortunately common , limitation in this model : Although several of the prop - ositions are informed by cross - cultural research ( e . g . , face threat and culture ) , much of the research cited here is limited to Western and / or student samples . The model itself focuses on individual creativity , which portrays a possible Western bias toward focusing on the individual ( e . g . , Triandis , 1989 , 1990 ; although see Paletz , Peng , et al . , 2011 , for no East – West differences in implicit theories of group vs . individual creativity ) . Although this model draws on the current literature , as with other theoretical models , it will need to change as additional studies provide better cultural generaliz - ability—and any other additional caveats , moderators , and medi - ators . Conclusions As the global economy develops , more and more individuals are required to be productive and creative within multicultural envi - ronments . The issues discussed in this article will only grow more pressing . Innovation is important for growing economies and cre - ating jobs ( e . g . , Ahlstrom , 2010 ) . Social interactions in multicul - T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 247 CULTURE , INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT , AND CREATIVITY tural settings often involve conflicts that limit individuals’ ability to think creatively . We suggest that the positive and negative effects of conflict on creativity can be stifled or enhanced depend - ing on the cultural meanings individuals hold . Cultural meanings determine whether individuals will interpret a social interaction as a conflict and feel threatened by it . By understanding possible differences in individual’s cultural meanings , conflict can be man - aged and leveraged to the benefit of anyone who engages in multicultural settings . References Ahlstrom , D . ( 2010 ) . Innovation and growth : How business contributes to society . The Academy of Management Perspectives , 24 , 11 – 24 . doi : 10 . 5465 / AMP . 2010 . 52842948 Amabile , T . M . ( 1983 ) . The social psychology of creativity : A componen - tial conceptualization . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 , 357 – 376 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 45 . 2 . 357 Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativity in context : Update to the social psy - chology of creativity . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . Amason , A . ( 1996 ) . Distinguishing the effects of functional and dysfunc - tional conflict on strategic decision making : Resolving a paradox for top management teams . Academy of Management Journal , 39 , 123 – 148 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 256633 Ayduk , O . , Rodriguez , M . L . , Mischel , W . , Shoda , Y . , & Wright , J . ( 2007 ) . Verbal intelligence and self - regulatory competencies : Joint predictors of boys’ aggression . Journal of Research in Personality , 41 , 374 – 388 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jrp . 2006 . 04 . 008 Ayoko , O . B . , Callan , V . J . , & Hartel , C . E . J . ( 2008 ) . The influence of team emotional intelligene climate on conflict and team members’ reactions to conflict . Small Group Research , 39 , 121 – 149 . Ayoko , O . B . , Hartel , C . E . J . , & Callan , V . J . ( 2002 ) . Resolving the puzzle of productive and destructive conflict in culturally heterogeneous work - groups : A communication accommodation theory approach . Interna - tional Journal of Conflict Management , 13 , 165 – 195 . doi : 10 . 1108 / eb022873 Ayub , N . , & Jehn , K . A . ( 2010 ) . The moderating influence of nationalism and the relationship between national diversity and conflict . Negotiation and Conflict Management Research , 3 , 249 – 275 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1750 - 4716 . 2010 . 00060 . x Baas , M . , De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Nijstad , B . A . ( 2008 ) . A meta - analysis of 25 years of mood - creativity research : Hedonic tone , activation , or reg - ulatory focus ? Psychological Bulletin , 134 , 779 – 806 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0012815 Barki , H . , & Hartwick , J . ( 2004 ) . Conceptualizing the construct of inter - personal conflict . International Journal of Conflict Management , 15 , 216 – 244 . doi : 10 . 1108 / eb022913 Bearman , C . , Paletz , S . B . F . , Orasanu , J . , & Thomas , M . J . W . ( 2010 ) . The breakdown of coordinated decision making in distributed systems . Hu - man Factors , 52 , 173 – 188 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0018720810372104 Beghetto , R . A . , & Kaufman , J . C . ( 2007 ) . Toward a broader conception of creativity : A case for “mini - c” creativity . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativity , and the Arts , 1 , 73 – 79 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 1931 - 3896 . 1 . 2 . 73 Benet - Martínez , V . , Leu , J . , Lee , F . , & Morris , M . W . ( 2002 ) . Negotiating biculturalism : Cultural frame switching in biculturals with oppositional versus compatible cultural identities . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychol - ogy , 33 , 492 – 516 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022102033005005 Betancourt , H . , & Lopez , S . R . ( 1993 ) . The study of culture , ethnicity , and race in American psychology . American Psychologist , 48 , 629 – 637 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 48 . 6 . 629 Brett , J . ( 2010 ) . Clueless about culture and indirect confrontation of con - flict . Negotiation and Conflict Management Research , 3 , 169 – 178 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1750 - 4716 . 2010 . 00056 . x Brew , F . , Tan , J . , Booth , H . , & Malik , I . ( 2011 ) . The effects of cognitive appraisals of communication competence in conflict interactions : A study involving Western and Chinese cultures . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 42 , 856 – 874 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022110381121 Brophy , D . R . ( 1998 ) . Understanding , measuring , and enhancing collective creative problem - solving efforts . Creativity Research Journal , 11 , 199 – 229 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1103 _ 2 Brophy , D . R . ( 2006 ) . A comparison of individual and group efforts to creatively solve contrasting types of problems . Creativity Research Journal , 18 , 293 – 315 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1803 _ 6 Brown , P . , & Levinson , S . ( 1987 ) . Politeness : Some universals in langrage usage . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Carver , C . S . , & Harmon - Jones , E . ( 2009 ) . Anger is an approach - related affect : Evidence and implications . Psychological Bulletin , 135 , 183 – 204 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0013965 Chatman , J . A . , Polzer , J . T . , Barsade , S . G . , & Neale , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Being different yet feeling similar : The influence of demographic composition and organizational culture on work processes and outcomes . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 43 , 749 – 780 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2393615 Chiu , M . M . ( 2008 ) . Effects of argumentation on group micro - creativity ; Statistical discourse analyses of algebra students’ collaborative problem - solving . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 33 , 382 – 402 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cedpsych . 2008 . 05 . 001 Choi , I . , Dalal , R . , Kim - Prieto , C . , & Park , H . ( 2003 ) . Culture and judg - ment of causal relevance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 84 , 46 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 84 . 1 . 46 Choi , S . C . , & Lee , S . L . ( 2002 ) . Two - component model of chemyon - oriented behaviors in Korea : Constructive and defensive chemyon . Jour - nal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 33 , 332 – 345 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022102033003008 Cronin , M . A . , & Weingart , L . R . ( 2007 ) . Representational gaps , informa - tion processing , and conflict in functionally diverse teams . The Academy of Management Review , 32 , 761 – 773 . doi : 10 . 5465 / AMR . 2007 . 25275511 Cropley , A . ( 2006 ) . In praise of convergent thinking . Creativity Research Journal , 18 , 391 – 404 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1803 _ 13 Curs¸eu , P . L . , Boros¸ , S . , & Oerlemans , L . A . G . ( 2012 ) . Task and rela - tionship conflict in short - term and long - term groups : The critical role of emotion regulation . International Journal of Conflict Management , 23 , 97 – 107 . doi : 10 . 1108 / 10444061211199331 De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Gelfand , M . ( 2008 ) . Conflict in the workplace : Sources , functions , and dynamics across multiple levels of analysis . In C . K . W . De Dreu & M . Gelfand ( Eds . ) , The psychology of conflict and conflict management in organizations ( pp . 3 – 54 ) . New York , NY : Erl - baum . De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Nijstad , B . A . ( 2008 ) . Mental set and creative thought in social conflict ; Threat rigidity versus motivated focus . Jour - nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 95 , 648 – 661 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 95 . 3 . 648 De Dreu , C . K . W . , & Weingart , L . R . ( 2003 ) . Task versus relationship conflict , team performance , and team member satisfaction : A meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology , 88 , 741 – 749 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 88 . 4 . 741 De Dreu , C . K . W . , & West , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Minority dissent and team innovation : The importance of participation in decision making . Journal of Applied Psychology , 86 , 1191 – 1201 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 86 . 6 . 1191 Derryberry , D . , & Tucker , D . M . ( 1994 ) . Motivating the focus of attention . In P . M . Niedenthal & S . Kitayama ( Eds . ) , Heart’s eye : Emotional influences in perception and attention ( pp . 167 – 196 ) . New York , NY : Academic Press . Dewar , R . D . , & Dutton , J . E . ( 1986 ) . The adoption of radical and incremental innovations : An empirical analysis . Management Science , 32 , 1422 – 1433 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 32 . 11 . 1422 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 248 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN de Wit , F . R . C . , Greer , L . L . , & Jehn , K . A . ( 2012 ) . The paradox of intragroup conflict : A meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology , 97 , 360 – 390 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0024844 Earley , P . C . , & Mosakowski , E . ( 2000 ) . Creating hybrid team cultures : An empirical test of transnational team functioning . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 43 , 26 – 49 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 1556384 Ferdman , B . M . , & Sagiv , L . ( 2012 ) . Diversity in organizations and cross - cultural work psychology : What if they were more connected ? Industrial and Organizational Psychology : Perspectives on Science and Practice , 5 , 323 – 345 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1754 - 9434 . 2012 . 01455 . x Fiske , S . T . ( 2002 ) . What we know now about bias and intergroup conflict , the problem of the century . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 11 , 123 – 128 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8721 . 00183 Friedman , R . , Chi , S . - C . , & Liu , L . A . ( 2006 ) . An expectancy model of Chinese - American differences in conflict - avoiding . Journal of Interna - tional Business Studies , 37 , 76 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1057 / palgrave . jibs . 8400172 Friedman , R . S . , & Forster , J . ( 2000 ) . The effects of approach and avoid - ance motor actions on the elements of creative insight . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 79 , 477 – 492 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 79 . 4 . 477 Friedman , R . S . , & Forster , J . ( 2001 ) . The effects of promotion and prevention cues on creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 81 , 1001 – 1013 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 81 . 6 . 1001 Friedman , R . S . , & Forster , J . ( 2002 ) . The influence of approach and avoidance motor actions on creative cognition . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 38 , 41 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1006 / jesp . 2001 . 1488 Friedman , R . S . , & Forster , J . ( 2005 ) . Effects of motivational cues on perceptual asymmetry : Implications for creativity and analytical prob - lem solving . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 88 , 263 – 275 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 88 . 2 . 263 Friedman , R . S . , & Forster , J . ( 2010 ) . Implicit affective cues and attentional tuning : An integrative review . Psychological Bulletin , 136 , 875 – 893 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0020495 Gabrielidis , C . , Stephan , W . G . , Ybarra , O . , Dos Santos Pearson , V . M . , & Villareal , L . ( 1997 ) . Preferred styles of conflict resolution : Mexico and the United States . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 28 , 661 – 677 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022197286002 Gelfand , M . J . , Erez , M . , & Aycan , Z . ( 2007 ) . Cross - cultural organizational behavior . Annual Review of Psychology , 58 , 479 – 514 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 58 . 110405 . 085559 Gelfand , M . J . , Nishii , L . H . , Holcombe , K . M . , Dyer , N . , Ohbuchi , K . - I . , & Fukuno , M . ( 2001 ) . Cultural influences on cognitive representations of conflict : Interpretations of conflict episodes in the United States and Japan . Journal of Applied Psychology , 86 , 1059 – 1074 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 86 . 6 . 1059 Gibson , C . B . , & McDaniel , D . M . ( 2010 ) . Moving beyond conventional wisdom : Advancements in cross - cultural theories of leadership , conflict , and teams . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 5 , 450 – 462 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1745691610375560 Goffman , E . ( 1967 ) . On face - work . In E . Goffman , Interaction ritual : Essays on face - to - face behavior ( pp . 5 – 45 ) . New York , NY : Pantheon Books . Goncalo , J . A . , & Staw , B . M . ( 2006 ) . Individualism - collectivism and group creativity . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro - cesses , 100 , 96 – 109 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2005 . 11 . 003 Gutnick , D . , Walter , F . , Nijstad , B . , & De Dreu , C . K . W . ( 2012 ) . Creative performance under pressure : An integrative conceptual framework . Organizational Psychology Review , 2 , 189 – 207 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 2041386612447626 Harrison , D . A . , & Klein , K . J . ( 2007 ) . What’s the difference ? Diversity constructs as separation , variety , or disparity in organizations . The Academy of Management Review , 32 , 1199 – 1228 . doi : 10 . 5465 / AMR . 2007 . 26586096 Harrison , D . A . , Price , K . H . , & Bell , M . P . ( 1998 ) . Beyond relational demography : Time and the effects of surface - and deep - level diversity on work group cohesion . Academy of Management Journal , 41 , 96 – 107 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 256901 Helmreich , R . L . , & Merritt , A . C . ( 1998 ) . Culture at work in aviation and medicine : National , organizational , and professional influences . Alder - shot , UK : Ashgate . Helmreich , R . L . , Merritt , A . C . , & Wilhelm , J . A . ( 1999 ) . The evolution of crew resource management training in commercial aviation . The International Journal of Aviation Psychology , 9 , 19 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15327108ijap0901 _ 2 Herman , A . , & Reiter - Palmon , R . ( 2011 ) . The effect of regulatory focus on idea generation and idea evaluation . Psychology of Aesthetics , Creativ - ity , and the Arts , 5 , 13 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0018587 Higgins , E . T . ( 1997 ) . Beyond pleasure and pain . American Psychologist , 52 , 1280 – 1300 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 52 . 12 . 1280 Hinds , P . , Liu , L . , & Lyon , J . ( 2011 ) . Putting the global in global work : An intercultural lens on the practice of cross - national collaboration . The Academy of Management Annals , 5 , 135 – 188 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 19416520 . 2011 . 586108 Ho , D . Y . ( 1976 ) . On the concept of face . American Journal of Sociology , 81 , 867 – 884 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 226145 Hofstede , G . ( 1980 ) . Culture’s consequences : International differences in work - related values . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Hofstede , G . ( 1983 ) . The cultural relativity of organizational practices and theories . Journal of International Business Studies , 14 , 75 – 89 . doi : 10 . 1057 / palgrave . jibs . 8490867 Homan , A . C . , van Knippenberg , D . , Van Kleef , G . A . , & De Dreu , C . K . W . ( 2007 ) . Interacting dimensions of diversity : Cross - categorization and the functioning of diverse work groups . Group Dy - namics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 11 , 79 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 1089 - 2699 . 11 . 2 . 79 Hong , Y . - Y . , Benet - Martinez , V . , Chiu , C . - Y . , & Morris , M . ( 2003 ) . Boundaries of cultural influence : Construct activation as a mechanism for cultural differences in social perception . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 34 , 453 – 464 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022103034004005 Hong , Y . - Y . , Morris , M . W . , Chiu , C . - Y . , & Benet - Martinez , V . ( 2000 ) . Multicultural minds : A dynamic constructivist approach to culture and cognition . American Psychologist , 55 , 709 – 720 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 55 . 7 . 709 Jehn , K . A . ( 1995 ) . A mulitmethod examination of the benefits and detriments of intragroup conflict . Administrative Science Quarterly , 40 , 256 – 282 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2393638 Jehn , K . A . ( 1997 ) . A qualitative analysis of conflict types and dimensions in organizational groups . Administrative Science Quarterly , 42 , 530 – 557 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2393737 Jehn , K . A . , & Bendersky , C . ( 2003 ) . Intragroup conflict in organizations : A contingency perspective on the conflict - outcome relationship . Re - search in Organizational Behavior , 25 , 187 – 242 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0191 - 3085 ( 03 ) 25005 - X Jehn , K . A . , & Mannix , E . A . ( 2001 ) . The dynamic nature of conflict : A longitudinal study of intragroup conflict and group performance . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 44 , 238 – 251 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 3069453 Jehn , K . A . , Northcraft , G . B . , & Neale , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Why differences make a difference : A field study of diversity , conflict , and performance in workgroups . Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 , 741 – 763 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2667054 Jehn , K . A . , Rispens , S . , & Thatcher , S . M . B . ( 2010 ) . The effects of conflict asymmetry on work group and individual outcomes . Academy of Management Journal , 53 , 596 – 616 . doi : 10 . 5465 / AMJ . 2010 . 51468978 Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1980 ) . Mental models in cognitive science . Cognitive Science , 4 , 71 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog0401 _ 4 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 249 CULTURE , INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT , AND CREATIVITY Joshi , A . , Liao , H . , & Roh , H . ( 2011 ) . Bridging domains in workplace demography research : A review and reconceptualization . Journal of Management , 37 , 521 – 552 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0149206310372969 Joshi , A . , & Roh , H . ( 2009 ) . The role of context in work team diversity research : A meta - analytic review . Academy of Management Journal , 52 , 599 – 627 . doi : 10 . 5465 / AMJ . 2009 . 41331491 Kanki , B . , Helmreich , R . , & Anca , J . ( 2010 ) . Crew resource management ( 2nd ed . ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Kaufman , J . C . , & Beghetto , R . A . ( 2009 ) . Beyond big and little : The Four C model of creativity . Review of General Psychology , 13 , 1 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0013688 Khaleefa , O . H . , Erdos , G . , & Ashria , I . H . ( 1996 ) . Creativity , culture and education . High Ability Studies , 7 , 157 – 167 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0937445960070206 Khaleefa , O . H . , Erdos , G . , & Ashria , I . H . ( 1997 ) . Traditional education and creativity in an Afro - Arab Islamic culture : The case of Sudan . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 31 , 201 – 211 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 1997 . tb00791 . x Kidwell , B . , & Langholtz , H . J . ( 1998 ) . Personnel selection , preparation , and training for U . N . peacekeeping missions . In H . J . Langholtz ( Ed . ) , The psychology of peacekeeping ( pp . 89 – 100 ) . Westport , CT : Praeger . Kim , J . Y . , & Nam , S . H . ( 1998 ) . The concept and dynamics of face : Implications for organizational behavior in Asia . Organization Science , 9 , 522 – 534 . doi : 10 . 1287 / orsc . 9 . 4 . 522 Kim , Y . - H . , & Cohen , D . ( 2010 ) . Information , perspective , and judgments about the self in face and dignity cultures . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 36 , 537 – 550 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0146167210362398 Kim , Y . - H . , Cohen , D . , & Au , W . - T . ( 2010 ) . The jury and abjury of my peers : The self in face and dignity cultures . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 98 , 904 – 916 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0017936 Klimoski , R . , & Mohammed , S . ( 1994 ) . Team mental model : Construct or metaphor ? Journal of Management , 20 , 403 – 437 . Kurtzberg , T . R . , & Mueller , J . S . ( 2005 ) . The influence of daily conflict on perceptions of creativity : A longitudinal study . International Journal of Conflict Management , 16 , 335 – 353 . Leung , A . K . - Y . , & Chiu , C . - Y . ( 2010 ) . Multicultural experience , idea receptiveness , and creativity . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 41 , 723 – 741 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022110361707 Leung , A . K . - Y . , & Cohen , D . ( 2011 ) . Within - and between - culture vari - ation : Individual differences and the cultural logics of honor , face , and dignity cultures . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 100 , 507 – 526 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0022151 Leung , A . K . - Y . , Maddux , W . W . , Galinsky , A . D . , & Chiu , C . ( 2008 ) . Multicultural experience enhances creativity : The when and how . Amer - ican Psychologist , 63 , 169 – 181 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 63 . 3 . 169 Leung , K . , Brew , F . , Zhang , Z . - X . , & Zhang , Y . ( 2011 ) . Harmony and conflict : A cross - cultural investigation in China and Australia . Jour - nal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 42 , 795 – 816 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022110363474 Leung , K . , Koch , P . T . , & Lu , L . ( 2002 ) . A dualistic model of harmony and its implications for conflict management in Asia . Asia Pacific Journal of Management , 19 , 201 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1016287501806 Lin , C . , & Yamaguchi , S . ( 2011 ) . Effects of face experience on emotions and self - esteem in Japanese culture . European Journal of Social Psy - chology , 41 , 446 – 455 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ejsp . 817 Liu , L . A . , Friedman , R . , Barry , B . , Gelfand , M . J . , & Zhang , Z . - X . ( 2012 ) . The dynamics of consensus building in intracultural and intercultural negotiations . Administrative Science Quarterly , 57 , 269 – 304 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0001839212453456 Lovelace , K . , Shapiro , D . L . , & Weingart , L . R . ( 2001 ) . Maximizing cross - functional new product teams’ innovativeness and constraint ad - herence : A conflict communications perspective . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 44 , 779 – 793 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 3069415 Lun , J . , Oishi , S . , Coan , J . A . , Akimoto , S . , & Miao , F . F . ( 2010 ) . Cultural variations in motivational responses to felt misunderstandings . Person - ality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 36 , 986 – 996 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0146167210362979 Maddux , W . W . , Adam , H . , & Galinsky , A . D . ( 2010 ) . When in Rome . . . Learn why the Romans do what they do : How multicultural learning experiences facilitate creativity . Personality and Social Psychology Bul - letin , 36 , 731 – 741 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0146167210367786 Maddux , W . W . , & Galinksy , A . D . ( 2009 ) . Cultural borders and mental barriers : The relationship between living abroad and creativity . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 96 , 1047 – 1061 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0014861 Madjar , N . , Greenberg , E . , & Chen , Z . ( 2011 ) . Factors for radical creativ - ity , incremental creativity , and routine , noncreative performance . Jour - nal of Applied Psychology , 96 , 730 – 743 . Mannix , E . , & Neale , M . A . ( 2005 ) . What differences make a difference ? The promise and reality of diverse teams in organizations . Psychological Science in the Public Interest , 6 , 31 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1529 - 1006 . 2005 . 00022 . x Markus , H . , & Kitayama , S . ( 1991 ) . Culture and the self : Implications for cognition , emotion , and motivation . Psychological Review , 98 , 224 – 253 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 98 . 2 . 224 Maslow , A . H . ( 1943 ) . Conflict , frustration , and the theory of threat . The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 38 , 81 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0054634 Mayer , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Fifty years of creativity research . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 449 – 460 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cam - bridge University Press . Merritt , A . ( 2000 ) . Culture in the cockpit : Do Hofstede’s dimensions replicate ? Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 31 , 283 – 301 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022100031003001 Miron - Spektor , E . , Efrat - Treister , D . , Rafaeli , A . , & Schwartz - Cohen , O . ( 2011 ) . Others’ anger makes people work harder not smarter : The effect of observing anger and sarcasm on complex thinking . Journal of Applied Psychology , 96 , 1065 – 1075 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0023593 Miron - Spektor , E . , Gino , F . , & Argote , L . ( 2011 ) . Paradoxical frames and creative sparks : Enhancing individual creativity through conflict and integration . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 116 , 229 – 240 . Miron - Spektor , E . , Lin , C . , & Paletz , S . B . F . ( 2013 ) . Abide , push back , or challenge ? The effect of face loss on creativity in face , dignity , and honor cultures . Manuscript submitted for publication . Mischel , W . , Shoda , Y . , & Mendoza - Denton , R . ( 2002 ) . Situation - behavior profiles as a locus of consistency in personality . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 11 , 50 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 8721 . 00166 Mohammed , S . , Ferzandi , L . , & Hamilton , K . ( 2010 ) . Metaphor no more : A 15 - year review of the team mental model construct . Journal of Management , 36 , 876 – 910 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0149206309356804 Morris , M . W . , & Gelfand , M . J . ( 2004 ) . Cultural differences and cognitive dynamics : Expanding the cognitive tradition in negotiation . In M . J . Gelfand & J . M . Brett ( Eds . ) , The handbook of negotiation and culture ( pp . 45 – 70 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Stanford University Press . Morris , M . W . , & Peng , K . ( 1994 ) . Culture and cause : American and Chinese attributions for social and physical events . Journal of Person - ality and Social Psychology , 67 , 949 – 971 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 67 . 6 . 949 Morris , M . W . , Williams , K . Y . , Leung , K . , Larrick , R . , Mendoza , M . T . , Bhatnagar , D . , . . . Hu , J . - Ch . ( 1998 ) . Conflict management style : Accounting for cross - national differences . Journal of International Busi - ness Studies , 29 , 729 – 747 . doi : 10 . 1057 / palgrave . jibs . 8490050 Mumford , M . D . , & Gustafson , S . B . ( 1988 ) . Creativity syndrome : Inte - gration , application , and innovation . Psychological Bulletin , 103 , 27 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 103 . 1 . 27 T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 250 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN Mumford , M . M . ( 2001 ) . Something old , something new : Revisiting Guil - ford Press’s conception of creative problem solving . Creativity Research Journal , 13 , 267 – 276 . doi : 10 . 1207 / S15326934CRJ1334 _ 04 National Science Board . ( 2012 ) . Science and engineering indicators 2012 . Arlington , VA : National Science Foundation . Nemeth , C . J . ( 1986 ) . Differential contributions of majority and minority influence . Psychological Review , 93 , 23 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 93 . 1 . 23 Nemeth , C . J . , & Kwan , J . ( 1985 ) . Originality of word associations as a function of majority vs . minority influence processes . Social Psychology Quarterly , 48 , 277 – 282 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 3033688 Nemeth , C . J . , Personnaz , B . , Personnaz , M . , & Goncalo , J . A . ( 2004 ) . The liberating role of conflict in group creativity : A study in two countries . European Journal of Social Psychology , 34 , 365 – 374 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ejsp . 210 Nemeth , C . J . , & Wachtler , J . ( 1983 ) . Creative problem solving as a result of majority vs . minority influence . European Journal of Social Psychol - ogy , 13 , 45 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ejsp . 2420130103 Neubert , M . J . , Kacmar , K . M . , Carlson , D . S . , Chonko , L . B . , & Roberts , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Regulatory focus as a mediator of the influence of initiating structure and servant leadership on employee behavior . Journal of Ap - plied Psychology , 93 , 1220 – 1233 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0012695 Nisbett , R . E . , Peng , K . , Choi , I . , & Norenzayan , A . ( 2001 ) . Culture and systems of thought : Holistic versus analytic cognition . Psychological Review , 108 , 291 – 310 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 108 . 2 . 291 Nishii , L . H . , & Goncalo , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Demographic faultlines and cre - ativity in diverse groups . Research on Managing Groups and Teams , 11 , 1 – 26 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 0856 ( 08 ) 11001 - 5 Niu , W . , & Sternberg , R . ( 2002 ) . Contemporary studies on the concept of creativity : The East and the West . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 36 , 269 – 288 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2002 . tb01069 . x Nijstad , B . A . , & Stroebe , W . ( 2006 ) . How the group affects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 10 , 186 – 213 . Oetzel , J . G . , & Ting - Toomey , S . ( 2003 ) . Face concerns in interpersonal conflict : A cross - cultural empirical test of the face - negotiation theory . Communication Research , 30 , 599 – 624 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0093650203257841 Oyserman , D . ( 2011 ) . Culture as situated cognition : Cultural mindsets , cultural fluency , and meaning making . European Review of Social Psychology , 22 , 164 – 214 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10463283 . 2011 . 627187 Oyserman , D . , & Lee , S . W . S . ( 2008 ) . A situated cognition perspective on culture : Effects of priming cultural syndromes on cognition and moti - vation . In R . M . Sorrentino & S . Yamaguchi ( Eds . ) , Motivation and cognition across cultures ( pp . 237 – 265 ) . New York , NY : Elsevier . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 373694 - 9 . 00011 - 8 Paletz , S . B . F . , & Peng , K . ( 2008 ) . Implicit theories of creativity across cultures : Novelty and appropriateness in two product domains . Jour - nal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 39 , 286 – 302 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022022108315112 Paletz , S . B . F . , Peng , K . , Erez , M . , & Maslach , C . ( 2004 ) . Ethnic composition and its differential impact on group processes in diverse teams . Small Group Research , 35 , 128 – 157 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1046496403258793 Paletz , S . B . F . , Peng , K . , & Li , S . ( 2011 ) . In the world or in the head : External and internal implicit theories of creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 23 , 83 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10400419 . 2011 . 571181 Paletz , S . B . F . , & Schunn , C . ( 2010 ) . A social - cognitive framework of multidisciplinary team innovation . Topics in Cognitive Science , 2 , 73 – 95 . Paletz , S . B . F . , Schunn , C . D . , & Kim , K . ( 2011 ) . Intragroup conflict under the microscope : Micro - conflicts in naturalistic team discussions . Nego - tiation and Conflict Management Research , 4 , 314 – 351 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1750 - 4716 . 2011 . 00085 . x Pelled , L . H . , Eisenhardt , K . M . , & Xin , K . R . ( 1999 ) . Exploring the black box : An analysis of work group diversity , conflict , and performance . Administrative Science Quarterly , 44 , 1 – 28 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2667029 Peng , K . , Ames , D . , & Knowles , E . ( 2001 ) . Culture and human inference : Perspectives from three traditions . In D . Masumoto ( Ed . ) , Handbook of culture and psychology ( pp . 245 – 264 ) . New York , NY : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Peng , K . , & Nisbett , R . E . ( 1999 ) . Culture , dialectics , and reasoning about contradiction . American Psychologist , 54 , 741 – 754 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 54 . 9 . 741 Peterson , R . S . , & Behfar , K . J . ( 2003 ) . The dynamic relationship between performance feedback , trust , and conflict in groups : A longitudinal study . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 92 , 102 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0749 - 5978 ( 03 ) 00090 - 6 Plucker , J . A . , Beghetto , R . A . , & Dow , G . T . ( 2004 ) . Why isn’t creativity more important to educational psychologists ? Potentials , pitfalls , and future direction in creativity research . Educational Psychologist , 39 , 83 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326985ep3902 _ 1 Porath , C . L . , & Erez , A . ( 2007 ) . Does rudeness really matter ? The effects of rudeness on task performance and helpfulness . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 50 , 1181 – 1197 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 20159919 Porath , C . L . , & Erez , A . ( 2009 ) . Overlooked but not untouched : How rudeness reduces onlookers’ performance on routine and creative tasks . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 109 , 29 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . obhdp . 2009 . 01 . 003 Post , C . ( 2012 ) . Deep - level team composition and innovation : The mediating roles of psychological safety and cooperative learning . Group & Organization Management , 37 , 555 – 588 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1059601112456289 Reiter - Palmon , R . , Mumford , M . D . , O’Connor Boes , J . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Problem construction and creativity : The role of ability , cue consistency and active processing . Creativity Research Journal , 10 , 9 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s15326934crj1001 _ 2 Rhodes , M . ( 1961 ) . An analysis of creativity . Phi Delta Kappan , 42 , 305 – 310 . Rispens , S . , & Jehn , K . A . ( 2010 ) . Conflict in workgroups : Constructive , destructive , and asymmetric conflict . In D . De Cremer , R . van Dick , & K . J . Murnighan ( Eds . ) , Social psychology and organizations ( pp . 185 – 209 ) . London , UK : Routledge . Rohner , R . P . ( 1984 ) . Toward a conception of culture for cross - cultural psychology . Journal of Cross - Cultural Psychology , 15 , 111 – 138 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0022002184015002002 Rudowicz , E . , & Yue , X . - D . ( 2000 ) . Concepts of creativity : Similarities and differences among mainland , Hong Kong , and Taiwanese Chinese . The Journal of Creative Behavior , 34 , 175 – 192 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2000 . tb01210 . x Runco , M . A . , & Johnson , D . J . ( 2002 ) . Parents’ and teachers’ implicit theories of children’s creativity : A cross - cultural perspective . Creativity Research Journal , 14 , 427 – 438 . doi : 10 . 1207 / S15326934CRJ1434 _ 12 Sanchez - Burks , J . , Lee , F . , Choi , I . , Nisbett , R . , Zhao , S . , & Koo , J . ( 2003 ) . Conversing across cultures : East - west communication styles in work and nonwork contexts . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 85 , 363 – 372 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 85 . 2 . 363 Shalley , C . , Zhou , J . , & Oldham , G . R . ( 2004 ) . The effects of personal and contextual characteristics on creativity : Where should we go from here ? Journal of Management , 30 , 933 – 958 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jm . 2004 . 06 . 007 Shoda , Y . , Mischel , W . , & Wright , J . C . ( 1994 ) . Intraindividual stability in the organization and patterning of behavior : Incorporating psychological situations into the idiographic analysis of personality . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 67 , 674 – 687 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 67 . 4 . 674 Simons , T . L . , & Peterson , R . S . ( 2000 ) . Task conflict and relationship conflict in top management teams : The pivotal role of intragroup trust . T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 251 CULTURE , INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT , AND CREATIVITY Journal of Applied Psychology , 85 , 102 – 111 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0021 - 9010 . 85 . 1 . 102 Stahl , G . K . , Maznevski , M . L . , Voigt , A . , & Jonsen , K . ( 2010 ) . Unraveling the effects of cultural diversity in teams : A meta - analysis of research on multicultural work groups . Journal of International Business Studies , 41 , 690 – 709 . doi : 10 . 1057 / jibs . 2009 . 85 Staw , B . M . , Sandelands , L . E . , & Dutton , J . E . ( 1981 ) . Threat rigidity effects in organizational behavior : A multilevel analysis . Administrative Science Quarterly , 26 , 501 – 524 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2392337 Swann , W . B . , Kwan , V . S . Y . , Polzer , J . T . , & Milton , L . P . ( 2003 ) . Fostering group identification and creativity in diverse groups : The role of individuation and self - verification . Personality and Social Psychol - ogy Bulletin , 29 , 1396 – 1406 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0146167203256868 Ting - Toomey , S . , Gao , G . , Trubisky , P . , Yang , Z . , Kim , H . S . , Lin , S . - L . , & Nishida , T . ( 1991 ) . Culture , face maintenance , and styles of handling interpersonal conflict : A study in five cultures . International Journal of Conflict Management , 2 , 275 – 296 . doi : 10 . 1108 / eb022702 Ting - Toomey , S . , & Kurogi , A . ( 1998 ) . Facework competence in intercul - tural conflict : An updated face - negotiation theory . International Journal of Intercultural Relations , 22 , 187 – 225 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0147 - 1767 ( 98 ) 00004 - 2 Tinsley , C . H . , & Brett , J . M . ( 2001 ) . Managing workplace conflict in the United States and Hong Kong . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 85 , 360 – 381 . doi : 10 . 1006 / obhd . 2000 . 2944 Tjosvold , D . , & Sun , H . F . ( 2002 ) . Understanding conflict avoidance : Relationship , motivations , actions , and consequences . International Journal of Conflict Management , 13 , 142 – 164 . doi : 10 . 1108 / eb022872 Torrance , E . P . ( 1966 ) . Torrance tests of creativity . Princeton , NJ : Person - nel Press . Torrance , E . P . ( 1968 ) . Testing the educational and psychological devel - opment of students from other cultures and subcultures . Review of Educational Research , 38 , 71 – 76 . Torrance , E . P . , & Sato , S . ( 1979 ) . Figural creative thinking abilities of United States and Japanese majors in education . Creative Child & Adult Quarterly , 4 , 216 – 221 . Triandis , H . C . ( 1989 ) . The self and social behavior in differing cultural contexts . Psychological Review , 96 , 506 – 520 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 96 . 3 . 506 Triandis , H . C . ( 1990 ) . Cross - cultural studies of individualism and collec - tivism . In J . J . Berman ( Ed . ) , Nebraska Symposium on Motivation , 1989 : Cross - cultural perspectives ( Vol . 37 , pp . 41 – 133 ) . Lincoln , NE : Uni - versity of Nebraska Press . Triandis , H . C . , & Gelfand , M . J . ( 1998 ) . Converging measurement of horizontal and vertical individualism and collectivism . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 74 , 118 – 128 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 74 . 1 . 118 Trubisky , P . , Ting - Toomey , S . , & Lin , S . - L . ( 1991 ) . The influence of individualism - collectivism and self - monitoring on conflict styles . Inter - national Journal of Intercultural Relations , 15 , 65 – 84 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0147 - 1767 ( 91 ) 90074 - Q Turner , M . E . , & Virick , M . ( 2008 ) . Threat and group creativity . Social Influence , 3 , 286 – 303 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 15534510802341199 van Knippenberg , D . , & Schippers , M . C . ( 2007 ) . Work group diversity . Annual Review of Psychology , 58 , 515 – 541 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 58 . 110405 . 085546 von Glinow , M . A . , Shapiro , D . L . , & Brett , J . M . ( 2004 ) . Can we talk , and should we ? Managing emotional conflict in multicultural teams . The Academy of Management Review , 29 , 578 – 592 . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Finke , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Creative cognition . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Handbook of creativity ( pp . 189 – 212 ) . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Vaid , J . ( Eds . ) . ( 1997 ) . Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . doi : 10 . 1037 / 10227 - 000 West , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Sparkling fountains or stagnant ponds : An integrative model of creativity and innovation implementation in work groups . Applied Psychology : An International Review , 51 , 355 – 387 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 1464 - 0597 . 00951 Williams , K . Y . , & O’Reilly , C . A . ( 1998 ) . Demography and diversity in organizations : A review of 40 years of research . In B . Staw & R . Sutton ( Eds . ) , Research in organizational behavior ( Vol . 20 , pp . 77 – 140 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Zane , N . , & Yeh , M . ( 2002 ) . The use of culturally - based variables in assessment : Studies on loss of face . In K . Kurasaki , S . Okazaki , & S . Sue ( Eds . ) , Asian American mental health : Assessment theories and methods ( pp . 123 – 140 ) . Dordrecht , Netherlands : Kluwer Academic . Zhou , J . , & Su , Y . ( 2010 ) . A missing piece of the puzzle : The organiza - tional context in cultural patterns of creativity . Management and Orga - nization Review , 6 , 391 – 413 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1740 - 8784 . 2010 . 00192 . x Received July 26 , 2013 Revision received December 2 , 2013 Accepted December 31 , 2013 (cid:2) T h i s do c u m e n t i s c opy r i gh t e d by t h e A m e r i ca n P s y c ho l og i ca l A ss o c i a ti on o r on e o f it s a lli e d pub li s h e r s . T h i s a r ti c l e i s i n t e nd e d s o l e l y f o r t h e p e r s on a l u s e o f t h e i nd i v i du a l u s e r a nd i s no t t o b e d i ss e m i n a t e d b r o a d l y . 252 PALETZ , MIRON - SPEKTOR , AND LIN