Educational Psychology Review , Vol . 7 , No . 3 , 1995 Creative Problem Solving : Educational Implications Donald J . Treffinger t , 2 Overview and Creative Problem Solving ( CPS ) is a framework which individuals or groups can use to : formulate problems , opportunities , or challenges ; generate and analyze many , varied , and novel options ; and plan for effective implementation of new solutions or courses of action . Today ' s CPS framework builds on more than four decades of theory , research , and application in a variety of contexts . CPS involves the integration of both creative and critical thinking skills . Using CPS effectively also requires drawing upon several metacognitive and task appraisal skills . Current research and applications focus on flexible , dynamic , descriptive uses of CPS , moving away from traditional linear , prescriptive step - or stage - sequential models . CPS offers a powerful set of tools for productive thinking ; these can be learned and used successfully by children , adolescents , and adults . KEY WORDS : creativity ; problem solving ; education ; teaching . INTRODUC ~ ON This article summarizes the development and current status of Crea - tive Problem Solving , an approach which has emerged from an extensive tradition of theory , research , and practice that spans more than four dec - ades . CPS has been applied successfully in a variety of settings and by prob - lem solvers of all ages ( from early childhood through adult ) . This article focuses on some important implications for applying and studying CPS in educational settings ; it is not intended as a comprehensive review , a survey 1Center for Creative Learning , Sarasota , Florida . 2Correspondence should be addressed to Donald J . Treffinger , Center for Creative Learning , Sarasota , Florida . 301 1040 - 726X / 95 / 0900 - 0301507 . 50 / U 0 1995 Plenum Publishing Corporation 302 Treffinger of research on CPS ( for which purpose see Isaksen , 1987 ; Isaksen , Mur - dock , Firestien , and Treffinger , 1993a , b ) , or as a general survey of issues related to nurturing creativity ( see Treffinger , Sortore , and Cross , 1993a ) . INCREASING ACCESS TO CREATIVITY : ORIGINS AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE CPS APPROACH Today ' s CPS approach ( Isaksen , Dorval , and Treffinger , 1994 ; Treffin - ger , Isaksen , and Dorval , 1994a ) builds on several fundamental principles which are generally supported by theory and research . CPS holds that : (cid:12)9 Creative potentials exist among all people . (cid:12)9 Creativity can be expressed among all people in an extremely broad array of areas or subjects , perhaps in a nearly infinite number of ways ( Tor - rance and Salter , 1990 ) . (cid:12)9 Creativity is usually approached or manifested according to the in - terests , preferences , or styles of individuals ( Dunn , Dunn , and Treffinger , 1992 ; Kirton , 1976 ) . (cid:12)9 People can function creatively , while being productive to different levels or degrees of accomplishment or significance . (cid:12)9 Through personal assessment and deliberate intervention , in the form of training or instruction , individuals can make better use of their creative styles , enhance their level of creative accomplishment , and thus realize more fully their creative potentials . This does not imply that everyone will become a person who attains creative breakthroughs of major human significance ; not everyone will be a Rembrandt , a Mozart , or an Edison . It does suggest that anyone might become creatively productive in meaningful ways . People can learn more about their own creative abilities and styles , learn and apply useful strate - gies in appropriat ' e ways , and attain greater success and satisfaction ( for themselves and others ) through creative efforts . The roots of CPS are found in Alex Osborn ' s ( 1953 ) work . He was enthusiastically concerned with promoting creativity for finding new and useful solutions and for developing opportunities for enhancing any situ - ation . He believed strongly in the potential of every person for creative behavior . Imagination and judgment , as Osborn wisely advocated , are both essential contributors to creative productivity , and everyone can learn to use them better . Our approach today maintains a clear focus on nurturing creative skills . In the mid - 1950s , Osborn was joined by Sidney Parnes , and the basic ideas of CPS were expanded and organized into a five - step process model ( Parnes , 1967 ) . Parnes , in collaboration with Ruth Noller , Angelo Biondi ,