An Exploratory Study of Creativity in Business Domain : A Systematic Literature Review Tomoyasu Hiranuma , Rihyei Kang Graduate School of Advanced Science and Technology , Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology , Ishikawa , Japan Abstract —This paper reports on a systematic literature review of creativity in the business domain to develop the study of individual and organizational creativity in innovation management . A transition of study of essential topics in business creativity was observed , qualitatively organized and discussed . Using the SCOPUS database , this paper studied 197 articles , reviews , or conference papers on business creativity with over 50 citations , out of 3 , 073 published by 2020 . We have found the following . The research of creativity in the business domain began to occur in the 1970s and has attracted much interest from the latter half of the 1980s . In addition , we have confirmed that there was high interest in the research topics such as entrepreneurial creativity , creative leadership , creativity management , and creative thinking processes . That research was conducted by cross - sectional study and literature review . Alternatively , there are few long - term studies through careers of businessperson across educational institutions and multiple organizations . This paper provides implications for future business creativity research and significantly change the way recruitment and organizing for innovation by discovering a research void that the research period is a snapshot in time , and there are few long - term studies toward specific individuals or organizations . I . I NTRODUCTION This paper reports on a systematic literature review of creativity in the business domain . In the innovation management of technology management , the management of organization and human resources is an important issue as well as the corporate strategy , new product development process management , and the intercompany division of labor systems . The creativity of the organization and its people is an important resource in the early stages of innovation [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] . This paper adopted Schumpeter and Levitt’s definitions for “Creativity” and “Innovation” . Schumpeter [ 3 ] uses “new combination” as innovation , describes it as “To produce means to combine materials and forces within our reach . To produce other things , or the same things by a different method , means to combine these materials and forces differently . . . Development in our sense is then defined by the carrying out of new combinations” . Schumpeter [ 3 ] also describes that “The carrying out of new combinations we call ‘enterprise’ ; the individuals whose function it is to carry them out we call ‘entrepreneurs’” . On the other hand , Levitt compares creativity with innovation , and describes it as “Creativity thinks up new things . Innovation does new things” [ 4 ] . Considering the above , this paper defines creativity and innovation as below . • Creativity thinks up novelty and usefulness things by combining materials , information , and forces in different methods from the conventional . • Innovation does new things and gets results . Based on the above definition , in order to realize Innovation , Creativity is a prerequisite . However who will do it ? By geniuses such as Bill Gates and Steve Jobs ? We answer this question with the sentences of Teresa M . Amabile , a management academic . “Most of the creative work done in the business world today gets done by people whose names will never be recorded in history books” [ 5 ] . These “ordinary people” , who are not recorded in the history books , can be regarded as the essential bearers of innovation . We believe that it is essential to deepen our consideration of the creativity of ordinary people in innovation management research . Creativity research has been conducted since the 19th century . However , it had a vital psychological aspect in the early days , and the subject was often discussed by specific geniuses who achieved remarkable results . Creativity research in the domain of business management , in particular , has not yet escaped from the rudimentary stage . We observe the status , trends , and transitions of study development in the developing creativity research of business management domain through the systematic review , qualitatively organize and discuss . Moreover , To answer the following Research Question is the purpose of this paper . RQ : “What are the research gaps in creativity research on ‘ordinary people’ to support innovation management in technology management ? ” II . L ITERATURE R EVIEW Firstly , this paper tries to grasp the basic knowledge for Creativity and Innovation management by narrative review . The pioneering research that theorized the relationship between “Creativity” and “Innovation management” in business organizations is the componential model of creativity proposed by [ 1 ] . This model describes the components and processes of individual or small group creativity and organizational innovation , and the relationship between them . Individual creativity has three components—intrinsic motivation to do the task , skills in the task domain , and skills in creative thinking— and five - step process—task presentation , preparation , idea generation , idea validation , and outcome assessment— , and the three elements have influences on each process . Organizational 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era ©2022 PICMET . Manuscript received Aug 31 , 2021 ; accepted Jan 20 , 2022 innovation also consists of three components—motivation to innovate , resources in the task domain , and skills in innovation management—and the five - step innovation process—setting the agenda , setting the stage , producing the ideas , testing and implementing the ideas , and outcome assessment— , and the three components have influences on the three elements of individual creativity as well as each process in organizational innovation . Furthermore , individual creativity as a whole has a great influence on “producing the ideas” which is the third step in the organizational innovation process . Through this model , Amabile insists that individual creativity is enhanced by the induction of intrinsic motivation as well as by two skills of domain - relevant skills and creativity - relevant skills . Organizational managers need to induce contribute individual creativity to organizational innovation by enhancing their motivation [ 1 ] . Mumford [ 6 ] argued that organizations should consider and selected multiple interventions—include training for core skills , performance evaluations , policies for recruiting managers and employees who will contribute to emphasize organizational growth and innovation , and develop a climate to encourage innovation—that take into account the individual , the group , the organization , and the strategic environment to enhance creativity and induce contribution . Somech and Drach - Zahavy [ 7 ] describe “individual creative personality , as well as functional heterogeneity , promotes team creativity , which in turn interacts with climate for innovation such that team creativity enhances innovation implementation only when climate for innovation is high” as the composition of a team that can transform the creativity of the team into innovation . Taylor and Greve [ 8 ] described that “multiple knowledge domains produce novel combinations that increase the variance of product performance and that extensive experience produces outputs with high average performance” . They have found that the diversity of backgrounds in personality , knowledge domain , and experience can enhance organizational creativity and innovation performance . These findings are consistent with Florida’s Creative Class theory which argued that tolerance for diversity is important as well as talent and technology [ 9 ] . Previous studies on creativity and innovation management has been conducted from the perspective of enhancing individual creativity and inducing contributions to the realization of organizational innovation through management such as training , motivation , fostering of organizational climate , and team organization . However , the “individual” in these studies is often regarded as a given . Few studies have scoped the process of fostering creativity by individual employees outside the organization including pre - employment as well as within the organization . Rosly , Junid , Lajin and Rahim [ 10 ] ’s study that indicates the relationship between entrepreneurs ( technopreneurs ) and creativity is one of the few studies of individual creativity in the innovation management domain of technology management . It is proposed that “creativity does impact one’s entrepreneurial intention and should be considered as part of the overall analysis in identifying one’s entrepreneurial competencies” [ 10 ] . Although it has indicated some relationships between entrepreneurship and elements of creativity , it has not yet elucidated the process of fostering creativity in individuals . In the next section , we expand the scope from innovation management and provide the research vacuum through a systematic review of creativity research in business management domain . III . M ETHOD This paper provides a comprehensive and systematic review of creativity research in business management domain for the purpose of “To identify any gaps in current research in order to suggest areas for further investigation” [ 11 ] . In addition , we follows the below rules : • Systematic reviews are based on a defined search strategy that aims to detect as much of the relevant literature as possible [ 11 ] . • Systematic reviews require explicit inclusion and exclusion criteria to assess each potential primary study [ 11 ] . Moreover , to ensure that the review is systematic , we carried out steps of the PRISMA Statement 2020 flow diagram [ 12 ] . Specifically , the steps of “Identification” , “Screening” , and “Included” . It is described in detail below . A . Identification The first step is to identify the literature . In that time , it is important to the information sources such as databases , and set keywords . As the information source , this systematic review adopted Scopus , the world’s largest abstract and citation database of scientific literature with more than 10 , 000 journals in the social sciences , to conduct quantitative analysis of research in the social sciences , including business management domain research . Keywords were set as only simple keywords—“Business” and “Creativity”—so as not to exclude more than necessary . Using that keywords , extract articles , reviews , or conference papers that include this keyword—“Business” and “Creativity”—in titles , abstracts , or keyword on Scopus . As a result of the first step procedure , We identified 4432 records . B . Screening The second step is screening . The criteria for screening is based on the research domain , citation , and assessed for eligibility . The research domain was narrowed down to research in business management domain . This screening was done by using the functions of Scopus . In Scopus , “Social Science” and “Business , Management and Accounting” are set as separate fields . At this stage , these two fields were included in order not to exclude more than necessary . As a result of the second step procedure , we screened 3073 records . In the screening by Citation , we decided to target papers that had enough citations to grasp the trend and set a threshold of 50 or more citations . As a result of the third step procedure , We screened 197 records . 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era Fig . 1 . Process of Systematic Review The next step was to assess eligibility . We reviewed the texts of 197 literature and excluded literature that was not eligible for creativity studies in business management domain . The evaluation criteria are the following three . • Not a business domain study • Creativity research is not the main topic • “Creativity” is just an explanatory variable we excluded literature that was not studies in business management domain . For example , study on education ( e . g . [ 13 ] ) and study of human nature ( e . g . [ 14 ] ) . We also excluded literature that were in the business management domain but not the main topic of creativity . For example , study on inside marketing ( e . g . [ 15 ] ) and study on tourism ( e . g . [ 16 ] ) . Besides we excluded literature that were in the business management domain and creativity studies , but where creativity was only an explanatory variable . For example , the literature by [ 17 ] is not a study exploring creativity , although the title also includes creativity and creativity is a key explanatory variable for Entrepreneurial Intentions . Therefore , we excluded it . C . Included As a result of the final step procedure , we included 52 records . Furthermore , we organize topics , research methods , and research subjects , and analyze the status and trends of creativity studies on “ordinary people” , especially in the business management domain . IV . R ESULT AND D ISCUSSION A . Overview First of all , we observe the development of creativity studies in business management domain before organizing the narrowed down literature . The graph in Fig . 2 covers 3071 records up to screening in the second step . Fig . 2 . Amount of “Business Creativity” Research and Percentage of “Business Creativity” Research in Business Domain Research Although there is research on creativity in general since the end of the 19th century , research of creativity in the business domain began to occur in the 1970s . since the latter half of the 1990s , the amount of literature and the ratio of creativity research literature to business management domain has been increasing and has attracted a lot of interest . Next , we organize the 52 screened literature . These studies can be broadly categorized into the following three types . • Study on individual creativity , such as employees and entrepreneurs • Study on creativity management or leadership in organizations • Study that is more specialized in creative process In Table 1 , we have set up three categories of “Individual Creativity” , “Organization Creativity Management” , and “Co - Creation Process” in accordance with the above three categories , and have organized the major literature with high citation by category . In the following , we analyze and discuss each category . Mainly focus on “Individual Creativity” and “Organization Creativity Management” . Identification Screening Keyword “Business” and “Creativity” Records ( n = 4462 ) Domain “Social Sciences” or “Business , Management and Accounting” Records ( n = 3073 ) Cite > = 50 Records ( n = 197 ) Assessed for eligibility The following reason reports are excluded : – Not a business domain study – Creativity research is not the main topic – “Creativity” is just an explanatory variable Records ( n = 52 ) Included Reports included in review Category “Individual Creativity” Records ( n = 15 ) Category “Co - Creation Process” Records ( n = 16 ) Category “Organization Creativity Management” Records ( n = 21 ) 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era TABLE I . SUMMARY OF THE LITERATURE REFERRED IN BUSINESS CREATIVITY Category Author Topics Methods Subjects of Questionnaires , Interviews , and / or Case Study Individual Creativity Ward , 2004 [ 18 ] Cognitive approaches to creativity as an important task of entrepreneurs Literature Review Entrepreneurs Maddux and Galinsky , 2009 [ 19 ] The relationship between living abroad and creativity Questionnaires , Experiments in 5 studies MBA Students Kor , Mahoney & Michael , 2007 [ 20 ] Individuals , their knowledge , resources and skills , and the processes of discovery and creativity Literature Review , Theory Building Entrepreneurs Kim , Hon & Crant , 2009 [ 21 ] The relationship between proactive personality , employee creativity , and newcomer outcomes Questionnaires—3 times , every 6 months Senior undergraduate students ( at time 1 ) , Employees from various organizations ( at time 2 , 3 ) Hood & Young , 1993 [ 22 ] Four primary areas in successful entrepreneurs—content , skills and behavior , mentality , and personality Questionnaires Chief Executives—from Inc . magazine’s list of the nation’s most successful publicly held entrepreneurial firms for the years 1979 - 1989 Zampetakis , Kafetsios , Bouranta , Dewett & Moustakis , 2009 [ 23 ] A theoretical model positing relationships among emotional intelligence ( EI ) , creativity , proactivity , and attitudes towards entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial intent Questionnaires Students of business , engineering , and science Zampetakis & Moustakis , 2006 [ 24 ] A preliminary model , which links creativity with entrepreneurial intention Questionnaires Undergraduate Students Zampetakis , 2008 [ 25 ] The role of creativity and proactivity on perceived entrepreneurial desirability Questionnaires Students of engineering and business Ahlin , Drnovšek & Hisrich , 2014 [ 26 ] A conceptual model of entrepreneur’s creativity , self - efficacy , and innovation outcomes Questionnaires Business Owners Organization Creativity Management Amabile , 1998 [ 5 ] What kills creativity in organization Questionnaires and Interview ( in two years ) More than 20 teams in 7 companies across three industries—high tech , consumer products , and chemicals Rego , Sousa , Marques & Cunha , 2012 [ 27 ] Supervisors’ authentic leadership for foster employees’creativity Questionnaires 201 employees in 33 commerce organizations Kamoche & Cunha , 2001 [ 28 ] Applied art form jazz improvisation to organizational innovative activities Literature Review , Theory Building - Amabile & Khaire , 2008 [ 29 ] Creativity and the role of the leader Discussion—discussion of creativity research implications with leading creativity scholars and executives in a two - days colloquium Leading creativity scholars and executives from companies—such as Google , IDEO , Novartis , Intuit , and E Ink Barczak , Lassk & Mulki , 2010 [ 30 ] Antecedents of team creativity , Team emotional intelligence and team trust and relationships among these precursors to creative effort Questionnaires 82 student teams at a large university Andriopoulos , 2001 [ 31 ] The five factors that influence organizational creativity—organizational climate , leadership style , organizational culture , resources and skills and the structure and systems of an organization Literature review - Tschang , 2007 [ 32 ] Balancing the tensions between rationalization and creativity in the video games industry Interview and Ethnography 19 lead designer or studio head—and almost all of the latter were involved in game design as well— from 17 firms Leonard & Straus , 1997 [ 33 ] How to promote or inhibit creative abrasion for encourage innovation Participant Observation Manager successful at fostering innovation in organization Gu , Tang & Jiang , 2015 [ 34 ] The relationship between moral leadership and enhance employee creativity Questionnaires , Theory Building 160 supervisors— subordinate dyads 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era Category Author Topics Methods Subjects of Questionnaires , Interviews , and / or Case Study Florida & Goodnight , 2005 [ 35 ] Managing for creativity—how to harness the creative energies of all its stakeholders Participant Observation A world’s largest privately held software company— SAS Institute Valentine , Godkin , Fleischman & Kidwell , 2011 [ 36 ] Assess the degree to which perceived corporate ethical values work in concert with group creativity to influence both job satisfaction and turnover intention Questionnaires 781 healthcare and administrative employees working at a healthcare organization and 127 sales and marketing employees working for a variety of firms Gotsi , Andriopoulos , Lewis & Ingram , 2010 [ 37 ] Managing creatives through management of identity tensions of creative workers Interviews 86 persons directly involved in the creative process in five leading New Product Design ( NPD ) consultancies M . S . Baucus , Norton , D . A . Baucus & Human , 2008 [ 38 ] How to fostering creativity and innovation without encouraging unethical behavior Literature review - Schepers & Van Den Berg , 2007 [ 39 ] The relationship between work - environment creativity and the social factors— organizational - culture perceptions , employee participation , knowledge sharing , and procedural justice Questionnaires 154 employees of a government organization . Halbesleben , Novicevic , Harvey & Buckley Ronald , 2003 [ 40 ] A competency - based model of time , leadership , and innovation in creativity and innovation Literature review , Theory Building - Sutton , 2001 [ 41 ] New approaches to hiring , managing creative people , and dealing with risk and randomness in innovation Literature review - Stevens , Burley & Divine , 1999 [ 42 ] Creativity of analyst and business discipline for higher profits faster from new product development ( NPD ) Measure Performance —two types of indicators 69 analysts evaluating 267 early - stage new product development ( NPD ) projects in a major global chemical company Henker , Sonnentag & Unger , 2015 [ 43 ] Transformational leadership and employee creativity Questionnaires ( Online panel survey , three - wave longitudinal study , every 4 weeks ) 279 employees worked within the fields of information technology , human resources , research and development , technical support , executive management , strategy , and public relations Wilson & Stokes , 2005 [ 44 ] To distinguish managing creativity from managing innovation Interview —in - depth face - to - face interviews and telephone interviews 28 industry practitioners and experts , and 310 owner - managers of small music businesses Lin & Liu , 2012 [ 45 ] A cross - level analysis of organizational creativity climate and perceived innovation—The mediating effect of work motivation Questionnaires 398 employees from 13 companies in three different industrial sectors Co - Creation Process Lingo & O’Mahony , 2010 [ 46 ] Brokerage work—connecting others to foster creativity and innovation—on creative projects Ethnography 23 independent music producers in the Nashville country music industry Stolarick & Florida , 2006 [ 47 ] The importance of creativity as a driving force in regional economic growth and prosperity Questionnaires , Interview Groups of up to ten individuals from across the business , education , arts , and government sectors of Montreal Gielnik , Frese , Graf & Kampschulte , 2012 [ 48 ] Creativity in the opportunity identification process and the moderating effect of diversity of information Interview , Experiments 98 business owners in venture Bidault & Castello , 2009 [ 49 ] The role of trust in creativity - oriented joint developments Questionnaires , Experiments 110 students from 5 business school 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era B . Individual Creativity This category covers 15 literature . What is striking about the “Individual Creativity” studies is that many of studies focus on entrepreneurs ( including CEOs and Business Owners ) and entrepreneurship , on the other hand , there are not many studies on creativity about employed employees . Employed “ordinary people” are often covered by “Organization Creativity Management” which will be discussed later , but there is a few studies on their individual creativity . Focusing on the research method , literature with the highest number of citations in entrepreneurial research is often literature reviews ( e . g . [ 18 ] , [ 20 ] ) . These literatures have conducted studies to build theories about creativity using previous studies in which creativity is not the main theme as input data . The study of entrepreneurship education ( e . g . [ 50 ] ) which was excluded by screening but has a high number of citations , was also a theory - building study with a literature review . In addition , although some studies have conducted surveys using questionnaires , many of the respondents are students ( e . g . [ 19 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] , [ 25 ] ) . It is clear that few studies of “Individual Creativity” have surveyed on employed “ordinary people” . Whereas , there are a small number of studies that have surveyed the creativity of employed “ordinary people” , not entrepreneurs ( e . g . [ 21 ] ) . This study conducted the first questionnaires survey for senior undergraduate students at a university in Hong Kong , and then the second and third questionnaires survey for their former students who graduated and started to work in an organization at six months and one year later . In other words , this study is a longitudinal study . C . Organization Creativity Management This category covers 21 literature , therefore It can be said to be the mainstream in Business Creativity studies . In addition , there are many studies by research methods that use not only interviews and questionnaires , but also Ethnography ( e . g . [ 32 ] ) , Participant Observation ( e . g . [ 33 ] , [ 35 ] ) . It can be said that creativity studies in business management domain is more focused on studies in “Organization Creativity Management” than in “Individual Creativity” in terms of the number and diversity of methods . In addition , if we focus on the duration of studies , some studies have conducted long - term qualitative studies . For example , [ 43 ] conducted a three - wave longitudinal study by questionnaires survey in the span of every 4 weeks . Others , [ 5 ] conducted a two - year study , [ 35 ] conducted the ten - year study . D . Co - Creation Process This category covers 16 literature . We defined the category of “Co - Creation Process” as studies that does not apply to “Individual Creativity” or “Organization Creativity Management” . It includes many studies on creative process in collaboration and interaction with others within and outside the organization , including knowledge creation theory . E . Discussion Andriopoulos [ 31 ] described it as “While the capability of an organization to become more creative must start at the level of the individual , individual creativity in itself is not enough . A vital , often ignored component of creativity is the creativity that occurs at the organizational level” . Andriopoulos [ 31 ] argues for the importance of creativity in organization , but [ 31 ] also assumes that the creativity of individuals who construct those organizations is naturally important . Twenty years after [ 31 ] ’s , the rise of “Organization Management Creativity” studies in business management domain can be seen from a number of studies and diversity of research methods compared to other categories . We pointed out that studies on “Individual Creativity” which is a prerequisite for “Organization Management Creativity” , is biased toward entrepreneurs , in addition , there are few longitudinal studies on the creativity of employed “ordinary people” as far as we could find . Studies of “Individual Creativity” in business management domain has been limited to spot or relatively short - term temporary studies . In terms of the discussion point of the period of time covered by the studies , longitudinal studies can be found scattered throughout studies on “Organization Management Creativity” , and observations are made for a relatively long period of time . However , these studies are not seeing the mechanisms of long - term creativity growth in the individual “ordinary people” who construct those organizations . Another important discussion point is that the individuals studied are either students or employees within a single organization . There is a lack of ongoing studies across multiple educational institutions and organizations throughout their career of a business person . The studies of “Organization Management Creativity” is a study with the performance of the organization as the explained variable , and that emphasizes only the viewpoint from the organization side . “Individual Creativity” is just an explanatory variable for demonstrating organizational creativity . In the last 20 years , creativity studies in business management domain has often used [ 1 ] ’s model of the componential theory of creativity—three components of Expertise , Creative - thinking skills , and Motivation—as a basic theory . With this effect , the mainstream of “Organization Management Creativity” studies has become to the idea that “expertise can be cultivated” and “creativity can be fostered by inducing motivation” , in other words , “creativity can be managed” . The studies of the view that environment where creativity can be exerted and management of motivation induction are effective is the mainstream , rather than the individual personalities and abilities of employees in the organization . After all , “Organization Management Creativity” studies are the study of how to utilize employees in organizations . In contrast , we have found that there is a lack of studies on the process of fostering creativity of individual employees across the organization . In business management domain , although there are many studies on how to bring out the 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era creativity that individuals already possess for the benefit of organization , there are few studies that takes the perspective that individual creativity can be developed . Although there is a finding that the diversity of an individual ' s background influences innovation performance [ 7 , 8 ] , there has been no progress in researching the factors and processes of creativity , including the individual ' s background outside the organization . It is not an exaggeration to say that this is a gap in research that has not been done although it should be done in this domain . This finding is a significant discovery that could change the way innovation organizations are organized in the future . V . C ONCLUSION We discussed to a research question “What are the research gaps in creativity research on ‘ordinary people’ to support innovation management in technology management ? ” . As we have seen in the previous sections , we found a business creativity research void that the research period is a snapshot in time , there are few long - term studies toward specific individuals , and there are few studies that follow the mechanism of individual creativity growth across organizations . This is a “research gap in creativity studies on ‘ordinary people’ in business management domain” , and it provides suggestions for the future direction of creativity studies in business management domain . The practical implication is that the research gaps indicated in this paper implies that there is room for further improvement in innovation performance . The process of fostering creativity in individual background has not been clarified , despite the finding that team formation considering the background of individuals is effective for innovation performance . As this process becomes clarified , organizational managers will be better able to recruit and select people with more creative qualities , and organizations will be better able to organize themselves for higher innovation performance . This finding will significantly change the way recruitment and organizing are done in organizations that aspire to innovation in the future . It proposes the issue of fostering professionals who can achieve creative achievements as a true individual ability rather than a particular organization environmental factor . Even in Japan , where the myth of lifetime employment has been deeply rooted for a long time , lifetime employment is no longer the naturally . We think that it is necessary to shift our focus from research on management in specific organizations to “people” and elucidate the mechanisms of how to develop the creativity of individual businessperson . The next step of this research is to identify universal indicators of individual creative nature that can further enhance technology organizational innovation performance , through clarifying factors and process that foster individual creativity by analyzing long - term life story of businessperson including pre - employment from both qualitative and quantitative research aspects . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] T . M . Amabile , “A Model of Creativity and Innovation in Organizations , ” Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 10 , pp . 123 - 167 , 1988 . [ 2 ] M . A . West , “Sparkling Fountains or Stagnant Ponds : An Integrative Model of Creativity and Innovation Implementation in Work Groups , ” Applied Psychology , Vol . 51 - 3 , pp . 355 - 367 , 2002 . [ 3 ] J . A . Schumpeter , The Theory of Economic Development : An Inquiry into Profits , Capital , Credit , Interest , and the Business Cycle , ( R . Opie , Trans . ) , Cambridge : Harvard University Press , 1934 . [ 4 ] T . Levitt , Marketing for Business Growth . New York : McGraw Hill , 1974 . [ 5 ] T . M . Amabile , “How to kill creativity . , ” Harvard business review , Vol . 76 - 5 , pp . 76 - 87 , 186 , 1998 . [ 6 ] M . D . Mumford , “Managing Creative People : Strategies and Tactics for Innovation , ” Human Resource Management Review , Vol . 10 - 3 , pp . 313 - 351 , 2000 . [ 7 ] A . Somech and A . Drach - Zahavy , “Translating Team Creativity to Innovation Implementation : The Role of Team Composition and Climate for Innovation , ” Journal of Management , Vol . 39 - 3 , pp . 684 - 708 , 2013 . [ 8 ] A . Taylor and H . R . Greve , “Superman or the Fantastic Four ? Knowledge Combination and Experience in Innovative Teams , ” The Academy of Management Journal , Vol . 49 - 4 , pp . 723 - 740 , 2006 . [ 9 ] R . Florida , The Rise of the Creative Class : And How It ' s Transforming Work , Leisure , Community and Everyday Life , New York : Basic Books , 2002 . [ 10 ] H . E . Rosly , J . Junid , N . F . M . Lajin and H . L . Rahim , “The Relationship of Creativity and Technopreneurship Intention , ” International Academic Research Journal of Social Science , Vol . 1 - 1 , pp . 8 - 15 , 2015 . [ 11 ] B . Kitchenham , “Procedures for Performing Systematic Reviews , ” Technical Report TR / SE - 0401 , UK : Keele University , 2004 . [ 12 ] “PRISMA 2020 flow diagram” at : http : / / www . prisma - statement . org / PRISMAStatement / FlowDiagram ( accessed 25 August 2021 ) [ 13 ] S . Marginson , “Higher education in East Asia and Singapore : Rise of the Confucian Model , ” Higher Education , Vol . 61 - 5 , pp . 587 - 611 , 2011 . [ 14 ] M . G . Haselton and G . F . Miller , “Women’s fertility across the cycle increases the short - term attractiveness of creative intelligence , ” Human Nature , Vol . 17 - 1 , pp . 50 - 73 , 2006 . [ 15 ] D . Zwick and J . Cayla , “Inside Marketing : Practices , Ideologies , Devices , ” Inside Marketing : Practices , Ideologies , Devices , UK : Oxford University Press , 2011 . [ 16 ] L . - L . Chang , K . F . Backman and Y . C . Huang , “Creative tourism : a preliminary examination of creative tourists’ motivation , experience , perceived value and revisit intention , ” International Journal of Culture , Tourism , and Hospitality Research , Vol . 8 - 4 , pp . 401 - 419 , 2014 . [ 17 ] A . Biraglia and V . Kadile , “The Role of Entrepreneurial Passion and Creativity in Developing Entrepreneurial Intentions : Insights from American Homebrewers , ” Journal of Small Business Management , Vol . 55 - 1 , pp . 170 - 188 , 2017 . [ 18 ] T . B . Ward , “Cognition , creativity , and entrepreneurship , ” Journal of Business Venturing , Vol . 19 - 2 , pp . 173 - 188 , 2004 . [ 19 ] W . W . Maddux and A . D . Galinsky , “Cultural Borders and Mental Barriers : The Relationship Between Living Abroad and Creativity , ” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , Vol . 96 - 5 , pp . 1047 - 1061 , 2009 . [ 20 ] Y . Y . Kor , J . T . Mahoney and S . C . Michael , “Resources , capabilities and entrepreneurial perceptions , ” Journal of Management Studies , Vol . 44 - 7 , pp . 1187 - 1212 , 2007 . [ 21 ] T . - Y . Kim , A . H . Y . Hon and J . M . Crant , “Proactive personality , employee creativity , and newcomer outcomes : A longitudinal study , ” Journal of Business and Psychology , Vol . 24 - 1 , pp . 93 - 103 , 2009 . 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era [ 22 ] J . N . Hood and J . E . Young , “Entrepreneurship’s requisite areas of development : A survey of top executives in successful entrepreneurial firms , ” Journal of Business Venturing , Vol . 8 - 2 , pp . 115 - 135 , 1993 . [ 23 ] L . A . Zampetakis , K . Kafetsios , N . Bouranta , T . Dewett and V . S . Moustakis , “On the relationship between emotional intelligence and entrepreneurial attitudes and intentions , ” International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research , Vol . 15 - 6 , pp . 595 - 618 , 2009 . [ 24 ] L . A . Zampetakis and V . Moustakis , “Linking creativity with entrepreneurial intentions : A structural approach , ” International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal , Vol . 2 - 3 , pp . 413 - 428 , 2006 . [ 25 ] L . A . Zampetakis , “The role of creativity and proactivity on perceived entrepreneurial desirability , ” Thinking Skills and Creativity , Vol . 3 - 2 , pp . 154 - 162 , 2008 . [ 26 ] B . Ahlin , M . Drnovšek and R . D . Hisrich , “Entrepreneurs’ creativity and firm innovation : The moderating role of entrepreneurial self - efficacy , ” Small Business Economics , Vol . 43 - 1 , pp . 101 - 117 , 2014 . [ 27 ] A . Rego , F . Sousa , C . Marques and M . P . E . Cunha , “Authentic leadership promoting employees’ psychological capital and creativity , ” Journal of Business Research , Vol . 65 - 3 , pp . 429 - 437 , 2012 . [ 28 ] K . Kamoche and M . P . E Cunha , “Minimal structures : From jazz improvisation to product innovation , ” Organization Studies , Vol . 22 - 5 , pp . 733 - 764 , 2001 . [ 29 ] T . M . Amabile and M . Khaire , “Creativity and the role of the leader , ” Harvard Business Review , Vol . 86 - 10 , pp . 100 - 109 , 2008 . [ 30 ] G . Barczak , F . Lassk and J . Mulki , “Antecedents of team creativity : An examination of team emotional intelligence , team trust and collaborative culture , ” Creativity and Innovation Management , Vol . 19 - 4 , pp . 332 - 345 , 2010 . [ 31 ] C . Andriopoulos , “Determinants of organisational creativity : A literature review , ” Management Decision , Vol . 39 - 10 , pp . 834 - 841 , 2001 . [ 32 ] F . T . Tschang , “Balancing the tensions between rationalization and creativity in the video games industry , ” Organization Science , Vol . 18 - 6 , pp . 989 - 1005 , 2007 . [ 33 ] D . Leonard and S . Straus , “Putting your company’s whole brain to work . , ” Harvard business review , Vol . 75 - 4 , pp . 110 - 121 , 1997 . [ 34 ] Q . Gu , T . L . - P . Tang and W . Jiang , “Does Moral Leadership Enhance Employee Creativity ? Employee Identification with Leader and Leader – Member Exchange ( LMX ) in the Chinese Context , ” Journal of Business Ethics , Vol . 126 - 3 , pp . 513 - 529 , 2015 . [ 35 ] R . Florida and J . Goodnight , “Managing for creativity , ” Harvard Business Review , Vol . 83 - 44385 , pp . 124 - 131 , 2005 . [ 36 ] S . Valentine , L . Godkin , G . M . Fleischman and R . Kidwell , “Corporate Ethical Values , Group Creativity , Job Satisfaction and Turnover Intention : The Impact of Work Context on Work Response , ” Journal of Business Ethics , Vol . 98 - 3 , pp . 353 - 372 , 2011 . [ 37 ] M . Gotsi , C . Andriopoulos , M . W . Lewis and A . E . Ingram , “Managing creatives : Paradoxical approaches to identity regulation , ” Human Relations , Vol . 63 - 6 , pp . 781 - 805 , 2010 . [ 38 ] M . S . Baucus , W . I . Norton Jr . , D . A . Baucus and S . E . Human , “Fostering creativity and innovation without encouraging unethical behavior , ” Journal of Business Ethics , Vol . 81 - 1 , pp . 97 - 115 , 2008 . [ 39 ] P . Schepers and P . T . Van Den Berg , “Social factors of work - environment creativity , ” Journal of Business and Psychology , Vol . 21 - 3 , pp . 407 - 428 , 2007 . [ 40 ] J . R . B . Halbesleben , M . M . Novicevic , M . G . Harvey and M . R . Buckley Ronald , “Awareness of temporal complexity in leadership of creativity and innovation : A competency - based model , ” Leadership Quarterly , Vol . 14 - 44291 , pp . 433 - 454 , 2003 . [ 41 ] R . I . Sutton , “The weird rules of creativity . , ” Harvard business review , Vol . 79 - 8 , pp . 94 - 103 , 161 , 2001 . [ 42 ] G . Stevens , J . Burley and R . Divine , “Creativity + Business Discipline = Higher Profits Faster from New Product Development , ” Journal of Product Innovation Management , Vol . 16 - 5 , pp . 455 - 468 , 1999 . [ 43 ] N . Henker , S . Sonnentag and D . Unger , “Transformational Leadership and Employee Creativity : The Mediating Role of Promotion Focus and Creative Process Engagement , ” Journal of Business and Psychology , Vol . 30 - 2 , pp . 235 - 247 , 2015 . [ 44 ] N . C . Wilson and D . Stokes , “Managing creativity and innovation . The challenge for cultural entrepreneurs , ” Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development , Vol . 12 - 3 , pp . 366 - 378 , 2005 . [ 45 ] C . Y . - Y . Lin and F . - C . Liu , “A cross - level analysis of organizational creativity climate and perceived innovation : The mediating effect of work motivation , ” European Journal of Innovation Management , Vol . 15 - 1 , pp . 55 - 76 , 2012 . [ 46 ] E . L . Lingo and S . O’Mahony , “Nexus work : Brokerage on creative projects , ” Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol . 55 - 1 , pp . 47 - 81 , 2010 . [ 47 ] K . Stolarick and R . Florida , “Creativity , connections and innovation : A study of linkages in the Montréal Region , ” Environment and Planning A , Vol . 38 - 10 , pp . 1799 - 1817 , 2006 . [ 48 ] M . M . Gielnik , M . Frese , J . M . Graf and A . Kampschulte , “Creativity in the opportunity identification process and the moderating effect of diversity of information , ” Journal of Business Venturing , Vol . 27 - 5 , pp . 559 - 576 , 2012 . [ 49 ] F . Bidault and A . Castello , “Trust and creativity : Understanding the role of trust in creativity - oriented joint developments , ” R and D Management , Vol . 39 - 3 , pp . 259 - 270 , 2009 . [ 50 ] D . A . Kirby , “Entrepreneurship education : Can business schools meet the challenge ? , ” Education + Training , Vol . 46 - 0 , pp . 510 - 519 , 2004 . 2022 Proceedings of PICMET ' 22 : Technology Management and Leadership in Digital Transformation - Looking Ahead to Post - COVID Era