Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Nurse Education Today journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / nedt Methodological challenges in qualitative content analysis : A discussion paper Ulla H . Graneheim a , b , ⁎ , Britt - Marie Lindgren a , Berit Lundman a a Department of Nursing , Umeå University , Umeå , Sweden b Department of Health Sciences , University West , Trollhättan , Sweden A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Abstraction level Categories Interpretation degree Latent content Manifest content Qualitative content analysis Themes A B S T R A C T This discussion paper is aimed to map content analysis in the qualitative paradigm and explore common methodological challenges . We discuss phenomenological descriptions of manifest content and hermeneutical interpretations of latent content . We demonstrate inductive , deductive , and abductive approaches to qualitative content analysis , and elaborate on the level of abstraction and degree of interpretation used in constructing categories , descriptive themes , and themes of meaning . With increased abstraction and interpretation comes an increased challenge to demonstrate the credibility and authenticity of the analysis . A key issue is to show the logic in how categories and themes are abstracted , interpreted , and connected to the aim and to each other . Qualitative content analysis is an autonomous method and can be used at varying levels of abstraction and interpretation . 1 . Background The ﬁ rst descriptions of content analysis were developed exclusively for a quantitative approach and thus related to a positivistic paradigm ( Berelson , 1952 ) . Later descriptions indicate that content analysis has undergone comprehensive changes , moving from ‘ a counting game ’ to a more interpretative approach within the qualitative paradigm ( Schreier , 2012 ; Egberg - Thyme et al . , 2013 ; Lindgren et al . , 2014 ) . This paradigm is a value - based process characterised by multiple realities , the mutual creation of data , and the development of individual and multifaceted perceptions of phenomena ( Lincoln and Guba , 1985 ) . Qualitative content analysis is a method to analyse qualitative data . It focuses on subject and context and emphasizes variation , e . g . simila - rities within and di ﬀ erences between parts of the text . It o ﬀ ers oppor - tunities to analyse manifest and descriptive content as well as latent and interpretative content ( Graneheim and Lundman , 2004 ) . Its roots in di ﬀ erent scienti ﬁ c paradigms contribute to challenges concerning ontology , epistemology , and methodology in research using qualitative content analysis . The origin of qualitative content analysis in a positivistic paradigm has an impact on discussions of its ontological and epistemological roots . The ontological assumptions of content analysis are open and vary according to the researchers ' standpoint . Researchers with a positivistic point of view maintain distance and separation from the objects of the study and strive to catch some ob - jective ‘ truth ’ ; those with a hermeneutic point of view strive to be close and connected to the study participants and reveal meanings in the data using various degrees of interpretation . The epistemological assump - tions in quantitative content analysis are that some ‘ truth ’ in a text can be revealed with as little interpretation as possible , for example by measuring , weighing , and counting frequencies and proportions of si - milar statements ( Krippendor ﬀ , 2013 ) . The epistemological basis of qualitative content analysis is that data and interpretation are co - creations of the interviewee and the interviewer , and interpretation during the analysis phase is a co - creation of the researchers and the text ( Mishler , 1986 ) . Thus , a text is assumed to imply more than one single meaning ( Sandelowski , 2011 ) . There are also various issues related to the choice of methodological approaches . Examples of such methodological issues are the inter - changeable use of the concepts of ‘ category ’ and ‘ theme ’ , and the dif - ﬁ culty of keeping levels of abstraction and degrees of interpretation logical and congruent throughout the analysis and the presentation of results . This is a discussion paper aimed to map qualitative content analysis in the qualitative paradigm and to explore common metho - dological challenges in qualitative content analysis . 2 . Mapping Qualitative Content Analysis In terms of epistemology , qualitative content analysis can be ap - plicable whether knowledge is believed to be innate , acquired , or so - cially constructed ( Lincoln and Guba , 1985 ) . Qualitative content http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . nedt . 2017 . 06 . 002 Received 28 December 2016 ; Received in revised form 23 May 2017 ; Accepted 8 June 2017 ⁎ Corresponding author at : Department of Nursing , Umeå University , SE - 90187 Umeå , Sweden . E - mail address : ulla . hallgren . graneheim @ umu . se ( U . H . Graneheim ) . Nurse Education Today 56 ( 2017 ) 29 – 34 0260 - 6917 / © 2017 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . MARK analysis comprises descriptions of the manifest content , close to the text , as well as interpretations of the latent content , distant from the text but still close to the participants ' lived experiences . The latent content is interpretations of the underlying meaning or the ‘ red thread ’ between the lines in the text ( Graneheim and Lundman , 2004 ) . The descriptions and interpretations can be seen as emanating from phe - nomenological and hermeneutic approaches to the objects of the study . Fig . 1 shows a two - dimensional model of various epistemological ap - proaches , including the researchers ' standpoint close to and / or distant from the text . Closeness to the text means more concrete descriptions and interpretations ; distance from the text means more abstract de - scriptions and interpretations . The ﬁ gure illustrates that manifest con - tent , close to the text , can be seen as a phenomenological description , and more latent content , distant from the text , can be seen as a her - meneutic interpretation . During the analysis the researcher often begins by sorting the coded manifest content into categories and continues to search for the latent content and formulate this as themes on various levels . Thus , the researcher takes various scienti ﬁ c positions depending on the aim of the study . 3 . Methodological Approaches The methodological approach can be inductive , deductive , and ab - ductive ( Krippendor ﬀ , 2013 ) , which means there are various challenges to be met . 3 . 1 . Inductive Approach An inductive approach , also called data - driven ( Schreier , 2012 ) or text - driven ( Krippendor ﬀ , 2013 ) , is characterised by a search for pat - terns . During the analysis the researcher looks for similarities and dif - ferences in the data , which are described in categories and / or themes on various levels of abstraction and interpretation . The researcher moves from the data to a theoretical understanding – from the concrete and speci ﬁ c to the abstract and general . Eriksson and Lindström ( 1997 , 1999 ) argue that there may be a risk in using an inductive approach of getting stuck in the surface structures of recurrent empirical summaries , and thus becoming a prisoner of induction . For example , the classi ﬁ - cation of human beings ' health in terms of physical , psychological , and social dimensions can serve as a valuable summary , but does not o ﬀ er any new insights . Another issue to address is whether this really re - presents an inductive approach , or if it may be a result of the re - searcher ' s pre - understanding of human beings as physical , psycholo - gical , and social beings . The challenge in conducting inductive analysis is to avoid surface descriptions and general summaries . One example of inductive content analysis is a study about lone - liness among the very old ( Graneheim and Lundman , 2010 ) . Text from individual interviews was divided into meaning units that were con - densed and coded . The codes were interpreted and compared for dif - ferences and similarities and sorted into 27 tentative subthemes . Through a process of re ﬂ ection and discussion the authors agreed on 15 subthemes , and ﬁ nally four themes were formulated that uni ﬁ ed the content in the subthemes . The descriptive themes were ‘ living with losses ’ , ‘ feeling abandoned ’ , ‘ living in con ﬁ dence ’ , and ‘ feeling free ’ and they illuminated the variations of loneliness among the very old . Another example of an inductive approach is found in an article by Lindgren et al . ( 2014 ) . The aim was to illuminate experiences of lone - liness among people with mental ill - health , which were reported under two categories : ( 1 ) ‘ multifaceted and altering ’ ( based on the sub - cate - gories ‘ varying with situation in life and endless ’ and ‘ a developing experience ’ ) and ( 2 ) ‘ emotionally and socially excluding ’ ( based on the sub - categories ‘ lack of belonging ’ and ‘ feeling set aside ’ ) . The for - mulated theme of meaning running through these two categories was that loneliness could be metaphorically described as ‘ looking at the world through a frosted window ’ . 3 . 2 . Deductive Approach Using a deductive approach , also called concept - driven ( Schreier , 2012 ) , researchers test the implications of existing theories or ex - planatory models about the phenomenon under study against the col - lected data . They move from theory to data or from a more abstract and general level to a more concrete and speci ﬁ c one . Eriksson and Lindström ( 1997 , 1999 ) argue that with a conventional deductive ap - proach the researcher risks formulating categories based exclusively on an established theory or model . Another challenge in using a deductive approach is deciding how to treat left - over data that does not ﬁ t the selected theory or explanatory model . What and how much is left over depends on the researcher ' s intentions when selecting theoretical model . Is the purpose to verify an Fig . 1 . A two - dimensional model of various epistemological ap - proaches including the researchers ' standpoint . U . H . Graneheim et al . Nurse Education Today 56 ( 2017 ) 29 – 34 30 existing model , to develop the existing dimensions of a model , or to add new dimensions to the model ? If the purpose is to verify a model , left - over data will cause concerns about , for example , the ﬁ tness of the selected model . If the purpose is to develop and / or add new dimensions to the model , left - over data will be important contributions . One example of a deductive content analysis is a study on inner strengths among old women ( Boman et al . , 2015 ) . The text of focus group discussions was analysed , based on a theoretical model of inner strength described in terms of four dimensions : connectedness , crea - tivity , ﬁ rmness , and ﬂ exibility ( Lundman et al . , 2010 ) . These dimen - sions had explicit de ﬁ nitions and the coding frame was based on the de ﬁ nitions of each of those dimensions . In the interviews , the meaning of connectedness was ‘ strive to be in communion ’ ; creativity meant ‘ make the best out of it ’ ; ﬁ rmness was interpreted as ‘ it is up to you ’ ; and ﬂ exibility meant ‘ a balancing act ’ . These descriptions of inner strength enriched and nuanced the theoretical formulations of the dimensions . No meaningful data were left over , only some speci ﬁ c episodes that the women wanted to share , for example , how they used to travel to get to the school during childhood ( Boman et al . , 2015 ) . 3 . 3 . Abductive Approach An abductive approach , also called complementary ( Blackstone , 2012 ) , combined ( Elo and Kyngäs , 2008 ) , retroductive ( Sayer , 1992 ) or fuzzy logic ( Rolfe , 1997 ) can be employed for a more complete un - derstanding and implies a movement back and forth between inductive and deductive approaches . Even though the researchers did not use the word ‘ abduction ’ , there are examples of inductive and deductive ap - proaches taken during di ﬀ erent stages in qualitative content analysis ( e . g . , Graneheim et al . , 2001 ; Rejnö and Berg , 2015 ) . In an article about interaction in dementia care , Graneheim et al . ( 2001 ) used an inductive approach in abstracting meaning units to codes , which resulted in subthemes reminiscent of human territoriality . This inspired a change to a deductive approach in the last step of the analysis , where they did a literature review of theories on human territoriality , and found that individual needs related to territoriality , such as identity , autonomy , privacy , and security , could form the themes . In a study about strategies for handling ethical problems in end - of - life care , Rejnö and Berg ( 2015 ) started with a deductive approach . They used strategies derived from an earlier study ( Rejnö et al . , 2013 ) to sort statements concerning obstacles and possibilities for each strategy . They then changed to an inductive analysis and condensed , coded and interpreted the statements for each strategy one by one to reach the whole of obstacles and pos - sibilities . Eriksson and Lindström ( 1997 , 1999 ) further de ﬁ ne abduction as a way to discover meaningful underlying patterns that makes it possible to integrate surface and deep structures . They refer to Peirce ( 1982 , 1990 ) and his philosophy about possibilities – the ‘ maybes ’ – and va - gueness . Reality is not only here and now , but also something that might be realised and is suggested as a vague possibility . Further to Chomsky ( 1968 ) , who states that since the interpreted empiricism is a basis for abduction , it is reasonable to believe that induction and de - duction serve as a springboard for the abductive leap into the unknown . However , few articles using qualitative content analysis demonstrate the abductive leap and this may be a challenge for the future . 4 . Interpretation Degree and Abstraction Level In texts analysed in qualitative content analysis , manifest content is to be described and latent content to be interpreted . Both manifest and latent content require interpretation ; however , the interpretations may vary in depth and level of abstraction , and a high level of abstraction is not to be confused with a high degree of interpretation . For example , it is not uncommon to ﬁ nd results in which sub - categories / subthemes are presented with a higher level of abstraction and / or degree of inter - pretation than the categories / themes , even in published articles . In research articles using qualitative content analysis there seems to be a challenge to keep abstraction levels and interpretation degrees logical and congruent throughout the analysis . In Fig . 2 we have added ab - straction levels and interpretation degrees to the various epistemolo - gical approaches . The ﬁ gure shows four di ﬀ erent squares in which the researcher can position the conclusive result derived from the analysis , not the analysis itself . A high abstraction level in categories or themes often means that they were built upon several basic structures on var - ious levels ( sub - categories and subthemes ) . The study aim and quality of data decide in which square the researchers will position their result . 4 . 1 . Low Abstraction Level – Low Interpretation Degree The left lower square represent descriptions with a low abstraction Fig . 2 . Abstraction levels and interpretation degrees added to the previous two - dimensional model . U . H . Graneheim et al . Nurse Education Today 56 ( 2017 ) 29 – 34 31 level and a low interpretation degree close to the text . This also includes descriptions of the manifest content . Examples of this are lists of risk factors for the development of diabetes , heart disease , etc . or of various types of equipment for disabled people . In qualitative content analysis low abstraction and low interpretation are seen when researchers pre - sent ﬁ ndings close to the text . 4 . 2 . High Abstraction Level – Low Interpretation Degree The left upper square includes descriptions of the topic under study with a high level of abstraction and low degree of interpretation . This also includes descriptions of the manifest content . Examples that would ﬁ t in this quadrant are various types of classi ﬁ cation , such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , DSM - 5 ( APA , 2013 ) , where the various mental disorders are considered as conclusive categories on a high abstraction level built upon general criteria and speci ﬁ c symptoms . Another example is the model of the store described in the paragraph on categories . 4 . 3 . High Abstraction Level – High Interpretation Degree The right upper square represents interpretations with a high ab - straction level and a high interpretation degree . This is an interpreta - tion of the latent content . A challenge in the last steps of the inter - pretation process is to resist drawing the interpretation too far , because it could become so general as to ﬁ t into almost any context . One ex - ample of this kind of general theme is ‘ guilt and shame ’ in relation to several topics such as patients ' experiences of illness and professionals ' and relatives ' experiences of various shortcomings . 4 . 4 . Low Abstraction Level – High Interpretation Degree The right lower square represents interpretations with a low ab - straction level and a high interpretation degree . This are also inter - pretations of the latent content , often labelled with metaphors or old sayings ( e . g . , ‘ feeling hoodwinked ’ , ‘ groping in the dark ’ , and ‘ nip the thing in the bud ’ ) . For example , Hörnsten and Graneheim ( 2009 ) de - scribed what patients with type 2 diabetes viewed as most important for diabetes specialty nurses to learn about receiving care for diabetes . The results show a high degree of interpretation presented under three themes , two of which are metaphors : ‘ not making a mountain out of a molehill ’ and ‘ to err is human ’ , which were close to the participants ' descriptions . 5 . Categories and Themes In qualitative content analysis the results are presented as categories and / or themes . In the literature there are various and sometimes con - fusing descriptions , with the concepts sometimes used interchangeably , and the degrees of interpretation and levels of abstraction are incon - sistent . We will discuss some characteristics of these concepts . 5 . 1 . Categories In qualitative content analysis a category often includes things , opinions , attitudes , perceptions , and experiences . Morse ( 2008 ) de - scribes a category as the ‘ what ? ’ comprising and describing a collection of similar data sorted into the same place . Early in the analysis re - searchers choose categories to identify and de ﬁ ne groups of codes that share common characteristics in order to compare and contrast them with other categories , to divide them into smaller subcategories , or to pool them into broader categories . The heading of a category in in - ductive content analysis describes the content on a manifest level , with a low degree of interpretation and a level of abstraction that can vary from low to high . The heading of a category in deductive content analysis often comprises de ﬁ ned properties of a concept , theory , or explanatory model , which indicates that both the degree of inter - pretation and level of abstraction can vary . A category is often to be found on the left side in Figs . 1 and 2 . A challenge during categorisation is maintaining the same logical and congruent level of abstraction and degree of interpretation in each step , from subcategories through ca - tegories to the main category . Inspired by Carlsson ( 1997 ) , we will illustrate the logic of con - structing categories on di ﬀ erent levels by discussing how a store may be organized . A store has several departments , for example sports , books , groceries , clothes , and shoes , which can be compared to main cate - gories . In this example we will categorise the grocery department . We will say this main category ( groceries ) is based on three categories : meat , greens , and bread . If we follow the category ‘ greens ’ we can see that it is constructed of the sub - categories fruits , vegetables , and root vegetables . The content of each sub - category contains several codes , for example apples and pears ( in the sub - category fruits ) , lettuce and beans ( in the sub - category vegetables ) , and potatoes and carrots ( in the sub - category root vegetables ) . If the categorisation is consistent we should not ﬁ nd any meat among the greens . The same idea is relevant to ca - tegorisation in qualitative content analysis , where we do not want to ﬁ nd strategies , opinions , or attitudes in the ﬁ ndings of a study aiming to illuminate experiences . Sometimes it is wise to end the analysis on a descriptive level and present the categories in the ﬁ ndings section . Sometimes , when the aim and data allow further interpretation , the categorisation is only one step in the analysis , which is then described and exempli ﬁ ed in the method section . In this case they constitute the base for the development of themes . However , the development of themes does not always require categorisation during the analysis . Sometimes , when data is rich and the codes are expressive , it can be appropriate to begin the inter - pretation after coding and move straight on to formulating subthemes and themes . 5 . 2 . Themes In research a theme is described as a unifying ‘ red thread ’ running through several categories that brings meaning to a recurrent topic or experiences and its various manifestations . Morse ( 2008 ) describes a theme as a meaningful ‘ essence ’ that runs through the data , similar to a motif in an opera , sometimes in the background and sometimes in the foreground . Sandelowski and Leeman ( 2012 ) demonstrate the di ﬀ erence be - tween a theme and a topic using the words ‘ trust ’ , ‘ con ﬁ dence ’ , and ‘ symptoms ’ as themes in describing adherence to a treatment regime . They argue that these words convey no idea of what researchers found out about ‘ trust ’ , ‘ con ﬁ dence ’ , and ‘ symptoms ’ . These words are just codes that researchers use to group utterances into categories without stating what the reader is to understand about ‘ trust ’ , ‘ con ﬁ dence ’ , and ‘ symptoms ’ in relation to adherence . In other words , the underlying meaning is missing . Themes are usually quite abstract and therefore di ﬃ cult to catch . They may be more apparent if the researchers distance themselves and consider ‘ What are these folks trying to tell me ? ’ or as Morse put it , ‘ What is this about ? ’ ( Morse , 2008 ) . The theme may be beneath the surface of the texts , but once identi ﬁ ed it appears obvious . A theme is to be found on the right side in Figs . 1 and 2 , as it is always an inter - pretation . The ‘ red thread ’ can be captured in one or several themes and a number of subthemes ( Graneheim and Lundman , 2004 ) . The challenge in formulating themes is similar to that in categorisation , which is keeping the same abstraction level and interpretation degree in each step , subthemes – themes – main theme , which means that all steps should be kept on a logical and congruent level of abstraction and de - gree of interpretation . Another challenge in qualitative content analysis is distinguishing between descriptive themes and themes of meaning . Depending on the U . H . Graneheim et al . Nurse Education Today 56 ( 2017 ) 29 – 34 32 aim of the study , the researcher has various options . On the one hand , the intention can be to sift out what the interviewee intended to discuss , which is formulated in descriptive themes and comprises explicit ex - pressions of what participants talk about . On the other hand , the in - tention can be to sift out the implicit message , formulated in themes of meaning . In Table 1 we present characteristics , kinds of research questions , and examples in relation to categories , descriptive themes , and themes of meaning . A category describes similarities and di ﬀ erences and is often sorted in hierarchies . The interpretation degree is usually low , but the abstraction level can vary from low to high . A descriptive theme describes ‘ the red thread ’ that does not vary through di ﬀ erent parts of the data . It gives direction and nuance to the data ; its interpretation degree is usually moderate , though the abstraction level can vary . A theme of meaning illuminates a comprehensive interpretation of data . Similar to a descriptive theme , it gives direction and nuance to data but with a higher degree of interpretation degree and on a more abstract level . The di ﬀ erences between descriptive themes and themes of meaning are related to their characteristics and the kind of research question they answer . 6 . Trustworthiness One challenge concerning the trustworthiness of studies using qualitative content analysis is discerning the ‘ red thread ’ running through the entire work , from the introduction and background , via the soundness of the method , to the integrity of the ﬁ ndings , discussion , and conclusions . To ensure the overall trustworthiness of a study , it is also a challenge to make clear whose voice is heard in the various parts of a research report : the participants ' voice or the researchers ' inter - pretation . Trustworthiness refers in a comprehensive sense to the entire study . It is the reader who judges the quality of a report ( Rolfe , 2006 ) ; the authors ' responsibility is to present the report in such a way that they persuade readers of its trustworthiness . The researcher can facilitate this judgement by establishing accuracy during the research process and by giving trails allowing readers to understand how and why de - cisions were taken . As we refer qualitative content analysis as belonging to a herme - neutic paradigm , it seems reasonable to use the concepts for judging trustworthiness developed for use with that paradigm ( Lincoln and Guba , 1985 ) . Trustworthiness is an overarching concept encompassing several methods for describing aspects of trustworthiness in qualitative studies . In this paper the concepts ‘ credibility ’ , ‘ dependability ’ , ‘ con - ﬁ rmability ’ , ‘ transferability ’ , and ‘ authenticity ’ are discussed . Various methods of judging trustworthiness are in the foreground and background in di ﬀ erent stages of the research process . In the planning phase the challenge lies in the recruitment of the participants . To achieve credibility , it is crucial to ﬁ nd participants who probably have experiences of the phenomenon under study and are able to tell about it . Another important question concerns the number of participants . As content analysis emphasizes variation in content and multiplicity , there must be enough data to cover signi ﬁ cant variations . It is not possible to suggest a speci ﬁ c number of interviewees or in - terviews , however , as the optimal amount of data depends on the aim of the study and the quality of data , and it is not certain that the richness of data increases with the number of participants or text pages ( Sandelowski , 1995 ) . The selection of participants is also important for the transferability of the ﬁ ndings together with an accurate and rich description of the context of the study . During the phase when categories are created , there is the challenge of deciding which codes and supporting quotes from the original text are to be included in a category . This is a matter of dependability . Clear rules for di ﬀ erentiating between categories are one way to address that challenge ( Cash and Snider , 2014 ) . Another challenge to dependability is the view that the interviews are co - created between the researcher and the interviewee , and between the text and the researcher in the analysis process . It is therefore necessary to be aware of , and open about , the researchers ' pre - understandings , as these can in ﬂ uence the way questions are asked , what follow - up questions are asked , and how the interviewees ' narratives are perceived and interpreted . Including more than one researcher in the analysis is one way to address de - pendability as researchers ' interpretative repertoires can vary ( Sandelowski , 2011 ) and a co - researcher can come up with alternative interpretations . This co - creation in the analysis is often described as consensus . A common issue in qualitative content analysis is that categories and themes are described on various levels of abstraction and inter - pretation , which threatens not only credibility and authenticity , but also overall trustworthiness . Incongruence between the degree of in - terpretation and the level of abstraction in the same analysis will challenge both credibility and authenticity if handled carelessly . Providing examples of the abstraction and interpretation processes ( e . g . , with use of representative citations or core stories ) is a way to facilitate the reader ' s ability to judge the credibility and authenticity of the ﬁ ndings , as well as to prioritise the voice of the participant over that of the researcher in the presentation of the results . With higher levels of abstraction and degrees of interpretation , the challenge to demonstrate credibility and authenticity increases . An important issue in this respect is to show the logic of how the categories and themes were abstracted , interpreted , and connected to the aim and each other . ‘ Do the categories and / or themes give an answer to the aim ? ’ is a good question to ask to get a sense of the logic . Still , a text never implies one single meaning ; it is the researcher ' s interpretation of the most probable meaning that is presented ( Sandelowski , 2011 ; Krippendor ﬀ , 2013 ) . 7 . Conclusion Qualitative content analysis has sometimes been seen as merely an analytical tool for use within various qualitative methods , but it is currently seen as an autonomous method of its own . In this paper we Table 1 Overview of categories , descriptive themes , and themes of meaning . Categories Descriptive themes Themes of meaning Characteristics Describes similarities and di ﬀ erences – variations in the text Describes ‘ the red thread ’ that does not vary through various parts of the text Illuminates the comprehensive interpretation of the text Describes hierarchies Gives direction and nuance to data Gives direction and nuance to data Kind of research question The ‘ what ? ’ on a manifest and descriptive level close to the text ‘ What are these folks trying to tell me ? ’ or ‘ What is going on ? ’ on a latent and interpretative level ‘ What are the meanings of the participants ' stories ? ’ on a latent and interpretative level distant from the text Examples Unsatisfactory work situation (cid:129) Limited time (cid:129) Ambiguous responsibilities (cid:129) Insu ﬃ cient support Living with losses Feeling free Living in con ﬁ dence Feeling abandoned Looking at the world through a frosted window Held to ransom Hovering between heaven and hell U . H . Graneheim et al . Nurse Education Today 56 ( 2017 ) 29 – 34 33 have discussed challenges related to qualitative content analysis . We have positioned qualitative content analysis as hovering between a descriptive and an interpretative paradigm , and we have discussed challenges related to various methodological approaches . We have also addressed and demonstrated the di ﬀ erences between categories , de - scriptive themes , and themes of meaning . A key issue in the analytic process is to di ﬀ er between abstraction and interpretation . A high level of abstraction can involve both high and low degrees of interpretation , and a high degree of interpretation can involve both high and low levels of abstraction . By establishing rigour and providing decision trails during the research and reporting , the researcher can facilitate the reader ' s abilities to discern ‘ the red thread ’ throughout the entire work and to recognise whose voice they are hearing . Contribution All authors have contributed equally with ideas and preparation of the manuscript . Declaration of Interest The authors report no con ﬂ icts of interest . The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper . Acknowledgement We thank Anders Ringnér who contributed with the ﬁ gures . References APA ( American Psychiatric Association ) , 2013 . Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . DSM - 5 , Fifth edition . . www . dsm5 . org ( Last accessed : March 2016 ) . Berelson , B . , 1952 . Content Analysis in Communication Research . The Free Press , Glencoe , IL . Blackstone , A . , 2012 . Sociological Inquiry Principles : Qualitative and Quantitative Methods . ( V . 1 . 0 ) . Boman , E . , Häggblom , A . , Lundman , B . , Nygren , B . , Santamäki - Fischer , R . , 2015 . Inner strength as identi ﬁ ed in narratives of elderly women : a focus group interview study . Adv . Nurs . Sci . 38 ( 1 ) , 7 – 19 . Carlsson , B . , 1997 . Kvalitativa Forskningsmetoder för Medicin och Beteendevetenskap ( Qualitative Research Methods for Medicine and Behavioural Sciences ) . Almqvist & Wiksell Medicin / Liber AB , Stockholm . Cash , P . , Snider , C . , 2014 . Investigating design : a comparison of manifest and latent approaches . Des . Stud . 35 ( 5 ) , 441 – 472 . Chomsky , N . , 1968 . In : Werner , P . ( Ed . ) , Människan och Språket ( Man and Language ) . 1969 PAN / Norstedts , Stockholm ( trans . ) . Egberg - Thyme , K . , Wiberg , B . , Lundman , B . , Graneheim , U . H . , 2013 . Qualitative content analysis in art psychotherapy research : concepts , procedures , and measures to reveal thelatent meaning inpictures and words attached to the pictures . Arts Psychother . 40 ( 1 ) , 101 – 107 . Elo , S . , Kyngäs , H . , 2008 . The qualitative content analysis process . J . Adv . Nurs . 62 ( 1 ) , 107 – 115 . Eriksson , K . , Lindström , U . , 1997 . Abduction – a way to deeper understanding of the world of caring . Scand . J . Caring Sci . 11 ( 4 ) , 195 – 198 . Eriksson , K . , Lindström , U . , 1999 . Abduktion och pragmatism – två vägar till framsteg inom vårdvetenskapen ( Abduction and pragmatism – two ways towards progress within caring science ) . Hoitotiede 11 ( 5 ) , 292 – 299 . Graneheim , U . H . , Lundman , B . , 2004 . Qualitative content analysis in nursing research : concepts , procedures and measures to achieve trustworthiness . Nurse Educ . Today 24 ( 2 ) , 105 – 112 . Graneheim , U . H . , Lundman , B . , 2010 . Experiences of loneliness among the very old . The Umeå 85 + project . Aging Ment . Health 14 ( 4 ) , 433 – 438 . Graneheim , U . H . , Norberg , A . , Jansson , L . , 2001 . Interaction relating to privacy , identity , autonomy and security . An observational study focusing on a woman with dementia and “ behavioural disturbances ' ” , and on her care providers . J . Adv . Nurs . 36 ( 2 ) , 256 – 265 . Hörnsten , Å . , Graneheim , U . H . , 2009 . A lesson to learn – patients ' critiques of diabetes nursing . Internet J . Adv . Nurs . Pract . 11 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5580 / 4e3 . Krippendor ﬀ , K . , 2013 . Content Analysis . An Introduction to Its Methodology . Sage , London . Lincoln , Y . S . , Guba , E . , 1985 . Naturalistic Inquiry . Sage , Newbury Park , CA ; London ; New Delhi . Lindgren , B . - M . , Sundbaum , J . , Eriksson , M . , Graneheim , U . H . , 2014 . Looking at the world through a frosted window – experiences of loneliness among persons with mental ill - health . J . Psychiatr . Ment . Health Nurs . 21 ( 2 ) , 114 – 120 . Lundman , B . , Aléx , L . , Jonsén , E . , Norberg , A . , Nygren , B . , Santamäki Fischer , R . , et al . , 2010 . Inner strength – a theoretical analysis of salutogenic concepts . Int . J . Nurs . Stud . 47 ( 2 ) , 251 – 260 . Mishler , E . G . , 1986 . Research Interviewing . Context and Narrative . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , ME . Morse , J . , 2008 . Confusing categories and themes . Qual . Health Res . 18 ( 6 ) , 727 – 728 . Peirce , C . S . , 1982 . Writings of Charles S . Peirce . A Chronological Edition . Vol . 5 . Indiana University Press , Bloomington , IN , pp . 1884 – 1886 . Peirce , C . S . , 1990 . In : Matz , R . ( Ed . ) , Pragmatism Och Kosmologi . Valda Uppsatser ( Pragmatism and Cosmology . Selected Writings ) . Daidalos , Gothenburg ( trans . ) . Rejnö , Å . , Berg , L . , 2015 . Strategies for handling ethical problems in end of life care : obstacles and possibilities . Nurs . Ethics 22 ( 7 ) , 778 – 789 . Rejnö , Å . , Danielson , E . , Berg , L . , 2013 . Strategies forhandling ethicalproblems insudden and unexpected death . Nurs . Ethics 20 ( 6 ) , 708 – 722 . Rolfe , G . , 1997 . Science , abduction and the fuzzy nurse : an exploration of expertise . J . Adv . Nurs . 25 ( 5 ) , 1070 – 1075 . Rolfe , G . , 2006 . Methodological issues in nursing research . Validity , trustworthiness and rigour : quality and the idea of qualitative research . J . Adv . Nurs . 53 ( 3 ) , 304 – 310 . Sandelowski , M . , 1995 . Focus on qualitative methods . Sample size in qualitative research . Res . Nurs . Health 18 ( 2 ) , 179 – 183 . Sandelowski , M . , 2011 . When a cigar is not just a cigar : alternative takes on data and data analysis . Res . Nurs . Health 34 ( 4 ) , 342 – 352 . Sandelowski , M . , Leeman , J . , 2012 . Writing usable qualitative health research ﬁ ndings . Qual . Health Res . 22 ( 10 ) , 1404 – 1413 . Sayer , A . , 1992 . Method in Social Science : A Realist Approach , Second edition . Routledge , London . Schreier , M . , 2012 . Qualitative Content Analysis in Practice . Sage , London . U . H . Graneheim et al . Nurse Education Today 56 ( 2017 ) 29 – 34 34