mTOR ensures increased release and reduced uptake of the organic osmolyte taurine under hypoosmotic conditions in mouse ﬁbroblasts Ian Henry Lambert , 1 Jane Vendelbo Jensen , 1 and Per Amstrup Pedersen 2 1 Department of Biology , Section of Cellular and Developmental Biology , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , Denmark ; and 2 Department of Biology , Section for Molecular Integrative Physiology , University of Copenhagen , Copenhagen , Denmark Submitted 7 January 2014 ; accepted in ﬁnal form 17 March 2014 Lambert IH , Jensen JV , Pedersen PA . mTOR ensures increased release and reduced uptake of the organic osmolyte taurine under hypoosmotic conditions in mouse ﬁbroblasts . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 306 : C1028 – C1040 , 2014 . First published April 2 , 2014 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 . —Mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) is a serine / threonine kinase that modulates translation in response to growth factors and alterations in nutrient availability following hypoxia and DNA damage . Here we demonstrate that mTOR activity in Ehrlich Lettré ascites ( ELA ) cells is transiently increased within minutes following osmotic cell swelling and that inhibition of phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphatase ( PTEN ) counteracts the upstream phosphatidylinositol kinase and potentiates mTOR ac - tivity . PTEN inhibition concomitantly potentiates swelling - induced taurine release via the volume - sensitive transporter for organic os - molytes and anion channels ( VSOAC ) and enhances swelling - induced inhibition of taurine uptake via the taurine - speciﬁc transporter ( TauT ) . Chronic osmotic stress , i . e . , exposure to hypotonic or hypertonic media for 24 h , reduces and increases mTOR activity in ELA cells , respectively . Using rapamycin , we demonstrate that mTOR inhibition is accompanied by reduction in TauT activity and increase in VSOAC activity in cells expressing high ( NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts ) or low ( ELA ) amounts of mTOR protein . The effect of mTOR inhibition on TauT activity reﬂects reduced TauT mRNA , TauT protein abundance , and an overall reduction in protein synthesis , whereas the effect on VSOAC is mimicked by catalase inhibition and correlates with reduced cata - lase mRNA abundance . Hence , mTOR activity favors loss of taurine following hypoosmotic cell swelling , i . e . , release via VSOAC and uptake via TauT during acute hypotonic exposure is potentiated and reduced , respectively , by phosphorylation involving mTOR and / or the kinases upstream to mTOR . Decrease in TauT activity during chronic hypotonic exposure , on the other hand , involves reduction in expres - sion / activity of TauT and enzymes in antioxidative defense . cell volume regulation ; taurine homeostasis ; 4E - binding protein 1 ; eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2A ; volume - sensitive organic anion channel TAURINE , 2 - amino ethane sulphonic acid , is an abundant free amino acid in mammalian cells , which , because of its meta - bolic inertness , resides freely in the intracellular compartment . Taurine was initially acknowledged for its role as a compatible organic osmolyte and hence its role in cell volume control , but later it has also been shown to contribute as a cytoprotector resulting from modulation of calcium movement , elimination of the reactive oxygen species , e . g . , hypochlorous acid , and protection against apoptosis ( 16 , 17 , 24 , 34 ) . Taurine is vital for fetal development , i . e . , consequences of taurine deﬁciency during pregnancy and lactation in mice are low birth weight , cardiomyopathy , kidney dysfunction , and nerve cell destruc - tion ( 15 , 58 ) . In mammalian cells , taurine is accumulated via the Na (cid:2) - dependent taurine transporter ( TauT ) ( SLC6A6 ) and the H (cid:2) - dependent transporter , putative anion transporter 1 ( SLC36A1 ) , whereas taurine is released via the leak path - way of volume - sensitive organic osmolyte and anion chan - nels ( VSOAC ) and a volume - insensitive leak pathway . The TauT gene from mouse ( 35 ) , rat ( 51 ) , dog ( 54 ) , human ( 44 ) , and ﬁsh ( 42 ) has been cloned and codes for an (cid:3) 620 - amino - acid - long protein with a molecular weight around 70 kDa . Translocation of one taurine molecule across the plasma mem - brane via TauT requires two to three Na (cid:2) ions ( 27 ) . Acute downregulation of TauT activity follows depolarization of the plasma membrane ( 30 ) , extracellular acidiﬁcation ( 30 ) , activa - tion of the serine / threonine kinases PKC ( 56 ) and casein kinase 2 ( CK2 ) ( 8 ) , exposure to reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) ( 7 ) , or osmotic cell swelling ( 7 , 11 ) . Long - term transcriptional regu - lation of TauT expression involves the tumor suppressor pro - tein p53 and the tonicity - responsive enhancer binding protein ( TonEBP ) / nuclear factor in activated T cell 5 ( NFAT5 ) ( 27 ) . However , although transcription of the TauT gene following hyperosmotic cell shrinkage correlates with TonEBP activity , we recently demonstrated that downregulation of TauT tran - scription and TauT activity following hypoosmotic cell swell - ing in NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts occurred independently of TonEBP1 activity ( 7 ) . The volume - insensitive leak pathway is activated by cholesterol depletion and following exposure to lysophospholipids , whereas activation of VSOAC following osmotic cell swelling involves cell - speciﬁc phospholipases A 2 subtypes and fatty acid oxidation by 5 - lipoxygenase to eico - sanoids . In the case of Ehrlich ascites tumor cells ( EATC ) , we have shown that it is the eicosanoid leukotriene D 4 that , via binding to a cysteinyl leukotriene receptor ( CysLT1 ) , activates VSOAC ( 25 , 30 ) . Once activated , VSOAC activity is potenti - ated by 1 ) ROS that seem to act via activation of tyrosine kinases and / or inactivation of vanadate - sensitive tyrosine phos - phatases and 2 ) inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol phos - phate phosphatase ( PTEN ) that counteracts the cell growth - promoting phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) ( 8 , 29 ) . PTEN is composed of a phosphatase domain that removes a phosphate group from the lipid second messenger phosphatidylinositol phosphate in the plasma membrane , a C2 domain that is critical for PTEN binding to the membrane , and a COOH - terminal domain that , upon phosphorylation of a cluster of Ser / Thr residues , interacts with the C2 domain - diminishing membrane afﬁnity and hence catalytic activity of PTEN ( 1 ) . The phos - phatase required for PTEN activation has not been identiﬁed , and it is also unknown whether PTEN activity is affected by osmotic cell swelling . Abrogation of the volume - regulatory Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : I . H . Lambert , Dept . of Biology , The August Krogh Bldg . , Universitetsparken 13 , DK - 2100 , Copenhagen Ø , Denmark ( e - mail : ihlambert @ bio . ku . dk ) . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 306 : C1028 – C1040 , 2014 . First published April 2 , 2014 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 . 0363 - 6143 / 14 Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society http : / / www . ajpcell . org C1028 b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m process in EATC involves PKC - mediated phosphorylation and desensitization of the CysLT1 receptor ( 18 ) . VSOAC has not been cloned although date indicates that it is different from volume - sensitive Cl (cid:4) channels ( 27 , 29 ) and Ca 2 (cid:2) - sensitive Cl (cid:4) channels ( 19 ) . Recent investigations indicate that TauT transcription as well as TauT plasma membrane abundance / activity are favored by mTOR , and it was suggested that the reduced placental amino acid transport activity seen in intrauterine growth re - striction could partly be caused by reduced mTOR activity ( 46 , 47 ) . mTOR is a serine / threonine kinase that forms the catalytic subunit of the complexes mTORC1 and mTORC2 , which are distinguished by their regulatory scaffolding proteins , regula - tory associated protein of mTOR ( Raptor ) and rapamycin - insensitive companion of mTOR ( Rictor ) , respectively . Bind - ing of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E - binding protein ( 4E - BP1 ) and the p70 - S6 kinase ( S6K ) to Raptor is a prerequisite for mTOR - mediated phosphorylation of 4E - BP1 and S6K ( 10 , 53 ) . 4E - BP1 will in its unphosphorylated state inhibit cap - dependent translation by binding to the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E ( eIF4E ) . However , as 4E - BP1 becomes phosphorylated by mTOR , the eIF4E will dissociate from 4E - BP1 and facilitate cap - dependent translation . It is assumed that rapamycin disrupts the Raptor mTOR interaction and hence the ability of mTOR to phosphorylate downstream substrates . mTORC1 activity is regulated by growth factors ( insulin , insulin - like growth factors ) and nutrient signals ( amino acids ) , cellular AMP / AMP - activated kinases ( AMPK ) following cell stress ( hypoxia , DNA damage ) ( 60 ) . Growth factor - induced mTOR stimulation involves phosphorylation by PI3K , which is counteracted by PTEN , as well as phosphory - lation by the serine / threonine kinase Akt ( protein kinase B ) . Activation of Akt elicits phosphorylation and inactivation of the GTPase - activating protein sclerosis complex ( TSC1 - TSC2 ) , which in turn leads to an increased fraction of the monomeric GTP - binding protein Rheb in its Rheb - GTP and hence mTOR - activating form ( 10 ) . Nutrients , such as amino acids , are suggested to promote Raptor / mTOR substrate inter - action and hence increased substrate accessibility to mTOR in a process that involves signaling through the Ras - related GTP - binding ( Rag ) proteins or recruitment of mTOR to intracellular organelles , e . g . , lysosomes ( 10 , 21 , 23 , 48 ) . Glucose depriva - tion leads to increased AMP levels , which promote AMPK activity and hence inhibition of mTORC1 either indirectly through AMPK - mediated phosphorylation and activation of TSC2 or more directly through phosphorylation of Raptor ( 10 , 50 ) . Although mTORC1 is usually inhibited when the avail - ability of oxygen is low ( 50 ) , Elorza and coworkers ( 3 ) have recently demonstrated that activation of the hypoxia - inducible factor 2 (cid:5) actually increases mTORC1 activity in a process involving upregulation of the Na (cid:2) - independent , high - afﬁnity amino acid transporter SLC7A5 ( 3 ) . Mammalian cells release organic osmolytes as part of the volume - regulatory process that follows osmotic cell swelling , and it has been shown that swelling - induced reduction in the taurine content in NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts reﬂects an in - creased loss of taurine via VSOAC and a concomitant reduc - tion in taurine uptake via TauT ( 7 , 27 ) . The reduction in TauT activity following reduction in the extracellular osmolarity occurs independently of TonEBP ( 7 ) . As mTOR inhibition reduces TauT gene transcription and TauT activity in primary human trophoblasts ( 46 ) , we initiated the present project to test whether osmotic perturbation affects mTOR activity and whether mTOR exerts coordinated regulation of TauT and VSOAC . Regulation of mRNA translation is a dynamic pro - cess broadly affected by changes in cell physiology ( 49 ) , and translation is primarily regulated at the step of initiation , where the major regulatory mechanism involves phosphorylation of eIF2 (cid:5) by one of four known eIF2 (cid:5) kinases ( 9 ) . To illustrate the role of mTOR in the regulation of TauT / VSOAC , we used the clinically used agent rapamycin and tested its effect on mTOR activity ( phosphorylation of the mTOR substrate 4E - BP1 ) , gene transcription ( qPCR ) , translation / protein synthesis ( phos - phorylation of eIF2 (cid:5) ) , and taurine uptake / release ( tracer tech - nique ) . We have used nonmalignant NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts and Ehrlich Lettré tumor cells to test whether the effect of mTOR on taurine transporters , in congruence with the effect of the CK2 ( 8 ) , occurs independently of the oncogenic status of the mouse ﬁbroblasts . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents . Unless otherwise stated , reagents were analytical grade and purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . [ 2 , 2 - 3 H ( N ) ] - taurine , (cid:5) - [ 1 - 14 C ] - methyl aminoisobutyric acid ( meAIB ) , L - [ 35 S ] - cysteine , and the scintillation ﬂuid Ultima Gold were from PerkinElmer ( Waltham , MA ) . Primary antibodies against mTOR ( rabbit Ab ) , eIF2 (cid:5) / Phospho - eIF2 (cid:5) ( rabbit Ab ) , PTEN / phospho - PTEN ( rabbit mAb ) and 4E - BP1 / Phospho - 4E - BP1 ( rabbit mAb ) , histone ( rabbit Ab ) , and (cid:6) - actin were all from Cell Signaling Technology ( Cam - bridge , UK ) . TauT antibody ( rabbit Ab ) was from Yorkshire Biosci - ence ( York , UK ) . Materials for cell culturing , real - time PCR , and Western blotting were from Invitrogen ( Paisley , UK ) and Agilent Technologies ( Hørsholm , Denmark ) . Rapamycin stock solution ( 400 (cid:7) M ) was prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide . Cell cultures . NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts ( clone 7 ) and ELA cells ( ATCC ) were grown in 75 - cm 2 culture ﬂasks ( Cellstar , Fricken - hausen , Germany ) at 37°C , 5 % CO 2 , 100 % humidity as monolayer cultures in DMEM and RPMI - 1640 , respectively . Both media con - tained 10 % heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum and 1 % antibiotics ( penicillin , streptomycin ) . Cells were split every 3 – 4 days using 0 . 5 % Trypsin ( Invitrogen ) in PBS to detach cells . Inorganic media . PBS contained 137 mM NaCl , 2 . 6 mM KCl , 6 . 5 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , and 1 . 5 mM KH 2 PO 4 . Isosmotic NaCl medium for ELA cells contained 141 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgSO 4 , and 10 mM HEPES . Isosmotic NaCl medium for NIH3T3 cells contained 159 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM MgSO 4 , and 10 mM HEPES . Hy - poosmotic NaCl solution was prepared by reduction of the NaCl concentration in the isosmotic solutions to 50 % without reducing the other components . Isosmotic N - methyl - D - glucamine - Cl ( NMDGCl ) and KCl media were prepared by substitution of NMDGCl or KCl for NaCl , respectively . pH was in all media adjusted to 7 . 4 . Radioactive tracer technique for amino acid uptake and release . [ 2 , 2 - 3 H ( N ) ] - taurine and (cid:5) - [ 1 - 14 C ] - meAIB were used to characterize amino acid uptake via TauT and System A , respectively , as well as release via the VSOAC . Uptake and release were determined at room temperature using cells grown to 80 % conﬂuence in six - well polyeth - ylene plates ( 9 . 6 cm 2 per well ) in their respective growth medium and following previously published procedures ( 13 ) . For determination of inﬂux , cells were washed and incubated with isosmotic medium . Five wells in a six - well plate were used for determination of accumulation of labeled amino acid , using 3 - , 6 - , 9 - , 12 - , and 15 - min exposure , and one well was used for a representative determination of the protein content in the wells using the Lowry method ( 36 ) and BSA as standard . Inﬂux was initiated by washing cells twice in isotonic NaCl C1029 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m medium , followed by addition of isotope and terminated by aspiration of the medium followed by rapid addition / aspiration of ice - cold MgCl 2 ( 115 mM ) . For determination of inﬂux under hypoosmotic conditions , isosmotic medium was substituted with hypoosmotic me - dium containing the isotope and incubated in the time intervals indicated . Following cell lysis with 96 % ethanol , labeled isotope was extracted with ddH 2 O and transferred to scintillation vials , and activ - ity was determined by (cid:6) - scintillation counting ( Ultima Gold ) . Cellular amino acid activity [ in counts per minute ( cpm ) / well ] was converted to nmol / g protein , using the extracellular speciﬁc activity ( cpm / nmol ) and the protein content ( mg protein / well ) , and ﬁnally plotted vs . time . Inﬂux ( nmol·g protein (cid:4) 1 ·min (cid:4) 1 ) was determined by linear regression . In cells pretreated in growth medium supplemented with 100 mM taurine or 100 mM sucrose , the wash of cells and experiment were performed with standard NaCl medium supplemented with 100 mM sucrose to preserve the tonicity . Two six - well plates were used for calculation of taurine transport kinetics , i . e . , 10 wells for variation of the extracellular Na (cid:2) concentration in the range 0 to 159 mM ( NaCl substituted isosmotically by NMDGCl ) and determination of taurine [ 3 H ] - taurine uptake within 15 min and two wells for quantiﬁcation of protein . [ 3 H ] - taurine inﬂux for sodium kinetics ( cpm / mg protein per 15 min ) was plotted vs . the extracellular Na (cid:2) concentration ( [ Na (cid:2) ] ) , and the curves were ﬁtted to a Hill type equation : Y (cid:8) ( V max (cid:9) [ Na (cid:2) ] n ) / ( K m n (cid:2) [ Na (cid:2) ] n ) , where V max is the maximal taurine uptake , K m is the Na (cid:2) concentration required for half maximal taurine uptake , and n is the number of Na (cid:2) ions required for initiation of the uptake of one taurine . For determination of efﬂux , cells were preloaded for 2 h ingrowth medium containing [ 3 H ] - labeled taurine or [ 14 C ] - labeled meAIB , the medium was aspirated , and cells were washed three times and left with isosmotic NaCl medium . Taurine efﬂux was executed by sam - pling / exchanging the extracellular medium every 2 min with isos - motic medium in the ﬁrst 8 min and hypoosmotic medium in the subsequent experimental time period . Cells were lysed at the end of the efﬂux experiment by addition of NaOH ( 1 M ) , and total [ 3 H ] - taurine in each well , representing a single experimental setup , was estimated as the sum of activity in all the efﬂux samples , the NaOH lysate plus two washouts with ddH 2 O . The natural logarithm to the fraction of activity remaining in the cells was calculated for each sampling time point and plotted vs . time . The fractional rate constant for the taurine efﬂux ( per minute ) , at a given sampling time point , was calculated from the logarithmic plot as the slope between the time point and its proceeding time point . Real - time polymerase chain reaction . Real - time PCR was used to quantify mRNA levels for PTEN , mTOR , TauT , and the actin - related protein ( ARP ) ( house - holding gene ) as described previously ( 52 ) . RNA was extracted from cells and grown in Petri dishes ( 90 % conﬂuence ) using the Nucleospin RNA II kit ( Macherey Nagel , Duren , Germany ) . Reverse transcription was performed on 1 (cid:7) g RNA ( determined from the 260 nm / 280 nm absorbance ratio ) and incubated ﬁrst at 65°C for 5 min in nucleotide solution ( dNTP mix ) plus oligo dT primer and subsequently at 42°C for 2 min with strand buffer plus dithiothreitol . Superscript II reverse transcriptase was added and mixture incubated at 42°C for 50 min . The reaction was inactivated by raising the temperature to 70°C for 15 min . For quantiﬁcation , we used the Stratagene Mx3000P real - time PCR system and Brilliant II SYBR Green QPCR master mix plus the following primers ( 100 pmol / (cid:7) l ) designed for SYBR Green I dye : mTOR : 5 = - CCAGGGGCTCCAACGGCAAG - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - TCGTGGGGT - CAGGCGGAAGA - 3 = ( reverse ) ; PTEN : 5 = - CTTGGGTTGGGAATG - GAGGG - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - CAGCAGCCAATCTCTCGGAT - 3 = ( re - verse ) ; glutathione peroxidase ( GPX ) 1 : 5 = - ACAGCCGCCGCTTTCG - TACC - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - ATGCCAGGGCCGCCTTAGGA - 3 = ( reverse ) ; superoxide dismutase ( SOD ) 1 : 5 = - TTCCGTCCGTCGGCTTCTCGT - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - CGCACACCGCTTTCATCGCC - 3 = ( reverse ) ; SOD2 : 5 = - CGGACGCTGCCTAGCAGACG - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - CACGCCGC - CCGACACAACAT - 3 = ( reverse ) ; catalase : 5 = - TCAGGGCCGC - CTTTTTGCCT - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - ACTCGAGCGCGGTAGGGACA - 3 = ( reverse ) ; ARP : 5 = - CGACCTGGAAGTCCAACTAC - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - ATCTGCTGCATCTGCTTG - 3 = ( reverse ) ; TauT : 5 = - ATC CTG GGC TTC ATG GCA CAA G - 3 = ( forward ) , 5 = - ATA GAC CAA AAG GTG GGC AGC G - 3 = ( reverse ) . cDNA products were separated in 1 % agarose gels , sequenced by Euroﬁns MWG Operon ( Hamburg , Germany ) , and veriﬁed by CLC DNA Workbench ( Cambridge , MA ) . qPCR was per - formed in triplicate under the following conditions : 10 min at 95°C followed by 40 cycles of 30 s at 95°C , 1 min at 60°C , 1 min at 72°C , and a single ﬁnal elongation step for 3 min at 72°C . Mean C T value was calculated . TauT and mTOR were in each sample determined relative to ARP . Western blotting . Western blotting was used to quantify the amounts of PTEN ( 54 kDa ) , mTOR ( 289 kDa ) , 4E - BP1 ( 15 – 20 kDa ) , eIF2 (cid:5) ( 38 kDa ) , TauT ( 70 kDa ) , and house - holding proteins , e . g . , histone ( 18 kDa ) and (cid:6) - actin ( 42 kDa ) . Shift in mTOR activity was determined from phosphorylation of 4E - BP1 ( 15 – 20 kDa ; increased Phospho - 4E - BP1 / 4E - BP1 ratio indicates increased mTOR activity ) . Shift in protein synthesis was quantiﬁed from phosphorylation of the eIF2 (cid:5) ( increased Phospho - eIF2 (cid:5) / eIF2 (cid:5) ration indicates downregula - tion of protein synthesis ) . Shift in PTEN activity was determined from phosphorylation of PTEN ( Ser380 / Thr382 / Thr383 ; increased Phos - pho - PTEN / PTEN ratio indicates reduced PTEN activity ) . Protein extraction and blotting were performed as previously described ( 52 ) . Brieﬂy , 1 – 2 (cid:9) 10 6 cells were washed gently in ice - cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer containing 1 % SDS , 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM HEPES , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 1 mM NaVO 3 , and 1 % protease inhibitor mix before sonication . Protein content was estimated by a DC assay ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) , and lysates with equivalent amount of protein were mixed with sample buffer ( 10 % SDS , 1 % bromophenol blue , 10 % glycerol , 5 mM Tris·HCl , pH 6 . 8 ) and proceeded for SDS PAGE gel electrophoresis ( NuPAGE precast 10 % Bis - Tris gels ) in NOVEX chambers under reducing and denaturing conditions ( NuPAGE MOPS SDS running buffer , Invitrogen ) . Bench - mark protein ladder was used for indication of molecular weight . NuPAGE transfer buffer ( Invitrogen ) was used for protein transfer to nitrocellulose membranes , and protein transfer was veriﬁed by Pon - ceau staining . Membranes , blocked at 37°C in Tris - buffered saline with Tween ( TBST ) ( 0 . 01 M Tris·HCl , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 0 . 1 % Tween 20 , pH 7 . 4 ) containing 5 % nonfat dry milk incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies , were washed in TBST and subsequently incubated with secondary antibodies for 1 h . Following wash in TBST , membranes were developed using nitro blue tetrazolium / 5 - bromo - 4 - chloro - 3 - indolyl phosphate ( KPL , Gaithersburg , MD ) . Membranes were scanned and bands quantiﬁed using UN - SCAN - IT ( Silk Scientiﬁc , Orem , UT ) . Protein synthesis . Protein synthesis was measured according to the method for inﬂux with the following exceptions : 1 ) cells in wells 1 to 5 in the six - well plate were exposed to [ 14 C ] - labeled cysteine for the time periods 5 , 15 , 30 , 60 , and 120 min , and 2 ) following termination of the cysteine uptake / incorporation process and cell lysis , the dried ethanol precipitated protein in each well was washed once with isosmotic medium containing unlabeled cysteine ( 1 mM ) , hydrolyzed with NaOH ( 24 h ) , and the [ 14 C ] activity in hydrolysate plus two washouts with ddH 2 O was used as an indication of [ 14 C ] - cysteine incorporation ( cpm / well ) . Values were converted ( cpm / mg protein ) , using the protein content ( mg protein / well ) in well 6 ( see Radioactive tracer technique for amino acid uptake and release ) , and plotted vs . time . Cellular protein incorporation ( cpm·mg protein (cid:4) 1 ·min (cid:4) 1 ) was determined by linear regression . Statistics . In bar and scatter plots , the error bars indicate means (cid:10) SE . Statistical signiﬁcance was analyzed by Student’s t - test and one - way ANOVA test . C1030 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m RESULTS Rapamycin - induced inhibition of mTOR reduces TauT mRNA abundance , TauT expression , and TauT activity . Inhi - bition of mTOR has previously been shown to reduce TauT mRNA abundance as well as TauT activity in primary human trophoblasts ( 46 ) . In the present investigation , we used the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin to test whether inhibition of mTOR affects TauT activity to the same extent in cells expressing different levels of mTOR . From Fig . 1 A , it is seen that ELA express (cid:3) 50 % less mTOR compared with nonmalignant NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts . However , qPCR technique re - vealed that mTOR mRNA abundance was twice as high in ELA compared with NIH3T3 cells ( Fig . 1 B ) . This can be explained by either lower translation of mTOR mRNA or increased degradation of mTOR protein in ELA cells , and hence a considerable capacity for upregulation of mTOR ex - pression and activity exists . From Fig . 2 A , it is seen that 24 - h incubation under hypoos - motic conditions reduced mTOR activity in ELA cells , which was observed as a reduction in phosphorylation of the mTOR substrate 4E - BP1 , i . e . , the phospho - 4E - BP1 / 4E - BP1 ratio was reduced . On the other hand , mTOR activity increased signiﬁ - cantly following 24 - h exposure to hypertonic conditions ( Fig . 2 A ) . TauT transport activity in mouse ﬁbroblasts was previ - ously shown to decrease following osmotic cell swelling ( 7 , 11 ) and to increase following osmotic cell shrinkage ( 27 ) . Hence , TauT activity correlates with mTOR activity following prolonged exposure to hypotonic and hypertonic tonicity . Eh - rlich cells release amino acids in response to hypoosmotic cell swelling ( 11 ) , and , as mTOR is sensitive to the cellular level of amino acids ( 50 ) , we tested whether a shift in the cellular taurine content would affect mTOR activity . Preincubation of ELA cells with growth medium supplemented with 5 mM (cid:6) - alanine , which depletes cells for taurine ( 52 ) , had no effect on mTOR activity , i . e . , the phospho - 4E - BP1 / 4E - BP1 ratio was from seven sets of experiments determined to 0 . 82 (cid:10) 0 . 14 and 0 . 78 (cid:10) 0 . 04 in normal and taurine - depleted cells , respectively . Hence , reduction in mTOR activity following 24 - h osmotic cell swelling is not explained by the concomitant net loss of taurine . ELA is an adherent subline of the nonadherent EATC , and we have previously shown that osmotic cell swelling in EATC is accompanied by depolarization of the plasma mem - brane due to a signiﬁcant increase in the Cl (cid:4) conductance , which exceeds the concomitant increase in the K (cid:2) conductance ( 31 ) . We found that hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane by preincubation in isotonic Na (cid:2) - free NMDGCl medium sig - niﬁcantly increased mTOR activity 5 . 5 (cid:10) 1 . 4 - fold , whereas depolarization of the membrane by preincubation in isotonic KCl medium signiﬁcantly reduced mTOR activity to 43 (cid:10) 7 % of the control value . Hence , neither membrane depolarization nor amino acid loss during osmotic cell swelling seems to explain downregulation of mTOR activity following prolonged hypoosmotic exposure . To mimic the effect of reduced mTOR activity following long - term hypoosmotic conditions , we exposed ELA and NIH3T3 cell to the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin . From Fig . 2 B , it is seen that exposing ELA cell to 50 nM rapamycin for 24 h reduced mTOR activity signiﬁcantly under isotonic conditions as well as under hypertonic conditions , whereas rapamycin had no effect under hypotonic conditions ( Fig . 2 B ) . Hence , mTOR activity in ELA cells was reduced to the same extent following long - term hypotonic exposure and rapamycin - induced inhibi - tion . Figure 2 also shows that rapamycin - induced inhibition of mTOR was accompanied by a reduction in protein synthesis , which was observed as an increased phosphorylation of eIF2 (cid:5) ( Fig . 2 C ) and reduced incorporation of [ 35 S ] - labeled cysteine into protein ( Fig . 2 D ) . Similarly , we ﬁnd that exposure to rapamycin reduced protein synthesis in NIH3T3 cells ( Fig . 2 E ) , which express a high level of mTOR ( Fig . 1 A ) . From Fig . 3 , it is seen that mTOR favors amino acid uptake in ELA cells under isotonic conditions , i . e . , 24 - h pretreatment with rapamycin reduced uptake of taurine ( Fig . 3 A ) as well as meAIB ( Fig . 3 B ) , which is a synthetic tracer for the alanine - preferring amino acid transporter ( System A ) . Four - hour rapamycin preexposure had no signiﬁcant effect on taurine inﬂux in ELA cells , i . e . , taurine inﬂux was 0 . 20 (cid:10) 0 . 01 nmol·g protein (cid:4) 1 ·min (cid:4) 1 ( n (cid:8) 3 ) in rapamycin - treated cells compared with 0 . 18 (cid:10) 0 . 01 nmol·g protein (cid:4) 1 ·min (cid:4) 1 ( n (cid:8) 13 ) in control cells . Adding rapamycin at the time of the initiation of the inﬂux experiment , likewise , had no effect on taurine inﬂux in ELA either ( data not shown ) . The reduced TauT activity observed in ELA cells exposed to rapamycin for 24 h correlates with a reduced TauT mRNA abundance ( Fig . 3 C ) and protein expression ( Fig . 3 D ) . Consistently , we found that rapamycin - induced inhibition of mTOR reduced taurine uptake via TauT in NIH3T3 cells ( Fig . 3 E ) and that the reduced taurine uptake correlates with reduced maximal transport ca - Fig . 1 . Accumulation of mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) mRNA and protein in NIH3T3 and Ehrlich Lettré ascites ( ELA ) mouse ﬁbroblasts . A : accumulated mTOR protein was determined by Western blotting and in each case normalized to the correspondent amount of (cid:6) - actin . Data represent 5 ( NIH3T3 ) and 6 ( ELA ) sets of experiments . Inset : representative Western blot of mTOR and (cid:6) - actin expression in NIH3T3 and ELA cells . M indicates protein ladder . Proteins from NIH3T3 and ELA cells were run in parallel on separate gels . B : mTOR mRNA was determined by qPCR and normalized to the actin cytoskeleton component actin - related protein ( ARP ) mRNA . Data represent 6 ( NIH3T3 ) and 11 ( ELA ) sets of experiments . # Signiﬁcant differ - ence between the 2 cell lines ( Student’s t - test ) . C1031 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m pacity ( V max ) , i . e . , a reduction in the number of functional transporters in the membrane and not a shift in the afﬁnity of TauT toward the cosubstrate Na (cid:2) or the Na (cid:2) : taurine stoichi - ometry for translocation of taurine via TauT ( Fig . 3 F ) . Hence , reduction in mTOR activity , induced by prolonged exposure to hypotonic conditions or addition of rapamycin , is taken to reduce TauT activity through reduction of TauT mRNA and / or protein abundance and / or translocation of TauT to the plasma membrane . We have previously shown that accumulation and transport capacity of TauT is reduced reversibly following long - term exposure to a high extracellular taurine concentration ( 56 ) . This is conﬁrmed in Fig . 4 A , where it is shown that 24 - or 48 - h exposure to growth medium supplemented with 100 mM tau - rine almost eliminated taurine inﬂux in ELA cells ( compare control in Fig . 3 A with Tau - 24h / Tau - 48h in Fig . 4 A ) and that TauT activity recovered in ELA cells when the 24 - h preexpo - sure with 100 mM taurine was followed by 24 - h exposure to growth medium supplemented with 100 mM sucrose ( compare Tau / Suc with Tau - 24h / Tau - 48h in Fig . 4 A ) . Recovery of TauT activity was not complete , as taurine inﬂux only reached a value equivalent to 50 % of the value seen in cells exposed to growth medium supplemented with 100 mM sucrose for 48 h ( Fig . 4 A ) . From Fig . 4 B , it is seen that rapamycin treatment reduced taurine uptake to the same extent irrespective of the magnitude of the prevailing TauT activity . From Fig . 4 C , it is seen that the reversible , substrate - induced downregulation of TauT transport activity reﬂects a reduced TauT mRNA level , i . e . , TauT mRNA abundance was reduced signiﬁcantly by 48 - h pretreatment with 100 mM taurine in the growth medium . TauT mRNA increased when extracellular taurine was substi - tuted by 100 mM sucrose and approached 50 % of the amount seen in cells exposed for 24 h to growth medium supplemented with 100 mM sucrose . Figure 4 D shows that mTOR inhibition reduced TauT mRNA abundance to the same extent in control cells and cell preexposed to sucrose . However , rapamycin does not seem to reduce TauT mRNA level in cells exposed for 24 h with 100 mM taurine followed by 24 h with 100 mM sucrose , presumably because upregulation of gene transcription follow - ing removal of extracellular taurine balances the concomitant rapamycin - induced inhibition . Taken together the data in Figs . 1 – 4 indicate that mTOR under isotonic conditions ensures Fig . 2 . Effect of long - term hypoosmolarity , hyperosmolarity , and rapamycin exposure on mTOR activity and protein synthesis . A : ELA cells were exposed to isotonic conditions ( Isotonic ) , hypotonic conditions for 24 h ( Hypo - 24h , lightly shaded ) , or hypertonic conditions for 24 h ( Hyper - 24h , darkly shaded ) . mTOR activity was subsequently determined by Western blotting as the ratio between phosphorylated 4E - binding protein ( 4E - BP1 ) ( P - 4E - BP1 ) and total 4E - BP1 . Inset : representative Western blot of 4E - BP1 and total 4E - BP1 protein bands in lysates isolated from ELA cells under the isotonic ( Iso ) , hypotonic ( Hypo ) , and hypertonic ( Hyper ) conditions . Data represent 6 sets of experiments . # Signiﬁcant difference from control ( ANOVA test ) . B : cells were exposed for 24 h to isotonic , hypotonic , or hypertonic medium in the absence ( open bar ) or presence of 50 nM rapamycin ( shaded bar ) . mTOR activity was determined as indicated in A . Values for mTOR activity in rapamycin - treated cells are given relative to their respective control and represent 3 sets of paired experiments . # Signiﬁcantly reduced by rapamycin ( Student’s t - test ) . C : rapamycin - induced downregulation of protein synthesis was determined by Western blotting as an increase in the ratio between phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (cid:5) ( eIF2 (cid:5) ) and total eIF2 (cid:5) . Data for rapamycin are given relative to untreated control and represent 6 sets of experiments . # Signiﬁcantly different from control ( Student’s t - test ) . D and E : rapamycin induced downregulation of protein synthesis in ELA ( D ) and NIH3T3 ( E ) was determined from the reduction in [ 14 C ] - cysteine incorporation in proteins . Data are given relative to control and represent 3 sets of paired experiments . # Signiﬁcantly different from control ( Student’s t - test ) . C1032 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m accumulation of taurine and other organic osmolytes in non - malignant and carcinoma mouse ﬁbroblasts by stimulating transcription of genes coding for the transporters TauT and System A , translation of the mRNA to functional protein , as well as expression of the transporters in the plasma membrane . Conversely , prolonged hypotonic exposure was accompanied by reduced mTOR activity ( Fig . 2 A ) and a concomitant reduc - tion in TauT mRNA abundance and TauT activity ( 7 ) , which will add to restoration of cell volume by limiting reuptake of osmolytes . Acute swelling - induced stimulation of mTOR is accompa - nied by reduction in TauT activity . Cell swelling has previously been reported to activate PI3K in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts ( 4 ) , and accordingly we ﬁnd that mTOR activity was signiﬁcantly increased by 30 % in ELA within 6 min following exposure to hypotonic conditions and that inhibition of PTEN , which counteracts the effect of increased PI3K activity , potentiated the effect of osmotic cell swelling on mTOR activity ( Fig . 5 A ) . However , PTEN activity was unaltered by acute hypotonic exposure , i . e . , the ratio between phosphorylated ( inactive ) PTEN and total PTEN was 0 . 22 (cid:10) 0 . 03 under isotonic condi - tions and 0 . 20 (cid:10) 0 . 004 following 6 - min hypotonic exposure ( 5 sets of paired experiments ) . This indicates that swelling - in - duced increase in mTOR activity is secondary to the increased PI3K activity . Acute osmotic cell swelling in mouse ﬁbroblasts is accompanied by reduction in TauT activity ( 7 ) , and , from Fig . 5 B , it is seen that taurine inﬂux under hypotonic conditions in ELA cells was signiﬁcantly reduced in the presence of HOpic and that this inhibition was ampliﬁed by rapamycin . Hence , swelling - induced reduction in TauT activity correlates with the increase in PI3K and mTOR signaling . As inhibition of mTOR leads to reduction in taurine uptake ( Fig . 3 ) , one would expect that increased mTOR activity following acute osmotic exposure should increase taurine uptake . This is not the case , indicating that downregulation of TauT within the initial minutes following hypoosmotic exposure is most likely mediated by direct phosphorylation involving the protein ki - nases upstream to mTOR . The more pronounced effect of acute osmotic cell swelling on TauT in rapamycin - treated cells most probably reﬂects the contribution from rapamycin - induced reduction in TauT mRNA abundance . The opposing effect of short - term ( 6 min ) and long - term ( 24 h ) hypotonic exposure on mTOR activity most probably reﬂects a general downregula - tion of mTOR activity - mediated signaling , elicited by pro - longed hypotonic conditions . Rapamycin - induced inhibition of mTOR potentiates swell - ing - induced taurine release . Cell swelling elicits a transient release of taurine to restore cell volume and hence functionality ( 27 , 32 ) . From the time trace in Fig . 6 A , where the fractional rate constant for release of taurine is plotted with 2 - min time Fig . 3 . Rapamycin induced downregulation of taurine / meAIB uptake and TauT mRNA / protein abundance . ELA and NIH3T3 cells were pretreated with 50 nM rapamycin for 24 h ( shaded bars ) . Control cells contained no rapamycin ( open bars ) . A and B : taurine and meAIB inﬂux in ELA was determined by tracer technique as indicated in MATERIALS AND METHODS . Values for control and rapamycin - treated cells represent 13 / 8 sets for taurine and 3 / 3 sets of experiments for meAIB . C : TauT mRNA abundance in ELA was determined by qPCR , and TauT mRNA was in each case normalized to ARP mRNA . Data are given relative to control with no rapamycin and represent 7 sets of experiments . D : TauT expression in ELA was determined by Western blotting using the 70 - kDa TauT protein band as indication of TauT and histone as house - holding protein . Values for rapamycin - treated cells are given relative to control cells and represent 3 sets of experiments . E : taurine inﬂux in NIH3T3 cells was determined by tracer technique . Values for control and rapamycin - treated cells represent 8 and 4 sets of experiments . F : kinetic parameters for Na (cid:2) - dependent taurine uptake were in 4 sets of experiments determined by tracer technique as indicated in MATERIALS AND METHODS . Values for rapamycin - treated cells are given relative to control cells where V max , Na (cid:2) : taurine stoichiometry , and K m for Na (cid:2) were determined at 485 , 188 (cid:10) 55 , 135 counts per minute ( cpm ) ·mg protein (cid:4) 1 ·15 min (cid:4) 1 , 2 . 21 (cid:10) 0 . 22 and 84 (cid:10) 9 mM , respectively . # Signiﬁcantly different from control ( Student’s t - test ) . C1033 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m intervals under isotonic and hypotonic conditions , it is seen that 24 - h pretreatment with 50 nM rapamycin ampliﬁed swell - ing - induced taurine release in ELA cells although the time - frame for activation and inactivation of the volume - sensitive pathway was unaffected . Using the maximal fractional rate constant obtained after the shift to hypotonic conditions , i . e . , 6 min after hypotonic exposure , as indication for VSOAC activ - ity , it was determined that rapamycin - induced inhibition of mTOR increased swelling - induced taurine release 1 . 4 - fold in ELA cells ( Fig . 6 C ) and 1 . 5 - fold in NIH3T3 cells ( Fig . 6 D ) . Taurine release under isotonic conditions was not affected by rapamycin , i . e . , the respective rate constants for taurine release in control and rapamycin - treated cells were 0 . 0013 (cid:10) 0 . 002 cells / min ( n (cid:8) 16 ) and 0 . 0014 (cid:10) 0 . 003 cells / min ( n (cid:8) 10 ) for ELA cells and 0 . 0027 (cid:10) 0 . 007 cells / min ( n (cid:8) 14 ) and 0 . 0028 (cid:10) 0 . 008 cells / min ( n (cid:8) 10 ) for NIH3T3 cells . Adding rapamycin at the time of initiation of the efﬂux experiment had no effect on swelling - induced taurine release , i . e . , the respective maxi - mal rate constants in control and rapamycin - treated ELA cells were 0 . 054 (cid:10) 0 . 035 cells / min ( n (cid:8) 16 ) and 0 . 0578 (cid:10) 0 . 077 cells / min ( n (cid:8) 4 ) , respectively . Thus , long - term rapamycin - induced inhibition of mTOR increases VSOAC activity . PI3K , PTEN , and the glycogen synthase kinase 3 ( GSK3 ) are all upstream to mTOR ( 60 ) , and , in congruence with previous ﬁndings for NIH3T3 ( 8 , 26 ) , data with ELA cells showed that volume - sensitive taurine release was potentiated in the presence of the PTEN inhibitor HOpic and reduced in the presence of the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin ( Fig . 6 B ) . As protein synthesis according to Fig . 2 is reduced in rapamycin treated cells , an increased VSOAC activity could be caused by a reduced PTEN expression or PTEN activity . However , as seen in Fig . 6 C ( ELA cells ) and Fig . 6 D ( NIH3T3 cells ) , 24 - h pretreatment with 50 nM rapamycin ampliﬁed swelling - in - duced taurine release under conditions where VSOAC activity was impaired by inhibition of PI3K with wortmannin and GSK3 with SB216763 or boosted by inhibition of PTEN with HOpic . Furthermore , although PTEN mRNA abundance ( Fig . 6 E ) and PTEN protein expression ( Fig . 6 F ) were signiﬁcantly increased following 24 - h rapamycin exposure , the PTEN ac - tivity ( Fig . 6 G ) was not concomitantly affected . Hence , it Fig . 4 . Effect of rapamycin on reversible , substrate - induced downregulation of TauT mRNA abundance and TauT transport activity . ELA cells were propagated in growth medium supplemented with 100 mM taurine for 24 or 48 h ( Tau - 24h , Tau - 48h ) , 100 mM sucrose for 24 h or 48 h ( Suc - 24h , Suc - 48h ) , or 100 mM taurine for 24 h followed by 100 mM sucrose for 24h ( Tau / Suc ) . Rapamycin ( 50 nM , shaded bars ) was present for 24 h before determination of taurine inﬂux by tracer technique and TauT mRNA abundance by qPCR . Control cells contained no rapamycin ( open bars ) . A : reversible substrate induced downregulation of TauT activity . Data represent 3 , 4 , 6 , and 5 sets of experiments for Tau - 24h , Tau - 48h , Tau / Suc , and Suc - 48h , respectively . # Signiﬁcantly larger than cells exposed to taurine for 24 h ( ANOVA ) . * Signiﬁcantly larger than cells preexposed to taurine plus sucrose ( ANOVA ) . B : effect of rapamycin on taurine inﬂux in cells pretreated with taurine , sucrose , or taurine followed by sucrose . Inﬂux data for rapamycin - treated cells are given relative to their respective control cells . Data represent 8 , 4 , 6 , and 5 sets of paired experiments for control , Tau - 24h , Tau - 48h , Tau / Suc , and Suc - 48h , respectively . # Signiﬁcantly reduced compared with cells with no rapamycin ( Student’s t - test ) . C : reversible substrate induced downregulation of TauT mRNA abundance . Values are given relative to control cells in standard NaCl medium and represent 6 , 6 , and 3 sets of paired sets for Tau - 48h , Tau / Suc , and Suc - 24h , respectively . # Signiﬁcantly different from control cells ( Student’s t - test ) . ¤Signiﬁcantly increased compared with cells pretreated with taurine ( Student’s t - test ) . D : effect of rapamycin on TauT mRNA abundance in control cells , cells pretreated with sucrose for 24 h ( Suc - 24h ) , or cells pretreated with taurine followed by sucrose ( Tau / Suc ) . Values for TauT mRNA in rapamycin - treated cells are given relative to their respective control cells and represent 8 , 6 , and 3 sets of experiments for control , Tau / Suc , and Suc - 24h , respectively . # Signiﬁcantly reduced compared with the respective control with no rapamycin ( Student’s t - test ) . C1034 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m seems reasonable to exclude that rapamycin - induced potentia - tion of the volume - sensitive taurine release is secondary to rapamycin - induced inhibition of PTEN activity . Similar to the effect of lipid phosphatase ( PTEN ) inhibition in Fig . 6 B and in accordance with previously published data ( 28 ) , Fig . 7 A shows that volume - sensitive taurine release from ELA cells is poten - tiated by ROS ( H 2 O 2 ) and exposure to the protein phosphatase inhibitor vanadate . From Fig . 7 B , it is seen that 24 - h pretreat - ment with 50 nM rapamycin ampliﬁed swelling - induced tau - rine release in the presence of H 2 O 2 and vanadate and to an even larger extent compared with cells treated with rapamycin alone . ROS are assumed to block protein tyrosine phosphatases by oxidation of a cysteine in the catalytic site , whereas vana - date is a phosphate analog that acts as a competitive inhibitor of the protein tyrosine phosphatases ( 14 ) . Hence , reduction in expression of enzymes involved in elimination of ROS could contribute to rapamycin - induced potentiation of VSOAC ac - tivity . Mouse ﬁbroblasts express the antioxidative enzymes SOD1 / 2 , catalase , and GPX ( Fig . 7 C ) , and , from Fig . 7 , D – F , it is seen that SOD1 / 2 and GPX mRNA abundance is higher in ELA compared with NIH3T3 , whereas catalase mRNA is larger in NIH3T3 compared with ELA . From Fig . 7 G , it is seen that reduction in catalase activity in ELA cells with 3 - amino - 1 , 2 , 4 - triazole ( 5 mM , 2 - h preincubation ) and hence elimination of ROS increased the maximal rate constant for the swelling - induced taurine release in ELA cells 1 . 2 - fold and that prein - cubation of ELA cells with N - acetyl cysteine ( precursor for glutathione synthesis ) , which enhances cellular glutathione content ( 52 ) and presumably GPX activity , reduced swelling - induced taurine release to 65 % of the control value . Hence , in agreement with previous data , modulation of the antioxidative capacity affects swelling - induced release of taurine ( 26 ) . In Fig . 7 H , it is shown that rapamycin - induced inhibition of mTOR reduced catalase mRNA abundance signiﬁcantly , whereas SOD1 mRNA and GPX mRNA abundance was un - affected . Thus reduced catalase capacity following inhibition of mTOR could contribute to reduced antioxidative capacity and explain the concomitant potentiation of VSOAC activity . It is noted that we are not able to test whether rapamycin affects expression of the protein tyrosine phosphatase and VSOAC genes , as they are not identiﬁed . DISCUSSION mTOR - taurine homeostasis following osmotic cell swelling . In mouse ﬁbroblasts , restoration of cell volume following osmotic cell swelling and hence protection of cellular function is ensured by transient activation of the release pathway for ions and organic osmolytes VSOAC as well as a concomitant downregulation of the taurine - accumulating transporter TauT ( 7 , 27 , 29 ) . Conversely , osmotic cell shrinkage elicits inacti - vation of VSOAC and upregulation of TauT expression and activity ( 27 – 29 , 56 ) . Mouse ﬁbroblasts also release ions and amino acids during the initial phase of apoptosis , which leads to cell shrinkage ( apoptotic volume decrease ) and hence initi - ation of the cell death process ( 12 , 32 , 43 ) . ROS are produced following osmotic cell swelling as well as osmotic cell shrink - age ( 2 , 5 , 13 , 26 , 39 , 55 ) . We have recently demonstrated that acute exposure to ROS reduces taurine uptake as a result of modulation of TauT transport kinetics ( 7 ) and concomitantly potentiates swelling - induced taurine release ( 13 , 26 , 39 ) , pre - sumably through potentiation of 5 - lipoxygenase activity and / or oxidation / inhibition of protein tyrosine phosphatases ( 13 , 26 ) . Hence , ROS favor net loss of organic osmolytes under hypoos - motic conditions . Here we demonstrate that mTOR activity is transiently increased following osmotic cell swelling . Within minutes following exposure to hypoosmotic conditions ( acute phase ) , the increased mTOR activity correlates with potentia - tion of taurine loss via VSOAC and reduction in taurine uptake via TauT . This acute regulation of the taurine transporters most probably involves phosphorylation by mTOR and / or protein kinases upstream to mTOR . Following prolonged exposure to hypoosmotic conditions ( 4 – 24 h ) , the reduced mTOR activity , mimicked by the presence of rapamycin , results in a reduced Fig . 5 . Swelling induced activation of mTOR and its impact on taurine uptake . mTOR activity and taurine inﬂux were determined as indicated in the legends to Figs 2 and 3 . A : mTOR activity was determined in ELA cells exposed to isotonic conditions ( Isotonic ) and hypotonic conditions for 6 min in the absence ( Control , open bar ) or presence of 5 (cid:7) M of the PTEN inhibitor HOpic ( shaded bar ) . mTOR activity is given relative to the isotonic control values and represents 5 sets of paired data . # * Signiﬁcantly larger than isotonic and larger than hypotonic control with no HOpic , respectively ( ANOVA test ) . B : taurine inﬂux was determined in ELA cells following acute exposure to hypotonic conditions in the absence of HOpic ( Control , open bar ) , in the presence of 5 (cid:7) M HOpic without rapamycin pretreatment ( HOpic , lightly shaded bar ) , or in the presence of 5 (cid:7) M HOpic after 24 - h pretreatment with 50 nM rapamycin ( Rapa (cid:2) HOpic , darkly shaded bar ) . Taurine inﬂux was determined under hypotonic conditions in the presence of 100 (cid:7) M DIDS to block taurine uptake via volume - sensitive transporter for organic osmolytes and anion channels ( VSOAC ) . Values are means from 5 sets of experiments . # * Signiﬁcantly reduced compared with hypotonic control and hypotonic plus HOpic , respec - tively ( ANOVA test ) . C1035 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m transcription of genes coding for antioxidative enzymes ( cata - lase ) and TauT as well as reduced TauT expression and incorporation in the plasma membrane . RNA - mediated silenc - ing of Raptor , i . e . , mTORC1 inhibition , is similarly shown to reduce basal System A and System L amino acid transport activities in human trophoblast cells by modulation of cell surface abundance of the transporters ( 47 ) . In ELA cells , reduction in antioxidative capacity will boost VSOAC activity , mimicked by addition of H 2 O 2 , and concomitantly inhibit TauT activity ( 7 , 29 ) . Regulation of TauT and VSOAC by mTOR under acute and prolonged hypoosmotic exposure is summarized in Fig . 8 . Activation of PI3K - Akt signaling in response to volume perturbation has previously been reported ( 22 , 37 , 45 , 57 , 59 ) , and here we demonstrate that acute osmotic cell swelling is accompanied by activation of mTOR and that inhibition of PTEN , which counteracts the action of PI3K , potentiates swell - ing - induced mTOR activity . Increased PI3K - Akt - mTOR sig - naling favors similar to ROS ( 7 , 29 ) net loss of organic osmolytes under hypotonic conditions by potentiation of tau - rine loss via VSOAC . Accordingly , inhibition of protein kinase activity coupled to the epidermal growth factor receptor , which is upstream to PI3K and mTOR , inhibits volume - sensitive taurine release , whereas addition of an epidermal growth factor potentiates volume - sensitive taurine release ( 26 ) . We have previously shown that addition of the phospholipase A 2 acti - vator melittin evokes taurine release via VSOAC in NIH3T3 cells under isotonic conditions by means of the same signaling pathway as evoked by osmotic cell swelling ( 26 ) . Melittin - induced taurine release from NIH3T3 cells is doubled under hyperpolarized conditions ( Na (cid:2) - free NMDGCl medium ) and reduced to about 30 % under depolarized conditions ( Na (cid:2) - free Fig . 6 . Effect of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) / phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphatase ( PTEN ) inhibition on rapamycin - induced stimulation of the volume - sensitive taurine release . For determination of taurine release , ELA cells were loaded with [ 3 H ] - taurine for 2 h , washed , and exposed to isotonic NaCl medium for 10 min and subsequently to hypotonic medium for 14 min ( shift in tonicity indicated by an arrow ) . Samples were drawn , and the fractional rate constant ( per minute ) for taurine release was determined every 2 min . Maximal rate constant for taurine release was determined at 6 min after hypotonic exposure . PTEN mRNA abundance , PTEN protein expression , and PTEN activity were determined by qPCR and Western blotting ( total PTEN expression , PTEN activity as the ratio between phosphorylated and total PTEN ) . A : rapamycin induced upregulation of swelling - induced taurine release from ELA . Taurine efﬂux was performed on ELA preincubated in growth medium in the absence ( Control , Œ ) or presence of 50 nM rapamycin for 24 h ( (cid:2) ) . Traces represent mean values for the fractional rate constant for 19 ( control ) and 13 ( rapamycin - treated ) cells . B : time trace for taurine release in ELA cells under control conditions ( no inhibitor , Œ ) and in the presence of the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin ( 1 (cid:7) M , present 20 min before and during efﬂux experiment , Œ ) or the PTEN inhibitor HOpic ( 5 (cid:7) M , present during efﬂux experiment , (cid:2) ) . Values represent 19 ( control ) , 3 ( wortmannin ) , and 4 ( HOpic ) sets of experiments . C and D : rapamycin induced upregulation of swelling - induced taurine release from ELA ( C ) and NIH3T3 cells ( D ) following inhibition of PI3K with wortmannin ( Wort ) , PTEN with HOpic or glycogen synthase kinase 3 (cid:6) with SB216763 ( SB 5 (cid:7) M , present 2 h before and during the efﬂux experiment ) . Data are given relative to the respective control conditions with no rapamycin and represent control , Wortmannin - , HOpic - , and SB216763 - treated cells from 13 , 3 , 4 , and 7 sets of experiments for ELA cells and 10 , 3 , 4 , and 4 sets of paired experiments for NIH3T3 cells , respectively . # Signiﬁcantly increased by rapamycin ( Student’s t - test ) . E : rapamycin induced upregulation of PTEN mRNA abundance . Value for rapamycin - treated cells is given relative to control and represents mean of 8 sets of experiments . F : Rapamycin induced upregulation of PTEN protein . Value for rapamycin - treated cells is given relative to control and represents mean of 6 sets of experiments . G : effect of rapamycin on PTEN activity . Value for rapamycin - treated cells is given relative to control and represents mean of 6 sets of experiments . # Signiﬁcantly increased compared with the respective controls ( Student’s t - test ) . C1036 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m KCl medium ) ( 40 ) . Similarly , we demonstrate that mTOR activity is increased by hyperpolarization and reduced by depolarization of the plasma membrane . Hence , the sensitivity of melittin - induced taurine release to the membrane potential could reﬂect an effect on mTOR activity . A hypothesis , which has to be tested , is that shift in the membrane potential affects association of Akt to phosphatidyl inositol biphosphate / phos - phatidyl inositol triphosphate at the inner side of the plasma membrane and hence activation of Akt by other protein kinases ( PDK1 , autophosphorylation ) and subsequently mTOR by Akt . It has been shown that the plasma membrane depolarizes within the ﬁrst minutes following hypoosmotic cell swelling in EATC attributable to a swelling - induced increase in anion conductance that exceeds a concomitant increase in cation conductance ( 31 ) . However , the swelling - induced depolariza - tion would , if anything , reduce mTOR activity and hence taurine release . It is noticed that swelling - induced mTOR activation is transient , i . e . , mTOR activity is signiﬁcantly increased following 6 - min hypotonic exposure ( Fig . 7 A ) but reduced following 4 - h ( data not shown ) and 24 - h hypotonic exposure ( Fig . 2 A ) . mTOR activity is reported to sense nutrient availability , in a process that , according to Kim and coworkers ( 20 , 21 ) , involves the mTOR regulator Raptor and G protein (cid:6) - subunit - like proteins . However , as shown in RESULTS , deplet - ing ELA cells for taurine has no effect on mTOR activity , i . e . , even though prolonged osmotic cell swelling reduces cellular Fig . 7 . Effect of H 2 O 2 exposure and inhibition of protein phosphatase activity on rapamycin - induced stimulation of the volume - sensitive taurine release . Taurine release was determined as indicated in Fig . 6 . mRNA abundance was determined by qPCR . A : time trace for taurine release in ELA cells under isotonic and hypotonic conditions ( shift in tonicity indicated by the arrow ) under control conditions ( Œ ) and in the presence of H 2 O 2 ( 100 (cid:7) M , present during the efﬂux experiment , Œ ) or the protein phosphatase inhibitor Navanadate ( Van , 50 (cid:7) M , present during the efﬂux experiment , (cid:2) ) . Curves represent 19 ( control ) , 4 ( H 2 O 2 ) , and 4 ( Navanadate ) sets of experiments . B : rapamycin induced upregulation of swelling - induced taurine release from ELA following hypoosmotic exposure in control cells and cells treated with H 2 O 2 or Navanadate . Maximal rate constants for taurine release were determined at 6 min after hypoosmotic exposure . Data are given relative to the respective control conditions with no rapamycin and represent 13 , 4 , and 4 sets of experiments for control , H 2 O 2 , and Navanadate , respectively . # Signiﬁcantly increased compared with the respective controls ( Student’s t - test ) . C : expression of antioxidative enzymes . mRNA was isolated from ELA cells and RT - PCR performed using mouse - speciﬁc primers for superoxide dismutase 1 ( SOD1 , 91 bp , lane 1 ) , SOD2 ( 96 bp , lane 2 ) , glutathione peroxidase ( GPX , 96 bp , lane 3 ) , and catalase ( Cat , 99 bp , lane 4 ) as indicated in MATERIALS AND METHODS . M indicates the band sizes of the DNA ladder used in the present experiment . D – F : SOD1 and SOD2 mRNA abundance ( D ) , catalase mRNA abundance ( E ) , and GPX mRNA abundance ( F ) in NIH3T3 ( shaded bars ) and ELA ( solid bars ) . Values are given relative to ARP mRNA and represent mean of 3 sets of experiments . G : effect of catalase inhibition ( 3AT , 5 mM during 2 - h preincubation , shaded bar ) and GPX boosting ( 20 mM of N - acetyl cysteine , NAC , added 24 h before the experiment , solid bar ) on swelling - induced taurine release from ELA cells . Maximal rate constants for taurine release were determined at 6 min after hypoosmotic exposure . Values are given relative to control and represent 8 and 3 sets of paired experiments for 3AT and NAC , respectively . H : effect of rapamycin - induced mTOR inhibition ( 50 nM , 24 h ) on SOD1 , catalase , and GPX mRNA abundance . mRNA expression in control and rapamycin - exposed cells was determined relative to ARP mRNA . Values for rapamycin - exposed cells are given relative to control cells , which were not exposed to rapamycin and represent 6 ( SOD1 ) , 6 ( catalase ) , and 8 ( GPX ) set s of experiments . # Signiﬁcant difference between control and rapamycin - treated cells ( Student’s t - test ) . C1037 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m taurine concentration dramatically ( 11 ) , the concomitant reduc - tion in mTOR activity seems not to be secondary to intracel - lular taurine restriction . Treating ELA cells with rapamycin did not increase the effect of prolonged hypoosmotic exposure on mTOR activity ( Fig . 2 B ) , and , as the potentiating effect of the rapamycin on volume - sensitive taurine release was the same irrespective of the prevailing VSOAC activity , i . e . , under control conditions and following inhibition of PI3K / PTEN and GSK3 signaling , we assume that inhibition of mTOR following prolonged hypotonic exposure similar to rapamycin - induced mTOR inhibition increases VSOAC activity through limitation in the antioxidative capacity . We have previously shown that TauT mRNA abundance and TauT activity are signiﬁcantly reduced under hypoosmotic conditions in NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts ( 7 ) . As acute stimu - lation of PI3K / mTOR following osmotic cell swelling corre - lates with inhibition of TauT , and not a potentiation of TauT as expected from the rapamycin data , it is suggested that the acute regulation of TauT involves phosphorylation of protein kinases upstream to mTOR or an unrelated mechanism . On the other hand , in accordance with the rapamycin data , reduction of TauT following prolonged hypotonic conditions most probably involves reduction in expression and translocation of amino acid transporters or regulators of the transporters to the plasma membrane . As rapamycin exposure is accompanied by a re - duction in catalase mRNA abundance , it is suggested that an increased ROS availability contributes to reduction in TauT activity under hypoosmotic conditions . mTOR - taurine homeostasis following osmotic cell shrinkage . Osmotic cell shrinkage normally elicits net uptake of KCl and organic osmolytes to reverse cell shrinkage in a process entitled regulatory volume increase ( RVI ) and hence restore normal cell function ( 12 , 29 ) . Cells protect themselves from chronic hy - pertonic exposure through phosphorylation and activation of the cytosolic transcription regulator NFAT5 / TonEBP , which , via its translocation to the nucleus and binding to tonicity - responsive enhancer TonE , facilitates transcription of genes encoding transporters for taurine , myoinositol , and betaine and subsequent increase in the net accumulation of organic os - molytes ( 29 ) . mTOR facilitates , according to Ortells and co - workers ( 38 ) , transcription of several osmostress response genes including TonEBP by increasing histone H4 acetylation and hence recruitment of RNA - polymerase II . Thus increased mTOR activity seen in ELA cells exposed to prolonged hy - pertonic exposure ( Fig . 2 A ) could well reﬂect an increased mTOR - dependent TonEBP activity . During apoptosis , loss of KCl and amino acids exceeds the capacity of the RVI process , which results in severe loss of osmotic substances , cell shrinkage ( apoptotic volume de - creased ) , induction of caspase activity , and hence apoptosis ( 12 , 33 , 43 ) . In multidrug - and cisplatin - resistant EATC , the permeabilities toward taurine , K (cid:2) , and Cl (cid:4) are only moder - ately increased , and the unset of cisplatin - induced apoptosis was prevented and / or delayed following cisplatin exposure compared with cisplatin - sensitive EATC ( 43 ) . Furthermore , prevention of taurine loss protects human epithelium lung cells against hypoxia - induced apoptosis ( 13 ) , and functional TauT expression protects cells against cisplatin - induced apoptosis , presumably through an increased cellular preservation of or - ganic osmolytes and limitation in the initial drug - induced cell shrinkage ( 6 , 13 , 43 , 52 ) . In congruence with the observation with human trophoblasts by Roos and coworkers ( 46 ) , we demonstrate that mTOR ensures TauT mRNA abundance , TauT expression , and TauT activity in nonmalignant NIH3T3 and carcinoma ELA ﬁbroblasts . As the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin ensures a signiﬁcant activation of mTOR within 3 h in human ovarian cancer cells ( 41 ) , it is possible that increase in taurine release , cell shrinkage , and hence initiation of the apoptotic process , which in EATC occurs within the same time frame ( 43 ) , involves mTOR . Targeting mTOR with rapamycin would , not only prevent growth factor - induced cell growth along the growth factor receptor , PI3K , Akt , and mTOR axis , but also limit expression of functional TauT in the plasma membrane and hence favor initiation of apoptosis . In conclusion , mouse ﬁbroblasts reduce the cellular content of taurine following osmotic cell swelling by releasing taurine via VSOAC and concomitantly reducing taurine uptake via TauT . During acute hypotonic exposure , i . e . , within minutes Fig . 8 . mTOR mediated regulation of taurine accumu - lation via TauT and taurine release via the volume - sensitive leak pathway VSOAC . For acute hypoos - motic exposure , phospholipase A 2 ( PLA 2 ) and 5 - li - poxygenase ( 5 - LO ) activities are required for swelling - induced activation of VSOAC . Once acti - vated , VSOAC activity is potentiated by reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) , produced by a volume - sensi - tive NADPH oxidase ( NOX ) , and acting by inhibition of protein tyrosine phosphatase ( PTP ) activity and hence potentiation of protein tyrosine kinases ( PTK ) activity . ROS concomitantly reduce TauT activity . PI3K , Akt , and mTOR activities are activated within minutes following osmotic cell swelling , and PTEN antagonizes the effect . An increased mTOR or protein kinase upstream to mTOR activity favors net loss of taurine through potentiation of VSOAC and a con - comitant inhibition of TauT . For chronic hypoosmotic exposure , prolonged exposure to hypotonic conditions or rapamycin leads to reduced mTOR activity , re - duced catalase mRNA / TauT mRNA abundance , as well as reduced TauT expression / incorporation in the plasma membrane . Reduced catalase capacity is ac - companied by potentiation of VSOAC activity and reduction in TauT activity . C1038 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m following osmotic exposure , the shift in VSOAC and TauT activities correlates with increased mTOR activity and most probably reﬂects the effect of phosphorylation by mTOR and / or areas upstream to mTOR kinases . During chronic hy - potonic exposure , shift in VSOAC and TauT activities corre - lates with reduced mTOR activity and consequently reduction in expression / activity of TauT and enzymes involved in anti - oxidative defense . Under isotonic conditions and during chronic hypertonic exposure , where VSOAC is inactive , mTOR ensures taurine uptake by warranting transcription of the TauT gene , translation of TauT mRNA , and / or transloca - tion of TauT to the plasma membrane . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Dorthe Nielsen is acknowledged for technical assistance and Jane B . Johansen for performing PTEN Western blots for cells exposed to hypoos - motic conditions . GRANTS This work was supported by The Danish Council for Independent Research / Natural Sciences , The Danish Council for Independent Research / Medical Sciences , Brødrene Hartmanns Fond , and Fabrikant Einar Willumsens Mind - elegat . DISCLOSURES No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are declared by the authors . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Author contributions : I . H . L . and P . A . P . conception and design of research ; I . H . L . and J . V . J . performed experiments ; I . H . L . , J . V . J . , and P . A . P . analyzed data ; I . H . L . and P . A . P . interpreted results of experiments ; I . H . L . prepared ﬁgures ; I . H . L . drafted manuscript ; I . H . L . , J . V . J . , and P . A . P . edited and revised manuscript ; I . H . L . , J . V . J . , and P . A . P . approved ﬁnal version of manuscript . REFERENCES 1 . Bolduc D , Rahdar M , Tu - Sekine B , Sivakumaren SC , Raben D , Amzel LM , Devreotes P , Gabelli SB , Cole P . Phosphorylation - mediated PTEN conformational closure and deactivation revealed with protein semisyn - thesis . Elife 2 : e00691 , 2013 . 2 . Diaz - Elizondo J , Chiong M , Rojas - Rivera D , Olea - Azar C , Kwon HM , Lavandero S . Reactive oxygen species inhibit hyposmotic stress - depen - dent volume regulation in cultured rat cardiomyocytes . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 350 : 1076 – 1081 , 2006 . 3 . Elorza A , Soro - Arnaiz I , Melendez - Rodriguez F , Rodriguez - Vaello V , Marsboom G , de CG , Acosta - Iborra B , Albacete - Albacete L , Ordonez A , Serrano - Oviedo L , Gimenez - Bachs JM , Vara - Vega A , Salinas A , Sanchez - Prieto R , Martin del RR , Sanchez - Madrid F , Malumbres M , Landazuri MO , Aragones J . HIF2alpha acts as an mTORC1 activator through the amino acid carrier SLC7A5 . Mol Cell 48 : 681 – 691 , 2012 . 4 . Franco R , Lezama R , Ordaz B , Pasantes - Morales H . Epidermal growth factor receptor is activated by hyposmolarity and is an early signal modulating osmolyte efﬂux pathways in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Pﬂügers Arch 447 : 830 – 839 , 2004 . 5 . Friis MB , Vorum KG , Lambert IH . Volume - sensitive NADPH oxidase activity and taurine efﬂux in NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 294 : C1552 – C1565 , 2008 . 6 . Han X , Yue J , Chesney RW . Functional TauT protects against acute kidney injury . J Am Soc Nephrol 20 : 1323 – 1332 , 2009 . 7 . Hansen DB , Friis MB , Hoffmann EK , Lambert IH . Down - regulation of the taurine transporter TauT during hypoosmotic stress in NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts . J Membrane Biol 245 : 77 – 87 , 2012 . 8 . Hansen DB , Guerra B , Jacobsen JH , Lambert IH . Regulation of taurine homeostasis by protein kinase CK2 in mouse ﬁbroblasts . Amino Acids 40 : 1091 – 1106 , 2011 . 9 . Harding HP , Novoa I , Zhang Y , Zeng H , Wek R , Schapira M , Ron D . Regulated translation initiation controls stress - induced gene expression in mammalian cells . Mol Cell 6 : 1099 – 1108 , 2000 . 10 . Hay N , Sonenberg N . Upstream and downstream of mTOR . Genes Dev 18 : 1926 – 1945 , 2004 . 11 . Hoffmann EK , Lambert IH . Amino acid transport and cell volume regulation in Ehrlich ascites tumour cells . J Physiol 338 : 613 – 625 , 1983 . 12 . Hoffmann EK , Lambert IH , Pedersen SF . Physiology of cell volume regulation in vertebrates . Physiol Rev 89 : 193 – 277 , 2009 . 13 . Holm JB , Grygorczyk R , Lambert IH . Volume - sensitive release of organic osmolytes in the human lung epithelial cell line A . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 305 : C48 – C60 , 2013 . 14 . Huyer G , Liu S , Kelly J , Moffat J , Payette P , Kennedy B , Tsaprailis G , Gresser MJ , Ramachandran C . Mechanism of inhibition of protein - tyrosine phosphatases by vanadate and pervanadate . J Biol Chem 272 : 843 – 851 , 1997 . 15 . Ito T , Oishi S , Takai M , Kimura Y , Uozumi Y , Fujio Y , Schaffer SW , Azuma J . Cardiac and skeletal muscle abnormality in taurine transporter - knockout mice . J Biomed Sci 17 , Suppl 1 : S20 , 2010 . 16 . Jong CJ , Azuma J , Schaffer S . Mechanism underlying the antioxidant activity of taurine : prevention of mitochondrial oxidant production . Amino Acids 42 : 2223 – 2232 , 2011 . 17 . Jong CJ , Azuma J , Schaffer SW . Role of mitochondrial permeability transition in taurine deﬁciency - induced apoptosis . Exp Clin Cardiol 16 : 125 – 128 , 2011 . 18 . Jorgensen ST , Eriksen HN , Dausell J , Jespersen T , Lambert IH , Hoffmann EK . Double mutation at the putative protein kinase C phos - phorylation sites Thr151 plus Thr323 in the mouse leukotrieneD4 receptor eliminates homologous desensitization . Cell Physiol Biochem 31 : 366 – 378 , 2013 . 19 . Juul CA , Grubb S , Poulsen K , Kyed T , Hashem N , Lambert IH , Larsen EH , Hoffmann EK . Anoctamin 6 differs from VRAC and VSOAC but is involved in apoptosis and supports volume regulation in the presence of Ca 2 (cid:2) . Pﬂugers Arch . [ Epub ahead of print ] , doi : 10 . 1007 / s00424 - 013 - 1428 - 4 . 20 . Kim DH , Sarbassov DD , Ali SM , Latek RR , Guntur KV , Erdjument - Bromage H , Tempst P , Sabatini DM . GbetaL , a positive regulator of the rapamycin - sensitive pathway required for the nutrient - sensitive interaction between raptor and mTOR . Mol Cell 11 : 895 – 904 , 2003 . 21 . Kim E , Goraksha - Hicks P , Li L , Neufeld TP , Guan KL . Regulation of TORC1 by Rag GTPases in nutrient response . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 935 – 945 , 2008 . 22 . Kim RD , Roth TP , Darling CE , Ricciardi R , Schaffer BK , Chari RS . Hypoosmotic stress stimulates growth in HepG2 cells via protein kinase B - dependent activation of activator protein - 1 . J Gastrointest Surg 5 : 546 – 555 , 2001 . 23 . Korolchuk VI , Saiki S , Lichtenberg M , Siddiqi FH , Roberts EA , Imarisio S , Jahreiss L , Sarkar S , Futter M , Menzies FM , O’Kane CJ , Deretic V , Rubinsztein DC . Lysosomal positioning coordinates cellular nutrient responses . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 453 – 460 , 2011 . 24 . Kramer JH , Chovan JP , Schaffer SW . Effect of Taurine on Calcium Paradox and Ischemic Heart - Failure . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 240 : H238 – H246 , 1981 . 25 . Lambert IH . Regulation of the taurine content in Ehrlich ascites tumour cells . Adv Exp Med Biol 442 : 269 – 276 , 1998 . 26 . Lambert IH . Reactive oxygen species regulate swelling - induced taurine efﬂux in NIH3T3 mouse ﬁbroblasts . J Membr Biol 192 : 19 – 32 , 2003 . 27 . Lambert IH . Regulation of the cellular content of the organic osmolyte taurine in mammalian cells . Neurochem Res 29 : 27 – 63 , 2004 . 28 . Lambert IH . Activation and inactivation of the volume - sensitive taurine leak pathway in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts and Ehrlich Lettre acites cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 293 : C390 – C400 , 2007 . 29 . Lambert IH , Hansen DB . Regulation of taurine transport systems by protein kinase CK2 in Mammalian cells . Cell Physiol Biochem 28 : 1099 – 1110 , 2011 . 30 . Lambert IH , Hoffmann EK . Regulation of taurine transport in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells . J Membr Biol 131 : 67 – 79 , 1993 . 31 . Lambert IH , Hoffmann EK , Jorgensen F . Membrane potential , anion and cation conductances in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells . J Membr Biol 111 : 113 – 131 , 1989 . 32 . Lambert IH , Hoffmann EK , Pedersen SF . Cell volume regulation : Physiology and Pathophysiology . Acta Physiol Scand 194 : 255 – 282 , 2008 . 33 . Lang F . Mechanisms and signiﬁcance of cell volume regulation . J Am Coll Nutr 26 : 613S – 623S , 2007 . 34 . Li Y , Hu Z , Chen B , Bu Q , Lu W , Deng Y , Zhu R , Shao X , Hou J , Zhao J , Li H , Zhang B , Huang Y , Lv L , Zhao Y , Cen X . Taurine attenuates methamphetamine - induced autophagy and apoptosis in PC12 cells through mTOR signaling pathway . Toxicol Lett 215 : 1 – 7 , 2012 . 35 . Liu QR , Lopez - Corcuera B , Nelson H , Mandiyan S , Nelson N . Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding the transporter of taurine and C1039 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m beta - alanine in mouse brain . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89 : 12145 – 12149 , 1992 . 36 . Lowry OH , Rosebrough NJ , Farr AL , Randall RJ . Protein Measure - ment with the Folin Phenol Reagent . J Biol Chem 193 : 265 – 275 , 1951 . 37 . Nielsen MB , Christensen ST , Hoffmann EK . Effects of osmotic stress on the activity of MAP kinases and PDGFR - beta - mediated signal trans - duction in NIH3T3 - ﬁbroblasts . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 294 : C1046 – C1055 , 2008 . 38 . Ortells MC , Morancho B , Drews - Elger K , Viollet B , Laderoute KR , Lopez - Rodriguez C , Aramburu J . Transcriptional regulation of gene expression during osmotic stress responses by the mammalian target of rapamycin . Nucleic Acids Res 40 : 4368 – 4384 , 2012 . 39 . Ortenblad N , Young JF , Oksbjerg N , Nielsen JH , Lambert IH . Reactive oxygen species are important mediators of taurine release from skeletal muscle cells . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 284 : C1362 – C1373 , 2003 . 40 . Pedersen SF , Poulsen KA , Lambert IH . Roles of phospholipase A ( 2 ) isoforms in swelling - and melittin - induced arachidonic acid release and taurine efﬂux in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 291 : C1286 – C1296 , 2006 . 41 . Peng DJ , Wang J , Zhou JY , Wu GS . Role of the Akt / mTOR survival pathway in cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 394 : 600 – 605 , 2010 . 42 . Pinto W , Ronnestad I , Jordal AE , Gomes AS , Dinis MT , Aragao C . Cloning , tissue and ontogenetic expression of the taurine transporter in the ﬂatﬁsh Senegalese sole ( Solea senegalensis ) . Amino Acids 42 : 1317 – 1327 , 2012 . 43 . Poulsen KA , Andersen EC , Hansen CF , Klausen TK , Hougaard C , Lambert IH , Hoffmann EK . Deregulation of apoptotic volume decrease and ionic movements in multidrug - resistant tumor cells : role of chloride channels . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 298 : C14 – C25 , 2010 . 44 . Ramamoorthy S , Del Monte MA , Leibach FH , Ganapathy V . Molec - ular identity and calmodulin - mediated regulation of the taurine transporter in a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line . Curr Eye Res 13 : 523 – 529 , 1994 . 45 . Ren Z , Raucci FJ Jr , Browe DM , Baumgarten CM . Regulation of swelling - activated Cl ( - ) current by angiotensin II signalling and NADPH oxidase in rabbit ventricle . Cardiovasc Res 77 : 73 – 80 , 2008 . 46 . Roos S , Kanai Y , Prasad PD , Powell TL , Jansson T . Regulation of placental amino acid transporter activity by mammalian target of rapamy - cin . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 : C142 – C150 , 2009 . 47 . Rosario FJ , Kanai Y , Powell TL , Jansson T . Mammalian target of rapamycin signalling modulates amino acid uptake by regulating trans - porter cell surface abundance in primary human trophoblast cells . J Physiol 591 : 609 – 625 , 2013 . 48 . Sancak Y , Peterson TR , Shaul YD , Lindquist RA , Thoreen CC , Bar - Peled L , Sabatini DM . The Rag GTPases bind raptor and mediate amino acid signaling to mTORC1 . Science 320 : 1496 – 1501 , 2008 . 49 . Schwanhausser B , Busse D , Li N , Dittmar G , Schuchhardt J , Wolf J , Chen W , Selbach M . Global quantiﬁcation of mammalian gene expres - sion control . Nature 473 : 337 – 342 , 2011 . 50 . Sengupta S , Peterson TR , Sabatini DM . Regulation of the mTOR complex 1 pathway by nutrients , growth factors , and stress . Mol Cell 40 : 310 – 322 , 2010 . 51 . Smith KE , Borden LA , Wang CH , Hartig PR , Branchek TA , Wein - shank RL . Cloning and expression of a high afﬁnity taurine transporter from rat brain . Mol Pharmacol 42 : 563 – 569 , 1992 . 52 . Tastesen HS , Holm JB , Møller J , Poulsen KA , Møller C , Stürup S , Hoffmann EK , Lambert IH . Pinpointing differences in cisplatin - induced apoptosis in adherent and non - adherent cancer cells . Cell Physiol Biochem 26 : 809 – 820 , 2010 . 53 . Thoreen CC , Chantranupong L , Keys HR , Wang T , Gray NS , Saba - tini DM . A unifying model for mTORC1 - mediated regulation of mRNA translation . Nature 485 : 109 – 113 , 2012 . 54 . Uchida S , Kwon HM , Yamauchi A , Preston AS , Marumo F , Handler JS . Molecular cloning of the cDNA for an MDCK cell Na ( (cid:2) ) - and Cl ( - ) - dependent taurine transporter that is regulated by hypertonicity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89 : 8230 – 8234 , 1992 . 55 . Varela D , Simon F , Riveros A , Jorgensen F , Stutzin A . NAD ( P ) H oxidase - derived H2O2 signals chloride channel activation in cell volume regulation and cell proliferation . J Biol Chem 279 : 13301 – 13304 , 2004 . 56 . Voss JW , Pedersen SF , Christensen ST , Lambert IH . Regulation of the expression and subcellular localisation of the taurine transporter TauT in mouse NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Eur J Biochem 271 : 4646 – 4658 , 2004 . 57 . Wang GX , McCrudden C , Dai YP , Horowitz B , Hume JR , Yamboliev IA . Hypotonic activation of volume - sensitive outwardly rectifying chlo - ride channels in cultured PASMCs is modulated by SGK . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 287 : H533 – H544 , 2004 . 58 . Warskulat U , Heller - Stilb B , Oerman E , Zilles K , Hass H , Lang F , Häussinger D . Phenotype of the taurine transporter knockout mouse . In : Methods in Enzymology . Philadelphia , PA : Elsevier , 2007 , pp . 439 – 458 . 59 . Webster CR , Srinivasulu U , Ananthanarayanan M , Suchy FJ , Anwer MS . Protein kinase B / Akt mediates cAMP - and cell swelling - stimulated Na (cid:2) / taurocholate cotransport and Ntcp translocation . J Biol Chem 277 : 28578 – 28583 , 2002 . 60 . Zoncu R , Efeyan A , Sabatini DM . mTOR : from growth signal integra - tion to cancer , diabetes and ageing . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 : 21 – 35 , 2011 . C1040 mTOR REGULATES TAURINE TRANSPORTERS AJP - Cell Physiol • doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00005 . 2014 • www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 33 . 3 on J une 28 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m