Personal Information Management Caleb Ames i385Q October 13th , 2005 First , the applications . . . What do PIMs look like ? Elements of personal information management • Email • Files • Bookmarks • To - do lists • Calendars • Contact lists Elements of personal information management • Email • Files • Bookmarks • To - do lists • Calendars • Contact lists This week ’ s readings focus on the ﬁ rst three of these . Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? DESKTOP METAPHOR — ARISE ! Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? DESKTOP METAPHOR — ARISE ! . . . or rather , what does the organization of physical desks imply for computer - based information management built upon a desktop metaphor ? Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? • People organize their desks to remind themselves of things . • Categorizing things is hard , and a ﬀ ects how people organize their documents . TWO MAJOR FINDINGS Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? • ﬁ les : things that are explicitly titled and arranged . • piles : things that are like . . . whatever . They may be unnamed and unarranged . UNITS OF DESK ORGANIZATION Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? UNITS OF DESK ORGANIZATION • ﬁ les : things that are explicitly titled and arranged . • piles : things that are like . . . whatever . They may be unnamed and unarranged . “ It may be desirable to incorporate the possibility of untitled piles in computer - based information systems . ” Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? Remember , categorizing information is hard . How can computers help ? Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? • Overcome physical burdens • avoid the mechanical di ﬃ culties of creating classi ﬁ cations • Overcome cognitive burdens • multiple classi ﬁ cations • deferred classi ﬁ cation • automatic classi ﬁ cation Computers can help the user to Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? • Multiple classi ﬁ cations – we ’ ll see this again . . . often teamed with information retrieval and called “ views ” or “ aspects ” • Deferred classi ﬁ cation – store it in a pile on the desktop • Automatic classi ﬁ cation – the de facto standard for email , called “ sorting ” Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? “ One can even imagine a system where users search for a document by a kind of simulated time - lapse photography of the history of their electronic desktop . They could ‘ rewind ’ and ‘ fast forward ’ the desktop to locate the last time the desired document was on the desk . ” We ’ ll see this again , too . Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? What about the reminding function of the desktop ? Malone ( 1983 ) , How do peopl e organize their desks ? Just make a place to dump stu ﬀ where it ’ ll remain in view ! What about the reminding function of the desktop ? Freeman , Gelernter ( 1996 ) , Lifestreams : A Storage Model for Personal Data 1 . The desktop metaphor is weak 2 . Named ﬁ les and hierarchical directories are obsolete Freeman , Gelernter ( 1996 ) , Lifestreams : A Storage Model for Personal Data The solution is a time - ordered stream of documents as an underlying storage system , organized by stream ﬁ lters . These are Lifestreams . Freeman , Gelernter ( 1996 ) , Lifestreams : A Storage Model for Personal Data 1 . Storage should be transparent 2 . Directories are inadequate as an organizing device 3 . Archiving should be automatic 4 . The system should provide sophisticated logic for summarizing / compressing / picturing / animating large groups of related documents 5 . Computers should make “ reminding ” convenient 6 . Personal data should be accessible anywhere and compatibility should be automatic The manifesto : Freeman , Gelernter ( 1996 ) , Lifestreams : A Storage Model for Personal Data “ Time is a natural guide to experience ; it is the attribute that comes closest to a universal skeleton - key for stored experience . ” Chronological streams provide historical context , a place for present work , and an attractive reminder mechanism , “ future creation ” . Kaplan et al ( 1990 ) , Agenda : A personal information manager This is the program that created the category . What sort of database do you need to manage personal information ? Boardman , Sasse , Spence ( 2002 ) , Life beyond the mailbox : a cross - tool perspective on personal information managemen t Boardman , Sasse ( 2004 ) , Stu ﬀ goes into the computer and doesn ’t come out . • They ﬁ nd certain tools are overloaded . • How does a small subset of British scholars organize its information ? ( they are very sensitive about their organization ) • They test WorkspaceMirror , developed because of their observations of “ folder overlap . ” Jones , Bruce , Dumais ( 2001 ) , Keeping found things found on the web . • Their study participants tended to not use bookmarks because they had di ﬃ culty remembering their context or relevance , or because they are not easily portable . • They preferred to ﬁ nd ﬁ les based on their location . The participants hated search , and would only use it as a last result . Two points of interest : Any questions or obser vations ?