Developmental Cell Article A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization David M . Bryant , 1 , 3 Julie Roignot , 1 Anirban Datta , 1 Arend W . Overeem , 1 Minji Kim , 1 Wei Yu , 1 Xiao Peng , 1 Dennis J . Eastburn , 1 Andrew J . Ewald , 1 , 4 Zena Werb , 1 and Keith E . Mostov 1 , 2 , * 1 Department of Anatomy , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94158 - 2140 , USA 2 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94158 - 2140 , USA 3 Present address : CRUK Beatson Institute for Cancer Research , University of Glasgow , Glasgow G61 1BD , UK 4 Present address : Department of Cell Biology , Center for Cell Dynamics , Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MD 21205 , USA * Correspondence : keith . mostov @ ucsf . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 SUMMARY The formation of epithelial tissues containing lumens requires not only the apical - basolateral polarization of cells , but also the coordinated orientation of this polarity such that the apical surfaces of neighboring cells all point toward the central lumen . Defects in extracellular matrix ( ECM ) signaling lead to inverted polarity so that the apical surfaces face the surround - ing ECM . We report a molecular switch mechanism controlling polarity orientation . ECM signals through a b 1 - integrin / FAK / p190RhoGAP complex to down - regulate a RhoA / ROCK / Ezrin pathway at the ECM interface . PKC b II phosphorylates the apical iden - tity - promoting Podocalyxin / NHERF1 / Ezrin complex , removing Podocalyxin from the ECM - abutting cell surface and initiating its transcytosis to an apical membrane initiation site for lumen formation . Inhibi - tion of this switch mechanism results in the retention of Podocalyxin at the ECM interface and the devel - opment instead of collective front - rear polarization and motility . Thus , ECM - derived signals control the morphogenesis of epithelial tissues by controlling the collective orientation of epithelial polarization . INTRODUCTION The most fundamental type of tissue is epithelium , where in the simplest case a monolayer of cells lines a cavity or surface . Epithelial cells have an apical ( AP ) plasma membrane ( PM ) facing the lumen or free surface , a lateral PM touching adjacent cells , and a basal PM contacting underlying extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . The AP - basolateral ( BL ) polarity of each cell has a spe - ciﬁc orientation , and this orientation is coordinated between cells to form the tissue ( e . g . , in a hollow tube the AP PMs of neighboring cells are radially polarized around a central lumen ) . How the polarity of cells is oriented is a fundamental , yet largely unanswered , question . The interaction of cells with ECM and other cells provides spatial cues to localize the BL PM ( Bryant and Mostov , 2008 ) . During morphogenesis of hollow organs , a lumen surrounded by AP PM often forms de novo at the center of a solid mass of cells . As a model to study this , we use MDCK cells grown as hol - low cysts in 3D gels of Matrigel , a type of ECM . When single MDCK cells are plated in Matrigel , some of their AP PM proteins , such as Podocalyxin / gp135 ( Podxl ) , are found at the PM in con - tact with the ECM . After the ﬁrst division , the doublets have two PM domains , a cell - cell contact and an ECM - abutting surface . The orientation of polarity at this stage is termed ‘‘inverted , ’’ in that Podxl and some other AP PM proteins are found only at the peripheral , ECM - abutting PM . As the cyst develops , polarity reorients and these AP proteins relocalize , typically at the two - cell stage , to a centrally located patch of existing cell - cell con - tact , called the AP membrane initiation site ( AMIS ) . The AMIS is converted into a nascent AP PM , containing Podxl and other AP proteins ( Bryant et al . , 2010 ; Ferrari et al . , 2008 ) , followed by its expansion to become a mature lumen . A similar process occurs in the developing mouse dorsal aorta , where Podxl is targeted to an AMIS - like patch and stabilized by the Ezrin - Radixin - Moesin ( ERM ) family protein Moesin , at cell - cell con - tacts to initiate de novo AP PM formation . This reorientation of polarity , which mirrors aspects of in vivo lumen formation , makes MDCK cystogenesis an appealingly simple system to study how the orientation of epithelial polarity is controlled . MDCK cysts with loss of Rac1 function fail to reorient , so that cysts retain Podxl and other AP proteins at the ECM - abutting periphery and lumens fail to form ( O’Brien et al . , 2001 ) . This was an early clue that establishment of epithelial polarity could be separated from orientation of polarity . Blockade of b 1 - integrin or perturbation of the Rac1 effector , Pak1 , similarly prevents re - orientation , leaving cysts in an inverted state ( deLeon et al . , 2012 ; Yu et al . , 2005 ) . Such abnormal inversion can be prevented by simultaneous RhoA - ROCKI pathway inhibition ( Yu et al . , 2008 ) . Inmultipleintestinalatresiapatients , mutationintetratrico - peptide repeat domain - 7A ( TTC7A ) similarly causes an inversion of enterocyte polarity ; treatment with a ROCK inhibitor rescues normal polarity orientation of enterocytes in 3D culture ( Bigorgne et al . , 2014 ) . These data suggested that polarity reorientation is controlled by a pathway involving integrins , TTC7A , and the antagonism between the Rac1 and RhoA GTPases , although how these pathways interface to control orientation is largely un - known . Inmammaryepitheliain3D , however , Rac1appearstobe dispensable , and an integrin - linked kinase ( ILK ) - microtubule pathway is instead utilized ( Akhtar and Streuli , 2013 ) . Cell - or tissue - type differences in polarization may therefore exist . Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 1 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 ( legend on next page ) Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 2 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 Work from many laboratories has analyzed how the AP PM is constructed de novo . Podxl and several other AP proteins are endocytosed from the ECM - abutting periphery and transcy - tosed to the AMIS . This vesicular transport pathway uses many components , including several Rab GTPases and their effec - tors , microtubules and the Cdc42 / Par polarity complex ( Akhtar and Streuli , 2013 ; Apodaca et al . , 2012 ) . Podxl is not only one of the earliest AP proteins delivered to the AMIS , but is also essential for building the AP PM and lumen ( Datta et al . , 2011 ; Strili (cid:1) c et al . , 2009 ) . The heavily glycosylated Podxl extracellular domain acts as an ‘‘anti - adhesin’’ ( Strili (cid:1) c et al . , 2010 ) , inciting membrane repulsion between neighboring cells , thereby gener - ating the intracellular space that gives rise to the lumen . Neutral - ization of this electrostatic charge , or genetic deletion of Podxl , attenuates mouse aorta lumen formation ( Strili (cid:1) c et al . , 2009 ) , Zebraﬁsh pronephros development ( Ichimura et al . , 2013 ) , and induces podocyte slit diaphragm effacement in vivo ( Takeda et al . , 2000 ; Takeda et al . , 2001 ) . Podxl null mice display profound kidney development defects and perinatal lethality ( Doyonnas et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , the vectorial targeting and stabi - lization of Podxl at the AMIS is a crucial event in building a lumen - containing tissue . These advances focus attention on the key question of how orientation is determined . Speciﬁcally , what controls the reorien - tation of polarity , so that Podxl and other AP PM proteins are removed from the peripheral PM and delivered to the AMIS to construct the AP PM and lumen de novo ? Here , we elucidate the molecular mechanism that mediates the ECM - directed reor - ientation of polarity in the MDCK cyst model . RESULTS b 1 - Integrin Controls Apical Polarity Orientation by a RhoA - Suppressive Mechanism To identify the ECM - derived signals that direct lumen formation , we examined b 1 - integrins . At the initially inverted , 2 - cell stage , GFP - tagged ( Figure 1A ) , or endogenous Podxl ( Figure S1A avail - able online ) localized to the ECM - abutting periphery . In contrast , b 1 - integrin was not detected at the ECM interface , instead local - izing to cell - cell contacts ( Figure S1A , white arrowheads ) . As cysts developed , polarity reoriented . Podxl was internalized from the periphery and delivered to the nascent lumen . Concom - itantly , b 1 - integrin now localized to the BL PM , with the active form of b 1 - integrin enriching at the ECM interface ( Figures 1A and S1A , yellow arrowheads ) . Inhibition of b 1 - integrin function with either blocking anti - bodies ( Figures S1B and S1C , + AIIB2 ) or stable depletion ( Fig - ures 1B – 1D and S1D – S1H ) blocked the normal reorientation of polarity , so that inverted polarity persisted . Podxl was retained at the ECM - abutting periphery on part of a signiﬁcant number of cysts ( Figures 1B , yellow arrowheads , 1D , S1C , and S1G ) , although some rudimentary lumens formed . This retention of inversion was not complete , in that in a portion of the multicellular aggregates BL proteins localized at the ECM - abutting PM . Notably , b 1 - integrin inhibition did not induce complete absence of polarity in these multicellular structures , as indicated by the cortical asymmetry of Podxl and b - catenin ( Figures 1B and S1D , arrows ) . This conﬁguration has some features of the ‘‘front - rear’’ polarity of migrating neutrophils , with a pseu - dopod - like ‘‘front’’ and a uropod - like ‘‘rear’’ ( Bryant and Mostov , 2008 ) , although here this was on a multicellular scale . Note that even when b 1 - integrin was not perturbed , a small baseline of cysts ( 6 % ± 2 % ) exhibited this front - rear polarity . Loss of b 1 - in - tegrin function also perturbed normal cyst formation as indicated by decreased single lumen formation ( SLF ) ( Figures 1C , S1B , and S1F ) . We therefore scored two types of polarity throughout this study : peripheral Podxl , indicating inverted or front - rear polarity ; and SLF , indicating coordinated orientation of AP - BL polarity between neighboring cells to form a central lumen . These phenotypes occurred with duplicate b 1 - integrin small hairpin RNAs ( shRNAs ) ( Figures S1E – S1G ) and were reversed by coexpression of RNAi - resistant b 1 - integrin - GFP ( Figures 1B – 1D and S1H ) , which localized to BL membranes ( Figures 1B and S1A ) . Conversely , overexpression of b 1 - integrin ( wild - type [ WT ] ) ( Figures 1C , 1D , and S1H ) , or to a greater extent an autoclustered ‘‘active’’ mutant ( V737N ) ( Paszek et al . , 2005 ) , increased rates of SLF , and reduced the baseline of front - rear polarized aggregates to below that in control cysts ( Figures S1I – S1K ) . b 1 - integrin depletion also resulted in decreased expression of both a 2 - and a 3 - integrins ( Figure S1E ) and deple - tion of either a - integrin mirrored the perturbation of SLF and development of front - rear polarity seen upon b 1 - integrin deple - tion ( Figures S1D – S1G ) . Thus b 1 - integrin , likely as a 2 b 1 and a 3 b 1 pairs , is not necessary for cell polarization per se , but instead controls the type of polarity , reorienting cells from initially inverted to lumen - containing cysts . Figure 1 . b 1 - Integrins Promote Luminal Polarity and Constrain Long - Range Motility in Cysts ( A ) GFP - Podxl , active b 1 - integrin and nuclei localization during progression from initially inverted ( 12 hr ) to open lumen cysts ( 48 hr ) . Arrowheads , basal . In all instances , bottom panels are higher magniﬁcation of split color images from boxed regions . Scale bars represent 20 m m ( unless otherwise indicated ) . ( B ) Parental or b 1 - integrin - GFP - expressing cysts with control or b 1 - integrin knockdown ( KD ) stained for Podxl and b - catenin . Arrows , AP ; yellow arrowheads , peripheral . All cysts , 48 hr after plating , unless otherwise indicated . ( C and D ) Quantitation SLF ( C ) or peripheral Podxl ( D ) ( see Experimental Procedures ) upon b 1 - integrin manipulation in parental ( MDCK ) or b 1 - integrin - GFP cells ( mean±SD , n R 100cysts / condition / experiment , threeindependentexperiments ) . Blackbars , scrambleshRNA ; whitebars b 1 - integrinKD . Inallinstances , thereddottedlineisthethresholdconsideredforapositivehit ( SLF , < 75 % ofcontrol ; peripheralPodxl , R 4 - foldchangeovercontrol ) . * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * p > 0 . 0001 . ( E ) Still frames of phase - contrast imaging of control or b 1 - integrin - inhibited ( + AIIB2 ) cysts ( time indicated from time - lapse ( every 15 min from 3 – 169 hr after plating ) ) . Cyst outlines were traced from every 12 hr from 3 – 135 hr , indicated by alternating color . Arrows , collective front . ( F ) Active FAK ( pY397 ) , total FAK , or GAPDH levels from total cell lysates of cysts without ( control ) or with ( AIIB2 ) b 1 - integrin inhibition . ( G ) Control or FAK - depleted cysts stained for Podxl , b - catenin and nuclei . Arrows , peripheral . ( H and I ) Quantitation of SLF ( H ) or peripheral Podxl ( I ) upon control or FAK depletion , with or without Y - 27632 ( 10 m M ) inhibition ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . Black bars , scramble shRNA ; white bars , b 1 - integrin KD . See also Figure S1 and Movie S1 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 3 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 ( legend on next page ) Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 4 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 To determine whether the potential collective front - rear polar - ization we observed corresponded to migratory behaviors , we performed long - term time - lapse imaging of control and b 1 - integ - rin - inhibited cysts ( Figure 1E ; Movie S1 ) . Time - lapse movies and tracing of cell / cyst outlines every 12 hr over 6 days revealed that initially both control and b 1 - integrin - inhibited ( + AIIB2 ) cyst structures are motile ( Figure 1E ) . Control cell aggregates quickly ( % 39 hr after plating ) lost such motility concomitant with morphogenesis to form spherical cysts ( Movie S1 , left ) , close to their initial observation site ( Figure 1E , cyst trace ) . In contrast , b 1 - integrin - inhibited cysts migrated throughout the ﬁeld of view , displaying long - range collective motility , often colliding to form large , irregularly shaped aggregates ( Figure 1A ; Movie S1 , right ) . Compared to controls , a fan - shaped collective leading edge - like structure was often visible at the ‘‘front’’ of b 1 - integrin - perturbed cysts ( Figure 1E , arrows ) , similar to the localization of Podxl in ﬁxed images ( Figure 1B , yellow arrowheads ) . These data sug - gest that b 1 - integrins are required to suppress long - range , potentially front - rear polarized collective motility . b 1 - integrin inhibition ( + AIIB2 ) markedly decreased activation of the b 1 - integrin effector FAK ( Figure 1F , pY397 ) . FAK deple - tion mimicked b 1 - integrin loss , decreasing SLF and markedly increasing the number of cysts with peripheral Podxl labeling ( Figures 1G , arrows , 1H , and 1I ) . One function of b 1 - integrin in 3D culture is to suppress RhoA GTPase activation ( Yu et al . , 2008 ) . Accordingly , inhibition of the RhoA effector ki - nases ROCKI / II ( + Y - 27632 , 10 m M ) in FAK - depleted cysts signiﬁcantly rescued SLF and decreased the incidence of cysts with peripheral Podxl ( Figures 1H and 1I ) . Thus , b 1 - integrin / FAK signaling controls AP - BL polarity by repressing RhoA - ROCK activation . FAK controls ﬁbroblast polarity by regulating formation of an adhesion complex containing the RhoA GAP p190A ( Tomar et al . , 2009 ) ; FAK - dependent p190A phosphorylation ( pY1105 ) is required for p190A association with the complex . FAK deple - tion abolished p190A phosphorylation ( pY1105 ; Figure S2A ) . Depletion of p190A signiﬁcantly disrupted SLF and signiﬁcantly increased the prevalence of cysts with peripheral Podxl , which could be robustly enhanced by coexpression of FAK phosphor - ylation - deﬁcient , RNAi - resistant p190A ( GFP - p190A Y1105F ; Figures S2B – S2E ) . Together , these data indicate a b 1 - integrin / FAK / p190A module is required to switch the orientation of polarization from a largely inverted conﬁguration to formation of a single lumen by repressing RhoA signaling . RhoA - ROCKI - Ezrin Signaling Is Necessary and Sufﬁcient for Collective Front - Rear Polarization We next examined the necessity and sufﬁciency of RhoA - ROCKI for maintaining inversion , thereby producing collective front - rear polarization . Corroborating our previous data ( Yu et al . , 2008 ) , both RhoA and ROCKI were dispensable for SLF ( Figures 2A and S2F – S2I ) , with robust depletion of ROCKI even slightly increasing SLF , similar to ROCK inhibition studies ( Ferrari et al . , 2008 ) . In stark contrast , RhoA or ROCKI depletion signiﬁ - cantly decreased the low baseline of front - rear polarization ( Figures 2B , hash symbol , and S2I ) . Moreover , in b 1 - integrin - in - hibited cysts , simultaneous RhoA depletion partially rescued SLF , attenuated front - rear polarization ( Figures 2A – 2C ) , and abolished the appearance of phase - dark ECM ‘‘tracks’’ that occurred near b 1 - integrin - inhibited cysts ( Figures S2J and S2K , yellow arrowheads ) . The incomplete rescue of SLF may be due to lack of other b 1 - integrin effector pathway activation , such as Rac1 - PAK1 ( deLeon et al . , 2012 ; Yu et al . , 2005 ) or an ILK - microtubule pathway ( Akhtar and Streuli , 2013 ) . These data reveal a necessity for RhoA - ROCKI in front - rear , but not for AP - BL polarization . b 1 - integrin inhibition in 3D cyst cultures causes a marked upregulation of global RhoA GTP loading ( Yu et al . , 2008 ) . Coex - pression of GFP - RhoA and a Cherry - tagged Rho - GTP - binding - domain ( Cherry - RBD ) construct to indicate RhoA - GTP localiza - tion ( Murakoshi et al . , 2011 ) revealed a sub - AP pool , below luminal Podxl labeling in control cysts ( Figures 2D , control , white arrowheads , and 2E ) . In b 1 - integrin - inhibited cysts , GFP - RhoA instead localized to cell - cell contacts ( Figure 2D , arrows ) and intracellular compartments , but ‘‘active’’ RhoA only became apparent at the ECM interface , now coincident with Podxl labeling ( Figures 2D , yellow arrowheads , and 2F ) . Combined GFP - RhoA overexpression / b 1 - integrin inhibition resulted in the complete inversion , rather than front - rear polarization of cysts , precluding detection of any potential front - rear RhoA - GTP Figure 2 . A RhoA - Ezrin Pathway Is Necessary and Sufﬁcient for Front - Rear , but Not Luminal AP - BL , Polarity ( A and B ) Quantitation of cyst SLF ( A ) or peripheral Podxl ( B ) , upon control or b 1 - integrin inhibition ( + AIIB2 ) , with scramble ( black bars ) or RhoA ( white bars ) KD ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . Hash symbol , value approaching zero . ( C ) Cysts with scramble or RhoA KD stained for Podxl , b - catenin , and nuclei . ( D ) Controlor b 1 - integrin - inhibited ( + AIIB2 ) cystscoexpressingGFP - RhoAandCherry - tagged - RBDstainedforPodxl . Whitearrowheads , AP ; yellowarrowheads , peripheral ; arrows , lateral ; asterisks , nuclei . Right panels : higher magniﬁcation of split - color images from boxed regions . Yellow arrows , line - scan region for ( E ) and ( F ) . ( E and F ) Quantitation of pixel intensity from line - scan regions in control ( E ) or AIIB2 - treated ( F ) cysts . ( G ) Cysts with repressed ( + Dox ) or induced ( (cid:1) Dox ) RhoA G14V expression stained for Podxl , pERM , and Scribble . Arrowheads , AP ; arrows , BL . ( H ) RhoA ( upper band , myc - tagged RhoA G14V ) , pERM , total Ezrin , and GAPDH levels from total cell lysates of cysts without ( + DOX ) or with ( (cid:1) Dox ) myc - RhoA G14V expression . ( I and J ) Quantitation of cysts with SLF ( I ) or peripheral Podxl ( J ) upon RhoA G14V repression ( + Dox ) or expression ( (cid:1) Dox ) ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . ( K ) b 1 - integrin , pERM , total Ezrin , and GAPDH expression from total cell lysates of cysts expressing scramble or b 1 - integrin KD . ( L ) Cysts without ( control ) or with ( + AIIB2 ) b 1 - integrin inhibition stained for Ezrin , pERM and nuclei . Yellow arrows , luminal ; arrows , peripheral . ( M ) Cysts coexpressing Ezrin shRNA and RNAi - resistant GFP - Ezrin T567D stained for Podxl and nuclei . Right panels : higher magniﬁcation of split red and green images from numbered , boxed regions . ( N and O ) Quantitation of SLF ( N ) or peripheral Podxl ( O ) upon control ( scramble shRNA ) or Ezrin shRNA / RNAi - resistant GFP - Ezrin T567D coexpression ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . See also Figure S2 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 5 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 Figure 3 . Podxl - NHERF - ERM Tail Interactions Are Required for AP - BL Polarization ( A ) Podxl , NHERF1 , andnucleilocalizationduringlumenformation ( 12 – 48hr ) . Whitearrowheads , peripheral ; arrows , vesicular ; yellowarrowheads , luminal . AMIS , AP membrane initiation site ; PAP , pre - AP patch . ( legend continued on next page ) Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 6 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 gradient . Despite this , these data suggest that b 1 - integrins are necessary to suppress the inappropriate activation of RhoA at the ECM interface during AP - BL polarization . To test the sufﬁciency of RhoA in promoting front - rear polarization , we examined cysts with Tetracycline - repressible ( Tet - OFF ) constitutively activate RhoA expression ( myc - RhoA G14V ) ( Jou and Nelson , 1998 ) . In the presence of the Tet analog Doxycycline ( Figures 2G and 2H , + Dox ) RhoA G41V was sup - pressed and luminal polarity formed with BL localization of the polarity protein Scribble ( Figure 2G , arrow ) , and luminal localization of Podxl and the Podxl - interacting , RhoA - ROCK substrates , phosphorylated ERM proteins ( Schmieder et al . , 2004 ) ( Figure 2G , pERM , white arrowheads ) . Induction of myc - RhoA G14V ( Figure 2H ; (cid:1) DOX ) strongly perturbed SLF ( Figure 2I ) and induced frank front - rear polarization , with AP Podxl at the front ( arrowheads ) and BL Scribble at the rear ( Figures 2G , arrows , 2H , and 2J ) . Notably , RhoA activation re - sulted in a strong upregulation of pERM ( Figure 2H , (cid:1) Dox ) , which became preferentially apically enriched ( Figure 2G , (cid:1) Dox ) , although some pERM was detected at cell - cell con - tacts , likely representing ectopic , global RhoA activation . Similarly , perturbation of b 1 - integrin resulted in robust pERM upregulation ( Figure 2K ) , which colocalized completely with Ezrin to the ECM - abutting periphery ( Figure 2L , white arrows ) , instead of at the lumen in control cysts ( yellow arrows ) . In contrast , we detected no speciﬁc AP or ‘‘front’’ enrichment of another major RhoA - ROCK effector , the Myosin - 2 light chain , which localized to all cortical domains of b 1 - integrin - inhibited cysts ( Figure S2L ) . These data suggest that asymmetric activa - tion and localization of Ezrin , downstream of RhoA - ROCKI , may control front - rear polarization . To directly dissect this possibility , we stably depleted Ezrin in cells expressing an RNAi - resistant phosphomimetic ROCK - site mutant of Ezrin ( Ezrin - GFP T567D ) . Compared to controls , phos - phomimetic Ezrin , which was enriched at the ‘‘front’’ of cysts with Podxl ( Figure 2M , box 1 ) , although also localizing to a lesser degree at cell - cell contacts and the ‘‘rear’’ of cysts ( Figure 2M , box 2 ) , signiﬁcantly lowered SLF ( Figure 2N ) , and robustly induced front - rear polarization ( Figures 2M and 2O ) . Taken together , these data indicate that RhoA - ROCK signaling pro - motes front - rear polarization by retaining Podxl localization at the ECM - abutting PM of part of aggregates . The Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin Complex Is Essential for AP - BL Polarization Ezrin phosphorylation ( pT567 ) releases autoinhibition , thereby activating Ezrin . NHERF - 1 / Ezrin - binding protein - 50 ( EBP50 ) is a dual PDZ domain - containing scaffold for numerous AP pro - teins ( Fehon et al . , 2010 ) . Active Ezrin associates with and sta - bilizes the AP localization of a complex of Podxl and NHERF1 , the latter two of which also directly interact through a PDZ - bind - ing motif ( PBM ) - PDZ domain interaction ( Fukasawa et al . , 2011 ; Schmieder et al . , 2004 ) . RhoA - ROCK signaling may therefore stabilize the Podxl complex at the ECM - abutting PM by locally increasing the pool of active ERM proteins . We thus examined the dynamics of the Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin complex during cys - togenesis ( 12 – 24 hr ) . At the initially inverted , 2 - cell stage Podxl localized to the ECM - abutting surface , where it colocalized strongly with NHERF1 , pERM , and Ezrin ( Figures 3A and S3A , white arrowheads ; data not shown ) . During the internalization and transcytosis stages of lumenogenesis , NHERF1 and pERM no longer colocalized with Podxl , now in vesicles ( vesi - cles / AMIS stage ) ; NHERF1 become cytoplasmic , before all three molecules recolocalized at the early forming ( pre - apical patch [ PAP ] ) , and then open , lumen ( Figures 3A and S3A , yellow arrowhead ) . A pool of pERM also transiently localized to the BL PM during Podxl transcytosis ( Figure S3A , PAP , white arrows ) . This suggests that Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin colocalize at the cell cortex , whether this be the ECM - abutting periphery or at the nascent lumen . The complex disassembles during polarity reorientation . We examined the function of Podxl in lumenogenesis . Podxl depletion strongly perturbed SLF ( Figure S3B ) , resulting in poorly formed or multiple lumens ( Figure 3B ) , which was rescued by RNAi - resistant GFP - Podxl coexpression ( Figures 3C – 3E ) . In contrast to the robust AP localization of NHERF1 , Ezrin , and pERM in control cysts ( Figure 3B , arrows ) , Podxl depletion redis - tributed a pool of NHERF1 to the cytoplasm and Ezrin / pERM to the BL PM ( Figure 3B , arrowheads ) , similar to their relocalization observed during Podxl transcytosis ( Figure 3A ) . Podxl depletion also disrupted the normally luminal localization of additional AP proteins , Crumbs3a , Syntaxin - 3a , and CNT1 , which instead localized to Rab11a - positive vesicles beneath a presumptive AMIS ( Figures S3A , S3C , and S3D , yellow arrowheads ) . Thus , Podxl is crucial for lumen formation and the AP localization of several proteins , including NHERF1 and Ezrin . We observed that interaction with NHERF and ERM proteins was required for Podxl localization and AP - BL polarization . Expression of Podxl deﬁcient in binding to either NHERF ( PBM * ) ( Figure S3E ) or ERM ( FERM - binding motif mutant [ FBM * ] ) proteins ( Li et al . , 2002 ; Schmieder et al . , 2004 ) resulted in signiﬁcantly decreased SLF , which was enhanced by codeple - tion of endogenous Podxl ( Figures 3C – 3E ) . AP targeting of both Podxl and Ezrin required the Podxl PBM . Upon Podxl PBM * expression , Ezrin and PBM - deﬁcient Podxl localized to all cortical domains ( white arrowheads ) and PBM - deﬁcient Podxl additionally to intracellular vesicles , some of which were quite large ( Figure 3E , yellow arrowheads ) . In contrast , direct Ezrin interaction ( uncoupled by FBM * mutant ) was required for the SLF - promoting function of Podxl , but not the AP targeting of ( B ) Control ( scramble KD ) or Podxl KD cysts stained for nuclei and either ( top ) NHERF1 and Scribble , or ( bottom ) Ezrin and pERM . Arrows , luminal ; arrowheads , lateral . ( C ) Cartoon of GFP - Podxl domains and motifs . WT , wild - type ; FBM * , FERM - binding motif mutant ; PBM , PDZ - binding motif mutant . ( D ) Quantitation of SLF in control ( white bars ) or Podxl KD ( black bars ) cysts without or with indicated RNAi - resistant GFP - Podxl domain mutant expression ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . ( E ) Cysts coexpressing Podxl KD and GFP - Podxl ( green ) wild - type ( WT ) or domain mutants stained for either ( left two panels ) F - actin and nuclei , or ( right two panels ) Ezrin and b - catenin . Arrows , luminal ; yellow arrowheads , vesicular ; white arrowheads , lateral . See also Figure S3 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 7 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 ( legend on next page ) Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 8 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 either Ezrin or Podxl ( Figures 3D , arrows , and 3E ) . Expression of Podxl lacking both the FBM and PBM ( Podxl FBM * / PBM * ) was nonfunctional : it localized to subapical vesicles ( yellow arrow - heads ) , failed to rescue the BL mistargeting of Ezrin upon endog - enous Podxl depletion ( white arrowheads ) , and had no effect on SLF rates in either scramble or Podxl shRNA - expressing cysts ( Figures 3C – 3E ) . Thus , the entire Podxl - NHERF - ERM complex is required for mutual AP recruitment and cyst AP - BL polarity . Podxl interacts with NHERF1 / 2 ( Li et al . , 2002 ; Schmieder et al . , 2004 ) . We previously identiﬁed both as required for SLF ( Ga´lvez - Santisteban et al . , 2012 ) . ShRNAs to either NHERF signiﬁcantly reduced SLF , with the greatest effect upon deple - tion of both , leading to vesicular Podxl accumulation ( Figures 4A , yellow arrowheads , 4B , S3F , and S3G ) . This suggests nonre - dundant roles for NHERF1 / 2 , which was supported by their differing localizations . NHERF1 colocalized with Podxl only at the PM , whether at the ECM - abutting surface or the AMIS / lumen ( Figures 4C and S3H , white arrowheads ) . In contrast , NHERF2 only colocalized with Podxl during transcytosis in Rab11a - posi - tive vesicles ( Figures 4C and S3H , yellow arrowheads ) . Depletion of NHERF1 redistributed Podxl to NHERF2 - positive vesicles ( Figure 4C ) . Conversely , NHERF2 depletion redistributed a pool of NHERF1 to Podxl - positive vesicles . Domain mapping of NHERF1 conﬁrmed that Podxl interacts with NHERF1 PDZ domain 2 ( PDZ2 ) ( Takeda et al . , 2001 ) ( Figure 4D ) . While both NHERF1 PDZ domains and NHERF - ERM interaction were required for SLF , the Podxl - interacting PDZ2 and FERM domain were required for efﬁcient NHERF1 AP targeting ( Figures 4E – 4G ) . Thus , NHERF - 1 and NHERF - 2 function with Podxl in distinct locations . A ternary Podxl / NHERF1 / ERM complex functions at the AP PM , while a Podxl - NHERF2 complex likely functions in endosomes . In our system , Ezrin was a regulator of the cortical Podxl - NHERF1 complex , conﬁrming previous studies ( Fukasawa et al . , 2011 ; Schmieder et al . , 2004 ) . Depletion of Ezrin signiﬁ - cantly reduced SLF ( Figure S3I ) and caused vesicular accumula - tion of Podxl ( Figure 4H , arrowheads ) . Ezrin depletion was rescued by RNAi - resistant WT GFP - Ezrin , which localized to the lumen ( arrows ) , but not an inactive Ezrin mutant ( phosphoi - nositide binding - deﬁcient , PIP * ; Figure 4I ) ( Fievet et al . , 2004 ) . Together , this suggests a PM complex of Podxl / NHERF1 / Ezrin that is required for , and transiently dissociates during reorienta - tion of , AP - BL polarity . PKC b II Controls AP Polarization Independently of b 1 - Integrins We examined how the Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin complex is regu - lated during reorientation of cyst polarity . Classical protein ki - nase C ( PKC ) phosphorylation of the FBM in either Podxl ( S481 ) or NHERF1 ( S339 , 340 ) abolishes interaction of either pro - tein with Ezrin ( Chen et al . , 2012 ; Fukasawa et al . , 2011 ; Garbett et al . , 2010 ) . Classical PKC ( s ) may therefore regulate the tran - sient disassembly of the Podxl complex during polarity reorien - tation ( Figures 3A and S3A ) . We examined whether classical PKC inhibition , similar to Ezrin hyperphosphorylation ( Figures 2K and 2M ) , accumulates a pool of Podxl at the ECM - abutting surface , thereby inducing front - rear polarization . Treatment with pan - PKC inhibitor Go¨ - 6983 caused accumula - tion of Podxl in vesicles close to the cell surface in the center of cysts ( Figure S4A , arrowheads ) and dose - dependent SLF decrease ( Figure S4B ) . In contrast , classical PKC inhibitor Go¨ - 6976 , or PKC a pseudosubstrate treatment not only perturbed SLF ( Figure S4B ) , but strikingly increased front - rear polarity ( Fig - ures 5A , S4C , and S4D ) , as indicated by asymmetric localization of NHERF1 ( arrowhead ) and active b 1 - integrin ( arrow ) . Multiday imaging of GFP - Podxl / RFP - Histone 2B ( H2B ) - expressing cysts revealed that the Podxl - labeled peripheral membranes are a bona ﬁde collective ‘‘front . ’’ In controls , (cid:3) 24 hr after plating , GFP - Podxl had internalized and was located in the inner region of cysts , eventually becoming the lumen ( Figure 5B , control , yel - low arrowheads ) , with cysts developing near the site of their initial observation ( Figure 5B , cyst trace ) . Classical PKC - in - hibited cysts , however , mirrored b 1 - integrin inhibition , devel - oping collective motility ( Figure 5B , cyst trace ) and displaying a Podxl - decorated collective front , from which the directionality of migration always occurred ( Figure 5B , + Go¨ - 6976 , white ar - rowheads ) . These data conﬁrm that inhibition of PKC results in an inability to reorient polarity from initially inverted to luminally polarized , thereby inducing the development of collective front - rear motility . Figure 4 . Formation of a Cortical Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin Complex Regulates AP Domain Formation ( A ) Cysts expressing either scramble ( control ) , or single or dual NHERF1 / 2 shRNAs were stained for Podxl and b - catenin . Arrowheads , intracellular Podxl . ( B ) Quantitation of cysts with SLF upon expression of scramble , NHERF1 or NHERF2 shRNAs , alone or in combination ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . ( C ) Cysts coexpressing GFP - NHERF1 or GFP - NHERF2 ( both green ) and either Scramble , NHERF1 , or NHERF2 shRNA stained for Podxl and b - catenin . White arrowheads , luminal ; yellow arrowheads , vesicular . ( D ) Lysates of control or GFP - NHERF1 wild - type and domain mutants immunoprecipitated with anti - GFP antibodies , were western blotted for total Podxl and GFP ( input ) , and immunoprecipitated Podxl and GFP ( IP : GFP ) . Band intensities are a ratio of immunoprecipitated Podxl / NHERF1 , normalized to WT NHERF1 . Values are mean ± SD from three experiments . ( E ) Cartoon of GFP - NHERF1 domains and motifs . WT , wild - type ; PDZ1 * , PDZ domain 1 mutant ; PDZ2 * , PDZ domain 2 mutant ; PDZ1 / 2 * , PDZ domains 1 + 2 mutant ; F355R , FERM - binding region mutant . ( F ) Quantitation of SLF in control ( black bars ) or NHERF1 KD cysts ( white bars ) , without or with indicated RNAi - resistant GFP - NHERF1 mutant expression ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . ( G ) Cysts coexpressing NHERF1 KD and RNAi - resistant GFP - NHERF1 wild - type ( WT ) or domain mutants ( all green ) stained for Podxl and b - catenin . White arrowheads , luminal ; yellow arrowheads , vesicular . ( H ) Cysts expressing either scramble or Ezrin KD and either RNAi - resistant GFP - Ezrin WT or a phosphoinositide binding - deﬁcit ( PIP * ) mutant stained for Podxl and either ( left two panels ) F - actin and nuclei , or ( right two panels ) b - catenin . Arrows , luminal ; arrowheads , vesicular . ( I ) Quantitation of cysts with SLF upon control ( black bars ) or Ezrin ( white bars ) , KD without or with RNAi - resistant GFP - Ezrin WT or PIP * expression ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . See also Figure S3 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 9 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 ( legend on next page ) Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 10 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 To determine the speciﬁc classical PKC ( s ) involved , we depleted two major Go¨ - 6976 targets : PKC a / b . Depletion of PKC b severely reduced SLF and robustly increased front - rear polarity ( Figures 5C – 5G ) , mirroring Go¨ - 6976 treatment ( Figures S4B – S4D ) . PKC b has two spliceforms : PKC b I and PKC b II ( Rosse et al . , 2010 ) . PKC b depletion was rescued by RNAi - resis - tant PKC b II ( Figures 5E – 5G ) , whereas ectopic PKC b I expression perturbed SLF and induced front - rear polarization irrespective of kinase activity or endogenous PKC b depletion ( Figures S5A – S5C ) . In contrast , PKC a depletion , either alone or in combination with RNAi - resistant kinase - dead PKC a ( GFP - PKC a D463N ) ( Cameron et al . , 2009 ) , while signiﬁcantly reducing SLF , only modestly increased front - rear polarization ( Figures 5D , 5E , S4E , and S4G – S4K ) . PKC a / b codepletion did not signiﬁcantly enhance the defects observed upon PKC b depletion alone ( Fig - ures 5D and 5E ) . Therefore , PKC b II is likely the major polarity orientation - regulating classical PKC in MDCK cysts . Accordingly PKC b II overexpression reduced the baseline level of front - rear polarization ( Figure 5G , hash symbol ) . GFP - PKC b II localized to all cortical domains ( Figure 5E , AP , yellowarrowheads ; BL , arrows ) andtointracellularvesicles ( white arrowheads ) . However , active PKC b II , phosphorylated either on activation loop ( T500 , T641 ) or autophosphorylation ( S660 ) sites , was detected primarily at the BL PM ( arrows ) , in some vesicles ( white arrowheads ) , with minor levels at the AP PM marked by Podxl ( Figures 5H andS5E , yellow arrowheads ; seeExperimental Procedures ) . Active PKC b II is thus localized to the appropriate PM to perturb the ECM - abutting localization of the Podxl com - plex . Although we expected that b 1 - integrin would control PKC a / b coactivation , wefoundthattheactivationandmembrane recruitment of either PKC a or PKC b II was independent of b 1 - in - tegrin . Inhibition , depletion , or mutational activation of b 1 - integ - rin , although affecting polarity orientation ( Figure 1 ) , failed to perturb PKC a or PKC b II activation or recruitment to the ECM - abutting surface ( Figures 5H – 5J , S4L , and S4M ) . These data indicate , surprisingly , that PKC b II is active under all condi - tions examined , irrespective of b 1 - integrin activation . Rather , the function of PKC a / b II in polarity orientation appears sequential to , anddependenton , priordownregulationoftheRhoApathway . We thus probed the interplay between the classical PKC and RhoA pathways . Inhibition of RhoA and classical PKCs had opposing effects on polarity ( Figures 6A – 6C ) . PKC inhibition perturbed SLF and induced front - rear polarization . RhoA deple - tion abolished the already low baseline of front - rear polarization in control cysts ( indicated by the hash sign ; Figure 6C ) . Simulta - neous RhoA / PKC perturbation returned SLF to control levels and signiﬁcantly attenuated front - rear polarization . These data sug - gest that RhoA and PKC b II function in opposing pathways con - trolling polarization , potentially converging on the regulation of Ezrin association with the Podxl complex ; RhoA - ROCKI may promote , while PKC potentially opposes , Ezrin association with Podxl - NHERF1 . To directly test this possibility , we ﬁrst determined that PKC b was a major regulator of Podxl complex phosphorylation using phosphorylation - speciﬁc antibodies to the NHERF1 FBM ( pS339 , 340 ) ( Chen et al . , 2012 ) . PKC b , and to a lesser extent PKC a , depletion reduced PMA - induced phosphorylation of the FBM of endogenous NHERF1 ( Figure 6F ) . Next , we ex - pressed Podxl and NHERF1 PKC phosphorylation site mutants that control Ezrin association ( Chen et al . , 2012 ; Fukasawa et al . , 2011 ) . Expression of phosphorylation - deﬁcient Podxl or NHERF1 strongly reduced SLF and induced front - rear polariza - tion , which was potentiated by codepletion of endogenous Podxl / NHERF1 . This occurred in a dose - dependent fashion for all NHERF1 PKC sites tested ( Figures 6G – 6L ) . Phosphoryla - tion - deﬁcient mutants of Podxl and NHERF1 , which showed strong overlap with each other and Ezrin , localized predomi - nantly to the collective front ( arrows ) , or to poorly formed lumens ( Figures 6G , 6J , S6A , and S6B ) . These data support the function of RhoA and PKC b II as opposing pathways promoting or inhibit - ing front - rear polarization , respectively , through modulation of Ezrin association with Podxl / NHERF1 . The Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin complex , although requiring disas - sembly at the ECM - abutting PM , requires subsequent reas - sembly at the AMIS for AP - BL polarization ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . Accordingly , expression of phosphomimetic mutants of Podxl or NHERF1 strongly perturbed SLF , without affecting front - rear polarization ( Figures 6G – 6L ) . Mimicking the transient dissocia - tion of the complex during normal polarity reorientation ( Figures 3A and S3A ) , phosphomimetic Podxl localized largely to intracel - lular vesicles that did not label for Ezrin ( white arrowheads ) or to poorly formed lumens ( Figure 6G ) , while phosphomimetic NHERF1 became cytoplasmic upon triple Ser - to - Asp mutation ( 3xSD ; Figure 6J ) . These data reveal that Podxl complex Figure 5 . PKC b II Regulates Polarity Orientation ( A ) Control or classical PKC - inhibited cysts ( + Go¨ - 6976 , 0 . 5 m M ) stained for Podxl and active b 1 - integrin . Arrowheads , Podxl ; arrows , integrin . ( B ) Time - lapsedual - colorconfocalimaging ofcysts expressing RFP - H2B ( nuclei ) and GFP - Podxlwithout ( control , top ) orwithPKCinhibition ( + Go¨ - 6976 , 0 . 5 m M , bottom ) . Images were taken every 30 min from 16 – 76 . 5hr after plating . Stills are presented from (cid:3) 24 – 60 hr . Cyst outlines were traced from still frames every 2 hr ( using alternating color ) , from 24 – 52 hr . Yellow arrowheads , luminal ; White arrowheads , peripheral . ( C and D ) Quantitation of SLF ( C ) or peripheral Podxl ( D ) in cysts upon control ( scramble ) , or single or dual PKC a / b KD ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . N . S . , not signiﬁcant . ( E ) Cysts expressing either scramble or PKC b KD without ( top panels ) or with ( bottom panels ) coexpression of RNAi - resistant GFP - PKC b II ( green ) stained for Podxl ( red ) and b - catenin ( blue ) . Insets show Podxl alone ( left ) , GFP - PKC b II alone ( middle ) , and merge ( right ) . Arrows , BL ; white arrowheads , vesicular ; yellow arrows , AP . ( F and G ) Quantitation of SLF ( F ) or peripheral Podxl ( G ) in cysts upon control ( black bars ) or PKC b KD ( white bars ) without ( MDCK ) or with GFP - PKC b II coex - pression ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . Hash symbol , abolished front - rear polarity . ( H ) Cysts expressing GFP - PKC b II without ( top , control ) or with ( bottom , + AIIB2 ) b 1 - integrin inhibition stained for pS660 - PKC b II and Podxl . Yellow arrowheads , luminal ; arrows , BL , white arrowheads , vesicular . Right panels : higher magniﬁcation of split color images from boxed regions . ( Iand J ) b 1 - integrin , PKC b II ( pS660 , pT641 , total [ anti - GFP ] ) and GAPDH from total cell lysates of parental ( MDCK ) or GFP - PKC b II - expressing cysts and either ( I ) scramble or b 1 - integrin shRNA , or ( J ) co - overexpressing b 1A - integrin ( WT , V737N ) . See also Figures S4 and S5 and Movies S2 and S3 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 11 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 Figure 6 . Podxl Complex Phosphorylation Regulates the Switch between Front - Rear and AP - BL AP Polarization ( A ) Cysts expressing either control or RhoA KD grown in the presence of classical PKC inhibitor ( + Go¨ - 6976 , 0 . 5 m M ) stained for Podxl , b - catenin , and nuclei . ( B and C ) Quantitation of SLF ( B ) or peripheral Podxl ( C ) in control cysts ( scramble , black bars ) or upon classical PKC inhibition ( + Go¨ - 6976 , 0 . 5 m M ) , and with or without RhoA KD ( white bars ) ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . ( legend continued on next page ) Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 12 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 phosphorylation represses its cortical localization and that phos - phorylation must be reversed to allow complex reformation at the AMIS . The PP2A phosphatase complex binds and dephosphorylates NHERF1 ( Boratko´ et al . , 2012 ; Chen et al . , 2012 ) . We examined the localization of the NHERF1 - associating PP2A - B55 a subunit ( 3xHA - PP2A - B a ) . At the initially inverted two - cell stage when Podxl was peripheral , we detected no speciﬁc colocalization with PP2A - B a ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . However , when vesicles con - taining Podxl began to accumulate at the AMIS ( here marked by the polarity protein Par3 , yellow arrowhead ) ( Bryant et al . , 2010 ) , corecruitment of PP2A - B a could be observed ( white arrow - heads ) . As the lumen formed and Par3 redistributed to juxtalumi - nal puncta , PP2A - B a continued to overlap with Podxl at the luminal PM ( Figure 7B , arrows ) . Notably , depletion of PP2A - B a mimicked the expression of phosphomimetic NHERF1 and Podxl , reducing SLF , causing the accumulation of Podxl in intra - cellular vesicles ( arrowheads ) and the cytoplasmic redistribution of NHERF1 ( Figures 7C – 7F ; data not shown ) . These data reveal that PP2A functions in the establishment of AP - BL polarity by regulating the reformation of the Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin complex at the AMIS . DISCUSSION Here , we elucidate a molecular switch that determines the orientation of polarity in the simple system of 3D MDCK cyst polarization . Initially , at the one - to two - cell stage , Podxl is at the ECM - abutting surface and polarity is inverted . During normal cyst formation , polarity is reoriented as Podxl internalizes and transcytoses to the AMIS , which eventually becomes the lumen . If components of the polarity reorientation switch mechanism are blocked , polarity inversion is largely maintained and multicellular aggregates with front - rear polarity form . During cyst formation a low , baseline percentage ( 6 % ± 2 % ) of front - rear polarized ag - gregates occurs , indicating that transitions between these two types of polarity normally occur during polarization . In our previ - ous work , when cysts were embedded in type - I collagen instead of grown on top of Matrigel , inhibition of b 1 - integrin gave almost complete inversion of polarity , with little or no front - rear polarity ( Yu et al . , 2005 , 2008 ) . The laminin in Matrigel partially rescues AP - BL polarity ( O’Brien et al . , 2001 ) , supporting the notion that different ECM compositions regulate the type of polarity orienta - tion and the collective behavior of epithelial cells ( i . e . , fully in - verted or front - rear polarized ) . The inverted localization of the Podxl - NHERF1 - pEzrin com - plex is stabilized by elevated RhoA / ROCKI - dependent phos - phorylation of Ezrin , which probably acts via a positive feed - back loop to stabilize RhoA - ROCKI - pEzrin ( Figure 7G , box 1 ) ( Schmieder et al . , 2004 ) . Polarity is reoriented by locally inacti - vating RhoA at the ECM interface . a 2 / a 3 / b 1 - integrin complexes sense the ECM to activate FAK / p190A RhoGAP - dependent RhoA - GTP hydrolysis ( Figure 7G , box 2 ) and decrease Ezrin phosphorylation . PKC b II phosphorylation of Podxl and NHERF1 dissociates them from Ezrin , triggering removal of Podxl from the periphery via endocytosis ( Figure 7G , box 3 ) . Internalized Podxl transcytoses to the AMIS ( Bryant et al . , 2010 ) , likely now in association with NHERF2 ( Figure 7G , box 4 ) . The Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin complex reforms at the AMIS via corecruitment of phosphatase PP2A ( Figure 7G , box 5 ) , probably promoting dephosphorylation of Podxl - NHERF1 ( Boratko´ et al . , 2012 ; Chen et al . , 2012 ) . The AMIS then progresses to an open lumen , surrounded by a monolayer of AP - BL polarized epithelial cells . Thus , the ECM controls a molecular switch that determines reorientation from front - rear to AP - BL polarity by ﬁrst inducing transient disassembly of the Podxl - NHERF1 - pEzrin complex at the ECM - abutting PM . At the earliest stage of cyst development ( 1 – 2 cells ) , the struc - tures are highly motile , although motility ends concurrently with endocytosis of Podxl and the initiation of reorientation of polarity . When inverted polarity persists , structures remain motile , even though they can contain many cells . There are few cell culture model systems for studying collective cell motility , which conse - quently is much less well understood , compared to single cell motility . Our discovery of collective motility in this system offers opportunities for dissecting the molecular mechanisms underly - ing such behaviors . In this system , collective motility is led by AP PM membrane components , rather than the expected integrin - decorated BL domain . This was dependent on the RhoA - ROCKI - Ezrin pathway , normally repressed by b 1 - integrins . b 1 - integrin - inde - pendent migration has been described in both cancer cells in 3D matrices and in dendritic cells in vivo , with such migration critically dependent on the RhoA - ROCK pathway ( La¨mmermann et al . , 2008 ; Renkawitz et al . , 2009 ; Tozluo (cid:3) glu et al . , 2013 ; Wyck - off et al . , 2006 ) . In 3D culture , the mode of migration can switch in a single cell type , dependent on the balance between RhoA / Rac1 mutual antagonism ( Sanz - Moreno and Marshall , 2010 ) . Our system also depends on the Rac1 / RhoA balance , and our data suggest that cell surface asymmetry , including apical mem - brane - lead front - rear polarization , may contribute to such polar - ity switching in 3D . In our system , RhoA - GTP levels were highest at the ECM interface . RhoA - GTP at the front of invasive cysts may stabilize AP proteins , such as by activating ERM proteins ( D and E ) Cartoons of GFP - Podxl ( D ) and GFP - NHERF1 ( E ) phosphorylation mutants used in subsequent experiments . 3xSA / SD , triple Ser - to - Ala / Asp mutants . ( F ) Podxl , ppS347 / 348 - NHERF1 , total NHERF1 , PKC a , and GAPDH expression from total cell lysates of cells expressing scramble , PKC a or PKC b shRNAs that were serum - starved overnight , and treated with either DMSO or PMA ( 100 nM ) for 30 min . ( G ) Cysts coexpressing Podxl shRNAs and RNAi - resistant GFP - Podxl FBM phosphorylation site mutants ( S481A / D ) stained for Ezrin and b - catenin . Arrows , AP ; arrowheads , vesicular . Smaller panels are higher magniﬁcation of split color images from boxed regions . ( H and I ) Quantitation of SLF ( H ) or peripheral Podxl ( I ) in cysts upon control ( scramble , black bars ) or Podxl ( white bars ) KD without or with RNAi - resistant GFP - Podxl ( WT or PKC phosphorylation mutant ) coexpression ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . ( J ) Cysts coexpressing NHERF1 KD and RNAi - resistant GFP - NHERF1 PKC phosphorylation - site mutants stained for Podxl and b - catenin . Arrows , AP ; arrowheads , vesicular . ( K and L ) Quantitation of SLF ( K ) or peripheral Podxl ( L ) in cysts upon control ( scramble , black bars ) or NHERF1 ( white bars ) KD without or with RNAi - resistant GFP - NHERF1 ( WT or PKC phosphorylation mutant ) coexpression ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . See also Figure S6 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 13 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 Figure 7 . PP2A Controls AP - BL Polarization and Model of Polarity Orientation ( A ) HA and GAPDH expression from total cell lysates of parental ( MDCK ) or 3xHA - tagged PP2A - B a - expressing MDCK . ( B ) HA , Podxl , and Par3 expression in 3xHA - PP2A - B a MDCK cells during lumen formation ( 12 – 48 hr ) . White arrowheads , vesicular ; arrows , AP ; yellow arrow - heads , Par3 at AMIS and tight junctions . ( legend continued on next page ) Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 14 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 and regulating their actin attachment . However , it is important to note that RhoA - ROCKI were dispensable for lumen formation , suggesting that there are additional mechanisms to stabilize Podxl - NHERF1 - pERM at the lumen . Ezrin association with the Podxl complex was critical for stabi - lization of the complex at the PM , whether at the ECM - abutting PM in inverted aggregates , or at the lumen . PKC b II triggered Podxl endocytosis and transcytosis to the AMIS . In all of our studies PKC b II activation was , unexpectedly , independent of b 1 - integrin activation , acting sequentially to RhoA - ROCKI pathway downregulation . This suggests a model ( Figure 7G ) whereby cortical stabilization of the Podxl - NHERF1 - pEzrin complex by RhoA - ROCKI may allow the complex to become re - fractory to the always - active PKC b II ; the actions of PKC b II only occur once integrin engagement leads to the lowering of pERM levels . The termination of PKC - mediated phosphorylation of Podxl - NHERF1 was critical for SLF and reassembly of Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin at the AMIS . This appeared to be mediated by the phosphatase PP2A , in accordance with its role as a major NHERF1 phosphatase ( Chen et al . , 2012 ; Garbett et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , pathways that converge on Ezrin association or dissocia - tion with the Podxl , or perhaps other AP , complex ( es ) may con - trol collective epithelial polarization by modulating the cortical stabilization of ERM - interacting proteins . It is important to note that the RhoA - inhibitory and PKC path - ways described here do not promote formation of the BL PM per se , but rather repress formation of AP PM , giving positional co - ordinates that prevent peripheral Podxl stabilization . If destabi - lized at the PM , Podxl undergoes endocytosis and trancytosis to the AMIS . This involves a complex network of trafﬁcking ma - chinery masterminded by the Rab11a GTPase , and a myriad of additional GTPases and their effectors , to ensure the ﬁdelity of transport of Podxl - containing vesicles precisely to the AP PM ( Bryant et al . , 2010 ; Ga´lvez - Santisteban et al . , 2012 ; Roland et al . , 2011 ) . That the AP PM can be either the lumen or the ‘‘front’’ of migrating aggregates suggests that the directionality of the apical membrane transport machinery must also be a target of ECM - derived signals . More generally , the switch mech - anism uncovered here depends on the balance between the opposing forces of the multiple kinases and complexes that we elucidate . This likely forms the basis for the bistability between the inverted and luminal AP - BL polarity forms and potentially serves as a prototype for understanding how the orientation of polarity occurs in many other types of polarized systems . Whether this switch is bidirectional and AP PM components can be switched ‘‘back’’ to the ECM - abutting membrane after luminal polarity has formed is an important future question . The molecular mechanisms were present here are likely to model many , but not all , signaling pathways controlling cell polarization . For instance , mammary epithelia , although nor - mally a bilayer in vivo , transduce polarity orientation apparently through the pseudokinase ILK ( Akhtar and Streuli , 2013 ) , rather than the FAK - and Rac1 - dependent pathways we describe , when cultured as a 3D monolayered acinus in vitro . This con - trasts with the monolayer found both in MDCK and kidney epithelia in vivo . Moreover , in colon cancer cell 3D models and the developing mouse aorta Moesin , rather than Ezrin , is the ma - jor ERM protein required for lumen formation ( Georgescu et al . , 2014 ; Strili (cid:1) c et al . , 2009 ) . These may represent cell - or tissue - type differences in polarization mechanisms . Importantly , our data and the model we present does not preclude roles for Moe - sin and ILK in either front - rear or luminal polarization . As polarity reorientation and lumen formation occurs over days , there are likely many additional molecules and intermediate steps involved in the reorientation mechanism we describe . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cyst Matrigel Culture 3D Matrigel culture of MDCK cysts was as previously described ( Bryant et al . , 2010 ) . Brieﬂy , cells subcultured in 5 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; GIBCO ) , min - imum essential medium ( MEM ) were trypsinized to a single cell suspension at 1 . 5 3 10 4 cells ml (cid:1) 1 in complete medium containing 2 % Matrigel ( BD Biosci - ences ) . Cell - medium - Matrigel suspensions ( 300 m l ) were plated into 8 - well coverglasschambers ( Nunc , LabTek - II ) , precoated with5 m lof100 % Matrigel . Cellsweregrownfor24 – 48hrbeforeﬁxationin4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) . In some experiments , cells were treated with Go¨ - 6976 , Go¨ - 6983 ( Calbiochem ) , or equal volumeof DMSO asa control from thetime of plating . In all instances , exogenous proteins were from stably expressing cell lines , created either by DNA lipofection , or retroviral infection , followed by selection for 1 – 3 weeks and FACS to obtain appropriate expression levels . All selective antibiotics were removed 24 hr prior to plating for 3D culture . For AIIB2 treatments , the antibody was added to the culture medium in a ﬁnal concentration of 8 m g / ml . For ROCK inhibition , Y - 27632 ( 10 m M ) was added at the time of plating and refreshed every 2 days . Statistics Single lumen formation quantiﬁcation was adapted from as previously described ( Bryantetal . , 2010 ) . Brieﬂy , cystswerescoredintothreecategories : ( 1 ) cyst with Podxl at a single lumen , ( 2 ) a cyst with peripherally located Podxl , or ( 3 ) multiple lumens / vesicular Podxl accumulation . For RNAi rescue experi - ments , onlycysts expressingdetectable levels ofthe exogenous transgene by confocal microscopy were scored . The relative percentages of cysts from each category were normalized to control cysts . Values are mean ± SD from three replicate experiments , with n R 100 cysts per replicate . Signiﬁcance was calculated using a paired , two - tailed Student’s t test . Line - scan analysis for pixel intensity was performed using Zeiss LSM510 imaging software and graphed using Microsoft Excel . Time - Lapse Phase Movies Cells grown in Matrigel - coated 24 - well plates were imaged essentially as previously described ( Yu et al . , 2007 ) , using a Zeiss Axiovert S - 100 micro - scope ( Carl Zeiss ) . AIIB2 was added at the time of plating , where appropriate . Time - lapse movies were recorded from 3 – 169 hr after plating . Imaging spec - iﬁcations include : a 10 3 A - Plan objective lens , a Cohu high - performance ( C ) PP2A - B a and vinculin expression from total cell lysates of upon scramble or two different PP2A - B a shRNAs . ( D ) Cysts expressing PP2A - B a KD stained for Podxl , b - catenin and nuclei . Arrowheads , vesicular . ( E and F ) Quantitation of SLF ( E ) or peripheral Podxl ( F ) in cysts upon control ( scramble ) or PP2A - B a KD ( mean ± SD , n R 100 cysts / condition / experiment , three independent experiments ) . ( G ) ModelofinteractionsthatcontrolAP - BL versusfront - rearpolarization : ( 1 ) thePodxl - NHERF1 - pEzrin complex isstabilized atthecellperipheryviaafeedback loop between RhoA - ROCKI - Ezrin , ( 2 ) an a 2 / a 3 / b 1 - integrin / FAK / p190A RhoGAP module breaks this feedback loop by downregulating RhoA - GTP at the periphery , ( 3 ) PKC b II phosphorylates and dissociates the Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin complex , triggering peripheral Podxl endocytosis , ( 4 ) Podxl and NHERF2 transcytose to the AMIS , and ( 5 ) AP polarity is reestablished at the AMIS , dependent on PP2A and the reassociation of the Podxl - NHERF1 - Ezrin complex . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 15 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 charge - coupled device camera , light exposure regulated though a Ludl shutter , controller and x - y - z – motorized stage . A 37 (cid:4) C temperature and 5 % carbon dioxide environment were maintained via a CTI Controller 3700 and Temperature Control 37 . 2 combination ( Carl Zeiss ) . Images were acquired at 15 min intervals using a custom macro implemented in OpenLab 4 . 0 . 2 ( Im - provision ) . Images were recorded using OpenLab LIFF series ( Improvision ) and compiled into QuickTime movies via ImageJ ( NIH ) . Cyst outlines were traced in Adobe Illustrator from still frames every 12 hr from 16 – 132 hr after plating . Live Cell Dual - Color Imaging Cells were plated as described above , although adjusted to 2 - well chamber slides ( Labtek II , Nunc ) . Cells coexpressing EGFP - Podxl / RFP - H2B were imaged on an inverted spinning - disk confocal microscope system ( Yoko - gawa / Zeiss ) witha37 (cid:4) Cand5 % CO 2 controlledenvironment ( Zeiss ) andheat - ed stage ( PECON ) through a 20 3 1 . 49NA lens ( Zeiss ) , using 488 / 561 nm laser lines . Images were captured via an AxioCam Mrm ( Zeiss ) . A stack of three im - ages at 5 m m intervals were taken every 30 min from 16 – 76 . 5 hr after plating using an automated stage controlled via the ZEN software package ( Zeiss ) . As cysts develop and move during image acquisition , the optimal focal plane was manually chosen for each time point postacquisition from the stackedim - ages , before compilation of image series of each movie . Movies were pro - cessed using ImageJ ( NIH ) . For PKC inhibition , Go¨ - 6976 ( 0 . 5 m M ) was added at the time of plating . Cyst outlines were traced in Adobe Illustrator from still frames every 2 hr from 24 – 52 hr after plating . Materialsand procedures forRNAi , virusproductionand transduction , plas - mids and cell lines , and antibodies and immunolabeling are detailed in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and three movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the investigators who kindly gifted reagents and the K . E . M . labora - tory for assistance . This work was supported by an American Cancer Society Research Scholar Grant ( RSG - 12 - 141 - 01 - CSM to A . J . E . ) , and NIH grants K99CA163535 ( D . B . ) , R01CA057621 ( Z . W . ) , R01DK074398 ( K . M . ) , and R01DK091530 ( K . M . ) . Received : February 19 , 2014 Revised : June 30 , 2014 Accepted : August 28 , 2014 Published : October 9 , 2014 REFERENCES Akhtar , N . , and Streuli , C . H . ( 2013 ) . An integrin - ILK - microtubule network ori - ents cell polarity and lumen formation in glandular epithelium . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 17 – 27 . Apodaca , G . , Gallo , L . I . , and Bryant , D . M . ( 2012 ) . Role of membrane trafﬁc in the generation of epithelial cell asymmetry . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 1235 – 1243 . Bigorgne , A . E . , Farin , H . F . , Lemoine , R . , Mahlaoui , N . , Lambert , N . , Gil , M . , Schulz , A . , Philippet , P . , Schlesser , P . , Abrahamsen , T . G . , et al . ( 2014 ) . TTC7A mutations disrupt intestinal epithelial apicobasal polarity . J . Clin . Invest . 124 , 328 – 337 . Boratko´ , A . , Gergely , P . , and Csortos , C . ( 2012 ) . Cell cycle dependent associ - ation of EBP50 with protein phosphatase 2A in endothelial cells . PLoS ONE 7 , e35595 . Bryant , D . M . , andMostov , K . E . ( 2008 ) . Fromcellstoorgans : building polarized tissue . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 887 – 901 . Bryant , D . M . , Datta , A . , Rodrı´guez - Fraticelli , A . E . , Pera¨nen , J . , Martı´n - Belmonte , F . , and Mostov , K . E . ( 2010 ) . A molecular network for de novo generation of the apical surface and lumen . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 1035 – 1045 . Cameron , A . J . , Escribano , C . , Saurin , A . T . , Kostelecky , B . , and Parker , P . J . ( 2009 ) . PKC maturation is promoted by nucleotide pocket occupation inde - pendently of intrinsic kinase activity . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 624 – 630 . Chen , J . Y . , Lin , Y . Y . , and Jou , T . S . ( 2012 ) . Phosphorylation of EBP50 nega - tively regulates b - PIX - dependent Rac1 activity in anoikis . Cell Death Differ . 19 , 1027 – 1037 . Datta , A . , Bryant , D . M . , andMostov , K . E . ( 2011 ) . Molecularregulationoflumen morphogenesis . Curr . Biol . 21 , R126 – R136 . deLeon , O . , Puglise , J . M . , Liu , F . , Smits , J . , ter Beest , M . B . , and Zegers , M . M . ( 2012 ) . Pak1 regulates the orientation of apical polarization and lumen forma - tion by distinct pathways . PLoS ONE 7 , e41039 . Doyonnas , R . , Kershaw , D . B . , Duhme , C . , Merkens , H . , Chelliah , S . , Graf , T . , and McNagny , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Anuria , omphalocele , and perinatal lethality in mice lacking the CD34 - related protein podocalyxin . J . Exp . Med . 194 , 13 – 27 . Fehon , R . G . , McClatchey , A . I . , and Bretscher , A . ( 2010 ) . Organizing the cell cortex : the role of ERM proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 276 – 287 . Ferrari , A . , Veligodskiy , A . , Berge , U . , Lucas , M . S . , andKroschewski , R . ( 2008 ) . ROCK - mediated contractility , tight junctions and channels contribute to the conversion of a preapical patch into apical surface during isochoric lumen initiation . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3649 – 3663 . Fievet , B . T . , Gautreau , A . , Roy , C . , Del Maestro , L . , Mangeat , P . , Louvard , D . , and Arpin , M . ( 2004 ) . Phosphoinositide binding and phosphorylation act sequentially in the activation mechanism of ezrin . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 653 – 659 . Fukasawa , H . , Obayashi , H . , Schmieder , S . , Lee , J . , Ghosh , P . , and Farquhar , M . G . ( 2011 ) . Phosphorylation of podocalyxin ( Ser415 ) Prevents RhoA and ezrin activation and disrupts its interaction with the actin cytoskeleton . Am . J . Pathol . 179 , 2254 – 2265 . Ga´lvez - Santisteban , M . , Rodriguez - Fraticelli , A . E . , Bryant , D . M . , Vergarajauregui , S . , Yasuda , T . , Ban˜o´n - Rodrı´guez , I . , Bernascone , I . , Datta , A . , Spivak , N . , Young , K . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Synaptotagmin - like proteins control the formation of a single apical membrane domain in epithelial cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 838 – 849 . Garbett , D . , LaLonde , D . P . , and Bretscher , A . ( 2010 ) . The scaffolding protein EBP50 regulates microvillar assembly in a phosphorylation - dependent manner . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 397 – 413 . Georgescu , M . M . , Cote , G . , Agarwal , N . K . , and White , C . L . , 3rd . ( 2014 ) . NHERF1 / EBP50 Controls Morphogenesis of 3D Colonic Glands by Stabilizing PTEN and Ezrin - Radixin - Moesin Proteins at the Apical Membrane . Neoplasia 16 , 365 – 374 , e362 . Ichimura , K . , Powell , R . , Nakamura , T . , Kurihara , H . , Sakai , T . , and Obara , T . ( 2013 ) . Podocalyxin regulates pronephric glomerular development in zebra - ﬁsh . Physiological reports 1 . Jou , T . S . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Effects of regulated expression of mutant RhoA and Rac1 small GTPases on the development of epithelial ( MDCK ) cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 85 – 100 . La¨mmermann , T . , Bader , B . L . , Monkley , S . J . , Worbs , T . , Wedlich - So¨ldner , R . , Hirsch , K . , Keller , M . , Fo¨rster , R . , Critchley , D . R . , Fa¨ssler , R . , and Sixt , M . ( 2008 ) . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent ﬂowing and squeezing . Nature 453 , 51 – 55 . Li , Y . , Li , J . , Straight , S . W . , and Kershaw , D . B . ( 2002 ) . PDZ domain - mediated interactionof rabbit podocalyxin and Na ( + ) / H ( + ) exchange regulatory factor - 2 . Am . J . Physiol . Renal Physiol . 282 , F1129 – F1139 . Murakoshi , H . , Wang , H . , andYasuda , R . ( 2011 ) . Local , persistentactivationof RhoGTPasesduringplasticityofsingledendriticspines . Nature 472 , 100 – 104 . O’Brien , L . E . , Jou , T . S . , Pollack , A . L . , Zhang , Q . , Hansen , S . H . , Yurchenco , P . , and Mostov , K . E . ( 2001 ) . Rac1 orientates epithelial apical polarity through effects on basolateral laminin assembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 831 – 838 . Paszek , M . J . , Zahir , N . , Johnson , K . R . , Lakins , J . N . , Rozenberg , G . I . , Gefen , A . , Reinhart - King , C . A . , Margulies , S . S . , Dembo , M . , Boettiger , D . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 8 , 241 – 254 . Renkawitz , J . , Schumann , K . , Weber , M . , La¨mmermann , T . , Pﬂicke , H . , Piel , M . , Polleux , J . , Spatz , J . P . , and Sixt , M . ( 2009 ) . Adaptive force transmission in amoeboid cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 1438 – 1443 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation 16 Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027 Roland , J . T . , Bryant , D . M . , Datta , A . , Itzen , A . , Mostov , K . E . , and Goldenring , J . R . ( 2011 ) . Rab GTPase - Myo5B complexes control membrane recycling and epithelial polarization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 2789 – 2794 . Rosse , C . , Linch , M . , Kermorgant , S . , Cameron , A . J . , Boeckeler , K . , and Parker , P . J . ( 2010 ) . PKC and the control of localized signal dynamics . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 103 – 112 . Sanz - Moreno , V . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2010 ) . The plasticity of cytoskeletal dynamics underlying neoplastic cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 22 , 690 – 696 . Schmieder , S . , Nagai , M . , Orlando , R . A . , Takeda , T . , and Farquhar , M . G . ( 2004 ) . Podocalyxin activates RhoA and induces actin reorganization through NHERF1 and Ezrin in MDCK cells . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 15 , 2289 – 2298 . Strili (cid:1) c , B . , Kucera , T . , Eglinger , J . , Hughes , M . R . , McNagny , K . M . , Tsukita , S . , Dejana , E . , Ferrara , N . , and Lammert , E . ( 2009 ) . The molecular basis of vascular lumen formation in the developing mouse aorta . Dev . Cell 17 , 505 – 515 . Strili (cid:1) c , B . , Eglinger , J . , Krieg , M . , Zeeb , M . , Axnick , J . , Baba´l , P . , Mu¨ller , D . J . , and Lammert , E . ( 2010 ) . Electrostatic cell - surface repulsion initiates lumen formation in developing blood vessels . Curr . Biol . 20 , 2003 – 2009 . Takeda , T . , Go , W . Y . , Orlando , R . A . , and Farquhar , M . G . ( 2000 ) . Expression of podocalyxin inhibits cell - cell adhesion and modiﬁes junctional properties in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3219 – 3232 . Takeda , T . , McQuistan , T . , Orlando , R . A . , and Farquhar , M . G . ( 2001 ) . Loss of glomerular foot processes is associated with uncoupling of podocalyxin from the actin cytoskeleton . J . Clin . Invest . 108 , 289 – 301 . Tomar , A . , Lim , S . T . , Lim , Y . , and Schlaepfer , D . D . ( 2009 ) . A FAK - p120RasGAP - p190RhoGAP complex regulates polarity in migrating cells . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1852 – 1862 . Tozluo (cid:3) glu , M . , Tournier , A . L . , Jenkins , R . P . , Hooper , S . , Bates , P . A . , andSahai , E . ( 2013 ) . Matrix geometry determines optimal cancer cell migration strategy and modulates response to interventions . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 751 – 762 . Wyckoff , J . B . , Pinner , S . E . , Gschmeissner , S . , Condeelis , J . S . , and Sahai , E . ( 2006 ) . ROCK - and myosin - dependent matrix deformation enables prote - ase - independent tumor - cell invasion in vivo . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1515 – 1523 . Yu , W . , Datta , A . , Leroy , P . , O’Brien , L . E . , Mak , G . , Jou , T . S . , Matlin , K . S . , Mostov , K . E . , and Zegers , M . M . ( 2005 ) . Beta1 - integrin orients epithelial polar - ity via Rac1 and laminin . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 433 – 445 . Yu , W . , Fang , X . , Ewald , A . , Wong , K . , Hunt , C . A . , Werb , Z . , Matthay , M . A . , and Mostov , K . ( 2007 ) . Formation of cysts by alveolar type II cells in three - dimen - sional culture reveals a novel mechanism for epithelial morphogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 1693 – 1700 . Yu , W . , Shewan , A . M . , Brakeman , P . , Eastburn , D . J . , Datta , A . , Bryant , D . M . , Fan , Q . W . , Weiss , W . A . , Zegers , M . M . , and Mostov , K . E . ( 2008 ) . Involvement of RhoA , ROCK I and myosin II in inverted orientation of epithelial polarity . EMBO Rep . 9 , 923 – 929 . Developmental Cell Molecular Regulation of Polarity Orientation Developmental Cell 31 , 1 – 17 , October 27 , 2014 ª 2014 Elsevier Inc . 17 Please cite this article in press as : Bryant et al . , A Molecular Switch for the Orientation of Epithelial Cell Polarization , Developmental Cell ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 08 . 027