Supporting Online Material Two Distinct Actin Networks Drive the Protrusion of Migrating Cells A . Ponti , M . Machacek , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , G . Danuser This document contains : • Experimental Procedures and Data Analysis • Supporting Figs . S1 , S2 , S3 , S4 , S5 • Supporting References and Notes • Legends to Supporting Movies S1 , S2 , S3 , S4 , S5 , S6 , S7 , S8 , S9 Experimental Procedures and Data Analysis Cell culture and Microinjection PtK 1 cells were cultured in Ham ' s F12 medium containing 25 mM Hepes ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 10 % FBS ( GIBCO BRL ) at 37°C , 5 % CO 2 . Primary cultures of newt lung epithelial cells were maintained in half strength L - 15 medium in 10 % FCS and antibiotics at room temperature . X - rhodamine – conjugated skeletal muscle actin was prepared as described previously ( S1 ) and microinjected into cells at 0 . 5 - 1mg / ml . Following injection , PtK1 and newt lung epithelial cells were incubated for approximately two hours at 37 o C or at room temperature , respectively , to allow fluorescent actin to incorporate into the cytoskeleton . Plasmid cDNA ( 100 µ g / ml ) encoding GFP - vinculin was microinjected together with X - rhodamine actin into the nuclei of new lung cells . Cells were incubated at room temperature for 6 - 8 hr to allow GFP - vinculin expression . Live Cell Microscopy and Image Acquisition PtK1 cells or newt lung epithelial cells were maintained on the microscope stage in a custom built stainless steel perfusion chamber ( S2 ) in culture medium containing 30 µ l Oxyrase per ml of media ( Oxyrase , Inc . ) to inhibit photobleaching and kept at 35 – 37°C 1 with an air stream incubator ( for PtK 1 cells ) , or room temperature ( for newt cells ) . Actin fluorescent speckle microscopy and phase contrast time - lapse image series were acquired at 10 - s intervals on a spinning disk confocal microscope equipped with an AOTF to control excitation wavelength and a double band pass dichroic mirror and emission filter to select emission wavelengths ( S3 ) . Images were collected using a 100 x , 1 . 4 NA Plan Apo Phase Contrast objective , and captured with a 14 - bit cooled CCD camera ( Orca II ; Hamamatsu Corporation ) controlled by MetaMorph ® software ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) . For drug treatments , cells were imaged and perfused with either 100 µ M blebbistatin , 500 nM cytochalasin D , or 1 µ M jasplakinolide in culture media containing Oxyrase . Immunofluorescence Control cells were fixed in cytoskeletal buffer ( 10 mM MES , 3mM MgCl 2 , 138 mM KCl , 2 mM EGTA ) with 4 % paraformaldehyde , and permeabilized in cytoskeletal buffer with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 and immunolocalabeled with antibodies against long isoforms of tropomyosin ( TM311 , Sigma ) , cofilin ( Cytoskeleton ) , or Arp3 ( kind gift from Matt Welch , UC Berkeley ) . For myosin II immunofluorescence ( Biomedical Technologies , Inc . ) , cells were subjected to a 45s short permeabilization in the presence of phalloidin to remove diffuse proteins and stabilize actin filaments , and subsequently fixed , permeabilized , and stained as the other samples . Epifluorescence images were acquired on an inverted microscope ( model TE300 ; Nikon ) equipped with a triple band pass dichroic mirror , electronically controlled shutters , filter wheels , and a 14 - bit cooled CCD camera ( Orca II ; Hamamatsu Corporation ) controlled by MetaMorph ® software ( Universal Imaging Corp . ) using a 60 x / 1 . 4 NA Plan Apo DIC objective lens ( Nikon ) . 2 Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy ( FSM ) capitalizes on the method of fluorescent analog cytochemistry , in which purified actin is covalently linked to a fluorophore and microinjected into living cells . Speckle formation occurs when the ratio of unlabeled endogenous to labeled injected protein is less than ~ 0 . 5 – 3 % . Incorporation of these mixed monomer pools yields a non - uniform distribution of fluorophores throughout the filament network ( S4 ) . Upon imaging with a high - resolution fluorescence light microscope , network areas with a locally elevated density of fluorophores appear as intensity peaks , called speckles , on a dim background . Importantly , speckles are exclusively associated with fluorescent actin monomers bound to the polymer meshwork , while diffusible monomers do not contribute to speckles in the image ( S5 ) . At the labeling ratio employed in this study , speckles represented the diffraction - limited image of 3 to 8 fluorophores clustered in a temporally stable patch of several filaments forming the F - actin network . Thus , speckles act as fiduciary marks of the movement of associated network path , and their intensity changes reflect the local exchange of labeled monomers due to network assembly and disassembly . However , the relationships between single speckle dynamics and network dynamics are defined only in a stochastic sense . To extract measurements of F - actin flow and turnover , hundreds of thousands of speckles per movie have to be computationally tracked from appearance to disappearance and then analyzed in a statistical framework relating speckle population behavior to spatially and temporally resolved parameters of network kinematics and kinetics ( S6 ) . Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy Image Analysis Movies were transferred from the MetaMorph image acquisition program to our home - written SpeckTackle FSM processing package . The program encompasses a suite of algorithms for camera calibration , low - contrast particle detection , high - performance 3 single - particle tracking methods , edge tracking , vector filtering techniques to extract flow maps from single speckle trajectories , statistical analysis of speckle intensity fluctuations to derive maps of polymer turnover , and numerous modules for the post - processing and visualization of these maps . The program has been developed under Matlab ( Mathworks , Inc . ) and in C , and runs either under the Windows XP or Linux operating systems . Many of the algorithms have already been or are being published in technical papers ( S6 , S7 , S8 , S9 ) . In the following , we briefly summarize the most essential steps of data analysis . Statistical selection of speckles Speckles are defined as the image of a sub - resolution cluster of fluorophores . To separate the faint speckle signal from noise , local maxima are detected in an image that has been low - pass filtered with a kernel representing the point spread function of the light microscope . For each local maximum , the peak intensity is then tested relative to local background using a statistical model of the camera noise ( as determined in a separate calibration protocol ) and signal - intrinsic shot noise . Local maxima which pass the test are further on considered as speckles ( S6 ) . Particle tracking We have implemented a novel particle tracking algorithm that can cope with the large number of speckles ( 100 , 000 – 1 , 000 , 000 per movie ) and their instable signal . Instability of the speckle signal is caused by the random appearance and disappearance of speckles due to monomer exchange , as well as the temporary disappearance and reappearance due to noise or out of focus movement ( S9 ) . Briefly , the algorithm relies on an iterative approach , where for every speckle a motion model is adopted from the flow field extracted in the previous iteration . This motion model is then applied to propagate the position of the speckles from the current ( source ) frame to the next ( target ) frame in 4 the movie . Correspondences between the propagated positions and the measured speckle positions in the target frame are established in a global sense by neuronal network data assignment ( S10 ) . The links thus found are spatially filtered to reduce signal - inherent jitter from speckle displacements while extracting locally coherent speckle flow . The correlation length of the filter is set to 1 . 8 µ m , in accord with the persistence length of actin filaments . For the first iteration , where no propagation is possible , we suppose the speckles to move randomly . Although this clearly inaccurate model causes a large number of false correspondences in the first iteration , the quality of the links generally suffices to reproduce the flow trend so that fast convergence of the tracking solution is guaranteed in only a few iterations . Speckles in the source frame with no link identified to the target frame are classified as disappearing ; speckles in the target frame with no link back to the source frame are classified as appearing . After repeating the procedure for all consecutive frame pairs of a movie , speckles are linked over their lifetime to reconstruct complete trajectories . To minimize the detection of false trajectory initiation and termination due to temporary interrupts , we run a gap closer algorithm that identifies disappearance and appearance events separated by two time steps but with a high probability for association to the same trajectory . Complete speckle trajectories are then stored in tables which can be parsed for further kinetic analysis ( see below ) and spatio - temporal mapping of F - actin flow . Extraction of kinetic data from intensity changes during speckle appearance and disappearance In ( S6 ) , we have proposed and demonstrated that intensity changes of speckles from one frame before until one frame after the time point of a speckle appearance or disappearance are , on average , proportional to the number of monomers exchanged between network and cytosol . Thus , integration of intensity changes in several 5 appearance or disappearance events in close spatial and temporal proximity permits the calculation of a score that reflects the local kinetics of network assembly and disassembly . This model assumes that appearance or disappearance events are exclusively related to network turnover and that events related to out - of - focus movements , photo - bleaching , and trajectory interrupts associated with tracking errors are eliminated from the data pool . To fulfill this requirement , each event is statistically tested for its significance in terms of reporting true network activity as opposed to noise - relate events . Also , the algorithm can distinguish assembly and disassembly . For data visualization , the spatiotemporal distribution of scores reflecting polymerization is presented in a red image channel , and scores reflecting depolymerization in a green image channel . Bright yellow areas in the thus obtained kinetic maps indicate regions of strong turnover activity with approximately equal rates of assembly and disassembly . Extraction of cell edge from speckle images Edge identification is achieved by automated segmentation of the speckled area of the image ( Fig . S3 A – C ) . Because of the instabilities of the speckle signal between movies and throughout the image sequence , two methods were implemented , which are automatically selected by the program dependent on the image conditions . Both methods rely on image intensity histograms to deduce an optimal threshold level . In the cases where the speckle area is significantly brighter than the background , the threshold is defined as the minimum found in the Gauss filtered , bimodal image histogram . For images with a low contrast between speckle area and background , the histogram is portioned in three intensity regimes using k - means clustering ( S11 ) . The two brighter regimes are associated with the speckled area . After thresholding , the binary image is 6 post - processed by morphological operators eliminating residual signals in the background and closing gaps between fragmented areas in the speckled foreground . Measurement of edge protrusion and retraction rates Displacements of cell edges between consecutive image frames are calculated by representing the segmented borderline in the first time point as a set of equally spaced points . To find the corresponding position for each point on the segmented borderline in the following time point , we seek the new force equilibrium in a simple elastic model of the membrane deformation between time points . Details of this schema will be published elsewhere . The same algorithm was applied to track the movement of the transition between lamellipodium and lamella . Data post - processing Modules for extraction of the transition between lamellipodium and lamella , for statistical evaluation of flow maps and turnover in larger areas , and for the generation of correlative space - time diagrams are integrated in the core FSM analysis package . Kinetic and kinematic maps are obtained by spatially and temporally averaging raw speckle displacements and kinetic scores . Spatial averaging of speckle displacements is achieved through a convolution with a Gaussian kernel whose correlation length is locally adapted as a function of the vector field divergence ( S9 ) . To facilitate temporal averaging , the vector convolution is first performed on a regular grid in space and subsequently integrated in the time domain . In analogy , kinetic scores are accumulated over several time points and then spatially averaged to generate kinetic maps . Integration over short periods reveal dynamic processes ( as shown in movies S3 , S4 , S5 and S6 ) whereas integrations over the entire movie reveal steady - state behavior ( as shown e . g . in Figs . 1A – D ) . 7 The construction of space - diagrams of protrusion , flow , and turnover activity at the leading edge is illustrated in Fig . S3D . Given the measurements of edge displacement , scores of polymerization and depolymerization , and the flow magnitude at the leading edge , we divide the cell boundary in any time point of the movie into small segments of user - defined length . For the example shown , a length of 1 . 2 µ m was chosen in accord with the spatial extension of the filter used for spatial averaging of kinetic scores and flow vectors . The segments define discrete sectors of a ribbon following the cell boundary ( in this example the ribbon width was set to 1 . 2 µ m ) . Speckles falling into one sector are co - analyzed to determine the mean network flow velocity of this sector and the mean kinetic score , indicating the average network turnover in the sector . Finally , we assign per sector an average edge displacement value , representing the protrusion or retraction of the associated edge segment between the analyzed time point and the following frame in the movie . Space - time diagrams are obtained by repeating the sector - wise analysis for all time points in the movie . The values for network turnover , average flow speed , and segment displacement are plotted sector by sector along the vertical axis of the space - time diagram ( Fig . S3D , right panel ) . The values for consecutive time points are pasted side by side along the horizontal axis , until all frames are processed . 8 Supplementary figures Fig . S1 : Comparison of regular fluorescence imaging of actin distribution at the cell front of a migrating cell with Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy . ( A ) Total F - actin visualized with Alexa - 488 phalloidin . ( B ) Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy of the same region . Local intensity maxima indicate fluorophore clusters randomly incorporated into the F - actin . In contrast to phalliodin staining , cytoskeleton structures such a stress fibers are less visible in FSM and can be perceived only by detection of chains of aligned speckles . In the limiting case ( fluorescent : unlabeled monomer < 0 . 2 % ) speckles represent single fluorophores ( S5 ) . Here , we imaged speckles containing 3 – 8 fluorescent monomers ( S4 ) . Compared to single fluorophore speckles , multi - fluorophore speckles occur at higher spatial density and carry information on the local rate of filament turnover instead of marking individual monomer association / dissociation events ( S6 ) . 9 Fig . S2 : Immunolocalization of actin regulatory molecules ( green ) in the lamellipodium and lamella of PtK1 cells . Red stain : Alexa 568 phalloidin . ( A ) The lamellipodium is characterized by high concentrations of Arp2 / 3 ( localized with antibodies to Arp3 ) and ADF / cofilin . ( B ) The lamella is characterized by punctate patterns of myosin II and tropomyosin . Both lamella markers are excluded from the lamellipodium , whereas punctate patterns of Arp2 / 3 and ADF / cofilin occur at lower concentrations also in the lamella . 10 11 Fig . S3 : Computational methods used to aggregate space - time diagrams of network turnover , cell edge displacement and network flow ( cf . Figs 3C and 4A ) . The concept of edge tracking and accumulation of edge specific dynamic information is illustrated for the Cytochalasin D perfusion and washout experiment displayed in Fig . 3C . ( A – C ) Tracking of the cell border by segmentation of the speckled area versus background . Little movement of the edge is measured before perfusion of Cytochalasin D ( A ) . After perfusion ( B ) and washout of the drug ( C ) the edge rapidly retracts and then advances , respectively . Time evolution is encoded from blue ( early time points ) to red ( late time points ) . ( D ) Computation of space - time diagrams . The boundary for any one time point of the movie is divided into segments which serve the definition of discrete sectors of a ribbon . Speckles falling into one sector are co - analyzed in terms of their flow and kinetic scores to extract a mean network flow and turnover measurement per segment . Space - time diagrams are obtained by repeating the sector - wise analysis for all time points . The values for network turnover , average flow speed , and boundary segment displacement are plotted sector by sector along the vertical axis of the space - time diagram . The values for consecutive time points are pasted side by side along the horizontal axis , until all frames are processed . ( E ) Due to spatially unequal retraction rates during cytochalasin D treatment , the definition of the sectors becomes ambiguous in late time points . Adjacent sectors may overlap ( arrows ) , or gaps may open between sectors for which no value is calculated . Despite these geometrical difficulties , the space - time diagram in Fig . 3C exhibits smooth parameter behavior even for those late time points . 12 Fig . S4 : Coupling of lamellipodium and lamella flow . ( A ) Definition of the sectors used in Fig . 4A for computation of space - time diagrams of network turnover , edge displacement and network flow at the leading edge and of lamella flow behind the lamellipodium - lamella transition ( white line ) . Sectors at the front have a size 0 . 8 x 1 . 2 µ m . Sectors in the lamella have a size 0 . 8 x 2 . 4 µ m ( B ) Comparison of the velocity at the leading edge ( red ) versus velocity in the lamella ( blue ) . The values at the cell edge originate from the velocity average over the sector band subadjacent to the leading edge , those for the lamella from the sector band subadjacent to the lamellipodium - lamella 13 transition . The data reveal the clear coupling of the two flows , suggesting a mechanical link between the two networks . Yet , the curve modulation drops by 69 % from the front to the lamella , indicating that the link is of transient nature . Fig . S5 : Model of two kinematically , kinetically , molecularly , and functionally distinct , yet spatially overlapping and materially weakly coupled actin networks mediating cell protrusion in migrating epithelial cells . 14 Supporting References S1 . C . M . Waterman Storer , Curr . Prot . Cell Biol . 4 , 10 . 1 ( 2002 ) S2 . S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , Cell Biology . A laboratory handbook , 4 , In press S3 . M . C . Adams , et al . , Methods 29 , 29 ( 2003 ) S4 . G . Danuser , C . M . Waterman - Storer , J . Microsc . 211 , 191 ( 2003 ) S5 . Y . Watanabe , T . J . Mitchison , Science 295 , 1083 ( 2002 ) S6 . A . Ponti , P . Vallotton , W . C . Salmon , C . M . Waterman - Storer , G . Danuser , Biophys . J . 84 , 3336 ( 2003 ) . S7 . P . Vallotton , A . Ponti , C . M . Waterman - Storer , E . D . Salmon , G . Danuser , Biophys . J . 85 , 1289 ( 2003 ) S8 . P . Vallotton , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , G . Danuser , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 101 , 9660 ( 2004 ) . S9 . A . Ponti , A . Matov , C . M . Waterman - Storer , G . Danuser , In Revision for Biophys . J . S10 . G . Labonté , Patt . Anal . Appl . 3 , 267 ( 2000 ) . S11 . Kanungo T . et . al . IEEE Trans Patt Anal Mach Intell 24 ( 7 ) , 881 ( 2002 ) 15 Legends to Supporting Movies Movie S1 : Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy ( FSM ) time - lapse series of a newt lung epithelial cell migrating at the border of an epithelial monolayer . The cell was microinjected with a small amount of X - rhodamine labeled actin . Frame rate of raw movie : 10 sec / frame . Frame rate of replay : 5 frames / sec . Movie S2 : Raw FSM time - lapse series of a PtK 1 cell migrating at the border of an epithelial monolayer . The cell was microinjected with a small amount of X - rhodamine labeled actin . Frame rate of raw movie : 10 sec / frame . Frame rate of replay : 5 frames / sec . Movie S3 : Animated map of F - actin retrograde flow in movie S1 . A steady state representation of the same data is displayed Fig . 1A . Each frame of the animation is computed as the moving average of speckle trajectories over 5 frames ( 50 sec ) . Movie S4 : Animated map of F - actin retrograde flow in movie S2 . A steady state representation of the same data is displayed in Fig . 1C . Each frame of the animation is computed as the moving average of speckle trajectories over 5 frames ( 50 sec ) . Movie S5 : Animated map of F - actin network turnover extracted from movie S1 . A steady state representation of the same data is displayed in Fig . 1B . Each frame of the animation is computed as the moving average of the space - integrated kinetic scores associated with speckle appearances and disappearances ( S6 ) over 5 frames ( 50 sec ) . 16 Movie S6 : Animated map of F - actin network turnover extracted from movie S2 . A steady state representation of the same data is displayed in Fig . 1D . Each frame of the animation is computed as the moving average of the space - integrated kinetic scores over 5 frames ( 50 sec ) . Movie S7 : Perfusion of PtK 1 cells with 0 . 5 µ M cytochalasin D . After disappearance of the lamellipodium , the F - actin at the leading edge retracts with the same velocity as the retrograde flow in the lamella . This suggests that low concentrations of cytochalasin D selectively remove the lamellipodium network , while the lamella network is more stable in the presence of inhibitors of polymerization . Movie S8 : Evolution of lamellipodium - to - lamella transition in S1 . One of the frames is shown in Fig . 1E to illustrate the mathematical definition of the borderline based on profiles of F - actin velocity and turnover Figs 1F - G . Movie S9 : Evolution of lamellipodium - to - lamella transition in S2 . Two of the frames are shown in Fig . 4B . 17