Inside the Belly of the Beast : The Challenges and Successes of a Reformist Participatory Agenda Ellen Balka Professor , School of Communication , Simon Fraser University Senior Research Scientist , Centre for Clinical Epidemiology & Evaluation , Vancouver Coastal Health Simon Fraser University , 8888 University Way , Burnaby , B . C . CANADA ellenb @ sfu . ca ABSTRACT Shapiro [ 38 ] recently argued that participatory design practitioners should consider pursuing a reformist agenda through engagement with the procurement and development of systems in the public sector . This paper considers the challenges , contradictions and possible arenas for success in the context of a reformist participatory design agenda [ 38 ] , by reflecting on recent work undertaken from a stance similar to that advocated by Shapiro [ 38 ] in a public sector agency . The intention of the paper is to stimulate and extend discussion about arenas in which the political goals that characterized participatory design in its early days can be pursued , and extend discussions about the role of politics in contemporary participatory design [ 14 ] . Author Keywords Participatory design , politics , terms of engagement , public sector , challenges . ACM Classification Keywords D . 2 . 10 Design , Methodologies , D . 2 . m Miscellaneous . H . Information Systems , Human factors ; H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization Evaluation / methodology , Organizational design J . 3 LIFE AND MEDICAL SCIENCES , Health , Medical information systems . K . 4 COMPUTERS AND SOCIETY , Use / abuse of power INTRODUCTION “The only way to eat an elephant is bite by bite . ” Attributed by rock climbers to Beverly Johnson , who with Sibylle Hechtel made the first all female ascent of Yosemite’s El Capitan in 1973 , and in 1978 became the first woman to solo a route on El Capitan . “The best way to understand something is to try to change it . ” Kurt Lewin , cited in [ 29 , p . 19 ] In a recent paper titled “Participatory Design : The Will to Succeed” Shapiro [ 38 ] argued that participatory design “should seriously consider claiming an engagement in the development of large scale systems , and more particularly an engagement with the procurement and development of systems in the public sector , and should devise a collective strategy for doing so” ( p . 32 ) . Citing numerous large scale system development failures in the public sector , Shapiro notes that PD practitioners—typically relying on ethnographic method—would be likely to understand such failures as part political ( deriving from a failure of traditional approaches to understand the underlying power relations that govern work ) and part analytical ( related to failures to understand the underlying sociality of work ) . Shapiro suggests that with few exceptions [ 19 , 33 , 34 ] , engagement with large scale or commercial systems has been limited . He advocates a reformist agenda for PD which in some instances would acknowledge that the effectiveness of interventions would depend upon demonstrating that they are consistent with employers’ interests , and suggests that critical self - reflection and an experimental strategy will be essential to such a reformist agenda for PD . Beck [ 14 ] has also advocated a redefinition of PD . Beck suggests that there has been a dilution of the political focus within PD , and she suggests that the PD community should exclude work that uses participation as a means though which to improve design , in the absence of a focus on understanding the manifold ways through which computerization can contribute to dominance patterns . Beck suggests that rather than focusing on participation—an area which Beck and others have identified as potentially problematic [ 1 , 24 ] , that we might discuss the motivations for undertaking PD projects in relation to changing dominance patterns . Here I take Shapiro’s [ 38 ] and Beck’s [ 14 ] work as a starting point for reflection about the practices I have engaged in , in pursuit of ideals often associated with participatory design . For me , these ideals include supporting democratic work , recognizing the skilled nature of work , and giving voice to marginalized groups in relation to the computerization of work . In recent years the focal Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Proceedings Participatory Design Conference , Aug . 2006 , Trento , Italy © 2006ACM ISBN 1 - 59593 - 460 - X / 06 / 08 . . . $ 5 . 00 134 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 point of my interventionist research has been one of increased engagement with a variety of actors—including senior management of large public sector corporations . Although members of both my local research group ( the Assessment of Technology in Context Design Lab ( ATIC - DL ) ) and my international research team ( The ACTION for Health project ) and I have written about our projects ( e . g . , [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 20 , 30 ] ) , often the end results of our accounts render the challenges associated with expanding the boundaries of our participation and intervention invisible [ 10 , 11 , 12 ] , or focus on the contradictions , challenges and limitations of strategies ( e . g . , [ 20 , 30 ] ) in ways that render the underlying rationale—however flawed—less than clear . As I moved from working with unions to working with management teams I often wrestled with what I was doing in relative isolation . Although theory often guided the decisions I made , the theoretical basis for the strategies I pursued has typically fallen outside the scope of inquiry addressed in published accounts of our work and the work of others . Here I attempt to increase the visibility of the processes underlying the work undertaken ATIC Lab in recent years , and situate that work in relation to relevant theory about participatory design and related areas such as action research and participatory ergonomics , both of which have influenced our approach . My aim is to stimulate debate about issues raised in relation to Shapiro’s [ 38 ] recent writing about a reformist PD agenda . I have often thought of this process of attempting to influence processes surrounding design of technology in public sector agencies as venturing “inside the belly of the beast” ( the corporate sector ) , where I feared my noble ideals would be consumed by dominant interests . Below I attempt to further link the practices in which I have engaged—however flawed they may be—to theoretical insights of PD practitioners , and situate the reformist strategy I have pursued in recent years . Through this reflection I hope to contribute to debates and discussion about both increasing the political content of participatory design , and the challenges inherent to attempting a reformist agenda . BACKGROUND Kensing and Blomberg [ 32 ] have characterized PD as both a maturing area of research and an area of evolving practice . They have suggested that there are three main areas addressed by PD researchers : the politics of design , the nature of participation , and methods , tools and techniques used to foster participation . The first two of these themes provide a useful starting point for reflection . The Politics of Design Like many who engaged in projects in the 1980s that we referred to as PD project , my perspective was influenced by Braverman’s work [ 22 ] , and other scholarship that seemed to grow up around it ( e . g . , [ 36 ] ) . These early works suggested that technology was introduced in order to break the stronghold of skilled workers [ 22 ] , and that although culturally we were often led to believe that the way technology existed was the only way it could exist , later work [ 36 ] suggested that technology bore the imprint of its authors , or , put another way , was socially biased . Captivated by the notion that technology is socially biased [ 36 ] , exposure to participatory design in the mid - 1980s appeared to offer an alternative that could produce emancipatory ends for women workers , by allowing women ( and other end users ) to bring values reflective of their needs to technology design processes . Much of the work I engaged in at the time reflected a single trajectory of thinking about PD agendas , based in the conflict and contradiction tradition of Ehn and Kyng [ 25 ] . , as well as theoretical commitments to action research . Greenwood and Levin [ 29 ] suggest that action research is a diverse ( and often divergent ) set of practices aimed at using social research to help bring about democratic social change . Action research , which consists of research , action and participation ( all of which must be present in a single project in order for it to be action research ) is undertaken with the aim of increasing the ability of a participating community ( or organization ) to more effectively control their destinies . Like PD , action research emerged from industrial democracy movements , and was intended to support action that would lead to a more just or satisfying situation for participants . Action research can be characterized as research in which the researcher is actively involved , which both the researcher and the organization expect to benefit from ; and which produces knowledge that can be immediately applied . The research is a cyclical process , linking theory and practice [ 13 ] . As I engaged in several participatory efforts ( see [ See 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 16 , 17 ] ) , the challenges inherent to facilitating participatory design projects became evident . The Nature of Participation Social relations of work in North America were such that well meaning academics and activists could assist in documenting the changes in work that accompanied new technology and we could sometimes secure language in collective agreements which we thought would protect unions against layoffs ( it turned out it was hard to prove that layoffs were the result of technological change , as opposed to economic downturns ) , but we were largely powerless to influence the design of technology , which was controlled by management . Lacking legislation to legitimate end user involvement in technology design , we carried out projects in North America where we could . Occasional research funds and progressive management supported experiments that fuelled our hope for change ( see for example [ 23 ] ) . Women’s organizations and non - profit groups offered another arena in which it was possible to work towards democratic change . In women’s organizations in particular , 135 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 hierarchical relations were often less pronounced than those in the for profit sector . The goals of computerization for these groups was not to break the strong hold of skilled workers and increase control of the labour force , ( often cited as goals of computerization by political economists and labour theorists ) , but in contrast were to improve service , to achieve more , and to realize administrative efficiencies ( e . g . , avoid mailing or phone costs through use of e - mail ) . Other challenges emerged however . Women’s groups often lacked the requisite knowledge for making informed choices about technology design [ 5 , 6 , 8 , 16 , 17 ] . While we strove to support the ideal of ‘science by the people’ those with whom we worked seemed content to have us engage in delivery of ‘science for the people’ [ 15 ] . 1 While continuing to work with women’s organizations in efforts to contribute to the development of technology that supported workplace democracy , my awareness of the challenges associated with participation grew [ 1 , 5 , 6 ] . I undertook a project aimed at exploring the strengths and limitations of participatory design efforts . I felt that if we were to take seriously the claim that technology is socially biased and socially shaped , our success in guiding processes aimed at improving the lives of end users would rest , in part , in our ability to understand the limitations of the strategies we adopted in efforts to create emancipatory ends . My work represented a friendly critique of PD , undertaken with the spirit of improving practice [ 1 ] . This project left me puzzling over several issues . The project included a focus on the then emergent field of participatory ergonomics , and I had begun working with researchers whose work was concerned with the mitigation of occupational health issues amongst women workers . I was intrigued that while studies concerned with occupational health and safety , often carried out by my Francophone colleagues in a manner quite similar to work practice studies ( see [ 35 ] ) enjoyed a certain legitimacy in changing work practices , that work practice studies that sought to influence technology design in an effort to democratize work often failed to achieve long term change . I wondered why the groundbreaking projects I had learned about had not been sustainable over time . I heard about staff who became active in participatory design projects who became empowered to the point of seeking new jobs with their newly acquired skills , or , worse yet , were treated with suspicion by co - workers who suspected them of 1 The notion of science for the people emerged from late 20 th century social movements which recognized the power of science in contemporary society , and encouraged scientists to share their expertise with disenfranchised groups to support those groups . Science was seen as an instrument of power and domination that could be challenged it was applied to the needs of dominated groups . colluding with management or shirking work responsibilities . Participation did not always achieve the emancipatory ends of democratic work , or empowerment [ 1 ] , and PD projects were difficult to sustain over time . Projects that had support from the shop floor and upper management could be weakened by middle managers , as well as a host of other factors . Gartner and Wagner [ 27 ] suggested that system design could be viewed as a series of boundary crossings between different arenas in which system development occurs . They suggested that participation in system design occurs in a variety of different political arenas . In the arena of designing work and systems , new organizational forms are created ; the task of redesigning work leads the agenda in this arena . In the second arena—that of organizational frameworks for action—unresolved conflicts and issues are addressed . This is the arena in which breakdowns or violations are addressed . In the third arena—that of the industrial relations context—legal and political frameworks define the relations between the different actors . I remained perplexed about how to participate in those arenas in which I , as an academic researcher completely lacked influence . A participatory project I had undertaken that resulted in the development of mathematics teaching software for children [ 9 ] left me wondering who really benefited from participation in design—surely the children who had contributed to the design of our software had not benefited much ( they would progress to the next grade before the software was completed ) . The software developers seemed poised to benefit financially from the software , while the participant / users / informants stood to gain little . The manifestation of participation without politics ( meaning a concern about dominance patterns [ 14 ] ) sat uneasily . Methods , Tools and Techniques to Foster Participation The future of participatory design became less clear for me—and I suspect others - - in an environment in which increasingly computer systems were being purchased “off the shelf” rather than designed either in - house or under contract to a specific end user group . Robertson [ 37 , p . 205 ] has suggested that under such circumstances , “user participation focuses on shopping decisions , and the fitting of purchased technology to the local work situation . ” It was unclear where to locate design in the face of off the shelf software and distributed arrangements for producing and configuring software , in part , because it was unclear where design takes place [ 14 ] . As Beck [ 14 , p . 80 ] puts it , “intervention requires a location . ” Somehow the tools through which one engaged end users in design seemed less important to me in an environment when it was not altogether clear where design took place . SCIENCE FOR THE PEOPLE In an environment where influencing design of technology seemed ever more remote a possibility , I scaled back my expectations , and focused my attention on documenting the challenges that marginalized groups ( women workers ) were 136 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 facing in relation to the computerization of health sector work . I took solace in one of Benston’s [ 15 ] insights : that science for the people and science with the people were likely pre - conditions to science by the people . Put another way , although I remained confused about what I could do to actually improve women’s jobs as they were being computerized , I was fairly confident that documenting the challenges women experienced in relation to the computerization of work from my stance as a ( privileged ) academic researcher might at worst give voice to the struggles women workers faced . My attentions had turned somewhat serendipitously towards the health sector . I began pursuing health sector work because much of it was carried out by women workers , the population I have focused on throughout my career . In light of Canada’s publicly funded health system , any benefits that could result from my work would likely benefit patients or the publicly funded health system , rather than ( for example ) specific software manufacturers . I built relationships with two healthcare unions , and began carrying out ethnographic work concerned with documenting how work was changing for nurses and clerks as electronic patient record systems were being introduced in hospitals . Although observation of work was compelling and work practice problems were evident , our work remained quite peripheral . Our project was research driven , rather than demand driven , and , as such , our scope of influence was limited . We were able to document issues that occurred within the arena of designing work and systems [ 27 ] , but we could not claim many successes in crossing boundaries into organizational frameworks for action . WORKING IN THE BELLY OF THE BEAST Another series of coincidences intensified my contact with health sector management . Amidst concern that working with management might lead to pressures to compromise , I decided to pursue a set of opportunities that lay before me as long as I could do so without compromising my beliefs . A research position opened at the hospital , and , after considerable thought I accepted it and became a member of the professional practice team , a management group responsible for practice issues for all nursing and allied health groups . 2 Although offered a full time position at the hospital , in light of recent cutbacks in the health sector , I opted instead for a secondment from my university position , which offered me the job security of tenure . As a member of the professional practice team I provided research guidance to other members of the professional practice team , assisted in practice issues that arose , and provided research support to members of the broader 2 The allied health professions consist of a range of professional groups such as physiotherapists , occupational therapists , respiratory therapists , social workers , etc . nursing and allied health communities . The ongoing research work I undertook was funded with grant funds I secured from federal funding agencies , which require that publication and other forms of dissemination of research results may not be subject to embargo or censorship . By the time I began working in the health sector , few custom software builds were taking place . 3 In the acute care sector , systems are typically large scale systems that often must be implemented on a large and varied base of legacy computer systems , each with their own problems and limitations . In practical terms this means that while a product a hospital purchases may not be a custom built product , the process of getting the purchased system to work across multiple sites and multiple computing platforms in many senses resembles a custom design . Indeed , configuration is increasingly emerging as a site for participatory intervention [ 12 ] , and if we take seriously the notion that the design of technology is only fully completed when in use [ 39 ] , processes surrounding implementation of technologies offer a site for intervention . Indeed , our work has shown [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 30 ] intervention at the point of configuration and implementation can give voice to marginalized populations . Negotiating the Politics of Design in a Reformist Agenda Shapiro [ 38 , p . 35 ] asks how “involvement of PD in the development of large - scale public sector systems” can stand up to scrutiny of the sort advocated by Beck [ 14 ] , and suggests that “it would have to be accepted that the effectiveness of such interventions depends on demonstrating that , in these instances , they are consistent with the real interests of employers” which Shapiro suggests is what makes this a reformist strategy . In fact , some of the more successful endeavors that utilize participatory techniques ( e . g . , contextual design ; see [ 18 ] have succeeded on the basis of demonstrating consistency with the real interest of employers , but would likely fail to meet Beck’s [ 14 ] inclusion criteria . Shapiro notes the potential contradictions inherent to addressing issues related to labour productivity within PD studies , and suggests that ethnographic work undertaken towards the ends of PD could , in Beck’s [ 14 ] terms challenge rather than reproduce marginalization , and , as such , could be valuable . Whether or not particular projects do challenge rather than reproduce marginalization however often is left unaddressed . Before reflecting on specific aspects of interventions which I suggest have given voice to marginalized workers , below I briefly address issues of negotiating access to field sites within the context of a 3 One custom build that has taken place recently consisted of a shell that integrated several distinct systems—a solution that was pursued when it was determined that the cost of replacing legacy systems would be too costly . 137 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 reformist PD agenda . The Pragmatics of Eating Elephants Even within a context where I was given legitimacy by virtue of my position at the hospital , the specifics of projects had to be negotiated , and projects undertaken at the hospital had to maintain compatibility with funders’ requirements . Greenbaum [ 28 ] has suggested that three arguments have been used to justify the need for PD . A pragmatic perspective suggests that PD can contribute to getting the job done better . Theoretical arguments often derive from philosophical stances and are aimed at bridging gaps between what we know and what we do . Political perspectives revolve around developers’ commitments to give people the opportunity to influence their lives , and are often seen by management as a strategy as a sound political strategy for securing support for technological change . In developing access to field sites and creating a role for my research team on hospital based projects , a pragmatic approach has frequently been taken to “sell” PD first to decision makers , and subsequently to first level managers and staff . We often begin dialogue about project involvement by acknowledging that the introduction of new technology will be challenging , and suggest that problems will occur . I suggest that as researchers we can help document the challenges , provide support during the planning and implementation stages of new technologies , and can assist in the development of solutions to problems . This is an atypical role for academic researchers ( see [ 20 ] ) , which has been legitimated by our funder , who has identified as one aim of our funding program the facilitation of “the development of methods and strategies , beyond traditional academic vehicles , for the mobilization of research , knowledge , and expertise in order to inform decisions , policies and practices” ( INE website 4 ) . In keeping with these goals , early project negotiations often specify non - academic deliverables such as evaluation reports , briefing notes , 5 or trouble logs [ 10 ] produced for practitioner communities , which research staff produce . Indeed , such negotiations help demonstrate that work undertaken helps meet the needs of employers [ 38 ] . As the principle investigator of a large research project , I must convince the practice based community that they will benefit from the involvement of my research team in their work . In light of the demands placed on the staff with whom we must work when new technologies are under consideration for adoption or are being implemented , our strategies for gaining access typically involve joining an organizational process that is already underway—a lesson I 4 INE website : http : / / 198 . 96 . 3 . 162 / ev _ en . php ( Last assessed : April , 2005 ) 5 The ACTION for Health web site ( www . sfu . ca / act4hlth ) contains examples of several non - academic deliverables developed for community partners . learned early in my tenure at the hospital , when our team was initially denied access to a field site , only to be granted access subsequently by “piggy - backing” onto an existing process ( e . g . , an initiative undertaken to support a move into a new building ) [ 10 ] . Most initiatives undertaken at the hospital are undertaken by multi - stakeholder groups , so joining an existing imitative typically results in a ready made multi - stakeholder group of users , ranging from front line workers through to directors . Participation is representative , and , because of shift scheduling and staffing pressures , always a challenge . Although a pragmatic approach is most commonly used to convince hospital staff to work with researchers , within the context of the Canadian health sector , some latitude exists for raising political concerns . Labour shortages ( and consequently the need to retain staff ) and high occupational injury rates among nursing staff , as well as a national concern about patient safety create openings through which other ‘political’ issues can be raised . This process is at times facilitated by the somewhat detached status of researchers , who are neither managers nor workers in the field settings in which they work [ 30 ] . Terms of Engagement Shapiro [ 38 ] has identified several elements of an experimental strategy for PD engagement in large - scale public sector systems . Among the elements for an experimental strategy identified is a working consensus among PD practitioners about the potential contributions that a reformist agenda might make . It is my hope that this piece will contribute to discussion that will help move our community towards such a consensus . Shapiro highlights the need for clarity—for the formulation of a clear , concise and persuasive statement about the advantages of the paradigm , and clear case illustrations of the benefits that a PD approach can deliver . The processes of securing funding for our research and gaining access to field sites as described above allowed us to develop a clear statement about the benefits of a participatory approach . We have been able to draw on some successes from some of our earlier work to illustrate the value that PD can make . Notable here is the case of keyboard trays ( see [ 10 ] for more detail ) . After moving into a new building , our research team documented ample problems with under - the - desk keyboard trays that had been installed . We gave voice to staff complaints , which initially fell on deaf ears at the managers’ table : managers attributed problems with the keyboard trays to poorly educated users , unable to properly operate the trays . Our observations and conversations with staff yielded a different picture , which we unyieldingly presented to managers . Eventually a staff member from the department that had authorized purchase of the keyboard trays accompanied our team member to the field setting , ostensibly to train the researcher about the use of the trays , 138 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 so she in turn could help train staff . Through this process , the magnitude of the problem became clear to the staff member from the department responsible . The trays were found to be defective , and were removed and replaced under warranty . We were able to demonstrate that our work resulted in action on a warranty issue , related to in excess of $ 30 , 000 worth of equipment . Referring back to the arenas of participation [ 27 ] , in the instance described above , our research team served as a communicative bridge between the individual project arena ( where work practices were interrupted by keyboard trays ) , and the company arena , where breakdowns or violations of agreements occurred . Shapiro [ 38 ] identifies integration as a potential site for experimentation within a reformist PD agenda . Issues to be addressed include best practices for large scale system integration , project management , and oversight and integration . Here insights from the sociology of infrastructures [ 21 ] can provide theoretical guidance . Our experience working with both health sector data producers and data users has shown us that the challenges associated with generating meaningful data across multiple computing platforms are poorly understood by those who rely on data for decision making . Hence PD practitioners can play a role in making the politics of infrastructure visible , but may need additional resources institutionally in order to effect change in how decisions are made . Here again one of the roles PD practitioners can play revolves around fostering linkages between arenas of participation [ 27 ] . The act of data collection may be carried out in several individual project arenas , with the aid of discreet systems and within the context of local organizational cultures . The integration of data from multiple sources may well bring to light differences between local practices , and highlight breakdowns and violations . For example , in the case of CareConnect ( an integrated health record that provides a common interface for accessing health information from multiple providers ) , although only 4 million residents live in the province ( only a portion of whom are served by the health authority ) , a briefing note about a part of the system upgrade required at one hospital in order for the local computer system to communicate with CareConnect stated that “the most difficult task has been the conversion of over 65 million patient and data records for the old system to the new system” [ 40 ] . Once this process had begun , it was anticipated that reconciliation of these duplicate records would require the labour of 20 full time staff members over a 6 month period , at a cost of in excess of $ 1 million dollars [ 3 ] . This effort was being supported provincially by an initiative called the Enterprise Master Person Index ( EMPI ) [ 41 ] designed to address issues arising because patients are identified differently from system to system . Our team has been particularly successful at addressing what can be viewed as the telescopic relationship between arenas of participation . As academics , we are well trained to “see the big picture . ” In several instances we have been able to serve a translational function , helping members of the organization to see how changes within the company arena may be required to respond to issues arising in the local project arena , or how changes at the national level may influence procedures that occur within the company arena , and , subsequently , within the individual project arena ( see [ 2 ] ) . Shapiro [ 38 ] identifies procurement as an area of concern and possible intervention for advocates of PD . Until recently , it was largely the case that when we got involved with technology projects in the health sector , it was only after procurement decisions had been made . In an era of off the shelf , large scale system acquisitions , proprietary purchasing agreements and strategic plans developed at the vice - presidential level , the focal point of our interventionist work has been the documentation of work practice and technology troubles during the pilot implementation stage [ 12 ] or when implementation occurs [ 10 , 11 ] . By working simultaneously over time within the organizational arena and in the national arena , we have provided support for the development of an internal health technology assessment office which will engage in pre - purchase evaluation of technologies throughout the health provider agency , and , in instances where decisions are made to proceed with technological procurement in spite of risks , research will be undertaken to insure that insights gained are shared throughout the agency . We remain hopeful that these new processes will provide a mechanism through which innovative solutions to problems will receive a fair hearing and a mechanism for halting the progression of poorly planned projects or projects for which little evidence of success exists . Working with pilot projects [ 38 ] has been an excellent means through which our group has built working relationships within our health sector provider agency . It should be noted though that the process of gaining political currency within an organization can require substantial time , and there may be quite a long time before the relationship building process yields a payoff . As comments below allude to , mishaps may occur along the way . As trust builds between participant interventionists [ 31 , 10 ] and actors in each of the three arenas in which participation occurs [ 27 ] , the possibility for escalation of intervention activities may emerge . For me , this process has taken four years , the first of which was spent engaging in projects as a researcher with no formal affiliation to the provider agency in which my research was carried out . Shapiro [ 38 ] advocates putting users in charge in order to avoid having them sidelined . Although philosophically this idea has considerable appeal , it is also fraught with challenges . Which users ? ( Should managers who are indirect users count here ? ) Keeping Beck’s [ 14 ] metric in 139 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 mind of marginalized groups and dominance relations , only front line workers would be appropriate here . Sadly , our experience has shown that the social relations of North American workplaces seldom support such a degree of end - user ownership . The necessity of carrying out often life - critical work , staffing shortages in the health sector that make it nearly impossible to ‘back fill’ positions even during short periods of time when staff receive training , and a range of hierarchical relations prevalent in health sector workplaces ( professional hierarchies grant greater status to doctors than nurses ; gender hierarchies accord men greater status than women , and class and race hierarchies accord white English speaking staff members greater status than their foreign born counterparts ) often work against the exercise of ownership amongst certain groups . Staff are not empowered merely because we deem them so . Although encouraging ownership of projects by users is a laudable goal , we have found that practically speaking this is not always possible , and under such circumstances , often the best we can do is represent the interests of marginalized groups to those who have the power to respond . As [ 15 ] noted some years ago , sometimes science for the people and science with the people must precede science by the people . Shapiro [ 38 ] notes that vested interests come in various forms , and that withstanding the onslaught from vested interests can be challenging . He points to the necessity of allies and the exercise of agility in building actor networks . Differently put , one’s success as a participant interventionist may rest in one’s ability to link activities that occur in each of the arenas of participation identified by [ 27 ] , and navigate the political minefields at each turn . A single un - anticipated action or poorly communicated point can sink a project and threaten future collaborations . I learned this the hard way . Size Matters , the State and Loss Leaders After about a year and a half of working inside the belly of the beast I learned a hard lesson . My direct boss ( who had hired me ) had been fired—a not uncommon event ( the average tenure in a health sector management position in Canada at present is about 3 years ) . I was asked to speak about technology in healthcare at a conference about the future of healthcare , which was widely attended by senior managers . I prepared what in academic terms was an extraordinarily benign presentation , the kernel of which was that the future of technology in healthcare will depend upon investment in human capitol ( training , listening to staff concerns about technology , etc . ) and developing an understanding of socio - technical aspects of systems . My presentation included a few slides from our fieldwork , such as a photo of a staff member struggling with a keyboard tray , and a bag full of receipts that had been printed by an automatic drug dispensing machine , and which signaled an ambiguity in work practices . A month or so later I went on my summer holiday . Upon my return I learned that my acting boss had attempted to sever my relationship with the professional practice group during my absence . Eventually I left the professional practice group ( under the watch of what became my third boss in twenty six months ) . By the time this had occurred however I was well ensconced in the provider agency , and I have been able to retain my position as a senior research scientist there . While I no longer hold operational responsibilities , I have continued to work with senior managers on projects . I learned several lessons from my ill fated presentation . First , I learned that sometimes the right message can be presented the wrong way , or at the wrong time . A senior manager in the room heard my presentation as a condemnation of events that had occurred on his watch . Although ultimately I have come to conclude that he and I have considerable common ground , whatever I thought about the content of my presentation , the fact remains that it threatened his interests . Second , I learned the value of allies . I have been able to repair the relationship I damaged over time through a “loss leader” ( in retail terms , a sale that looses money but gets the buyer in the door ) and help from a colleague . Third , I have learned that size matters—I am certain that I have been able to retain my position as a research scientist because I hold a particularly large research grant and the healthcare agency is standing by its commitment to honour its partnership with the state in support of that research . 6 Finally , I have learned about the value of tenure . Because I had remained seconded to the health provider agency and retained my position at the university , I was able to speak my mind without threat of job loss . Until I began to experience the fall out from my epic presentation to senior managers , tenure had only an intellectual meaning to me . I now see tenure as an extraordinary privilege that should be exercised in the public interest . The existence of tenure may ultimately protect academically based researchers from job loss in the face of research results that some may find unfavorable . Other challenges though researchers may face along the way can be handled by invoking a distinction between operational needs and research . 7 Resisting Cooptation : Invoking Research Standards Although issues of labour productivity are not the only issues health sector managers grapple with ( after all , health outcomes and patient safety must be balanced against 6 I owe much to colleagues around me who supported me as I negotiated new terms for my position at the health agency . 7 This is a far more complicated issue than is implied here . While I am quite clear that I am never “just a researcher” and that I always represent some interests and not others , I have used my researcher status to avoid situations that I have found ideologically offensive . 140 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 labour savings and other cost saving measures ) , nonetheless early in my tenure at the hospital I was asked by a co - worker to undertake some work which I felt could contribute to the marginalization of workers , rather than their emancipation . I was able to avoid contributing to what was in my view a questionable exercise by invoking claims about research ( e . g . , the answer cannot be known at the onset of the project , and if it was known that ‘data collection’ would result in layoffs , there was little point in collecting data ; the process of collecting data has to be systematic , and their can be no embargo on the dissemination of research results ) . It has been possible for me to make a distinction between research and operational needs and to refuse the latter partly because our work is funded through external grants , over which the health provider agency has no control . As participatory design practices have gained currency , they have also been increasingly utilized in circumstances where the focus on political aspects of design at times appear secondary to goals of increasing profit margins for technology vendors . The extent to which participatory processes are concerned with democratization of work or support for marginalized groups may be further obfuscated by the language used to “sell” participatory approaches to those stakeholders who are in a position to carry out recommendations and designs . The lines between operational activities and research , between consulting and action research , and between participation for profit vs . participation for democracy are increasingly blurred , and it is perhaps useful to return to some of these distinctions – however contested they may be—as we explore the possibilities for a reformist participatory design . Baskerville and Wood - Harper [ 13 ] suggest that there are at least 4 factors which distinguish action research from consulting : more rigorous documentation ; theoretical justification ( rather than empirical justification ) ; time and budgetary constraints ( researchers have more time and often less money ) ; and the nature of the process ( consulting is linear and action research is cyclical ) . Wood - Harper , Corder , Wood and Watson [ 42 ] also raise the issue of whose perspective will dominate system development processes , and whose ethical perspective ( workers or management or system designers ? ) will dominate system development activities . Engaging in a reformist PD strategy is likely to be both challenging and confusing , and as we undertake participatory design projects , it may prove instructive to reflect on some of the distinctions made by Baskerville and Wood - Harper [ 13 ] and Wood - Harper et . al . [ 42 ] . Along with Beck’s [ 14 ] metric ( is participation used as a means though which to improve design , in the absence of a focus on understanding the manifold ways through which computerization can contribute to dominance patterns ? ) we can perhaps increase our clarity about just what it is we are trying to do . A reformist PD agenda has the potential to succeed , but also can temp us to loose sight of those attributes ( such as an action orientation undertaken in support of marginal workers , questions of ethics and values and democracy ) which brought many of us to PD in the first place . Yet an awareness of these issues as we engage in participatory practices can help us resist cooptation . Clearly , colleagues working in corporate settings where research is funded by a corporate employer and no tenure exists are labouring under extraordinarily different conditions , and the strategy identified above of invoking research standards as a means of resisting cooptation is not likely possible . As many of the situations I have found myself in while working as a researcher in a public sector agency have demonstrated , university - community partnerships present numerous challenges . However , they may also present opportunities to reinstate ideas about undertaking work that is in the public interest ( e . g . , publicly funded research results should not be subject to embargo ) . As companies increasingly seek university partnerships in order to offset the costs of research , corporate and academic researchers may be able to develop new strategies that support old ideals about ‘the public intellectual’ whose primary goal is to represent broad public interests . DISCUSSION : COMING IN FROM THE COLD ? Is a reformist PD possible ? When I began my journey inside the belly of the beast some years ago , I seldom spoke about the challenges , contradictions and trials I encountered . Shapiro’s [ 38 ] paper , together with Beck’s [ 14 ] insights that participation in the ways we conceived of PD some years ago may not be the best means through which to practice political system design have given me some language through which I can begin to speak about the strategies I have pursued as I have wrestled with the limitations of what those of us in the PD community have come to think of as our practice . This signals a maturity to me : we have developed enough of a sense of security in what we are doing that we can take a more critical or self - reflective stance towards it . From the odd space I inhabit—with the protection of tenure and external grant funding , the insider status accorded non - union staff in a major public sector agency , and support from those with whom I have worked in labour and feminist endeavors over the years , a reformist PD seems possible . I suspect a reformist PD will require new organizational forms ( little of what I have described would likely work in a strictly corporate environment ) , as well as new forms of partnerships . As I continue to work on the development of a major research imitative that will , I suspect , reflect new ways for academic and corporate researchers to work together , Shapiro’s [ 38 ] subtitle comes to mind : if my colleagues and I enjoy success in the very ambitious goals we have set , it will be because we have a will to succeed . Floyd [ 26 ] , in her opening paper for the Critical Computing conference made several salient comments . She suggested that “critical computing rests on having an impact on 141 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 computing practice” and that being critical refers to how computers are developed and used [ 26 , p . 209 ] . Floyd suggests that as a community , we consider how we can intervene in the network of activities involved in designing , adapting and enhancing existing systems , but in doing so , that we retain our focus on the specific properties of computing . Engagement with large public sector organizations in a manner similar to that described here offers the possibility of having an impact on computing practice , as well as the development and use of computing systems . It offers close enough proximity to the systems that become the subjects of our study to support a level of engagement that allows us to put computing at the centre of our inquiry , while at the same time affording us with access to the networks of activities involved in designing , adapting and using computer systems . We may need to become skilled at functioning within actor networks , but Floyd reminds us that we must also retain our focus on the specific properties of computing in order to have an impact on computing practice . Floyd [ 26 ] suggests that it is possible to be critical in computing without having any bearing on what is implemented in society . Beck [ 14 ] has pointed out that it is possible to have participation in technology design without contributing to understanding or challenging patterns of dominance . PD needs to address both of these points . A reformist PD strategy can offer the possibility of having an impact on computing practice and on dominance relations if computing and politics remain central to the reformist agenda . By engaging with large scale public sector organizations as advocated by Shapiro [ 38 ] we are , in a sense , coming in from the cold . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work has been supported through a Social Sciences and Research Council of Canada Collaborative Research Initiative Grant titled “The role of technology in the production , consumption and use of health information : Implications for policy and practice” ( ACTION for Health ) . I am grateful to several colleagues including Joan Greenbaum , Ina Wagner , Karen Messing , Janet Joy and Linda Peritz with whom I have spoken candidly in recent years as I have struggled to make sense of the work I have been undertaking . REFERENCES 1 . Balka , E . Tidying up loose ends : Theoretical and practical issues related to women’s participation in technological design . In H . Rohracher ( Ed . ) , User Involvement in Technological Innovation , Profil - Verlag , Munich , 2005 , 147 - 173 . 2 . Balka , E . The Production of Health Indicators as Computer Supported Cooperative Work : Reflections on the Multiple Roles of Electronic Health Records . In Balka , E . and Wagner , I . ( Eds . ) . Reconfiguring Healthcare : Issues in Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Healthcare Environments , ( 2005 ) , 67 - 75 3 . Balka , E . Notes taken at presentation about the system upgrade , March 18 2005 . 4 . Balka , E . Feminist Technology Assessment : Reflections on Theory and Practice . Atlantis 22 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 112 - 122 . 5 . Balka , E . Computer Networking : Spinsters on the Web . Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women , Ottawa ( 1997a ) . 6 . Balka , E . Participatory Design in Women’s Organizations : The Social World of Organizational Structure and the Gendered Nature of Expertise . Gender , Work and Organizations 4 , 2 ( 1997b ) , 99 - 115 . 7 . Balka , E . Women’s access to on - line discussions about feminism . The Electronic Journal of Communication / La Revue Electronique de Communication 3 , 1 ( 1993 ) . 8 . Balka , E . and Doucette , L . The accessibility of computers to organizations serving women in the province of Newfoundland : Preliminary study results . Electronic Journal of Virtual Culture 2 , 3 ( 1994 ) , 739 lines . 9 . Balka , E . , Jones , M . , Jorgenson , L . and Sinclair , N . Participatory Design with Island Pacific School : Lessons from the Field , Unpublished paper ( 1998 ) . http : / / pdg . cecm . sfu . ca / IPS / PDC . html 10 . Balka , E . and Kahnamoui , N . Technology trouble ? Talk to us ! Findings from an ethnographic field study . Proc . Participatory Design Conference 2004 , Artful integration : interweaving media , materials and practices – Volume 1 , New York , NY , ACM Press ( 2004 ) , 224 – 234 . 11 . Balka , E . , Kahnamoui , N . and Nutland K . Who’s in Charge of Patient Safety ? Work Practice , Work Processes and Utopian Views of Automatic Drug Dispensing Systems . Proc . Technology in Healthcare , To Err is System , 2004 . 12 . Balka , E . , Wagner , I . and Jensen , C . B . Reconfiguring Critical Computing in an Era of Configurability . In . Bertelsen , O . W . , Bouvin , N . O . , Krough , P . G . and Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) . Proc . The Forth Decennial Aarhus Conference , Critical Computing - Between Sense and Sensibility . New York , NY , ACM Press ( 2005 ) , 79 - 88 . 13 . Baskerville , R . L . and Wood - Harper , A . T . A Critical Perpsective on Action Research as a Method for Information Systems Research . Journal of Information Technology , 11 , ( 1996 ) . 235 - 246 . 14 . Beck , E . P for Political : Participation is Not Enough . Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems 14 , 1 ( 2002 ) , 77 - 92 . 15 . Benston , M . Feminism and systems design : Questions of control . In Tomm , W . ( Ed . ) . The effects of feminist approaches on research methodologies . University of Calgary , Calgary , 1989 . 142 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006 16 . Benston , M . and Balka , E . Participatory Design by Non - Profit Groups . Canadian Woman Studies Journal / les cahiers de la femme 13 , 2 ( 1993 ) , 100 - 103 . 17 . Benston , M . and Balka , E . Participatory design by nonprofit groups . In Proc . Participatory Design Conference 1990 , CPSR , Palo Alto , CA , ( 1990 ) , 107 - 113 . 18 . Beyer , H . and Holzblatt , K . Contextual Design . Interactions 6 , 1 ( 1999 ) , 32 - 42 . 19 . Blythin , S . , Hughes , J . and Rouncefield , M . ‘Never mind all that ethno stuff : what does it mean and what do we do now ? ’ Ethnography in a Commercial Context . Interactions 4 , 3 ( 1997 ) , 38 - 47 . 20 . Boulus , N . Making things work : On being an academic researcher working with a community partner . Paper presented at the Urban Health Conference : Achieving Social Justice in Urban Communities , 2005 . 21 . Bowker , G . and Star , S . L . Sorting Things Out : Classification and Its Consequences . Cambridge , Mass , MIT Press , 1999 . 22 . Braverman , H . Labor and monopoly capital . New York , Monthly Review Press , 1974 . 23 . Clement , A . Computing at Work : Empowering Action by ' Low - level Users ' . Communications of the ACM , Special Issue on ' Social Computing ' 37 , 1 ( 1994 ) , 52 - 63 . 24 . Damodaran , L . User involvement in the systems design process - A practical guide for users . Behaviour & Information Technology 15 , 6 ( 1996 ) , 363 - 377 . 25 . Ehn , P . and Kyng ( M ) . The collective resource approach to systems design . In Bjerknes , G . , Ehn , P . , & Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) , Computers and democracy : A Scandinavian challenge , 17 - 57 . Aldershot , UK : Avebury ; Brookfield , VT : Gower . , 1987 . 26 . Floyd , C . Being critical in , on or around computing ? Proc . Forth Decennial Aarhus Conference , Critical Computing - Between Sense and Sensibility ( 2005 ) . 27 . Gärtner J . and Wagner I . Mapping actors and agendas : Political frameworks of systems design and participation . Human - Computer Interaction 11 , ( 1996 ) , 187 - 214 . 28 . Greenbaum , J . PD : A Personal Statement . In Communications of the Association of Computing Machinists ( CACM ) , Special Issue on Participatory Design , 36 , 4 ( 1993 ) , 47 . 29 . Greenwood , D . J . and Levin , M . Introduction to action research : Social research for social change . Newbury Park , CA , Sage 1998 . 30 . Jensen , C . B . Sorting Attachments : On Intervention and Usefulness in STS and Health Policy . Practices of Assessment and Intervention in Action - Oriented STS Research , 2005 . 31 . Karasti , H . Increasing sensitivity towards everyday work practice in system design ( Academic Dissertation ) , 2001 . 32 . Kensing , F . and Blomberg , J . Participatory Design : Issues and Concerns . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 7 , 3 - 4 ( 1998 ) , 167 - 185 . 33 . Kensing , F . Participatory Design in a Commercial Context – a conceptual framework . In Proc . Participatory Design Conference 2000 , CPSR , Palo Alto , CA , ( 2000 ) 116 - 126 . 34 . Kensing , F . , Simonsen , J . and Bødker , K . Participatory Design at a Radio Station . Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : The Journal of Collaborative Computing 7 3 - 4 ( 1998 ) , 243 - 271 . 35 . Messing , K . , Seifert , A . M . , Vézina , N . , Balka , E . , Chatigny , C . Qualitative research using numbers : Analysis developed in France and used to transform work in North America . New Solutions : A Journal of Environmental and Occupational Health Policy 15 ( 3 ) : ( 2005 ) , 245 - 260 . 36 . Noble , D . F . Social choice in machine design : The case of automatically controlled machine tools . In A . Zimbalist ( Ed . ) . Case studies on the labour process . New York , Monthly Review Press , 1979 , 18 - 50 . 37 . Robertson , T . Shoppers and Tailors : Participative Practices in Small Australian Design Companies . Computer Supported Cooperative Work 7 3 - 4 ( 1998 ) , 205 - 221 . 38 . Shapiro , D . Participatory design : The will to succeed . In . Bertelsen , O . W . , Bouvin , N . O . , Krough , P . G . and Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) . Proc . Forth Decennial Aarhus Conference , Critical Computing - Between Sense and Sensibility . New York , NY , ACM Press ( 2005 ) , 29 - 38 . 39 . Suchman , L . and Jordan , B . Computerization and Women ' s Knowledge ( with Jordan , B . ) In K . Tijdens , Jennings , M . , Wagner , I . and Weggelaar , M . ( Eds . ) Women , Work and Computerization : Forming New Alliances . Amsterdam , North Holland , ( 1988 ) , 153 - 160 . 40 . Vancouver Coastal Health . Briefing note : Patient Care Information System ( PCIS ) Enhancement Project . April 7 , ( 2005 ) , 1 . 41 . Vancouver Coastal Health , Building the foundation for electronic health records : Recording accurate patient identity data is the key . In Medlink : The VCH physician newsletter September , ( 2005 ) , 3 . 42 . Wood Harper , A . T . , Corder , S . , Wood , J . R . G . , and Watson , H . How We Profess : The Ethical Systems Analyst . Communications of the Association of Computing Machinists ( CACM ) , 39 , 3 ( 1996 ) , 69 - 77 . 143 PDC 2006 - Proceedings of the ninth Participatory Design Conference 2006