INTRODUCTION The ability to express a gene in a directed fashion is a useful means of analyzing its role in development . A switch in cell fate can often be induced by ectopic expression of a gene . The ability to alter transcription patterns at will would permit direct testing of models for cell fate determination . For example , misexpression of a ligand can be used to assay whether a receptor is restricted to speciﬁc cells or is present , and competent to respond to ligand - induced activation , in every cell of a particular tissue ( such as the ability of cells expressing the sevenless receptor tyrosine kinase to respond to the presence of the ligand , boss ; Van Vactor et al . , 1991 ) . A gene encoding a putative transcriptional activator ( or repressor ) can be expressed in a different cell , or at a dif - ferent time of development , and its effect on the subsequent expression of a target gene assayed . In this way it is pos - sible to determine if the activator is both necessary and suf - ﬁcient for transcription of the target . Such an analysis is particularly useful where a protein acts as an activator in one context and as a repressor in another ( as may be the case for the zinc - ﬁnger protein Kruppel ; Sauer and Jackle , 1991 ) . To date , two methods have been employed most widely to manipulate gene expression . The ﬁrst is to drive expression of a gene from a heat shock promoter . The gene can then be turned on at a speciﬁc point in development by heat shocking the transgenic animal ( Struhl , 1985 ; Schneuwly et al . , 1987 ; Ish - Horowicz and Pinchin , 1987 ; Ish - Horowicz et al . , 1989 ; Gonzales - Reyes and Morata , 1990 ; Blochlinger et al . , 1991 ; Steingrimsson et al . , 1991 ) . An advantage of the heat shock method is that it permits inducible expression ; several disadvantages are that ectopic expression is ubiquitous , that basal levels of expression are observed from heat shock promoters , and that heat shock itself can induce phenocopies ( Petersen and Mitchell , 1987 ; Petersen , 1990 ; Yost et al . , 1990 ) . The second technique is to drive expression of a gene using the transcriptional reg - ulatory sequences from a deﬁned promoter ( Zuker et al . , 1988 ; Parkhurst et al . , 1990 ; Parkhurst and Ish Horowicz , 1991 ) . The use of tissue - speciﬁc promoters allows tran - scription to be restricted to a deﬁned subset of cells , but is limited by the availability of cloned and characterized pro - moters that can direct expression in the desired pattern . Fur - thermore , if the gene product to be expressed is toxic to the organism , it is impossible to establish stable transgenic lines carrying the chimeric gene . Here we describe a method for directing gene expression in Drosophila that overcomes these difficulties ( Fig . 1 ) . First , the system allows the rapid generation of individual strains in which ectopic expression of the gene of interest ( the target gene ) can be directed to different tissues or cell types . Second , the method separates the target gene from its transcriptional activator in two distinct transgenic lines . 401 Development 118 , 401 - 415 ( 1993 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1993 We have designed a system for targeted gene expression that allows the selective activation of any cloned gene in a wide variety of tissue - and cell - speciﬁc patterns . The gene encoding the yeast transcriptional activator GAL4 is inserted randomly into the Drosophila genome to drive GAL4 expression from one of a diverse array of genomic enhancers . It is then possible to introduce a gene containing GAL4 binding sites within its promoter , to activate it in those cells where GAL4 is expressed , and to observe the effect of this directed misexpression on development . We have used GAL4 - directed tran - scription to expand the domain of embryonic expression of the homeobox protein even - skipped . We show that even - skipped represses wingless and transforms cells that would normally secrete naked cuticle into denticle secreting cells . The GAL4 system can thus be used to study regulatory interactions during embryonic devel - opment . In adults , targeted expression can be used to generate dominant phenotypes for use in genetic screens . We have directed expression of an activated form of the Dras2 protein , resulting in dominant eye and wing defects that can be used in screens to identify other members of the Dras2 signal transduction path - way . Key words : targeted expression , enhancer trap , GAL4 , cell fate SUMMARY Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes Andrea H . Brand 1 , * and Norbert Perrimon 1 , 2 1 Department of Genetics and 2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 , USA * Present address : The Wellcome / CRC Institute , Tennis Court Road , Cambridge CB2 1QR , UK 402 A . H . Brand and N . Perrimon Fig . 1 . Directed gene expression in Drosophila . To generate transgenic lines expressing GAL4 in numerous cell - and tissue - speciﬁc patterns , the GAL4 gene is inserted randomly into the genome , driving GAL4 expression from numerous different genomic enhancers . A GAL4 - dependent target gene can then be constructed by subcloning any sequence behind GAL4 binding sites . The target gene is silent in the absence of GAL4 . To activate the target gene in a cell - or tissue - speciﬁc pattern , ﬂies carrying the target ( UAS - Gene X ) are crossed to ﬂies expressing GAL4 ( Enhancer Trap GAL4 ) . In the progeny of this cross , it is possible to activate UAS - Gene X in cells where GAL4 is expressed and to observe the effect of this directed misexpression on development . Fig . 2 . ( A ) Vectors for directed gene expression . The vectors pGaTB , pGawB and pUAST are illustrated . To target GAL4 expression to speciﬁc cells , promoters can be subcloned upstream of GAL4 at the unique Bam HI site of pGaTB . pGawB is an enhancer detection vector that directs expression of GAL4 in a genomic integration site - dependent fashion . pUAST is designed to direct GAL4 - dependent transcription of a gene of choice . The sequence is subcloned into a polylinker situated downstream of ﬁve tandemly arrayed , optimized GAL4 binding sites , and upstream of the SV40 small t intron and polyadenylation site . Unique restriction sites are indicated in bold letters . ( B ) GAL4 - dependent expression of b - galactosidase in the ocelli . To direct expression of GAL4 to the photoreceptor cells of the ocelli , the promoter of the Rh2 gene was subcloned upstream of GAL4 in pGaTB . Flies heterozygous for this gene construct ( Rh2 - 7 - 2 ) were crossed to a line homozygous for the UAS - lacZ gene . In the progeny of this cross approx . 50 % of the ﬂies express b - galactosidase in the ocelli , as assayed by staining with X - Gal . On the left is the head of a ﬂy that carries both the Rh2 - GAL4 fusion gene and the UAS - lacZ reporter construct , on the right is the head of a ﬂy that carries only the UAS - lacZ construct . A B 403 Targeted gene expression in Drosophila In one line the target gene remains silent in the absence of its activator , in the second line the activator protein is present but has no target gene to activate . This ensures that the parental lines are viable . Only when the two lines are crossed is the target gene turned on in the progeny , and the phenotypic consequences of misexpression ( including lethality ) can be conveniently studied . Finally , the method is designed to generate lines that express a transcriptional activator , rather than an individual target gene , in numer - ous patterns . The target can then be activated in different cell - and tissue - types merely by crossing a single line car - rying the desired target to a library of activator - expressing Fig . 3 . GAL4 expression patterns generated by enhancer detection . Three enhancer detection / GAL4 lines were crossed to a UAS - lacZ line ( b g4 - 1 - 2 ) and their progeny were assayed for expression of b - galactosidase by staining with anti - b - galactosidase antibodies . ( A ) Line 1J3 : pGawB has inserted at the hairy locus and activates expression of b - galactosidase in a pair - rule pattern of seven stripes , and in the head of a stage 11 embryo . ( B ) Line 24B : this GAL4 insertion directs expression of b - galactosidase ﬁrst in the presumptive mesoderm , as shown in a stage 11 embryo , and then ( C ) in the muscle cells of a stage 13 embryo . ( D ) Line 31 - 1 : this pGawB insertion directs expression of b - galactosidase in neuroblasts at stage 11 ( D ; dorsal view ) and stage 12 ( E ; dorsal view ) , and then in neurons in both ( F ) the central and ( G ) the peripheral nervous system at stage 13 . In all photographs anterior is to the left . 404 lines . Thus , a library of different activator - expressing lines can direct each new target gene to be expressed in numer - ous distinct patterns . A ﬁrst step is to generate lines expressing a transcrip - tional activator in a variety of patterns . It is necessary to use a transcriptional activator that has no endogenous tar - gets in Drosophila , so as to express ectopically only the gene of interest . An activator from yeast , GAL4 , can acti - vate transcription in ﬂies but only from promoters that bear GAL4 binding sites ( Fischer et al . , 1988 ) . The GAL4 pro - tein is a potent transcriptional activator in yeast , and the protein has been extensively characterized with respect to both DNA binding and transcriptional activation ( reviewed by Ptashne , 1988 ) . The GAL4 binding site has been muta - genized , generating an optimized site to which GAL4 binds with high affinity ( Webster et al . , 1988 ) . Numerous muta - tions have been made in the GAL4 transcriptional activa - tion domain , producing activators of varying strengths ( Ma and Ptashne , 1987a , b ; Gill and Ptashne , 1987 ; Johnston and Dover , 1988 ) . GAL4 has been shown to activate transcrip - tion , not only in Drosophila , but also in plants and in mam - malian cells , again only from promoters that bear GAL4 binding sites ( Fischer et al . , 1988 ; Ma et al . , 1988 ; Kaki - dani et al . , 1988 ; Webster et al . , 1988 ; Ornitz et al . , 1991 ) . We have taken two approaches to generate different pat - terns of GAL4 expression . First , GAL4 transcription can be driven by characterized Drosophila promoters . The second approach is based on the ‘enhancer detection’ technique , which was developed as a means of identifying transcrip - tional regulatory elements in situ in the Drosophila genome ( O’Kane and Gehring , 1987 ; Bier et al . , 1989 ; Bellen et al . , 1989 ; Wilson et al . , 1989 ) . O’Kane and Gehring ( 1987 ) fused the E . coli lacZ gene to the weak P - transposase pro - moter , and showed that this reporter gene could respond to neighboring transcriptional regulatory elements . By fusing the GAL4 coding sequence to the P - transposase promoter , we constructed a vector that , depending upon its genomic site of integration , can direct expression of GAL4 in a wide range of patterns in embryos , larvae and adults . This elim - inates the need to link numerous different promoters to the GAL4 gene , and allows expression in novel patterns from enhancers that have not yet been described . In addition , the enhancer detection / GAL4 vector can be mobilized to new genomic sites simply by P - transposition ( Cooley et al . , 1988 ; Robertson et al . , 1988 ) . In this way , a single trans - formant can be used to generate a large number of trans - genics , each exhibiting a different GAL4 expression pat - tern . To create GAL4 - responsive target genes , we designed a vector into which genes can be subcloned behind a tandem array of ﬁve optimized GAL4 binding sites ( hereafter referred to as the UAS , for Upstream Activation Sequence ) , and upstream of the SV40 transcriptional terminator . It is possible , then : ( 1 ) to subclone any sequence behind GAL4 binding sites ; ( 2 ) to activate that target gene only within cells where GAL4 is expressed and ( 3 ) to observe the effect of this aberrant expression on development . Using the GAL4 system we have been able to generate speciﬁc embryonic phenotypes by misexpression of the homeobox - containing transcription factor even - skipped . even - skipped is involved in determining cell fate , ﬁrst during embryonic segmentation , and later during the devel - opment of the central nervous system ( CNS ; Frasch et al . , 1987 , 1988 ; Doe et al . , 1988 ) . By restricting misexpression within the ectoderm , we have been able to alter epidermal cell fates speciﬁcally without affecting central nervous system development . This now permits the separate func - tions of even - skipped in different tissues to be studied inde - pendently of one another . Dominant phenotypes can be generated in adults using the GAL4 system to restrict the expression of potentially lethal products , such as constitutively active proteins . Sup - pression or enhancement of these phenotypes can then be used to identify interacting gene products , or to establish epistatic relationships . Dominant mutations recovered by classical genetic techniques have proved invaluable in iden - tifying and ordering the components of several signal trans - duction pathways in C . elegans and Drosophila . For exam - ple , the Ras proteins have been shown to act in determining cell fate in the nematode vulva and in the Drosophila com - pound eye ( Han and Sternberg , 1990 ; Simon et al . , 1991 ) . Of the three Ras homologues isolated from ﬂies ( Neuman - Silberberg et al . , 1984 ; Brock , 1987 ) , Dras1 , which is most similar to Ha - ras , appears to act downstream of the recep - tor tyrosine kinases sevenless and DER ( the Drosophila EGF receptor ) to determine cell fate during eye develop - ment ( Simon et al . , 1991 ) . Dras3 is also required in the eye and encodes a homologue of the human rap1 gene , a pos - sible Ras antagonist ( Hariharan et al . , 1991 ) . Dras2 is most similar to R - ras ( Lowe et al . , 1987 ) , but its role in devel - opment has not yet been determined . We have generated dominant , visible phenotypes in adults by targeted expression of constitutively active Dras2 ( Bishop and Corces , 1988 ) . Genetic suppression of these phenotypes can now be used to identify mutations in interacting gene prod - ucts , as a means to elucidate the Dras2 signal transduction pathway . MATERIALS AND METHODS GAL4 expression vectors 1 . pGATB and pGATN : we have constructed vectors in which either a unique Not I or Bam HI site is inserted upstream of the GAL4 coding region . The GAL4 coding sequence was excised from vector pLKC15 ( a gift from L . Keegan ) as a Hin dIII frag - ment . This fragment extends from a synthetic Hin dIII site inserted approximately 15 nucleotides upstream of the initiator methion - ine , and includes the complete GAL4 coding sequence and its transcriptional terminator ( L . Keegan , personal communication ) . The Hin dIII fragment was subcloned in the vector pHSREM ( Knipple and Marsella - Herrick , 1988 ) to give plasmid pF18 - 13 , and the heat shock consensus sequences were removed from the promoter by digestion with Bgl II and Esp I . A unique Bam HI site was inserted in place of the heat shock boxes to create pGaTB . To construct pGaTN , a Not I site was inserted in place of the heat shock elements . Promoters can now be subcloned upstream of GAL4 , and the fusion gene moved from the pHSREM vector back - bone into a P - element vector . 2 . Rh2 - GAL4 : the Rh2 promoter ( Mismer et al . , 1988 ) was excised from vector pHSS7 as a Bam HI fragment and subcloned into the Bam HI site of vector pGaTB , creating p25 / 18XI . The Rh2 - GAL4 fusion gene was then subcloned , as a Kpn I - Not I frag - ment , into pCaSpeR4 ( a gift from C . Thummel and V . Pirrotta ) to make pF72 . A . H . Brand and N . Perrimon 405 Targeted gene expression in Drosophila 3 . pGawB : as a ﬁrst step in creating an enhancer detection GAL4 vector , we modiﬁed the enhancer detection lacZ vector , plwB ( Wilson et al . , 1989 ) . To remove the Not I site in the vector , plwB was digested with Not I and the 5 ¢ overhanging ends were ﬁlled using T4 polymerase . The resultant blunt ends were then ligated to make plasmid p41 - 4 . To remove the P - transposase - lacZ fusion gene , p41 - 4 was digested with Hin dIII , the Hin dIII frag - ment was removed and the plasmid was religated , forming p41 - 4 - H3 - 1 . A short linker oligonucleotide , formed by annealing the sequences : 5 ¢ - AGCTTGGTTAACGCGGCCGC - 3 ¢ and 3 ¢ - ACCAATTGCGCCGGCGTCGA - 5 ¢ , was then subcloned into the Hin dIII site of p41 - 4 - H3 - 1 . In the resultant plasmid , p41 - 4Hpa , the Hin dIII site is maintained and a unique Hpa I site is introduced . To reconstitute the 5 ¢ end of the P - element and the P - trans - posase promoter , we synthesized an oligonucleotide that extends from the Hin dIII site in the 5 ¢ end of the P - element to nucleotide 140 , followed by the sequence CGGCCGC , to create a Not I site . The oligonucleotide was subcloned as a Hin dIII - blunt ended frag - ment into p41 - 4Hpa cut with Hin dIII and Hpa I , to create p41 - 4Hpa14 . As a ﬁnal step , the GAL4 coding sequence followed by the hsp70 terminator was isolated from pGaTN by digestion with Not I . The Not I fragment was subcloned into the unique Not I site of p41 - 4Hpa14 to create pGawB . GAL UAS fusion genes 1 . pUAST : we constructed a vector into which genes can be sub - cloned behind the GAL UAS . A fragment containing ﬁve opti - mized GAL4 binding sites ( the ‘ Sca I site’ 17 - mer ; Webster et al . , 1988 ) and a synthetic TATA box ( Lillie and Green , 1989 ) separ - ated by a unique Not I site from the SV40 terminator was excised from pF40X2 - 1 by digestion with Nsi I and Spe I . The fragment was subcloned into the P - element vector pCaSpeR3 ( a gift from C . Thummel and V . Pirrotta ) , cut with Pst I and Xba I , to give plas - mid pF91 . This vector was used to drive expression of Dras2 Val14 , but appeared to be inefficient in promoting transcription , and so was modiﬁed as follows . pF91 was digested with Xba I , and a fragment spanning the TATA box was removed . This was replaced by a fragment con - taining the hsp70 TATA box , generated as a PCR product using pCaSpeR - hs ( a gift from C . Thummel and V . Pirrotta ) as a tem - plate . The PCR product begins with an Nhe I restriction site , extends from eleven nucleotides upstream of the hsp70 TATA box to the Sac II site in pCaSpeR3 , and is followed by restriction sites for Xho I , Kpn I and Xba I . The resulting vector , named pUAST , consists of ﬁve tandemly arrayed , optimized GAL4 binding sites , followed by the hsp70 TATA box and transcriptional start , a polylinker with unique restriction sites for Eco RI , Bgl II , Not I , Xho I , Kpn I and Xba I , and the SV40 small t intron and polyadeny - lation site . 2 . UAS - lacZ : an Adh - lacZ fusion gene was removed from pCaSpeR - AUG - b - gal ( Thummel et al . , 1988 ) by digestion with Eco RI and Xba I , and was subcloned in pUAST . 3 . UAS - even - skipped : the even - skipped gene was subcloned as a Hin cII fragment from plasmid pE D I ( a gift from R . Warrior and M . Levine ) into the plasmid pF91 that had been cut with Not I and made blunt using T4 polymerase , to give plasmid pF100 . The Hin cII fragment contains the 5 ¢ end of the even - skipped cDNA ( from an Xho I site to a Pst I site ) fused to the 3 ¢ end of the genomic even - skipped sequence ( from the Pst I site to an Eco RI site ; Mac - Donald et al . , 1986 ; Frasch et al . , 1987 ) . The even - skipped gene was then excised from pF100 as a Sma I - Xba I fragment and sub - cloned into pUAST that had been digested with Not I and Xba I , and the Not I site made blunt with T4 polymerase . 4 . UAS - Dras2 Val14 : the Dras2 Val14 gene was excised from plas - mid pIBI20 7 . 7 Xho I # 6 ( a gift from J . Bishop and V . Corces ) as a Hpa I - Xho I fragment and was subcloned into plasmid pF91 that had been digested with Kpn I and Xho I , and the Kpn I site made blunt with T4 polymerase . Injections Transgenic lines were generated by injection of CsCl banded DNA , at a concentration of 600 m g / ml , into embryos of strain y w ; + / + ; Sb , P [ ry + , D 2 - 3 ] / TM6 , Ubx ( Robertson et al . , 1988 ) using standard procedures ( Santamaria , 1986 ; Spradling , 1986 ) . Enhancer detection screen Flies were raised on standard Drosophila medium at 25°C . Descriptions of balancers and mutations that are not described in the text can be found in Lindsley and Zimm ( 1992 ) . An enhancer detection screen was carried out to recover lines that express GAL4 in a cell - or tissue - speciﬁc manner . Insertion lines were generated by mobilizing a single X - linked enhancer detection GAL4 vector , pGawB . The ﬁrst insertion line we used is hemizygous lethal and is carried over an FM7 balancer chro - mosoome ( GAL4 - lethal / FM7 ) . We also mobilized a pGawB inser - tion from the D 2 . 3 , Sb chromosome . The P - element transposons were mobilized using the ‘jumpstarter’ strain P [ ry + ; D 2 - 3 ] , which carries a defective P - element on the third chromosome at 99B ( Laski et al . , 1986 ; Robertson et al . , 1988 ; Cooley et al . , 1988 ) . This P - element expresses high levels of a constitutively active transposase , but cannot itself transpose . The frequency with which new pGawB insertion lines were recovered was much lower than that previously reported for a similarly sized enhancer detec - tion / lacZ P - element ( N . P . , unpublished data ) . This might be attributed to the alterations made in the sequence of the 5 ¢ end of the P - element pGawB that allow GAL4 to be expressed from its own AUG , rather than as a P - transposase - GAL4 fusion protein . Insertions segregating with the X chromosome were detected by examining the segregation of w + . Autosomal insertions were mapped by standard genetic methods using the two stocks : w ; + / + ; TM3 , Sb / CxD and w ; CyO / Sco ; + / + . Each of the 220 lines was crossed to a line carrying either the 17 - hsp70 / lacZ ( Fischer et al . , 1988 ) or the UAS - lacZ reporter gene . Embryos from the cross were collected on agar / molasses plates and stained for b - galactosidase expression with anti - b - galactosi - dase antibodies . A subset of the lines were also examined for b - galactosidase expression in imaginal discs by staining with X - Gal . Antibody immunocytochemistry and X - Gal staining Embryos were dechorionated in 50 % Clorox , ﬁxed for 10 min - utes in a 1 : 1 mix of heptane and 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and the vitelline membranes were removed by shak - ing in heptane / methanol . The embryos were incubated overnight at 4°C in a 1 : 1000 dilution of rabbit anti - b - galactosidase antibody ( a gift from B . Holmgren ) , or a 1 : 1 dilution of mouse anti - even - skipped antibody ( a gift from N . Patel ) . After washing in PBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , embryos were incubated for 2 hours in biotinylated horse anti - mouse antibody ( Vector Laboratories ) at a 1 : 500 dilution , and then for 1 hour in avidin and biotinylated horseradish peroxidase ( Vectastain Elite ABC kit , Vector Labo - ratories ) . Peroxidase was detected using diaminobenzidine ( 0 . 3 mg / ml in PBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) as a substrate . Embryos were then dehydrated in ethanol and mounted in methyl salicylate . Imaginal discs were dissected in PBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and ﬁxed in 1 % glutaraldehyde for 15 minutes . They were then stained in a solution of 10 mM Na 2 HPO 4 / NaH 2 PO 4 [ pH 7 . 2 ] , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 3 mM K 4 [ FeII ( CN ) 6 ] , 3 mM K 3 [ FeIII ( CN ) 6 ] containing a 1 / 50 dilution of X - Gal ( 25 mg / ml in dimethyl for - mamide ) . After washing in PBS , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , discs were mounted in 70 % glycerol . In situ hybridization Single stranded DNA probes were prepared as described by Patel 406 and Goodman ( 1992 ) . In situ hybridization to whole - mount embryos was carried out as described by Ephrussi et al . ( 1991 ) , except that embryos were ﬁxed in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde , without DMSO . In addition , the 1 hour incubation in methanol / DMSO at - 20°C was omitted . Embryos were cleared in 50 % glycerol for several hours and then mounted in 70 % glycerol . Cuticle preparations Cuticles were prepared and mounted as described by Struhl ( 1989 ) . A . H . Brand and N . Perrimon Fig . 4 . GAL4 - dependent misexpression of even - skipped . We used the same three GAL4 - expressing lines shown in Fig . 3 to direct ectopic expression of the even - skipped gene . Lines 1J3 , 24B and 31 - 1 were crossed to a UAS - even - skipped line ( eve - 2 - 7 - 1 ) and the progeny of the cross were stained with anti - even - skipped antibodies ( 3C10 ; N . Patel and C . S . Goodman , unpublished data ) . ( A ) Line 1J3 directs even - skipped expression in seven stripes and in the head of a stage 9 embryo ( compare the ectopic even - skipped expression shown here with the b - galactosidase expression in Fig . 3A ) . ( B ) Line 24B drives even - skipped expression in the muscles of a stage 13 embryo ( compare with the b - galactosidase expression pattern in Fig . 3C ) . ( C ) Line 31 - 1 activates UAS - even - skipped in cells throughout the central nervous system of a stage 12 embryo ( see Fig . 3F for the comparable b - galactosidase expression pattern ) . In all photographs anterior is to the left , ventral at the bottom . 407 Targeted gene expression in Drosophila RESULTS GAL4 expressed from the Rh2 promoter activates transcription in the photoreceptor cells of the ocelli We constructed a vector into which promoters can be inserted upstream of the GAL4 coding sequence ( pGaTB ; Fig . 2A ) . Transcriptional regulatory sequences are sub - cloned into the unique Bam HI site to create a gene that includes the promoter of choice fused to the GAL4 coding sequence , which is in turn linked to the transcriptional ter - mination sequence of the hsp70 gene . To test whether GAL4 - activated transcription is both speciﬁc and efficient , we used the promoter of the Rh2 gene to drive GAL4 expression . The Rh2 promoter is active in the photoreceptor cells of the ocelli , which are three light sensing organs located on the top of the Drosophila head ( Mismer et al . , 1988 ; Pollock and Benzer , 1988 ) . Trans - genic lines carrying the Rh2 - GAL4 gene were crossed to a line that carries the E . coli lacZ gene regulated by GAL4 binding sites ( UAS - lacZ ; see below ; Fig . 2B ) . In the prog - eny of this cross GAL4 should be expressed in the pho - Fig . 5 . Ectopic expression of even - skipped leads to segmental fusions . The GAL4 - expressing line 1J3 directs expression of even - skipped in a pattern corresponding to that of the hairy gene ( Fig . 4A ) . Cuticles prepared from these embryos exhibit fusions in alternating pairs of segments . ( A ) An embryo in which abdominal segments seven and eight are fused ( arrow ) . ( B ) An embryo in which abdominal segments ﬁve and six , then seven and eight are fused ( arrows ) , and ( C ) an embryo in which abdominal segments three and four , ﬁve and six , and seven and eight are fused ( arrows ) . These phenotypes were observed in 68 out of 103 embryos in one experiment . More extensive fusions ( e . g . A3 - A4 and A5 - A8 ; A6 - A8 ; A3 - A8 ) were observed in 15 embryos , while the remainder appeared wild - type . To show that the varied expressivity is not a general property of GAL4 - mediated activation , but is due rather to GAL4 expression from the hairy promoter , we used a paired - GAL4 construct to drive expression of UAS - even - skipped . In the progeny of this cross , as shown in D , 75 % of the embryos show alternating segmental fusions along the entire length of the cuticle ( arrows indicate thoracic segments T2 - 3 and abdominal segments A1 - A2 , A3 - A4 , A5 - A6 and A7 - A8 ) . In all photographs anterior is to the left . Fig . 6 . Misexpression of even - skipped selectively represses wingless expression . The loss of wingless between 6 and 9 . 5 hours of development leads to the appearance of extra denticles ( Bejsovec and Martinez Arias , 1991 ; Dougan and DiNardo , 1992 ) . Since misexpression of even - skipped gives a similar phenotype , we assayed whether ectopic even - skipped represses wingless transcription . wingless transcription in ( A ) a wild - type embryo at stage 11 ( 5 : 20 - 7 : 20 hours AEL ) , as assayed by in situ hybridization , and in B an embryo in which UAS - even - skipped expression is driven by paired - GAL4 ( stage 10 ; 4 : 20 - 5 : 20 hours AEL ) . In B wingless transcription is repressed in alternating segments throughout the embryo ( arrowheads ) . ( C ) A wild - type embryo ( about stage 11 ) stained with anti - wingless and anti - even - skipped antibodies . At this stage of development wingless , but not even - skipped , is expressed in stripes . ( D ) An embryo ( about stage 11 ) in which UAS - even - skipped expression is driven by hairy - GAL4 , stained with anti - wingless and anti - even - skipped antibodies . The wingless expressing cells are brown and the even - skipped expressing cells are a very pale purple . wingless is repressed ( arrowhead ) in those cells that ectopically express even - skipped . The anti - even - skipped staining is underdeveloped so as not to obscure wingless staining . In all photographs , anterior is to the left ; A and B are lateral views ; C and D are dorsal views of germ band extended embryos . 408 toreceptor cells of the ocelli , where it should activate tran - scription of the UAS - lacZ gene . Fig . 2B shows the heads of two ﬂies : on the left is a ﬂy that carries both the Rh2 - GAL4 and the UAS - lacZ fusion genes and on the right , one that carries only the UAS - lacZ gene . In an assay for b - galactosidase expression , the ocelli of ﬂies carrying both the Rh2 - GAL4 and the UAS - lacZ fusion genes stain dark blue after a 15 minute incubation with the chromogenic substrate X - Gal , whereas the ocelli of ﬂies that carry only the UAS - lacZ gene do not stain . Enhancer detection to express GAL4 in cell - and tissue - speciﬁc patterns To generate many patterns of GAL4 expression rapidly , without having to rely on the availability of suitable pro - moters , we constructed an enhancer detection vector in which GAL4 transcription is directed by the weak promoter of the P - transposase gene ( pGawB ; Fig . 2A ) . With this vector , the enhancerless GAL4 gene can be integrated at random in the genome , bringing it under the control of a diverse array of genomic enhancers . The previously described enhancer detection vectors express a P - trans - posase / b - galactosidase fusion protein that is directed to the nucleus by a nuclear localization signal within the P - trans - posase sequence ( O’Kane and Gehring , 1987 ; Bier et al . , 1989 ; Bellen et al . , 1989 ; Wilson et al . , 1989 ) . Since the amino terminus of GAL4 directs both nuclear localization and DNA binding ( Silver et al . , 1984 ; Keegan et al . , 1986 ) , the enhancer trap / GAL4 vector , pGawB , was designed to express GAL4 from its own AUG , but is otherwise similar to the lacZ enhancer detection vector , plwB ( Wilson et al . , 1989 ; see Fig . 2A and Materials and methods ) . To make target genes responsive to transcriptional acti - vation by GAL4 , we constructed a vector into which genes can be subcloned downstream of ﬁve tandemly arrayed , high affinity GAL4 binding sites and upstream of the SV40 transcriptional terminator ( pUAST ; Fig . 2A ) . To test pUAST , the lacZ gene was inserted within the polylinker sequence to create the GAL4 - responsive gene , UAS - lacZ ( Fig . 2B ) . Transgenic lines carrying pGawB were generated by P - element transformation . To ensure that these transformants express GAL4 , each line was crossed to ﬂies carrying UAS - lacZ , and the resultant progeny were stained for b - galac - tosidase activity . A line with pGawB inserted within an essential gene on the X - chromosome ( GAL4 - lethal ) was used as a starter line to mobilize pGawB to different sites in the genome by introduction of a constitutively active P - transposase gene ( D 2 - 3 ; Laski et al . , 1986 ; Robertson et al . , 1988 ; Cooley et al . , 1988 ; see Materials and methods ) . We examined 220 independent insertion lines . To iden - tify the cells in which GAL4 activates transcription , each insertion line was crossed to the UAS - lacZ line , and the progeny were stained with anti - b - galactosidase antibodies . In this screen , 61 % of the GAL4 insertions activate UAS - lacZ in a speciﬁc embryonic pattern . The distribution of patterns is shown in Table 1 . In addition to activating expression in speciﬁc embryonic patterns , 51 % of the inser - tions also activate transcription in the salivary glands and 28 % activate in the salivary glands alone , suggesting that in constructing the GAL4 vector we may have generated a position - dependent salivary gland enhancer . The earliest time in embryonic development that we have been able to detect GAL4 - mediated expression is just after gastrulation , between 3 . 5 and 4 hours after fertilization . GAL4 expression patterns Many of the GAL4 lines we generated can be used to acti - vate genes in speciﬁc embryonic tissues . In Fig . 3 we show a representative group of GAL4 - expressing lines . The GAL4 insertion 1J3 activates transcription of UAS - lacZ in a pair - rule pattern of seven stripes , as assayed by staining with anti - b - galactosidase antibodies ( Fig . 3A ) . This expression pattern resembles that of the gene hairy with respect to both the number and placement of the stripes , and the pattern of expression in the head ( Carroll et al . , 1988 ; Hooper et al . , 1989 ) . In common with the hairy pro - tein expression pattern , stripe four is fused to stripe three at gastrulation and is somewhat weaker than the other stripes . Ectodermal hairy expression begins to decay at gas - trulation , while expression endures within the mesoderm until stage 9 / 10 , at the end of germ band extension ( Hooper et al . , 1989 ) . Ectodermal b - galactosidase expression directed by GAL4 insertion 1J3 persists through germ band extension , and eventually fades . Expression is maintained in the mesoderm and is later observed within muscle cells . A lacZ enhancer detection vector inserted at the hairy locus gives a b - galactosidase expression pattern similar to that directed by line 1J3 . The prolonged period of expression in stripes might be due to increased mRNA stability , or to per - durance of b - galactosidase in the former case , and of the GAL4 protein and the target gene product in the latter . When the 1J3 insertion is made homozygous , viable adults exhibiting extra scutellar bristles are generated , a phenotype associated with several hairy alleles ( Ingham et al . , 1985 ) . Adults that carry the 1J3 insertion in trans to hairy allele h 5HO7 also exhibit extra scutellar bristles , sug - gesting that in line 1J3 pGawB has inserted at the hairy locus . Expression of GAL4 by insertion 24B causes UAS - lacZ to be transcribed ﬁrst in the presumptive mesoderm , as observed at germ band extension ( Fig . 3B ) , and then in muscle cells ( Fig . 3C ) . Insertion 31 - 1 activates UAS - lacZ in neuronal precursor cells , or neuroblasts , at stage 11 ( Fig . 3D , E ) and then within neurons of both the central and peripheral nervous systems ( Fig . 3F , G ) . Other embryonic tissues or cells in which GAL4 can activate UAS - lacZ include the amnioserosa , the foregut , midgut and hindgut , the pharynx , the malpighian tubules , vitellophages , oeno - cytes and glia . A . H . Brand and N . Perrimon Table 1 . Patterns of GAL4 - directed expression in embryos No . of No Salivary Other strains staining glands tissues % 23 + - - 10 . 45 62 - + - 28 . 2 112 - + + 50 . 9 23 - - + 10 . 45 Total 220 100 . 00 409 Targeted gene expression in Drosophila Altering cell fates by targeted expression of even - skipped Targeted misexpression is a promising approach for exam - ining the roles of different regulatory proteins in specify - ing cell fates . We used GAL4 to target expression of the even - skipped gene in an attempt to direct speciﬁc cell fate changes . even - skipped encodes a homeodomain protein that is involved in determining cell fate in the ectoderm , during embryonic segmentation , and later in the central nervous system ( Frasch et al . , 1988 ; Doe et al . , 1988 ) . even - skipped is expressed at the blastoderm stage in seven stripes , cor - responding to the odd - numbered parasegments . By stage 7 , at 3 hours of development , the stripes have faded and expression is not observed again until after germ band retraction when even - skipped can be detected in the central nervous system in about fourteen neurons per hemisegment ( Patel et al . , 1989 ) . To test if GAL4 can activate UAS - even - skipped to levels that result in embryonic phenotypes , transgenic lines car - rying UAS - even - skipped were crossed to the GAL4 - expressing lines shown in Fig . 3 . The progeny of each cross were then stained with anti - even - skipped antibodies ( Fig . 4 ) . Fig . 4A shows GAL4 - insertion IJ3 activating even - Fig . 7 . GAL4 - dependent expression of Dras2 Val14 leads to a rough eye phenotype . Scanning electron micrographs of compound eyes from ﬂies with the following genotypes : ( A ) wild type ; ( B ) GAL4 insertion 32B driving expression of UAS - Dras2 Val14 , and ( C ) GAL4 insertion 69B driving expression of UAS - Dras2 Val14 , demonstrating the roughening caused by targeted expression of Dras2 Val14 . Fig . 8 . Targeted expression of Dras2 Val14 disrupts wing development . ( A ) A wing from a ﬂy in which GAL4 insertion 32B drives UAS - Dras2 Val14 expression : the longitudinal veins bifurcate at the wing margin ( arrow ) , and extra vein material is evident ( arrow ) . ( B ) A more severe phenotype is seen in ﬂies where GAL4 - insertion 69B drives UAS - Dras2 Val14 expression : the wing is reduced in size and exhibits broadened and disorganized veins . These ﬂies rarely eclose . 410 A . H . Brand and N . Perrimon 411 Targeted gene expression in Drosophila skipped in the pair rule stripes corresponding to the hairy expression pattern . By this stage of development ( stage 9 , 3 : 40 - 4 : 20 hours ) even - skipped expression would normally have faded , but expression persists due to GAL4 - directed transcription . Fig . 4B shows GAL4 insertion 24B directing even - skipped expression in embryonic muscle . In Fig . 4C , UAS - even - skipped is activated by GAL4 insertion 31 - 1 , causing even - skipped to be expressed throughout the ner - vous system , rather than in a speciﬁc subset of neurons . In each of these crosses , misexpression of even - skipped results in embryonic lethality . Restricting expression within the animal permits cell fates to be altered in a chosen tissue or cell - type . Using the GAL4 - insertion line 1J3 , we can misexpress even - skipped in the ectoderm in the hairy pattern ( Fig . 4A ) . In wild - type embryos at the cellular blastoderm stage , even - skipped is expressed in the odd - numbered parasegments , partly over - lapping the stripes of hairy expression . The anterior border of hairy expression lies one to two cells anterior to the border of even - skipped expression ( Carroll et al . , 1988 ; Hooper et al . , 1989 ) and thus encompasses the wingless - expressing cells . Between 6 and 9 . 5 hours of development , wingless is required to instruct cells to secrete naked cuticle : the loss of wingless in this time window leads to the appear - ance of extra denticles ( Bejsovec and Martinez Arias , 1991 ; Dougan and DiNardo , 1992 ) . One function of even - skipped during segmentation is to repress wingless transcription ( reviewed by Ingham and Martinez Arias , 1992 ) . Misex - pression of even - skipped within the wingless - expressing cells might therefore switch off wingless transcription and effect a cell fate change such that cells that would normally secrete naked cuticle instead produce denticles . Using the hairy - GAL4 insertion line ( 1J3 ) we have acti - vated UAS - even - skipped so as to expand the stripes of even - skipped expression anteriorly , into the wingless - expression domain , and to prolong even - skipped expression beyond the time when endogenous even - skipped has faded . This pat - tern of expression results in embryonic lethality and cuti - cles prepared from the embryos exhibit extra denticles between alternating segments , as shown in Fig . 5 . Ectopic denticles can be seen in the normally naked region between abdominal segments three and four , ﬁve and six , and seven and eight ( Fig . 5A - C ) . The expressivity of this phenotype is variable with respect to the number of segmental fusions observed in each embryo , with fusions occurring primarily in the most posterior segments . We attribute this variabil - ity to GAL4 expression directed by the hairy promoter , since a paired - GAL4 construct ( L . Fasano and C . Desplan , unpublished ) driving expression of UAS - even - skipped causes alternating segmental fusions along the entire length of the embryo ( Fig . 5D ) . By targeting even - skipped transcription to the wingless - expressing cells in alternating segments we are able to elicit a change in epidermal cell fate within the naked region of the embryo . Since wingless is required to instruct cells to secrete naked cuticle , this phenotype suggests that wingless is being repressed . We assayed wingless expression in embryos in which even - skipped is ectopically expressed ( Fig . 6 ) . When UAS - even - skipped is activated by paired - GAL4 , wingless transcription is turned off in alternating segments along the entire length of the embryo ( Fig . 6B ) . Activating UAS - even - skipped with hairy - GAL4 leads to the repression of alternate wingless stripes primarily in the pos - terior abdominal region of the embryo ( Fig . 6D ) . Generation of dominant adult phenotypes by directed expression of activated Dras2 We have used the GAL4 activation system to target expression of a constitutively active form of the Dras2 pro - tein . Our goal was ﬁrst to establish viable transformant lines carrying the UAS - activated Dras2 fusion gene , and second to generate stable Dras2 - dependent phenotypes to be used in genetic screens . One advantage of a two - part activation system ( eg . Fischer et al . , 1988 ; Khillan et al . , 1988 ; Byrne and Ruddle , 1989 ; Ornitz et al . , 1991 ) is the ability to study the consequences of expressing products that might be toxic to the animal ( Kunes and Steller , 1991 ) . Using the GAL4 system , genes encoding lethal products can be subcloned into pUAST , where they are silent until GAL4 is intro - duced . Lines bearing the UAS - gene fusion are thus viable until crossed to a GAL4 - expressing line . Only the progeny of such a cross will exhibit phenotypes resulting from the activity of the gene . Next , transcription of the gene can be targeted to non - essential tissues , to permit the generation of viable adults with visible phenotypes . With the intention of generating a constitutively activated form of Dras2 , Bishop and Corces ( 1988 ) converted the glycine residue at position 14 to valine , to produce Dras2 Val14 . This mutation , by analogy with mutations at position 12 of mammalian Ras , is thought to activate the protein . Transcription of Dras2 Val14 from a heat - shock pro - moter during third instar larval development kills 60 - 80 % of the population . Surviving ﬂies show eye and wing defects . Transcription of Dras2 Val14 from the Dras2 pro - moter results in variable eye and wing defects , suggesting that Dras2 may normally function in both eye and wing development ( Bishop and Corces , 1988 ) . The ﬂies also exhibit reduced viability and fertility . Fortini et al . ( 1992 ) expressed Dras2 Val14 in the developing eye from the sev - enless promoter , also producing a rough eye phenotype . In contrast to Dras1 , Dras2 does not appear to act downstream of sevenless , but appears to function in a separate signal transduction pathway . We were able to generate several independent transgenic lines carrying the UAS - Dras2 Val14 fusion gene . All of these lines are viable and show no visible phenotypes in the absence of GAL4 , suggesting that the UAS - Dras2 Val14 gene is silent . A UAS - Dras2 Val14 transgenic line ( R52 - a ) was then crossed to several GAL4 - expressing lines ( 1J3 , 24B , 69B , 32B , 30A and 71B ) . In two crosses the progeny arrest as pupae ( 1J3 and 24B ; data not shown ) ; in one , as pupae and young adults ( 69B ; Figs 7C , 8B ) , and in three crosses adult phenotypes are apparent ( 30A , 71B and 32B ; Figs 7B , 8A ) . This suggests that the phenotypes we observe are due to GAL4 expression in the imaginal discs . To conﬁrm this , we assayed for GAL4 expression in the imaginal discs of four of the GAL4 insertion lines and compared the GAL4 expression patterns with the Dras2 Val14 - dependent pheno - types produced . Fig . 9 shows the GAL4 - dependent b - galac - tosidase expression pattern observed in the eye and wing imaginal discs of lines 71B , 30A , 32B and 69B . In crosses where GAL4 - insertions 71B and 30A activate 412 UAS - Dras2 Val14 , ﬂies show a mild wing defect , such that the wings appear slightly opaque ( data not shown ) . Both of these lines express GAL4 in the wing imaginal disc ( Fig . 9B , D , respectively ) . No obvious eye defects are observed , as might be expected , given the restricted GAL4 expression pattern in the eye imaginal disc in these lines ( Fig . 9A , C , respectively ) . Activating UAS - Dras2 Val14 with GAL4 - inser - tions 32B and 69B results in ﬂies with a more severe wing defect , as well as a rough eye phenotype ( Figs 7 , 8 ) . The wings are not only opaque , but also exhibit vein defects . Lines 32B and 69B express GAL4 at high levels in both the wing and the eye imaginal discs ( for line 32B , compare the eye disc in Fig . 9E with the eye in Fig . 7B , the wing disc in Fig . 9F with the wing in Fig . 8A ; for line 69B , com - pare Figs 9G and 7C for the eye , and Figs 9H and 8B for the wing ) . The high level of UAS - Dras2 Val14 expression driven by GAL4 - insertion 69B results most often in pupal lethality , whereas expression driven by 32B leads to viable adults in which the Dras2 Val14 phenotype is fully penetrant ( in a sample of 100 ﬂies , all showed the Dras2 Val14 - depen - dent eye and wing phenotype ) . Using enhancer detection / GAL4 insertion lines we have observed Dras2 Val14 - dependent phenotypes in the wing alone , or in both the wing and the eye . We can also gen - erate a rough eye phenotype , in the absence of a wing defect , by activating UAS - Dras2 Val14 in the developing eye using GAL4 expressed from the sevenless promoter ( sev - enless - GAL4 , K . Basler , unpublished ; A . B . and N . P . , unpublished data ) . Since these phenotypes are stable and reproducible , in contrast to those generated by expression of Dras2 Val14 from a heat shock promoter , genetic screens can now be carried out with the aim of identifying second - site mutations that affect other proteins in the Dras2 signal transduction pathway . DISCUSSION The GAL4 activation system We have developed a two - part system for targeting gene expression in Drosophila that allows transcription to be restricted to speciﬁc cells or tissues in embryos , larvae and adults . Using enhancer detection we have generated trans - genic lines that express the yeast transcriptional activator GAL4 in numerous different patterns and at various stages of development . To activate a gene speciﬁcally in a par - ticular cell or tissue , we constructed target genes in which transcription is driven by GAL4 binding sites . Transgenic ﬂies carrying the target gene are then crossed to a GAL4 - expressing line , producing progeny in which the target gene is transcribed in a speciﬁc GAL4 - dependent pattern . The GAL4 system can be used to express any gene of interest ectopically , including one that might be lethal to the organism . In the absence of GAL4 the toxic target gene is silent , and is only activated in progeny arising from a cross to a GAL4 - expressing line . If a protein is required in a number of developmental processes , or acts at several times in development , its separate roles can be conveniently studied by restricting ectopic expression to speciﬁc cells or tissues , or to a particular stage of development . GAL4 can direct expression in a wide range of embry - onic patterns in Drosophila , and does not appear to be excluded from particular embryonic cells or tissues . We have observed expression in cells derived from all three germ layers : the endoderm , from which the midgut derives , the ectoderm , from which the nervous system and the epi - dermis arise , and the mesoderm . The one tissue where we have not been able to detect GAL4 mediated expression is the female germ line . In enhancer detection / lacZ screens , about one third of the insertion lines express b - galactosi - dase in the germ line ( Fasano and Kerridge , 1988 ) . In con - trast , none of the enhancer detection / GAL4 lines we screened show appreciable expression in the germ line ( A . B . and N . P . , unpublished data ; D . McKearin , personal communication ) . GAL4 translation might be selectively repressed in the germ line , or the GAL4 message may be selectively degraded . Alternatively , GAL4 may activate transcription in conjunction with another protein that is not present in germ cells . The earliest that we are able to detect GAL4 - directed expression in embryos , by staining with antibodies against either b - galactosidase or even - skipped , is after the comple - tion of gastrulation , between 3 . 5 and 4 hours of develop - ment . A GAL4 insertion at the hairy locus can direct expression in a pattern that resembles hairy , but only from about stage 8 ( 3 : 10 to 3 : 40 hours ; Campos - Ortega and Hartenstein , 1985 ) , an hour or so after the onset of stripes of hairy protein expression . Whereas GAL4 mRNA can be detected at the cellular blastoderm stage ( K . Staehling - Hampton and F . M . Hoffmann , personal communication ) transcription of the target gene is not seen until three and a half to four hours of development . Two possible expla - nations for the delay in activation in early embryos are : ( 1 ) that the GAL4 mRNA is not translated during early embry - onic development , or ( 2 ) that GAL4 - mediated transcrip - tional activation requires a co - activator , which is itself not expressed until three to four hours after fertilization . These alternative explanations will be distinguishable when anti - bodies that recognize GAL4 in Drosophila embryos become available . Expression of even - skipped in hairy stripes alters epidermal cell fate The segmentation gene even - skipped encodes a home - odomain protein that directs cell fates in the ectoderm and in the central nervous system ( Frasch et al . , 1987 , 1988 ; Doe et al . , 1988 ) . Each of these roles can be studied inde - pendently using the GAL4 system to target even - skipped expression . We have misexpressed even - skipped in the hairy and paired expression patterns , expanding the even - skipped stripes anteriorly into the even - numbered paraseg - ments , and repressing wingless in those cells that ectopi - cally express even - skipped . This ectopic expression alters the fate of cells that would normally secrete naked cuticle , such that they now secrete denticles . Since wingless is required for the secretion of naked cuticle ( Bejsovec and Martinez Arias , 1991 ; Dougan and DiNardo , 1992 ) , it is possible that the ectopic denticles we observe are a direct result of even - skipped repressing wingless in the posterior cells of the even - numbered parasegments . We found cuticle defects in the embryos that ectopically express even - skipped , but observed no associated central A . H . Brand and N . Perrimon 413 Targeted gene expression in Drosophila nervous system defects . We have performed reciprocal experiments in which we have been able to disrupt CNS development without affecting the cuticle ( A . B . and N . P , unpublished data ) . GAL4 - dependent targeted expression can thus be used effectively to study the roles of even - skipped in either epidermal or central nervous system devel - opment . Directed expression of activated Dras2 to generate adult phenotypes for genetic analysis The GAL4 system can be used to restrict the expression of lethal products , and in so doing , to generate dominant adult phenotypes for use in genetic screens . We have targeted expression of an activated form of the Drosophila Ras homologue , Dras2 . Using a randomly integrated GAL4 gene to drive transcription , we have been able to target expression of Dras2 Val14 to the eye and wing imaginal discs , and to generate ﬂies exhibiting a rough eye pheno - type and wing vein defects , but normal viability and fertil - ity . These mutants can now be used to identify other pro - teins in the Dras2 signal transduction pathway by isolating second - site mutations that enhance or suppress the Dras2 Val14 phenotype . Furthermore , possible epistatic rela - tionships can be tested by combining the Dras2 Val14 muta - tions with mutations that affect eye or wing development , such as EGF receptor mutations ( Baker and Rubin , 1989 ; Clifford and Schupbach , 1989 ) . Future prospects In conclusion , we have developed a two - part activation system that allows the restricted expression of any gene of interest . We have utilized a transcriptional activator that can activate transcription in yeast , in Drosophila , in plants and in mammalian cells , such that the enhancer detection / GAL4 system we describe might be extended for use in other organisms . For example , enhancer - or promoter - detec - tion / lacZ constructs have been developed for use in mice ( Allen et al . , 1988 ; Gossler et al . , 1989 ) , and could be mod - iﬁed to express GAL4 . GAL4 can be used to misexpress regulatory proteins , or to target expression of mutated proteins , producing either gain of function or dominant negative phenotypes . Mutant proteins from other species might be expressed in Drosophila to generate phenotypes for use in genetic screens . As an example , we have expressed an activated form of the human c - raf1 gene in ﬂies , generating embry - onic and adult phenotypes consistent with the known roles in development of the Drosophila raf protein kinase , as well uncovering previously unidentiﬁed functions ( A . B . and N . P . , unpublished data ) . The GAL4 system allows the expression of genes encod - ing toxic products , such as activated oncogenes . More recently we have used GAL4 to target expression of the A chain of diphtheria toxin , and have demonstrated GAL4 - dependent cell killing ( A . B . , J . Haseloff , H . M . Goodman and N . P . , unpublished data ) . It is now possible to kill any cell expressing GAL4 and to study the consequences of cell - and tissue - speciﬁc ablation on embryonic , larval or adult development . For example , targeted killing within the nervous system may result in reproducible behavioral abnormalities , such that the role of particular cells in gen - erating behavior can be analyzed . Finally , other components of the GAL regulatory path - way , which has been so thoroughly analyzed in yeast , could be imported into ﬂies to diversify further the GAL4 system . For example , a temperature sensitive allele of GAL4 ( Mat - sumoto et al . , 1978 ) has been described that , if expressed in ﬂies , would allow ectopic expression to be restricted tem - porally as well as spatially . Alternatively , GAL4 could be used to drive expression of target genes encoding temper - ature sensitive proteins . To reﬁne further the pattern of GAL4 - dependent transcription , a negative regulator of GAL4 , the GAL80 protein , might be introduced into Drosophila and expressed in a pattern that overlaps that of GAL4 . A temperature sensitive allele of GAL80 has also been described ( Matsumoto et al . , 1978 ) . The level of GAL4 induced expression can be modulated by increasing or decreasing the number of GAL4 binding sites upstream of the target gene , or by using GAL4 deriv - atives , or activators fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain , that are capable of activating transcription to dif - ferent degrees ( Ma and Ptashne , 1987a , b ; Gill and Ptashne , 1987 ; Johnston and Dover , 1988 ) . We have constructed an enhancer detection vector with GAL4 derivative 236 ( Ma and Ptashne , 1987a ) , which is about half as active in yeast as full length GAL4 , and have found it to activate tran - scription in ﬂies ( A . B . and N . P . , unpublished data ) . While we have exclusively discussed the activation of target genes with GAL4 , it may also be possible to repress the expression of endogenous genes by using GAL4 to drive the transcription of antisense RNAs . GAL4 can activate and maintain transcription at high levels , which might improve the efficiency of sense / antisense interactions . We would like to thank Beth Noll and Marcy Engelstein for technical help with the enhancer detection screen and the assays for embryonic b - galactosidase expression , and Robin Pinto of the scanning electron microscope facility at the Museum of Compar - ative Zoology , Harvard University , for instruction in preparing samples for SEM , and for producing the micrographs shown in Fig . 7 . For kindly providing DNAs and ﬂies , we thank Janice Fis - cher - Vize , Konrad Basler , John Bishop , Victor Corces , Claude Desplan , Laurent Fasano , Ed Giniger , Phil Ingham , Liam Keegan , Mike Levine , Gerry Rubin and Rahul Warrior and for invaluable vectors , we thank Doug Knipple , Hugo Bellen , Clive Wilson , Walter Gehring , Carl Thummel and Vincent Pirrotta . For com - municating results prior to publication we thank Dennis McK - earin , Karen Staehling - Hampton , Mike Hoffmann and Nipam Patel . We are most grateful for the repeated gifts of antibodies from Nipam Patel and Bob Holmgren . We thank Rich Baldarelli , Joe Duffy , Jim Haseloff , Bob Holmgren and Michele Musacchio for fruitful discussions and / or comments on the manuscript . A . B . was supported by postdoctoral fellowships from the Helen Hay Whitney Foundation and the NIH , and is a Leukemia Society of America Special Fellow . This work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . REFERENCES Allen , N . D . , Cran , D . G . , Barton , S . C . , Hettle , S . , Reik , W . and Surami , M . A . ( 1988 ) . Transgenes as probes for active chromosomal domains in mouse development . Nature 333 , 852 - 855 . Baker , N . and Rubin , G . M . ( 1989 ) . Effect on eye development of 414 dominant mutations in Drosophila homologue of the EGF receptor . Nature 340 , 150 - 153 . Bejsovec , A . and Martinez Arias , A . ( 1991 ) . Roles of wingless in patterning the larval epidermis of Drosophila . Development 113 , 471 - 485 . Bellen , H . J . , O’Kane , C . , Wilson , C . , Grossniklaus , U . , Pearson R . K . and Gehring , W . J . ( 1989 ) . P - element - mediated enhancer detection : a versatile method to study development in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 3 , 1288 - 1300 . Bier , E . , Vaessin , H . , Shepherd , S . , Lee , K . , McCall , K . , Barbel , S . , Ackerman , L . , Caretto , R . , Uemura , T . , Grell , E . , Jan , L . Y . and Jan , Y . N . ( 1989 ) . Searching for pattern and mutation in the Drosophila genome with a P - lacZ vector . Genes Dev . 3 , 1273 - 1287 . Bishop , J . G . 3rd . and Corces , V . G . ( 1988 ) . Expression of an activated ras gene causes developmental abnormalities in transgenic Drosophila melanogaster . Genes Dev . 2 , 567 - 577 . Blochlinger , K . , Jan , L . Y . and Jan , Y . N . ( 1991 ) . Transformation of sensory organ identity by ectopic expression of Cut in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 5 , 1124 - 1135 . Brock , H . W . ( 1987 ) . Sequence and genomic structure of ras homologues Dm ras 85D and Dm ras 64B of Drosophila melanogaster . Gene 51 , 129 - 137 . Byrne , G . W . and Ruddle , F . H . ( 1989 ) . Multiplex gene regulation : a two - tiered approach to transgene regulation in transgenic mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 86 , 5473 - 5477 . Campos - Ortega , J . A . and Hartenstein , V . ( 1985 ) . The Embryonic Development of Drosophila melanogaster . Berlin : Springer Verlag . Carroll , S . B . , Laughon , A . and Thalley , B . S . ( 1988 ) . Expression , function , and regulation of the hairy segmentation protein in the Drosophila embryo . Genes Dev . 2 , 883 - 890 . Cliiford , R . J . and Schupbach , T . ( 1989 ) . Coordinately and differentially mutable activities of torpedo , the Drosophila melanogaster homologue of the verterbrate EGF receptor gene . Genetics 123 , 771 - 787 . Cooley , L . , Kelley , R . and Spradling , A . ( 1988 ) . Insertional mutagenesis of the Drosophila genome with single P elements . Science 239 , 1121 - 1128 . Doe , C . Q . , Smouse , D . and Goodman , C . S . ( 1988 ) . Control of neuronal fate by the Drosophila segmentation gene even - skipped . Nature 333 , 376 - 378 . Dougan , S . and DiNardo , S . ( 1992 ) . Drosophila wingless generates cell type diversity among engrailed expressing cells . Nature 360 , 347 - 350 . Ephrussi , A . , Dickinson , L . K . and Lehmann , R . ( 1991 ) . oskar organizes the germ plasm and directs localization of the posterior determinant nanos . Cell 66 , 37 - 50 . Fasano , L . and Kerridge , S . ( 1988 ) . Monitoring positional information during oogenesis in adult Drosophila . Development 104 , 245 - 253 . Fischer , J . A . , Giniger , E . , Maniatis , T . and Ptashne , M . ( 1988 ) . GAL4 activates transcription in Drosophila . Nature 332 , 853 - 865 . Fortini , M . E . , Simon , M . A . and Rubin , G . M . ( 1991 ) . Signalling by the sevenless protein tyrosine kinase is mimicked by Ras1 activation . Nature 355 , 559 - 561 . Frasch , M . , Hoey , T . , Rushlow , C . , Doyle , H . and Levine , M . ( 1987 ) . Characterization and localization of the even - skipped protein of Drosophila . EMBO J . 6 , 749 - 759 . Frasch , M . , Warrior , R . , Tugwood , J . and Levine , M . ( 1988 ) . Molecular analysis of even - skipped mutants in Drosophila development . Genes Dev . 2 , 1824 - 1838 . Gill , G . and Ptashne , M . ( 1987 ) . Mutants of GAL4 protein altered in an activation function . Cell 51 , 121 - 126 . Gonzalez - Reyes , A . and Morata , G . ( 1990 ) . The developmental effect of overexpressing a Ubx product in Drosophila embryos is dependent on its interactions with other homeotic products . Cell 61 , 515 - 522 . Gossler , A . , Joyner , A . L . , Rossant , J . and Skarnes , W . C . ( 1989 ) . Mouse embryonic stem cells and reporter constructs to detect developmentally regulated genes . Science 244 , 463 - 465 . Han , M . and Sternberg , P . W . ( 1990 ) . let - 60 , a gene that speciﬁes cell fates during C . elegans vulval induction , encodes a ras protein . Cell 63 , 921 - 931 . Hariharan , I . K . , Carthew , R . W . and Rubin , G . M . ( 1991 ) . The Drosophila Roughened mutation : Activation of a rap homolog disrupts eye development and interferes with cell determination . Cell 67 , 717 - 722 . Hooper , K . L . , Parkhurst , S . M . and Ish - Horowicz , D . ( 1989 ) . Spatial control of hairy protein expression during embryogenesis . Development 107 , 489 - 504 . Ingham , P . W . and Martinez Arias , A . ( 1992 ) . Boundaries and ﬁelds in early embryos . Cell 68 , 221 - 235 . Ingham , P . , Pinchin , S . M . , Howard , K . R . and Ish - Horowicz , D . ( 1985 ) . Genetic analysis of the hairy gene in Drosophila . Genetics 111 , 463 - 486 . Ish - Horowicz , D . and Pinchin , S . M . ( 1987 ) . Pattern abnormalities induced by ectopic expression of the Drosophila gene hairy are associated with repression of ftz transcription . Cell 51 , 405 - 415 . Ish - Horowicz , D . , Pinchin , S . M . , Ingham , P . W . and Gyurkovics , H . G . ( 1989 ) . Autocatalytic ftz activation and metameric instability induced by ectopic ftz expression . Cell 557 , 223 - 232 . Johnston , M . and Dover , J . ( 1988 ) . Mutational analysis of the GAL4 - encoded transcriptional activator protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 120 , 63 - 74 . Kakidani , H . and Ptashne , M . ( 1988 ) . GAL4 activates gene expression in mammalian cells . Cell 52 , 161 - 167 . Keegan , L . , Gill , G . and Ptashne , M . ( 1986 ) . Separation of DNA binding from the transcription - activating function of a eukaryotic regulatory protein . Science 231 , 699 - 704 . Khillan , J . S . , Deen , K . C . , Yu , S . , Sweet , R . W . , Rosenberg , M . and Westphal , H . ( 1988 ) . Gene transactivation mediated by the TAT gene of human immunodeﬁciency virus in transgenic mice . Nucl . Acids Res . 16 , 1423 - 1430 . Knipple , D . C . and Marsella - Herrick , P . ( 1988 ) . Versatile plasmids for the construction , analysis and heat - inducible expression of hybrid genes in eukaryotic cells . Nucl . Acids Res . 16 , 7748 . Kunes , S . and Steller , H . ( 1991 ) . Ablation of Drosophila photoreceptor cells by conditional expression of a toxin gene . Genes Dev . 5 , 970 - 983 . Laski , F . A . , Rio , D . C . and Rubin , G . M . ( 1986 ) . Tissue speciﬁcity of Drosophila P element transposition is regulated at the level of mRNA splicing . Cell 44 , 7 - 19 . Lillie , J . W . and Green , M . R . ( 1989 ) . Transcriptional activation by the adenovirus E1a protein . Nature 338 , 39 - 44 . Lindsley , D . L . and Zimm , G . G . ( 1992 ) . The genome of Drosophila melanogaster . San Diego : Academic Press , Inc . . Lowe , D . G . , Capon , D . J . , Delwart , E . , Sakaguchi , A . Y . , Naylor , S . L . and Goeddel , D . V . ( 1987 ) . Structure of the human and murine R - ras genes , novel genes closely related to ras proto - oncogenes . Cell 48 , 137 - 146 . Ma , J . and Ptashne , M . ( 1987a ) . Deletion analysis of GAL4 deﬁnes two transcriptional activating segments . Cell 48 , 847 - 853 . Ma , J . and Ptashne , M . ( 1987b ) . A new class of yeast transcriptional activators . Cell 51 , 113 - 119 . Ma , J . , Przibilla , E . , Hu , J . , Bogorad , L . and Ptashne , M . ( 1988 ) . Yeast activators stimulate plant gene expression . Nature 334 , 631 - 633 . MacDonald , P . M . , Ingham , P . and Struhl , G . ( 1986 ) . Isolation , structure , and expression of even - skipped : A second pair - rule gene of Drosophila containing a homeo box . Cell 47 , 721 - 734 . Matsumoto , K . , Toh - e , A . and Oshima , Y . ( 1978 ) . Genetic control of galactokinase synthesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae : evidence for constitutive expression of the positive regulatory gene gal4 . J . Bacteriol . 134 , 446 - 457 . Mismer , D . , Michael , W . M . , Laverty , T . R . and Rubin , G . M . ( 1988 ) . Analysis of the promoter of the Rh2 opsin gene in Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 120 , 173 - 180 . Neuman - Silberberg , F . S . , Schejter , E . , Hoffmann , F . M . and Shilo , B . - Z . ( 1984 ) . The Drosophila ras oncogenes : Structure and nucleotide sequence . Cell 37 , 1027 - 1033 . O’Kane , C . J . and Gehring , W . J . ( 1987 ) . Detection in situ of genomic regulatory elements in Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 84 , 9123 - 9127 . Ornitz , D . M . , Moreadith , R . W . and Leder , P . ( 1991 ) . Binary system for regulating transgene expression in mice : Targeting int - 2 gene expression with yeast GAL4 / UAS control elements . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 698 - 702 . Parkhurst , S . M . , Bopp , D . and Ish - Horowicz , D . ( 1990 ) . X : A ratio , the primary sex - determining signal in Drosophila , is transduced by helix - loop - helix proteins . Cell 63 , 1179 - 1191 . Parkhurst , S . M . and Ish - Horowicz , D . ( 1991 ) . Mis - regulating segmentation gene expression in Drosophila . Development 111 , 1121 - 1135 . Patel , N . H . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 1992 ) . DIG - labeled single stranded DNA probes for in situ hybridization . In Nonradioactive Labeling and Detection of Biomolecules ( ed . C . Kessler ) , pp . 377 - 381 . Berlin : Springer Verlag . A . H . Brand and N . Perrimon 415 Targeted gene expression in Drosophila Patel , N . H . , Schafer , B . , Goodman , C . S . and Holmgren , R . ( 1989 ) . The role of segment polarity genes during Drosophila neurogenesis . Genes Dev . 3 , 890 - 904 . Petersen , N . S . ( 1990 ) . Effects of heat and chemical stress on development . Adv . Genet . 28 , 275 - 296 . Petersen , N . S . and Mitchell , H . K . ( 1987 ) . The induction of a multiple wing hair phenocopy by heat shock in mutant heterozygotes . Dev . Biol . 121 , 335 - 341 . Pollock , J . A . and Benzer , S . ( 1988 ) . Transcript localization of four opsin genes in the three visual organs of Drosophila ; RH2 is ocellus speciﬁc . Nature 333 , 779 - 782 . Ptashne , M . ( 1988 ) . How eukaryotic transcriptional activators work . Nature 335 , 683 - 689 . Robertson , H . M . , Preston , C . R . , Phillis , R . W . , Johnson - Schlitz , D . , Benz , W . K . and Engels , W . R . ( 1988 ) . A stable source of P - element transposase in Drosophilamelanogaster . Genetics 118 , 461 - 470 Santamaria , P . ( 1986 ) . Injecting eggs . In Drosophila : A Practical Approach ( ed . D . B . Roberts ) , pp . 159 - 173 . Oxford , England : IRL Press . Sauer , F . and Jackle , H . ( 1991 ) . Concentration - dependent transcriptional activation or repression by Kruppel from a single binding site . Nature 353 , 563 - 566 . Schneuwly , S . , Klemenz , R . and Gehring , W . J . ( 1987 ) . Redesigning the body plan of Drosophila by ectopic expression of the homoeotic gene Antennapedia . Nature 325 , 816 - 818 . Silver , P . A . , Keegan , L . P . and Ptashne , M . ( 1984 ) . Amino terminus of the yeast GAL4 gene product is sufficient for nuclear localization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 81 , 5951 - 5955 . Simon , M . A . , Bowtell , D . D . L . , Dodson , G . S . , Laverty , T . R . and Rubin , G . M . ( 1991 ) . Ras1 and a putative guanine nucleotide exchange factor perform crucial steps in signaling by the sevenless protein tyrosine kinase . Cell 67 , 701 - 716 . Spradling , A . C . ( 1986 ) . P element - mediated transformation . In Drosophila : A Practical Approach , ( ed . D . B . Roberts ) pp . 175 - 197 , Oxford , England : IRL Press . Steingrimsson , E . , Pignoni , F . , Liaw , G - J . and Lengyel , J . A . ( 1991 ) . Dual role of the Drosophila pattern gene tailless in embryonic termini . Science 254 , 418 - 421 . Struhl , G . ( 1985 ) . Near - reciprocal phenotypes caused by inactivation or indiscriminate expression of the Drosophila segmentation gene ftz . Nature 318 , 677 - 680 . Struhl , G . ( 1989 ) . Morphogen gradients and the control of body pattern in insect embryos . In Cellular Basis of Morphogenesis CIBA Foundation Symposium 144 ( ed . D . Evered and J . Marsh ) , pp . 65 - 91 . Chichester , England : John Wiley and Sons . Thummel , C . S . , Boulet , A . M . and Lipshitz , H . D . ( 1988 ) . Vectors for Drosophila P - element - mediated transformation and tissue culture transfection . Gene 7 , 445 - 456 . Van Vactor , D . L . , Cagan , R . L . , Kramer , H . and Zipursky , S . L . ( 1991 ) . Induction in the developing compound eye of Drosophila : Multiple mechanisms restrict R7 induction to a single retinal precursor cell . Cell 67 , 1145 - 1155 . Webster , N . , Jin , J . R . , Green , S . , Hollis , M . and Chambon , P . ( 1988 ) . The yeast UAS G is a transcriptional enhancer in human HeLa cells in the presence of the GAL4 trans - activator . Cell 52 , 169 - 178 . Wilson , C . , Pearson , R . K . , Bellen , H . J . , O’Kane , C . J . , Grossniklaus , U . and Gehring , W . J . ( 1989 ) . P - element - mediated enhancer detection : an efficient method for isolating and characterizing developmentally regulated genes Drosophila . Genes Dev . 3 , 1301 - 1313 . Yost , H . J . , Petersen , R . B . and Lindquist , S . ( 1990 ) . RNA metabolism : strategies for regulation in the heat shock response . Trends Genet . 6 , 223 - 227 . Zuker , C . S . , Mismer , D . , Hardy , R . and Rubin , G . M . ( 1988 ) . Ectopic expression of a minor Drosophila opsin in the major photoreceptor cell class : distinguishing the role of primary receptor and cellular context . Cell 53 , 475 - 482 . ( Accepted 16 March 1993 )