Paper to be presented at the DRUID 2011 on INNOVATION , STRATEGY , and STRUCTURE - Organizations , Institutions , Systems and Regions at Copenhagen Business School , Denmark , June 15 - 17 , 2011 Incentives or Resouces ? Commercialization of University Research by Start - Ups vs . Established Firms Arvids A . Alexander Ziedonis University of Oregon Lundquist College of Business aaz @ uoregon . edu Abstract The commercialization of scientific research performed at U . S . universities since the Bayh - Dole Act of 1980 has increasingly been governed by licensing contracts between universities and private firms ( Mowery , Sampat , and Ziedonis 2004 ) . A number of scholars have examined factors that influence whether an established firm or start - up venture would be best positioned to develop and introduce a university invention to the market ( Shane 2001 , 2002 ; Lowe and Ziedonis 2006 ) . Less attention has been paid to how technology licenses between the university and these two types of firms are structured to facilitate commercialization , however . We argue that start - ups and established firms have different inherent organizational risks ; comparatively , start - ups bear a greater risk of firm failure , while commercialization incentives in established firms may be weaker . Using data from over one thousand technology licenses at a leading university licensor , Stanford University , we examine how these organizational risks , along with other relevant technology characteristics , affect the structure of licensing contracts in start - ups and established firms . For start - up firms , we also examine the implications for license structure of the involvement of ( a ) a venture capitalist and ( b ) a university founder . Jelcodes : A10 , - Incentives or Resources ? Commercialization of University Research by Start - Ups vs . Established Firms Brent Goldfarb Robert H . Smith School of Business University of Maryland Rachelle C . Sampson Robert H . Smith School of Business University of Maryland Arvids A . Ziedonis Lundquist College of Business University of Oregon This Version : February 25 , 2011 Abstract The commercialization of scientiﬁc research performed at U . S . universities since the Bayh - Dole Act of 1980 has increasingly been governed by licensing contracts between universities and private ﬁrms ( Mowery , Sampat , and Ziedonis 2004 ) . A number of scholars have examined factors that inﬂuence whether an established ﬁrm or start - up venture would be best positioned to develop and introduce a university invention to the market ( Shane 2001 , 2002 ; Lowe and Ziedonis 2006 ) . Less attention has been paid to how technology licenses between the univer - sity and these two types of ﬁrms are structured to facilitate commercialization , however . We argue that start - ups and established ﬁrms have different inherent organizational risks ; com - paratively , start - ups bear a greater risk of ﬁrm failure , while commercialization incentives in established ﬁrms may be weaker . Using data from over one thousand technology licenses at a leading university licensor , Stanford University , we examine how these organizational risks , along with other relevant technology characteristics , affect the structure of licensing contracts in start - ups and established ﬁrms . For start - up ﬁrms , we also examine the implications for li - cense structure of the involvement of ( a ) a venture capitalist and ( b ) a university founder . Our results shed light on how organizational structure , via licensing terms , can be used to control for technology and organizational risks , bearing implications for the role of organization in commercialization success . JEL Classiﬁcations : O31 , O32 , O34 Keywords : entrepreneurship , start - ups , licensing , technology commercialization ∗ Authors listed in alphabetical order . We are indebted to Katherine Ku of the Stanford University Ofﬁce of Technology Licensing for generous access to data . We thank Janet Bercowitz , Pablo D’Este , Jenny Kuan , Joanne Oxley and Rosemarie Ziedonis as well as participants at the HEC Paris Workshop on Academic Entrepreneurship and seminar participants at Boston University and the University of California , Berkeley for insightful comments . 1 Introduction Basic scientiﬁc research conducted in university laboratories has long been an impor - tant source of technologies commercialized by private ﬁrms . For example , surveyed phar - maceutical industry managers reported that more than one quarter of new drugs com - mercialized would not have been developed or would have been signiﬁcantly delayed without academic research ( Mansﬁeld 1991 ) . Similarly , the well - known “Yale” ( Levin et al . 1987 ) and “Carnegie - Mellon” ( Cohen et al . 2002 ) surveys of industrial R & D execu - tives identify the importance of university research on innovation within their industries . Moreover , surveyed managers in most industries surveyed by Levin et al . reported that they relied most heavily on scientiﬁc publications , conferences , informal interaction with university researchers for scientiﬁc information . In a much more recent study , Nelson ( 2010 ) ﬁnds that academic publications and hiring of graduate students are the two most prominent avenues by which the music industry beneﬁted from research performed at the Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics at Stanford University , far out - pacing the number of instances that ﬁrms became industrial afﬁliates or licensed speciﬁc technologies from Stanford . Despite the multitude of channels by which industrial organizations have drawn on university research in the 20th century , patenting and licensing has become an increas - ingly important channel in the decades since the Bayh - Dole Act of 1980 ( Mowery et al . 2004 ) . Recent scholarly work has focused on the differences between established ﬁrms and entrepreneurial start - ups in their ability and performance in commercializing licensed university technologies ( Shane 2001 , 2002 ; Lowe and Ziedonis 2006 ) . While iden - tifying numerous factors likely to inﬂuence the choice by the university of an established or start - up licensee , these studies were unable to observe how the commercialization ef - forts by these two types of ﬁrms were governed through the licensing contracts with the university . Start - ups and established ﬁrms each pose unique challenges to be overcome to suc - cessfully commercialize a licensed technology . Exploiting a comprehensive set of licens - ing contracts governing the commercialization of inventions discovered by researchers at Stanford University , we examine the organizational choice made by Stanford as to the type of licensee – start - up or established ﬁrm . We then recognize the endogeneity of this choice and consider how the selection of organizational form is related to contract design . Our setting , the commercialization of research undertaken at Stanford University via licensing contracts , is ideal to address this issue for several reasons . First , in contrast to technologies discovered within the ﬁrm where the invention may be developed in - ternally or shelved , the licensing event allows us to observe the decision to undertake development and commercialization . Second , the choice of licensee by Stanford depends largely on ﬁnding the ﬁrm best able to commercialize the technology , without regard to the competitive dynamics that likely play a role in such decisions when new technologies are discovered within ﬁrm . 1 Firms often seek to avoid creating competitors and often consider how related a technology is to their core abilities in considering whether to de - 1 The stated goal of Stanford‘s Ofﬁce of Technology Licensing is to develop products that beneﬁt the public ( Leute , 2005 ) . 1 velop the new technology or not . Finally , we can observe licensing provisions employed to address organizational risks in technology commercialization . A goal of this study is to further our understanding of a question receiving little at - tention in the literature , namely how organizational form and intellectual property pro - tection affect the commercialization of technologies , as opposed to their discovery . Since the seminal work of Arrow ( 1962 ) , much attention has been paid to the role of intellectual property in encouraging and facilitating discovery . Less attention has been paid to the technological development and commercialization process ( Hahn , 2003 ) . 2 While previous studies have identiﬁed mechanisms used by university licensors to address developer ef - fort and related shelving issues ( Dechenaux et al . 2009 ; Hegde , 2010 ) , to our knowledge there is no prior research examining the terms used in start - up licenses to address speciﬁc organizational risks that start - up licensees pose , particularly as compared to established ﬁrm licensees . The closest study to ours is Elfenbein ( 2004 ) , which compares the effect of several different terms on early termination between large and small ﬁrm licensees . We also note that most studies examine only exclusive licenses ( Thursby , Elfenbein 2004 ) and often only patented inventions ( Shane 2001 , 2002 ; Elfenbein 2004 ; Hegde 2010 ) . We are able to observe both patented and unpatented inventions , and both exclusive and non - exclusive licenses . A complementary line of reasoning explores the question of which technologies will likely be commercialized by start - ups and which by established ﬁrms ( Shane , 2001 , 2002 ) . This literature , in part based on Teece’s ( 1986 ) insight that complementary assets often play a critical role in successful commercialization , has explored the role of intellectual property right protection on successful commercialization . Building on this seminal work as well as Arora et . al ( 2001 ) , Gans , Hsu and Stern ( 2003 ) argue that intellectual property protection facilitates the market for technologies , enabling start - up commercialization when intellectual property protection is strong . Whether or not a technology is com - mercialized by a start - up ﬁrm appears to depend upon appropriability regimes and the nature of complementary assets ( Gans and Stern 2003 ; Shane 2001 , 2002 ) . Schumpeter’s work exempliﬁes this tension as well ( i . e . , Schumpeter 1934 ; 1942 ) . Whether a start - up or incumbent ﬁrm is best positioned to commercialize a technology depends in part whether strong commercialization incentives or available organizational resources ( e . g . , complementary assets ) are relatively more important for commercializa - tion success of a particular technology . Start - up ﬁrms have very strong incentives to com - mercialize new technologies and are unlikely to shelve them , as may established ﬁrms , but start - ups often lack slack resources and relevant complementary assets for success - ful commercialization . There is thus is a fundamental tension between incentives and resources in not only technology discovery , but also commercialization . We begin by examining which technologies are likely to be commercialized via start - ups or established ﬁrms . In our study , we largely conﬁrm Shane’s ( 2001 , 2002 ) ﬁndings in our ﬁrst stage regressions . We then present novel ﬁndings on the match between tech - 2 The strategic nature of the commercialization process has been analyzed by a few notable exceptions , however . For example , Lilien and Yoon ( 1990 ) and later Bayus et al . ( 1997 ) demonstrate that ﬁrms may delay commercialization under certain conditions . In more recent work , Dechenaux et al . ( 2008 ) consider whether the strength of different appropriability mechanisms affect the likelihood of commercialization of MIT technologies . 2 nologies and licensees . We then estimate the relative level of organizational risk ( i . e . , the risk of shelving vs . the risk of ﬁrm failure ) as well as technology risk ( i . e . , the novelty of the technology , need for complementary assets , and whether the market is developed or ambiguous ) . Our prior belief is that the greater the technological risks , the lower the like - lihood of commercialization success . We can then show the organizational mechanisms designed to mitigate these risks and , ultimately , measure the effectiveness of these mech - anisms via commercialization success as measured by royalties paid . We thus examine the effect of two key decisions on commercialization success : ( 1 ) the choice of licensee , given the technology ; and ( 2 ) the choice of license terms , which we view as attempts to mitigate various risks associated with the licensee / technology pair . In the next section , we consider the commercialization decision , speciﬁcally the in - ﬂuence of technology characteristics on whether the licensee is likely to be a start - up or established ﬁrm . Conditional on a match between the technology and ﬁrm type , we then estimate the technology and organizational risk associated with a licensed technology . In Section 3 , we examine contract terms that can be used to attenuate these risks and the im - plications for performance ( i . e . commercialization success ) of the use of particular terms in response to risk types ( matching of terms with risks ) . We assume that Stanford chooses terms to increase the probability of commercial success , which we will test in a later pa - per . Sections 4 and 5 describe our data and research design in detail . We discuss our results and conclude our analysis and discuss implications and limitations in Section 6 . 2 Organizational and Technological Risks Start - ups and established ﬁrms are each potential vehicles to take a new discovery from research to the development or commercialization phase . Both types of ﬁrms have been active in bringing university research to the market . Which type of ﬁrm would be the most effective licensee is a function of both organizational characteristics ( e . g . , the resources required to successfully develop a new technology and the incentives to do so ) as well as technology characteristics ( e . g . , whether complementary assets are required and the degree of market and technological uncertainty ) . The characteristics of the licensee ﬁrm , particularly whether the ﬁrm is established or a start - up , lead to organizational risk , or the risk that a ﬁrm will fail to commercialize a tech - nology even when the technology is ripe for such commercialization . These risks come primarily in three forms : ( 1 ) the ﬁrm runs out of resources before successful commercial - ization occurs , ( 2 ) the ﬁrm itself fails or exits , and ( 3 ) the ﬁrm lacks sufﬁcient incentives to commercialize the technology ( due to competing priorities or other competitive con - siderations , for example ) . While any of these modes of failure could conceivably occur in either start - ups or established ﬁrms , the ﬁrst two risks are more common in start - ups and the third is more likely in the established ﬁrm . These risks are similar to those originally posed for innovation more broadly by Schum - peter ( 1934 , 1942 ) . Schumpeter argued that large ﬁrms are more likely to enjoy economies of scale in R & D , better able to spread the risk of R & D activities , and have superior access to ﬁnancial resources than smaller ﬁrms ( CSD 1942 ) . Small ﬁrms ( including start - ups ) , however , are typically not burdened by hierarchical incentive failures , coordination difﬁ - 3 culties and bureaucratic sluggishness ( Scherer 1992 : 1422 ; Schumpeter 1912 ) . The funda - mental tension thus is between the need for resources for development and the incentives for development . How this tension is resolved is the subject of much empirical research on the relationship between ﬁrm size and innovation ( see Scherer 1980 for a review ) . Em - pirically , it appears that small ﬁrms have a greater number of innovations per research dollar , but large ﬁrms may still have an advantage in R & D in the sense that these ﬁrms can spread the costs of development over greater output where these ﬁrms have devel - oped markets ( Cohen and Klepper 1996 ) . More recent research emphasizes that who is more likely to commercialize a new tech - nology depends on how well the “market for ideas” functions . Gans and Stern ( 2000 ) ar - gue that incumbents generally earn greater returns to R & D via direct commercialization of discoveries , whereas entrants earn their returns primarily through contracting or li - censing with an incumbent ﬁrm when intellectual property protection is strong . Instances of entrant competition are suggestive of the inability to successfully fashion a contract or license between a potential entrant and an established ﬁrm , e . g . a failure in the market for ideas . This analysis suggests that established ﬁrms are more likely to commercialize new technologies than entrants , particularly in the presence of strong intellectual prop - erty rights that support the market for ideas ( Gans , Hsu , and Stern 2002 ) . Established ﬁrms are also more likely to commercialize new technologies when the cost of acquiring the necessary complementary assets is high ( ibid ) . Shane ( 2002 ) explores several variables that are mostly related to commercialization environments . He ﬁnds that start - ups are more likely to commercialize newer technolo - gies or those that address a smaller , segmented market . In either case , one might expect large ﬁrms’ complementary assets to be less important . Levine ( 2009 ) ﬁnds that market size is a very good predictor of whether a small pharmaceutical ﬁrm will market itself a drug it has developed . When markets are small and a limited number of doctors treat a particular disease , a ﬁrm is much more likely to develop its own marketing and sales capabilities . When the drug serves a common disease category treated by a large number of doctors , the small ﬁrm will instead tend to outsource these activities . University inventions are often licensed in an embryonic state ( Jensen and Thursby 2001 ) , thus signiﬁcant technological development is likely to occur within the duration of the license . Whether the licensee is a startup or established ﬁrm may therefore be as much a function as the optimal location for development as opposed to the optimal loca - tion for ultimate commercialization . Shane ( 2001 ) ﬁnds that at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , start - ups were more likely to be the licensee when the licensed tech - nology is more radical , important and broader in scope , or when patent rights in the ﬁrm’s industry are strong ( Shane 2002 ) . Existing complementary assets are likely to be less useful in the commercializing a radical technology , thus mitigating the advantage in being selected as the licensee that an established ﬁrm may enjoy . 3 Shane’s results do sug - gest that strong patents lead to greater start - up licensing . Gans , Hsu and Stern might ﬁnd this surprising—they argue that strong property right protection facilitates the market for 3 Shane ( 2001 , 2002 ) does not analyze the relative propensity to license to startups or established ﬁrms . Rather , he predicts the number of startups that license each patented invention – without regard to the num - ber of established ﬁrms that also license the invention . It is unclear if the share of overall licensees that are startups follow the same pattern . 4 ideas , thus making it easier for a start - up to “cooperate” by licensing a technology to the established holder of complementary assets rather than compete directly . Shane’s results are not necessarily inconsistent with Gans , et al . ( 2002 ) , however , if small ﬁrms are better suited to perform the initial development of a university invention then subsequently li - cense it to a larger ﬁrm to be brought to market . Lowe ( 2005 ) , as well as Goldfarb ( 2005 ) suggest that if the university inventor’s effort is necessary for successful development , it may be difﬁcult for large ﬁrms to provide sufﬁcient compensation to inventors to induce such effort . Lowe and Ziedonis ( 2006 ) found that inventor - founded start - ups licensing inventions from the University of California often were acquired by established ﬁrms just prior to product market entry . It may be therefore that even within a strong intellectual property regime , development may occur under the guise of a start - up license , but ulti - mate commercialization is undertaken by an established ﬁrm through sub - licensing by the start - up or subsequent acquisition after the market is better deﬁned ( Bloningen and Taylor 2000 , Lowe and Ziedonis , 2006 ) . Given these factors and absent other competitive considerations , the choice of licensee is a matter of identifying the best development environment ( if needed ) , then subse - quently resolving whether this ﬁrm is best suited for commercialization or if there should be an expectation of subsequent licensing to a third party . Prior studies have identiﬁed several risks facing the university in its licensing decision . There is the risk that a ﬁrm will license a technology but then shelve it either due to competitive considerations—for example , the technology competes or potentially cannibalizes the ﬁrm’s existing tech - nologies , or the ﬁrm may want the license the technology simply to prevent competitors from doing so ( Dechenaux , Thursby and Thursby , 2009 ) . One might expect an established ﬁrm to pose a greater shelving risk than a startup whose survival will be more likely to depend on the successful development of a single licensed technology . Licensing to start - ups present other risks , however , notably the risk of organizational failure—either the start - up fails outright or is unable to obtain the resources necessary for development and commercialization . The university licensor must therefore balance the different organizational risks posed by established or entrepreneurial potential licensees . 4 Commercialization success also depends critically on the characteristics of the tech - nology being licensed . New discoveries range from conceptual ideas , far from prototype , to fully developed new products or processes that are close to the market ( Jensen and Thursby 2001 ) . Similarly , markets for a new product or process may or may not cur - rently exist . Greater technology risks decrease the odds of successful commercialization , regardless of the licensee type . In our context , the Stanford Ofﬁce of Technology Licensing ( hereafter , the ‘OTL‘ ) weighs both organizational and technology risks in licensing a new technology . Our conversa - tions with licensing professionals at the OTL reveals that Stanford typically chooses an established ﬁrm over a start - up for commercialization if an appropriate established ﬁrm can be found . We therefore assume that the OTL prefers an established ﬁrm to a start - up , suggesting that the risk of organizational failure or lack of complementary assets by a 4 Note that this is not simply a matter of asymmetric information . It is quite possible , perhaps likely that neither the licensor nor the licensee understand ex - ante the ability of the new start - up to navigate potential organizational risks ( Jovanovic 1982 ) . 5 start - up is greater than the risk of shelving by an established ﬁrm . Interested and quali - ﬁed established ﬁrms are not always available , however . Start - ups then emerge as likely licensees , particularly for nascent , risky technologies ( consistent with Bloningen and Tay - lor 2000 , Shane 2001 , 2002 ; and Lowe and Ziedonis 2006 ) . The question then becomes how license terms , or organizational form , can be used to address resultant organizational and technological risk . 3 Licensing under Technology and Organizational Risk Three primary mechanisms are frequently utilized to address technology risk asso - ciated with licensing a new invention—exclusivity , running royalties , and equity stakes in the licensee ﬁrm . Exclusive licensing is often offered for very nascent technologies— ensuring that competitors will not also have access to the licensed technology provides the licensee incentives to invest in commercializing early stage inventions ( Gallini and Wright 1990 , Dechenaux , Thursby and Thursby 2009 , Ziedonis , 2007 ) . We therefore ex - pect to observe exclusive licensing when technological risk is signiﬁcant . Early technolo - gies may also require signiﬁcant transfers of tacit knowledge by the inventor directly to the ﬁrm to improve commercialization odds ( Agrawal , 2006 ) . In such a scenario , licenses can be structured to include terms that align the incentives of the inventor with the ﬁrm , such as higher royalty rates and / or equity stakes in the licensee ﬁrm ( Gallini and Wright 1990 , Hegde 2010 ) . Lowe ( 2006 ) and Goldfarb ( 2007 ) suggest that in cases where tacit knowledge transfer is important , strong incentives are effective in encouraging inventor effort—which implies that commercialization is more likely to take place in a startup . Royalty rates are generally thought to increase with the hidden quality of the inven - tion ( Gallini and Wright 1990 ; Hegde 2010 ) , since shifting payments to the inventor later in the commercialization process ensures that the inventor has the incentive to stay en - gaged with the development process . Royalty rates require a good sense of the nature of the end market , and hence reﬂect a degree of contract completeness that may only be fea - sibly for technologies with sufﬁciently low market ambiguity—which may be more likely for easily purposed or later staged technologies . The taking of equity stakes in the li - censee has a similar effect , ensuring that commercialization success is in the best interests of the inventor . Some of the mechanisms used to address technological risk may exacerbate organiza - tional risks , however . For example , while exclusivity is often required to deal with tech - nological uncertainty , granting such a monopoly increases the risks of shelving or delay in commercialization ( Dechenaux et al . 2009 ) . Shelving is more likely by established li - censees with potentially cannibalized products , however . Startups are less likely shelve a licensed technology , as successful commercialization is important for ﬁrm survival . Simi - larly , higher royalty rates have distorting effects , creating incentives for ﬁrms to decrease output ( Gallini and Wright , 1990 ) . Many licensors are aware of these issues , however , and have designed mechanisms to address these increased organizational risks . Upfront fees may decrease shelving ( Hedge 2010 ) , but such fees are often used in lieu of higher royalty rates , which then dampens inventor incentives to transfer tacit knowledge . A potential solution to this dilemma is 6 posed by Dechanaux et al . ( 2009 ) , who argue that a combination of milestone payments and annual fees solves the organization risk problem . Milestone payments , or payments on achievement of speciﬁc commercialization objectives , do not distort output in the way royalties can and preserve incentives of the inventor to contribute ( Bousquet et al . , 1998 ) . Annual fees , or payments not tied to output or commercialization milestones , encourage the licensee to either develop the technology or to return the technology to the licensor . Diligence clauses , or non - ﬁnancial requirements to achieve development milestones by a particular date , are also a means for the licensor to monitor progress and terminate the license if the ﬁrm is not taking steps to commercialize . While these organizational risks of shelving and lack of incentives to develop a particular technology are possible in both established and start - up ﬁrms , we expect these risks to be greater in established ﬁrms ( as argued above ) . Thus , we expect to observe diligence clauses and annual fees in licenses to established ﬁrms more frequently than in licenses to start - up ﬁrms . Jovanovic ( 1982 ) suggests that entrepreneurs enter without knowledge of their abili - ties in the market . If so , we should expect diligence and milestone clauses not to provide mechanisms to revoke licenses in case of moral hazard , but instead to provide mecha - nisms to revoke licenses in the case of business incompetence . Additionally , it is possible that startups may agree to more draconian terms as a signal – only ﬁrms with a great deal of conﬁdence of their own abilities would agree to such terms ( see Dessein 2006 for a similar argument in the context of venture capital contracts ) . However , such uncertainty about business competence is less plausible in the case of licensing to established ﬁrms with known track records . Hence , milestone payments that would work to combat moral hazard may be more likely with licenses to established ﬁrms whereas diligence clauses may be more likely with startups . In contrast , milestone payments should be common among both start - up and estab - lished ﬁrms , since they both preserve inventor effort ( important for both types of licensee ) as well as and deal with possible risk aversion of the licensee in developing an early tech - nology . In this sense , while milestone payments address organizational risks , they also deal with technology risks . We would expect milestone payments to be more likely the farther from commercialization is the licensed technology . Milestone payments also can address an organizational risk more common in start - ups—that the licensee will lack re - sources necessary to commercialize the new technology . By tying license payments to commercialization in lieu of annual fees and effectively deferring these payments until some development objectives are achieved , the start - up will be left with greater resources to invest in commercialization early in this process . Other mechanisms that may address organizational risks more common to start - ups ( ﬁrm failure and lack of resources to commercialize ) include equity as a more signiﬁcant portion of royalty payments , speciﬁc diligence clauses tied to organizational milestones , such as achievement of venture capital funding , and exclusivity . Equity , in lieu of royalty or other cash payments , preserves resources of the start - up for commercialization efforts , while aligning the incentives of the inventor with the start - up as mentioned above ( Feld - man et al . 2000 ) . We also expect speciﬁc diligence clauses to be more common in licenses to start - ups , as a reﬂection of the organization risks unique to such ﬁrms . One illustration of such a clause would be a requirement to achieve venture capital funding by a speciﬁc date . 7 Finally , exclusivity to keep competitive pressures at bay may be relatively more im - portant for start - up ﬁrms as they develop any necessary complementary assets . We thus expect to see exclusivity more commonly in licenses to start - up ﬁrms than to established ﬁrms . Note , however , that we also expect start - ups to be licensed the most risky and nascent technologies , due to the fact that established ﬁrms are often reluctant to license such technologies and may prefer to wait to acquire the start - up or sub - license from the start - up once the technology is better developed ( Lowe and Ziedonis 2006 ) . This would lead to greater use of exclusivity in start - up licenses – especially if property rights are strong – as it would allow further trade in downstream technology markets once the technology is further developed . Fundamentally , we expect that careful use of these terms may lower commercializa - tion risks set by the technology - ﬁrm pair . In this sense , the license contract moderates the effect of the technology - ﬁrm pair on commercialization success . 4 Data and Sample Description Our data come from a comprehensive sample of 1 , 819 technology licensing contracts for technologies emanating from Stanford University , a major private research institution in the U . S . The Stanford OTL was ofﬁcially established in 1970 and since that time has been one of the most successful university licensing ofﬁces in terms of licensing revenue . The Stanford data include options , material transfer agreements and emblematic licenses ( e . g . , licensing of Stanford logos and images for collegiate wear ) , as well as licenses for newly developed technologies . We focus on newly developed technologies and exclude the other agreements from our sample . For each remaining license we coded terms in - cluding exclusivity , royalty rates and structure , the existence of annual minimum fees and issue fees . These terms are set out in greater detail below . To date , we have coded terms in 1 , 481 licenses . We excluded licenses for which we were unable to identify the underlying technological area , reducing our sample size to 852 agreements . While we have licenses back to the early 1980’s , we have a relatively small sample of these early licenses and thus focus our current analysis on licenses executed from 1990 - 2004 . For each license in the sample , we observe the entire license agreement , enabling us to examine the pricing structure ( i . e . , upfront fees , annual fees , milestone payments and running royalties ) , prices ( i . e . , royalty rates ) and other mechanisms inﬂuencing incen - tives and directing actions by the licensee ( e . g . , diligence clauses and exclusivity ) . Table 1 provides brief exemplars of coded terms . * * * Table 1 Here * * * We utilize OTL classiﬁcations of each licensed technology , such as whether the new invention is a product or process innovation , a drug or medical device , whether the re - search underlying the invention was federally funded . We also obtained from OTL the academic department and number of past discoveries disclosed by each inventor as well as the number of inventors for each new invention . Finally , we identiﬁed the technology 8 area of the licensed invention ( i . e . , the industry ) , coded the effectiveness of each indus - try’s appropriability regime ( Cohen et al . 2000 ) , and added industry concentration from the US Census of Manufacturers ( 1997 , 2002 ) . Table 2 describes these measures . * * * Table 2 Here * * * We utilized several sources to identify founding years for each of the licensees , in - cluding Factiva , Secretary of State ofﬁces , VentureXpert , Zephyr ( Bureau Van Dijk ) and the Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment report entitled Commercial Biotechnology : An Inter - national Analysis ( Chapter 4 , Firms Commercializing Technology ) . 5 We code ﬁrms with founding years one year prior to the license date or later as start - ups . 6 Invention characteristics for the full sample and for the start - up and established ﬁrm subsamples is reported in Table 3 and characteristics of the inventors are contained in Table 4 . * * * Table 3 and Table 4 Here * * * We also report these characteristics split by exclusive and non - exclusive licenses , given that exclusive licenses likely reﬂect differences in underlying technologies ( e . g . , exclusive licenses may be associated with the need to develop more complementary assets ) as well as driving organizational risks ( e . g . , exclusive licenses are much more prone to shelving for competitive reasons than non - exclusive ) . Tables 5 and 6 report invention and inventor characteristics for exclusive licenses and Tables 7 and 8 report these characteristics for non - exclusive licenses . * * * Tables 5 , 6 , 7 , and 8 Here * * * Table 9 describes the licensing ﬁrms , and Table 10 reports characteristics of the licenses in the sample . * * * Table 9 and Table 10 Here * * * Tables 11 and 12 report licensee and license characteristics for exclusive licenses and Tables 13 and 14 report these characteristics for non - exclusive licenses . * * * Tables 11 , 12 , 13 , and 14 Here * * * Comparing our data to those utilized in past studies , we note several important dif - ferences . Our sampling frame is different compared to several past studies involving university licensing such as Thursby and Thursby ( 2002 ) , Dechenaux et al . ( 2009 ) , Shane ( 2001 , 2002 ) and Elfenbein ( 2004 ) . Our sample is signiﬁcantly broader than those in ear - lier work ; we include both non - exclusive licenses as well as unpatented inventions . Fre - quencies set out in Table 10 reveal that 41 . 9 % of our licenses are exclusive ( vs . 100 % in 5 Available at http : / / www . princeton . edu / ˜ota / disk3 / 1984 / 8407 / 8407 . PDF 6 Note that the license date is the earliest date of the following three : date signed , date effective and date entered as written either on the contract itself or maintained in the OTL’s records . The most commonly used date is the date effective . 9 the above studies ) . The proportion of exclusive licenses at Stanford is slightly less than recently reported by the Association of University Technology Managers ( AUTM ) as typ - ical , whose surveys suggest that approximately half of university licenses are exclusive , and signiﬁcantly less than the 75 % exclusivity reported by Thursby and Thursby ( 2002 ) and Jensen and Thursby ( 2001 ) . 7 This contrast may reﬂect university differences in licens - ing approaches between Stanford and other universities or differences in the underlying discoveries themselves . Patenting rates in our sample also differ from earlier work ; only 43 . 7 % are patented in our study , versus 100 % in several earlier studies ( based on sampling choice , not the population : e . g . , Elfenbein , 2004 ; Shane , 2001 , 2002 ) . We note that the approach of the Stanford OTL in most cases is to submit a patent application after a suitable licensee has been identiﬁed . This strategy contrasts with the MIT approach noted in Shane ( 2001 ) — MIT will often patent on speculation before suitable licensees have been identiﬁed . 8 Table 4 reports that the licensed inventions in our sample are largely federally funded ( 67 . 1 % ) , involve research tools ( 69 % ) , and are bio - medical inventions of some kind , either medical devices or drugs ( 66 . 9 % ) . 9 Most of the licensed discoveries are made by inventors who have previously disclosed inventions . Consistent with the high share of biomedical inventions , 59 . 4 % of inventors are afﬁliated with the Stanford School of Medicine . The de - partment with the second highest number of inventions is electrical engineering ( 16 . 3 % ) . These inventions are typically licensed to small ﬁrms ( 58 . 4 % ) , deﬁned as ﬁrms with fewer than 500 employees . Only 20 . 1 % of inventions are licensed to start - up ﬁrms , which is roughly equivalent to the proportion of inventor founded ﬁrms ( 19 . 2 % ) . Note that this does not imply that all start - ups are inventor - founded ; roughly 47 . 4 % of start - up ﬁrms are inventor founded . 10 License Terms : Start - up licenses appear to have a greater number of diligence terms than do licenses to established ﬁrms , though these terms are utilized in fewer than 35 % of licenses ) . This is surprising since we would expect that diligence terms would be com - monly utilized to discourage shelving , a problem more likely in established ﬁrms . It could 7 Association of University Technology Managers , AUTM Licensing Survey ( FY 1991 and FY 2001 ) . 8 Stanford’s approach suggests that a smaller fraction of invention disclosures by its faculty will be patented at Stanford than at MIT , but also raises an interesting issue—all of the patents in our sample are for licensed inventions . Suitable licensees have been found for all inventions in our sampling frame ( since we are analyzing only licensed inventions ) , yet fewer than half of these inventions have associated patents . This suggests that either ( a ) the samples used in studies of only patented inventions may be less representative than previously thought , or ( b ) the underlying technologies at Stanford differ dramatically from those at other universities such as MIT in the sense that they are less ‘patentable . ’ One explanation could be that Stanford’s pool of invention disclosures is more highly represented by software than disclo - sures at other universities . ( Mowery and Ziedonis ( 2002 ) suggests that Stanford is a signiﬁcant licensor of software . ) While software patenting has increased dramatically in recent years , rates of patenting on software are lower than for inventions in other technological areas . 9 Mowery et al . ( 2001 ) report that biomedical invention disclosures as a share of all disclosures at Stanford rose sharply in the late 1970s and that by 1990 the share of licensing agreements by biomedical inventions was slightly more than 70 % . 10 Established ﬁrms were also founded by inventors in some cases ( 12 . 2 % ) . This number likely reﬂects ﬁrms that repeatedly license from Stanford—a faculty inventor creates a ﬁrm , licenses one technology , later creates another technology and then licenses that new technology . 10 be that issue fees and , to a lesser extent annual minimum royalties , which are commonly used in both start - up and established ﬁrm licenses , are sufﬁcient to deter shelving . However , these data may have nuances that these descriptive statistics do not capture . For example , the timing for payment or amounts due may be very different for these same clauses between start - ups and established ﬁrms . Issue fees or minimum annual payments may be higher for established ﬁrms than for start - ups and this increased magnitude may compensate for the increased risk of shelving or delay . 11 Overall , seventy percent of these 852 licenses include issue fees , 37 . 7 % include output based royalty fees , 46 . 8 % include annual fees , 16 . 7 % include progress or milestone fees , 22 . 9 % include patent reimbursement fees , 10 . 7 % are equity licenses and 41 . 9 % contain exclusivity clauses . Start - up ﬁrms are much more likely to obtain an exclusive license than established ﬁrms , perhaps in recognition of the heightened organizational risk if the license is non - exclusive and other ﬁrms license and develop the same technology . Non - exclusive li - censes may also control for the risk of shelving or delay by established ﬁrms . However , we note that the underlying technology licensed to start - ups versus established ﬁrms may drive this difference in exclusivity . To further explore the differences between exclusive and non - exclusive licenses , we further split the sample by exclusive / non - exclusive and generate descriptives for both start - up and established ﬁrms . We complement the coded license terms with additional data on the underlying tech - nology , using patent information ( where a licensed technology was patented prior to li - cense ) , as well as information on the licensee from Dun and Bradstreet and CorpTech , and founding years from the sources described above . 5 Methodology Identifying how organizational type ( i . e . , start - up or established ﬁrm ) affects the con - tractual terms of university licenses in ways not otherwise predicted by the technology being licensed is a difﬁcult empirical exercise . Fundamentally , we seek to identify how li - cense terms are selected to simultaneously address both technological and organizational risk . To disentangle these two dimensions , we proceed in two main stages . In the ﬁrst stage , we establish a level of technology risk for each discovery . Ideally we would observe the stage of technological development at the time of license . For ex - ample , in the 1997 AUTM Survey , respondents reported seven different classiﬁcations of maturity ranging from“proof of concept but no prototype” to “ready for practical or com - mercial use” ( Jensen and Thursby 2001 ) . Unfortunately , the Stanford OTL did not monitor the stage of development for invention disclosures in our sample and we have no such detailed measure . We instead measure technological maturity based on the age of the disclosure at the time of license . Since prior research suggests that the most nascent and risky technologies are often licensed to start - up ﬁrms ( Shane 2001 ) , we then estimate the probability that the licensee will be a start - up ( versus an established ﬁrm ) based on the age of technology and other industry speciﬁc measures , as suggested by prior research 11 These differences in timing and magnitude will be explored in a later draft . 11 ( Shane 2001 , 2002 ) . Due to the dichotomous nature of the dependent variable ( whether the technology is licensed to a start - up or not ) , we utilize a probit model for this estima - tion . We then use the variables identiﬁed as strongly correlated with the probability of licensing to a start - up as a signal of earlier or riskier technologies . We then assume that the identity of the licensee , that is , a start - up or established ﬁrm , proxies for the organizational risk associated with the license . Shelving risks are assumed to be relatively stronger in established ﬁrms , while start - ups are relatively more prone to organizational failure . Finally , we examine the license terms selected for each license , having categorized the levels of technological and organizational risk . While we have some expectations about when particular license terms are used ( e . g . , Hedge 2010 ) , we know less about the portfolio of terms used in conjunction with different technologies and ﬁrms . For this reason , our approach is somewhat inductive at this stage . We use descriptives , basic probits and cluster analysis to identify how terms are used in con - junction with one another and with particular licensees / technologies . Speciﬁcally , we examine whether licenses include exclusivity , upfront fees , royalties , annual minimums , equity patent reimbursements and different types of diligence clauses . Our driving as - sumption is that the terms selected for a particular license are so chosen to maximize the probability of commercialization success . 6 Results and Discussion We ﬁrst examine the factors that are correlated with licensing to a start - up ﬁrm . Table 15 reports a probit analysis where the dependent variable equals 1 if the licensee was a start - up , 0 otherwise . The ﬁrst model includes characteristics of the invention . The second model adds inventor departments and the mean number of inventions per inventor for the licensed technology . Finally , the third model adds industry characteristics , including survey ﬁndings from the Carnegie Mellon survey on the relevance of intellectual property protections . We repeat these models on two subsamples , exclusive and non - exclusive licenses , to allow estimates to vary between these two potentially distinct types of license . * * * Table 15 Here * * * From Model ( 1 ) of Table 15 , we see that start - ups are less likely to be the licensee in medical technologies as well as in consumer products . Start - up ﬁrms are also less likely to be the licensee for inventions that are already patented at the time of license , though this effect is not signiﬁcant in the full sample . Research tools are also less likely to be licensed by a start - up . Because research tools often require little development and are typically licensed widely on a non - exclusive basis ( Ziedonis 2007 ) , such technologies are likely to be of little interest to entrepreneurs . Start - ups appear to be just as likely to license software technologies invented at Stanford as they are to license inventions arising from federally funded research . Model ( 2 ) of Table 15 includes inventor departments , a control for the number of in - ventions for each faculty inventor listed on the invention disclosure and the number of inventors on the team . Departmental afﬁliations appear to have little effect on whether 12 a start - up ﬁrm or established ﬁrm will be the licensee , with the exception of inventions disclosed by faculty in the computer science department . Those inventions are less likely to be licensed by a start - up ﬁrm . Start - up licensing is similarly less likely when inven - tors have more prior inventions . If prior inventions are licensed and later inventions are related technologically to these earlier licenses , then we might expect the same ( now es - tablished ) ﬁrms that licensed before to be interested in licensing these later technologies . Finally , new technologies are more likely to be licensed to a start - up when these technolo - gies are developed by a larger group of inventors . Larger inventor team size is thought to be correlated with underlying value of inventions , since such inventions by deﬁnition require greater resources to develop . Possibly , inventors may be more interested in com - mercializing more valuable inventions themselves , which would lead to greater start - up licensing , presumably to inventor founded ﬁrms . When we add industry characteristics and control for the " boom " years of 1999 - 2000 in Model ( 3 ) , we ﬁnd that start - ups more likely licensed in industries where patenting is an effective appropriability mechanism . Strong patent protection would allow to com - pete with ﬁrms that are established with resources that could otherwise be used to imi - tate quickly . This result appears to be inconsistent with the result that startups are less likely to license patented inventions . One explanation could be that startups often license early - stage ( and unpatented ) technologies . If the start - up fails , Stanford would likely not pursue a patent unless it has identiﬁed another licensee willing to pay for patent pros - ecution costs . Further , it is possible that the patent effectiveness is capturing another ( unmeasured ) industry characteristic . Start - up licensing is more prevalent during the years 1999 - 2000 , which is not surpris - ing given the availability of venture capital funding during that period . Start - up licens - ing is also more prevalent in concentrated industries , a ﬁnding inconsistent with Shane ( 2001 ) . Signs and signiﬁcance levels of the remaining variables do not change from mod - els ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) . Splitting our sample into exclusive and non - exclusive licenses adds some nuance to the above discussion . With the exception of inventions out of the computer science de - partment , which are absent from the non - exclusive license sample , the effects discussed above appear to be largely driven by non - exclusive licenses . For example , medical and research tool inventions are less likely to be licensed to start - ups , but this effect is only signiﬁcant for non - exclusive licenses . Patented inventions are similarly signiﬁcantly less likely licensed to start - ups , but again largely in non - exclusive licenses . In contrast with the full sample results , however , older technologies are more likely to be licensed to start - ups in non - exclusive licenses , in contrast with technologies licensed through exclusive licenses . Further , patented inventions are less likely licensed to start - ups in non - exclusive licenses . Non - exclusive licenses to start - ups are more likely inventions from electrical engineering and are more likely to have inventors outside of Stanford on the invention . Finally , non - exclusive licenses more likely go to start - ups during the technology bubble : 1990 - 2000 . * * * Table 16 and Table 17 Here * * * These ﬁndings suggest a more nuanced relationship between technology maturity and licensing to start - up ﬁrms . While our full sample results are broadly consistent with 13 Shane ( 2001 ) in the sense that patented ( i . e . , more mature ) technologies are less likely licensed to a start - up , this effect is largely driven by non - exclusive licenses , a category of licenses not included in Shane’s analysis . Further , our technology age variable is posi - tively linked to start - up licensing for non - exclusive licenses . This may suggest that start - ups are more likely for more mature technologies in non - exclusive settings , where the organizational risks of both types of ﬁrm are mitigated by the ability to license to another ﬁrm , or that the risk of licensing to a start - up is less signiﬁcant because the technology is more mature and less uncertainty surrounds its development prospects . Having identiﬁed variables signiﬁcantly correlated with start - up licensing , we now turn to the license terms used to control for the relevant technology and organizational risks associated with a particular license . Again , we assume that terms are efﬁciently cho - sen so as to maximize commercialization and , consequently , diffusion of the underlying technology . License contracts are multi - dimensional , embodying a signiﬁcant variety of tools available to Stanford to meet its objectives . While we have access to the complete agreements of the licenses in our sample , we initially focus our efforts on a few broad categories of license terms : whether a license is exclusive , whether royalties , issue fees , and / or annual minimum royalties exist , whether equity is granted in the licensee as part of royalties paid , whether patent reimbursements are offset against royalties , and , ﬁnally , whether and what type of diligence clauses are included in the agreement . We expect that these terms are not chosen in isolation from each other , but rather are interrelated . For example , exclusivity raises the risk of shelving as well as the costs of organizational failure ( particularly when licensing to start - ups ) . To compensate for exclusivity , Stanford may include terms such as annual minimum royalties ( to prevent shelving ) and / or diligence clauses that require frequent progress reports ( to ensure that development is proceeding as expected ) . As such , we use cluster analysis to divide the licenses into distinct groups to analyze the simultaneous use of these different license contract terms . Cluster analysis has been used in earlier studies to identify similarities in groups of observations across multiple dimensions ( see , e . g . , Kaplan and Stromberg 2003 , analyzing venture capital contracts ; Ichniowski , Shaw and Prennushi 1997 , analyzing the effects human resource management practices on productivity ) . We cluster on the license terms used , essentially developing groups of licenses that have common terms . We then examine differences in invention , inventor and licensee characteristics between clusters with a view to identifying ( 1 ) license term complemen - tarity ; and ( 2 ) what types of license contracts are matched with the different types of inventions and licensee ﬁrms . We use a partition cluster method ( “ k - means” cluster analysis ) to separate the observa - tions into a distinct number overlapping groups . With partition clustering , the number of groups must be speciﬁed . 12 We estimated two to six clusters and then chose the number of groups according to the values of the Calinski and Harabasz ( 1974 ) pseudo - F index ; larger values indicate more distinct clusters . The largest value of this index was at three groups and the results of this cluster analysis are reported in Tables 18 ( invention charac - 12 The clusters are formed iteratively ; each observation is assigned to a group based on how close the observation mean is to the group mean . Group means are initially determined by k randomly chosen observations , where k is the number of groups selected . The group mean is then adjusted to reﬂect the inclusion of the new observation . This process continues until no observations change groups . 14 teristics ) , 19 ( inventor characteristics ) , and 20 ( licensee and license characteristics ) . 13 * * * Table 18 , 19 , and 20 Here * * * The three clusters break down along a few distinct lines . Examining ﬁrst the differ - ences between the clusters in terms of license terms ( how the clusters were formed ) , we note that clusters 1 and 2 are characterized by largely exclusive licenses . There are no exclusive licenses in cluster 3 . Of the “exclusive” clusters , cluster 2 has more exclusive licenses , while cluster 1 has more royalty clauses ( 76 . 6 % vs . 47 . 5 % in cluster 2 ) , including annual minimum royalties ( 82 . 1 % vs . 41 . 5 % in cluster 2 ) , milestone payments ( 39 . 3 % vs . 26 . 5 % in cluster 2 ) and equity as part of the royalties ( 35 . 2 % vs . 17 % in cluster 2 ) . Inter - estingly , cluster 1 ( exclusive ) has the most diligence clauses ( 100 % of these licenses have some form of diligence clause ) , while both clusters 2 ( exclusive ) and 3 ( non - exclusive ) have very few diligence clauses ( 3 . 5 % and 3 . 8 % of licenses , respectively ) . In contrast , there does not appear to be a signiﬁcant difference between clusters in terms of the how frequently issue fees are used or which licenses have been terminated . Based on license terms alone , there appear to be two exclusive clusters , distinguished by diligence clauses and royalties , and one non - exclusive cluster , characterized by few diligence clauses and other differences in the royalty clauses ( speciﬁcally , less use of equity , milestone pay - ments , for example ) . Based on these observations , we can identify some apparent complementarities among license contract terms . For example , patent reimbursements are common in licenses that are exclusive . This suggests a higher patenting rate for these licenses , which is conﬁrmed in the Table 20 ; patents exist in 66 . 9 % and 52 . 5 % of cluster 1 and 2 licenses , respectively , but only 22 . 3 % of licenses in cluster 3 . This is consistent with expectations ; exclusivity is only possible and valuable to the extent that intellectual property rights can be protected . Milestone payments are also more common in exclusive licenses in clusters 1 and 2 ( 39 . 3 % and 26 . 5 % of licenses , respectively , versus 8 . 7 % in cluster 3 ) . Perhaps more interesting is to link the clusters of license terms with the underlying technologies and licensee characteristics . Focusing ﬁrst on invention characteristics , we note that the average technology age is slightly higher for non - exclusive licenses than exclusive ( 2 . 858 years between disclosure and license for cluster 3 licenses , versus 2 . 7 and 2 . 575 years for cluster 1 and 2 licenses , respectively ) . Research tools , software and medical inventions are much more common in non - exclusive licenses , than exclusive . Optical inventions are more common in exclusive licenses ( 13 . 8 % and 11 % for clusters 1 and 2 vs . 2 . 4 % for cluster 3 ) , as were consumer products ( around 24 % for exclusive clusters , 12 . 8 % for non - exclusive ) . Consistent with these observations , 65 . 5 % of inventors for cluster 3 licenses are from the school of medicine , while inventors from electrical engineering are more likely associated with inventions in clusters 1 and 2 ( 29 . 7 % and 16 % vs . 9 . 8 % in cluster 3 ) . Licensees are signiﬁcantly more likely to be start - ups , have venture capital funding and be inventor founded in the exclusive clusters , 1 and 2 . Further , within the exclusive clusters , licensees are more likely start - ups , with VC funding and inventor founded in 13 We note that the results from a larger number of clusters are very similar to that reported below . The main difference with , for example , four groups is that the non - exclusive group is split into two groups . 15 cluster 1 than 2 . This , when combined with the license differences between the two exclu - sive clusters , suggests that technologies that are licensed to inventor founded start - ups use more diligence terms and require more royalty payments . There are several counter - intuitive ﬁndings in this observation . First , inventor founded ﬁrms are presumed to have strong commercialization incentives and should therefore not require as many diligence clauses setting technical , market or organizational development milestones . That royal - ties are more likely in the cluster with more inventor founded start - ups is interesting ; royalty payments ( particularly running royalties or those tied to milestones , as opposed to annual royalties ) align the incentives of the inventor with the licensee , which presum - ably would not be an issue in inventor founded ﬁrms . Additionally , we might expect venture capital to function as an external monitor of the commercialization process . This logic suggests that VC funding may be a substitute for monitoring in the license itself , via diligence clauses . However , in the cluster with the highest incidence of VC funding ( cluster 1 ) , we also observe the highest incidence of both royalties as well as diligence clauses . This suggests that VC funding may not in fact substitute for other monitoring mechanisms via the license contract , but rather form a complement . The picture that emerges from this analysis is one where the underlying technology is correlated with the choice of licensee ; research tools , software and medical inventions are more likely licensed to established ﬁrms , while patented inventions are more likely licensed to start - ups in exclusive license deals . Further , where these start - ups are more likely inventor founded and more likely have VC funding , royalties and extensive dili - gence clauses are much more likely . It seems possible and perhaps likely that inventor founding and VC funding proxy for some unobserved quality of the invention ; both are more likely the greater the commercialization prospects of the licensed technology . 16 Table 1 : License Terms License Term Illustration Exclusivity Said license under the Licensed Patents is Exclusive , including the right to sublicense pursuant to Article 13 , in the Licensed Field of Use for a term commencing as of the Effective Date and ending upon expiration of the last to expire of Licensed Patent ( s ) . STANFORD agrees that it will not grant further licenses under or to the Technology . Equity LICENSEE will issue and convey to STANFORD , as consideration for the granting of the license from STANFORD to LICENSEE , ﬁfty thousand ( 50 , 000 ) shares of Common Stock of LICENSEE , which shares constitute one percent ( 1 % ) of the currently outstanding number of shares of capital stock of the LICENSEE within thirty ( 30 ) days after the date of this Agreement . During the term of this Agreement , the LICENSEE will grant to STANFORD the same right to participate in future ﬁnancing , the same registration rights and the same information rights that the Company grants to an investor in a future round of ﬁnancing . Royalties LICENSEE shall pay STANFORD earned royalties on Net Sales as follows : ( a ) 1 . 5 % of Net Sales of therapeutics ; and ( b ) 1 . 5 % of Net Sales of diagnostics . Annual Minimum Fees LICENSEE shall pay to STANFORD the following amounts as annual royalty advances , each November 15 of the years set forth below : Year Amount of Annual Royalty 2002 – 2005 $ 10 , 000 2006 – 2010 $ 20 , 000 2011 – each year thereafter $ 30 , 000 Each of the annual royalty advance payments set forth in this Section 6 . 3 are nonrefundable , but they are fully creditable against earned royalties to the extent provided in Paragraph 6 . 7 . License Issue Fees LICENSEE agrees to pay to STANFORD a noncreditable , nonrefundable license issue royalty of Twenty Thousand Dollars ( $ 20 , 000 ) . Progress Milestone Payments Licensee shall also pay creditable milestone payments as follows : ( a ) for therapeutics : ( i ) $ 50 , 000 upon the ﬁrst to issue of Licensed Patent ( s ) ; and , ( ii ) $ 150 , 000 upon FDA Approval of a Licensed Product . ( b ) for a diagnostic Licensed Product , $ 50 , 000 upon ﬁrst commercial sale . Patent Reimbursement Fees Within thirty ( 30 ) days after receipt of a statement from STANFORD , LICENSEE shall reimburse STANFORD for all reasonable costs incurred and paid by STANFORD after August 1 , 2001 in connection with the preparation , ﬁling and prosecution of all patent applications and maintenance of patents within Licensed Patent ( s ) covering the Invention ( s ) . Developmental Milestones As an inducement to STANFORD to enter into this Agreement , LICENSEE agrees to use all reasonable efforts and diligence to proceed with the development , manufacture , and sale or lease of Licensed Products and to diligently develop markets for the Licensed Products , either by itself or through its Afﬁliates or sublicensees . STANFORD may , at its option , convert all Exclusive licenses granted herein to non - exclusive if LICENSEE fails to meet any of the following diligence milestones ( dates are calculated from the Effective Date ) : ( a ) within six ( 6 ) months , provide STANFORD with a detailed business plan identifying three top target markets and applications , including a research and development funding plan for at least one Licensed Product ; ( b ) within eighteen ( 18 ) months , develop prototype speciﬁcations and design for at least one Licensed Product ; ( c ) within eighteen ( 18 ) months , complete a Successful Financing ; ( d ) within thirty - six ( 36 ) months , complete a working prototype of a Licensed Product ; and ( e ) within forty - eight ( 48 ) months , make a First Commercial Sale of a Licensed Product . Progress Reports Required Progress Report . On or before September I of each year until LICENSEE markets a Licensed Product , LICENSEE shall make a written annual report to STANFORD covering the preceding year ending June 30 , regarding the progress of LICENSEE toward commercial sale or use of Licensed Products . Such report shall include , as a minimum , information sufﬁcient to enable STANFORD to satisfy reporting requirements of the U . S . Government and for STANFORD to ascertain progress by LICENSEE toward meeting the technical and ﬁnancial diligence requirements of this Article 5 . These reports are LICENSEE’s conﬁdential information under Article 20 . 17 Table 2 : Technology , Inventor , Firm , and Industry Characteristics Variable Description Source Technology Characteristics Software Invention is software or related to development of an algorithm Stanford OTL Medical Invention is a medical device Stanford OTL Consumer Invention is a consumer product , but not a therapeutic drug Stanford OTL Tool Invention is a research tool used by other researchers Stanford OTL Process invention is a production process Stanford OTL Patented Invention is patented at or near license execution date Stanford OTL Federal Funding Research generating invention was federally funded Stanford OTL Inventor Characteristics Inventor Whether an inventor was appointed in the following departments : Stanford OTL Department • Computer Science • Chemistry • Genetics • Pathology • Electrical Engineering • Physics ( No observations in sample ) • Medicine ( omitted category ) • Non - Stanford Department Mean Number of Mean of prior invention disclosures Stanford OTL Prior Inventions by inventor for current licensed technology Industry Characteristics Effectiveness of Appropriability Mechanisms : Patents % of industry respondents claiming patents as CMU Survey an effective appropriability mechanism Complementary % of industry respondents claiming complementary CMU Survey Sales sales as an effective appropriability mechanism Complementary % of industry respondents claiming complementary CMU Survey Manufacturing manufacturing as an effective appropriability mechanism Lead time % of industry respondents claiming lead time CMU Survey Manufacturing as an effective appropriability mechanism Industry HHI index , scaled ( divided by 1000 ) US Census of Concentration Manufacturers , 1997 and 2002 Firm Characteristics Start - Up Whether ﬁrm is a start - up based on founding year Various VC Funding Whether ﬁrm has VC funding at license execution date Stanford OTL Firm Size Whether ﬁrm is large ( greater than 500 employees ) Stanford OTL Inventor Whether ﬁrm was founded by Stanford inventor Stanford OTL Founded Future Variables ( Not currently in analysis ) Drug Invention is a therapeutic drug Prototype Exists A prototype exists prior to license execution date Goldfarb and Colvyas Survey Radical If innovation is radical—3 - digit patent classes in patents USPTO ( patented cited by focal patent but not directly cited by focal patents inventions only ) Invention Scope Breadth of invention—Number of international classes USPTO ( patented cited by patent inventions only ) Tacit Knowledge Need for tacit knowledge transfer by inventor Stanford OTL ( license terms on know - how clauses ) 18 Table 3 : Invention Characteristics - Full Sample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 852 n = 171 n = 681 N % N % N % Invention received federal funding 572 67 . 1 % 106 62 . 0 % 466 68 . 4 % Consumer product 158 18 . 5 % 43 25 . 1 % 115 16 . 9 % Production process 54 6 . 3 % 17 9 . 9 % 37 5 . 4 % Research tool 588 69 . 0 % 95 55 . 6 % 493 72 . 4 % Therapeutic drug 52 6 . 1 % 16 9 . 4 % 36 5 . 3 % Software invention 185 21 . 7 % 39 22 . 8 % 146 21 . 4 % Chemical 14 1 . 6 % 4 2 . 3 % 10 1 . 5 % Electronic 55 6 . 5 % 15 8 . 8 % 40 5 . 9 % Optical 60 7 . 0 % 19 11 . 1 % 41 6 . 0 % Telecom 15 1 . 8 % 9 5 . 3 % 6 0 . 9 % Other non - medical 43 5 . 0 % 8 4 . 7 % 35 5 . 1 % Medical invention 570 66 . 9 % 88 51 . 5 % 482 70 . 8 % Biotech 307 36 . 0 % 47 27 . 5 % 260 38 . 2 % Medical devices 24 2 . 8 % 8 4 . 7 % 16 2 . 3 % Pharmaceutical 34 4 . 0 % 5 2 . 9 % 29 4 . 3 % Other medical 114 13 . 4 % 17 9 . 9 % 97 14 . 2 % Patent exists 372 43 . 7 % 80 46 . 8 % 292 42 . 9 % Year of license 1990 - 1998 449 52 . 7 % 76 44 . 4 % 373 54 . 8 % 1999 - 2000 249 29 . 2 % 67 39 . 2 % 182 26 . 7 % 2001 - 2004 154 18 . 1 % 28 16 . 4 % 126 18 . 5 % Table 4 : Inventor Characteristics - Full Sample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 852 n = 171 n = 681 N % N % N % Inventor invented before current invention 495 58 . 1 % 98 57 . 3 % 397 58 . 3 % Electrical engineering department 139 16 . 3 % 76 44 . 4 % 91 13 . 4 % Chemistry department 89 10 . 4 % 22 12 . 9 % 67 9 . 8 % Computer science department 28 3 . 3 % 3 1 . 8 % 25 3 . 7 % Genetics department 73 8 . 6 % 13 7 . 6 % 60 8 . 8 % Pathology department 102 12 . 0 % 18 10 . 5 % 84 12 . 3 % Medicine department ( in school of med ) 87 10 . 2 % 15 8 . 8 % 72 10 . 6 % School of medicine 506 59 . 4 % 81 47 . 4 % 425 62 . 4 % Non - Stanford department 30 3 . 5 % 7 4 . 1 % 23 3 . 4 % 19 Table 5 : Invention Characteristics - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 383 n = 98 n = 255 N % N % N % Invention received federal funding 214 60 . 60 % 53 54 . 10 % 161 63 . 10 % Consumer product 81 22 . 90 % 22 22 . 40 % 59 23 . 10 % Production process 31 8 . 80 % 12 12 . 20 % 19 7 . 50 % Research tool 194 55 . 00 % 48 49 . 00 % 146 57 . 30 % Therapeutic drug 47 13 . 30 % 16 16 . 30 % 31 12 . 20 % Software invention 53 15 . 00 % 13 13 . 30 % 40 15 . 70 % Chemical 10 2 . 80 % 2 2 . 00 % 8 3 . 10 % Electronic 25 7 . 10 % 9 9 . 20 % 16 6 . 30 % Optical 43 12 . 20 % 14 14 . 30 % 29 11 . 40 % Telecom 11 3 . 10 % 6 6 . 10 % 5 2 . 00 % Other non - medical 25 7 . 10 % 6 6 . 10 % 19 7 . 50 % Medical invention 205 58 . 10 % 53 54 . 10 % 152 59 . 60 % Biotech 78 22 . 10 % 22 22 . 40 % 56 22 . 00 % Medical devices 22 6 . 20 % 8 8 . 20 % 14 5 . 50 % Pharmaceutical 29 8 . 20 % 5 5 . 10 % 24 9 . 40 % Other medical 56 15 . 90 % 13 13 . 30 % 43 16 . 90 % Patent exists for invention 209 59 . 20 % 56 57 . 10 % 153 60 . 00 % Year of license 1990 - 1998 187 53 . 00 % 45 45 . 90 % 142 55 . 70 % 1999 - 2000 107 30 . 30 % 36 36 . 70 % 71 27 . 80 % 2001 - 2004 59 16 . 70 % 17 17 . 30 % 42 16 . 50 % Table 6 : Inventor Characteristics - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 383 n = 98 n = 255 N % N % N % Inventor invented before current invention 180 51 . 00 % 56 57 . 10 % 124 48 . 60 % Electrical engineering department 75 21 . 20 % 25 25 . 50 % 50 19 . 60 % Chemistry department 30 8 . 50 % 11 11 . 20 % 19 7 . 50 % Computer science department 10 2 . 80 % 3 3 . 10 % 7 2 . 70 % Genetics department 28 7 . 90 % 9 9 . 20 % 19 7 . 50 % Pathology department 27 7 . 60 % 9 9 . 20 % 18 7 . 10 % Medicine department ( in school of med ) 55 15 . 60 % 11 11 . 20 % 44 17 . 30 % School of medicine 188 53 . 30 % 46 46 . 90 % 142 55 . 70 % Department outside of Stanford 7 2 . 00 % 1 1 . 00 % 6 2 . 40 % 20 Table 7 : Invention Characteristics - Non - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 490 n = 71 n = 419 N % N % N % Invention received federal funding 350 71 . 40 % 51 71 . 80 % 299 71 . 40 % Consumer product 77 15 . 70 % 21 29 . 60 % 56 13 . 40 % Production process 23 4 . 70 % 5 7 . 00 % 18 4 . 30 % Research tool 386 78 . 80 % 45 63 . 40 % 341 81 . 40 % Therapeutic drug 4 0 . 80 % 0 0 . 00 % 4 1 . 00 % Software invention 130 26 . 50 % 25 35 . 20 % 105 25 . 10 % Chemical 4 0 . 80 % 2 2 . 80 % 2 0 . 50 % Electronic 30 6 . 10 % 6 8 . 50 % 24 5 . 70 % Optical 16 3 . 30 % 4 5 . 60 % 12 2 . 90 % Telecom 4 0 . 80 % 3 4 . 20 % 1 0 . 20 % Other non - medical 18 3 . 70 % 2 2 . 80 % 16 3 . 80 % Medical invention 358 73 . 10 % 35 49 . 30 % 323 77 . 10 % Biotech 224 45 . 70 % 25 35 . 20 % 199 47 . 50 % Medical devices 2 0 . 40 % 0 0 . 00 % 2 0 . 50 % Pharmaceutical 5 1 . 00 % 0 0 . 00 % 5 1 . 20 % Other medical 57 11 . 60 % 4 5 . 60 % 53 12 . 60 % Patent exists for invention 160 32 . 70 % 23 32 . 40 % 137 32 . 70 % Year of license 1990 - 1998 255 52 . 00 % 30 42 . 30 % 225 53 . 70 % 1999 - 2000 141 28 . 80 % 30 42 . 30 % 111 26 . 50 % 2001 - 2004 94 19 . 20 % 11 15 . 50 % 83 19 . 80 % Table 8 : Inventor Characteristics - Non - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 490 n = 71 n = 419 N % N % N % Inventor invented before current invention 308 62 . 90 % 40 56 . 30 % 268 64 . 00 % Electrical engineering department 63 12 . 90 % 22 31 . 00 % 41 9 . 80 % Chemistry department 57 11 . 60 % 10 14 . 10 % 47 11 . 20 % Computer science department 18 3 . 70 % 0 0 . 00 % 18 4 . 30 % Genetics department 45 9 . 20 % 4 5 . 60 % 41 9 . 80 % Pathology department 72 14 . 70 % 9 12 . 70 % 63 15 . 00 % Medicine department ( in school of med ) 32 6 . 50 % 4 5 . 60 % 28 6 . 70 % School of medicine 311 63 . 50 % 35 49 . 30 % 276 65 . 90 % Department outside of Stanford 21 4 . 30 % 6 8 . 50 % 15 3 . 60 % 21 Table 9 : Licensee Characteristics - Full Sample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 677 n = 138 n = 539 N % N % N % Small ﬁrm a ( classifIed by OTL ) 336 58 . 4 % 111 84 . 1 % 225 50 . 8 % Startup ﬁrm ( classiﬁed by OTL ) 171 20 . 1 % 171 100 . 0 % 0 0 . 0 % VC funded 152 17 . 8 % 39 22 . 8 % 113 16 . 6 % Firm is inventor founded 164 19 . 2 % 81 47 . 4 % 83 12 . 2 % Firm is software ﬁrm 112 13 . 1 % 25 14 . 6 % 87 12 . 8 % Firm is publishing ﬁrm 10 1 . 2 % 1 0 . 6 % 9 1 . 3 % Note : a OTL observed whether a ﬁrm was a " small ﬁrm " for only 525 of the 852 observations in the sample . Table 10 : License Characteristics - Full Sample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 677 n = 138 n = 539 N % N % N % Exclusive license 353 41 . 9 % 98 58 . 0 % 255 37 . 8 % License terminated 696 81 . 7 % 145 84 . 8 % 551 80 . 9 % Royalties exist 321 37 . 7 % 75 43 . 9 % 246 36 . 1 % Issue fee required 597 70 . 1 % 119 86 . 2 % 478 82 . 4 % Annual minimum royalties exist 399 46 . 8 % 81 58 . 7 % 318 54 . 8 % Milestone payments required 142 16 . 7 % 31 22 . 5 % 111 19 . 1 % Equity in licensee acquired as part of royalties 91 10 . 7 % 44 25 . 7 % 47 6 . 9 % Patent fees offset against royalties 195 22 . 9 % 51 37 . 0 % 144 24 . 8 % Diligence clauses Reasonable efforts to develop’ clause 144 16 . 9 % 51 29 . 8 % 93 13 . 7 % Progress report required by date 118 13 . 8 % 41 24 . 0 % 77 11 . 3 % Products avaialable for sale by date 85 10 . 0 % 31 18 . 1 % 54 7 . 9 % Raise capital by date 17 2 . 0 % 8 4 . 7 % 9 1 . 3 % Any technical diligence clause ( dummy ) 145 17 . 0 % 51 29 . 8 % 94 13 . 8 % Any market diligence clause ( dummy ) 107 12 . 6 % 39 22 . 8 % 68 10 . 0 % Any organizational diligence clause ( dummy ) 147 17 . 3 % 52 30 . 4 % 95 14 . 0 % Any diligence clause ( dummy ) 166 19 . 5 % 58 33 . 9 % 107 15 . 7 % 22 Table 11 : Licensee Characteristics - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 383 n = 98 n = 255 N % N % N % Small ﬁrm a ( classiﬁed by OTL ) 177 74 . 10 % 72 84 . 70 % 105 68 . 20 % Startup ﬁrm ( classiﬁed by OTL ) 98 27 . 80 % 98 100 . 00 % 0 0 . 00 % VC funded 83 23 . 50 % 28 28 . 60 % 55 21 . 60 % Firm is inventor founded 121 34 . 30 % 57 58 . 20 % 64 25 . 10 % Firm is software ﬁrm 25 7 . 10 % 5 5 . 10 % 20 7 . 80 % Firm is publishing ﬁrm 9 2 . 50 % 1 1 . 00 % 8 3 . 10 % Note : a OTL observed whether a ﬁrm was a " small ﬁrm " for only 239 of the 353 observations in the exclusive subsample . Table 12 : License Characteristics - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 383 n = 98 n = 255 N % N % N % Exclusive license 353 100 . 00 % 98 100 . 00 % 255 100 . 00 % License terminated 274 77 . 60 % 92 93 . 90 % 182 71 . 40 % Royalties exist 174 49 . 30 % 47 48 . 00 % 127 49 . 80 % Issue fee required 252 83 . 70 % 66 85 . 70 % 186 83 . 00 % Annual minimum royalties exist 171 56 . 80 % 53 68 . 80 % 118 52 . 70 % Milestone payments required 99 32 . 90 % 26 33 . 80 % 73 32 . 60 % Equity in licensee acquired as part of royalties 80 22 . 70 % 36 36 . 70 % 44 17 . 30 % Patent fees offset against royalties 184 61 . 10 % 48 62 . 30 % 136 60 . 70 % Diligence clauses ‘Reasonable efforts to develop’ clause 103 29 . 20 % 37 37 . 80 % 66 25 . 90 % Progress report required by date 90 25 . 50 % 32 32 . 70 % 58 22 . 70 % Products availalble for sale by date 69 19 . 50 % 24 24 . 50 % 45 17 . 60 % Raise capital by date 17 4 . 80 % 8 8 . 20 % 9 3 . 50 % Any technical diligence clause 104 29 . 50 % 37 37 . 80 % 67 26 . 30 % Any market diligence clause 87 24 . 60 % 30 30 . 60 % 57 22 . 40 % Any organizational diligence clause 106 30 . 00 % 38 38 . 80 % 68 26 . 70 % Any diligence clause 111 31 . 40 % 39 39 . 80 % 72 28 . 20 % 23 Table 13 : Licensee Characteristics - Non - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 490 n = 71 n = 419 N % N % N % Small ﬁrm a ( classiﬁed by OTL ) 157 47 . 30 % 38 82 . 60 % 119 41 . 60 % Startup ﬁrm ( classiﬁed by OTL ) 71 14 . 50 % 71 100 . 00 % 0 0 . 00 % VC funded 69 14 . 10 % 11 15 . 50 % 58 13 . 80 % Firm is inventor founded 42 8 . 60 % 23 32 . 40 % 19 4 . 50 % Firm is software ﬁrm 86 17 . 60 % 20 28 . 20 % 66 15 . 80 % Firm is publishing ﬁrm 1 0 . 20 % 0 0 . 00 % 1 0 . 20 % Note : a OTL observed whether a ﬁrm was a " small ﬁrm " for only 332 of the 490 observations in the non - exclusive subsample . Table 14 : License Characteristics - Non - Exclusive Subsample ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 490 n = 71 n = 419 N % N % N % Exclusive license 0 0 . 00 % 0 0 . 00 % 0 0 . 00 % License terminated 417 85 . 10 % 52 73 . 20 % 365 87 . 10 % Royalties exist 147 30 . 00 % 28 39 . 40 % 119 28 . 40 % Issue fee required 345 83 . 70 % 53 86 . 90 % 292 83 . 20 % Annual minimum royalties exist 228 55 . 30 % 28 45 . 90 % 200 57 . 00 % Milestone payments required 43 10 . 40 % 5 8 . 20 % 38 10 . 80 % Equity in licensee acquired as part of royalties 11 2 . 20 % 8 11 . 30 % 3 0 . 70 % Patent fees offset against royalties 11 2 . 70 % 3 4 . 90 % 8 2 . 30 % Diligence clauses ‘Reasonable efforts to develop’ clause 41 8 . 40 % 14 19 . 70 % 27 6 . 40 % Progress report required by date 28 5 . 70 % 9 12 . 70 % 19 4 . 50 % Products avaialble for sale by date 16 3 . 30 % 7 9 . 90 % 9 2 . 10 % Raise capital by date 0 0 . 00 % 0 0 . 00 % 0 0 . 00 % Any technical diligence clause 41 8 . 40 % 14 19 . 70 % 27 6 . 40 % Any market diligence clause 20 4 . 10 % 9 12 . 70 % 11 2 . 60 % Any organizational diligence clause 41 8 . 40 % 14 19 . 70 % 27 6 . 40 % Any dilgence clause 55 11 . 20 % 20 28 . 20 % 35 8 . 40 % 24 Table 15 : Licensing to Startups or Established Firms ? ( Full Sample ) PROBIT Dependent Variable : Start - Up = 1 Invention Add Inventor Add Industry Characteristics Characteristics Characteristics ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) Technology Age 0 . 0104 0 . 0139 0 . 0092 ( 0 . 0168 ) ( 0 . 0174 ) ( 0 . 0190 ) Software - 0 . 0794 0 . 0184 - 0 . 2412 ( 0 . 1383 ) ( 0 . 1500 ) ( 0 . 2343 ) Medical - 0 . 5321 * * * - 0 . 5048 * * * - 0 . 7920 * * * ( 0 . 1355 ) ( 0 . 1664 ) ( 0 . 2376 ) Consumer - 0 . 5694 * * - 0 . 5340 * * - 0 . 5695 * * ( 0 . 2478 ) ( 0 . 2518 ) ( 0 . 2612 ) Tool - 0 . 6359 * * * - 0 . 6576 * * * - 0 . 6246 * * * ( 0 . 1998 ) ( 0 . 2027 ) ( 0 . 2075 ) Process - 0 . 3478 - 0 . 4211 - 0 . 3438 ( 0 . 2724 ) ( 0 . 2789 ) ( 0 . 2893 ) Patented - 0 . 1611 - 0 . 2033 - 0 . 179 ( 0 . 1182 ) ( 0 . 1236 ) ( 0 . 1307 ) Federally funded - 0 . 0795 - 0 . 1744 - 0 . 1227 ( 0 . 1109 ) ( 0 . 1203 ) ( 0 . 1221 ) Computer science department - 0 . 7425 * * - 0 . 8026 * * ( 0 . 3544 ) ( 0 . 3587 ) Chemistry department 0 . 2101 0 . 1998 ( 0 . 1716 ) ( 0 . 1857 ) Genetics department 0 . 2657 0 . 1656 ( 0 . 1976 ) ( 0 . 2026 ) Pathology department 0 . 0404 0 . 0322 ( 0 . 1918 ) ( 0 . 1985 ) Electrical Engineering department 0 . 3562 * 0 . 2615 ( 0 . 1866 ) ( 0 . 2023 ) Some inventors outside Stanford 0 . 2555 0 . 3446 ( 0 . 2890 ) ( 0 . 2959 ) Mean number of prior inventions - 0 . 0127 * - 0 . 0092 ( 0 . 0070 ) ( 0 . 0072 ) Inventor team size 0 . 0964 * * 0 . 0942 * * ( 0 . 0390 ) ( 0 . 0398 ) Patents effective ( CMU ) 0 . 0270 * * ( 0 . 0127 ) Complementary sales effective ( CMU ) 0 . 0133 ( 0 . 0107 ) Complementary manufacturing effective ( CMU ) - 0 . 0375 ( 0 . 0456 ) Lead time effective ( CMU ) 0 . 0347 ( 0 . 0213 ) HHI ( scaled ) 1 . 6099 * * ( 0 . 6489 ) Licensed in 1999 - 2000 0 . 2832 * * ( 0 . 1235 ) Licensed in 2001 - 2004 0 . 0455 ( 0 . 1568 ) Constant 0 . 158 - 0 . 0369 - 2 . 3654 ( 0 . 2540 ) ( 0 . 2946 ) ( 2 . 4803 ) N 861 852 852 Log - likelihood - 416 . 1 - 397 . 8 - 390 . 4 Chi - square 34 . 55 * * * 58 . 71 * * * 73 . 45 * * * d . o . f . 8 16 23 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p > 0 . 01 * * p > 0 . 05 * p > 0 . 10 25 Table 16 : Licensing to Startups or Established Firms ? ( Exclusive Subsample ) PROBIT Dependent Variable : Start - Up = 1 Invention Add Inventor Add Industry Characteristics Characteristics Characteristics ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) Technology Age - 0 . 0105 - 0 . 0201 - 0 . 035 ( 0 . 0343 ) ( 0 . 0356 ) ( 0 . 0402 ) Software - 0 . 1293 - 0 . 1041 - 0 . 5021 ( 0 . 2265 ) ( 0 . 2463 ) ( 0 . 3173 ) Medical - 0 . 2244 - 0 . 2254 - 0 . 1399 ( 0 . 1856 ) ( 0 . 2326 ) ( 0 . 3870 ) Consumer - 0 . 4599 - 0 . 4713 - 0 . 6981 * * ( 0 . 2946 ) ( 0 . 2982 ) ( 0 . 3246 ) Tool - 0 . 3842 * - 0 . 4026 * - 0 . 4708 * ( 0 . 2234 ) ( 0 . 2278 ) ( 0 . 2432 ) Process 0 . 0287 - 0 . 0156 - 0 . 0315 ( 0 . 3279 ) ( 0 . 3408 ) ( 0 . 3587 ) Patented - 0 . 1918 - 0 . 1916 - 0 . 1588 ( 0 . 1623 ) ( 0 . 1663 ) ( 0 . 1785 ) Federally funded - 0 . 2669 * - 0 . 3712 * * - 0 . 3176 * ( 0 . 1518 ) ( 0 . 1625 ) ( 0 . 1652 ) Computer science department 0 . 2777 0 . 2476 ( 0 . 4910 ) ( 0 . 5042 ) Chemistry department 0 . 1665 0 . 3603 ( 0 . 2825 ) ( 0 . 3128 ) Genetics department 0 . 4663 0 . 4659 ( 0 . 2955 ) ( 0 . 3022 ) Pathology department 0 . 4474 0 . 4262 ( 0 . 3111 ) ( 0 . 3209 ) Electrical Engineering department 0 . 2729 0 . 0014 ( 0 . 2698 ) ( 0 . 2991 ) Some inventors outside Stanford - 0 . 5562 - 0 . 5506 ( 0 . 6151 ) ( 0 . 6306 ) Mean number of prior inventions - 0 . 0057 - 0 . 0003 ( 0 . 0102 ) ( 0 . 0108 ) Inventor team size 0 . 0508 0 . 0587 ( 0 . 0538 ) ( 0 . 0545 ) Patents effective ( CMU ) - 0 . 0077 ( 0 . 0197 ) Complementary sales effective ( CMU ) 0 . 01 ( 0 . 0143 ) Complementary manufacturing effective ( CMU ) 0 . 0126 ( 0 . 0595 ) Lead time effective ( CMU ) 0 . 0563 * * ( 0 . 0286 ) HHI ( scaled ) 1 . 4753 * ( 0 . 8801 ) Licensed in 1999 - 2000 0 . 1737 ( 0 . 1802 ) Licensed in 2001 - 2004 0 . 1643 ( 0 . 2418 ) Constant 0 . 1578 0 . 032 - 4 . 3479 ( 0 . 3225 ) ( 0 . 3630 ) ( 3 . 3744 ) N 355 353 353 Log - likelihood - 204 . 3 - 200 - 195 . 5 Chi - square 9 . 725 * * * 17 . 01 * * * 26 . 06 * * * d . o . f . 8 16 23 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p > 0 . 01 * * p > 0 . 05 * p > 0 . 10 26 Table 17 : Licensing to Startups or Established Firms ? ( Non - Exclusive Subsample ) PROBIT Dependent Variable : Start - Up = 1 Invention Add Inventor Add Industry Characteristics Characteristics Characteristics ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) Technology Age 0 . 0476 * * 0 . 0659 * * * 0 . 0603 * * ( 0 . 0215 ) ( 0 . 0237 ) ( 0 . 0254 ) Software - 0 . 0762 0 . 0289 0 . 2969 ( 0 . 1880 ) ( 0 . 2219 ) ( 0 . 4453 ) Medical - 0 . 7834 * * * - 0 . 7793 * * * - 1 . 4416 * * * ( 0 . 2075 ) ( 0 . 2580 ) ( 0 . 3531 ) Consumer 0 . 0396 ( 0 . 3625 ) Tool - 0 . 2321 - 0 . 4234 * - 0 . 4254 ( 0 . 3349 ) ( 0 . 2558 ) ( 0 . 2690 ) Process - 0 . 1066 0 . 0506 ( 0 . 3927 ) ( 0 . 4343 ) Patented - 0 . 4414 * * - 0 . 6603 * * * - 0 . 5937 * * ( 0 . 1948 ) ( 0 . 2302 ) ( 0 . 2482 ) Federally funded 0 . 2113 0 . 1142 0 . 1997 ( 0 . 1773 ) ( 0 . 2068 ) ( 0 . 2170 ) Computer science department NA Chemistry department 0 . 3592 0 . 3947 ( 0 . 2473 ) ( 0 . 2874 ) Genetics department 0 . 048 - 0 . 1598 ( 0 . 3121 ) ( 0 . 3443 ) Pathology department - 0 . 1976 - 0 . 318 ( 0 . 2981 ) ( 0 . 3144 ) Electrical Engineering department 0 . 4870 * 0 . 6584 * * ( 0 . 2819 ) ( 0 . 3289 ) Some inventors outside Stanford 0 . 6723 * 0 . 8299 * * ( 0 . 3581 ) ( 0 . 3792 ) Mean number of prior inventions - 0 . 0183 * - 0 . 0145 ( 0 . 0107 ) ( 0 . 0114 ) Inventor team size 0 . 1409 * * 0 . 111 ( 0 . 0675 ) ( 0 . 0710 ) Patents effective raisebox . 7ex [ 0pt ] ( CMU ) 0 . 0623 * * * ( 0 . 0210 ) Complementary sales effective ( CMU ) 0 . 0018 ( 0 . 0200 ) Complementary manufacturing effective ( CMU ) - 0 . 0823 ( 0 . 0854 ) Lead time effective ( CMU ) - 0 . 0027 ( 0 . 0398 ) HHI ( scaled ) 1 . 7064 ( 1 . 1932 ) Licensed in 1999 - 2000 0 . 5409 * * * ( 0 . 1957 ) Licensed in 2001 - 2004 - 0 . 0241 ( 0 . 2420 ) Constant - 0 . 5308 - 0 . 6224 * 0 . 2396 ( 0 . 3574 ) ( 0 . 3552 ) ( 4 . 5812 ) N 493 468 468 Log - likelihood - 193 - 169 . 1 - 160 . 6 Chi - square 30 . 94 * * * 60 . 26 * * * 77 . 3 * * * d . o . f . 7 14 21 Standard errors in parentheses . * * * p > 0 . 01 * * p > 0 . 05 * p > 0 . 10 27 Table 18 : Cluster Analysis - Invention Characteristics ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 145 n = 200 n = 368 Mean Median Mean Median Mean Median Technology age 2 . 700 2 . 047 2 . 575 1 . 921 2 . 858 2 . 195 Inventor team size 2 . 545 2 2 . 495 2 2 . 277 2 Mean number of prior inventions 10 . 000 6 8 . 730 6 9 . 178 7 Frequency % Frequency % Frequency % Invention received federal funding 97 66 . 9 % 115 57 . 5 % 262 71 . 2 % Consumer product 35 24 . 1 % 47 23 . 5 % 47 12 . 8 % Production process 17 11 . 7 % 14 7 . 0 % 14 3 . 8 % Research tool 76 52 . 4 % 112 56 . 0 % 304 82 . 6 % Therapeutic drug 17 11 . 7 % 27 13 . 5 % 3 0 . 8 % Software invention 27 18 . 6 % 31 15 . 5 % 101 27 . 4 % Chemical 3 2 . 1 % 4 2 . 0 % 3 0 . 8 % Electronic 16 11 . 0 % 10 5 . 0 % 20 5 . 4 % Optical 20 13 . 8 % 22 11 . 0 % 9 2 . 4 % Telecom 7 4 . 8 % 4 2 . 0 % 1 0 . 3 % Other non - medical 10 6 . 9 % 14 7 . 0 % 12 3 . 3 % Medical invention 70 48 . 3 % 129 64 . 5 % 286 77 . 7 % Biotech 19 13 . 1 % 55 27 . 5 % 172 46 . 7 % Medical devices 4 2 . 8 % 14 7 . 0 % 2 0 . 5 % Pharmaceutical 11 7 . 6 % 16 8 . 0 % 4 1 . 1 % Other medical 27 18 . 6 % 30 15 . 0 % 44 12 . 0 % Patent exists for invention 97 66 . 9 % 105 52 . 5 % 82 22 . 3 % Year of license 1990 - 1998 80 55 . 2 % 107 53 . 5 % 180 48 . 9 % 1999 - 2000 51 35 . 2 % 60 30 . 0 % 108 29 . 3 % 2001 - 2004 14 9 . 7 % 33 16 . 5 % 80 21 . 7 % Notes : Three clusters , based on k - means partitioning . Clusters formed on basis of license characteristics . 28 Table 19 : Cluster Analysis - Inventor Characteristics ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 145 n = 200 n = 368 Frequency % Frequency % Frequency % Inventor invented before current invention 82 56 . 6 % 108 54 . 0 % 215 58 . 4 % Electrical engineering department 43 29 . 7 % 32 16 . 0 % 36 9 . 8 % Chemistry department 20 13 . 8 % 13 6 . 5 % 43 11 . 7 % Computer science department 6 4 . 1 % 3 1 . 5 % 10 2 . 7 % Genetics department 10 6 . 9 % 17 8 . 5 % 37 10 . 1 % Pathology department 6 4 . 1 % 16 8 . 0 % 63 17 . 1 % Medicine department ( in school of med ) 16 11 . 0 % 31 15 . 5 % 29 7 . 9 % School of medicine 62 42 . 8 % 115 57 . 5 % 241 65 . 5 % Department outside of Stanford 5 3 . 4 % 4 2 . 0 % 18 4 . 9 % Three clusters , based on k - means partitioning . Clusters formed on basis of license characteristics . 29 Table 20 : Cluster Analysis - Licensee and License Characteristics ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Full Sample Start - Up Firms Established Firms n = 145 n = 200 n = 368 Licensee Characteristics Frequency % Frequency % Frequency % Startup ﬁrm ( classiﬁed by OTL ) 51 35 . 2 % 42 21 . 0 % 45 12 . 2 % VC funded 22 15 . 2 % 9 4 . 5 % 4 1 . 1 % Firm is inventor founded 59 40 . 7 % 52 26 . 0 % 24 6 . 5 % License Characteristics Exclusive license 104 71 . 7 % 197 98 . 5 % 0 0 . 0 % License terminated 116 80 . 0 % 152 76 . 0 % 313 85 . 1 % Royalties exist 111 76 . 6 % 95 47 . 5 % 115 31 . 3 % Issue fee required 130 89 . 7 % 160 80 . 0 % 307 83 . 4 % Annual minimum royalties exist 119 82 . 1 % 83 41 . 5 % 197 53 . 5 % Milestone payments required 57 39 . 3 % 53 26 . 5 % 32 8 . 7 % Equity in licensee acquired as part of royalties 51 35 . 2 % 34 17 . 0 % 6 1 . 6 % Patent fees offset against royalties 84 57 . 9 % 106 53 . 0 % 5 1 . 4 % Diligence clauses ‘Reasonable efforts to develop’ clause 144 99 . 3 % 0 0 . 0 % 0 0 . 0 % Progress report required by date 114 78 . 6 % 3 1 . 5 % 1 0 . 3 % Products available for sale by date 85 58 . 6 % 0 0 . 0 % 0 0 . 0 % Raise capital by date 16 11 . 0 % 1 0 . 5 % 0 0 . 0 % Any technical diligence clause 144 99 . 3 % 1 0 . 5 % 0 0 . 0 % Any market diligence clause 106 73 . 1 % 1 0 . 5 % 0 0 . 0 % Any organizational diligence clause 145 100 . 0 % 2 1 . 0 % 0 0 . 0 % Any diligence clause 145 100 . 0 % 7 3 . 5 % 14 3 . 8 % 30 REFERENCES Anand , B . N . and Khanna , T . ( 2000 ) . “The Structure of Licensing Contracts , ” The Journal of Industrial Economics , 48 ( 1 ) , 103 – 135 . Arora , A . , Fosfuri , A . , and Gambardella , A . ( 2001 ) . Markets for Technology : The Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy , Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Arora , A . ( 1996 ) . “Contracting for Tacit Knowledge : The Provision of Technical Ser - vices in Technology Licensing Contracts , ” The Journal of Development Economics , 50 , 233 – 256 . Arrow , K . J . ( 1962 ) . “Economic welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention , ” in R . R . Nelson , ed . , The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity , 609 – 625 . ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press ) . Elfenbein , D . ( 2004 ) . “Contract Structure and Performance of Technology Transfer Agreements : Evidence from University Licenses , ” Working Paper . Jensen , R . and Thursby M . ( 2001 ) . “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale : The Licensing of University Inventions , ” American Economic Review , 91 ( 1 ) , 240 – 259 . Gallini , N . T . and B . D . Wright ( 1990 ) . “Technology Transfer under Asymmetric Infor - mation , ” RAND Journal of Economics , 21 ( 1 ) , 147 – 160 . Ichniowski , C . , K . Shaw , and G . Prennushi ( 1997 ) . “The Effects of Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity : A Study of Steel Finishing Lines , " American Eco - nomic Review , Vol . 87 ( 3 ) : 291 - 313 . Kamien , M . I . ( 1992 ) . “Patent Licensing , ” Ch . 11 in R . J . Aumann and S . Hart , eds . , Handbook of Game Theory , 1 . Kaplan , S . N . , and P . Stromberg . 2003 . “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World : An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts , " Review of Economic Studies , Vol . 70 : 281 - 315 . Lowe , R . A . , and A . A . Ziedonis ( 2006 ) . “Overoptimism and the Performance of En - trepreneurial Firms , ” Management Science , 52 ( 2 ) , 173 – 186 . Mansﬁeld , E . , M . Schwartz , and S . Wagner ( 1981 ) . “Imitation Costs and Patents : An Empirical Study , ” Economic Journal , 91 , 907 – 918 . Mowery , D . C . , R . R . Nelson , B . N . Sampat , and A . A . Ziedonis ( 2004 ) . Ivory Tower and Industrial Innovation ( Palo Alto , CA : Stanford University Press ) . Shane , S . ( 2002 ) . “Selling University Technology : Patterns from MIT , ” Management Science , 48 ( 1 ) , 122 – 133 . Thursby , M . , J . Thursby , J . , and E . Dechenaux ( 2005 ) . “Shirking , Shelving , and Sharing Risk : The Role of University License Contracts , ” NBER Working Paper No . 11128 . Ziedonis , A . A . ( 2007 ) . " Real Options in Technology Licensing , " Management Science , 53 ( 10 ) , 1618 - 1633 . 31