Collective Intelligence 2014 Not as Smart as We Think : A Study of Collective Intelligence in Virtual Groups JORDAN B . BARLOW AND ALAN R . DENNIS , Indiana University 1 . INTRODUCTION Cross - disciplinary research on collective intelligence considers that groups , like individuals , have a certain level of intelligence . For example , the study by Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) indicates that groups which perform well on one type of task will perform well on others . In a pair of empirical studies of groups interacting face - to - face , they found evidence of a collective intelligence factor , a measure of consistent group performance across a series of tasks , which was highly predictive of performance on a subsequent , more complex task . This collective intelligence factor differed from the individual intelligence of group members , and was significantly predicted by members’ social sensitivity – the ability to understand the emotions of others based on visual facial cues ( Baron - Cohen et al . 2001 ) . Though these results for face - to - face groups are important , groups are increasingly using information and communication technologies ( ICT ) to enable virtual work ( Chudoba et al . 2005 ; Montoya et al . 2011 ) . One key question is whether the factor measured by Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) , which is highly correlated with visual processing ( something that is not available in many ICT used by groups ) , transcends media or is instead a measure of a group’s capability to interact in one media where visual processing dominates , i . e . , face - to - face communication . Is collective intelligence like individual intelligence , an inherent factor that can transcend media , or is collective intelligence constrained by media or task type ? We examined collective intelligence in an ICT environment in which groups used text - based computer - mediated communication ( CMC ) . We considered that if we were to find evidence of collective intelligence in this environment that is correlated to the same factors as in the Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) study of face - to - face interaction , then we could be more confident that that this factor is indeed like general intelligence and transcends media . If we did not find evidence of a collective intelligence factor in groups using CMC , then we would question the generalizability of previous findings and suggest that collective intelligence , as a concept , differs depending on context , and that when using CMC , task requirements may trump any inherent group characteristics . In other words , it may be that the collective intelligence of a group can only be developed under certain circumstances . Some groups may be more “intelligent” ( i . e . , high performing ) than others , but only when the conditions are right . Such an outcome would demonstrate that for CMC , an inherent disconnect exists between task performance and inherent group characteristics , which makes performance more dependent on task type than on any inherent group characteristic . This would lead us to conclude that different types of tasks have different requirements , and thus the processes groups use to perform them are likely more important in this setting than underlying group characteristics . A study examining such a potential outcome does not depend on perfect replication of the Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) studies . In fact , if we were to conduct a perfect replication of their studies , we would not know if the collective intelligence factor we studied was somehow unique to the tasks and subjects used . 1 2 J . B . Barlow and A . R . Dennis Collective Intelligence 2014 2 . METHOD AND RESULTS Following the basic procedures of Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) , 324 individuals in 86 groups ( of 3 - 5 members each ) completed three initial group tasks and one complex group task . The initial tasks were used in a factor analysis in an effort to find a collective intelligence factor , while the complex task was used to have a single measure of group performance separate from the collective intelligence tasks . ( More details about specific procedures and tasks can be found in an online supplement , which is stored at http : / / jordanbarlow . files . wordpress . com / 2014 / 01 / supplement _ methods _ analysis . pdf . ) We used group performance scores on the set of simple tasks to determine whether a collective intelligence factor emerged from the data . The first criterion is that the average correlation between task scores should be positive ( Woolley et al . 2010 ) . In our study , correlations between task scores were either not statistically significant or were significantly negative , as shown in Table 1 . The average correlation was - 0 . 12 , indicating that performance on one task was not correlated with performance on other tasks . Table 1 also shows correlations between performance scores and other measures we collected during this study . Specifically , we collected the same measures examined by Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) : individual intelligence ( collected through the Wonderlic test ) , social sensitivity ( collected through the Reading the Mind in the Eyes test ) , speaking turn variance , percentage of females , and group performance on a complex task . Table 1 . Correlations between group tasks and traits . The method to identify an intelligence factor , whether individual or collective , consists of a factor analysis of performance scores on a variety of tasks ( Deary 2000 ; Woolley et al . 2010 ) . The intelligence factor in this factor analysis should ( a ) account for 30 - 50 percent of the variance , with the next factor accounting for significantly less , ( b ) have an eigenvalue greater than 1 . 38 , and ( c ) demonstrate an obvious elbow in the scree plot ( Woolley et al . 2010 ) . None of these criteria were met in our study . In our principal components factor analysis , the first factor accounted for 42 percent of the variance , but the second factor accounted for 36 percent , suggesting two dominant factors , rather than an emerging intelligence factor . The first factor’s eigenvalue was 1 . 26 , and no drop - off elbow appeared in the scree plot , which is shown in Figure 1 . Taken together , these analyses indicate that a general collective intelligence factor does not emerge when groups use CMC . We completed three robustness checks and two validity checks to ensure that our results were not dependent on task selection , extraction method , nor random noise from inattentive participants . ( More details about all these robustness checks can be found in the online supplement at http : / / jordanbarlow . files . wordpress . com / 2014 / 01 / supplement _ methods _ analysis . pdf . ) Collective Intelligence in Virtual Groups 3 Collective Intelligence 2014 Fig . 1 . Scree plots comparing our factor analysis to the Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) studies . 3 . CONCLUSIONS The results of this study show that no collective intelligence factor emerged when groups used text - based CMC . An inherent collective intelligence factor similar in nature to individual intelligence should transcend media , indicating that collective intelligence as a concept is different in nature from individual intelligence . We conclude that the factor found by Woolley et al . ( 2010 ) is not a general factor of collective intelligence inherent to groups under all conditions , but it is a measure of a group’s general ability to work well in face - to - face settings ( i . e . , face - to - face collective intelligence ) . Collective intelligence manifests itself differently in virtual settings ; that is , groups using CMC do not appear to have an inherent factor that makes some groups more intelligent than others , though perhaps such an ability can be developed over time . Rather , certain characteristics of the tasks more strongly predicted which groups would outperform others . Regardless of the reasons that face - to - face groups could outperform groups using ICTs ( e . g . , difficulty with conflict management , difficulty understanding social cues , etc . ) , the findings indicate that even in sub - optimal conditions , no groups performed consistently better than others . Truly intelligent groups should perform well relative to other groups , across tasks and media , even in conditions where the task and the technology do not fit well together . Therefore , the concept of collective intelligence is more complex than past research suggests , manifesting under some conditions but not others . We believe there are many open doors for continued research on the conceptualization and measurement of collective intelligence in small groups . These areas include , but are not limited to , the examination of which conditions facilitate collective intelligence , how it might develop over time , how individual and collective intelligence are related under varied conditions , and how social sensitivity affects groups who sometimes work using CMC . Finally , because no collective intelligence factor emerged in this study , researchers may be able to draw conclusions from and build future studies more deeply examining which of the variables were correlated with specific task scores ( see Table 1 ) . That is , because performance on different tasks is not correlated , it is interesting and useful to better understand which factors , such as individual intelligence , relate to performance on specific task types . Future studies should assess why these effects differ depending on the type of task . 4 J . B . Barlow and A . R . Dennis Collective Intelligence 2014 REFERENCES Baron - Cohen , S . , Wheelwright , S . , Hill , J . , Raste , Y . , and Plumb , I . 2001 . " The " Reading the Mind in the Eyes " test revised version : A study with normal adults , and adults with Asperger Syndrome or High - functioning autism , " Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ( 42 : 2 ) , pp . 241 - 251 . Chudoba , K . M . , Wynn , E . , Lu , M . , and Watson - Manheim , M . B . 2005 . " How virtual are we ? Measuring virtuality and understanding its impact in a global organization , " Information Systems Journal ( 15 : 4 ) , pp . 279 - 306 . Deary , I . J . 2000 . Looking Down on Human Intelligence : From Psychometrics to the Brain , New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Montoya , M . , Massey , A . P . , and Lockwood , N . 2011 . " 3D collaborative virtual environments : Linking collaborative behaviors and team performance , " Decision Sciences ( 42 : 2 ) , pp . 451 - 476 . Woolley , A . W . , Chabris , C . F . , Pentland , A . , Hashmi , N . , and Malone , T . W . 2010 . " Evidence for a collective intelligence factor in the performance of human groups , " Science ( 330 ) , pp . 686 - 688 . An expanded version of this paper with additional background , detail , and references , can be accessed at : http : / / jordanbarlow . files . wordpress . com / 2014 / 03 / ci - expanded - paper . pdf