Arp2 / 3 Is Critical for Lamellipodia and Response to Extracellular Matrix Cues but Is Dispensable for Chemotaxis Congying Wu , 1 , 4 , 7 Sreeja B . Asokan , 1 , 4 , 7 Matthew E . Berginski , 2 Elizabeth M . Haynes , 1 , 4 Norman E . Sharpless , 3 , 4 Jack D . Grifﬁth , 4 , 5 Shawn M . Gomez , 2 and James E . Bear 1 , 4 , 6 , * 1 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology 2 Departments of Biomedical Engineering , Computer Science , and Pharmacology 3 Department of Genetics 4 Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center 5 Department of Biochemistry 6 Howard Hughes Medical Institute University of North Carolina School of Medicine , Chapel Hill , NC 27599 , USA 7 These authors contributed equally to this work * Correspondence : jbear @ email . unc . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 12 . 034 SUMMARY Lamellipodia are sheet - like , leading edge protrusions in ﬁrmly adherent cells that contain Arp2 / 3 - generated dendritic actin networks . Although lamellipodia are widely believed to be critical for directional cell motility , this notion has not been rigorously tested . Using ﬁbroblasts derived from Ink4a / Arf - deﬁcient mice , we generated a stable line depleted of Arp2 / 3 complex that lacks lamellipodia . This line shows defective random cell motility and relies on a ﬁlopo - dia - based protrusion system . Utilizing a microﬂuidic gradient generation system , we tested the role of Arp2 / 3 complex and lamellipodia in directional cell migration . Surprisingly , Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells re - spond normally to shallow gradients of PDGF , indi - cating that lamellipodia are not required for ﬁbroblast chemotaxis . Conversely , these cells cannot respond to a surface - bound gradient of extracellular matrix ( haptotaxis ) . Consistent with this ﬁnding , cells de - pleted of Arp2 / 3 fail to globally align focal adhesions , suggesting that one principle function of lamellipodia is to organize cell - matrix adhesions in a spatially coherent manner . INTRODUCTION Cell motility is essential for many biological processes such as embryonic morphogenesis , immune surveillance , and tissue repair . Dysregulation of cell motility is associated with a number of disease states including metastatic cancer and autoimmune disorders ( Condeelis et al . , 2005 ; Wickramarachchi et al . , 2010 ) . Random motility is thought to allow cells to effectively sample their environment such as in the case of afﬁnity matura - tion of B cells in the germinal center ( Allen et al . , 2007 ) . However , cell migration is frequently governed by various directional cues such as soluble factors ( chemotaxis ) , substrate - attached factors ( haptotaxis ) , or mechanical cues ( durotaxis ) . Understanding how eukaryotic cells sense these directional cues and respond with directed movement remains one of the central problems of modern biology . Chemotaxis is perhaps the most well understood form of directional motility and involves a variety of signaling pathways connecting cell surface receptors to the motility machinery inside of cells ( Swaney et al . , 2010 ) . Based mainly on studies of rapidly migrating amoeboid cells such as neutrophils and Dictyostelium cells , these signaling cascades are thought to trigger directional protrusions at the leading edge by controlling actin assembly pathways ( Parent , 2004 ) . Haptotaxis and duro - taxis are much more poorly understood , but likely involve signaling events triggered by adhesive receptors such as integ - rins ( Thiery , 1984 ) . Fibroblasts are mesenchymal cells that perform a variety of tissue repair functions and respond to directional cues such as gradients of PDGF ( Wynn , 2008 ) . In addition , the in vitro motility of these cells has been extensively studied . The sheet - like , protruding leading edge of ﬁbroblasts known as the lamellipo - dium contains a dense array of actin ﬁlaments arranged in a dendritic meshwork ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . Extensive ex - perimental evidence and theoretical models of lamellipodial protrusion indicate that the polymerization of actin ﬁlaments within this meshwork drives protrusion ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . In addition to its function in protrusion , the lamellipodium is the site of formation for most cell - matrix adhesions ( Webb et al . , 2002 ) . Integrin binding to extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins and subsequent clustering lead to the formation of nascent focal complexes appearing continuously at the distal margin of the lamellipodium . A subset of the focal complexes mature into focal adhesions that are connected to bundled actin stress ﬁbers . Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 973 The central pillar of the actin network found in lamellipodia is the seven - subunit Arp2 / 3 complex . The structure , regulation , and biochemical properties of this complex have been exten - sively studied in vitro ( reviewed in Goley and Welch , 2006 ) . Once activated by nucleation promoting factors ( such as SCAR / WAVE ) , Arp2 / 3 nucleates actin daughter ﬁlaments as branches off of existing mother ﬁlaments . The localization of Arp2 / 3 to actin ﬁlament branches in vivo ( Cai et al . , 2008 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) and the functional role of this complex in lamel - lipodia formation in cells has been conﬁrmed by many ( Nichol - son - Dykstra and Higgs , 2008 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ) , but not all studies ( Di Nardo et al . , 2005 ) . Recently , the existence of actin branches in lamellipodia has been called into question by experiments using alternate electron micros - copy techniques ( Urban et al . , 2010 ) . Functional studies of Arp2 / 3 in vivo have been severely hampered by effects on viability observed upon loss of this complex in a variety of organisms . Genetic deletion of Arp2 / 3 subunits is lethal in yeast and Dictyostelium , and mouse knock - outs produce preimplantation lethality ( Schwob and Martin , 1992 ; Yae et al . , 2006 ; Zaki et al . , 2007 ) . These data led to the prevailing notion that Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for viability in eukaryotes ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) . Here , we describe a cell line derived from Ink4a / Arf - deﬁcient mice that can support near complete and stable depletion of Arp2 / 3 subunits without compromising viability . This cell line has allowed us to directly test the role of Arp2 / 3 and lamellipodia in ﬁbroblast chemotaxis and haptotaxis . RESULTS Development of a Stable Arp2 / 3 - Depleted Cell Line We previously reported a clonal , mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast ( MEF ) cell line ( IA32 ) derived from an Ink4a / Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) animal with unusually prominent lamellipodia ( Cai et al . , 2008 ) . To develop a stable cell line with ﬂuorescently tagged Arp2 / 3 complex in this background , we utilized an established lentiviral shRNA knockdown - rescue ( KDR ) system to deplete the endogenous p34Arc subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex and simultaneously ex - press a green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - tagged , RNAi - resistant subunit ( Vitriol et al . , 2007 ) . We separated clonal derivatives of ﬁbroblasts infected with this construct and blotted for p34Arc ( Figure S1A available online ) . As expected , we recovered some clones with appropriate depletion and physiological levels of re - expression of the p34Arc - GFP ( line 3G6 ) . To our surprise , we also recovered clones that had no re - expression of p34Arc - GFP , but had near complete depletion of the endogenous protein ( line 1B3 ) . This result suggested that this cell line , which was derived from an Ink4a / Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) mouse ( lacking both p16 INK4a and Arf ) , might be able to proliferate in the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex because of its genetic background . Since Arf is known to play the dominant role in the growth of MEFs ( Kamijo et al . , 1997 ) , we repeated the depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex in early passage wild - type ( WT ) and Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) MEFs ( lacking Arf only , but retaining p16 INK4a ) and monitored the growth rate . Expression of a nontargeting shRNA ( NS ) in either background showed no effect on cell proliferation , whereas depletion of p34Arc ( data not shown ) or the Arp2 subunit strongly reduced the proliferation of WT MEFs , but not Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) MEFs ( Figure 1A ) . These results indicate that in the context of Ink4a / Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) or Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) MEFs , the Arp2 / 3 complex is not strictly required for cell viability and that its loss may activate speciﬁc growth arrest pathways requiring the Arf tumor suppressor . Single depletion of either p34Arc or Arp2 in the Ink4a / Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) IA32 cell line was not stable over time , and revertant cell lines showing re - expression of the endogenous gene product over - whelmed the culture after 3 - 5 passages . To produce a more stable Arp2 / 3 knockdown , we simultaneously depleted both subunits , resulting in a cell line we designated 2xKD ( Figures S1B and S1C ) . This cell line showed near complete depletion of both subunits by blotting and concomitant loss of other subunits of the complex as observed by others ( Figure 1B ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ) . Quantitative western blotting indicated that depletion levels exceeded 98 % ( data not shown ) . This depletion was also observed at the single - cell level by immunoﬂuorescence ( Fig - ure 1C ) . Consistent with the growth experiments in early passage MEFs , lossofArp2 / 3complexhadnoeffectoncellproliferationin the IA32 cells ( Figure 1D ) . Unlike single knockdown cells , these 2xKD cells showed stable depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex for at least 12 passages . Thus , we employed this system to study the role of Arp2 / 3 complex in cell motility . Depletion of Arp2 / 3 Complex Leads to the Disappearance of Lamellipodia and Alters Actin Architecture Strikingly , despite their normal proliferation rate , the 2xKD cells lost lamellipodia and formed excessive ﬁlopodial protrusions ( Figure 1E ) , consistent with the role of Arp2 / 3 complex in gener - ating branched actin networks within lamellipodia . To ensure that the lack of lamellipodia was solely due to the absence of Arp2 / 3 activity , we microinjected bovine Arp2 / 3 complex into the 2xKD cells , and observed the reappearance of lamellipodia within 20 min after injection ( Figure 1F ; Movie S1 ) . This result conﬁrmed the speciﬁcity of Arp2 / 3 depletion and indicated that the upstream activators of Arp2 / 3 complex were still present and functional in 2xKD cells . These striking changes in cell morphology prompted us to examine the actin cytoskeleton in the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex . We ﬁrst compared F - actin organization in NS and 2xKD cells by phalloidin staining ( Figure 1C ) . As expected from the lack of morphological lamellipodia , 2xKD cells have a dif - ferent pattern of phalloidin staining with no areas of enrichment in peripheral regions . We also utilized electron microscopy ( EM ) to investigate leading edge actin networks in detail . A recently described method involving rapid freezing , freeze - drying and high - resolution metal shadowcasting developed for visualizing puriﬁed protein complexes ( Ozgur et al . , 2011 ) was extended to the imaging of cells plated directly on EM grids . The spreading and formation of protrusions was conﬁrmed by live - cell imaging of the grids in pilot experiments ( data not shown ) . This method allowed us to prepare the cells without critical point drying and replicaformation . Weobserveddrasticallydifferentactinﬁlament architectures at the margins of 2xKD cells compared to the NS control cells ( Figure 1G ) . The NS cells had a network of short , in - terconnected ﬁlaments with many examples of branching . This architecture is similar to the networks observed with platinum 974 Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Figure 1 . Establishment of a Stable Arp2 / 3 Complex - Depleted Cell Line ( A ) Growth curve of wild - type ( WT ) and Arf (cid:1) / (cid:1) early passage MEFs infected with lentivirus expressing a nonspeciﬁc sequence ( NS ) shRNA or Arp2 shRNA ( Arp2 - KD ) . Error bars : SEM . ( B ) IA32 cells were infected with lentivirus that expressed shRNAs against NS , p34Arc and Arp2 ( 2xKD ) , or shArp2 that also coexpressed human Arp2 - GFP ( Arp2 - KDR ) . Lysates were blotted for p34Arc , Arp3 , p21Arc , Arp2 , and for GAPDH as a loading control . ( C ) Mixed NS ( expressing GFP ) and 2xKD cells ( marked by red asterisks ) were immunostained for p34Arc to verify knockdown of the endogenous gene and phalloidin to visualize F - actin . ( D ) Growth curve of NS and 2xKD cells . Error bars : SEM . ( E ) DIC images of NS and 2xKD cells . Scale bar , 50 m m . ( F ) 2xKD cells were microinjected with 5 mg / ml Arp2 / 3 complex . Representative time - lapse sequence before and after injection show the reappearance of lamellipodia . See Movie S1 . ( G ) Cryo - shadowingEMimagesshowingtheleadingedgeactinnetworksofNSand2xKDcells . Leftandmiddlepanelsareseparatecells , rightpanelismagniﬁed portion of middle panels indicated by black boxes . See also Figure S1 and Movie S1 . Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 975 replica EM previously ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . The 2xKD cells had a much more sparse network of longer ﬁlaments that were highly bundled , which frequently converged into higher order bundles in ﬁlopodia . Actin ﬁlament crosslinks and some end - to - sidejunctionscouldbeobservedinthe2xKDcells , suggesting multiple forms of crosslinking and bundling still occur in the absence of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Overall , our results are consis - tent with the obligate role of Arp2 / 3 complex in generating densely branched actin networks . Arp2 / 3 - Depleted Cells Show Inefﬁcient , Filopodia - Driven Cell Motility Since lamellipodia are thought to play important roles in cell migration , we examined the effect of Arp2 / 3 depletion and loss of lamellipodia on cell motility using single - cell tracking . 2xKD cells and cells singly depleted of either p34Arc or Arp2 showed a marked reduction in migration speed compared to NS cells . The reduced speed was fully rescued in both p34 - KDR and Arp2 - KDR cells re - expressing RNAi resistant p34Arc or Arp2 subunits , respectively , as well as doubly depleted and doubly rescued ( 2KDR ) cells ( Figure 2A ) , conﬁrming that neither of the effects of the respective shRNAs was due to off - target effects . A similar reduction of cell migration speed was observed when NS cells were treated with the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK - 666 ( 100 m M ) , but not with the inactive compound CK - 689 ( Nolen et al . , 2009 ) . This same concentration of the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor did not affect cell speed or morphology of 2xKD cells ( Figure 2B , data not shown ) , conﬁrming the near complete depletion of Figure 2 . Arp2 / 3 - Depleted Cells Show Inefﬁcient , Filopodia - Driven Cell Motility ( A ) Time - lapse microscopy of NS , 2xKD , p34 - KD Arp2 - KD , p34 - KDR , and Arp2 - KDR and 2KDR cell lines was used to determine single - cell speed , depicted in graph . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence intervals . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ( Student’s t test ) . ( B ) Single - cell speed of NS and 2xKD cells treated with 100 m M Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK - 666 or the inactive control compound CK - 689 . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence intervals . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ( Student’s t test ) . ( C ) Single - cell speed of NS and 2xKD cells treated with 1 m M Latrunculin B ( LatB ) or DMSO as a control . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence intervals . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , * * p < 0 . 01 ( Student’s t test ) . ( D ) Single - cell speed of NS and 2xKD cells treated with 15 m M blebbistatin ( BLB ) or DMSO as a control . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence intervals . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ( Student’s t test ) . ( E ) SEM images of NS and 2xKD cells treated with DMSO or BLB . Scale bar , 5 m m . ( F ) Number of ﬁlopodia / cell with DMSO or BLB treatment was calculated from > 30 cells in each cell line from SEM images . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ( Student’s t test ) . ( G ) Time - lapse images of 2xKD cells treated with DMSO or BLB . Scale bar , 5 m m . See also Figure S2 and Movie S2 . 976 Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Arp2 / 3 complex and suggesting that the residual motility in 2xKD cells was not dependent on any remaining Arp2 / 3 complex activity . Totestwhethertheresidualmotilityin2xKDcellswasstill dependent on actin assembly , we treated cells with latrunculin B ( LatB ) to inhibit F - actin polymerization . Both NS and 2xKD cells showedsigniﬁcant reductionincellspeedwhenF - actin polymer - ization was impaired ( Figure 2C ) , suggesting that the Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells still rely on actin assembly to migrate . One possible mechanism by which the 2xKD cells could continue to migrate , albeit slowly , is by relying on myosin con - tractility . To address this , we treated cells with blebbistatin ( BLB ) , a myosin II inhibitor . This treatment decreased focal adhe - sion and stress ﬁber staining , but increased phosphorylation of the myosin light chain at Ser19 ( Figures S2A – S2C ) , consistent with previous studies ( Goeckeler et al . , 2008 ) . Based on this previous work , increased phospho - myosin light chain does not reﬂect an increase in cellular contractility in this case . In the motility assay , BLB treatment increased 2xKD cell speed signif - icantly without an effect on the speed of NS cells ( Figure 2D ) . This result indicates that the residual motility of the Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells does not depend on myosin contractility . We observed from time - lapse DIC images ( data not shown ) and F - actin stain - ing ( Figure S2A ) that BLB treatment increased ﬁlopodia number in 2xKD cells . Filopodia were counted in NS and 2xKD cells treated with BLB or DMSO control using scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ) ( Figure 2E ) . Control 2xKD cells have approx - imately 3 - fold more ﬁlopodia than NS cells . Filopodia number in BLB - treated 2xKD cells increased signiﬁcantly , whereas the number of ﬁlopodia remained unchanged in BLB - treated NS cells ( Figure 2F ) . Time - lapse imaging revealed that 2xKD cells create new areas of ﬂat protrusion by ‘‘ﬁlling the gap’’ between adjacent ﬁlopodia ( Movie S2 ) . Occasionally , the tips of two adjacent ﬁlopodia fuse and the resulting hole ﬁlls in ( Movie S2 ) . Due to the larger number of ﬁlopodia on the BLB - treated 2xKD cells , more of these ‘‘ﬁlling the gap’’ events were observed ( Figure 2G ) , correlating with higher whole - cell motility . Together , these observations suggest that cells have an alternate , ﬁlopodia - driven form of protrusion in the absence of Arp2 / 3 activity that leads to relatively inefﬁcient whole - cell translocation . Chemotaxis in the Absence of Arp2 / 3 Complex Loss of Arp2 / 3 complex causes changes in leading edge actin organization and disappearance of lamellipodia , leading to re - duced random cell motility . However , cell migration speed and the ability to respond to directional cues are independent prop - erties and rigorous experimental approaches are required to separately measure these properties . To address this issue , we utilized a modiﬁed version of a previously described microﬂuidic chemotaxis chamber ( Figure 3A ) ( Shamloo et al . , 2008 ) which allowed us to directly image the migration of cells exposed to a deﬁned gradient of chemoattractant for > 12 hr . The establish - ment and maintenance of a linear soluble gradient in this device was conﬁrmed using ﬂuorescent dextran ( Figure 3B ) Based on the ﬂuorescence intensity proﬁle , this equates to a slope of 43 . 6 % / mm across the cell culture chamber . The average cell in our experiments was (cid:3) 150 m m across in the dimension of the gradient which yields a chemoattractant slope of (cid:3) 6 . 5 % across an individual cell . In every experiment , NS expressing GFP and 2xKD cells were seeded in the same cell culture chamber and serum starved prior to establishment of the PDGF gradient . DIC live - cell imaging was used to monitor cell movement , and gradient stability was monitored at each time point by imaging the gradient of Cy5 - dextran for up to 16 hr ( Movie S3 ) . Single - cell tracking was used to follow individual cells over time and calculate the velocity and directionality of migration . We utilized two methods to calculate the directional bias of the resulting tracks . First , we transposed the tracks so that each had its start point at the origin and then computed the forward migration index ( FMI ) using the ﬁnal position of the cell at the end of the track ( Figure 3C ) . Second , we calculated the angle of each turn in the track relative to the gradient and plotted these as a histogram ( Figure 3D ) . Using this distribution of turn angles , we used a nonlinear curve ﬁt to compute the compass parameter ( CP ) as described previously ( Arrieumerlou and Meyer , 2005 ) . Surprisingly , no statistically signiﬁcant difference in either FMI or CP was observed between NS and 2xKD cells at all source concentrations of PDGF tested ( Figures 3E and S3A ) . In experi - ments with early passage single knockdown cells ( p34 - KD ) and knockdown - rescue cells ( p34 - KDR ) , we used serum as a more generic chemoattractant and observed the same result ( Fig - ure S3B ) . This result was further conﬁrmed using Rat2 ﬁbroblasts treated with the Arp2 / 3 complex inhibitor CK - 666 . As with the Arp2 / 3 - depleted IA32 cells , inhibition of Arp2 / 3 activity had no effect on the ability to respond to the PDGF gradient ( Figures 3F and S3C ) . These results indicate that although Arp2 / 3 and lamellipodia play important roles in increasing the efﬁciency of cell migration , they are not essential for directional sensing of chemotactic gradients in ﬁbroblasts . To conﬁrm that proximal signaling events in the PDGF pathway were also unaffected by Arp2 / 3 depletion , levels of total and phosphorylated Akt ( pAkt ) in response to PDGF stimulation were examined by blotting . Similar changes in Akt signaling were observed in 2xKD and NS cells upon PDGF stimulation ( Fig - ure 3G ) . Since 2xKD cells can respond to gradients of PDGF , we examined the morphological response of these cells to acute , uniform stimulation with PDGF . Although NS cells produced lamellipodia and rufﬂes ( Figure S3D ) , 2xKD cell increased the number of ﬁlopodia ( Figure 3H ; Movie S4 ) . We also examined 2xKD cells during chemotaxis up a PDGF gradient and observed that these cells had more ﬁlopodia on the up - gradient side of the cell ( Figure 3I ) . Together , these results indicate that PDGF signaling is intact in the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex , but that cells produce ﬁlopodia in response to this stimulus rather than lamellipodia without Arp2 / 3 . Depletion of Arp2 / 3 Leads to Defects in Cell Spreading When cells encounter surfaces coated with extracellular matrix proteins , they initiate a spreading process that involves the dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . To examine spreading in the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex , we plated NS and 2xKD cells expressing GFP - Paxillin ( GFP - Pax ) on ﬁbro - nectin ( FN ) - coated surfaces and stained cells at different time - points for F - actin and phospho - tyrosine ( pTyr ) . The 2xKD cells showed a marked delay in spreading kinetics and the expected absence of peripheral lamellipodia ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . Both Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 977 Figure 3 . Arp2 / 3 Complex Depletion Does Not Affect Chemotaxis ( A ) Schematic of the microﬂuidic chamber for chemotaxis and haptotaxis experiments . ( B ) Left : ﬂuorescentimageofCy5 - dextrangradientformedinsidethechamberasanindicationofgradientformationandmaintenance . Right : line - scanplotofthe gradient along the yellow line depicted in the left panel , slope of the gradient is indicated under the curve . ( C ) Diagram showing FMI calculation method and representative end point scatter plots of NS and 2xKD cells in chemotaxis assays ( data from 120 ng / ml source PDGF concentration ) . ( D ) Diagram showing Compass Parameter ( CP ) calculation and representative histograms showing angular turn per step of NSand 2xKDcells inthe samePDGF chemotaxis assays as in 3C . P ( a ) is the probably distribution of angles measured relative to gradient , g is a constant , g is the gradient steepness , and d is the angular step size ( Arrieumerlou and Meyer , 2005 ) . ( E ) Table showing compass parameter ( CP ) , forward migration index ( FMI ) , velocity ( V ) , and number of cells analyzed ( N ) in chemotaxis assays with indicated PDGF source concentrations . Numbers in parentheses for each entry are 95 % conﬁdence intervals . 978 Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . pTyr and GFP - Pax showed focal adhesions had formed in the 2xKD cells by 90 min , but most of these adhesions remained associated with the periphery compared with the NS controls . To quantify the cell - spreading defect , we used an impedance - based system that measures electrical changes caused by cells interacting with a microelectrode within the surface of a dish . Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells showed statistically signiﬁcant decrease in cell spreading compared to control cells ( Figure 4C ) . Con - sistent with the delay in physical spreading , the 2xKD cells showed delayed and reduced adhesion signaling during spread - ing as reported by the phosphorylation of Focal Adhesion Kinase ( FAK ) at Tyr397 ( Figure 4D ) . Arp2 / 3 and Lamellipodia Are Essential for Responding to Absolute or Gradient Changes in ECM Concentration Although spreading provides useful information about the initial formation of cell - matrix adhesions , changes in the motility of fully spread cells in response to changes in matrix concentration are more physiologically relevant . Many investigators have noted that cells display a biphasic motility response when plated on different concentrations of ECM with optimal motility occurring at intermediate concentrations ( DiMilla et al . , 1993 ; Gupton and Waterman - Storer , 2006 ) . We tested the role of Arp2 / 3 and lamellipodia in this biphasic motility response . As expected , when plated on different concentrations of FN , NS cells dis - played a biphasic motility response . However , 2xKD cells mi - grated at a constant , slow speed on all FN concentrations tested ( Figure 5A ) . This result was conﬁrmed with Rat2 ﬁbroblasts treated with the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK - 666 ( Figure 5B ) . This loss of biphasic motility response led us to explore the role of Arp2 / 3 complex and lamellipodia in haptotaxis . Using the same microﬂuidic system as in the chemotaxis experiments , we were able to establish a linear ECM gradient bound to the surface of the cell culture chamber prior to plating the cells ( Figure 5C ) . The chamber was thoroughly ﬂushed prior to plating the cells to ensure that no soluble FN remained that could act as a chemoattractant . As in the chemotaxis experi - ments , NS and 2xKD cells were plated in the same device for live cell imaging during haptotaxis . We plotted endpoint posi - tions and angular turn per step based on cell tracking data and found that both measurements showed a dramatic difference between NS and 2xKD cells ( Figures 5D and 5E ; Movie S5 ) . Hap - totactic FMI and CP of 2xKD cells showed that these cells have no directional response to concentration gradients of FN , despite a robust haptotactic response of NS cells plated in the same chamber . This result was the same with all source concen - trations of FN tested ( Figure 5F ; Figure S4A ) . In addition to FN , we tested other ECM proteins ( laminin [ LN ] and vitronectin [ VTN ] ) that utilize different integrin receptors and observed that 2xKD cells show complete absence of haptotaxis on all ECMs tested ( Figures 5G and S4A ) . Finally , we conﬁrmed this result with Rat2 ﬁbroblasts treated with the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK - 666 and observed that Arp2 / 3 activity was required for haptotaxis in this cell line ( Figures 5H and S4B ) . Together , these results reveal an essential role of Arp2 / 3 complex and lamellipodia in responding to changes in either the absolute concentration or gradient presentation of ECM . Depletion of Arp2 / 3 Complex Leads to Altered Focal Adhesion Morphology and Dynamics The defects in the ability to sense and / or respond to changes in ECM observed in the 2xKD cells suggest that cell - matrix interac - tions may be changed when Arp2 / 3 complex and lamellipodia are absent . To address this question , we compared the distribu - tion of focal adhesion proteins by immunoﬂuorescence . Endog - enous Paxillin ( Pax ) , Vinculin ( Vin ) , and FAK were all present at clearly recognizable focal adhesions in 2xKD cells ( red asterisks , Figure 6A ) , although there were no obvious focal complexes present in these cells due to the lack of lamellipodia . To visualize the dynamics of focal adhesions , GFP - Pax was expressed in NS and 2xKD cells . Using TIRF microscopy , we observed that both cell types contained GFP - Pax positive focal adhesions , but that these two cell types tended to form adhesions in qualitatively different ways . In line with descriptions from other cell types , the NS cells generated small focal complexes at the distal margin of lamellipodia , a subset of which matured into focal adhesions . These adhesions matured in the distal to proximal direction ( Fig - ure 6B ) . In the 2xKD cells , however , the focal adhesions ﬁrst appeared at the base of ﬁlopodia and reached maximal intensity quite rapidly ( within 1 – 2 min , Figure 6C ) . Unlike in the NS cells , these adhesions grow in the proximal to distal direction . These qualitative differences in the formation of focal adhesions sug - gested that cells depleted of Arp2 / 3 complex were utilizing alter - native pathways of adhesion assembly . To quantify the parameters of the individual focal adhesions once formed in both cell types , we used a recently developed method to segment and track every focal adhesion in an unbi - ased manner ( Figures S5A – S5D ; Berginski et al . , 2011 ) . We analyzed the focal adhesion properties of NS and 2xKD cells across three concentrations of ﬁbronectin ( Figure 6D ) . With increasing ﬁbronectin concentration , mean focal adhesion area and mean longevity were increased in the NS cells . Interestingly , neither of these properties varies signiﬁcantly in the 2xKD cells as a function of ﬁbronectin concentration . Mean long axis length and mean axial ratio are the same in both cell types and do not vary with ﬁbronectin concentration . The number of adhesions per cell ( per 10 min ) trends in the opposite direction in NS and 2xKD cells as a function of ﬁbronectin concentration . Control NS cells have decreased numbers of adhesions per cell with increasing ﬁbronectin , whereas Arp2 / 3 - depleted 2xKD cells ( F ) Table showing Rat2 cell chemotaxis parameters in the presence of Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK - 666 or its inactive control CK - 689 . ( G ) Western blotting showing the change of phospho - Akt ( pAkt ) level upon PDGF stimulation . Cells were serum - starved overnight before stimulation with 40 ng / ml PDGF . ( H ) 2xKD cells before and after PDGF stimulation ( images ) and the number of ﬁlopodia before and after PDGF treatment of 2xKD cells was calculated from > 30 2xKD cells . * p < 0 . 05 ( Student’s t test ) . ( I ) Example oftheﬁlopodia upanddownthePDGFgradientin2xKDcellchemotaxiswasshownandthenumberofﬁlopodiawascalculatedfrom > 302xKDcells . * p < 0 . 001 ( Student’s t test ) . See also Figure S3 and Movies S3 and S4 . Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 979 have increased numbers of adhesions with increasing ﬁbro - nectin concentration . We also examined the focal adhesions in Rat2 ﬁbroblasts expressing GFP - Pax treated with the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK - 666 or its inactive analog CK - 689 . With transient Arp2 / 3 inhibition , some of the same trends in focal adhesion properties were evident ( and statistically signiﬁcant ) , but were much less pronounced than with RNAi - based depletion . Together these data indicate that some focal adhesion proper - ties are unchanged by Arp2 / 3 depletion , whereas others are altered when Arp2 / 3 is depleted . Lamellipodia Promote Global Focal Adhesion Alignment Although the characterization of individual focal adhesion parameters is important , the ensemble pattern of adhesions is the most relevant parameter to whole - cell behavior . How cells control these ensemble or global parameters of focal adhesions Figure 4 . Arp2 / 3 Depletion Inhibits Cell Spreading ( A ) NS and 2xKD cells expressing GFP - Pax were immunostained for phospho - tyrosine ( pTyr ) and F - actin at different time points during cell spreading . ( B ) Time - lapse images showing the spreading of NS and 2xKD cells . ( C ) CelladhesionandspreadingkineticsofNSand2xKDcellswereanalyzedusinganimpedance - basedsystemandreportedasarbitraryunits ( CellIndex ) . Error bars : SEM . ( D ) Western blotting showing the change of phosphorylated FAK ( pFAK ) level upon cell adhesion to ﬁbronectin . Cells were serum - starved overnight and tryp - sinized and plated on ﬁbronectin - coated surface . Lysates were blotted for pFAK , total FAK , Arp2 , and GAPDH as control . 980 Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . is poorly understood . We observed that during spreading and after cells had fully spread , 2xKD cells had adhesions that were more radially arrayed and less aligned to each other than the NS cells ( Figure 6A ) . One possible way adhesions could become aligned to each other is through rotation of their long axis . Although our visual impression from TIRF movies of cells expressing GFP - Pax strongly argued against this possibility , we tested this by plotting the average deviation in long - axis angle during the time that an individual adhesion was observed . Consistent with ourvisual impression , focal adhesions show very little variation in their long - axis angle over time in either cell type ( Figure 7A ) . Thus , any change in global alignment must arise from spatially coherent formation , rather than postformation realignment . To quantify global focal adhesion alignment , we developed a method to measure the deviation of adhesion angles from the most frequent or dominant angle observed in the whole cell ( see Figure S6 ) . In order to reliably determine the angle of the individual adhesions , we limited our measurements to those adhesions with a length / width ratio of at least 3 ( Figure 7B ) . By plotting the angles of all the adhesions that met this criterion , we were able to determine the most frequent or dominant focal adhesion angle by rotating the image frame of reference until the standard deviation ( SD ) was minimized and the peak of the distribution of angles moved close to zero ( Figure S6B ) . The dominant focal adhesion angle was simply the degree to which the image had to be rotated to center the peak over zero . The Focal Adhesion Alignment Index ( FAAI ) is directly related to the Figure 5 . Arp2 / 3 Complex - Depleted Cells Cannot Respond to Concentration or Gradient Changes in Extracellular Matrix ( A ) Single - cell speed of NS and 2xKD cells plated on different concentrations of ﬁbronectin was plotted ( N > 30 ) . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence intervals . ( B ) Speeds of Rat2 cells treated with CK - 666 or CK - 689 and plated on different concentrations of FN were plotted ( N > 30 ) . Error bars represent 95 % conﬁdence intervals . ( C ) Left : ﬂuorescent image of Cy5 - ﬁbronectin gradient formed on the glass surface inside the cell culture chamber . Right : line - scan plot of the gradient along the yellow line depicted in the left panel . ( D ) Representative end point scatter plots of NS and 2xKD cells in haptotaxis assays ( 250 m g / ml source ﬁbronectin concentration ) . ( E ) Representative histogram showing angular turn per step of NS and 2xKD cells in the same haptotaxis assays as in ( D ) . ( F ) Table showing compass parameter ( CP ) , forward migration index ( FMI ) , velocity ( V ) , and number of cells analyzed ( N ) in haptotaxis assays with indicated FN source concentrations . Numbers in parentheses for each entry are 95 % conﬁdence intervals . ( G ) Table showing compass parameter ( CP ) , forward migration index ( FMI ) , velocity ( V ) , and number of cells analyzed ( N ) in haptotaxis assays with indicated extracellular matrix . ( H ) Table showing compass parameter ( CP ) , forward migration index ( FMI ) , velocity ( V ) , and number of cells analyzed ( N ) in Rat2 cell haptotaxis assays with 250 m g / ml source ﬁbronectin concentration and treated with CK - 666 or CK - 689 . See also Figure S4 and Movie S5 . Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 981 standard deviation of this distribution ; FAAI = 90 - SD in order to have a higher index value correspond to more aligned adhesions ( Figure 7C ) . To illustrate this measurement , a cell with high FAAI and low FAAI are shown in Figure 7D ( Movie S6 ) . Using this metric , we quantiﬁed the FAAI of NS and 2xKD cells plated on 1 , 10 , and 100 m g / ml ﬁbronectin . We observed in - creased alignment of adhesions across the cell ( increasing FAAI ) with increasing ﬁbronectin concentration in the NS cells , whereas the alignment in the 2xKD cells was decreased compared to the NS cells and was constant at all ﬁbronectin concentrations ( Figure 7E ) . Since mean adhesion area showed similar trends ( Figure 6D ) , we tested whether focal adhesion alignment was independent from adhesion area . To do this , we recalculated the FAAI considering only small , medium or large adhesions in the NS and 2xKD cells ( Figure 7F ) . Regardless of which size adhesions we used to calculate FAAI , the same differ - ence in alignment was observed between NS and 2xKD cells . To ensure that this result was not speciﬁc to the expression of GFP - Pax , we calculated the FAAI of NS and 2xKD cells express - ing ﬂuorescent fusions of FAK and Vinculin . With all three Figure 6 . Depletion of Arp2 / 3 Complex Leads to Defective Focal Adhesion Morphology and Dynamics ( A ) MixedNS ( expressingGFP ) and2xKDcells ( markedbyredasterisks ) wereimmunostainedforendogenous paxillin ( Pax ) , focaladhesionkinase ( FAK ) , vinculin ( Vin ) , and F - actin . Scale bar , 10 m m . ( B ) Representative time - lapse TIRF images of an NS cell expressing GFP - Pax and LifeAct - tagRFP . ( C ) Representative time - lapse TIRF images of a 2xKD cell expressing GFP - Pax and LifeAct - tagRFP . ( D ) Table of focal adhesion parameters : NS versus 2xKD plated on 1 , 10 , and 100 m g / ml FN ; Rat2 ﬁbroblasts treated with CK - 666 or CK - 689 on 100 m g / ml FN . Numbers after the ± indicate 95 % conﬁdence intervals as determined by a t - distribution ﬁt . See also Figure S5 . 982 Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . markers , 2xKD cells showed signiﬁcantly lower FAAI compared to NS control cells ( Figure 7G ) . Finally , we conﬁrmed this result in Rat2 ﬁbroblasts treated with the Arp2 / 3 complex inhibitor CK - 666 where we observed decreased FAAI with Arp2 / 3 in - hibition ( Figure 7H ) . These results suggest that one of the principal functions of the lamellipodium is to promote global focal adhesion alignment . DISCUSSION In this work , we have established a stable Arp2 / 3 - depleted cell line that allowed us to study random and directional cell motility in the absence of lamellipodia . The depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex causes striking changes in cell morphology , motility , and global focal adhesion geometry . Furthermore , our study also reveals the essential role of lamellipodia in ﬁbroblast haptotaxis , but not chemotaxis . Establishment of a Stable Arp2 / 3 - Depleted Cell Line It is widely believed that Arp2 / 3 complex is required for viability in eukaryotic organisms ; however , our data suggest that this is not strictly true in mammalian cells in culture . It is worth considering why we were able to recover stable cell lines depleted of > 98 % of Arp2 / 3 complex . First , we quickly separated the cells as clones after they were infected with the shRNA - expressing lenti - viruses through the use of ﬂuorescent protein reporters rather than relying on drug resistance . Any selective growth advantage conferred by less than full knockdown is cancelled out under these circumstances . Although we initially had some concerns about using clones , these were put to rest by the microinjection rescue experiment that indicated that these cells were still capable of making lamellipodia within minutes of the reintroduc - tion of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Second , we depleted two essential subunits ( p34Arc and Arp2 ) to create a ‘‘fail - safe’’ condition where loss of either shRNA conferred no advantage due to the continued absence of another essential subunit . Third , the com - plexity of mammalian cells may have been working in our favor . Simpler eukaryotes may be strictly dependent on Arp2 / 3 activity for viability - associated processes such as nutrient uptake , whereas mammalian cells have a multitude of partially redundant pathways . Finally , we performed these experiments in the Ink4a / Arf - deﬁcient background . These genes are well known as tumor suppressors that arrest cell growth upon oncogenic insult ( Kim and Sharpless , 2006 ) . Our results indicate that cells harboring an intact Arf gene are much more sensitive to the loss of Arp2 / 3 complex , suggesting that the deranged actin cytoskel - eton resulting from the loss of Arp2 / 3 activity may trigger an Arf - dependent growth arrest pathway . The Relationship between Arp2 / 3 Complex and Lamellipodia The most striking morphological change we observed in the Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted cells was the disappearance of lamel - lipodia . We report several lines of evidence to support the idea that the phenotypic loss of lamellipodia is due to a speciﬁc loss of Arp2 / 3 complex activity . Both shRNAs used to deplete p34Arc and Arp2 , respectively , could be fully rescued by coex - pression of RNAi - resistant versions of these genes . Pharmaco - logical inhibition of Arp2 / 3 complex by CK - 666 produced a similar , although slightly milder phenotype as the double deple - tion of p34Arc and Arp2 . Importantly , this compound had no further effect on the 2xKD cells , indicating that any residual Arp2 / 3 activity was not contributing to the residual motility . Furthermore , lamellipodia could be recovered in the 2xKD cells within minutes of microinjection of bovine Arp2 / 3 complex . Therefore , the 2xKD cells are not only useful in the study of Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent functions , but also serve as useful tools to dissect the functional role of lamellipodia in cell motility . Previous studies have shown that the actin networks within lamellipodia contain short , branched ﬁlaments nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) , consistent with ob - servations of networks generated with puriﬁed Arp2 / 3 complex and actin ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Recently , this model has been called into question based on an alternate electron microscopy protocol ( Urban et al . , 2010 ) . Using this technique , mostly long actin ﬁlaments were observed in the lamellipodia . Our results with the cryo - shadowing technique are entirely consistent with the notion of highly branched networks of short actin ﬁlaments in lamellipodia as originally observed by platinum replica EM ( Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . Further evidence for the role of Arp2 / 3 complex in branch generation comes from the apparent lack of these structures in cells with near total depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex . In the absence of branched actin generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , more ﬁlopodial protrusions form on the periphery of cells . 2xKD cells engage in a form of ﬁlopodia - dependent cell motility , in which new ﬂat cell surface area is created by ‘‘ﬁlling the gap’’ between adjacent ﬁlopodia . The ﬁlopodia of 2xKD cells protrude and bend until they become anchored to the underlying matrix , at which time the membrane between two ﬁlopodia gradually ﬁlls in . When myosin II was inhibited in the 2xKD cells using blebbistatin , we observed increased ﬁlopodia number and ‘‘ﬁlling the gap’’ behavior , and a proportional increase in cell speed . This suggests that the Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells rely on this ﬁlopodia - initiated ‘‘ﬁlling the gap’’ motility to migrate . This form of motility is relatively inefﬁcient compared to motility using lamellipodia ; however , efﬁciency of motility does not necessarily relate to the ability of cells to sense or respond to directional cues . The Role of Lamellipodia in Chemotaxis Chemotaxis is required for numerous physiological processes and has been the subject of intense study for well over a century . The most successful model systems have been the social amoeba Dictyostelium and amoeboid cells of the hematopoietic system such as neutrophils ( Parent , 2004 ) . Studies of chemo - taxis in amoeboid cells and other cell types have largely focused on the signal transduction cascades that connect cell surface receptors to the polymerization of actin at the protrusive leading edge . As lamellipodia are the actin - rich , protrusive organelle in ﬁbroblasts , we fully anticipated that depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex and the resulting loss of lamellipodia would have a profound impact on ﬁbroblast chemotaxis . To our surprise , depletion of Arp2 / 3 complex has no effect whatsoever on ﬁbroblast chemo - taxis up shallow gradients of PDGF , other than affecting the speed at which the cells crawl . Although stimulated actin Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 983 Figure 7 . Arp2 / 3 Complex Depletion Leads to Poor Global Alignment of Focal Adhesions ( A ) Distribution of single focal adhesion mean deviations from their ﬁrst orientation measurement starting point . The adhesions analyzed were from NS ( 17 cells and 3 , 184 adhesions ) or 2xKD ( 22 cells and 1 , 132 adhesions ) cells plated on 100 m g / ml ﬁbronectin . Insets show single adhesions outlined in green through time , there are 6 min between each image . 984 Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . assembly may still be important for chemotactic response , this assembly clearly does not involve the Arp2 / 3 complex in this cell type . However , other forms of actin assembly such as those that lead to the increased ﬁlopodia on the 2xKD cells may be important for chemotaxis . It is also worth noting that our results may not translate to amoeboid cell chemotaxis , which may require Arp2 / 3 activity . Future studies will focus on testing the role of alternate actin assembly pathways in ﬁbroblast chemo - taxis and testing the generality of our ﬁndings for other cell types . Although the normal chemotaxis of Arp2 / 3 - depleted ﬁbro - blasts is surprising , several studies point toward a more complex picture of chemotaxis than previously appreciated . Transient depletion of either the Cdc42 or Rac1 small GTPase or both does not affect the ability of ﬁbroblasts to respond to gradients of PDGF ( Monypenny et al . , 2009 ) . Similar to our cells , these depletions affect the morphology of the leading edge without affecting chemotaxis , although some non - GTPase - dependent activation of Arp2 / 3 cannot be excluded . Another enzyme that was initially thought to be crucial for chemotaxis , PI - 3 Kinase , is also not strictly required for chemotaxis of Dictyostelium amoebae based on genetic studies ( Hoeller and Kay , 2007 ) or ﬁbroblast chemotaxis toward PDGF based on pharmacological inhibition of this enzyme ( Melvin et al . , 2011 ) . Together with our results , these studies highlight the complexity of chemotactic mechanisms and the insufﬁciency of current models in explain - ing this process . The Role of Lamellipodia in Sensing / Responding to Changes in ECM Our results with the Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells reveal the importance of Arp2 / 3 complex and lamellipodia in sensing and responding to the changes in the ECM . Several groups have reported that cells exhibit a biphasic motility response to variable extracellular matrix concentration with fast migration occurring at interme - diate ECM concentration and slower migration occurring at low and high ECM concentrations ( DiMilla et al . , 1993 ; Gupton and Waterman - Storer , 2006 ) . The molecular basis of this biphasic response is thought to involve spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal adhesion systems ( Gupton and Waterman - Storer , 2006 ) ; however , the relationship between this response and speciﬁc cellular architecture is unclear . Our data indicate that Arp2 / 3 and lamellipodia are required for the biphasic response of cells to variable ECM . Stated another way , the adhesions formed by the ﬁlopodial protrusions on the 2xKD cells are insufﬁcient to allow cells to sense or respond to these differences in ECM concentration . This suggests that the adhesions formed within lamellipodia have qualitatively different properties that allow the whole cell to coordinate global motility . Cells not only can regulate velocity when migrating on different concentrations of ECM , but also can sense and respond to ECM gradients and migrate in a directional way . This process , termed haptotaxis , requires cells to ( 1 ) sense differences of ECM concentration / engagement across a single cell , ( 2 ) polarize cyto - skeletal and motility machinery , and ( 3 ) migrate up the gradient . Our data show that Arp2 / 3 depletion and subsequent loss of lamellipodia completely ablates haptotaxis . Importantly , this was true not only on gradients of ﬁbronectin , but also on gradi - ents of laminin or vitronectin , ECMs that require different integrin heterodimers . One outstanding question about the role of lamellipodia in haptotaxis is whether this structure is involved in sensing the gradient or responding to the gradient or both . Considering the intact PDGF chemotactic response without Arp2 / 3 complex , the loss of haptotaxis appears to be a speciﬁc effect rather than a general defect in direction sensing . This remarkable difference in the need for lamellipodia between chemotaxis and haptotaxis suggests that cells use very different mechanisms to sense and respond to these different directional cues . Spatial Organization of Cell - Matrix Adhesions and Global Cell Motility Although focal adhesions have been intensively studied for decades , the processes that spatially organize these structures in an ensemble manner across the whole cell are poorly under - stood . Our results indicate that lamellipodia play a major role in bringing spatial coherence to focal adhesion formation . Without lamellipodia , focal adhesions are poorly aligned to each other , which may explain why these cells migrate slowly . An open question is how lamellipodia promote the alignment of focal adhesions . One possibility is that the retrograde ﬂow of actin networks in lamellipodia , which is itself spatially coherent over 0 . 5 – 5 m m length scales , could promote the alignment of the adhesions that form and mature within this ﬂow ﬁeld . However , how the alignment of focal adhesions within lamellipodia con - tribute to global alignment is less clear . Since the rear of the cell was once the front the cell , this alignment may reﬂect the history of these adhesions as born within previous lamellipodia . How cells manage to deﬁne a new axis of focal adhesion align - ment upon turning will be the subject of future studies . Our observations also provide a conceptual framework for linking events occurring at small length scales such as the for - mation of branches by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( (cid:3) 10 nm ) to whole - cell motility at much longer length scales ( (cid:3) 100 m m ) ( Figure 7I ) . Branched actin networks generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex are the main component of the lamellipodial cytoskeleton . As we have shown in this paper , lamellipodia are critical for the ( B ) Diagram showing adhesion ﬁltering through a minimum axial ratio of 3 and two sample adhesion orientations . ( C ) Diagram showing the determination of dominant angle and focal adhesion alignment index ( FAAI ) . ( D ) Sample single - cell cartoons showing representative high and low FAAI cells with corresponding adhesion orientation data sets . ( E ) FAAI of NS and 2xKD cells expressing GFP - Paxillin plated on different concentrations of ﬁbronectin ( number of cells same as in Figure 6D , p values for the difference between the means were calculated by bootstrapping with 10 , 000 replicates ) . ( F ) FAAI of NS and 2xKD cells with the adhesions grouped by size ( p values for each size range < 0 . 0005 ) . ( G ) FAAI of NS and 2xKD cells expressing indicated focal adhesion markers . ( n = number of cells analyzed , p values calculated same as in 7E ) . ( H ) FAAI of Rat2 cells with CK - 666 or CK - 689 . ( I ) Conceptual model of cell motility events across length scales . See also Figure S6 and Movie S6 . Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 985 alignment of focal adhesions . Cells with aligned focal adhesions will have aligned stress ﬁbers attached to those adhesions . Since stress ﬁbers are the main contractile structure of ﬁbro - blasts , cells with aligned focal adhesions will have more coherent contractility . We postulate that this coherent contractility will contribute directly to efﬁcient whole - cell migration . This overall notion is consistent with our observation that a strong relation - ship exists between the ﬁbronectin concentration the cells are plated on , the global alignment of focal adhesions , and their increased cell speed . Future studies will focus on testing this hypothesis in context of other 2D and 3D motility events . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture , Viral Transduction , and Generation of 2xKD Cells Cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS ( HyClone ) , 100 U / ml pen / strep , and 292 m g / ml L - glutamine . DMEM supplemented with 0 . 1 % fatty - acidfreeBSA ( Equitech - Bio ) wasusedtoculturecellsduringserum starvation . Lentivirus production and infection were as described ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . IA32 cells infected with viruses were cloned by ﬂuorescence - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) and screened for p34 and Arp2 expression by blotting . For complete methods , see the Extended Experimental Procedures . Microscopy and Image Analysis Forimmunoﬂuorescent staining , thecells wereﬁxed , stained , and mountedas described previously ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) . Primary antibodies were applied to cells in PBS containing 1 % BSA as indicated in the Extended Experimental Procedures . For live - cell imaging , cells were placed on 10 m g / ml FN - coated glass bottom culture dishes ( MatTek Corporation ) for 8 – 12 hr before imaging . Time - lapse microscopy was performed on an Olympus VivaView FL micro - scope or with Nikon BioStation IM . Cell speed was measured with ImageJ using the Manual Tracking plug - in ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij / plugins / track / track . html ) . Total internal reﬂectance microscopy was performed using Olympus cell ^ TIRF illuminator motorized multicolor TIRF microscope . Elec - tron microscopy was performed as described in the Extended Experimental Procedures . Directional Migration Assays Polymethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) - based microﬂuidic devices were fabricated as described in the Extended Experimental Procedures . For chemotaxis assays , the source syringe was ﬁlled serum free DMEM containing indicated chemo - attractant and 10 m g / ml of TRITC - dextran to visualize the gradient . The sink syringe contained only serum free DMEM . The syringe pump was operated at a ﬂow rate of 20 nl / min . A stable gradient was established in the cell culture chamberwithin30min , andtypicallyremainedstablefor18hrasmonitoredby TRITC - dextran ﬂuorescent intensity . For haptotaxis assays , the cell culture was coated with a minimal concentration of 2 . 5 m g / ml FN ( or 5 m g / ml LN ) to promote cell attachment throughout the chamber . The source and sink syringes were ﬁlled with the indicated concentration FN ( or LN or VTN ) in PBS or PBS alone , respectively . The syringe pump was maintained at a ﬂow rate of 20 nl / min . The chambers were allowed to equilibrate for 1 hr . Once the ECM gradient was established on the surface , 1 mg / ml PLL ( 20 ) - g [ 3 . 5 ] - PEG ( 2 ) was ﬂowed into all channels of the device to block nonspeciﬁc adhe - sion . Thorough wash of the chambers with distilled water was performed before plating the cells . Imaging for directional migration assays was per - formed and analyzed as described in the Extended Experimental Procedures . Focal Adhesion Segmentation and Measurements To identify focal adhesions in each image of a time - lapse series , a set of segmentation methods were used ( Berginski et al . , 2011 ) . In order to measure the global alignment of focal adhesions across the entire cell , we developed the focal adhesion alignment index ( FAAI , Figures S5A and S5B ) . A complete description of these procedures is contained in the Extended Experimental Procedures . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and six movies and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 12 . 034 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge support from HHMI , NIH grants to J . E . B . ( GM083035 ) , N . E . S . ( UO1 - CA141576 ) , S . M . G . ( DK037871 ) , and J . D . G . ( GM31819 , ES 13773 ) , the LCCC Electron Microscopy Core ( supported by NIH CA16086 ) the UNC - Olympus Imaging Research Center , UNC Research Computing , the Allbrittion lab for use of facilities , members of the Bear lab for critical discussions , Zenon Rajfur for assistance with microinjection , and Klaus Hahn for the mCherry - FAK construct . Received : June 15 , 2011 Revised : September 28 , 2011 Accepted : December 21 , 2011 Published : March 1 , 2012 REFERENCES Allen , C . D . , Okada , T . , Tang , H . L . , and Cyster , J . G . ( 2007 ) . Imaging ofgerminal center selection events during afﬁnity maturation . Science 315 , 528 – 531 . Arrieumerlou , C . , and Meyer , T . ( 2005 ) . A local coupling model and compass parameter for eukaryotic chemotaxis . Dev . Cell 8 , 215 – 227 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2002 ) . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 . Berginski , M . E . , Vitriol , E . A . , Hahn , K . M . , and Gomez , S . M . ( 2011 ) . High - resolution quantiﬁcation of focal adhesion spatiotemporal dynamics in living cells . PLoS ONE 6 , e22025 . Cai , L . , Marshall , T . W . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2007 ) . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and coﬁlin activities at the leading edge . Cell 128 , 915 – 929 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , Schafer , D . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Coronin 1B antagonizes cortactin and remodels Arp2 / 3 - containing actin branches in lamellipodia . Cell 134 , 828 – 842 . Condeelis , J . , Singer , R . H . , and Segall , J . E . ( 2005 ) . The great escape : when cancer cells hijack the genes for chemotaxis and motility . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 21 , 695 – 718 . Di Nardo , A . , Cicchetti , G . , Falet , H . , Hartwig , J . H . , Stossel , T . P . , and Kwiat - kowski , D . J . ( 2005 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex - deﬁcient mouse ﬁbroblasts are viable and have normal leading - edge actin structure and function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 16263 – 16268 . DiMilla , P . A . , Stone , J . A . , Quinn , J . A . , Albelda , S . M . , and Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Maximal migration of human smooth muscle cells on ﬁbronectin and type IV collagen occurs at an intermediate attachment strength . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 729 – 737 . Goeckeler , Z . M . , Bridgman , P . C . , and Wysolmerski , R . B . ( 2008 ) . Nonmuscle myosin II is responsible for maintaining endothelial cell basal tone and stress ﬁber integrity . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 295 , C994 – C1006 . Goley , E . D . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2006 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 713 – 726 . Gupton , S . L . , and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2006 ) . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migra - tion . Cell 125 , 1361 – 1374 . Hoeller , O . , and Kay , R . R . ( 2007 ) . Chemotaxis in the absence of PIP3 gradi - ents . Curr . Biol . 17 , 813 – 817 . Kamijo , T . , Zindy , F . , Roussel , M . F . , Quelle , D . E . , Downing , J . R . , Ashmun , R . A . , Grosveld , G . , and Sherr , C . J . ( 1997 ) . Tumor suppression at the mouse INK4a 986 Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . locus mediated by the alternative reading frame product p19ARF . Cell 91 , 649 – 659 . Kim , W . Y . , and Sharpless , N . E . ( 2006 ) . The regulation of INK4 / ARF in cancer and aging . Cell 127 , 265 – 275 . Melvin , A . T . , Welf , E . S . , Wang , Y . , Irvine , D . J . , and Haugh , J . M . ( 2011 ) . In chemotaxing ﬁbroblasts , both high - ﬁdelity and weakly biased cell movements track the localization of PI3K signaling . Biophys . J . 100 , 1893 – 1901 . Monypenny , J . , Zicha , D . , Higashida , C . , Oceguera - Yanez , F . , Narumiya , S . , and Watanabe , N . ( 2009 ) . Cdc42 and Rac family GTPases regulate mode and speed but not direction of primary ﬁbroblast migration during platelet - derived growth factor - dependent chemotaxis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 , 2730 – 2747 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , and forma - tion of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 . Nicholson - Dykstra , S . M . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 depletion inhibits sheet - like protrusions but not linear protrusions of ﬁbroblasts and lympho - cytes . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 , 904 – 922 . Nolen , B . J . , Tomasevic , N . , Russell , A . , Pierce , D . W . , Jia , Z . , McCormick , C . D . , Hartman , J . , Sakowicz , R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 460 , 1031 – 1034 . Ozgur , S . , Damania , B . , and Grifﬁth , J . ( 2011 ) . The Kaposi’s sarcoma - associ - ated herpesvirus ORF6 DNA binding protein forms long DNA - free helical protein ﬁlaments . J . Struct . Biol . 174 , 37 – 43 . Parent , C . A . ( 2004 ) . Making all the right moves : chemotaxis in neutrophils and Dictyostelium . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 16 , 4 – 13 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 – 1088 . Schwob , E . , and Martin , R . P . ( 1992 ) . New yeast actin - like gene required late in the cell cycle . Nature 355 , 179 – 182 . Shamloo , A . , Ma , N . , Poo , M . M . , Sohn , L . L . , and Heilshorn , S . C . ( 2008 ) . Endo - thelial cell polarization and chemotaxis in a microﬂuidic device . Lab Chip 8 , 1292 – 1299 . Steffen , A . , Faix , J . , Resch , G . P . , Linkner , J . , Wehland , J . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2581 – 2591 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolyme - rizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . Swaney , K . F . , Huang , C . H . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 2010 ) . Eukaryotic chemo - taxis : a network of signaling pathways controls motility , directional sensing , and polarity . Annu Rev Biophys 39 , 265 – 289 . Thiery , J . P . ( 1984 ) . Mechanismsofcellmigrationinthevertebrateembryo . Cell Differ . 15 , 1 – 15 . Urban , E . , Jacob , S . , Nemethova , M . , Resch , G . P . , and Small , J . V . ( 2010 ) . Electron tomography reveals unbranched networks of actin ﬁlaments in lamellipodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 429 – 435 . Vitriol , E . A . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Shen , F . , Jacobson , K . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2007 ) . EnhancedEGFP - chromophore - assistedlaserinactivationusingdeﬁcientcells rescued with functional EGFP - fusion proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 6702 – 6707 . Webb , D . J . , Parsons , J . T . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 2002 ) . Adhesion assembly , disassembly and turnover in migrating cells — over and over and over again . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , E97 – E100 . Wickramarachchi , D . C . , Theoﬁlopoulos , A . N . , and Kono , D . H . ( 2010 ) . Immune pathologyassociatedwithalteredactincytoskeletonregulation . Autoimmunity 43 , 64 – 75 . Wynn , T . A . ( 2008 ) . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of ﬁbrosis . J . Pathol . 214 , 199 – 210 . Yae , K . , Keng , V . W . , Koike , M . , Yusa , K . , Kouno , M . , Uno , Y . , Kondoh , G . , Gotow , T . , Uchiyama , Y . , Horie , K . , and Takeda , J . ( 2006 ) . Sleeping beauty transposon - based phenotypic analysis of mice : lack of Arpc3 results in defec - tive trophoblast outgrowth . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 6185 – 6196 . Zaki , M . , King , J . , Fu¨tterer , K . , and Insall , R . H . ( 2007 ) . Replacement of the essential Dictyostelium Arp2 gene by its Entamoeba homologue using para - sexual genetics . BMC Genet . 8 , 28 . Cell 148 , 973 – 987 , March 2 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 987