From Exaptation to Radical Niche Construction in Biological and Technological Complex Systems Biological adaptation assumes the evolution of structures toward better functions . Yet , the roots of adaptive trajectories usually entail subverted—perverted—structures , derived from a different function : what Gould and Vrba called ‘‘exaptation . ’’ Generally , this derivation is regarded as contingent or serendipitous , but it also may have regular - ities , if not rules , in both biological evolution and technological innovation . On the basis of biological examples and examples from the history of technology , the authors demon - strate the centrality of exaptation for a modern understanding of niche , selection , and environment . In some cases , biological understanding illuminates technical exaptation . Thus , the driver of exaptation is not simply chance matching of function and form ; it depends on particular , permissive contexts . V C 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . Complexity 18 : 7 – 14 , 2013 Key Words : innovation ; exaptation ; adaptation ; evolution ; technology O ccasionally , exaptations—which occur when traits get co - opted for use in unintended ways—open new evolutionary trajectories in complex systems , yet these new trajectories do not necessarily invoke greater fitness or per - formance advantages . Instead , they require the co - construction of specialized adaptations and further exaptations , culminating ultimately in the emergence of a new niche , whether in biological or technological settings . But how does this pro - cess occur ? Starting with Lewontin [ 1 ] , we learned that random mutations and gradualist evolution are outmoded concepts , and that evolutionary innovations actually derive from robust selection of recombined , well - tested , genetic modules that map onto functional modules during embryology . We also know that the muta - tion – selection – retention triad , through which ‘‘the organism proposes and the environment disposes’’ [ 2 ] ( p . 228 ) , describes a system in which the arrow of cau - sality exclusively operates from bottom up [ 3 ] , or in biological terms , from genes to ecosystems . This triad can explain the smooth , gradualist changes fairly well , but it fails when it tries to capture multiple feedback loops among the environ - ment and agents and even more importantly sudden accelerations of evolutionary dynamics . Smoothly adapting trajectories are much easier to imagine than strik - ingly different innovations , because nearly all trajectories are only marginally PIERPAOLO ANDRIANI 1 JACK COHEN 2 1 Euromed Management School , Rue Antoine Bourdelle Domaine de Luminy BP 921 13288 Marseille Cedex 9 France and 2 Mathematics Institute University of Warwick Coventry CV4 7AL United Kingdom ( e - mail : pierpaolo . andriani @ euromed - management . com ) C O M P L E X I T Y 7 Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . , Vol . 18 No . 5 DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx . 21450 Published online 31 May 2013 in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary . com ) viable : nearly all sexually produced organisms fail to breed [ 3 ] . Rather than considering only the rare viable trajectories , more pluralistic , multidi - mensional approaches are required . In response , we note that nearly all biological traits , similar to many com - mercial products ( and technologies ) developed for particular markets , began as something different . Feathers were selected for thermal insulation , bones originated as excess calcium reposito - ries , microwave ovens started as radar magnetrons , and gin and tonic origi - nally was an anti - malaria concoction intended to mask the unacceptable taste of quinine British troops had to drink in India . Development of new knowledge follows similar patterns : Dow Corning’s development of fiber optics relied on capabilities the firm had developed for special glass fabrica - tion , which was a different technology [ 4 ] . Ubiquitous general purpose tech - nologies , such as the computer and microprocessor , initially sought to solve highly specific problems , such as CERN’s world wide web , which served as a telephone directory [ 5 ] . Predictions that appear humorous in hindsight—as when the Chairman of IBM Thomas Watson predicted in 1943 , ‘‘I think there is a world market for maybe five com - puters’’ or when Alexander Graham Bell reportedly exclaimed , ‘‘the telephone is so important that , one day , every town will have one ! ’’—demonstrate the diffi - culty of envisaging the spectrum of applications that ultimately can arise from what have become ubiquitous technologies . To frame such nonadaptive proc - esses , Gould and Vrba [ 6 ] suggest the term ‘‘exaptation , ’’ which refers in biol - ogy to characters that have ‘‘evolved for other usages ( or for no function at all ) that are later ‘‘coopted’’ for their current role . ’’ In technology settings , it similarly ‘‘refers to cases in which an entity was selected for one trait but eventually ended up carrying out a related but different function’’ [ 7 ] . To qualify as an exaptation , a feature must satisfy three conditions : it must ( 1 ) not have ‘‘arisen as an adaptation for its present role , ’’ ( 2 ) but rather have been ‘‘subsequently coopted for its current function’’ [ 8 ] , and ( 3 ) ‘‘enhance fitness’’ [ 8 ] ( p . 47 ) . The mate - rials available for such co - option include functional biological traits , technological modules , inventions ( selected through natural selection or redesigned for current uses ) , vestigial elements , and spandrels [ 9 ] ( which refer to Darwin’s correlations of growth , that is , the byproducts of the evolution of other traits ) . Thus , exaptations seem pervasive in both the evolution of species and the evolution of technologies . According to historian of technology , Mokyr ‘‘exaptation . . . can be widely docu - mented in the history of technology’’ [ 10 ] ( p . 20 ) . Also geographer Jane Jacobs notes : ‘‘the process by which one sort of work leads to another must have happened millions of times in the whole history of human economic development’’ [ 11 ] ( p . 52 ) . Our chal - lenge then is to understand how to conceptualize this leap to a new func - tion , before the start of the new adap - tational trajectory , as something other than an accident , contingency , or ser - endipity . Can we imagine the leap to new function without conceptualizing sudden evolutionary jumps , as exem - plified in Goldschmidt’s ‘‘Hopeful Monster’’ model , so effectively criticized by John Maynard Smith [ 12 ] ? How does this creative ‘‘tinkering’’ occur , and how do the dramatic inno - vations that occur at the beginning of a developmental trajectory extend over evolving generations to craft evolution ? At the heart of the innovative potential of exaptation is an indefi - nite—and rarely explicit—range of potential functions [ 13 ] of existing modules . The ordinariness of objects often hides a wide range of uses , such that ‘‘At the end of its production a US master sergeant wrote nostalgically of its uses : as seat , pillow , washbasin , cooking pot , nutcracker , tent - peg pounder , wheel chock , and even—with the explosive from an unserviceable Claymore mine—popcorn popper’’ [ 14 ] ( p . 253 ) . What was this remarkable de - vice ? A simple U . S . Army helmet . Yet recognizing this potential is inherently difficult . Even at the linguis - tic level , we find spontaneous confla - tion of form and function : The common roots of many ordinary verbs and nouns ( a hammer is a tool to hammer something ; a nail is a tool to nail something ) transform objects and traits into embedded and embodied functions , making it difficult to associ - ate new , emergent functions with existing objects . Innovation by progressive adapta - tion , as described by the Market - pull model of innovation , is the primary lesson taught in traditional business schools and by ‘‘adaptive radiation’’ biologists . It is bland , uninteresting , and thus not true innovation . Innova - tion by exaptation is more difficult to teach systematically though , because the new connection creates the new phase space . It is not that there was an island of possibility waiting to be exploited [ 15 ] ; rather , a new domain appears within the universe of possi - bilities . Exaptations that create new functions , such as flying or cooking with microwave radiation , without the invention or evolution of a new form , tend to generate a new peak in the form – function fitness landscape . In retrospect , it seems obvious ( penguins and whales return to marine life ; re - frigeration by heat - engine technology ) , but in prospect , the connections made seem random , or at best serendipitous . In advance , it is nearly impossible to chart a map of the new phase space . Are there patches of potential ? Deserts of constraints ? Groves of encourage - ment ? Furthermore , we must consider whether evolutionary models permit such meta - selective ideas . They do not if we remain limited to an old , 8 C O M P L E X I T Y Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx gradualist model , in which random mutations get tested by the organisms in which they appear and which deter - mine the viability and reproductive ‘‘potential’’ of their carriers . This biological revolution has not been as well publicized as , say , the shift in physics from Newton to Einstein— especially perhaps in the complexity sciences . We still need to make explicit the modern evolutionary models that are based in the genetics of real wild populations [ 3 ] . ‘‘Random mutations’’ and ‘‘gradualist evolution , ’’ associated with the names of Fisher , Haldane , and Sewall Wright are outdated concepts , unless applied specifically to laboratory animals and crop plants . Yet , many biologists have not caught up with this change , nor has it found its way into more popular media . Since Lewontin’s group [ 1 ] discovered the 10 % hetero - zygosity of most wild individuals , 1 such that one - third of loci possess several al - leles , we must accept that nearly all innovation and adaptation involves the recombination of ancient mutations , through robust selections of well - tested genetic modules that map onto func - tional modules during embryology [ 16 ] . This new mapping implies that the direction of evolutionary change is not determined solely through selection , given random mutations , but rather that evolutionary change is constrained ( and simultaneously enabled ) by devel - opmental trajectories that are based on the activation of cascades of recombi - nant regulatory processes . That is , the ‘‘organism as a whole is not a blank state but poised response system , rather like one of the signal - response systems within its physiology . Its adapt - ive envelope of responses is far greater than that which can be elicited by test - ing every environmental condition on the whole organism’’ [ 17 ] ( p . 226 ) . In this new Evo - Devo ( evolution – de - velopment [ 17 – 19 ] ) field , every family of progeny is an assortment of recombi - nations , much like Darwin’s concept of selectable and heritable differences . Technological innovation , as described by Schumpeter [ 20 ] , resonates with this idea of recombination . Even more than their biological counterparts , radical new technologies are chimeras , involv - ing innovative reconfigurations of exist - ing modules ( often borrowed from completely different technological lineages ) . Several classical concepts also inform our conceptualization , with a variation on their usage . A biological or ecological ‘‘niche’’ once referred to some pre - formed , ecosystematic func - tion , waiting for an organism to evolve into it , as in : ‘‘The scavenger niche has been emptied now that we’ve killed off the vultures in India ; what will replace them in that niche ? ’’ A niche , intended as a persistent architecture of relations among biotic and abiotic elements is a pervasive concept ; as Erwin writes in the context of mass extinctions : ‘‘most models . . . assume that extinction is a giant hand sweeping pieces off the board , but leaving the board and the rules of the game intact’’ [ 21 ] ( p . 219 , emphasis added ) . In contrast to this lock - and - key image , we have come to regard a niche as a form of complicity , between a lineage of organisms and the environments they inhabit and change . This creative process , rather than a view of habitation for rent [ 21 ] , is much more appropriate for com - plexity thinkers . That is , in the tradi - tional usage , which still dominates population ecology and some evolu - tionary economics , organisms adapt progressively to their niche . With the new usage , both organisms and niches take unexpected trajectories by co - constructing their own environment . Because new niches are often repeated , reconstructed , during evolution , with detailed parallel innova - tions , they seem likely to be constrained by rules . This likelihood contrasts with the common belief that these parallel developments are simply contingent , and it suggests that the geography of exaptation features both hills ( opportu - nities ) and valleys ( constraints and lim - its ) . The co - construction of niches not only reintroduces multilevel dynamics to evolutionary explanations but also raises issues about the origin of new niches . The emergence of new niches requires a parallel transformation of agents and environments , which effec - tively generates a mutual hostage situa - tion . In the same way , technologies cannot evolve without pre - existing markets , nor can new markets emerge without societal applications of new technologies . The latter cannot , appa - rently , develop before the technologies . Adaptive mechanisms thus better explain the slow morphing of a niche into another , not radical innovation . But by co - opting existing modules for a new function , exaptation causes a sym - metry - breaking and an evolutionary bifurcation in existing trajectories with - out the need to design or invent new modules . That is , the rapid emergence of new niches is characterized by mor - phological ( or technological ) continuity and functional discontinuity—which is the difference between adaptation and exaptation . Cichlid fishes in Lakes Victoria , Ma - lawi , and Tanzania ( Tanganyika ) exhibit parallel arrays of both likely and highly unlikely specializations : In these three Rift Valley lakes , different ‘‘ordinary’’ riverine originators diversified into ‘‘species flocks’’ that included adapted plankton feeders , adapted rock - scra - pers , and specialized ( adapted ) pisci - vore predators . But all three lakes also have cichlids that have exapted their mouths to bags for eating the babies held in the mouths of other ( mouth - brooding ) species , others that have pro - truded their mouths for eating only the eyes of other fish , and some have 1 Among nonbiologists ( and perhaps some traditional geneticists ) , a com - mon belief is that mutations are rare and special , so nearly all gene loci should be homozygous , with identical alleles . C O M P L E X I T Y 9 Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx exapted hinged teeth to scrape off the scales around the tail of a caught - but - not - swallowed prey . These three func - tions have greatly modified the mouths of each fish species . Although they all eat ‘‘fish food’’ in aquaria , in the wild their stomachs contain only the specific prey items that they could not have caught before their exaptation . Each requires a jump to a new function and cannot have adapted smoothly [ 22 ] , yet parallel acquisitions appear in all three lakes separately . We can identify paleontological repeats too , as in the sagas of acquisi - tion of sabre teeth in some creodonts and horns in titanotheres . Ancient car - nivores , such as the terrier - sized creo - donts , exapted sabre teeth as they grew to tiger sizes . Small , horn - less titano - theres , the size of Labrador retrievers , grew allometrically [ 23 ] with enormous horns for protection against sabre teeth , at least three successive times . Each drove the other to extinction along an arms - race ( adaptational ) tra - jectory ; then the exaptation re - arose , at least twice , from smaller - bodied parent stocks without sabre teeth or horns . These examples , like the lake cichlids and many others , strongly suggest con - tingent , rule - driven innovations , or hills in our exaptational landscape . The exaptations , like refrigerators and microwave ovens , seem to have at least as much to do with the context as with the nature of the tool or the task . But is it only ‘‘lucky’’ adaptational trajec - tories that ‘‘cross’’ into new contexts ? In this sense , can we distinguish between truly rule - driven exaptations and Con - way Morris’s repeated adaptational tra - jectories ? [ 24 ] We believe Conway Morris’s model actually is anti - exapta - tional , sharing philosophical problems with the Intelligent Design promoters who insist on the same function throughout an evolutionary process— and thus deny its very possibility . Thus , we identify three players in the game , not just Darwin’s two . In addition to a ( genetically inherited ) function and environment , the jump to a new function requires permissive contexts that create effective bridges between unconnected hills in the exaptational landscape . This has reso - nance with Sewall - Wright’s classical model of speciation , leaping from peak to peak of a selective landscape , which was very difficult to model with the old form of population genetics . How - ever , we now have a more dynamic model , in which the selective geogra - phy changes as ecosystems evolve ( more consistently with complexity thinking ) , and species already have a spectrum of ancient mutations / abil - ities to call on ( instead of waiting for new , random mutations ) . Perhaps there are driving contexts that encour - age the contiguity of form and func - tion , which promotes exaptation . These driving contexts might consist of relatively transient combinations that occur at the intersection of phe - notypic traits , transmitted by develop - ment or genetic inheritance , and environmental conditions , transmitted through ecological inheritance [ 25 ] ( for technologies , we would add cultural inheritance mechanisms ) . These driv - ing contexts may take the form of a meso - environment that exists during the construction of a niche , before its traits have had time to become fixed in various new inheritance systems through adaptations / exaptations of the organisms ( or epigenetic changes ) . As an example , consider the process of diffusion - limited accretion in a coral reef [ 26 ] : Accidents or irregularities may become amplified as the forming gra - dients generate spatial concentrations of nutrients . These nutrients then pro - vide scaffolding for polyp growth , which reinforces the gradients and increases the nutrients’ spatial dis - homogeneity . More species are attracted , and the pro - cess becomes autocatalytic , continuing until a new niche in the ecosystem emerges , and a dense network of rela - tionships stabilizes . These driving con - texts may be activated by processes such as relocational or perturbational niche construction activities [ 25 ] . Ecosystem engineering [ 27 ] , niche construction , [ 25 ] and external physiol - ogy [ 26 ] all describe the emergence of new types of feedback between organis - mic traits and meta - environmental fac - tors . Earthworms offer the classic example : These ‘‘aquatic’’ animals , instead of following an adaptive route by which they retool their body plan to live on land , modified their environ - ment to work as an external kidney [ 26 ] . As Turner puts it , ‘‘it is . . . the soil envi - ronment adapting to the earthworm , not the other way around’’ [ 26 ] ( p . 118 ) ; in the process , earthworms ‘‘invented’’ soil and made agriculture possible . Such niche construction engineers build their own environment by ‘‘per - verting’’ environmental factors and hijacking external fluxes of energy , which they use to build new niches , thereby changing their selective trajec - tory—as well as the trajectories of everyone else . Photosynthetic bacteria are another dramatic example . Niche construction ( like the creation of new industrial niche / sectors ) starts with an exaptation , such as soil , oxygen excretion into the atmosphere , or mag - netrons creating microwave ovens , then evolves into a locked dance between the two pairs : exaptation / adaptation and or - ganism / environment ( or goods / market ; e . g . , automobiles / gas stations , mobile phones / towers ) . This locked dance resolves the paradox of gradualism and punctuation , for both biology and tech - nological change [ 28 ] , and helps resolve the issue of agency for the emergence of new technological capabilities [ 4 ] , which has considerably blurred the use of evo - lutionary frameworks in technological studies . Such cascades give us a new way of thinking about not only techno - logical exaptation but also adaptation . What properties of the context are permissive for exaptations ? A sparse , almost uninhabited region of phase space offers few opportunities for find - ing the contiguities necessary to 10 C O M P L E X I T Y Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx establish functional bridges among tools , technologies , or species . Limited micro - diversity [ 29 ] and few islands of connectivity [ 30 ] prevent exaptations from starting an autocatalytic cas - cade—a norm for the history of human - kind . With different starting points , Mokyr [ 31 ] , Diamond [ 32 ] , and Kauff - man [ 33 ] all note the nonlinearity of the dynamics of diversity growth and its threshold dependence . On a macro scale , recurrent explosions of techno - logical innovations ( e . g . , the technologi - cal creativity that flourished in China during the Song dynasty [ 10 ] or in Mi - lan in the 16th century , during the era of Leonardo da Vinci [ 34 ] ) are short - lived . The exception is the British industrial revolution [ 35 ] , when diver - sity and connectivity conditions became ripe and sparked an autocata - lytic development , which we continue to experience today . On the microscale , the picture is similar . Consider the saga of the microwave oven : In 1945 , an engineer named Percy Lebaron Spencer , work - ing at Raytheon ( a major U . S . military contractor ) noticed that when he stood in proximity to a radar , a candy bar in his pocket melted , despite the absence of a heat source . Spencer identified the magnetron as the component respon - sible for the cooking effect . Raytheon then applied for a patent 2 and entered the civil sector with the first micro - wave oven , the Radarange . Priced at $ 5 , 000 ( more than $ 50 , 000 in today’s dollars ) , the Radarange was a bulky , water - cooled , more than 300 kg device , of 1 . 65 m in height . No modern con - sumers would recognize it as a micro - wave oven . Although it was hailed as the first true radical innovation in cooking since the discovery of fire , sales of the Radarange were disap - pointing . The concept was far too rev - olutionary , and the ecology of practices , technologies , and usage pat - terns that lead to the diffusion of an exaptation - based radical innovation were missing or underdeveloped . In other words , the environment was too sparse for the Radarange to construct a socio - economic niche ; there were too few contiguities for microwave cooking practices to emerge . Over the next 20 years , the technology was radi - cally simplified , and the price dropped to less than 10 % of the original price , but various attempts to penetrate the household markets still failed . Only in 1967 , when the recently acquired Amana company ( a leader in kitchen appliances ) introduced a countertop model and launched a year - long cam - paign to introduce retailers , consum - ers , and wholesalers to the alien concept of microwave cooking , did the popularity of the microwave explode . Five years later , sales of microwave units reached the 1 million milestone . When sound recording began , wax cylinders , and then disks , dominated ; early wire recorders succeeded as elec - tricity came into technical use , but there were few contiguities . Even as disks evolved toward CDs , there was little expansion into diverse technologies . However , as the era of electrical record - ing was joined by the digital revolution in electronics , the subversion ( exapta - tion ) of digital compact disk technology to music , and then to sound - and - pic - ture DVDs , became seemingly inevita - ble , crossing from one adapting trajectory to another . Today , music re - cording has leapt over into solid mem - ory , and its new adaptational trajectories involve compression techniques and display / play developments [ 36 ] . The evolving ‘‘audio - tech’’ ecosystems have approached greater dimensionality as the space has become dense with new technologies , with many exaptations along the way . Similar to cichlids , they have moved rapidly away from the sparse – dense constraint , as have most surrounding Silicon Valley technologies . This multidimensional network of reconfiguration experiments mimics a coral reef ecosystem . The audio / DVD / media system has became autocatalytic , almost ‘‘mesobiotic , ’’ similar to the ear - liest life . At the same time , it is also like the microwave - cooker industry , and the plankton , and the symbiont community in herbivore guts , and the soil ecosys - tems that Darwin understood were based on earthworm specialties . In contrast , a very crowded region instead likely fosters high competition , low ‘‘rents , ’’ and unacceptable costs for the initial exaptation stages , before it progresses into an adaptational trajec - tory . Early African lakes , with few fishes , offered few opportunities , simi - lar to early audio technology . When the ecosystem had matured to encom - pass hundreds of specialized niches , there was no room to experiment , and exaptation driven by population pres - sures produced unlikely habits , such as eating other fishes’ eyes or babies . The potential of an exaptation to activate a cascade that leads to the emergence of a new niche thus depends on the features of the form – function phase space , and especially its diversity and connectivity . But does exaptation also prompt the unfolding of an evolutionary cascade beyond its initiation ? In this case , we must con - sider which type of cascades can lead to niche emergence . We think that that they involve the interaction and com - plicity of exaptive and adaptive proc - esses that feed into or serve as jumping off points for one another ( like a tram - poline ) , each expanding the ‘‘adjacent possible’’ [ 13 ] available to of the other . Accordingly , we view riverine cichl - ids in a filling Rift Lake basin and newly arrived finches to the Galapagos as sim - ilar to the radios and tape players that first entered the transistor age , or like early automobiles before the emer - gence of motorways and gas stations . They are suboptimal ; they evolved from or were designed for a different func - tional environment . Once they create a new peak in the form – function phase space though , they open adaptive 2 U . S . Patent Office n . 2 , 495 , 429 , Application October 8 , 1945 . C O M P L E X I T Y 11 Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx trajectories based on new fitness and selection functions . Such a chain of complicity between processes [ 15 ] is exemplified by early automobiles , which were rare but with rich and polit - ically powerful owners , such that gas stations became economically viable and demands for better roads increased , which in turn promoted diverse , more economically viable auto - mobiles for nearly everyone . As the cichlids , or the finches , or the automo - biles , multiplied and diversified , new opportunities for sympatric speciation arose . These cascades are multilevel , of - ten nested . Reconsider the history of microwave ovens . Beginning with a symmetry - breaking horizontal exaptation 4 [ 37 ] ( serendipitous discovery of a novel function and natural phenomenon [ 38 ] ) of a radar component , the microwave oven grew into more than just a mag - netron . It requires a dedicated architec - ture of components and subsystems , surrounding the exapted magnetron , to satisfy safety , compatibility , quality , design , ergonomic , and economic issues . Raytheon thus designed an entirely new system , popularly known as The Electronic Oven , 5 which con - sisted of a case with controls to contain the redesigned magnetron , linked to a reflecting cavity by a waveguide . The components were vertically exapted and partly adapted from other indus - tries , to fulfill functions defined by the technical architecture of the new niche and driven by a system - level purpose that had been translated into specifica - tions for the technological modules . The new system , with the exapted mag - netron at its core , initiated an internal selection pressure 6 on the exapted module , which then was redesigned to comply with its new assigned purpose . This cascade process results from the design tension , set in motion by the transformation of a horizontal exapta - tion into an architecture of nested processes that must be performed by exapted and adapted technical compo - nents . The whole architecture becomes a homeodynamic 7 system , maintained with embedded intelligence ( and partly by external designers ) that regulates fluxes of energy . Although the concept of design varies in natural versus artifi - cial ecosystems , the basic logic of niche formation remains the same . Both regulated systems of processes are driven by emergent homeodynamics [ 39 ] —even the regulation is not homeo - static , as is so often taught . The collapse of dense environments in the form – function space , as occurs during and after a biological or industrial extinction , may generate the rapid emer - gence of new niches , through a process of architecture reconfiguration ( i . e . , the reworking of selective phase - space ) . This reconfiguration usually deconstrains organisms and traits from the symbiotic ( but increasingly rigid ) environments that previously had locked them into adaptational trajectories . The ensuing opportunities for navigating new paths , together with the loss of fine - tuned ‘‘external physiology’’ [ 26 ] , may facilitate the emergence of biological , ecological , and technological reconfigurations . New niches may arise through horizontal exaptation , outward to newly promoted niches . Tools and their new functions , as well as organisms in their new niches , may be ‘‘vertically’’ exapted in the new architectures and ecosystems , descended from the original niches . Thus , the poten - tial for exaptation cannot be sought in the properties of a tool or its uses but rather must be found in the facilities in the developing context , for new utilities to be engendered . Evolution is a conservative , diver - sity - generating mechanism [ 15 ] . To make sense of this paradox , we need an enhanced model of evolution , based on a multilevel , hierarchical understanding of biological and tech - nological change , that blends together parallel inheritance forms , including genetic , ecological , and cultural . For example , ‘‘What we call the Palaeo - lithic ‘‘Revolution’’ might well have been a crucial event of exaptation of mental and linguistic faculties , poten - tially already present and triggered by an ecological opportunity or a cultural advancement . A new process of ‘‘niche construction’’ began , ultimately leading toward our unusual symbolic and cognitive niche’’ [ 40 ] ( p . 54 ) . The 4 We define horizontal exaptation ( HE ) as the serendipitous discovery of a new function for an existing trait or module . HE has the potential to acti - vate a cascade of change that construes a new niche . The term horizontal is borrowed from the concept of horizon - tal transfer in microbiology ( see for instance [ 37 ] ) . We define vertical exaptation ( VE ) as the purposeful association of a new function with an existing trait or mod - ule not designed or naturally selected for that purpose . In VE , the function is given and the trait or module is verti - cally extracted from its natural func - tional context . VE typically occurs when an entrepreneur or an organism searches through the set of available artifacts or traits to identify one that performs the required function ( or a part of it ) . A VE process is search - driven ; serendipity does not play any role at the function - level . Although the process applies better to the technology arena because of the radical decompos - ability of artifacts and the more promi - nent role of human agency , it does not necessarily require either . 5 The term ‘‘microwave oven’’ emerged only in the 1970s . 6 This pressure differs from market pressure . It arises from the need to comply with the requirements of the new architecture , of which the exapted module is a component . 7 We prefer homeodynamics to ho - meostasis for our terminology . For a good explanation of the difference between the two terms , see West [ 38 ] . 12 C O M P L E X I T Y Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx concepts of horizontal and vertical exaptation thus deepen our under - standing of evolutionary advances functioning in complex ecosystems . If exaptive education similarly leaps across specialty ‘‘hills , ’’ these ideas offer the potential to provide manag - ers ( and policy makers ) with a new tool for understanding , and perhaps accelerating , innovation . We have attempted an analysis of the role of exaptation as a trigger of the pro - cess of niche construction in complex systems . By approaching evolutionary dynamics in both biological and tech - nological domains from the standpoint of exaptation , we map the structural similarities through which exaptation triggers niche construction and con - tributes to its development . Therefore , we introduce distinctions between dif - ferent types of exaptation and link these different types to various stages of niche development . Finally , we introduce the idea of driving context and show how two parameters , diver - sity and connectivity , influence the probability of activation of an exaptive cascade that ultimately can result in the emergence of a new niche . REFERENCES 1 . Lewontin , R . C . The Genetic Basis of Evolutionary Change ; Columbia University Press : New York , 1974 . 2 . Gould , S . J . Wonderful Life ; Vintage : London , 1990 . 3 . Cohen , J . Concepts : Knife - edge of design . Nature 2001 , 411 , 52 . 4 . Cattani , G . Technological pre - adaptation , speciation , and emergence of new technologies : How Corning invented and devel - oped fiber optics . Ind Corp Change 2006 , 15 , 285 – 318 . 5 . Tuomi , I . Networks of Innovation : Change and Meaning in the Age of the Internet ; OUP : Oxford , 2002 . 6 . Gould , S . J . ; Vrba , E . S . Exaptation—A missing term in the science of form . Paleobiology 1982 , 8 , 4 – 15 . 7 . Mokyr , J . Science , Technology , and Knowledge : What Historians Can Learn from an Evolutionary Approach . Max Planck Inst . for Research into Economic Systems : Jena , 1998 . 8 . Gould , S . J . Exaptation : A crucial tool for evolutionary psychology . J Soc Issues 1991 , 47 , 43 – 65 . 9 . Gould , S . J . ; Lewontin , R . C . The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm : A critique of the adaptationist pro - gramme . Proc R Soc London B 1979 , 205 , 581 – 598 . 10 . Mokyr , J . Natural History and Economic History : Is Technological Change an Evolutionary Process ? Working Paper ; Northwest - ern University : Chicago , 2000 ; pp 1 – 47 . 11 . Jacobs . The Economies of Cities ; Random House : New York , 1969 . 12 . Maynard Smith , J . The Theory of Evolution ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 1993 . 13 . Kauffman , S . Investigations . Oxford University Press : Oxford , 2000 . 14 . Tenner , E . Our Own Devices : How Technology Remakes Humanity ; Vintage : New York , 2004 . 15 . Cohen , J . ; Stewart , I . The Collapse of Chaos : Discovering Simplicity in a Complex World ; Viking : London , 1994 . 16 . Watson , R . A . Compositional Evolution ; MIT Press : Cambridge , MA , 2006 . 17 . Kirschner , M . W . ; Gerhard , J . C . The Plausibility of Life : Resolving Darwin’s Dilemma ; Yale University Press : New Haven , CT , 2005 . 18 . Carroll , S . B . Endless Forms Most Beautiful : The New Science of Evo Devo ; Norton & Company : New York , 2006 . 19 . Wallace , A . Biased Embrios and Evolution ; Cambridge University Press : Cambridge , 2004 . 20 . Schumpeter , J . A . The Theory of Economic Development ; Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA , 1934 . 21 . Erwin , D . H . Extinction : How Life on Earth Nearly Ended 250 Million Years Ago ; Princeton University Press : Princeton , 2006 . 22 . Gould , J . S . Not Necessarily a Wing . Nat Hist 1985 , 94 , 12 – 25 . 23 . West , G . B . ; Brown , J . H . ; Enquist , B . J . A general model for the origin of allometric scaling laws in biology . Science 1997 , 276 , 122 – 126 . 24 . Conway Morris , S . The Crucible of Creation : The Burgess Shale and the Rise of Animals ; Oxford University Press : Oxford , 1999 . 25 . Odling - Smee , F . J . ; Laland , K . N . ; Feldman , M . W . Niche Construction : The Neglected Process in Evolution ; Princeton University Press : Princeton , N . J . , 2003 . 26 . Turner , J . S . The Extended Organism : The Physiology of Animal - Built Structures ; Harvard University Press : Cambridge , 2002 . 27 . Jones , C . G . ; Lawton , J . H . ; Shachak , M . Organisms as ecosystem engineers . Oikos 1994 , 69 , 373 – 386 . 28 . Levinthal , D . The slow pace of rapid technological change : Gradualism and punctuation in technological change . Ind Corp Change 1998 , 7 , 217 – 247 . 29 . Allen , P . Evolution , innovation and economics . In : Technical Change and Economic Theory ; Dosi , G . ; Freeman , C . ; Nelson , R . ; Silverberg , G . ; Soete , L . L . , Eds . ; Pinter : London , 1988 . 30 . Stirling , A . Multicriteria diversity analysis : A novel heuristic framework for appraising energy portfolios . Energy Policy 2010 , 38 , 1622 – 1634 . 31 . Mokyr , J . The Lever of Riches . Technological Creativity and Economic Progress ; Oxford University Press : New York , 1990 . 32 . Diamond , J . Guns , Germs and Steel . The Fates of Human Societies ; W . W . Norton and Company : New York , 1997 . 33 . Kauffman , S . The Origin of Order . Oxford University Press : Oxford , 1993 . 34 . Braudel , F . The Perspectives of the World ; Fontana Press : London , 1985 . C O M P L E X I T Y 13 Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx 35 . Mokyr , J . The British Industrial Revolution : An Economic Perspective ; Westview Press : Boulder : CO , 1999 . 36 . Stewart , I . ; Elmhirst , T . ; Cohen , J . Symmetry breaking as an origin of species . In : Trends in Mathematics : Bifurcation Symmetry and Patterns ; Buescu , J . ; Castro , S . ; Dias , A . P . S . , Eds . ; Birkhauser Verlag : Basel , 2002 ; pp 3 – 54 . 37 . Jain , R . ; Rivera , M . C . ; Lake , J . A . Horizontal gene transfer among genomes : The complexity hypothesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999 , 96 , 3801 – 3806 . 38 . Arthur , W . B . The Nature of Technology ; Free Press : New York , 2009 . 39 . Turner , J . S . The Tinkerer’s Apprentice : How Design Emerges from Life Itself ; Harvard University Press : Cambridge , MA , 2007 . 40 . Pievani , T . Born to cooperate : Altruism as exaptation and the evolution of human sociality . In : Origin of Altruism and Coopera - tion ; Sussman , R . W . ; Cloninger , C . R . , Eds . ; Springer : New York , 2011 ; pp 41 – 62 . 14 C O M P L E X I T Y Q 2013 Wiley Periodicals , Inc . DOI 10 . 1002 / cplx