Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 www . elsevier . com / locate / ymeth 1046 - 2023 / $ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2006 . 12 . 002 Creative cognition as a window on creativity Thomas B . Ward Department of Psychology , University of Alabama , Box 870348 , Tuscaloosa , AL , USA Accepted 2 December 2006 Abstract The creative cognition approach views creativity as the generation of novel and appropriate products through the application of basic cognitive processes to existing knowledge structures . It relies on converging evidence from anecdotal accounts of creativity and tightly con - trolled laboratory studies designed to examine the processes that are assumed to operate in those anecdotes . Speci W c examples of creative cog - nition studies are described in detail with a particular focus on research concerned with accessing conceptual information at varying levels of abstraction and combining previously separate concepts . Important aspects of the design of these studies are delineated , including the main creative tasks , properties of the materials used , characteristics of responses observed , including their originality and practicality , participant and rater attributes , and the relations among these and other study aspects . Other issues addressed are generality across materials , popula - tions , and situations , as well as causal versus correlational connections among processes , structures and creative outcomes . © 2006 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . Keywords : Creativity ; Cognition ; Creative generation ; Concept combination 1 . Introduction Creativity is a complex and multifaceted phenomenon . As such , it is appropriate to adopt a variety of methods to investigate it from a multitude of perspectives . The focus of the present paper is the methods associated with the crea - tive cognition approach [ 1 , 2 ] . The approach adopts what has come to be a consensus view that creative products are characterized by two key properties ; they are original or novel , and they are useful , practical or in some way appro - priate to the task at hand . In the creative cognition approach , ideas and tangible products that are novel and useful are assumed to emerge from the application of ordi - nary , fundamental cognitive processes to existing knowl - edge structures . This paper describes examples of creative cognition par - adigms that are designed to gain information about con - ceptual processes and structures , and it delineates some of the critical design properties of such studies as well as their pitfalls and prospects . The goal is to provide guidance on developing studies concerned with the role of basic cogni - tive operations in creative performance . The intent is to dis - cuss methods as opposed to more purely theoretical issues . The methods described in this paper are cognitive rather than cognitive neuropsychological , although they are cer - tainly amenable to enhancement via neuropsychological measurement , especially to the extent that any hypothesized cognitive constructs have theoretical correlates in brain structures , pathways , and systems see e . g . , [ 3 ] . The perspective adopted here is that studies should be designed to be sound in a cognitive sense so that they then have the best potential to yield useful insights whether the main focus is strictly cog - nitive or more speci W cally cognitive neuroscienti W c . 2 . A focus on underlying cognitive processes The creative cognition approach is deeply rooted in its parent disciplines of cognitive psychology and cognitive sci - ence . It assumes that the cognitive capacity to behave crea - tively is a normative characteristic of humans , and it seeks to advance our understanding of creativity through precise characterization and rigorous scienti W c study of the cognitive processes that lead to creative and noncreative E - mail address : tward @ bama . ua . edu T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 29 outcomes . A side bene W t of the approach is advancing our understanding of basic cognitive processes by assessing their application in creative endeavors . 2 . 1 . Beyond divergent thinking Creative cognition seeks to move beyond traditional psy - chometric approaches to understanding creative thought , such as relying heavily on X uency and X exibility scores from divergent thinking tests as indicators of creative functioning . Many criticisms have been leveled at psychometric proce - dures , as detailed in other contributions to this special issue . However , from the perspective of creative cognition , the problem with an emphasis on divergent thinking is not so much that it is confused with creativity , for even researchers who use divergent thinking tests are careful to distinguish between creativity and performance on those tests e . g . [ 4 ] , and others note that such performance is at best , a measure of creative potential not creativity itself [ 5 ] . Nor is the central problem that performance on divergent thinking tasks is unrelated to real world creativity , for there are some studies that do identify such links [ 4 , 6 ] , albeit relatively modest links that do not account for large amounts of variance . The major shortcoming of divergent thinking tests from a cognitive perspective is that divergent thinking is too broad a construct to provide a precise characterization of the processes that underlie creative accomplishment . When a person achieves a certain X uency score on a divergent thinking task by listing items in response to a prompt ( e . g . , alternate uses for a shoe ) , for example , the listed items may have been derived from the application of a wide range of processes , including episodic retrieval ( e . g . , recalling having used a shoe to kill a bug ) , mental imagery ( e . g . , scanning a mental image of a shoe , noting that it has laces , and realiz - ing that they could serve a speci W c purpose ) , analysis of fea - tures ( e . g . , noting that shoes have the property of being heavy and therefore could be used as doorstops ) , abstrac - tion ( e . g . , interpreting a shoe as a container , with the conse - quence that it could be used to store things ) , among many other possibilities . The point is not that any one participant uses all of these speci W c processes , but rather that it is the underlying processes that are doing the work and therefore are of most interest ; the divergent thinking score is simply the end result . There is nothing wrong with using the score as an indicator , but a more precise characterization of crea - tivity will require a detailed consideration of the processes that were used in generating the items that led to that score . By extension it is essential to come to understand the basic underlying processes that lead to all forms of creativity . 3 . A convergence strategy As a general guide to developing studies of creative pro - cesses , the creative cognition approach makes use of a conver - gence strategy [ 7 , 8 ] . Using that strategy , anecdotes or historical accounts of creative achievements or creative failures are examined to provide hints about potentially relevant processes and conceptual structures . Those processes and structures are then de W ned operationally in terms of experimental procedures and outcomes in a way that allows controlled experiments to be conducted to investigate them . Combining anecdotes and laboratory studies helps to overcome the shortcomings of either approach alone . Anec - dotes about real world instances of creativity are important because they point to processes that may have some ecolog - ical validity . On the other hand , being accounts of events that may have happened a long time ago , it is di Y cult to verify the extent to which particular processes were actually used and the extent to which they were causally associated with the real world accomplishments or failures . Laboratory studies can be more e V ective in establishing causal connections between processes and outcomes , but they may create entirely arti W cial situations and assess pro - cesses with little or no relevance to real world creative endeavors . But , by basing laboratory investigations on pro - cesses and structures that are derived from anecdotal accounts , laboratory studies have a better chance of assess - ing relevant processes in reasonably valid ways . Thus , using a convergence approach it is possible to bal - ance the strengths and weaknesses of anecdotal and labora - tory procedures against one another . The result can be a more compelling account of the cognitive underpinnings of creative accomplishment . 4 . Examples of speci W c methods Two types of processes will be used in this paper to illus - trate the creative cognition approach : accessing existing conceptual knowledge at various levels of abstraction [ 9 – 11 ] , and combining previously separate concepts [ 12 – 14 ] . However , it should be noted that a wide range of other pro - cesses have been investigated in creative cognition studies [ 1 , 2 ] . The presentation will include both anecdotal and experimental evidence . In describing creative cognition methods relevant to these processes , examples of anecdotal information will be pre - sented W rst followed by a description of the main issues that were examined in the related laboratory studies . Key aspects of the methods to be considered are the main creative task that the participants are asked to perform , associated proce - dures needed to assess and manipulate the stimulus materials , the populations from which participants are sampled , out - come variables that are used to indicate more versus less cre - ativity or creative potential in the responses ( e . g . , ratings of originality and emergent properties ) , potentially relevant aspects of coders and procedures to increase trust in their rat - ings , generality across populations and materials , and other relevant design considerations . 4 . 1 . Accessing stored knowledge at various levels of abstraction Creative activities clearly rely on accessing stored knowl - edge , but some ways of accessing knowledge may be more 30 T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 conducive than others to the development of original ideas that diverge from those that have come before . In particu - lar , I will describe work that examines the impact of access - ing information at di V erent levels of abstraction on the development of original and practical ideas . 4 . 2 . Preliminary anecdotal evidence of retrieval at speci W c concept levels Anecdotal evidence suggests that , at least for ordinary ( as opposed to revolutionary ) creative accomplishments people often access highly speci W c examples of solutions to earlier problems and pattern new solutions directly after them , a tendency that can facilitate a rapid solution but also impose constraints when unnecessary properties of known concepts are projected onto new solutions . Histori - cal examples of this phenomenon abound , but a particu - larly interesting one is that , in the 1830s , when passenger rail travel was just getting started in the US , designers seem to have patterned the W rst railway passenger cars directly on horse - drawn stagecoaches , including the fact that con - ductors had to sit on the outside of the car [ 15 ] . This approach was e Y cient in the sense that railway passenger cars became available quickly , but because the conductors were seated on the outside , several of them fell o V and were killed . Another example is that , according to Barker [ 16 ] , Sony initially abandoned the development of music CDs because they started with LP record albums of the day as their model , and projected the property of a 12 - inch diame - ter onto the envisioned new device . The device would have held a large and economically unviable quantity of music . Clearly Sony caught up and overtook many competitors , but the initial reliance on a highly speci W c known instance of a musical storage device slowed their early progress . In the cases mentioned in the previous paragraph , accessing and relying on speci W c exemplars of earlier knowledge got in the way of innovation . However , there is ample evidence from historical accounts that many non - problematic advances in a wide range of domains also were based on a slow incremental process of patterning new ideas after very speci W c earlier ones , such as Eli Whitney’s patterning his Cotton Gin after the charka and Thomas Edison’s reliance on several previous designs to develop his light bulb see , e . g . , [ 17 , 8 ] . That approach to the creative gen - eration of new products may favor practicality over extreme , but impractical originality . 4 . 3 . Converging laboratory - based methods : creative generation paradigms To approximate real world creative endeavors of the type described in the previous section , researchers have devised several laboratory techniques in which participants are required to develop more complete creative products than in typical divergent thinking tasks . Such open - ended products have included collages [ 18 ] , stories and drawings based on speci W c prompts [ 19 ] , designs for novel toys [ 20 ] , sketches and descriptions of possible extraterrestrials or other imagined entities [ 11 ] , inventions for various domains [ 1 ] , and logos for new products [ 21 ] , among many others . The productions are generally rated for their creativity , originality , and practicality as well as for the presence of other speci W c types of properties . However , the ratings themselves are not the main issue . Rather , they are used pri - marily as markers to provide evidence about the combina - tions of external and internal factors that in X uence creative performance , as well as the cognitive processes and struc - tures that are most commonly used and that are associated with more or less creative outcomes . The particular example of a creative generation study to be discussed in detail was designed to test a path - of - least - resistance model [ 22 ] . According to the model , and as hinted at in the anecdotes described above , people will tend to approach creative generation tasks by retrieving one or more speci W c known instances of the relevant conceptual domain and projecting the properties of those instances onto their novel creation . Because the new products are constrained by speci W c properties of the retrieved exem - plars , they are expected to be lower in originality than products developed by people who use alternative modes of processing . The retrieval and selection of an instance is assumed to be guided by the accessibility of instances within their categories , such that the higher the accessibility of a category exemplar , the more likely it is that the item will be used as a starting point in developing a new idea . For example , a person attempting to imagine a novel extra - terrestrial would be likely to pattern the creature after a highly accessible Earth animal ( e . g . , a dog ) rather than a less accessible one and rather than accessing more abstract information , such as “things that live on Earth , ” just as railway passenger car designers may have relied on the accessible “stagecoach” rather than a more abstract repre - sentation , such as “land vehicles . ” Ward et al . [ 22 ] tested the assumptions of the path - of - least - resistance model across three conceptual domains : animals , tools , and fruit using data from creative genera - tion , listing , and rating tasks . An important design feature to note is that the domains are relatively familiar to most people , so the studies could be conducted with a sample consisting of non - expert participants , in this case college students enrolled in psychology classes . Studies on creative generation for more specialized domains would necessarily dictate testing participants with at least some domain expertise . Another notable feature of the design is the use of three conceptual domains ( rather than just one ) to extend the generality of the results . 4 . 3 . 1 . Main creative generation task In the creative generation tasks , for each category , sepa - rate groups of participants conceived , drew and described novel instances that would be appropriate to an imaginary setting ( i . e . , animals or fruit that might exist on other plan - ets , or tools an intelligent extraterrestrial species might use ) . They were given as much time as they desired . T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 31 4 . 3 . 2 . Originality of outcomes and rating considerations A dependent variable of central importance is the origi - nality of the generated products . Because originality seems like a vague and highly subjective construct , it is essential to have more than one rater judge the responses and for them to achieve highly correlated ratings , and this was accom - plished using two coders in the Ward et al . study . One question that arises in choosing raters for creative generation studies is the extent to which their domain exper - tise matters . Although Amabile [ 18 ] began her work on the Consensual Assessment Technique with the assumption that judges should be domain experts , her results revealed that nonartists were as reliable as artists in judging the creativity of the collages she had her participants produce . Evidently , most people , even those without art training , have enough familiarity with the domain to make sensible judgments of the creativity collages . Similarly , most people have enough familiarity with animals , fruit and tools to recognize the extent to which a participant’s creation deviates from typical instances of those domains so that they can render a reason - able judgment . On the other hand , as with the selection of participants for the study , if the domain under investigation is highly specialized , recruiting raters with specialized experi - ence in the domain will be essential . Another rating issue arises in studies in which compari - sons are made across distinctly di V erent groups for whom di V erent assumptions may hold about what constitutes cre - ativity . Niu and Sternberg [ 23 ] for example compared Chi - nese and American college students on a creature generation task and an art task . They used two Chinese and two American raters , and found that all the raters judged the originality of products by the Chinese students to be lower . Obviously , if they had used only American raters , the lower assessments of the Chinese students’ products would have been suspect . In general then , in implementing creative generation studies , the appropriateness of the raters in rela - tion to the participant population is of vital concern . An additional factor that can lead to more trust in origi - nality ratings , even ones that yield high interjudge reliability is to have more quantitative assessments of the participants’ products . Ward , Patterson , and Sifonis [ 24 ] , for example , cal - culated quantitatively - based di V erence scores for partici - pants’ imagined extraterrestrials . Points were assigned for each of seven major di V erences from typical Earth animals , such as no appendages , no sense organs , and violation of the property of bilateral symmetry . Although not reported in that study , correlations between the di V erence scores and rat - ers’ judgments of originality were large and positive , suggest - ing that the coders’ ratings were indeed based on novelty in the sense of deviation from what is already known . In design - ing creative generation studies , thought should be given to whether or not objective deviation measures can be devel - oped and what form they might take . 4 . 3 . 3 . Assessing participants’ approaches In creative generation tasks , it is often of interest to gather evidence regarding participants’ processing approaches , such as their retrieving of speci W c or more general types of conceptual information . In Ward et al . [ 22 ] , subsequent to performing the creative generation task , participants wrote open - ended statements about the factors that in X uenced the development of their products . Because the study was focused on the issue of accessing and using highly accessible category exemplars , of particular interest in those statements were any reports of having used speci W c exemplars of known animals , fruit or tools as sources of information . Imagination Frequency was determined for each speci W c real world exem - plar mentioned , and was de W ned as the number of individuals who mentioned relying on that particular exemplar in gener - ating their novel idea . Imagination Frequency provides a gauge of the extent to which particular category exemplars are used in generating novel ideas for the domain . One design consideration for obtaining information about participants’ approaches in creative generation studies is whether to use retrospective reports as in Ward et al . [ 22 ] or online measures , such as collecting verbal protocols during the generation task itself . The former rely on memory , which may or may not be accurate , whereas that latter could conceivably disrupt the person’s concentration on the creative task at hand . In using retro - spective accounts , it is therefore helpful to have some independent measures to con W rm those reports . For example , Ward [ 11 ] was able to correlate retrospective reports with the properties of drawings and show , among other things , that participants who mentioned relying on birds and W sh were signi W cantly more likely to produce creatures that had birdlike and W shlike properties , respec - tively , thus boosting con W dence in the validity of such reports . As noted in the introduction , the focus in this paper is cognitive rather than neuroscienti W c , but if there are neural correlates of the processes under investigation ( e . g . , di V erent patterns of activity for retrieving speci W c category instances versus more general category informa - tion ) , neuropsychological techniques could be integrated with such cognitive studies to provide con W rming infor - mation about the mode of processing adopted . Still another technique for assessing participants’ approaches is to collect data on intermediate products . In their study on product logos , for example , Jaarsveld and van Leeuwen [ 21 ] had participants produce a series of sketches , which allowed them to assess aspects of genera - tion such as introducing , abandoning , and reintroducing elements into the design . 4 . 3 . 4 . Key property One property of interest was the relative accessibility of the exemplars that participants reported relying on in developing their novel products . Accessibility was mea - sured using a separate listing task , in which 30 participants who had not participated in the main study were given response forms containing a category label at the top and 20 blank lines beneath the label . They were instructed to write the W rst 20 real instances they could think of for each category . Measures of accessibility were determined from 32 T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 those lists , which were referred to as Output Dominance , de W ned as the number of participants who listed a given category member , and Output Precedence , which combined the frequency of listing with how early the items appeared on participants’ lists . The listing task was not timed , but using a variation on the procedure ( not reported in the paper ) in which participants had 90s to list as many cate - gory instances as they could think of led to comparable estimates of accessibility . Norms for various key properties such as Output Domi - nance may exist in the literature , but because they can vary over populations and time of testing , it is generally prefera - ble to collect norms from the same population and in the same time - frame as data from the creative generation tasks . Although more time - consuming , the approach increases the likelihood of observing the hypothesized relationships . 4 . 3 . 5 . Connection between variables of interest and performance Two related questions of interest are ( 1 ) whether , as hinted at by the anecdotal cases , a common processing ten - dency is to access and use speci W c known category exem - plars , and ( 2 ) whether participants who do report a reliance on speci W c exemplars generate products that are less origi - nal , thereby indicating that their creativity is constrained by accessing those instances . The percentages of students who reported that they relied on their knowledge about one or more speci W c Earth animals , tools or fruit in developing their imaginary entities were 63 , 68 , and 66 , respectively , indicating that accessing such exemplars is a common ten - dency used by roughly two thirds of the participants . Importantly , in each case , they produced creations that were rated as less original than those developed by partici - pants who reported alternative approaches . A more speci W c issue of interest in Ward et al . [ 22 ] was the extent to which Output Dominance , as assessed in the listing task , predicted Imagination Frequency in the crea - tive generation task . Are the most accessible exemplars the ones most likely to be used in a creative task ? The answer is yes . The correlation between the Output Dominance of domain exemplars and Imagination Frequency of those exemplars were positive and signi W cant for all domains , r ( 150 ) D . 486 , p < . 01 for animals , r ( 201 ) D . 615 , p < . 01 for tools , and r ( 79 ) D . 622 , p < . 01 for fruit . Instances that come to mind readily in response to a category label are the ones that are most likely to be used . From an experimental design perspective , to determine correlations among the properties of the concepts people access ( e . g . , Output Dominance and Imagination Fre - quency ) it is important to have a relatively large sample size . If the interest were simply in the overall tendency to rely on basic level instances or to determine relative levels of originality of people’s creations , smaller Ns might be appropriate , but to examine links between key properties of concept instances and Imagination Frequency , larger Ns are necessary . This is because the likelihood of any one par - ticipant relying on any one speci W c exemplar ( especially those lower in accessibility ) out of the multitude of possible exemplars is small , making it necessary to have a large sam - ple to obtain a range of values on the measure . 4 . 3 . 6 . Generality For the creative cognition approach ( or any other approach ) to provide important advances in understanding creative functioning , it is essential to document W ndings that generalize across materials and situations . The creative generation results reported by Ward et al . [ 22 ] were general in the sense that they applied to three distinct conceptual domains . They were also stable across instructional varia - tions . For example , some of the participants were asked to imagine tools for a species that had no appendages , but those instructions reduced neither the percentage of partici - pants who relied on Earth tools nor the correlation between Output Dominance and Imagination Frequency . In addition , although investigators have not always assessed their participants’ approaches to creative idea gen - eration , the tendency of novel ideas to be structured in pre - dictable ways by existing conceptual frameworks has been observed in a range of populations , including young chil - dren [ 25 , 26 ] , gifted adolescents [ 27 ] , science W ction authors [ 11 ] , design engineers [ 28 ] , and other creative individuals [ 8 , 29 ] . Thus , it is reasonable to assume that the tendency to retrieve and rely upon basic level domain instances is a common one , occurring across populations and domains of knowledge . More generally , it is clear that creative genera - tion paradigms are broadly applicable to investigating crea - tive functioning across a wide spectrum of populations . Creative generation paradigms have also been devised to reveal the impact of recently experienced category exem - plars . In these paradigms , exposure to particular exemplars results in the copying of properties of those exemplars even when participants are instructed to avoid doing so , as in the case of design engineers developing ideas for practical inventions [ 30 ] and college students imagining new toys and extraterrestrial animals [ 20 , 31 ] . 4 . 3 . 7 . Additional properties An important concern in creative cognition research is being able to link particular aspects of people’s stored con - cepts to creative generation outcomes . However , a compli - cating factor for any such study is that aspects of conceptual structure that are of interest may be correlated with others that are assumed to be less in X uential . Again using Ward et al . [ 22 ] as an example , although accessibility was hypothesized to be an in X uential property it may well be correlated with other properties , such as typicality or familiarity see e . g . , [ 32 ] , which could be the real determi - nants of performance . For example , when engaged in a cre - ative generation task , people may prefer to rely on items that they are most familiar with , and those items may only coincidentally be ones that come to mind most readily . To examine that possibility , Ward et al . [ 22 ] had separate groups of 16 – 20 participants each rate exemplars on their typicality , familiarity , frequency of occurrence , and other T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 33 properties . In collecting such ratings of stimuli or responses , it is important to have separate groups provide ratings to avoid having a person’s rating of one factor ( e . g . , familiarity ) contaminate his or her rating of another ( e . g . , typicality ) . The ratings of the additional concept properties were used in multiple regression procedures , which revealed that Output Dominance continued to predict Imagination Fre - quency even when variance due to the other properties was accounted for . Finally , when variance due to Output Domi - nance was accounted for , rated typicality was signi W cantly negatively correlated with Imagination Frequency , suggest - ing that those di V erent aspects of representativeness may have functionally distinct roles in conceptual expansion . Output Dominance may determine the set of instances most likely to be retrieved and considered , and typicality may determine the items selected from that set , with people trying to boost originality by favoring the less typical among those highly dominant items . Thus , by considering alternative properties of stimuli and responses and using multiple regression procedures , creative cognition studies can yield new insights about the underpinnings of creative behavior . More generally , it is essential in any examination of the in X uential properties of the stimuli under investiga - tion to consider whether there are confounding properties that might actually be the crucial ones . A data analytic issue to consider in determining , which properties of a stimulus or responses are most in X uential is whether or not the measures of the various properties are on the same scale or are otherwise comparable . In the spe - ci W c case of Ward et al . [ 22 ] for example , Output Domi - nance scores could range from 0 to the number of participants in the listing task ( i . e . , 30 ) and be heavily skewed , whereas familiarity , typicality , and other ratings ranged from 1 to 7 ( because they were assessed via 7 - point rating scales ) and may be more evenly distributed . The wider range on one variable could give it an advantage in correlational analyses over those with smaller ranges . Con - sequently adjustments , such as log , square root , or other transformations may be needed to correct the problem and remove the advantage . In Ward et al . ( 2002 ) , log transfor - mations of the accessibility measures did not alter the out - come , but in general , that type of cautious data analysis plan may be needed to have con W dence that favorable results are not simply an artifact of scale problems . 4 . 3 . 8 . Practicality of products The studies discussed so far have assessed originality , but not another key ingredient of creativity , namely practi - cality . A study by Ward [ 33 ] provides a cautionary note about the apparent value to originality of relying on abstract concept information as opposed to accessing spe - ci W c exemplars . It may come at a cost to practicality . When college students were asked to devise new sports , although those who reported reliance on speci W c exemplars produced creations that were rated as less original ( as in Ward et al . 2002 ) , their creations were also rated higher on the extent to which people would actually want to play them . Thus , as implied in discussing the anecdotes for this section , at least some laboratory W ndings converge on the idea that reliance on known , highly accessible exemplars may limit the origi - nality component of creativity , but enhance the practicality component . The W ndings highlight the importance of obtaining ratings of multiple properties of products in crea - tive generation studies . 4 . 3 . 9 . Causality A crucial assumption in the creative cognition approach is that processes and the properties of conceptual structures are causally related to outcomes , which means that experimental manipulations of those processes and concept properties are needed . For example , accessing conceptual information at more versus less speci W c levels is assumed to be causally linked to di V ering levels of originality in participants’ prod - ucts . Ward et al . [ 24 ] provided evidence in favor of that assumption in a creative generation task in which partici - pants in an exemplar condition were instructed to bring spe - ci W c exemplars of animals to mind , others in an abstraction condition were told to consider general properties needed by animals to survive , and others ( in a control condition ) were given no special instructions . Rated originality was lowest in the speci W c exemplar condition , highest in the abstraction condition , and at an intermediate level in the control condi - tion , thus providing evidence for a causal link between the approaches and the originality of the outcomes . Similarly , to experimentally verify that accessibility of exemplars was causally linked to their use in creative genera - tion tasks , Ward and Wickes [ 34 ] made use of the fact that the accessibility of category exemplars can be primed via pre - liminary orienting tasks , such as rating the pleasantness of category exemplars , which has been shown to increase their Output Dominance in subsequent exemplar listing tasks rela - tive to exemplars that have not been rated in the preliminary task see e . g . , [ 35 ] . Participants in Ward and Wickes [ 34 ] per - formed a pleasantness rating task with a subset of fruit and tool exemplars prior to creative generation . Exemplars that were rated in that task ( as compared to exemplars that were not rated ) had higher Output Dominance in a subsequent listing task ( replicating the Graf et al . W nding that the accessi - bility of the rated items had been primed ) . Most importantly , the rated items that were now more accessible also were higher in Imagination Frequency in a subsequent creative generation task in which participants imagined , drew and described novel types of fruit and tools , providing evidence for a causal role for accessibility . Thus in addition to assessing processes and structures , an important item in the creative cognition toolbox is the experimental manipulation of those factors . Being able to support causal claims depends on such manipulations . 4 . 4 . Combining previously separate concepts A second process that has been of great interest in the creative cognition approach is conceptual combination , the 34 T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 mental merging of two individual concepts that had previ - ously been separate in the thinker’s mind . As with access to knowledge at di V erent levels of abstraction anecdotal accounts and laboratory studies converge on important aspects of combining concepts . 4 . 5 . Preliminary anecdotal evidence on the power of particular types of combinations In anecdotal accounts , one of the most commonly noted processes underlying creative accomplishments is the com - bining of previously separate elements ( e . g . , words , con - cepts , visual forms , and so on ) such that new properties , discoveries , or insights emerge from the combination that would not have been expected from a consideration of the separate elements . Whether in science , technology , art , music , literature , or other creative realms , combinations are touted as stimulants to creativity . To illustrate with just one example from literature , Stephen Donaldson , a noted fan - tasy writer attributed the inspiration for his series on Thomas Covenant , The Unbeliever to the combined con - cepts of unbelief and leprosy . Unbelief is an unwillingness to accept the possibility of alternatives to our observed physi - cal reality . Donaldson had wanted to write a story about unbelief but was stymied until he combined that concept with the disease of leprosy , at which point his “brain took W re” [ 36 ] . The reason it was so powerful a combination for Donaldson is that his knowledge of leprosy told him that a person with leprosy would be extremely vigilant to detect unsensed , but potentially life threatening injuries and would be loathe to accept the reality of a fantasy world , even one in which he had a hero’s status and apparent relief from the disease . The dynamic tension between Covenant’s need for continued self vigilance and the attraction of the fantasy world sets the stage for a powerful series of books . Donaldson went on to note that combinations of exotic and familiar concepts were particularly potent for him , echoing the view from other historical and anecdotal obser - vations that discrepant and even opposing combinations hold the most potential for creativity see e . g . , [ 37 ] . A ques - tion for creative cognition is whether or not the power of combinations , particularly those composed of dissimilar or opposing pairs , to produce emergent ideas can be demon - strated in a laboratory study with non - expert participants . 4 . 6 . Converging laboratory - based methods : conceptual combination paradigms A wide range of laboratory studies have asked partici - pants to de W ne , interpret , list properties of or otherwise process novel or familiar combinations or conjunctions of concepts . Although many of the studies have been con - cerned primarily with language processing , a persistent phe - nomenon relevant to understanding creativity is that emergent properties appear in the combinations that were either non - evident or completely absent from either of the constituents of the combination . So for example , Harvard educated carpenters are sometimes deemed to be non - mate - rialistic , whereas neither Harvard educated people nor car - penters alone are so characterized [ 38 ] . Likewise , culturally anomalous combinations , such as Republican social worker [ 39 ] , and truly exotic conjunctions , such as furniture which is also fruit [ 13 ] lead to emergent properties not char - acteristic of the separate elements of the combination . One interpretation of the W ndings is that participants have to generate explanations or otherwise reconcile the discrepan - cies of the component concepts , which leads them to postu - late novel properties . Although these studies did not require participants to develop stories , much like Donaldson’s “unbelieving leper , ” the more discrepant combinations seem to suggest more creative possibilities than more ster - eotypic combinations ( e . g . , Harvard educated lawyer ) . An example of a conceptual combination study that more directly tested the role of constituent similarity in pro - ducing emergence that will be describe in more detail here is Wilkenfeld and Ward [ 40 ] . In that study , participants inter - preted combinations that varied in similarity and the num - ber of emergent features was assessed . 4 . 6 . 1 . Main combination task The college student participants were given 16 pairs of words and asked to write two separate de W nitions of each . Eight of the pairs were composed of similar concepts ( e . g . , guitar harp ) and eight were composed of dissimilar con - cepts ( e . g . , airplane puddle ) . Because de W nitions alone would not be expected reveal a large number of attributes that people deemed to be true of the combined concepts , participants were also asked to list features that something would need to be considered a good instance of the de W ned concept . The set of features could then be used to determine whether there are novel properties that emerge from com - bining the concepts and whether they are more pervasive in dissimilar combinations . Although experimenters could probably construct simi - lar and dissimilar pairs for this type of study based on their own intuitions , a better approach , and that used by Wilken - feld and Ward is to verify intuitions through similarity judgment tasks . Thus , the 16 pairs that were actually used in the main task were selected from a set of 90 pairs ( 45 assumed by the experimenter to be similar and 45 assumed to be dissimilar ) based on similarity ratings provided by a di V erent group of participants . The 16 pairs actually selected were the 8 most similar and least 8 similar pairs based on those ratings . 4 . 6 . 2 . Emergence properties of the combinations Rather than ratings of originality as in creative genera - tion tasks , the measure of the creative outcome in this type of study is the number of emergent properties . Operation - ally , emergent properties are those that are evident in the de W nitions and feature lists for the combinations but not in feature lists for the separate concepts . To provide the needed features for assessing emergence , a separate group of participants listed the characteristic features of each of T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 35 the separate concepts that comprised the 16 similar and dis - similar combinations . The participants were asked to list at least six features that describe each word . They were further instructed to avoid purely personal or idiosyncratic free associations to the words . Without such an admonition , feature listing tasks can lead to large numbers of associa - tions unique to each individual ( e . g . , for guitar : “I once dated somebody who played guitar in a band” ) rather than the more characteristic features that are generally true of the objects themselves ( e . g . , for guitar : “six strings” ) . How - ever , even those features mentioned by only one person were noted in order to produce a list of features of the com - ponent concepts that was as comprehensive as possible . The resulting database contained more than 11 , 000 features . Features were considered to be emergent if they were in the list for a combination but not for either of its con - stituent concepts alone . An alternative approach that could be used in studies of emergence is to present partic - ipants with lists of features to be judged in relation to sin - gle and combined concepts and to consider features to be emergent if participants judge them to be true of the com - bination but not of the constituent concepts alone [ 13 ] . The listing and rating procedures have been found to yield comparable results [ 38 , 39 ] , so either could be used , but the former may be more appropriate for truly novel combinations that are likely to evoke a range of idiosyn - cratic interpretations , whereas the latter may be more appropriate in a study involving familiar combinations for which most people will share the same interpretation . If one person interprets the novel combination of “air - plane puddle , ” for example , as “an oil slick under an aging plane” and another interprets it as “a pond for landing a seaplane” they would not be expected to agree on judgments about possible features of the combination such as “dirty” or “slippery . ” Thus , rather than obtaining group ratings of the validity of features , considering all features listed by each participant to be valid features of the combination would be appropriate . In contrast , for familiar combinations such as “pet bird , ” for which there is likely to be a consensus de W nition ( e . g . , a real bird that is also a real pet in the ordinary sense ) , using consensus ratings of whether properties ( e . g . , “lives in a hanging cage” ) are true of the combination would be a viable option . If most people then judge “living in hanging cage” to be true of “pet birds” but not “pets” or “birds” in isolation , that property could be deemed to be emer - gent for the combination . Consistent with the anecdotes mentioned at the begin - ning of this section , Wilkenfeld and Ward [ 40 ] found that dissimilar combinations resulted in more emergent proper - ties than similar combinations . They also found that second interpretations resulted in more emergent properties , espe - cially for similar pairs , indicating that people may use up their easiest interpretation W rst and then engage in more creative exploration to produce a second interpretation . Thus , the laboratory results con W rm and extend the anec - dotal accounts . 4 . 6 . 3 . Additional properties As in the creative generation studies , in focusing on one property of interest , it is essential to consider whether it is confounded with other properties that may be of less inter - est , but are nevertheless in X uential . As an example of con - trolling extraneous factors , all of the concepts in Wilkenfeld and Ward were non - living . In fact , one dissimilar pair , “snowmobile bass” was not included in the W nal set because participants interpreted “bass” as the W sh rather than the musical instrument as intended . If living things had also been included in the materials , it could have been that the dissimilar pairs ended up being composed of one living and one non - living thing whereas the similar pairs might be from the same ontological categories . Di V erence in emer - gence might then be based on ontological category mem - bership in particular rather than global similarity in general . Thus , care must be used in creating pairs that are assumed to vary in similarity or other properties for this type of conceptual combination study . 4 . 6 . 4 . Generality and variations Although the relative similarity of component concepts is important to emergence , anecdotal suggestions indicate that opposition , or Janusian thinking may also be impor - tant [ 37 ] . A study by Estes and Ward [ 41 ] brought opposi - tion into the laboratory by assessing emergence in opposing versus non - opposing concepts ( e . g . , friendly enemy and complex simplicity versus hostile enemy and clear simplic - ity ) . Consistent with anecdotally - based expectations , opposing concepts yielded more emergent properties . Combination processes also include more than just interpreting noun – noun or adjective – noun combinations , and laboratory studies have been devised to examine vari - ous combinatorial processes . For example , sometimes com - bination involves W guring out how to integrate sets of objects that ordinarily are not grouped together into a sin - gle coherent concept . Mobley , Doares , and Mumford [ 12 ] used a paradigm to approximate that type of combination process , in which participants were given four exemplars from each of three categories ( e . g . , furniture : chair , couch , table , and stool ) and had to develop concepts to explain the grouping of all of them together . When the component objects were more dissimilar , people generated more origi - nal outcomes , but the outcomes were also judged to be of lower quality . As with studies in the creative generation sec - tion of this paper , the W ndings point to the need for ratings of products along multiple dimensions , including the key creativity ingredients of originality and practicality . Creative combination processes that operate in real - world setting go beyond combining simple concepts and can include combining larger knowledge structures . Impor - tantly , Scott , Lonergan , and Mumford [ 42 ] have also shown that this type of paradigm can be extended to examine com - binations of more complex structures . In that study , college students were asked to combine information from descrip - tions of education programs to develop their own ideas for curricula . 36 T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 Sometimes combinations can be of visual forms as opposed to verbal concepts , as in Tesla’s envisioning of the integrated workings of separate components of devices . To investigate image - based combination , Finke [ 43 ] developed a procedure in which participants were given sets of three geometric forms and were asked to mentally integrate them into more complex ones that could be interpreted as inven - tions or new products for domains , such as furniture , vehi - cles , or tools ( see also [ 44 ] ) . When subjects chose the category or were assigned a category in advance of generat - ing the form , they produced fewer creative inventions ( rated as original and practical by judges ) than when the relevant category was speci W ed only after they developed the forms . There seem to be creative bene W ts of combining visual materials without a speci W c goal in mind and then later interpreting them in an exploratory phase of processing . 5 . A multitude of applications The studies selected for review were presented in detail to illustrate important issues to be considered in designing creative cognition studies . However , there are many other basic types of processes that underlie creativity that have been investigated in creative cognition studies , such as anal - ogy e . g . , [ 45 , 46 ] . The Gentner et al . [ 46 ] work is especially interesting in the sense that it used the convergence approach described here in reverse . They analyzed the his - torical account of Kepler’s reasoning about planetary motion , not to devise new experiments that would converge with and con W rm his account , but rather to show how Kep - ler’s account converged with and lent real - world , extreme - case validity to existing laboratory research and theorizing about analogy . Analogy is a global descriptor for more fun - damental processes such as alignment , retrieval , mapping , and projection of information from a source to a target domain e . g . , [ 47 ] , and Gentner et al . were able to show how speci W c aspects of Kepler’s reasoning W t in with that detailed model of stages in analogical reasoning . Dunbar’s approach [ 45 ] represents advances on several fronts , including the fact that he assessed cognitive process - ing in groups ( rather than just individuals ) through analy - ses of molecular biology laboratory groups . He identi W ed limitations of anecdotal accounts of far analogies in crea - tive discovery ( e . g . , solar system : atom ) , by showing that ongoing groups only rarely use such analogies for discov - ery . Noting when laboratory W ndings fail to con W rm expec - tations based on anecdotes is as crucial to understanding creativity as identifying when they do . Finally , Dunbar identi W ed a wide range of cognitive processes other than analogy , such as reasoning about unexpected W ndings that should receive attention in creative cognition work . Other researchers have shown how traditional cognitive psychology approaches can be adapted to analyze creativ - ity relevant processing topics such as the role of memory and forgetting in incubation and insight [ 10 , 48 , 49 ] , intuition [ 50 ] , the importance of problem W nding and problem de W ni - tion [ 51 – 53 ] , among many other processes . 6 . Summary and conclusions An important feature of the creative cognition approach is the speci W city with which it characterizes both the nature of basic cognitive processes and how they operate on knowledge structures to produce original and task - appro - priate ideas . Rather than relying solely on global cognitive descriptors , such as “divergent thinking , ” a creative cogni - tion approach seeks to specify the basic component process that lead to divergent productions , such as retrieval , combi - nation , analogy , and so on . Creative cognition studies generally begin with anec - dotal accounts that highlight seemingly relevant pro - cesses , structures and other considerations . In designing laboratory studies to converge with ( or possibly discon - W rm ) the anecdotes , it is necessary to consider a wide range of factors . These include the task to be performed , the nature of the stimuli to be used and the manner in which they are presented . They also include any addi - tional properties of the stimuli that are not of central interest , but might nevertheless in X uence performance . Beyond the task and stimuli , it is also essential to clearly de W ne the speci W c process or set of processes under inves - tigation , the types of products to be developed and the properties they possess , such as rated originality and prac - ticality along with other indicators of creative potential such as the emergence of novel properties . Other issues of importance are the causal , as opposed to purely correla - tional links between processes , structures and outcomes , the generality of W ndings across populations , materials , and situations , as well as the characteristics of raters and populations such as their domain expertise and cultural backgrounds . The W ne - grained assessment of basic cogni - tive processes in the creative cognition approach is an important tool in coming to fully understand creativity . References [ 1 ] R . A . Finke , T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , Creative Cognition : Theory , Research , and Applications , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1992 . [ 2 ] T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , R . A . Finke , in : R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Hand - book of Creativity , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1999 , pp . 189 – 212 . [ 3 ] A . Dietrich , Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 11 ( 2004 ) 1011 – 1026 . [ 4 ] K . H . Kim , Journal of Creative Behavior ( in press ) . [ 5 ] M . A . Runco , Gifted Child Quarterly 37 ( 1993 ) 16 – 22 . [ 6 ] J . A . Plucker , Creativity Research Journal 12 ( 1999 ) 103 – 114 . [ 7 ] T . B . Ward , American Psychologist 56 ( 2001 ) 350 – 354 . [ 8 ] T . B . Ward , R . A . Finke , S . M . Smith , Creativity and the Mind : Discov - ering the Genius Within , Plenum Publishing , New York , 1995 . [ 9 ] D . N . Perkins , The Mind’s Best Work , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA , 1981 . [ 10 ] S . M . Smith , in : S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1995 , pp . 135 – 156 . [ 11 ] T . B . Ward , Cognitive Psychology 27 ( 1994 ) 1 – 40 . [ 12 ] M . I . Mobley , L . M . Doares , M . D . Mumford , Creativity Research Journal 5 ( 1992 ) 125 – 155 . [ 13 ] J . A . Hampton , in : T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Structures and Processes , American Psychological Association , Washington , DC , 1997 , pp . 83 – 110 . T . B . Ward / Methods 42 ( 2007 ) 28 – 37 37 [ 14 ] G . L . Murphy , Cognitive Science 12 ( 1988 ) 529 – 562 . [ 15 ] J . H . White , The American Railroad Passenger Car , Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore , 1978 . [ 16 ] J . Barker , Paradigms : The Business of Discovering the Future , Har - perBusiness , New York , 1993 . [ 17 ] G . Basala , The Evolution of Technology , Cambridge University Press , London , 1988 . [ 18 ] T . M . Amabile , Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 43 ( 1982 ) 997 – 1013 . [ 19 ] T . I . Lubart , R . J . Sternberg , in : S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1995 , pp . 269 – 302 . [ 20 ] S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , J . S . Schumacher , Memory & Cognition 21 ( 1993 ) 837 – 845 . [ 21 ] S . Jaarsveld , S . C . van Leeuwen , Cognitive Science 29 ( 2005 ) 79 – 101 . [ 22 ] T . B . Ward , M . J . Patterson , C . M Sifonis , R . A . Dodds , K . N . Saunders , Memory & Cognition 30 ( 2002 ) 199 – 216 . [ 23 ] W . Niu , R . J . Sternberg , International Journal of Psychology 36 ( 2001 ) 225 – 241 . [ 24 ] T . B . Ward , M . J . Patterson , C . Sifonis , Creativity Research Journal 16 ( 2004 ) 1 – 9 . [ 25 ] C . Cacciari , M . C . Levorato , P . Cicogna , in : T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Struc - tures and Processes , American Psychological Association , Washing - ton , DC , 1997 , pp . 145 – 177 . [ 26 ] A . Karmilo V - Smith , Cognition 34 ( 1990 ) 57 – 83 . [ 27 ] T . B . Ward , K . N . Saunders , R . A . Dodds , Roeper Review 21 ( 1999 ) 260 – 265 . [ 28 ] S . S . Condoor , H . R . Brock , C . P . Burger , Innovation through early rec - ognition of critical design parameters , Paper Presented at the Meeting of the American Society for Engineering Education , Urbana , IL , 1993 , June . [ 29 ] T . B . Ward , in : S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1995 , pp . 157 – 178 . [ 30 ] D . G . Jansson , S . M . Smith , Design Studies 12 ( 1991 ) 3 – 11 . [ 31 ] R . L . Marsh , J . D . Landau , J . L . Hicks , Memory & Cognition 24 ( 1996 ) 669 – 680 . [ 32 ] L . W . Barsalou , Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Mem - ory , and Cognition 11 ( 1985 ) 629 – 654 . [ 33 ] T . B . Ward , Strategic approach and the degree of novelty in new idea generation . Paper Presented at the Meeting of the Association for Consumer Research , Toronto , 2003 , October . [ 34 ] T . B . Ward , K . N . S . Wickes , Unpublished manuscript 2006 . [ 35 ] P . Graf , P . A . P . Shimamura , L . R . Squire , Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition 11 ( 1985 ) 386 – 396 . [ 36 ] S . R . Donaldson , The Real Story ( Afterword ) , Bantam Books , New York , 1992 . [ 37 ] A . Rothenberg , The Emerging Goddess , University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1979 . [ 38 ] Z . Kunda , D . T . Miller , T . Claire , Cognitive Science 14 ( 1990 ) 551 – 577 . [ 39 ] R . Hastie , C . Schroeder , R . Weber , Bulletin of the Psychonomic Soci - ety 28 ( 1990 ) 242 – 247 . [ 40 ] M . J . Wilkenfeld , T . B . Ward , Journal of Memory and Language 45 ( 2001 ) 21 – 38 . [ 41 ] Z . Estes , T . B . Ward , Creativity Research Journal 14 ( 2002 ) 149 – 156 . [ 42 ] G . M . Scott , D . C . Lonergan , M . D . Mumford , Creativity Research Journal 17 ( 2005 ) 79 – 98 . [ 43 ] R . A . Finke , Creative Imagery : Discoveries and Inventions in Visuali - zation , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1990 . [ 44 ] B . Roskos - Ewoldsen , M . J . Intons - Peterson , R . A . Anderson ( Eds . ) , Imagery , Creativity , and Discovery : A Cognitive Perspective , Elsevier Science Publishers ( North - Holland ) , Amsterdam , 1993 . [ 45 ] K . Dunbar , T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Structures and Processes , American Psychological Association , Washington , DC , 1997 , pp . 461 – 494 . [ 46 ] D . Gentner , S . Brem , R . Ferguson , P . Wol V , A . B . Markman , in : T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Structures and Processes , American Psychological Association , Washington , DC , 1997 , pp . 403 – 460 . [ 47 ] D . Gentner , in : S . Vosniadou , A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and Ana - logical Reasoning , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1989 , pp . 199 – 241 . [ 48 ] J . W . Schooler , J . Melcher , in : S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1995 , pp . 97 – 133 . [ 49 ] S . M . Smith , E . Vela , Memory & Cognition 19 ( 1991 ) 168 – 176 . [ 50 ] K . S . Bowers , G . Regehr , C . Balthazard , K . Parker , Cognitive Psychol - ogy 22 ( 1990 ) 72 – 109 . [ 51 ] J . W . Getzels , M . Csikszentmihalyi , The Creative Vision : A Longitudi - nal Study of Problem Finding in Art , Wiley , New York , 1976 . [ 52 ] M . D . Mumford , R . Reiter - Palmon , M . R . Redmond , in : M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Problem Finding , Problem Solving , and Creativity , Ablex Pub - lishing Company , Norwood , NJ , 1994 , pp . 3 – 39 . [ 53 ] M . A . Runco , I . Chand , in : M . A . Runco , ( Ed . ) , Problem Finding , Prob - lem Solving , and Creativity ( pp . 3 – 39 ) . Ablex Publishing Company , Norwood , NJ , 1994 , pp . 217 – 290 .