Analysis of Myofibrillar Structure and Assembly Using Fluorescently Labeled Contractile Proteins JOSEPH W . SANGER , BALRAJ MITTAL , and JEAN M . SANGER Department ofAnatomylG3 and Pennsylvania Muscle Institute , University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 ABSTRACT To study how contractile proteins become organized into sarcomeric units in striated muscle , we have exposed glycerinated myofibrils to fluorescently labeled actin , alpha - actinin , and tropomyosin , In this in vitro system , alpha - actinin bound to the Z - bands and the binding could not be saturated by prior addition of excess unlabeled alpha - actinin . Conditions known to prevent self - association of alpha - actinin , however , blocked the binding of fluores - cently labeled alpha - actinin to Z - bands . When tropomyosin was removed from the myofibrils , alpha - actinin then added to the thin filaments as well as the Z - bands . Actin bound in a doublet pattern to the regions of the myosin filaments where there were free cross - bridges i . e . , in that part of the A - band free of interdigitating native thin filaments but not in the center of the A - band which lacks cross - bridges . In the presence of 0 . 1 - 0 . 2 mM ATP , no actin binding occurred . When unlabeled alpha - actinin was added first to myofibrils and then labeled actin was added , fluorescence occurred not in a doublet pattern but along the entire length of the myofibril . Tropomyosin did not bind to myofibrils unless the existing tropomyosin was first removed , in which case it added to the thin filaments in the I - band . Tropomyosin did bind , however , to the exogenously added tropomyosin - free actin that localizes as a doublet in the A - band . These results indicate that the alpha - actinin present in Z - bands of myofibrils is fully complexed with actin , but can bind exogenous alpha - actinin and , if actin is added subsequently , the exogenous alpha - actinin in the Z - band will bind the newly formed fluorescent actin filaments . Myofibrillar actin filaments did not increase in length when G - actin was present under polymerizing conditions , nor did they bind any added tropomyosin . These observations are discussed in terms of the structure and in vivo assembly of myofibrils . The myofibrils of cross - striated muscles are contractile com - plexes of thick myosin filaments , that interdigitate and inter - act with thin tropomyosin - coated actin filaments ( 16 ) . These thin filaments are attached or embedded in a Z - band com - posed of alpha - actinin and several other proteins ( 4 ) . Al - though thick and thin filaments can self - assemble in vitro from their constituent molecules , the synthetic filaments are not uniform in length , as they are in vivo ( 21 , 23 , 24 ) . Furthermore , we do not know how newly synthesized thick and thin filaments become oriented to form functional con - tractile units in muscle cells . Studies that have attempted to identify which contractile proteins are synthesized first in developing muscle cells have concluded that there is coordi - THE JOURNAL Of CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 98 MARCH 1984 $ 25 - 833 © The Rockefeller University Press ~ 0021 - 9525 / 84 / 0310825109 $ 1 . 00 nate synthesis of actin , myosin , tropomyosin , and alpha - actinin during myogenesis ( 5 ) . Immunocytochemical ( I S ) and electron microscopic data ( 7 ) suggest that thick and thin filaments are formed concurrently in the cytoplasm and sub - sequently become organized into interdigitating arrays that at first lack organized Z - bands . Several workers have suggested from structual studies that the first myofibrils , often found near the cell membrane ( 2 , 8 , 20 ) , might serve as templates for the formation of additional myofibrils ( 7 , 15 ) . We have tried to explore this idea by following the incorporation of fluorescently labeled contractile proteins into glycerinated myofibrils from adult and embryonic animals . This aproach has lead to new information about the organization ofproteins 825 in myofibrils . We suggest that new actin filaments may be incorporated into myofibrils in vivo after addition of alpha - actinin to the Z - bands . MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation of Glycerinated Myofibrils and Cardiac Muscle Cells : (cid:9) Bundles of psoas muscle were dissected from a freshly killed rabbit and tied with thread to applicator sticks . The bundles were placed immediately in a solution of 50 parts glycerol and 50 parts standard salt ( 0 . 1 M KCI , O . OI M phosphate buffer , 0 . 001 M MgCI Z , pH 7 . 0 ) at 4°C . After a day , the glycerol was replaced with a fresh 50 % glycerol solution and the muscle stored in this solution at - 20°C . Glyceànated bundles of trout muscle were a gift of Dr . F . A . Pepe , University ofPennsylvania . Insect muscle was obtained from flight muscles in the thoraxes of the moth , Hyalophora cecropia ( 24 ) . The thoraxes were placed in a glycerol solution ( see above ) over night ( 4°C ) and then placed in a fresh solution of glycerol and stored ( - 20°C ) until needed . Embryonic cardiac muscle from the chick was grown in culture on glass coverslips ( 28 ) . Glycerination was accomplished by replacing the culture medium with cold 50 % glycerol in standard salt and keeping the cells in this solution for 2 h at 4°C . The cells were washed with cold standard salt before being exposed to labeled proteins . Myofibàls were prepared by washing small pieces ( several millimeters ) of either rabbit or fish or insect glyceànated muscle in standard salt for an hour at 4°C to remove the glycerol . The pieces were placed in a Sorvall Omni Mixer ( Sorvall , Newtown , CT ) in 10 ml of cold standard salt and blended for ~ 20 s or until the bundles were broken into myofibàls . After several rinses with standard salt , the myofibàls were used for labeling expeàments or were stored in 50 % glycerol at - 20°C . Myofibàls usually were stained while suspended in a small volume ( l00 pl ) of standard salt . In expeàments where myosin was removed from myofibàls to create myofibàl ghosts , the myofibàls were treated with Hasselbach - Schnei - der extraction solution ( 0 . 6 M KCI , 10 mM NasP20 , , 1 mM MgC1 2 , 0 . 1 M KH ZPOe , pH 6 . 40 ( 13 ) . Myofibàls in glycerol solution were added in one or two drops from a Pasteur pipette to a coverslip . They were spread over the surface of the coverslip with the pipette and the coverslip then placed in a 35 - mm petàdish . Glycerol wasremovedby addingseveralchangesofcold standard salt . The myosin then was extracted by adding 2 ml of cold Hasselbach - Schneider solution and incubating for 10 min at 4°C . After extensive washing with fresh Hasselbach - Schneider solution and then with cold standard salt solution , the myofibàls were stained on the coverslip with labeled protein , washed , and mounted on a glass slide for observation . Preparation of Fluorescently - labeled Actin , Alpha - actinin , Tropomyosin , and Heavy Meromyosin ( HMM ) ' : F - actin was prepared from acetone powderofrabbit skeletal muscle by standard procedures ( 22 ) ( Fig . I C ) . Tropomyosin and alpha - actinin were prepared from fresh or frozen chicken gizzards ( 6 , 30 ) ( Fig . I , b and d ) . Each protein waslabeled with lissamine rhodamine sulfonyl chloride ( LR ) accordingto the method ofBrandt - zaeg ( 3 ) for antibody labeling . LR was synthesized from lissamine rhodamine B ( Polysciences , Inc . , Warrington , PA ) and phosphorous pentachloàde ( 3 ) or was purchased from Molecular Probes ( Junction City , OR ) . Unbound dye was removed from the labeled protein preparations by posing the protein - LR through a G - 25 Sephadex column ( Pharmacia , Inc . , Piscataway , NJ ) . The labeledproteins subsequently were passed througha DE 52 column ( Whatman Co . , Clifton , NJ ) to remove over - and under - labeled protein by eluting with a salt gradient ( 32 ) . Alpha - actinin was stored for later use in a 50 % glycerol - standard salt solution . Tropomyosin - LR was stored in a lyophilized form . Actin - LR was stored in the fibrous form as F - actin - LR and converted to monomer form by dialysizing against depolymeàzing buffer ( 0 . 2 mM ATP , 2 mM Tàs , 0 . 2 mM CaCl2 , 0 . 5 mM ß - mercaptoethanol and 0 . 005 % NaN ) before labeling expeàments were carried out ( 22 ) . HMM was prepared as previously reported ( 25 - 27 ) but was labeled with lissamine rhodamine sulfonyl chloàde . The HMM - LR was stored in 25 - 50 % glycerol in standard salt solution . Addition of Labeled Proteins to Myofibrils and Muscle BundIes : (cid:9) Monomer actin - LR wasadded to myofibàlseither in the presence ofATP or in the absence of ATP . In the former case , l vol of monomer actin - LR ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) present in depolymeàzing buffer that contained 0 . 2 mM ATP ( see above ) was added to myofibrls bathed in an equal volume ofstandard salt . To prevent the myofibàls from contracting when the ATP - containing buffer was added , the myofibàls were attached to a glass coverslip by spreading a drop ' Abbreviations used in this paper . " (cid:9) HMM , heavy meromyosin ; LR , lissamine rhodamine sulfonyl chloàde . H26 (cid:9) THE IOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 9 $ , 1 9 $ 4 FIGURF 1 (cid:9) SDS polyacrylamide gel ( 10 % ) of proteins prior to label - ing with lissamine rhodamine . ( b ) Tropomyosin , alpha , and beta chains ; ( c ) actin ; ( d ) alpha - actinin ; ( a and e ) marker proteins : rabbit muscle heavy chain of myosin ( 200 kdaltons ) , ß glactosidase ( 116 kdaltons ) , phosphorylase B ( 97 kdaltons ) , BSA ( 66 kdaltons ) , and egg albumin ( 43 kdaltons ) . of a myofibàl suspension ( in standard salt ) over the coverslip with a Pasteur pipette . Unattached myofibàls were ànsed off with standard salt , and 100 ~ I of standard salt was added to the covetslip to bathe the myofibàls . The same volume of monomer - actin - LR in depolymeàzing buffer was added , and the myofibàl incubated for 30 - 60 min at 4°C . The coverslips were then ànsed thoroughly with standard salt to remove unbound actin , and mounted on a slide in 25 or 50 % glycerol - standard salt . In the second method , free ATP was removed from the monomer - actin LR solution before incubation with myofibàls . To do this , the solution was treated with Dowex - 1 ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) for 10 min and the Dowex beads were then spun down leaving monomer actin - LR in a solution that was free of ATP . l00 ul of the actin solution was added to myofibàls in suspension in an equal volume of standard salt solution . The myofibàls were incubated with the protein for 30 - 60 min at 4°C , washed in several changes ofstandard salt , and mounted on a slide in 25 - 50 % glycerol in standard salt . Tropomyosin - LR and alpha - actinin - LR were each added to myofibàls at a concentration of 1 mg / ml for 1 h at 4°C . The myofibàls were washed and mountedas descàbed foractin - LR . Forsome expeàments , unlabeledmonomer actin ( l - 2 mg / ml ) or unlabeled alpha - actinin ( 2 - 5 mg / ml ) were first added to the myofibàls for an hour at 4°C , and then the myofibàls were ànsed several times before the labeled protein was added . Procesing was carried out as descàbed for additon ofa single labeled protein . Small bundles of rabbit , trout , and moth muscles were teased from the glyceànated muscle . These small fibers were exposed to alpha - actinin - LR for periods of 1 - 2 h at 4°C , then washed with many changes ofcold standard salt solution for 30 min to remove any unbound labeled protein . The bundles were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde ( 29 ) , dehydrated in an ethanol seàes , and embedded in Epon . 1 - km sections were cut with an LKB Ultramicrotome III and mounted on a glass slide , covered with Histoclad ( Clay - Adams , New York , NY ) and a coverslip . Negdtive Staining : (cid:9) Samples ofmonomer actin - LR were polymerized under conditions identical to those used for incubation with myofibrils ( see above ) i . e . , 1 vol of monomer actin - LR in depolymeàzing buffer ( either with or without ATP as descàbed above ) plus an equal volume of standard salt for 30 - 60 min at 4°C . A drop of sample was placed on a Formvar - coated gàd , washed with 0 . 1 M KCI , andthen stained with a 1 % aqueous solution ofuranyl acetate and examined with a Philps 201 electron microscope . Microscopy : (cid:9) Myofibàls and the plastic embedded sections were ex - amined with an Olympus Vanox Photomicroscope equipped for epifluores - cence . The obiectives used were Zeis Planapochromats , x 63 and 100 . Images were recorded using Kodax Tri - X film developed with Acufine for an ASA of 1 , 000 . All photomicrographs in this article are printed at the same magnifica - tion . RESULTS Addition of Contractile Proteins to Control Myofibrils The contractile proteins , alpha - actinin , actin , and tropo - myosin ( Fig . 1 ) , all labeled with lissamine rhodamine ( LR ) , each reacted with glycerinated myofibrils in a different way . Alpha - actinin - LR and tropomyosin - LR were added in stand - and salt solution to myofibrils that were suspended in standard salt . Alpha - actinin - LR bound to the Z - bands ofrabbit psoas , fish and insect flight muscle myofibrils ( Fig . 2 , a and b ) , and to the Z - bands and intercalated discs of embryonic chick myocardial cells ( Fig . 2 c ) . Cross sections ofplastic embedded rabbit and insect myofibrils showed that the fluorescence was localized throughout the Z - band ( Fig . 2 , f - i ) . In contrast , tropomyosin - LR did not bind to any region of the various types ofcontrol myofibrils ( Fig . 2 , d and e ) . Monomer actin - LR in depolymerizing bul % r ( see Materials and Methods ) formed filaments of F - actin several miçrons long when diluted 1 : 1 with standard salt solution ( Fig . 3 ) . FIGURE 2 (cid:9) Phase and fluorescence ( a and b ) of rabbit psoas myofibril with Z - bands stained with alpha - actinin - LR . ( c ) Glycerinated embryonic chick cardiac muscle cell with stain in the Z - bands and intercalated disc ( arrow ) . ( d and e ) Phase and fluorescence of rabbit psoas myofibril stained with tropomyosin - LR . No binding occurs in any of the bands of the myofibril ( f - i ) Longitudinal and cross sections of rabbit ( f and g ) and moth ( h and i ) myofibrils stained with alpha - actinin - LR . The entire disc stains with alpha - actinin in cross - section . x 2 , 500 . SANGER ET AL . (cid:9) Myofibrillar Siructure andAssembly (cid:9) ô27 FIGURE 3 Field of actin filaments formed by mixing monomer actin - LR with an equal volume of standard salt after 30 min . Scale marker equals 1 gym . This was true whether or not the ATP was removed from the depolymerizing buffer . When monomer actin - LR in depo - lymerizing buffer from which ATP had been removed ( see Materials and Methods ) was added to myofibrils that were in an equal volume of standard salt , actin binding occurred in a bright doublet in the H - zone of the myofibrils ( Fig . 4 , a and b ) , and in the myofibrils of chick cardiac cells . Stretched myofibrils with wider H - zones bound actin - LR in doublets that were correspondingly wider . In asymmetrically con - tracted sarcomeres where the thin filaments completely over - lapped all of the cross - bridges in one - half of a sarcomere , no actin - LR bound in that area . However , actin was bound in the other half of the sarcomere , resulting in a single band of fluorescence ( Fig . 4 , c - e ) . In the presence of 0 . 2 mM ATP , actin - LR did not bind to any region ofthe myofibril . Neither actin - LR nor alpha - actinin - LR bound to myofibrils and cells that had been previously fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde for 5 min . Addition of Contractile Proteins to Treated Myofibrils The high salt Hasselbach - Schneider solution ( 13 , 16 ) is used to remove myosin from myofibrils ( Fig . 5 , a and b ) . When myofibrils with H - zone doublets of actin fluorescence were treated with this solution the actin fluorescence was elimi - nated . Because of its high ionic strength , Hasselbach - Schnei - der solution should also extract tropomyosin from muscle ( 22 ) . This was confirmed by running gels of the supernatant HZH (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 9S , 1984 of the extracted myofibrils ( data not shown ) . If tropomyosin - LR was added to myofibrils that had been extracted with Hasselbach - Schneider solution , fluorescence was found along the actin filaments in the I - band ( Fig . 5 , c and d ) . No staining was observed in the Z - band ( Fig . 5 , c and d ) . HMM - LR stained myosin extracted myofibrils just as tropomyosin - LR did ( Fig . 5 , a and b ) . If alpha - actinin - LR was added to similarly extracted myofibrils , binding occurred in the Z - band as well as the rest ofthe I - band ( Fig . 5 , e andf ) . Alpha - actinin will not self - associate in buffer containing 1 mM bicarbonate ( 19 ) . when alpha - actinin - LR was added to myofibrils in 1 mM bicarbonate , there was no binding of the alpha - actinin - LR ( Fig . 6 , a and b ) . Indirect immunofluores - cence staining with alpha - actinin antibody showed that alpha - actinin was still present in the Z - bands . After the bicarbonate - treated myofibrils were returned to standard salt , alpha - ac - tinin - LR bound to the Z - bands and also to the rest of the I - band ( Fig . 6 , c and d ) . Gels of the supernatant from the bicarbonate - treated myofibrils indicated that tropomyosin was extracted from these myofibrils ( Fig . 7 ) . Tropomyosin - LR bound to the thin filaments in the I - bands but not to the Z - bands of these bicarbonate - treated myofibrils . Addition of Contractile Proteins to Myofibrils Pretreated with Exogenous Contractile Proteins When an excess of unlabeled alpha - actinin ( 3 - 5 mg / ml ) was allowed to bind to myofibrils and then alpha - actinin - LR added , fluorescent localization occurred at the Z - bands just as when control myofibrils were used . If actin - LR was added to the myofibrils that had been pretreated with unlabeled alpha - actinin , fluorescent actin staining was found along the whole length of the myofibril ( Fig . 8 , a and b ) . When unla - beled actin was reacted with myofibrils followed by addition oftropomyosin - LR , the resultant fluorescent localization was in a doublet pattern in the H - zone ( Fig . 8 , c and d ) just as when control myofibrils were exposed to actin - LR ( Fig . 4 ) . DISCUSSION Our results show that fluorescently labeled alpha - actinin will associate in vitro with native alpha - actinin in the Z - bands of isolated myofibrils , muscle bundles , and in intercalated discs of glycerinated cardiac muscles . Recently , Geiger has shown that fluorescently labeled alpha - actinin bound to stress fibers , attachment plaques , and cell junctions of detergent - treated nonmuscle cells ( 8 ) . We have also demonstrated that neither labeled actin nor tropomyosin associated with its myofibrillar counterpart . Labeled tropomyosin did not bind to any region of control myofibrils , whereas actin bound in a doublet pat - tern to part of the A - bands . The actin binding was confined to the region of the A - band where there are free cross - bridges available on the myosin filaments . In the center of the thick filaments where cross - bridges are absent , there was no actin binding . Furthermore , no actin - LR bound in the overlap region of the A - band where thick filaments interdigitate with the native thin filaments . In contracted sarcomeres there is greater overlap of thick and thin filaments , and the amount of actin - LR that bound to the sarcomeres was diminished correspondingly ( Fig . 4 ) . The lack of actin - LR staining in the overlap region is not due to steric problems since HMM - LR readily binds to these areas ( 25 , 26 ) . The doublet staining pattern might have arisen if actin - LR polymerized from the ends of the thin filments ; if this were the case , the binding FIGURE 4 ( a - d ) Myofibrils stained with actin - LR . The phase dense A - bands ( a and c ) are slightly wider than the bands of fluorescence ( b and d ) , indicating that actin - LR binds to the area of the myosin filaments free of interdigitating thin filaments . The two single bands of fluorescence in d result from the staining of two sarcomeres that contracted asymmetrically ( arrow , c ) . The diagram in e shows schematically the relationship between the fluorescent staining ( solid bars ) and the position of thin and thick filaments and the thick filament cross - bridges . x 2 , 500 . FIGURE 5 Myofibrils extracted with Hasselbach - Schneider solution to remove myosin and stained with various contractile proteins . With removal of the A - bands and exposure to added proteins , the I - bands appear as phase - dense bands ( a , c , and e ) . The I - band minus the Z - band stains with HMM - LR ( b ) and tropomyosin - LR ( d ) . Alpha - actinin - LR stains the entire I - band ( f ) . x 2 , 500 . SANDER ET AL . (cid:9) Myofibrillar StructureandÀssembly (cid:9) ôz9 FIGURE 6 Myofibrils treated with 1 mM NaHC03 . In this solution , myofibrils do not bind alpha - actinin - LR ( a and b ) . If the myofibrils are returned to standard salt , alpha - actinin - LR binds to the entire I - band ( c and d ) . x 2 , 500 . FIGURE 7 SDS poly - acrylamide gel ( 7 . 5 % ) of myofibrils treated with 1 mM NaHCOs for 1 h . ( a ) markers : 1 , myosin heavy chain ( 200 kdaltons ) ; 2 , ß - ga - lactosidase ( 116 kdal - tons ) ; 3 , phosphorylase B ( 97 kdaltons ) ; 4 , BSA ( 66 kdaltons ) ; 5 , egg al - bumin ( 43 kdaltons ) ; 6 , carbonic anhydrase ( 29 kdaltons ) . ( b ) Rabbit myofibrils ; ( c ) myofi - brils after treatment with NaHCO , ; ( d ) ex - tract from myofibrils treated with NaHCO , ; ( e ) actin . should not have been inhibited by 0 . 2 mM ATP , as it was . ATP blocks actin - myosin interaction ( 16 ) and thus would have prevented actin - LR from binding to the free myosin cross - bridges of myofibrils , but ATP does not inhibit actin polymerization ( 21 ) . Moreover , the doublet actin staining pattern was removed by Hasselbach - Schneider solution , a solution that removes myosin from myofibrils ( 16 ) . These experiments indicate that actin - LR binding to myofibrils oc - curs where free myosin cross - bridges are available and does not result from polymerization at the ends of the native thin filaments . There were only two conditions under which tropomyosin - LR would bind to myofibrils . Ifactin was added to myofibrils U3O (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 9B , 19B4 first , followed by addition of tropomyosin - LR , binding oc - curred as a doublet in the A - band ( Fig . 8 , c and d ) , which is the same pattern that was obtained when actin - LR alone was added to myofibrils . Tropomyosin has been shown to bind to actin in the ratio of one tropomyosin molecule per seven actin molecules ( 21 ) . Since the exogenously added actin was free of any tropomyosin ( Fig . 1 c ) , the tropomyosin - LR was able to bind to it . The fact that tropomyosin did not bind the native thin filaments of the myofibrils indicates that these actin filaments are fully saturated with tropomyosin . In the second case , tropomyosin - LR bound to the I - bands ( but not the Z - band ) of myofibril ghosts and of bicarbonate - treated myofibrils . This occurred because the high salt Hasselbach - Schneider solution that was used to extract myosin and make ghosts , also extracted tropomyosin from the myofibrils as did the 1 mM of bicarbonate solution . Thus , there were free tropomyosin binding sites available on the thin filaments to which tropomyosin - LR could add . The addition of alpha - actinin - LR to myofibrils occurred not just at the periphery but throughout the entire thickness of the Z - band in both rabbit and insect myofibrils ( Fig . 2 , g and i ) . The binding was not saturatable as evidenced by the binding of alpha - actinin - LR to Z - bands after the myofibrils had been pretreated with unlabeled alpha - actinin . In vitro , alpha - actinin self - associates in 0 . 1 M KCI , but is prevented from self - association in 1 mM bicarbonate solution ( 19 ) . In the same manner , we found that alpha - actinin - LR would not associate with the Z - bands in the presence of 1 mM sodium bicarbonate . In addition to self - association , alpha - actinin also binds to actin ( 12 ) . Jockusch , and Isenberg ( 17 ) have recently reported that in this binding of alpha - actinin to tropomyosin - free fibrous actin , the alpha - actinin molecule behaves as a cross - linking molecule with two equivalent binding sites on the opposite ends ofthe elongated molecule . We found that alpha - actinin - LR did not bind to the thin filaments in I - band or in the A - band , but when we made myofibril ghosts , or when we FIGURE 8 (cid:9) Myofibrils pretreated with unlabeled protein followed by labeled protein . ( a and b ) Myofibrils were first exposed to unlabeled alpha - actinin and then to actin - LR . ( c and d ) Myofibrils were exposed to unlabeled actin and then to tropomyosin - LR . Staining is in a doublet in the A - band , the same pattern seen when actin - LR is used to stain myofibrils ( see Fig . 3 ) . x 2 , 500 . treated myofibrils with 1 mM sodium bicarbonate , we re - moved tropomyosin , and under these conditions , alpha - ac - tinin - LR bound not only to the Z - bands but also along the entire I - band . Therefore the native tropomyosin on the thin filaments in myofibrils prevents alpha - actinin from binding along the length ofthe thin filament . Although actin binds to alpha - actinin in vitro ( 12 , 17 ) , we observed no binding of actin - LR to Z - bands in control my - ofibrils . If , however , myofibrils were pretreated with unlabeled alpha - actinin and then actin - LR added , actin - LR staining occurred along the entire length of the myofibril . This indi - cates that the native alpha - actinin in Z - bands was fully satu - rated with actin , but when exogenous alpha - actinin was added to the Z - bands , these Z - bands could then bind additional actin . Although , we have not shown that the fluorescent actin binding to these myofibrils is in the form of long filaments , an examination of actin - LR under identical conditions but without myofibrils present showed that actin filaments up to several microns long were formed ( Fig . 4 ) . We conclude that the exogenous alpha - actinin associates with the Z - bands and binds the actin filaments that formed in the standard salt - Tris incubation medium . In the same incubation medium , but without the presence of the added alpha - actinin , actin can bind only to the free myosin cross - bridges ( Fig . 4 ) and the unbound actin filaments that formed are washed away when the myofibrils are rinsed . Our results lead us to the following conclusions about myofibrillar structure : ( a ) Z - bands bind a full complement of thin actin filaments ( labeled actin did not bind to Z - bands ) , but ( b ) can incorporate an indefinite amount of added alpha - actinin . ( Labeled alpha - actinin bound to Z - bands and the binding could not be saturated by prior addition ofunlabeled alpha - actinin . ) ( c ) Exogenous alpha - actinin incorporated into Z - bands can now bind new actin filaments . ( If alpha - actinin was added to myofibrils followed by labeled actin , fluores - cence was seen along the whole length of the myofibril ) . ( d ) The thin filaments of myofibrils are maximally complexed with tropomyosin . ( Labeled tropomyosin did not bind to myofibrils unless the native tropomyosin was first extracted with Hasselbach - Schneider solution or 1 mM bicarbonate . When actin lacking tropomyosin was first added to myofibrils , followed by labeled tropomyosin , fluorescence occurred in a doublet in the A - band , the site where actin binds to myofi - brils . ) ( e ) Tropomyosin prevents alpha - actin from binding to actin along the length of the thin filaments . ( Labeled alpha - actinin did not bind thin filaments in the I - band unless tropomyosin was first extracted . ) ( f ) The thin filaments are capped in some way that prevents additional growth when exogenous actin is present . ( Labeled actin added to the A - band of myofibrils as a doublet that was removed when myosin was extracted . The doublet actin staining pattern is prevented when ATP is present in the medium . ) ( g ) The thick filaments of rabbit myofibrils in rigor are fully bound to the interdigitating thin filaments . ( No labeled actin bound in the overlap region of the A - band . When the extent of overlap increased in contracted sarcomeres , less actin bound to the A - band . In fully contracted muscle no actin bound to the thick filaments . ) These results have several implications for theories of mus - cle formation and growth . They suggest that in developing muscle , newly synthesized alpha - actinin would associate with forming Z - bands , and then could promote the attachment of SANGER ET AL . (cid:9) MyofibrillarStructure and Assembly (cid:9) ô3 ~ new actin filaments to the Z - band , thus causing myofibrils to increase in diameter . Subsequent interdigitation of myosin filaments would produce wider sarcomeres . Taniguchi and Ishikawa ( 31 ) showed that if myosin was added to myosin - extracted myofibrils in glycerinated cultured muscle cells , new thick filaments formed within the framework of actin fila - ments that projected from the Z - bands . The disposition of the filaments in the reconstructed myofibrils closely resem - bled their arrangement in vivo . In developing insect muscle , A - band length increases in sarcomeres that are already well ordered ( 1 , 2 ) , which shows that myosin can polymerize in vivo into an existing actin sarcomeric lattice . On the ultrastructural level , it has not been possible to determine if there is a sequential assembly of sarcomeric components during myogenesis . Biochemical studies of de - veloping muscle cells indicate that actin , myosin , tropomyo - sin , and alpha - actinin are all synthesized concurrently ( 6 ) . Muscle filaments are first detected in the electron microscope as single filaments or in small bundles of interdigitating thick and thin filaments in cells that sometimes appear to lack Z - band material ( 7 ) . Hayashi et al . ( 14 ) demonstrated that polymerization of actin in the presence of myosin filaments leads to the formation of bipolar arrays of thick and thin filaments . It may be that actin and myosin filaments first associate with one another and then alpha - actinin binds to the thin filaments at their ends , the only binding sites available if the actin is complexed with tropomyosin ( 12 ) . There have been speculations that myofibrils could serve as templates for a further increase in the number ofmyofibrils ( ' 15 ) . Goldspink ( 10 , 11 ) has extended this view by suggesting that âhere is a critical width for a Z - band beyond which it would be subjected to tearing forces during contraction ( due to the mismatch in the square lattice of the thin filaments attached to the Z - band and the hexagonal lattice of the thin filaments interdigitating in the A - band ) leading to longitudi - nally split myofibrils which are often seen in published micro - graphs ( 10 ) . Our results show that alpha - actinin , when added to myofibrils , is incorporated thoughout the Z - band and then can promote actin filament binding . If this happens in vivo , it would lead to expanison ofthe Z - band as well as an increase in the number of thin filaments bound to a Z - band in a Sarcomere . Association of myosin with the additional thin filaments would give rise to an increase in width of the myofibril . The data we have obtained by exposing glycerinated muscle to labeled contractile proteins has added significance for stud - ies of microinjection of fluorescent contractile proteins into living cells . Geiger ( 8 ) first demonstrated that in demembrar - ated nonmuscle cells , fluorescently labeled alpha - actinin as - sociated with areas of the cells known to contain alpha - actinin . He pointed out that this indicated that a living cell was not needed for alpha - actinin incorporation . Our Z - band labeling with alpha - actinin - LR matches the Z - band labeling that Kreis and Birchmeier ( 18 ) obtained by injecting labeled alpha - actinin into living cultured myotubes . We also have injected the same alpha - actinin - LR used for staining glycer - inated cardiac muscle cells into living cardiac and skeletal muscle cells . The patterns in the living and glycerinated cells are indistinguishable ( Sanger , J . , M . Pochapin , B . Mittal . , and J . Sanger , manuscript in preparation ) , confirming Geiger ' s results with nonmuscle cells . Recently , Glacy ( 9 ) has reported the results of microinject - ing fluorescently labeled actin into living chick embryonic H32 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 9S , 19B4 cardiac muscle cells . He observed labeled actin in the I - bands ( but not the Z - bands ) and in the M - lines as well . The labeled actin , however , did not stain any part of the overlap region of the A - band where actin is also present . We have never observed any binding of actin - LR to the I - bands or M - lines of our various skeletal and cardiac myofibrils . Presumably the different staining patterns of fluorescent actin in our cell models and , the living cell is due to an active process of incorporation in the living cell . Comparison ofthe staining ofcell models and the microin - jection of living cells with the same fluorescently labeled protein will make it possible to distinguish processes of self - assembly or passive binding from active processes of incor - poration . In addition , labeling of glycerinated myofibrils can provide a sensitive control for the purity and nativeness of labeled contractile proteins since impure and denatured la - beled proteins give rise to spurious staining of myofibrils . This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( HL - 15835 to the Pennsylvania Muscle Institute and GM 25653 to J . W , Sanger and J . M . Sanger ) . Received for publication 20 June 1983 , and in revised form 14 November 1983 . REFERENCES I . Aronson , J . Sarcomere size in developing muxles of a tarsonemid mite . 1961 . J . Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . IIa47 - 156 . 2 . Auber , J . La myofibrillogenese du muscle strie . I . Insectes . 1969 . J . Microsc . ( Paris ) . 8 : 197 - 232 . 3 . Brandtzaeg , P . Conjugates of immunoglobulin G with different fluorochromes . I . Characterization by anionic - exchange chromatography . 1973 . Scandanavian J . Immu - no1 . 2 : 273 - 290 . 4 . Chowrashi , P . K . , and F . A . Pepe . TheZ - band : 85 , 000 dalton amorphin and alpha - actinin andtheir relation to structure . 1982 . J . Cell Biol . 94 : 565 - 573 . 5 . Devlin , R . B . , and C . P . Emerson . Coordinate regulation ofcontractile protein synthesis during myoblast differentiation . 1978 . CeB . 13 : 599 - 61 l . 6 . Feramisco , J . R . , and K . Burridge . Arapid purification oCalpha - actinin , filamin , and a 130 , 000 dalton protein from smooth muscle . 1980 . J Biol . Chem . 255 : 1194 - I 199 . 7 . Fischman , D . A . Development of striated muscle . In The Structure andFunction of Muscle . 1972 . G . H . Boume , editor . Academic Press , Inc . , NewYork . 75 - 148 . 8 . Geiger , B . Theassociation of rhodamine - labelled alpha - actinin with actin bundles in demembranated cells . 1981 . CellBiology International Reports . 5 : 627 - 634 . 9 . Glacy , S . D . Pattern and time course of rhodamine - actin incorporation in cardiac myocytes . 1983 . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 1164 - I 167 . 10 . Goldspink , G . Changes in striated muscle fibres during contraction and growth with particular referenceto myofibril splitting . 1971 . J . Cell Sci . 9 : 123 - 138 . II . Goldspink , G . Growth ofmuscle . / n DevelopmentandSpecialization oCSkeletal Muscle . 1980 . D . F . Goldspink , editor . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 19 - 35 . l2 . Goll , D . E . , A . Suzuki , J . Temple , and G . R . Holmes . 1972 . Studies on purified alpha - actinin . I . Effets of temperature andtropomyosin on the alpha - actinin / Radin interac - tion . J . Mol . Biol . 67 : 469 - 488 . 13 . Haselbach , W . , andG . Schneider . DerLrMyosin - und Aktingehalt des Kaninchenmu - skels . 1951 . Bicehem . Z . 321 : 461 - 482 . 14 . Hayashi , T . , R . B . Silver , W . Ip , M . L . Cayer , andD . S . Smith . Actin - myosininteraction . Self - assembly into abipolar " contractile unit . " 1977 . J . Mol . Biol . f 11a59 - 171 . I5 . Holtzer , H . , J . M . Marshall , and H . Frock . An analysis of Myogenesis by the use of fluorescent antimyosin . 1957 . J Biophys . Biochem . Cytol . 3 : 705 - 724 . 16 . Huxley , H . E . Molecular basis ofcontraction in croc - striated muscles andrelevance to motilemechanismsin other cells . InMuscleandNonmuscle Motility . 1983 . A . Stracher , editor . Academic Pres , Inc . , New York . I - 104 . 17 . Jockusch , B . M . , and G . Isenberg . Interaction ofalpha - actinin andvinculin with actin : opposite effects of filament network formation . 1981 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 78 : 3005 - 3009 . 18 . Kreis , T . E . , and W . Birchmeier . Stres fiber sarcomeres offirbroblasts are contractile . 1980 . Cell . 22 : 555 - 561 . 19 . Malaki , T . , andO . Takaita . Someproperties ofchicken alpha - actinin . 1969 . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) . 66 : 637 - 643 . 20 . Nag , A . C . , and M . Cheng . Differentiation offibre types in an extraocularmuxle ofthe rat . 1982 . J . Embryo . Exp . Morphol . 71 : 171 - 191 . 21 . Oosawa , F . Macromolecular assembly of actin . In Muscle and Nonmuscle Motility . 1983 . A . Stracher , editor . Academic Press , Inc . , NewYork . 1 : 151 - 216 . 22 . Pardee , J . D . , and J . A . Spudich . Purification of muscle actin . Methods in Enzymol . 1982 . ß5 : 27I - 289 . 23 . Pepe , F . A . Macromolecularassembly ofmyosin . In Muscle and Nonmuscle Motility . 1983 . A . Stracher , editor . Academic Pres , Inc . , NewYork . 1 : 105 - 149 . 24 . Sanger , J . W . Formationof synthetic myosin filaments : influenceofpH , ionic strength , cation substitution , dielectric constant and method of preparation . 1971 . Cytobiologie . 4 : 450 - 466 . 25 . Sanger , J . W . Changing patterns of actin localization during cell division . 1975 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 72 : 1913 - 1916 . 26 . Sanger , J . W . The presence ofactin during chromosomal movement . 1975 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 72 : 2451 - 2455 . 27 . Sanger , J . W . Intracellular localization ofactin with fluorescently labelled heary mero - (cid:9) Methods Enzymol . 85 : 234 - 241 . myosin . 1975 . Cell TissueRes . 161 : 432 - 444 . (cid:9) 31 . Taniguchi , M . , andH . Ishikawa . In situ reconstitution of myosin filaments within the 28 . Sanger , J . W . Mitosis in beating cardiac myoblasts treated with cytochahtsin - B . J Exp . (cid:9) myosinextracted myofibril in cultured skeletal muscle cells . 1982 . J . Cell Biol . 92 : 324 - Zool . 201 : 463 - 469 . (cid:9) 332 . 29 . Sanger , J . W . , J . M . Sanger , andB . M . Jockusch . Differences in the stress fibers between (cid:9) 32 . Wang , Y . L . , andD . L . Taylor . Preparation and characterization of a new molecular 6broblasts andepithelial cells . 1983 . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 961 - 969 . (cid:9) cytochemical probe : 5 - iodoacetamido Ouorescein - labeled actin . 1980 . J . Histochem . 30 . Smillie , L . B . Preparation and idenùfication of alpha - and & tropomyosins . 1982 . (cid:9) Cytochem . 2ß : 1I98 - 1206 . SANGER ET AL . (cid:9) Myofibrillar Structure and Assembly (cid:9) 833