Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 1 A Scribble / Cdep / Rac pathway regulates follower cell crawling and cluster cohesion during collective border cell migration Joseph P . Campanale a , b , James A . Mondo a , b , and Denise J . Montell a , 1 a Molecular , Cellular and Developmental Biology Department , University of California Santa Barbara , Santa Barbara , CA 93106 , USA . b These authors contributed equally 1 Correspondence : dmontell @ ucsb . edu Summary Collective cell movements drive normal development and metastasis . Drosophila border cells move as a cluster of 6 - 10 cells , where the role of the Rac GTPase in migration was first established . Rac stimulates leading edge protrusions in most migratory cells . Upstream Rac regulators in leading border cell protrusions have been identified ; however the regulation and function of Rac in follower cells is unknown . Here we show that Rac is required in all cells of the cluster and promotes follower cell motility . We identify a Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor , Cdep , that also regulates follower cell movement and cluster cohesion . The tumor suppressors Scribble , Discs Large , and Lethal Giant Larva localize Cdep basolaterally and share phenotypes with Cdep . Relocalization of Cdep : : GFP partially rescues Scrib knockdown , suggesting that Cdep is a major downstream effector of basolateral proteins . Thus , a Scrib / Cdep / Rac pathway promotes cell crawling and coordinated , collective migration in vivo . Keywords : Apicobasal polarity , Collective cell migration , RhoGTPases , Scribble complex , Par complex , Rac1 , FARP2 , Cdep , Border cells Introduction Collective cell migrations drive homeostasis , normal development , and tumor metastasis ( Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ; Friedl et al . , 2012 ; Mishra et al . , 2019a ; Scarpa and Mayor , 2016 ; Stuelten et al . , 2017 ) . Within collectives , leaders and followers can be distinguished by their positions , and cells at the front steer the group ( Khalil and de Rooij , 2019 ; Revenu et al . , 2014 ; Zhang et al . , 2019 ) . The border cell cluster in the Drosophila ovary has emerged as a powerful model for elucidating the cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating collective migration ( Montell et al . , 2012 ; Norden and Lecaudey , 2019 ; SenGupta et al . , 2021 ) . Drosophila egg chambers consist of 15 nurse cells and one oocyte surrounded by a monolayer of follicle cells ( Fig . 1A ) . Follicle cells exhibit classical epithelial polarity with apical microvilli , E - cadherin rich adherens junctions , lateral membranes , and basal surfaces , which contact a basement membrane that surrounds each follicle ( Fig . 1A ) . During developmental stage 9 , 6 - 10 anterior follicle cells called border cells delaminate as a cluster , detach from the basement membrane and their epithelial neighbors , retain apicobasal polarity , and squeeze between the nurse cells to migrate to the oocyte ( Montell et al . , 2012 ) [ reviewed in ] ( Fig . 1A ) . The evolutionarily conserved Rho family of small GTPases , Rac , Cdc42 and Rho , regulate the actin cytoskeleton dynamics that drive single and collective cell migrations in vivo and in vitro ( Lyda et al . , 2019 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ; Parri and Chiarugi , 2010 ; Ridley , 2015 ) . The Drosophila genome encodes three Rac genes , Rac1 , Rac2 and Mig - 2 - like ( Mtl ) , which in border cells promote lead cell protrusion and migration ( Murphy and Montell , 1996 ; Geisbrecht and Montell , 2004 ) . Rac activity is highest in the lead cell , and photoactivation of Rac in one cell is sufficient to make it the leader and steer the whole cluster ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Decades of research have focused on Rac activity and function in lead cell protrusions ( Bianco et al . , 2007 ; Duchek et al . , 2001 ; Fernández - Espartero et al . , 2013 ; Geisbrecht and Montell , 2004 ; Murphy and Montell , 1996 ; Ramel et al . , 2013 ) . These large protrusions have at least two functions . First , they steer the cluster by sensing chemoattractants as well as small open spaces between nurse cells ( Dai et al . , 2020 ) and second , they facilitate mechanical communication by inhibiting large protrusions in follower cells ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) . However the contribution of follower cells to cluster motility and the regulation and function of Rac in follower cells has not been addressed . Follower cell behavior is generally a less well understood feature of collective cell migration , particularly in vivo ( Qin et al . , 2021 ) . Here we show that Rac is required in all cells of the border cell cluster and identify a basally localized Rac GEF , Cdep , that is required for follower cell crawling . We further show that Cdep membrane localization requires the basolateral proteins Scribble ( Scrib ) , Discs Large ( Dlg ) and Lethal Giant Larva ( LGL ) . Inhibition of any of these components leads to defective cell motility and reduced cluster cohesion . These phenotypes are complementary to knockdown of E - cadherin in the migratory cells , which causes loss of lead cell protrusion but maintenance of cluster crawling and cohesion . This work suggests an integrated model of collective border cell migration in which Rac - dependent lead cell protrusions steer the cluster whereas Rac - dependent crawling in all cells is required for coordinated and cohesive movement . Results Rac is active and required in follower cells To investigate the contribution of follower border cells to cluster migration , we performed timelapse imaging of delaminating clusters using markers for the two cell types that make up the cluster : a central pair of non - migratory polar cells , surrounded and carried by migratory Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv cells [ reviewed in ( Montell et al . , 2012 ) ( Fig . 1B - B’’’ , Movie 1 ) . Live imaging of border cell F - actin at high spatial and temporal resolution showed that as the migratory cells round up and encase the polar cells , multiple cells generate large forward directed protrusions ( Fig . 1B , Movie 1 ) and appear to compete to lead the cluster . Eventually , one cell “wins” ( Fig . 1B’ ) , and both the leader and followers move away from the epithelium ( Fig . 1B’ - 1B’’’ ) . The dominant negative form of Rac , Rac T17N ( RacDN ) , inhibits all three , functionally redundant Racs in Drosophila . Expressing RacDN in all outer migratory cells blocks lead cell protrusion , cluster delamination and migration so the cells remain at the anterior tip of the egg chamber ( Murphy and Montell , 1996 ; Geisbrecht and Montell , 2004 ) . Using a RacFRET activity reporter , we observed that although Rac activity in the lead cell is on average 15 % higher than the rear , Rac is also active in follower cells ( Fig . 1C and D ) . However its role in followers , if any , has not been addressed ( Fig . 1E ) . Similarly , the regulatory network of guanine exchange factors ( GEFs ) that activate Rac in the lead cell have been well described ( Fig . 1E ) , whereas the regulation of Rac in follower cells remains unexplored . To test for the requirement for Rac in follower cells , we expressed RacDN clonally in a varying number of border cells using the FLP - OUT technique . We reasoned that if every cell contributes to cluster movement , then as more cells within the cluster express RacDN we expected a concomitant decrease in cluster motility . So , we compared migration of clusters with different numbers of cells expressing UAS - moesinGFP and either a control ( UAS - white RNAi ) or UAS - RacDN . All clusters containing cells expressing white RNAi completed migration by stage 10 , regardless of the number of labeled cells ( Fig 1F ) . In contrast , Figure 1 : Rac is required in follower cells . ( A ) Projected Drosophila ovariole from ovary with DNA ( blue ) , Ecad ( magenta ) , and slbo > LifeActinGFP ( green ) . ( B - B’’’ ) Stills from a time - lapse of delaminating border cells expressing slbo > LifeActGFP ( white ) and polar cell nuclei expressing upd Gal4 > UAS - RFPnls ( green ) . Lead cell protrusions and follower cells are marked by red and orange arrows , respectively . ( C ) Intensity coded RacFRET signal co - expressing control UAS - LacZ . ( D ) Line plot of RacFRET intensity for cluster in ( C ) . ( E ) Border cell cluster schematic overlayed with known Rac signaling in lead cell protrusions . ( F ) Frequency distribution for complete border cell migration of clusters containing variable numbers of clonal UAS expressing cells . All scale bars are 20 µm . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 3 the more RacDN - expressing cells in a cluster , the more severe the migration defect ( Fig . 1F ) . None of the clusters with four cells expressing RacDN completed migration , and even a single RacDN - expressing cell could impede migration in 10 % of clusters . We conclude that Rac activity in every migratory cell of the cluster contributes to their collective movement . Rac is required for follower cell crawling While lead cell protrusions are obvious when the entire border cell cluster is labeled , follower cell morphology and dynamics are difficult to discern . Therefore we expressed MoesinGFP in subsets of border cells and made time lapse movies . Control clones expressing MoesinGFP and RNAi against the white gene showed that follower cells typically extend dynamic protrusions ( Fig . 2A ) . Rather than protruding outward between nurse cells , as the lead cells do , followers actively crawl over other cells of the cluster ( Movie 2 ) . In contrast , RacDN - expressing cells exhibit little actin dynamics ( Fig . 2B , Movie 3 ) . In fixed imaging , we observed that labeled control follower cells typically exhibit a relatively compact morphology while extending lateral protrusions around E - cadherin boundaries with neighboring cells , as they crawl over and enwrap one another ( Fig 2C - C”’ , Movies 2 and 4 ) . In contrast , RacDN - expressing follower cells , which were most commonly in the rear position , exhibited an extremely elongated morphology such that the majority of the cell lacked contact with and was not integrated into the cluster ( Fig 2D - D’ , Movie 5 ) . Thus follower cells require Rac for actin dynamics , which promote cell motility and cluster compactness . The basally localized RacGEF , Cdep , is required for follower cell crawling and cluster cohesion The Rac GEFs sponge ( Spg ) , myoblast city ( Mbc ) and Vav are required in the lead cell for protrusion ( Bianco et al . , 2007 ; Fernández - Espartero et al . , 2013 ; Wang et al . , 2018 ) . To determine which GEF or GEFs might be required in follower cells , we carried out an RNAi screen of 26 putative Rac GEFs and identified one , Cdep , that is required for the crawling behavior of follower border cells . In contrast to control clusters , which move as a compact and cohesive unit ( Fig . 3A , Movie 6 ) , Cdep RNAi - expressing border cell clusters do not ( Fig . 3B and Fig . S1 , Movie 7 ) . Two different RNAi lines effectively knocked down Cdep protein ( Fig . S1A - B’ ) and caused similar defects . Cdep is the predicted Drosophila ortholog of human FARP1 ( 29 % identical and 42 % similar ) and FARP2 ( 27 % identical and 40 % similar ) . Wild type border cells initiate migration with a single lead cell protrusion , and when individual frames taken at ~ 30 minute intervals from a time lapse movie are displayed in different colors in a single figure , the spatial separation between border cell clusters at different time points reflects cohesive and coordinated cluster movement ( Fig . 3A ) . The crawling defect in Cdep knockdown clusters ( Movie 7 ) causes abnormally elongated clusters ( Fig . 3B and Fig . S1D - L ) . Similar to RacDN clones , some cells of the cluster do not crawl forward ; however , they have dynamic filopodia not observed in RacDN - expressing cells ( Movie 7 ) . The white color in Fig . 3B indicates failure to move and thus overlap of multiple time points . Cluster cohesion was reduced and some cells protruded ectopically ( Fig . 3B , arrows ) . In fixed imaging , we also observed trailing cells and split clusters consistent with an inability of the follower cells to crawl on one another to maintain cluster cohesion ( Fig . 3C - G ) . In some cases a single Figure 2 : Rac is required for follower cell crawling . ( A - D ) Intensity color - coded live imaging of AyFLPout clones at time zero expressing UAS - moesinGFP and co - expressing either ( A ) UAS - w RNAi or ( B ) UAS - RacDN . Right , zooms of the boxed region . Arrows mark protrusions from crawling follower cells on an unmarked cell ( * = unmarked cell , dashed line = approximate cell boundary ) . ( C - D ) Single border cell clones expressing UAS - moesinGFP and either ( C ) UAS - w RNAi or ( D ) UAS - RacDN . Ecad ( magenta ) and Singed ( white ) . Polar cell apical surface marked with “p” . GFP surface reconstruction ( green ) . ( C’ ) Dashed line marks the junction between the clone and neighboring cell . ( C’ - C’’’ and D’ - D’’ ) show same clone with surface overlay . ( C’’’ ) Rotated view of the neighboring cell . All scale bars = 20 µm except C - C’’’ which are 10 µm . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv cell showed a trailing phenotype similar to clonal expression of RacDN in a single cell ( Fig . 3C , C’ ) , while in other cases a single cell detached from the cluster ( Fig . 3E ) . Interestingly , such cells could make a lead - cell - like protrusion ( Fig . 3E ) , consistent with Cdep being required for follower cell behavior . The trailing phenotype and separation of follower cells caused an increase in the cluster aspect ratio in Cdep knockdown clusters ( Fig . 3H ) . To determine whether Cdep is a RacGEF , we expressed Cdep or control RNAi for the yellow ( y ) or w gene in combination with a validated RacFRET activity probe ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Indeed , knockdown of Cdep with two independent RNAi constructs significantly lowered RacFRET but not Cdc42FRET compared to the controls , indicating Cdep is a bona fide RacGEF in the border cells ( Fig . 3I ) . Interestingly we found that while overall levels of RacFRET were reduced , the front - back bias of Rac activity was unchanged in Cdep knockdown ( Fig . 3J and K ) , supporting our hypothesis that Cdep functions predominantly outside of the lead cell protrusion . To gain further insight into Cdep function , we examined its localization . We found that an endogenously GFP - tagged Cdep ( Cdep : : GFP ) is expressed in all follicle cells , including border cells ( Fig . 3L - P ) . Co - staining with the cell adhesion molecule E - cadherin , which is enriched in subapical adherens junctions , showed that Cdep localizes to basolateral membranes in the follicular epithelium ( Fig . 3M ) and in border cell clusters ( Fig 3N - P ) . Cdep : : GFP is enriched at cell - cell contacts but not in lead cell protrusions ( 3N ) . High resolution imaging of migrating clusters showed that Cdep is particularly enriched basally at polar / border cell contacts ( Fig . 3O ) and at border / border cell membranes ( Fig . 3N - P ) . Apicobasal polarity proteins regulate Cdep localization Figure 3 : The basally localized RacGEF , Cdep , is required for follower cell crawling behavior and cluster cohesion . ( A - B ) 30 min interval color coded images from 3 . 5 hr time lapse movies for RNAi indicated . Red arrow indicates a detached border cell , and orange arrow indicates ectopic protrusion . ( C - G ) Representative projections of border cell clusters expressing UAS - Cdep RNAi stained for F - actin ( magenta ) and slbo > LifeActGFP ( green ) . ( C - D ) trailing cells , ( E ) single cells falling off the cluster , ( F - G ) loss of cohesion . ( H ) Dot plot of cluster aspect ratio . ( I ) Analysis of c306Gal4 , UAS - RacFRET or UAS - Cdc42FRET intensities and co - expressing control UAS - w RNAi / UAS - y RNAi or UAS - Cdep RNAi . Each dot is one cluster . ( J ) Representative images of RacFRET . ( K ) Front / back RacFRET intensity ratio of protrusive clusters in ( I ) . ( L ) Projection of stage 10 egg chamber stained for Cdep : : GFP ( green ) and Ecadherin ( magenta ) . Dashed box indicates docked border cell cluster . ( M ) Zoom of epithelial follicle cells . ( N ) Delaminating border cells stained for Cdep ( green ) . ( O ) Migrating border cell cluster stained as in ( L ) . ( P ) Medial view of a border cell cluster with arrows marking border / border cell boundaries and “p” marking polar cell nuclei . All scale bars = 20 µm . Statistical significance tested using one - way ANOVA with Kruskal - Wallace ( H ) and Tukey ( I and K ) post hoc analysis . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 5 Epithelial follicle cells exhibit classical apicobasal polarity with apically localized atypical protein kinase C ( aPKC ) , lateral Scrib , and a basal basement membrane ( Fig 4A and B ) . Border cells retain some apicobasal polarity as they migrate ( Pinheiro and Montell , 2004 ; Godt and Tepass , 2009 ) . However , polarity is clearest in contacts between polar cells and between border cells and polar cells ( Fig . 4C ) . As border cells delaminate , they undergo a 90° turn , which causes the apical domain to orient roughly perpendicular to the direction of migration ( Fig . 4D - F” ) . At the end of migration , they turn again to dock their apical surfaces to the oocyte ( Fig . 4G - G” ) . The basolateral protein Scrib is found on basal and lateral membranes between border cells and polar cells and the apical polarity determinant , aPKC , is enriched in apical junctions ( Fig . 4C ) . Crumbs , Par , and Scrib modules are required for border cell migration ( Li et al . , 2011 ; Pinheiro and Montell , 2004 ; Szafranski and Goode , 2004 ; Wang et al . , 2018 ; Zhao et al . , 2008 ) , but the mechanism by which they act is not yet clear . To interrogate the relationship between Cdep and the polarity modules , we compared Cdep localization to that of aPKC , the Scrib module , and the basal kinase Par - 1 . Cdep : : GFP membrane localization partially overlapped with Par - 1 ( Fig . 4H , Fig . S2A - A’’’ ) , although Cdep was concentrated even more basally than Par - 1 in these cells . Cdep was undetectable in apical membranes and thus did not colocalize with aPKC at the polar cell / border cell boundary . Cdep overlaps with Scribble in lateral membranes though Cdep is concentrated more basally , while Scrib is most enriched just basal to the adherens junction ( Fig . 4I and Fig . S2B - B”’ ) . To test if Cdep membrane localization and polarization depends on apicobasal polarity proteins , we examined Cdep : : GFP in cells expressing RNAi lines against Par - 1 , aPKC , and scrib . Par - 1 knockdown did not detectably change the localization of GFP : : Cdep ( Fig . 4K ) . In contrast , knockdown of either Scrib or aPKC caused a general reduction in Cdep : : GFP membrane association and a more diffuse cytoplasmic signal ( Fig . 4L and M ) . Line scans of border cell - polar cell contacts from Figure 4 : Core polarity modules localize Cdep in border cell clusters . ( A ) Projected stage 9 egg chamber with migrating border cells stained for Laminin with peanut lectin ( yellow ) , aPKC on apical membrane ( magenta ) , and Scribble on lateral membrane ( green ) . ( B ) Epithelial follicle cell and ( C ) border cell zooms of ( A ) with DNA ( blue ) . ( D - G’’ ) Stages of border cell migration from stage 9 - 10 egg chambers with DNA ( blue ) , ( D - G ) Actin staining from slbo > LifeActinGFP reporter ( green ) , ( D’ - G’ ) aPKC staining ( color coded by intensity ) with arrows to denote the apical cap of the polar cells , and ( D’’ - G’’ ) schematic representations of D - G’ . Axis in D’’ indicates anterior , A , posterior , P , dorsal , D , and ventral , V . ( H ) Overlay of a border cell cluster stained for endogenous Cdep : : GFP ( green ) , Par - 1 ( magenta ) , and aPKC ( yellow ) . ( I ) Overlay of a border cell cluster stained for Cdep : : GFP ( green ) , and Scribble ( magenta ) . ( J - M ) Representative images of border cell clusters expressing Cdep : : GFP in combination with indicated RNAi . Arrow points toward apical . ( N ) Representative line scans along the polar / border cell boundary from basal to apical for genotypes in ( J - M ) . ( O ) Dot plot of basal to apical asymmetry of Cdep at polar / border cell membrane for indicated knockdowns . Each dot is an individual border cell cluster . Statistical significance was tested using one - way ANOVA with Kruskal - Wallace post hoc . ( P - R’ ) Representative images of Dlg ( magenta ) and Cdep : : GFP ( green ) in control ( P , P’ ) , aPKC RNAi ( Q - Q’ ) and scrib RNAi ( R - R’ ) . Layering is outlined . ( S ) Control and ( T ) UAS - aPKCΔN expressing border cell clusters during migration . All scale bars = 20 µm . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv basal to apical showed that Par - 1 knockdown did not change Cdep asymmetry whereas Scrib and aPKC did ( Fig . 4N and O ) . Dlg and Lgl knockdowns phenocopied Scrib ( Fig . 4O ) . Analysis of posterior epithelial follicle cells from the same egg chambers also showed a difference in Cdep membrane localization . Knockdown of either Scrib or aPKC causes multiple layers of follicle cells to form , characteristic of epithelial polarity defects ( Fig . 4P - R ) . Whereas Cdep : : GFP is normally excluded from apical domains ( Fig . 4P , P’ ) , Cdep was present on all cell surfaces within the layering event and was enriched between layers ( Fig . 4Q , Q’ ) . Conversely , knockdown of Scrib led to reduced membrane accumulation of Cdep : : GFP on lateral membranes and more diffuse cytoplasmic signal ( Fig . 4R - R’ ) . The data from both border cells and posterior follicle cells suggest that the Scrib module promotes Cdep membrane association whereas aPKC antagonizes it . A prediction then is that expression of a constitutively active form of aPKC would reduce Cdep membrane association . As expected , when we overexpressed a constitutively active form of aPKC lacking its NH 2 - terminus ( aPKCΔN ) ( Betschinger et al . , 2003 ) , Cdep : : GFP failed to associate with basal membranes and appeared more diffusely cytoplasmic in both border cells ( Fig . 4S and T ) and epithelial cells ( Fig S2C and D ) . We conclude that the Scrib module promotes membrane association while aPKC excludes Cdep from the apical domain . The Scrib module promotes cluster integrity independent of tumor suppression . Figure 5 . The Scrib module coordinates cluster cohesion , detachment , and migration dynamics . ( A - D ) Representative projections of migrating border cell clusters expressing c306Gal4 , slbo > LifeActGFP , tub Gal80 ts , and indicated UAS - RNAi . Lifeact ( white ) and DNA ( blue ) . Cells with ectopic protrusions or that fell off the cluster marked with orange or red arrows , respectively . ( E ) Color coded schematic of migration index measurements in stage 10 egg chambers . ( F ) Frequency distribution of border cell migration at stage 10 . ( G ) Dot plot of cluster aspect ratio . ( H - K ) 30 min color coded images from 4 hr time lapse movies for RNAi indicated . ( L ) Schematic and proportion of stage 10 egg chambers with clonal border cells on or off the cluster expressing the indicated UAS - RNAi under the control of HsFlp > AyGal4 . All scale bars = 20µm . Statistical significance tested using one - way ANOVA with Kruskal - Wallace post hoc analysis ( G ) . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 7 To investigate the mechanism by which Scrib , Dlg , and Lgl regulate border cell migration , we used validated RNAi lines to knock down their expression . However these proteins are tumor suppressors , and mutations cause hyperproliferation and multilayering of follicle cells that at best complicate and at worst preclude analysis of border cell migration ( Goode and Perrimon , 1997 ; Goode et al . , 2005 ) . To circumvent this issue , we conditionally expressed RNAi lines targeting scrib , dlg or lgl using c306Gal4 ( Manseau et al . , 1997 ) and the temperature - sensitive repressor tubGal80 ts . RNAi against the white gene was used as a control . Incubating c306Gal4 , tub Gal80 ts , UAS - RNAi flies at 30°C ( to inactivate Gal80 ts ) for 72 hours was long enough to achieve knockdown of Scrib , Dlg and Lgl ( Fig . S3A - F ) without causing multilayering or proliferative tumors . LifeActGFP labeled the border cell F - actin cytoskeleton and showed that , in contrast to controls ( Fig . 5A ) , Scrib , Dlg or Lgl knockdown caused cluster elongation ( Fig . 5B - D ) , individual cells splitting off ( Fig . 5B , C , red arrows ) , and ectopic protrusions from follower cells ( Fig . 5B - D , orange arrows ) . Compared to control clusters , knockdown of the Scrib module reduced the percentage of border cells that complete migration ( Fig . 5E - F ) , and increased overall cluster aspect ratios by ~ 50 % ( Fig . 5G ) . Multiple RNAi lines against each gene caused similar effects ( Fig . 5F ) . Longer incubation times resulted in multilayering , as expected ( Fig . S3G - I” ) . Live imaging confirmed that clusters progressively elongate throughout their migration ( Fig . 5H - K , Fig . S3J - Q , Movies 8 and 9 ) similar to Cdep knockdown . In the most extreme cases of cluster cohesion loss , individual cells separated from the cluster . To quantify how frequently this occurred we clonally knocked down Scrib in cells of the cluster and observed that ~ 40 % of scrib RNAi containing clusters had cells that completely detached from their neighboring wild type Figure 6 : Re - localizing Cdep to the basal membrane suppresses border cell epithelial layering and cluster elongation caused by Scrib module knockdown . ( A - F ) Egg chambers expressing ( A - C ) UAS - GrabFP - basal or ( D - F ) UAS - ExGrabFP - basal and co - expressing UAS - Scrib RNAi , stained for F - actin ( magenta ) and DNA ( blue ) . ( A and D ) Layering throughout the egg chamber ( arrow ) . Bars represent the length measurement for anterior layering . ( B and E ) Dotted box indicates the border cell cluster . ( C and F ) Bar represents the length measurement for cluster elongation . ( G ) Quantification of ovariale strands where either no layering was observed ( blue ) , or any layering ( orange ) anywhere within a single ovariole strand . ( H ) Quantification of anterior layering size ( I ) Frequency distribution of migration defects in stage 10 egg chambers . ( J ) Quantification of cluster elongation as the length of the longest line that can be drawn through the anterior - posterior axis of the border cell cluster . Statistical significance was tested using one - way ANOVA with Kruskal - Wallace post hoc analysis . All scale bars = 20 µm . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv counterparts compared to ~ 5 % in white RNAi ( Fig 5L ) . These results indicate that Scrib knockdown reduces cluster cohesion and impedes cluster migration . Localizing Cdep to basal membranes partially suppresses Scrib phenotypes Scrib knockdown causes diverse phenotypic effects and Scrib interacts with dozens of binding partners ( Bonello and Peifer , 2019 ) , raising the question as to which effectors mediate Scrib function . Since Scrib knockdown disrupts Cdep membrane localization , we wondered which , if any , Scrib functions might be mediated by Cdep . So we used the GrabFP system to re - localize Cdep : : GFP to basal membranes in Scrib knockdown cells . GrabFP is an anti - GFP nanobody - based trap that was developed to concentrate GFP tagged proteins in specific subcellular locations ( Harmansa et al . , 2017 ) . We used GrabFP - Basal , in which Nrv1 is fused to the anti - GFP nanobody to target it to basolateral membranes . As a negative control we used ExGrabFP - Basal , in which the anti - GFP nanobody is expressed on the exterior of the cell and so should not interact with intracellular Cdep . We expressed either GrabFP - Basal or ExGrabFP - Basal with Cdep : : GFP and UAS - scrib RNAi with c306Gal4 in the absence of tubGal80 ts . Without tubGal80 ts to attenuate the Scrib knockdown phenotype , egg chambers had extensive anterior follicle cell layering ( Fig 6A and D , white arrows ) in addition to border cell migration phenotypes ( Fig 6B and E ) and elongation of the border cell cluster ( Fig 6C and F ) . Under these conditions , most egg chambers eventually became necrotic ( Fig . 6D ) , hampering our ability to quantify border cell motility . However , expression of GrabFP - Basal efficiently restored basolateral localization of Cdep : : GFP in scrib RNAi - expressing follicle cells ( Fig . 6A - C ) . Basolateral localization of Cdep : : GFP also ameliorated multiple Scrib knockdown phenotypes including egg chamber death ( Fig 6A and D ) and follicle cell layering frequency and severity ( Fig . 6G and H ) compared to the ExGrabFP - Basal control . In the healthy stage 10 egg chambers , we observed a significant reduction in the number of anterior layering events with GrabFP - Basal vs ExGrabFP - Basal ( Fig . 6I ) . Cluster cohesion was also significantly improved in GrabFP - Basal vs ExGrabFP - Basal ( Fig . 6J ) . We conclude that basolateral membrane targeting of Cdep is sufficient to improve egg chamber viability , restore follicle cell epithelial polarity , and promote border cell cluster cohesion . In further support of the sufficiency of basolateral Cdep to rescue epithelial follicle cell defects , we found that basolaterally localized Cdep also reduced the frequency of ovariole strands containing even a single egg chamber of any stage with any epithelial layering ( Fig . 6G ) . In addition , even in those egg chambers that did have multiple layers , basolateral re - localization of Cdep significantly reduced the number of cell layers ( Fig . 6H ) ( p < . 0001 ) . These findings suggest that a major function of the Scrib module during egg chamber development is to localize Cdep to basolateral membranes . Discussion Follower cell crawling depends on Rac and promotes cluster cohesion Collective cell migration is a widespread phenomenon that drives much of embryonic development , wound healing , and tumor metastasis . In migrating collectives , there are typically leader cells that extend protrusions outward from the group to steer it ( Haney et al . , 2018 ; Khalil and de Rooij , 2019 ; Theveneau and Linker , 2017 ; Zhang et al . , 2019 ) . The functions of follower cells are less clear ( Qin et al . , 2021 ) , especially in vivo . Follower cell contributions have primarily been studied in collective sheet migration in vitro , rather than in small clusters . But Figure 7 : An integrated view of collective border cell migration . Illustration of wild type border cell cluster migration . olor indicates sequential time points . Comparison of features of normal border cell leader and follower cell behavior and cluster movement to those of Cdep or Scrib knockdown and the complementary defects caused by E - cadherin knockdown ( based on Cai et al . , 2014 , Movie S2 ) . In wild type , the front cell extends a large protrusion that senses chemoattractants ( Duchek and Rørth , 2000 ; Duchek et al . , 2001 ; McDonald et al . , 2004 ) and small spaces ( Dai et al . , 2020 ) and is shaped and stabilized by E - cadherin - mediated adhesion ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) and steers the cluster . Cluster cohesion and movement also require basal , Rac - dependent crawling in follower cells . Knockdown of Cdep or Scrib disrupts crawling and thus cluster cohesion and coordinated movement . E - cadherin knockdown causes loss of lead cell protrusion and directional migration but cells within the cluster continue to crawl , maintaining cohesion and leading to random movement . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 9 clusters are emerging as major contributors to metastasis ( Aceto et al . , 2014 ; Au et al . , 2016 ; Cheung and Ewald , 2016 ; Cheung et al . , 2016 ; Conod et al . , 2022 ) , so it is of interest to understand the mechanisms by which clusters maintain cohesion as they move . Cohesion of collectively migrating cell sheets has been primarily attributed to cadherin - mediated adhesion between cells ( Khalil and de Rooij , 2019 ) . In border cells , as in collective sheet migration , E - cadherin mechanically couples leaders to followers , inhibiting followers from protruding outward between nurse cells ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) . However , knockdown of E - cadherin in outer border cells does not cause a loss of cluster cohesion ; rather the clusters lack a leader and crawl and tumble in random directions ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) . Based on the data presented here , we propose that border cell cluster cohesion is mediated at least in part by follower cells enwrapping one another as they crawl ( Fig . 7 ) . In many ways the E - cadherin knockdown phenotype and the Scrib / Cdep knockdown phenotypes are complementary to one another . In E - cadherin knockdowns , cluster cohesion is maintained and follower cell crawling is active , while lead cell protrusions are lost ( Fig 7 of this work and Cai et al . , 2014 , Figure 1F , Movie S2 ) . Conversely , in Scrib or Cdep knockdowns , leading protrusions are present , but follower cells are impaired in motility , so that the cluster becomes elongated , and some cells completely detach . In contrast , in sheets of cells migrating on matrix , basal cryptic protrusions mediate cell - substrate interactions and traction forces transmit tension to E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell contacts to coordinate the collective motion ( Ng et al . , 2012 ) . Thus the mechanism for maintaining cohesion and coordinated movement of small clusters of cells squeezing between other cells may differ substantially from the mechanism in a sheet of cells moving on matrix , even though both types of collectives contain leaders and followers . In border cells , the lead cell protrusion was initially proposed to function as a grapple that would pull the rest of the cluster forward ( Fulga and Rørth , 2002 ; Rørth , 2009 ) . This idea implied that the follower cells might be passive passengers , thus much work focused on elucidating the molecular pathways regulating Rac in the lead cell protrusion . However the grapple model was based on fixed tissue imaging . Live imaging has revealed that 90 % of lead protrusions retract and that cluster speed is uncorrelated with extension or retraction of protrusions ( Mishra et al . , 2019b ) . These observations lead to a model in which the large forward - directed protrusion is primarily a sensory structure , probing for chemoattractants , traction , and physical spaces ( Dai et al . , 2020 ) , rather than a grapple . If the lead protrusion does not function as a grapple , then how does the cluster actually move ? Here we show that all cells contribute to cluster movement . We show that Rac is required in each cell and that the molecular pathway regulating Rac - mediated crawling differs from the regulators of lead cell protrusion . And whereas the Rac GEFs in the lead cell protrusion are activated downstream of chemoattractant receptor signaling , Cdep localization is regulated by the basolateral proteins Scrib , Dlg and Lgl rendering follower cells more dependent on polarity than chemoattractant signaling . Scrib , Dlg and Lgl are best known as tumor suppressors ( Bilder et al . , 2000 ; Brumby and Richardson , 2003 ; Hariharan and Bilder , 2006 ) , mutation of which causes tissue overgrowth . Scrib loss of function causes epithelial to mesenchymal transition and increased single cell invasion in cells expressing oncogenic Ras ( Igaki et al . , 2006 ; Pagliarini and Xu , 2003 ; Wu et al . , 2010 ) . Paradoxically though , Scrib , Dlg , and Lgl are infrequently mutated in human cancers ( Lin et al . , 2015 ; Santoni et al . , 2020 ) . The results here provide a possible explanation . We show that Scrib loss of function impedes collective motility of border cell clusters . If tumors spread collectively and Scrib is similarly required for cluster cohesion and coordinated migration , then the function identified here could provide a selective pressure against Scrib loss - of - function mutations . Polarity signaling complexes and Rho GTPase activities appear to be well - conserved between border cells and mammalian cells that migrate collectively , and a basal Rac GEF dependent upon Scribble has even been predicted but not yet identified ( Zegers and Friedl , 2014 ) . The results presented here suggest that FARP1 and FARP2 would be excellent candidates to mediate cluster cohesion in collectively migrating mammalian cell clusters downstream of Scribble . Neither has been extensively studied , however the little that has been reported is intriguing . FARP1 is required for migration of lung adenocarcinoma cells ( Cooke et al . , 2021 ) , and FARP2 promotes collective invasion of colorectal carcinoma ( Libanje et al . , 2019 ) . Colorectal carcinomas invade and spread as small groups of cells with apicobasal polarity . It will be interesting to determine whether it serves a similar function in that context . Materials and Methods Drosophila husbandry and genetics A detailed list of all fly strains used in this study , their source and the figures in which they were used is documented in Table 1 . Strains outside of lab stocks were ordered from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center , the Vienna Drosophila Resource Center , or kindly donated ( see table 1 ) . Most crosses were grown at 25ºC and flies were fattened by yeast addition on an ad libitum basis for three days at 29ºC before dissection . The exceptions were for crosses containing the conditional expression construct , tubGal80ts , in which flies were grown at 18ºC and transitioned to 30ºC for fattening . tubGal80ts is a temperature dependent repressor of Gal4 activity , thus at restrictive temperature ( 18ºC ) Gal4 remains inactive and at permissive temperature ( 30ºC ) , Gal80ts is inactive therefore allowing Gal4 to be active . Experiments that required clonal border cells expressing RNAi and a fluorescent clonal marker were generated using the FLP / FRT clonal marking system . RNAi stocks were crossed to either hsp70 - FLP ; Acty17bGal4 , UAS - moesin - GFP or hsp70 - FLP ; Tub [ FRT ] CD2 [ FRT ] Gal4 , UAS - GFP / SM5a were heat - shocked two times at 37ºC with at least 6 hours between each heat shock . Flies were fattened for 48 hr and dissected as stated below for fixed staining or live imaging . Immunohistochemistry 5 - 7 fattened adult female flies were dissected in Schneider ' s Medium ( ThermoFisher , catalog # 21720001 ) supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum and 1x antimycotic / antibiotic ( VWR , catalog # 45000 - 616 ) . Ovarioles were separated from the muscle sheath using Dumont style 5 stainless steel forceps ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) before fixation . Egg chambers were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) for a total of 15 min at room temperature before washing three times 15 min with PBS + 0 . 2 % TritonX - 100 ( PBST ) . Primary antibodies were diluted in PBST and ovarioles were incubated overnight at 4ºC . Egg chambers were then washed with PBST three times at room temperature , incubated in fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies ( Invitrogen , all AlexaFluor conjugated goat antibodies ) in PBST for 2 hr , and washed three times more with PBST . Samples were then mounted in VectaShield ( Vector Laboratories , catalog # H - 1000 ) mounting medium and stored at 4ºC until imaging . Egg chambers were mounted on a # 1 . 5 coverglass and imaged with either a Zeiss LSM780 or LSM800 confocal microscope using either a PlanAPO 20x 1 . 2NA or a PlanAPO 40x 1 . 4NA objective . All image settings were kept exactly the same within each experiment . Antibodies used in this study include : rabbit anti - Scrib ( kind gift from Dr . Chris Doe , 1 : 2000 ) , guinea pig anti - Scrib ( kind gift from Dr . David Bilder , 1 : 500 ) , Rabbit anti - Par - 1 ( a kind gift from Dr . Jocelyn McDonald , 1 : 500 ) , mouse anti - PKCζ ( sc - 216 ) and rabbit anti - PKCζ ( sc - 17781 ) , mouse anti - HA ( sc - 7392 , 1 : 1000 ) , and rabbit anti - LGL ( sc - 9826 ) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology and used at 1 : 500 , mouse anti - Dlg ( 4F3 , 1 : 25 ) , mouse anti - Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv Cut ( 2B10 , 1 : 100 ) and rat anti - Ecad ( DEcad , 1 : 20 ) were from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , rabbit anti - GFP ( A11122 , 1 : 1000 ) from ThermoFisher , chicken anti - GFP ( ab13970 , 1 : 1000 ) from Abcam . Lectin PNA Alexa 647 was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific ( L32460 ) . Live imaging Egg chambers were dissected from 5 - 7 fattened adult female flies in Schneider’s Medium supplemented with 20 % fetal bovine serum and 1x antimycotic / antibiotic . Egg chambers were washed two times with dissecting medium and mounted on Lumox imaging dishes in medium containing 0 . 4 mg / mL bovine insulin and 1 % low melt agarose . Egg chambers were imaged by confocal as above . Generating UAS - HA - Cdep The RNeasy kit ( Qiagen , catalog # 74124 ) was used to isolate total RNA from the ovaries of six fattened female flies . RNA was converted to cDNA using the SuperScriptIII - First strand synthesis kit ( ThermoFisher , catalog # 18080 - 51 ) . The following primers with overhangs for subsequent Infusion cloning into the pJFRC7 vector and encoding a N - terminal 2xHA tagg were used to amplify full length Cdep isoforms E / F . Forward : GCGGCCGCGGCTCGAGATGTACCCATACGATGTTCCAGAT TACGCTGGATATCCATATGATGTTCCAGATTATGCTGGAATGTCCCT GGCCGACATGGG . Reverse : CATGCTGTGTTGGGCAACTAATCTAGAGGATCTTTGT . Amplicons of tagged - Cdep were isolated by gel extraction after PCR amplification using Phusion high fidelity polymerase ( New England Biolabs , catalog # E0553L ) . The amplicons were then cloned into the pJFRC7 5x UAS vector ( ref ) using Infusion cloning kit ( Takara Bio , catalog # 638948 ) . Sequenced clones were sent to BestGene for injection and stock generation . Image processing and quantification . Quantification of apical - basal polarization of proteins along the border cell - polar cell boundary ( Fig 1H / I , Fig 3D / E ) : When possible the apical cap of the polar cells was identified by either E - cadherin , Phalloidin / F - actin or aPKC staining . Using ImageJ a line scan with a thickness of . 75 μm was drawn tracing the border cell - polar cell boundary using the F - actin channel as a guide . Measurements were then taken in the Cdep channel and averaged over 0 . 50 μm to smooth the signal and then normalized to the peak value within an individual border cell cluster . Representative line scans were chosen for the line graphs . To compare population differences we took the average of the 25 % most basal signal divided by the 25 % most apical signal for each sample . This ratiometric measurement of basal asymmetry was used for statistics and population level plotting . In a subset of polarity complex knockdown samples the apical cap could not be easily distinguished and an arbitrary pole was chosen as basal . In this condition , there was no bias seen in Cdep asymmetry regardless of orientation or start point chosen . Quantification cluster aspect ratio ( Fig 2G ) : A bounding box was manually drawn in FIJI around the border cell cluster in an anterior - posterior orientation . The aspect ratio of the bounding rectangle was then measured and plotted for each condition . Quantification of cluster speed ( Fig 2L ) : The center of mass of the border cell cluster was manually identified in each time point . The MTrackJ plugin was then used to calculate the velocity of the border cell cluster . Quantification of Rac FRET ( Fig 3D ) : FRET images were obtained during live cell imaging on a Zeiss LSM 780 . A 458 - nm laser was used for excitation of the sample . CFP and YFP images were collected simultaneously using channel 1 ( 464 – 502 nm ) and channel 2 ( 517 – 570 nm ) under a 40× / 1 . 1 numerical aperture ( NA ) water immersion objective LD C - Apo lens . Images were taken at 16 - bits with a frame size of 512 × 512 in the center of mass of the border cell cluster . CFP and YFP images were then processed using Fiji image analysis software as described before ( Kardash ref ) . The final FRET image of the YFP / CFP ratio image was generated in ImageJ . The average FRET signal of the entire cluster was measured . All samples were observed after detachment and prior to docking . Quantification of layering ( Fig 5D / E ) : Images were taken of whole ovariale strands at a low zoom - level on a 20x objective using a Zeiss LSM 800 or Zeiss LSM 780 . Images were 30 - 36 microns in thickness with a z - step of 2 . 5 - 3 microns . Images were then manually quantified in ImageJ by observing any location within the follicular epithelium that showed layering in any stage egg chamber . Quantification of layering was done only on anterior layering events in stage eight and nine egg chambers . The distance from the anterior tip of the egg chamber to the posterior - most cell within the layering event was measured to quantify the size of the layering event . Quantification of cryptic protrusions ( Fig6 D / E ) : Filopodia were manually marked at the distal tip and at where the protrusion meets the circumference of the border cell cluster . The distance between the XY coordinates at the tip vs base was then quantified with the distance formula : distance = sqrt ( X 2 - X 1 ) 2 + ( Y 2 - Y 1 ) 2 ) . Graphing and statistical analyses All data were analyzed in Excel ( Microsoft ) . Graphs and statistics were generated in Prism 9 ( GraphPad ) . For statistical analysis by one - way ANOVA , Bartlett ' s Test was run to determine if significant differences in sample deviations warranted non - parametric analysis . In cases where deviations were not significantly different , parametric ANOVA was performed with Tukey post - hoc tests of significance . In cases where deviations were found to be significantly different , non - parametric ANOVA was run with Kruskal - Wallace post - hoc tests of significance . Author Contributions Conceptualization , J . P . C . , J . A . M , and D . J . M . ; Methodology J . P . C . , J . A . M , and D . J . M . ; Validation , J . P . C . and J . A . M ; Formal Analysis , J . P . C . and J . A . M ; Investigation , J . P . C . and J . A . M ; Resources , J . P . C . , J . A . M , and D . J . M . ; Data Curation , J . P . C . and J . A . M ; Writing - Original Draft , J . P . C . , J . A . M , and D . J . M . ; Writing - Review & Editing , J . P . C . , J . A . M , and D . J . M . ; Visualization , J . P . C . and J . A . M ; Supervision , J . P . C . , J . A . M , and D . J . M . ; Funding Acquisition , J . P . C . and D . J . M . Acknowledgments We would like to acknowledge Drs . Abhinava Mishra , Lauren Penfield , Wei Dai Guangxia Miao , and Allsion Gabbert for thoughtful discussions during the course of this work . We kindly thank Dr . David Bilder and Dr . Christopher Doe for Drosophila Scrib antibody and Dr . Jocelyn McDonald for Par - 1 antibody . We acknowledge the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center and Vienna Drosophila Resource Center for fly stocks . This work was funded by an American Cancer Society award PF - 17 - 024 - 01 - CSM to J . P . C and an National Institutes of Health award GM46425 to D . J . M . References Aceto , N . , Bardia , A . , Miyamoto , D . T . , Donaldson , M . C . , Wittner , B . S . , Spencer , J . A . , Yu , M . , Pely , A . , Engstrom , A . , Zhu , H . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Circulating tumor cell clusters are oligoclonal precursors of breast cancer metastasis . Cell 158 , 1110 – 1122 . Au , S . H . , Storey , B . D . , Moore , J . C . , Tang , Q . , Chen , Y . - L . , Javaid , S . , Sarioglu , A . F . , Sullivan , R . , Madden , M . W . , O’Keefe , R . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Clusters of circulating tumor cells traverse capillary - sized vessels . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 , 4947 – 4952 . Betschinger , J . , Mechtler , K . , and Knoblich , J . A . ( 2003 ) . The Par complex directs asymmetric cell division by phosphorylating the cytoskeletal protein Lgl . Nature 422 , 326 – 330 . Bianco , A . , Poukkula , M . , Cliffe , A . , Mathieu , J . , Luque , C . M . , Fulga , T . A . , and Rørth , P . ( 2007 ) . Two distinct modes of guidance signalling during collective migration of border cells . Nature 448 , 362 – 365 . Bilder , D . , Li , M . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2000 ) . Cooperative regulation of cell polarity and growth by Drosophila tumor suppressors . Science 289 , 113 – 116 . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 11 Bonello , T . T . , and Peifer , M . ( 2019 ) . Scribble : A master scaffold in polarity , adhesion , synaptogenesis , and proliferation . J . Cell Biol . 218 , 742 – 756 . Brumby , A . M . , and Richardson , H . E . ( 2003 ) . scribble mutants cooperate with oncogenic Ras or Notch to cause neoplastic overgrowth in Drosophila . EMBO J . 22 , 5769 – 5779 . Cai , D . , Chen , S . - C . , Prasad , M . , He , L . , Wang , X . , Choesmel - Cadamuro , V . , Sawyer , J . K . , Danuser , G . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2014 ) . Mechanical feedback through E - cadherin promotes direction sensing during collective cell migration . Cell 157 , 1146 – 1159 . Cheung , K . J . , and Ewald , A . J . ( 2016 ) . A collective route to metastasis : Seeding by tumor cell clusters . Science 352 , 167 – 169 . Cheung , K . J . , Padmanaban , V . , Silvestri , V . , Schipper , K . , Cohen , J . D . , Fairchild , A . N . , Gorin , M . A . , Verdone , J . E . , Pienta , K . J . , Bader , J . S . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Polyclonal breast cancer metastases arise from collective dissemination of keratin 14 - expressing tumor cell clusters . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113 , E854 - 63 . Conod , A . , Silvano , M . , and Ruiz I Altaba , A . ( 2022 ) . On the origin of metastases : Induction of pro - metastatic states after impending cell death via ER stress , reprogramming , and a cytokine storm . Cell Rep . 38 , 110490 . Cooke , M . , Kreider - Letterman , G . , Baker , M . J . , Zhang , S . , Sullivan , N . T . , Eruslanov , E . , Abba , M . C . , Goicoechea , S . M . , García - Mata , R . , and Kazanietz , M . G . ( 2021 ) . FARP1 , ARHGEF39 , and TIAM2 are essential receptor tyrosine kinase effectors for Rac1 - dependent cell motility in human lung adenocarcinoma . Cell Rep . 37 , 109905 . Dai , W . , Guo , X . , Cao , Y . S . , Mondo , J . A . , Campanale , J . P . , Montell , B . J . , Burrous , H . , Streichan , S . , Gov , N . , Rappel , W . - J . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Tissue topography steers migrating Drosophila border cells . BioRxiv . Duchek , P . , Somogyi , K . , Jékely , G . , Beccari , S . , and Rørth , P . ( 2001 ) . Guidance of cell migration by the Drosophila PDGF / VEGF receptor . Cell 107 , 17 – 26 . Fernández - Espartero , C . H . , Ramel , D . , Farago , M . , Malartre , M . , Luque , C . M . , Limanovich , S . , Katzav , S . , Emery , G . , and Martín - Bermudo , M . D . ( 2013 ) . GTP exchange factor Vav regulates guided cell migration by coupling guidance receptor signalling to local Rac activation . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 2285 – 2293 . Friedl , P . , and Gilmour , D . ( 2009 ) . Collective cell migration in morphogenesis , regeneration and cancer . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 445 – 457 . Friedl , P . , Sahai , E . , Weiss , S . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 2012 ) . New dimensions in cell migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 743 – 747 . Fulga , T . A . , and Rørth , P . ( 2002 ) . Invasive cell migration is initiated by guided growth of long cellular extensions . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 715 – 719 . Geisbrecht , E . R . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2004 ) . A role for Drosophila IAP1 - mediated caspase inhibition in Rac - dependent cell migration . Cell 118 , 111 – 125 . Godt , D . , and Tepass , U . ( 2009 ) . Breaking a temporal barrier : signalling crosstalk regulates the initiation of border cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 536 – 538 . Goode , S . , and Perrimon , N . ( 1997 ) . Inhibition of patterned cell shape change and cell invasion by Discs large during Drosophila oogenesis . Genes Dev . 11 , 2532 – 2544 . Goode , S . , Wei , J . , and Kishore , S . ( 2005 ) . Novel spatiotemporal patterns of epithelial tumor invasion in Drosophila discs large egg chambers . Dev . Dyn . 232 , 855 – 864 . Haney , S . , Konen , J . , Marcus , A . I . , and Bazhenov , M . ( 2018 ) . The complex ecosystem in non small cell lung cancer invasion . PLoS Comput . Biol . 14 , e1006131 . Hariharan , I . K . , and Bilder , D . ( 2006 ) . Regulation of imaginal disc growth by tumor - suppressor genes in Drosophila . Annu . Rev . Genet . 40 , 335 – 361 . Harmansa , S . , Alborelli , I . , Bieli , D . , Caussinus , E . , and Affolter , M . ( 2017 ) . A nanobody - based toolset to investigate the role of protein localization and dispersal in Drosophila . ELife 6 . Harrison , D . A . , and Perrimon , N . ( 1993 ) . Simple and efficient generation of marked clones in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 3 , 424 – 433 . Igaki , T . , Pagliarini , R . A . , and Xu , T . ( 2006 ) . Loss of cell polarity drives tumor growth and invasion through JNK activation in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1139 – 1146 . Kardash , E . , Bandemer , J . , and Raz , E . ( 2011 ) . Imaging protein activity in live embryos using fluorescence resonance energy transfer biosensors . Nat . Protoc . 6 , 1835 – 1846 . Khalil , A . A . , and de Rooij , J . ( 2019 ) . Cadherin mechanotransduction in leader - follower cell specification during collective migration . Exp . Cell Res . 376 , 86 – 91 . Libanje , F . , Raingeaud , J . , Luan , R . , Thomas , Z . , Zajac , O . , Veiga , J . , Marisa , L . , Adam , J . , Boige , V . , Malka , D . , et al . ( 2019 ) . ROCK2 inhibition triggers the collective invasion of colorectal adenocarcinomas . EMBO J . 38 , e99299 . Lin , W . - H . , Asmann , Y . W . , and Anastasiadis , P . Z . ( 2015 ) . Expression of polarity genes in human cancer . Cancer Inform . 14 , 15 – 28 . Li , Q . , Feng , S . , Yu , L . , Zhao , G . , and Li , M . ( 2011 ) . Requirements of Lgl in cell differentiation and motility during Drosophila ovarian follicular epithelium morphogenesis . Fly ( Austin ) 5 , 81 – 87 . Lyda , J . K . , Tan , Z . L . , Rajah , A . , Momi , A . , Mackay , L . , Brown , C . M . , and Khadra , A . ( 2019 ) . Rac activation is key to cell motility and directionality : An experimental and modelling investigation . Comput . Struct . Biotechnol . J . 17 , 1436 – 1452 . Manseau , L . , Baradaran , A . , Brower , D . , Budhu , A . , Elefant , F . , Phan , H . , Philp , A . V . , Yang , M . , Glover , D . , Kaiser , K . , et al . ( 1997 ) . GAL4 enhancer traps expressed in the embryo , larval brain , imaginal discs , and ovary of drosophila . Developmental Dynamics . Mishra , A . K . , Campanale , J . P . , Mondo , J . A . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2019a ) . Cell interactions in collective cell migration . Development 146 . Mishra , A . K . , Mondo , J . A . , Campanale , J . P . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2019b ) . Coordination of protrusion dynamics within and between collectively migrating border cells by myosin II . Mol . Biol . Cell 30 , 2490 – 2502 . Montell , D . J . , Yoon , W . H . , and Starz - Gaiano , M . ( 2012 ) . Group choreography : mechanisms orchestrating the collective movement of border cells . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 631 – 645 . Murphy , A . M . , and Montell , D . J . ( 1996 ) . Cell type - specific roles for Cdc42 , Rac , and RhoL in Drosophila oogenesis . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 617 – 630 . Ng , M . R . , Besser , A . , Danuser , G . , and Brugge , J . S . ( 2012 ) . Substrate stiffness regulates cadherin - dependent collective migration through myosin - II contractility . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 545 – 563 . Nobes , C . D . , and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 . Norden , C . , and Lecaudey , V . ( 2019 ) . Collective cell migration : general themes and new paradigms . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 57 , 54 – 60 . Pagliarini , R . A . , and Xu , T . ( 2003 ) . A genetic screen in Drosophila for metastatic behavior . Science 302 , 1227 – 1231 . Parri , M . , and Chiarugi , P . ( 2010 ) . Rac and Rho GTPases in cancer cell motility control . Cell Commun . Signal . 8 , 23 . Pinheiro , E . M . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2004 ) . Requirement for Par - 6 and Bazooka in Drosophila border cell migration . Development 131 , 5243 – 5251 . Qin , L . , Yang , D . , Yi , W . , Cao , H . , and Xiao , G . ( 2021 ) . Roles of leader and follower cells in collective cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 32 , 1267 – 1272 . Ramel , D . , Wang , X . , Laflamme , C . , Montell , D . J . , and Emery , G . ( 2013 ) . Rab11 regulates cell - cell communication during collective cell movements . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 , 317 – 324 . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv Revenu , C . , Streichan , S . , Donà , E . , Lecaudey , V . , Hufnagel , L . , and Gilmour , D . ( 2014 ) . Quantitative cell polarity imaging defines leader - to - follower transitions during collective migration and the key role of microtubule - dependent adherens junction formation . Development 141 , 1282 – 1291 . Ridley , A . J . ( 2015 ) . Rho GTPase signalling in cell migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 36 , 103 – 112 . Rørth , P . ( 2009 ) . Collective cell migration . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 25 , 407 – 429 . Santoni , M . - J . , Kashyap , R . , Camoin , L . , and Borg , J . - P . ( 2020 ) . The Scribble family in cancer : twentieth anniversary . Oncogene 39 , 7019 – 7033 . Scarpa , E . , and Mayor , R . ( 2016 ) . Collective cell migration in development . J . Cell Biol . 212 , 143 – 155 . SenGupta , S . , Parent , C . A . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2021 ) . The principles of directed cell migration . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 22 , 529 – 547 . Stuelten , C . , Parent , C . A . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2017 ) . Cell Motility in Cancer Metastasis : Mechanistic Insights from Simple Model Organisms . Nature Reviews Cancer . Szafranski , P . , and Goode , S . ( 2004 ) . A Fasciclin 2 morphogenetic switch organizes epithelial cell cluster polarity and motility . Development 131 , 2023 – 2036 . Theveneau , E . , and Linker , C . ( 2017 ) . Leaders in collective migration : are front cells really endowed with a particular set of skills ? [ version 1 ; peer review : 2 approved ] . F1000Res . 6 , 1899 . Wang , H . , Qiu , Z . , Xu , Z . , Chen , S . J . , Luo , J . , Wang , X . , and Chen , J . ( 2018 ) . aPKC is a key polarity determinant in coordinating the function of three distinct cell polarities during collective migration . Development 145 . Wang , X . , He , L . , Wu , Y . I . , Hahn , K . M . , and Montell , D . J . ( 2010 ) . Light - mediated activation reveals a key role for Rac in collective guidance of cell movement in vivo . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 591 – 597 . Wu , M . , Pastor - Pareja , J . C . , and Xu , T . ( 2010 ) . Interaction between Ras ( V12 ) and scribbled clones induces tumour growth and invasion . Nature 463 , 545 – 548 . Zegers , M . M . , and Friedl , P . ( 2014 ) . Rho GTPases in collective cell migration . Small GTPases 5 , e28997 . Zhang , J . , Goliwas , K . F . , Wang , W . , Taufalele , P . V . , Bordeleau , F . , and Reinhart - King , C . A . ( 2019 ) . Energetic regulation of coordinated leader - follower dynamics during collective invasion of breast cancer cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 116 , 7867 – 7872 . Zhao , M . , Szafranski , P . , Hall , C . A . , and Goode , S . ( 2008 ) . Basolateral junctions utilize warts signaling to control epithelial - mesenchymal transition and proliferation crucial for migration and invasion of Drosophila ovarian epithelial cells . Genetics 178 , 1947 – 1971 . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 13 Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv Supplementary figure 1 : Cdep RNAi knocks down Cdep - GFP leading to cohesion defects . ( A - B ) Projections showing efficacy of Cdep knockdown in both the border cells ( A , B - dashed box , A’ and B’ ) and in the epithelial cells that also are within the C306 expression domain ( A , B - dashed line ) . ( D - L ) Representative images from individual time lapse movies showing morphological defects observed during live imaging after Cdep knockdown . All scale bars are 20 µm Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv 15 Supplemental Figure 2 : Cdep : : GFP is asymmetrically localized to basolateral membranes ( A - A’’’ ) Composite image and individual channels from Fig 4H . ( A’ - A’’ ) Cdep : : GFP ( green ) and Par - 1 ( magenta ) antibody localizes to basal - lateral membrane while ( A’’’ ) aPKC antibody ( yellow ) localizes to the apical cap of the polar cells . ( B - B’’ ) Composite image and individual channels from Fig 4I . ( B’ ) Cdep : : GFP ( green ) localizes to basal - lateral membrane while ( B’’ ) Scrib antibody localizes most strongly to sub - apical junctions at cell - cell contacts . ( C ) Cdep : : GFP localizes to the basal - lateral membrane in all epithelial cells . ( D ) Upon expression of aPKC - delta - N Cdep loses its strong membrane localization , becoming more punctate and diffuse . All scale bars = 20 µm . Campanale and Mondo et al . , 04 Jan 2022 – preprint copy - BioRxiv Supplementary Figure 3 . RNAi targetingScribble complex proteins reduces protein expression in egg chambers . ( A - F ) Scrib module protein knockdowns in posterior follicle cells ( gray ) after expressing w , scrib , dlg , or lgl RNAi . ( G - I ) Representative early stage 9 egg chamber expressing scrib RNAi for 96 hrs stained for cut ( magenta ) and DNA ( blue ) . ( H ) Zoom of the anterior . Polar cell nuclei marked with arrows . ( I ) Zoom of the posterior . ( J - Q ) Representative images from individual time lapse movies showing morphological defects observed during live imaging of Scrib knockdown .