Clathrin Heavy Chain Functions in Sorting and Secretion of Lysosomal Enzymes in Dictyostelium discoideum Tracy Ruscetti , * James A . Cardelli , * Maria L . Niswonger , * and Theresa J . O ' Halloran * * Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Louisiana State University Medical Center , Shreveport , Louisiana 71130 ; and ~ Department of Cell Biology , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , North Carolina 27710 Abstract . The clathrin heavy chain is a major compo - nent of clathrin - coated vesicles that function in selec - tive membrane traffic in eukaryotic cells . We disrupted the clathrin heavy chain gene . ( chcA ) in Dictyostelium discoideum to generate a stable clathrin heavy chain - deficient cell line . Measurement of pinocytosis in the clathrin - minus mutant revealed a four - to five - fold deficiency in the internalization of fluid - phase markers . Once internalized , these markers recycled to the cell surface of mutant cells at wild - type rates . We also explored the involvement of clathrin heavy chain in the trafficking of lysosomal enzymes . Pulse chase analysis revealed that clathrin - minus cells processed most ot - mannosidase to mature forms , however , " ~ 20 - 25 % of the precursor molecules remained un - cleaved , were missorted , and were rapidly secreted by the constitutive secretory pathway . The remaining in - tracellular c ~ - rnannosidase was successfully targeted to mature lysosomes . Standard secretion assays showed that the rate of secretion of ot - mannosidase was significantly less in clathrin - minus cells compared to control cells in growth medium . Interestingly , the secretion rates of another lysosomal enzyme , acid phosphatase , were similar in clathrin - minus and wild - type cells . Like wild - type cells , clathrin - minus mu - tants responded to starvation conditions with increased lysosomal enzyme secretion . Our study of the mutant cells provide in vivo evidence for roles for the clathrin heavy chain in ( a ) the internalization of fluid from the plasma membrane ; ( b ) sorting of hydrolase precursors from the constitutive secretory pathway to the lyso - somal pathway ; and ( c ) secretion of mature hydrolases from lysosomes to the extracellular space . T I ~ organized and directed movement of intracellular membranes and proteins are fundamental to the basic organization and functions of the eukaryotic cell . One way in which cells selectively invaginate and direct mem - brane traffic is via clathrin - coated regions of membranes and vesicles . Clathrin complexes on the plasma membrane gather specific receptors and facilitate receptor internaliza - tion into clathrin - coated vesicles for subsequent delivery to endosomes ( Brodsky , 1988 ; Keen , 1990 ) . As clathrin - coated vesicles bring receptors and their ligands into the cell , nutrients and fluids can follow by bulk - flow pinocytosis . Membrane proteins and extraceUular liquids are also inter - nalized by non - clathrin - mediated pathways ; however , the overall contribution of this pathway to endocytosis is not known for most cells ( Hansen et at . , 1991 ) . Previous studies of clathrin - deficient Dictyostelium discoideum cells created by antisense vectors demonstrated that the majority of fluid - phase endocytosis was dependent on the presence of func - tional clathrin ( O ' HaUoran and Anderson , 1992a ) . However , Address all correspondence to James A . Cardelli , Department of Microbi - ology and Immunology , Louisiana State University Medical Center , 1501 Kings Highway , Shreveport , LA 71130 . the low level of endocytosis exhibited by the antisense ceUs could be caused by a residual clathrin - mediated pathway and not by non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Beyond its role in endocytosis , clathrin may also be in - volved in the sorting of lysosomal enzymes from the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) ~ ( Kornfeld and Mellman , 1989 ) . Proteins destined for lysosomes are synthesized and mod - ified as they travel the secretory pathway . In mammalian cells , the oligosaccharide side chains of lysosomal enzymes are modified by phosphorylation of mannose sugars , and these moieties are bound by the cation - dependent or the cation - independent mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor ( MPR ) ( Kornfeld and Mellman , 1989 ) . The MPR binds lysosomal enzymes in the TGN , and this receptor - ligand complex is targeted to the endolysosomal system . In a targeting process analogous to receptor - mediated endocytosis at the plasma membrane , MPRs and their lysosomal protein cargo may cluster in the TGN , associate with clathrin , and bud from 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : chc , clathrin heavy chain ; chc - , dath - rin - minus Dictyostelium cell line ; chcA , the gene in Dictyostelium ; Meses buffer , 20 mM MES ( 2 - [ N - morpholino ] ethanesulfonic acid ) ; MPR , man - nose - 6 - phosphate receptor ; TGN , trans - Golgi Network ; 2H9 , monoclonal antibodies against a - mannosidase . © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 94 / 07 / 343 / 10 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 126 , Number 2 , July 1994 343 - 352 343 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m the membrane as clathrin - coated vesicles . This trafficking mechanism is supported by studies in mammalian cells that have shown that lysosomal enzymes are found in clathrin - coated vesicles , and that the cation - independent MPR can be associated with clathrin coats through its COOH - terminal cytoplasmic tail . Thus , clathrin may be a key component in the MPR - dependent sorting process ( Dahms et al . , 1989 ; Lobel , 1989 ) . Dictyostelium and the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae apparently lack MPRs and lysosomal enzyme tar - geting proceeds along an MPR - independent pathway ( Car - delli et al . , 1986 , 1987 ; Vails et al . , 1987 ) . This MPR - independent pathway may also exist in mammalian cells ( Dahms et al . , 1989 ) . To date , the mechanism of protein sorting in the MPR - independent pathway is not well under - stood . Indeed , membrane proteins in yeast may not require specialized vesicles for transit to the vacuole because recent evidence suggests that the vacuole may be the default com - partment ( Roberts et al . , 1992 ) . S . cerevisiae mutants that carry a temperature - sensitive allele of the clathrin heavy chain show an initial inhibition of protein sorting to the lysosome - like vacuole when incubated at the nonpermissive temperature for short periods . However , this effect is only transient ; over long periods at the nonpermissive tempera - ture , these mutants recover the ability to target proteins to the vacuole , suggesting that clathrin is not an absolute re - quirement for protein targeting to the vacuole ( Seeger and Payne , 1992a ) . Like S . cerevisiae , Dictyostelium apparently uses a MPR - independent pathway to target hydrolases to lysosomes ( Car - delli et al . , 1993 ) . D . discoideum lysosomal hydrolases are synthesized as membrane - bound precursor polypeptides in the ER , where they are glycosylated on Ash residues ( Car - delli et al . , 1986 , 1987 ) . The precursor polypeptides are transported to the Golgi apparatus , where the oligosaccha - ride side chains are further modified by sulfation and phos - phorylation ( Freeze and Wolgast , 1986 ; Mierendorf et al . , 1985 ) . In a later Golgi compartment or in endosomes , the precursors are cleaved to generate intermediate subunits , and finally in the lysosome , they are processed into the solu - ble mature enzymes ( Cladaras and Kaplan , 1984 ; Richard - son et al . , 1988 ) . The lysosome is not a dead - end compart - ment for the newly synthesized mature lysosomal hydrolases ; they are secreted from the cell along a specific pathway thought to include a distinct intracelhlar compartment ( termed the postlysosomal compartment ) ( Padh et al . , 1993 ) . We have chosen to examine the role of the clathrin heavy chain in two aspects of membrane traffic : the endocytosis of fluid from the plasma membrane and the trafficking of lysosomal hydrolases to lysosomes . As a tool for these studies , we have generated a clathrin - minus Dictyostelium cell line ( ehc - ) that lacks a functional clathrin heavy chain gene . We find that the chc - cells are viable ; however , the mutant cells are defective in fluid - phase endocytosis , sorting of hydrolases to the lysosome , and secretion of hydrolases from the lysosome . Materials and Methods Cell Growth D . discoideum ( strain Ax2 ) was grown in HL5 medium ( 1 % oxoid proteose peptone , 1 % glucose , 0 . 5 % yeast extract ( Difco Laboratories , Inc . , Detroit , MI ) , 2 . 4 mM Na2HPO4 , and 8 . 8 mM KI - I2PO4 , pH 6 . 5 ) supplemented with penicillin - streptomycin ( GIBCO BRL , Gaithersburg , MD ) at 60 U / mi . For transformant selection , the media also contained 10 ~ g / ml G418 ( GIBCO BRL ) . In all other procedures , cells were grown in T2s tissue culture flasks in HL5 media unless otherwise indicated . Generation and Characterization of chc - Cell Line Standard molecular biology techniques were performed according to the methods of Sambrook et ai . ( 1989 ) . pTO123 was created by replacing the middle portion of the clathrin heavy chain gene with the 2 . l - kb neomycin resistance gene . The plasmid pTO123 was constructed from pTZ2 . 1 ( Man - stein et al . , 1989 ) with the 2 . l - kb neomycin selectable marker of pTZ2 . 1 flanked 5 ' by the 2 . 8 - kb BamHI - BglII fragment of the chcA gene ( O ' Hallo - ran and Anderson , 1992b ) inserted into the BamHI site and 3 ' by the 1 . l - kb SspI fragment cloned into the SalI site ( blunted ) of PTZ2 . 1 . pTO123 was transformed into Ax2 cells by electroporation using a gene pulser ( Bio Rad Laboratories , Richmond , CA ) as according to Kuspa and Loomis ( 1992 ) . Briefly , Ax2 cells ( 2 x 107 ) Were pelleted by centrifuga - tion at 228 g and resuspended in 0 . 8 mi electroporation buffer ( 10 mM so - dium phosphate , pH ~ 1 , and . 50 mM sucrose ) . Plasmid DNA ( 15 / ~ g ) was mixed with the resuspended cells in a plastic 0 . 5 - cm cuvette and incubated on ice for 10 min . Electroporation was carried out on the cells at 1 . 2 kV , 3 . 0 ~ F , and 200 t , followed by a 10 - min recovery period on ice . The cells then recovered overnight in a petri dish containing HL5 / Pen - Strep / G418 and were plated the next day into three 96 - well plates . Dictyostelium DNA was prepared by Sarkosyl lysis followed by olganic extraction ( Manstein et al . , 1989 ) . Southern blots were prepared from 0 . 7 % agarose gels and transferred to Hybond N + ( Amersham Corp . , Arlington Heights , IL ) using standard methods ( Sambrook et al . , 1989 ) . RNA was prepared by the method of Nellen et al . ( 1987 ) . For Nordmrn blots , 10 / ~ g of RNA was electrophoresed in a 1 % agarose gel in the presence of 3 % formaldehyde . After electrophoresis , equivalent bands of ribosomal RNA were seen in each sample of the ethidium bromide - stained gel , confirming equal loading of each RNA sample . Southern and Northern blots were probed with I0 ~ cpm / ml of various Dictyostelium clathrin heavy chain DNA fragments labeled with [ c ~ - 32p ] dCTP using a random - primed DNA labeling kit ( Boehringer Mannheim Biochemicals , Indianapolis , IN ) . Protein Characterization For Western analysis , 100 ~ g of protein was analyzed on 7 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels and subsequently transferred to nitrocellulose . The nitrocellulose was incubated with Blotto ( 5 % dry milk , 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 , 50 mM Tris - HCl , and 0 . 15 M NaCI , pH 7 . 5 ) and then incubated for 1 h with the rabbit anti - Dictyostelium clathrin heavy chain serum diluted 1 : 1000 in primary antibody solution ( 5 % bovine serum albumin , 0 . 02 % sodium azide , 50 mM Tris - HC1 , and 0 . 15 M NaC1 , pH 7 . 5 ) . After washing for 1 h with l× TBS ( 10 mM Tris , 150 raM NaCl , pH 7 . 4 ) containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , the nitrocellulose was incubated with horseradish peroxidase - con - jugated goat anti - rabbit IgG ( H + L ) ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) diluted 1 : 1000 in Blotto . After an additional hour of washes , the color was developed using 3 rng / mi 4 - chloro 1 - napthol and hydrogen peroxide . Protein concentrations were determined with protein assay ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) using bovine gamma globulin as a standard . Measurement of Hnocytosis Pinocytosis was measured according to the method of Klein and Satre ( 1986 ) . Log - phase cells were harvested , plated at 1 - 2 x 106 cells / ml in HL5 ( 2 ml total ) in a 60 - ram petri dish , and grown overnight until the cells were at a titer of 3 - 4 x 106 cells / ml . FITC - dextran ( 70 , 000 Mr ; Sigma Im - munochemicals , St . Louis , MO ) was added to a final concentration of 2 mg / ml . All samples were kept covered at 20°C , and zero time points were kept covered on ice water for 30 rain before assaying . To stop pinocytosis , the cells were washed twice by centrifugetion with ice - cold HL5 and resuspended in 10 mi ice - cold HL5 . Cells were spun cold at 228 g for 5 rain and the supernatant was removed . The cells were resuspended in 3 ml of 50 mM Na2HPO4 buffer , pH 9 . 2 , counted , and then lysed with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 . Fluorescence was measured on a fluorimeter ( Beckman In - struments , Inc . , Fullerton , CA ) using excitation and emission wavelengths of 470 and 520 rim , respectively . FITC - dextran was diluted to make a stan - dard curve and the amount of FITC - dextran pinocytosed per 106 cells was calculated . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 126 , 1994 344 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Enzyme Assays ~ x - Mannosidase , B - glucosidase , and acid phosphatase enzyme activity were measured as previously described ( Bennet and Dimond , 1986 ; Free and Loomis , 1974 ; Dimond and Loomis , 1974 ) . Radiolabel Pulse Chase Analysis and Immunoprecipitation Cells were grown to , 080 - 90 % confluency in 10 ml of HL5 in T ~ flasks . The media was gently aspirated from each plate , replaced with 2 ml HL5 containin ~ 625 t ~ Ci of [ 35S ] methionine ( 6 , 000 ~ Ci / ml ; New England Nu - clear , Du Pont Chemicals , Boston , MA ) , and incubated at 21°C for 20 - 30 rain . At the end of the pulse period , the labeled media was collected and replaced by 2 ml of unlabeled HL5 . For every chase point , one flask was harvested by gently removing the media and resuspending the cell monolayer in 1 ml of 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 . The cell and media samples were adjusted to a final concentration of lx C buffer ( 50 mM Na2EDTA , 150 mM NaC1 , 50 mM Tris Base , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 2 mM methionine , 1 mM NAN3 ) using a 5x concentrated stock . The samples were precleared using 0 . 1 ml of lx C - buffered Pansorbin ( Calbiochem - Novabiochem Corp . , La Jolla , CA ) ; the samples were incubated on ice for 1 h and then centrifuged at 12 , 000 g for 3 rain to pellet the Pansorbin . The supernatant was incubated on ice for 1 . 5 - 2 h with 1 ~ tl of ascites fluid containing monoclonal antibodies against ¢x - mannosidnse . 125 ~ tl of lX C - buffered Pansorbin were added to the samples and then incubated on ice for 1 - 1 . 5 h . The Pansorbin / anti - body / antigen complexes were washed by centrifugatlon in lx C three times and eluted in 2x Laemmli buffer by heating for 3 - 5 min at 80 " C . Samples were run on 7 . 5 % SDS - PAGE gels ( Laemmli , 1980 ) , subjected to fluorogra - phy ( EN3HANCE ; New England Nuclear ) , and exposed using x - ray film ( X - Omat ; Eastman Kodak Co . , Rochester , NY ) . Percoll Gradient Fractionation Cells were grown in 10 ntis HL5 medium in T25 flasks to 80 - 90 % confluency , mechanically harvested , and added to 250 ml of C ~ 1 carrier cells growing at 3 x 106 cells / ml ( see Cardelli et al . , 1990 ) . The strain C ~ l contains mutations in the ¢x - mannosidase and / ~ - glucosidase genes and is effectively devoid of both of these enzymatic activities . Cell were washed twice by centrifugation ( 1 , 000 g for 5 rain ) and resnspended in Mesas buffer ( 20 mM MES ( 2 - [ N - morpholino ] ethanesulfoulc acid ) , 1 mM EDTA , and 250 raM sucrose , pH 6 . 5 ) . The cells were mechanically disrupted using a tight - fitting Dounce homogenizer ( Wheaton Scientific , Mlllville , NJ ) . The unbroken cells and nuclei were pelleted by 1 , 000 g centrifugation , and the postnuclear supernatant was recovered . The unbroken cells were resus - pended in 3 ml Meses buffer and subjected to a second round of homogeni - zation and centrifugation . The post - nuclear supernatants were combined and 5 ml were layered on a cushion of 24 % Percoll in buffer containing 250 mM sucrose . The gradients were formed in a fixed - angle rotor ( type 40 . 2 ) at 25 , 000 g for 1 h at 4°C . 1 . 25 - ml fractions were collected starting from the bottom of the gradient , and the membranes were solubilized by the addi - tion of 10 % Triton X - 100 to a final concentration of 0 . 5 % . Enzymes were assayed as described above . Immunofluorescent Cell Staining Immunofluorescent cell staining was performed as previously described ( Bush and Cardelli , 1989 ) with minor modifications . Cells were grown in 10 - ml HL5 media in T25 flasks to 50 % confluency . The cells were mechan - icaily harvested and 300 / ~ 1 of cells were pipetted onto glass coverslips in - side a covered 35 x 10 mm plastic petri dish and were allowed to adhere for 1 h . The cells were fixed in 2 . 5 ml of 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS ( 10 mM Na2PO4 , 150 mM NaCI , pH 7 . 4 ) for 1 h at room temperature . The fixative was removed from the petri dishes , and the coverslips were bathed in a blocking solution ( PBS with 0 . 1 % gelatin ) for 10 min followed by three washes in 2 . 5 ml PBS supplemented with 0 . 5 % Tween 20 . Monoclonal anti - bodies against c ~ - mannosidase ( 2H9 ) were added to the top of the coverslips at a l : 100 dilution in PBS containing 0 . 1 % sapouln and 2 . 5 mg / ml BSA ( an - tibody solution ) . After a 2 - h incubation at 4°C , the coversllps were washed three times as described above . Fluorescein - conjugated goat anti - mouse secondary antibodies ( Southern Biotech , Birmingham , AL ) were added to the coverslips at a 1 : 50 dilution in antibody solution and incubated at 4 " C for 1 . 5 h . The coverslips were washed as described above and mounted to microscope slides using PBS - buffered glycerol supplemented with I mg / ml phenylenediamine ( Johnson , 1981 ) and sealed with clear nail polish . Photo - graphs were taken with black and white 400 ASA T - max film . Standard Secretion Assays Cells were grown at 21°C in 10 ml HL5 media on T25 tissue culture flasks until they were , ~ 70 - 90 % confluent . The media were gently aspirated , and 2 ml of HL5 media or starvation buffer ( 10 mM phosphate buffer , pH 6 . 5 , 50 mM glucose ) were added to each plate . At the times indicated , one T25 plate was harvested by gentle aspiration of the media or buffer , and the at - tached cell monolayer was harvested by addition of 0 . 5 ml of 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 . Results Creation and Characterization of Clathrin - minus Cells The clathrin heavy chain ( chc ) gene in Dictyostelium , chcA , exists as a single copy 5 . 3 - kb gene ( O ' Halloran and Ander - son , 1992b ) ( Figure 1 C ) . To establish a permanent clathrin - minus cell line , we targeted the chcA gene with a linear piece of DNA designed to replace 0 . 8 kb from the middle portion of the gene with a 2 . 2 - kb selectable neomycin resistance marker . To accomplish homologous recombination of the marker into the chcA locus , the neomycin marker was flanked by 2 . 8 kb of coding sequence from the 5 ' region of the gene and 1 . 2 kb of sequence from the 3 ' end of the gene ( Fig . 1 B ) . This linear DNA construct was introduced into wild - type Ax2 cells by electroporation . The transformation procedure yielded a total of 41 independent G418 - resistant colonies that were analyzed for the presence of clathrin heavy chain protein by Western blot analysis . These tests re - vealed one colony , HO101 , that was devoid of the 190 - kD clathrin heavy chain protein ( Fig . 2 A ) . We selected the HO101 colony for further study , as well as another colony , HO102 , with wild - type levels of clathrin heavy chain to use as a control . Northern blot analysis of the HO101 cells demonstrated that the absence of chc protein was caused by a lack of chc mRNA . While cells from the control colony had levels of clathrin heavy chain message that were equiva - lent to the parental strain Ax2 , the chc - strain had a com - plete absence of the 5 . 2 - kb clathrin heavy chain message ( Fig . 2 B ) . Southern blots of genomic DNA confirmed that the mutant the - cell line arose from homologous recombination of the selectable marker into the chcA locus . A probe derived from the portion of the gene that was replaced by the selectahle marker detected the 2 . 8 - kh BamHI - BglII fragment predicted in wild - type DNA , but detected no signal from genomic DNA purified from the mutant cell line ( Fig . 1 A , probe / ) . This result confirmed that the chcA gene was destroyed by the replacement of the middle portion of the chcA gene by the neomycin marker in a double crossover event . A second probe derived from the 5 ' end of the chcA gene revealed the predicted 2 . 8 - kb BamHI - BglII fragment in wild - type Ax2 DNA , but detected a 9 . 1 kb BamHI and a 6 . 2 - kb BamI - II - BglII band in the mutant DNA . This pattern can be explained by extra copies of the parent plasmid in tandem integration into the 5 ' end of the gene ( Fig . 1 D ) . The intensity of the 9 . 1 - kb BamHI band suggested that multiple copies of the par - ent plasmid integrated into the gene , a phenomenon that has been observed previously in Dictyostelium transformants selected with neomycin ( Manstein et al . , 1989 ) . Further - more , the presence of the 9 . 1 - kb BamHI band demonstrated that the plasmid had integrated exclusively into the chcA lo - cus ; no bands attributable to other loci were detected . Ruscetti et sl . The Role of Clathrin in Sorting and Secretion 345 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m B B . amHI Pstl 5 ' l . . . . . . . . ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J Sspl 8spJ [ . . . . . . . . . . I , . . . , . , . . , . - , . , . , . . . , i 3 ' Neo r pTZ18R C BamHI Pstl I I 5 ' Probe 2 _ caSl ~ pl BalII Probe 1 2 . 8 kb 2 kb D 5 ' J - . . . . . . . . J . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 ~ . . . . . . . . . i . ~ y Probe 2 Probe 2 9 . 1 kb 6 . 2 kb Figure 1 . Chc - cells contain a disrupted clathrin heavy chain gene . ( , 4 ) Southern blots of genomic DNA from Ax2 and chc - cells were digested with BamHI and BgllI and probed with the 0 . 8 - kb BglII - ScaI fragment ( probe 1 ) and the 1 . 1 - kb BamHI - PstI fragment ( probe 2 ) of the chcA gene . ( B ) The linearized plasmid , pTO123 , used for homologous recombination , contains the chcA gene in pTZ18R in which the 0 . 8 - kb BgUI - ScaI chaA fragment was replaced with the 2 . 2 - kb neomycin resisthnce marker . ( C ) The wild - type chcA restriction map is shown . Probe 1 detects a 2 . 0 - kb fragment in Ax2 DNA while probe 2 detects a 2 . 8 - kb fragment . ( D ) The restriction map of the - DNA is shown . Probe 1 does not detect any fragment in chc - DNA , indicating that this portion of the chcA gene has been deleted from the mutant DNA . Probe 2 detects 6 . 2 - and 9 . 1 - kb bands in chc - DNA , indicating that the plasmid ( 9 kb ) has integrated into the genome and disrupted the chcA gene , yielding a 6 - kb fragment . The circle represents a BgUI site that was destroyed during the cloning process , and the triangle represents the site where multiple copies of the 9 - kb plasmid have integrated into the genome . Sn ' ppled box , pTZ18R ; white box , neomycin resistance gene ; hatched boxes , chcA gene . Endocytosis by chc - Cells We found that the chc - cell line was viable but grew more slowly than control or wild - type cultures . Exponentially growing cultures of control cell lines had a doubling time of 12 h , whereas exponentially growing cultures of chc - cells doubled every 21 h . Since Dictyostelium cells grow in axenic media by virtue of fluid - phase endocytosis , the slow growth of the chc - cells could be explained by a defect in endocyto - sis . To evaluate the role of the clathrin heavy chain in fluid - phase endocytosis , we measured the ability of the chc - cells to internalize the fluid phase marker , fluorescein - labeled dextran . This 70 , 000 - Mr molecule is too large to cross the membrane passively and thus serves as a fluid phase marker . Logarithmically growing cultures of control cells and chc - cells were incubated in growth media with the labeled dex - Figure 2 . Clathrin heavy chain protein and RNA are undetectable in chc - cells . ( A ) Whole - cell lysates were separated on a 7 . 5 % acrylamide gel , transferred to nitrocellulose , and clathrin heavy chain was detected with a rabbit anticlathrin polyclonal antibody followed by HRP - conjugated goat anti - rabbit secondary antibody . Results show that the 190 - kD clathrin heavy chain protein is present in Ax2 and control cells , but is absent from chc - cells . The band at 60 kD is nonspecific but serves as a convenient loading control . ( B ) Total RNA was isolated , separated on a formaldehyde gel , transferred to nitrocellulose , and probed with probe 1 . Ax2 and control cells show the expected 5 . 2 - kb RNA signal , but chc - cells show no signal , indicating that the chcA RNA is not present . ( C ) The same blot was stripped of the chcA probe and hybridized with a myosin heavy chain probe to confirm equal loading . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 126 , 1994 346 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m A . ~ 0 . 5 ~ 0 . 4 ~ 0 . 3 " i 0 . 2 ~ 0 . 1 ~ 0 . 0 B I I I I I I 20 40 60 80 100 120 Minutes 11301 / / ~ 0 I I I / / ~ 0 1 2 3 4 7 . 5 Hours Figure 3 . Pinocytosis in chc - cells is defective but exocytosis is normal . ( , 4 ) Control ( closed circles ) or chc - cells ( open circles ) were incubated with 2 mg / ml FITC - dextran . Intracellular fluores - cence was measured at the time points indicated , and the amount of FITC - dextran internalized per 106 cells was plotted . Control and chc - cells pinocytosed a maximum of 0 . 4 # 1 and 0 . 1 / zl dextran per 106 cells , respectively . The initial rate of dextran uptake in chc - ceils was 4 . 6 - fold less than control cells . ( B ) Control ( closed circles ) or chc - ceils ( open circles ) were incubated with 2 mg / ml FITC - dextran for 2 h , washed twice with fresh HL5 , and incubated with fresh HL5 for the time points indicated . Intraceilular fluores - cence was measured and the percent of the total FITC - dextran exo - cytosed was plotted . Chc - and control cells exocytosed FITC - dextran at similar rates . tran for various amounts of time . Subsequently , the cells were washed free of extracellular dextran , lysed with deter - gent , and the amount of internalized dextran was quantified with a fluorimeter . In comparison with control cells , che - cells showed a marked depression of both the rate and the extent of fluid - phase endocytosis ( Fig . 3 A ) . Chc - cells ac - cumulated the fluid - phase marker at a rate that was 4 . 6 - fold lower than control cells ( 1 . 4 nl dextrardl0 + cells per rain vs 6 . 5 nl dextraxffl06 cells per min , respectively , for the first 30 rain ) . The extent to which the mutant ebc - cells aceu - mulateA the marker was also depressed relative to control cells : uptake reached equilibrium at levels fourfold lower than wild - type ceils ( 0 . 1 # 1 dextran / 106 cells vs 0 . 4 / ~ 1 dex - tran / 10 ~ cells ) . These results are in agreement with previ - ous results with elathrin - minus cells generated by antisense plasmids that showed initial rates eightfold lower than wild type and a fourfold lower accumulation of fluid - phase mark - ers ( O ' Hailoran and Anderson , 1992a ) . The low rate of accumulation of dextran by the the - cells suggests that elathrin acts directly to facilitate endocytosis from the plasma membrane . However , an alternative sce - nario could also explain the reduced rate and extent of fluid phase uptake by the chc - cells . It is possible that the fluid phase markers are endocytosed at normal levels but that they recycle to the media by a faster rate of exocytosis . This result would be observed if , for example , elathrin was required for the presence of an endosomal compartment where the pinocytosed material is accumulated . To distinguish between these possibilities , we examined exocytosis of fluoreseein - labeled dextran in che - and control cells . The cells were loaded with dextran for 2 h , assuring that their endocytic compartments were filled completely . We then placed the cells in fresh media , and measured the amount of dextran that remained in the cell over time . Fig . 3 B shows that both the rate and extent of exocytosis of internalized dextran was similar : control cells exocytosed 0 . 79 % of their dextran stores / rain while the mutants exocytosed 0 . 70 % / rain ( aver - aged during 60 min ) . Thus , the failure of chc - mutants to accumulate dextran can be attributed to a deficiency in inter - nalization and not increased export of internalized fluid to the extraeeUular space . The Clathrin Heavy Chain is Required for F _ ~ cient Protein Sorting of Lysosomal ~ - Mannosidase In addition to its role in endocytosis , elathrin may be in - volved in sorting of proteins from the secretory pathway ( Kornfeld and Mellman , 1989 ; Seeger and Payne , 1992a ) . To determine the role of the elathrin heavy chain in the sort - ing of D . discoideum lysosomal proteins , we performed ra - diolabel pulse - chase analysis to examine the processing and secretion of the lysosomal enzyme , u - mannosidase , in con - trol and chc - cells , a , - Mannosidase is synthesized as a 140 - kD membrane - bound precursor that is processed to an 80 - kD intermediate and the 58 - kD mature subunit in the late Golgi or early endosomes ( Cardelli et al . , 1990 ) . In lyso - somes , the 80 - kD intermediate is cleaved to generate the 60 - kD mature subunit ( Richardson et al . , 1988 ) and together , the 58 - and 60 - kD subunits form the soluble heterotetra - merle holoenzyme found in lysosomes . Normally , > t95 % of the ot - mannosidase precursor is segregated from the consti - tutive secretory pathway into the lysosomal targeting path - way , while the remaining precursor polypeptides continue in the default secretory pathway and are rapidly secreted from the cell in precursor form ( Cardelli et al . , 1986 ; Mieren - dorf et al . 1985 ) . Logarithmically growing cultures of Ax2 , control and ehc - cells were metabolically labeled for 40 min with 35S [ methionine ] ( pulse ) and then chased in unla - beled media for 5 h . Samples were taken at 0 , 1 , 2 . 5 , and 5 h of chase and separated by eentrifugation into cellular and supernatant fractions . Antibodies specific for o ~ - mannosi - dase were used to immunoprecipitate the enzyme from each Ruscctti et al . The Role of Clathrin in Sorting and Secretion 347 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 4 . Pulse chase analysis of the - cell lines . Growing cells were pulsed with [ 35S ] methionine in HL5 media for 40 min and chased for the times indicated in unlabeled media . Each sample was incubated with monoclonal antibodies specific for ¢x - marmosidase . SDS - PAGE and fluorography were used to separate and visualize the immuno - precipitated protein . sample ( Fig . 4 ) . The relative rates of synthesis of o ~ - mannosi - dase were 10 - fold lower in chc - cells compared to wild - type and control cells ( results not shown ) and , therefore , the autoradiographs of the ehc - cell samples required a longer exposure to achieve a signal comparable to Ax2 and control samples . We determined that the decreased rate of ~ , - man - nosidase synthesis in the - cells was the result of a decrease in the relative levels of ot - mannosidase message ( data not shown ) . This may reflect the inability of the - cells to detect or effectively secrete the prestarvation factor ; a glycoprotein responsible for increasing transcription of the o ~ - mannosi - dase gene and other prestarvation factor - responsive genes ( Schatzle et al . , 1993 ) . In all three strains examined , a , - man - nosidase was synthesized as 140 - kD precursor ( Fig . 4 , lanes marked 0 ) . In each strain , ' ~ 90 % of the intracellular precur - sor molecules were proteolytically processed into the 80 - kD intermediate and 60 - and 58 - kD mature subunits by 1 h of chase ( Fig . 4 ) . By 5 h of chase , 80 - 90 % of the cell - associ - ated immunoprecipitable ot - mannosidase was found as the mature enzyme . In samples from control and Ax2 cells , < 5 % of the detectable ¢x - rnannosidase precursor molecule was found extracellularly , and > 90 % of the intracellular pre - cursor was processed into mature enzyme . Although chc - cells proteolytieally processed most of the ot - marmosidase precursor , , ~ 25 - 30 % of the precursor remained unpro - cessed and was rapidly secreted ( missorted ) from the mutant cells ( Fig . 4 , chc - panel ) . Missorting of the newly synthe - sized c ~ - mannosidase precursor in the absence of clathrin heavy chain supports a role for clathrin in maintaining the fidelity of the sorting process . Lysosomal Enzymes Retained in chc - Cells are Correctly Localized to Lysosomes Three lines of evidence support the hypothesis that intracel - lularly retained a - rnannosidase was correctly targeted to lysosomes in chc - cells . First , the final processing event of the ot - mannosidase precursor molecule is the cleavage of the 80 - kD intermediate polypeptide into the 60 - kD mature subunit and this event occurs in lysosomes ( Wood and Kaplan , 1985 ; Richardson et al . , 1988 ; Mierendorf et al . , 1985 ) . Radiolabel pulse chase analysis ( described above ) re - vealed that chc - cells were capable of this final processing event suggesting that ot - mannosidase was localized to lyso - somes . In addition , we performed subcellular fractionation to determine the localization of c ~ - mannosidase in the mutant cells . Control and chc - cells were broken in isotonic buffer and cell nuclei were pelleted . The remaining cellular or - ganelles and cytoplasm were separated by virtue of their den - sity on isopycnic Percoll gradients . Each fraction of the gra - dient was assayed for ot - mannosidase enzyme activity , which was expressed as the percent of total enzyme activity in the entire gradient ( Fig . 5 ) . Fractionation of control cells re - vealed a peak of a - mannosidase enzyme activity predomi - nantly in the dense fractions of the gradient ( fractions 2 - - 4 ) , corresponding most likely to mature dense lysosomes . A second , smaller peak of enzyme activity was observed in less dense fractions ( fractions 11 - 14 ) , and it corresponded in density to ER and Golgi membranes ( data not shown ) , These lighter membranes containing cx - mannosidase enzyme activ - ity may be analogous to endosomal vesicles or transport vesicles carrying hydrolases to lysosomes . Fractions 16 - 21 represent the soluble portion of the gradient and enzyme ac - tivity in these fractions represents hydrolase - containing vesi - 20 " . ~ 15 10 o ~ 5 10 15 20 Bottom Fraction Top Figure 5 . Subcellular fractionation of chc - cells . Logarithmically growing cells were disrupted and separated by density on an isopyc - nic Percoll gradient . The fractions of the gradient were solubilized and assayed for enzyme activity . Fraction 1 represents the bottom of the gradient and the most dense fraction . The peak of ~ x - mannosi - dase enzyme activity in both chc - ( o ) and control ( [ ] ) cells is found in fractions 2 - 5 , presumably representing dense lysosomes . There is a smaller peak of enzyme activity in lighter membrane fractions ( 10 - 15 ) that correspond to the ER and Golgi fractions ( data not shown ) . Fractions 16 - 21 represent the soluble portion of the gradient , and enzyme activities in these fractions may identify enzymes that were released from lysosomes during the fraction - ation process . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 126 , 1994 348 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Figure 6 . c ~ - Mannosidase is localized to punctate structures by im - munofluorescent cell staining . Growing cells were allowed to ad - here to coverslips , fixed with 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS , and per - meabilized with saponin . Murine monoclonal antibodies specific for c ~ - rnatmosidase ( 2H9 ) were incubated with the fixed cells , and the bound antibodies were visualized using F1TC - conjugated anti - mouse antibodies . The antibodies predominantly decorated distinct punctate structures in wild - type , control , and chc - cells , suggesting the ct - mannosidase was localized to lysosomes . cles that have been disrupted by the fractionation process . The overall profile on Percoll gradients of ot - mannosidase enzyme activity from chc - postnuclear supernatants was very similar to that observed for control cells , except that a higher percentage of the total o ~ - marmosidase enzyme activ - ity was found in the dense fractions . Furthermore , the peak of enzyme activity from fractionated chc - cells was found in a slightly more dense fraction of the gradient than was the peak activity from control cells ( Fig . 5 , fraction 2 vs fraction 3 ) . The relative levels of o ~ - marmosidase enzyme activity in the lighter membrane fractions were equivalent in both chc - and control cells . We also used indirect immunofluorescent cell staining to localize ot - mannosidase in cells . As indicated in Fig . 6 , ~ mannosidase antibodies stained punctate intracellular structures consistent with lysosomal staining in each of the cell lines tested . Antibodies to lysosomai enzyme , acid phos - phatase , also decorated punctate structures in chc - , Ax2 , and control cells ( data not shown ) . Taken together , these data suggest that the clathrin heavy chain does not affect the localization of intracellularly retained lysosomal enzymes to dense lysosomes . Secretion of Lysosomal Enzymes is Impaired in Clathrin Heavy Chain - deficient Cells As indicated in Fig . 4 , after 2 . 5 h of chase , the newly labeled intermediate and mature forms of c ~ - mannosidase were de - tected in the extracellular media in cultures of Ax2 and con - trol cells , and after 5 h of chase , , 070 % of the radiolabeled mature ot - mannosidase had been secreted ( Fig . 4 , Control and Ax2 ) . In contrast , secretion of the radiolabeled mature and intermediate forms of ot - mannosidase was severely im - paired in chc - cultures ; < 10 % of these radiolabeled forms were detected in the extracellular media after 5 h of chase ( Fig . 4 , chc - panel ) . To determine if hydrolases accumulated to higher levels in chc - cells compared to wild type , we determined the steady - state intracellular versus extracellular distribution of three lysosomal enzymes , oemannosidase , ~ - glucosidase , and acid phosphatase . Logarithmically growing cultures ( midlog phase ) were separated into intracellular and media ( extracellular ) fractions by centrifugation . The intracellular enzyme activities of the three lysosomal hydrolases were measured and expressed as the percent of the total ( intracel - lular and extracellular ) enzyme activity ( Fig . 7 ) . Only 10 - 15 % of the total ot - mannosidase and / 3 - glucosidase en - zyme activities was found in logarithmically growing wild - type and control cells , while in contrast , 45 - 50 % of these glycosidases were retained in the chc - cells . This fourfold increase in the level of intracellular lysosomal enzyme activ - ity in chc - cells is consistent with a secretion defect for a - mannosidase and / 3 - glucosidase . However , the amount of acid pbosphatase retained intracellularly was similar for wild - type , control , and chc - cells . Also , as previously ob - served , the relative level of acid phosphatase enzyme activity in wild - type cells is almost threefold that of the glycosidases . To more accurately quantify the secretion defect , standard secretion assays were performed . In these assays , logarithmi - cally growing cells were harvested and resuspended in either growth media or starvation buffer , and lysosomal enzyme ac - tivity was measured in both cells and media at various times ( Fig . 8 ) . During growth conditions , ~ mannosidase enzyme was secreted from both wild - type and control cells at the same rate ( 11 - 12 % of the total enzyme activity was found in the media at 30 rain ) ( Fig . 8 A ) . By 4 h , " 045 % of the total ot - mannosidase enzyme activity was found outside of wild - type and control cells . In contrast , after 4 h , , o10 % of the enzyme activity was found in the extracellular media in chc - cultures ( Fig . 8 A ) . To determine whether the secre - tion defect was specific for ¢ - mannosidase , we examined the secretion of other lysosomal hydrolases . We found that the chc - cells undersecreted another glycosidase , ~ glucosi - dase , to the same extent as ~ - mannosidase ( data not shown ) . In addition , we examined a third enzyme , acid phosphatase , previously shown to be secreted during growth with slower 50 - ~ 40 - 30 - . ~ 20 - ~ 10 - O - MANN GLU PHOS Lysosomal Enzymes Figure 7 . Intracellular retention of lysosomal enzymes in chc - cells vs wild - type cells . Logarithmically growing cells were sepa - rated into cellular and media fractions by centrifugation , lysed with Triton X - 100 , and each fraction was assayed for lysosomal enzyme activity . In chc - cells ( black bars ) , 45 - 50 % of the glycosidases , c ~ - mannosidase , and / 3 - glucosidase were cell - associated compared to only 10 - 15 % of the enzymes in the wild - type ( white bars ) and control cells ( hatched bars ) . Acid phosphatase was cell - associated to the same extent in all cell types tested . Ruscetti et al . The Role of Clathrin in Sorting and Secretion 349 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m GROWTH ALPHA MANNOSIDASE ACID PHOSPItATASE A 7o ~ = S0 - 30 - ilo gu 1 . 0 2 . 5 4 . 0 HOURS 1 . 0 2 . 5 4 . 0 STARVATION ALPHA MANNOSIDASE ACID PHOSPHATASE ~ , C D 70 < g 50 ' h 10 - 1 ' 0 21s 4 : 0 10 2 . s 4 . 0 . HOURS Figure 8 . Chc - cells secrete mature lysosomal enzymes to a lesser extent than wild - type or control cells . The media was removed from growing cells and replaced with either media ( growth conditions ) or 10 mM phosphate buffer ( starvation conditions ) . Samples were removed at the times indicated , the cells were pelleted and solubi - lized , and both the cell samples and supernatants were assayed for lysosomal enzyme activity . The results are expressed as the percent of the total enzyme activity ( cell + media ) that is extracellular at each time point . ( A and B ) The percent of extracellular enzyme ac - tivity of ot - mannosidase and acid phosphatase during growth for chc - ( e ) , control ( n ) and Ax2 ( zx ) cells . ( C and D ) The percent of extracellular enzyme activity of the lysosomal enzymes under star - vation conditions for chc - ( e ) , control ( [ ] ) , and Ax2 ( zx ) cells . Chc - cells secreted mature lysosomal c ~ - mannosidase to a lesser extent than did the wild - type or control cells . During starvation , all cell types tested were able to respond to developmental cues and induce the secretion of mature lysosomal enzymes compared to the levels of enzyme that are secreted during growth . kinetics than a - mannosidase ( Cardelli , 1993 ; Bush et al . , 1990 ) . We confirmed that the secretion rate and extracellular accumulation level of acid phosphatase was significantly less than that of o ~ - mannosidase in control cells . Interestingly , the kinetics with which chc - cells secreted acid phosphatase were almost identical to wild - type cells ( Fig . 8 B ) , suggest - ing that the secretion defect was specific for a subset of the lysosomal hydrolases . In Dictyostelium , limiting nutrient conditions initiate the developmental cycle . An early response to starvation is the induced secretion of lysosomal hydrolases ( Cardelli , 1993 ) . To test this response , standard secretion assays were per - formed as described above using cultures of cells resus - pended in starvation buffer . After 30 min of starvation , Ax2 and control cultures had relative levels of extraceUular ot - mannosidase that were four times the levels observed dur - ing growth ( Fig . 8 , A vs C ) . By 4 h of starvation ( secretion was linear for 1 h ) , , , o 60 - 75 % of the total ot - mannosidase enzyme activity in Ax2 and control cells was found in the extracellular fraction , 1 . 5 - 2 times the level observed for these cultures in growth media ( compare A to C ) . Under starvation conditions , chc - ceils consistently secreted less of ot - mannosidase than did control or Ax2 cultures . After 1 h in starvation buffer , chc - ceils had secreted 25 % of this en - zyme in the media , whereas control cells had secreted 60 % in the extracellular media ( Fig . 8 C ) . By 4 h in starvation buffer , chc - had secreted 52 % of ot - mannosidase compared with 66 - 77 % of the enzymes secreted by control and wild - type cells . Although chc - ceils secreted less o ~ - mannosidase than control cells , the levels secreted during starvation con - ditions were significantly greater than the levels achieved un - der growth conditions . After 1 h in starvation buffer , the rela - tive level of extracellular a - mannosidase was 10 times the levels attained during growth ( Fig 8 , A vs C ) . By 4 h , the extracellular fraction reached 52 % of the total ot - marmosi - dase activity , five times the levels attained during growth conditions . Thus chc - cells remained responsive to the de - velopmental cues that increase secretion rates of the hydro - lases . Fig . 8 D indicates that both the rate and the extent of secreted acid phosphatase increased in cultures of starved chc - cells . Further , the increase in secretion was similar for wild - type , control and chc - cultures ; after 4 h in starvation buffer , the three cultures secreted , , 030 - - 40 % of their acid phosphatase compared to the 10 - 12 % of the enzyme that was secreted after 4 h in growing cultures . Discussion We have investigated the role of the clathrin heavy chain in membrane traffic by analyzing the properties of Dictyoste - lium ceils engineered to eliminate a functional clathrin heavy chain gene . The cells are viable and provide us with an ex - perimental model to study the transport of markers and pro - teins in a cell that is devoid of clathrin . Our investigation of the mutant cells identifies roles for the clathrin heavy chain in ( a ) the internalization of fluid from the plasma membrane ; ( b ) sorting of precursor hydrolases from the constitutive secretory pathway to the lysosomal pathway ; and ( c ) secre - tion of mature oL - mannosidase from the lysosome to the ex - tracellular space . The Role of Clathrin Heavy Chain in Endocytosis We find that clathrin - minus cells exhibit a severe defect in the internalization of fluid from the extracellular media . Rel - ative to the parental axenic strain or control transformants , chc - cells internalize fluid - phase markers at only one fourth the rate and extent of wild - type cells . These results confirm previous studies of clathrin - minus Dictyostelium generated by antisense plasmids ( O ' Hailoran and Anderson , 1992b ) . The chc - mutant described here demonstrates that clathrin is not essential for viability in Dictyostelium cells . In addi - tion , we can now conclude that there is a clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis pathway that constitutes a minor compo - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 126 , 1994 350 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m nent of total endocytosis in Dictyostelium . Previous studies have shown that endocytosed markers can recycle to the cell surface from a postlysosomal compartment ( Padh , 1993 ) . Our results show that this recycling pathway is not absolutely dependent on clathrin . The Role of the Clathrin Heavy Chain in Protein Sorting to the Lysosome Previous studies have shown that the clathrin heavy chain plays a role in protein sorting from the secretory pathway . In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , a mutant strain carry - ing a temperature - sensitive allele of the clathrin heavy chain exhibited a severe but transient protein sorting defect at the nonpermissive temperature , suggesting that the clathrin heavy chain was involved in protein sorting ( Seeger and Payne , 1992a ) . The transient nature of the defect suggests that a clathrin - independent sorting mechanism may have compensated for the loss of clathrin heavy chain function . In Dictyostelium , we have found that the absence of elathrin heavy chain caused a significant decrease in the efficiency of lysosomal protein sorting ; , ~ 25 % ( representing a 5 - 10 - fold increase over wild - type ) of newly synthesized ¢x - marmosi - dase precursor molecules were missorted and rapidly secreted in the unprocessed form via the default constitutive secretory pathway . As in the yeast system , there appears to be a clathrin heavy chain - independent mechanism of protein sorting in Dictyostelium since ' ~ 75 % of radiolabeled ~ - man - nosidase precursors were corrected sorted to the lysosome . It is thought that the initial cleavage of a - mannosidase that generates the 80 - and 58 - kD subunits from the 140 - kD precursor occurs in the late Golgi or in an endosomal com - partment , an event that may be necessary for sorting to lyso - somes ( Wood and Kaplan , 1985 ; Richardson et al . , 1988 ) . A delay in reaching this cleavage compartment could result in the rapid secretion of the uncleaved precursor through the default secretory pathway . The clathrin heavy chain spe - cifically affects the sorting of proteins before the cleavage compartment since only the sorting of the 140 - kD precursor was affected in chc - cells . The efficient processing of the 80 - kD intermediate form suggests that once o ~ - mannosidase is in or through the cleavage compartment , it is correctly localized to dense lysosomes . One model that can explain these results is that the clathrin heavy chain segregates newly synthesized precursor molecules from the constitutive secre - tory pathway by selectively packaging the precursor mole - cules into vesicles destined for the cleavage compartment . This scenario is analogous to a mechanism proposed for lysosomal enzyme targeting in mammalian ceils , where lysosomal enzymes bound to MPRs are packaged into clathrin - coated vesicles destined for the lysosomal pathway . However , the absence of MPRs in Dictyostelium suggests ei - ther that the lysosomal precursors segregate in clathrin coated vesicles or that a novel receptor mediates this interac - tion . In addition , the Dictyostelium lysosomal enzymes are not completely missorted in the absence of the clathrin heavy chain , suggesting the existence of a clathrin - independent mechanism of lysosomal protein sorting to the cleavage com - parunent or the activation in chc - cells of a compensatory targeting pathway . The missorting and oversecretion of a - mannosidase pre - cursor molecules in chc - cells could also be explained by an alternative model in which the protease that cleaves the newly synthesized precursors into the intermediate forms is localized into the cleavage comparUnent by a clathrin - mediated pathway . In the absence of clathrin , the protease would not be localized properly and the precursor would not be processed properly . The result of decreased processing would be reflected as the oversecretion of the precursor form . This possibility is consistent with studies that have shown that inhibition of the proteolytic processing of precur - sors for , - mannosidase and fl - glucosidase cause the over - secretion of precursor forms of these enzymes ( Richardson et al . , 1988 ) . This alternative hypothesis is supported by studies in yeast that show that some proteases require clathrin to localize to a late Golgi compartment ( Seeger and Payne , 1992b ; Payne and Schekman , 1989 ) . The Role of Clathrin in Secretion of Mature Lysosomal Enzymes There are at least two pathways by which lysosomal enzymes can be exported from the cell : either the enzymes are mis - sorted as uncleaved precursors and secreted through the de - fault constitutive secretory pathway , or the lysosomally localized mature enzymes are exported through lysosomes through a regulated pathway . The clathrin heavy chain does not affect the transport or export through the constitutive secretory pathway because the uncleaved , - mannosidase precursor was efficiently secreted from chc - cells . How - ever , our results indicate that the clathrin heavy chain is directly or indirectly involved in the secretion of mature en - zymes from lysosomes . We find that both the rate and extent of secretion of the lysosomal enzyme a - mannosidase was significantly reduced in chc - cells . This effect was specific for ot - mannosidase : the absence of ciathrin did not affect the secretion of another hydroiase , acid phosphatase . Differ - ences in secretion behavior of acid phosphatase and ot - man - nosidase have been found in previous studies that show that the mature lysosomal glycosidases are secreted from Dic - tyostelium cells at a different rate and with different kinetics than acid phosphatase ( CardeUi , 1993 ) . The mechanism of differential secretion between lysosomal enzymes has been postulated to be due to a preferential intracellular retention of acid phosphatase over the glycosidases ; perhaps by a tighter association of acid phosphatase with an intraorganel - lar matrix and / or an increase in the efficiency of packaging of other enzymes into secretory transport vesicles . Thus , the clathrin heavy chain may act to increase the efficiency of selective packaging of ¢ - mannosidase into the transport / secretory vesicles destined for the extracellular milieu and without clathrin , ~ - mannosidase is inefficiently secreted at rates similar to acid pbosphatase . Our results show that chc - cells remain able to respond to starvation signals and induce the secretion of the mature lysosomal enzymes . The three - to fivefold increase in the level of both oe - mannosidase and acid phosphatase enzyme secretion exhibited by chc - cells demonstrates that the developmental induction of mature lysosomal release is not blocked in the absence of the clathrin heavy chain . It is worth speculating where the clathrin heavy chain may function in the clathrin - dependent secretory pathway . Secre - tion of mature lysosomal enzymes is thought to progress in at least two steps : first , from the lysosome to an intermediate Ruscetti et al . The Role of Clathrin in Sorting and Secretion 351 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m compartment , termed the postlysosomai compartment , and from this compartment to the plasma membrane for release into the extraceUular environment ( Padh et ai . , 1993 ) . Vesi - cles filled with enzyme cargo may bud directly from the lyso - some and transport the enzyme to the intermediate compart - ment . This may be a step analogous to endocytosis in that clathrin heavy chain may be required for the budding process from the lysosome . Alternatively , the lysosomal organelle may mature into the postlysosomal compartment , and the clathrin heavy chain may facilitate this process . The second step of the secretory pathway is the movement from the post - lysosomal compartment to the plasma membrane . Again , this process may occur either by budding of transport vesi - cles from the postlysosomai compartment or by the matura - tion and fusion of this compartment to the plasma mem - brane . The clathrin heavy chain may function at either of these two stages of the clathrin - dependent pathway . Studies are currently underway to determine the site at which the clathrin heavy chain affects secretion of mature lysosomal enzymes . We are grateful to Dr . John M . Bush for Northern analysis of the chc - strains . We also thank the members of the Cardelli and O ' Halloran labora - tories for critical reading of this manuscript and for helpful scientific dis - cussions . This research is supported by National Institutes of Health grant DK 39232 - 05 ( J . Cardelli and National Science Foundation grant DCB - 9104576 ( J . Cardelli ) and National Institutes of Health grant GM48625 ( T . O ' Halloran ) . T . O ' Halloran is the recipient of a Basil O ' Connor Starter Scholar Research Award . We also acknowledge the support of the Loui - siana State University Medical Center Center for Excellence in Cancer Re - search and the Center for Excellence in Arthritis and Rheumatology . Received for publication 15 March 1994 and in revised form 19 April 1994 . References Bennet , V . D . , and R . L . Dimond . 1986 . Biosynthesis of two developmentally distinct acid phnsphatase isozymes in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 5355 - 5362 . Brodsky , F . M . 1988 . Living with clathrin : its role in intracellular membrane traffic . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 242 : 1396 - 1402 . Bush , J . M . , and J . A . Cardelii . 1989 . Processing , transport , and secretion of the lysosomal enzyme acid phosphatase in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 7630 - 7636 . Cardelii , J , A . , G . S . Golumbeski , and R . L . Dimond . 1986 . Lysosomal en - zymes in Dictyostelium discoideum are transported to lysosomes at distinctly different rates . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1264 - 1270 . Cardelli , J . A . , G . S . Golumbeski , N . Woychik , D . Ebert , R . Mierendoff , and R . Dimond . 1987 . Defining the intraeellular localization pathways followed by lysosomal enzymes in Dtctyostelium discoideum . In Methods in Cell Biol - ogy . J . Spudich , editor . Academic Press , Inc . , Orlando , FL . pp . 139 - 155 . Cardelli , J . A . , J . M . Bush , D . Ebert , and H . Freeze . 1990 . Sulfated N - linked oligosaccharides affect secretion but are not essential for the transport , pro - teolytic processing , and sorting of lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium dis - coideum . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 8847 - 8853 . Cardelli , J . A . 1993 . Regulation of the lysosomal trafficking and function dur - ing growth and development of Dictyostelium discoideum . In Advances in Cell and Molecular Biology of Membranes . Vol . 1 . B . Storrie and R . Mur - phy , editors . JAI Press , Inc . , Greenwich , CT . pp . 341 - 390 . Cladaras , M . H . , and A . Kaplan . 1984 . Maturation of a - mannosidase in Dic - tyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 259 : 14165 - 14169 . Dahras , N . M . , P . Lobel , and S . Kornfeld , 1989 . Mannose 6 - pbosphate recep - tors and lysosomal enzyme targeting . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 12115 - 12118 . Dimond , F . L . , and W . F . Loomis . 1976 . Structure and function of ~ 5 - glu - cosideses in Dictyostelium discoideurn . J . BioL Chem . 251 : 2680 - 2687 . Free , S . J . , and W . F . Loomis . 1974 . Isolation of mutations in Dictyostelium discoideum affecting o ~ - maanoaldase . Biochimie . 56 : 1525 - 1528 . Freeze , H . H . , and D . Wolgast . 1986 . Biosynthesis of methylphnsphomannosyl residues in the oligosaccharides of Dictyostelium discoideum glycoproteins . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 135 - 141 . Hansen , S . H . , K . Sandvig , and B . V . Deurs . 1991 . The preendesomal com - partment comprises distinct coated and noncoated endocytic vesicle popula - tions . J . Cell Biol . 113 ( 4 ) : 731 - 741 . Johnson , G . D . , and G . M . de C . Nogueira Araujo . 1981 . A simple method of reducing the fading of immunofluorescence during microscopy . J . lm - munol . Method . 43 : 349 - 350 . Keen , J . H . 1990 . Clathrin and associated assembly and disassembly proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 59 : 415 - - 438 . Klein , G . , and M . Satre . 1986 . Kinetics of fluid - phase pinocytosis in Dic - tyosteUum discoideum amoebae . Biochem . Biophys , Res . Commun . 138 : 1146 - 1152 . Korofeld , S . , and I . Mellman . 1989 . The biogenesis of the lysosome . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 : 483 - 525 . Kuspa , A . , and W . F . Loomis . 1992 . Tagging developmental genes in Dic - tyostelium discoideum by restriction enzyme - mediated integration of plasmid DNA . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 8803 - 8807 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . Lobel , B . , K . Fujimoto , R . D . Ye , G . Griffiths and S . Kornfeld . 1989 . Muta - tions in the cytoplasmic domain of the 275 kd mannose 6 - phosphate receptor differentially alter lysosomal enzyme sorting and endocytosis . Cell . 57 : 787 - 796 . Manstein , D . , M . Titus , A . D . Lozanne , and J . Spudich . 1989 . Oene replace - ment in Dictyostelium : generation of myosin null mutants . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 8 : 923 - 932 . Mierendoff , R . C . , J . A . Cardelli , and R . Dimond . 1985 . Pathways involved in targeting and secretion of a lysosomal enzyme in Dictyostelium dis - coideum . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 1777 - 1787 . Neilen , W . , S . Datta , C . Reymond , A . Sivertsen , S . M . T . Crowley , and R . Firtel . 1987 . Molecular biology in Dictyasteliura : tools and applications . In Methods in Cell Biology . J . Spudich , editor . Academic Press , Orlando , FL . pp . 139 - 155 . O ' I - Ialloran , T . , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992a . Clathrin heavy chain is re - qulred for pinocytosis , the presence of large vacuoles and development in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 1371 - 1378 . O ' Halioran , T . J . , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1992b . Characterization of the clathrin heavy chain from Dictyostelium discoideam . DATA Cell Biol . 11 : 321 - 330 . Padh , H . , J . Ha , M . Lavasa , and T . L . Stuck . 1993 . A post - lysosomal compart - ment in Dictyostelium discokieum . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 6742 - 6747 . Payne , G . , and R . Schekman . 1989 . Clathrin : a role in the intracellular reten - tion of a Golgi membrane protein . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 245 : 1358 - 1365 . Richardson , J . M . , N . A . Woychik , D . L . Ebert , R . Dimond , andJ . A . Cardelli . 1988 . Inhibition of early but not late proteolytic processing events leads to the missol ~ Jng and oversecretion of precursor forms of iysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 2097 - 2107 . Roberts , C . , S . Nothwehr , and T . Stevens . 1992 . Membrane protein sorting in the yeast secretory pathway : evidence that the vacuole may be the default compartment . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 69 - 83 . Sambrook , J . , E . F . Fritsch , andT . Manlatis . 1989 . Molecular Cloning : A Lab - oratory Manual . 2nd ed . Cold Spring Laboratory Press , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Schatzle , J . , J . M . Bush , S . Dharmawardhane , R . A . Firtel , R . H . Gomer , and J . A . Cardelii . 1993 . Characterization of the signal transduction pathways and cis - acting DNA sequence responsible for the transcriptional induction during growth and development of the lysosomal a - mannosidase gene in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 19632 - 19639 . Seeger , M . , and G . S . Payne . 1992a . A role for clathrin in the sorting of vacuo - lar proteins in the Golgi complex of yeast . EMBO ( Fur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 11 : 2811 - 2818 . Seeger , M . , and G . S . Payne . 1992b . Selective and immediate effects of clathrin heavy chain mutations on Golgi membrane protein retention in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 531 - 540 . Vails , L . A . , C . P . Hunter , J . H . Rothman , and T . H . Stevens . 1987 . Protein sorting in yeast : the localization determinant of yeast vacuolar carboxypepti - dase Y resides in the propeptide . Cell . 48 : 887 - 897 . Wood , L . , and A . Kaplan . 1985 . Transit of tx - mannosidase during its matura - tion in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol Chem . 101 : 2063 - 2069 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 126 , 1994 352 on O c t obe r 29 , 2017 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m