COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE JOURNAL OF MATERIALS SCIENCE 38 ( 2003 ) 4461 – 4470 Microrheology as a tool for high - throughput screening V . BREEDVELD ∗ , ‡ , D . J . PINE Department of Chemical Engineering & Materials Research Laboratory , University of California , Santa Barbara , CA 93106 - 5080 , USA E - mail : victor . breedveld @ chbe . gatech . edu Microrheology can be used for high - throughput screening of the rheological properties of sample libraries of complex ﬂuids . Two passive techniques are particularly suitable : video microscopy and diffusing - wave spectroscopy . The techniques complement each other very well and can be applied to samples that offer different experimental challenges . We offer a thorough analysis of the strengths and limitations of microrheology with the emphasis on high - throughput applications . To illustrate the potential of microrheology , results are presented for two representative cases : the rheological screening of aqueous solutions of a block copolypeptide library and the rheological phase diagram of a water / surfactant / salt system . C (cid:2) 2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers 1 . Introduction Parallel and combinatorial chemistry have opened new pathways for the synthesis of large libraries of novel materials . Such approaches are particularly useful for polymers , whose properties can be tailored to meet spe - ciﬁc requirements by manipulating their many degrees of freedom : molecular weight , backbone monomer , de - gree of branching or cross linking , and side group com - position ( partially or fully functionalized ) . In the case of copolymers , the number of possible architectures in - creases even further because of the virtually unlimited number of monomer combinations and relative compo - sitions . With such an extended parameter space , combi - natorial characterization techniques become useful be - cause they can signiﬁcantly accelerate and extend the systematic investigation of material properties . In this paper , we explore the use of microrheology as a tool for high - throughput screening of large libraries of polymer melts and solutions . Conventional ( macro ) rheology has proven to be an important method for studying the mechanical properties of polymer melts and solutions . Key quantities for characterizing their structure , strength , and processibility include the strain - rate dependent steady - state shear viscosity and the frequency dependent viscoelastic moduli . The classic technique for determining these quantities , mechanical rheometry , is slow and laborious . Loading a sample , performing measurements , and the subsequent cleaning of the rheometer limit the typical number of samples that can be characterized to 5 – 10 per day . By contrast , the high - throughput techniques described in this pa - per can be one or two orders of magnitude faster , thus making them ideal for characterizing the vast libraries that need to be screened . This screening might be used to locate phase boundaries for structural transitions , for ∗ Author to whom all correspondence should be addressed . ‡ Current address : School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta , GA 30332 - 0100 , USA . gelation , or to differentiate samples according mechan - ical or rheological properties . The key points are that only a small amount of each sample is required and that each rheological measurement can be automated and performed quickly . In Section 2 the concept of microrheology is ex - plained and a review of the work in this ﬁeld is pro - vided in order to set the stage for its application as a high - throughput screening method . Section 3 describes two complementary implementations of microrheol - ogy , both suitable for a combinatorial approach . In the ﬁnal two sections we provide some practical guide - lines for using microrheology as a rapid screening tool and illustrate the method with measurements from our laboratory . 2 . Microrheology True to its name , microrheology is best described as “rheology on the micrometer length scale . ” It involves using microscopic mechanical probe particles to mea - sure the relation between stress and deformation in ma - terials . Analogous to macroscopic mechanical rheom - etry , a known stress ( probe force ) is applied by the probe particle and the resulting deformation ( probe position ) is measured . From these quantities the rhe - ological properties of the medium can be derived . As a result of the miniaturization , microrheology typically requires less than 10 micro liters of sample , while a tra - ditional mechanical rheometer requires at least a few milli liters . The dramatic decrease in sample volume makes it feasible to perform rheological measurements in situations where only a limited amount of material is available , e . g . , biological samples . For cases of large libraries for high - throughput screening , the reduced 0022 – 2461 C (cid:2) 2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers 4461 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE sample size has an additional advantage : it relieves the synthetic chemist from the burden of producing mate - rials on the gram scale . The concept of using microscopic probe particles to measure mechanical properties dates back to the early twentieth century , when magnetic particles were em - bedded to study the elasticity of gelatin gels [ 1 ] . Over the last decade rapid developments have occurred in the ﬁeld ( for recent reviews , see e . g . , [ 2 – 4 ] ) . Technological innovations in light scattering and video microscopy , as well as theoretical advances have renewed interest in and greatly expanded the power of microrheology . Current techniques can be divided into two main cate - gories : active methods that involve probe manipulation and passive methods that rely on thermal ﬂuctuations to induce motion of the probes . In this paper we fo - cus mainly on passive methods , but provide a short overview of active methods and their speciﬁc proper - ties since for certain speciﬁc applications these can be favorable . 2 . 1 . Active methods The earliest experimental implementation of microrhe - ology was based on the manipulation of magnetic beads with an external magnetic ﬁeld [ 1 ] . Because of limited control over the forces , non - sphericity of particles and inaccuracy of the detected particle position , these mea - surements only provided qualitative rheological data . Modern versions have improved accuracy and are ca - pable of quantitative rheological characterization of the embedding medium under the application of constant or oscillatory forces , which respectively yield steady - shear viscosity and viscoelastic moduli [ 5 , 6 ] . The rhe - ological properties of many interesting systems , includ - ing the cytoplasm of living cells [ 7 ] , have been mea - sured in this way . A modern alternative to magnetic manipulation of small particles is the use of optical tweezers . The elec - tric ﬁeld gradients of a highly focused laser beam re - sult in a local trapping force that pulls the particle to - wards the waist of the focused beam [ 8 ] . High - aperture objectives on an optical microscope can be used con - veniently to simultaneously trap and image the probe particle [ 9 ] . The local trapping force can be calibrated . Then , by moving the beam and observing the particle response , the local rheological properties of the embed - ding medium can be determined . The main advantage of optical tweezers over magnetic methods is the local - ization of the applied force . A third method for applying sample deformation on microscopic length scales is atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) . The technique is widely used to image surfaces with atomic resolution , but the nanometer position - control and sensitivity as a force transducer make AFM a logical choice for rheological measurements as well [ 10 , 11 ] . The cantilever tip is used to indent the surface of a sample and sinusoidal modulations are superim - posed to measure frequency dependent mechanical re - sponses that can be interpreted in terms of elastic and viscous dynamic moduli . The AFM technique is ca - pable of generating larger stresses ( 0 . 1 – 10 kPa ) than the other two methods and in combination with the imaging capability it is particularly useful for the char - acterization of thin samples , e . g . , ﬁlms , coatings and cell surfaces . Because it is inherently a surface method , the results are sometimes difﬁcult to translate into bulk properties . 2 . 2 . Passive methods Insteadofusinganexternalexcitationtomovetheprobeparticles , the intrinsic Brownian motion of the particles can be used . In this case , the driving force is thermal , with a known energy scale corresponding to k B T . An advantage of this approach is that no external driving force is required , i . e . , the method is passive . Because the thermal driving force is small , no sample defor - mations occur that exceed equilibrium thermal ﬂuctua - tions . This virtually guarantees that only the linear vis - coelastic response of the embedding medium is probed . Active methods , by contrast , can easily rupture weak structures . While it may be advantageous to have ac - cess to non - linear steady shear viscosity in some cases , it also means that an amplitude sweep must be per - formed for every sample to conﬁrm linearity , similar to macroscopic rheometry . One drawback of using Brownian motion as the driv - ing force is that thermal energy is ﬁxed and limited to k B T , so that the stress will be sufﬁciently large to gen - erate detectable particle motion only in relatively soft materials , such as polymer solutions and gels . Measure - ments in polymer melts and solids are much more dif - ﬁcult . Nevertheless , with modern detection techniques spatial resolutions ranging from 0 . 1 to 10 nm can be achieved , so that microrheology measurements can be performed on many complex ﬂuids . In Section 4 quan - titative estimates of the limits of operation are provided . An intuitive theoretical basis for passive microrheol - ogy is provided by considering two extremes : a parti - cle with radius a that is embedded in a purely viscous Newtonian liquid or a fully elastic network . In case of a Newtonian liquid with viscosity η the particle mo - tion is diffusive with a diffusion coefﬁcient given by the Stokes - Einstein relation D = k B T / 6 πη a . For diffusive motion , the d - dimensional mean - squared displacement ( MSD ) is given by (cid:3) (cid:3) r 2 ( τ ) (cid:4) ≡ (cid:3) | r ( t + τ ) − r ( t ) | 2 (cid:4) = d k B T 3 πη a τ ( 1 ) where the brackets denote averaging over all starting times t and τ is the lag time . The Stokes - Einstein rela - tion enables viscosity measurements by observing the time - dependent MSD of a particle of known size . If the same particle is embedded in a purely elas - tic medium with a storage modulus G , there will be a maximum to the displacement (cid:3) r , occurring when the thermal energy k B T of the particle equals the elastic energy associated with the deformed network . In terms of the MSD this means that a plateau is reached for long lag times : (cid:3) (cid:3) r 2 (cid:4) τ →∞ = d k B T 3 π Ga ( 2 ) 4462 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE Most materials , however , exhibit more complex be - havior with a frequency dependent viscoelastic re - sponse that has both viscous and elastic components . These materials are characterized by the complex mod - ulus G ∗ ( ω ) = G (cid:8) ( ω ) + iG (cid:8)(cid:8) ( ω ) that is usually measured with oscillatory mechanical rheometry . For these cases a generalized Stokes - Einstein relation ( GSER ) has been formulated , which is a natural extension of Equations 1 and 2 to the Laplace frequency domain [ 12 ] . In this case , a frequency dependent MSD is obtained : (cid:3) (cid:3) ˜ r 2 ( s ) (cid:4) = d k B T 3 π as ˜ G ( s ) ( 3 ) where s is the Laplace frequency . The two moduli G (cid:8) ( ω ) and G (cid:8)(cid:8) ( ω ) , which respectively represent the elastic and viscous response of the material , can be determined from the single real function ˜ G ( s ) , since they are re - lated to each other through the Kramers - Kronig rela - tions . The derivation of Equation 3 has been the semi - nal breakthrough for passive microrheology . Although originally derived on a rather ad hoc basis , the GSER has since been shown to be an extremely valuable tool with a strong theoretical backing [ 13 ] . Direct compari - son with macroscopic rheological data has revealed ex - cellent agreement , often beyond limits where it might be anticipated . The range of frequencies over which Equation 3 is valid is limited by two effects : inertia and compressibil - ity [ 13 , 14 ] . At very high frequencies the penetration depth of the deformation waves caused by the probe particle in the surrounding liquid becomes comparable to the probe size . In a mechanical rheometer this effect usually comes into play between 10 and 100 Hz for low - viscosity ﬂuids , because the relevant length scale is the gap size , typically about 1 mm . The smaller size of the microscopic probe delays the onset of this effect into the MHz - regime for microrheology , thus opening a new window of timescales . At the low frequency end of the spectrum , there is a concern about the compressibility of the viscoelastic medium , which generally consists of an elastic network surrounded by an incompressible ﬂuid . Consider , for example , polymer chains in solution or a polymer gel . At low deformation rates , the motion of network and liquid can decouple and the liquid drains freely through the network . The medium then no longer responds as a continuum and the assumptions on which Equation 3 is based break down . The use of the GSER reduces the practical task for the experimentalist to the determination of the time - dependent MSD . The techniques that have been em - ployed to achieve this can be divided into three classes : single - particle laser detection [ 14 , 15 ] , ensemble av - eraged light - scattering [ 12 , 16 ] and video microscopy [ 17 , 18 ] . The latter two will be discussed in more de - tail in Section 3 , since they are most suitable for high - throughput applications . The main characteristics that distinguish between the methods are the accessible frequency range and spa - tial resolution . Single - particle laser detection uses a set - up similar to optical tweezers and tracks the mo - tion of a single particle over time . It has single particle resolution and a large potential frequency range , up to the MHz regime . Scattering techniques have lower spatial resolution , since they average the MSD over multiple particles , but they span a similarly large fre - quency domain ( well into the MHz range ) . Scattering techniques also allow for more rapid data acquisition because of the inherent ensemble averaging that takes place during light - scattering . Video microscopy is lim - ited by the video capture rate , which is 60 Hz for a standard NTSC video system , but can be faster using specialized cameras . Many particles can be captured in the ﬁeld of view ( ca . 100 ) . This provides a great deal of ﬂexibility : for homogenous systems averaging over all particles improves the statistics of the MSD ; in case of spatial heterogeneity one can actually verify and quantify variations in local rheology over the observed sample volume [ 10 , 19 ] . Once the MSD has been found the real challenge is over . Various computational schemes can be employed to extract the dynamic moduli G (cid:8) ( ω ) and G (cid:8)(cid:8) ( ω ) , but all the crucial information is available in the MSD . When plotted as a function of time on a double logarithmic plot , the slope of the graph (cid:3) (cid:3) r 2 ( τ ) (cid:4) ∼ τ α must fall between the viscous ( α = 1 ) and elastic ( α = 0 ) ex - tremes ( Equations 1 and 2 ) . Deviations of the slope α from these integer values are indicative of viscoelas - tic relaxation processes in the medium ( see Fig . 1 ) . In Figure 1 ( a ) Mean - squared displacement as a function of lag time for Newtonian ( (cid:1) , water - glycerol mixture ) , mostly elastic ( (cid:2) , K 160 L 40 gel at 0 . 25 wt % polymer ) and viscoelastic ( • , K 160 ( rac - L ) 40 solution at 2 . 0 wt % ) ﬂuids ( see Section 5 . 1 and [ 20 ] for diblock copolypep - tide information ) ; MSD’s are normalized by the dimensionality d . ( b ) Corresponding dynamic moduli G (cid:8) ( closed symbols ) and G (cid:8)(cid:8) ( open ) , calculated using Equation 3 with the second - order logarithmic polynomial ﬁt [ 21 ] . Data was measured with amidine - functionalized polystyrene spheres with diameter a = 0 . 53 µ m and 100 × objective . 4463 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE many cases , conclusions about sample rheology can be drawn directly from the MSD . Often it is not necessary calculate dynamic moduli . If it is somehow desirable , Equation 3 provides the recipe , but practical issues arise when performing ( inverse ) Laplace and Fourier trans - forms to a discrete data set over a limited frequency domain . Especially near the edges of the domain , sig - niﬁcant errors can occur due to the numerical imple - mentation of the transformations . Instead of the direct route [ 14 ] an alternative approach is to locally ﬁt the MSD (cid:3) (cid:3) r 2 ( τ ) (cid:4) to a ﬁrst - or second - order logarithmic polynomial after which G ∗ ( ω ) can be calculated alge - braically [ 21 , 22 ] . These schemes have proven to be ro - bust within an accuracy that is acceptable for rheology , with a maximum 5 – 10 % error for simulated noise - free data . 2 . 3 . Heterogeneous samples In deriving the equations above it has been assumed that the embedding medium is homogenous on a length scale comparable to the size of the probe particles . Un - der this condition the probe particles sample the macro - scopic bulk rheological properties of the medium dur - ing their thermal motion . By contrast , if the system possesses structures with characteristic lengths scales comparable to the size of the probe particles , the as - sumptions of homogeneity on which Equation 3 are based are not valid . In some cases , the mere presence of the probe particle can lead to changes in the local environment surrounding the particle , e . g . , through ad - sorption or depletion , so that a straightforward applica - tion of Equation 3 leads to systematic errors . An important quantity for assessing potential prob - lems in using Equation 3 is the typical size ξ of the struc - tural elements that constitute the viscoelastic medium . For polymer networks this should be the mesh size , in emulsions the droplet size , in porous systems the pore size , etc . As long as ξ is much smaller than the particle radius a , it is usually safe to apply the GSER and inter - pret the microrheological measurements as reﬂecting bulk properties . Comparison of length scales is not al - ways sufﬁcient . Often the dynamics play a role as well . In mixtures of colloidal rods it was found [ 23 ] that the diffusion coefﬁcient of added tracer spheres is governed by the macroscopic viscosity ( Equation 1 ) and does not depend on rod size as long as the rods are relatively mo - bile . Only at high concentrations , when the rods get en - tangled and immobilized , size does matter : in this case tracer spheres must be larger than the pores to obey the Stokes - Einstein relation . Another striking example was the initial work on microrheology of concentrated emulsions , where the emulsion droplets act as tracers themselves [ 12 ] . Although ξ ∼ a , microrheology was in excellent agreement with bulk measurements . Since the interaction of embedded probe particles with the medium strongly depends on the system un - der investigation , it is impossible to provide a general recipe for successful measurements . For each new com - plex ﬂuid the choice of probe particles needs to be ad - dressed carefully , as will be illustrated in Section 4 . 2 . A very pragmatic way to deal with this is to pre - pare samples with different probes , varying size and surface chemistry . Robustness of the results against such changes supports reliability . If sample material is availableinsufﬁcientquantity , asomemacroscopicrhe - ological experiments can also be performed to bench - mark the results . Recently , a so - called two - particle microrheology method has been developed to extract bulk rheol - ogy from microscopic measurements in heterogeneous samples [ 13 , 18 ] . The idea was to rely on hydrody - namic interparticle interactions and measure how one particle’s motion is correlated with that of another . To this purpose the two - particle cross - correlation of the particles’ displacement is measured instead of the auto - correlation of single - particle displacement . The cross - correlation function is a direct measure of the strain ﬁeld generated by the Brownian tracers between the particles , that is , on interparticle length scales of typ - ically 10 – 100 µ m rather than the particle size length scale of approximately 1 µ m . Realizing that the motion of particles in an in - compressible medium is coupled by hydrodynamic interactions that decay as 1 / r for r (cid:10) a ( r being the interparticle distance ) , the cross - correlation of particle displacements can directly be related to the rheology of the medium , averaged over the interparticle distance r : (cid:3) (cid:3) ˜ r i ( r , s ) (cid:3) ˜ r j ( r , s ) (cid:4) i (cid:11) = j = k B T 2 π rs ˜ G ( s ) ( 4 ) where (cid:3) r i and (cid:3) r j are the displacements of two parti - cles i and j along their center - to - center vector . Aver - aging over this larger length scale dramatically reduces the sensitivity to changes in the immediate surround - ings of the probes . As an added bonus , particle size and shape drop out of the equation : particles are treated as point sources in the deformation ﬁeld . Therefore even polydisperse probe particles can be used . The main dis - advantage of two - particle microrheology is the fact that calculating cross - correlation functions requires signiﬁ - cantly more data and is computationally more intensive than determining auto - correlation functions . Because of this constraint , video microscopy is currently the most suitable technique , since it simultaneously tracks the motion of up to a few hundred particles . By com - bining one - and two - particle analysis heterogeneity can in principle be detected in the sample without the need of additional experiments . 3 . High - throughput rheology Rheological properties often change by many orders of magnitude when a phase boundary is crossed or when other structural changes like gelation occur . This makes rheology a suitable candidate not only for screening mechanical properties , but also for mapping out other phenomena that are directly correlated with rheology , such as phase behavior and gelation . Having introduced the general concept of microrheology , in this section we discuss how it can be applied as a high - throughput method . The implementation of microrheology for screening purposes imposes certain speciﬁc demands . First of all , 4464 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE any suitable technique must offer signiﬁcant speed ad - vantages over conventional rheology in order to handle large numbers of samples . Additionally , the method of choice should be capable of dealing with large varia - tions in material properties without intervention from the operator . Systematical detection of such variations is after all the goal of high - throughput screening . Two complementary techniques that satisfy these requirements of speed and robustness are video mi - croscopy and diffusing - wave spectroscopy ( DWS ) , which are described below . 3 . 1 . Video microscopy Video microscopy [ 17 , 18 ] is probably the simplest and most intuitive of all microrheology implementations . The motion of Brownian probe particles is monitored under an optical microscope , either in bright - ﬁeld or ﬂuorescent mode depending on the nature of the tracer particles . In order to obtain the mean - squared displace - ment , movies are recorded with a CCD camera . Sub - sequently , the tracer particle positions are analyzed in each frame of the movie . Finally , these positions are linked to identify the trajectories of individual particles . Initial versions of the technique captured the out - put of an analog CCD camera ( 30 Hz frame rate , 640 × 480 pixels ) on video tape . The desired parts of the tape were then digitized with a frame grabber on a PC . Ever increasing computer speed and memory now enable direct capture of the CCD video output onto computer hard disk by means of dedicated software de - veloped in the Sackmann group ( OpenBox [ 24 ] ) . Im - age analysis routines for particle detection and tracking , based on the original work of Crocker and Grier [ 25 ] , have been further developed in the Weitz group ( e . g . , [ 18 ] ) . The procedures are available as freeware in the form of macros for the software package IDL ( Research Systems Inc , Boulder , CO ) . The spatial resolution of video microscopy is deter - mined by optical magniﬁcation and CCD pixel den - sity . In our lab , a 100 × oil - immersion objective on a Nikon inverted microscope in combination with a 640 × 480 pixel CCD camera ( Cohu , Poway , CA ) on the photo port leads to a resolution of 0 . 129 µ m per pixel . Even thought this resolution is beyond the diffraction limit ( ca . 250 nm for visible light on a high quality mi - croscope ) , the particle position can be determined with even greater precision , to subpixel accuracy . As long as the particle diffraction image is spread over 5 – 10 CCD pixels , one can ﬁt the observed intensity proﬁle to a Gaussian distribution . If the proper settings are used , the particle position can be found with 0 . 1 pixel accu - racy . Of course , optical measurements of the particle size are still limited by diffraction , but the position of a single particle can be determined with subpixel ac - curacy so long as the density of particles is sufﬁciently low that particle images do not overlap . Subpixel res - olution is only meaningful if the shutter speed of the camera is short enough to prevent signiﬁcant particle motion during the generation of each image . Temporal resolution of a standard CCD camera is limited to 1 / 60 s when the two ﬁelds that constitute each video frame are split and analyzed separately . Splitting the full image into two 640 × 240 images decreases the spatial resolution , especially in the vertical direction , since each particle covers fewer CCD pixels , but the temporal beneﬁts are signiﬁcant . The frequency range can be extended further by using high - speed video cameras . In a typical measurement , there are 100 particles within the ﬁeld of view . Under these circumstances 50 s of data acquisition ( 1500 images ) is usually sufﬁcient to obtain reliable statistics up to a lag time τ = 3 s . Longer lag times require proportionally longer acqui - sition times . As a rule of thumb , the ensemble averaged MSD must consist of at least 500 independent contri - butions to provide a meaningful value . On a relatively modern PC ( 1 . 5 GHz , 512 Mb RAM ) the image analy - sis and data processing of 1500 images ( 400 Mb ) takes about 15 min , from movie to MSD . In practice , the frequency domain of standard video - based microrheology is limited to two and a half decades even in the best possible scenario : 0 . 1 to 60 Hz . In comparison to other methods this is rather mediocre and for detailed quantitative rheological studies it is of - ten insufﬁcient , because relaxation processes typically span more than a decade in frequency . Nevertheless , the beneﬁts of the method are consid - erable . First of all , the set - up is simple and robust . The hardware consists of a research - grade inverted micro - scope , video camera and dedicated image analysis com - puter . Most of these are present in modern research labs . Secondly , the images are accessible to check the distribution of the tracers and make sure that no ag - gregation has taken place . Finally , the detailed knowl - edge about temporal and spatial distribution of single - particle tracks enables advanced statistical analysis to identifyclustersofparticlesthathaveasimilarmicroen - vironment [ 19 ] . This approach has been used successful to study the local rheology of living cells with high spa - tial resolution [ 26 ] . The two - particle method described in Section 2 . 3 is also a natural tool to be applied to video microscopy data sets . For high - throughput applications , a multi - sample set - up with automation is desirable . In the case of video microscopy the main issue that must be dealt with is efﬁcient sample preparation . Multi - well plates with Nr . 1 . 5 cover glass optical bottoms are available com - mercially ( Nalge Nunc International , Rochester , NY ) . The real challenge is to get samples into these 100 – 200 µ l wells at the right composition and with the probe particles properly mixed in . In the next section we discuss the problems we encountered in some of our applications . Once the sample is in place , taking movies is a relatively fast and easy task . Although it can easily be automated with a computer controlled microscope stage , our experience is that for a 96 - well plate manual acquisition of 50 s movies is relatively painless in comparison with sample preparation . The time - consuming step is the image analysis and data pro - cessing . As mentioned above , this still requires about 15 min per movie , but signiﬁcant reductions are an - ticipated with the progress of computer development . The full analysis on all movies of a plate can easily 4465 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE be performed automatically by means of a computer macro for IDL . All in all , measuring 96 samples cur - rently requires about 24 h of computer time , 1 . 5 – 2 h of video recording and a highly system dependent amount of preparation time . Once the recording phase has been automated , the speed of the method is only limited by computational power , which is relatively cheap and guaranteed to improve in the near future . 3 . 2 . Diffusing - wave spectroscopy A complementary method to video microscopy is diffusing - wave spectroscopy ( DWS ) ( see [ 27 ] for a thorough introduction to the subject and [ 28 ] for a re - cent review ) . The method was developed in the late 80’s and has evolved into a powerful tool for inves - tigating the dynamics of concentrated , highly scatter - ing systems like emulsions , colloidal suspensions , and foams . The sample is illuminated with a laser beam ; the key idea is that the laser light experiences a very large number of scattering events before exiting the sample . The outgoing light is collected in either the forward or backward scattering direction and projected onto a conventional dynamic light - scattering detection system consisting of photomultiplier tube , ampliﬁer - discriminator and digital correlator ( Fig . 2 ) . Because the light is scattered from many particles , angular in - formation is lost . However , each particle only needs to move over a small fraction of the wavelength to gener - ate decorrelation of the light . The spatial resolution can thus reach the Angstrom level . The temporal resolution of the method is also extremely high , up to 10 MHz in an ordinary off - the - shelf system . The lower frequency limit depends on the desired signal - to - noise level , sta - bility of the laser , and patience of the experimentalist , but is typically about 1 Hz . The advantage of DWS is that ensemble - averaging takes place on the ﬂy and the intensity correlation func - tion can be directly transformed into a time - dependent MSD . The procedure requires application of the Siegert relation , careful calibration of the DWS set - up with a reference sample and straightforward numerical Figure 2 Diffusing - wave spectroscopy set - up for high - throughput screening . To facilitate the use of a multi - well plate , the laser beam is deﬂected upward and shines through the glass bottom . The speckle pat - tern on the free surface of the sample is imaged onto an optical ﬁber that connects to the photomultiplier tube . An optical tube with diaphragm , lens and optical bandpass ﬁlter is used to minimize stray light . analysis [ 27 ] . This beats the time - consuming image analysis step of video microscopy . At the same time , however , the inherent ensemble averaging disables the advanced statistical treatment that is possible with single - particle trajectories . At about 1 vol % DWS re - quires a larger concentration of probe particles than video microscopy , where 0 . 02 % usually sufﬁces for spheres with 0 . 5 µ m diameter . 4 . Practical considerations 4 . 1 . Limits of operation As brieﬂy discussed in Section 2 . 2 the ﬁxed amount of thermal energy associated with Brownian motion re - stricts the applicability of passive microrheology tech - niques . Fig . 3 presents some practical examples where the results are inﬂuenced by the operational limits . The most important implication of the limited ther - mal energy available from Brownian motion is an effec - tive upper limit to the viscosity and / or elasticity , since the tracer particle must diffuse over a distance that ex - ceeds the detection resolution . Equations 1 and 2 can be used to estimate these limits η max = d k B T 3 π a δ 2 τ G max = d k B T 3 π a δ 2 ( 5 ) δ being the spatial resolution . For a viscous liquid the maximum viscosity depends on the lag time τ ; in principle one can always wait long enough to see the mean - squared displacement rise above noise level . Also , decreasing the particle size shifts the limits , sim - ply because smaller particles move faster with the same amount of energy . For viscoelastic liquids Equation 5 can be applied to estimate the upper boundary for the dominant dynamic modulus , G (cid:8) or G (cid:8)(cid:8) . In our video based experiments ( d = 2 ) we typ - ically use particles with a = 0 . 5 µ m together with a 60 × objective and a = 0 . 25 µ m with 100 × mag - niﬁcation . Using the estimated 0 . 1 pixel resolution of δ = 22 and 13 nm for the respective objectives results in G max = 3 . 6 and 21 Pa at ambient temperature . For a minimum lag time of 1 s , the same numerical values can Figure 3 MSD as a function of lag time τ for 0 . 53 µ m spheres ( 100 × objective ) in water ( (cid:2) ) where the fast motion limits the attainable lag timesandfor1 . 1 µ mbeads ( 60 × ) inahighlyviscouswater - glycerolmix - ture ( • ) and a strong 4 % gelatin gel ( (cid:1) ) ; in this case the spatial resolution of 22 nm for the 60 × objective makes part of the data meaningless . 4466 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE be used for η max in a viscous system when expressed in Pa . s . Diffusing - wave spectroscopy ( d = 3 ) has a better spatial resolution , δ ∼ 2 nm , so that with a = 0 . 25 µ m the maximum elasticity improves to G max = 1300 Pa . As a result of these limits , passive microrheology is only applicable to soft materials . Highly viscous poly - mer melts and very stiff gels are examples of systems that could be accessible with active probe manipulation . If the sample modulus becomes even higher , microrhe - ological techniques can no longer be used . In inviscid media , video microscopy has another op - erational limit : tracer diffusion can be so fast that the average tracer residence time in the ﬁeld of view re - stricts the longest lag time for which the MSD can be measured . The maximum lag time can be estimated as : τ max = 3 π ad 2f η 2 k B T ( 6 ) where d f is the depth of focus , which depends on the microscope settings . Equation 6 shows that this is only relevant for small particles in low - viscosity media . For dilute aqueous solutions this results in an upper limit τ max ∼ 1 – 2 s . 4 . 2 . Probe particles Colloidal tracer particles can be obtained commer - cially in a large variety of sizes , chemical composi - tions , and surface preparations . We have used particles from Interfacial Dynamics Corporation ( Portland , OR ) and Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . Other sources are available , with Bangs Laboratories Inc . ( Fishers , IN ) being another of the large suppliers . The most popular particles for microrheology exper - iments are polystyrene lattices . These particles have excellent sphericity and very low polydispersity . Their density ( 1 . 05 g / ml ) is close enough to water to elimi - nate sedimentation over the course of the experiments . Polystyrene is hydrophobic , so the particles need to be stabilized against aggregation in an aqueous envi - ronment . The most commonly used method is charge stabilization with ionic surface groups . We have used sulfonated and carboxylated spheres with negative sur - face charge and positively charged particles with ami - dine surface groups . These lattices are stable at reason - ably high salt concentrations , although the presence of multivalent counterions should be avoided as much as possible . If the system under investigation is highly charge sensitive and both positive and negative parti - cles affect the rheological properties , alternatives such as sterically stabilized silica particles can be used . Probe selection is one of the most important ex - perimental choices to be made , since microrheology relies on the absence of interaction between embed - ding medium and probe particle . In some cases , ba - sic knowledge of the experimental system is sufﬁcient . When studying the microrheology of positively charged lysine - based block copolymers , it was hardly a sur - prise to ﬁnd that positively charged polystyrene par - ticles worked much better than negative ones , which aggregated under the presence of the polyelectrolyte . In many other cases , however , the choice is less obvious and the preparation of a few test samples with different particle types is advisable . 4 . 3 . Sample handling and preparation The preparation of sample arrays for high - throughput screening is often a challenge that rivals the actual ex - periments . In a 96 - well plate the sample volume varies between 50 and 200 µ l and in a 384 - well plate the working volume is reduced even further to 10 – 50 µ l . In principle , even less volume is needed , as little as 1 µ l for video microscopy , but the presence of a free surface in multi - well plates imposes the need of a relatively large sample thickness to prevent surface effects . One of the systems that we have studied is am - phiphilic diblock copolypeptides in aqueous solution [ 20 ] ( see Section 5 . 1 ) . In our ﬁrst attempts , a 6 × 4 array was synthesized were the total molecular weight was changed along one axis and relative block compo - sition along the other . The most interesting rheologi - cal feature of these diblock copolypeptides is gelation , requiring that the rheology thus should be studied as a function of polypeptide concentration as well . In a 96 - well plate , this means that each of the 24 block copolypeptides could be measured at four different con - centrations : 0 . 1 % , 0 . 3 % , 1 % and 3 % by weight . Getting the correct polypeptide concentrations into each well in a time - efﬁcient and accurate manner is a non - trivial task . The most efﬁcient route would be to prepare one stock solution for each polypeptide and di - lute it with deionized water in the corresponding 4 wells to get the desired concentration series . However , like most complex ﬂuids , polypeptide solutions are difﬁcult to load and dispense quantitatively with a pipetter , be - cause of their viscoelasticity . The elaborate route is to prepare each of the 96 samples outside the plates at the correct concentration in individual vials , by weighing and diluting the stock solution and adding the probe particles . Of course this approach takes away part of the elegance of combinatorial methods . As an inter - mediate solution , we used added salt ( NaCl ) to break down the gel in the 24 stock solutions of the individual polypeptides . Using a pipetter , known quantities of so - lution were transferred to each of the 96 wells . Then the plate was dialyzed against deionized water for several days and freeze dried . Finally , water and tracer par - ticles were added to redissolve the copolypeptides at the desired concentration . This protocol involved two time - consuming steps , dialysis and freeze - drying , but requires relatively little human intervention . Mixing small volumes of viscoelastic sample with tracer particles is an additional difﬁculty that should not be underestimated . It can be difﬁcult to induce the necessary convective ﬂow , even in low - viscosity ﬂuids because the Reynolds number is small due to the sample size . 5 . Applications 5 . 1 . Gelation in block copolypeptide solutions The high - throughput screening approach was suc - cesfully applied to aqueous solutions of diblock 4467 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE copolypeptides . These short polypeptide amphiphiles consist of a hydrophilic polyelectrolyte block and a shorter hydrophobic block . The copolypeptides are ca - pable of forming hydrogels at remarkably low concen - trations [ 20 ] . The gelation properties strongly depend on the molecular architecture : total molecular weight , relative block lengths and choice of hydrophobic pep - tide monomer all play an important role . The syn - thesis chemistry is ﬂexible [ 29 ] , yields monodisperse polypeptides and can handle a large variety of amino acid monomers . With the added potential to expand to multiblock designs , block copolypeptides are an excel - lent testcase for high - troughput rheology . As noted in Section 4 . 3 , our collaborators synthe - sized one library of poly - ( L - lysine ) - b - poly - ( L - leucine ) diblock copolymers , varying both total molecular weight and the relative block lengths . Here we re - port in more detail on another library where the total molecular weigth was kept constant at 200 amino acid monomers . L - lysine ( K ) formed the hydrophilic block in all cases , but four different amino acids were used on the hydrophobic end : L - leucine ( L ) , L - isoleucine ( I ) , L - phenylalanine ( F ) and L - valine ( V ) . In addition , the rel - ative length of the blocks was varied : 95 – 5 % , 90 – 10 % , 80 – 20 % and 70 – 30 % , the hydrophilic lysine segment being the largest in all copolypeptides . The result was a library of 4 × 4 diblock copolypeptides . Although at ﬁrst sight 16 may seem a very modest number for high - throughput screening , it should be realized that studying gelation implies that concentration is added as a parameter . We chose to prepare samples at 0 . 1 , 0 . 3 , 1 and 3 % by weight in order to span a reasonably wide range of concentrations . As tracer particles we used positively charged amidine functionalized spheres ( a = 0 . 26 µ m ) to prevent aggregation in the presence of positively charged polyelectrolyte blocks . The tracer particles were ﬂuorescently labeled to facilitate mi - croscopy through the bottom of a 96 - well plate . Illumi - nation for bright - ﬁeld microscopy would be a challenge due to sample thickness and plate geometry , whereas ﬂuorescence offers illumination and detection from the same side of the sample . As a result the samples can be protected against evaporation during the experiments by means of plate - sealing ﬁlm without affecting the optics ( Titer - Top , Diversiﬁed Biotech , Boston , MA ) . Fig . 4 shows the tracer mean - squared displacements for two of the diblock architectures , K 190 L 10 and K 160 F 40 , as a function of concentration . While K 190 L 10 remains liquid - like up to 3 wt % , K 160 F 40 exhibits more interesting behavior : at 0 . 1 and 0 . 3 % it is a liquid , at 1 % it starts to exhibit viscoelasticity ( slope deviates from 1 ) and at 3 % it forms a strong gel . The quali - tative rheological classiﬁcation fulﬁlls the purpose of the gelation study and can easily be made without actu - ally transforming the data into dynamic moduli through Equation 3 . An overview of the qualitative rheology of all samples is presented in Table I , where we only dis - tinguish between liquid ( L ) , strong gel ( G ) and weak viscoelastic gel ( WG ) . There are a few gaps in the data set . One of the block copolypeptides , K 140 I 60 , did not dissolve in deionized water and could not be measured at all . In some cases , video microscopy could not be Figure 4 Mean - squared displacement of 0 . 53 µ m spheres ( 100 × objective ) in two of the diblock copolypeptides , ( a ) K 190 L 10 and ( b ) K 160 F 40 at different concentrations : ( (cid:1) ) 0 . 10 wt % , ( ◦ ) 0 . 30 wt % , ( (cid:2) ) 1 . 0 wt % and ( (cid:3) ) 3 . 0 wt % ; note the different scales . performed on the 0 . 3 % samples due to severe aggrega - tion of the tracer particles . Also , a few of the 0 . 1 % sam - ples exhibited a much weaker ﬂocculation at the glass bottom . Depletion ﬂocculation provides a likely expla - nation . The aggregation was obvious from the movies TABLE I Overview of the qualitative rheology of all of the diblock copolypeptide solutions ; ( L ) denotes liquid - like behavior , ( WG ) a weak viscoelastic gel and ( G ) a strong , elastic gel ; × indicates that sample could not be measured with video microrheology . The subscripts in the molecular nomenclature refer to the number of monomers inside the respective blocks ; K : lysine , L : leucine , I : isoleucine , F : phenylalanine and V : valine 0 . 1 % 0 . 3 % 1 % 3 % K 190 L 10 L L L L K 180 L 20 L L L WG K 160 L 40 L x G G K 140 L 60 L x WG G K 190 I 10 L x L L K 180 I 20 L x L L K 160 I 40 L L L G K 140 I 60 x x x x K 190 F 10 L L L L K 180 F 20 L L L WG K 160 F 40 L L WG G K 140 F 60 L L L G K 190 V 10 L x L L K 180 V 20 L x L L K 160 V 40 L x WG G K 140 L 60 L L L G 4468 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE and the generation of spurious results was prevented automatically because particle tracking failed . In spite of the missing data , clear trends can be spot - ted . Leucine is the most effective gel - former of the hydrophobic amino acids in our study , followed by phenylalanine , valine and isoleucine . Secondly , for all polymers the 70 / 30 design breaks the trend of increas - ing strength with hydrophobic content . This is an early warning that we are pushing the limits of solubility and approach the onset of phase separation . Indeed , the 70 / 30 samples were slightly cloudy , when observed closely , and K 140 I 60 did not dissolve at all . Block copolypeptide hydrogels are an exciting exam - ple of the potential of high - throughput rheology when developing new materials and the method will be vital to screen the phase space of possible molecular designs if the complexity of the copolypeptides expands beyond relatively simple diblocks architectures . 5 . 2 . Phase diagram studies Another area where high - throughput rheology has po - tential is the screening of phase behavior in multi - component mixtures . By constructing a sample array where the variable is relative sample composition , one cangeneratea“rheologicalphasediagram . ”Oncephase boundaries have been established , samples of interest can be subjected to more labor - intensive characteri - zation techniques to determine the underlying struc - ture in more detail . As proof of concept we have used diffusing - wave spectroscopy to carry out a limited study of the tertiary system consisting of water , sodium dodecyl sulphate ( SDS ) and NaCl . It is known that the addition of salt changes the properties of the micellar phase due to the growth of elongated wormlike micelles [ 30 ] . We have investigated this regime in a small array with SDS concentrations of 15 , 20 and 25 wt % in NaCl solutions of respectively 0 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 2 and 0 . 4 M . The SDS was dissolved in NaCl solutions with 25 % higher concentration than the target value , so that the addition of concentrated suspension of polystyrene tracers yielded the correct composition . Samples were tranferred into a 96 well - plate with optical bottom , volumes of 120 µ l resulting in a sample thickness of 3 . 5 mm . The polystyrene spheres had a diameter of 0 . 55 µ m and volume fraction of 0 . 9 % . The well - plate was protected against evaporation with plate seal - ing ﬁlm , that was removed only for the actual DWS measurement . For a number of the samples the dynamic structure factor g 1 ( τ ) is presented in Fig . 5 together with the mean - squared displacements that were extracted from the scattering data . The transformation was performed after calibration with polystyrene suspension in deion - ized water at the same volume fraction as the surfactant solutions . Both data sets present the same picture : at a ﬁxed SDS concentration , the addition of salt dramatically slows down the particle dynamics , once a threshold value of 0 . 1 M has been reached . For the highest salt con - centration of 0 . 4 M , the dynamics becomes noticeably more complex , viscoelastic behavior being indicated by the kink in the MSD at long lag times . Similar results Figure 5 ( a ) Normalized dynamic structure factors g 1 ( t ) and ( b ) meansquareddisplacementfordifferentSDS - water - NaClmixtures . SDS concentration 20 wt % in ( (cid:3) ) 0 , ( (cid:3) ) 0 . 1 , ( ◦ ) 0 . 2 and ( ∇ ) 0 . 4 M NaCl . Polystyrene spheres of 550 nm diameter at 0 . 9 wt % ; wavelength λ = 488 nm and T = 25 ◦ C . are found when the library is scanned along the other axis by increasing the surfactant concentration at con - stant salinity . These experiments on a multicomponent surfactant system elucidate how DWS based microrheology can be used to screen libraries of complex ﬂuids with purely compositional variation , thus providing a different range of applications . The big advantage of the DWS is the speed at which the data can be collected due to the inherent ensemble averaging . The correlation mea - surements described above were performed for 300 s in order to get reliable statistics at the longest times even for the most viscous sample . Further exploration of this application of microrheology remains to be done . 6 . Conclusions Microrheology is an excellent tool for high - throughput screening of the mechanical properties of complex ﬂu - ids , in particlular the dynamic viscoelastic moduli as a function of frequency . The small sample size and highly automated data analysis enable the rheological charac - terization of at least 100 samples per day in contrast with 5 – 10 samples per day on a conventional mechani - cal rheometer . There is a variety of passive microrheo - logical techniques that all measure the thermal motion of Brownian tracer particles . The statistical analysis of tracer motion yields rheological properties of the em - bedding medium . Because the Brownian tracer motion is driven by thermal energy k B T , passive microrheoloy is limited to complex ﬂuids that are soft enough for the micrometer sized tracers to undergo detectable motion . Two implementations of microrheology are partic - ularly suitable for high - throughput screening : video 4469 COMBINATORIAL AND HIGH - THROUGHPUT POLYMER SCIENCE microscopy and diffusing - wave spectroscopy . Video microscopy requires relatively time - consuming image analysis procedures , but it has the beneﬁt of added spatial resolution since single - particle trajectories are measured . In heterogeneous samples this enables de - tailed quantitative analysis of the level of heterogene - ity . Diffusing - wave spectroscopy , on the other hand , performs ensemble averaging on the ﬂy , so that mean - squared displacements of particles can be measured efﬁciently by sacriﬁcing spatial resolution . As in many other high - thoughput techniques , sam - ple library preparation is a critical process . For complex ﬂuids it is not trivial to prepare small volumes of well - deﬁned composition , especially in multi - component mixtures . The need to mix in Brownian tracer particles complicates matters even further . Sample preparation therefore needs to be addressed on a case by case basis . Two examples were presented for which microrheology is a useful high - throughput investigation tool : the gela - tion behavior of aqueous solutions of block copolypep - tide libraries and phase diagrams of multi - component mixtures . Acknowledgements We would like to thank Dr . Andrew Nowak ( UCSB ) for synthesizing the diblock copolypeptide library and Megan Valentine ( Harvard ) for an introduction into IDL - based particle tracking . We further acknowledge ﬁnancial support of the Netherlands Organization for Scientiﬁc Research ( NWO ) , Unilever and the MRSEC Program of the National Science Foundation ( DMR00 - 80034 ) . References 1 . H . FREUNDLICH and W . SEIFRIZ , Zeitschrift f¨ur Physikalische Chemie 104 ( 1922 ) 233 . 2 . F . C . MACKINTOSH and C . F . SCHMIDT , Curr . Opin . Coll . Interf . Sci . 4 ( 1999 ) 300 . 3 . M . J . SOLOMON and Q . LU , ibid . 6 ( 2001 ) 430 . 4 . A . MUKHOPADHYAY and S . GRANICK , ibid . 6 ( 2001 ) 423 . 5 . F . ZIEMANN , J . RADLER and E . SACKMANN , Biophys . J . 66 ( 6 ) ( 1994 ) 2210 . 6 . F . AMBLARD , et al . , Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 ( 21 ) ( 1996 ) 4470 . 7 . A . R . BAUSCH , W . MOLLER and E . SACKMANN , Biophys . J . 76 ( 1 ) ( 1999 ) 573 . 8 . A . ASHKIN , Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . United States of America 94 ( 10 ) ( 1997 ) 4853 . 9 . C . MIO and D . W . M . MARR , Adv . Mater . 12 ( 12 ) ( 2000 ) 917 . 10 . B . Y . DU , et al . , Langmuir 17 ( 11 ) ( 2001 ) 3286 . 11 . R . E . MAHAFFY , et al . , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 ( 4 ) ( 2000 ) 880 . 12 . T . G . MASON and D . A . WEITZ , ibid . 74 ( 7 ) ( 1995 ) 1250 . 13 . A . J . LEVINE and T . C . LUBENSKY , ibid . 85 ( 8 ) ( 2000 ) 1774 . 14 . B . SCHNURR , et al . , Macromol . 30 ( 25 ) ( 1997 ) 7781 . 15 . T . G . MASON , et al . , Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 ( 17 ) ( 1997 ) 3282 . 16 . T . G . MASON , H . GANG and D . A . WEITZ , J . Opt . Soc . Amer . a - Optics Image Sci . Vis . 14 ( 1 ) ( 1997 ) 139 . 17 . J . APGAR , et al . , Biophys . J . 79 ( 2 ) ( 2000 ) 1095 . 18 . J . C . CROCKER , et al . , Phys . Rev . Lett . 85 ( 4 ) ( 2000 ) 888 . 19 . M . T . VALENTINE , et al . , Phys . Rev . E 64 ( 2001 ) 061506 . 20 . A . P . NOWAK , et al . , Nature 417 ( 6887 ) ( 2002 ) 424 . 21 . B . R . DASGUPTA , et al . , Phys . Rev . E 65 ( 2002 ) 051505 . 22 . T . G . MASON , Rheol . Acta 39 ( 4 ) ( 2000 ) 371 . 23 . S . G . J . M . KLUIJTMANS , G . H . KOENDERINK and A . P . PHILIPSE , Phys . Rev . E 61 ( 1 ) ( 2000 ) 626 . 24 . M . KELLER , J . SCHILLING and E . SACKMANN , Rev . Sci . Instr . 72 ( 9 ) ( 2001 ) 3626 . 25 . J . C . CROCKER and D . G . GRIER , J . Coll . Interf . Sci . 179 ( 1996 ) 298 . 26 . M . T . VALENTINE , et al . , Biophys . J . 80 ( 1 ) ( 2001 ) 495a . 27 . D . A . WEITZ and D . J . PINE , in “Dynamic Light Scattering , ” edited by W . Brown ( Oxford University Press , New York , 1993 ) p . 652 . 28 . G . MARET , Curr . Opin . Coll . Interf . Sci . 2 ( 3 ) ( 1997 ) 251 . 29 . T . J . DEMING , Nature 390 ( 6658 ) ( 1997 ) 386 . 30 . M . TORNBLOM , U . HENRIKSSON and M . GINLEY , J . Phys . Chem . 98 ( 28 ) ( 1994 ) 7041 . 4470