Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 15 , 5647 – 5658 , December 2004 Repeated Cycles of Rapid Actin Assembly and Disassembly on Epithelial Cell Phagosomes □ V Patricia T . Yam * and Julie A . Theriot * †‡ Departments of * Biochemistry and † Microbiology and Immunology , Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford CA 94305 Submitted June 22 , 2004 ; Revised September 17 , 2004 ; Accepted September 20 , 2004 Monitoring Editor : Jennifer Lippincott - Schwartz We have found that early in infection of the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes in Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells expressing actin conjugated to green ﬂuorescent protein , F - actin rapidly assembles ( (cid:1) 25 s ) and disassem - bles ( (cid:1) 30 s ) around the bacteria , a phenomenon we call ﬂashing . L . monocytogenes strains unable to perform actin - based motility or unable to escape the phagosome were capable of ﬂashing , suggesting that the actin assembly occurs on the phagosome membrane . Cycles of actin assembly and disassembly could occur repeatedly on the same phagosome . Indirect immunoﬂuorescence showed that most bacteria were fully internalized when ﬂashing occurred , suggesting that actin ﬂashing does not represent phagocytosis . Escherichia coli expressing invA , a gene product from Yersinia pseudotubercu - losis that mediates cellular invasion , also induced ﬂashing . Furthermore , polystyrene beads coated with E - cadherin or transferrin also induced ﬂashing after internalization . This suggests that ﬂashing occurs downstream of several distinct molecular entry mechanisms and may be a general consequence of internalization of large objects by epithelial cells . INTRODUCTION Bacterial pathogens such as Salmonella , Yersinia , and Listeria have a variety of mechanisms that allow them to enter and survive in eukaryotic cells . Their ability to survive intracel - lularly can protect them from host defenses and allow them to cross epithelial barriers . To enter eukaryotic cells , these invasive bacteria actively induce their own uptake by phagocytosis in normally nonphagocytic cells . Internalized bacteria either survive within the phagosome , encapsulated by the host cell membrane , or they escape from the phago - some and disseminate throughout the cytoplasm and to neighboring cells ( reviewed in Cossart and Sansonetti , 2004 ) . Modulation of the host cell actin cytoskeleton by invasive bacteria allows them to control many of these steps , includ - ing attachment and entry into cells , survival in the phago - some , and movement in the cytoplasm . One bacterium with an intracellular niche is Listeria mono - cytogenes , a food - borne pathogen responsible for meningitis , meningoencephalitis , septicemia , gastroenteritis , and abor - tions ( reviewed in Cossart and Lecuit , 1998 ) . Two L . mono - cytogenes proteins , internalin ( InlA ) and internalin B ( InlB ) , can interact with the host cell surface proteins E - cadherin , gC1q - R , and Met to induce bacterial uptake into nonphago - cytic cells ( Mengaud et al . , 1996 ; Braun et al . , 2000 ; Shen et al . , 2000 ) . Uptake of bacteria is driven by actin polymerization and membrane extension ( reviewed in Cossart and San - sonetti , 2004 ) . Once inside the cell , L . monocytogenes escapes from the phagosome into the cytoplasm . In the cytoplasm , L . monocytogenes nucleates actin ﬁlaments that assemble into actin clouds around the bacteria and then into polarized comet tails . The actin comet tails propel the movement of L . monocytogenes within the cytoplasm of an infected cell and into neighboring cells ( Tilney and Portnoy , 1989 ; Mounier et al . , 1990 ) . The recruitment of host cell proteins to the bacteria for actin - based motility is solely dependent on bacterial expression of the surface protein ActA ( Kocks et al . , 1992 ; Smith et al . , 1995 ) . Proteomic analysis and immunoﬂuorescent staining has shown that actin is associated with InlA - coated bead phago - somes , InlB - coated bead phagosomes , and L . monocytogenes phagosomes from epithelial cells ( Bierne et al . , 2001 ; Pizarro - Cerda et al . , 2002 ) . It is known that L . monocytogenes modu - lates the host cell actin cytoskeleton during entry and intra - cellular movement . We were interested in determining whether L . monocytogenes also manipulated the actin cy - toskeleton while it is in the phagosome . Because epithelial cells are the primary route of L . monocytogenes infection in vivo ( Lecuit et al . , 2001 ) , we were particularly interested in L . monocytogenes infection in epithelial cells . In addition , the dynamics of actin assembly on phagosomes have not been studied in live cells . Therefore , epithelial cells expressing green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - actin were an ideal system to study changes in the host cell actin cytoskeleton in re - sponse to infection because it permitted us to image actin dynamics in live cells . Here , we show that actin repeatedly assembles and dis - assembles on the membrane of L . monocytogenes phago - somes , in a process we call ﬂashing . The actin dynamics on the phagosome membrane are not only speciﬁc to L . mono - cytogenes phagosomes but also occur on the phagosomes of Escherichia coli expressing invasin from Yersinia pseudotuber - culosis and polystyrene beads coated with E - cadherin or transferrin . Thus , the cycles of actin accumulation on the phagosome membrane are independent of speciﬁc molecu - lar features of the internalized object and may reﬂect host cell actin dynamics . Article published online ahead of print . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 – 06 – 0509 . Article and publication date are available at www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 – 06 – 0509 . □ V The online version of this article contains supplemental material at MBC Online ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org ) . ‡ Corresponding author . E - mail address : theriot @ cmgm . stanford . edu . © 2004 by The American Society for Cell Biology 5647 http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2004 / 09 / 29 / E04 - 06 - 0509 . DC1 Supplemental Material can be found at : MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell Lines , Bacterial Strains , and Infections Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) G cells and MDCK A10 * cells ( stable GFP - actin transfectants of MDCK G cells ) were cultured as described previ - ously ( Robbins et al . , 1999 ) . Twenty - four hours before infection , cells were seeded onto glass coverslips in six - well tissue culture plates containing growth medium without antibiotic - antimycotic . Cells were 60 – 80 % conﬂuent on the day of infection . Infections were performed with L . monocytogenes strains 10403S ( wild - type ) ( Bishop and Hinrichs , 1987 ) , DP - L973 ( Sun et al . , 1990 ) , DP - L3078 (cid:2) actA ( Skoble et al . , 2000 ) , DP - L2319 (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB ( Gedde et al . , 2000 ; O’Riordan et al . , 2002 ) , and DP - L4032 GGG actA allele ( Skoble et al . , 2001 ) ; as well as E . coli ( ATM379 ) expressing invasin from Y . pseudotuberculosis ( Isberg and Falkow , 1985 ; Monack and Theriot , 2001 ) . L . monocytogenes strains were provided by Dr . D . A . Portnoy ( University of California , Berkeley , CA ) and E . coli ( invasin ) was provided by Dr . D . M . Monack ( Stanford University , Stanford , CA ) . Cells were infected with L . monocytogenes and E . coli ( invasin ) as described previously ( Robbins et al . , 1999 ; Monack and Theriot , 2001 ) . After 45 – 60 min at 37°C , 5 % CO 2 , infected cells were washed three times with DMEM sup - plemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( DMEM / FBS ) to remove un - attached bacteria , and fresh DMEM / FBS was added . Cells infected with L . monocytogenes strains or E . coli ( invasin ) were imaged from 1 to 4 h from the start of infection . Bead Experiments The extracellular domain of E - cadherin conjugated to the human immuno - globulin hinge region and F c domain ( E - cadherin . F c ) ( Chen and Nelson , 1996 ) was a generous gift from T . D . Perez ( Stanford University ) . To coat polysty - rene beads with E - cadherin . F c , 1 - (cid:1) m polystyrene beads ( Polysciences , War - rington , PA ) were incubated in 1 mg / ml biotinylated protein A ( Pierce Chemical , Rockford , IL ) at room temperature with rotation for 3 h . Beads were washed once in PBS , resuspended in E - cadherin . F c ( 0 . 2 mg / ml ) , and incubated fo r 1 h atroom temperature and then overnight at 4°C with rotation . Beads were washed once in 137 mM NaCl , 3 mM KCl , 50 (cid:1) M CaCl 2 , 5 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 4 , and resuspended in this buffer to a ﬁnal concentration of (cid:1) 2 (cid:3) 10 6 beads / (cid:1) l . To coat polystyrene beads with transferrin , 1 - (cid:1) m polystyrene beads were incubated in 1 mg / ml canine apotransferrin ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) at room temperature for 2 h and then over - night at 4°C with rotation . The beads were washed twice in PBS . To load iron onto the apotransferrin , the beads were resuspended in 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 10 mM NaHCO 3 , 1 mM ferric citrate ( Markelonis et al . , 1982 ) ; incubated for 3 h atroom temperature ; and then overnight at 4°C with rotation . Beads were washed twice in PBS and resuspended in PBS to a ﬁnal concentration of (cid:1) 2 (cid:3) 10 6 beads / (cid:1) l . For bead uptake experiments , MDCK A10 * cells were plated as for bacterial infections , except that cells were grown in the presence of antibiotic - antimy - cotic . The beads were brieﬂy sonicated and 2 – 4 (cid:3) 10 7 E - cadherin – coated beads or 4 – 6 (cid:3) 10 7 transferrin - coated beads were added to cells per well of a six - well plate . The plates were centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 min ; incubated at 37°C , 5 % CO 2 for 30 – 45 min ; and then washed three times with growth media to remove unbound beads . Cells were imaged from 1 to 4 h after the addition of beads . In addition , for uptake of the transferrin - coated beads , cells were washed twice in PBS and then starved for 1 h inDMEM ( without serum ) before addition of beads to promote uptake of transferrin . All subsequent incubations and imaging were performed in the absence of serum . Immunostaining An immunoﬂuorescence protection assay that distinguishes extracellular from intracellular bacteria was modiﬁed from Marquis et al . ( 1995 ) and Alrutz et al . ( 2001 ) . Twenty minutes or 1 . 5 h after infection of MDCK A10 * or MDCK G cells with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB , cells were ﬁxed in 4 % electron microscopy ( EM ) - grade formaldehyde ( Ted Pella , Redding , CA ) in cytoskel - eton buffer ( Symons and Mitchison , 1991 ) with 0 . 32 M sucrose ( CBS ) at room temperature for 20 min . Cells were rinsed three times in PBS and blocked in PBS (cid:4) 3 % bovine serum albumin ( PBS - BSA ) . To detect extracellular bacteria , rabbit polyclonal serum raised against L . monocytogenes O antigen ( Difco , Detroit , MI ) was diluted in PBS - BSA and added for 30 min . Cells were washed four times with PBS - BSA and then incubated with the secondary antibody . In addition , for MDCK G cells , cells were then permeabilized with PBS contain - ing 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 and 4 % formaldehyde for 5 min and blocked in PBS - BSA containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . F - actin was then ﬂuorescently labeled with 0 . 4 (cid:1) M ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) for 15 min . Phalloidin staining of MDCK A10 * cells was performed by ﬁxing the cells in 4 % EM - grade formaldehyde at room temperature for 15 min . Cells were washed and blocked , and incubated with 0 . 013 (cid:1) M tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate - phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) at room temperature for 15 min to label the F - actin . Indirect immunoﬂuorescent staining for Arp3 and p34 was performed 1 h after infection of MDCK A10 * cells with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB or 1 h after addition of transferrin - coated beads to MDCK A10 * cells . Arp3 and p34 were detected using afﬁnity - puriﬁed rabbit polyclonal antibodies against Arp3 and p34 ( a generous gift from M . D . Welch , University of California , Berkeley , CA ) . Immunostaining was performed as described previously ( Welch et al . , 1997a , b ) , except that cells were ﬁxed in CBS with 4 % formal - dehyde , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , and 0 . 4 (cid:1) M FITC phalloidin for 15 min and washed once in PBS , before being postﬁxed in – 20°C methanol for 3 min . Microscopy Live cell imaging was performed at 37°C by mounting the coverslips on a temperature - controlled chamber . Cells were imaged in Leibovitz’s L - 15 me - dium without phenol red and supplemented with 10 % FBS , and covered with a thin layer of silicone DC - 200 ﬂuid , 0 . 937 g / ml ( Fluka Chemika , Sigma - Aldrich , Steinheim , Switzerland ) to prevent evaporation . Time - lapse phase contrast and epiﬂuorescent images of live cells were acquired using a Nikon Diaphot - 300 inverted microscope with a 60 (cid:3) ( numerical aperture [ NA ] 1 . 4 ) or 100 (cid:3) ( NA 1 . 4 ) objective . Images of ﬁxed cells were collected on the Nikon Diaphot - 300 microscope with the 60 (cid:3) ( NA 1 . 4 ) objective or an Axioplan 2 microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Thornwood , NY ) by using a 63 (cid:3) ( NA 1 . 4 ) or 100 (cid:3) ( NA 1 . 4 ) objective . All images were collected with a cooled back - thinned charge - coupled device camera ( MicroMax 512BFT ; Princeton Instruments , Princeton , NJ ) with a 2 (cid:3) optivar attached , using MetaMorph version 4 . x software ( Universal Imaging , Downingtown , PA ) . Pharmacological Treatments All pharmacological agents were added to cells while in the temperature - controlled chamber on the microscope . The same cells with ﬂashing bacteria or beads were imaged before and after the addition of the pharmacological agent . Chloroquine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to the cells at a ﬁnal concen - tration of 100 (cid:1) M , and at least 30 min elapsed before reimaging the cells . Latrunculin A ( Molecular Probes ) was added to the cells at a ﬁnal concentra - tion of 1 (cid:1) M , and at least 5 min elapsed before reimaging the cells . LY 294002 ( Calbiochem , San Diego , CA ) was added to the cells at a ﬁnal concentration of 50 or 100 (cid:1) M , and at least 5 min elapsed before reimaging the cells . Quantitative Image Analysis Boxes ( 3 (cid:3) 3 pixels ; 0 . 34 (cid:3) 0 . 34 (cid:1) m for the 60 (cid:3) objective ) were placed at the circumference of the object where the ﬂashing actin was present . The average ﬂuorescence intensity of the GFP - actin signal was measured in each box for each time point of the movies . Average ﬂuorescence intensity from a nearby area of the cell was designated the background level of ﬂuorescence . The GFP - actin ﬂuorescence intensity ( after background subtraction ) was plotted versus time . These ﬂuorescence traces had a variety of peak shapes , ranging from single isolated peaks to multiple overlapping peaks . To detect periodicity in the changes in GFP - actin ﬂuorescence intensity associated with ﬂashing , fast Fourier transforms were performed using Mat - Lab on ﬂuorescence traces that had three or more peaks , and the power spectrum was calculated . Ten traces from six wild - type L . monocytogenes and 12 traces from seven E - cadherin beads were analyzed in this way . Approximately 50 % of the peaks were single isolated peaks , and these peaks were analyzed to determine the rise time and fall time for each ﬂash . Where there was more than one shoulder , the peak was not included in the data analysis . Analysis of single peaks was performed on 17 wild - type L . monocytogenes , 21 DP - L973 L . monocytogenes , 10 (cid:2) actA L . monocytogenes , six (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB L . monocytogenes , nine E . coli ( invasin ) , 10 E - cadherin – coated beads , and nine transferrin - coated beads . The rise times and fall times for each ﬂash were measured ( Figure 6A ) . The duration of the rise and fall time was judged by eye , taking into account ﬂuctuations in the ﬂuorescence intensity of the background with time . The beginning and end of each ﬂash were identi - ﬁed as the points where the slope of the ﬂuorescence trace changed signiﬁ - cantly , with the ﬂash deﬁned as occurring during the steepest part of the ﬂuorescence trace . This resulted in a total of 189 data points for the rise times , and 194 data points for the fall times . To compare the rise times and fall times of different populations , one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with Tukey’s posttest and the Kruskal - Wallis test with Dunn’s posttest was performed using GraphPad Prism version 3 . 03 for Windows ( GraphPad Software , San Diego , CA ) . Both tests gave the same outcome . RESULTS Flashing : Cyclic Assembly and Disassembly of Actin around Bacteria We used epithelial cells expressing GFP - actin ( MDCK A10 * ) infected with wild - type L . monocytogenes ( 10403S ) to study the interaction of actin with L . monocytogenes at early stages of infection . Time - lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy of live in - fected cells revealed that actin rapidly assembled and disas - sembled around bacteria , resulting in a cyclic appearance and disappearance of an actin cloud ( Figure 1 , A and B ; P . T Yam and J . A . Theriot Molecular Biology of the Cell 5648 Vid1Fig1 and Vid2Fig1 in Supplementary Materials ) . To reﬂect the rapid dynamics observed , we called this phenom - enon ﬂashing . Actin was rapidly recruited to the bacterium and just as rapidly disassembled , such that an entire ﬂash usually lasted (cid:5) 80 s . Flashing occurred 1 – 4 h after infection of cells with L . monocytogenes and occurred before the onset of comet tail formation and intracellular motility . We ob - served that ﬂashing seemed to occur more frequently on bacteria that were closer to the cell periphery and that not all internalized bacteria exhibited ﬂashing . A single bacterium could ﬂash multiple times . Figure 1A shows a bacterium ﬂashing three times in (cid:5) 5 min . The intensity and spatial distribution of GFP - actin was not al - ways the same for each ﬂash . Flashing also could propagate along and between bacteria . Figure 1B illustrates propaga - tion of an actin ﬂash from the bacterium on the left to its neighbor on the right . The bacterium on the right gains the ﬂash that then propagates along the entire bacterium . To quantitate ﬂashing actin dynamics , we measured the GFP - actin ﬂuorescence intensity at various points on the bacterial surface for each frame of the movies and plotted the ﬂuorescence intensity versus time ( Figure 1C ) . The peaks in ﬂuorescence intensity represent the transient accumula - tion of GFP - actin we observe . Figure 1C , i , represents a point from the bacterium on the left in Figure 1B . A variety of peak shapes were observed , varying from single peaks ( Figure 1C , i ) to multiple overlapping peaks ( Figure 1C , v ) . Figure 1C , i – iv , are traces from different bacteria , illustrating the variability in ﬂashing among bacteria . In addition , not all points on a bacterium always behaved in the same way . For example , Figure 1C , iv and v , are different points on the same bacterium . The peak intensities of ﬂashes differed within one bacterium and among different bacteria . Differ - ences in peak intensity might be due to a different number of actin ﬁlaments being involved in each ﬂash as a result of variation in the initial conditions of each event . Differences in GFP - actin expression of host cells and intensity of ﬂuo - rescence illumination also contributed to differences in peak intensity of ﬂashes . Power spectrum analysis was performed on ﬂuorescence traces which contained three or more peaks to determine whether different ﬂashing bacteria shared a common ﬂashing frequency . Nine of 10 traces analyzed showed a dominant peak frequency corresponding to a pe - riod of 72 – 120 s . Flashing Occurs on the Phagosome Membrane ActA is the only L . monocytogenes protein required for actin - based motility of the bacteria in host cells ( Kocks et al . , 1992 ; Smith et al . , 1995 ) . ActA recruits all additional proteins re - quired for actin - based motility from the host cell cytoplasm . As actin is nucleated on the bacterial surface , it initially forms a cloud around the whole bacterium . This then trans - Figure 1 . Flashing . Cyclic assembly and disassembly of actin around L . monocytogenes . ( A and B ) MDCK A10 * cells infected with wild - type L . monocytogenes . Paired phase contrast and ﬂuorescence ( GFP - actin ) time - lapse images . Time in minutes : seconds . ( A ) Three cycles of transient actin accumulation occur on this bacterium . ( B ) Flashing actin is passed from the bacterium on the left to the bacterium on the right . ( C ) Traces of ﬂuorescence intensity ( GFP - actin ) versus time for various points on ﬂashing bacteria . Peaks in the ﬂuorescence intensity represent transient accumulation of GFP - actin around bacteria . i corresponds to a point on the bacterium on the left in B . i – iv represent points from different bacteria . iv and v represent different points from the same bacterium . Full videos Vid1Fig1 ( A ) and Vid2Fig1 ( B ) are available as supplementary material . Cyclic Actin Assembly on Phagosomes Vol . 15 , December 2004 5649 forms into a polarized comet tail that propels movement of the bacterium ( Tilney and Portnoy , 1989 ) . We initially hy - pothesized that ﬂashing depended on ActA and represented a stage in actin nucleation that preceded stable cloud forma - tion . To test this , we used L . monocytogenes mutants express - ing different amounts of ActA . L . monocytogenes strain DP - L973 expresses decreased lev - els of gene products regulated by the transcriptional activa - tor PrfA , including ActA , and DP - L973 is deﬁcient in actin - based motility ( Freitag et al . , 1993 ; Smith et al . , 1996 ) . DP - L973 invaded MDCK A10 * cells and was able to induce ﬂashing ( Figure 2 ) , suggesting that decreased ActA levels had no effect on ﬂashing . To determine whether ActA had any involvement in ﬂashing , we infected cells with L . mono - cytogenes (cid:2) actA . L . monocytogenes (cid:2) actA were able to ﬂash ( Figure 2 ) . Therefore , ﬂashing is not dependent on ActA - mediated nucleation of actin . We had noticed that the proportion of ﬂashing bacteria for DP - L973 was approximately twice that of wild - type L . mono - cytogenes . PrfA also regulates genes required for escape of L . monocytogenes from the phagosome ( reviewed in Cossart and Lecuit , 1998 ) . Because DP - L973 remains in the phago - some for a longer period ( Sun et al . , 1990 ) and ﬂashed more frequently compared with wild - type L . monocytogenes , we hypothesized that ﬂashing might be associated with the phagosome rather than the bacterial surface . Infection of MDCK A10 * cells with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB , a mutant that is unable to escape the phago - some ( O’Riordan et al . , 2002 ) , demonstrated that these bac - teria were able to ﬂash ( Figure 2 ) . Thus , the actin dynamics we observe corresponds to actin assembly and disassembly on the phagosome membrane , and direct contact between the bacterial surface and the cytosol is not required . That the actin accumulates close to the bacterial surface is consistent with electron micrographs of L . monocytogenes in epithelial cells which show a close apposition of the phagosome mem - brane with the bacteria ( Gaillard et al . , 1987 ; Mengaud et al . , 1996 ; Lecuit et al . , 2000 ) . Flashing Occurs after Internalization of Bacteria To determine whether the GFP - actin accumulation during ﬂashing represented F - actin , we ﬁxed MDCK A10 * cells infected with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB and labeled them with phalloidin . GFP - actin accumulation on the phagosome colocalized with phalloidin ( Figure 3A ) . Hence , the actin accumulated on the phagosome is polymerized actin . To determine whether ﬂashing occurred during or after internalization of bacteria , cells infected with L . monocyto - genes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB were ﬁxed and stained such that intracellular and extracellular bacteria could be distin - guished from each other . We ﬁxed cells without permeabi - lization , and added polyclonal serum raised against L . mono - cytogenes O antigen such that only extracellular bacteria were stained . Intracellular bacteria were protected from the antibody and were nonﬂuorescent . When actin was present on a bacterium , the bacterium was protected from the anti - serum , indicating that the bacterium was intracellular ( Fig - ure 3B ) . Also , a nonuniform distribution of actin was not necessarily associated with a bacterium that was partially inside and partially outside the cell ( Figure 3B , top ) , sug - gesting that ﬂashing actin and entry are not necessarily correlated . In a minority ( (cid:1) 35 % ) of instances where bacteria were associated with actin , the bacteria seemed to be par - tially inside the cell . These cases were presumed to be bac - teria in the process of entering the cell and were often characterized by fainter actin staining compared with those bacteria that were fully internalized . Extracellular bacteria and extracellular portions of bacteria did not costain for actin . Therefore , ﬂashing most likely does not represent abortive attempts at phagocytosis and represents actin ac - cumulation on a fully formed phagosome . To test whether actin accumulation on fully formed phagosomes also occurred on MDCK cells that do not ex - press GFP - actin , we used MDCK G cells . Phalloidin staining showed that F - actin also colocalized around the phagosome of L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB in MDCK G cells ( Fig - ure 3C ) . Similar to MDCK A10 * cells , actin accumulation was observed on bacteria that were intracellular . Therefore , ﬂashing is not an artifact of GFP - actin expression . Previous studies of macrophages and epithelial cells in - fected with wild - type L . monocytogenes show that approxi - mately one - third of the bacteria remain within the phago - some 2 h after infection ( Tilney and Portnoy , 1989 ; Marquis et al . , 1995 ) . We observed ﬂashing 1 – 4 h after infection of MDCK cells with L . monocytogenes , consistent with the pe - riod during which the bacteria reside in the phagosome . Flashing Actin Is Associated with Arp2 / 3 Complex ActA mediates actin polymerization through activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Arp2 / 3 complex has nucleating and branching activity that enables it to form dendritic networks of actin ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ) . Even though ﬂashing is not dependent on ActA , Arp2 / 3 complex may still be involved in ﬂashing . We immunostained MDCK A10 * cells infected with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB for Arp3 and p34 , two members of the Arp2 / 3 complex . Flashing actin colo - calized with Arp3 ( Figure 4 ) . Similar results were obtained for p34 staining . Therefore , Arp2 / 3 complex is probably involved in mediating actin ﬁlament network growth in ﬂashing . In experiments performed with L . monocytogenes and E - cadherin – coated beads ( see below ) , sequestration of actin Figure 2 . Flashing is independent of ActA and occurs on the phagosome membrane . Traces of ﬂuorescence intensity ( GFP - actin ) versus time for various points on ﬂashing L . monocytogenes strains DP - L973 , (cid:2) actA , and (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB . L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB is unable to escape the phagosome but still ﬂashes . P . T Yam and J . A . Theriot Molecular Biology of the Cell 5650 monomers by treating cells with 1 (cid:1) M latrunculin A abol - ished ﬂashing . Flashing is not dependent on the activity of phosphatidylinositol phosphate 3 - kinase ( PI 3 - kinase ) , be - cause addition of 50 or 100 (cid:1) M LY 294002 , a PI - 3 kinase inhibitor , to the cells failed to inhibit ﬂashing or perturb ﬂashing dynamics . In addition , ﬂashing is not dependent on acidiﬁcation of the phagosome because treatment of the cells with chloroquine , a membrane - permeant weak base that neutralizes the endosomal compartment , had no effect on ﬂashing . Flashing Occurs Downstream of Several Distinct Molecular Entry Mechanisms We have shown that ﬂashing occurs on L . monocytogenes phagosomes in MDCK epithelial cells . Entry of L . monocyto - genes into epithelial cells is primarily mediated by internalin ( InlA ) ( Mengaud et al . , 1996 ; Lecuit et al . , 2001 ) . The receptor for InlA is E - cadherin , a calcium - dependent cell - cell adhe - sion molecule normally involved in homophilic interactions at adherens junctions of polarized epithelial cells . The inter - action of InlA with E - cadherin promotes binding and entry Figure 3 . Flashing occurs after inter - nalization of bacteria . ( A ) MDCK A10 * cells infected with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB ﬁxed and labeled with phalloidin . Phalloidin labeling colocalizes with GFP - actin accumula - tion around the bacteria . ( B ) MDCK A10 * cells or ( C ) MDCK G cells in - fected with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB ﬁxed and stained for ex - tracellular L . monocytogenes . MDCK G cells also were stained with phalloi - din . Arrowheads indicate bacteria as - sociated with actin . Actin localization around bacteria occurs on bacteria that are fully internalized and not ac - cessible to the polyclonal serum raised against L . monocytogenes O antigen . Figure 4 . Flashing actin is associated with Arp3 . MDCK A10 * cells infected with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB , ﬁxed and stained for Arp3 . Arp3 staining colocalizes with GFP - actin around the bac - terial phagosome . Cyclic Actin Assembly on Phagosomes Vol . 15 , December 2004 5651 of L . monocytogenes into epithelial cells ( Mengaud et al . , 1996 ) . Polystyrene beads coated with the extracellular do - main of E - cadherin also are internalized when added to MDCK cells , via interactions with E - cadherin on the cell surface ( Perez and Nelson , personal communication ) . Inter - nalized E - cadherin – coated beads ﬂashed ( Figure 5A ; Vid3Fig5 in Supplementary Materials ) , demonstrating that E - cadherin – mediated entry into epithelial cells is sufﬁcient for ﬂashing to occur . E - cadherin – coated beads ﬂashed with similar spatial and temporal characteristics to L . monocyto - genes ﬂashing ( Figure 5A ) . The power spectrum of 8 of 12 ﬂuorescence traces of ﬂashing E - cadherin beads shared a peak corresponding to a period of 82 – 118 s , similar to that of wild - type L . monocytogenes . Furthermore , because the beads are inert , the ability of E - cadherin – coated beads to trigger ﬂashing demonstrates that ﬂashing is not dependent on expression of bacterial proteins , signaling from the bacteria across the phagosome membrane , or escape from the phago - some . To determine whether ﬂashing was speciﬁc to E - cad - herin – mediated entry into cells , we tested two other uptake mechanisms : that of Y . pseudotuberculosis and transferrin . Invasin , a bacterial outer membrane protein from Y . pseudo - tuberculosis , binds (cid:2) 1 - integrins on the host cell surface and is sufﬁcient for entry of bacteria into host cells ( Isberg and Falkow , 1985 ; Isberg and Leong , 1990 ) . E . coli expressing invasin also induced ﬂashing ( Figure 5B ) . Therefore , al - though E - cadherin binding is sufﬁcient for ﬂashing , it is not necessary . Using E . coli ( invasin ) , we were able to compare entry of a bacterium into a cell with ﬂashing . During one movie ( Vid - eo4 in Supplementary Materials ) , a bacterium was taken up by a cell and subsequently began to ﬂash . Entry of the bacterium was associated with weak actin accumulation , Figure 5 . Flashing occurs downstream of several distinct molecular entry mechanisms . MDCK A10 * cells with internalized E - cadherin – coated beads ( A ) , E . coli ( invasin ) ( B ) , or transferrin - coated beads ( C ) all ﬂash . Top , matched phase contrast and GFP - actin image . Bottom , traces of ﬂuorescence intensity ( GFP - actin ) versus time for various points on the ﬂashing objects . ( D ) GFP - actin on transferring - coated beads is associated with Arp3 . Transferrin - coated beads were added to MDCK A10 * cells , and cells were ﬁxed and stained for Arp3 . Full video Vid3Fig5 ( A ) is available as supplementary material . P . T Yam and J . A . Theriot Molecular Biology of the Cell 5652 consistent with previous ﬁxed cell studies of invasin - medi - ated entry into cells ( Finlay et al . , 1991 ; Mengaud et al . , 1996 ) . Weak actin accumulation began (cid:1) 1 min after ﬁrst contact between the bacterium and the cell , and faint actin outlining the presumptive phagocytic cup enveloped the bacterium for a duration of 3 – 4 min . We observed more intense actin accumulation during ﬂashing , which began (cid:1) 6 min later . Both E - cadherin and (cid:2) - integrin normally have a close , albeit indirect , interaction with actin as part of their adhesive function . To investigate a mechanism of entry that involves receptors that do not consistently interact with the actin cytoskeleton , we added transferrin - coated beads to epithe - lial cells . Transferrin binds to transferrin receptors on the cell membrane and is internalized by a clathrin - dependent path - way . Neither ﬁlamentous actin nor actin assembly play an obligatory role for clathrin - mediated endocytosis of trans - ferrin ( Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ) . Transferrin - coated beads also ﬂashed ( Figure 5C ) . Arp3 and p34 immunostaining of trans - ferrin - coated beads added to MDCK A10 * cells demon - strated that the actin accumulated on the bead phagosomes also associated with Arp3 ( Figure 5D ) and p34 , as was the case for the L . monocytogenes phagosomes . Flashing seemed similar among the different L . monocyto - genes strains , E . coli ( invasin ) , E - cadherin – coated beads , and transferrin - coated beads . The traces of GFP - actin ﬂuores - cence intensity versus time ( Figures 1C , 2 and 5 ) allowed us to quantitate ﬂashing behavior and to compare the ﬂashing kinetics between the different objects . We analyzed the peaks in GFP - actin ﬂuorescence associated with ﬂashing . The analysis was restricted to single isolated peaks . Multiple overlapping peaks were assumed to be composed of over - lapping single events and excluded from the analysis . Pla - teaus were extremely rare ( (cid:5) 2 % of points examined ) . The rise time and fall time ( Figure 6A ) were deﬁned as the time it took for the actin to assemble and disassemble , re - spectively , during the steepest part of the ﬂash . Rise times clustered around 15 – 40 s ( Figure 6B ) , and fall times clus - tered around 20 – 45 s ( Figure 6C ) . The rise and fall times were independent of peak intensity . Comparison of the rise times ( Figure 6B ) for all the L . monocytogenes strains , E - cadherin – coated beads and transferrin - coated beads showed that none of populations were signiﬁcantly different from each other ( p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . The E . coli ( invasin ) rise time might be slightly longer than that of wild - type L . monocyto - genes and DP - L973 ( p (cid:5) 0 . 01 ) . Comparison of the fall times ( Figure 6C ) for the L . monocytogenes strains , E - cadherin – coated beads , E . coli ( invasin ) , and transferrin - coated beads showed that none of the fall times were signiﬁcantly differ - ent from each other ( p (cid:6) 0 . 05 ) . The similarity in the rise and fall times for all the populations suggests that the actin dynamics in all cases are the same . Thus , ﬂashing seems to be independent of the molecular entry mechanism of the object . Flashing May Be Associated with Membrane Deformation Surprisingly , ﬂashing can occur on membrane domains other than completed phagosomes . Actin dynamics with kinetics similar to ﬂashing were observed as a result of perturbation of the cell membrane by objects that were not fully phagocytosed , on the surface of induced vesicles in the cells , and at the edge of a wound in the cell ( Figure 7 ) . In these cases , ﬂashing occurs on the deformed membrane long after the initial change has occurred . Transient or shallow membrane deformations are probably insufﬁcient to induce ﬂashing . Where unusually long bacteria were partially engulfed by the host cell ( Figure 7A ; Vid5Fig7 in Supplementary Mate - rials ) , actin assembled and disassembled around the mem - brane - bound portion of the bacterium . These bacteria could not be fully phagocytosed and deformed the plasma mem - brane for a prolonged period . Like ﬂashing , the actin assem - bly was transient and propagated along the membrane . The rise times and fall times of the actin dynamics were consis - tent with those of ﬂashing bacteria and beads . Flashing actin on the engulfed portion of a bacterium was accompanied by the bacterium being thrust away from the cell , suggesting that the force generated by actin polymerization on the membrane contributed to the ejection of the bacterium from the cell . As stated earlier , addition of the PI 3 - kinase inhibitor LY 294002 to the cells had no effect on ﬂashing kinetics . It did , however , induce the accumulation of enlarged intracellular vesicles , which have previously been identiﬁed as having characteristics of endosomes ( Chen and Wang , 2001 ) . These enlarged vesicles also ﬂashed , with rise times and fall times that were consistent with those of the ﬂashing bacteria and beads ( Figure 7B ; Video6 in Supplementary Materials ) . Fur - thermore , when a cell was accidentally wounded with a microinjection needle , piercing through the apical and basal plasma membrane ( diagrammed in Figure 7D ) actin tran - siently accumulated at the edge of the wound . The rise and fall time of the actin ﬂash around the wound edge was consistent with that of ﬂashing ( Figure 7C ; Vid7Fig7 in Supplementary Materials ) . These various observations argue that actin ﬂashing is not only limited to fully internalized objects , but also occurs in situations where there is a perturbation in the shape of the plasma membrane such that the plasma membrane ( or membrane derived from the plasma membrane ) is in contact with cytoplasm that is not normally adjacent to the plasma membrane . We have observed three geometries of deformed membranes that trigger this dynamic actin assembly and disassembly ( Figure 7D ) . In some cases , small actin comet tails emerged from a ﬂashing bacterium or bead and moved away from the ﬂashing object ( Figure 8A ; Vid8Fig8 in Supplementary Materials ) . These comets are reminiscent of those ob - served on small vesicles and endosomes ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ; Taunton et al . , 2000 ) . Actin tails also could be di - rectly formed on a ﬂashing phagosome ( Figure 8B ) . This polarized accumulation of actin on phagosomes of bacte - ria or beads was usually accompanied by transient direc - tional movement . The same phagosome could exhibit both polarized and symmetrical actin ﬂashing ( Figure 8B ) . Therefore , polarized ﬂashing accompanied by an actin comet tail and symmetrical ﬂashing are likely to be dif - ferent expressions of the same phenomenon . DISCUSSION Repeated Cycles of Actin Assembly and Disassembly Occurs on Phagosomes This is the ﬁrst study of the spatial and temporal dynamics of actin on phagosomes in live epithelial cells . Previous proteomic and immunoﬂuorescence studies showing the presence of actin on macrophage and epithelial cell phago - somes have focused on ﬁxed or isolated samples ( Defacque et al . , 2000 ; Garin et al . , 2001 ; Pizarro - Cerda et al . , 2002 ) , overlooking the striking dynamics that we have observed . Based on our observations of cycles of transient actin assem - bly and disassembly on phagosomes in live epithelial cells , we suggest that the association of actin with phagosomes is highly dynamic . Cyclic Actin Assembly on Phagosomes Vol . 15 , December 2004 5653 Previous observations of L . monocytogenes phagosomes in ﬁxed cells have shown that actin is present on the phago - somes of bacteria that are entirely intracellular ( Bierne et al . , 2001 ) . This observation was proposed to correspond to phagocytic cup closure or residual F - actin from phagocyto - sis . Our live cell imaging of GFP - actin on phagosomes to - gether with our immunostaining data places these results in a new context . Prior observations in ﬁxed cells of actin on L . monocytogenes phagosomes ( Lecuit et al . , 2000 ; Bierne et al . , 2001 ) may in fact be snapshots of ﬂashing . Flashing is un - likely to be associated with phagocytic cup closure because it can occur repeatedly ( (cid:3) 3 times ) over tens of minutes on the same phagosome while the phagosome is drifting rela - tive to the cell . If ﬂashing were associated with phagosome closure , it might be hypothesized that the actin would be localized to the point of closure where the phagosome is being pinched off from the membrane . Instead , we observe actin accumulation over the entire phagosome , sometimes in varying spatial patterns on the same phagosome . When actin is localized around the phagosome , the majority of the bacteria are completely intracellular . In addition , some ﬂash - ing phagosomes form short comet tails and move through the cytoplasm in a manner that suggests that they are unat - tached to the plasma membrane , similar to actin - based ves - icle movement . Inhibition of PI 3 - kinase with LY 294002 had no effect on the ﬂashing of E - cadherin – coated beads , suggesting that ﬂashing is not dependent on PI 3 - kinase . Given the robust nature of ﬂashing , we predict that this observation would be true for ﬂashing on the phagosomes of L . monocytogenes and E . coli ( invasin ) . In contrast , efﬁcient InlA - or InlB - mediated entry of L . monocytogenes ( Ireton et al . , 1996 ) and invasin - mediated uptake ( Mecsas et al . , 1998 ) into nonphagocytic cells requires PI 3 - kinase . This suggests that the mechanism of ﬂashing differs from the mechanism of entry into a cell . Like ﬂashing actin on epithelial cell phagosomes , phos - phatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PI3P ) cycles on and off mac - rophage bead phagosomes ( Chua and Deretic , 2004 ) and Salmonella typhimurium epithelial cell phagosomes ( Pattni et al . , 2001 ) . It has been proposed that the recurring waves of PI3P may play a role in phagosomal maturation ( Chua and Deretic , 2004 ) and that this can be modulated by intracellular pathogens . For example , Mycobacterium tu - berculosis alters the timing and characteristics of PI3P waves on its phagosomes as a strategy for blocking phagosome conversion into the phagolysosome ( Chua and Deretic , 2004 ) . Likewise , some intracellular pathogens that survive and replicate within the phagosome modulate the F - actin net - work around the phagosome . For example , the formation of an F - actin meshwork around the macrophage phagosome is essential for replication of S . typhimurium ( Meresse et al . , 2001 ) . In contrast to S . typhimurium , inhibition of actin as - sembly on the phagosome seems to be important for sur - vival of M . tuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium inside the macrophage phagosome ( Anes et al . , 2003 ) . In these cases where intracellular pathogens modulate actin polymeriza - tion on phagosomes for their own advantage , this may be achieved through modulating the endogenous process of actin ﬂashing . Perhaps the small actin comet tails that emerge from ﬂashing bacteria or beads and move away from the ﬂashing object reﬂect the occurrence of membrane re - modeling on the phagosomes associated with phagosome maturation . Figure 6 . Various objects have similar ﬂashing kinetics . ( A ) Trace of ﬂuorescence intensity ( GFP - actin ) versus time illustrating the deﬁnition of the rise time and the fall time of a ﬂash . ( B ) Rise times for ﬂashing points on L . monocytogenes wild - type ( n (cid:7) 40 ) , DP - L973 ( n (cid:7) 55 ) , (cid:2) actA ( n (cid:7) 19 ) , and (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB ( n (cid:7) 11 ) , and E - cadherin – coated beads ( n (cid:7) 20 ) , E . coli ( invasin ) ( n (cid:7) 25 ) , and transferrin - coated beads ( n (cid:7) 19 ) . Horizontal lines depict the me - dian value for each group . ( C ) Fall times for ﬂashing points on L . monocytogenes wild - type ( n (cid:7) 46 ) , DP - L973 ( n (cid:7) 45 ) , (cid:2) actA ( n (cid:7) 19 ) , and (cid:2) hly (cid:2) plcA (cid:2) plcB ( n (cid:7) 12 ) , and E - cadherin – coated beads ( n (cid:7) 29 ) , E . coli ( invasin ) ( n (cid:7) 25 ) , and transferrin - coated beads ( n (cid:7) 18 ) . Horizontal lines depict the median values for each group . P . T Yam and J . A . Theriot Molecular Biology of the Cell 5654 Figure 7 . Flashing may be associated with deformed membranes . ( A ) MDCK A10 * cell infected with L . monocytogenes DP - L4032 . Left , paired phase contrast and ﬂuorescence ( GFP - actin ) time - lapse images . Time in minutes : seconds . Flashing actin is associated with an unusually long bacterium unable to enter the cell , which deforms the plasma membrane and is eventually thrust out of the cell . Right , trace of ﬂuorescence intensity ( GFP - actin ) verus time for a point from the ﬂashing bacterium . ( B ) MDCK A10 * cell treated with 50 (cid:1) M LY 294002 . Left , paired phase contrast and ﬂuorescence ( GFP - actin ) time - lapse images . Time in minutes : seconds . Enlarged vesicles ﬂash . Right , trace of ﬂuorescence intensity ( GFP - actin ) versus time for a point from the ﬂashing vesicle . ( C ) MDCK A10 * cell with microinjection needle wounds . ( i ) Phase contrast and ﬂuorescence ( GFP - actin ) images of the wound in the cell at time 0 : 00 . ( ii ) Left , paired phase contrast and ﬂuorescence ( GFP - actin ) time - lapse images of the area of the cell containing the wound denoted by the box in i . Time in minutes : seconds . The edge of the wound has ﬂashing actin dynamics . Right , trace of ﬂuorescence intensity ( GFP - actin ) versus time for a point on the edge of the wound . ( D ) Various membrane geometries where we have observed ﬂashing actin dynamics . Full videos Vid5Fig7 ( A ) and Vid7Fig7 ( C ) are available as supplementary material . Cyclic Actin Assembly on Phagosomes Vol . 15 , December 2004 5655 Phagosomes , Endosomes , and Vesicles All Exhibit Actin - based Motility Flashing objects can nucleate short actin comet tails that propel directional movement , suggesting that there is a con - nection between ﬂashing and vesicle rocketing . Actin comet tails have been observed in vivo on endosomes and lyso - somes stimulated with phorbol 12 - myristate 13 - acetate ( Taunton et al . , 2000 ) , endosomes in macrophages treated with lanthanum and zinc ions ( Southwick et al . , 2003 ) , pino - somes ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 1999 ) , and Golgi and endocytic vesicles in cells overexpressing phosphatidylinositol phos - phate 5 - kinase ( PI 5 - kinase ) or treated with pervanadate and platelet - derived growth factor ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) . In addi - tion , actin - based phagosome motility has been observed at a very low frequency ( 0 . 6 – 1 . 5 % of engulfed beads over a 10 - min interval ) in unstimulated macrophages ( Zhang et al . , 2002 ) . Vesicle rocketing , phagosome rocketing , and ﬂashing share several kinetic and molecular features . All are tran - sient events and , under unstimulated conditions , infrequent events . Actin tails on macrophage phagosomes persist for only 1 – 2 min ( Zhang et al . , 2002 ) . Actin tails on vesicles induced by PI - 5 kinase overexpression persist for an average of 2 . 2 min ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) . In our study , ﬂashing had rise times of (cid:1) 25 s and fall times of (cid:1) 30 s ; a total duration of (cid:1) 1 min . Furthermore , Arp2 / 3 complex is present throughout the actin tail of endosomes and vesicles ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ; Taunton et al . , 2000 ; Southwick et al . , 2003 ) and colocalizes with ﬂashing actin . Actin - based phagosome mo - tility in macrophages does not depend on the surface coating on the bead ( Zhang et al . , 2002 ) . Likewise , ﬂashing does not depend on the molecular features of the internalized object . Inhibition of PI - 3 kinase does not block comet tail formation ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) nor in vitro assembly of actin on bead phagosomes ( Defacque et al . , 2002 ) . Similarly , inhibition of PI 3 - kinase had no effect on ﬂashing . Although there are cases when ﬂashing is asymmetrical and associated with transient periods of directed motion , we did not observe any transition from ﬂashing to persistent directed motion . The preference for nonpolar assembly of actin over the entire phagosome in contrast with the forma - tion of polarized comet tails on vesicles may be due to the different sizes of the objects involved . Actin nucleation on larger objects tends to be nonpolar and uniform . Decreasing the size of the nucleating object increases the probability of symmetry breaking and formation of a polar comet tail ( Cameron et al . , 1999 , 2004 ) . In general , phagosomes are larger than endocytic vesicles , and therefore would have a preference for nonpolar assembly of actin on their surfaces . In addition , variation in the ﬂuidity of the membrane ( Giar - dini et al . , 2003 ) can contribute to differences in the proba - bility of symmetry breaking and the resultant geometry of the actin assembly on the object . Hence , nonpolar and polar forms of actin assembly on membrane - bound organelles may reﬂect different facets of the same phenomenon . Figure 8 . Flashing can initiate directed movement . Paired phase and ﬂuorescence ( GFP - actin ) time - lapse images . Time in minutes : seconds . ( A ) MDCK A10 * cell infected with L . monocytogenes (cid:2) actA . The bacterium ﬂashes ( 0 : 18 – 0 : 59 ) and an actin comet tail emerges from the ﬂashing actin . Arrowheads indicate the position of the comet tail . The maximum projection of ﬂuorescence intensity across the images illustrates the path of the comet tail . ( B ) MDCK A10 * cell with internalized E - cadherin – coated beads . The same bead can nucleate a short actin comet tail ( 0 : 23 – 1 : 23 ) propelling directional movement , and a nonpolar ﬂash ( 2 : 11 ) . Right , diagram depicting the position of the bead during movement from 0 : 23 – 1 : 23 . Full video Vid8Fig8 ( A ) is available as supplementary material . P . T Yam and J . A . Theriot Molecular Biology of the Cell 5656 The ability of phagosomes , endosomes , and vesicles to nucleate actin polymerization in vivo suggests that they share a supramolecular organizational similarity . It has been suggested that sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts may be plat - forms for PIP 2 - dependent actin polymerization on the mem - brane of vesicles ( Rozelle et al . , 2000 ) . A similar mechanism may exist for actin nucleation on phagosomes , which has been shown to be dependent on PIP 2 in vitro ( Defacque et al . , 2002 ) and in vivo ( Anes et al . , 2003 ) for macrophage phago - somes . Interestingly , proteins associated with lipid rafts , such as ﬂotillin and stomatin , have been identiﬁed on phagosomes from macrophages ( Garin et al . , 2001 ) and may localize to lipid subdomains ( Dermine et al . , 2001 ) . Flashing Reﬂects Host Cell Actin Dynamics Actin ﬂashing dynamics are not limited to fully formed phagosomes and also occur on several membrane geome - tries . Flashing was coincident with the expulsion of unusu - ally long bacteria from cells and reduction in the size of a wound . This suggests that some property of deformed mem - branes triggers ﬂashing , when the deformations are sufﬁ - ciently large and prolonged . Furthermore , ﬂashing may be a host cell response involved in the repair of wounds in the cell or maintenance of cellular integrity when foreign objects disrupt the shape of the membrane . Flashing is more common in the cell periphery than the cell center , and this may reﬂect differences in host cell actin dynamics in various parts of the cell . The cell periphery may be a more permissible environment for actin assembly on membrane - bound organelles . For example , endosomal rock - eting occurs after formation of the endosome and moves the endosome away from the cell periphery into the cell center , where actin assembly on membranes may be less frequent . In contrast , ﬂashing phagosomes remain in the periphery for longer and drift slowly toward the cell center , giving rise to more opportunities for the assembly of actin on the mem - brane and repeated cycles of ﬂashing . Traveling waves of actin have been observed in ﬁbro - blasts , epithelial cells , and in Dictyostelium ( Vicker , 2002 ; Krueger et al . , 2003 ; Bretschneider et al . , 2004 ) . It has been proposed that they are involved in the creation of protrusive structures and remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton over cellular distances . The rise and fall times of the actin waves in Dictyostelium ( Bretschneider et al . , 2004 ) were shorter than those seen for ﬂashing , but the shape of the events was similar , with the rise time being slightly faster than the fall time . One tantalizing possibility is that ﬂashing on phago - somes and disturbed membranes is a result of the actin waves interacting with membrane surfaces . Flashing is sometimes coordinated between phagosomes over large dis - tances , so phagosomes may be sensing both large scale waves that are easily visualized , as well as smaller undetect - able waves . These actin waves may be one method cells use to both probe the state of the cell and respond to perturba - tions . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to D . A . Portnoy , D . M . Monack , T . D . Perez , and M . D . Welch for reagents . We thank members of the Theriot laboratory for stimulating discussions and support throughout the course of the project , in particular K . Keren for assistance with MatLab . We acknowledge the initial observations of ﬂashing made by D . M . Monack and J . R . Robbins . We thank S . R . Pfeffer , I . Mellman , and W . J . Nelson for suggesting the transferrin bead experiment , and J . Swanson for helpful discussions . We greatly appreciate comments on the manuscript from D . A . Aivazian , M . R . Amieva , A . E . Brotcke , R . A . Ihrie , T . D . Perez and S . R . Pfeffer . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant AI - 36929 . P . T . Y . was supported by a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Predoctoral Fellowship , Stanford Graduate Fellowship , and a Skye International Foundation Scholarship . REFERENCES Alrutz , M . A . , Srivastava , A . , Wong , K . W . , D’Souza - Schorey , C . , Tang , M . , Ch’Ng , L . E . , Snapper , S . B . , and Isberg , R . R . ( 2001 ) . Efﬁcient uptake of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis via integrin receptors involves a Rac1 - Arp 2 / 3 pathway that bypasses N - WASP function . Mol . Microbiol . 42 , 689 – 703 . Anes , E . , Kuhnel , M . P . , Bos , E . , Moniz - Pereira , J . , Habermann , A . , and Grif - ﬁths , G . ( 2003 ) . Selected lipids activate phagosome actin assembly and mat - uration resulting in killing of pathogenic mycobacteria . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 793 – 802 . Bierne , H . , Gouin , E . , Roux , P . , Caroni , P . , Yin , H . L . , and Cossart , P . ( 2001 ) . A role for coﬁlin and LIM kinase in Listeria - induced phagocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 101 – 112 . Bishop , D . K . , and Hinrichs , D . J . ( 1987 ) . Adoptive transfer of immunity to Listeria monocytogenes . The inﬂuence of in vitro stimulation on lymphocyte subset requirements . J . Immunol . 139 , 2005 – 2009 . Braun , L . , Ghebrehiwet , B . , and Cossart , P . ( 2000 ) . gC1q - R / p32 , a C1q - binding protein , is a receptor for the InlB invasion protein of Listeria monocytogenes . EMBO J . 19 , 1458 – 1466 . Bretschneider , T . , Diez , S . , Anderson , K . , Heuser , J . , Clarke , M . , Muller - Taubenberger , A . , Kohler , J . , and Gerisch , G . ( 2004 ) . Dynamic actin patterns and Arp2 / 3 assembly at the substrate - attached surface of motile cells . Curr . Biol . 14 , 1 – 10 . Cameron , L . A . , Footer , M . J . , van Oudenaarden , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Motility of ActA protein - coated microspheres driven by actin polymerization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 4908 – 4913 . Cameron , L . A . , Robbins , J . R . , Footer , M . J . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2004 ) . Biophysical parameters inﬂuence actin - based movement , trajectory , and initiation in a cell - free system . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 2312 – 2323 . Chen , X . , and Wang , Z . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of intracellular trafﬁcking of the EGF receptor by Rab5 in the absence of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase activity . EMBO Rep . 2 , 68 – 74 . Chen , Y . T . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 1996 ) . Continuous production of soluble extra - cellular domain of a type - I transmembrane protein in mammalian cells using an Epstein - Barr virus Ori - P - based expression vector . Anal . Biochem . 242 , 276 – 278 . Chua , J . , and Deretic , V . ( 2004 ) . Mycobacterium tuberculosis reprograms waves of phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate on phagosomal organelles . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 36982 – 36992 . Cossart , P . , and Lecuit , M . ( 1998 ) . Interactions of Listeria monocytogenes with mammalian cells during entry and actin - based movement : bacterial factors , cellular ligands and signaling . EMBO J . 17 , 3797 – 3806 . Cossart , P . , and Sansonetti , P . J . ( 2004 ) . Bacterial invasion : the paradigms of enteroinvasive pathogens . Science 304 , 242 – 248 . Defacque , H . , Bos , E . , Garvalov , B . , Barret , C . , Roy , C . , Mangeat , P . , Shin , H . W . , Rybin , V . , and Grifﬁths , G . ( 2002 ) . Phosphoinositides regulate mem - brane - dependent actin assembly by latex bead phagosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 1190 – 1202 . Defacque , H . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Involvement of ezrin / moesin in de novo actin assembly on phagosomal membranes . EMBO J . 19 , 199 – 212 . Dermine , J . F . , Duclos , S . , Garin , J . , St - Louis , F . , Rea , S . , Parton , R . G . , and Desjardins , M . ( 2001 ) . Flotillin - 1 - enriched lipid raft domains accumulate on maturing phagosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 18507 – 18512 . Finlay , B . B . , Ruschkowski , S . , and Dedhar , S . ( 1991 ) . Cytoskeletal rearrange - ments accompanying Salmonella entry into epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 99 , 283 – 296 . Freitag , N . E . , Rong , L . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Regulation of the prfA transcriptional activator of Listeria monocytogenes : multiple promoter elements contribute to intracellular growth and cell - to - cell spread . Infect . Immun . 61 , 2537 – 2544 . Fujimoto , L . M . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2000 ) . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Trafﬁc 1 , 161 – 171 . Gaillard , J . L . , Berche , P . , Mounier , J . , Richard , S . , and Sansonetti , P . ( 1987 ) . In vitro model of penetration and intracellular growth of Listeria monocytogenes in the human enterocyte - like cell line Caco - 2 . Infect . Immun . 55 , 2822 – 2829 . Garin , J . , Diez , R . , Kieffer , S . , Dermine , J . F . , Duclos , S . , Gagnon , E . , Sadoul , R . , Rondeau , C . , and Desjardins , M . ( 2001 ) . The phagosome proteome : insight into phagosome functions . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 165 – 180 . Cyclic Actin Assembly on Phagosomes Vol . 15 , December 2004 5657 Gedde , M . M . , Higgins , D . E . , Tilney , L . G . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 2000 ) . Role of listeriolysin O in cell - to - cell spread of Listeria monocytogenes . Infect . Immun . 68 , 999 – 1003 . Giardini , P . A . , Fletcher , D . A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Compression forces generated by actin comet tails on lipid vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6493 – 6498 . Ireton , K . , Payrastre , B . , Chap , H . , Ogawa , W . , Sakaue , H . , Kasuga , M . , and Cossart , P . ( 1996 ) . A role for phosphoinositide 3 - kinase in bacterial invasion . Science 274 , 780 – 782 . Isberg , R . R . , and Falkow , S . ( 1985 ) . A single genetic locus encoded by Yersinia pseudotuberculosis permits invasion of cultured animal cells by Escherichia coli K - 12 . Nature 317 , 262 – 264 . Isberg , R . R . , and Leong , J . M . ( 1990 ) . Multiple beta 1 chain integrins are receptors for invasin , a protein that promotes bacterial penetration into mam - malian cells . Cell 60 , 861 – 871 . Kocks , C . , Gouin , E . , Tabouret , M . , Berche , P . , Ohayon , H . , and Cossart , P . ( 1992 ) . L . monocytogenes - induced actin assembly requires the actA gene prod - uct , a surface protein . Cell 68 , 521 – 531 . Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . A dynamin - cortactin - Arp2 / 3 complex mediates actin reorganization in growth factor - stimulated cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 1085 – 1096 . Lecuit , M . , Hurme , R . , Pizarro - Cerda , J . , Ohayon , H . , Geiger , B . , and Cossart , P . ( 2000 ) . A role for alpha - and beta - catenins in bacterial uptake . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 10008 – 10013 . Lecuit , M . , Vandormael - Pournin , S . , Lefort , J . , Huerre , M . , Gounon , P . , Du - puy , C . , Babinet , C . , and Cossart , P . ( 2001 ) . A transgenic model for listeriosis : role of internalin in crossing the intestinal barrier . Science 292 , 1722 – 1725 . Markelonis , G . J . , Bradshaw , R . A . , Oh , T . H . , Johnson , J . L . , and Bates , O . J . ( 1982 ) . Sciatin is a transferrin - like polypeptide . J . Neurochem . 39 , 315 – 320 . Marquis , H . , Doshi , V . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1995 ) . The broad - range phospho - lipase C and a metalloprotease mediate listeriolysin O - independent escape of Listeria monocytogenes from a primary vacuole in human epithelial cells . Infect . Immun . 63 , 4531 – 4534 . Mecsas , J . , Raupach , B . , and Falkow , S . ( 1998 ) . The Yersinia Yops inhibit invasion of Listeria , Shigella and Edwardsiella but not Salmonella into epithelial cells . Mol . Microbiol . 28 , 1269 – 1281 . Mengaud , J . , Ohayon , H . , Gounon , P . , Mege , R . M . , and Cossart , P . ( 1996 ) . E - cadherin is the receptor for internalin , a surface protein required for entry of L . monocytogenes into epithelial cells . Cell 84 , 923 – 932 . Meresse , S . , Unsworth , K . E . , Habermann , A . , Grifﬁths , G . , Fang , F . , Martinez - Lorenzo , M . J . , Waterman , S . R . , Gorvel , J . P . , and Holden , D . W . ( 2001 ) . Remod - elling of the actin cytoskeleton is essential for replication of intravacuolar Salmonella . Cell Microbiol . 3 , 567 – 577 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Moss , S . E . , Ballestrem , C . , Imhof , B . A . , Giese , G . , Wunderlich , I . , and Almers , W . ( 1999 ) . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cultured mast cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 72 – 74 . Monack , D . M . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Actin - based motility is sufﬁcient for bacterial membrane protrusion formation and host cell uptake . Cell Micro - biol . 3 , 633 – 647 . Mounier , J . , Ryter , A . , Coquis - Rondon , M . , and Sansonetti , P . J . ( 1990 ) . Intra - cellular and cell - to - cell spread of Listeria monocytogenes involves interaction with F - actin in the enterocytelike cell line Caco - 2 . Infect . Immun . 58 , 1048 – 1058 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high afﬁnity pointed end capping , and for - mation of branching networks of ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 . O’Riordan , M . , Yi , C . H . , Gonzales , R . , Lee , K . D . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Innate recognition of bacteria by a macrophage cytosolic surveillance path - way . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 13861 – 13866 . Pattni , K . , Jepson , M . , Stenmark , H . , and Banting , G . ( 2001 ) . A PtdIns ( 3 ) P - speciﬁc probe cycles on and off host cell membranes during Salmonella inva - sion of mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1636 – 1642 . Pizarro - Cerda , J . , Jonquieres , R . , Gouin , E . , Vandekerckhove , J . , Garin , J . , and Cossart , P . ( 2002 ) . Distinct protein patterns associated with Listeria monocyto - genes InlA - or InlB - phagosomes . Cell Microbiol . 4 , 101 – 115 . Robbins , J . R . , Barth , A . I . , Marquis , H . , de Hostos , E . L . , Nelson , W . J . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 1999 ) . Listeria monocytogenes exploits normal host cell processes to spread from cell to cell . J . Cell Biol . 146 , 1333 – 1350 . Rozelle , A . L . , Machesky , L . M . , Yamamoto , M . , Driessens , M . H . , Insall , R . H . , Roth , M . G . , Luby - Phelps , K . , Marriott , G . , Hall , A . , and Yin , H . L . ( 2000 ) . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin - based movement of raft - enriched vesicles through WASP - Arp2 / 3 . Curr . Biol . 10 , 311 – 320 . Shen , Y . , Naujokas , M . , Park , M . , and Ireton , K . ( 2000 ) . InIB - dependent internalization of Listeria is mediated by the Met receptor tyrosine kinase . Cell 103 , 501 – 510 . Skoble , J . , Auerbuch , V . , Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 2001 ) . Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes motility . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 89 – 100 . Skoble , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2000 ) . Three regions within ActA promote Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin nucleation and Listeria monocyto - genes motility . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 527 – 538 . Smith , G . A . , Portnoy , D . A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 1995 ) . Asymmetric distribution of the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein is required and sufﬁcient to direct actin - based motility . Mol . Microbiol . 17 , 945 – 951 . Smith , G . A . , Theriot , J . A . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1996 ) . The tandem repeat domain in the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein controls the rate of actin - based motility , the percentage of moving bacteria , and the localization of vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein and proﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 647 – 660 . Southwick , F . S . , Li , W . , Zhang , F . , Zeile , W . L . , and Purich , D . L . ( 2003 ) . Actin - based endosome and phagosome rocketing in macrophages : activation by the secretagogue antagonists lanthanum and zinc . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 54 , 41 – 55 . Sun , A . N . , Camilli , A . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1990 ) . Isolation of Listeria monocy - togenes small - plaque mutants defective for intracellular growth and cell - to - cell spread . Infect . Immun . 58 , 3770 – 3778 . Symons , M . H . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) . Control of actin polymerization in live and permeabilized ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 503 – 513 . Taunton , J . , Rowning , B . A . , Coughlin , M . L . , Wu , M . , Moon , R . T . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Larabell , C . A . ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent propulsion of endosomes and lysosomes by recruitment of N - WASP . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 – 530 . Tilney , L . G . , and Portnoy , D . A . ( 1989 ) . Actin ﬁlaments and the growth , movement , and spread of the intracellular bacterial parasite , Listeria monocy - togenes . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 1597 – 1608 . Vicker , M . G . ( 2002 ) . Eukaryotic cell locomotion depends on the propagation of self - organized reaction - diffusion waves and oscillations of actin ﬁlament assembly . Exp . Cell Res . 275 , 54 – 66 . Welch , M . D . , DePace , A . H . , Verma , S . , Iwamatsu , A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997a ) . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved subunits and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin ﬁlament assem - bly . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 375 – 384 . Welch , M . D . , Iwamatsu , A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997b ) . Actin polymerization is induced by Arp2 / 3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes . Nature 385 , 265 – 269 . Zhang , F . , Southwick , F . S . , and Purich , D . L . ( 2002 ) . Actin - based phagosome motility . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 53 , 81 – 88 . P . T Yam and J . A . Theriot Molecular Biology of the Cell 5658