The Immunological Synapse Balances T Cell Receptor Signaling and Degradation Kyeong - Hee Lee , 1 , 2 * Aaron R . Dinner , 3 * ‡ Chun Tu , 1 Gabriele Campi , 5 Subhadip Raychaudhuri , 4 Rajat Varma , 5 Tasha N . Sims , 5 W . Richard Burack , 1 Hui Wu , 1 Julia Wang , 1 Osami Kanagawa , 1 Mary Markiewicz , 1 Paul M . Allen , 1 Michael L . Dustin , 5 † Arup K . Chakraborty , 3 , 4 , 6 † Andrey S . Shaw 1 † The immunological synapse is a specialized cell - cell junction between T cell and antigen - presenting cell surfaces . It is characterized by a central cluster of antigen receptors , a ring of integrin family adhesion molecules , and temporal stability over hours . The role of this speciﬁc organization in signaling for T cell activation has been controversial . We use in vitro and in silico experiments to determine that the immunological synapse acts as a type of adaptive controller that both boosts T cell receptor triggering and attenuates strong signals . The mature immunological synapse is char - acterized by a reorganization of membrane proteins , resulting in a stable central cluster of T cell receptors ( TCRs ) ( the C - SMAC ) surrounded by a ring of adhesion molecules ( the P - SMAC ) ( 1 – 3 ) . Although it was origi - nally proposed that the immunological syn - apse serves to enhance and sustain signaling through the TCR for long periods of time ( 3 ) , the paucity of active signaling molecules in the C - SMAC after a few minutes suggests that it may not be involved in signaling ( 4 , 5 ) . We combined in vitro experiments with CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells and simulations of a com - putational ( or in silico ) model to address this controversy . Our results demonstrate that the C - SMAC is a site for both strong receptor triggering and increased TCR degradation . Because CD2AP is required for receptor segregation into the C - SMAC in a model immunological synapse ( 6 ) , we compared synapse formation and signaling in CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells with those in wild - type ( WT ) cells . Our attempts were initially com - plicated by lethal nephrotic syndrome in CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice by 6 to 7 weeks of age ( 7 ) . The location of the CD2AP gene on mouse chromosome 17 , close to the major histocom - patibility complex ( MHC ) class II locus , ne - cessitated the use of a TCR transgenic mouse that is compatible with the b haplotype . Therefore , we crossed the CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) ani - mals to the AND TCR transgenic mouse ( 8 ) . This TCR recognizes a cytochrome c peptide bound to the MHC class II molecule , I - E k , but it can develop in the thymus of a b haplotype mouse . CD4 and CD8 profiles from young animals , as well as bone marrow chimeras , showed normal distributions of CD4 - and CD8 - positive cells , suggesting that thymocyte development is not grossly im - paired in CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice ( 9 ) . Naı¨ve T cells were isolated from mice at (cid:2) 3 weeks of age ( the time of kidney disease initiation ) and were used immediately or established as T cell lines . Images of the interface between antigen - bearing APCs and T cells were reconstructed with confocal microscopy and staining with antibodies to the TCR and LFA - 1 . As reported previously ( 4 ) , by 30 min , WT T cells form a “mature” synapse : a ring of LFA - 1 , marking the P - SMAC , surrounding a region enriched in TCR , marking the C - SMAC [ fig . S9A ( 10 ) ] . Consistent with previous work ( 6 ) , CD2AP deficiency profoundly altered these morpholog - ical features [ fig . S9B ( 10 ) ] . At no time were clearly defined C - and P - SMACs visualized , and TCRs were homogeneously distributed with LFA - 1 throughout the synapse . 1 Department of Pathology and Immunology , Wash - ington University School of Medicine , Box 8118 , 660 South Euclid , Saint Louis , MO 63110 , USA . 2 Depart - ment of Immunology , Genentech , 530 Forbes Boule - vard , One DNA Way , South San Francisco , CA 94080 , USA . 3 Department of Chemistry , 4 Department of Chemical Engineering , University of California , Berke - ley , CA 94720 , USA . 5 Program in Molecular Pathogen - esis , Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine and Department of Pathology , New York University , New York , NY 10016 , USA . 6 Physical Biosciences and Ma - terials Sciences Division , Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , University of California , Berkeley , CA 94720 , USA . * These authors contributed equally to this work . † To whom correspondence should be addressed : E - mail : shaw @ pathbox . wustl . edu ( A . S . S . ) , arup @ uclink . berkeley . edu ( A . K . C . ) , and dustin @ saturn . med . nyu . edu ( M . L . D . ) ‡ Present address : Department of Chemistry , Univer - sity of Chicago , Chicago , IL 60637 , USA . Fig . 1 . Hypersensitivi - ty of CD2AP - deﬁcient T cells to antigen . Pro - liferative responses of ( A ) freshly isolated naı¨ve splenic T cells and ( B ) long - term cul - tured primary T cell lines from AND (cid:3) / CD2AP (cid:3) / (cid:1) or AND (cid:3) / CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were stimulated by anti - genic peptide – pulsed APCs at the indicated doses of MCC peptide ( 88 – 108 ) for 48 hours . ( A ) A representative result from nine independent experiments . The T cell line in ( B ) was cultured for 6 weeks in vitro and rested for 2 weeks before antigenic stimulation . Mean 3 H - thymidine uptakes (cid:4) SD are shown . ( C ) Delayed and sustained tyrosine phosphorylation in CD2AP - deﬁcient T cells . T cells from AND (cid:3) / CD2AP (cid:3) / (cid:1) or AND (cid:3) / CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) primary cell lines were stimulated with the B cell hybridoma TA3 prepulsed with 100 mM MCC peptide . At the indicated time points , cells were lysed and postnuclear lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti - ZAP70 or anti - TCR (cid:5) polyclonal rabbit sera . Samples were resolved by SDS – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunoblotted with anti - phosphotyrosine ( 4G10 ) . As a protein - loading con - trol , the same blots were stripped and reblotted with ZAP70 - or TCR (cid:5) - speciﬁc antibodies . R E P O R T S 14 NOVEMBER 2003 VOL 302 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1218 To assess T cell activation , we incubated cells with peptide - pulsed splenocytes . Both naı¨ve and cultured T cell lines from CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells showed an increased sen - sitivity to antigen and augmented cell prolif - eration compared with WT cells ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . Some of the enhanced proliferation may be attributed to increased levels of se - creted interleukin - 2 ( IL - 2 ) because naı¨ve CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells secreted increased IL - 2 at all peptide concentrations tested [ fig . S6A ( 9 , 10 ) ] . CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells also exhibited an increased number of cell divisions and in - creased apoptosis compared with WT cells [ fig . S6B ( 9 , 10 ) ] . The enhanced proliferation associated with CD2AP deficiency correlated with prolonged tyrosine phosphorylation of the TCR (cid:5) chain and of ZAP70 ( Fig . 1C ) , pa - rameters that reflect TCR signaling . TCR (cid:5) and ZAP70 immunoprecipitates , prepared from T cells stimulated with APC - peptide , were immunoblotted with an antibody to phosphotyrosine . InWTcells , tyrosinephos - phorylation of ZAP70 and TCR (cid:5) was de - tectable at 10 min , peaked at 20 min , and returned to base line by 60 min . In contrast , CD2AP deficiency delayed and markedly prolonged the detectable response ; tyrosine phosphorylation was barely detectable at 10 min , peaked at 20 min , and was main - tained at this level for at least 60 min . Thus , CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells did not form a C - SMAC with APC and exhibited sustained tyrosine phosphorylation , which correlates with increased proliferation . These findings appear to support the view that the C - SMAC does not potentiate TCR signaling . However , the veracity of this interpretation is compli - cated by the many factors that affect ampli - fication and termination of signaling ( e . g . , receptor - ligand binding , formation of intra - cellular signaling complexes , kinetic proof - reading , serial triggering , receptor endocyto - sis and degradation , and receptor clustering ) . To delineate the roles played by each of these factors and to understand how their interplay and coordination affect signal transduction , we developed a computational model in which proteins are represented by particles on a lattice . A kinetic Monte Carlo ( MC ) algo - rithm ( 10 ) simulated the dynamics of recep - tor - ligand binding , signal transduction , and protein movement . Particles diffuse , form complexes , catalyze phosphorylation and nu - cleotide exchange , and undergo phospho - transfer . Each attempt of one such event cor - responds to an increment in time of one MC step ( the time unit in the simulations ) . The TCR signaling cascade ( Fig . 2 ) was deter - mined by a specific set of allowed reactions ( 11 – 13 ) . Signaling is initiated by binding of peptide MHC ( pMHC ) to the TCR . This allows Lck to sequentially phosphorylate two sites on the TCR ( first TCR (cid:5) 1 and then TCR (cid:5) 2 ) . These sites are a simplified repre - sentation ( Fig . 2A , i ) of the immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motifs ( ITAMs ) . A TCR with only TCR (cid:5) 1 phosphorylated corre - sponds to the p21 form , whereas a TCR phosphorylated at both TCR (cid:5) 1 and TCR (cid:5) 2 corresponds to the p23 form ( 14 ) . The extent to which the TCR becomes phosphorylated is dependent on the half - life of the interaction between pMHC and TCR . The phosphoryl - ated TCR (cid:5) 1 and TCR (cid:5) 2 can then be bound by one or more ZAP70s , which in turn can be phosphorylated and activated by Lck ( Fig . 2A , ii ) . When ZAP70 is phosphoryl - ated , it can recruit adapter molecules like LAT , GADS ( or Grb2 ) , Itk , SLP - 76 , and SLAP - 130 , as well as the signaling mole - cules that bind to them ( Fig . 2A , iv to vi ) . The various downstream intracellular sig - naling molecules in the model ( such as Ras ) serve merely as “counters” that give us potential readouts and measure the signal strength . Lck interactions with SHP - 1 and ERK ( Fig . 2B ) provided negative and pos - itive feedback , respectively , to the cascade ( 13 , 15 , 16 ) . To model formation of the C - SMAC , we introduced a force that biases TCR motion toward the center of the interface with the APC . The central accumulation of TCR de - Fig . 2 . Schematic representation of the signaling network . ( A ) Basic network used in the simula - tions . Each box corresponds to a particle on the lattice ; molecules composed of more than one particle are indicated by larger boxes , some of which are subdivided to indicate multiple internal - state variables ( e . g . , TCR (cid:6)(cid:7) , TCR (cid:5) 1 , and TCR (cid:5) 2 ) . Colored boxes represent active states and gray boxes represent inactive ones ; white boxes represent internal states that do not change . Yellow boxes represent phosphorylation , blue boxes represent conformational changes , and green boxes represent GTPase . Species pairs that form complexes are indicated by dashed lines . Thin single - headed arrows indicate activation ( and deactivation ) events , and wide double - headed arrows indicate equilibria between states . Thin T - shaped lines indicate inhibition . Two additional transfer reactions , corresponding to generic phosphatases ( Pase 1 and Pase 2 ) that dephosphorylate TCR (cid:5) 1 and TCR (cid:5) 2 , are not shown . These reactions were included to allow signaling TCR to revert in the absence of pMHC interactions . ( B ) Additional interactions and reactions included in the full network used in the simulations . The symbols are the same as in ( A ) . LckY reﬂects the phosphorylation state of residue Y394 and is taken to be partially active even when not phosphorylated . We neglect regulation at the Y505 site of Lck ( by CD45 and Csk ) , which corresponds to assuming that it is always dephosphorylated ( not inhibitory ) . Ignoring CD45 prevents our model from exhibiting the brief reduction in tyrosine phosphorylation observed in the ﬁrst few minutes of signaling ( 5 ) . LckY activates its own inhibitor , the phosphatase SHP - 1 . When active , SHP - 1 dephosphorylates LckY , as shown in ( ii ) . This last reaction is prevented by phosphorylation of residue S59 ( LckS ) by ERK ( a positive - feedback loop ) . SHP - 1 also inhibits signaling by competing with ZAP70 to bind TCR (cid:5) 1 . R E P O R T S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 302 14 NOVEMBER 2003 1219 pends on cytoskeletal and membrane forces regulated by the Rho family of GTPases ( 17 ) . This was modeled by linking the biasing force to active ZAP70 - mediated recruitment of an adapter that can activate a heterotrimer - ic GTP - binding protein ( G protein ) ( referred to in Fig . 2 as a GTPase that could be Rac ) . Specifically , receptor movement was stimu - lated when the number of these activated G proteins exceeded a threshold ( 10 ) . TCR internalization and degradation were also included in the model as these processes are thought to play critical roles in turning off TCR signaling . On the basis of existing data , our model constitutively internalizes TCRs at a fixed rate ( 18 ) . If a receptor is not phos - phorylated or only singly phosphorylated ( p21 ) , it is returned to the surface . If a TCR is fully phosphorylated ( p23 ) , it is degraded ; i . e . , it is removed from the system ( 18 ) . Both bound and unbound TCRs in the p23 form were subject to degradation ( 19 ) . The quali - tative results of our simulations were insen - sitive to whether internalized TCRs were re - turned to the same spot on the membrane or whether they were randomly returned to any spot on the surface . Although this model ( Fig . 2 ) is clearly a simplified representation of signaling in T cells , it includes key features of TCR - medi - ated signaling , thus allowing us to assess how various factors interact to influence signal transduction . As an example of the time course of signaling obtained with our model ( Fig . 3A ) , we used phosphorylation of ZAP70 as the readout because its activation is a critical intermediate in the signaling pro - cess . Other readouts downstream of active ZAP70 are also accessible in our simulations , and in all cases , exhibited the same qualita - tive behavior ( 10 ) . The simulations showed that the magni - tude of signaling increases and then decreases over time . Analysis of these results demon - strated that the initial rise reflects the time it takes for the signal to propagate through the network of biochemical events , and the de - cline of signaling occurs because of receptor degradation . When the model was tested over a range of different TCR - pMHC half - lives , the magnitude of signaling was maximized at an intermediate TCR - pMHC half - life ( Fig . 3B ) . Half - lives longer than the optimum val - ue impaired the ability of pMHC to engage many TCRs ( serial triggering ) ( 20 ) . In con - trast , short half - lives did not allow sufficient time for receptor triggering ( kinetic proof - reading ) ( 21 ) . This competition results in an optimal half - life ( 19 – 21 ) . In addition , the simulations showed that a negative - feedback loop associated with SHP - 1 ( Fig . 2B ) in - creased specificity by inhibiting TCR - based signaling for shorter TCR - pMHC half - lives ( 13 , 15 , 16 ) . Eliminating centrally biased TCR move - ment from the model allowed us to ask how the lack of an organized C - SMAC ( as seen with conjugates of CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells with APC ) affected signaling . When the C - SMAC did not form , the strength of the signal at early times was somewhat lower than when the C - SMAC did form , but the signal was sustained for a much longer period of time ( Fig . 3A ) . This qualitative difference resem - bles the difference in the time course of signaling between CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) and WT cells ( Fig . 1C ) , except that the in silico experi - ments without C - SMAC formation did not exhibit a marked delay in the onset of signal - ing . The qualitative results in Figure 3A are robust to 20 - fold variations in the kinetics of the reactions that constitute the signaling pathways in our simulations . Our analysis of the simulation results demonstrates that the C - SMAC enhances sig - naling by concentrating TCR , pMHC , and kinases like Lck into a small area . Clustering TCR and pMHC allows for more frequent TCR - pMHC binding . When the C - SMAC does not form , the median time for a pMHC to rebind a TCR after dissociation is 20 . 3 (cid:8) 10 6 MC steps . In contrast , the corresponding time is only 2 . 7 (cid:8) 10 6 MC steps when TCRs cluster in the C - SMAC . Receptor clustering in the C - SMAC should therefore directly en - hance the frequency of TCR - pMHC complex formation without any change in the TCR - pMHC half - life . Our analysis also showed that the C - SMAC facilitates TCR phospho - rylation by Lck because Lck can act on clus - tered TCRs rather than single TCRs . These factors combine to result in a much higher rate of production of fully phosphorylated TCRs ( p23 ) when the C - SMAC does form . Why then do we observe a paucity of phos - phorylated molecules in the C - SMAC over long times in the in vitro and in silico exper - iments ( Figs . 1C and 3A ) ? Because only fully phosphorylated recep - tors are subject to degradation , the higher rate of production of fully phosphorylated TCRs in the C - SMAC enhances receptor degrada - tion . Thus , counterintuitively , enhanced re - ceptor triggering in the C - SMAC also serves to limit sustained tyrosine kinase activity in the C - SMAC over long times . The higher the rate of receptor degradation , the shorter will be the time period over which phosphorylated molecules are observed in the C - SMAC . In - deed , the model suggests that the only way to sustain TCR signaling over longer periods would be to have TCR replenishment from new synthesis ( 22 , 23 ) . The persistent high level of signaling in the absence of CD2AP may therefore stem from defects that lower Fig . 3 . ( A ) Time course of ZAP70 activity from simula - tions of the full model : No C - SMAC formation ( blue line ; p s (cid:9) 1 . 00 , where p s is the probability of accepting a displacement away from the center of the junction ) and C - SMAC formation ( red line ; p s (cid:9) 0 . 85 ) . Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean for 40 trials . The panels on the right show the spatial distribu - tion of active ZAP70 at the approximate peak in signal - ing activity ( 20 (cid:8) 10 9 MC steps ) . On average , TCRs were internalized every 1 (cid:8) 10 9 MC steps . The basic re - sults shown here are repro - duced by a simpler ﬁeld model ( 10 ) . ( B ) The average number of active ZAP70 as a function of TCR - pMHC off rate at 10 (cid:8) 10 9 MC steps . Blue line : basic network shown in Fig . 3B ; red line : full network ( includes the interactions in Fig . 3C ) . Er - ror bars indicate the SEM for 10 trials . At the slowest off rate , each pMHC interacts with only 1 . 3 TCRs on aver - age within the simulation time . As the off rate increases , each pMHC triggers a larger number of TCR until Lck can no longer phosphorylate TCR (cid:5) 2 within the time a TCR is bound to a pMHC . On average , at the fastest off rate , the time for p23 TCR to form once pMHC is bound is about 13 times as long as the lifetime of the TCR - pMHC complex . R E P O R T S 14 NOVEMBER 2003 VOL 302 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1220 the rate of TCR triggering , and / or concomi - tant degradation of activated TCRs . To directly assess whether CD2AP defi - ciency affects TCR down - regulation , we measured TCR expression levels before and after T cell activation . Antigen - pulsed APCs induced WT T cells to down - regulate TCR expression ( Fig . 4A ) ( 24 ) . CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells only minimally down - regulated TCR expres - sion ( Fig . 4A ) . This was due directly to the absence of CD2AP because reconstitution of CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells with a CD2AP - expressing retrovirus restored TCR down - regulation ( Fig . 4B ) . To assess the effect of CD2AP deficiency on degradation of TCR ( 22 ) , we measured TCR (cid:5) expression before and after stimulation with peptide - pulsed APCs . Whereas T cell activation greatly reduced the level of TCR (cid:5) in WT T cells , there was no effect on TCR (cid:5) chain levels in CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells ( Fig . 4C ) . This could be due to a role for CD2AP in intracellular trafficking because CD2AP deficiency impaired delivery of the TCR to lysosomes ( fig . S7 ) ( 10 , 25 , 26 ) . To determine whether the defect in down - regulation also involved changes in TCR in - ternalization , we measured the basal rate of TCR internalization using an inhibitor of an - terograde transport , brefeldin A . In the pres - ence of brefeldin A , TCRs were steadily lost from the plasma membrane because internal - ized TCRs are unable to recycle ( 18 ) . CD2AP deficiency did not alter this basal rate of internalization ( fig . S5 ) ( 9 ) . Furthermore , an - tibody - mediated TCR internalization at early time points was similar between WT and CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells ( 9 ) . Therefore , the failure to down - regulate TCR in the CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells appears to be due to a defect in TCR degradation , not internalization . A counterintuitive prediction of the com - putational model is that the attenuation of phosphotyrosine levels in the C - SMAC is due to enhanced receptor triggering , which results in increased receptor degradation . Because CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells cannot mediate receptor degradation , we reasoned that , if these cells could be induced to form a C - SMAC , we could directly assess whether there is en - hanced receptor triggering in the C - SMAC . A mathematical model analyzing the thermody - namics of synapse formation predicts that a C - SMAC should form more readily with pla - nar lipid bilayers containing intercellular ad - hesion molecule 1 ( ICAM - 1 ) and pMHC than with APCs because of higher ligand mobility in the planar bilayer and because only one deformable membrane is involved ( 27 ) ; both factors make reorganization of receptors and ligands easier . Furthermore , CD2AP may be required for C - SMAC formation only when there are large numbers of CD2 - CD48 inter - actions that require organization , which are present in the cell - cell system but absent in the bilayer system . These reasons led us to examine whether CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells could form a C - SMAC with planar bilayers . Despite some defects in the fine structure , C - and P - SMACs were readily formed in the absence of CD2AP ( Fig . 5A ) , demonstrating that CD2AP is not absolutely required for C - SMAC formation . This experimental sys - tem allowed us to measure signaling in a C - SMAC in the absence of receptor degrada - tion . The in silico model was used to predict the outcome of signaling in the C - SMAC with ( WT cells ) and without ( CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells ) receptor degradation . Based on the presence of phosphotyrosine as the readout , the model predicts sustained and strong phos - photyrosine staining in the C - SMAC , assum - ing formation of the synapse in the absence of receptor degradation ( Fig . 5B ) . Consistent with this prediction , anti - phosphotyrosine stained the P - SMAC but not the C - SMAC in WT cells ( Fig . 5C ) . In contrast , when CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells were stained for phospho - tyrosine , the greatest staining was observed in the C - SMAC ( Fig . 5C ) . These experiments confirm that concentrating receptors in the C - SMAC facilitates and enhances signaling by the TCR and that the absence of signaling intermediates at later time points is due to concomitantly higher receptor degradation . The observation that CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells in the bilayer system exhibit discernable C - SMACs that are the site of the strongest signaling also provides evidence against a role for CD2AP only in formation of the C - SMAC . If CD2AP’s only function was to promote C - SMAC formation , WT cells and CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells should exhibit nearly identical behavior in the bilayer experiments . Indeed , CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells exhibited the strongest phosphotyrosine levels , and WT cells , the weakest phosphotyrosine levels , in the C - SMAC ( Fig . 5 ) . Combining experiments with CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells and simulations of a computational model reveals an unsuspected function of the C - SMAC and resolves the controversy re - garding the role of the C - SMAC in propagat - ing and attenuating signals . Concentrating antigen , TCR , and kinases in the C - SMAC enhances signaling by decreasing the amount Fig . 4 . Defective TCR down - regulation and degradation in CD2AP - deﬁcient T cells . ( A ) Naı¨ve T cells from ei - ther AND / CD2AP (cid:3) / (cid:1) or AND / CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were stimulated with splenic APCs from B10 . BR mice in the presence or absence of 10 (cid:10) M MCC peptide . After 2 hours , cell conjugates were disrupted by treatment with EDTA - trypsin . The surface expression of AND TCRs was analyzed by ﬂow cytometry with the TCR Vb 3 - speciﬁc antibody KJ25 and gating on Thy1 . 2 - positive cells . ( B ) Retroviral transfection of CD2AP reconstitutes TCR down - regulation in CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells . ( Left ) CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cell lines were transduced with CD2AP – green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) retrovirus and stimulated as described in ( A ) . The surface expression of AND TCRs was analyzed in the GFP - positive ( R1 ) or - negative ( R2 ) T cell population . ( Right ) CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells were transduced with a retrovirus expressing GFP alone . ( C ) TCR degradation in CD2AP (cid:3) / (cid:1) and CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells . Lymph node T cells from either AND / CD2AP (cid:3) / (cid:1) or AND / CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were stimulated for 4 hours with the B cell hybridoma CH27 prepulsed with 100 (cid:10) M MCC peptide . Cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer , and postnuclear lysates were immunoprecipitated and immunoblotted with anti - TCR (cid:5) polyclonal rabbit sera . To block synthesis of TCRs , T cells were pretreated with cycloheximide for 1 hour before antigenic stimulation . R E P O R T S www . sciencemag . org SCIENCE VOL 302 14 NOVEMBER 2003 1221 of time required for antigenic ligand to search and find TCR and for subsequent receptor phosphorylation . Because of these factors , it is predicted that fully phosphorylated recep - tors ( p23 ) form in the absence of C - SMAC formation only with high - affinity agonists ; p23 generation is greatly facilitated by the C - SMAC when ligand quality is weaker . However , enhanced receptor triggering in the C - SMAC results in increased receptor degra - dation , which limits sustained tyrosine phos - phorylation within the C - SMAC . The model therefore predicts that the C - SMAC is re - sponsible for intense but self - limited signal - ing . Thus , the synapse functions as an adap - tive controller . Limiting strong signaling over long times may serve to protect against cell death caused by overstimulation . This is con - sistent with our observation of enhanced ap - optosis in CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells ( 9 ) . The adaptive control function of the C - SMAC revealed by our work touches on many complex issues including ligand quality , TCR down - modulation , and partial TCR signaling . For example , our model has implications for the biology of signaling by altered peptide ligands ( APLs ) ( 28 ) . Our model suggests that the critical link be - tween partial (cid:5) chain phosphorylation and inefficient TCR down - modulation of APLs ( 29 , 30 ) is their inability to form the im - munological synapse ( 3 ) , which both en - hances and limits signaling . These and oth - er hypotheses emerging from the adaptive control function of the C - SMAC are test - able and should motivate further experi - ments that will result in a deeper under - standing of the complex issues underlying T cell activation . The function of the immunological syn - apse is an emergent property involving many inextricably linked variables , and our work illustrates how the analysis of such complex biological systems benefits greatly from syn - ergistic experimental and computational stud - ies . Without the computational model , for example , we might have wrongly concluded that the C - SMAC is not involved in TCR triggering and that it functions only to atten - uate signaling . The surprising interpretation that the C - SMAC balances TCR signaling and degradation emerged from the computa - tional model and the cellular experiments it suggested . References and Notes 1 . M . F . Krummel , M . M . Davis , Curr . Opin . Immunol . 14 , 66 ( 2002 ) . 2 . C . R . Monks et al . , Nature 395 , 82 ( 1998 ) . 3 . A . Grakoui et al . , Science 285 , 221 ( 1999 ) . 4 . K . H . Lee et al . , Science 295 , 1539 ( 2002 ) . 5 . B . A . Freiberg et al . , Nature Immunol . 3 , 911 ( 2002 ) . 6 . M . L . Dustin et al . , Cell 94 , 667 ( 1998 ) . 7 . N . Y . Shih et al . , Science 286 , 312 ( 1999 ) . 8 . J . Kaye et al . , Nature 341 , 746 ( 1989 ) . 9 . K . - H . Lee et al . , data not shown . 10 . Supporting material is available on Science Online . 11 . G . A . Koretzky , P . S . Myung , Nature Rev . Immunol . 1 , 95 ( 2001 ) . 12 . A . Weiss , D . R . Littman , Cell 76 , 263 ( 1994 ) . 13 . R . N . Germain , I . Stefanova , Annu . Rev . Immunol . 17 , 467 ( 1999 ) . 14 . J . Sloan - Lancaster , A . S . Shaw , J . B . Rothbard , P . M . Allen , Cell 79 , 913 ( 1994 ) . 15 . C . Chan , A . J . George , J . Stark , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 5758 ( 2001 ) . 16 . I . Stefanova et al . , Nature Immunol . 4 , 248 ( 2003 ) . 17 . C . Wulﬁng , M . M . Davis , Science 282 , 2266 ( 1998 ) . 18 . H . Liu , M . Rhodes , D . L . Wiest , D . A . Vignali , Immunity 13 , 665 ( 2000 ) . 19 . D . Coombs , A . M . Kalergis , S . G . Nathenson , C . Wofsy , B . Goldstein , Nature Immunol . 3 , 926 ( 2002 ) . 20 . S . Valitutti , S . Muller , M . Cella , E . Padovan , A . Lanza - vecchia , Nature 375 , 148 ( 1995 ) . 21 . T . W . McKeithan , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 5042 ( 1995 ) . 22 . A . G . Schrum , L . A . Turka , J . Exp . Med . 196 , 793 ( 2002 ) . 23 . A . Lanzavecchia , F . Sallusto , Curr . Opin . Immunol . 12 , 92 ( 2000 ) . 24 . S . Valitutti , S . Muller , M . Salio , A . Lanzavecchia , J . Exp . Med . 185 , 1859 ( 1997 ) . 25 . J . Kim et al . , Science 300 , 1298 ( 2003 ) . 26 . I . Dikic , S . Giordano , Curr . Opin . Cell . Biol . 15 , 128 ( 2003 ) . 27 . S . Y . Qi , J . T . Groves , A . K . Chakraborty , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 6548 ( 2001 ) . 28 . J . Sloan - Lancaster , P . M . Allen , Annu . Rev . Immunol . 14 , 1 ( 1996 ) . 29 . Y . Itoh , B . Hemmer , R . Martin , R . N . Germain , J . Immunol . 162 , 2073 ( 1999 ) . 30 . S . Martin , M . J . Bevan , Eur . J . Immunol . 28 , 2991 ( 1998 ) . 31 . This research is supported by the NIH . We thank D . Wiley , D . Chandler , E . Unanue , E . Hailman , and T . Starr for discussions or assistance . T . N . S . was also supported by the National Psoriasis Foundation . M . L . D . was also supported by the Irene Diamond Foundation . A . R . D . was also supported by a Bur - roughs Wellcome Fund Hitchings – Elion Fellowship and the NSF ( grant CHE - 0078458 ) . Supporting Online Material www . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 1086507 / DC1 SOM Text Fig . S1 to S9 Table S1 to S4 References 6 May 2003 ; accepted 26 August 2003 Published online 25 September 2003 ; 10 . 1126 / science . 1086507 Include this information when citing this paper . Fig . 5 . CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) cells form a C - SMAC with planar bilayers and exhibit strong signaling . ( A ) Immune synapse formation with planar lipid bilayers . T cell blasts from either CD2AP (cid:3) / (cid:1) or CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice were incubated on a supported planar lipid bilayer containing Oregon Green - I - E k ( prepulsed with 100 (cid:10) M peptide ) at 166 molecules / (cid:10) m 2 and Cy5 – ICAM - 1 at 266 molecules / (cid:10) m 2 . Cells were imaged at 37°C with a Zeiss Confocal LSM510 microscope in real time . ( B ) Time course of phosphorylated TCR , LckY , and ZAP70 ( pY ) obtained from the com - putational model for cases that form the C - SMAC with ( red curve ) and without ( blue curve ) TCR degradation . Error bars indicate the SEM for 40 trials . The panels show the levels of phosphotyrosine at 60 (cid:8) 10 9 MC steps in the C - SMAC only . Brighter shades of red correspond to higher phosphotyrosine levels . ( C ) Tyrosine phosphorylation patterns in CD2AP (cid:3) / (cid:1) and CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) T cells on planar lipid bilayer . T cell blasts were plated on supported planar lipid bilayer containing I - E K ( pre - pulsed with peptide ) and ICAM - 1 , as in ( A ) . After 1 hour , cell - bilayer conjugates were ﬁxed and permeabilized . Tyrosine phosphorylation was visualized by staining with a phosphotyrosine - speciﬁc antibody ( 4G10 ) . ( Right ) Quantitation of these patterns was obtained by calculating the ratio of C - SMAC ﬂuorescence divided by the P - SMAC ﬂuorescence in over 15 cells per experiment . Data are the average of three independent experiments . Error bars denote standard deviations . R E P O R T S 14 NOVEMBER 2003 VOL 302 SCIENCE www . sciencemag . org 1222