Supporting Comment Moderators in Identifying High Quality Online News Comments Deokgun Park , Simranjit Sachar , Nicholas Diakopoulos , Niklas Elmqvist University of Maryland College Park , MD , USA { intuinno , ssachar , nad , elm } @ umd . edu HumanComputer Interaction Laboratory Comments In an ideal world , In reality , To save the world 6 , 367 submitted 6 , 367 submitted 4 , 447 accepted 6 , 367 submitted 4 , 447 accepted 1 , 920 filtered 6 , 367 submitted 4 , 447 accepted 1 , 920 filtered In 3 hours 9 , 000 comments per day Good comments Heroic Drawbacks ? Scalable way ? The damage is already done . Wait INST 728Q – Visual Analytics 27 INST 728Q – Visual Analytics 28 INST 728Q – Visual Analytics 29 The world of comments Best Worst Best Worst Redundant No new information Consensus Best Worst Redundant No new information Consensus Irrelevant Add noise Best Worst Redundant No new information Consensus Irrelevant Add noise Inappropriate Harmful Negative Loop A Bad comment A Bad comment Journal of Communication ISSN 0021 - 9916 O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E Online and Uncivil ? Patterns and Determinants of Incivility in Newspaper Website Comments Kevin Coe 1 , Kate Kenski 2 , 3 , & Stephen A . Rains 2 1 Department of Communication , University of Utah , Salt Lake City , UT 84112 , USA 2 Department of Communication , University of Arizona , Tucson , AZ 85721 , USA 3 Department of Government & Public Policy , University of Arizona , Tucson , AZ 85721 , USA Incivility in public discussions has received increasing attention from academic and popular commentators in recent years . In an e ff ort to better understand the nature and determi - nants of such incivility , this study examined a 3 - week census of articles and comments posted to a local newspaper’s website—totaling more than 300 articles and 6 , 400 com - ments . Th e results of the content analysis show that incivility occurs frequently and is asso - ciated with key contextual factors , such as the topic of the article and the sources quoted within the article . We also fi nd that , contrary to popular perceptions , frequent commenters are more civil than are infrequent commenters , and uncivil commenters are no less likely than civil commenters to use evidence in support of their claims . doi : 10 . 1111 / jcom . 12104 Civility is a crucial principle of public life , one that speaks to “the fundamental tone and practice of democracy” ( Herbst , 2010 , p . 3 ) . Indeed , a commitment to civil discourse—the free and respectful exchange of ideas—has been viewed as a demo - cratic ideal from the ancient Athenian forums to the mediated political debates of modern times ( Papacharissi , 2004 ; Sapiro , 1999 ) . Th is is not to say the ideal is always realized . Public discourse has always had its share of incivility , and the current era is no di ff erent in this respect . What is di ff erent now , however , is that the 21st century’s vast , interactive media environment has created broader opportunities for public debate , and that moments of incivility now spread more rapidly and widely than ever before ( Sobieraj & Berry , 2011 ) . In this milieu , incivility has become a central concern of citizens and scholars . For example , a 2010 survey found that more than 8 in 10 Americans viewed “the lack of civil or respectful discourse in our political system” as a “somewhat serious” or “very serious” problem ( Public Religion Research Institute , 2010 ) . Across the United States , various organizations have been created in recent Corresponding author : Kevin Coe ; e - mail : kevin . coe @ utah . edu 658 Journal of Communication 64 ( 2014 ) 658 – 679 © 2014 International Communication Association Journal of Communication ISSN 0021 - 9916 O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E Online and Uncivil ? Patterns and Determinants of Incivility in Newspaper Website Comments Kevin Coe 1 , Kate Kenski 2 , 3 , & Stephen A . Rains 2 1 Department of Communication , University of Utah , Salt Lake City , UT 84112 , USA 2 Department of Communication , University of Arizona , Tucson , AZ 85721 , USA 3 Department of Government & Public Policy , University of Arizona , Tucson , AZ 85721 , USA Incivility in public discussions has received increasing attention from academic and popular commentators in recent years . In an e ff ort to better understand the nature and determi - nants of such incivility , this study examined a 3 - week census of articles and comments posted to a local newspaper’s website—totaling more than 300 articles and 6 , 400 com - ments . Th e results of the content analysis show that incivility occurs frequently and is asso - ciated with key contextual factors , such as the topic of the article and the sources quoted within the article . We also fi nd that , contrary to popular perceptions , frequent commenters are more civil than are infrequent commenters , and uncivil commenters are no less likely than civil commenters to use evidence in support of their claims . doi : 10 . 1111 / jcom . 12104 Civility is a crucial principle of public life , one that speaks to “the fundamental tone and practice of democracy” ( Herbst , 2010 , p . 3 ) . Indeed , a commitment to civil discourse—the free and respectful exchange of ideas—has been viewed as a demo - cratic ideal from the ancient Athenian forums to the mediated political debates of modern times ( Papacharissi , 2004 ; Sapiro , 1999 ) . Th is is not to say the ideal is always realized . Public discourse has always had its share of incivility , and the current era is no di ff erent in this respect . What is di ff erent now , however , is that the 21st century’s vast , interactive media environment has created broader opportunities for public debate , and that moments of incivility now spread more rapidly and widely than ever before ( Sobieraj & Berry , 2011 ) . In this milieu , incivility has become a central concern of citizens and scholars . For example , a 2010 survey found that more than 8 in 10 Americans viewed “the lack of civil or respectful discourse in our political system” as a “somewhat serious” or “very serious” problem ( Public Religion Research Institute , 2010 ) . Across the United States , various organizations have been created in recent Corresponding author : Kevin Coe ; e - mail : kevin . coe @ utah . edu 658 Journal of Communication 64 ( 2014 ) 658 – 679 © 2014 International Communication Association Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication The ‘‘Nasty Effect : ’’ Online Incivility and Risk Perceptions of Emerging Technologies ∗ Ashley A . Anderson Center for Climate Change Communication , George Mason University University of Wisconsin - Madison Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center in Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale Dominique Brossard Department of Life Sciences Communication , University of Wisconsin - Madison Center for Nanotechnology in Society at Arizona State University University of Wisconsin - Madison Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center in Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale Dietram A . Scheufele Department of Life Sciences Communication , University of Wisconsin - Madison Center for Nanotechnology in Society at Arizona State University University of Wisconsin - Madison Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center in Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale Michael A . Xenos University of Wisconsin - Madison Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center in Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale Department of Communication Arts , University of Wisconsin - Madison Peter Ladwig Department of Life Sciences Communication , University of Wisconsin - Madison University of Wisconsin - Madison Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center in Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale Uncivil discourse is a growing concern in American rhetoric , and this trend has expanded beyond traditional media to online sources , such as audience comments . Using an experiment given to a sample representative of the U . S . population , we examine the effects online incivility on perceptions Paper forthcoming in Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication All correspondence regarding this manuscript should be addressed to the ﬁrst author in the Center for Climate Change Communication , George Mason University , Mail Stop 6A8 , 4400 University Drive , Fairfax , VA , 22030 ph : 703 - 993 - 8368 ; e - mail : aander24 @ gmu . edu . This material is based upon work supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation to the UW - Madison Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center in Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale ( Grant No . SES - DMR - 0832760 ) . Any opinions , ﬁndings , and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation . ∗ Accepted by previous editor Maria Bakardjieva Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 19 ( 2014 ) 373 – 387 © 2013 International Communication Association 373 Best Worst Redundant No new information Irrelevant Add noise Inappropriate Harmful Negative Loop High Quality Inspiring Add information Best Worst Redundant No new information Irrelevant Add noise Inappropriate Harmful Negative Loop High Quality Inspiring Add information Positive Loop Normative Influences on Thoughtful Online Participation Abhay Sukumaran 1 , Stephanie Vezich 2 , Melanie McHugh 1 , Clifford Nass 1 1 Department of Communication 450 Serra Mall Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 { abhays , mmchugh , nass } @ stanford . edu 2 Department of Psychology University of California Los Angeles 1285 Franz Hall , Los Angeles , CA 90095 isvezich @ ucla . edu ABSTRACT We describe two experiments on whether individual thoughtful effort during online commenting is shaped by situational norms derived from the behavior of social others and the design of the environment , respectively . By measuring the length of participants’ comments on a news website , the time taken to write them , and the number of issue - relevant thoughts they contain , we demonstrate that participants conform to high vs . low norms of thoughtfulness manifested through either the apparent behavior of other users or through visual , textual and interactional design features conceptually associated with thoughtfulness . Theoretical and applied insights for designing online participatory environments are discussed . Author Keywords Online comments , user - generated content , thoughtfulness , social norms , environmental norms . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . ACM General Terms Experimentation . INTRODUCTION A widespread form of public discourse is conducted through participation in online comments on shared media such as news stories and blog posts [ 25 ] . While such participation holds much potential for enabling a more participatory media culture [ 14 ] and fostering offline civic engagement [ 41 ] , online comment spaces are often plagued by banality and thoughtlessness rather than edifying discussion . Improving participatory online behavior is thus a central concern for designers . While such regulation has traditionally been achieved through moderation systems [ 18 ] , recent research has also focused on subjective perceptions that people form about their online social situations . Online contributions can be motivated , for example , by the individual’s perception of their level of participation relative to others [ 4 ] or their degree of identification with a social group [ 33 ] . In the physical world , interpersonal situations are rife with behavioral influences traceable to social norms , i . e . , shared standards of expected behavior inferred from what others are doing [ 6 ] . Research also suggests that norms can be derived not only from other people but also from features of the immediate environment that are mentally associated with specific categories of social behavior [ 1 , 15 ] . We suggest that online comment spaces present fundamentally social yet rather ambiguous situations that are likely to be subject to such normative influence . In two experimental studies , we explore whether thoughtful participation in online comment spaces can be induced via social norms . The first experiment shows that people tend to conform to standards of thoughtfulness in commenting behavior set by others . The second experiment demonstrates that a similar effect can be achieved by introducing design elements conceptually associated with thoughtfulness in an online comment space . We interpret these results in light of social psychological theories of how environmental and social cues influence perception and behavior in interpersonal situations , and discuss the implications of these findings for designers of participatory technologies . RELATED WORK We briefly review prior research to establish support for two related ideas that correspond to these two empirical studies . First , individuals in social settings often turn to normative indicators in the behavior of others to guide their own decisions and actions , particularly when the setting is ambiguous . Second , even when others are not present , social environments can possess features mentally associated with such standards of normative conduct . Whenever available , we also cite evidence that such effects can exert themselves in online settings as well as physical ones . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2011 , May 7 – 12 , 2011 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0267 - 8 / 11 / 05 . . . . $ 10 . 00 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3401 Normative Influences on Thoughtful Online Participation Abhay Sukumaran 1 , Stephanie Vezich 2 , Melanie McHugh 1 , Clifford Nass 1 1 Department of Communication 450 Serra Mall Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 { abhays , mmchugh , nass } @ stanford . edu 2 Department of Psychology University of California Los Angeles 1285 Franz Hall , Los Angeles , CA 90095 isvezich @ ucla . edu ABSTRACT We describe two experiments on whether individual thoughtful effort during online commenting is shaped by situational norms derived from the behavior of social others and the design of the environment , respectively . By measuring the length of participants’ comments on a news website , the time taken to write them , and the number of issue - relevant thoughts they contain , we demonstrate that participants conform to high vs . low norms of thoughtfulness manifested through either the apparent behavior of other users or through visual , textual and interactional design features conceptually associated with thoughtfulness . Theoretical and applied insights for designing online participatory environments are discussed . Author Keywords Online comments , user - generated content , thoughtfulness , social norms , environmental norms . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . ACM General Terms Experimentation . INTRODUCTION A widespread form of public discourse is conducted through participation in online comments on shared media such as news stories and blog posts [ 25 ] . While such participation holds much potential for enabling a more participatory media culture [ 14 ] and fostering offline civic engagement [ 41 ] , online comment spaces are often plagued by banality and thoughtlessness rather than edifying discussion . Improving participatory online behavior is thus a central concern for designers . While such regulation has traditionally been achieved through moderation systems [ 18 ] , recent research has also focused on subjective perceptions that people form about their online social situations . Online contributions can be motivated , for example , by the individual’s perception of their level of participation relative to others [ 4 ] or their degree of identification with a social group [ 33 ] . In the physical world , interpersonal situations are rife with behavioral influences traceable to social norms , i . e . , shared standards of expected behavior inferred from what others are doing [ 6 ] . Research also suggests that norms can be derived not only from other people but also from features of the immediate environment that are mentally associated with specific categories of social behavior [ 1 , 15 ] . We suggest that online comment spaces present fundamentally social yet rather ambiguous situations that are likely to be subject to such normative influence . In two experimental studies , we explore whether thoughtful participation in online comment spaces can be induced via social norms . The first experiment shows that people tend to conform to standards of thoughtfulness in commenting behavior set by others . The second experiment demonstrates that a similar effect can be achieved by introducing design elements conceptually associated with thoughtfulness in an online comment space . We interpret these results in light of social psychological theories of how environmental and social cues influence perception and behavior in interpersonal situations , and discuss the implications of these findings for designers of participatory technologies . RELATED WORK We briefly review prior research to establish support for two related ideas that correspond to these two empirical studies . First , individuals in social settings often turn to normative indicators in the behavior of others to guide their own decisions and actions , particularly when the setting is ambiguous . Second , even when others are not present , social environments can possess features mentally associated with such standards of normative conduct . Whenever available , we also cite evidence that such effects can exert themselves in online settings as well as physical ones . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2011 , May 7 – 12 , 2011 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0267 - 8 / 11 / 05 . . . . $ 10 . 00 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3401 Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication Changing Deliberative Norms on News Organizations’ Facebook Sites Natalie Jomini Stroud Department of Communication Studies , University of Texas , 2504A Whitis Ave . ( A1105 ) , Austin , TX 78712 - 0115 Joshua M . Scacco Brian Lamb School of Communication , Purdue University , 100 N . University St . , Beering Hall 2154 , West Lafayette , IN 47907 - 2098 Ashley Muddiman Department of Communication and Journalism , University of Wyoming , Ross Hall , 1000 E . University Ave . , Dept . 3904 , Laramie , WY 82071 Alexander L . Curry Department of Communication Studies , University of Texas , 2504A Whitis Ave . ( A1105 ) , Austin , TX 78712 - 0115 Comments posted to news sites do not always live up to the ideals of deliberative theorists . Drawing from theories about deliberation and group norms , this study investigates whether news organi - zations can a ff ect comment section norms by engaging directly with commenters . We conducted a fi eld study with a local television station in a top - 50 Designated Market Area . For 70 political posts made on di ff erent days , we randomized whether an unidenti fi ed sta ff member from the station , a recognizable political reporter , or no one engaged with commenters . We assessed if these changes a ff ected whether the comments ( n = 2 , 403 ) were civil , were relevant , contained genuine questions , and provided evidence . Th e fi ndings indicate that a news organization can a ff ect the deliberative behavior of commenters . Keywords : Online Forums , Deliberation , Journalism , Civility , News . doi : 10 . 1111 / jcc4 . 12104 Comments posted in response to news stories , whether on a Facebook page or in a comment section beneath an article , do not always live up to the ideals of deliberative theorists . As opposed to instances of thoughtful , reasoned discourse , comments are o ft en irrelevant , uncivil , and misleading ( Coe , Kenski , & Th e authors thank the Democracy Fund for funding this project and our news station partner for making this research possible as part of the Engaging News Project and Cynthia Peacock for her coding assistance . Editorial Record : First manuscript received on March 08 , 2014 . Revisions received on July 01 , 2014 . Accepted by Jennifer Stromer - Galley on August 01 , 2014 . Final manuscript received on August 08 , 2014 . First published online on October 15 , 2014 . Correction made a ft er online publication October 15 , 2014 : Natalie Jomini Stroud’s name has been updated . 188 Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 20 ( 2015 ) 188 – 203 © 2014 International Communication Association Normative Influences on Thoughtful Online Participation Abhay Sukumaran 1 , Stephanie Vezich 2 , Melanie McHugh 1 , Clifford Nass 1 1 Department of Communication 450 Serra Mall Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 { abhays , mmchugh , nass } @ stanford . edu 2 Department of Psychology University of California Los Angeles 1285 Franz Hall , Los Angeles , CA 90095 isvezich @ ucla . edu ABSTRACT We describe two experiments on whether individual thoughtful effort during online commenting is shaped by situational norms derived from the behavior of social others and the design of the environment , respectively . By measuring the length of participants’ comments on a news website , the time taken to write them , and the number of issue - relevant thoughts they contain , we demonstrate that participants conform to high vs . low norms of thoughtfulness manifested through either the apparent behavior of other users or through visual , textual and interactional design features conceptually associated with thoughtfulness . Theoretical and applied insights for designing online participatory environments are discussed . Author Keywords Online comments , user - generated content , thoughtfulness , social norms , environmental norms . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . ACM General Terms Experimentation . INTRODUCTION A widespread form of public discourse is conducted through participation in online comments on shared media such as news stories and blog posts [ 25 ] . While such participation holds much potential for enabling a more participatory media culture [ 14 ] and fostering offline civic engagement [ 41 ] , online comment spaces are often plagued by banality and thoughtlessness rather than edifying discussion . Improving participatory online behavior is thus a central concern for designers . While such regulation has traditionally been achieved through moderation systems [ 18 ] , recent research has also focused on subjective perceptions that people form about their online social situations . Online contributions can be motivated , for example , by the individual’s perception of their level of participation relative to others [ 4 ] or their degree of identification with a social group [ 33 ] . In the physical world , interpersonal situations are rife with behavioral influences traceable to social norms , i . e . , shared standards of expected behavior inferred from what others are doing [ 6 ] . Research also suggests that norms can be derived not only from other people but also from features of the immediate environment that are mentally associated with specific categories of social behavior [ 1 , 15 ] . We suggest that online comment spaces present fundamentally social yet rather ambiguous situations that are likely to be subject to such normative influence . In two experimental studies , we explore whether thoughtful participation in online comment spaces can be induced via social norms . The first experiment shows that people tend to conform to standards of thoughtfulness in commenting behavior set by others . The second experiment demonstrates that a similar effect can be achieved by introducing design elements conceptually associated with thoughtfulness in an online comment space . We interpret these results in light of social psychological theories of how environmental and social cues influence perception and behavior in interpersonal situations , and discuss the implications of these findings for designers of participatory technologies . RELATED WORK We briefly review prior research to establish support for two related ideas that correspond to these two empirical studies . First , individuals in social settings often turn to normative indicators in the behavior of others to guide their own decisions and actions , particularly when the setting is ambiguous . Second , even when others are not present , social environments can possess features mentally associated with such standards of normative conduct . Whenever available , we also cite evidence that such effects can exert themselves in online settings as well as physical ones . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CHI 2011 , May 7 – 12 , 2011 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Copyright 2011 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0267 - 8 / 11 / 05 . . . . $ 10 . 00 . CHI 2011 • Session : Incentives & User Generated Content May 7 – 12 , 2011 • Vancouver , BC , Canada 3401 Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication Changing Deliberative Norms on News Organizations’ Facebook Sites Natalie Jomini Stroud Department of Communication Studies , University of Texas , 2504A Whitis Ave . ( A1105 ) , Austin , TX 78712 - 0115 Joshua M . Scacco Brian Lamb School of Communication , Purdue University , 100 N . University St . , Beering Hall 2154 , West Lafayette , IN 47907 - 2098 Ashley Muddiman Department of Communication and Journalism , University of Wyoming , Ross Hall , 1000 E . University Ave . , Dept . 3904 , Laramie , WY 82071 Alexander L . Curry Department of Communication Studies , University of Texas , 2504A Whitis Ave . ( A1105 ) , Austin , TX 78712 - 0115 Comments posted to news sites do not always live up to the ideals of deliberative theorists . Drawing from theories about deliberation and group norms , this study investigates whether news organi - zations can a ff ect comment section norms by engaging directly with commenters . We conducted a fi eld study with a local television station in a top - 50 Designated Market Area . For 70 political posts made on di ff erent days , we randomized whether an unidenti fi ed sta ff member from the station , a recognizable political reporter , or no one engaged with commenters . We assessed if these changes a ff ected whether the comments ( n = 2 , 403 ) were civil , were relevant , contained genuine questions , and provided evidence . Th e fi ndings indicate that a news organization can a ff ect the deliberative behavior of commenters . Keywords : Online Forums , Deliberation , Journalism , Civility , News . doi : 10 . 1111 / jcc4 . 12104 Comments posted in response to news stories , whether on a Facebook page or in a comment section beneath an article , do not always live up to the ideals of deliberative theorists . As opposed to instances of thoughtful , reasoned discourse , comments are o ft en irrelevant , uncivil , and misleading ( Coe , Kenski , & Th e authors thank the Democracy Fund for funding this project and our news station partner for making this research possible as part of the Engaging News Project and Cynthia Peacock for her coding assistance . Editorial Record : First manuscript received on March 08 , 2014 . Revisions received on July 01 , 2014 . Accepted by Jennifer Stromer - Galley on August 01 , 2014 . Final manuscript received on August 08 , 2014 . First published online on October 15 , 2014 . Correction made a ft er online publication October 15 , 2014 : Natalie Jomini Stroud’s name has been updated . 188 Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 20 ( 2015 ) 188 – 203 © 2014 International Communication Association Moderation , Response Rate , and Message Interactivity : Features of Online Communities and Their Effects on Intent to Participate Kevin Wise Missouri School of Journalism University of Missouri - Columbia Brian Hamman Missouri School of Journalism University of Missouri - Columbia Kjerstin Thorson School of Journalism & Mass Communication University of Wisconsin - Madison Abstract We conducted two experiments to explore how moderation , response rate , and message interactivity affected people’s intent to participate in a web - based online community . In our ﬁrst experiment , 62 participants observed either a moderated or an unmoderated online community and answered questions about their intent to participate in the commu - nity . The participants who viewed the moderated community reported signiﬁcantly higher intent to participate than participants who viewed the unmoderated community . In our second experiment , 59 participants observed a different online community in which we manipulated both the rate ( in time ) of posted comments and the interactivity of each com - ment . We derived our manipulation of interactivity from Rafaeli’s ( 1988 ) deﬁnition of interactivity as message contingency . Participants reported signiﬁcantly greater intent to participate in an online community featuring interactive messages , but only when response rate was slow . These results indicate that both structural features of interfaces and content features of interactions affect people’s intent to participate in online communities . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1083 - 6101 . 2006 . 00313 . x Introduction Once the realm of the technically savvy , the Internet has become a practical com - munication channel for people of all abilities . While many people use the Internet to communicate with individuals through tools such as email and instant messaging , others use it to communicate with larger groups by posting their ideas to blogs , Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 24 Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 12 ( 2006 ) 24 – 41 ª 2006 International Communication Association HOW CAN WE SELECT GOOD COMMENTS ? HOW CAN WE SELECT GOOD COMMENTS ? ( IN A MORE SCALABLE WAY ) Wait ! What do you mean by good comments ? Methodology PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Design Study Methodology : Reflections from the Trenches and the Stacks Michael Sedlmair , Miriah Meyer , and Tamara Munzner IEEE Trans . Visualization and Computer Graphics ( Proc . InfoVis ) , 18 ( 12 ) : 2431 - 2440 , 2012 . PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Learn PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Learn Design PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Learn Design Evaluate PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Learn Design Evaluate PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Learn Design Evaluate Target User Interviews Bassey Etim , community manager at NYT “We use real people because humans can absorb the variables of conversation and weigh them in more intricate ways . ” Give moderator power to sort as he / she wants “We use real people because humans can absorb the variables of conversation and weigh them in more intricate ways . ” “The second comes from a fear that the thoughts you’re absorbing will seep into your own opinions . ” Give moderator power to sort as he / she wants “We use real people because humans can absorb the variables of conversation and weigh them in more intricate ways . ” “The second comes from a fear that the thoughts you’re absorbing will seep into your own opinions . ” Give moderator power to sort as he / she wants Need for balanced view “We use real people because humans can absorb the variables of conversation and weigh them in more intricate ways . ” “Want to go up to the reporter and say here are the 10 from commenters that are from more thoughtful people in comments . “ “Want to go up to the reporter and say here are the 10 from commenters that are from more thoughtful people in comments . “ Multiple use case “The comments section often reads like a PhD seminar . I am quite certain that your readers can and would offer up insightful but wry and amusing comments . ” “Want to go up to the reporter and say here are the 10 from commenters that are from more thoughtful people in comments . “ Commenter - based tasks “The comments section often reads like a PhD seminar . I am quite certain that your readers can and would offer up insightful but wry and amusing comments . ” “Want to go up to the reporter and say here are the 10 from commenters that are from more thoughtful people in comments . “ Commenter - based tasks Unexpected comments PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Learn Design Evaluate VISUAL ANALYTICS VS Outliers Trends Get answers to the questions you didn’t ask yet . Computational Analysis Interactive Visualization Computational Analysis Interactive Visualization Computational Analysis Analytical Reasoning Statistical Modelling Visual Analytics HOW ? Yay ! Let’s read them all . Previously in newsroom… 1 . Score comments with NLP criteria Proposed process 2 . Interactive selection with Custom Ranked List and Overview visualization Proposed process 3 . Machine learns from User feedback Proposed process 1 Scoring criterias The Times’ Community API 2815 articles 331782 comments 12542 Pick Criteria Only The Times’ Community API 2815 articles 331782 comments 12542 Pick Train Test Pick comments Nonpick comments P N Criteria Only Results Precision : 0 . 65 Recall : 0 . 68 F2 score : 0 . 68 1712 ( True Positive ) 926 ( False Positive ) 797 ( False Negative ) 1583 ( True Negative ) Pick No Pick Ground Truth Prediction Pick No Pick Results Precision : 0 . 65 Recall : 0 . 68 F2 score : 0 . 68 1712 ( True Positive ) 926 ( False Positive ) 797 ( False Negative ) 1583 ( True Negative ) Pick No Pick Ground Truth Prediction Pick No Pick User history and Readability are best predictor for quality . 2 Custom Ranked List Overview Visualization http : / / moderator . comment - iq . com / # / demo CommentIQ 3 PRECONDITION personal validation CORE inward - facing validation ANALYSIS outward - facing validation learn implement winnow cast discover design deploy reﬂect write Learn Design Evaluate ID Organization Field - experience ( in years ) Workflow P1 Washington Post 10 Post - moderation P2 1 P3 4 P4 New York Times 4 Pre - moderation P5 7 P6 Wall Street Journal 4 Post - moderation P7 Baltimore Sun 7 Post - moderation ID Organization Field - experience ( in years ) Workflow P1 Washington Post 10 Post - moderation P2 1 P3 4 P4 New York Times 4 Pre - moderation P5 7 P6 Wall Street Journal 4 Post - moderation P7 Baltimore Sun 7 Post - moderation ID Organization Field - experience ( in years ) Workflow P1 Washington Post 10 Post - moderation P2 1 P3 4 P4 New York Times 4 Pre - moderation P5 7 P6 Wall Street Journal 4 Post - moderation P7 Baltimore Sun 7 Post - moderation 1 hour structured interview with test drive Findings “…shifting moderating to a reporting research job . ” Paraphrased from one moderator • Flexibility is great • Comments are made by people ! • Lots of other use - cases • Flexibility is great • Comments are made by people ! • Lots of other use - cases • Flexibility is great • Comments are made by people ! • Lots of other use - cases Discussion Score by Algorithm Score by Algorithm Balanced human judgement Beyond “Most Liked” For general public • Beyond For general public • Beyond For general public • Beyond Conclusion WHAT ARE GOOD COMMENTS ? HOW CAN WE SELECT GOOD COMMENTS ? Visual analytics approach helps moderators find high - quality comments . What is a high - quality comment depends on the journalistic context . Visual analytics approach can help moderators find high - quality comments . What is a high - quality comment depends on the journalistic context . Time to upgrade our comments section TEAM WORK Niklas Elmqvist @ NElmqvist Nicholas Diakopoulos @ ndiakopoulos Simranjit Sachar ssachar @ umd . edu Deokgun Park @ intuinno Niklas Elmqvist @ NElmqvist Nicholas Diakopoulos @ ndiakopoulos Simranjit Sachar ssachar @ umd . edu Questions ? Try at Comment - iq . com Deokgun Park @ intuinno