20 December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Illustration by Brad Yeo Since scientific discoveries and engineer - ing innovation produce broad benefits , improved tools that advance individual , group , and social creativity are impor - tant contributions . The current and forthcoming generations of program - ming , simulation , information visualiza - tion , and other tools are empowering engineers and scientists just as animation and music composition tools have invig - orated filmmakers and musicians ( see the sidebar “New Media Arts and the Future of Technologies” ) . These and many other creativity support tools enable discovery and innovation on a broader scale than ever before ; eager novices are performing like seasoned masters and the grandmasters are pro - ducing startling results . The accelerating pace of academic research , engi - neering innovation , and consumer product design is amply documented in journal publications , patents , and customer purchases . By Ben Shneiderman How can designers of programming interfaces , interactive tools , and rich social environments enable more people to be more creative more often ? CREATIVITY SUPPORT TOOLS Accelerating Discovery and Innovation While telescopes and microscopes extended an individual’s perceptual abilities to make discoveries , modern creativity support tools also enable new forms of expression for individuals , and they are espe - cially potent in supporting group collaboration and social creativity ( see the table here ) . Creativity includes discovery or invention of a significant idea , pattern , method , or device that gains recognition from accepted leaders in a field , while innovation requires further steps to ensure adoption ( see the sec - tion “Defining and Supporting Creative Processes” ) . For example , many researchers extend their perceptual abilities by applying general - purpose scientific or information visualization tools , which enable them to make dis - coveries about their data ( see Figure 1 ) . Other domain experts , such as genomic researchers , use specialized visual analysis tools to discover biological pathways . Scientists and engineers draw on power - ful mathematical , design , and simulation tools to support their discovery and innovation ( see Figure 2 ) . New media artists real - ize their desire for personal expression with powerful development environ - ments that support anima - tion , music , or video editing tools . Even more remarkable opportunities have emerged for group collaboration across time and space , as afforded by programming environments that enable distributed teams to accelerate development of soft - ware projects . Still broader impacts stem from social creativity tools , such as wikis , citizen journalism , and media sharing , which enable thousands of cooperating individuals to create and share significant new content and services . Never before has it been possible to arrange rapid and broad collaboration among numerous content creators and service providers . Understanding the pas - sion and persistence required for individual creativity is difficult enough , so designing for social creativity requires rigorous research , with fresh theories of col - lective efficacy and the motivational impact of rewards and recognition ( see the sidebar “Sustaining Social Creativity” ) . A H ISTORIC S HIFT During the past half - century , computing professionals have developed potent productivity support tools that reduced manufacturing costs , tightened supply chains , and strengthened financial management . These busi - ness productivity support tools were designed to meet clear requirements such as improving insurance claim processing , reducing costs for airline reservations , or simplifying order entry . These tools were conve - niently evaluated by stan - dard measures such as time per task , cost per transaction , and errors per order . But now , a growing community of innovative tool designers and user interface visionaries is addressing a greater chal - lenge and moving from the comparatively safe territory of productivity support tools to the more risky frontier of creativity support tools . The chal - lenges they face stem from the vague require - ments for discovery and innovation , as well as from the unorthodox user behaviors and unclear measures of success . The risks are high , but so are the payoffs for innovative developers , ambitious product managers , and bold researchers . Creativity support tools extend users’ capability to make discoveries or inventions from early stages of gathering information , hypothesis genera - tion , and initial production , through the later stages of refinement , validation , and dissemination . A way forward for research and development on creativity support tools has been to focus on specific tasks that support discovery in the sciences , explo - ration in design , innovation in engineering , and imagination in the arts . For example , we already know that an accelerator for creative efforts is the capacity to locate , study , review , and revise existing projects and performances , such as open source soft - ware modules , Web page source code , architectural drawings , or music scores . The Web has done much to make existing projects and performances accessible 22 December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Information visualization tools Specialized visualization tools : GIS Specialized visualization tools : gene expression analysis Mathematical manipulation Engineering , architectural , industrial , product design Simulation New media development environments Animation and interaction Music Video editing Concept mapping Spotfire , SAS JMP , DataDesk , ManyEyes , Digg Google Maps , ArcInfo GeneSpring , DNASTAR MatLab , Mathematica Autocad Inventor , DataCAD , SolidWorks SPICE , Tierra Max / MSP , Pd , processing Flash , FLEX , OpenLaszlo Cinescore , Cakewalk Sonar Premier , Final Cut Pro , Lightworks , iMovie , Windows MovieMaker Inspiration , MindMapper , MindManager , Axon Software development Wikis Citizen journalism Media sharing Music Eclipse , JDeveloper , Visual Studio Wikipedia , Wikia Blogger , Ohmynews , Slashdot Flickr , YouTube Garageband , MacJams Group and Social Creativity Support Tools Individual and Group Creativity Support Tools Samples of classes of creativity support tools and examples of products . and search engines like Google have helped innova - tors to quickly find what they want . Future search engines can be designed far more elegantly to enable users to find the relevant results with specific features . While current search engines can find sonatas , sin - gling out those in a romantic style with accelerating tempo written in France during the 20th century may be more difficult to achieve . Often searchers need help in discovering the range of possibilities , while learning the concepts and terminology . Such exploratory searches may take users weeks or months to complete , requiring note taking , consulting with colleagues , and refining their goals . Of course , intellectual property policies must be modernized , to let users more easily build on previous work while paying fair licensing fees . Diverse proposals for copyright reform , patent modernization , and the Creative Commons offer modernizations of legal structures that accommodate these new technologies and new ways of working . A second example of creativity support is the capacity for users to rapidly generate multiple alterna - tives , explore their implications , or revert to earlier stages when needed . Hypothesis generation for scien - tists , prototypes for software engineers , models for architects , and sketches for artists are well established as important steps in their agile creative processes . Certainly well - designed software tools can help cre - ators in generating multiple possibilities , showing the implications of their choices and tracking their design decisions [ 12 ] . The best tools enable users to save their history , edit it , email it , and replay it thousands of times with different parameters . These and other examples distill emerging design principles , but skeptical business professionals , inspired artists , and diligent academics still worry about whether creativity support is an achievable goal . They may deride suggestions that creative human endeavors can be aided by inherently structured user COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 23 Figure 1 . The IN Cell Analyzer automated microscope was used to identify proteins influencing the division of human cells . After the images were analyzed , quantitative results were transferred to Spotfire DecisionSite . This screen revealed the previously unknown involvement of the retinol binding protein RBP1 in cell cycle control ( see Stubbs , S . and Thomas , N . , Methods in Enzymology 414 ( 2006 ) , 1 – 21 ) . Retinol—a form of Vitamin A—plays a crucial role in vision and during embryonic development ( courtesy of Nick Thomas , GE Healthcare ) . interfaces that inevitably limit exploration . These concerns are taken seriously by creativity support tool designers , who recognize the difficulties , but already see grand successes and future opportunities . Just as telescopes , microscopes , and cameras are pow - erful devices that enable discoveries and innovations , they are still only tools ; the act of creation is carried out by the users . As a computer and information science research topic , creativity is still emerging . The ACM Comput - ing Reviews Classification System has more than 1 , 500 entries , but does not include creativity , discov - ery , exploration , or innovation . By contrast , creativ - ity - related topics are currently high in national priorities worldwide , generating calls for support from national science research boards [ 6 , 7 ] . At the same time , national legislators and regional planners are concerned about promoting competitiveness , enhancing workplace innovation , and attracting cre - ative industries . Their emphasis ranges from support for game design entrepreneurs and film animation companies to pharmaceutical drug discovery teams and consumer product designers . Traditional descriptions of creativity often sug - gested that creative personalities—the Einsteins and Picassos of the world—were rare occurrences with special talents who came along once in a generation to transform the world . The modern belief , held by many teachers and researchers , is that creativity can be taught , and that everyone can be creative . This is a remarkable transformation from 400 years ago , when scholars devoted much energy to copying or translat - ing the words of Aristotle and other long - dead authors . While learning from and building on past work is important , the Web and the broad use of information and communications technologies has raised expectations that every student should write poems / programs , make photos / videos , design inter - faces / games , and then disseminate them to others . The widespread availability of books and then elec - tronic media transformed education so that now every student is expected to compose original texts , videos , animations , music , and art . Teachers also expect their students to produce science and engi - neering projects with fresh empirical evidence , origi - nal discoveries , or innovative devices [ 8 ] . D EFINING AND S UPPORTING C REATIVE P ROCESSES While there has been extensive research on creativity in many disciplines , the topic is a relatively new one 24 December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Figure 2 . Using Autodesk Inventor’s Design Accelerators for engineering tasks such as shaft design , gear design , and bearing selection , engineers at Stork Townsend , Inc . were able to create a custom gearbox with confidence that the unit would perform to expectations in a harsh environment . Shown here : the Worm Gear Generator is used to create matched sets of paired gears used in this gearbox design . All mating assembly constraints are automatically added , and an additional benefit to users is that this same interface is used for any edits to the gear pairs ( courtesy of Autodesk and Stork Townsend , Inc . ) . in computer and information science . The excellent Handbook of Creativity [ 11 ] covers many research directions but terms such as “computer” and “user interface” don’t even appear in the index . The large amount of literature on creativity , discovery , design , innovation , and composition may be sorted into three intersecting schools : • Structuralists believe people can be creative if they follow an orderly method , typically described with several stages , such as preparation , incubation , illu - mination , and verification . There is ample anecdotal evidence that great breakthroughs happened accord - ing to this generic method , but many variations are promoted by self - help books , organizational creativ - ity consultants , and systematic discovery methods such as TRIZ ( Theory of Inventive Problem Solving ; www . triz . org ) . Systematic approaches to exploratory search include the Arrowsmith ( http : / / arrowsmith . psych . uic . edu ) method for find - ing unusual overlaps in distant disciplines and the combinatorial hypothesis generation ( exhaustive search ) for multiparameter simulations . • Inspirationalists argue that breaking away from familiar structures elicits creative solutions . They advocate working on unrelated problems , getting away to scenic locations , and viewing random pho - tos or inkblots . Inspirationalists promote meditation , hypnosis , dreaming , and playful exploration . They seek to liberate thinking from old habits so as to break through to the Aha ! moment of inspiration . This school of thinking advocates sketching to quickly explore possibilities , concept mapping to dis - cover unexpected relationships , and visualization strategies to see the big picture . • Situationalists recognize that creative work is social . They seek to understand the motivation of creative people , their family history , and their per - sonal relationships with challenging teachers , empathic peers , or helpful mentors . They under - stand the need for distinctive forms of consultation at early stages when fear of rejection , ridicule , and rip - off are high versus later stages when validation , refinement , and dissemination are prominent . Sit - uationalists seek to understand the motivating roles of rewards and recognition ( for example , does the Nobel Prize promote creative work ? ) , as well as competition vs . collaboration . Each of these three schools offers important lessons for designers of creativity support tools . Structuralist thinking encourages systematic tools that include progress indicators with reminders of what is still needed . The inspirationalist view supports develop - ment of image libraries , thesauri , sketching interfaces , and concept - mapping tools . Situationalists broaden the designer’s view to include email and collaboration tools , as well as the e - science notebooks that guide users and coordinate groups through scientific processes over weeks , months , and years . A prominent situationalist researcher is Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi , whose in - depth interviews with 91 famously creative people [ 2 ] led him to make these useful , but provocative definitions : Domain : “consists of a set of symbols , rules , and pro - cedures” that are accepted and used by a well - defined community , such as mathematics or biology . Field : the respected leaders in a domain : “the individuals who act as gatekeepers to the domain . . . decide whether a new idea , perfor - mance , or product should be included . ” Individual : creativity starts with individual motiva - tions and insights , but requires social confirma - tion . He defines creativity as “when a person . . . has a new idea or sees a new pattern , and when this novelty is selected by the appropriate field for inclusion in the relevant domain . ” On first reading , Csikszentmihalyi’s definition may be disturbing , since it implies that contributions are creative only when recognized by journal editors , patent examiners , symphony directors , and others in similar roles . Many people feel they are able to judge their own contributions , but Csikszentmihalyi’s defi - nition asserts that to gain recognition , contributions must be judged by accepted leaders in a field . He makes clear that creative people need to respect previ - ous work and to present discoveries and innovations in a way that clarifies their contributions . Csikszent - mihalyi’s definition stresses context , making creativity a social and political process in which the structured methods and Aha ! moments are merely middle stages . COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 25 Just as telescopes , microscopes , and cameras are powerful devices that enable discoveries and innovations , they are still only tools ; the act of creation is carried out by the users . C HANGING M IND - S ETS Getting information technology companies and aca - demic researchers to invest resources in creativity - related research and development requires at least three significant changes in mind - sets . • Developers who understand that benchmark task completion is giving way to playful exploration , richer search features , generation of multiple alter - natives , and easy backtracking with rich history - keeping . They also recognize that Web - enabled social creativity environments can support innova - tive approaches to software development , content creation , and rapid dissemination of new ideas . • Product managers who conceive of their customers as creators , rather than merely users or consumers , are already changing their requirements analysis , feature selections , and marketing strategies . They know creative people want open systems they can extend and that they want an audience , feedback , rewards , and recognition . • Researchers who study and evaluate software usage are getting past old strategies of controlled studies and short - term usability testing to embrace ethno - graphic styles of observation , long - term case stud - ies , and data logging to understand patterns of usage . They know that motivation , empathy , play - fulness , and surprise are part of the creative land - scape . They also know that getting the correct combination of individual discovery , supportive consultation , and community brainstorming gen - erates high user engagement . These changes to expectations for individuals and their institutions are important first steps in enabling more people to be more creative more often . But even with clarity about the goals , there are still numerous challenges such as developing design guidelines and appropriate research methods . D ESIGN P RINCIPLES FOR C REATIVITY S UPPORT T OOLS World - famous architects such as Norman Foster and Frank Gehry claim their innovative buildings would not be possible without computer tools that enabled them to create their complex structures . Excellent interfaces , sometimes with rich domain - specific fea - tures , are essential for creativity support , as users need to apply their cognitive resources and passions fully to their discoveries and innovations . While experience across domains is diverse , there are underlying principles to guide designers [ 5 , 9 ] . These principles include : Support exploratory search : To be successful at discovery and innovation users should be aware of previous and related work , but finding relevant items may prove challenging with traditional key - word search . Google is great for fact finding , and it can be helpful for exploratory search projects , but there is much room for improvement . The inspira - tionalist school of creativity encourages viewing many relevant examples of previous work to engage innovators in a creative mind - set . Faceted search ( simultaneous menus on independent aspects such as people , geography , and time ) helps guide users by providing compact visual cues about attributes and attributes values . Dynamic queries ( changes to slid - ers , selectors , and filters , producing rapid changes to displays ) support rapid incremental and reversible exploration that enables users to learn about distrib - utions , gaps , and outliers . Improved search services provide rich mechanisms for organizing search results by ranking , clustering , and partitioning with ample tools for annotation , tagging , and marking . Advanced search services also enable seamless col - laboration with shared views , chat rooms , and emailing of result sets . Since serious discovery and innovation may require group processes that last for weeks or months , as in legal , patent , or scientific article searches , history - keeping facilities are helpful , as are overviews of what has been done and what remains to be accomplished . Enable collaboration : While the Aha ! moments of discovery and innovation are very personal , the processes that lead to them are often highly collabo - rative . Inspirationalists and situationalists claim col - laborations at early stages revolve around problem definition and setting goals , so consultations must be handled carefully because innovators fear rejection , ridicule , and rip - off . Communications systems that let users expose their uncertainties in a safe environ - ment could help build trust , and designs that record who said what can document contributions to emerg - ing ideas . Trust , accurate records , and safe exchanges are also needed in the middle stages when informa - tion gathering , idea refinement , and knowledgeable partners are important . In later stages , when valida - tion and dissemination become dominant , finding appropriate test situations , preview audiences , and media partners is helpful . These processes are well understood for individuals and small groups , but technology support for them is marginal . For the larger communities engaged in social creativity , wholly new forms of collaboration are emerging . Wikipedia and its support environment , Wikimedia , have proven to be remarkable and surprising success stories , defying expectations by finding a good bal - ance between freewheeling individual effort and well - enforced administrative principles . Each individual contribution to Wikipedia may be small , but the 26 December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Wikimedia environment produces an intense collabo - rative effort that leads to an impressive and original product . Thomas Edison famously quipped that genius is 1 % inspiration and 99 % perspiration , but now he might remark that innovation is 1 % inspira - tion and 99 % collaboration . Provide rich history - keeping : Many people believe discovery and innovation processes take many forms , so it is difficult to provide precise guidance in a step - by - step manner . But after casting aside rigid and doc - trinaire strategies , semi - structured methods or at least an orderly process has repeatedly been shown to be beneficial . The structuralist school embraces system - atic approaches ; sometimes around the traditional phases of preparation , incubation , illumination , and verification , but often around more carefully defined methods such as the 40 potential phases of TRIZ ( see www . triz . org ) . While Thomas Edison tested more than 4 , 000 filament variations for his light bulb , newer forms of structured discovery apply computer - based exhaustive search of millions of cases to under - stand optimal conditions and relationships among parameters . Whether discoverers and innovators used structured or free - form thinking , the benefits of rich history - keeping are apparent . Users have a record of which alternatives they have tried , they can compare the many alternatives , and they can go back to earlier alternatives to make modifications . History - keeping on computers has still more benefits , such as sending interesting cases to colleagues for comments and cre - ating macro processes that can be run repeatedly on new data . Design with low thresholds , high ceilings , and wide walls : This metaphoric description of desirable attributes for creativity support tools suggests that tools should be easy for novices to begin using , yet provide ambitious functionality that experts need . Good tools should also have a wide range of func - tionality so that many different services are provided , from data input and statistical analyses to report gen - eration . A single tool with a uniform user interface reduces frustrating file conversions and enables users to concentrate on their problems . Of course , there are limits to what one tool can do and also good argu - ments for modular designs , as well as domain - specific variations . Still , when users can import datasets easily , handle missing data , transform values , try multiple visualizations , run statistical tests , include annota - tions , and export subsets of data in desired formats , then they are free to concentrate on their exploration rather than cleaning data , recording comments , and transforming file formats . One strategy for satisfying this principle is to use a multilayer interface design that allows novices to begin a first layer and move up as their experience increases and needs require . Many video games have dozens of layers , most search engines have novice and advanced layers ( Google , Yahoo ) , many art and video tools have three or more workspaces ( Apple Final Cut Pro , Adobe Premiere ) , and some tools have as many as eight layers to accom - modate a wide range of expertise and ambition . R IGOROUS R ESEARCH M ETHODS These design principles for creativity support tools and the tools themselves would be difficult to vali - date with controlled studies that measured time to correct completion of benchmark tasks . Approxi - mately 300 years of scientific methods based on a reductionist model and controlled experimental studies have produced huge benefits , but the com - plex nature of human discovery and innovation can - not be studied like pendulums or solid - state materials [ 1 , 3 ] . Researchers are beginning to understand that design of discovery and innovation tools is a worthy subject of study , but they are often torn by devotion to traditional controlled studies . They also face pressure from many journal and conference review - ers , who favor statistically significant results , even when laboratory - controlled studies with many par - ticipants are inappropriate . The emphasis on close study of domain experts as they make discoveries has led many researchers to adopt case study , obser - vational , and interview methods with small num - bers of users over weeks and months . Their goal is to capture the processes that precede breakthrough incidents and to collect evidence that supports hypotheses about how software design features pro - mote creative moments . The intense desire for validity that comes from close observations has led many researchers to take fresh approaches to other research goals like replica - bility and generalizability . Until many more case stud - ies are collected and many related problems are studied , carefully documented methods are needed to answer critics who are legitimately concerned about misleading interpretations based on experimenter bias [ 4 ] . Individual case studies are meant to provoke mul - tiple case studies that replicate findings with diverse users and problems . As multiple case studies replicate results , researchers gain confidence in the replicability and generalizability of cause - and - effect conjectures . Many researchers have already demonstrated high payoffs in understanding how powerful tools can sup - port creative people . These researchers also argue that creative work in science , design , or the arts evolves so rapidly that replicability has a different meaning than in physical sciences research where the properties of COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 27 28 December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM Although creative individuals are often thought of as working in isolation , much of our intelligence and creativity results from interaction with tools and artifacts and from collaborat - ing with other individuals [ 4 ] . Many traditional approaches to creativity , however , have disregarded the importance of social and material surroundings . A richer framework would enable software developers , interaction designers , content man - agers , and researchers to understand the opportunities , chal - lenges , and principles of social creativity . SSoocciiaall CCrreeaattiivviittyy . . As demonstrated by leading scientists , movie directors , and influential politicians , an individual’s skills and experience can significantly influence the success of a project . Individual and social creativity can and must complement each other . In complex design problems such as urban planning , for example , the difference in knowledge , expertise , and perspectives that exist among individuals provides the ground to collaborate toward more creative and sustainable solutions [ 1 ] . The same is true for scientific collaboratories [ 8 ] , in which computer scientists work with domain specialists to accelerate knowledge development and dissemination , and for creative practices such as art and technology collaboration , the results of which super - sede what a single artist or computer scientist could have achieved in isolation [ 3 , 9 ] . Environments supporting mass col - laboration and social production such as annotated collections ( GenBank ) , media sharing ( Flickr , YouTube ) , wikis ( Wikipedia ) , folksonomies ( del . icio . us ) , and virtual worlds ( Second Life ) are other examples of social creativity . The diverse and collective stock of scientific content and artistic or stylistic ideas that individuals and communities share , reinterpret , and use as a basis for new ideas and visions constitutes the vital source of invention and creativity . FFooccuussiinngg oonn CCoommmmuunniittiieess . . Socio - technical environments are necessary for communities to collaborate and bring social creativity alive : to express themselves , combine different per - spectives , and generate new understandings . In large and het - erogeneous groups working together for long periods of time over complex design problems , as well as in communities including individuals with diverse but converging goals and intentions , distances and diversity between contributing indi - viduals can enhance creativity rather than hinder it . The chal - lenge is not to reduce heterogeneity and specialization but to support it and manage it at both the technological and social level by finding ways to build bridges between individuals and exploiting conceptual collisions and breakdowns to stimulate imagination and invention . The distances are distributed in multiple dimensions : spatially ( across physical distance ) , tem - porally ( across time ) , technologically ( across artifacts ) , and conceptually ( across individuals , communities , and cultures ) [ 5 ] . This distribution provides a foundation for social creativity by making all voices heard , harnessing diversity , and enabling people to be aware of and access each other’s work and ideas , relate them to their own , and contribute the results back to the community . CCoonnssttrruuccttiinngg SSoocciioo - - TTeecchhnniiccaall EEnnvviirroonn - - mmeennttss . . Because social creativity has “no head , ” externalizations are vital to socio - technical environments . Externalizations support creativity by : producing a record of our mental efforts ; causing us to move from vague mental conceptualizations of an idea to a more concrete representation of it ; making thoughts and intentions more accessible for personal reflection ; and pro - viding a means by which other individuals can interact with , react to , negotiate around , and build upon an idea . One example of this is when sketching is used to share and negotiate design concepts . Externalizations support cre - ativity by enabling individuals also to : sense new aspects of the environment experienced by other individuals ; interact with it in new ways ; and socially unfold and interpret emotions and behaviors [ 7 ] . One example is Flickr , where people can develop new photographic styles by looking at how other peo - ple have photographed or “sensed” their environment . Another example is our collaborative mapping system The Silence of the Lands ( www . thesilence . org ) , in which geo - located information is overlapped with a person’s individual perceptions of specific aspects of the sonic environment . From this enriched perspective , externalizations for social creativity ( shared representations , pictures , sounds , and so forth ) must be thought of as an instrument for creative conversations , rather than a tool for categorization . HHaarrnneessssiinngg tthhee SSyynneerrggyy ooff MMaannyy bbyy MMeettaa - - ddeessiiggnn . . Creativ - ity needs the “synergy of many” [ 2 ] , and this kind of synergy can be facilitated by meta - design . Meta - design is a socio - technical approach that characterizes objectives , techniques , and processes that allow users to act as designers and be cre - SUSTAINING SOCIAL CREATIVITY By Gerhard Fischer and Elisa Giaccardi Creativity needs the “synergy of many . ” (cid:1) (cid:1) electrons or tensile strength of steel can be studied again and again under diverse conditions . In medi - cine , business , and other research domains , when case study methods are based on established procedures to limit bias , they are accepted as valuable contributions . Year - long studies of artist - technologist collabora - tions ( as described in the sidebar “New Media Arts and the Future of Technologies” ) and a long tradition of ethnographic research have influenced the multi - dimensional in - depth long - term case studies , which are emerging as an accepted research method for sci - entific discovery and design innovation [ 10 ] . The key idea is to closely study domain experts who are work - ing on their own problems over a period of weeks or months . This is a form of hypothesis testing , in which the goal is to collect quantitative and qualitative evi - dence about how a creativity support tool benefits its users . When the focus is on documenting and under - standing how specific features contribute to successful outcomes , the researchers often produce insights that have substantial and broad value . Researchers become more than participant observers , as they may help the users to apply the tool effectively while recording their reactions . In a grow - ing number of studies , once - a - week visits for one to two hours over a one - to four - month period enabled participant observers to gather evidence about what worked and what did not . The users benefit by hav - ing access to novel technologies and the participation of sympathetic researchers , who are eager to see the users succeed . Careful logs of tool usage and audio or video recordings document critical incidents and reveal problems with the tool design or usage . The close linkage of researchers and users violates tradi - tional experimental design principles , but it seems necessary to understand creative processes that involve individual , group , and social environments . Comple - mentary analyses from usage logs , interviews , surveys , or focus groups—usually referred to as triangula - tion—can contribute additional insights and increase perceived validity . C ONCLUSION Creativity support tools have been around for as long as people have been creative . However , design - ers of modern computer - based environments are enabling new discovery and innovation processes for individuals , groups , and communities . In order to improve their design , they need refined theories and rigorous empirical studies based on new research methods . The close collaboration required by multidimensional in - depth long - term case stud - ies can produce breakthrough insights about how discovery and innovation occur . COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 29 ative in personally meaningful activities [ 7 ] . However , a ten - sion exists between creativity and organization . A defining characteristic of social creativity is that it transcends individual creativity and thus requires some form of organization ; but elements of organization can and frequently do stifle creativity [ 6 ] . Advocates of meta - design address such a challenge and promote the importance of keeping environments open to users’ modifications and adaptations by technical and social means that empower participation . This serves a double pur - pose : to provide a potential source for new insights , new knowledge , and new understandings ; and to provide a higher degree of synergy and self - organization . Meta - design can facilitate social creativity by shifting the focus from finished products or complete solutions to conditions for many to explore mismatches and embrace new emerging opportunities during use . How to generate and sustain these conditions effectively is the next challenge for software developers , inter - action designers , content managers , and researchers . References 1 . Arias , E . G . et al . Transcending the individual human mind—Creating shared understanding through collaborative design . ACM Transactions on Computer Human - Interaction 7 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 84 – 113 . 2 . Benkler , Y . The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . Yale University Press , New Haven , 2006 . 3 . Candy , L . and Edmonds , E . A . Explorations in Art and Technology . Springer - Verlag , London , 2002 . 4 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . Creativity—Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention . HarperCollins Publishers , New York , NY , 1996 . 5 . Fischer , G . Distances and diversity : Sources for social creativity . In Pro - ceedings of Creativity and Cognition , ( London , April 2005 ) , 128 – 136 . 6 . Florida , R . The Rise of the Creative Class and How It’s Transforming Work , Leisure , Community and Everyday Life . Basic Books , New York , NY , 2002 . 7 . Giaccardi , E . and Fischer , G . Creativity and Evolution : A Metadesign Per - spective . Digital Creativity , ( forthcoming ) . 8 . Kouzes , R . T . , Myers , J . D . , and Wulf , W . A . Collaboratories : Doing sci - ence on the Internet . IEEE Computer 29 , 8 ( 1996 ) , 40 – 46 . 9 . National Research Council . Beyond Productivity : Information Technology , Innovation , and Creativity . National Academy Press , Washington , D . C . , 2003 . Gerhard Fischer ( gerhard @ colorado . edu ) is a professor in the Department of Computer Science , a Fellow of the Institute of Cognitive Science , and the director of the Center for LifeLong Learning and Design ( L3D ) at the University of Colorado in Boulder , CO . Elisa Giaccardi ( elisa . giaccardi @ colorado . edu ) is a research associ - ate at the University of Colorado Center for LifeLong Learning and Design in Boulder , CO . © 2007 ACM 0001 - 0782 / 07 / 1200 $ 5 . 00 c 30 December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM New technology is increasingly becoming an integral part of creative practice in the arts . This offers an exciting and chal - lenging opportunity for computer scientists , software engi - neers , and interface designers . To guide their efforts for the audience of artistic end users , developers will need to know more about innovative uses of technology by new media artists . One of the ACM Education Board’s Great Principles of Com - puting project’s four core practices is innovating [ 4 ] . Innovation is the process of creating something new that is then adopted in practice . We need to find ways of drawing more attention to this aspect of our work and placing concerns for innovation and cre - ativity more centrally in the canon of methods and terms we use . For innova - tion to take place , however , complex social , organiza - tional , and cultural factors must be harnessed ; on the other hand , strategies for supporting creativity are directly within the province of the computer science community via the design and development of cre - ativity support technolo - gies . This is the primary focus of this sidebar . In advancing this idea we could benefit from applying the principle of “Hitching our research to someone else’s driving problems , and solving those problems on the owners’ terms , ” which can lead to “richer computer science research” [ 1 ] . What better way forward than to begin by focusing our attention on indis - putably creative application domains and how they meet the needs of creative professionals and their ever - expanding demand for more effective computer systems ? As an example , consider image manipulation and well - developed applications such as Photoshop , which have achieved widespread success and adoption . The use of a multi - layered approach [ 11 ] is pow - erful in the way it enables the user to start with a basic set of facilities and go deeper in as and when more functionality is needed . This enables the user to focus on the essentials of the creative task without the hindrance of having to grapple with unhelpful complexities imposed by the system . Creativity sup - port systems can support the user by encouraging exploration and enhancing collaboration and if technology developers design with creative cognition in mind and recognize the vital role of the social context of creativity , the tools they develop will be more effective . AARRTTIISSTTSS AASS PPOOWWEERR UUSSEERRSS : : AA SSYYSSTTEEMMSS PPEERRSSPPEECCTTIIVVEE Taking the focus on creativity support further , there are today many examples of creativity enhancing systems being developed by artists working with new media [ 2 ] . Some artists are creative power users who need to access the full capability of the com - puter : they either perform programming tasks or collaborate closely with programmers . This kind of artist user is a special kind of programmer need - ing dynamic and flexible software environments . Consider the example of Andrew Johnston , a software engineer and trombonist , who in col - laboration with Ben Marks , a musician com - poser , has developed a software instrument that responds to someone playing or singing by creating sound and visual images that capture and reflect the human performance . Musi - cians have described it as rather like playing with a partner . This collaboration , initially driven by creative impulses rather than scientific ones , is an example of how creative work across different disciplines can not only lead to new tools for creative expression but also yield new insights into principles that can inform the design of innovative digital tools . Johnston’s sys - tem is written in Pd ( Pure Data ) . One aspect of his method involves developing the code during sessions in which the musicians use the system . This process involves developing the code ( or parts of it ) with the musicians as they explore . Johnston likes to call his software constructs toys , things with which people constructively play . Making art systems might seem a little esoteric and making games rather limited , but making creative toys opens up new opportunities for explo - ration and collaboration through playfulness [ 7 ] . By Linda Candy A trombonist plays with an interactive musical instrument from “Partial Reflections” by Andrew Johnston and Benjamin Marks . NEW MEDIA ARTS AND THE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGIES COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 31 Art making is as much ( or more ) about creating new forms as creating new content . In the former case , the artist requires more than application - level software to fully support the work . Pd is an environment in the Max / MSP family , which Lyon called an instrument design language [ 9 ] . Artists in many media use such systems to build instruments , or software environments , that need to be extended , personalized , or integrated . What is often needed is a context - dependent environment . Systems like Max / MSP are often used to build specific development environments that then enable the artist to explore their partic - ular concerns . In collaboration with Prix Nica winner Yasunao Tone , a new audiovisual instrument was constructed using computational representations of the concepts at the center of Tone’s creative practice [ 5 ] . John Maeda has argued for more emphasis on the use of “software sketching , ” where a loose and initially poorly defined piece of code can be constructed in order to help move the idea - generation process forward [ 10 ] . Creative practitioners spend much important effort on exploration and problem finding . This requires a fluid engagement with the materials at hand—much of this is software . Maeda has drawn upon very successful models of software environment styles , such as Max / MSP [ 3 ] , which are both visual and dynamic and hence supportive of the rapid exploration and feedback needed in the idea - generation process . The need for dynamic , flexible , and complete software environments is central to creative users . Because these envi - ronments must be situated in or adaptable to specific domains ( such as music ) , and these domains are themselves shifting , this poses key challenges for future technologies . TTAALLKKIINNGG AABBOOUUTT CCRREEAATTIIVVIITTYY : : AANN EEXXTTEENNDDEEDD VVOOCCAABBUULLAARRYY As well as pointing to a specific focus in software development approaches , the study of creative digital practitioners leads to a need to develop and extend the vocabulary we use to discuss interactive systems . Jonas Lowgren suggests we need to regu - larly use terms that do not necessarily derive from a work - oriented view ( including relevance and usefulness ) . Instead , he suggests playability , seductivity , and fluency , for example . He also points out that ambiguity can be a positive property in relation to creativity [ 8 ] . For the artist , the term engagement may be a more significant than usability , and is already used by researchers and software developers . Because building systems for creative engagement is still mostly confined to new media arts we must make an effort to extend it to other kinds of inter - active systems . With an extended vocabulary , software design can grapple with the issues of creativity in a much more com - prehensive way . The ever - expanding demand for more effective computer systems by creative practitioners in the arts , music , literature , and new media , can guide designers in meeting the needs of all creative professionals . The arrival of complex art systems has opened up new avenues that are impacting our thinking about what is possible and desirable . We are already familiar with how computing can impact the creative arts , but now we see the emergence of creative communities that can influence comput - ing . This is a lively two - way process that benefits both com - munities . Art is impacting technology and technology is impacting art . On a wide front exciting changes are in the air . The emergence of communities of research and practice that are exploring how the arts can influence computing is an excit - ing prospect . The role of aesthetics in programming and other core elements of computer science is a challenging develop - ment for the future of computing . The recent work of artists as power users follows the evolutionary trend of artists beginning with their use of the computer as a tool , and more recently as raw material that can be easily modified for creative applica - tions . The next step beyond software as material is to view software as the subject material [ 6 ] and to use creativity as a means to redesign software itself . R EFERENCES 1 . Brooks , F . The computer scientist as toolsmith II . Commun . ACM 39 , 3 ( Mar . 1996 ) , 61 – 68 . 2 . Candy , L . and Edmonds , E . A . Explorations in Art and Technology . Springer - Verlag , 2002 . 3 . Cycling 74 . Tools for new media ; www . cycling74 . com / . 4 . Denning , P . J . Great principles of computing , Commun . ACM 46 , 11 ( Nov . 2003 ) , 15 – 20 . 5 . Edmonds , E . A . et al . Developing interactive art using visual program - ming . In C . Stephanis and J . Jacko , Eds . , Proceedings of Human - Com - puter Interaction 2003 . Lawrence Erlbaum , London , 2003 , 1183 – 1187 . 6 . Fishwick , P . An introduction to aesthetic computing . Aesthetic Com - puting . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2006 , 3 – 27 . 7 . Johnston , A . and Marks , B . Partial reflections . Leonardo Transactions 40 , 5 ( Oct . 2007 ) , 510 – 511 . 8 . Löwgren , J . Articulating the use qualities of digital designs . In P . Fish - wick , Ed . , Aesthetic Computing . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2006 , 383 – 404 . 9 . Lyon , E . Dartmouth symposium on the future of computer music software : A panel discussion . Computer Music Journal 26 , 4 ( Apr . 2002 ) , 13 – 30 . 10 . Reas , C . and Fry , B . Processing : A Programming Handbook for Visual Designers and Artists . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2007 . 11 . Shneiderman , B . Promoting universal usability with multi - layer inter - face design . In Proceedings of the Conference on Universal Usability ( CUU’03 ) , ACM Press , 2003 . Linda Candy ( linda @ lindacandy . com ) is Senior Associate and Honorary Research Fellow in the Creativity and Cognition Studios , Faculty of IT , at the University of Technology , Sydney , Australia . © 2007 ACM 0001 - 0782 / 07 / 1200 $ 5 . 00 c The growth of interest in creativity support tools in recent years is gratifying . The June 2005 U . S . National Science Foundation - sponsored workshop on the topic [ 9 ] inspired research under the CreativeIT program , a strong commitment to discov - ery and innovation research in the NSF five - year strategic plan [ 7 ] , and the ambitious billion - dollar vision for cyber - enabled discovery and innovation research . The risks are high and the scientific methods novel , but the payoffs are substantial in bringing about thrilling moments of scientific discovery and engineering innovation . References 1 . Basili , V . R . , Shull , F . , and Lanubile , F . Building knowledge through families of experiments . IEEE Trans . Software Engineering 25 , 4 ( Apr . 1999 ) , 456 – 473 . 2 . Csikszentmihalyi , M . Creativity : Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention . HarperCollins , New York , 1996 . 3 . Fjermestad , J . and Hiltz S . R . Group support systems : A descriptive evaluation of case and field studies . Journal of Management Information Systems 17 , 3 ( Mar . 2000 ) , 113 – 157 . 4 . Hewett , T . Informing the design of computer - based environments to support creativity . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 63 , 4 – 5 , Special Issue on Computer Support for Creativity , E . Edmonds and L . Candy , Eds . , ( 2005 ) , 383 – 409 . 5 . Myers B . A . , Hudson , S . E . , and Pausch , R . Past , present and future of user interface software tools . ACM Transactions on Computer Human Interaction 7 , 1 ( Mar . 2000 ) , 3 – 28 . 6 . National Academy of Sciences . Beyond Productivity : Information Tech - nology , Innovation and Creativity . NAS Press , Washington , D . C . , 2003 . 7 . National Science Foundation . Investing in America’s Future : Strategic Plan 2006 – 2011 . Arlington , VA , 2006 . 8 . Shneiderman , B . Leonardo’s Laptop : Human Needs and the New Com - puting Technologies . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 2002 . 9 . Shneiderman , B . et al . Creativity support tools : Report from a U . S . National Science Foundation sponsored workshop . International Jour - nal of Human – Computer Interaction 20 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 61 – 77 ; www . cs . umd . edu / hcil / CST . 10 . Shneiderman , B . and Plaisant , C . Strategies for evaluating infor - mation visualization tools : Multi - dimensional in - depth long - term case studies . In Proceedings of Beyond Time and Errors : Novel Eval - uation Methods for Information Visualization , Workshop of the Advanced Visual Interfaces Conference ( 2006 ) ; http : / / portal . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 1168149 . 1168158 . 11 . Sternberg , R . , Ed . Handbook of Creativity . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , U . K . , 1999 . 12 . Terry , M . , Mynatt , E . D . , Nakakoji , K . , and Yamamoto , Y . Variation in element and action : Supporting simultaneous development of alter - native solutions . In Proceedings of CHI 2004 Conference on Human Fac - tors in Computing Systems , ACM Press , New York ( 2004 ) , 711 – 718 . Ben Shneiderman ( www . cs . umd . edu / ~ ben ) is a professor in the Department of Computer Science , the founding director ( 1983 – 2000 ) of the Human - Computer Interaction Laboratory ( www . cs . umd . edu / hcil / ) , and a member of the Institute for Advanced Computer Studies at the University of Maryland at College Park . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or class - room use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . © 2007 ACM 0001 - 0782 / 07 / 1200 $ 5 . 00 c 32 December 2007 / Vol . 50 , No . 12 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM