The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 1 Manuscript EMBO - 2013 - 84396 Threshold - controlled ubiquitination of the EGFR directs receptor fate Sara Sigismund , Veronica Algisi , Gilda Nappo , Alexia Conte , Roberta Pascolutti , Alessandro Cuomo , Tiziana Bonaldi , Elisabetta Argenzio , Lisette GGC Verhoef , Elena Maspero , Fabrizio Bianchi , Fabrizio Capuani , Andrea Ciliberto , Simona Polo and Pier Paolo Di Fiore Corresponding author : Pier Paolo Di Fiore , European Institute of Oncology Review timeline : Submission date : 04 January 2013 Editorial Decision : 21 February 2013 Revision received : 19 April 2013 Editorial Decision 21 May 2013 Accepted : 03 June 2013 Transaction Report : ( Note : With the exception of the correction of typographical or spelling errors that could be a source of ambiguity , letters and reports are not edited . The original formatting of letters and referee reports may not be reflected in this compilation . ) Editor : Andrea Leibfried 1st Editorial Decision 21 February 2013 Thank you for submitting your manuscript to the EMBO Journal . I am sorry for the delay in getting back to you , but I have now received the three reports on your paper . As you can see below , referee # 1 ' s report on your work is very positive . However , referee # 2 and 3 raise major concerns : both think that the work is very well performed , but might rather describe a correlation and not causality . Referee # 3 is furthermore pointing out that the observed correlation is not general and that mechanistic insights are lacking . Given the comments provided , I would like to invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript , addressing the concerns of the referees . I should also add that it is EMBO Journal policy to allow only a single round of revision and that it is therefore important to address the concerns raised at this stage . When preparing your letter of response to the referees ' comments , please bear in mind that this will form part of the Review Process File , and will therefore be available online to the community . For more details on our Transparent Editorial Process , please visit our website : http : / / www . nature . com / emboj / about / process . html Thank you for the opportunity to consider your work for publication . I look forward to your revision . The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 2 REFEREE COMMENTS Referee # 1 Sigismund et al . report that ubiquitination of the EGF receptor at the plasma membrane is threshold - controlled , dependent on Cbl - mediated phosphorylation of two tyrosines , Y1045 and either Y1068 or Y1086 . The authors find that the dose - response curve of EGF receptor ubiquitination correlates with clathrin - independent endocytosis of the receptor , and that clathrin - independent EGF receptor endocytosis depends on receptor ubiquitination . The latter finding is consistent with previous data from the same laboratory . This is a conceptually interesting study since it offers a plausible explanation to an important observation made by the authors previously , that relative contribution of clathrin - dependent vs - independent EGF receptor endocytosis is determined by ligand concentration . The experimental part of the study is of high quality , and the results are carefully interpreted with respect to the extensive ( and sometimes controversial ) literature on EGF receptor endocytosis . Minor point : Some of the panels in Fig . 8A are shown at too high contrast . Referee # 2 This manuscript is the most impressive example of a quantitative cell biology study . Each hypothesis is logically tested using several complimentary approaches , all technically challenging but carried out very rigorously . The authors unequivocally confirmed the " threshold " phenomenon in the dose - response of EGFR ubiquitination to ligand concentration , which was proposed in their previous studies . In the present work , they show that this kinetics of EGFR ubiquitination is due to a threshold kinetics of the recruitment of the Cbl - Grb2 complex to the receptor , which in turn depends on cooperativity between phosphorylation of Cbl and Grb2 binding sites in the EGFR . In the second part of the manuscript , the authors correlate receptor ubiquitination with non - clathrin endocytosis ( NCE ) by showing that both processes have similar threshold - containing dose - response to ligand concentrations . The authors define NCE ( non - clathrin endocytosis ) as the clathrin - and caveolin - 1 independent but dynamin - and cholesterol - dependent pathway . Such classification implies that there are at least three types of EGFR endocytosis : 1 ) clathrin - mediated ; 2 ) NCE ; and 3 ) so called " background internalization " ( also clathrin - independent ) . The latter pathway contributes significantly to the overall uptake of EGF at all concentrations of EGF , especially at high concentrations . In this model the relative physiological significance of NCE and " background " internalization is unclear . In early studies by Wiley ' s group , the EGFR antibody was used to compare the internalization rates of ligand - occupied and unoccupied EGFRs . These rates were similar when high concentrations of EGFR were used , suggesting that the bulk of EGFR endocytosis at high EGF concentrations is ligand - independent , e . g . basal , constitutive internalization . Whether NCE and the background internalization are EGF - dependent is not determined in the present study . Certainly , these mechanisms may be cell type dependent . The simplest experiment is to test the effect of EGFR kinase inhibitors on NCE and background internalization in cells used in this study . Furthermore , while good correlation of the dose - dependences of ubiquitination and NCE is established , this is just a correlation . Some kind of a functional evidence of the casuistic relationship , for example , testing if Cbl knockdown inhibits NCE but not the background endocytosis , would greatly strengthen this paper . It is likely the authors have already published such an experiment , and I could have missed it . Finally , an important technical comment - the amount of ubiquitin and pTyr in EGFR immunoprecipitates should be normalized to the number of EGF - bound receptors rather than total amount of receptors in the cell . EGF - free receptors are not phosphorylated ( at least based on the conventional model of EGFR activation ) , not ubiquitinated and not detected in the internalization assay . Specific comments : The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 3 1 ) Why is the pTyr signal not reaching a plateau in most figures ? Since a maximum of the pTyr signal cannot be determined , it is misleading to express the pTyr signal as % of maximum , and the comparison of ubiquitination and pTyr dose - responses may also be misrepresentative . 2 ) As authors noted , ke values determined at high EGF concentrations are not true rate constants because the amount of surface EGF is not constant during the internalization experiment , and the first - order kinetics cannot be applied . In essence , ke is overestimated at high concentrations of EGF due to significant down - regulation of surface receptors during the course of the uptake . This implies that ke values measured at low and high EGF concentrations are not directly comparable , and the use of % of maximum endocytosis is questionable ( Fig . 9 ) . 3 ) Supplemental figure 3E : should be 1165 - 1175 not 1065 - . . . 4 ) Fig . 5B . Theoretically , Cbl must bind to EGFR in order to be phosphorylated . It is therefore unclear why Cbl pTyr signal does not display the threshold kinetics , as in the case of Cbl binding to EGFR . 5 ) Fig . 7E . While there is a " jump " in the dose - response curve of the amount of pY1045 co - precipitated with pY1068 , the curve does not reach a plateau as it is observed with the ubiquitination dose - response curves ( Fig . 7A ) . Referee # 3 While there is considerable information gathered about the endocytic mechanisms of ligand - dependent EGFR endocytosis , these authors have consistently held that two different modes of endocytosis define the low ( < 5 ng / ml ) versus high ( > 10 ng / ml ) ligand regime . Here they show that at least in some cell lines there may be an explanation for this bipartite behavior - the degree of ubiquitination of the receptor being the main discriminator . In this manuscript ' Threshold controlled ubiquitination . . ' , Sisigmund et al , first set up careful methodology to measure the extent of phosphorylation and ubiquitination of EGFR , using two distinct quantitative means . MS analysis of phosphopeptides corresponding to the EGFR phosphorylation sites and forward and reverse analysis of Ubq as well as phosphorylation by the use of specific antibodies , are the two means utilized . These analysis show that Ubq of EGFR takes place as a step threshold while phosphorylation of all sites together or independently have a much more gradual change . The authors then find a mechanistic explanation for this difference ; they show that this is related to the synergistic Ubq of EGFR by the corresponding recruitment of Cbl . This in turn is connected to the recruitment of Grb2 to the phospho - peptide sites 1086 / 68 . Of note - for a single receptor the acquisition of multiple phosphorylation on the same protein also exhibits a threshold like behavior . The experiments here are well presented and document a potential novel mechanism for observed differences in phosphorylation and Ubq of EGFR . The authors then argue that this difference is of functional significance , since mutants that do not recruit Grb2 ( and as a consequence generate enhanced levels of Cbl ) are defective in endocytosis via NCE . The experiments in this manuscript are very well executed and controlled and support the main conclusions of the authors . However some issues remain : 1 ) Is EGFR - Ubq necessary for its internalization via CME ? What happens to CME on mutating sites required for EGFR ubiquitination . If ubiquitination is ' only ' important for NCE , when those sites are mutated EGFR should in principle traffic via CME regardless of EGF concentration used . Recent experiments have shown that it is the RING domain of Cbl that is necessary for endocytosis via CME , and not the ligase domain further buttressing this argument . Is this also the case for NCE ? 2 ) Why do the different HeLa cell lines exhibit different behavior despite exhibiting the same threshold Ubq of EGFR ? This is indeed puzzling . As discussed by the authors , this implies that other factors are necessary over and above a critical threshold Ubq . An attempt at uncovering this factor ( s ) will certainly add value to this study , and directly connect Ubq to the NCE mechanism . In its absence , it is hard to argue that Ubq is mechanistically coupled to NCE ; it certainly correlates with NCE . The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 4 3 ) In the Grb2 - KD study ( Fig 4 ) , Ubq of EGFR becomes a gradual increasing function of EGF levels . What happens to NCE in this context ? A careful measurement of NCE at different doses of EGF would be most instructive here . 4 ) In the presence of 10 fold excess Grb2 why is EGFR association with Cbl at low ( 1ng / ml ) concentration less than when only cellular Grb2 present ? If Grb2 involved in recruiting Cbl to EGFR , why does excess of Grb2 inhibiting EGFR ' s association with Cbl ? 5 ) In the mutant EGFR lines in Fig 9 , do the levels of Cbl recruitment to the mutant receptors also follow the same profile as the ubiquitination / NCE ? Also , the Author ' s claim about the combined presence of pY1045 and pY1068 on the same receptor moiety increasing sharply and non - gradually as the function of the ligand is based on one data point 7A ( 3 ng / ml ) . To be more convincing , it would be necessary to show separation of the curves with more than one data point . Some minor technical issues : i ) Are Ubq levels normalized ? If yes , to what are they normalized to within a single dose response experiment ? This question extends to all the quantification shown . i ) Legend to Figure 6 is mislocated ! ii ) Please check the numbers in the Table 1 . Some of the values of Ke are erroneously entered . iii ) In experimental procedures the quantification of EGFR levels is not explained properly . 1st Revision - authors ' response 19 April 2013 Referee # 1 : Minor point : Some of the panels in Fig . 8A are shown at too high contrast . R . We have reduced the contrast of the figures as suggested ( now in new Figure 8B ) . Referee # 2 ( major points were number by us for convenience ) 1 . The authors define NCE ( non - clathrin endocytosis ) as the clathrin - and caveolin - 1 independent but dynamin - and cholesterol - dependent pathway . Such classification implies that there are at least three types of EGFR endocytosis : 1 ) clathrin - mediated ; 2 ) NCE ; and 3 ) so called " background internalization " ( also clathrin - independent ) . The latter pathway contributes significantly to the overall uptake of EGF at all concentrations of EGF , especially at high concentrations . In this model the relative physiological significance of NCE and " background " internalization is unclear . In early studies by Wiley ' s group , the EGFR antibody was used to compare the internalization rates of ligand - occupied and unoccupied EGFRs . These rates were similar when high concentrations of EGFR were used , suggesting that the bulk of EGFR endocytosis at high EGF concentrations is ligand - independent , e . g . basal , constitutive internalization . Whether NCE and the background internalization are EGF - dependent is not determined in the present study . Certainly , these mechanisms may be cell type dependent . The simplest experiment is to test the effect of EGFR kinase inhibitors on NCE and background internalization in cells used in this study . R . We agree with the reviewer that this is an important issue . We have tackled it by taking advantage of an EGFR kinase dead mutant ( K721A ) and also by performing experiments with an EGFR kinase inhibitor ( AG1478 ) , as suggested by the reviewer . The results are now shown in Supplementary Figure 8C , D and discussed in the main text ( page 14 , lines 23 - 24 and page 15 , lines 1 - 10 ) and more extensively in the legend to Supplementary Figure 8 . The sum of the results clearly shows that EGFR - NCE depends on the kinase activity of the receptor , while background endocytosis is kinase - independent . 2 . Furthermore , while good correlation of the dose - dependences of ubiquitination and NCE is established , this is just a correlation . Some kind of a functional evidence of the casuistic relationship , for example , testing if Cbl knockdown inhibits NCE but not the background The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 5 endocytosis , would greatly strengthen this paper . It is likely the authors have already published such an experiment , and I could have missed it . R . Agree . We now have included internalization kinetics upon Cbl KD ( alone or in combination with other KDs ) ( Figure 9A ) . The new results show that EGFR - NCE is absolutely Cbl - dependent . The new set of results also establishes that background endocytosis is Cbl - independent . As already shown by others , we also show that EGFR - CME displays some moderate dependence on Cbl . We believe that this dependency is unlikely due to the E3 ligase activity of Cbl on the EGFR , and we have thoroughly discussed this issue ( now further supported also by new results added as Supplementary Figure 6F , please see reply to point 1 of reviewer 3 ) in a specific chapter of the Discussion ( “Multiple levels of involvement of Cbl in EGFR internalization ) . 3 . Finally , an important technical comment - the amount of ubiquitin and pTyr in EGFR immunoprecipitates should be normalized to the number of EGF - bound receptors rather than total amount of receptors in the cell . EGF - free receptors are not phosphorylated ( at least based on the conventional model of EGFR activation ) , not ubiquitinated and not detected in the internalization assay . R . We apologize for an inaccurate use of words that led to this misunderstanding . We DID NOT normalize the immunoprecipitates for the total amount of EGFR in the cell . What we did was to normalize the signal in the Ub or pY blots for the amount of immunoprecipitated receptor . This is a routine technical adjustment that corrects for the inevitable experimental differences among samples . We have now clearly specified this in Materials and Methods ( “Signal quantification and normalization” , page 29 ) . Specific comments : 1 ) Why is the pTyr signal not reaching a plateau in most figures ? Since a maximum of the pTyr signal cannot be determined , it is misleading to express the pTyr signal as % of maximum , and the comparison of ubiquitination and pTyr dose - responses may also be misrepresentative . R . We apologize for not having explained this point in the original version of the manuscript . We know that at 100 ng / ml the maximum level of EGFR - pY is reached . We have now included an EGF dose - response extended to 300 ng / ml EGF , to show that there is no further increase in the EGFR - pY levels between 100 and 300 ng / ml ( Supplementary Figure 1C ) . 2 ) As authors noted , ke values determined at high EGF concentrations are not true rate constants because the amount of surface EGF is not constant during the internalization experiment , and the first - order kinetics cannot be applied . In essence , ke is overestimated at high concentrations of EGF due to significant down - regulation of surface receptors during the course of the uptake . This implies that ke values measured at low and high EGF concentrations are not directly comparable , and the use of % of maximum endocytosis is questionable ( Fig . 9 ) . R . Agree . We now provide additional evidence and explanations in the text to justify the comparison between internalization rates at low and high doses . In essence , in the two cellular systems in which we performed all our kinetics characterization ( HeLa Milan and NR6 - EGFR ) , the bound counts did not change appreciably over the time frame of the experiments . We have now added these data in Supplementary Figure 8A , B . As explained now in Supplementary Experimental Procedures ( page 1 , lines 21 - 23 and page 2 , lines 1 - 9 ) , this has two - fold consequences : i ) also under conditions of high EGF , the Ke obs can be simply extrapolated by the first order internalization kinetics ; ii ) it is possible to compare directly the kinetics parameters obtained under low and high EGF . We note that in some of the cell lines shown in Table 1 ( i . e . those with low receptor number ) we observed the effect highlighted by the reviewer . Therefore , in these specific cases , we did not apply the first order kinetic rule but we estimated the internalization coefficient Ke using the trapezoidal rule , to take into account variations in bound ( see Opresko and Wiley 1987 ; Lund et al . , 1990 ) . This is now described in detail in Supplementary Experimental Procedures ( page 2 , lines 10 - 14 ) . 3 ) Supplemental figure 3E : should be 1165 - 1175 not 1065 - . . . R . Agree . We have corrected the mistake . The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 6 4 ) Fig . 5B . Theoretically , Cbl must bind to EGFR in order to be phosphorylated . It is therefore unclear why Cbl pTyr signal does not display the threshold kinetics , as in the case of Cbl binding to EGFR . R . This is an interesting point . In order to shed light on this issue , we have performed an experiment , reported in the new Supplementary Figure 5 . We measured the levels of Cbl tyrosine phosphorylation by the 1045 + , 1068 / 86 + and 1045 / 68 / 86 + mutants , in comparison to EGFR WT and to EGFR 9Y - . Cbl phosphorylation by EGFR depends on phosphorylation of the receptor , as shown by negligible phosphorylation by the 9Y - mutant . The concomitant presence of the two binding Cbl binding sites pY1045 and pY1068 / 86 is necessary and sufficient for optimal Cbl phosphorylation , since the 1045 / 68 / 86 + mutant was as efficient as EGFR - WT . The presence of a single Cbl binding site ( as obtained in either the 1045 + or in the 1068 / 86 + mutant ) was sufficient to cause Cbl phosphorylation , but not to obtain optimal phosphorylation . Importantly , the 1045 + and the 1068 / 86 + mutant were able to phosphorylate Cbl half as efficiently as the 1045 / 68 / 86 + mutant ( or EGFR - WT ) . This shows that the simultaneous presence of the two binding sites has additive and not synergistic effects on Cbl phosphorylation . It seems therefore that a weak and / or transient interaction , as it can be achieved even in the presence of a singly binding site , is sufficient for Cbl phosphorylation by the EGFR . We have discussed this interpretation in the revised version of the manuscript ( legend to Supplementary Figure 5 ) . 5 ) Fig . 7E . While there is a " jump " in the dose - response curve of the amount of pY1045 co - precipitated with pY1068 , the curve does not reach a plateau as it is observed with the ubiquitination dose - response curves ( Fig . 7A ) . R . Agree . A new experiment is provided in revised Figure 7A , with more doses and higher EGF concentrations to reach a plateau in the pY curve . Referee # 3 1 ) Is EGFR - Ubq necessary for its internalization via CME ? What happens to CME on mutating sites required for EGFR ubiquitination . If ubiquitination is ' only ' important for NCE , when those sites are mutated EGFR should in principle traffic via CME regardless of EGF concentration used . Recent experiments have shown that it is the RING domain of Cbl that is necessary for endocytosis via CME , and not the ligase domain further buttressing this argument . Is this also the case for NCE ? R . This is an interesting point and highlights an issue that is still somehow open in the field . Previous work , mostly from the Sorkin’s lab – and to a lesser extent from our lab – has shown that ubiquitination - defective EGFR mutants ( either in the direct Cbl - binding site , Y1045F , or in the major acceptor lysines ) are internalized through CME with similar rates as WT EGFR ( Huang F . et al . , 2007 ; Jiang and Sorkin 2003 ; Sigismund S . et al . , 2005 and 2008 ) . However , it has been argued that some residual ubiquitination of the EGFR mutants used in those studies might contribute to CME ( Madshus et al . , 2009 ) . Indeed , the Y1045F mutant , which lacks only the direct Cbl binding site , still displays ~ 10 % residual ubiquitination ( Supplementary Figure 6E ) . To address the reviewer’s point , we took advantage of the TripleF mutant , in which Y1045 , 1068 and 1086 are simultaneously mutagenized to Phe . This mutant shows < 3 % ubiquitination vs . EGFR - WT . The mutant was internalized exclusively through CME ( see new Figure 6F ) , both at low and high EGF doses . Importantly , The TripleF mutant , displayed overall good internalization ( ~ 60 % of EGFR WT at both low and high concentrations ) . Thus , the analysis of the TripleF mutant supports the notion that EGFR ubiquitination is essential for NCE , while it is dispensable for CME of the EGFR . This is further supported by Cbl KD experiments , newly added to the manuscript as per request of reviewer 2 ( please see reply to reviewer 2 , major point 2 ) . The data obtained with the TripleF mutant show that ubiquitination is not necessary for CME . However , since some reduction in the internalization rate was detected , they are also compatible with the possibility that EGFR - Ub might participate to CME with a non - essential , optimizing role . We have exhaustively discussed this possibility in our Discussion ( section - Multiple levels of involvement of Cbl in EGFR internalization - ) . In that section , based also on the data obtained with the 1045 + add - back mutant and on existing literature , we argue that Cbl has a role in CME but not The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 7 as a ligase for EGFR ( i . e . that EGFR - Ub is not involved in CME ) , but rather as an adaptor protein or as a ligase for other endocytic proteins . 2 ) Why do the different HeLa cell lines exhibit different behavior despite exhibiting the same threshold Ubq of EGFR ? This is indeed puzzling . As discussed by the authors , this implies that other factors are necessary over and above a critical threshold Ubq . An attempt at uncovering this factor ( s ) will certainly add value to this study , and directly connect Ubq to the NCE mechanism . In its absence , it is hard to argue that Ubq is mechanistically coupled to NCE ; it certainly correlates with NCE . R . The core question here is as to whether we provide sufficient evidence that EGFR - Ub is mechanistically coupled to EGFR - NCE . We believe that we have made a cogent case that this is indeed so . The case is articulated in its entirety in the Discussion of the manuscript ( page 21 , lines 9 - 23 ) . In particular , we have not just shown that EGFR - Ub and EGFR - NCE correlate , but we have used a molecular genetics approach , based on add - back mutants , to prove that starting from a naïve EGFR backbone ( incompetent for ubiquitination and internalization ) , we can reconstruct exactly the determinants whose presence is necessary to re - acquire competency for both phenotypes . The mechanistic dimension is ensured by the fact that the reconstruction is not a qualitative – all or none – response , but a progressive stepwise process in which each mutant displays a precise qualitative and quantitative phenotype which is always concordant for NCE and Ub . In the revised manuscript , we have further buttressed our argument with new experiments . As mentioned in the reply to point 1 , we now show that an EGFR Ub - defective mutant ( TripleF ) is uncoupled from NCE ( new Supplementary Figure 6 ) . In addition , we now show that Cbl KD completely abolishes EGFR - NCE ( new Figure 9A ) . We believe therefore that the question of whether EGFR - Ub and EGFR - NCE are mechanistically coupled is satisfactorily answered in the paper . This notwithstanding , we concur with the reviewer that the question of how the two events are coupled is not resolved . Of course , this is not a trivial task . In previous work ( Sigismund et al . , 2005 ) , we have shown that some Ub receptors ( eps15 and / or epsins ) are required for EGFR - NCE , but dispensable for EGFR - CME . This might provide a starting point to understand how EGFR ubiquitination is coupled to the downstream machinery ( discussed on page 21 , lines 24 - 25 and page 22 lines 1 - 10 ) . A complete understanding of the process will require , however , the molecular characterization of the EGFR - NCE pathway . For the last 6 years , we have been working hard on this topic . We have biochemically isolated and purified the vesicular intermediates through which EGFR is internalized via NCE and we have performed quantitative mass spec to identify the proteins contained in them . More than 100 identified proteins have been systematically tested by RNAi and a number of them validated as bona fide specific regulators of the EGFR - NCE pathway . They identify a completely novel modality of internalization , which we are finishing characterizing . Of course , we cannot incorporate any of these data in the present manuscript . Our understanding of EGFR - NCE is just beginning ( as we said , it is molecularly a completely new pathway ) ; as it progresses important questions , such as that asked by this reviewer on the molecular nature of the difference between HeLa Milan and HeLa Oslo , will be answered . 3 ) In the Grb2 - KD study ( Fig 4 ) , Ubq of EGFR becomes a gradual increasing function of EGF levels . What happens to NCE in this context ? A careful measurement of NCE at different doses of EGF would be most instructive here . R . We have performed internalization kinetics in Grb2 KD cells ( now included as Supplementary Figure 11 ) . It was previously reported that under these conditions , EGFR - CME ( but not Tf - CME ) is blocked ( Huang F . et al . , 2004 ) . Indeed , we could reproduce these data . In addition , by employing the appropriate combinations of clathrin , dynamin 2 , and Grb2 KDs , at low and high EGF dose , we could show that EGFR - NCE is completely dependent on Grb2 , while the constitutive pathway of EGFR endocytosis ( what we operationally define as “background endocytosis” , see replies to points 1 and 2 of reviewer 2 ) was not Grb2 - dependent . Thus , the impact on Grb2 on EGFR internalization is rather wide ; however , EGFR - NCE depends on it , congruently with all our other results . 4 ) In the presence of 10 fold excess Grb2 why is EGFR association with Cbl at low ( 1ng / ml ) concentration less than when only cellular Grb2 present ? If Grb2 involved in recruiting Cbl to EGFR , why does excess of Grb2 inhibiting EGFR ' s association with Cbl ? The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 8 R . To avoid displaying blots in which the signal was saturated , we used – in the previous version of the manuscript – two different exposures . We apologize for not having explained this properly in the figure legend . We thank the reviewer for pointing this to our attention . To avoid misinterpretations , we have changed the Figure choosing the same exposure in both conditions ( the shown experiment is the same as in the previous version ) . 5 ) In the mutant EGFR lines in Fig 9 , do the levels of Cbl recruitment to the mutant receptors also follow the same profile as the ubiquitination / NCE ? R . This is an interesting experiment , and we thank the reviewer for suggesting it . We have done the experiment ( new Figure 8A ) , and indeed the co - ip of Cbl and EGFR follows the same profile as EGFR - Ub or NCE for the various mutants . Also , the Author ' s claim about the combined presence of pY1045 and pY1068 on the same receptor moiety increasing sharply and non - gradually as the function of the ligand is based on one data point 7A ( 3 ng / ml ) . To be more convincing , it would be necessary to show separation of the curves with more than one data point . R . Agree . We have repeated this experiment adding more data points ( new Figure 7A ) . Some minor technical issues : Are Ubq levels normalized ? If yes , to what are they normalized to within a single dose response experiment ? This question extends to all the quantification shown . R . After being corrected for the EGFR level in the immunoprecipitates , Ub ( or pY ) levels were expressed relative to the maximal value obtained within the single dose - response experiment ( what we call “ % of max” ) . In some experiment , when comparing different mutants and WT , we expressed all values relative to the maximal value obtained with EGFR WT ( we define this as arbitrary units , 100 = max WT ) . We have added a section to Materials and Methods to explain in detail all the procedures that we used for signal quantification ( “Signal quantification and normalization” , page 29 ) . Legend to Figure 6 is mislocated ! R . This has been corrected . Please check the numbers in the Table 1 . Some of the values of Ke are erroneously entered . R . We have checked very carefully Table 1 , and all values are correct as originally entered . In experimental procedures the quantification of EGFR levels is not explained properly . R . We have added more detailed procedure to how signals quantification was performed in the IBs ( “Signal quantification and normalization” , page 29 ) , and on how surface EGFR levels were measured by 125 I - EGF saturation binding ( “Measurement of surface EGFRs” , page 33 ) . 2nd Editorial Decision 21 May 2013 I have now received comments from two of the original referees of your mansucript that are both satisfied with the amount of revisions and thus support publication ( please see their comments below ) . I would be grateful at this stage if you were to provide original source data , particularly uncropped / - processed electrophoretic blots for the main figures of your manuscript ( Figs 1 , and 3 - 8 ) . This is in accord with our policy to make original results better accessible for the community and thus increase reliability of published data . We would welcome one PDF - file per figure for this information . These will be linked online as supplementary " Source Data " files . The EMBO Journal Peer Review Process File - EMBO - 2013 - 84396 © European Molecular Biology Organization 9 Please allow me to congratulate you to this study at this point . The editorial office will be in touch soon with an official acceptance letter . REFEREE COMMENTS Referee 2 : I have carefully examined the revised manuscript and author ' s rebuttal . The authors adequately responded to the critique by performing a number of new experiments and modifying the text of the paper . The manuscript is now suitable for publication . Referee 3 : The revision of the authors provide a compelling argument for the claims that threshold ubiquitination controls EGFR fate . As stated in previous reviews , how general are these observations and that the mechanism for the diversion of these receptors for the NCE pathway are clearly important issues . According to the authors a new molecular mechanism for the redirection of EGFR into the NCE pathway is being followed up and this should also enhance the endocytosis field . At this stage I remain quite convinced that EGFR receptors respond in threshold controlled fashion to EGF levels , and that this mediated via Cbl dependent Ubiquitination ( albeitt in a sub - set of cell lines ) .