Juxtacrine and Paracrine Interactions of Rat Marrow - Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells , Muscle - Derived Satellite Cells , and Neonatal Cardiomyocytes with Endothelial Cells in Angiogenesis Dynamics Reza Rahbarghazi , 1 Seyed Mahdi Nassiri , 1 Parvaneh Khazraiinia , 1 Abdol - Mohammad Kajbafzadeh , 2 Seyed Hossein Ahmadi , 3 Elham Mohammadi , 1 Mohammad Molazem , 4 and Mohamad Zamani - Ahmadmahmudi 1 Research into angiogenesis has contributed to progress in the fast - moving ﬁeld of regenerative medicine . De - signing coculture systems is deemed a helpful method to understand the dynamic interaction of various cells involved in the angiogenesis process . We investigated the juxtacrine and paracrine interaction between 3 dif - ferent cells , namely rat marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells ( rMSCs ) , rat muscle - derived satellite cells ( rSCs ) , and rat neonatal cardiomyocytes ( rCMs ) , and endothelial cells ( ECs ) during angiogenesis process . In vitro Matrigel angiogenesis assay was performed whereby ECs were monocultured or cocultured with rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs or their conditioned media ( CM ) . In addition , in vivo Matrigel plug assay for angiogenesis was conducted to assess the angiogenic potential of the rCM - , rMSC - , and rSC - derived CM . Our results demon - strated that the rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs elongated along the EC tubules , whereas the rMSCs formed tube - like structures with sprouting tip cells , leading to improved angiogenesis in the coculture system . Moreover , the rMSC - and rSC - derived CM signiﬁcantly improved angiogenesis tube formation on Matrigel , accelerated EC chemotaxis , and increased the arteriolar density , vascularization index , and vascularization ﬂow index in the Matrigel plug in vivo . Western blotting showed that rMSCs secreted a high level of vascular endothelial growth factor , basic ﬁbroblast growth factor , and stromal - derived factor - 1 - alpha . Tie2 is also shed from rMSCs . This study demonstrated that stem cells interact with ECs in the juxtacrine and paracrine manner during angio - genesis , and marrow MSCs have superior angiogenic properties . Introduction T issues are sophisticated structures with many different cells that play a role in a tight , regulated manner for re - generation . Understanding the vascularization or angiogen - esis process is one of the most scintillating issues of interest in the realm of regenerative medicine [ 1 ] . Angiogenesis , deﬁned as the formation of new blood vessels from pre - existing ves - sels , is critical in many physiological and pathological pro - cesses [ 2 , 3 ] . In the last 2 decades , the mechanisms controlling angiogenesis have come under scrutiny . Imbalances in an - giogenesis contribute to the pathogenesis of numerous dis - ease states . Speciﬁcally , insufﬁcient angiogenesis is a principal factor that limits tissue recovery in ischemic disease , leading to stroke , myocardial infarction , ulcerative disorders , and neurodegeneration [ 4 , 5 ] . Designing coculture systems is believed to be a helpful method to understand the dynamic interaction of various cells involved in the angiogenesis process [ 1 ] . The angiogenic potential of a number of progenitor cells have recently been investigated by some authors , who have proposed multiple hypotheses , including physical contact and paracrine mech - anisms , to explain the positive , and sometimes negative , ef - fects of these cells in angiogenesis . In vitro morphogenesis of endothelial cells ( ECs ) , as well as in vivo neovascularization , is induced by mesenchymal stem cell ( MSC ) secretome [ 6 ] . Conditioned media ( CM ) derived from MSCs cocultured with mouse brain endothelial cells ( MBECs ) signiﬁcantly 1 Department of Clinical Pathology , Faculty of Veterinary Medicine , University of Tehran , Tehran , Iran . 2 Department of Urology , Pediatric Urology Research Center , Children’s Hospital Medical Center , Tehran University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran . 3 Tehran Heart Center , Tehran University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran . 4 Department of Radiology and Surgery , Faculty of Veterinary Medicine , University of Tehran , Tehran , Iran . STEM CELLS AND DEVELOPMENT Volume 22 , Number 6 , 2013 (cid:2) Mary Ann Liebert , Inc . DOI : 10 . 1089 / scd . 2012 . 0377 855 increased MBEC expression of angiopoietin 1 ( Ang1 ) / Tie2 and Flk1 compared with MBECs alone [ 7 ] . Crosstalk be - tween MSCs and astrocytes accelerated vascular endo - thelial growth factor ( VEGF ) and Ang1 / Tie2 expression by astrocytes in the coculture condition in comparison to astrocyte culture alone [ 7 ] . Other progenitors such as muscle - resident stem cells , known as satellite cells ( SCs ) , are capable of producing a number of angiogenic growth factors . SC transplantation in experimentally injured mouse medial collateral ligament was reported to have accelerated angiogenesis and increased capillary density [ 8 ] . Moreover , in the coculture of rat SCs and microvas - cular fragments , the index of angiogenesis is greater than that of single culture alone [ 9 ] . Given the importance of vascular disease in the heart and muscle and dynamic interaction between ECs and the somatic and stem cell niche in the angiogenesis process , we aimed in this study to comparatively investigate the potential angiogenic effect of 3 different cells , namely rat MSCs ( rMSCs ) , rat SCs ( rSCs ) , and neonatal rat cardiomyocytes ( rCMs ) . To study the physical and mechanical roles of these cells on EC tubulogenesis , we designed coculture systems of human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) with rCMs , rMSCs , and rSCs on Matrigel . In addition , we assayed the angiogenic potential of rCM - , rMSC - , and rSC - derived CM in vitro and in vivo . Materials and Methods Animals In this study , both green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - positive ( rat GFP + / + ) ( [ Wistar - TgN ( CAG - GFP ) 184ys ] strain ) and GFP - negative adult male Wistar rats ( rat GFP - / - ) were employed [ 10 ] . The rats , weighing 70 – 100g , were treated in accordance with the published guideline of The Care and Use of Laboratory Animals ( NIH Publication No . 85 - 23 , re - vised 1996 ) . All implementation phases of this study were approved by the Animal Care Committee of the University of Tehran . Cells isolation and expansion rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs were isolated as previously de - scribed . A complete description of the cell isolation tech - niques is provided in the Supplementary Methods section ( Supplementary Data are available online at www . liebertpub . com / scd ) . CM preparation The impact of CMs on EC tubulogenesis and migration was tested by collecting rMSC , rSC , and rCM CMs . The third passage of rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs ( with 70 % – 80 % conﬂu - ence ) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium - low glucose ( DMEM / LG ) for 5 days , and then the medium was subsequently discarded and washed 3 times with phos - phate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . Thereafter , 10mL of serum - free DMEM / LG was added and incubated for further 24h [ 6 , 11 , 12 ] . The CMs were then harvested , centrifuged at 1 , 000 g for 10min at 4 (cid:3) C ( Hettich universal 320R ) , and ﬁltered through a 0 . 20 - m m - pore syringe ﬁlter ( GVS Filter Technology , Inc . ) . The harvest was stored at - 80 (cid:3) C until use [ 6 ] ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . Western blotting The concentrated CMs were subject to protein expression analysis through western blotting . Detailed information is provided in the Supplementary Methods section . EC migration assay For migration assay , 24 - well polycarbonate membrane cell culture plate inserts with 8 - m m - pore size were obtained ( Catalog No . 35224 ; SPL Life Science ) . For this propose , the ECs from the third subconﬂuent passage were utilized . In brief , ECs were serum - starved overnight [ 13 ] and were thereafter trypsinized . Next , 5 · 10 4 cells were suspended in 100 m L serum - free DMEM / LG and seeded on the top chamber of the transwell Inserts ( triplicate per one sample ) . The bottom chambers contained 750 m L of serum - free CMs , each from the rMSCs , rCMs , and rSCs , or a combined serum - free CM ( a cocktail containing 250 m L CM for each cell type ) . The serum - free DMEM was used as control [ 14 ] . After in - cubation for 24 h in a CO 2 incubator , 6 random ﬁelds per well were counted . All experiments were performed in triplicate . EC labeling with CM - Dil The ECs were labeled with CellTracker TM CM - Dil ( Cata - log No . C - 7000 ; Molecular Probes ) according to the manu - facturer’s instructions . The cells were incubated with 2 m M cell tracker for 20 min at 37 (cid:3) C , washed with PBS , trypsinized , washed 3 times with PBS , and then resuspended in DMEM / LG [ 15 ] . In vitro tube formation assay ( Matrigel assay ) In vitro tube formation was assessed via growth factor - depleted Matrigel ( Catalog No . 356231 ; BD Biosciences ) . For Matrigel assay , a 3D culture system was designed in 96 well plates ( Catalog No . 167008 ; Nunclon ) , in which the wells were coated with 50 m L of overnight pre - cooled Matrigel followed by incubating at 37 (cid:3) C for 30 min to be solidiﬁed [ 16 ] . Three different protocols were used to perform the in vitro angiogenesis assays : Protocol I : single - cell culture ( ECs , rCMs , rSCs , and rMSCs ) ; protocol II : coculture system ( EC - rCMs , EC - rSCs , and EC - rMSCs ) and combined cell culture ( ECs – rMSCs – rSCs – rCMs ) ; and protocol III : CM - dependent culture ( ECs—200 m L rCM CM , ECs—200 m L rSC CM , ECs— 200 m L rMSC CM , and EC - cocktail CM containing * 66 . 7 m L CM for each cell ) ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . Three indepen - dent experiments with duplicate wells were performed : a total of 2 · 10 4 cells were seeded in each well . For coculture experiments , a 4 : 1 ratio of cells was used ( 16 , 000 ECs : 4 , 000 non - ECs ) . The wells were checked daily by an inverted mi - croscope ( Nikon ; Eclipse TS100 ) , which was equipped with a digital imaging device ( Sight DS - L2 ; Nikon ) . In our prelim - inary studies on in vitro Matrigel assay , we investigated different time points for tubulogenesis and found that the best time for tubulogenesis assay was at day 7 . At day 7 , each well was photographed and analyzed [ 15 ] . In vitro angio - genesis was assessed quantitatively through examining 25 colonies in each well , and an assigning score from 0 to 4 to each colony : 0 , aggregate with no budding ; 1 , colony bud - ding without arborization ; 2 , with arborization ; 3 , with 856 RAHBARGHAZI ET AL . anastomosis ; and 4 , development of a complex network ( Supplementary Fig . S2 ) . The total score per well was cal - culated by adding all the 25 scores , with a maximum pos - sible score of 100 . The average tubular length of 50 tubes in 10 serial microscopic ﬁelds and the average of tube area per total ﬁeld area in 10 serial microscopic ﬁelds were also measured . Tubular length was measured in micrometer us - ing an image - analyzing software ( Sight DS - L2 ; Nikon ) , while the tube area was calculated as pixel 2 using AxioVision Version Rel 4 . 8 Software ( Carl Zeiss Microimaging , Inc . ) . Fluorescent images were captured with an inverted micro - scope ( Olympus IX71 ) , and merged using analysis LS Starter software . Matrigel implantation in rats In this phase , 500 m L of CM , each from rCM , rMSCs , and rSCs , or from the control DMEM ( DMEM / LG that was in - cubated in 37 (cid:3) C in a CO 2 incubator ) , was added to 500 m L of overnight precooled growth factor - depleted Matrigel and mixed by gentle vortexing for homogenization . The ﬁnal volume for injection was 1 , 000 m L . The mixture was loaded in a syringe and maintained in 4 (cid:3) C until injection . The rats were separated into 4 experimental groups ( n = 4 each ) ; in each group , the mixture of CM from each cell ( or control DMEM ) and Matrigel was injected subcutaneously . Before injection , rats were anesthetized with xylazine ( 5 mg / kg ) and keta - mine ( 80mg / kg ) , and the left ﬂank was shaved and disin - fected by a surgical disinfectant solution . Ultrasonography imaging For ultrasonography imaging , all animals underwent an ultrasonographic analysis at days 0 , 3 , and 7 postinjection using a Voluson 730 ProSystem ( GE Medical Systems ) ﬁtted with a 5 – 12 - MHz linear 3D – 4D transducer . The anesthetized rats were placed on the right side before the injection site was impregnated with acoustic gel for the positioning of the probe . Raw - power Doppler 3D data were selected and pro - cessed using 4D view version : 5 . 0 software ( GE Medical Systems Kretztechnik GmbH & Co . OHG Company ) . The 3D power Doppler of the injected site ( hypoechoic compared to the surrounding tissue ) was measured and demonstrated by Vocal (cid:4) analysis in the software , which was calculated as vascularization index ( VI ) , ﬂow index ( FI ) , and vascularization - ﬂow index ( VFI ) of the cut volume ( in terms of cm 3 ) by the following formulas . All calculations were done by the soft - ware ( Fig . 1 ) . FI ¼ + 100 c ¼ 1 c : hc ( c ) + 100 c ¼ 1 hc ( c ) VI ¼ + 100 c ¼ 1 hc ( c ) + 100 g ¼ 1 hg ( g ) þ + 100 c ¼ 1 hc ( c ) VFI ¼ + 100 c ¼ 1 c : hc ( c ) + 100 g ¼ 1 hg ( g ) þ + 100 c ¼ 1 hc ( c ) VFI ¼ VI · FI ð ANGIO Þ FI describes the average of color intensity , showing the blood ﬂow in 3D volume indirectly , where c stands for the color value in the cut volume at the range interval of 0 – 100 . VI calculates the number of blood vessels in the cut volume . In this formula , g is the abbreviation of gray scale value in the cut volume at the range of 0 – 100 , and c stands for color value in the cut volume at the range interval of 0 – 100 again . Additionally , hg ( g ) presents the frequency of gray scale value in 3D volumetric image , and hc ( c ) scores the frequency of color value in 3D volumetric image . VFI is the multiplication of the blood vessel number by the blood ﬂow . Histopathology of Matrigel plug Seven days postinjection , the rats were sacriﬁced , and the Matrigel plug was obtained . A ﬁxative solution containing 2 % paraformaldehyde and 1 % glutaraldehyde ( Catalog No . 1 . 04239 . 0250 ; Merck ) was used for better ﬁxation and pre - venting of Matrigel depolymerization . Parafﬁn - embedded sections were cut into 5 - m m sections for immunohisto - chemistry and hematoxylin and eosin staining . To assess the effect of the CM in angiogenesis induction in the Ma - trigel plug , an anti - alpha - smooth muscle actin ( a - SMA ) antibody ( Catalog No . M0851 ; Dako ) was used to stain smooth muscle cells and myoﬁbroblasts [ 17 ] . Capillary ECs were stained with an antibody against von Willebrand factor ( vWF ; Catalog No . M0616 ; Dako ) . After depar - afﬁnization process , the slides were incubated in 3 % H 2 O 2 solution for 30 min to inhibit endogenous peroxidase . For antigen retrieval , the slides were submitted to autoclaving in a citrate buffer , pH 6 . 0 , for 30 min . After cooling in room temperature and rinsing with PBS , the sections were incu - bated with the antibody for 30min , washed twice with PBS , and colored with EnVision + Dual Link System HRP kit ( Dako ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . 3 , 3 ¢ - Diaminobenzidine and Mayer’s hematoxylin solution were utilized as the chromogen and counterstain , respectively . All parts of the slides were examined serially in a high - power ﬁeld view . FIG . 1 . Orthogonal and reconstructed 3D ultrasonography imaging of Matrigel mass that was injected subcutaneously . The swollen form of Matrigel beneath the skin during injection changed and ﬂattened by day 3 or 7 ( upper right part in this ﬁgure ) . After ultrasonography imaging of the injection site , the hypoechoic mass was selected , and 3D power Doppler infor - mation was measured by Vocal analysis . In the bottom right , the 3D reconstructed image of the gel is shown . This image is related to Matrigel impregnated with control Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) at day 7 . Red points that are seen in the gel are indicative of blood vessels . On the left side , the upper column is indicative of gray scale g ( 0 – 100 ) , and the lower column represents color value c ( 0 – 100 ) . Color images available online at www . liebertpub . com / scd INTERACTION OF STEM CELL WITH ENDOTHELIAL CELL 857 Statistical analysis Data on the angiogenesis scoring and on the Matrigel tube formation are expressed as mean – standard error ; other data are expressed as mean – standard deviation and were ana - lyzed using the SPSS package version 16 ( SPSS , Inc . ) . In our study , the data analyses between groups were performed via the one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) or Kruskal – Wallis test with a signiﬁcant level of 95 % . The results in any given group at different times were compared using the repeated - measure ANOVA test . Mean difference was sig - niﬁcant at P < 0 . 05 . In histograms , statistical difference be - tween the groups is shown by brackets with * P < 0 . 05 and * * P < 0 . 005 . Results Dynamics of angiogenesis in the coculture system of ECs with rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs Matrigel tube formation assay was employed to evaluate the effects of coculture on tube formation . First , the tube formation capability of each cell was assessed using mono - culture systems , in which rMSCs GFP + / + , rSCs GFP + / + , and rCMs GFP + / + were individually seeded onto Matrigel - coated wells : the rCMs , rMSCs , and rSCs formed cellular aggregates with no evidence of budding or elongation in Matrigel monoculture systems ( Fig . 2 ) . Aggregates were larger and less frequent for rCMs than those for the rMSCs or the rSCs ( Fig . 2 ) . For cocultures , the ECs were labeled with Cell - Tracker TM CM Dil , and mixed with the rMSCs GFP + / + , rSCs GFP + / + , rCMs GFP + / + , or their combination . Within 48h , cells started to mix and elongate . After a week , the tubular - like structures and networks were sufﬁciently large , posses - sing lumens lined with ECs . Interestingly , co - alignment of the rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs with the ECs was seen in the coculture systems ( Fig . 3A – D ) . The rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs elongated along the tubules , although aggregated cells were occasionally present . Moreover , compared to the EC monoculture , the formation of vascular - like networks was enhanced in the coculture conditions . The rMSC - EC cocul - ture exhibited a signiﬁcantly improved angiogenesis scoring ( P = 0 . 026 ) , and increased tube length and tube area ( P = 0 . 001 ) compared to the EC monoculture ( Fig . 4A – C ) . Speciﬁcally , in the rMSC - EC coculture , GFP - positive tip cells , sometimes with anastomosis , were discernible , indicating that the rMSCs contributed to sprouting angiogenesis ( Fig . 3C ) . In the combined cell culture , dual - ﬂuorescent cells , which appeared yellow , were detected ( Fig . 3D ) ; this could be due to vesicle trafﬁcking between the adjacent ECs and GFP + cells [ 1 ] . Promotion of angiogenesis by cell - derived CM The paracrine interaction between the rMSCs , rSCs and rCMs with ECs was evaluated by assessing endothelial tube formation on Matrigel , where the ECs were incubated with the rMSCs CM , rSCs CM , rCMs CM , and cocktail CM for 7 days . Statistical analysis revealed no signiﬁcant effect of the rCM - derived CM on the ECs angiogenesis scoring , whereas the rMSCs , rSCs and the cocktail CM signiﬁcantly increased angiogenesis scoring , tube length and tube area compared to the ECs incubated with DMEM alone ( Fig . 5A – C ) . The rMSC - derived CM showed a higher colony scoring index than the rSC - derived CM ( P = 0 . 001 ) . In addition , tube length increased signiﬁcantly by the rMSC - derived CM when compared with the rCMs derived CM , cocktail CM or ECs incubated with DMEM alone ( P = 0 . 003 , P = 0 . 018 , and P = 0 . 000 respectively ) . The area of tube formation by the ECs incubated with the rMSC - and rSC - derived CM was also larger than that by the ECs incubated with the rCM - derived FIG . 2 . Monoculture sys - tems . Phase - contrast and ﬂuorescent micrographs of rSCs GFP + / + , rCMs GFP + / + , and rMSCs GFP + / + , which were separately cultured on Ma - trigel . As is seen , these cells formed cellular aggregates , without capability to form tube - like vascular structures alone . Scale bars : 100 m m . rSCs , rat muscle - derived sat - ellite cells ; rCMs , rat neonatal cardiomyocytes ; rMSCs , rat marrow - derived mesenchy - mal stem cells . Color images available online at www . liebertpub . com / scd 858 RAHBARGHAZI ET AL . CM and ECs incubated with the DMEM alone . Taken to - gether , the paracrine stimulation of the rMSCs derived - CM on the ECs tube formation was more potent than that of the other cell - derived CM used in this study . The rCM - derived CM had no better effect than the ECs incubated with the DMEM alone . In the mixed cocktail CM , the angiogenesis scoring and tube formation were less than those in the rSC - and rMSC - derived CM probably due to the dilution of soluble angiogenic factors after mixing the CM from the 3 different cells . FIG . 3 . Representatives of tube formation by ECs CM - Dil + cocultured with rCMs GFP + / + , rSCs GFP + / + , rMSCs GFP + / + , or in combined cell culture ( A – D ) . In all cocultures , GFP - positive cells align along the red - ﬂuorescent - labeled ECs to promote vascular net - work formation . GFP - positive sprouting tip cells with a propensity for tube - like for - mation were seen promi - nently in the rMSC - EC coculture ( C ) . In the combined cell culture ( ECs – rMSCs – rSCs – rCMs ) , dual - labeled cells ( yellow ) are seen by dual - ﬂuorescence ﬁlter , in - dicating cellular crosstalk ( D ) . ECs , endothelial cells ; GFP , green ﬂuorescent pro - tein . Color images available online at www . liebertpub . com / scd FIG . 4 . Improvement in Matrigel angiogenesis in cocultures compared to EC monoculture . Coculture of rMSCs with ECs signiﬁcantly increased the angiogenesis scoring ( A ) , and Matrigel tube formation ( B , C ) . Data are expressed as mean – standard error . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 005 . INTERACTION OF STEM CELL WITH ENDOTHELIAL CELL 859 Chemotactic potency of CM toward ECs Next , the effect of cell - derived CM on ECs cell migration was examined . The results showed that the rMSC - derived CM profoundly stimulated the ECs chemotaxis compared to the rCM - derived CM and DMEM , indicating that the rMSC - derived CM has the highest level of chemotactic soluble factors , which accelerate the ECs migration and invasion through the membrane ( Fig . 6 ) . Also , the rSC - derived CM as well as the cocktail CM promoted the ECs migration , which was signiﬁcantly higher than that of control DMEM ( P = 0 . 013 and P = 0 . 035 respectively ) . In contrast , the rCM - derived CM had no chemotactic effect on the ECs ( Fig . 6 ) . In vivo angiogenesis induced by CM in Matrigel plug To further conﬁrm the angiogenic potency of the cell - derived CM used in this study , in vivo angiogenesis assay was performed by mixing an equal amount of Matrigel with each CM and injecting the mixture subcutaneously into rats ( Supplementary Fig . S1 ) . On the third post - injecting day , some evidence of blood ﬂow was observed at the peripheral aspect of the Matrigel plug ( Fig . 7A – D ; Supplementary Mo - vies M1 – M5 available in Supplementary Methods ) . Cell - derived CM had a positive effect on the VI and VFI indices over time . The repeated measures ANOVA showed no signiﬁcant difference between the groups at days 0 and 3 . Data analysis revealed that VFI and VI were not statistically different from day 0 to 7 in the control group ( P = 0 . 06 ) , whereas the rMSC - derived CM substantially increased the VI index ( P = 0 . 006 ) as well as the VFI index ( P = 0 . 013 ) compared to the control group . In the rMSC - derived CM group , both VFI and VI indices were signiﬁcantly different between day 0 and 7 ( P = 0 . 013 for VFI 0 – 7 , and P = 0 . 01 for VI 0 – 7 ) . Also , in the rats that were injected with Matrigel impregnated with the rSC - derived CM , both indices signiﬁcantly increased from day 0 to 7 [ VFI 0 – 7 ( P = 0 . 001 ) , VI 0 – 7 ( P = 0 . 000 ) ] . In addition , in this group , the indices were substantially higher than those of the control group at day 7 ( P = 0 . 001 for VI , and P = 0 . 004 for VFI ) . The rCMs secretome also improved the indices by day 7 [ VFI 0 – 7 ( P = 0 . 012 ) , VI 0 – 7 ( P = 0 . 011 ) ] , although the indices were not statistically different when compared with those of the control group ( Fig . 7E , F ) . FIG . 6 . Effect of cell - derived CM on EC migration . The rMSC - derived CM signiﬁcantly enhanced EC migration . Data are mean – standard deviation of the number of mi - grated cells per high - power ﬁeld ( HPF ) . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 005 . FIG . 5 . Angiogenesis scoring ( A , colony scoring per 25 co - lonies ) and tube formation ( B , tube length [ m m ] ) ; ( C tube area [ pixel 2 ] ) on Matrigel by ECs in - cubated with the cell CM . The rMSC - derived CM improved angiogenesis tube formation on Matrigel . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 005 . CM , conditioned media . 860 RAHBARGHAZI ET AL . Seven days post injection , the rats were sacriﬁced and the Matrigel plugs were removed . On histological review , a ro - bust network of new , functional blood vessels with in - traluminal erythrocytes had formed in the groups that had received Matrigel with the rMSC - derived CM and with the rSC - derived CM ( Fig . 8A – H ) . A diffuse cellular inﬁltration , including a heterogeneous population of macrophages , lymphocytes and plasma cells , was seen in all plugs ( Fig . 8A – H ) , which is consistent with a previous study that used Matrigel in rats [ 18 ] . Statistical analysis proved the rMSCs CM to be the most potent to increase capillary and arteriolar density , but this CM had less effect on myoﬁbroblast recruitment into the Matrigel plugs ( Fig . 8I – K ) . While the rCM - derived CM had a comparable effect on the in vivo angiogenesis process as did the control DMEM , the rSC - de - rived CM increased the numbers of vWF - positive capillary ECs , a - SMA - positive arterioles and myoﬁbroblasts ( Fig . 8I – K ) . Secretion of pro - angiogenic factors in cell - derived CM EC tube formation is under the control of angiogenic soluble factors as well as direct cell – cell contact [ 1 ] . We examined the secretion of angiogenic soluble factors in the rMSC - , rSC - and rCM - derived CM via western blotting analysis . Western blotting conﬁrmed the paracrine role of these cells in angiogenesis dynamics . VEGF was detected to be secreted into all of the 3 CM , with a strong immunore - active band in the rMSCs CM ( Fig . 9A ) . However , the ex - pression of VEGF in the rCM - derived CM was barely detectable . Basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ( bFGF ) was also found in both the rMSC - and rSCs derived CM ( Fig . 9B ) . Tie2 was only detected in the harvested rMSC - derived CM ( Fig . 9C ) . Soluble fragment of Tie2 ( sTie2 ) , which has been reported in human , is produced from proteolytic cleavage and shedding of Tie2 , which was demonstrated to be in - duced by VEGF [ 19 ] . Here , we found that Tie2 is also shed from rat MSCs . In addition , stromal derived factor - 1 alpha ( SDF - 1 a ) was detected in the rMSC - derived CM ( Fig . 9D ) . None of the CM analyzed showed immunoreactive bands for Ang1 or angiopoietin 2 ( Ang2 ) . Discussion Stem cells are heralded as a source of great promise for augmenting angiogenesis during ischemia . Nonetheless , there is a controversy over their role in the angiogenesis process . This study was conducted to assess the juxtacrine interaction between rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs with ECs un - dergoing tube formation angiogenesis , and to assess the paracrine effects of these cells on in vitro and in vivo an - giogenesis . While monocultured rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs FIG . 7 . Representatives of the 3D views of Matrigel plugs by Vocal (cid:4) analysis in the 4 groups at day 3 ( left column ) and day 7 ( right column ) . [ ( A ) Control DMEM ; ( B ) rCM - derived CM ; ( C ) rSC - derived CM ; and ( D ) rMSC - derived CM ] . Blood vessels started to develop from the periphery of the Matrigel plug with more vascular density in the ventral aspect of the plug . In the control group , the vascular density is less than that of the other groups . The highest vascular density is seen in the rMSC - and rSC - derived CM groups . Vessel growth into Matrigel was analyzed by ultrasonography imaging and presented as vascu - larization index ( VI ) ( E ) and vascularization ﬂow index ( VFI ) ( F ) . The rMSC - and rSC - derived CM substantially improved both the VI and VFI indices 7 days postinjection of Matrigel containing CM ( * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 005 ) . INTERACTION OF STEM CELL WITH ENDOTHELIAL CELL 861 were not qualiﬁed for tube formation angiogenesis on Ma - trigel , their cocultures with the ECs caused these cells to be aligned along the ECs during angiogenesis dynamics . The best effect was from the rMSCs : not only signiﬁcantly pro - moted tube formation by the ECs , but also organized to form tube - like spatial structures with sprouting tip cells . It has been suggested that EC crosstalk with surrounding stem cells and cell transdifferentiation are involved in the regu - lation of new blood vessel formation [ 20 ] . Speciﬁcally , MSCs play an active role in cellular processes involved in the formation and stabilization of tubular arrays by ECs [ 15 , 21 ] . In addition , MSCs have the potential to exhibit an endothe - lial phenotype under speciﬁc conditions with a capability for transdifferentiation into endothelial - like cells [ 22 , 23 ] . In this study , we showed through the coculture system that inter - action of rMSCs with ECs is more potent than that of rSCs or rCMs , which indicates the importance of these cells for an - giogenesis stem cell therapy . In contrast with the effects of MSCs observed in this study , Menge et al . recently reported that human MSCs exert stabilizing effects on ECs and inhibit FIG . 8 . The effect of cell - derived CM on the development of a - SMA - positive arterioles , vWF - positive capillary ECs , and recruitment of myoﬁbroblasts in the Matrigel plugs ( A – K ) . The rMSC - derived CM enhanced arteriolar development in the Matrigel plug ( D , I ) . Myoﬁbroblasts recruitment ( arrows ) was most prominent in the rSC - derived CM group ( C , J ) . Capillary density was markedly augmented in the Matrigels impregnated with the rSC - ( G , K ) as well as rMSC - derived CM ( H , K ) . Mononuclear cell inﬁltration is noticeable in the Matrigels containing the rCM - derived CM ( B , F ) . ( A , E ) Refer to control DMEM ( * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 005 ) . a - SMA , alpha - smooth muscle actin ; vWF , von Willebrand factor . Color images available online at www . liebertpub . com / scd FIG . 9 . Western blot analysis for angiogenic paracrine factors in cell - derived CM . VEGF was found in the CM from the rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs with different levels . The highest VEGF level was detected in the rMSC - derived CM and the lowest level in the rCM - derived CM ( A ) . bFGF was detected in the rSC - and rMSC - derived CM ( B ) . sTie2 was present only in the rMSC - derived CM with no shedding into the CM of rSCs and rCMs ( C ) . The presence of SDF - 1 a was also detected only in the CM secreted by the rMSCs ( D ) . DMEM was used as negative control . Data are from 3 independent experiments . VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor ; bFGF , basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ; sTie2 , soluble fragment of Tie2 ; SDF - 1 a , stromal - derived factor - 1 - alpha . 862 RAHBARGHAZI ET AL . endothelial angiogenesis via cell – cell contact [ 24 ] . The con - verse effects of MSCs on ECs in their study compared with our results can partially be due to the xenogeneic coculturing system that we employed in our study . Indeed , allogeneic and xenogeneic cells may employ different mechanisms when encountered with similar biological phenomena [ 25 ] . Dual - ﬂuorescent cells seen in the combined cell culture fur - ther afﬁrmed the cell - to - cell communication between adja - cent , cocultured cells , which may partially be mediated by microvesicles that are able to transfer a number of proteins , RNAs , or microRNAs between adjacent cells [ 26 – 28 ] . The juxtacrine interaction between rMSCs , rSCs , and rCMs with HUVECs might also be mediated via gap - junctions that were previously demonstrated to be formed between adjacent cells in cocultures [ 29 – 32 ] ; be that as it may , in a recent study where MSCs were cocultured with nucleus pulposus cells , the authors found that the bidirectional intercellular transfer of membrane - bound microvesicles is the predominant mechanism of interaction between cells , and that other phenomena such as gap - junctional communication were detectable only in a small proportion of cells [ 33 ] . We also found that the MSC - derived CM had a greater angiogenic potential than the CM derived from the other cells . Chiming in with our ﬁndings , previous studies dem - onstrated that MSC - derived CM induced tube formation and sprouting of ECs , and could affect EC survival in vitro [ 15 , 34 , 35 ] . Speciﬁc factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor A ( VEGF - A ) , hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , insulin - like growth factor 1 ( IGF - 1 ) , and angiopoietins were reported to be upregulated in serum - deprived MSCs [ 22 ] . Here , we found a signiﬁcant level of VEGF , bFGF , and SDF - 1 a secreted into the CM of the rMSCs ; nonetheless , immune blotting of the CM showed neither Ang1 nor Ang2 . Shedding of Tie2 into the rMSC - derived CM might be induced by a high level of VEGF in the CM . Inhibiting the proteolytic shedding of Tie2 through abrogation of VEGF signaling in uterine microvascular ECs has been suggested as an under - lying cause of the failure of vascular remodeling in human pre - eclamptic pregnancies [ 36 ] . In the present study , the rMSC - derived CM increased the arteriolar density in Matrigel plug in vivo . Using ultraso - nography analysis , we demonstrated that the new blood vessels were adequately functional to increase both the VI and VFI indices . VEGF as well as SDF - 1 a in the CM might also attract the endothelial progenitor cells ( EPCs ) circulating in peripheral blood . EPCs express VEGF receptors ; hence , local VEGF plays a part in EPCs recruitment and subsequent for - mation of functional vessels [ 37 ] . Moreover , the combination of SDF - 1 a and VEGF can enhance EPC - mediated angiogenesis [ 38 ] . Despite the superior effects of rMSC - derived CM for angiogenesis induction in vivo , the population of myoﬁbro - blasts was inferior in the Matrigel plugs impregnated by rMSC - derived CM compared to the Matrigel plugs containing rSC - and rCM - derived CM . It seems that there are speciﬁc soluble factors that modulate myoﬁbroblasts invasion . A previous study showed an inhibitory wound - healing effect of MSC - derived CM on corneal stromal ﬁbroblasts in vitro [ 39 ] . Moreover , depending on concentration and release kinetics , MSCs exert inhibitory effects on inﬂammation , pathological remodeling , or scar formation [ 40 ] . An active , paracrine role of rSCs on in vitro and in vivo angiogenesis was also documented in this study . The stim - ulatory effect of the stem cell - derived CM on endothelial tube - like formation in vitro and arteriolar development in vivo conﬁrmed the importance of paracrine signaling . It has been reported that a number of angiogenic inducers , including FGF , VEGF , IGF , and HGF , are produced by SCs [ 8 ] . Also , selected members of metalloproteases and extra - cellular matrix - degrading enzymes are secreted by human muscle SCs , which may participate in remodeling and in myogenesis [ 41 ] . In contrast to the above stem cells , the rCMs had no signiﬁcant paracrine or juxtacrine effects during an - giogenic dynamics . In conclusion , this study demonstrated the paracrine and juxtacrine interaction between adult stem cells and ECs in angiogenesis dynamics . We showed that stem cells are ac - tively and robustly involved in angiogenic processes . Future studies for understanding mechanisms mediating cell - to - cell communication between stem cells and ECs will provide new opportunities to interfere in the dynamics of angio - genesis for tissue engineering . Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank Mrs . L . Haghighi for her technical assistance and Dr . Mohseni , Mrs . M . Zakipour , and Mr . V . Siavashi for their help in this study . This study was supported by a grant from the University of Tehran , and a research grant ( No . 89002374 ) from the Iran National Science Foundation ( INSF ) . Author Disclosure Statement No competing ﬁnancial interests exist . References 1 . Aguirre A , J Planell and E Engel . ( 2010 ) . Dynamics of bone marrow - derived endothelial progenitor cell / mesenchymal stem cell interaction in co - culture and its implications in angiogenesis . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 400 : 284 – 291 . 2 . Wiley DM , J - D Kim , J Hao , CC Hong , VL Bautch and S - W Jin . ( 2011 ) . Distinct signalling pathways regulate sprouting angiogenesis from the dorsal aorta and the axial vein . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 686 – 692 . 3 . Folkman J . ( 1985 ) . Tumor angiogenesis . Adv Cancer Res 43 : 175 – 203 . 4 . Herbert SP and DYR Stainier . ( 2011 ) . Molecular control of endothelial cell behaviour during blood vessel morphogen - esis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 : 551 – 564 . 5 . Carmeliet P and RK Jain . ( 2011 ) . Molecular mechanisms and clinical applications of angiogenesis . Nature 473 : 298 – 307 . 6 . Estrada R , N Li , H Sarojini , J An , M - J Lee and E Wang . ( 2009 ) . Secretome from mesenchymal stem cells induces angiogenesis via Cyr61 . J Cell Physiol 219 : 563 – 571 . 7 . Zacharek A , J Chen , X Cui , A Li , Y Li , C Roberts , Y Feng , Q Gao and M Chopp . ( 2007 ) . Angiopoietin1 / Tie2 and VEGF / Flk1 induced by MSC treatment ampliﬁes angiogenesis and vascular stabilization after stroke . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27 : 1684 – 1691 . 8 . Nishimori M , T Matsumoto , S Ota , S Kopf , Y Mifune , C Harner , M Ochi , FH Fu and J Huard . ( 2012 ) . Role of angio - genesis after muscle derived stem cell transplantation in injured medial collateral ligament . J Orthop Res 30 : 627 – 633 . 9 . Rhoads RP , RM Johnson , CR Rathbone , X Liu , C Temm - Grove , SM Sheehan , JB Hoying and RE Allen . ( 2009 ) . Sa - tellite cell - mediated angiogenesis in vitro coincides with a INTERACTION OF STEM CELL WITH ENDOTHELIAL CELL 863 functional hypoxia - inducible factor pathway . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 296 : C1321 – C1328 . 10 . Hakamata Y , K Tahara , H Uchida , Y Sakuma , M Nakamura , A Kume , T Murakami , M Takahashi , R Takahashi , et al . ( 2001 ) . Green ﬂuorescent protein - transgenic rat : a tool for organ transplantation research . Biochem Biophys Res Com - mun 286 : 779 – 785 . 11 . Son BR , LA Marquez - Curtis , M Kucia , M Wysoczynski , AR Turner , J Ratajczak , MZ Ratajczak and A Janowska - Wiec - zorek . ( 2006 ) . Migration of bone marrow and cord blood mesenchymal stem cells in vitro is regulated by stromal - derived factor - 1 - CXCR4 and hepatocyte growth factor - c - met axes and involves matrix metalloproteinases . Stem Cells 24 : 1254 – 1264 . 12 . Kinnaird T , E Stabile , MS Burnett , CW Lee , S Barr , S Fuchs and SE Epstein . ( 2004 ) . Marrow - derived stromal cells ex - press genes encoding a broad spectrum of arteriogenic cy - tokines and promote in vitro and in vivo arteriogenesis through paracrine mechanisms . Circ Res 94 : 678 – 685 . 13 . Beckert S , F Farrahi , RS Aslam , H Scheuenstuhl , A Ko¨ - nigsrainer , MZ Hussain and TK Hunt . ( 2006 ) . Lactate stim - ulates endothelial cell migration . Wound Repair Regen 14 : 321 – 324 . 14 . Potapova IA , GR Gaudette , PR Brink , RB Robinson , MR Rosen , IS Cohen and SV Doronin . ( 2007 ) . Mesenchymal stem cells support migration , extracellular matrix invasion , pro - liferation , and survival of endothelial cells in vitro . Stem Cells 25 : 1761 – 1768 . 15 . Sorrell JM , MA Baber and AI Caplan . ( 2009 ) . Inﬂuence of adult mesenchymal stem cells on in vitro vascular formation . Tissue Eng Part A 15 : 1751 – 1761 . 16 . Michaelis M , UR Michaelis , I Fleming , T Suhan , J Cinatl , RA Blaheta , K Hoffmann , R Kotchetkov , R Busse , H Nau and J Cinatl Jr . ( 2004 ) . Valproic acid inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo . Mol Pharmacol 65 : 520 – 527 . 17 . Fathi E , SM Nassiri , N Atyabi , SH Ahmadi , M Imani , R Farahzadi , S Rabbani , S Akhlaghpour , M Sahebjam and M Taheri . ( 2012 ) . Induction of angiogenesis via topical delivery of basic - ﬁbroblast growth factor from polyvinyl alcohol – dextran blend hydrogel in an ovine model of acute myo - cardial infarction . J Tissue Eng Regen Med [ Epub ahead of print ] ; DOI : 10 . 1002 / term . 1460 . 18 . Stieger SM , SH Bloch , O Foreman , ER Wisner , KW Ferrara and PA Dayton . ( 2006 ) . Ultrasound assessment of angio - genesis in a matrigel model in rats . Ultrasound Med Biol 32 : 673 – 681 . 19 . Findley CM , MJ Cudmore , A Ahmed and CD Kontos . ( 2007 ) . VEGF induces Tie2 shedding via a phosphoinositide 3 - kinase / Akt dependent pathway to modulate Tie2 signal - ing . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27 : 2619 – 2626 . 20 . Takakura N . ( 2011 ) . Role of intimate interactions between endothelial cells and the surrounding accessory cells in the maturation of blood vessels . J Thromb Haemost 9 : 144 – 150 . 21 . Duffy GP , T Ahsan , T O’Brien , F Barry and RM Nerem . ( 2009 ) . Bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells pro - mote angiogenic processes in a time - and dose - dependent manner in vitro . Tissue Eng Part A 15 : 2459 – 2470 . 22 . Oskowitz A , H McFerrin , M Gutschow , ML Carter and R Pochampally . ( 2011 ) . Serum - deprived human multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) are highly angiogenic . Stem Cell Res 6 : 215 – 225 . 23 . Nassiri SM , Z Khaki , M Soleimani , SH Ahmadi , I Jahanzad , S Rabbani , M Sahebjam , FA Ardalan and MS Fathollahi . ( 2007 ) . The similar effect of transplantation of marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells with or without prior dif - ferentiation induction in experimental myocardial infarction . J Biomed Sci 14 : 745 – 755 . 24 . Menge T , M Gerber , K Wataha , W Reid , S Guha , CS Cox Jr . , P Dash , MS Reitz Jr . , AY Khakoo and S Pati . ( 2012 ) . Human mesenchymal stem cells inhibit endothelial proliferation and angiogenesis via cell – cell contact through modulation of the VE - cadherin / b - catenin signaling pathway . Stem Cells Dev [ Epub ahead of print ] ; DOI : 10 . 1089 / scd . 2012 . 0165 . 25 . Schiltz PM , GJ Lee , JG Zhang , N Hoa , HT Wepsic , RO Dillman and MR Jadus . ( 2007 ) . Human allogeneic and mu - rine xenogeneic dendritic cells are cytotoxic to human tumor cells via two distinct pathways . Cancer Biother Radiopharm 22 : 672 – 683 . 26 . Hergenreider E , S Heydt , K Treguer , T Boettger , AJG Hor - revoets , AM Zeiher , MP Scheffer , AS Frangakis , X Yin , et al . ( 2012 ) . Atheroprotective communication between endothe - lial cells and smooth muscle cells through miRNAs . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 249 – 256 . 27 . Aliotta JM , M Pereira , KW Johnson , N de Paz , MS Dooner , N Puente , C Ayala , K Brilliant , D Berz , et al . ( 2010 ) . Micro - vesicle entry into marrow cells mediates tissue - speciﬁc changes in mRNA by direct delivery of mRNA and induc - tion of transcription . Exp Hematol 38 : 233 – 245 . 28 . Simpson RJ , JWE Lim , RL Moritz and S Mathivanan . ( 2009 ) . Exosomes : proteomic insights and diagnostic potential . Ex - pert Rev Proteomics 6 : 267 – 283 . 29 . Villars F , B Guillotin , T Amedee , S Dutoya , L Bordenave , R Bareille and J Amedee . ( 2002 ) . Effect of HUVEC on human os - teoprogenitor cell differentiation needs heterotypic gap junction communication . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 : C775 – C785 . 30 . Badorff C , RP Brandes , R Popp , S Rupp , C Urbich , A Aicher , I Fleming , R Busse , AM Zeiher and S Dimmeler . ( 2003 ) . Transdifferentiation of blood - derived human adult endo - thelial progenitor cells into functionally active cardiomyo - cytes . Circulation 107 : 1024 – 1032 . 31 . Formigli L , F Francini , A Tani , R Squecco , D Nosi , L Polidori , S Nistri , L Chiappini , V Cesati and A Pacini . ( 2005 ) . Mor - phofunctional integration between skeletal myoblasts and adult cardiomyocytes in coculture is favored by direct cell - cell contacts and relaxin treatment . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 288 : C795 – C804 . 32 . Muller - Borer BJ , WE Cascio , GL Esch , HS Kim , WB Cole - man , JW Grisham , PAW Anderson and NN Malouf . ( 2007 ) . Mechanisms controlling the acquisition of a cardiac pheno - type by liver stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 3877 . 33 . Strassburg S , NW Hodson , PI Hill , SM Richardson and JA Hoyland . ( 2012 ) . Bi - directional exchange of membrane components occurs during co - culture of mesenchymal stem cells and nucleus pulposus cells . PLoS One 7 : e33739 . 34 . Wu Y , L Chen , PG Scott and EE Tredget . ( 2007 ) . Mesench - ymal stem cells enhance wound healing through differenti - ation and angiogenesis . Stem Cells 25 : 2648 – 2659 . 35 . Tille J - C and MS Pepper . ( 2002 ) . Mesenchymal cells poten - tiate vascular endothelial growth factor - induced angiogen - esis in vitro . Exp Cell Res 280 : 179 – 191 . 36 . Sung JF , X Fan , S Dhal , BK Dwyer , A Jafari , YY El - Sayed , ML Druzin and NR Nayak . ( 2011 ) . Decreased circulating soluble Tie2 levels in preeclampsia may result from inhibi - tion of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) signaling . J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96 : E1148 – E1152 . 37 . Li B , EE Sharpe , AB Maupin , AA Teleron , AL Pyle , P Carmeliet and PP Young . ( 2006 ) . VEGF and PlGF promote adult vasculogenesis by enhancing EPC recruitment and 864 RAHBARGHAZI ET AL . vessel formation at the site of tumor neovascularization . FASEB J 20 : 1495 – 1497 . 38 . Yu JX , XF Huang , WM Lv , CS Ye , XZ Peng , H Zhang , LB Xiao and SM Wang . ( 2009 ) . Combination of stromal - derived factor - 1 [ alpha ] and vascular endothelial growth factor gene - modiﬁed endothelial progenitor cells is more effective for ischemic neovascularization . J Vasc Surg 50 : 608 – 616 . 39 . Watson SL , H Marcal , M Sarris , N Di Girolamo , MTC Cor - oneo and D Wakeﬁeld . ( 2009 ) . The effect of mesenchymal stem cell conditioned media on corneal stromal ﬁbroblast wound healing activities . Br J Ophthalmol 94 : 1067 – 1073 . 40 . Ranganath SH , O Levy , MS Inamdar and JM Karp . ( 2012 ) . Harnessing the mesenchymal stem cell secretome for the treat - ment of cardiovascular disease . Cell Stem Cell 10 : 244 – 258 . 41 . Gue´rin CW and PC Holland . ( 1995 ) . Synthesis and secretion of matrix - degrading metalloproteases by human skeletal muscle satellite cells . Dev Dyn 202 : 91 – 99 . Address correspondence to : Dr . Seyed Mahdi Nassiri Department of Clinical Pathology Faculty of Veterinary Medicine University of Tehran Qareeb Street , Azadi Avenue P . O Box 14155 - 6453 Tehran , 1419963111 Iran E - mail : nasirim @ ut . ac . ir ; nasirim @ vetmed . ut . ac . ir Received for publication July 7 , 2012 Accepted after revision October 15 , 2012 Prepublished on Liebert Instant Online October 16 , 2012 INTERACTION OF STEM CELL WITH ENDOTHELIAL CELL 865