Perceptions of Expertise and Transactive Memory in Work Relationships Andrea B . Hollingshead University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign People involved in close interpersonal relationships often develop a transactive memory system – a division of cognitive labor with respect to the encoding , storage , and retrieval of information from different substantive domains . The present study examined transactive memory systems using a sample of clerical ofﬁce workers in a laboratory setting . It tested the general hypothesis that individual learning in work relationships is affected by perceptions of the relative expertise of coworkers . Participants were told that they would work on a task with a partner who had either similar or different work - related knowledge and job responsibilities . The ﬁndings supported the hypotheses that ( a ) people learn and recall more information in their own areas of expertise when their partner has different rather than similar work - related expertise ; and ( b ) this effect reverses for recall of information outside work - related expertise . Taken together , the data showed that transactive memory is a property of work relationships , not just romantic relationships , and that role - based expertise can serve as its basis . keywords expertise , groups , learning , transactive memory Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 2000 Vol 3 ( 3 ) 257 – 267 Much oftheworld’sworkisdonecollaboratively by groups , crews , staffs , committees , teams , and partnerships . In most collaborations , people are interdependent : they have a common purpose , they rely on one another for information , they make joint decisions , and those decisions have consequences for everyone involved ( Kelley & Thibaut , 1978 ) . Developingsolutionstocomplex problems , a critical part of many collaborations , involves gathering , exchanging , processing , and using information . Consequently , much group research now focuses on the functioning and effectiveness of work groups often from the per - spective of information processing systems ( Hinsz , Tindale , & Vollrath , 1997 ; Larson & Christensen , 1993 ; McGrath , 1997 ) . There are several current and important lines of group research that employ this perspective . For example , there is considerable evidence that groups and organizations exhibit processes parallel to those referred to as ‘learning’ when they occur for individuals . Work on group and organizational learning shows that a group can GPIR Copyright © 2000 SAGE Publications ( London , Thousand Oaks , CA and New Delhi ) [ 1368 - 4302 ( 200007 ) 3 : 3 ; 257 – 267 ; 011130 ] Author’s note Address correspondence to Dr . Andrea B . Hollingshead , Department of Psychology , University of Illinois , 603 E . Daniel St , Champaign , IL 61820 , USA [ email : hollings @ uiuc . edu ] at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from generate considerably more cognitive resources than any one of its members ( for a review , see Argote & McGrath , 1993 ) . Some researchers have suggested that group members share both encoding and retrieval processes in ways that suggest a ‘transactive’ or group memory ( Hollingshead , 1998d ; Moreland , 1999 ; Wegner , 1987 ) . This body of research shows that social systems , such as organizations , groups , and relationships , can affect how indi - viduals in those systems learn , store , and retrieve information . One important ﬁnding in the transactive memory literature is that learning in close relationships can be affected by each individ - ual’s perceptions of relative expertise : individ - uals tend to focus on learning information in their own areas of relative expertise , and they expect the other person in their relationships to do the same ( Hollingshead , 1998a ; Wegner , Erber , & Raymond , 1991 ) . This division of cog - nitive labor reduces the amount of information for which each person is responsible , yet pro - vides each person access to a larger pool of information across domains . When one person needs information in the other’s area of expert - ise , he or she can simply ask the other person rather than spend time and energy learning that information . When members’ beliefs about relative expertise are accurate , groups make better decisions ( Henry , 1995 ; Littlepage , Robison , & Reddington , 1997 ; Littlepage & Silbiger , 1992 ) . The objective of the present study was to investigate how individual learning in work relationships might be affected by perceptions of the work - related expertise of coworkers . This study extends previous research that has exam - ined the development and use of transactive memory systems in romantic relationships and in artiﬁcial work groups ( Hollingshead , 1998a , 1998b , 1998d ; Liang , Moreland , & Argote , 1995 ; Moreland , 1999 ; Moreland , Argote , & Krishnan , 1996 ; Wegner et al . , 1991 ) . Expertise and learning in transactive memory systems Transactive memory is the specialized division of labor with respect to the encoding , storage , and retrieval of information from different sub - stantive domains that develops during the course of many relationships ( Wegner , 1987 , 1995 ) . Each member in the relationship becomes a specialist in some domains but not others ; and all members rely on each particular member to access information in appropriate domains . Members specialize in areas based on their relative expertise , skills , or experiences , formal assignments ( by a high status member ) , or negotiated agreements . Over time , members gain responsibility for the encoding , storage , and retrieval of information in different domains , and knowledge about this division of cognitive labor becomes shared among mem - bers . Thus , the transactive memory system becomes more efﬁcient over time , i . e . knowl - edge becomes more differentiated and less redundant among individuals in the system . The way the information is distributed in a relationship – which person is responsible for acquiring and encoding information of various sorts – is part of the transactive memory system . If that system is to function effectively , then each person needs an accurate representation of it , so he or she knows who to ask for needed information . The extent to which people in relationships share expectations about who has ( or is expected to have ) various information can affect coordination , communication , and task performance ( Hollingshead , 1998a , 1998b , 1998c , 1998d ; Wegner et al . , 1991 ; Wittenbaum , Stasser , & Merry , 1996 ; Wittenbaum , Vaughan , & Stasser , 1998 ) . Members can learn what others know or what others should know informally or more for - mally . Members can learn informally who is the relative expert across knowledge domains through shared experiences and conversations with one another ( Hollingshead , 1998b ; Wegner , 1987 ) . Wegner et al . ( 1991 ) provided the ﬁrst empirical evidence that people in close relationships , who have many shared experi - ences and conversations , have an implicit struc - ture for assigning responsibility for learning new information based on their shared concep - tion of each partner’s expertise . Dyads com - posed of either dating couples or strangers of Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 3 ( 3 ) 258 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from the opposite sex learned and later recalled words in different knowledge categories with - out communicating . Dating couples agreed more about the relative expertise of each part - ner than did strangers . They also recalled more words collectively across knowledge categories than did dyads of strangers , and showed less overlap in their individual recall . Hollingshead ( 1998a , 1998d ) extended that research by examining the role of communi - cation in the development and implementation of transactive memory systems . Both studies employed a similar experimental paradigm as Wegner et al . ( 1991 ) . Hollingshead ( 1998a ) replicated the ﬁndings of Wegner et al . ( 1991 ) : dating couples had more shared agreement about each person’s relative expertise and recalled more words collectively than did strangers . However , when strangers were able to communicate at learning , they assigned responsibility for different knowledge cat - egories to each individual explicitly and thus were able to compensate for the dating couples’ transactive memory systems . Hollingshead ( 1998d ) showed that dating couples retrieved and used knowledge more effectively than did strangers , because they were better able to ﬁgure out which partner was correct in situ - ations when only one partner knew the correct answer . Process analyses indicated that dating couples made fewer references and assertions about their individual knowledge than did strangers , presumably because the dating couples already knew about one another’s rela - tive expertise . Moreland , Argote , Liang and Krishnan moved empirical research on transactive memory from personal relationships to groups . They conducted a series of laboratory experi - ments that examined the impact of different individual and group training methods on the development of transactive memory and per - formance in artiﬁcial work groups ( Liang et al . , 1995 ; Moreland , 1999 ; Moreland et al . , 1996 , 1998 ) . The studies showed that work groups performed better when their members were trained together on a task and that shared knowledge about the abilities , skills , and knowl - edge of each member ( i . e . the development of a transactive memory system ) accounted for the improved performance in the group training condition . In addition , members who trained in groups had more complex , accurate , and shared beliefs about the distribution of skills among members and were more likely to view one another as unique individuals , each with special skills that others might not possess . This research also supports the notion that transac - tive memory systems develop informally as members learn more about one another’s knowledge , expertise , and skills and such learn - ing can lead to more effective group perform - ance . In the context of work relationships , group members can also learn what others know or should know more explicitly through instruc - tion from other people , such as a supervisor , or from procedures in the form of documents , manuals , or other codiﬁed reference materials . Some academic departments , for example , dis - tribute an ofﬁce procedures handbook to all staff , faculty , and graduate students at the start of every academic year . The ﬁrst section of these handbooks typically are titled ‘Who To See About What’ . The speciﬁc duties of each member of the ofﬁce staff are provided , so that faculty and students know which staff members to ask for different types of information . Ofﬁce staff members’ responsibility for knowing infor - mation is explicitly assigned on the basis of their job descriptions . Research with ad hoc groups also supports the idea that when group members are instructed about other members’ expertise , they use information more effectively . Stasser , Stewart , and Wittenbaum ( 1995 ) found that when previously unacquainted groups were explicitly told by an experimenter about each member’s speciﬁc area of expertise , they were more likely to discuss individually held infor - mation and made better decisions . Henry ( 1995 ) observed that when groups were instructed to determine their most accurate member , they performed better than when they were not given such instructions . The present study extends previous research by investigating how instructions about other members’ work - related expertise might affect Hollingshead perceptions of expertise in work relationships 259 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from individual learning in the context of work relationships . Even with no social interaction , perceptions of one’s own and other members’ areas of expertise can affect how individuals decide what information to learn and remem - ber ( cf . Hollingshead , 1998a ; Wegner et al . , 1991 ) . When responsibility for different areas of work - related knowledge are distributed among and known to individuals in a transac - tive memory system , it should be easy for each member to know what information to learn . Each member should focus on learning infor - mation in his or her own unique areas of expertise and expect other members to do the same . Such specialization will increase the group’s access to information and reduce the redundancy of information among members . However , individuals may be motivated to learn information outside their areas of work - related expertise when they perceive that others have similar work - related knowledge . This occurs because individuals anticipate that others will learn information in their common areas of expertise , so they are motivated to max - imize the group’s access to information , save cognitive labor , and reduce redundancy among individuals . These considerations led to the following hypotheses . Hypothesis 1 : Individuals will learn and recall more information in their own areas of work - related expertise when they perceive that others have different rather than similar expertise . Hypothesis 2 : Individuals will learn and recall more information outside their areas of work - related expertise when they perceive that others have similar rather than different expertise . These hypotheses suggest that perceptions of relative expertise affect the degree to which individuals learn and recall information in or outside their areas of expertise . It is also poss - ible that perceptions of relative expertise affect how much individuals recall and how many errors they make during recall . There is evi - dence that it is easier to learn and to recall fam - iliar than unfamiliar information ( Hall , 1954 ) . Information in one’s own area of expertise is likely to be more familiar than information in another area of expertise . Learning infor - mation outside one’s area of expertise that is difﬁcult or unfamiliar may require more cogni - tive resources . Thus , learning outside one’s areas of expertise may lower total recall , and increase intrusion errors . These considerations led to the following hypotheses : Hypothesis 3a : Individuals will learn and recall fewer words when they perceive that their part - ner has similar rather than different work - related expertise . Hypothesis 3b : Individuals will make more intrusion errors when they perceive that their partner has similar rather than different work - related expertise . Because this is the ﬁrst study to directly inves - tigate how perceptions of coworkers’ expertise affect how individuals learn work - related knowl - edge , special care was taken to control variables that might have an impact on learning pro - cesses among coworkers . The experimental par - adigm was similar to that of Wegner et al . ( 1991 ) and Hollingshead ( 1998a ) . Clerical workers from ofﬁce staffs memorized words in different work - related knowledge categories with a partner . This task was chosen because it was possible to examine the relation between reported expertise and learning in categories of reported expertise . To isolate the impact of per - ceptions of relative expertise and to control for the nature of participants’ relationships with their partners , participants were assigned a partner who had skills and knowledge similar to those of their coworkers but who was not actu - ally a coworker . Participants were told that their partner was from an ofﬁce staff in a different department and had either similar or different work - related expertise . The scoring and incen - tive structure were designed to make partici - pants interdependent , as they might be in work relationships . Method Participants Forty - four ofﬁce staff members from 24 aca - demic departments at the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign participated in the study . This population was chosen for several reasons . The demographic composition of ofﬁce staffs is Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 3 ( 3 ) 260 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from similar across departments – most staff employees are women with a high school or associate degree . The duties performed by ofﬁce staffs are similar across departments , and they involve both individual and group tasks such as photocopying , typing , answering phones , mailing letters and manuscripts , sched - uling rooms , recording student grades , manag - ing department ﬁnances , and the like . The responsibilities associated with various job titles do not vary much across departments , so it was possible to develop one set of stimulus materials appropriate for all participants . All participants had the job titles of secretary , clerk , or administrative assistant and were from departments that varied between 3 and 12 staff members . The University Student / Staff direc - tory was used to identify potential participants , and a letter was sent that brieﬂy described the purposes of the study , listed the dates and times of the study , and the compensation for partici - pation ( US $ 10 for 30 minutes ) . Procedure The study was run in two large classrooms on the University of Illinois campus during the lunch hour on four consecutive days . Between 10 and 12 participants attended each session . The sessions began by explaining that the purpose of the study was to examine how people exchange information in work relation - ships . Participants were randomly assigned to one of two partner conditions for the word memorization task . The experimenter told par - ticipants that they would work on a task with a staff member from another department , but that they would not meet or interact with their partners . In the similar partner condition , the experimenter explained that they would be matched with someone who was most similar to them in terms of their work - related expertise . In the different partner condition , the experi - menter explained that they would be matched with someone who was most different from them in terms of their work - related expertise . At that point , participants completed a ‘Partner Match’ form , which they were told would be used to help select their partner . The Partner Match form consisted of two par - allel columns listing the 10 categories of the memorization task – one for their own areas of expertise and one for their partner’s areas of expertise . At the top of the left column , a head - ing included the participant’s experiment ID number ( which appeared on all materials ) and the words : ‘Your areas of expertise’ . At the top of the right column , a heading included a blank space for their partner’s experiment ID and the words : ‘Your partner’s areas of expertise’ . Participants were asked to circle all categories representing their areas of work - related expert - ise under the column that said ‘Your areas of expertise’ . In the similar partner condition , the experimenter reiterated to participants that they would be matched with the person in the study who was most similar to them based on work - related expertise . To help match them with partners , participants were asked to circle the same categories for their partners that they circled for themselves under the column that said ‘Your partner’s areas of expertise’ . In the different partner condition , the exper - imenter reiterated to participants that they would be matched with the person in the study who was most different from them based on work - related expertise . To help match them with partners , participants were asked to circle all categories that they did not circle for them - selves under the column that said ‘Your part - ner’s areas of expertise’ . The experimenter walked around to make sure that all partici - pants circled the appropriate categories for their partners based on these conditions . Afterward , the experimenter reminded partici - pants that their partners would be chosen based on the areas they circled on the Partner Match sheet , and that their ID numbers would be used so that neither the researchers nor their part - ners would know their identities when the part - ners were selected . The participants did not seem at all confused or suspicious regarding this manipulation . Next , participants were given a word list and had three minutes to learn the words on that list . To reduce any anxiety that participants might have about learning a large number of words in a short period of time , the experi - menter stressed that the task was not an intelli - Hollingshead perceptions of expertise in work relationships 261 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from gence test , and that researchers were more interested in which words , rather than how many words , the participants learned with their partners . Participants had four minutes to recall and write the words on a sheet that presented the 10 category labels in the same location as on the word list . ( Pilot testing indicated that four minutes was ample time to recall words . ) At the end of the experiment , participants completed a brief survey that asked closed - ended questions about the categories of words they had tried to learn and the strategy they had used to learn them . Finally , the participants were thanked , paid , and debriefed . Task The word memorization task required partici - pants ( with their partner ) to learn as many work - related words as possible in three minutes . There were eight words in each of the 10 different work - related categories . The words and the category labelsappearedonthewordlist . Thework - related categories and words were generated and tested in a pilot study conducted with ofﬁce staff mem - bers from two departments who did not partici - pate in the study . The categories and word list are provided in the Appendix . Examples of words in each of the categories include : ordering desk copies ( ‘publisher’ ) ; ofﬁce supplies ( ‘letter - head’ ) ; accounting ( ‘invoice’ ) ; computers ( ‘modem’ ) ; instructional resources ( ‘over - head’ ) ; mailing ( ‘parcel’ ) ; word processing ( ‘format’ ) ; photocopying ( ‘collate’ ) ; inventory ( ‘vendor’ ) ; andgradesandenrollment ( ‘roster’ ) . The scoring was described to the participants as follows : the words that each participant cor - rectly remembered would be pooled with the words that their partner correctly remembered and a bonus of US $ 20 would be awarded to the pair that remembered the most words . 1 Dyads would receive one point for every word cor - rectly recalled from the list regardless of whether one or both partners recalled it . In other words , no additional points would be given for words correctly recalled by both part - ners . Thus , the members of each pair were interdependent and there was an incentive for each person to learn words that his or her part - ner would not learn . The scoring was explained to the participants several times : before the word list was given , after learning and before the recall phase , and after the recall phase . The experimenter also explained that their partners would receive the same instructions . In other words , both of the staff members in each pair knew that they would perform the task with a similar or a dissimilar other . Results Recall Total words correctly recalled from the list served as the measure of recall . Misspelled words were counted as correct . A one - way analy - sis of variance was conducted on total recall with partner ( similar vs . different ) as a between - participants factor . The main effect of partner on recall was not statistically signiﬁcant ( M (cid:2) 15 . 05 , SD (cid:2) 4 . 50 ) ( F ( 1 , 41 ) (cid:2) 1 . 14 , ns ) . Contrary to hypothesis 3a , participants did not recall fewer words overall ( i . e . they did not make more errors of omission ) when they perceived that their partner had similar rather than dif - ferent areas of expertise . Total recall was divided into expert recall ( words recalled in participant’s own categories of expertise ) and non - expert recall ( words recalled in categories not indicated as partici - pant’s own expertise ) to test hypotheses 1 and 2 . To control for differences in the amount of expertise across participants , expert recall was divided by the number of categories in which the participant had indicated expertise . Non - expert recall was divided by the number of cat - egories that the participant did not indicate as areas of expertise . This established the mean number of words recalled per expert and per non - expert category . Participants reported having expertise in 5 . 9 of the 10 categories on average . This did not vary signiﬁcantly across the two partner conditions ( F ( 1 , 42 ) (cid:2) . 01 , ns ) . One participant reported having expertise in all 10 categories , and was thus excluded . A 2 (cid:3) 2 analysis of variance was conducted on mean recall per category , with partner ( similar vs . different ) as a between - participants factor and category type ( whether the category was an area of reported expertise ) as a repeated Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 3 ( 3 ) 262 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from measures factor . The main effect of partner was not statistically signiﬁcant ( F ( 1 , 41 ) (cid:2) 1 . 14 , ns ) . However , the analysis did reveal a signiﬁcant main effect of category type ( F ( 1 , 41 ) (cid:2) 61 . 67 , p (cid:4) . 0001 ) . In both partner conditions , partici - pants recalled signiﬁcantly more words per cat - egory in their own expertise ( M (cid:2) 2 . 05 , SD (cid:2) 0 . 86 ) than outside their expertise ( M (cid:2) 0 . 77 , SD (cid:2) 0 . 73 ) . The interaction effect of partner and cat - egory type was also statistically signiﬁcant ( F ( 1 , 41 ) (cid:2) 11 . 41 , p (cid:4) . 001 ) . When participants believed their partners had different expertise , they recalled signiﬁcantly more words per expert category ( t ( 42 ) (cid:2) 2 . 99 , p (cid:4) . 005 ) . When participants believed their partners had similar expertise , they recalled signiﬁcantly more words per non - expert category ( t ( 42 ) (cid:2) 1 . 71 , p (cid:4) . 05 ) . ( See Figure 1 . ) These results support hypothesis 1 and hypothesis 2 . Hollingshead perceptions of expertise in work relationships 263 Figure 1 . Mean recall by category ( expert or non - expert ) and partner ( similar vs . different expertise ) . at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from Intrusion errors Words recalled that were not on the list were categorized as intrusion errors . A one - way analysis of variance was conducted on intrusion errors with partner ( similar vs . different ) as a between - participants factor . Contrary to hypothesis 3b , the partner manipulation did not have a signiﬁcant effect on the total number of intrusion errors ( M (cid:2) 6 . 00 , SD (cid:2) 4 . 76 ) ( F ( 1 , 42 ) (cid:2) 1 . 01 , ns ) . Intrusion errors were divided into those in the participant’s areas of expertise and those outside their expertise . A 2 (cid:3) 2 analysis of vari - ance was conducted on mean intrusions per cat - egory , with partner ( similar vs . different ) as a between - participants factor and category type ( whether category was an area of expertise ) as a repeated measures factor . The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect of category type ( F ( 1 , 41 ) (cid:2) 23 . 75 , p (cid:4) . 001 ) . Participants made signiﬁcantly more errors per category in an area of reported expertise in both partner conditions . On average , partici - pants made . 80 errors per expert category , and . 30 errors per non - expert category . These results are in the opposite direction of hypothe - sis 3b . 2 The main effect of partner and the inter - action effect of partner and category type were not statistically signiﬁcant ( F ( 1 , 41 ) (cid:2) 1 . 97 , p (cid:5) . 16 , and F ( 1 , 41 ) (cid:2) 0 . 19 , ns , respectively ) . To summarize , total recall was unaffected by the partner manipulation . However , partici - pants tended to recall more in areas of expert - ise when they believed their partner had different rather than similar expertise . These results indicate that what information partici - pants learned rather than how much they learned , was affected by the assumed expertise of their partners . Discussion This experiment builds upon previous research on learning and transactive memory in close relationships . It simulated learning processes among coworkers with a sample of clerical ofﬁce workers and a task that involved learning work - related information . The results sup - ported the notion that transactive memory is a property of work relationships , not just roman - tic relationships , and that role - based expertise can serve as its basis . Even with no social inter - action , perceptions of relative expertise can affect the allocation of knowledge responsibili - ties in work relationships . Perceptions about the expertise of other people can come from many sources . Stereotypes based on demographic character - istics ( such as age , gender , ethnicity , social class ) can be used to infer the knowledge of group members in a particular domain and shared group memberships can be used to infer socially shared knowledge ( Krauss & Fussell , 1991 ) . Through previous conversations and shared experiences , people may also become more accurate judges about what others know ( Hollingshead , 1998d ; Wegner et al . , 1991 ) . This experiment showed that people also make inferences about what other group members know in work settings based on knowledge they receive from outside sources about other mem - bers’ expertise . Participants were instructed about the expertise and job responsibilities of their assigned partners , and these instructions had an impact on individual learning . Participants were more likely to learn infor - mation outside their expertise when their assigned partners had similar rather than dif - ferent work - related knowledge and responsibil - ities . These results suggest that participants were motivated to maximize collective knowl - edge . Responses to a post - task questionnaire in which participants described the strategy they used to learn the words indicated that they were often conscious of this process . Participants who were assigned a partner with different expertise often concentrated on learning the words in their own categories of expertise , e . g . ‘I memorized words from the categories of my expertise hoping my partner would do the same’ , ‘I paid more attention to the areas I knew’ . Participants who were assigned a partner with similar expertise mentioned using strategies other than specializing in learning words in their expertise , e . g . ‘My strategy was mostly random glancing all over the list focusing on the ones I was least familiar with’ , ‘I tried to Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 3 ( 3 ) 264 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from focus on 4 different groups – not necessarily in my ﬁeld of knowledge’ . The implication is that one way to get group members to learn infor - mation in their areas of expertise is to make them believe that they are the only expert on that topic in the group . This ﬁnding is consis - tent with research on criticality in social dilem - mas , showing that group members are more likely to cooperate when they perceive that their contributions are critical to the group ( Chen , Au , & Komorita , 1996 ; Kerr & Kaufman - Gilliland , 1997 ) . Participants tended to remember infor - mation better in their own areas of reported expertise regardless of whether their assigned partner had similar or different expertise . One reason for this may be that people use their own expertise as their default strategy for deciding what information to learn . Information in one’s own area of expertise may be more familiar and easier to learn . Although there was an incentive for participants to remember different words than their partners , they were not penalized for redundant recall and may have been less con - cerned about duplicating the efforts of their partner . This may also explain why participants were more likely to make intrusion errors in their own areas of expertise . Participants were not penalized for guessing , and may have been able to generate more plausible guesses in their areas of expertise . The nature of the work groups and the task employed in this study may account for why total recall and total intrusion errors were not affected by the partner manipulation . The responsibilities associated with different job titles did not vary much , so the words in cat - egories outside participants’ expertise may have been familiar . In addition , the words were not technical and did not require any special train - ing or education to be understood . Coworkers who have less overlap of work - related knowl - edge than the ofﬁce workers in this sample probably make more intrusion and omission errors when learning highly specialized and technical information outside their areas of expertise . For example , in a group composed of an engineer , a medical doctor , and a computer scientist , members may have signiﬁcantly more difﬁculty learning information in one another’s areas of expertise . This was the ﬁrst experiment to directly inves - tigate how perceptions of coworkers’ expertise affect how people learn work - related knowl - edge . As a result , special care was taken to con - trol variables that may have an impact on learning processes among coworkers . For example , to control the nature of the relation - ship between coworkers , participants were assigned to work with a partner from another ofﬁce staff rather than from their own staff . To measure individual learning easily , a word memorization task was used . One would expect the ﬁndings of this experiment to generalize and perhaps increase in magnitude for actual coworkers working on tasks intrinsic to their everyday work . Future research should examine this possibility . Notes 1 . At the end of the study , the Partner Match forms were used to compose dyads , and bonuses were in fact awarded to both the highest scoring dyad with similar job responsibilities , and to the highest scoring dyad with different job responsibilities . 2 To control for the higher amount of recall in participants’ categories of expertise , one reviewer suggested creating a ratio of intrusion errors per word recalled within expert and non - expert categories . This analysis indicated that the rate of intrusion errors per word recalled did not vary signiﬁcantly across expert and non - expert categories ( M (cid:2) 0 . 43 ; 0 . 30 respectively ) ( F ( 1 , 41 ) = 0 . 83 , ns ) . Acknowledgments I thank Stewart Alexander and Andrew Krugh for their help with data collection , and Peter Carnevale , Dick Moreland , and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments . This research was supported by a grant from the University of Illinois Research Board . References Argote , L . , & McGrath , J . E . ( 1993 ) . Group processes in organizations : Continuity and change . In C . L . Hollingshead perceptions of expertise in work relationships 265 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from Cooper & I . T . Robertson ( Eds . ) , International review of industrial and organizational psychology ( Vol . 8 , pp . 333 – 389 ) . Chichester , UK : Wiley . Chen , X . , Au , W . , & Komorita , S . S . ( 1996 ) . Sequential choice in a step - level public goods dilemma : The effects of criticality and uncertainty . Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes , 65 , 37 – 47 . Hall , J . F . ( 1954 ) . Learning as a function of word frequency . American Journal of Psychology , 67 , 138 – 140 . Henry , R . ( 1995 ) . Improving group judgement accuracy : Information sharing and determining the best member . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 62 , 190 – 197 . Hinsz , V . B . , Tindale , R . S . , & Vollrath ( 1997 ) . The emerging conceptualization of groups as information processors . Psychological Bulletin , 121 , 43 – 64 . Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1998a ) . Communication , learning , and retrieval in transactive memory systems . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 34 , 423 – 442 . Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1998b ) . Distributed expertise and communication processes in groups . In E . A . Mannix , M . A . Neale , & D . H Gruenfeld ( Eds . ) , Research on managing groups and teams ( Vol . 1 , pp . 105 – 125 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1998c ) . Group and individual training : The impact of practice on performance . Small Group Research , 29 , 254 – 280 . Hollingshead , A . B . ( 1998d ) . Retrieval processes in transactive memory systems . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 , 659 – 671 . Kelley , H . H . , & Thibaut , J . W . ( 1978 ) . Interpersonal relations : A theory of interdependence . New York : Wiley . Kerr , N . L . , & Kaufman - Gilliland , C . M . ( 1997 ) . ‘ . . . and besides , I probably couldn’t have made a difference anyway’ : Justiﬁcation of social dilemma defection via perceived self - inefﬁcacy . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 33 , 211 – 230 . Krauss , R . M . , & Fussell , S . R . ( 1991 ) . Perspective - taking in communication : Representations of others’ knowledge in reference . Social Cognition , 9 , 2 – 24 . Larson , J . R . , Jr . , & Christensen , C . ( 1993 ) . Groups as problem - solving units : Toward a new meaning of social cognition . British Journal of Social Psychology , 32 , 5 – 30 . Liang , D . W . , Moreland , R . , & Argote , L . ( 1995 ) . Group versus individual training and group performance : The mediating role of transactive memory . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 21 , 384 – 393 . Littlepage , G . E . , Robison , W . , & Reddington , K . ( 1997 ) . Effects of task experience and group experience on group performance , member ability , and recognition of expertise . Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes , 69 , 133 – 147 . Littlepage , G . E . , & Silbiger , H . ( 1992 ) . Recognition of expertise in decision - making groups : Effects of group size and participation patterns . Small Group Research , 23 , 344 – 355 . McGrath , J . E . ( 1997 ) . Small group research , that once and future ﬁeld : An interpretation of the past with an eye to the future . Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice , 1 , 7 – 27 . Moreland , R . L . ( 1999 ) . Transactive memory : Learning who knows what in work groups and organizations . In L . Thompson , D . Messick , & J . Levine ( Eds . ) , Sharing knowledge in organizations . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Moreland , R . L . , Argote , L . , & Krishnan , R . ( 1996 ) . Socially shared cognition at work : Transactive memory and group performance . In J . L . Nye & A . M . Brower ( Eds . ) , What’s new about social cognition ? Research on socially shared cognition in small groups ( pp . 57 – 84 ) . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Moreland , R . L . , Argote , L . , & Krishnan , R . ( 1998 ) . Training people to work in groups . In R . S . Tindale et al . ( Eds . ) , Theory and research on small groups ( pp . 37 – 60 ) , New York : Plenum Press . Stasser , G . , Stewart , D . D . , & Wittenbaum , G . M . ( 1995 ) . Expert roles and information exchange during discussion : The importance of knowing who knows what . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 31 , 244 – 265 . Wegner , D . M . ( 1987 ) . Transactive memory : A contemporary analysis of the group mind . In B . Mullen & G . R . Goethals ( Eds . ) , Theories of group behavior ( pp . 185 – 208 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Wegner , D . M . ( 1995 ) . A computer network model of human transactive memory . Social Cognition , 13 , 319 – 339 . Wegner , D . M . , Erber , R . , & Raymond , P . ( 1991 ) . Transactive memory in close relationships . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 923 – 929 . Wittenbaum , G . M . , Stasser , G . , & Merry , C . J . ( 1996 ) . Tacit coordination in anticipation of small group task completion . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 32 , 129 – 152 . Wittenbaum , G . M . , Vaughan , S . I . , & Stasser , G . ( 1998 ) . Coordination in task - performing groups . In R . S . Tindale et al . ( Eds . ) , Theory and research on small groups ( pp . 177 – 204 ) , New York : Plenum Press . Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 3 ( 3 ) 266 at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from Paper received 23 November 1998 ; revised version accepted 27 July 1999 . Biographical note ANDREA B . HOLLINGSHEAD is Associate Professor of Psychology and Speech Communication at the University of Illinois , Urbana - Champaign . Her current research investigates how transactive memory systems develop , how they operate , and how they affect individual and group outcomes over time . Hollingshead perceptions of expertise in work relationships 267 Appendix List of categories and words used in memorization task Ordering desk copies Ofﬁce supplies Accounting Computers Author Tape Receiving report Login Title Envelope UFAS Printer Enrollment Post - it - notes Requisition number Modem Book order form File folder Invoice System error Publisher Pencils Paystub Virus Instructor Thesis folders Transfer Monitor Hardcover Letterhead Purchase order Diskette Edition Rubber bands Budget Microprocessor Instructional resources Mailing Word processing Photocopying Head phone Meter postage Format Paper tray Camcorder US mail Menu Zoom Audio deck 10 (cid:3) 13 Control key Duplex Easel Domestic mail Edit Single run Audiocassette Parcel Cut Collate Overhead UPS Table Glass Tripod Manila envelopes Copy Transparencies LCD Panel Airborne express Print Double - sided Inventory Grades and enrollment Brand Section Property control no . Contact hours Category Roster Account number Timetable Transfer Instructor Vendor College Surplus AB Condition code Discussion section at Universitaetsbibliothek on April 23 , 2009 http : / / gpi . sagepub . com Downloaded from