DE ANIVERSARIO Sources of students’ difficulties in learning Chemistry David Treagust , 1 Reinders Duit , 2 and Martina Nieswandt 3 Abstract Chemistry is a difficult subject to teach and to learn at both secondary and tertiary levels . Major learning difficulties are due to the particular views of chemis - try phenomena that in many ways contradict intui - tive and everyday views of the learners . As a result , major misunderstandings occur when students try to comprehend chemical explanations within the framework of their pre - instructional conceptions . This paper describes research findings on students’ pre - instructional conceptions in the domain of chem - istry and on attempts to guide students from their conceptions to the core ideas of chemistry . Rather than providing an overview of students’ conceptions in various topics , we review learning difficulties from the perspectives of the challenge of multiple repre - sentations and the relation of chemistry to everyday experiences , including understanding the special language of chemistry . We believe that these perspec - tives contribute substantially to the limited success of teaching and learning chemistry . Studies on understanding and learning chemistry Understanding and learning core science concepts and principles , including those in chemistry , are difficult ; many research studies have revealed major learning difficulties and identified key causes of these difficulties . A large number of intervention studies have attempted to address these difficulties by exam - ining the role of students’ preinstructional concep - tions in the learning process . Further readings in this area are the bibliography by Pfundt and Duit ( 1998 ) , general reviews of studies on learning science by Treagust , Duit and Fraser ( 1996 ) and by Duit and Treagust ( 1998 ) , and a review on conceptual change approaches in science by Hewson , Beeth , & Thorley ( 1998 ) . There is overwhelming empirical evidence in the literature that what students already know is the key factor in learning . Usually students’ preinstruc - tional conceptions provide frameworks that are not in accordance with the science conceptions to be learned . From a constructivist perspective , which is the predominating contemporary view of learning in science education , every observation and every sen - sual input of any other kind has to be interpreted by the receiver ( Steffe & Gale , 1995 ; Tobin , 1993 ) . Stu - dents construct their own meanings of observations that they make when experiments are presented , pictures are shown , and explanations are given by the teacher or the textbook . The only interpretive frameworks that students possess are the conceptions gained in daily life or in science classes . As a result , in making sense of what is presented in science classes and in textbooks , sometimes students con - struct meanings that are in contrast to the expected chemistry view . Within this constructivist perpective , learning is not seen as the intake of knowledge that is delivered by the teacher and teaching is not viewed as transfer of knowledge from teacher or textbook to the head of the students . Rather , learning is viewed as an active construction process of the learner and teaching is designed to support and nurture this construction process . Accordingly , learning science can be a painstaking process of a sequence of gradual changes of students’ preinstructional conceptions to - wards science conceptions ( Vosniadou & Ioannides , 1998 ) . The term conceptual change is usually em - ployed to point to this process because it denotes that major changes of the initial conceptual frameworks are necessary when science concepts and princi - ples are learned . Most of the 3000 or so studies on learning diffi - culties in science reported by Pfundt and Duit ( 1998 ) have been carried out in the domain of physics ( 70 % ) , with much less in biology ( 20 % ) and even less in chemistry ( 10 % ) . Consequently , most general results on the role of preinstructional conceptions in the learning process and on the effect of conceptual change approaches to learning draw on findings from physics , although studies in biology and chem - istry do contribute to these insights . 1 Science and Mathematics Education Centre , Curtin University of Technology , Perth , Australia . 2 Institute for Science Education at the University of Kiel , Germany . 3 University of Nevada , Las Vegas , USA . 228 Educación Química 11 [ 2 ] Studies on students’ pre - instructional concep - tions and learning processes in chemistry have ex - amined major concepts and principles of chemistry in a number of topics . These topics include ( a ) views of chemical changes and reactions , ( b ) the particle view of atoms and molecules , ( c ) chemical equilib - rium , ( d ) models and representations of chemical reactions , ( e ) acids and basis , ( f ) combustion , ( g ) electrochemistry and ( h ) the mole concept . In these topics , however , research findings are not as well established as in the case of physics , where , for instance , some hundreds of studies are available on Newtonian mechanics and electricity ; at best , some 20 studies , for instance , are available on students’ views of chemical changes . More research is neces - sary to better understand the learning difficulties in the major chemistry topics with a more diverse range of students and in an increasingly diverse range of settings as well as in additional topics such as organic chemistry . To date , several review articles have provided summaries of the results of studies on learning chem - istry , each with different emphases . Andersson ( 1990 ) analyzed students’ views of matter and its transformation within the framework of the four categories of disappearance , displacement , modifi - cation and transmutation . Nakhleh ( 1992 ) focused on the particulate nature of matter , molecules and inter - molecular forces , phase changes , gases , chemical equations , chemical change and chemical equilib - rium . Stavy ( 1995 ) primarily dealt with children’s views of matter and its properties , including continu - ous versus particulate views and conceptions of the conservation of matter . The most recent and com - prehensive review by Garnett , Garnett and Hackling ( 1995 ) summarized and discussed findings on ( a ) the particulate nature of matter , including the nature and characteristic of particles , the space between parti - cles and the way particles are arranged , molecules in different phases , and changes of phase and the effects of temperature ; ( b ) covalent bonding and intermo - lecular forces ; ( c ) chemical equations ; ( d ) chemical equilibrium , including characteristics of chemi - cal equilibrium , constancy of the equilibrium constant and inappropriate use of Le Chatelier’s principle ; ( e ) acids and bases ; ( f ) oxidation - reduc - tion , and ( g ) electrochemistry . Garnett et al . ( 1995 ) also provided an overview of theoretical frameworks in which research on stu - dents’ learning difficulties is embedded . Implications from the research data available on teaching and learning include ( a ) the need to carefully examine the use of everyday language in a scientific context ; ( b ) over - simplification of concepts and the use of unqualified , generalised statements ; ( c ) the use of multiple definitions and models ; ( d ) the rote appli - cation of concepts and algorithms ; ( e ) students’ precon - ceptions from prior world experiences ; ( f ) overlapping of similar concepts ; ( g ) endowing objects with hu - man / animal characteristics ; ( h ) inadequate prerequi - site knowledge ; and ( i ) students’ inability to visualize the particulate / submicroscopic nature of matter . Issues such as these need to be considered in the development of new curricula or courses in order to help students with their learning . This task is rela - tively difficult and few studies are reported that have incorporated these issues into a chemistry curricu - lum that has been systematically evaluated . Exam - ples where such development and evaluation have occurred are the work of van Driel , De Vos , Verloop and Dekkers ( 1998 ) in chemical equilibrium and Acampo and De Jong ( 1994 ) in electrochemistry , both conducted in the Netherlands , and Stork ( 1995 ) , in Germany . Stork ( 1995 ) designed a course based on the literature of students’ conceptions to introduce basic chemistry ideas to students of about 15 years of age . The study focused on the change of substances and students’ view of the particle model and addressed , among others , students’ conceptions that a change of substances is the same as change of characteristics of substances and that a substance is totally de - stroyed when it burns . In the first instance , when copper is heated in air , in normal everyday conditions , a black layer forms which students describe as the copper becom - ing black ; they think that the substance copper has been given a new characteristic , namely a black colour . In other words , students interpret their obser - vations in terms of a change of characteristics of the substance which is a way of thinking that is usually successful in everyday situations . However , in chem - istry , this change is conceptualized in a markedly different manner : Red copper does not exist any more , black copper - oxide comes into being . In the second instance , when zinc is burned , a white sub - stance results which students believe is impossible to be returned to zinc . Even when an experiment showed that the metal zinc can be obtained from the ash , students were quite hesitant , but fascinated , to accept this result . These two examples show that chemistry views of change of substances are often DE ANIVERSARIO Abril de 2000 229 strange to students ; common sense thinking which is so successful in daily life no longer applies . Although Stork’s course focused on the tradi - tional curricular content , there were marked differ - ences from usual introductory courses in the se - quence in which the content was presented and in the teaching approach used . The first three of the six units concentrated on topics for which concrete - op - erational thinking was adequate . Starting in unit four , phenomena were interpreted at the particle level requiring students to think increasingly in abstrac - tions . Students’ awareness was first enhanced by their own relevant everyday conceptions and then they were engaged in cognitive conflict triggered by a discrepant event ( Fensham & Kass , 1988 ) in order to develop an understanding of the scientific concept . During one school year , the course was taught and students’ progress evaluated in four 9th grade classes at four different German Gymnasiums , selec - tive upper secondary schools to which the top 30 % of academically able secondary students attend ( Nieswandt , in press ) . Students were given different tasks of transfer , the content of which belonged mostly to everyday problems . Results showed that students had different learning paths for their con - ceptions of change of substances and the particle model evaluated on five different occasions during one school year ( Nieswandt , 1999 ) . One third of the students realized that substances possess constant , recognizable properties , that a change in property indicated that a new substance has been created and they developed an increasingly differentiated knowl - edge about and deeper understanding of the scien - tific concepts . However , the majority of students required exposure to scientific concepts more than once , implying that learning is enhanced by re - teach - ing the chemical concept in different contexts and giving students different opportunities to practice the new concept for similar tasks and applying them to everyday phenomena . A small number of students preferred not to give an answer because they realized that their everyday conceptions were not useful for interpreting the scientific phenomena . Finally , a small proportion of students hold hybrid conceptions ( Jung , 1993 ) , a mixture of everyday descriptions and scientific explanations , and struggle with their scien - tific and everyday life knowledge . For these students , the new scientific concepts were not fully grasped and they did not realize in which context everyday conceptions are appropriate . The teacher’s goal is to help students bring these two conceptions together so they can be used more appropriately . DE ANIVERSARIO D . E . May , Sin título , 1986 . ( Tomado de The Sciences , Sep . / Oct . 1996 , p . 21 . ) 230 Educación Química 11 [ 2 ] The challenge of multiple representations In chemistry , and in all sciences as well as in every - day life , analogies , metaphors and / or models are used to help explain a phenomenon that is not observable . However , the research literature on the use of models and analogies in science teaching and learning is ambivalent about whether or not the best way to learn concepts in science is by single or multiple analogies ( Goswami , 1993 ; Zook , 1991 ) . Studies investigating the role of multiple analogies or models in the teaching and learning of secondary chemistry by Garnett and Treagust ( 1992 ) showed that some students prefer not to be presented with more than one model at a time . Students who held more than one definition for oxidation / reduc - tion experienced problems when trying to identify oxidation - reduction equations because they were uncertain as to which model to apply to given situ - ations . However , in a study of the topic of organic chemistry , Harrison and Treagust ( in press ) observed that students who are exposed to , and who become skilled in the use of multiple analogies , develop a more scientific understanding of the science concept under investigation than do students who concen - trated on one single well established analogy . Learning chemistry , especially at senior high school and university level , emphasizes relation - ships , processes , abstract concepts and mental mod - els . Relational thinking and scientific knowledge in - volve mental models which are a ‘‘special kind of mental representation , an analog representation , which individuals generate during cognitive func - tioning’’ ( Vosniadou , 1994 , p . 48 ) . Mental models need not be technically accurate , but they must be functional and constantly evolve as individuals inter - act with their world ( Johnson - Laird , 1983 ) . How students develop their mental models is therefore a major challenge to both teachers in secondary schools and lecturers in universities . Scientific models are normally used to represent the real world or as tools for connecting the real world with scientific and mathematical laws and theories ( Hodgson , 1995 ) . The boundaries between models as heuristic , explanatory and communicative devices are often blurred . This need not be a weak - ness because the heuristic effect of a model as it is being used to communicate ideas can help students in their understanding of the phenomena being investigated ( Gilbert & Boulter , 1998 ) . Models such as structural representations of organic and inorganic compounds , as used by chemists and found in all modern chemistry texts , are trademarks of science and are considered part of the chemical language ( Hoffmann & Laszlo , 1991 ) . Chemistry texts are filled with a variety of draw - ings to represent molecules . These drawings can range from simple Lewis structures showing atom connectivity through to the highly abbreviated ‘line - bond’ structures . There are also many ways of rep - resenting three - dimensional molecules including ball & stick structures , space filling structures , New - man projections and Fisher projections . Each of these methods of representing molecules is used in almost all university chemistry texts to depict a par - ticular aspect of the chemistry or structure of the molecule as required . None of these representations is universally applicable and the particular repre - sentation chosen for a given situation is dependent on the situation itself . Although , each representation has its particular advantages , they all depict the same molecule but neither textbooks nor lectures gener - ally include descriptions of how one representation can be translated into another . Indeed , the process of explaining a phenomenon or problem solution through a different model often suggests new rela - tionships and insights . This aspect is a major chal - lenge for teachers and lecturers who want their stu - dents to functionally transfer between one model , structural representation or diagram , and another . A recommendation for teaching at both secon - dary and tertiary levels is that early in chemical education it is essential for the teacher to emphasize students’ understanding that these symbols , formu - lae or models are representations of different proper - ties of a molecule or substance and not a copy of anything . Such a teaching approach can work as is illustrated by the research reporting how a student named Alex used six different analogical models in his study of organic chemistry ( Harrison and Treagust , in press ) . Alex viewed each of the ball - and - stick , space - filling , electron - dot , electron cloud / shell overlaps , 2 - dimensional structural diagrams and the balloons model as a purpose - built model to describe the attributes of covalent organic molecules . His use of multiple mental models enabled him to have a fruitful conception of the nature of covalent - bonded molecules because different aspects of the six models represented different aspects of the molecules . Alex had developed close to an expert view of the use of these models in chemistry despite his relative inexperience in science ( Grosslight , Unger , Jay & Smith , 1991 ) . DE ANIVERSARIO Abril de 2000 231 The relationship of chemistry to everyday experiences Teaching chemistry with an emphasis on the learn - ers’ everyday experiences and preconceived ideas is the basis of the constructivist perspective outlined earlier ( Yager , 1991 ) . The strategy of building on a core of familiar ideas requires the teacher to first identify the depth and breadth of a student’s knowl - edge base . However , teachers often assume prior knowledge far beyond the students’ comprehension and do not begin by examining the chemistry in the students’ everyday life . In Chemistry in the Market Place , Selinger ( 1998 , p . ix ) expressed surprise how little ‘added value’ chemical educators give to their teaching examples . Often no distinction is made between the scien - tific chemical meaning and the commonplace mean - ings of words in our vocabulary and , consequently , these words are used indiscriminately by students ( Fensham , 1994 ) . To complicate matters , even within the chemistry profession , there are several meanings for the same word ( Selinger , 1998 ) and naturally enough , when students are confronted with the same words but with different meanings they become confused . For example , ‘pure’ can refer to the clean - liness of a substance , not its chemical nature ; ‘mix - ture’ refers to something physically combined to - gether , not , for example , the chemical nature of glass or blood or drinking water . Students’ experience is mainly with mixtures ; however , their perception is that these substances , for example , brass , lemon - ade , wine , tap water , are chemically pure . Words as different as dissolving and melting which are obvious to teachers are confused when used by students ( Fensham , 1994 ) . Students have insufficient back - ground or experience with which to distinguish these terms and consequently the teacher’s meaning is not communicated clearly . As emphasized more than two decades ago by Gardner ( 1975 ) , the language of science is difficult to learn . His analysis of science textbooks showed that students learning science have to learn not only new technical words about science , such as those de - scribed above , but also have to learn many linking words and phrases , such as ‘then’ , ‘so that’ , ‘on the other hand’ , which tie the scientific propositions together in a logical argument . These linking words and phrases called ‘logical connectives’ create their own complexities and difficulties . To those familiar with the way in which science is taught in the first years of high school , this situation will not be surpris - ing . Further , as students progress in their science studies , they encounter more special words to de - scribe and explain scientific phenomena that differ in meaning between the everyday and scientific meanings , creating additional learning problems . In a scientific context , a word is frequently harder to understand because it has a more precise meaning and this extra precision requires more effort and thought ( Cassels & Johnstone , 1983 ) . For example , research in electrochemistry ( Garnett , Garnett & Treagust , 1990 ) showed that students misinterpret the phrase ‘ the ions carry the charge’ when referring , for example , to reactions between metals and acids in an electrochemical cell , as being in the same way that a suitcase is carried . They interpreted ‘carry’ to mean that the electron is picked up at one electrode , carried piggy - back fashion to the other electrode and then deposited or removed in the oxidation process . The relevance , usefulness and applicability of chemistry to everyday life can influence students’ attitudes towards learning chemistry , but unfortu - nately , many chemistry courses fail to do this . At the beginning of the chemistry course , students almost need blind faith in order to continue learning the symbols , valencies , and how to balance equations before they can apply any knowledge to see its relevance . Scientific nomenclature is like a foreign language and frustration can occur when trying to relate chemical names with everyday experiences . To guard against pitching courses at too high a level and thus excluding a high percentage of the population , Selinger ( 1998 ) provides many examples of the use of chemistry in everyday life from the kitchen to industry . A number of chemistry courses have attempted to relate the content to students’ everyday experiences ; one such example , a labora - tory course for university non - majors , adopted a practical approach where students made chemical products such as wine , soap , cheese , dyed fabric ( Roberts , Selco & Wacks , 1996 ) . This emphasis on extensive laboratory work dramatically improved the students’ perceptions of chemistry - - - - the use of familiar products was a significant factor in relating chemistry to the students . However , the assumption that this type of chemistry is only suited to non - chem - istry students is not valid . In a course for chemistry majors ( Doran , Chan & Tamir , 1998 ) , experiments exposing scientific methods using everyday items such as baking soda , vinegar , shampoo and sugar in practical assessment tasks have been used to ‘‘rein - force the connection between science and the stu - DE ANIVERSARIO 232 Educación Química 11 [ 2 ] dents’ out of school experience’’ ( p . 131 ) . In another chemistry program , the inclusion of environmental factors helped students to ‘‘see the influence of chem - istry on daily life’’ when experiments were used to investigate environmental issues such as the pres - ence of CFC’s in household chemicals ( Klemmer , Hutter , & Howard , 1996 , p . 55 ) . The Salters Chemistry course developed in Eng - land during 1983 - 1987 started with the present inter - est and experiences of the students and built on this through active learning techniques such as discus - sions , experimental design , role - plays and decision making activities ( Ramsden , 1992 ) . Research studies on this course have indicated that students have responded favourably to the use of everyday refer - ences ( Ramsden , 1994 ) . In a typically content - driven curriculum , examples are provided to support the content , whereas the Salters curriculum is driven by everyday examples which is a fundamental change in the approach to presenting and explaining scien - tific phenomenon ( Campbell et al . , 1994 ) . Examples of the units , Fire , Friend or Foe , Current Thinking , Sports Science , are interesting and different , and improve the image of the chemistry subject matter . Although the title does not make the students learn chemistry , it may improve their attitude to the sub - ject and motivate them to learn . Campbell et al . ( 1994 ) reported that teachers felt there was an im - provement in the climate of their science classrooms after using the Salters approach . Students’ prior knowledge is an asset that can be accessed to link new concepts and students’ preconceptions and mis - conceptions significantly influence the building of new knowledge . Strategies incorporating the use of familiar products and personal experiences can improve the linking of existing knowledge with new concepts . Conclusions Research has revealed that many difficulties in learn - ing and understanding chemistry appear to be caused by a view of chemistry instruction that is oriented primarily to a view of chemistry that is aca - demic and not related in any way to the chemistry of everyday life . Teaching and learning chemistry in a meaningful way needs a much broader perspective . Clearly , the nature of the chemistry content plays a significant part in the process of planning the teach - ing and learning processes . However , the clarifica - tion of subject matter structure has to be imbedded in considerations on the aims affiliated with teaching and learning that particular content and in reflections on student starting points . These student starting points include pre - instructional conceptions about the phenomena and concepts to be learned , views about chemistry and chemistry teaching , mental abilities , interests and motivations , as well as key features of daily life . Research has shown that learn - ing for understanding needs an active , self - reflective and self - responsible learner whereby students con - DE ANIVERSARIO Ashley Bickerton , GUH , 1986 . ( Tomado de The Sciences , Sep . / Oct . 1996 , p . 22 . ) Abril de 2000 233 struct their own knowledge . The teacher can only provide help in this construction process because knowledge cannot be transferred to the students’ brain in a similar way as bytes are transferred in a computer’s memory . Unfortunately , students engage in the painstaking construction process only if they see the need to learn and the process is only success - ful if students are carefully guided from their pre - in - structional conceptions and views towards the chem - istry concepts ( Duit & Treagust , 1998 ) . The findings of many more recent research studies where stu - dents’ conceptions are taken into account and where contexts include issues of students’ life world have proven promising ( Wandersee , Mintzes & Novak , 1994 ) . When planning instruction in chemistry , for more effective learning , teachers need to take into consideration a much broader range of issues than the chemistry concepts themselves . These issues are to be aware of and take into consideration ( a ) stu - dents’ prior knowledge , ( b ) the multiple ways in which chemistry phenomena can be represented , ( c ) the meanings of the same and similar terms used in chemistry and in everyday life , and ( d ) the chem - istry of everyday life . When students become deeply engaged in their own learning , they frequently have a better understanding of chemistry and of the role of chemistry in their daily lives . Furthermore , the lessons are more pleasing experiences both for teacher and students .  References Acampo , J . & De Jong . O . ( 1994 ) . Chemistry teachers’ learning processes : a study of teacher training and reflection on classroom activities . In H - J . Schmidt ( ed . ) , Problem - solving and misconceptions in chemistry and physics ( p . 229 - 237 ) . Hong Kong : ICASE . Andersson , B . R . ( 1990 ) . Pupils’ conceptions of mat - ter and its transformations ( age 12 - 16 ) . Studies in Science Education , 18 , 53 - 85 . Campbell B . , Lazonby , J . , Millar , R . , Nicolson , P . , Ramsden , J . , & Waddington , D . ( 1994 ) . Science : The Salters’ approach - - - - A case study of the pro - cess of large scale curriculum development . Science Education , 78 , 415 - 447 . Cassels , J . R . L . & Johnstone , A . H . ( 1983 ) . The mea - ning of words and the teaching of chemistry . In R . B . Bucat and P . J . Fensham ( eds . ) , ( 1995 ) . Selec - ted papers in chemical education research : Implica - tions for the teaching of chemistry . Delhi , India : The Committee on Teaching of Chemistry , Interna - tional Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry . Doran P . R . , Chan , F . & Tamir , P . ( 1998 ) . Science educator’s guide to assessment . Arlington , VA : Na - tional Science Teachers Association . Duit , R . & Treagust , D . ( 1998 ) . Learning in science - - - - From behaviourism towards social constructi - vism and beyond . In B . Fraser and K . Tobin , ( eds . ) , International handbook of science education ( p . 3 - 25 ) . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer . Fensham , P . J . ( 1994 ) . Beginning to teach chemistry . In P . J . Fensham , R . F . Gunstone , and R . T . White ( eds . ) , ( 1994 ) . The content of science : A constructivist approach to its learning and teaching ( p . 14 - 28 ) . London : Falmer Press . Fensham , P . J . & Kass , H . ( 1988 ) . Inconsistent or discrepant events in science instruction . Studies in Science Education , 15 , 1 - 16 . Garnett , P . J . , Garnett , P . J . , & Hackling , M . ( 1995 ) . Students’ alternative conceptions in chemistry : A review of research and implications for tea - ching and learning . Studies in Science Education , 25 , 69 - 95 . Gardner , P . L . ( 1975 ) . Logical connectives in science : A preliminary report . Research in Science Educa - tion , 5 , 161 - 176 . Garnett , P . J . & Treagust , D . F . ( 1992 ) . Conceptual difficulties experienced by senior high school students of electric circuits and oxidation - reduc - tion equations . Journal of Research in Science Tea - ching , 29 , 121 - 142 . Gilbert , J . K . , & Boulter , C . J . ( 1998 ) . Learning science through models and modelling . In B . J . Fraser & K . G . Tobin ( Eds . ) , International handbook of science education ( p . 53 - 66 ) . Dordrecht , The Nether - lands : Kluwer . Goswami , U . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning in chil - dren . Hove , U . K . : Lawrence Erlbaum . Grosslight , L . , Unger , C . , Jay , E . , & Smith , C . ( 1991 ) . Understanding models and their use in science : Conceptions of middle and high school students and experts . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 28 , 799 - 822 . Harrison , A . G . & Treagust , D . F . ( 1996 ) . Secondary students’ mental models of atoms and molecu - les : Implications for teaching chemistry . Science Education , 80 , 509 - 534 . Harrison , A . G . & Treagust , D . F . ( in press ) . Learning about atoms , molecules and chemical bonds ; A case study of multiple model use in grade - 11 chemistry . Science Education . DE ANIVERSARIO 234 Educación Química 11 [ 2 ] Hewson , P . W . , Beeth , M . E . & Thorley , N . R . ( 1998 ) . Teaching for conceptual change . In B . J . Fraser and K . G . Tobin ( Eds . ) , International handbook of science education ( p . 199 - 218 ) . Dordrecht , The Netherlands : Kluwer . Hodgson , T . ( 1995 ) . Secondary mathematics mod - eling : Issues and challenges . School Science and Mathematics , 95 , 351 - 358 . Hoffmann , R . & Laszlo , P . ( 1991 ) . Representation in chemistry . Angewandte Chemie , International Edi - tion in English , 30 , 1 - 16 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1983 ) . Mental models . Cambrid - ge , MA : Cambridge University Press . Jung , W . ( 1993 ) . Hilft die Entwicklungspsychologie dem Naturwissen - schaftsdidaktiker ? ( Is deve - lopmental psychology of help for science educa - tors ? ) In : Duit , R . & Gräber , W . ( Eds . ) , Kognitive Entwicklung und Lernen der Naturwissenschaften ( Cognitive development and learning science ) ( p . 86 - 109 ) . Kiel : Institute for Science Education : . Klemmer , G . , Hutter , L . & Howard , E . ( 1996 ) . Che - mistry education and environmental awareness . School Science Review , 78 ( 280 ) , 55 - 61 . Nakhleh , M . B . ( 1992 ) . Why some students don’t learn chemistry . Journal of Chemical Education , 69 , 3 , 191 - 196 Nieswandt , M . ( in press ) . Problems and possibilities for learning in an introductory chemistry course from a conceptual change perspective . Science Education . Nieswandt , M . ( 1999 , March ) . On the way to a scientific concept : Examples of students’ learning paths in an introductory chemistry course . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Asociation for Research in Science Teaching ( NARST ) , Bos - ton , USA . Pfundt , H . & Duit , R . ( 1998 ) . Bibliography : Students’ alternative frameworks and science education . Kiel , Germany : Institute for Science Education at the University of Kiel ( version August 1998 ; distrib - uted electronically ) . Ramsden , J . ( 1992 ) . Going in through both ears and staying there : The Salters approach to science . Australian Science Teachers Journal , 38 [ 2 ] , 13 - 18 . Ramsden , J . ( 1994 , March ) . Context and activity based science in action . School Science Review , 75 [ 272 ] , 7 - 14 . Ramsden , J . M . ( 1992 ) . If its enjoyable , is it science ? School Science Review , 73 [ 265 ] , 65 - 71 . Roberts , J . L . , Selco , J . I . & Wacks , D . B . ( 1996 ) . Mot - her Earth Chemistry : A laboratory course for non - majors . Journal of Chemical Education , 73 , 779 - 781 . Selinger , B . ( 1998 ) . Chemistry in the market place . Mel - bourne : Harcourt Brace . Stavy , R . ( 1995 ) . Conceptual development of basic ideas in chemistry . In S . M . Glynn & R . Duit , ( eds . ) , Learning science in the schools : Research refor - ming practice ( p . 131 - 154 ) . Mahwah , New Jersey : Lawrence Erlbaum . Steffe , L . P . & Gale , J . [ eds . ] ( 1995 ) . Constructivism in education . Hillsdale , New Jersey : Lawrence Erl - baum . Stork , H . ( 1995 ) . Was bedeuten die aktuellen Ford - erungen ‘‘Schülervorstellungen berücksichtigen , ‘konstruktivistisch’ lehren ! ’’ für den Chemie - unterricht in der Sekundarstufe I ? [ Consequences of the actual demands to take students’ concep - tions into consideration and to teach ‘cons - tructively’ for teaching chemistry in secondary level I ] . Zeitschrift für Didaktik der Naturwissen - schaften , 1 , 15 - 28 . Tobin , K . ( 1993 ) . The practice of constructivism in science education . Washington , DC : American Associa - tion for the Advancement of Science Press . Treagust , D . , Duit , R . & Fraser , B . , eds . ( 1996 ) . Improving teaching and learning in science and ma - thematics . New York : Teacher College Press . Van J . H . Driel , De Vos , W . , Verloop , N . & Dekkers , H . ( 1998 ) . Developing secondary students con - ceptions of chemical reactions ; the introduction of chemical equilibrium . International Journal of Science Education , 20 [ 4 ] , 379 - 392 . Vosniadou , S . ( 1994 ) . Capturing and modelling the process of conceptual change . Learning and Ins - truction , 4 , 45 - 69 . Vosniadou , S . & Ioannides , C . ( 1998 ) . From concep - tual change to science education : a psychologi - cal point of view . International Journal of Science Education , 20 , 1213 - 1230 . Wandersee , J . H . , Mintzes , J . J . , & Novak , J . D . ( 1994 ) . Research on alternative conceptions in science . In D . Gabel ( ed . ) , Handbook of research on science teaching and learning ( p . 177 - 210 , New York : Macmillan Publishing Company . Yager , R . E . ( 1991 ) . The constructivist learning mo - del : towards real reform in science education . The Science Teacher , 58 [ 6 ] , 52 - 57 . Zook , K . B . ( 1991 ) . Effect of analogical processes on learning and misrepresentation . Educational Psychology Review , 3 [ 1 ] , 41 - 72 . DE ANIVERSARIO Abril de 2000 235