A recurrent problem in many design domains is communication between different members of the design team involved in the different stages of concept creation , embodiment and detail design , fabrication and production . It is frequently the case that misunder - standings arise , that incorrect and / or incomplete speciﬁcations are passed from one team group to another , and that errors or inconsistencies in the design are discovered at late stages of the process . Sometimes , design prob - lems are resolved by production or technical staff in ways that are regarded as unsatisfactory by the originating design staff , but further re - corrections may be too late or too costly to attempt . A response to this problem has been to develop broader , more integrated teams , and the introduction of ‘concurrent’ design processes . www . elsevier . com / locate / destud 0142 - 694X / 00 $ - see front matter Design Studies 21 ( 2000 ) 99 – 112 PII : S0142 - 694X ( 99 ) 00006 - X 99 (cid:211) 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd All rights reserved Printed in Great Britain Intelligent support for communication in design teams : garment shape speciﬁcations in the knitwear industry Claudia M . Eckert , Nigel Cross and Jeffrey H . Johnson , Department of Design and Innovation , The Open University , Milton Keynes MK7 6AA , UK Communication between different members of a design team is a notoriously difﬁcult problem , especially at the early stages of the design process . In the knitwear design process , the communication between knitwear designers and technicians has been identiﬁed in an empirical study as a major bottleneck . While knitwear is inherently difﬁcult to communicate , the design culture does little ease the problem . This paper argues that an intelligent design support system allows the designers to turn their typically incomplete , inconsistent and inaccurate speciﬁcation of designs into a correct representation of their ideas , thus reducing the interpretation by technicians as well as the design time . This can be achieved by automatically creating design solution suggestions based on the designers’ customary speciﬁcations . This principle has been illustrated for the construction of garment shapes , which were modeled mathematically . (cid:211) 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved Keywords : communication , design process , computer - aided design , knitwear 1 Maher , M L et al . Formal aspects of collaborative CAD Key Centre of Design Comput - ing , Sydney , Australia ( 1997 ) 2 Eckert , C and Stacey , M ‘CADsystems andthe divisionof labour in knitwear design’ in Adam , A , Emms , J , Green , E and Owen , J ( eds ) Woman , work and computerisation : breaking old boundaries—build - ing new forms North - Holland , Amsterdam ( 1994 ) pp 409 – 422 3 Eckert , C Intelligent support forknitweardesignPh . D . Thesis , The Open University , Milton Keynes ( 1997 ) The communication problem in design teams has also been addressed by the development of computer - based models of the artefact being designed . Such models allow simultaneous access by different members of the team , and the artefact design evolves through collaborative input and evaluation from all the team 1 . However , although this may be beneﬁcial during embodiment and detail design , difﬁculties still remain at the conceptual design stage . The study reported in this paper addressed the communication problem in the knitwear design domain , where particular difﬁculties arise due to the nature of the artefacts being designed and the materials from which they are made . Communication problems in the design process between the fashion designers ( who design the appearance of the garments ) and the fabrication technicians ( who realise the designs on knitting machines ) are exacerbated by major differences in their respective cultures , education and careers 2 . An extensive empirical study in knitwear companies identiﬁed communication between designers and technicians as a major bottleneck in the industrial process 3 . Computer support in the knitwear industry has so far mainly been limited to automation of the knitting machines , which has also added to the com - munication problems between designers and technicians . The designers still produce hand - drawn sketches for interpretation on the machines by the technicians ( Figure 1 ) . The study reported here has attempted to widen the scope of computer support for knitwear design by addressing the particular needs of the knitwear designers and their means of communication with the technicians . An intelligent computer support system is proposed , which is capable of using inaccurate , incomplete and / or inconsistent sketch design speciﬁcations , and correcting and completing these using AI techniques to give the designers immediate feedback on their work . More accurate and reliable communication is thus established between designers and tech - nicians . 1 Communication difﬁculties in an industrial context The study reported in this paper looked at ways to widen the scope of existing CAD systems for knitwear design and sampling by addressing the particular needs of the knitwear designers , who design the appearance of the garments , rather than the knitwear technicians , who realise the designs on knitting machines and have been the traditional users of these systems . An empirical study in knitwear companies has identiﬁed the communi - cation between the designers and the technicians as a major bottleneck in the industrial process . 100 Design Studies Vol 21 No 1 January 2000 4 Agar , M The professional stranger , An informal introduc - tion to ethnography Academic Press , London ( 1980 ) 5 Tunnicliff , A and Scrivener , S ‘Knowledge elicitation for design’ Design Studies Vol 12 No 2 ( 1991 ) pp 73 – 80 1 . 1 The study This research draws on observations in over 20 knitwear companies in Britain and Germany over a period of four years . The interaction with the practitioners ranged from one - hour interviews with designers and tech - nicians to observations in companies of up to one week . The methodology draws on the social science approach of ethnography 4 , as well as knowl - edge acquisition techniques from artiﬁcial intelligence 5 . The study covered a wide range of companies from the suppliers of bottom of the market mail order companies to some of the world’s most prestigious knitwear companies . The study placed emphasis on conﬁrming assertions from inter - views and conclusions from observations by talking to different people in the same companies about the same issues as well as addressing competi - tor companies . In addition to this process of formal knowledge acquisition , the ﬁrst author has also worked on acquiring some of the domain knowledge of the design - ers and technicians herself , by attending training courses and designing gar - ments . Intelligent support for communication in design teams 101 Figure 1 Overview over the knitwear design process 1 . 2 Brief background to the knitwear industry The textile industry is one of the world’s major industries and the knitwear industry is a substantial part within it . Like all textile products , knitwear must be designed and produced under tight time pressures with the begin - ning of a new season in shops setting an unmovable deadline . Due to the requirements of production and the retail chains’ need to select co - ordi - nated collections , there is an 18 month – 2 year period before designs will reach the shops . In knitwear , the shape of the garment piece is created at the same time as the fabric itself . The pieces are either knitted or cut into shape and assembled into complete garments in the end . Knitwear design thus com - bines the scope of fashion design , which is concerned with the shape of garments , and textile design , which creates woven or print patterns . The interplay between shape and form is a major difﬁculty of knitwear design . 1 . 3 Overview of the knitwear design process The designers begin by researching coming fashion trends and selecting yarns from which all the garments in a season are made . Most designers initially design fabric swatches , little samples , of possible fabrics for gar - ments . These are combined and supplemented into the designs of garments . Designers create speciﬁcations for all garments they want to see turned into a sample garment . The technicians then take over the development . The fabric technicians program the knitting machine and knit the garment pieces . The shape technicians create cutting patterns for the shape and make up the complete garments . Only then can the designers evaluate their designs . In current industrial practice this is nearly a linear process . Designers create their designs ; when they have ﬁnished most of their designs , these will be handed over to technicians . While the technicians sample the gar - ments the designers have already moved on to designing for the next sea - son . 1 . 4 Communication difﬁculties Communication between the different participants in the design process is problematic . Designers complain that the designs that they speciﬁed are not created . Technicians complain that designers do not have the expertise to design garments which are technically feasible . Both assertions were found to be largely true in the observed companies . The technicians work through the speciﬁed designs . They interpret the designers’ concept speciﬁcations . As long as the technicians think they 102 Design Studies Vol 21 No 1 January 2000 6 Ha¨gglund , S ‘Introducing expert critiquing systems’Knowl - edgeEngineeringReviewVol 8 No 4 ( 1993 ) pp 281 – 284 7 Silverman , BG ‘Survey of expert critiquing systems : practi - cal and theoretical frontiers’ CommunicationsoftheACMVol 35 No 4 ( 1992 ) pp 106 – 127 8 Kumar , S , Suresh , S , Krish - namoorthy , C , Fenves , S and Rajev , S ‘GENCRIT : A tool for knowledge - based critiquing in engineering design’ Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufac - turingVol 8 ( 1994 ) pp 239 – 259 9 Miller , P Expertcritiquingsys - tems : practise - based medical consultation by computer Springer , New York ( 1986 ) understand the designs , no more contact between the designers and tech - nicians exists until the technicians can present an embodiment solution suggestion to the designer . At this point the designers evaluate the solutions and specify modiﬁcations , if necessary . In this way designs are modiﬁed until the designers and technicians are satisﬁed and the price points are met ; or time runs out . Many designs are brought to the market in a sub - optimal state . Like all experts , technicians interpret the concept design speciﬁcation in the light of their own previous experience of the designers and their work , and their knowledge of textiles . In fashion it is , however , necessary to see designs in the context that will be fashionable when the garment will come to the market . Technicians are not included in the con - ceptual design research process . This has the consequence that new designs can look much more similar to previous designs than the designers had intended . 1 . 5 Deﬁning knitwear is difﬁcult Designers often ﬁnd it hard to predict how easy it is to knit a speciﬁc stitch structure , such as a cable . Similar looking structures are created in different ways . Each yarn has slightly different performance properties , which restricts the range of possible patterns . The knitting time of a gar - ment depends on the number of operations a knitting machine needs to perform without knitting stitches . When stitch structures are placed next to each other knitting time can increase unless the patterns are co - ordinated in terms of their machine operation . Many designs are changed for the sake of knitting efﬁciency . 2 Intelligent design support Research into artiﬁcial intelligence for design has taken two different approaches : systems that design or take over part of the design task ; and systems that support the user doing design tasks . Most intelligent design support systems employ a combination of both approaches , as does the system proposed in this research . 2 . 1 Critiquing systems Critiquing systems are concerned with evaluating a design , or part of it , as part of an intelligent design environment ( see Ha¨gglund 6 for an introduc - tion ; and Silverman 7 for an extensive review ) . Most critiquing systems employ passive critiquing which evaluates a design when it is completed or has come to a natural breakpoint ( for example , Kumar et al . 8 ) . Active critiquing monitors the designers’ actions and interrupts the design process to point out errors and give guidance . The ability of a system to critique actively is ultimately limited by its ability to know the users’ goals . Miller 9 distinguishes between critiquing by reacting , critiquing by local risk analy - sis and critiquing by global plan . Critiquing by reacting occurs when ( 1 ) Intelligent support for communication in design teams 103 10 Fischer , G , Nakakoji , K , Ostwald , J , Stahl , G and Sumner , T ‘Embedding critics in design environments’ Knowl - edgeEngineeringReview Vol 8 No 4 ( 1993 ) pp 285 – 307 11 Kolodner , J Case - based reasoning Morgan Kaufmann , San Mateo , CA ( 1993 ) 12 Voss , A Towards a method - ology for case adaptation Pro - ceedingsof12thEuropeanCon - ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence John Wiley , Chichester ( 1996 ) 13 Voss , A , Bartsch - Spo¨rl , B and Oxman , R A study of case adaptation systemsProceedings ofArtiﬁcialIntelligenceinDesign’96KluwerAcademic , Dord - recht ( 1996 ) 14 Stiny , G ‘Introduction to shape and shape grammars’ Environment and Planning B : Planning and Design Vol 7 ( 1980 ) pp 343 – 351 15 Todd , S and Latham , W Evolutionary art and computers Academic Press , London ( 1992 ) 16 Rosenman , M The gener - ation of form using an evolution - ary approach Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design ’96 Kluwer Academic , Dord - recht ( 1996 ) 17 Schnier , T and Gero , J Learninggeneticrepresentations Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Intelli - genceinDesign’96Kluwer Aca - demic , Dordrecht ( 1996 ) speciﬁc rules can be written for each type of wrong answer , ( 2 ) the rules for reviewing the user solution optimality are objective and few , ( 3 ) only one or two possible correct outcomes exist for the task , ( 4 ) each sub - task can be critiqued independently of the others . Fischer and his group have analysed what information could or should be presented to users during a design episode by an active critic ; and how this should be presented ( see Fischer et al . 10 for a good overview of their concerns and approaches ) . 2 . 2 Automatic solution suggestions Automatic designs aim to create a design solution from a problem speciﬁ - cation , however vague , without the interference of the user . Some problems can be modelled through accurate mathematical models . These can only be applied when the input data is complete and correct . Otherwise different strategies need to be employed : In the simplest case default values can be used for missing input . Case Based Reasoning is concerned with the analysis or solution of prob - lems based on previous cases ( see Kolodner 11 for an introduction and Voss 12 and Voss et al . 13 for a detailed review of current cased - based reasoning systems with special reference to their use in design ) . It will be argued that case based reasoning could be employed to provide starting measurements for cutting pattern construction . Other AI techniques are concerned with creating designs from scratch . Shape grammars 14 have been introduced as a formal way to create descrip - tions of designs . A shape grammar consists of an alphabet of shapes , a starting shape and rules that deﬁne the spatial relations between different shapes . Shape grammars are a systematic mechanism to create the space of possible designs . The possible solutions need to be evaluated either by a human , as in Todd and Latham 15 in the generation of creative art forms ; or tested by a machine against predeﬁned constraints . Shape grammars can be combined with genetic algorithms to increase the search space or reduce the initial start up cost of ﬁnding the generation rules . Rosenman 16 shows how building forms can evolve in combination with shape grammars . Schnier and Gero 17 shows how genetic algorithms can learn suitable rep - resentations and thereby gather domain knowledge . The problem with gen - etic algorithms is , however , the deﬁnition of a suitable ﬁtness function for the speciﬁc problem . 3 Supporting knitwear designers 3 . 1 Existing support Knitwear design—like most other design domains—can be supported in two fundamentally different ways : 104 Design Studies Vol 21 No 1 January 2000 18 Aldrich , W Metric pattern cutting ( 4th ed ) , Unwin Hyman , London ( 1987 ) I By providing solutions or supporting the creation of solutions to sub - tasks as they occur within the existing design process , while main - taining the design culture . Automatic or semiautomatic design support is given for problem - solving tasks to the people who traditionally undertake this task in the design process . The division of labour only changes radically once the task of a participant has been taken over by the support system to the degree that this person is no longer required , or needs to be given different tasks . I Using CAD systems as a way to overcome structural problems in the design process by giving different participants access to information and expertise of their colleagues . Commercial CAD systems have over the last few years automated the programming of a knitting machine , by creating a high level speciﬁcation language which can be compiled into a programming language for knitting machines similar to assembler . These systems use default values and ques - tion the user for some missing information . They try to represent the speci - ﬁed design as closely as possible , even if the program they have speciﬁed does not make sense . The systems require that every stitch on the garment is speciﬁed . They do not allow tentative solutions and require a great com - mitment of time and energy to produce any results . In spite of their market - ing claims , these systems are still mainly used by fabric technicians to program knitting machines , rather than by designers . CAD technology has blurred the division between the tasks of all parti - cipants . Designers use CAD systems increasingly to create and specify the same types of designs and fabric technicians create garment shapes for garments that are knitted to shape . However , the work pattern of designers and technicians has changed little over the observed period of four years . The systems have speeded up individual tasks enormously , but over the same period knitwear designs have become technically much more com - plex . The trend to more complexity is still continuing , with technicians pushing the CAD systems to their limits to access the full scope of hand knitting . 3 . 2 Overcoming the bottleneck Communication problems occur when different members of a design pro - cess , in this case the knitwear designers and technicians , do not understand the assertions , speciﬁcation and background knowledge of other members of the design team . A CAD system can help to overcome this by giving different members of the design team access to the expertise of their colleagues . Early and tentative designs in most domains are speciﬁed Intelligent support for communication in design teams 105 incompletely , inconsistently and inaccurately . In knitwear design a com - plete description of a design would require a great commitment of time and technical skills , which designers do not have . An intelligent CAD system can overcome communication problems by enabling designers to specify their designs accurately , without requiring great time investment and expertise . In the approach presented in this paper the role of the system is to take the designers customary speciﬁcations and turn them into suggestions that can be evaluated visually ( Figure 2 ) . Knitwear designers are used to receiving solution suggestions , because technicians show them swatches or garments which the designers can evaluate . The CAD system gives designers the opportunity to tweak their speciﬁcations or modify the solution suggestions until the design corre - sponds to their initial idea or they prefer the suggestion . The system is responsible for assuring internal consistency and technical correctness of the design . At the same time the computer - generated design speciﬁcation can be used as a starting point for technicians to make adaptations to the properties of individual yarns . 106 Design Studies Vol 21 No 1 January 2000 Figure 2 Overcoming the communication problems for garment shapes through a mathematical model as part of an intelligent CAD system Eckert 3 has illustrated this principle for the construction of garment shapes . The measurements deﬁned by the designers are turned into a cutting pattern and an outline sketch of the garment ( see Figure 3 ) . Inconsistencies and missing values are detected in the process of calculating the garment shapes . The designers can evaluate the shape and adapt it to their design idea . 3 . 3 Shape construction The deﬁnition of the shape of a knitted garment has in principle two differ - ent stages : I The deﬁnition of the shape the ﬁnal garment will have once it is ﬁn - ished . I The deﬁnition of the shape of the individual pieces of the garment . Knitted fabric stretches ( think of the rib on a sweater ) . These stretch properties have to be taken into consideration for the construction of each garment . The skills of the technicians lie in knowing what allowances to Intelligent support for communication in design teams 107 Figure 3 The system prototype make for each fabric ( to date the stretch properties of knitted fabric are not sufﬁciently understood to automate or even support this process ) . How - ever , when the designers are deﬁning their designs they do not yet know the exact fabric . Currently , the shape technicians interpret the designers’ speciﬁed measure - ments in the light of the brief verbal description of the garment , for example ‘A - line ladies tunic’ at the same time as they are making allow - ance for the speciﬁed fabric . Many interviewed designers complained that the shape technicians ignore the outline sketches . The designers rarely get feedback on their design speciﬁcation other then seeing a completed gar - ment after great time and resources have been invested . A typical garment has two different cutting patterns , one for the front and the back and one for the sleeves . When the garment is assembled the differ - ent pieces need to ﬁt together . The classical shape of the sweater has set - in sleeves ( Figure 4 ) . The sleeve shape poses an interesting mathematical problem , because two curves , the armhole curve and the sleeve crown curve , need to have the same length . The rough shape of the curves has evolved over centuries to give maximum freedom in arm movement . The exact shape of the curves is different for each company and garment . The armhole depth , sleeve length , sleeve width and the length of these curves are dependent measurements . Their speciﬁcations often create inconsist - encies . 108 Design Studies Vol 21 No 1 January 2000 Figure 4 Set - in sleeve cutting pattern ; body , sleeve and sleeve crown detail construction after Aldrich 18 19 Be´zier , P How Renault uses numerical control for car body design and tooling Paper SAE 6800010 , Society for Automotive Engineers ( 1968 ) 20 Faux , I and Pratt , M Com - putational geometry for design andmanufacture , Ellis Horwood , New Jersey ( 1979 ) 3 . 4 Mathematical models The mathematical model of garment shapes is used to create cutting pat - terns ( and through them garment outlines ) from the verbal description of the garment and the measurements speciﬁed by the designers . The math - ematical model assumes that the measurements are complete and consist - ent . Reasoning to correct measurements belongs to a different part of the system , see below . The endpoints of lines and curves on cutting patterns can be represented as points in a coordinate system . The mathematical model of garment curves is needed to fulﬁl a number of requirements : I Create curves that follow the domain constraints and customs . I Create visually appealing curves , which look right to the user . I Create curves that are mathematically consistent between different pieces of the garment . I Be simple to use , so that a mathematically inexperienced user can mod - ify the curves . I Use the minimum possible number of assumptions that are not derived directly from the users’ input . I Be ﬂexible enough to incorporate individual styles and company default values into the automatic solution suggestions . Be´zier curves 19 , 20 were chosen for the following reasons : I The manipulation of Be´zier curves is fairly intuitive . By moving a Be´zier point the curve is moved in the same direction . I The representation as a polynomial and the mathematical manipulation via the control points is fairly simple . I Be´zier curves give easy control over the end tangent vectors , which is an important domain constraint . 3 . 5 System architecture A control program controls the interaction between the different compo - nents of the system . The user can use three different editors ( Figure 5 ) : I The measurement editor to input the verbal description of the garment and the measurements . I The two - dimensional outline editor , which displays the automatically created garment outline . The outline can also be manipulated . I The cutting pattern editor , in which the automatically displayed cutting patterns can be modiﬁed or created using conventional pattern cutting techniques . This editor can serve as well a speciﬁc work environment for shape technicians to create adaptation to the shape . Intelligent support for communication in design teams 109 The mathematical model of the garment shapes is integrated with the calcu - lation of the co - ordinates . Internal consistency of the input measurements can be achieved by prioritising input measurements and adjusting inconsist - ent ones accordingly . From the observational work , it is reasonable to assume that designers know the broad dimensions of a design , such as length or width , but are likely to guess dependent measurements , such as sleeve width or use measurements from previous garments . Successful results have been achieved by iteratively moving the sleeve width and the sleeve crown height . Measurement completion could be achieved in two different ways : I Using default values for missing measurements or applying a simple calculation to adapt basic measurements to the proportions of the gar - ment . For example , the missing chest measurement could be derived by altering the chest measurements of the sample size the same pro - portion as another measurement has changed from the size measure - ments , such as ratio of the width of the garment at the hip to the hip measurement . A similar approach has been successfully employed by 110 Design Studies Vol 21 No 1 January 2000 Figure 5 Overview of the control ﬂow of the garment shape design module 21 Papamicheal , K , LaPorta , J , Chauvet , H , Trzcinski , T , Thorpe , Jand Selkowitz , S The building design advisorProceed - ingsofACADIA’96 ( 1996 ) 22 Smith , I , Stalker , R and Lottaz , C Creating design objectsfrom casesfor interactive spatial composition Proceedings ofArtiﬁcialIntelligenceinDesign’6 , Kluwer Academic , Dordrecht ( 1996 ) Papamicheal et al . 21 in the BDA system . It uses default values , with a possible extension to case based reasoning , to complete input data , and displays the data instantly in multiple representations . As in the IDIOM system 22 , active critiquing and user preferences could be in included . I By applying case based reasoning from similar garments to model the behaviour of the shape technicians in interpreting the designers’ speci - ﬁcations . 3 . 6 The prototype A prototype ( Figure 3 ) has been developed in Smalltalks VisualWorks (cid:210) . It enables the user to select a description of the body , neckline and sleeve following the domain pattern of verbal descriptions . Different domain terms are mapped to fundamental categories of shapes . The measurement selection window for each garment type changes with garment type description to request exactly those measurements required to specify the shape . At present missing measurements are completed using default values for each garment type . The shape can be displayed as a cutting pattern or a two - dimensional outline . 4 Effect on the design process The support system allows designers to create complete and consistent speciﬁcations , which correspond to their design ideas . The communication problems in the supported areas are overcome through reliable speciﬁ - cations . This can have wider consequences for the design process , as designers and technicians trust each other’s speciﬁcations , they might also trust each other’s assertions in other issues and treat each other with greater respect . The number of samples required during the sampling process decreases as the speciﬁed design is closer to the designers’ initial idea and surplus samples due to misinterpretations can be avoided . It is , however , possible that the released time will be invested in creation of more complex or more innovative designs . Acknowledgments Claudia Eckert’s research has been supported by SERC ACME grant GR / J 40331 for the knitwear project at the University of Loughborough Depart - ment of Computer Studies ; by ESRC grant L12730100173 for the MIND project at the Open University Computing Department ; and by Open Uni - versity Research Development Fund grant 717 at the Open University Department of Design and Innovation . The author is deeply indebted to her PhD supervisor Dr Helmut Bez at the Loughborough University Department of Computer Studies , who assisted her greatly with the Math - Intelligent support for communication in design teams 111 ematics ; Dr Anthony Lucas - Smith who supported her during the implemen - tation stage ; and Graham Perkins and Martin Stacey of the Department of Computer and Information Sciences , De Montfort University , Milton Keynes , without whom the implementation would have been impossible . This paper has greatly beneﬁted from conversations and comments on pre - vious drafts by Dr Martin Stacey of the Department of Computer and Infor - mation Sciences , De Montfort University , Milton Keynes . 112 Design Studies Vol 21 No 1 January 2000