Towards a Model of Understanding Social Search Brynn M . Evans University of California , San Diego La Jolla , CA bmevans @ cogsci . ucsd . edu Ed H . Chi Palo Alto Research Center Palo Alto , CA echi @ parc . com ABSTRACT Search engine researchers typically depict search as the solitary activity of an individual searcher . In contrast , results from our critical - incident survey of 150 users on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service suggest that so - cial interactions play an important role throughout the search process . Our main contribution is that we have integrated models from previous work in sensemaking and information seeking behavior to present a canon - ical social model of user activities before , during , and after search , suggesting where in the search process even implicitly shared information may be valuable to indi - vidual searchers . Author Keywords Social search , social navigation , information seeking , sensemaking , web browsing . INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK Surprisingly , researchers have thought about navigat - ing and browsing for information as a single user activ - ity , centered on eliciting users’ information needs and improving the relevance of search results . For exam - ple , Choo , Detlor & Turnbull [ 2 ] discussed categories of search behaviors and motivations in information seek - ing , but they overlooked the role of other individuals in search . On the other hand , library scientists [ 10 ] have observed for some time that friends and colleagues may be valuable information resources during search . Simi - larly , recent authors have begun to recognize the preva - lence and beneﬁts of collaborative search [ 5 , 9 ] . However , in addition to explicit collaboration in joint search tasks [ 5 ] , we believe that even implicit social experiences could improve the search process . There - fore , the general term “social search” may more suitably describe information seeking and sensemaking habits that make use of a range of possible social interac - tions : including searches that utilize social and exper - tise networks or that may be done in shared social workspaces . This notion certainly encompasses collab - orative co - located search , as well as remote and asyn - chronous collaborative and collective search . Our focus in this paper is to explore a model of social search that may oﬀer suggestions for supporting social interactions in the information seeking process . SURVEY We conducted a survey asking 150 users to describe their most recent search act using Amazon’s Mechan - ical Turk service . Our survey was designed to resem - ble critical - incident reporting , in which users self - report events that occurred relatively recently [ 4 ] . We prompted users to report information about the context ( “What were you doing just before you searched ? ” ) and pur - pose ( “What prompted you to perform the search ? ” ) of the selected incident , and how ( or if ) they inter - acted with other individuals prior to and following the primary search act . Selected survey questions are pre - sented below : 1 . What kind of information were you searching for ? 2 . Did you talk with anyone before you searched ? 3 . What steps did you take to ﬁnd this information ? 4 . What did you do just after you searched ? 5 . If other people were nearby , were you interacting with them or were they inﬂuencing your search process ? 6 . After you found the information , did you share it with anyone ? 7 . If yes , how did you share the information ? Users provided background information on their profes - sion , job roles ( Table 1 ) , and levels of job expertise as rated on a 5 - point Likert scale ( Table 2 ) . Two - thirds of search acts occurred on the same day that our survey was ﬁlled out ; 19 . 3 % on the day before ; and 17 . 3 % more than 2 days ago . Profession % Users Job Role % Users Education 9 . 3 Manager 19 . 3 Financial 8 . 7 Assistant 18 . 7 Healthcare 6 . 7 CEO / Director 8 . 0 Govt . Agency 6 . 0 Customer Support 7 . 3 Retail 6 . 0 Teacher 6 . 0 Table 1 . The most frequently occurring professions and job roles reported by users in our sample . Search Duration % Users Job Expertise % Users < 5 minutes 44 . 7 5 33 . 3 5 – 10 minutes 23 . 3 4 35 . 3 10 – 20 minutes 10 . 7 3 20 . 7 20 – 30 minutes 13 . 3 2 7 . 3 > 30 minutes 8 . 0 1 3 . 3 Table 2 . Information reported about duration of the search act and level of job experience . RESULTS Our main contribution is that we have integrated our ﬁndings with models of sensemaking and information seeking from the literature , and we present a canoni - cal model of social search ( Figure 1 on the next page ) . We will discuss our model in three phases , highlight - ing where information exchange occurred through so - cial interactions and providing both quantitative data and anecdotal case studies of actual user behavior . Before Search Context Framing Information - seeking behavior is rooted in a “need” to ﬁnd information [ 1 , 10 ] or a motivation that drives the search process . This may be thought of as the con - text framing stage , where user motives and information needs are deﬁned . Requests for information may come from an external source or may be self - initiated . From our sample , 47 of 150 users ( 31 . 3 % ) searched for in - formation following a speciﬁc request from a boss , cus - tomer , or client ; whereas 103 / 150 users ( 68 . 7 % ) were self - motivated to ﬁnd information related to personal or work endeavors . Requirement Reﬁnement After the information need and motives are established , users reﬁne their search requirements . Previously de - scribed as a generation loop [ 8 ] , this phase involves gath - ering requirements and formulating relevant schemas such that an eﬀective search may result . In our data , this cycle is marked by social interactions 42 . 0 % of the time ( 63 / 150 users ) as a means to “inﬂuence the infor - mation need” [ 9 ] , gather useful keywords or URLs , or develop the necessary guidelines for a given task . During Search Although search can be a cyclical process , the search stage in our model represents the active instantiation of representations or “encodons , ” as part of a “data cov - erage” loop [ 8 ] . In other words , this is the stage where users engage in traditional information seeking [ 10 ] and foraging activities [ 6 , 7 ] . We detail each of the three types of search acts below ( transactional , navigational , and informational [ 1 ] ) , drawing special attention to the social interactions . Transactional Search With a transactional search , users locate a source where they can subsequently perform a transaction or other “web - mediated activity” [ 1 ] . In our sample , this typi - cally involved navigating to a website through a series of routine steps and requesting speciﬁc information such as weather at a destination , movie listings , or data from a customer’s account . As an example , an ambulance chief found the distance from a patient’s home to the hospital through MapQuest . com by entering the start and end locations , and then retrieving the mileage information . Navigational Search During a navigational search , users perform a series of actions to identify content from a particular , often fa - miliar , location . The content is often known in advance , or will be easily recognized once it is ( re ) discovered . For example , a nurse used the NIH website to look up infor - mation on a medical drug : ﬁrst by logging into Google , looking up the NIH’s web address , and then searching for the drug on the NIH website . The nurse reports : “I knew exactly where [ the information ] would be—just couldn’t recall what the answer was . ” Transactional and navigational searches occasionally in - volved pre - search interactions with others ( 19 . 0 % and 47 . 6 % , respectively ) , but information exchange did not occur during the search itself . Consequently , it is un - likely that socially - augmented search would improve or facilitate transactional or navigational information re - trieval . Informational Search On the other hand , social search may greatly improve tasks involving informational search—an exploratory process , combining foraging and sensemaking [ 6 , 7 ] , of searching for information that may or may not be fa - miliar to the user . Foraging . The basic “information assimilation” pro - cess [ 3 ] illustrates this early foraging phase where users search for information within a speciﬁc patch , followed by skimming , reading , and extracting information from source ﬁles . Throughout this process , users may up - date and shift their search representations [ 8 ] as they discover new items , at times by seeking feedback from others . A public librarian worked with her boss to ﬁnd the Cheetah Girls 2 soundtrack : “We had to deduce a number of [ keyword ] combinations . We tried a number of ways to write Cheetah Girls , including hyphens and spelling out the number two . ” Sensemaking . After an initial pass at foraging , users may identify preliminary “evidence ﬁles” [ 7 ] from which they can further modify their search schema and query . For example , an English Professor engaged in a classic sensemaking process when he used MSN . com to look up information about Robert Frost . He copied and pasted query results into a Word document , which he revisited later to sort and summarize for an upcoming lecture . Social interactions may also augment the sensemaking process . One programmer from Intuit engaged with a colleague while searching for an application program - ming interface ( API ) . They began with a brainstorm - ing session , followed by an online search , and ﬁnally “another round of discussion” on whether the API ( the “evidence ﬁle” ) would be suﬃcient for their purposes . Over half of the search experiences reported by our sam - ple were informational in nature ( 89 / 150 users , 59 . 3 % ) . Even though our survey did not ask users to report Figure 1 . Canonical social model of user activities before , during , and after a search act , including citations from related work in information seeking and sensemaking behavior . social incidents or explicitly collaborative search acts , searchers did engage with others both before and dur - ing the informational search . In fact , 35 out of these 89 individuals ( 39 . 3 % ) had social experiences prior to searching—and not simply out of obligation . Some used these social opportunities for brainstorming , to assess others’ opinions , or to improve their own search schemas ( “to know what kind of material would be useful” ) . Consequently , there appears to be both a need for and an interest in input from others throughout the infor - mational search process . After Search Following the active search phase , an “end product” is often obtained [ 9 ] , which may be “acted” on through organization and / or distribution [ 3 ] . Organization Nearly half of our users ( 71 / 150 or 47 . 3 % ) organized their end products in some fashion . Pirolli and Card referred to this process as schematizing , where raw evi - dence is organized and “represented in some schematic way” [ 7 ] . For example , one real estate agent printed and reviewed the results of a search before “giving them to an attorney for legal inspection . ” The president of a design company bookmarked online articles about web mashups to read later in the week . Evans and Card remarked how users may serve as ﬁlters for information through their actions in bookmarking , tagging , or anno - tating items , which subsequently “improve [ s ] access to the item in the future or . . . integrate [ s ] it with previous knowledge and context” [ 3 ] . Distribution In fact , most of these organizational acts served as a means for distributing the end product to others , as a “presentation or publication of a case” [ 7 ] . At other times , information was shared directly face - to - face or verbally over the phone . Regardless of the distribution mechanism , over half of respondents ( 88 / 150 , 58 . 7 % ) shared their end products with others ( e . g . , a ﬂoral designer relayed information about local spring bloom - ing ﬂowers to a bride - to - be ) . Some even “shared” the content with themselves by printing out documents or bookmarking websites for re - accessing at a future date ( 11 users , 7 . 3 % ) . These activities suggest that social interactions are im - portant even after the primary search act , especially for self - initiated searches . 49 of the 104 self - motivated searchers ( 47 . 5 % ) distributed search content for veriﬁ - cation , feedback , or because they thought others would ﬁnd it interesting . CONCLUSION As we outlined through the model , social inputs may help users throughout the search process . Before search - ing , social interactions may help establish the require - ments for the actual search task . During search , espe - cially for self - motivated informational searches , users may talk to others for advice , feedback , and brainstorm - ing to improve their search schema and query keyword selections . After search , users may still wish to engage with others to collect additional feedback or to share knowledge gained during the search . Altogether this suggests that a notion of “social search” may facilitate the process of information seeking . One techinque for supporting social search may be through instant messaging access to your personal connections alongside the search box . Or it might exploit a web - site’s existing community to reveal domain - speciﬁc ex - perts who would be willing to advise searchers . Alter - natively , sites could display related and successful key - word combinations or search trails from previous users , or automatically - generated tag clouds of semantically related concepts that may provide high - level feedback on the general search topic . We hope that our discus - sion in this paper will encourage researchers to explore both explicitly collaborative social interactions as well as implicitly shared information to augment web - based search . REFERENCES 1 . A . Broder . A taxonomy of web search . In ACM SIGIR Forum , pages 3 – 10 , 2002 . 2 . C . W . Choo , B . Detlor , and D . Turnbull . Information seeking on the web : An integrated model of browsing and searching . In Proc . ASIS’99 , ACM Press , pages 3 – 16 , 1999 . 3 . B . M . Evans and S . K . Card . Augmented information assimilation : Social and algorithmic web aids for the information long tail . In Proc . CHI’08 , ACM Press , pages 989 – 998 , 2008 . 4 . J . Flanagan . The critical incident technique . Psychological Bulletin , 51 : 327 – 358 , 1954 . 5 . M . Morris . A survey of collaborative web search practices . In Proc . CHI’08 , ACM Press , pages 1657 – 1660 , 2008 . 6 . P . Pirolli and S . K . Card . Information foraging . Psychological Review , 106 : 643 – 675 , 1999 . 7 . P . Pirolli and S . K . Card . The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identiﬁed through cognitive task analysis . In Proc . Int’l Conference on Intelligence Analysis’05 , pages 2 – 4 , 2005 . 8 . D . M . Russell , M . J . Steﬁk , P . Pirolli , and S . K . Card . The cost structure of sensemaking . In Proc . CHI’93 , ACM Press , pages 269 – 276 , 1993 . 9 . M . B . Twidale , D . M . Nichols , and C . D . Paice . Browsing is a collaborative process . Information Processing and Management , 33 ( 6 ) : 761 – 783 , 1997 . 10 . T . Wilson . On user studies and information needs . Journal of Documentation , 37 ( 1 ) : 3 – 15 , 1981 .