Integrating innovation skills in an introductory engineering design - build course Leon Liebenberg • Edward Henry Mathews Published online : 19 September 2010 (cid:2) Springer Science + Business Media B . V . 2010 Abstract Modern engineering curricula have started to emphasize design , mostly in the form of design - build experiences . Apart from instilling important problem - solving skills , such pedagogical frameworks address the critical social skill aspects of engineering edu - cation due to their team - based , project - based nature . However , it is required of the twenty - ﬁrst century engineer to be not only technically competent and socially and culturally aware , but also innovative and entrepreneurial . This paper discusses a reformulated ﬁrst - year engineering course at the University of Pretoria , which was adopted 6 years ago to better address the required innovation skills of engineering students . This design - build - innovate course employs a unique creative problem - solving strategy in designing and building solutions to set technological problems . The students further investigate the provisional patenting of their design concepts . Mini business plans are developed and the students participate in a university - and in a national innovation competition . This intro - ductory engineering course has been successful as measured by overwhelmingly positive student feedback , several provisional patents , and a number of small start - up companies that emanated from the students’ work . Keywords Design - build (cid:2) Innovation skills (cid:2) Herrmann brain dominance instrument (cid:2) Introductory engineering course Introduction The requirements of twenty - ﬁrst century engineers are considerable : engineers must be technically competent , globally sophisticated , culturally aware , innovative and entrepre - neurial , and life - long learners ( Duderstadt 2008 ; King 2007 ; ABET 2003 ) . They must also be intellectually nimble and ﬂexible , and mobile ( Continental 2006 ) . The changing workforce and technology needs of a global knowledge economy are dramatically L . Liebenberg ( & ) (cid:2) E . H . Mathews Centre for Research and Continued Engineering Development ( Pretoria ) , North - West University , Suite no . 93 , Private Bag X30 , Lynnwood Ridge 0040 , Pretoria , South Africa e - mail : lliebenberg @ researchtoolbox . com 123 Int J Technol Des Educ ( 2012 ) 22 : 93 – 113 DOI 10 . 1007 / s10798 - 010 - 9137 - 1 challenging the nature of engineering practice . This demands far broader skills than simply the mastery of scientiﬁc and technological disciplines ( Duderstadt 2008 ; Crawley et al . 2007 ) . ‘‘Today’s engineering students have all too little opportunity for discovery - oriented , interactive , and collaborative learning experiences’’ ( Duderstadt 2008 , p . 33 ) . Numerous strong curricular initiatives have therefore been implemented to help develop and foster multi - disciplinary , team - based , and project - based problem solving skills ( i . e . active or experiential learning ) , and to hone communication and other social skills ( Sheppard et al . 2009 ; Crawley et al . 2007 ; King 2007 ; Downey et al . 2006 ; Dym et al . 2005 ) . These initiatives represent a move away from lecture - dominated educational systems that encourage a passive ( i . e . receptive ) learning environment that features a highly compartmentalized ( lecture - sized ) curriculum ( McCowan and Knapper 2002 ; Felder and Brent 2004 ) . Passive learning environments are also characterized by their instilling neither the motivation nor the skills for lifelong learning ( Duderstadt 2008 ) . On the contrary , project - and problem - based pedagogic frameworks enhance design thinking and improve student retention rates , especially among women and underrepre - sented race groups ( Dym et al . 2005 ) . Active involvement in learning helps the student to develop the skills of self - learning while at the same time contributing to a deeper , longer lasting knowledge of the theoretical material ( Kolmos 2009 ; Lamancusa 2008 ; Crawley et al . 2007 ; Ditcher 2001 ; Felder and Silverman 1988 ) . Research also shows that active learning is a highly effective way to develop professional skills and to realize the inte - gration of material from different sources ( McCowan 2002 ; Lumsdaine and Lumsdaine 1995 ) . In addition , project - and problem - based pedagogic frameworks have reportedly pro - vided an improved basis for students to make better - informed choices of study disciplines ( e . g . mechanical rather than electronic engineering ) . Such frameworks further give engi - neering students valuable appreciation of pre - requisite mathematics and science courses ( Dym et al . 2005 ) . Educational initiatives have also been established to help prepare engineering students to effectively function in a global environment ( Hirleman et al . 2007 ) . The key achieve - ment in attaining ‘‘ global competency ’’ is deemed to be learning to work effectively with people who deﬁne problems differently than oneself ( Downey et al . 2006 ) . Such a learning outcome may be achieved by subjecting engineering students to multi - cultural problem - solving environments ( Chubin et al . 2005 ) . Apart from learning that engineering problems can be solved in different ways , students are also brought to understand that problems can be deﬁned in different ways and mean different things to people holding different perspectives . It therefore makes sense for engineering students to gain experiences with people who are participating in , responding to , and / or challenged by cultural perspectives that differ from their own ( Dym 2008 ; Downey et al . 2006 ; Hirleman et al . 2007 ) . The global , knowledge - driven economy has also resulted in a growing awareness of the critical importance of technological innovation to competitiveness , long - term productivity and growth , and the generation of wealth ( Council on Competitiveness 2005 ) . Preeminence in technological innovation however requires leadership in all aspects of engineering ( i . e . research , education , and practice ) . According to Duderstadt ( 2008 ) , the most important technical skills that engineering students should acquire , are the integration of knowledge , synthesis , design , and innovation . The challenge in responding to these needs is to do so without reducing the quality of the technical education and without extending the period of formal education beyond the 94 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 4 years that is the international norm . Equipping an engineer with a much broader range of competencies is made difﬁcult by the fact that the specialized material in his or her program is likely to be narrowing ( McCowan and Knapper 2002 ; Dym 1994 ; Bordogna et al . 1993 ) . We discuss a unique ﬁrst - year ( freshman ) engineering design - build - innovate course which was adopted 6 years ago by the University of Pretoria’s School of Engineering . Apart from employing team - based project work , the students learn how to carry their ideas from conception to possible market adoption . All the activities are superimposed on a novel four - quadrant brain - based model of creative problem - solving . No other engineering course with a similar structure could be traced in published literature . Design Design stands at the core of engineering practice and engineers rely on a variety of strategies when they perform this activity ( Dym 1994 ) . Design consists of both creative and rational ( or analytic ) dimensions ( Koestler 1964 ; Suh 1990 ; Rubinstein 1975 ) . New ideas are synthesized during the creative process and may include brainstorming , synectics such as analogical thinking and bisociation , and enlarging the problem through dialectics— pitting an idea against its opposite ( Voland 2004 ; Lewis and Zuga 2007 ) . Rational ( or analytic ) methods involve breaking a problem into sub - problems , and evaluation of pro - posed ideas then arriving at sub - solutions . Problem - solving strategy Engineering design is an iterative process requiring numerous decisions . Due to the inherent features of engineering design , the design process will be different depending on the type of device or system to be designed , the state of the art , the supporting personnel and equipment available , etc . ( Middendorf and Engelmann 1998 ) . Students should further understand that engineering design always entails compromises and trade - offs ( Petroski 1998 ) . It is important also to comprehend the open - endedness of engineering problem - solving ( Dym 1994 ; Lumsdaine et al . 1999 ) . A general approach to engineering design may be formulated to comprise of the fol - lowing steps , c . f . Fig . 1 ( Grote and Antonson 2009 ; Voland 2004 ; Lumsdaine et al . 1999 ; Fogler and LeBlanc 2008 ; Koen 1994 ; Cross 2002 ; Rubinstein 1975 ; Dym 1994 ) : • Problem Deﬁnition ( needs assessment ; formulating the real problem ; sub - dividing problem into design goals ) • Idea Generation ( abstraction and synthesis ; generation of possible solutions ) • Idea Evaluation ( analysis ; compare and evaluate alternative designs ) • Idea Judgment ( analysis ; concept selection ) • Solution Implementation ( manufacture ; testing ; and evaluation ) Apart from this engineering design method , students should also appreciate that engi - neers frequently use heuristics ( such as ‘‘rules of thumb’’ and ‘‘safety factors’’ ) to guide design ( Koen 1985 ) . Although these heuristics do not guarantee a solution , they can aid in the solution of problems that would be unsolvable using conventional analytic techniques . Heuristics also reduce the search time in solving a problem ( Lewis and Zuga 2007 ) . Various approaches for teaching engineering design exist . Such methods attempt to provide a structured , problem - solving method that may be used to tackle open - ended Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 95 123 design problems , including the popular methods proposed by Otto and Wood ( 1996 ) , Pugh ( 1991 ) , Ullman ( 2003 ) , Ulrich and Eppinger ( 2000 ) , and those summarized in Dieter and Schmidt ( 2008 ) , Blanchard and Fabrycky ( 1998 ) , and Fogler and LeBlanc ( 2008 ) . Team - based learning activities Worldwide , new freshman engineering design courses have been developed to subject students from early on in their studies to the importance of design ( and re - design ) in engineering practice ( Crawley et al . 2007 ; Wood et al . 2001 ; Dym et al . 2005 ; Petroski 1998 , Sheppard and Jenison 1997 ; Otto and Wood 1996 ) . These foundation courses have also formed part of design - based curricula , such as the MIT - initiated conceive - design - implement - operate ( CDIO ) initiative ( Crawley et al . 2007 ) . The focus of these activities is typically on creating and testing ( ‘‘implementing’’ ) a functional product or system , rather than one that has strong potential to succeed in the marketplace ( Young and Ha¨llstrom 2007 ; Wood et al . 2001 ; Carlson and Sullivan 2005 ) . It has been found that team - based and project - based learning are the most well proven methods of developing professional skills and achieving active learning ( Hernandez et al . 2009 ; Crawley et al . 2007 ; McCowan and Knapper 2002 ; Sheppard and Jenison 1997 ) . Felder and Silverman ( 1988 ) however found that the learning styles of most engineering students and teaching styles of most engineering lecturers were incompatible . Lumsdaine and Lumsdaine ( 1995 ) accounted for these differences when they restructured the Uni - versity of Toledo’s engineering curriculum . Their longitudinal research study showed that the formation of ‘‘whole - brain’’ student design teams resulted in optimal problem - solving , compared to a control group . It follows that a student who has a ﬁrm grasp of fundamentals , the techniques for team work and effective communication , the ability to ﬁnd and assess relevant facts and theory , and experience in employing all three in dealing with a series of projects , is deemed to be able to employ these techniques in dealing with any projects in his or her ﬁelds ( Otto and Problem Definition Idea Generation CreativeIdeaEvaluation Idea Judgment Solution Implemen - tation Fig . 1 The engineering design process ( after Lumsdaine et al . 1999 ) 96 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 Wood 1996 ; Wood et al . 2001 ; Lumsdaine and Lumsdaine 1995 ; Kjersdam and Enemark 1994 ) . To improve the educational outcomes of team - based , project - based learning , senior students are often used as mentors and managers , which provide learning opportunities for the senior students while providing guidance and feedback to the junior students ( Wood et al . 2001 ) . The above design - build experiences are characterized by Young and Ha¨llstrom ( 2007 ) : • their dual impact , in that they teach students personal and interpersonal skills , as well as product / system design and implementation skills , whilst simultaneously reinforcing disciplinary knowledge ; • their strengthening of learning fundamentals , by being presented multiple times within a curriculum , ﬁrst to introduce and motivate learning , then to provide opportunities for application . At the University of Pretoria , engineering students engage in four design - build opportunities , one in each year of study ; • their involving active learning , where students not only manipulate , apply and evaluate ideas , but also where the students take on roles that simulate professional engineering practice ; • their being motivating and fun , and enthusing students for their successive engineering studies , and also retaining the students . It has also been found that engineering freshmen can perform effectively in design - build experiences , despite their limited engineering background ( Lewis and Zuga 2007 ) . Dym ( 1994 , p . 1 ) suggests that engineering freshmen ‘‘are smart enough—and interested enough , given the chance—to take chances at putting together components , matching them in a systems - like approach , recognizing performance characteristics , and linking compo - nents accordingly to realize a successful ﬁnal design’’ . Petroski ( 1998 ) is in agreement , and notes that freshman engineering design courses should not focus on calculations , but on learning the essence of design , including critique of design , the role of trade - offs , team - work , and invention . At the University of Pretoria , the ﬁrst year of study is the same for all engineering disciplines . Students are therefore able to gain a deeper understanding of an engineering discipline prior to ﬁnally choosing their area of study in the second year . Early design - build experiences therefore have a signiﬁcant positive effect on ﬁrst - year engineering students . From the perspective of engineering fundamentals , design - build experiences also strengthen a foundation upon which deeper conceptual understanding of disciplinary and multi - disciplinary knowledge can be built . Early design - build experiences lay this underpinning by engaging students in creative problem - solving , and motivating the need for analysis . In this way , students are eager to learn a theory when it is presented to them , and they better understand its relevance and limitations ( Young and Ha¨llstrom 2007 ) . Creative problem solving If design is the essence of engineering , then creativity is the essence of design . Creative problem - solving is a structured model that uses exploratory , analytical , creative , critical , organized , and interpersonal thinking in the most effective sequence to obtain optimum outcomes ( Lumsdaine and Binks 2006 ) . Effective problem - solving is achieved when applying such a ‘‘whole - brain’’ model iteratively to achieve a desired goal ( Herrmann 1990 ) . Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 97 123 All 950 freshmen engineers at the University of Pretoria , from all disciplines , are required to take a year - long course in ‘‘Innovation’’ ( MNV 100 ) . This course exposes students to theory and abstractions , and implements a formal framework of creative problem - solving to address engineering design . During the ﬁrst semester of this course , the students learn a novel framework of creative problem - solving . This framework , which is based on the methodology explained in Fig . 1 , is superimposed on the Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument ( HBDI ) - four - quadrant model and certain metaphorical mindsets , as shown in Fig . 2 . Ned Herrmann ( 1990 ) developed a four - quadrant model of thinking preferences , which enables a clear understanding of the creative problem - solving process , and developing entrepreneurial ideas from conception to market . Figure 2 shows the four quadrants of the HBDI , with each quadrant representing a cluster of distinct thinking abilities and ways of ‘‘knowing’’ . Each person embodies a coalition of these abilities in various proportions ( Lumsdaine and Lumsdaine 1995 ; Herrmann 1990 ) . Freshman engineers at the University of Pretoria ascertain their HBDI brain proﬁles by completing HBDI questionnaires . They learn that thinking preference does not necessarily equate to competence . Further , the students get to appreciate that difference in thinking preferences are expressed in different vocabularies and in different problem - solving out - comes ( Lumsdaine and Lumsdaine 1995 ) . The students also learn that that their primary and secondary preferred modes of thinking can be used more effectively through training , motivation , and practice . In addition , the students are shown techniques with which to strengthen their less - referred thinking modes ( Herrmann 1990 ; Lumsdaine and Lumsdaine 1995 ) . The four main thinking quadrants are : • A : ‘‘Analyzer’’ : Logical , critical , factual , technical , analytical , quantitative • B : ‘‘Administrator’’ : Conservative , structured , sequential , organized , detailed , planned • C : ‘‘Collaborator’’ : Interpersonal , kinesthetic , emotional , spiritual , sensory , feeling - oriented • D : ‘‘Synthesizer’’ : Visual , holistic , intuitive , innovative , imaginative , conceptual It is interesting to note that in 2007 the average HBDI - proﬁle of freshmen engineers at the University of Pretoria showed a predominantly left - brain bias ( A = 85 , B = 77 , C = 54 , D = 72 ) . This lack , or avoidance of , quadrant - C thinking ( teamwork skills ) and quadrant - D thinking ( synthesizing skills ) , highlights the problem that some freshmen are Fig . 2 Creative problem solving framework and metaphorical mindsets superimposed on the herrmann brain dominance instrument ( HBDI ) four - quadrant model ( after Lumsdaine et al . 1999 ) . The HBDI model comprises the division of the brain into right ( A , B ) and left ( C , D ) halves and into the cerebral ( A , D ) and limbic ( B , C ) hemispheres , resulting in four distinct quadrants 98 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 initially uncomfortable in a course that accentuates these aspects . It also motivates the importance of subjecting students to learning experiences that will develop or enhance those crucial right - brain thinking skills . Lumsdaine and Lumsdaine ( 1995 ) associate each of the four HBDI quadrants with six metaphorical mindsets ( i . e . explorer , detective , artist , engineer , judge , and producer ) : ( 1 ) Problem Deﬁnition Here the engineering students must look at the big picture or context of the problem , or to discover its opportunity and future - oriented aspects . The metaphorical mindset of the ‘‘explorer’’ is adopted , primarily using quadrant C and D thinking . To ﬁnd the root causes of the problem , the students need to think like ‘‘detectives’’ , looking for clues and asking questions using quadrant A and B thinking . The Problem Deﬁnition stage ends with a summary brieﬁng and a positive problem deﬁnition statement based on an analysis of the collected information ( Lumsdaine and Binks 2006 ) . The students should understand the importance of clearly stating the design objectives , contextual background , design methodology , expected deliverables and success criteria . In formulating the success criteria , the students will be wise to recall the old saying that ‘‘an engineer is someone who for a penny , can do what any fool can do for a pound . ’’ ( 2 ) Idea Generation Here the students brainstorm a multitude of creative ideas based on the problem deﬁ - nition in the imaginative , intuitive mindset of an ‘‘artist’’ , using thinking quadrants C and D ( Lumsdaine and Binks 2006 ) . ( 3 ) Idea Evaluation / Synthesis In the creative idea evaluation phase , the students play around with the brainstormed ideas to obtain fewer but more practical , optimized , synthesized solutions in the mindset of an ‘‘engineer’’ , using thinking quadrants D and A ( Lumsdaine and Binks 2006 ) . ( 4 ) Idea Judgment In the critical idea evaluation phase , the students must use relevant criteria to determine which ideas and solutions are best and should be implemented , in the mindset of a ‘‘judge’’ and primarily using thinking quadrants A and B ( Lumsdaine and Binks 2006 ) . Engineers are usually good at this type of task , which also hints at why they are often not good businesspeople . ( 5 ) Solution Implementation Putting a solution into action requires a new round of creative problem - solving in the mindset of the ‘‘producer’’ . Here the focus is primarily on quadrant - B planning and quadrant - C communication to carry the project to successful conclusion ( Lumsdaine and Binks 2006 ) . For each of the six metaphorical mindsets , the students learnt a selection of different techniques to carry out the particular problem - solving step . These techniques are well - documented in the prescribed textbook by Lumsdaine and Binks ( 2006 ) . It is important for the engineering students to appreciate that creativity is an act that produces ‘‘effective surprise’’ . This ‘‘surprise’’ that is associated with creative accom - plishment often has the quality of obviousness after the fact . The creative product or process makes perfect sense , once it is revealed ( Bruner 1961 ; Koestler 1964 ; Lewis and Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 99 123 Zuga 2007 ; Zull 2002 ) . For the creative person , surprise is the privilege only of prepared minds—minds with structured expectancies and interests ( Bruner 1961 ) . Creativity is further a composite concept , the product not just of individual traits , but also of societal and environmental factors ( Lewis and Zuga 2007 ) . Czikszentmihalyi ( 1988 ) proposed that creativity is never accomplished by an individual alone , but rather is the product of the interaction of a stable cultural domain that will ensure perpetuation of the idea , a supporting institutional framework ( a ‘‘ﬁeld’’ ) comprised of the stakeholders and gatekeepers who affect the structure of the domain , and an embedded social system . These concepts are especially important for instilling team - work capabilities in engi - neering students . This they get to appreciate in the second semester of the course , during which they have to solve a problem by designing and building a solution , and their investigating the process of taking their ideas to market ( viz . , ‘‘innovation’’ ) . Technological innovation The importance of a nation’s competitiveness depends on the capacity of its industries to innovate , to act as trendsetters and to determine future developments ( Hockﬁeld 2010 ; Duderstadt 2008 ; Liebenberg 2006 ; Council on Competitiveness 2005 ) . It is therefore imperative that a nation’s future cadre of engineers and scientists have a thorough understanding not only of the technical and creative aspects of innovation ; they should also grasp the context of the broader innovation process . Successful companies place innovation at the heart of their business activities and entrepreneurial strategy ( Vogel et al . 2005 ; Liebenberg 2006 ) . The American Council on Competitiveness recently concluded that ‘‘ [ f ] or the past 25 years we have optimized our organizations for efﬁciency and quality . Over the next quarter century , we must optimize our entire society for competitiveness’’ ( Council on Competitiveness 2005 , p . 7 ) . The most signiﬁcant role of the engineer of the future is deemed to be innovation through the creation of new products , processes , and service—a role that stresses systems integration ( synthesis ) over engineering science ( analysis ) . ‘‘Tomorrow’s engineers should have the capacity to produce concurrent discovery and innovation , key to both economic prosperity and social well being in a knowledge - driven world’’ ( Duderstadt 2008 , p . 45 ) . It was therefore deemed crucial to restructure the engineering curriculum at the University of Pretoria to contain strong elements of innovation training . This training emphasizes that successful innovations have two components , namely invention and market exploitation . An innovation is therefore deemed as being successful when a group or community has adopted a new practice ( Drucker 1993 ; Brown 2008 ) . This differs from invention , as invention means the creation of something new and does not require that anyone accepts or adopts it ( Denning and Dunham 2006 ) . Although invention and innovation are different skill sets , they share common aspects ( Vogel et al . 2005 ) . Both inventors and innovators start with a possibility . The inventor turns the possibility into an idea , artifact , patent or process and proposes others to consider it ( Denning and Dunham 2006 ; Kleppe and Wang 2001 ) . The innovator turns the possi - bility into an offer for adoption and then follows it through to adoption ( c . f . Fig . 3 ) . Innovation is widely regarded as the product of a fertile , creative mind , the work of a ‘‘lonely genius’’ ( Brown 2008 ; Denning and Dunham 2006 ) . The modern framework ( depicted in Fig . 3 ) shifts the emphasis to interaction ( or C - quadrant type skills ) . Inno - vation therefore means not only that a group or community adopts new practices of interaction , but the way to arrive there is through seven kinds of interaction with those 100 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 groups and communities ( Denning and Dunham 2006 ) . It is important for engineering students to comprehend this gap between invention and innovation , and the steps required to bridge it . It is also important for engineering students to understand that market penetration of an innovation is dependent on creative and entrepreneurial thinking ( Rutherford and Rowe 1987 ) . Entrepreneurs have the capacity to understand the nature and potential of innova - tions , the creativity to assemble human and ﬁnancial capital to build organizations capable of using them to create value , and the courage to take the risks to take them into the marketplace ( Brown 2008 ) . As Bordogna ( 2006 , p . 11 ) notes , ‘‘If technological innovation is at the heart of pro - gress … then we need to understand the skills that foster the capacity for risk taking , for imagination , and a tolerance for unfamiliar and uncertain technology . ’’ It seems imminent that the stimulation of creative thinking and innovation skills should form core components of an engineering curriculum ( Council on Competitiveness 2005 ; Denning and Dunham 2006 ) . The second semester of the ‘‘Innovation’’ course affords the opportunity for the inter - disciplinary , team - based freshmen to solve ( and create a solution to ) a technological problem ( viz . ‘‘implementation’’ ) . It is important to advise the students that working in teams to solve real - world problems is exactly what most of them will do as professionals ( Felder and Brent 2004 ) . Students are then divided into groups of four , with each group required to be inter - disciplinary in nature ( at least two students from different ﬁelds of engineering study ) , and with a mix of race and gender , where possible ( Oakley et al . 2004 ) . Importantly , however , is the fact that the teams have to comprise of students with different HBDI - determined brain dominances . As Hollingsworth et al . ( 2005 , p . 9 ) con - tend , ‘‘It is the diversity of disciplines and paradigms to which individuals are exposed with frequent and intense interaction that increases the tendency for creativity , and for break - throughs to occur’’ . The engineering students , so divided into heterogeneous teams , should be brought to understand that creative problem - solving best works with a marriage of different - thinking minds . Due to the disproportionate composition of students per engineering discipline , it was not always possible to form perfectly heterogeneous teams . Figure 4 shows an example of 6 . Sustaining integration into surroundings 1 . Sensing possibilities 2 . Envisioning new realities 3 . Offering new outcomes 4 . Executing plans and tools 5 . Adopting new practice 7 . Leading with care , courage , value , power , focus , destiny , and speech act fluency Fig . 3 Anatomy of innovation ( after Denning and Dunham 2006 ) . The practice of invention comprises the ﬁrst three of the seven foundational practices of innovation . Many innovators bypass the work of invention by taking up what inventors have already proposed . The six practices on the rim of this ﬁgure are a progression but are not necessarily sequential steps . Innovators move forward and backward among them as they blend and adapt what they are learning Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 101 123 a team that displayed a good mix of thinking preferences . Their product is very advanced , and its successful operation testament to strong right and left brain proﬁles in the team . Figure 5 shows a team that was more homogeneous in make - up , with apparent right - brain dominance . Although this group’s artefact was well made and fulﬁlled in its stated pur - pose , it lacked the novelty and level of difﬁculty of that displayed by the ‘‘whole - brain’’ group in Fig . 4 . In general it was found that the heterogeneous ( ‘‘whole - brain’’ ) teams developed more advanced and creative artefacts , or better thought - through concepts , with greater potential for invention and market exploitation . The class therefore experienced ﬁrst - hand the advantages ( and challenges ) of performing problem - solving tasks in heterogeneous teams . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 4 a Freshman engineering team with their electric skateboard that features automatic stabilization . The team comprised of two mechanical engineering students , one civil engineering student , and one electronic engineering student . b Three of the students had HBDI brain proﬁle dominances in quadrants A , B , and D , respectively , whilst the fourth member had whole - brain dominance ( near - equal A – B – C – D distribution ) . In general , the team displayed a good mix of learning proﬁles . A score of 67 or more points on any one preference is considered a primary preference ; a score of 34 – 66 is considered a secondary preference ; and a score of 0 – 33 is considered a tertiary preference and indicates an area of potential avoidance ( a ) ( b ) A B C D 33 66 99 Fig . 5 a Freshman engineering team with their electricity efﬁciency training kit for use in schools and in science centres . The team comprised of two mechanical engineering students , one electrical engineering student , and one chemical engineering student . b The team members displayed homogeneous HBDI brain proﬁles , with apparent ( and quite rare ) right - brain ( and especially C - quadrant ) dominances 102 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 The students also appreciated that engineers are typically left - brain dominant , although right - brain skills ( especially C - quadrant skills ) are critical in modern engineering practice . Teams received instructions on how to effectively manage conﬂict . They were also regularly reminded of the importance to honor another team member’s difference in thinking style . Teams were instructed that anyone could raise an objection at any time , but that a reason for the objection should also be provided . All the other team members were to listen to the objection , treat it as legitimate , and counter with their own reasons if they did not agree . Team meetings should also allow time for both divergent and convergent discussions , to ensure that no team member becomes frustrated , which might lead to conﬂict . If unresolved , conﬂicts had to be addressed using an HBDI four - quadrant prob - lem - solving approach , by identifying the real problem , collecting information , identifying and analyzing alternative solutions , and choosing the best option . Each team is assigned a senior engineering or postgraduate student as mentor , with each mentor working with no more than four groups . All the mentors undergo a training course in mentorship as presented by psychologists of the University of Pretoria . Teams meet their mentors on a weekly basis , and mentors provide feedback to the professor , also on a weekly basis . The teams are expected to work on their projects during the scheduled weekly 2 - h laboratory periods , but considerable out - of - class time is usually required for successful completion of the project . Each year a different problem set is given to the freshmen engineers . They have to perform research into the different problem areas , and identify a suitable problem that requires solving . The professor assists the students in selecting appropriate project topics . The teams have to use the creative problem - solving methodology that they learnt in the ﬁrst semester in solving their problem . Appendix 1 shows that each successive week of the second semester is linked to the execution of at least one major step in the problem - solving process . Each student accordingly has to keep a logbook of ideas , which is assessed at least twice in the second semester . The students are advised of the critical importance of such an ‘‘inventor’s logbook’’ to help protect possible inventions . Upon selecting their ﬁnal concepts and performing suitable analyses that they self - studied , the design concepts are drawn up using SolidWorks and each of the ? 230 artefacts products are then manufactured . The manufacturing takes place in the mechanical engi - neering workshops , with assistance of technical instructors . Students may also manufacture the artifacts at their homes . Where necessary , teams manufacture scale models of their concepts . The latter is dictated by the allowed budget of US $ 100 , which may only be exceeded upon the teams successfully soliciting ﬁnancial support from engineering companies . The groups have to present their artefacts to their fellow students and invited adjudi - cators . The activities are presented in competition format , held over a period of a week . The winning group gets entered into a National Innovation Competition with cash prizes ranging from US $ 5 , 000 each for three regional winning teams , and US $ 30 , 000 for the national winning team ( National Innovation Competition 2009 ) . All groups are required to investigate the possible provisional patenting of their ideas . Meritorious groups are given free provisional patenting , sponsored by a local engineering magazine ( Research Channel 2010 ) . Irrespective of the teams’ concepts being patentable / exploitable or not , students are familiarised with the important role of patents in a com - petitive industry ( Ozkul 2008 ) . They also gauge that the patent system is a useful resource for industrially - relevant case studies and projects in design ( Garris 2001 ) . All groups also have to submit mini business plans for introducing their products to the market . Again , meritorious groups are identiﬁed and introduced to a local non - governmental Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 103 123 organization which assists students with incubating their ideas ( The Innovation Hub 2010 ) . The University or Pretoria maintains ownership of intellectual property in the event of a student using signiﬁcant resources other than that normally accessed for instruction . There is therefore real incentive for students to develop and retain all intel - lectual property . A ﬁnal technical report is submitted by each design team , which collates all of the documented work during the year . In addition , ﬁnal design drawings and photos of the ﬁnished product are included . The conclusions must contain post - design reﬂection . Teams should comment on products that could not adequately perform their advertised functions , and how they would improve the designs . In the event of re - designed products , teams are also required to comment on the initial and re - designed product’s different impacts on society ( to help draw attention to the societal and ethical impacts of technology and for students to appreciate that engineering solutions offering greater beneﬁt to society , exist ) . Students are also expected to creatively envision the impact of the technology on the environment , where applicable . This could , for example , include the calculation of heat losses from a pipe , the determination of waste products from a certain process , or the required electrical input power needed to power certain types of lights . Each of these issues connects to much broader societal and ethical issues , and has to be uncovered by the design teams . ( E . g . the energy loss from a pipe will have to be continuously supplied through the burning of fossil fuels , which is accompanied by the associated negative environmental impact in the mining and production life cycle stages , etc . ) . The students obtain a ﬁnal design year - mark based on all the deliverables throughout the year ( i . e . three progress reports , one ﬁnal technical report , designed product , logbook , peer review report ) , which account for 50 % of the year mark . The other half of the year mark is obtained from the ﬁrst semester - based theoretical part of the course , comprising of two semester tests , six small homework assignments , and a written examination ( Innovation 2010 ) . Peer evaluation is performed at the conclusion of the years’ activities . The students are required to evaluate their team members , themselves , and the team as a whole . The students numerically rate commitment to the team and the project , quality of technical contribution , ability to communicate effectively , and ability to provide or accept leader - ship . The ﬁnal peer evaluation is directly incorporated into the student’s year marks . Course speciﬁcs The knowledge and skills gained in this ﬁrst - semester ‘‘Innovation’’ course are aimed at helping students to integrate creative and analytical thinking , to think critically on how technology is connected to values , people , ecology , economy , quality and ethics , and to help them gain conﬁdence in creative problem solving . Students learn how ideas on solving problems are generated , protected , implemented and marketed to eventually become successful technological innovations ( Innovation 2010 ) . Appendix 1 provides an outline of the course structure . The ﬁrst semester constitutes the theoretical part of the course and the second semester the practical component . An annual course assessment is performed by the University of Pretoria’s Centre for Educational Innovation . Table 1 provides a summary of the main aspects that were evaluated for the ‘‘Innovation’’ course , between 2007 and 2009 . Appendix 2 provides a detailed breakdown of the assessment questionnaire and results . The course evaluations ( for the ‘‘new course’’ ) 104 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 are signiﬁcantly better than those in years prior to the introduction of the HBDI - creative problem - solving and ‘‘innovation’’ components . Students report that the course as a whole is difﬁcult , especially from a time manage - ment point - of - view considering the already full curriculum . They also report that the hands - on nature and perceived industrial relevance of the design projects ( and of the course as a whole ) are refreshing and greatly improve their understanding of the course material . The student teams responded very positively to the usefulness of the HBDI regarding conceptual design . Regarding team work , students were initially skeptical about forming imposed design teams based on differing learning style , gender , race , and engineering study discipline . Students however acknowledged the importance of being subjected to people with a variety of skills and types of personality , as it simulates real - world scenarios . They further realized that among chosen combinations the most fertile were those formed of elements drawn from domains which are far apart . This was attributed to the differing brain proﬁles and cultures of the group members . Table 1 reveals that the majority of engineering students experience difﬁculty in communicating with practicing engineers . This again raises the issue of engineering stu - dents typically having weak C - quadrant thinking skills and weak inter - personal skills . It also helps explain why engineering graduates often ﬁnd it difﬁcult to adapt to an Table 1 End - of - the year course evaluation results for the ‘‘Innovation’’ project Category Excellent ; very well ; stimulating ; great ; high ( % ) Very good or good ; reasonable ; easy ( % ) Unsatisfactory ; uncertain ; slight ; difﬁcult or very difﬁcult ( % ) Oldcourse Newcourse Oldcourse Newcourse Oldcourse Newcourse Meeting of expectations and course outcomes 73 94 27 6 – – Interest in design - build project 82 99 13 – 5 1 Level of difﬁculty 12 – 54 68 34 32 Understanding engineering 52 82 – 2 48 16 Course contents 62 92 34 – 4 8 Career value of course 84 100 – – 16 – Meaningfulness of design - build projects 78 94 16 4 6 2 Connection of practical work and theory 83 96 12 3 5 1 Self - conﬁdence in communicating with practicing engineer / entrepreneur / innovator 34 46 28 48 38 6 2007 Evaluation conducted among 570 ﬁrst year engineering students ; 2009 evaluation conducted among 602 students ; Class typically comprises of 950 students : 320 mechanical / aeronautical ; 260 electrical / elec - tronic ; 220 civil ; 75 chemical ; 20 mining ; 15 metallurgical ; and 40 industrial engineering students . 5 % Female students ; 28 % Black , Indian , and coloured students ‘‘Old course’’ refers to 2007 curriculum , which did not strongly focus on teaching of innovation concepts ; ‘‘New course’’ refers to 2009 curriculum , which includes strong element of innovation teaching in the design - build course . Appendix 1 provides a more detailed breakdown of the assessment questionnaire and results Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 105 123 engineering work environment . Table 1 however shows a marked improvement between the ‘‘old’’ course which did not feature a strong focus on innovation aspects , whilst the ‘‘new’’ course does . Apart from these questionnaire - based ( and anonymous ) surveys , students were also randomly selected and interviewed . These interviews clearly show the students’ enthusi - asm for the engineering profession . In some cases , the opposite outcome is achieved , which is also important as this enables the students to investigate different studying skills , or perhaps even change their study directions . Lecturers in the second ( and other ) year of study reported a marked rise in the students’ passion for problem solving and improved group working skills . But written and verbal communication skills are apparently little inﬂuenced by the ‘‘Innovation’’ projects . Lec - turers are however impressed by the students’ increased preparedness for performing effective design work based on the execution of a systematic strategy for solving ( espe - cially ) open - ended problems . Because of the nature of the goals ( required outcomes ) of this course , the assessment of the course is necessarily qualitative and somewhat subjective . The quality of the student work in both semesters strongly supports accomplishment of the earlier - stated teaching and learning objectives , as well as objectives related to professional skills . In particular , the design solutions that were developed and documented are among the best ever observed at the University of Pretoria . The formal design tools / techniques appear to have been used appropriately , and the various intellectual objects ( objectives , constraints , functions , etc . ) were clearly and properly distinguished in the students’ work . The oral student presentations were of very high quality . The written reports were also appreciably better than those of previous years , especially regarding the improved dem - onstrations of the formal design tools and the content generated by those tools . It is apparent that in - class critiques also served to ‘‘initiate’’ some of the less verbal students into presenting and defending their ideas . The problem of introvert students was also overcome by the design groups meeting individually with their senior - student mentors on a weekly basis . All of the teams demonstrated a greater usage of traditional research in both comprehending the problem and in generating alternative solutions . Although there were not great expectations regarding the patenting and innovation possibilities of the freshmen engineering projects , the course delivered a number of very pleasant surprises . In the 6 years of the course being presented , eight provisional patents were taken by the freshmen ; at least three small companies were founded based on the developed concepts , and one team won the regional arm of the National Innovation Competition ( Innovate 2009 ) . Conclusion The changing workforce and technology needs of the global knowledge economy are challenging the nature of engineering practice . Accordingly , engineering curricula need to be restructured to align with industries’ requirements for modern engineers . It is further apparent that a nation’s competitiveness depends on the capacity of its industries to innovate . The twenty - ﬁrst century engineer should therefore be well - versed in engineering design , and also have innovation skills to take an idea from conception to market . The University of Pretoria’s School of Engineering has therefore adopted a new design - build - innovate course for its ﬁrst year engineering students . The course successfully and uniquely integrates fundamental innovation skills with the traditional steps in the 106 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 engineering design - build process . These problem - solving steps have however been superimposed on the four - quadrant Herrmann Brain Dominance Instrument ( HBDI ) model . It is shown that such an approach lends itself to critical and creative problem - solving with exceptionally positive outcomes . Meritorious students were guided in developing their concepts during the later stages of their engineering studies . A number of student teams incubated their subsequential busi - nesses with the aid of a local non - governmental organization . A few student teams also successfully patented their ideas with the ﬁnancial assistance of engineering companies . Therefore , despite time constraints , ideas developed during such an introductory design - build - innovate course , could be taken to maturity with suitable guidance and support . The new design - build - innovate course proved conclusively that , despite their limited engineering background , freshmen engineers can perform effectively in design - build activities that include aspects of innovation . The course success , as measured by a number of outcomes , shows that that a conscious integration of content , method and facilities can be used to educate engineers who not only understand theory , but understand through experience the complex interactions of that theory with societal needs , economic limita - tions and environmental imperatives which shape actual practice . The educational beneﬁts of team - based and project - based learning have been proven over the course’s 6 - year implementation period . This type of learning creates a wide range of learning opportunities by attempting to teach in a context which mirrors professional practice more closely , by bringing students from different engineering disciplines together , by achieving active ( experiential ) learning and therefore supporting an important learning mode , and by raising consciousness of the surroundings . The positive outcomes of the new teaching approach suggest that design - build projects present a viable opportunity for teaching innovation fundamentals to engineering students . Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge the following people who reviewed the manuscript and offered helpful advice : Col . ( USAF ret . ) Peter Young , Dr Johan Gouws , Mr Robert Pyle , Ms Raine Lidbetter , and Dr Ruaan Pelzer . Appendix 1 See Table 2 . Table 2 Course structure , ‘‘innovation’’ ( MNV 100 , University of Pretoria ) Study units Contactweeks First semester : theory ( design , invention , and innovation ) 1 . Introduction to ‘‘innovation’’ 1 Module overview and administration ; justiﬁcation and context of the module ; completion of thinking preferences questionnaire 2 . Entrepreneurship , creativity and innovation 2 Deﬁnitions of creativity , innovation , and entrepreneurs ; characteristics of inventors , innovators , and entrepreneurs ; the seven foundational practises of innovation ; problem solving strategies ; change and paradigm shifts 3 . Overcoming mental barriers to creative thinking and promoting innovation 1 False assumptions ; habits ; attitudes and emotions ; multiple intelligence ; recognising and encouraging creative thinking ; innovation in an organization Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 107 123 Table 2 continued Study units Contactweeks Test # 1 4 . The Herrmann thinking styles model 2 The 4 - quadrant brain model of thinking preferences ; the concept of brain dominance ; characteristics of quadrant A , B , C , and D thinking ; whole - brain thinking for creative problem solving ; HBDI and teamwork , and entrepreneurship 5 . Creative problem solving : problem deﬁnition 1 Problem solving schemes ; convergent and divergent thinking ; data collection and analysis ; trend watching and contextual analysis ; incubation ; pareto diagram 6 . Idea generation , brainstorming , teamwork and creative idea evaluation 1 Verbal brainstorming—the ‘‘artist’’ mindset ; other brainstorming methods ; rules for creative idea evaluation—the ‘‘engineer’’ mindset ; synectics ; analogies 7 . Critical idea evaluation , developing the best solution , idea judgment and critical thinking 1 Evaluation criteria ; evaluation reviews ; trade - offs ; improved and detailed concepts ; idea judgment and decision making—the ‘‘judge’’ mindset ; techniques for idea judgment ; prototype development 8 . Solution implementation 1 Implementation of ideas—the ‘‘producer’’ mindset ; manufacture , testing , veriﬁcation and validation ; the work plan and implementation . Business development and mindsets Test # 2 9 . Invention and patents 2 Types of intellectual property protection ; patents , trademarks , copyright , trade secrets ; inventors and inventions ; patent protection ; the national and US / UK patent ﬁling processes ; initiative and willingness to take risks ; perseverance ; technical entrepreneurship ; ‘selling’ your idea 10 . Selling your idea 1 Presentation ; Written messages ; Improving chances for success Written examination 1 Second semester : design and implementation 11 . Formation of team and team proﬁle analysis 1 Being an effective team member ; being an effective team leader ; successful team meeting ; conﬂict management 12 . Identifying an innovative opportunity 1 Individual and societal problems ; personal problem ﬁnding ; trend watching ; searching the internet ; logbook ( journal ) 13 . Problem deﬁnition 2 Focusing the problem topic ; asking questions with a customer’s survey ; data analysis with a Pareto diagram ; identifying the real problem and the real customers ; one - page brieﬁng and concise problem deﬁnition 14 . Idea generation 1 Creative thinking warm - up ; force - ﬁtting ; Osborn’s SCAMPER thought - starter tool 15 . Critical idea evaluation 1 The Pugh method 16 . Idea judgment 1 17 . Developing the best solution 2 Pugh phase 1 : develop better ideas ; Pugh phase 2 : develop a ‘‘best’’ solution ; cost estimating ; naming your product ; prototype development 108 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 Appendix 2 Survey of design - build - innovate course : Students’ perceptions about their training in design - build - innovate competencies 1 . Meeting of expectations and course outcomes Students were asked to comment on the course meeting their expectations . Nearly the whole group ( 94 % ) was of the opinion that their expectations had been exceeded or met very well , whilst the rest of the group ( 6 % ) reckoned that their expectations had only slightly been met . Students also had to compare the course with their other ﬁve engineering courses in terms of meeting of their expectations . Only 2 % of the students indicated that this course did not meet their expectations compared to the other subjects . In contrast , 84 % of the students indicated that the course exceeded their expectations compared to the other subjects . For the rest of the group ( 14 % ) all the courses met their expectations . 2 . Interest in design - build project Nearly all the students ( 99 % ) experienced the course as being very interesting . Only 1 % of the students experienced the course as totally boring . In comparison to other subjects , 86 % of the group indicated that this course was more interesting , whilst 8 % were of the opinion that their other subjects were more interesting . The remaining 6 % of the students experienced the level of interest as similar to that of their other subjects . 3 . Level of difﬁculty On the question of how easy or difﬁcult the students experienced the course , 68 % of the group assessed the course as being easy ; 32 % of the group assessed the course as being difﬁcult or very difﬁcult . Only 6 % of the group considers the course to be more difﬁcult than their other courses , whilst 36 % viewed the course as being easier . The fact that the students do not view this course as too difﬁcult is conﬁrmed by the fact that nearly two - thirds of the group ( 65 % ) Table 2 continued Study units Contactweeks 18 . Prototype testing and implementation 2 Elements of an effective test plan ; prototype evaluation 19 . Invention 1 Intellectual property protection ; strategies for success ; the seven foundational practices of innovation 20 . Business development 2 Right - brain business decisions ; left - brain business decisions ( e . g . assessment of proﬁt potential , licensing ) ; decisions to have your own business ( e . g . legal businesses , franchising , naming your business , business location , when should you start your business ? ) ; marketing plan ; starting your business ; idea ‘selling’ ; writing a business plan ; start - up funding for entrepreneurs ; business incubation Innovation competition 1 Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 109 123 that there is agreement in all their subject marks , whilst 8 % were of the opinion that they performed better in their other subjects . 4 . Understanding engineering In answering the question whether the course helped the students to better understand engineering , 82 % indicated that it had indeed helped them . The remaining 18 % indicated that the course only helped a small amount . 5 . Course contents The students were asked whether they would be able to quickly ( within 5 min ) explain to an outside person what they had learnt in the course . Ninety - two per cent ( 92 % ) of the group were of the opinion that they would be able to convey easily to an outside person , whilst the balance ( 8 % ) reckoned that it would be difﬁcult for them . This aspect tests students’ complete view of the course contents . It is apparent that a holistic course perspective was established . 6 . Career value of the course Students were requested to provide a short evaluation of the perceived value that the course would have on their future careers , if at all . Students’ evaluations were strongly correlated to their study disciplines and there is deﬁnite unanimity that the course established a great measure of general career preparation . This does not concern course contents , but rather student disposition and method of work ( creative problem - solving ) in which the modern technological society can be understood . All students were of the opinion that this course would indeed form an important part of their future engineering careers . Some of the abbreviated responses were : ‘‘Teaches you a mental way to solve problems . ’’ ‘‘Simple , down to earth concepts that help you understand and address engineering problems . ’’ ‘‘Course material is generally interesting / useful . The practical application of the course material is stimulating . ’’ ‘‘Certain theoretical concepts could be understood even better during team discussions . ’’ ‘‘I am excited about the prospect of combining my future engineering knowledge with the learnt methods to bring about innovation . ’’ ‘‘I like the way in which engineers are taught to think differently and creatively . We are encouraged to think out of the box . ’’ ‘‘I understand the importance of effective time management and organization skills in creative problem solving to bring about effective engineering products . ’’ 7 . Meaningfulness of design - build - innovate project The students were asked to indicate whether they experienced the practical ( design - build - innovate ) project as meaningful . Ninety - four per cent ( 94 % ) of the group indicated that they experienced the project as very meaningful , 4 % as to a slight extent , and 2 % did not experience it as meaningful in any way . Some of the provided reasons were : ‘‘It was an executable challenge . ’’ ‘‘Not really what I wanted to do . ’’ ‘‘All innovation principles had to be applied . ’’ 110 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 ‘‘You design and build based on what you learnt in the lectures . ’’ ‘‘Learned how other students think due to sharing of ideas among team members . ’’ ‘‘Good teamwork was essential in completing the project on time . ’’ 8 . Connection of practical work and theory The students were asked to what extent the practical course component coincided with the theoretical part ; 96 % of the group was of the opinion that it linked to a great or to a large extent ; 3 % were of the opinion that it linked slightly , and 1 % reckoned that there was no connection . 9 . Self - conﬁdence in communicating with practicing engineer / entrepreneur / innovator Last , the students were asked to indicate to what extent they would have the conﬁdence to communicate with a practicing engineer / entrepreneur / innovator . Forty - six per cent ( 46 % ) of the students indicated that they would have great self - conﬁdence , whilst 48 % indicated that they would have reasonable self - conﬁdence ; 4 % have slight and 2 % have no self - conﬁdence . References Council on Competitiveness . ( 2005 ) . Innovate America : Thriving in a world of challenge and change . The national innovation initiative . Washington , DC : National Academies Press . http : / / www . compete . org ( last accessed April 2010 ) . Innovation Fund . ( 2009 ) . The national innovation competition . National Research Foundation , Pretoria , South Africa . http : / / www . innovationfund . ac . za / ( last accessed April 2010 ) . The Innovation Hub . ( 2010 ) . Blue IQ initiative . Pretoria , South Africa . http : / / www . theinnovationhub . com / ( last accessed April 2010 ) . ABET . ( 2003 ) . Accreditation policy and procedure manual . Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology , Baltimore , MD , http : / / www . abet . org ( last accessed March 2010 ) . Blanchard , B . S . , & Fabrycky , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Systems engineering and analysis ( 3rd ed . ) . New York , NY : Prentice - Hall . Bordogna , J . ( 2006 ) . Round , ﬂat , or spiky : The world turns on an axis . Washington , DC : IEEE - USA Leadership Workshop , IEEE . Bordogna , J . , Fromm , E . , & Ernst , E . W . ( 1993 ) . Engineering education : Innovation through integration . Journal of Engineering Education , 82 ( 4 ) , 3 – 8 . Brown , T . ( 2008 ) . Design thinking . Harvard business review , June , http : / / www . unusualleading . com / wp - content / uploads / 2009 / 12 / HBR - on - Design - Thinking . pdf ( last accessed April 2010 ) . Bruner , J . S . ( 1961 ) . The act of discovery . Harvard Educational Review , 31 ( 1 ) , 21 – 32 . Carlson , L . E . , & Sullivan , J . F . ( 2005 ) . Bridging the gap between invention and innovation . International Journal of Engineering Education , 21 ( 2 ) , 205 – 211 . Chubin , D . E . , May , E . , & Babco , E . L . ( 2005 ) . Diversifying the engineering workforce . Journal of Engineering Education , 94 ( 1 ) , 73 – 86 . Continental . ( 2006 ) . In search of global engineering excellence : educating the next generation of engineers for the global workplace . Continental AG , Hanover , Germany , http : / / www . conti - online . com ( last accessed April 2010 ) . Crawley , E . , et al . ( Eds . ) . ( 2007 ) . Rethinking engineering education : The CDIO approach . New York , NY : Springer . Cross , N . ( 2002 ) . Creative cognition in design : Processes of exceptional designers . In T . T . Hewitt & T . Kavanaugh ( Eds . ) , Creativity and cognition ( pp . 14 – 19 ) . UK : Loughborough University . Czikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1988 ) . Society , culture , and person : A systems view of creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contemporary psychological perspectives . London : Cambridge University Press . Denning , P . J . , & Dunham , R . ( 2006 ) . Innovation as language action . Communications of the ACM , 49 ( 5 ) , 47 – 52 . Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 111 123 Dieter , G . E . , & Schmidt , L . ( 2008 ) . Engineering design . New York , NY : McGraw - Hill . Ditcher , A . K . ( 2001 ) . Effective teaching and learning in higher education , with particular reference to the undergraduate education of professional engineers . International Journal of Engineering Education , 17 ( 1 ) , 24 – 29 . Downey , G . L . , et al . ( 2006 ) . The globally competent engineer : Working effectively with people who deﬁne problems differently . Journal of Engineering Education , 95 ( 2 ) , 103 – 120 . Drucker , P . ( 1993 ) . Innovation and entrepreneurship . New York , NY : Harper Business . Duderstadt , J . J . ( 2008 ) . Engineering for a changing world : A roadmap to the future of engineering practice , research , and education . Ann Arbor , MI : The Millennium Project , The University of Michigan . Dym , C . L . ( 1994 ) . Teaching design to freshmen : Style and content . Journal of Engineering Education , 83 ( 4 ) , 303 – 310 . Dym , C . L . ( 2008 ) . Educating engineers for a ﬂat world . International Journal of Engineering Education , 24 ( 2 ) , 214 – 220 . Dym , C . L . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Engineering design thinking , teaching , and learning . Journal of Engineering Education , 94 ( 1 ) , 103 – 120 . Felder , R . M . , & Brent , R . ( 2004 ) . The intellectual development of science and engineering students ; part 2 : Teaching to promote growth . Journal of Engineering Education , 93 ( 4 ) , 279 – 291 . Felder , R . M . , & Silverman , L . K . ( 1988 ) . Learning and teaching styles in engineering education . Journal of Engineering Education , 97 ( 2 ) , 674 – 681 . Fogler , H . S . , & LeBlanc , S . E . ( 2008 ) . Strategies for creative problem solving . Upper Saddle , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Garris , C . A . ( 2001 ) . The United States patent system : An essential role in engineering design education . Journal of Engineering Education , 90 ( 2 ) , 239 – 246 . Grote , K . - H . , & Antonson , E . K . ( 2009 ) . Springer handbook of mechanical engineering . Heidelberg : Springer . Hernandez , W . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Analysis of results of application of a student - centered learning system to improve performance of ﬁrst - year students . International Journal of Engineering Education , 25 ( 1 ) , 161 – 172 . Herrmann , N . ( 1990 ) . The creative brain . Lake Lure , NC : Brain Books . Hirleman , E . D . , Groll , E . A . , & Atkinson , D . L . ( 2007 ) . The three axes of engineering education . Pro - ceedings of the ICEE 2007 — international conference on engineering education , Coimbra , Portugal . Hockﬁeld , S . ( 2010 ) . Paving the way back to growth : Innovation and the Research University , Eurobank dinner remarks . The Acropolis Museum , 22 March . http : / / web . mit . edu / hockﬁeld / speeches / 2010 - acropolis - museum . html ( last accessed April 2010 ) . Hollingsworth , J . , Hollingsworth , E . , & Hage , J . ( 2005 ) . Fostering scientiﬁc excellence : Organizations , Institutions , and Major Discoveries in Biomedical Science . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Innovate . ( 2009 ) . Easy ice does it . Innovate , 3 , 91 . www . innovate . up . ac . za ( last accessed April 2010 ) . Innovation . ( 2010 ) . Website of the ‘‘Innovation’’ module at the University of Pretoria . http : / / www . ee . up . ac . za / main / en / undergrads / subjects / snv111 / index ( last accessed April 2010 ) . King , J . E . ( chair ) . ( 2007 ) . Educating engineers for the 21st century . London : The Royal Academy of Engineering . Kjersdam , F . , & Enemark , S . ( 1994 ) . The aalborg experiment : Project innovation in university education . Aalborg , Denmark : Aalborg University Press . Kleppe , J . A . , & Wang , E . L . ( 2001 ) . Teaching invention , innovation and entrepreneurship in engineering . Journal of Engineering Education , 90 ( 4 ) , 565 – 570 . Koen , B . V . ( 1985 ) . Deﬁnition of the engineering method . Washington , DC : American Society for Engi - neering Education . Koen , B . V . ( 1994 ) . Toward a strategy for teaching engineering design . Journal of Engineering Education , 83 ( 3 ) , 193 – 201 . Koestler , A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . London : Hutchinson and Co . Kolmos , A . ( 2009 ) . Problem - based and project - based learning . In O . Skovsmose , P . Valero , & O . R . Christensen ( Eds . ) , University science and mathematics education in transition . Heidelberg : Springer . Lamancusa , J . S . ( 2008 ) . The learning factory : Industry - partnered active learning . Journal of Engineering Education , 97 ( 1 ) , 5 – 12 . Lewis , T . , & Zuga , K . F . ( 2007 ) . A conceptual framework of ideas and issues in technology education . Columbus , OH : Technology Education Program , School of Teaching and Learning , The Ohio State University . 112 L . Liebenberg , E . H . Mathews 123 Liebenberg , L . ( 2006 ) . Innovation provides the competitive edge . Innovate ( 1 ) : 10 . www . innovate . up . ac . za ( last accessed April 2010 ) . Lumsdaine , E . , & Binks , M . ( 2006 ) . Entrepreneurship , from creativity to innovation : Thinking skills for a changing world . Victoria , BC : Trafford Publishing . Lumsdaine , M . , & Lumsdaine , E . ( 1995 ) . Thinking preferences of engineering students : implications for curriculum restructuring . Journal of Engineering Education , 84 ( 2 ) , 193 – 204 . Lumsdaine , E . , Lumsdaine , M . , & Shelnutt , J . W . ( 1999 ) . Creative problem solving and engineering design . New York , NY : McGraw - Hill . McCowan , J . D . ( 2002 ) . An integrated and comprehensive approach to engineering curricula , part two : Techniques . International Journal of Engineering Education , 18 ( 6 ) , 638 – 643 . McCowan , J . D . , & Knapper , C . K . ( 2002 ) . An integrated and comprehensive approach to engineering curricula , part one : Objectives and general approach . International Journal of Engineering Education , 18 ( 6 ) , 633 – 637 . Middendorf , W . H . , & Engelmann , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Design of devices and systems . New York , NY : Marcel Dekker Inc . Oakley , B . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Turning student groups into effective teams . Journal of Student Centered Learning , 2 ( 1 ) , 9 – 34 . Otto , K . N . , & Wood , K . L . ( 1996 ) . A reverse engineering and redesign methodology . Research in Engi - neering Design , 10 ( 4 ) , 226 – 243 . Ozkul , T . ( 2008 ) . Using patents as a tool for reinforcing constructivist learning environment in engineering education . International Journal of Education and Information Technologies , 2 ( 1 ) , 157 – 166 . Petroski , H . ( 1998 ) . Polishing the gem : A ﬁrst - year design project . Journal of Engineering Education , 87 ( 4 ) , 445 – 449 . Pugh , S . ( 1991 ) . Total design . New York , NY : Addison - Wesley . Research Channel . ( 2010 ) . Creamer Media’s research channel . Johannesburg , South Africa . http : / / www . researchchannel . co . za / and at http : / / www . saiipl . org . za / masiphembe . htm ( last accessed April 2010 ) . Rubinstein , M . F . ( 1975 ) . Patterns of problem solving . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Rutherford , R . J . D . , & Rowe , G . W . ( 1987 ) . Teaching innovation in engineering : Theory and practice . European Journal of Engineering Education , 12 ( 4 ) , 377 – 386 . Sheppard , S . , & Jenison , R . ( 1997 ) . Examples of freshman design education . International Journal of Engineering Education , 13 ( 4 ) , 248 – 261 . Sheppard , S . D . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Educating engineers . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Suh , N . P . ( 1990 ) . The principles of design . London : Oxford University Press . Ullman , D . ( 2003 ) . The mechanical design process . New York , NY : McGraw - Hill . Ulrich , K . T . , & Eppinger , S . D . ( 2000 ) . Product design and development . New York , NY : McGraw - Hill . Vogel , C . M . , Cagan , J . , & Boatwright , P . ( 2005 ) . The design of things to come : How ordinary people create extraordinary products . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Wharton School Publishing . Voland , G . ( 2004 ) . Engineering by design . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson Education . Wood , K . L . , Saintive , D . , Hager , D . , Nowe´ , M . , & Sathianathan , D . ( 2001 ) . Reverse engineering and redesign : Courses to incrementally and systematically teach design . Journal of Engineering Education , 90 ( 3 ) , 363 – 374 . Young , P . W . , & Ha¨llstrom , S . ( 2007 ) . Design - implement experiences and engineering workspaces . In E . Crawley , et al . ( Eds . ) , Rethinking engineering education : The CDIO approach . New York , NY : Springer . Zull , J . E . ( 2002 ) . The art of changing the brain . Sterling , VA : Stylus . Integrating innovation skills in an introductory 113 123