External Representations Contribute to the Dynamic Construction of Ideas Masaki Suwa 1 and Barbara Tversky 2 1 Information and Human Activity , PRESTO , JST School of Computer and Cognitive Sciences , Chukyo University , 101 Tokodachi , Kaizu , Toyota , 470 - 0393 , Japan suwa @ sccs . chukyo - u . ac . jp 2 Department of Psychology , Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 - 2130 , USA bt @ psych . stanford . edu Extended Abstract External representations such as diagrams , sketches , charts , graphs and scribbles on napkins play facilitatory roles in inference , problem - solving and understanding ( e . g . [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] ) . How does the externality and visibility of representa - tions facilitate inference and problem - solving ? One benefit of external representations is on memory . They reduce working memory load by providing external tokens for the elements that must otherwise be kept in mind . This frees working memory to perform mental calculations on the elements rather than both keeping elements in mind and operating on them [ 2 ] , [ 9 ] . External representations also serve as visuo - spatial retrieval cues for long term memory , evoking relevant information that might not otherwise be retrieved . Another benefit of external representations is to promote discovery and infer - ence , both visuo - spatial and metaphorical . Perceptual judgements about size , distance , and direction are easily made from external representations ( e . g . [ 4 ] ) . In a Venn diagram , set relations such as inclusion are abstractly mapped onto visuo - spatial diagrammatic features , enabling direct perceptual calculation . Visuo - spatial features such as proxim - ity , connectivity , and alignment provide useful hints to selection of appropriate infer - ence paths ( e . g . [ 1 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 8 ] ) and to proper understanding of the structure of a target system ( e . g . [ 5 ] ) . Calculations requiring counting , sorting , or ordering are easily made by rearranging external spaces ( e . g . [ 7 ] ) . To serve these functions of memory , inference , and calculation , the interpretation of the external representation is static ; it must stay the same in order not to introduce error in the operations performed from the external representation . External representa - tions , however , are visuo - spatial displays , and it is known from research on perception that such displays , especially vague and ambiguous ones , can be interpreted and rein - terpreted . Are there situations where the very instability of visuo - spatial displays can be used to advantage ? One situation where the instability of interpretations of external representations can be beneficial is design . Among the earliest of commentators on this was Schon [ 10 ] , who proposed that freehand sketches serve as a medium for the dynamic generation of new design ideas . In developing ideas for new projects , designers do not draw sketches to externally represent ideas that are already consolidated in their minds . Rather , they draw sketches to try out ideas , usually vague and uncertain ones . By examining the externalizations , designers can spot problems they may not have anticipated . More than that , they can see new features and relations among elements that they have drawn , ones not intended in the original sketch . These unintended discoveries promote new ideas and refine current ones . This process is iterative as design progresses . Seeing unintended relations and features in sketches requires release from previous interpreta - tions . Previous interpretations can have a strong hold on observers , so preventing fixation and encouraging new interpretations are perceptual processes desirable for designers to acquire . In recent years we have explored ways that designers use external representations to discover and develop design ideas . The project has used both naturalistic and experi - mental methods . We present data from both these projects that are relevant to the current analysis . In a large naturalistic study , novice and experienced architects were filmed as they designed a museum . Later , they watched their design session , and com - mented on every stroke of the pen . These protocols have been analyzed in detail [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] . In the experimental study , designers and novices were shown ambigu - ous sketches and asked to produce as many interpretations of them as possible . The protocols from the design sessions showed clearly that new design ideas were likely to be generated immediately after discovering new relations and features in one’s own sketches . Notably these new relations and features were unintentional byproducts of the aspects of the sketches drawn for other reasons . We call this process detection of unintended relations and features [ 12 ] . Detection of unintended relations and fea - tures is a significant impetus for the generation of new ideas . The generation of new ideas , in turn , was likely to become an impetus for further detection of unintended relations and features , so that each component process drives the other [ 12 ] . The joint occurrence of generation of new ideas and detection of unintended relations and features constituted the core cognitive processes of designers as they worked . As is common in discovery problems , the designers themselves were not able to predict what kind of unintended relations and features they were going to detect and what kinds of ideas they were going to generate . Productive design is situated in the physical setting of sketches . They are not merely a static medium for externalizing internal visions , but rather a physical environment from which ideas are generated on the fly . The key to creative design , then , is the cyclic pattern of generating new ideas and detecting unintended relations and features in external representations . More generally , it can be regarded as a coordinated co - generation of new conceptual thoughts and per - ceptual discoveries in external representations . This appears to be a general phenome - non occurring in a broader context involving any kind of creation , not just in design processes [ 13 ] . An important issue is how to facilitate the co - generation of reinterpre - tations and novel ideas in inspecting external representations , given that it is by no means automatic . We argued that the cognitive skill we have called constructive perception promotes the discovery of new interpretations in external representations [ 14 ] . By constructive perception , we mean self - awareness of the ways that perception underlies interpretations of external representations . The self - awareness allows search - ing for other ways to perceive , enabling reorganization of the external representation to promote novel interpretations . Experienced designers are superior to laypeople in this skill [ 14 ] . This finding raises two issues , one cognitive , the other didactic . What constitutes the ability of constructive perception ? How can people be trained to use it ? Research on these will promote successful use of external representations for creative purposes . References 1 . Gelernter , H . : Realization of a Geometry - Theorem Proving Machine . In E . A . Feigen - baum and J . Feldman ( eds . ) Computer and Thought . MacGraw - Hill . ( 1963 ) 2 . Newell , A . , Simon , H . A . : Human Problem Solving . Prentice - Hall , N . J . ( 1972 ) 3 . Koedinger , K . R . , Anderson , J . R . : Abstract Planning and Perceptual Chunks : Elements of Expertise in Geometry . Cognitive Science . 14 ( 1990 ) 511 - 550 4 . Clement , J . : Use of Physical Intuition and Imagistic Simulation in Expert Problem Solv - ing . In D . Tirosh ( ed . ) Implicit and Explicit Knowledge . Ablex Publishing Co . ( 1994 ) 5 . Petre M . : Why Looking isn ' t Always Seeing : Readership Skills and Graphical Program - ming . Communications of the ACM . 38 ( 6 ) ( 1995 ) 33 - 44 . 6 . Larkin , J . , Simon , H . A . : Why a Diagram is ( sometimes ) Worth Ten Thousand Words . Cognitive Science . 11 ( 1987 ) 65 - 99 7 . Kirsh , D . : The Intelligent Use of Space . Artificial Intelligence . 73 ( 1 - 2 ) ( 1993 ) 31 - 68 8 . Narayanan , N . H . , Suwa , M . , Motoda , H . : Diagram - based Problem - Solving : The Case of an Impossible Problem . Proceedings of the 17th annual conference of the cognitive science society . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , N . J . ( 1995 ) 206 - 211 . 9 . Tversky , B . : Spatial Schemas in Depictions . In M . Gattis ( ed . ) , Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought . Cambridge : MIT Press . ( 2001 ) 79 - 111 . 10 . Schon , D . A . : The Reflective Practitioner . Basic Books , New York . ( 1983 ) 11 . Suwa , M . , Tversky , B . : What Do Architects and Students Perceive in Their Design Sketches ? : A protocol analysis . Design Studies . 18 ( 1997 ) 385 - 403 . 12 . Suwa , M . , Gero , J . , Purcell , T . : Unexpected discoveries and S - invention of design re - quirements : Important vehicles for a design process . Design Studies . 21 ( 2000 ) 539 - 567 . 13 . Suwa , M . , Tversky , B . , Gero , J . , Purcell , T . : Regrouping Parts of an External Represen - tation as a Source of Insight . Proceedings of the third International Conference on Cog - nitive Science . Press of USTC , Beijing , China ( 2001 ) 692 - 696 . 14 . Suwa , M . , Tversky , B . : Constructive Perception in Design , in J . S . Gero and M . L . Maher ( eds . ) , Computational and Cognitive Models of Creative Design V . Key Centre of Des - ign Computing and Cognition , University of Sydney , Australia ( 2001 ) 227 - 239