ABSTRACT In this paper we describe techniques used to move from a wide variety of speculative concepts to three working prototypes of potentially commercial audiophotography products . Stages in this trajectory included illustrated workbooks , video envision - ments , form models and technical drawings , and ended with working prototypes using microprocessors to simulate stand - alone products . These methods were useful in communicating with our partners in a multidisciplinary collaboration . At each stage , however , we left many details of our designs purposeful - ly unresolved , in order to encourage our own and our partners ' imaginations as part of the design process . Keywords Audiophoto , design research , design methodology , prototypes . 1 . INTRODUCTION In this paper , we describe a recent project on audiophotography to illustrate our approach to focusing speculative design ideas into product prototypes . Audiophotography , in which short ( ~ 30 seconds ) fragments of sound are captured with images , had been developed by researchers from Hewlett Packard [ 4 , 5 ] as part of the company’s ongoing interest and activity in digital photogra - phy . They sponsored us to open and extend their ideas as part of a collaboration with the Appliance Design Studio , a virtual organisation coordinated by Appliance Studio Ltd . [ 1 ] which spans ourselves , Hewlett Packard , and IDEO Product Development . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy oth - erwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . DIS ' 00 , Brooklyn , New York . Copyright 2000 ACM 1 - 58113 - 219 - 0 / 00 / 0008… $ 5 . 00 . During the project , we used a variety of methods to explore and communicate our design ideas . A feature of all of them was that we kept decisions open as long as possible , purposefully under - specifying aspects of the designs to allow our partners and our - selves to imagine how they might be developed . This proved valuable in allowing us to nurture ideas , which , seemingly impractical at first , proved essential to our final designs . Here we start by briefly describing a series of speculative con - cept proposals , developed before we joined the audiophoto proj - ect that set the tone of our approach . We then introduce the audiophoto project and illustrate our methods for exploring and defining our design concepts . Finally , we reflect on the value of using speculative prototypes in developing new possibilities for technology . 1 . 1 Speculative Design Proposals Although the notion of information appliances has captured the imaginations of many , only a few tangible examples exist that allow us to imagine how this design space might eventually be populated . At the outset we decided to expand the space further by developing a series of conceptual proposals , which we pre - sented in two workbooks shared with our partners [ 6 ] . A major role of these proposals was to highlight values that we felt need - ed to be addressed , in this case the cultural and social impact of such devices . We adopted a technique for presenting our ideas in the work - books that used collages to illustrate the ideas and narrative text to suggest their functionality ( Figure 1 - 4 ) . Juxtaposing found imagery allowed us to create designs that evoked alternative relationships between an object’s form and functionality . By merging such disparate elements we could hint at these relation - ships without prematurely committing ourselves to fine details . Our intention was to ensure that people viewed and judged the ideas based on their functions and the new social and cultural roles they might offer rather than their appearance [ see 7 ] . In addition , we wrote supporting narratives encouraging specula - tion about how these objects might be used . This enabled us to explore a set of values that we felt were important to incorporate in the development of new information appliances , suggesting playful devices that encourage curiosity and explore psycholog - ical and emotional content ( an approach influenced by Dunne [ 3 ] ) . Beyond the Snapshot From Speculation to Prototypes in Audiophotography Heather Martin Royal College of Art Kensington Gore London SW7 2EU + 44 ( 0 ) 20 7590 4444 h . martin @ rca . ac . uk Bill Gaver Royal College of Art Kensington Gore London SW7 2EU + 44 ( 0 ) 20 7590 4444 w . gaver @ rca . ac . uk 55 Objective View A feeling of detachment from oneself can help in dealing with stress and chal - lenges . Standing back from our experi - ences can allow us to view them in new ways , finding new solutions or recognis - ing the unimportance of seemingly seri - ous problems . The problem is , recording devices take an egocentric view of the world . Far from allowing us to stand back , they encourage our feeling that we are at the centre of the universe , and even extend our egocen - trism into history . The Objective View device would simply allow us to capture an image of ourselves from a distance . Seeing our - selves in context , ideally from a variety of unusual angles , would help us find a ben - eficial attitude of detachment . Several technologies might be used to instantiate the Objective view . A miniature ( ~ 15 cm ) radio controlled helicopter might lift a tethered lens above our heads - - working models at this scale have already been built . Very small blimps or kites might also be used . Simple climbing vehi - cles might swarm up lamp posts , trees , or telephone poles . Finally , the Objective View image - taker might be fired as a pro - jectile , and reeled in by the line that also sends messages back . Figure 1 . The Objective View speculated about cameras that could take pictures of oneself from a distance . Figure 2 . Placeholders suggested that images could be sent wirelessly to stand - alone displays around the home . Placeholders In the future , digital imagery will flood the home from many diverse sources . Incorporated in devices that support spe - cific tasks , current displaystelevisions , home PC s , even smaller devices such as PDAs will become bottlenecks , actively impeding the flow of imagery rather than enabling it . The aesthetic and cultural qualities of existing appliances , moreover , will become increasingly inappropriate for the imagery we wish to view . Placeholders would be one alternative form of display well - adapted for showing ambient information in the home . Designed to minimise the technology as far as possible , the effect should be one of a simple image floating in space . They could be used as digital frames for snap - shots , or to allow a slowly evolving dis - play of event imagery to play over them ( see Ad Capture ) . Using wireless communications to a serv - er , and new screen technologies , Placeholders could proliferate throughout the home . Instead of viewing all images through the narrow channel of centralised appliances , visuals would be found wher - ever most appropriate functionally , cultur - ally , and aesthetically . Invisible Cameras Using a camera is never entirely casual . In going through the predictable series of gestures ( point , view , click ) , the camera masks the face , becoming the focus for both the photographer and the sitters . From the photographers point of view , taking a picture becomes self - conscious enough that potentially meaningful images are uncollected . From the sub - jects perspective , the experience is often one of smiling and looking natural while waiting for the picture to be finally taken . As technology finally develops , however , cameras may become as small as the human eye . This allows new form factors to appear that could change the culture of taking pictures , allowing it to become a truly casual and unobtrusive medium . The affordances of these forms - more than the convenience or appeal of mini - turisation itself - represent the real poten - tial of new capture technologies . Configurations such as the ones shown here , dissolve the formal rituals of pho - tography , allowing image capture to be casual , imprecise and easy . The results might be less precise than those of tradi - tional cameras . But with collecting pic - tures being so simple and cheap , hun - dreds might be gathered in the space of an hour , to not make this an issue . And processing software can always be used on the few images we do want to archive , as we crop , reframe the images as desired . Figure 3 . Invisible Cameras explored cameras to wear and use casually . Intimate View The objective nature of text , words , even video images is not only unsatisfactory for supporting distant love relationships , but eben seems to interfere with the deeper , more subtle forms of interaction that cre - ate intimacy . The Intimate View seeks to build a visual connection between lovers , but con - strained so that shared perceptions , rather than visual facts , become the object . This is achieved by transmitting images from a tiny macro camera , or per - sonal scanner , worn on the body . By sharing only tightly focused portions of the local environment - veins of a leaf , a drop of water , the corner of one s smile - the system would encourage partners to join together in a moment of highly focused mutual perception . Used playful - ly , aesthetically , or erotically , the device would permit rich new forms of loving communication to exist even over great distances . Figure 4 . Intimate View Camera proposed sharing detailed images to create moments of shared focus between lovers . 56 1 . 2 Audiophotography Wide ranges of possibilities , from household digital displays ( Figure 2 ) to devices supporting psychological and spiritual insight , were explored in our initial proposals [ 6 ] . Several , how - ever , used image capture to achieve their effects ( Figure 1 , 3 & 4 ) . Recognising the overlap , our partners invited us to develop these proposals , and the values we were exploring , as part of an ongoing project on audiophotography . The basic premise of audiophotography is that people may find value in capturing sound as well as images , a possibility afford - ed by new digital devices . Although several commercially avail - able digital cameras can capture sound , this usually takes the form of short video clips . In contrast , David Frohlich and his colleagues from Hewlett Packard [ 5 ] found through consumer research that still images combined with sound were also appealing to users . In addition , several strategies had been explored for attaching sounds directly to photographs , for instance by using small memory chips [ 4 ] . With this as a start - ing point , we were invited to explore audiophotography as a medium to uncover new possibilities for its use . We began the project by formulating a series of questions that we deliberated during our brainstorming sessions . Because we were unaware of the exact technical specification of the audio - photo cameras , we were unaware of its functional capability , and thus its limitations . Having no limitations gave us the creative freedom to explore how we would ideally like to use this new medium . We began to question whether this medium could facil - itate new forms for communication between people . How would such a system work ? How would the images and sounds be dis - played or heard ? Would they be downloaded to the Internet or displayed on large electronic billboards in public spaces , where people could download , donate and share their images and sounds ? Could sound be printed directly onto the printed image ? If so , how would the sound be accessed ? If a photograph were taken at the top of a hill what sound would be heard ? Would it be worth recording ? If not , could alternative sounds from differ - ent locations be juxtaposed to re - contextualise the image ? Our final design proposals emphasised the potential for casual and playful forms of photography . Currently , the action of tak - ing a photo is seldom casual . Looking through a viewfinder , pointing the camera in the right direction and clicking the shut - ter release all take time and attention away from engagement with the event being captured . The result is that most of us are familiar with just missing the perfect photo opportunity . In addi - tion , looking through the viewfinder tends to mask the face of the user , which in turn becomes the focus for the sitter . This cre - ates an element of self - consciousness for both parties , and the result is a collection of often staged images , as the sitter tries to portray a natural pose . Having already explored several novel and poetic uses for image capture in our workbooks , we were further inspired by Lomo cameras [ 8 ] . The Lomo Action Sampler is an inexpensive cam - era which takes four images in quick succession to give the impression of capturing sequential movement . The combination of its price , its appearance , and its novel functionality encourage a new style of photography that is uncontrived and spontaneous . The manufacturers extended this further by recommending that the viewfinder should not be used at all . We appreciated the light - hearted manner of the Lomo camera as it allowed the object and the process of taking a photograph to be more exper - imental and playful ( Figure 5 ) . One of the features of digital photography , we realized , is that users may take hundreds of images without the extra cost of developing and processing film . Moreover , miniaturised internal components could allow digital cameras to become much small - er , allowing us to experiment with several new form factors . These forms were not chosen for their aesthetics , but for the new affordances they could offer users . In order to allow users to try these various new configurations without having to buy multiple cameras , we proposed that the camera lens itself , along with the circuit boards and the batteries , could become separate compo - nents that operate with new add - on extensions . Most of the concepts we developed were aimed at trying to obtain an alternative perspective on our existing world . We altered the action of capturing images and sounds by omitting a viewfinder and trying various add - on extensions for the camera . For example , we explored the idea of changing the perspective of the camera by placing it on a small remote - control toy car ( figure 6 ) , and tested the results as we roamed around galleries , parks and streets . We mounted the camera on the end of an aer - ial ( figure 7 ) and walked around trying to imagine what pictures we could take if the idea existed as a product . We found our - Figure 5 . Examples of images taken with a Lomo Camera . 57 selves exploring the inside of bushes , investigating inaccessible areas under floorboards , around corners or amongst a group of squirrels . We also explored the possibility of cameras reacting to sound as well as recording sound , by sitting with a bunch of friends and taking photos when they laughed or talked loudly . Finally , we developed ideas from the earlier workbooks , such as the Objective View ( Figure 1 ) , and the Intimate View camera ( Figure 4 ) . We soon realized that the camera was enabling and encouraging us to explore our existing environment in new ways . Digital pho - tography means more than being able to download , manipulate , and distribute images : it could allow image capture to play many , and more poetic , roles in our lives . In the following stages of the project , then , we used a variety of prototyping techniques to explore and communicate these ideas further . 2 . PROTOTYPING Designers use different prototyping techniques to test specific design attributes and to solve problems that may occur as the design is being developed . Appearance models are used to test the form and aesthetics of a product , storyboards and video sce - narios are used to explain the role of the product and ' touch and feel ' prototypes are used to test interactive qualities without requiring focus on details of technical implementation ( c . f . 5 ) . Throughout the development of the audiophoto project we adopted and used a variety of these techniques . We used proto - typing not only to refine and communicate our ideas , however , but as a means of stimulating and generating further ideas . 2 . 1 Video scenarios Video scenarios , as a technique , are widely used in research cen - tres and the computer and consumer electronics industry . It is a method that enables designers to create and communicate a mode of use for complex interactive products and systems . For example , the project ' Vision of the Future ' by Philips used video scenarios as a technique for explaining numerous specula - tive design ideas for products of the future [ 9 ] . The videos were informative and provided a quick and accessible means for view - ers to understand a product function , form and interactive quali - Figure 6 . Stills taken from one of the video scenarios . A camera is mounted on top of a remote control car and begins to offer an alternative perspective on the world . Figure 7 . CAD drawing showing one of the configurations for the “Kit of Parts” . This extendable version affords reaching over crowds or peering into inaccessible places . 58 ties . These films , however , were used primarily as a presenta - tion tool rather than a way of trying to expand the design space . The resolution and high cost of the films ( involving actors , film sets , and film crews and computer animations ) required ideas to be highly developed before filming could begin . Rather than using video scenarios purely as a presentation tool , we tried to use them as a development tool , allowing our ideas to evolve and mutate freely during the process . We intended the films to be like animated sketches , taking a casual and unre - hearsed approach . Such improvisation meant that we could explore the original concept further , without being forced to resolve issues prematurely [ 2 ] . We found that many of the pos - sibilities of our ideas became clear only during the process of finding scenarios to video . Scripted videos are often used to ‘spin’an idea , often suggesting that a product concept will make peoples’ work easier , relation - ships closer and lives more fulfilling . We tried to avoid a strong narrative , in contrast , kept the potential use of the objects open for discussion and allowed viewers to express their own inter - pretations and misinterpretations . We used no dialogue in the videos , but instead relied on background noise and visual clues to set the context . We tried to allow the viewer to feel as if they were observing the scenario first - hand , rather than an enactment from a scripted story . Such features helped us to stimulate dis - cussions that revealed ideas that were richer in content than the originals and stretched our imaginations in new directions . 2 . 2 Functional models In conjunction with the filming of the videos , we built several functional models to describe the way each of the designs was to be used . The purpose of creating these models was to test not only the functionality of our concepts but also to use them as props in our video scenarios . The low grade of these models ( made in white card ) was intentional , and proved appropriate for the medium of video as it lends itself to creating an overall impression of a scene , rather than overemphasising any detail . We intentionally used an " underdesigned , " spare aesthetic design at this stage to avoid any bias towards a particular idea based on its appearance rather than its function . The dimensions of the models were based on given component specifications , such as the circuit board , camera optics and batteries , and reflected our idea for a " Kit of Parts " , a system of add - on exten - sions for the basic camera module ( Figure 7 & 8 ) . Figure 8 . CAD drawing of an another add - on extention . A version of the Objective View Camera ( see figure 1 ) , it uses a hand - powered helicopter to allow images to be captured from high in the air . 59 Throughout the process , we tried to capture just enough detail of the ideas to encourage our partners and ourselves to imagine liv - ing with the objects , whilst also leaving many aspects unspeci - fied to encourage speculation rather than evaluation . In present - ing the models , drawings , and videos to our partners as the design ideas progressed , we found they worked well in this regard , bringing out aspects of the designs that we wanted to promote , and leaving room for other possibilities to be raised . 3 . ' TOUCH & FEEL ' PROTOTYPES Not only does the design of an interactive object require consid - eration of its form and physical functions , but equally important is the design of the interactive experience itself . The way the user interacts with the object and how the object responds to the user is crucial . The most effective way to achieve this form of experience is to build a working experiential prototype . Small programmable microprocessors such as stamp chips enable designers , rather than engineers and programmers , to prototype the complete experience of using an interactive object ( with the exception that the prototype is usually tethered to a computer ) . Their relatively small size also allows chips to be embedded in the objects themselves , giving an opportunity to design the behaviour , form and aesthetics of the object . Figure 11 . ( above ) Sketches of the Eavesdropper Camera showing the development of the form to indicate that the camera was listening , as well as watching , you . Figure 10 . ( below ) Images taken by the Eavesdropper Camera at the Show . 60 We developed a selection of the ideas explored in the video sce - narios to create working prototypes . The selection involved bal - ancing desire with practicality : while we believe that all our pro - posals are technically achievable , some ( like the flying Objective View camera ) were beyond our prototyping capabili - ties . In the end , we developed those ideas which we felt we could realistically implement using off - the - shelf technologies reconfigured in various ways , while still retaining the forms and functionality that we found compelling . This was a process of continual adjustment , as technological constraints appeared throughout the process which forced designs to be rethought . In developing the prototypes , we began with CAD drawings for each idea , based on the earlier functional model dimensions and sketches . To avoid people viewing the objects as commercially available products we tried to keep the aesthetics of the objects understated . This was also to accentuate the experiential , rather than the aesthetic , qualities of the prototypes . Our intention was to encourage users to react to the functions of each object and experiment with the images and sounds that they might capture . We presented the working prototypes as part of an exhibition at the Royal College of Art in November 1999 . The show , titled " This Appliance Must Be Earthed " , presented a wide variety of work from the Computer Related Design Research Studio over a period of 10 days . With many visitors from the general pub - lic , as well as students and staff at the Royal College of Art , it provided us with a means for getting feedback about our pro - posals . To help contextualise the work we played the earlier video scenarios showing how the ideas were formulated . Central to the exhibition , however , were the three prototypes which peo - ple could use . 3 . 1 Eavesdropper Camera The Eavesdropper camera ( Figure 9 ) was developed initially as a video scenario . We began to wonder whether an audio camera could not only record sound , but " listen " to sound as well . If so , the camera might become automatic , constantly listening for sounds loud enough to trigger it to capture an image . This would alter the process of taking a photo by giving an element of free - dom to the person using the camera . The Eavesdropper camera removes the photographer from the focus of the event , instead allowing the photographer and the sit - ter to trigger the shutter release at unexpected moments . We liked the idea that the camera would not only capture people unaware , but that sounds such as laughter or voices could trig - ger an image to be captured . Figure 9 . CAD drawing of Eavesdropper Camera . 61 During the Show we collected over 3000 images , a result indi - cating how many people played with and used the Eavesdropper camera . The images ( Figure 10 ) begin to demonstrate how peo - ple were indeed caught unaware , laughing and in some cases intentionally making sounds to trigger the shutter release . 3 . 2 Digital Shelf The Digital Shelf , our second prototype , was a device for listen - ing to audio postcards printed with images and sounds taken by an audiophoto camera . The sounds , each about 30 seconds long , were represented by barcodes on the reverse of each postcard ( Figure 12 ) . According to our scenario , these codes would direct the shelf to retrieve sounds over the Internet , while the cards would be printed either by an audiophoto bureau or at home using a special printer . The Digital Shelf concept was also influ - enced by one an earlier proposal , Placeholders ( Figure 2 ) from the original workbook . We proposed that the Digital Shelf would not only be able to play the sounds from each card , but store both the image and sound digitally . Rather like a digital photo album , the small post - card - sized screen would allow hundreds of different images and sounds to be displayed and played . Such a system would enable people to send or swap their audio postcards with friends or fam - ily , confident that the shelf had stored each audio postcard per - manently . In our implementation , placing an audio postcard in a narrow slot in the shelf ( Figure 13 ) would play the sound associated with the audio postcard . As the audio postcard sound played , both the sound and the image were digitally transferred to the shelf via an internal barcode scanner . A digital replica immedi - ately appeared on the screen , confirming that the image and sound had been stored correctly . When the audio postcard was removed from the shelf , the sound being played stopped , leaving the digital copy remaining on the screen . The action of sliding the screen along the length of the shelf allowed the listener to ‘flip’ through the audiophotos stored by the shelf ( Figure 14 ) . Stopping the screen at any point along its path caused the digital version of an audio postcard to appear on screen . After a few seconds , if the screen remained motionless , the sound associated with that particular image was heard . Each time a new audio postcard was digitally stored it appeared on the screen , no matter where the screen was positioned . As soon as the screen was moved the same digital image was then reposi - tioned to a virtual location at one end of the shelf . This meant that every time a new image was stored , regardless of where the screen has been left along the shelf , it became the last in line to be seen . We felt that it was important for the form of the shelf to make references to the aesthetics of the home and the way people dis - Figure 12 . An example of an audio postcard . The sound clip is accessed via the barcode on the reverse of the card . Figure 14 . Sliding the screen along the shelf causes the screen to ‘flip’ through any previously stored cards . 62 play photographs and postcards on mantelpieces and shelves . The materials for the prototype , in this case beech wood , gave reference to a domestic environment , without being too explicit . The series of bristles running along the rear of the shelf were for the audio postcards to rest against when they were not in use . In order to make the audio postcards self contained we experi - mented with attaching a thin layer of piezo film directly onto the card to act as a speaker . After testing this concept as a prototype however , we realised that the quality of the sound produced through the piezo film was not loud enough , prompting us to reconsider the concept by placing the speakers in the shelf itself . The concept behind the shelf was to encourage people to exchange audio postcards amongst themselves sharing particular and special moments collectively . This idea could extend to other applications , such as audio flyers for advertising a concert . In addition to a card showing an image of the event , a sound clip could accompany it , which would allow people to sample the music before making a commitment to attend the event . Many other uses for the audio postcards can be imagined , indicating the generality of the concept as a medium , which could work equally well in private , public and commercial spheres . 3 . 3 Intimate View Camera The final prototype was the Intimate View camera , developed from one of the original workbooks ( Figure 15 ) . The proposal was for a camera that would take only small , tightly focused images that could be exchanged wirelessly between distant lovers . By sharing only a fragment of the environment , such as the veins of a leaf , a drop of water , or the corner of a smile , part - ners might join together in a moment of highly focused mutual perception . We began the development of this concept by placing a small plastic magnifying lens directly in front of a digital camera and experimenting with the kinds of pictures we could take . Capturing details for their aesthetic qualities or the personal associations they had , we gathered a collection of images that convinced our partners of the potential of the idea ( figure 16 ) . For the working prototype , we used a small video camera about the same size as a disposable cigarette lighter , housed in a translucent plastic casing . The camera had a macro lens mount - ed in front of it , so that it could only focus on objects within about 25mm of the end of the lens . Both to indicate this distance and to provide light , a fringe of fibre optics was mounted on the front , which glowed when the camera was moved . We played on the visual language of a probe by formatting the images to be round , rather than the typical landscape or portrait formats . This helped in giving the images a softer and more inti - mate connotation , giving the results a distinctive identity . Figure 13 . Placing a card in the shelf displays the same image on the small LCD screen and plays its sound simultaneously . 63 Within the exhibition , we displayed the images on a flat panel screen on the floor underneath the hanging camera . Images that had been taken during the course of the show slowly faded in and out when the device was not being used . 4 . CONCLUSION The experiential prototypes of the Eavesdropper Camera , the Digital Shelf , and the Intimate View camera were well received both by our partners and by the general public attending the exhibition . Thousands of images were captured as people played with the devices , exploring what they offered and finding new ways to use them . Although experiencing the prototypes in an exhibition context has clear differences from using them in everyday situations , the event provided a valuable opportunity to test the concepts , and the results encouraged us that they had potential viability as commercial products . Beyond this , however , the process of exploring ideas through concept proposals , videos , form models , and prototypes taught us that digital photography could extend beyond replacing film cameras . Cameras that afford new uses and a nonchalant approach may offer new roles for image capture , offering unusu - al perceptions and insights and new forms of communication . In hindsight , this realisation , more than the specific prototypes we built , was the most significant result of this project . The purpose of this paper has been to illustrate the tactics we used in to develop these new concepts for audiophotography . In Figure 15 . The Intimate View Camera prototype . Figure 16 . Images taken with the Intimate View Camera . 64 particular , we have tried to indicate how we used these meth - ods – most in common use within commercial and research estab - lishments – in an improvisational and exploratory way . By approaching various kinds of prototyping with this attitude , the methods became a means for us to do research as well as to com - municate with or convince our partners . For each form of prototyping , some aspects of the designs were made concrete , while others were left intentionally unspecified . This balance allowed ourselves and our partners to test ideas about functionality , experience , and so forth , while preventing design decisions from becoming reified prematurely . The abstractness or ambiguity of the results , from prototypes to mod - els and even to the final experience prototypes , allowed a con - tinuous process of rethinking and refinement to continue through the course of the project . It is interesting to note that the final results of this project—the three prototypes—were developed to a level where more tradi - tional validation efforts could begin . One of the features of our process , in comparison to that used by many commercial and academic establishments interested in such technologies , is that we spend a relatively long period of time exploring ideas and roles for technology before implementing working prototypes . During this period , all of our research methods , from the work - books to the videos , form - models , and so on , work in themselves as prototypes—not only in the technology sense , but in the effects and experiences that they offer . From this point of view , it is important to appreciate the role of the original concept workbooks in the trajectory that resulted in the final prototypes . Developing speculative design proposals is useful in exploring new aesthetic , functional , and cultural possi - bilities for technology . Yet the results can appear idealistic or even frivolous , irrelevant to commercial realities . We hope to have illustrated here that such work is an important foundation in a process of design that considers cultural desire as well as technological and commercial feasibility . 5 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to our partners from Hewlett Packard , IDEO Product Design , and Appliance Studio Ltd . , and in particular Bill Sharpe , David Frohlich , Ray Crispin , Phil Stenton , and Colin Burns . We also thank Michael Fields and Heiko Hansan for their help in realising the final prototypes . 6 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Appliance Studio Ltd . www . appliancestudio . com [ 2 ] Burns , C . , Dishman , E . , Verplank , W . , and Lassiter , B . ( 1994 ) . Actors , hairdos & videotape - Informance Design . In CHI ' 94 Conference Companion . New York : Acm Press . [ 3 ] Dunne , A . Hertzian tales : Electronic products , aesthetic experience and critical design . RCACRD Research Publications , London , 1999 . [ 4 ] Frohlich D . M . , Adams G . & Tallyn E . ( 2000 ) Augmenting photographs with audio . Submission to HUC 2000 Conference , 25 - 27th September , Bristol , UK . [ 5 ] Frohlich , D . , and Tallyn , E . ( 1999 ) . Audiophotography : practice and prospects . CHI ' 99 Extended Abstracts , New York , ACM Press , p 296 - 297 . [ 6 ] Gaver , W . , and Martin , H . ( 2000 ) . Alternatives : Exploring information appliances through conceptual design proposals . Proceedings of CHI ' 00 ( Den Haag ) . New York , ACM Press . [ 7 ] Houde , S . , and Hill , C . ( 1997 ) . What do prototypes proto - type ? In Helander , M . G . , Landauer , T . K . and Prabhu , P . ( eds ) , Handbook of Human - Computer Interaction , 2nd edition . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : Elsevier Science , 367 - 381 . [ 8 ] Lomo . www . lomo . com [ 9 ] Philips Corporate Design ( 1996 ) . Vision of the Future . Bussum : V + K Publishing . ( http : / / www . design . philips . com / vof / toc1 / home . htm ) 65