Standing on the Schemas of Giants : Socially Augmented Information Foraging Aniket Kittur , Andrew M . Peters , Abdigani Diriye , and Michael R . Bove Carnegie Mellon University 5000 Forbes Ave , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 { akittur , andrewpe , adiriye } @ cs . cmu . edu , mbove @ andrew . cmu . edu ABSTRACT People spend an enormous amount of time searching for complex information online ; for example , consumers re - searching new purchases or patients learning about their conditions . As they search , people build up rich mental schemas about their target domains ; which , if effectively shared , could accelerate learning for others with similar in - terests . In this paper we introduce a novel approach for in - tegrating the schemas individuals develop as they gather in - formation online and surfacing them for others with similar interests . Through a controlled experiment we show that having access to others’ schemas while foraging for infor - mation helps new users to induce more useful , prototypical , and better - structured schemas than gathering information alone . Author Keywords Schema ; social search ; foraging ; search ; structure . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] General Terms Human Factors ; Design ; Measurement . INTRODUCTION People spend an enormous amount of time online searching for information about unfamiliar domains , whether they are patients trying to make sense of their symptoms ; consumers deciding which digital camera to buy ; scientists learning the literature of an unfamiliar field ; or voters trying to under - stand which issues they should support . The amount of time spent online globally is estimated at 35 billion hours per month ( comscoredatamine . com ) , of which approximately ⅓ is estimated to be spent on such complex information forag - ing activities [ 23 ] . Thus accelerating online knowledge ac - quisition could have significant and widespread benefits . As people engage with an unfamiliar domain they learn not only about the content of a domain but also its structure . Specifically , users build up mental models and rich knowledge representations that capture the structure of a domain in ways that serve their goals [ 45 , 21 , 25 ] . Such schemas change over time as a user moves from being a novice to an expert , with greater expertise enabling sche - mas that focus on deeper and more meaningful features [ 6 , 25 ] . For example , a novice photographer may begin their search for a new digital camera focusing on how many megapixels a camera has , but upon learning more about the domain might come to the conclusion that the size of the sensor and low - light sensitivity are more important dimen - sions . How can schema acquisition for novices be augmented ? One approach is to leverage the schemas that other novices have already induced as they learn about a new domain [ 12 , 47 ] . Enabling people to build on each others’ learning could increase the speed and depth of their sensemaking across a variety of fields [ 11 , 17 ] . However , such an approach also raises potential challenges . Capturing structured infor - mation can be time consuming for users , who may be fo - cused on their own interests rather than on helping others . Even if users were motivated to capture structured infor - mation , mismatches with the goals and expertise of those consuming their information could make it too costly to consume and with little benefit . In the limit , if each per - sons’ schema were idiosyncratic , there would be no easy way to aggregate across schemas . In this paper we begin to explore these challenges by aug - menting an online sensemaking tool [ 25 ] with features that enable the integration and surfacing of schemas from multi - ple users during information foraging . Our key contribu - tions include :  A scalable approach for capturing and aggregating schemas across individuals  Methods for surfacing the schemas of others during sensemaking  Empirical evidence of the value of others’ schemas during information foraging APPROACH How can we capture the schemas that people build up as they make sense of an unfamiliar domain , integrate the schemas of multiple people , and usefully surface those schemas to others ? One promising line of work highlights the utility of capturing and iterating on schemas across us - Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita - tion on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permis - sion and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CSCW ' 14 , February 15 – 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , Maryland , USA . Copyright © 2014 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2540 - 0 / 14 / 02 . . . $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531644 CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 999 ers . Fisher , Counts & Kittur [ 12 ] engaged users in the open - ended creation of “knowledge maps” , and found that users often created two - dimensional structured schemas involv - ing options ( e . g . , Canon T2i , Sony A55 ) and dimensions ( e . g . , lens , picture quality ) of the information space . Fur - thermore , they found that having users iteratively build on the maps of others led to improved maps that new users found useful . However , new users preferred to start from scratch rather than use maps created by only one individual . This raises the challenge of getting over the " hump " that raw , individual maps are not found useful , yet generating useful iterated maps requires someone to start from a raw , non - iterated map . Another challenge for this approach is how to aggregate maps across users , as each map in their study had an idiosyncratic spatial layout . Instead of trying to combine entire maps across users , here we introduce the approach of breaking down schemas into their constituent elements and aggregating those elements . Given that users consistently structured their maps accord - ing to options ( e . g . , Canon Rebel T2i ) and dimensions ( e . g . , picture quality ) [ 12 ] , here we use dimension as the element on which to aggregate across users’ information spaces . To capture options and dimensions in a lightweight way we build on the sensemaking system described in [ 25 ] , which elicited structure using an { item , valence , dimension } para - digm framed as a sentence ( e . g . , “The Canon T2i was good on picture quality ” ) . This approach was shown to be useful and robust in eliciting people’s structure of an information space . However , the system in [ 25 ] was designed for indi - vidual sensemaking , and users foraged for information completely independently from others . In this paper we add asynchronous social aggregation : aggregating the dimen - sions of previous users as potentially useful ways for a new user to structure their information workspace . On the one hand , such an approach could expose users to more useful and expert dimensions that could augment their schema acquisition . Conversely , it is possible that the di - mensions of others might not be valuable and just add to the burden of information to consume . Indeed , [ 25 ] found that eliciting dimensions from users during the information for - aging process was likely to produce dimensions that are ob - solete , irrelevant , novice , or idiosyncratic . For example , the previously mentioned novice photographer might start off creating dimensions such as megapixels , but upon learning more about the domain realize that sensor size or lens selec - tion were more important factors . Aggregating and surfac - ing obsolete dimensions could be worse than showing none at all . However , if more useful or expert dimensions are more commonly input by users than obsolete or idiosyncrat - ic dimensions , then aggregating dimensions across users could be a way to find valuable dimensions to surface . We hypothesize that augmenting the approach introduced by [ 25 ] so that the captured dimensions could be integrated across individuals and then surfaced to new users might simultaneously address a number of fundamental challeng - es : 1 ) the foraging interface could capture and aggregate schemas across individuals without requiring them to inter - act with raw schemas , 2 ) aggregating by dimensions pro - vides a scalable and segmentable method for combining Figure 1 . A novel interface to support social sensemaking . Social autocompletion ( a ) and dimension hints ( b ) assist users while they create clips . At right , the workspace panel shows information about the domain’s dimensions ( c ) and their corresponding clips ( d ) . CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1000 multiple users’ data ; and 3 ) aggregating schemas across in - dividuals could filter out noisy , obsolete , or idiosyncratic schemas . Below we introduce novel asynchronous social aggregation features to the Clipper interface [ 25 ] that ena - ble capturing , aggregating , and surfacing schemas across individuals . We then describe a controlled experiment aimed at understanding the conditions under which socially augmented information foraging is effective . RELATED WORK Information Seeking Users engage in a variety of information exploration tasks online ranging from finding the price of a camera they have in mind to deciding on the model of a carseat to purchase [ 7 , 23 , 33 ] ; there is a large body of work that has looked at understanding and supporting how users navigate the web to find information ( e . g . , [ 5 , 32 , 42 , 44 , 50 ] ) . During online information seeking people engage in a process of infor - mation foraging and integration [ 45 , 24 ] . To support these behaviors , a number of tools exist – for example , WebBook and WebForager by Card et al . [ 4 ] , which use a book meta - phor to find , collect , and manage web pages ; Elastic Win - dows , which provided information overview and location context [ 22 ] ; Webcutter , which collects and presents URL collections in tree , star , and fisheye views [ 31 ] ; SenseMaker [ 2 ] for evolving collections of information ; and Scat - ter / Gather [ 8 ] a text - clustering interface for iteratively nav - igating through document collections . Some of the more re - cent tools include Hunter Gatherer [ 46 ] which supports fi - ne - grain clipping of information from web pages ; and Dontcheva et al . ’s suite of tools to assist users’ browsing , collecting and sharing information found on web pages [ 10 ] . Our approach is similar in spirit to Dontcheva’s in or - ganizing collected information in a structured way , but in - stead of having predefined templates and extraction pat - terns , in our system structure continually emerges from and is refined by the aggregate behavior of many individuals . Furthermore our structure aims to reflect the schemas that underlie the structure of the conceptual information space rather than the elements of the web page . Social Data Data created by people using one of the above tools has started to be repurposed for other means . Social annotation and data is used by most systems to either augment the con - tent surfaced to the user or to enrich the content presented . Social annotation and data is derived from user behavior ( e . g . selecting a specific search result ) or generated content ( e . g . tags assigned to a given web page ) . Social data can benefit users to make sense of information and search and browse more effectively . Social data is becoming more vis - ible ; we see social footprints and annotations in the forms of “likes” , “shares” , + 1’s and reviews on sites like Face - book , Yelp , and Google + . Several different approaches have been proposed on how to use social data to personalize and re - rank search results , and enrich information sharing [ 17 , 18 , 34 , 3 , 54 , 53 ] . Systems developed by Golder et al . looked at the structure of systems leveraging user annotations and tags [ 17 ] ; Wu et al . leveraged social data and annotations to build statistical models in search and browsing [ 52 ] ; Dmitriey et al . used social data to enrich anchor text and improve intranet search [ 9 ] , and Muralidharan et al . studied the content and presentation that make social annotations useful [ 39 ] . Re - search into social data during information seeking can in - form us of what type of information is useful during users’ sensemaking . Social and Collaborative Sensemaking Other aspects of sensemaking such as the social and collab - orative dimensions are seeing more attention . Collaborative sensemaking involves people interacting , sharing , searching and understanding information with each other while col - laborating [ 42 ] , and according to Morris and Horvitz [ 37 ] , the support provided by existing tools for collaborative sensemaking falls under two categories : awareness features , that is features intended to support the group ' s status and work product , and division of labour , features intended to support how work is divided up . One notable piece of work is by Sharma et al . [ 47 ] , who studied how artifacts handed - off and available online affect subsequent sensemaking . They found that resources that were accessed online result - ed in more structured sensemaking whereas information that was handed - off to people resulted in less structure add - ed . We are also seeing work that looks at how people turn to others for recommendations [ 11 , 36 ] or actively work to - gether to search and filter information for each other [ 28 , 36 , 51 ] . Some work has looked at saving information from the search process so that others can re - use it in the future [ 1 , 37 , 41 ] . Research in personalized web search often uses the implicit traces of others’ opinions of behaviors to train collaborative filtering systems to recommend items match - ing individuals’ information seeking needs [ 15 , 16 , 19 , 27 , 49 ] . Similarly , social navigation uses the traces of others’ behaviors to point people to useful places that others have found [ 38 , 13 ] . An increasing number of social web sites are collecting and aggregating information from many us - ers , including social bookmarking systems such as del . icio . us [ 29 ] , DogEar [ 35 ] , and Spartag . us [ 20 ] ; social news aggregators such as Digg [ 30 ] ; and many other com - mercial systems ( e . g . , diigo , CiteULike , Connotea , Con - nectBeam ) . Our work builds on these approaches but in - stead of focusing on navigation and suggesting items to look at , we aim to make use of the deeper cognitive pro - cessing and myriad judgments that individuals engage in while sensemaking and using them to help others build up rich relational schemas of the information space . PLATFORM – DESIGN RATIONALE Overview We started with the design of the existing Clipper web tool [ 25 ] , which assists individuals in the gathering and structur - ing of information in a given domain . Clipper allows the CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1001 user to save textual information ( “clips” ) from a web page , along with a structured summary of the text . This summary is captured in a well - defined schema , where each contains an item ( the topic of the clip ) , a valence ( whether the senti - ment is positive , negative , or neutral ) and a dimension ( the attribute of the item in question ) . This approach leads to summaries that can be surfaced in sentence form , such that “The [ item ] is [ valence ] in terms of [ dimension ] . ” We fol - low the approach of [ 25 ] in operationalizing schemas as the dimensions that structure the information space , due to the simplicity , tractability , and grounding in empirical evidence of the approach , though we recognize that real mental schemas can be richer and deeper . Thus , for a given do - main , a collection of its clips’ dimensions begins to define the important and differentiable criteria between items in the space . We used two distinct versions of the interface that elicit this schema at different points of the information foraging pro - cess . The “full” clipper prompts the user to supply node , va - lence , and dimension when the Clipper is activated and text on the page is highlighted ( see Figure 1 ) ; the “mini” clipper prompts only for node during clip creation and defers va - lence and dimension selection until a later review phase . Although we were interested in whether different versions of the interface would lead to differences in how social schema information was used , our results did not show any significant differences in our primary outcome measures ; hence , going forward we collapse our data across the two interface conditions . We then created a social version of the Clipper tool , which integrates and surfaces the schemas of multiple users . In or - der to provide users with assistance with creating dimen - sions , we leveraged schemas that had been collected using the Clipper interface from a previous study [ 25 ] . These data were comprised of 55 users , 2388 clips , and 560 distinct dimensions . We surface this information in a number of ways in the socially augmented interface : Autocomplete Dimensions are suggested to users as they begin to type in the dimension selection field while saving clips . In the so - cial condition , users see autocomplete suggestions from other users’ workspaces in addition to their own , along with a measure of dimension overlap ( see Figure 2 ) . Dimension hints We surface dimension hints to users whenever they are prompted to select dimensions while creating clips ( see Figure 3 ) . For each clip , we suggest up to five dimensions , including : the user’s last used dimension ; the user’s most popular dimension ; a random dimension from the user’s workspace ; a random dimension from all social workspac - es ; and the most overlapping dimension from other users , given the words comprising the clip . Specifically , the latter social overlap method involved summing the distribution of dimensions for each word in the clip across all social work - spaces , and selecting the dimension with the highest total weight . Ties were broken by the heuristic of selecting the dimension with the higher average clip length . Dimension hints were generated independently , with one “slot” for each of the five methods . When the same dimension was generated for two or more slots it was randomly assigned to one of the slots so that no dimension was shown more than once . In the non - social condition , only the user’s random , most popular , and last dimension were shown as hints . Workspace Pane The workspace pane is overlaid on the web pages where the user browses to gather information ( see Figure 5 ) . It con - tains a list of all dimensions the user has specified for the domain ( marked with a head in the You column in Figure 5 ) , and , in the social condition , the most popular dimen - sions specified by all users with their corresponding clips . The blue bar in the Others column ( specific to the social condition ) corresponds to the number of other users who have saved the dimension . It serves as a running summary of the most popular dimensions ; users may refer to it while foraging for clips or hide it if desired . Review Table The review table , the final view of clips the user is shown after finishing their foraging ( see Figure 4 ) , contains a table of a user’s nodes vs . dimensions , with corresponding clips in each cell organized by valence ( e . g . , good / neutral / bad ) . In the social condition , this table additionally contains nodes , dimensions , and clips from all users who have pre - viously completed the task , which are shown in a less satu - rated hue than the users’ own . Hovering over a node shows the actual text of the clip . CORE HYPOTHESES A core idea behind the interface features described above is that integrating and surfacing dimensions across individuals Figure 3 . Dimension hinting provides users with suggestions derived from a variety of social and individual contexts . Figure 2 . The social autocomplete feature suggests socially rel - evant dimensions to users as they type in the input field . CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1002 will accelerate learning the important structure of a new knowledge domain . However , there are many reasons that this might not occur . Below we discuss three core challeng - es we examine through a controlled experiment . Overlapping Dimensions First , simply aggregating dimensions from multiple indi - viduals might not be a useful approach for identifying use - ful dimensions . One challenge is that users may use dimen - sion names that are too diverse to aggregate . For example , Furnas et al . [ 14 ] showed that the probability of two people generating the exact same name for an object was below 20 % for a variety of tasks ; even expanding to the three most popular names led to less than 50 % overlap on most tasks . Furthermore , it is not clear whether dimensions that are more prototypical are more useful for learning about the structure of a domain . Thus the impact of social dimension aggregation depends on whether 1 ) there is sufficient over - lap density of dimensions across individuals , and 2 ) more prototypical dimensions are found more useful . Hyp 1 . 1 : Aggregating dimensions across users will result in overlapping dimensions . Hyp 1 . 2 : Dimensions that are shared across more people will be more useful . Noticing and Using Social Data Second , users might not want to see or interact with the so - cial data from other users . Information foraging is already a cognitively demanding task , and adding even more infor - mation from other users might prove overwhelming . We tried to address these issues by providing social data in an unobtrusive way , enabling ( but not forcing ) the user to drill down for further information ( e . g . , showing the clips asso - ciated with a dimension ) . However , this approach raises the risk that users would not even notice or look at social data . Conversely , if social data is found sufficiently useful then users might interact with the interface even more than they would if such data was not present . Hyp 2 . 1 : People will notice and use social data in the inter - face . Hyp 2 . 2 : When social data is present people will interact with the interface more than when it is not present . Impact of Social Schemas Finally , even if social schema information is present and noticed that does not mean that it will actually change us - ers’ mental representations of an information space . Users might not trust data from others , especially if those others are anonymous , with unknown expertise , motivations , or goals [ 26 , 47 ] . Schemas from other users might be difficult to understand , especially if the schema provider is already familiar with the domain and the schema consumer is not - - exactly the situation we are trying to support . Relatedly , just seeing the abstracted dimension name may not be suffi - cient information to help users develop a better mental model of the information space . However , if the social schema information conveys useful information it could help users to understand the structure of the domain , and do so faster than if such information was not available . We expect such understanding to manifest in more prototypical and useful dimensions generated , espe - Figure 4 . The review table shows a final , graphical summary of a user’s workspace . Figure 5 . The workspace pane shows dimensions and clips . CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1003 cially early on in the process where people are still unfamil - iar with a domain . It could also result in better structured workspaces involving fewer “throwaway” or singleton di - mensions , which are often created when a person is unfa - miliar with the structure of a domain and uses a dimension that later becomes obsolete or irrelevant [ 25 ] . Hyp 3 . 1 : The social condition will generate more prototyp - ical and more useful dimensions than the non - social condi - tion . Hyp 3 . 2 : The social condition will generate more prototyp - ical and more useful dimensions earlier than the non - social condition . Hyp 3 . 3 : Workspaces in the social condition will be better structured than the non - social condition . In addition to improving the explicit structure of their workspace , we are also interested in how participants’ men - tal models changed over the period of the task . If social schemas are useful and impactful we would expect partici - pants’ mental models to change more when in the social condition , for example in terms of the dimensions that they find important at the end of the task versus what they thought important going into the task . We might also expect them to converge faster on a common vocabulary , as they are exposed to an already - common vocabulary from others’ schemas . Hyp 3 . 4 : The social condition will lead to greater changes in participants’ mental models from before the information foraging task to afterwards . Hyp 3 . 5 : The social condition will converge to a common vocabulary faster than the non - social condition . EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH To test these hypotheses we conducted a within - subjects experiment comparing social vs . non - social versions of the interface . The social version of the interface included the various social features for capturing , integrating , and sur - facing schemas , while the non - social version maintained the same basic functionality but was limited so that individuals only saw the results of their own work . Each participant en - gaged in two information foraging tasks , one with the social interface and one with the non - social interface ( counterbal - anced across participants ) . Evaluating overall schema quality is challenging and unre - liable : any single approach will have its weaknesses . In - stead , we opted to operationalize multiple metrics in tan - dem ( e . g . structure of the overall workspace , usefulness of dimensions , overlap of dimensions , etc . ) to provide con - verging evidence for overall schema quality in the social and non - social conditions . Participants We recruited 64 participants from a university subject pool . Our participants were 28 females and 36 males , and their ages ranged from 18 – 63 years old with an average age of 24 . 8 years old ( SD = 8 . 1 years ) . Our participants identified having a variety of backgrounds from undergraduate and graduate students to graphic designers and retired military staff . Almost all of our participants identified spending at least 5 hours online engaged in information foraging activi - ties ( 61 / 64 participants ) . Our participants spent 90 minutes conducting our experiment and were paid $ 15 for their time . Procedure The experiment was a within - subjects design in which each participant interacted with both the social and non - social versions of the interface ( counterbalanced for order ) . Partic - ipants were asked to perform information foraging tasks in two domains – cameras and carseats ( fixed order , respec - tively ) . Half of the participants used the “full” interface ( which captures node , valence and dimension during clip - ping ) and the other half used a “mini” interface that cap - tured only node during clipping , then valence and dimen - sion in subsequent steps . In each condition , participants were seated at computers and presented with a browser window with many open tabs comprising the experiment . The tabs contained a survey , two clipping tasks , and instructions and videos throughout to help assist participants during the experiment . Participants were asked to proceed through the tabs in or - der . They began by entering demographic information in the survey , then proceeded to perform clipping tasks for both the camera and carseat domains . Each clipping task consisted of saving information from a group of three Ama - zon product pages using the tool , reviewing the resulting clips in spreadsheet form , and finally seeing a review table of the results . Participants could switch between the prod - ucts pages as they wished . After completing each task , par - ticipants answered more survey questions about their search process and findings . RESULTS Overlapping Dimensions We hypothesized that aggregating dimensions from multi - ple users would result in dimensions that had high overlap Figure 6 . Distribution of dimensions by how many participants’ workspaces they overlapped . 1 10 100 1000 1 10 100 1000 P a r t i c i p a n t O ve r l a p Dimension Rank CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1004 across users , and that those dimensions would be found more useful than low overlap dimensions . Hyp 1 . 1 : Aggregating dimensions across users will result in overlapping dimensions . As shown in Figure 6 , we found a highly skewed distribu - tion in which a small number of dimensions were shared across many participants and many dimensions shared by only a few or unshared , similar to the long - tail distributions found in studies of unstructured tagging [ 17 , 40 ] . Hyp 1 . 2 : Dimensions that are shared across more people will be more useful . Two domain experts independently labeled all 510 unique dimensions generated by our participants according to how useful they would be to new users engaging in the task on a scale of 1 – 5 ( 1 = low ; 5 = high ) . We defined usefulness as how well the dimension described the domain to a novice . For example , dimensions such as “safety” or “affordability” would score highly on usefulness , while dimensions such as “operate” or “pro & cons” would score lower on usefulness . We compared our domain experts’ ratings for the 510 di - mensions , and found a weighted Cohen’s kappa ( κ ) of 0 . 69 indicating a significant level of agreement between our raters on how useful the dimensions were . Using this data , we performed a regression analysis which showed that increased dimension overlap was significantly positively associated with greater usefulness ( b = 0 . 21 , p < . 001 ) , indicating that dimensions that are shared across more people are also more useful . These results provide empirical evidence that surfacing high overlap dimensions may be indeed be a useful strategy for supporting social schema induction . Noticing and Using Social Data Hyp 2 . 1 : People will notice and use social data in the inter - face . We recorded the mouse hovering interactions of all users , and found that people did notice and interact with social da - ta elements . This included both dimensions and clips in the workspace pane ( M = 10 . 3 ; M = 2 . 8 ) , and clips in the review table ( M = 10 . 4 ) . These results suggest that many users did notice and interact with social elements of the interface . We were particularly interested in how people would inter - act with the dimension hints , as we tested five different methods for surfacing potentially useful dimensions , either from the participants’ own workspace ( their last used , most popular , or random ) or from others’ workspaces ( highest social overlap or random ) . The social overlap method ( i . e . , selecting from others’ dimensions given the text of the clip ) was selected most frequently , although an ANOVA control - ling for within - subject effects with post - hoc Tukey HSD comparisons showed that only the difference between the social overlap method and random was significant ( p < . 05 ) , with the difference between social overlap and user - last of marginal significance ( p = . 079 ) . Hyp 2 . 2 : When social data is present people will interact with the interface more than when it is not present . Although Hyp 2 . 1 indicates that people interacted with so - cial data , many of the elements they interacted with exist for both the social and non - social conditions . To test whether participants interacted with the interface more in the social condition we aggregated counts of all of the in - stances when a participant hovered over an element in the dimension pane or in the review view , regardless of wheth - er it was their own or another’s clip or dimension ( see Ta - ble 1 ) . The social condition had significantly more hover counts than the non - social condition ( F 1 , 63 = 17 . 4 , p < . 001 ) . This effect was significant for hover counts for the review page , pane dimensions , and pane dimension clips – in other words , all of the elements that existed in both conditions and had social data embedded in them in the social condi - tion . Interestingly , there was no difference between the so - cial and non - social conditions as to how much they inter - acted with their own clips ( F 1 , 63 = . 20 , p > . 6 ) . This is a somewhat surprising and promising result : increasing their interaction with social data did not reduce participants’ in - teraction with their own data . This suggests that social data was beneficial on top of participants’ own data , rather than competing with it for attention . Impact of Social Schemas So far two of our prerequisite challenges have been ad - dressed : aggregating dimensions across participants led to more useful dimensions ; and participants noticed and inter - acted with social data . However , the most important ques - tion is whether interacting with useful social data actually changes participants’ mental schemas . As it can be difficult to identify exactly when and how a mental schema has been changed and improved , below we address this question through converging evidence involving a number of vari - ants operationalizing the question . Hyp 3 . 1 : The social condition will generate more prototyp - ical and more useful dimensions than the non - social condi - tion . One question we looked was how the structure of a partici - pant’s workspace changed as a function of being in the so - cial condition . In this hypothesis we look specifically at ef - fects on prototypicality ( i . e . , participant overlap ) and use - fulness of the dimensions generated . We conducted nested Hover counts Social Non - social Dimension 545 116 Clip 169 11 Review 4757 1896 Table 1 . Total interactions ( as measured by hover counts ) for interface elements in the social and non - social conditions . CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1005 linear regressions with participant as a random factor to de - termine whether being in the social condition would lead to more prototypical and more useful dimensions . Our results ( see Table 2 ) show that participants’ workspaces when in the social condition had dimensions with greater overlap with other participants’ dimensions than when in the non - social condition ( b = 3 . 14 , SE = . 78 , p < . 001 ) . Dimensions generated in the social condition were also rated as more useful than in the non - social condition ( b = . 12 , SE = . 035 , p < . 001 ) . Hyp 3 . 2 : The social condition will generate more prototyp - ical and more useful dimensions earlier than the non - social condition . We hypothesized that the social condition would lead to more prototypical and useful dimensions earlier in partici - pants’ information foraging process than the non - social condition . While participants did tend to produce higher overlapping dimensions earlier in the process , this effect did not differ between the social and non - social conditions Furthermore , there were no temporal effects associated with rated usefulness of dimensions . These results disconfirm our hypothesis , and suggest that the beneficial effects of surfacing social schemas continue even beyond the early period of information foraging . Hyp 3 . 3 : Workspaces in the social condition will be better structured than the non - social condition . We operationalized workspaces as being better structured if they had fewer singleton dimensions , which often reflect dimensions that users created but later found irrelevant or obsolete [ 25 ] . To determine if workspaces in the social condition were better structured we conducted a nested lo - gistic regression with participant as a random factor , pre - dicting whether a dimension will be a singleton or not . We found that the social condition was a significant negative predictor of generating a singleton dimension ( b = - 0 . 80 , p < . 001 ) . This effect was quite substantial : seeing others’ schemas was associated with a . 45 factor reduction in the likelihood of a dimension being a singleton . Hyp 3 . 4 : The social condition will lead to greater changes in participants’ mental models from before the information foraging task to afterwards . Previous research [ 25 ] has shown that people’s mental models change depending on the support facilitated by a tool . We sought to extend this finding by studying the ef - fects of social data . We hypothesized that the participants’ mental models will change the most in the social condition . We used data pertaining to which dimensions our partici - pants thought were important before and after the task to address this question . We find that on average participants in the social condition changed 0 . 98 dimensions compared to 0 . 77 for the non - social condition , and the participants in the social condition identified more dimensions ( 5 . 41 di - mensions ) than the non - social condition ( 5 . 14 dimensions ) . However , these findings were only marginally significant ( change in dimensions : t 63 = 1 . 284 , p = 0 . 103 ; dimension sizes : t 63 = 1 . 619 , p = 0 . 055 ) . To shed some light on the rationale behind our participants change in mental models , we examined the qualitative data gathered from our surveys . Using our participants’ respons - es to how their choice of dimensions changed over the task , we performed content analysis and categorized their re - sponses into groups depending on the theme . We find that our participants’ mental models changed during the task in four key ways : by certain dimensions becoming more im - portant and visible in their mental models ( 27 . 3 % ) resulting in participants prioritizing them over others ; by expanding through learning and encountering more information ( 28 . 9 % ) ; becoming more confident of their decision - making ( 2 . 3 % ) ; no change due to existing knowledge ( 28 . 9 % ) ; and other ( 12 . 5 % participants ) . These findings support similar results published by [ 25 ] . Hyp 3 . 5 : The social condition will converge to a common vocabulary faster than the non - social condition . We hypothesize that the presence of social data will influ - ence people to use a common vocabulary . Once again , us - ing the dimensions identified by our participants as im - portant , we compared the data from the social and non - social condition to understand the characteristics and differ - ences of the vocabularies used in the two conditions . After stemming and cleaning the data ( i . e . removing stopwords , e . g . ‘the’ , ‘a’ , ‘were’ , etc . ) , we computed the frequency of each term within the social and non - social vocabularies . Overlap Coeff . SE P Intercept 24 . 6 1 . 85 * * * Social 5 . 55 2 . 31 * Dimension order - . 849 . 27 * * Social X Dimension order - . 278 . 38 Table 2 . Regression model predicting dimension overlap . Figure 8 . Vocabulary convergence over time in the social and non - social conditions . Users in the social condition achieved greater convergence in less time . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 100 P e r c en t age o f V o c abu l a r y Top k terms Non - Social Social CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1006 Table 3 shows that the characteristics of the social and non - social vocabularies differ : the social condition has a larger number of dimensions , but fewer unique ones used , and there is a large number of repeat dimensions found in the social condition vocabulary ( 228 vs . 118 ) compared to the non - social condition . What we can understand from this is that participants in the social condition are identifying more dimensions but are re - using ones used by other participants . We tabulated this data , and in Figure 8 we see that fewer number of terms comprise the majority of the vocabulary in the social condition compared to the non - social condition . What is also of interest is that the social condition has a much smaller tail compared to the non - social conditions and fewer singleton dimensions suggesting that a smaller vocabulary with a high re - use of terms was found for the social condition . Subjective Data After performing both tasks , our participants provided feedback on the usability of the social Clipper tool via our survey . The feedback comprised the overall utility of the tool as well as the helpfulness and use of specific social fea - tures . Feedback took the form of evaluations on a 7 - point Likert scale as well as open - ended responses . Overall re - sults show that participants rated the system highly ( 5 + ) across all features and dimensions , including whether they felt effective and confident using it , whether it was helpful , enjoyable , and easy to use , and whether they would like to continue using it for their own use ( Figure 9 ) . Ratings for specific social features showed that participants found all features easy to use and useful , with ratings above 5 for the review table , dimension suggestions , autocomplete , and the dimension pane sidebar ( Figure 10 ) . From our survey we also collected open - ended responses about what aspects of the tool our participants liked and what aspects they would improve . When asked what as - pects of the tool our participants liked , a number of re - sponses were given such as its ability to provide social awareness of others’ information seeking and having this information at hand ( 15 . 6 % participants ) : “ The community aspect with others ' clips was very helpful overall . ” – Participant 48 Most participants liked the features provided by Clipper and identified specific features like the review table and the di - mensions ( 18 . 7 % participants ) : “ Review Table was very helpful . Interface for saving clips was intuitive . ” – Participant 8 “ Dimensions , seems to me like a time saver , very easy to use ” – Participant 29 More generally , a number of participants mentioned the positive aspects of how the tool organizes and structures in - formation ( 17 . 2 % ) and the general functionality ( 18 . 7 % ) , though this feedback was not specific to the social features we implemented . However , it is encouraging that despite the increased amount of information involved in using so - cial data , participants still mentioned the tool’s ease of use ( 15 . 6 % ) : “ It was so simple and intuitive – and I am thrilled to use it for my shopping purposes in the future ” – Participant 41 To assist in future iterations , we asked our participants what improvements they would make . Our participants identified a number of suggestions including additional features ( 23 . 4 % participants ) such as chat and Q & A features , pre - views of the product , snippets of content and summarizing the main content and dimension . A significant number of participants ( 23 . 4 % ) identified improvements being needed with the performance and responsiveness ; these were pri - marily due to bugs that led to dimension suggestions taking Social Condition Non - Social Condition Vocab . Size 346 329 # Unique Dimensions 118 140 # Non - Unique Dimensions 228 118 Table 3 . Vocabulary size and dimension sharing , for social and non - social conditions . Users in the social condition built a larger vocabulary with more shared dimensions . Figure 10 . Participants found the interface’s social fea - tures both easy to use and helpful . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Workspace Pane Autocomplete DimensionSuggestion Review Table Easy Helpful Figure 9 . Participants gave the Clipper high marks for measures of usability . 1 3 5 7 Enjoyment Ease of use Helpfulness Interface appeal Increased effectiveness Increased confidence Appeal for personal use CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1007 2 - 3 seconds to generate . Other issues arose from constraints of the study in which we surfaced random suggestions as a baseline , which may have undermined perceived perfor - mance . DISCUSSION In this paper we examined how capturing , integrating , and surfacing the schemas of users as they engage in infor - mation foraging could help others to learn about the struc - ture of a new domain . We designed and implemented novel social features into an information foraging interface which addresses the dual challenges of algorithmically integrating the schemas generated by multiple individuals while simul - taneously filtering out less useful dimensions . Users found this interface and its various social elements useful and helpful for information foraging . We conducted an experi - ment to explore a number of potential challenges for social - ly augmented information foraging including : whether users would generate useful , overlapping dimensions ; whether users would notice and use the dimensions of others ; and whether others’ dimensions would impact users’ workspace structure , mental models , and vocabulary . Our results indicated that the dimensions generated by users showed significant overlap , and that dimensions with more overlap across users were rated as more useful . This link between dimension overlap and usefulness is an interesting result that may have implications for interfaces aimed at supporting information foraging , and more generally for so - cial tagging . We also showed that users noticed and used the social elements we introduced , with preliminary support for the usefulness of our social dimension suggestion meth - od . These results are promising given our design rationale of making such elements unobtrusive and not forcing users to interact with them . Furthermore , users did not reduce their interaction with non - social elements of the interface , suggesting that the social elements were useful but not competing with the non - social elements . Finally , we presented results indicating that being exposed to others’ schemas changed users’ behavior in a number of ways . In the social condition , users generated more proto - typical and more useful dimensions than when they were in the non - social condition . They also had better structured workspaces with fewer singleton dimensions and converged on a common vocabulary faster than when in the non - social condition . Interestingly , these results were consistent whether participants added structure to their clips during ( full version ) or after ( mini version ) clip creation , suggest - ing that the workspace pane was effective in influencing their mental models even if they were not explicitly adding dimensions at the time of clipping . Our approach demonstrates a scalable and effective way for users to learn from each others’ schemas while learning about a new domain online . In many cases when users search they are not looking for a single piece of content but instead trying to understand the structure of a new infor - mation space and how multiple pieces of content fit into that structure . Framing search as a process of learning and schema induction [ 12 , 25 , 33 ] highlights this as a critical need that we begin to address here . Our results provide an important step towards a future of distributed sensemaking [ 12 ] , in which the effort that indi - viduals put forth in learning about a new domain is not lost but instead accelerates the learning process for individuals coming after them . A key challenge for that future is deter - mining how to capture , aggregate , and surface schemas so that they are useful to others . By algorithmically aggregat - ing schemas and showing that more overlapping schemas are also rated as more useful , we identify a method of over - coming the “hump” paradox introduced by [ 12 ] - - that indi - vidual schemas are less valuable than starting from scratch , but iterated schemas are more valuable . Our approach also naturally deals with the challenge raised in [ 25 ] , that early dimensions generated before a user is familiar with a do - main become obsolete and irrelevant : by aggregating di - mensions across users , these idiosyncratic and less relevant dimensions drop to the bottom of the pile . At the same time , our study suggests a number of areas that would profit from further research . While we aim to mini - mize user effort through features such as dimension hinting , computational approaches to automatically infer important dimensions could further streamline the process . Aggregat - ing and summarizing similar clips is another area that com - putational approaches could help . However , any such ap - proaches would need to provide clear orientation , prove - nance , and the ability for the user to override the machine in order to support and privilege the process of learning and schema induction in information foraging . There may also be drawbacks to using the social Clipper system for users with differing viewpoints than the common view . For example , people may use different dimensions for the same information if they have different goals , back - ground , experience , or cultures , and valuable minority views could be lost through aggregation . However , there may be ways of addressing this , such showing dimensions from people like themselves , where similarity could be de - termined by browsing or clipping characteristics . In summary , we have demonstrated an approach for captur - ing , aggregating , and surfacing schemas from others and its benefits for information foraging . Further reducing the costs and increasing the benefits for schema acquisition by nov - ices will help us move to a future where new learners no longer have to start from scratch , and can stand on the schemas of their fellow giants . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by NSF grants IIS - 1149797 , IIS - 1217559 , OCI - 0943148 , IIS - 0968484 , IIS - 1111124 , Bosch , Google , and Microsoft . CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1008 REFERENCES 1 . Amershi and Morris , M . R . CoSearch : A system for colocated collaborative web search . In Proc . CHI 2008 . 2 . Baldonado , M . W . and Winograd , F . SenseMaker : an information - exploration interface supporting the con - textual evolution of a user ' s interests . In Proc . CHI 1997 . 3 . Bao , S . , Wu , X . Fei , B . , Xue , G . , Su , Z . and Yu , Y . Op - timizing web search using social annotations . In Proc . WWW 2007 . 4 . Card , S . K . , Robertson , G . G . and York , W . The Web - Book and the Web Forager : Video use scenarios for a World - Wide Web information workspace . In Proc . CHI 1996 . 5 . Catledge , L . D . and Pitkow , J . E . Characterizing brows - ing strategies in the World Wide Web . In Proc . WWW 1995 . 6 . Chi , M . T . H . , Feltovich , P . J . and Glaser , R . Categoriza - tion and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science 5 , 2 , ( 1981 ) , 121 - 152 . 7 . Choo , C . W . , Detlor , B . and Turnbull , D . Information seeking on the Web : An integrated model of browsing and searching . First Monday 5 , 2 , ( 2000 ) . 8 . Cutting , D . R . , Karger , D . R . and Pedersen , J . O . Con - stant interaction - time scatter / gather browsing of very large document collections . In Proc . SIGIR 1993 . 9 . Dmitriev , P . A . , Eiron , N . , Fontoura , M . and Shekita , E . Using Annotations in Enterprise Search . In Proc . WWW 2006 , 811 - 817 . 10 . Dontcheva , M . , Drucker , S . , Wade , G . , Salesin , D . and Cohen , M . Collecting and Organizing Web Content . In Proc . SIGIR 2006 . 11 . Evans , B . M . and Chi , E . H . Towards a Model of Under - standing Social Search . In Proc . CSCW 2008 . 12 . Fisher , K . , Counts , S . and Kittur , A . Distributed sensemaking : improving sensemaking by leveraging the efforts of previous users . In Proc . CHI 2012 , 247 - 256 13 . Freyne , J . , Farzan , R . , Brusilovsky , P . , Smyth , B . and Coyle , M . Collecting community wisdom : integrating social search & social navigation . In Proc . UIST 2007 , 14 . Furnas , G . W . , Landauer , T . K . , Gomez , L . M . and Du - mais , S . T . The vocabulary problem in human - system communication . CACM 30 , 11 , ACM Press ( 1987 ) , 964 - 971 . 15 . Glance , N . S . Community search assistant . In Proc . IUI 2001 . 16 . Goldberg , D . , Nichols , D . , Oki , B . M . and Terry , D . Us - ing collaborative filtering to weave an information tap - estry . CACM 35 , 12 , ( 1992 ) , 61 – 70 . 17 . Golder , S . A . and Huberman , B . A . Usage Patterns of Collaborative Tagging Systems . Journal of Information Science 32 , 2 , ( 2006 ) , 198 - 208 . 18 . Hammond , T . , Hannay , T . , Lund , B . and Scott , J . So - cial book marking tools ( i ) - a general review . D - Lib Magazine 11 , 4 , ( 2005 ) . 19 . Hofgesang , P . I . Web personalisation through incre - mental individual profiling and support - based user segmentation . In Proc . IEEE 2007 . 20 . Hong , L , Chi , E . H . , Budiu , R . , Pirolli , P . and Nelson , L . SparTag . us : Low Cost Tagging System for Foraging of Web Content . In Proc AVI 2008 . 21 . Hummel , J . E . and Holyoak , K . J . Distributed represen - tations of structure : A theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychological Review 104 , ( 1997 ) , 427 - 466 . 22 . Kandogan , E . and Shneiderman , B . Elastic Windows : evaluation of multi - window operations . I n Proc CHI 1997 . 23 . Kellar , M . , Watters , C . and Shepherd , M . A Field Study Characterizing Web - Based Information - Seeking Tasks . Journal of the American Society for Information Science 58 , 7 , ( 2007 ) , 999 - 1018 . 24 . Klein , G . , Moon , B . and Hoffman , R . R . Making Sense of Sensemaking 2 : A Macrocognitive Model . In Proc . IEEE 2006 . 25 . Kittur , A . , Peters , A . M . , Diriye , A . , Telang , T . and Bove , M . R . Costs and benefits of structured infor - mation foraging . In Proc . CHI 2013 , 2989 - 2998 . 26 . Kittur , A . , Suh , B . and Chi , E . H . Can you ever trust a wiki ? : impacting perceived trustworthiness in Wikipe - dia . In Proc . CSCW 2008 , 477 - 480 . 27 . Konstan , J . A . , Miller , B . N . , Maltz , D . , Herlocker , J . L . , Gordon , L . R . and Riedl . J . GroupLens : Applying col - laborative filtering to Usenet news . CACM 40 , 3 , ( 2007 ) , 77 – 87 . 28 . Large , A . , Beheshti , J . and Rahman , T . Gender Differ - ences in Collaborative Web Searching Behavior : An Elementary School Study . Information Processing and Management 38 , ( 2002 ) , 427 - 433 . 29 . Lee , K . J . What Goes Around Comes Around : An Analysis of del . icio . us as Social Space . In Proc . CSCW 2006 . 30 . Lerman , K . Social Information Processing in News Aggregation . In Proc . IEEE 2007 . 31 . Maarek , Y . S . , Jacovi , M . , Shtalhaim , M . , Ur , S . , Zer - nik , D . and Ben - Shaul , I . Z . WebCutter : a system for dynamic and tailorable site mapping . In Proc . WWW 1997 , 1269 - 1279 . 32 . MacKay , B . , Kellar , M . and Watters , C . An evaluation of landmarks for re - finding information on the Web . Ext . Abstracts CHI 2005 . 33 . Marchionini , G . Information seeking in electronic en - vironments . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press , ( 2000 ) . 34 . Mathes , A . Folksonomies – Cooperative Classification and Communication through Shared Metadata . http : / / www . adammathes . com / academic / computer - mediatedcommunication / folksonomies . html . ( Decem - ber 2004 ) . 35 . Millen , D . R . , Feinberg , J . and Kerr , B . Dogear : Social bookmarking in the enterprise . In Proc . CHI 2006 . 36 . Morris , M . R . A Survey of Collaborative Web Search Practices . In Proc . CHI 2008 . CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1009 37 . Morris , M . R . and Horvitz , E . SearchTogether : An In - terface for Collaborative Web Search . In Proc . UIST 2007 . 38 . Munro , A . J . , Hook , K . , and Benyon , D . R . Eds . Person - al and Social Navigation of Information Space . Spring - er - Verlag ( 1999 ) . 39 . Muralidharan , A , Gyongyi , Z . and Chi , E . Social anno - tations in web search . In Proc . CHI 2012 , ACM Press ( 2012 ) , 1085 - 1094 . 40 . Marlow , C . , Naaman , M . , boyd , d . and Davis , M . HT06 , Tagging Paper , Taxonomy , Flickr , Academic Article , To Read . In Proc . HT06 , 31 - 40 . 41 . Paul , S . A . and Morris , M . W . CoSense : Enhancing Sensemaking for Collaborative Web Search . In Proc . CHI 2009 . 42 . Paul , S . A . , Reddy , M . C . Sensemaking in collaborative web search . Human Computer Interaction 26 , 72 – 122 ( 2011 ) . 43 . Pirolli , P . and Card , S . K . Information foraging in in - formation access environments . In Proc . CHI 1995 . 44 . Pirolli , P . and Card , S . K . Information foraging . Psy - chological Review 106 , ( 1999 ) , 643 - 675 . 45 . Russell , D . M . , Stefik , M . J . , Pirolli , P . and Card , S . K . The cost structure of sensemaking . In Proc . CHI 1993 , 269 - 276 . 46 . Schraefel , M . , Zhu , Y . , Modjeska , D . , Wigdor , D . and Zhao , S . Hunter gatherer : interaction support for the creation and management of within - web - page collec - tions . In Proc . WWW 2002 . 47 . Sharma , N . Role of available and provided resources in sensemaking . In Proc . CHI 2011 . 48 . Shneiderman , B . Designing trust into online experienc - es . CACM 43 , 12 , ( 2000 ) , 57 - 59 . 49 . Smyth , B . , Balfe , E . , Boydell , O . , Bradley , K . , Briggs , P . , Coyle , M . and Freyne , J . A liveuser evaluation of collaborative web search . In Proc . International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2005 . 50 . Tauscher , L . and Greenberg , S . How people revisit Web pages : Empirical findings and implications for the design of history systems . International Journal of Human – Computer Studies 47 , ( 1997 ) , 97 – 137 . 51 . Twidale , M . , Nichols , D . and Paice , C . Browsing is a Collaborative Process . Information Processing and Management 33 , 6 , ( 1997 ) , 761 - 783 . 52 . Wu , X . , Zhang , L . and Yu , Y . Exploring Social Anno - tations for the Semantic Web . In Proc . WWW 2006 , 417 - 426 . 53 . Yanbe , Y . , Jatowt , A . , Nakamura , S . and Tanaka , K . Can social bookmarking enhance search in the web ? In Proc . ACM / IEEE - CS joint conf . on Digital libraries 2007 , 107 . 54 . Zanardi , V . and Capra , L . Social ranking : uncovering relevant content using tag - based recommender sys - tems . In Proc . ACM RecSys 2008 , 51 . CSCW 2014 • Building on Others February 15 - 19 , 2014 , Baltimore , MD , USA 1010