I N S T I T U T E O F B I O T E C H N O L O G Y H E L S I N K I I N S T I T U T E O F L I F E S C I E N C E S D O C T O R A L P R O G R A M I N B I O M E D I C I N E F A C U L T Y O F B I O L O G I C A L A N D E N V I R O N M E N T A L S C I E N C E S Revising the actin disassembly machinery The role of GMF and twinfilin in turnover of dendritic actin arrays MARKKU HAKALA Revising the actin disassembly machinery The role of GMF and twinfilin in turnover of dendritic actin arrays MARKKU HAKALA ACADEMIC DISSERTATION to be presented for public discussion with the permission of the Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences of the University of Helsinki , in Auditorium 2 , Info Centre Korona , Viikinkaari 11 , on the 20th of March , 2020 at 12 noon . HELSINKI 2020 Institute of Biotechnology and Helsinki Institute of Life Sciences Doctoral Program in Biomedicine Doctoral School in Health Sciences Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences University of Helsinki III REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY The Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences uses the Urkund plagiarism recognition system to examine all doctoral dissertations . All figures in the thesis summary are under copyright of the author and are made available under CC - BY - NC 4 . 0 International licence . Back cover artwork by Ilkka Hakala ISBN 978 - 951 - 51 - 5944 - 1 ( paperback ) ISBN 978 - 951 - 51 - 5945 - 8 ( pdf ) Painosalama Oy 2020 Academy professor Pekka Lappalainen University of Helsinki , Finland Docent Maria Vartiainen University of Helsinki , Finland Professor Kari Keinänen University of Helsinki , Finland Associate Professor Diana Toivola Åbo Akademi University , Finland Professor Jari Ylänne University of Jyväskylä , Finland Associate professor Alexis Gautreau Institute Polytechnique de Paris , CNRS , France Professor Kari Keinänen University of Helsinki , Finland SUPERVISOR ADVISORY COMMITTEE REVIEWERS OPPONENT CUSTODIAN IV MARKKU HAKALA Preface This thesis has taught me a lot . This is especially for the reason that I was able to collaborate with so many fantastic scientists along the way . If you have courage to read further , you will find out that this study utilized approaches like mutagenesis , biochemistry , cell biology , MD simulations and genetics , among others . At this point it’s ( probably ) safe to admit that I didn’t know much of many of these topics and methods when I started my studies . It’s also ( again , probably ) safe to say that nowadays I know a lot more . With all these different techniques , there was also a new expert joining my projects either by collaborating with me or by supervising me , and I couldn’t be more thankful for all of you who have helped me during my studies . When I started PhD studies , I had two projects to choose from . From researchers who had been involved in these projects , I received very encouraging advices : “stay away from them if you ever want to graduate ! ” Luckily , my supervisor had a second opinion . So , I started working on with twinfilin . Probably the project would have been quite awful without the great guidance I received from Pekka . I can’t imagine anyone who would be more enthusiastic about the project , and who would more eager be ready to talk about results and problems . So , thank you , Pekka , for taking me to your lab and for believing me for all these years . The project proved to be very exciting , as you promised . This was a long road and , I think , pretty much everything we guessed about the functions of twinfilin along the way were incorrect . But on the other hand , it was much more exciting this way . Beside Pekka , there was a continuous support from the whole Lappalainen lab . It has been a privilege to solve mysteries of actin dynamics with a group of so talented and intelligent researchers . As a PhD student , I have learnt so much from the broad expertise in the group . For few former lab members , I need to give a special , huge thanks , for their help and support . First , from Hongxia and Yosuke I learned basically everything I know about lipids and protein - lipid interactions . Thus , your help and advices were very crucial for me to succeed . I’m sure I will need many of those skills in the future as well . Thank you for both of you for your time and patience with my endless questions . I’m happy to know you have been successful in your careers after leaving Pekka’s lab , and quite sure our paths will cross again at some point . Especially in the beginning of my thesis work , and already during my master’s , I had long and profound discussions with Minna . I was very lucky to have you in our “office” , as I probably learned more of actin , actin dynamics , cell migration and other actin - related and non - related thingies , by discussing with you than I would have learnt by reading any of the books . I admire your willingness to discuss about science and to get excited about unanswered questions . This is a skill I am planning to borrow from you in my new adventures . Thanks for taking me into your GMF project , you did great job to introduce me to Drosophila genre . I even started to like those little creatures . I’m sure that if you hold on to this excitement towards science , mentoring and teaching you will be very successful in your career and life as well . Thank you for all your help , support and guidance ! It’s really hard to find correct words to my fellow PhD students of Lappalainen lab . I couldn’t wish for better peer support during this long road . I have always been able to count on you both in good and in bad times . Pekka might think our coffee breaks are too long ( hmm… ) and they are too frequent ( well… ) , but for me they kept me going and actually helped to solve many problems and questions . Jaakko , your expertise in imaging and interest to improve both your skills and also to share your knowledge is admirable . Also . I appreciate your efforts to get me climbing or to V REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY gym more often . Hope you keep on asking . Kasia , I really miss your dark humour and our endless discussions about different ways to sell kidneys for money . It’s always good to have a good backup plan . I was very happy to know you have found a job and there’s probably no need to sell any of body parts at this point . Reena , I admire your passion to search and learn new things , whether they are science related or non - related . Whenever I needed to work late in the lab , I could count on that you were keeping me company . I’m sure we’ll find that slot for the tennis , eventually , and I’m looking forward for all those bicycle trips we have planned to do in Switzerland , Italy , and France . Tommi , your honesty and openness have been crucial for our group dynamics . If there is anyone who I can rely on to ask for help , it is you . Not because you always promise to do it , but because if you promise to do it , I can trust your word . Thank you for all of you for these great moments . And thanks for all those gin - and - tonics , too . I’m quite sure there will be many more to come . For all current and former members of Lappalainen lab : Elena , Kostya , Yaming , Geri , Mirva , Johan , Lina , Shrikant , Sari , Anna - Liisa ( I’m sure I’m missing someone ) , thank you for each and every one of you for your great support and advices whenever I needed them . We all come from so many different background and cultures , and I have learnt so much from all of you . I hope we stay in touch also in a future , wherever it may lead us . Take care all of you ! I also want to thank members of Vartiainen lab for your help and support , and especially for the supply of reagents whenever I have needed . Last but not least , I want to thank my former students Mitro and Mari , who were helping me a lot in lipid and mammalian cell projects , respectively . I’m sure you both have great futures ahead of you , whatever you will decide after your own PhD studies . I want to thank also my collaborators in Helsinki and Paris for their great support during this PhD . From Ilpo Vattulainen and his group at Department of Physics , especially from Maria and Giray , I learned everything I know from membrane biophysics and simulations . Have to say , that learning curve was steep . It was great to have you and your expertise in the paper . Next time if I decide to collaborate with MD simulation experts I at least can speak their language already in beginning . I also want to acknowledge Romet - Lemonne / Jegou lab at Institute Jacques Monod . Guillaume , Antoine and Hugo , huge thanks for you all for all that hard work . I hope I can visit your institute at some point and bring you a collection of wine to celebrate our achievements . My special thanks go to the whole ProLipids community . Past six years in the Centre of Excellence in Biomembrane research taught me a lot , and also change my career plans and research interest from the actin field more towards the membrane research . I’m very grateful for this experience and for all the people in Lappalainen , Vattulainen and Ikonen groups . Thank you ! This study would not have been possible without excellent microscopy core facilities in Viikki and Meilahti . I want to thank especially Kimmo , Mika , Marko and Harri in Viikki Light microscopy unit , as well as Mikko and Kirstin at Biomedicum imaging unit for all your help and support along the way . There are also bunch of students , post - docs and group leaders in both Viikki and Meilahti who have been ready to chat with me and giving me instructions whenever I have needed them . I want to thank especially Juha Saarikangas and Ville Paavilainen for your comments and suggestions for my projects , and advices in search for post - doctoral positions . Special thanks to Leo Almeida - Souza and An - Sofie Lenaerts for your hospitality in Cambridge and your countless advices of what I should take into account when moving abroad . And your honest view on Brexitland . I was lucky to have so many nice people around me during my undergraduate and PhD studies . I will probably forget to mention half of you , and I apologize for that . Anni , Tea , Pauliina , Aino Tuomas K , Markus S , Tuomas A , Kalle M , Tuomas O , Elli , thanks for all of you for those great memories and support , all the coffee , all the bird watching , bicycle fixing , nice gigs and music VI MARKKU HAKALA festivals and whatever there has been in past years . Thanks to Ewelina , Elina , Mridul , Siggi , Darshan , Behnam , Kul , Isabel , Otto , Lydia and many others in ILS and / or DPBM for sharing those good and bad times of PhD life . Tapanila climbing crew : Nalle , Johanna and Sergio , thanks for keeping me alive . I hope we have many nice climbing trips ahead of us . Many , many thanks for all those great moments for Kerjääjät band . Playing with you was so much fun and helped me to shift my thoughts from research to something completely different at least once a week . So , big thanks to Otso , Johanna , Antti , Lauri , Valtteri , Martta , Anna , Juan , Mari , Tadeu , and Jorge for keeping up with my fluctuating tempo , all those nice tours in Finland , UK and Germany , and for countless bad jokes . Hope I get change to see you playing many times in coming years with new people on board . Big thanks to the Pukkila gang , Marja , Hanna , Tomi , Henriikka and Toni ( yes , I count Askola here as well ) for staying in my life since primary school . Even though we meet nowadays very ( too ) seldom , it always feels there is a special connection between us . Thanks for all those lovely moments . I hope , and I know there will be many more to come . To my family , Sanja , Olavi and Ilkka , I first of all owe you an apologize for all those excessively long working days . Sanja , things haven’t always been too easy for us and combining two PhD thesis and two kids has been quite a task . But we managed , and I know we manage many other things as well after this . Olavi and Ilkka , te kaksi olette minulle tärkeimpiä ihmisiä maailmassa ja minä odotan innolla tulevia vuosia ja uusia seikkailuja teidän kanssa . To my parents , Eino and Sirkka , en voi kylliksi kiittää kaikesta tuesta jonka olen saanut teiltä . Kiitos ! Eiköhän nämä opinnot nyt olleet tässä eli ei tarvitse enää kysellä milloin minä oikeastaan valmistun . Thanks to my brothers and sisters as well for everything . Outi , Pirjo , Toivo , Janne , Erkki , Pekka and Mikko , I ' m lucky to have all of you as people who I can really count on in every turn and everytime when I need any help . Thank you ! I would like to end by acknowledging those who helped me to get this thesis over the line . Beside my supervisor , professor Kari Keinänen was a familiar face to me in last few months . Docent Maria Vartiainen fulfilled my thesis committee with Kari , and I thank you both for your great comments and suggestions in our meetings . I got lots of valuable comments and suggestions for my thesis from Associate Professor Diana Toivola and Professor Jari Ylänne . I thank you for the time and effort you gave to the thesis , which , based on your emails , accumulated heavily on evenings and weekends . I want to express my deepest thanks to my opponent , Associate Professor Alexis Gautreau , who seemingly spent his holiday on reading my thesis . Thank you for accepting my invitation and putting the effort on this examination . Finally , I hope you all enjoy the show as much as I do . And , of course , I hope enjoy reading the thesis . VII REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Abstract Polymerization of actin filaments against cellular membranes and contraction of actomyosin fibers generate pushing and pulling forces for cell migration , endocytosis , cell division , and maintenance of cell morphology , as well as for intracellular motility and morphogenesis of organelles . Thus , the actin cytoskeleton is a fundamental cellular component in development , immune responses , and in several other aspects of physiology . Moreover , the actin cytoskeleton is hijacked by viruses and pathogens during the infection process . Owing to their central role in above - mentioned cellular processes , actin and actin - binding proteins have been in the limelight of cancer research . Actin is a globular protein , which can polymerize into filaments and depolymerize back to monomers . Dozens of actin binding proteins regulate actin dynamics in cells . Whereas regulation of actin filament nucleation and filament elongation are relatively well understood , the disassembly is far more enigmatic topic . ADF / cofilin is the key actin disassembly factor . It belongs to a family of six actin depolymerizing homology ( ADF - H ) domain proteins , which all interact with actin or actin - related proteins . However , apart from ADF / cofilin , biochemical and cellular functions of members of this protein family have remained elusive . In this work , I studied the cellular and biochemical roles of two ADF - H domain proteins , glia maturation factor ( GMF ) and twinfilin . I show that they both promote the disassembly of dendritic actin networks in cells , but by distinct mechanisms . GMF , which binds actin - related proteins ( Arp ) in the Arp2 / 3 complex , debranches dendritic actin networks in vitro . The data presented here show that GMF regulates the dynamics of lamellipodial , dendritic actin network in Drosophila cells and promotes collective border cell migration in vivo . Moreover , Drosophila GMF display a strong genetic interaction in cells and in vivo with another actin - regulatory protein , actin - interacting protein 1 ( Aip1 ) , indicating that they facilitate actin disassembly in a synergistic manner . Twinfilin interacts with actin monomers and actin filament barbed ends to inhibit actin polymerization . Moreover , it binds heterodimeric Capping Protein ( CP ) and membrane phosphatidylinositol phosphates ( PIPs ) , which inhibit the actin - binding function of twinfilin . However , the molecular mechanism of this interaction has remained unknown . Thus , in the second part of the thesis I utilized a combination of mutagenesis and biochemistry , supplemented with molecular dynamics simulations , to reveal how PIPs inhibit twinfilin . Interestingly , twinfilin interacts with PIPs with a two - step mechanism . First , the CP - interaction motif in the carboxy - terminal tail of twinfilin anchors the protein to plasma membrane . Subsequently , the actin - binding interface interacts with lipids , leading to inhibition of both the CP - and actin - binding activities of twinfilin . Cellular functions of twinfilin have remained elusive despite extensive studies in past decades . In the third part of the thesis , I generated mouse twinfilin knockout cell lines and showed that twinfilin regulates both actin and CP turnover in lamellipodia . Surprisingly , twinfilin promotes CP dynamics in cells and in vitro by uncapping filament barbed ends , thus providing an explanation why the localization of CP in cells is restricted to the very distal edge of lamellipodia . Moreover , twinfilin itself does not accelerate filament depolymerization after uncapping , but instead allows filaments to disassemble after removal of CP from actin filament barbed ends , explaining the diminished filament disassembly rates in twinfilin - deficient cells . Together , the work presented here highlights the important roles of twinfilin and GMF in regulation of lamellipodial actin networks . Their distinct roles in actin disassembly show that actin turnover in dendritic arrays is maintained by several functionally different proteins which , in concert , facilitate the turnover of branched actin filament networks in cells . VIII MARKKU HAKALA Tiivistelmä A ktiinisäikeiden solun kalvorakenteita vasten tuottama työntövoima sekä aktiini - ja myosiinikimppujen synnyttämä kimppujen supistumisvoima ylläpitävät muun muassa solujen liikkumista , kalvoliikennettä , jakautumista sekä solujen muodon ja rakenteen säilymistä . Näin ollen solujen aktiinitukiranka on välttämätön muun muassa yksilönkehityksessä ja immuunipuolustusjärjestelmässä . Useat virukset ja taudinaiheuttajat hyödyntävät aktiinikoneistoa päästäkseen soluun sisälle . Lisäksi aktiinitukirangan merkitys edellä mainituissa solubiologisissa tapahtumissa on tuonut aktiinin ja aktiinitukirankaa säätelevät proteiinit syöpätutkimuksen valokeilaan . Aktiini on pallomainen proteiini , joka kykenee pidentymään pitkiksi säikeiksi ja purkautumaan yksittäisiksi monomeereiksi . Aktiinisäikeiden pidentyminen ja sen säätelijät tunnetaan varsin hyvin . Sen sijaan purkautumiseen osallistuvat proteiinit ja niiden rooli on huonommin tiedossa . Useat tutkimukset viime vuosikymmeninä ovat osoittaneet , että ADF / kofiliinilla on keskeinen rooli aktiinisäikeiden purkautumisen säätelyssä . ADF / kofiliini kuuluu kuuden proteiinin muodostamaan proteiiniperheeseen , jotka kaikki sitoutuvat joko aktiiniin tai aktiinin kaltaisiin proteiineihin . Toisin kuin ADF / kofiliinin , muiden tämän perheen jäsenten biokemialliset ja solubiologiset toiminnot ovat huonosti ymmärrettyjä . Tässä tutkielmassa tutkin kahden tämän perheen proteiinin , GMF : n ja twinfiliinin , solubiologisia ja biokemiallisia toimintoja . Näytän , että ne molemmat osallistuvat haaroittuneiden aktiinisäieverkostojen purkautumiseen omilla hyvin erilaisilla tavoilla . GMF , joka sitoutuu aktiinin kaltaiseen proteiiniin ( Arp ) Arp2 / 3 - kompleksissa , purkaa aktiinisäieverkostojen haaroja . Tämän tutkielman tulokset osoittavat , että GMF säätelee solun levyjalan aktiinisäikeiden kierrätystä ja on tärkeässä roolissa rajasolujen liikkumisessa banaanikärpäsen munakammion kehittymisen aikana . Lisäksi GMF : n ja toisen aktiinia säätelevän proteiinin , Aip1 : n , geeniluennan samanaikainen hiljentäminen johti aktiinisäikeiden kertymiseen sekä viljellyissä soluissa että kärpäsen munakammioissa . Aiemmin on osoitettu , että twinfiliini sitoutuu sekä yksittäisiin aktiinimonomeereihin että aktiinisäikeiden nopeasti kasvaviin pluspäihin , estäen näin säikeiden pidentymistä . Tämän lisäksi twinfiliini sitoutuu aktiinisäikeiden pluspäihin sitoutuvaan CP - tulppaproteiiniin ja solukalvon PIP - lipideihin . PIP - lipidit estävät twinfiliinin sitoutumisen aktiiniin , mutta tämän säätelyn tarkka mekanismi on ollut tuntematon . Tässä työssä käytimme puhdistettuja proteiineja biokemiallisissa kokeissa sekä hyödynsimme tietokonemallinnusta selvittääksemme , miten twinfiliini sitoutuu PIP - lipideihin . Tuloksemme osoittavat , että twinfiliini sitoutuu lipideihin kaksiosaisella mekanismilla . Aluksi twinfiliinin häntä ankkuroi proteiinin solukalvoon , minkä jälkeen loppu proteiini aktiininsitoumisalueineen sitoutuu kalvoon . Näin ollen twinfiliinin kyky sitoa aktiinia ja CP : ia estyvät sen sitoutuessa solukalvon PIP - lipideihin . Twinfiliinin tarkka rooli aktiinisäikeiden säätelyssä soluissa on jäänyt toistaiseksi epäselväksi . Tässä tutkielmassa käytin hiiren soluja , joista olin estänyt twinfiliinin geenin ilmentymisen mutaatiolla , ja vertasin näitä soluja villityyppisiin soluihin . Näin osoitan , että twinfiliini säätelee sekä aktiinisäikeiden että CP : n dynamiikkaa solujen levyjaloissa . Twinfiliini poistaa CP : n aktiinisäikeiden plus - päistä ja siten edistää aktiinisäikeiden purkautumista soluissa . Tämä havainto selittää sen , miksi CP paikantuu solujen levyjalassa aivan solukalvon lähelle ja sen , miksi CP : n dynamiikka on huomattavasti nopeampaa soluissa kuin mitä sen biokemialliset ominaisuudet ennustavat . Tulokset selittävät myös sen , miksi aktiinisäikeiden lyhentyminen on hitaampaa soluissa , joista twinfiliinin ilmentyminen on estetty mutaatiolla . Tämä väitöskirjatyö osoittaa , että twinfiliinillä ja GMF : llä on tärkeä rooli solujen aktiiniverkostojen säätelyssä . Niiden hyvin erilaiset roolit aktiinisäikeiden purkautumisen säätelyssä osoittavat , että aktiinisäikeiden kierrätystä ylläpitää soluissa useat proteiinit yhteistyössä toistensa kanssa . Ix REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Abbreviations ABP1 actin - binding protein 1 ADF actin depolymerizing factor ADF - H actin depolymerizing factor homology ADP adenosine diphosphate ADP - Pi adenosine diphosphate - phosphate Aip1 actin - interacting protein 1 Arp actin related protein ATP adenosine triphosphate BAR bin - amphiphysis - rsv CAP cyclase - associated protein CME clathrin - mediated endocytosis CP heterodimeric Capping Protein αβ C - terminal carboxy - terminal DPH 1 , 6 - diphenyl - 1 , 3 , 5 - hexatriene Drebrin developmentally regulated brain protein DNA deoxyribonucleic acid EGFP enhanced green fluorescence protein Ena / VASP enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ERM ezrin - radixin - moesin F - actin filamentous actin FH2 formin - homology 2 ( domain ) FMNL formin - like ( family of formin proteins ) FRAP fluorescence recovey after photobleaching G - actin globular ( monomeric ) actin x MARKKU HAKALA GMF glia maturation factor Hsp70 heat shock protein 70 mDia mammalian diaphanous - related formin NPF nucleation promoting factors N - WASP neural Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome proteins PIP phosphatidylinositol phosphate SCAR suppressor of cAMP receptor WASH Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein and SCAR homolog WASP Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome proteins WAVE WASP and verprolin homology WDS WISH / DIP / SPIN90 xI REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Contents Preface iii Abstract vi Tiivistelmä vii Abbreviations viii List of original publications xii Contribution of the author to each publication xii 1 . Review of the literature 1 1 . 1 . The actin cytoskeleton 1 1 . 2 . Actin filament populations in mammalian non - muscle cells 2 1 . 2 . 1 . Dendritic actin networks 2 1 . 2 . 2 . Parallel actin filament bundles 2 1 . 2 . 3 . Actin stress fibers 3 1 . 2 . 4 . Cortical actin network 4 1 . 3 . Actin in action 4 1 . 3 . 1 . Cell migration 5 1 . 3 . 2 . Endocytosis 6 1 . 4 . Regulation of actin dynamics 7 1 . 4 . 1 . Filament nucleation and branching 8 1 . 4 . 2 . Regulation of filament elongation 9 1 . 4 . 3 . Actin filament disassembly 11 xII MARKKU HAKALA 1 . 4 . 4 . Membrane phosphoinositides regulate actin dynamics 12 1 . 4 . 5 . Rho GTPases as actin regulators 13 1 . 4 . 6 . Interplay between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane tension 14 1 . 5 . The ADF - H domain protein family 14 1 . 5 . 1 . Glia - maturation factor 15 1 . 5 . 2 . Twinfilin 16 2 . Aims of the study 19 3 . Experimental procedures 20 4 . Results and discussion 21 4 . 1 . Drosophila GMF promotes collective cell migration and turnover of dendritic actin networks ( publication I ) 21 4 . 2 . Twinfilin interacts with membrane phosphoinositides through electrostatic interactions ( publication II ) 22 4 . 3 . Twinfilin binds phosphoinositides through a two - step mechanism ( publication II ) 23 4 . 4 . Mammalian twinfilin is crucial for efficient lamellipodial actin turnover ( publication III ) 25 4 . 5 . Twinfilin uncaps filament barbed ends to promote actin disassembly ( publication III ) 26 5 . Concluding remarks and future perspectives 29 6 . References 32 xIII REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY List of original publications This thesis work is based on the following original articles , which are referred in the text by their roman numerals I . Poukkula M , Hakala M , Pentinmikko N , Sweeney MO , Jansen S , Mattila J , Hietakangas V , Goode BL , Lappalainen P . GMF promotes leading - edge dynamics and collective cell migration in vivo . Curr Biol . 2014 , 24 : 2533 - 40 II . Hakala M , Kalimeri M , Enkavi G , Vattulainen I , Lappalainen P . Molecular mechanism for inhibition of twinfilin by phosphoinositides . J Biol Chem . 2018 , 293 : 4818 - 4829 III . Hakala M , Wioland H , Tolonen M , Jegou A , Romet - Lemonne G , Lappalainen P . Twinfilin uncaps filament barbed ends to promote turnover of actin filament networks . BioRxiv 2019 Contribution of the author to each publication I . M . H . performed GMF , Aip1 and p16 depletions in S2R + cells , as well as imaging and image analysis for figure 3 . M . H . purified mGMF - γ for experiments in figure 1 . II . M . H . performed all experiments except molecular dynamics simulations in figure 4 and supplemental figures S3 - S7 . M . H . , M . K . , G . E . , and P . L . wrote the manuscript with contribution from other authors . III . M . H . performed all experiments except single filament assays in figures 3 , 6 and 7 . M . H . and P . L . wrote the manuscript with contribution from other authors . 1 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY 1 . Review of the literature 1 . 1 . The actin cytoskeleton Since actin was discovered in the early 1940’s in the laboratory of Albert Szent - Györgyi in series of publications that eventually led to purification of the protein by Brúnó F . Straub [ reviewed in ( Bugyi and Kellermayer , 2019 ) ] , it has become evident how integral cellular component actin is throughout the evolution with its homologues existing also in archaea and bacteria ( Cabeen and Jacobs - Wagner , 2010 ; Velle and Fritz - Laylin , 2019 ) . Actin is a critical player in cell motility , vesicle transport and endocytosis , cell division , maintenance of cell polarity and shape , as well as in muscle cell contraction , just to name few . Recently , the potential of actin has spread beyond cells , with its properties emerging as solutions for electrical connections ( Galland et al . , 2013 ) and parallel - computation systems ( Nicolau et al . , 2016 ) . Vertebrates express six isoforms of actin . These include skeletal and cardiac muscle α - actin isoforms , smooth muscle α - and γ - isoforms , and non - muscle β - and γ - isoforms ( Dominguez and Holmes , 2011 ) . These isoforms differ only on few amino acids , especially in the N - terminal region of proteins ( Herman , 1993 ) . Drosophila has six actin genes , which encode two isoforms of cytoplasmic actin , larval muscle actin , and adult muscle actin ( Fyrberg et al . , 1981 , 1980 ) . Structurally , actin belongs to a superfamily of sugar kinases , hexokinases , heat shock protein 70 ( Hsp70 ) , actin - related proteins ( Arp ) and prokaryotic actin - like proteins , which all contain a common ~ 375 - amino - acid polypeptide folding into two α / β - domains ( Dominguez and Holmes , 2011 ) . These domains can be further divided into subdomains 1 - 4 ( Kabsch et al . , 1990 ) . The most fundamental property of actin is its ability to convert between a monomeric , globular actin ( G - actin ) ( Kabsch et al . , 1990 ) and a filamentous actin ( F - actin ) ( Fujii et al . , 2010 ; Holmes et al . , 1990 ) states . Additionally , actin binds divalent cations , and nucleotides adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) or adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) . Actin also act as an ATPase ( Korn , 1982 ) , giving rise to its property to polymerize into F - actin state and depolymerize to the G - actin state . ATPase activity of actin is prominent only in the F - actin state , where irreversible ATP hydrolysis ( Carlier et al . , 1988 ) acts as an indicator of filament aging and triggers depolymerization when F - actin is in the ADP state . The hydrolysis of ATP is rapid process with a halftime of ~ 2 seconds ( Blanchoin and Pollard , 2002 ) , whereas the dissociation of phosphate group from the newly formed ADP - Pi transition state is relatively slow ( Carlier and Pantaloni , 1986 ) . Thus , it is thought that most subunits in F - actin are in the ADP - Pi form , which resembles the ATP - actin form from the Figure 1 . Actin filament assembly , disassembly and treadmilling . Association constants have unit of µM - 1s - 1 and dissociation constants unit of s - 1 . Direction of treadmilling of actin subunits in the filament is indicated with a dotted arrow . Adapted from Pollard & Borisy ( 2003 ) Cell . 112 : 453 - 465 . 2 MARKKU HAKALA biochemical point of view ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Notably , the kinetics of ATP hydrolysis and phosphate dissociation from ADP - Pi - actin in cells are not known . Myosins are a large family of actin - dependent molecular motors that interact with actin and utilize energy from the ATP - hydrolysis to generate contractile movement ( Sellers , 2000 ) . Myosin - decorated F - actin resembles an arrowhead shape in electron micrographs ( Moore et al . , 1970 ) , giving rise to the nomenclature of barbed and pointed ends for different ends of F - actin . Due the irreversible ATP hydrolysis , and different association and dissociation rate constant at barbed and pointed ends for ATP - and ADP - G - actin ( Pollard , 1986 ) , filaments polymerize at barbed ends and depolymerizes at pointed ends at the steady state conditions ( figure 1 ) . This leads to slow treadmilling of actin along the filament from barbed ends to pointed ends ( Fujiwara et al . , 2002 ) . However , the spontaneous depolymerization and polymerization of F - actin are far too slow for the actin cytoskeleton to function in its many cellular assignments . Thus , several actin binding proteins , consisting over 60 classes of proteins , regulate the physiological behaviour of actin ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . 1 . 2 . Actin filament populations in mammalian non - muscle cells Mammalian non - muscle cells have several different actin filament populations ( figure 2 ) that provide different types of forces to enable various functions of cells ( Lehtimäki et al . , 2017 ; Svitkina , 2018b ) . A pushing force is produced by the coordinated polymerization of actin filaments against cellular membranes . It is generated by polymerization of either branched filament networks or parallel , linear actin filament bundles . A pulling or contractile force is provided via sliding of motor protein myosin II along thick antiparallel actin bundles . The third force , the resistance , maintains the cellular shape via cross - linking branched actin filament networks to cellular membranes ( Svitkina , 2018a ) . 1 . 2 . 1 . Dendritic actin networks Branched or dendritic actin networks are present at the leading edge of migrating cells , where the structure is called lamellipodium ( Abercrombie et al . , 1970 ) , at the sites of endocytosis ( Collins et al . , 2011 ) , and in specialized cellular structures , such as in the growth cone of neuronal axons ( Svitkina , 2018a ) . The basic structure of the actin cytoskeleton in these above - mentioned processes is highly similar . Lamellipodium , a protrusive , actin - rich structure that serves as a major cellular element in cell migration and navigation , is filled with branched actin filaments ( Small et al . , 1978 ) . These filaments are attached to sides of each other with a 70 ° angle between barbed ends of two filaments ( Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . Importantly , barbed ends in the lamellipodial actin network are facing the plasma membrane , explaining why polymerization of filaments generates protrusive force for cell migration , which is the main function of lamellipodia in motile cells ( Small et al . , 1978 ) . During endocytosis , branched network of actin provides force to overcome the membrane tension barrier in the endocytic vesicle formation ( Boulant et al . , 2011 ) . 1 . 2 . 2 . Parallel actin filament bundles Cells have various parallel actin bundles depending on the cell type and environment . Individual filaments in these structures are cross - linked to each other and attached to the plasma membrane 3 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY by ezrin - radixin - moesin ( ERM ) proteins , enabling the generation of protrusive force against the membrane ( Vignjevic et al . , 2006 ; Yamashiro - Matsumura and Matsumura , 1986 ) . Microvilli and stereocilia are relatively stable protrusive structures in the intestinal epithelium and inner ear sensory hair cells , respectively . Actin filaments in both of these structures are tightly bundled to each other . Microvilli contain ~ 30 parallel actin filaments , whereas in stereocilia the density of filaments is much higher and can reach to over 300 filaments ( Mooseker and Tilney , 1975 ; Tilney et al . , 1980 ) . Filopodia are the most thoroughly studied cellular protrusions formed by parallel actin bundles . They are finger - like , long and unbranched protrusions rising from the lamellipodium , and contain bundled actin filaments that elongate through the entire filopodium length ( Small et al . , 1978 ) . The main function of filopodia is to sense environment , and generate new attachments to the extra - cellular matrix through focal adhesions ( Lehtimäki et al . , 2017 ; Mattila and Lappalainen , 2008 ; Svitkina , 2018a ) . Filopodia undergo dynamic transition to microspikes and retraction fibers . These transitions are guided by protrusions and retractions of the surrounding lamellipodium ( Svitkina et al . , 2003 ) . 1 . 2 . 3 . Actin stress fibers Stress fibers are bundles of 10 - 30 cross - linked anti - parallel actin filaments . When coupled with non - muscle myosin - II motor protein , they provide contractile force for cell motility . Stress fibers share features of muscle sarcomeres in that non - muscle myosin II forms discontinuous , filamentous stacks , which somewhat resemble myosin stacks of muscle cells ( Fenix et al . , 2016 ; Hu et al . , 2017 ) . Additionally , α - actinin and tropomyosins , which bundle and decorate filaments , respectively , show similar periodic pattern in stress fibers compared to muscle sarcomeres ( Langanger et al . , 1986 ; Lazarides , 1976 ) . Based on their morphology and protein content , stress Figure 2 . Actin filament populations in motile , non - muscle mammalian cells . Lamellipodium consists short , branched network of filaments . In filopodium , filaments are long and parallel , whereas in stress fibers actin filaments display an anti - parallel orientation . 4 MARKKU HAKALA fibers are classified to dorsal stress fibers , transverse arcs , ventral stress fibers , and perinuclear actin cap ( Small et al . , 1998 ; Tojkander et al . , 2012 ) . Dorsal stress fibers are anchored to focal adhesions , which are multiprotein complexes facilitating the connection between cell and extracellular matrix ( Burridge et al . , 1988 ) . However , dorsal stress fibers do not contain myosin II , and thus do not contract . Instead , they appear to act as precursor for other , contractile stress fiber populations ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ; Tojkander et al . , 2011 ) . In contrast to dorsal stress fibers , transverse arcs contain a periodic pattern of α - actinin and myosin II . However , they are not attached to focal adhesions and thus do not directly produce contractile force to the extracellular environment . During cell migration , transverse arcs display a retrograde flow from cell periphery towards the center of the cell ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ; Small et al . , 1998 ; Tojkander et al . , 2015 ) . Ventral stress fibers are considered as mature stress fibers , which possess periodic arrangement of α - actinin and myosin II , and are attached to extracellular environment through focal adhesions ( Burridge , 2017 ) . Hence , they can transmit the contractile force from stress fibers to the extracellular matrix . The assembly of ventral stress fibers was shown to be partially regulated by mechanical tension ( Tojkander et al . , 2018 ) . The perinuclear actin cap is composed of stress fibers that elongate from the leading edge towards the cell rear . They are connected to the extracellular matrix through focal adhesions and to a nuclear envelope through a linker of the nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton complex ( LINC ) ( Khatau et al . , 2009 ) . The exact role of the perinuclear actin cap have remained unclear . They are thought to transmit mechanical stimuli between the extracellular matrix and the nucleus , guide a nuclear orientation during cell migration and constrain the nucleus upon cell shape changes ( Khatau et al . , 2009 ; Maninova et al . , 2017 ; Shiu et al . , 2018 ) . 1 . 2 . 4 . Cortical actin network The actin cortex at cell periphery is a relatively disordered network of actin filaments and non - muscle myosin - II ( Bray and White , 1988 ) . Due presence of myosin - II , the cortical actin network has contractile properties , and it regulates the cell surface tension for example during cell division ( Chugh et al . , 2017 ; Stewart et al . , 2011 ) . At least in motile fibroblasts , the cell cortex seems to contain different populations of actin filament bundles and branched actin networks , whose ratio might change over time . Thus , these different actin populations provide different mechanical properties for the cortex ( Eghiaian et al . , 2015 ) and maintain the cell polarity during migration ( Ramalingam et al . , 2015 ) . During certain modes of cell migrations , the cortical actin network has important function in formation of cell surface blebs ( Bovellan et al . , 2014 ; Paluch and Raz , 2013 ) . However , the precise role and underlying molecular mechanisms of the cortical actomyosin network dynamics in above - mentioned processes are still incompletely understood . 1 . 3 . Actin in action Considering the amount of different actin populations in mammalian cells , it is not surprising that they are involved in wide variety of cellular processes . Perhaps the best characterized example is muscle contraction , where the powerstroke of myosin motor protein pulls actin filaments to provide force for body movements ( Sweeney and Hammers , 2018 ) . In non - muscle cells , the actin cytoskeleton promotes cell division ( Mangione and Gould , 2019 ) , endosome recycling ( Simonetti and Cullen , 2019 ) , organelle dynamics ( Venkatesh et al . , 2019 ) , and developmental processes such as meiosis ( Uraji et al . , 2018 ) . Actin monomers and filaments are present also in the 5 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY nucleus , where they act as components of chromatin remodelling machinery , regulate activities of transcription factors , and participate in DNA repair ( Kyheröinen and Vartiainen , 2019 ; Virtanen and Vartiainen , 2017 ) . Here , I discuss in more detail two fundamental cellular processes where actin is involved : cell migration and endocytosis . 1 . 3 . 1 . Cell migration Cell migration is one of the most fundamental physiological processes during development , immune response , wound healing and maintenance of tissue morphology . However , uncontrolled cell migration is also one of the hallmarks of cancer ( Hanahan and Weinberg , 2011 , 2000 ) . To migrate , cells need force to translocate their body mass , organelles and cytoplasm towards the direction of migration , and generate attachments to their environment to transform cellular forces to movement . Depending on the cell type and environment , cells utilize different strategies to migrate through tissues . The migration modality depends on a variety of determinants of extracellular matrix , including dimension , stiffness , orientation , and its components . Moreover , cellular determinants , such as cell - cell and cell - matrix contacts , cytoskeleton polarity , cell stiffness and ability to provide pericellular polarity , are key aspects controlling which migration mode cells utilize . In two - dimensional environment , cells migrate utilizing adhesion - independent amoeboid or adhesion - dependent mesenchymal migration mode either as individual cells or as a collective group of cells . ( Friedl and Wolf , 2010 ) . In more complex three - dimensional environment , such as in tissue or in extra - cellular matrix , cells migrate in amoeboid , mesenchymal , lobopodial , and collective mode ( Yamada and Sixt , 2019 ) . Mesenchymal migration is an adhesion - dependent migration mode , where cells generate leading edge protrusions , mainly lamellipodia and filopodia in two - dimensional migration , through polymerization of actin filaments against the plasma membrane ( Schaks et al . , 2019 ) . To translocate , cells need to pull their cytoplasm and organelles towards the direction of migration . This process requires force provided by the actomyosin bundles , and generates traction force , which is proportional to properties of extra cellular matrix , strength of cell - matrix adhesion , and the pulling force of stress fibres . Thus , different cell types , such as fibroblast and neutrophils , generate different amounts of traction forces to translocate their cytoplasm ( Beningo et al . , 2001 ; Smith et al . , 2007 ) . To convert the pulling force to motion , cells need to attach to their environment . This is achieved most commonly through focal - adhesions , which generate connections between cells and extracellular matrix ( Changede and Sheetz , 2017 ) . In contrast to mesenchymal cell migration mode , the amoeboid migration is not dependent on adhesions between cells and extracellular matrix . The exact mechanism of amoeboid migration remains enigmatic , and few alternative models have been suggested . Cells lacking specific attachments to extracellular matrix can exhibit rounded protrusions , often referred as membrane blebs , towards the direction of migration by utilizing their contractile actin cortex ( Paluch and Raz , 2013 ; Petrie and Yamada , 2012 ) . A bleb - like protrusions can provide poorly - adhesive “structural” anchoring , also called “elbowing” , for actomyosin contraction and cell rear retraction ( Charras and Paluch , 2008 ) . A recent study suggested an alternative model for amoeboid migration mode , where macrophage cells lacking adhesions to the extracellular environment use membrane trafficking from the cell rear towards the cell front . This membrane trafficking is coupled with increased endocytosis at the back of the cell ( O’Neill et al . , 2018 ) Several cell types , such as various mesenchymal cells , leukocytes and tumor cells , can undergo transition between mesenchymal and 6 MARKKU HAKALA amoeboid migration modes ( Lämmermann et al . , 2008 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ; Ruprecht et al . , 2015 ; Wolf et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , it seems the cell migration mode is not strictly cell type dependent , but is determined both by features of migrating cells as well as by the composition and architecture of the extracellular environment . Collective cell migration is a special mode of cell motility , where a group of moving cells generate connections and affect one another at least during some of the time . The degree of cell connections and interplay during collective migration varies significantly depending on the cell type ( Rørth , 2009 ) . Collective cell migration is important in developmental processes , where large tissue structures are re - shaped , but also during the regeneration of epithelial tissues and in the epidermal wound closure . Additionally , collective cell invasion is common feature of several cancer types ( Montell , 2008 ; Rørth , 2009 ) . In certain types of collective cell migration , such as in vascular sprouting , cells at the leading front of the group specialize into “leader cells” , whereas other cells act as “followers” . Leader cells sense the environmental cues and generate protrusions towards the direction of migration , whereas follower cells form tight cell - cell connections between each other and leader cells through cadherin proteins . However , in many other types of collective migration , the position of individual cells is not as strictly determined ( Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ; Haeger et al . , 2015 ) . A popular and well - studied model system for collective cell migration is a border cell migration in Drosophila ovary . Border cells are a small cluster of about 8 cells that delaminate at the anterior epithelium of a Drosophila egg chamber and migrate in between nurse cells to the posterior side of egg chamber near the oocyte . There , border cells form a structure called micropyle , which is important for fertilization of the egg ( Montell , 2003 ; Rørth , 2009 ) . During migration , the border cell cluster generates long actin - dependent lamellipodia - like protrusions ( Verkhusha et al . , 1999 ) and cell - cell contacts with surrounding nurse cells through E - cadherin adhesion proteins ( Niewiadomska et al . , 1999 ) . Finally , border cells utilize myosin - dependent tractions to squeeze their way between nurse cells ( Geisbrecht and Montell , 2002 ) . The precise regulation of the actin dynamics and cellular protrusions during border cell migration has remained largely elusive . 1 . 3 . 2 . Endocytosis In endocytosis , small membrane vesicles bud off from the plasma membrane and are transported to inner parts of the cell . Endocytosis is used for transportation of several different cargo molecules from the plasma membrane into the cell , and is important for cellular processes such as nutrient uptake , cellular and developmental signalling , and the maintenance of membrane homeostasis ( McMahon and Boucrot , 2011 ; Sigismund et al . , 2012 ) . Additionally , several viruses hijack the endocytosis machinery to enter the cell ( Helenius , 2018 ; Mercer et al . , 2010 ) . Different endocytosis pathways are named based on the coat protein involved , with clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) being the most extensively studied pathway to date ( Kaksonen and Roux , 2018 ) . During CME , a vesicle of ~ 100 nm in diameter is pinched off from the plasma membrane in a process that lasts ~ 60 s . Dozens of proteins , including clathrin itself , clathrin adaptor proteins and , coat proteins , as well as actin and actin - binding proteins , arrive and leave the clathrin - coated pit in specific sequence and precise timing , which are evolutionarily constrained ( Kaksonen and Roux , 2018 ; Weinberg and Drubin , 2012 ) . Clathrin and its adaptor proteins are sufficient to generate the initial membrane curvature ( Chen et al . , 1998 ; Dannhauser and Ungewickell , 2012 ; Saleem et al . , 2015 ; Stachowiak et al . , 2012 ) . The bin - amphiphysis - rsv ( BAR ) domain proteins recognize different types of membrane curvatures at the site of endocytosis to further support and enhance membrane bending ( David et al . , 1996 ; Kishimoto et al . , 2011 ) and to enhance actin filament polymerization ( Almeida - Souza 7 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY et al . , 2018 ) . In yeasts , CME is depended on force provided by the actin cytoskeleton ( Ayscough , 2000 ; Ayscough et al . , 1997 ; Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) . In mammalian cells , however , the role of actin is not as clear as in yeasts , since inhibition of actin dynamics does not always lead to a complete inhibition of endocytosis in cultured cells ( Fujimoto et al . , 2000 ; Gottlieb et al . , 1993 ) . However , actin seems to be necessary for mammalian cell endocytosis to overcome the increased membrane tension barrier ( Boulant et al . , 2011 ) , and inhibition of actin dynamics was shown to interrupt several stages of CME , including the clathrin pit formation and vesicle internalization ( Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . In CME , actin filaments polymerize to surround the endocytic invagination ( Collins et al . , 2011 ; Mulholland et al . , 1994 ) . Filaments are branched ( Collins et al . , 2011 ) and consist of several actin binding proteins found also in lamellipodia ( Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that endocytic and lamellipodial actin networks share both structural similarities and similar regulation mechanisms . In both yeast and mammalian cells , actin filaments start to polymerize at the sites of endocytosis only after the clathrin coat has already formed ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , it seems that actin is not important in early stages of clathrin coat formation , but is instead involved in the last steps of endocytosis events , namely vesicle budding and membrane scission ( Kaksonen and Roux , 2018 ) . Actin polymerizes at the base of the endocytic pit with filament barbed ends oriented against the plasma membrane and drives the endocytic internalization ( Akamatsu et al . , 2020 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ; Picco et al . , 2015 ) . Apart from endocytic invagination , actin has a fundamental role also in endosome recycling . Canonically , the cargo is transported first from endocytic sites to early endosomes , where they are sorted back to the plasma membrane , to the endosomal recycling complex or to late endosomes and further to lysosomes ( Simonetti and Cullen , 2019 ) . Several studies show that actin cables and dendritic actin patches are present throughout the endosome recycling pathway ( Gauthier et al . , 2007 ; Huckaba et al . , 2004 ; Nakagawa and Miyamoto , 1998 ; Pol et al . , 1997 ) . Actin is linked to multiple processes , such as vesicle fusion , endosome biogenesis and cargo sorting ( Kjeken et al . , 2004 ; Morel et al . , 2009 ; Muriel et al . , 2016 ; Ohashi et al . , 2011 ) . However , the precise role of the actin cytoskeleton in endosome trafficking remains elusive . Endocytosis and cell migration machineries are linked to each other through recycling of membrane protein complexes involved in cell - cell and cell - matrix contacts . In mesenchymal cell migration depended on integrin - mediated cell - matrix contacts , integrins are recycled through clathrin - and caveolin - mediated endocytosis to the cell interior ( De Franceschi et al . , 2015 ) . Similarly , cadherin adhesion receptors , which maintain cell - cell contacts during collective cell migration , are recycled through both caveolin - and clathrin - mediated endocytosis pathways ( Brüser and Bogdan , 2017 ; Cadwell et al . , 2016 ) . Indeed , N - cadherin - containing adherent junctions undergo continuous treadmilling during collective cell migration , which is supported by the intake of N - cadherin at the rear of the cell through endocytosis ( Peglion et al . , 2014 ) . These examples highlight the complexity of functions of the actin cytoskeleton that should be considered when dissecting the possible phenotypes of individual actin regulators in cell migration and endocytosis . 1 . 4 . Regulation of actin dynamics Actin interacts with a vast amount of proteins . In fact , it is involved in more protein - protein interactions than any other known protein ( Dominguez and Holmes , 2011 ) , highlighting the complexity of its regulation . However , only nine actin - regulating proteins are conserved during 8 MARKKU HAKALA evolution from the protozoan parasites , such as Leismania or Trypanosoma , to yeasts , Dictyostelia and animals . These proteins include formins , the actin - related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex , profilin , actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin , twinfilin , actin - interacting protein 1 ( Aip1 ) , cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) , heterodimeric Capping Protein ( CP ) , and coronin ( De Melo et al . , 2008 ) . Moreover , in the reconstituted motility system only few proteins of either Listeria or Shigella , namely the Arp2 / 3 complex and its activator , ADF / cofilin , profilin , and CP , are required to generate the actin - dependent motility ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . These above - mentioned proteins form a core group of actin regulators that facilitate most fundamental phases of actin dynamics : filament nucleation , branching and capping , as well as polymerization , depolymerization , and severing of filaments . 1 . 4 . 1 . Filament nucleation and branching Nucleation of new actin filaments is a critical to define the architecture of the actin cytoskeleton . To simplify very complex regulatory mechanism , I will focus here on two main classes of actin nucleators : the Arp2 / 3 complex , which nucleates branched actin networks , and formins , which nucleate linear actin filament ( Pollard , 2007 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex , a multiprotein complex consisting of two actin related proteins and five other subunits ( Machesky et al . , 1994 ) , facilitates filament branching by binding to the side of a “mother filament” where it nucleates a new “daughter filament” ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ; Welch et al . , 1998 ) ( figure 3 A ) . The angle between “mother” and “daughter” filament in the Arp2 / 3 - nucleated actin network is ~ 70 ° ( Mullins et al . , 1998 ; Svitkina et al . , 1997 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex localizes to the lamellipodial region in motile cells ( Machesky et al . , 1997 ; Welch et al . , 1997 ) , and depletion or inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex in yeast , mammalian and Drosophila cells leads to loss of dendritic actin filament networks ( Bailly et al . , 2001 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Winter et al . , 1997 ) . Moreover , the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates endocytic dendritic actin filament networks ( Benesch et al . , 2005 ; Picco et al . , 2015 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is inherently inactive and can be activated by nucleation promoting factors ( NPFs ) , a diverse group of proteins with a distinct cellular localization pattern ( figure 3 ) . These different NPFs seem to serve as organelle - specific activators of actin assembly . The most studied families of NPFs are Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome proteins ( WASP ) and WASP - family verprolin homologue proteins ( WAVE ) , which activate the Arp2 / 3 complex at the plasma membrane ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000a ; Machesky et al . , 1999 ; Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Winter et al . , 1999 ) . Moreover , Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein and SCAR homolog ( WASH ) family of NPFs activate the Arp2 / 3 complex on the surface of endosomes ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Gomez and Billadeau , 2009 ) . The importance of NPFs is highlighted in several studies , where depletion or inhibition of WASP , N - WASP and WAVE proteins impaired various cellular processes , such as lamellipodia formation , endocytosis , dorsal and peripheral membrane ruffling , and cell motility ( Agathon et al . , 2003 ; Innocenti et al . , 2005 ; Legg et al . , 2007 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2003 ) . NPFs are further regulated by Rho GTPases and membrane phosphoinositides . These topics are discussed in following chapters . Beside NPFs , the Arp2 / 3 complex is regulated also by other proteins , such as cortactin and arpin . Arpin inhibits the activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex and regulates the directional persistence of cell migration ( Dang et al . , 2013 ) . In contrast , cortactin promotes nucleation of new actin filaments by activating and stabilizing the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Uruno et al . , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2001 ) . Formins are a conserved family of proteins , which contain unique formin homology domain ( FH2 ) and several other domains ( Chesarone et al . , 2010 ; Zigmond , 2004 ) . Purified FH2 domain catalyses nucleation of actin filaments from purified actin monomers in vitro ( Pruyne et al . , 2002 ; 9 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Sagot et al . , 2002 ) . In cells , formins promote nucleation of linear actin filaments independently from the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Evangelista et al . , 2002 ; Sagot et al . , 2002 ; Watanabe et al . , 1999 ) ( figure 3 B ) . Compared to the Arp2 / 3 complex , formins are a diverse group of proteins with at least two genes in fungi , 15 in mammals and over 20 in plants ( Chesarone et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , it is not a surprise that formins contribute to many cellular processes , such as cytokinesis ( Castrillon and Wasserman , 1994 ) , stress fiber assembly ( Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ) , lamellipodia and filopodia formation ( Kage et al . , 2017 ; Schirenbeck et al . , 2005 ; Yang et al . , 2007 ) , focal adhesion formation ( Kobielak et al . , 2004 ) , and vesicle transport ( Gasman et al . , 2003 ) . Formins and the Arp2 / 3 complex with its activators balance each other in nucleation of different actin filament arrays in cells . In yeast , inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex leads to increase in formin - nucleated actin filament populations , whereas inhibition of formins have the opposite effect ( Burke et al . , 2014 ) . However , recently it was shown that also the Arp2 / 3 complex can nucleate linear actin filaments when bound to WISH / DIP / SPIN90 ( WDS ) proteins ( Balzer et al . , 2019 , 2018 ) , whereas FMNL formins are shown to enhance the lamellipodial protrusion force by nucleating and elongating filaments ( Kage et al . , 2017 ) . These observations indicate that the linear and branched actin arrays could be nucleated by both formins and the Arp2 / 3 complex in an orchestrated fashion . 1 . 4 . 2 . Regulation of filament elongation The control of filament elongation is crucial for maintaining the architecture and functions of actin networks . Many proteins contribute to filament elongation by either enhancing or inhibiting filament polymerization . Enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoproteins ( Ena / VASP ) localize to lamellipodia and filopodia tips in animal cells ( Rottner et al . , 1999 ) and promote filament elongation both in vitro and in cells ( Bear et al . , 2002 ) ( figure 3 C ) . Thus , they for example regulate the length and dynamics of filopodia ( Barzik et al . , 2014 ) and protrusion of lamellipodia ( Dimchev et al . , 2017 ) The ability of Ena / VASP to enhance filament elongation was suggested to rise from its ability to protect filament barbed ends from CP , which inhibits filament elongation ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ) . Later , it was shown that Ena / VASP enhances elongation of filaments by directly interacting with actin filament barbed ends and actin monomers . Thus , Ena / VASP proteins processively add actin monomers to growing barbed ends ( Breitsprecher et al . , 2011 , 2008 ) and remain associated to barbed end during filament elongation ( Winkelman et al . , 2014 ) . In addition to actin filament nucleation , formins also enhance filament elongation by both protecting barbed end from capping , and by permitting addition of actin monomers to the growing filament end ( Zigmond et al . , 2003 ) ( figure 3 B ) . Similar to Ena / VASP , formins remain associated with barbed ends during filament elongation ( Kovar and Pollard , 2004 ) . Profilin is one of the first actin - binding proteins described ( Carlsson et al . , 1977 ) , and since then multiple interaction partners , including Ena / VASP proteins , WAVE complex , formins , and several other proteins containing proline - rich domains or motifs , are described for profilin ( Krishnan and Moens , 2009 ; Witke , 2004 ) . Profilin interacts with ATP - actin monomers and enhance filament elongation ( Carlsson et al . , 1977 ; Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ) , as well as accelerates nucleotide exchange in actin monomer from ADP to ATP ( Goldschmidt - Clermont et al . , 1992 ) . Later , cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) , a multidomain protein which binds both ADP - and ATP - actin monomers , as well as profilin - ATP - actin complex , was found to catalyse nucleotide exchange in actin monomers . Moreover , due its higher affinity to substrate ADP - actin monomers than profilin , 10 MARKKU HAKALA CAP is thought to be more efficient nucleotide exchange factor than profilin ( Balcer et al . , 2003 ; Kotila et al . , 2018 ; Mattila et al . , 2004 ; Moriyama and Yahara , 2002 ) . Profilin is required for the processive function of formin ( Romero et al . , 2004 ) . It was shown that profilin promotes formin - and Ena / VASP - mediated actin filament assembly by delivering ATP - actin monomers these nucleation and elongation factors over the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ; Suarez et al . , 2015 ) . The capping of filament barbed ends is crucial to maintain the architecture of short , branched nature of dendritic actin networks . Several proteins function as barbed end cappers , with the heterodimeric Capping Proteins ( CPs ) being the most prominent ones . CP binds to the barbed end of filament with nanomolar affinity and inhibits both filament polymerization and depolymerization ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . CP , which is a heterodimer of α and β subunits and a homolog of a striated muscle cell CapZ , is abundant in all cell types and species with a concentration of 1 - 2 µM ( Edwards et al . , 2014 ) . In cells , CP localizes to the edge of lamellipodia ( Mejillano et al . , 2004 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Schafer et al . , 1998 ) and to endocytic actin structures ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Kim et al . , 2004 ) . Moreover , the depletion of CP disrupts the lamellipodial actin network morphology and protrusions , as well as cell migration ( Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ; Mejillano et al . , 2004 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Sinnar et al . , 2014 ) . CP is very dynamic component of dendritic actin networks in cells ( Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ; Lai et al . , 2008 ; Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ) and its association to barbed ends is regulated by several proteins ( Edwards et al . , 2014 ) . A protein V - 1 , also called myotrophin , binds CP and inhibits its association to actin filaments by binding directly to the actin filament binding site in CP ( Bhattacharya et al . , 2006 ; Taoka et al . , 2003 ) . Since V - 1 is present in cells in micromolar concentration , it was suggested that most of CP in cells would remain bound to V - 1 ( Shekhar et al . , 2016 ) . Capping Protein Interaction ( CPI ) motif proteins , such as CARMILs , bind CP and release it from V - 1 protein through an allosteric competition to promote filament capping ( Edwards et al . , 2015 ; Fujiwara et al . , 2014 ) . Additionally , CPI - motif proteins enhance dissociation of CP from actin filament barbed end in vitro ( Fujiwara et al . , 2010 ; Uruno et al . , 2006 ) . However , their role in promotion of CP dissociation from filament barbed ends in cells Figure 3 . Nucleation of and elongation of actin filaments . ( A ) The Arp2 / 3 complex , which is activated near plasma membrane by NPFs , promotes nucleation of new branches to pre - existing actin filaments . ( B ) Formins nucleate linear actin filaments . Both formins and ( C ) Enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoproteins ( Ena / VASP ) enhance elongation of linear actin filaments by promoting addition of profilin - actin complexes to the growing barbed ends of filaments . 11 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY has not been shown . Interestingly , CP displays much more rapid dynamics in cells compared to in vitro studies ( Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ; Lai et al . , 2008 ; Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ; Schafer et al . , 1996 ) , suggesting that additional factors regulating the CP dynamics in cells might exist . As described above , CP competes in binding to filament barbed ends with both formins and Ena / VASP ( Barzik et al . , 2005 ; Zigmond , 2004 ) . However , CP and mammalian diaphanous - related formin ( mDia ) 1 can simultaneously bind to actin filament barbed ends in vitro , and form a decision complex for filament capping and elongation ( Bombardier et al . , 2015 ) . At least in yeast CP protects barbed ends in dendritic actin networks from formins , and thus maintains the identity of branched networks nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Billault - Chaumartin and Martin , 2019 ) . Thus , the precisely regulated balance between local concentrations and activities of the Arp2 / 3 complex , formins , Ena / VASP and CP appears to be essential for the maintenance of the complex architecture of cellular actin filament arrays . Further studies are required to understand the effect of this complex interplay on regulation of balance between different actin populations in vitro and in cells . 1 . 4 . 3 . Actin filament disassembly The amount of polymerization - competent actin monomers defines the ability of actin filaments to elongate in processes described above . However , since the concentration of actin in cells is limited , efficient elongation needs to be coupled with filament disassembly to maintain the pool of polymerization - competent actin monomers . Several actin binding proteins facilitate filament disassembly by enhancing filament severing and depolymerization from pointed and barbed ends . The key component of actin filament disassembly machinery is actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin , which promotes disassembly of actin filament structures in vivo ( Lappalainen and Drubin , 1997 ) . ADF / cofilin binds actin filaments in cooperative manner with one ADF / cofilin interacting with one actin subunit in filament , which eventually leads to filament domains to be decorated by ADF / cofilin ( Cao et al . , 2006 ; De La Cruz , 2005 ; Suarez et al . , 2011 ; Wioland et al . , 2017 ) . The binding of ADF / cofilin to filament induces torsional stress in filament by changing the flexibility and bending of filament ( McGough et al . , 1997 ; Prochniewicza et al . , 2005 ; Wioland et al . , 2018 ) , which leads to severing of filament from the border of bare and ADF / cofilin decorated filament domains ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ; Pavlov et al . , 2007 ; Wioland et al . , 2018 ) . Additionally , ADF / cofilin - decorated filaments depolymerize from both barbed and pointed ends ( Wioland et al . , 2017 ) . ADF / cofilins prefer to bind to ADP - actin instead of ADP - Pi - or ATP - actin , and in fact , binding of ADF / cofilin to actin filament enhances the release of the bound phosphate ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000b ; Suarez et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , ATP hydrolysis and phosphate dissociation in the filament seems to serve as a ‘clock’ for ADF / cofilin mediated filament disassembly . Several biochemical studies have shown that actin - interacting protein 1 ( Aip1 ) and coronin enhance the severing of ADF / cofilin - decorated actin filament and might serve as a trigger for fast filament disassembly ( Gandhi et al . , 2009 ; Gressin et al . , 2015 ; Hayakawa et al . , 2019 ; Jansen et al . , 2015 ; Nadkarni and Brieher , 2014 ) ( figure 4 ) . Recently , it was shown that cyclase - associated protein ( CAP ) promotes rapid depolymerization of ADF / cofilin - decorated actin filaments from their pointed ends ( Kotila et al . , 2019 ; Shekhar et al . , 2019 ) ( figure 4 ) . Thus , ADF / cofilin seems to serve as a ‘marker’ for disassembly - competent filaments , and additional factors , such as Aip1 and CAP are required to trigger the rapid disassembly of filaments . The synergistical effect of ADF / cofilin , coronin , Aip1 and CAP in disassembly of actin filaments is also highlighted by studies done on mammalian and Drosophila cells , and in yeast . 12 MARKKU HAKALA Depletion or inhibition of these proteins leads to accumulation of actin filaments , defects of the normal cell and actin cytoskeleton morphology , and reduced cell migration and endocytosis ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Bertling et al . , 2004 ; Hotulainen et al . , 2005 ; Lin et al . , 2010 ; Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . In summary , biochemical , cell biological and in vivo studies highlight how different actin disassembly factors work in concert , but with distinct roles , to maintain the normal actin filament turnover and cellular morphology . 1 . 4 . 4 . Membrane phosphoinositides regulate actin dynamics Membrane phosphatidylinositol phosphates ( PIPs or phosphoinositides ) have a key role in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton dynamics through a large amount of actin - binding proteins ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ; Senju and Lappalainen , 2019 ) . Mammalian cells have seven phosphoinositide species with distinct subcellular localizations . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is the most abundant phosphoinositide and comprises 0 . 3 - 1 . 5 % of total lipid amount in the plasma membrane ( Ferrell and Huests , 1984 ; Tran et al . , 1993 ) . Other phosphoinositides , namely PI ( 3 ) P , PI ( 4 ) P , PI ( 5 ) P , PI ( 3 , 4 ) P2 , PI ( 3 , 5 ) P2 and PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 , are present in the plasma membrane in significantly smaller amounts ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ) . However , although the total amount of phosphoinositides in cells is relatively low , their local concentrations might increase through a stimulated synthesis of specific PIP species or through clustering of lipids at the membrane . For example , the local increase in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 concentrations were detected in lamellipodial protrusions and during phagocytosis ( Botelho et al . , 2000 ; Golub and Caroni , 2005 ; Ling et al . , 2006 ) . Many proteins facilitating nucleation and polymerization of actin filaments , including N - WASP ( Rohatgi et al . , 2000 ) , are active only when bound to PIPs ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ) . Moreover , a WAVE2 - induced lamellipodia formation was shown to be dependent on interaction of WAVE2 Figure 4 . Actin filament disassembly . ADF / cofilin - decorated actin filaments are severed from pointed end side of the ADF / cofilin - decorated filament domain spontaneously and from barbed end side of decorated domain by Aip1 . Free barbed ends of filaments depolymerize rapidly through spontaneous manner . ADF / cofilin - decorated filaments are depolymerized from their pointed end by CAP . 13 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY complex with membrane PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 lipids ( Oikawa et al . , 2004 ) . In contrast , several actin disassembly factors , including ADF / cofilin and CP , are inhibited by phosphoinositides ( Kim et al . , 2007 ; Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ; Yonezawa et al . , 1990 ) . This inhibition occurs commonly through direct competition between actin and phosphoinositides for the shared binding surface in the actin - binding protein ( Kim et al . , 2007 ; Ojala et al . , 2001 ; Yonezawa et al . , 1991 ) . Actin - binding proteins interact with membrane phosphoinositides mainly through electrostatic interactions ( Senju et al . , 2017 ; Zhao et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , the increase in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 density of the membrane increases the affinity of actin - binding protein to membrane , which might affect they subcellular localizations and dynamics ( Papayannopoulos et al . , 2005 ; Senju et al . , 2017 ) . Moreover , the lipid binding domain of mDia1 and mDia2 formins is required for correct localization of these proteins near the plasma membrane in cells ( Gorelik et al . , 2011 ; Ramalingam et al . , 2010 ) , whereas disruption of Myosin X lipid - binding domain led to incorrect Myosin X localization in cells and impaired filopodia formation ( Plantard et al . , 2010 ) . Together , these findings suggest that PIPs have important role in regulation of sub - cellular localization of actin - binding proteins . Phosphoinositides are important regulators both in endocytosis and cell migration . The level of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 is changing during vesicle invagination in endocytosis and during lamellipodia protrusion and retraction in cell migration ( Golub and Caroni , 2005 ; Sun et al . , 2007 ) . Importantly , acute depletion of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 leads to inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , as well as rapid retraction of lamellipodia ( Idevall - Hagren et al . , 2012 ; Zoncu et al . , 2007 ) . However , the complex role of phosphoinositides in regulation of actin dynamics and actin dependent processes , such as cell migration and endocytosis , is still incompletely understood . 1 . 4 . 5 . Rho GTPases as actin regulators Actin regulating proteins give rise to different actin filament populations . Thus , precise spatiotemporal regulation of different actin regulators is a necessity to control cellular processes , such as leading - edge protrusions and actomyosin contractions during cell migration . An important protein family regulating these processes is Rho GTPases , which consists 20 proteins in humans ( Ridley , 2015 ) . The best - known members of this family are RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 . They all have a distinct effect on the actin cytoskeleton in cells , with activation of Rac1 inducing lamellipodia and membrane ruffle formation ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Wu et al . , 2009 ) , activation of Cdc42 the formation of filopodia ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) , and activation of RhoA the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . However , Rac1 , Cdc42 and RhoA all localize to lamellipodia of motile cells and have a complex relationship with each other ( Machacek et al . , 2009 ) . Both Rac1 and Cdc42 induce lamellipodia formation through the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleation factors WAVE and WASP / N - WASP , respectively ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Miki and Takenawa , 2002 ; Suetsugu et al . , 2003 ; Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . However , they also regulate actin disassembly by inactivating ADF / cofilin through LIM kinases ( Oser and Condeelis , 2009 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , these two GTPases seem to regulate actin filament assembly and disassembly by partially overlapping pathways . Depletion of RhoA leads to loss of actin stress fibers , whereas its over - expression leads to diminished lamellipodia protrusions ( Heasman et al . , 2010 ) . Different spatiotemporal activities of Rac1 , Cdc42 and RhoA at leading edge of motile cells indicate that they regulate different stages of protrusion ( Machacek et al . , 2009 ) . During leading - edge protrusion 14 MARKKU HAKALA phase , both Rac1 and Cdc42 become activated , whereas RhoA is inhibited . Before the retraction phase , RhoA gets activated to enhance retraction ( Iseppon et al . , 2015 ; Martin et al . , 2016 ) . Activated RhoA promotes formation of focal adhesions and stress fibers by activating formin mDia1 ( Amano et al . , 1997 ; Hotulainen and Lappalainen , 2006 ) , and results in increased contraction by activating myosin II through ROCK ( Maekawa et al . , 1999 ; Ridley et al . , 2003 ) . Similar to Rac1 and Cdc42 , RhoA inhibits filament disassembly through LIM kinases ( Maekawa et al . , 1999 ) . Interestingly , at the rear of the motile cell , RhoA is more active than Rac1 ( Machacek et al . , 2009 ; Schaks et al . , 2019 ) . Thus , there seems to be a negative crosstalk regulatory system between Rac1 and RhoA , which maintains both cell polarity and directional movement ( Schaks et al . , 2019 ) . Additionally , Rac1 and RhoA participate in regulation of actin dynamics through facilitating the asymmetry of membrane phosphoinositides . They both induce synthesis of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in plasma membrane by activating PIP - kinase I ( PIPK - I ) that phosphorylates PI ( 4 ) P in the 5 - position ( Chatah and Abrams , 2001 ; Chong et al . , 1994 ) . Rac1 also activates phosphoinositide - 3 kinase ( PI3K ) , which in turn facilitates the productions of phosphoinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate [ PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 ] at the leading edge . Interestingly , PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 in turn activates both Rac1 and Cdc42 through positive feedback , which is important for PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 - polarity in migrating cells ( Weiner et al . , 2002 ) . In contrast , RhoA activates PTEN , an antagonist for PI3K , and could thus decrease the amount of PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 at cell rear ( Li et al . , 2005 ) . These processes further enhance the effect of Rho GTPases on cell polarity during cell migration . 1 . 4 . 6 . Interplay between the actin cytoskeleton and membrane tension Animal cells do not have cell wall to maintain their morphology , and thus , plasma membrane and the actin cytoskeleton act together in this fundamental process . The interplay of actin binding proteins and membrane phosphoinositides was discussed above . However , the actin cytoskeleton and plasma membrane are also in a mechanical interplay with each other , that affects both membrane tension and actin network morphology . Increase in the membrane tension inhibits lamellipodia protrusion rate , whereas decreased membrane tension increases the rate ( Raucher and Sheetz , 2000 ) . Moreover , decrease in membrane tension was shown to result in formation of multiple lamellipodia in migrating cells ( Lieber et al . , 2013 ; Raucher and Sheetz , 2000 ) . Protrusion of lamellipodia increases the membrane tension , which subsequently activates the exocytosis - mediated flow of lipids to plasma membrane to balance the increased tension ( Gauthier et al . , 2011 ) . Interestingly , the lamellipodial actin network seems to undergo conformational changes according to the force it needs to overcome ( Bieling et al . , 2016 ; Mueller et al . , 2017 ) . This has led to the load adaptation model of lamellipodial actin network geometry ( Svitkina , 2018b ) . However , the mechanism regulating these different states remains unknown . Collectively , these studies show that the actin cytoskeleton is controlled by both chemical and mechanical signals , which fine - tune its morphology and functions in different cellular processes . 1 . 5 . The ADF - H domain protein family Actin depolymerizing factor homology domain ( ADF - H ) proteins form an evolutionarily conserved protein family , whose members are found in protozoan parasites Leishmania and Trypanozoma , and eukaryotes such as yeasts , Drosophila , Caenorhabditis elegans , and animals ( De 15 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Melo et al . , 2008 ; Lappalainen et al . , 1998 ; Poukkula et al . , 2011 ) . The family consists six classes of proteins in vertebrates : ADF / cofilin , twinfilin , glia maturation factor ( GMF ) , coactosin , actin - binding protein 1 ( ABP1 ) and developmentally regulated brain protein ( drebrin ) ( figure 5 ) . ADF - H domain is a globular protein domain with a molecular weight of 13 - 19 kDa ( Lappalainen et al . , 1998 ) . Despite distinct biochemical functions , ADF - H domain in different members of the protein family display high structural similarity ( Poukkula et al . , 2011 ) . ADF / cofilins and twinfilins bind both monomeric and filamentous actin , whereas coactosin , Abp1 and drebrin bind only actin filaments . GMF does not bind actin but actin - related protein in the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Luan and Nolen , 2013 ; Poukkula et al . , 2011 ) . ADF - H domains can have two actin binding sites . The regions interacting with actin monomers are referred as “G - actin binding sites” . At least in ADF / cofilins and twinfilins the G - actin binding site is conserved ( Lappalainen et al . , 1997 ; Paavilainen et al . , 2008 , 2002 ) . F - actin interactions occurs through both “G - actin binding site” and additional “F - actin binding site” in the ADF - H domain ( Lappalainen et al . , 1997 ; Ono et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , much larger surface is required for interaction with F - actin than with G - actin . The functions of ADF / cofilins were discussed in chapter 1 . 4 . 3 . Below , I discuss biochemical functions and cellular roles of GMF and twinfilin in more detail . 1 . 5 . 1 . Glia - maturation factor Glia - maturation factor ( GMF ) consists a single ADF - H domain and is a small protein with molecular weight of 17 kDa . Similar to other members of the ADF - H domain protein family , also GMF is highly conserved during evolution , and its orthologs have been found in yeast , Dictyostelium , C . elegans , Drosophila and mammals ( Goode et al . , 2018 ; Poukkula et al . , 2011 ) . The gene was duplicated during evolution and mammals have two GMF copies , which were named GMF - β and GMF - γ . The amino acid sequences of these orthologs are ~ 82 % identical to each other ( Asai et al . , 1998 ) and their protein structures are highly similar ( Goroncy et al . , 2009 ) . Unlike other ADF - H domain proteins , GMF does not bind actin , but instead interacts with Arp2 subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ; Luan and Nolen , 2013 ; Nakano et al . , 2010 ) . Two biochemical functions for GMF has been described . It inhibits the nucleation of new actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ; Nakano et al . , 2010 ) and stimulates debranching of daughter filaments generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ydenberg et al . , 2013 ) . Figure 5 . ADF - H domain proteins in vertebrates , their domain structures and main biochemical activities . Adapted from ( Poukkula et al . , 2011 ) . 16 MARKKU HAKALA Interestingly , GMF utilizes a conserved sites which in other ADF - H domain proteins facilitates the interaction with actin monomers and filaments ( Luan and Nolen , 2013 ; Ydenberg et al . , 2013 ) . In all studied cell types , GMF is enriched in regions of high actin turnover . These include the leading edge of migrating mammalian cells ( Aerbajinai et al . , 2011 ; Ikeda et al . , 2006 ; Lippert and Wilkins , 2012 ) , where GMF co - localizes with lamellipodial proteins , such as the Arp2 / 3 and cortactin ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ) . Silencing of GMF leads to unstable lamellipodia in neutrophils ( Aerbajinai et al . , 2011 ) and decrease in cell migration speed of T - lymphocytes ( Lippert and Wilkins , 2012 ) . It regulates directed cell migration also in monocytes ( Aerbajinai et al . , 2016 ) . Interestingly , GMF regulates the distribution of the Arp2 / 3 complex and lamellipodia retraction rate in mammalian cells ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ) , providing a possible explanation for defects in cell migration speed . In budding yeast , GMF localizes to the cortical endocytic actin patches ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ; Nakano et al . , 2010 ) . The deletion of GMF alone does not show strong phenotype in yeast , but displays genetic interaction with cofilin in cell growth ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ) . Overexpression of GMF leads to re - organization of actin structures both in budding yeast actin patches and in lamellipodia of mammalian cells ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ; Haynes et al . , 2015 ) . GMF was , misleadingly , originally identified as a differentiation factor in brain extract ( Lim et al . , 1989 ) . Mammalian GMF isoforms are , however , intracellular proteins that are present in several tissues . GMF - β is most abundant in brains , lungs , spleen , colon and thymus , whereas protein levels of GMF - γ are highest in spleen , colon and thymus and significant also in lungs ( Ikeda et al . , 2006 ; Inagaki et al . , 2004 ; Tsuiki et al . , 2000 ; Zaheer et al . , 1993 ) . GMF - β null mice are viable but show defects in motor skills and learning due to loss of neurons in inferior olive ( Lim et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting an important role in development or maintenance of central nervous system and neuronal plasticity . This is also supported by the fact that GMF - β is upregulated during axonal regeneration after physical injury or exercise ( Bosch et al . , 1989 ; Yin et al . , 2018 ; Zaheer et al . , 2006 ) . GMF was also linked to inflammation response and Alzheimer’s disease ( Kempuraj et al . , 2013 ; Zaheer et al . , 2007 , 2013 ) . Finally , GMF is linked to development in zebrafish , where the knockout of GMF - γ leads to defects in angiogenic sprouting ( Zuo et al . , 2013 ) and to progression and metastasis of serous ovarian and colorectal cancer as well as glioma metastasis and progression ( Kuang et al . , 2016 ; Li et al . , 2010 ; Wang et al . , 2017 ) . However , the precise mechanism by which GMF contributes to these cellular processes remains elusive . 1 . 5 . 2 . Twinfilin Twinfilin genes in human and mouse were first , misleadingly , described as a tyrosine kinases ( Beeler et al . , 1997 , 1994 ) , but were soon defined as molecular weight of 37 - 40 kDa proteins consisting of two ADF - H domains , which are separated by a short linker and followed by a short carboxy terminal ( C - terminal ) tail peptide ( Goode et al . , 1998 ) . Mammals have two genes of twinfilin , namely twinfilin - 1 and twinfilin - 2 , which are approximately 65 % homologous with each other ( Vartiainen et al . , 2003 ) . Moreover , alternative promoter usage generates two splice variants of twinfilin - 2 . Twinfilin - 2a and - 2b are otherwise identical to each other but have different first 6 - 8 residues ( Nevalainen et al . , 2009 ) . Unlike mammals , yeast , C . elegans , and Drosophila have one twinfilin gene . Yeast twinfilin is approximately 20 % identical to mouse twinfilin - 1 at the amino acid sequence level ( Vartiainen et al . , 2000 ) , and Drosophila twinfilin display a 26 % and 49 % sequence identity with yeast twinfilin and mouse twinfilin - 1 , respectively ( Wahlström et al . , 2001 ) . 17 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Yeast , Drosophila , and mouse twinfilins sequester actin monomers in 1 : 1 ratio ( figure 6 ) and inhibit actin filament polymerization ( Goode et al . , 1998 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2000 ; Wahlström et al . , 2001 ) . Twinfilin has approximately 10 - fold higher affinity towards ADP - G - actin than ATP - G - actin . Interestingly , monomer sequestering occurs through the C - terminal ADF - H domain , which has 10 - fold higher affinity towards ADP - G - actin that the N - terminal ADF - H domain ( Ojala et al . , 2002 ) . The ability to sequester actin monomers with 1 : 1 ration does not explain why twinfilins are composed of two ADF - H domains , and indeed it was revealed that mouse twinfilins interact also with barbed ends of actin filaments with mechanism that requires both ADF - H domains ( Helfer et al . , 2006 ; Paavilainen et al . , 2007 ) . Similar to actin monomer interaction , twinfilin displays higher affinity towards barbed - ends of actin filaments when the terminal F - actin subunits are in the ADP - state ( Helfer et al . , 2006 ) . Interactions of twinfilin with barbed - ends of actin filaments leads to decreased actin filament polymerization at least in vitro ( Helfer et al . , 2006 ) . Interestingly , both yeast twinfilin and mouse twinfilin - 1 were reported to increase actin filament disassembly from barbed ends in vitro . Additionally , yeast twinfilin , but not mouse twinfilin - 1 , increases filament pointed end depolymerization together with CAP ( Hilton et al . , 2018 ; Johnston et al . , 2015 ) . In line with twinfilin’s effect on actin filament polymerization and depolymerization in vitro , twinfilin null allele in yeast and Drosophila leads to defects in the actin filament turnover and actin - dependent cellular processes . In yeast , twinfilin localizes to endocytic actin patches ( Falck et al . , 2004 ; Goode et al . , 1998 ) , and deletion of twinfilin display a synthetic lethality with certain cofilin mutants ( Goode et al . , 1998 ) . In Drosophila , twinfilin has an important role in development , and twinfilin - null Drosophila die at larval stage ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Hypomorphic twinfilin mutant flies are viable , but have an increased amount of filamentous actin in border cells and follicle cells of egg chamber , as well as defects in collective border cell migration , bristle morphology , and synaptic endocytosis ( Wahlström et al . , 2001 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Drosophila twinfilin has also a strong genetic interaction with twinstar , a Drosophila homolog of ADF / cofilin , in eye and bristle development ( Wahlström et al . , 2001 ) . Figure 6 . Functions of mammalian twinfilin . Twinfilin interacts and sequesters actin monomers ( A ) , and caps filament barbed ends ( B ) . Association of twinfilin with barbed ends was reported to enhance filament depolymerization . Twinfilin interacts also with plasma membrane phosphoinositides ( C ) , which inhibits its actin - binding function . Twinfilin also interacts with Capping Protein through its C - terminal tail ( D ) . 18 MARKKU HAKALA Unlike any other ADF - H domain protein , twinfilin interacts not only with actin , but also with CP ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) ( figure 6 ) . This interactions is mediated by the C - terminal tail region of twinfilin , and is crucial for the correct localization of twinfilin at least in budding yeast ( Falck et al . , 2004 ) . The biological role of twinfilin - CP interaction is still unclear . Recently , it was proposed that twinfilin stabilizes CP at the barbed ends of actin filaments by competing in CP - interaction with CARMIL peptide , which has high sequence similarity with the C - terminal tail of twinfilin ( Johnston et al . , 2018 ) . However , in budding yeast twinfilin localises to cytoplasm and cortical actin patches , and the interaction between twinfilin and CP seems to be crucial for correct subcellular localization of twinfilin rather than for localization of CP ( Falck et al . , 2004 ) . Moreover , the role of twinfilin for regulation of CP activity in cells remains unknown . Beside actin and CP , twinfilin interacts with membrane phosphoinositides , especially with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) ( figure 6 ) . The interaction with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 inhibits the actin - binding functions of twinfilin , and the ability of twinfilin to decelerate actin filament polymerization . However , the mechanism of this interactions , as well as the exact binding site for phosphoinositides in twinfilin , remains unknown . Also , the role of phosphoinositides in regulation of other functions of twinfilin is unclear . In mammalian cells , both twinfilin - 1 and twinfilin - 2 localises to the perinuclear region , and to the regions of rapid actin turnover , such as filopodia , lamellipodia , cell - cell contact sites and endosomal actin structures ( Helfer et al . , 2006 ; Johnston et al . , 2018 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2000 , 2003 ) . Similar to Drosophila twinfilin , also mammalian twinfilins are linked to regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Helfer et al . , 2006 ; Pelkmans et al . , 2005 ) and neurite outgrowth ( Yamada et al . , 2007 ) . The two twinfilin - 2 isoforms show tissue - specific localisation pattern . Twinfilin - 2a is ubiquitously expressed in all tissue types , whereas twinfilin - 2b is expressed mainly in skeletal and heart muscles ( Nevalainen et al . , 2009 ) . Twinfilin - 2a localizes to and regulates the length of cochlear mechanosensory stereocilia , which are thick bundles of actin filaments ( Peng et al . , 2009 ; Rzadzinska et al . , 2009 ) . In mouse platelets , knockout of twinfilin - 2a leads to thickened cortical actin network , as well as restricted inactivation of integrins . Twinfilin - 2a deficient platelets showed also increased amounts of active cofilin and profilin , suggesting that twinfilin - 2a regulates assembly of actin filaments in platelets ( Stritt et al . , 2017 ) . At this point , however , the precise cellular role of twinfilin in regulation of actin dynamics or endocytosis remains elusive . The effect of complete knockout of twinfilin in mammalian cells has not been reported . However , depletion of twinfilin - 1 expression with siRNAs caused alterations in the actin cytoskeleton morphology and the loss of actomyosin stress fibres in human breast cancer cells ( Bockhorn et al . , 2013b ) . In mouse melanoma cells , silencing of twinfilin expression causes loss of leading edge lamellipodia and an increased amount of filopodia ( Johnston et al . , 2018 ) . Similar accumulation of actin filaments in twinfilin - deficient mammalian cells compared to yeasts and Drosophila has not been reported so far . Thus , the two ubiquitous twinfilin genes in mammals might functionally compensate each other and further studies are required to study their synergistic role in regulation of actin dynamics in mammalian cells . 19 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY 2 . Aims of the study GMF has been studied extensively during past ten years , and the protein has been linked to several actin - dependent diseases and developmental processes . However , its role in regulation of actin dynamics and in remodelling of actin networks in vivo was previously unknown . Also , the ability of Drosophila GMF to debranch actin filaments was not reported earlier . The aim here was to unravel how Drosophila GMF regulates lamellipodia actin network in cultured cells , and what is its role in collective cell migration and remodelling of actin networks in vivo . Similar to several other actin - binding proteins ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ; Senju et al . , 2017 ; Senju and Lappalainen , 2019 ) , the ADF - H domain protein twinfilin interacts with phosphoinositides , and PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 efficiently inhibits its actin - binding function . However , the mechanism of twinfilin - PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 interaction was unknown . Thus , the aim of my work was to elucidate how twinfilin interacts with phosphoinositides , to map the binding site for phosphoinositides in twinfilin , and to reveal how phosphoinositides affect other biochemical functions of twinfilin . As described above , twinfilin has several different biochemical functions with some of them , namely actin monomer sequestration , filament capping and depolymerising functions , arising from its ability to interact with actin through ADF - H domains . On the other hand , twinfilin also interacts with CP through its C - terminal tail . Although work with yeast , Drosophila and mammalian cell cultures suggested that twinfilin regulates actin dynamics in lamellipodia , endosomal actin structures , filopodia and cell - cell contacts , its precise role remains enigmatic . Thus , the third aim of my studies was to address this question by using mammalian cultured cells as a model system . 20 MARKKU HAKALA 3 . Experimental procedures The methods I used in this study are listed below . The roman numbering indicates the publication in which the mentioned method was used and is described in more detail . Method Publication Molecular cloning and mutagenesis I , II , III Drosophila cell culture I Mammalian cell culture III Immunofluorescence staining and imaging I , III RNA interference I Western blot I , III Live - cell imaging I , III Recombinant protein expression and purification I , II , III Preparation of lipid vesicles II Lipid co - sedimentation assay II Lipid co - flotation assay II 1 , 6 - diphenyl - 1 , 3 , 5 - hexatriene ( DPH ) anisotropy assay II Actin filament co - sedimentation assay II Microscale thermophoresis II Gene knockout with CRISPR / Cas9 III Confocal imaging III High - content imaging III Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) and photoactivation III 21 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY 4 . Results and discussion 4 . 1 . Drosophila GMF promotes collective cell migration and turnover of dendritic actin networks ( publication I ) Branches within the actin filament networks , generated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , are remarkably stable in vitro , persisting several minutes ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000b ; Gandhi et al . , 2010 ; Mahaffy and Pollard , 2006 ) . However , in cells the turnover of lamellipodial actin network is an order of magnitude more rapid ( Lai et al . , 2008 ; Ponti et al . , 2004 ) . Active debranching of filaments might thus be required to maintain the dynamics of branched actin networks . Earlier studies identified GMF as an interaction partner for the Arp2 / 3 complex . In yeast , GMF inhibits the nucleation and branching activities of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Nakano et al . , 2010 ) and debranches filaments produced by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ) . However , the role of GMF in regulation of the branched actin network dynamics during cell migration remains largely unknown . We thus utilized cultured Drosophila S2R + cells and Drosophila egg chambers to study the cellular and in vivo functions of GMF . We first examined the localization of GMF in cultured S2R + cells . By using a polyclonal antibody specific to Drosophila GMF ( dGMF ) , we learned that GMF enriches at the lamellipodia region , as well as in peripheral actin ridges and in the nucleus . Moreover , silencing of dGMF by RNA interference increased the lamellipodia width ( publication I , figure 1 ) . Consistent with our results , a subsequent study showed that mammalian GMF - β localizes to lamellipodia in mouse embryonic fibroblasts . Interestingly , the latter study also showed that GMF requires the active Arp2 / 3 complex for its correct localization to the leading edge of fibroblasts ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ) . Together with our findings , these results provide the evidence that GMF regulates actin dynamics in lamellipodia . To study the role of GMF in vivo , we utilized Drosophila egg chambers as a model system . We revealed that dGMF is expressed in the follicular epithelium and enriched in migrative border cells and epithelial polar cells . In border cells , dGMF showed a diffuse cytoplasmic staining ( publication I , figure 2 ) . We then generated flies with a dGMF mutant allele gmf1 , which lacked the expression of dGMF protein , and compared the migration of border cells in wild type and gmf1 mutant flies during the oogenesis . Although almost all border cells in gmf1 mutants were able to finish the migration by stage 10 of the oogenesis ( publication I , figure 2 ) , the speed of the border cell cluster in gmf1 mutant ovaries during the early phase of migration was significantly slower . Additionally , extensions of the leading cell in the border cell cluster was slightly shorter , but more persistent in time ( publication I , figure 4 ) , suggesting that the difference in migration speed between control and gmf1 mutants is due to a decrease leading edge protrusion dynamics upon loss of GMF expression . Similar to our results , subsequent study on mammalian fibroblasts showed that expression levels of GMF - β affect the leading edge dynamics , with GMF - β depletion decreasing the rates of both lamellipodia protrusion and retraction ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ) . We then examined genetic interactions of GMF with other actin binding proteins by silencing possible candidates in the gmf1 mutant background . Interestingly , silencing of Aip1 in gmf1 mutant background caused almost complete blockage of border cell migration ( publication I , figure 2 ) . Moreover , simultaneous silencing of dGMF and Aip1 in border cells resulted in accumulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex - positive actin filament structures ( publication I , figure 2 ) . We then tested , if dGMF and Aip1 would show the genetic interaction also in S2R + cells . Indeed , 22 MARKKU HAKALA silencing dGMF simultaneously with Aip1 with RNA interference led to a significant increase in the Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin filament accumulations in lamellipodia and lamella of the cell ( publication I , figure 3 ) Earlier studies with budding yeast identified a genetic interaction between GMF and ADF / cofilin in F - actin disassembly ( Nakano et al . , 2010 ) and cell proliferation ( Gandhi et al . , 2010 ) . Also Aip1 and ADF / cofilin display a genetic interaction in yeast ( Clark et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that these proteins regulate actin dynamics in a coordinated fashion or might compensate each other . Indeed , ADF / cofilin induces debranching at least in vitro ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000b ) , indicating that the mild phenotype identified for GMF knockout both in yeast and in Drosophila might be partially compensated by ADF / cofilin . Filament debranching by GMF does not lead to disassembly of the entire filament , suggesting that GMF facilitates remodelling of the dendritic actin network by specifically debranching filament networks . Therefore , I suggest that following actin filament debranching by GMF , other filament disassembly factors , such as ADF / cofilin , coronin and Aip1 ( Gressin et al . , 2015 ; Jansen et al . , 2015 ) , promote rapid filament disassembly of newly formed linear filaments . It is also intriguing to hypothesize that after the debranching of filament by GMF , the newly formed pointed ends , that are free from the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Ydenberg et al . , 2013 ) , will be rapidly depolymerized by the actin filament pointed end depolymerization machinery consisting of ADF / cofilin and CAP ( Kotila et al . , 2019 ; Shekhar et al . , 2019 ) . Interestingly , also GMF and CAP display a genetic interaction in growth assay in yeast , and a simultaneous depletion of GMF , Aip1 and CAP in budding yeast is lethal ( Ydenberg et al . , 2015 ) . These findings further propose the combinatorial role of several actin - binding proteins in disassembly of the dendritic actin network . However , further studies are required to understand the precise underlying mechanism of this complex actin filament disassembly machinery . To summarize this part , we have shown here that Drosophila GMF promotes remodelling of the Arp2 / 3 complex nucleated branched actin networks in cells and in vivo . Consistent with the subsequent study ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ) , we show that GMF regulates the leading - edge dynamics in migrating cells and facilitates the disassembly of actin filaments in coordinated manner with other actin filament disassembly factors . However , the role of GMF in actin - dependent cellular functions other than cell migration , such as endocytosis , vesicle trafficking and organelle dynamics , remains unknown . Moreover , we revealed that GMF is enriched in the follicular epithelium in Drosophila ovaries , but its role in maintaining the morphology of epithelial cells remains to be studied . 4 . 2 . Twinfilin interacts with membrane phosphoinositides through electrostatic interactions ( publication II ) Twinfilin interacts with membrane phosphoinositides , especially with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) , and this interaction inhibits twinfilin’s ability to prevent actin filament polymerization ( Falck et al . , 2004 ) . However , the binding site and binding mechanism of twinfilin to membrane phospholipids was not known , and thus we utilized a combined mutagenesis , biochemistry , and molecular dynamics simulation approach to solve this question . By using a recombinant mouse twinfilin - 1 protein and a lipid co - sedimentation assays we revealed that twinfilin prefers phosphoinositides with higher negative charge , namely PI ( 3 , 5 ) P2 , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 , and binds PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 with relatively high affinity . Additionally , by performing a co - sedimentation assay with an increasing salt concentration , and by using DPH anisotropy assay ( Zhao and Lappalainen , 2012 ) , we learned that twinfilin interacts with membranes through electrostatic interactions ( publication II , figure 1 ) . Interestingly , although different actin - binding 23 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY proteins interact with membrane phosphoinositides with different affinities and through structurally distinct domains , they all bind to phospholipids through electrostatic interactions ( Senju et al . , 2017 ; Zhao et al . , 2010 ) . Our results show that twinfilin does not display cooperative binding to the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membrane ( publication II , figure 1 ) . In contrast to twinfilin , many other actin - binding proteins , such as profilin - 1 , cofilin - 1 , mDia2 , and N - WASP , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 bind cooperatively to membrane in a manner that is depending on the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 density ( Senju et al . , 2017 ) . Thus , twinfilin does not act as a sensor of membrane phosphoinositide density by responding to small increases in PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 density in a switch - like manner . This suggest that twinfilin has a partially distinct binding mechanism to membrane phosphoinositides compared to other actin - binding proteins . 4 . 3 . Twinfilin binds phosphoinositides through a two - step mechanism ( publication II ) Twinfilin consists two ADF - H domains , which facilitate the interaction with actin monomers and actin filament barbed ends . Moreover , a short linker separates these two domains , and a short C - terminal motif follows the ADF - H domains and facilitates the interaction with CP ( Poukkula et al . , 2011 ) . To elucidate the binding site of twinfilin to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes , we expressed and purified different domains of twinfilin - 1 , and studied their affinity to phosphoinositide - rich lipid vesicles with co - sedimentation and co - flotation assays . Surprisingly , we noticed that the C - terminal tail of twinfilin was absolutely necessary for this interaction , and the two ADF - H domains display only relatively weak affinity to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes ( publication II , figure 2 ) . This is in striking contrast with ADF / cofilin , which interacts with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes through its ADF - H domain ( Gorbatyuk et al . , 2006 ; Ojala et al . , 2001 ; Senju et al . , 2017 ; Zhao et al . , 2010 ) . In this context it is also important to note that twinfilin binds phosphoinositide - rich membranes with much higher affinity compared to ADF / cofilin . Since ADF / cofilin does not contain similar motif , high affinity of the C - terminal tail to phosphoinositides explains why twinfilin has much higher affinity towards phospholipids compared to ADF / cofilin . To map the PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - binding site in the C - terminal tail of twinfilin - 1 , we utilized a combination of mutagenesis and co - sedimentation assays . We revealed that the tail contains several clusters of positively charged residues , which facilitate the interaction with both PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes and CP ( publication II , figure 3 , 6 ) . The overlapping binding sites between PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 and CP in the C - terminal tail of twinfilin suggest that phosphoinositides inhibit also the CP - binding function of twinfilin . However , because also CP binds phosphoinositide - rich membrane with high affinity ( Kim et al . , 2007 ) , this is difficult to show with experimental methods . The actin - binding function of twinfilin lies in the two ADF - H domains ( Ojala et al . , 2002 ; Paavilainen et al . , 2008 ) , whereas our results show that twinfilin binds phosphoinositides mainly through the C - terminal tail . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich lipid vesicles are , however , able to inhibit the actin - binding function of twinfilin ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) , and thus there seems to be a contradiction between these results . Therefore , we studied by using an actin polymerization assay if the C - terminal tail of twinfilin is necessary for the ability of phosphoinositides to inhibit the actin - binding function of twinfilin . Strikingly , we learned that , whereas both full length twinfilin and protein lacking the tail inhibit actin polymerization , only the full - length protein can be inhibited by lipids . Mutant twinfilin lacking the C - terminal tail inhibits actin polymerization even in the presence of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich lipid vesicles ( publication II , figure 5 ) . We then utilized molecular dynamics simulations to examine the mechanism by which twinfilin associates with membranes . These experiments provided evidence that the C - terminal tail anchors twinfilin on the membrane , 24 MARKKU HAKALA and that the ADF - H domains subsequently interact with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 lipids , leading to inhibition of actin - binding function of twinfilin ( publication II , figure 4 ) . Notably , the existence of multiple binding sites for PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 lipids should lead to cooperative binding . The reason why twinfilin does not display cooperative binding manner to phosphoinositides might rise from its C - terminal tail motif , which possess significantly higher affinity to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 lipids compared to its ADF - H domains . Thus , the C - terminal tail could dominate the interaction and the effect of ADF - H domains on binding is negligible . To summarize this study , we report that twinfilin interacts with phosphoinositide - rich membrane through electrostatic interactions in a two - step mechanism ( figure 7 ) . Moreover , our results explain how the actin - binding function of twinfilin is inhibited upon phosphoinositide - interaction . Although the experimental evidence is still missing , it is intriguing to hypothesize that membrane phosphoinositide levels would regulate functions of twinfilin also in cells . This would lead to inhibition of twinfilin in close proximity to membranes , in region where actin filaments are assembled , while twinfilin would be active further away from membrane , in actin filament disassembly region . As described above , PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 enriched at the leading edge of the cell upon lamellipodial protrusions ( Golub and Caroni , 2005 ) , and acute PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - depletion leads to lamellipodial retraction ( Idevall - Hagren et al . , 2012 ) . Similar cycles could regulate activity of twinfilin during cell migration . Since twinfilin inhibits actin polymerization at least in vitro , its actin - binding activity could be inhibited during lamellipodia protrusion phase through high density PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 on membrane . During retraction phase , when actin filaments are not Figure 7 . The mechanism of phosphoinositide interaction of twinfilin and ADF / cofilin . Twinfilin interacts with membrane phosphoinositides with two - step mechanism , where high - affinity C - terminal tail region first anchors protein on membrane , and subsequently , the ADP - H domains interacts with lipids . Interaction with phosphoinositides inhibit other biochemical activities of twinfilin . ADF / cofilin interacts with phosphoinositides directly through ADF - H domain with significantly lower affinity compared to twinfilin . Interaction with phosphoinositides inhibit the actin - binding activity of ADF / cofilin . 25 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY polymerized , low density of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 might trigger activation of twinfilin to sequester actin monomers and cap filament barbed ends . However , further studies are required to uncover the role of phosphoinositides in regulation of twinfilin as well as other actin - binding proteins in a cellular context . 4 . 4 . Mammalian twinfilin is crucial for efficient lamellipodial actin turnover ( publication III ) In cells , twinfilin localizes to regions of high actin turnover , such as cortical actin patches in budding yeast ( Goode et al . , 1998 ; Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) , and lamellipodia , filopodia and cell - cell junctions in mammalian cells ( Vartiainen et al . , 2003 , 2000 ) . However , it remains enigmatic how twinfilin regulates the actin cytoskeleton dynamics in cells . In budding yeast , the knockout of twinfilin leads to increased amount of F - actin in cortical patches ( Goode et al . , 1998 ) and in Drosophila the depletion of twinfilin lead to increased amount of F - actin in migrating border cells and in the follicular epithelium ( Wang et al . , 2010 ) . Earlier studies on mammalian cells have led to somewhat contradictory conclusions on the role of twinfilin in regulation of leading edge dynamics ( Bockhorn et al . , 2013a ; Johnston et al . , 2018 ) . We thus utilized CRISPR / Cas9 approach to interrupt the expression of both twinfilin - 1 and twinfilin - 2 in mouse melanoma B16 - F1 cells to uncover the role of twinfilins in regulation of actin turnover in cells . Consistent with earlier studies on Drosophila and budding yeast , we detected an accumulation of F - actin in twinfilin - deficient cells . These accumulations were most abundant in lamellipodia and in the Arp2 / 3 complex - positive perinuclear actin patches . Additionally , perinuclear accumulations in twinfilin - deficient cells were positive in transferrin after transferrin uptake , indicating that twinfilin regulates actin dynamics also in the endosome recycling pathway ( publication III , figure 1 , supplementary figure 5 ) . Further on , twinfilin - deficient cells had abnormal lamellipodia morphology , and the lamellipodia protrusion velocity was significantly decreased in knockout cells compared to wild type cells ( publication III , figure 1 ) . These lamellipodia phenotypes were consistent with migration defects that were earlier reported both on Drosophila border cells and mouse lymphoma cells upon twinfilin depletion ( Meacham et al . , 2009 ; Wang et al . , 2010 ) . The increased F - actin amount in twinfilin - deficient cells could be either due to increased actin filament assembly or decreased disassembly . To solve this question , we utilized photoactivation and fluorescence photobleaching techniques . We revealed that twinfilin - deficient cells display diminished actin filament disassembly rates at their lamellipodia compared to control cells . Moreover , the actin treadmilling rate was significantly slower in twinfilin - deficient cells compared to control cells ( publication III , figure 2 ) . These results suggests that twinfilin either regulates filament assembly by capping filament barbed ends ( Helfer et al . , 2006 ) or promotes filament depolymerization , as suggested earlier ( Hilton et al . , 2018 ; Johnston et al . , 2015 ) . To test these possibilities , we utilized single filament imaging approach ( Carlier et al . , 2014 ; Jégou et al . , 2011b ) and learned that at least mouse twinfilin - 1 does not enhance filament barbed end depolymerization . Instead , twinfilin inhibited actin depolymerization in concentration - dependent manner . Interestingly , at saturated conditions actin filaments depolymerized from their barbed ends with rate of ~ 6 subunits / s , whereas in absence of twinfilin - 1 the barbed end depolymerization rate was ~ 10 subunits / s . Our results indicate that twinfilin does not enhance actin filament depolymerization at the barbed ends of actin filaments , but instead allow them to polymerize at least with rate of ~ 6 subunit / s ( publication III , figure 3 ) . Our results are in striking contrast with earlier studies proposing that both yeast and mammalian twinfilin enhances actin filament barbed end depolymerization ( Hilton et al . , 2018 ; Johnston et al . , 2015 ) . However , in these studies , performed with single filament TIRF approach , where actin filaments crosslinked 26 MARKKU HAKALA to the coverslip at multiple points , the disassembly rate of bare actin filament barbed ends was significantly slower compared to our results and earlier studies with fluorometric approach ( 0 . 6 - 1 . 4 subunits / s compared to 8 - 10 subunits / s ) ( publication III , figure 3 ) ( Pollard , 1986 ; Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . We hypothesize that the differences in results obtained with alternative approaches is due to heavy anchoring of F - actin to glass surface during TIRF imaging ( Hilton et al . , 2018 ; Johnston et al . , 2015 ) , which is known to affect actin dynamics significantly ( Jégou et al . , 2011a ; Kuhn and Pollard , 2005 ; Wioland et al . , 2019 ) . To summarize , we show for the first time that twinfilin regulates actin filament disassembly in cells . However , twinfilin itself does not enhance actin filament depolymerization from barbed ends . Thus , it is possible that additional factors are required for rapid filament disassembly from barbed ends , or that twinfilin enhance filament disassembly through previously unknown , indirect approach . 4 . 5 . Twinfilin uncaps filament barbed ends to promote actin disassembly ( publication III ) Earlier study showed that twinfilin co - localizes in lamellipodia with CP ( Johnston et al . , 2018 ) . However , their collective effect on lamellipodial actin dynamics has not been reported . We revealed that twinfilin and CP have distinct localization patterns at the leading edge , where CP localizes to the very distal edge of lamellipodia and twinfilin throughout the entire lamellipodial region ( publication III , figure 4 ) . Strikingly however , in twinfilin - deficient cells CP localized throughout entire lamellipodium , suggesting that twinfilin restricts its localization to the distal edge ( publication III , figure 5 ) . Interestingly , somewhat similar phenotype was reported earlier in twinfilin - deficient Drosophila S2 cells ( Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ) , indicating that the role of twinfilin to regulate the localization of CP is not restricted only to mammalian cells . CP is a dynamic component of cellular actin structures and for example in lamellipodia its turnover rates are less than 10 seconds ( Lai et al . , 2008 ; Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ) . However , in vitro CP binds actin filament barbed ends with sub - nanomolar affinity and with very slow dissociation kinetics ( t1 / 2 > 30 min ) ( Schafer et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , the dynamics of capping protein in cells must be accelerated by other proteins , and we hypothesized that twinfilin might , in addition to regulating CP localization , also regulate its dynamics in lamellipodia . We thus utilized fluorescence recovery after photobleaching on EGFP - tagged CP in controls and twinfilin - deficient cells . Strikingly , simultaneous knockout of twinfilin - 1 and twinfilin - 2 decreased the recovery of EGFP - CP recovery in lamellipodia ( publication III , figure 5 ) , indicating that twinfilin promotes CP dynamics in lamellipodia . Importantly , we were able to phenocopy this finding in endosomal actin filament networks ( publication III , supplementary figure 6 ) , as well as rescue the CP - dynamics with recombinant expression of mouse twinfilin - 1 ( publication III , figure 5 , 7 ) . We hypothesized that twinfilin enhances CP - dynamics in cells by uncapping filament barbed ends . To examine this question , we then utilized single filament assay , where we polymerized actin filaments from spectrin - actin seeds , capped filament barbed end with CP and observed , if addition of twinfilin - 1 with microfluidics would dissociate CP from filament barbed ends . Strikingly , we observed concentration - dependent filament barbed end uncapping after addition of twinfilin - 1 , indicating that twinfilin uncaps filament barbed ends ( publication III , figure 6 ) . We then asked , which biochemical activity of twinfilin is required for the uncapping functions . Surprisingly , mutant twinfilin - 1 , which does not bind actin , could not promote CP dissociation from barbed ends . Strikingly , mutant twinfilin - 1 which does not bind CP displayed elevated uncapping activity 27 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY compared to wild type protein , suggesting that the C - terminal tail of twinfilin , which binds CP , tethers CP to close proximity to barbed end of actin filaments ( publication III , figure 7 ) . However , when we used wild type twinfilin together with V - 1 protein , an inhibitor of CP ( Fujiwara et al . , 2014 ; Takeda et al . , 2010 ) , we observe ~ 63 - fold increase in filament barbed end uncapping rate compared to V - 1 alone ( publication III , figure 6 ) . Collectively , our data reveal that twinfilin promotes uncapping of actin filament barbed ends together with V - 1 . Twinfilin binds CP through the CPI - like motif in its C - terminal tail region [ publication II , ( Falck et al . , 2004 ; Johnston et al . , 2018 ) ] . An earlier study proposed that twinfilin activates CP by competing with other CPI - motif proteins for binding to CP , and by allosterically competing with V - 1 for the CP binding ( Johnston et al . , 2018 ) . We note that twinfilin may both promote filament uncapping ( publication III ) and activate CP ( Johnston et al . , 2018 ) in cells , because these two functions arise from different domains of twinfilin . However , our EGFP - CP FRAP experiments with transient expression of mutant twinfilins in twinfilin - deficient cells are somewhat contradictory to the capping protein activation model . This is because inhibition of twinfilin - CP interaction through specific point mutations in the C - terminal tail of twinfilin did not significantly affect CP dynamics in cells ( publication III , figure 7 ) . Thus , it seems that twinfilin - CP interaction is not necessary for CP activation in lamellipodia , suggesting that other CPI - containing proteins , such as CARMILs ( Fujiwara et al . , 2014 ) , are the primary CP activation factors in cells , or at least complement the possible activation function of twinfilin . In this context it is important to note that CPI - motifs of CARMILs possess significantly higher affinity to CP and they are much more efficient to compete CP off from V - 1 compared to the C - terminal tail motif of twinfilin ( Mekel et al . , 2020 ) . Since CARMIL - like proteins do not exist in fungi ( Liang et al . , 2009 ) , it is formally possible that the pro - capping function of twinfilin might be necessary to control the CP activity for example in yeast . However , contradictory to this hypothesis , CP localizes normally to actin patches in twinfilin - null yeast strains ( Falck et al . , 2004 ) , indicating that it is active also in absence of twinfilin and CARMIL . Additionally , to my knowledge V - 1 protein has not been identified in yeast , suggesting that the regulation of CP might be different between yeast and mammalian cells . To summarize results in publication III , we revealed that twinfilin functions as an essential uncapping factor for CP at barbed ends of actin filaments ( see publication III , figure 8 for model ) . Lack of twinfilin leads to more stable actin filaments due to increased filament capping by CP . Twinfilin itself does not possess filament depolymerization activity , but its association to barbed ends of actin filaments allows filament depolymerization with a moderate speed while simultaneously inhibiting filament elongation . By promoting CP and F - actin turnover , twinfilin is an important component of lamellipodial actin networks to produce protrusive force for cell migration and morphogenesis . The mechanism by which twinfilin localizes to lamellipodia and endocytic sites in animal cells remains unknown at this point . However , in budding yeast a specific mutations in either actin ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) or phosphoinositide and CP - binding sites ( Falck et al . , 2004 ) disturb the localization of twinfilin to endocytic actin patches . Thus , association of twinfilin with actin filament barbed ends seems to require interaction with both actin and CP . However , further studies are required to reveal the underlying mechanism of twinfilin recruitment to dendritic actin structures in cells , as well as the structural mechanism how twinfilin replaces CP at the barbed end of actin filament . Moreover , specific roles of twinfilin - 1 and twinfilin - 2 in regulation of actin and CP dynamics in vitro and in cells remain elusive at this point . Twinfilin - 2 localizes to the tips of actin filament bundles at inner ear cochlear stereocilia , and regulate their length ( Peng et al . , 2009 ; Rzadzinska 28 MARKKU HAKALA et al . , 2009 ) . Additionally , twinfilin - 2 was shown to be enriched at the tips of filopodia ( Rzadzinska et al . , 2009 ) . Because possible biochemical differences between twinfilin - 1 and twinfilin - 2a / b are incompletely characterized , the mechanism by which twinfilin - 2 regulates filopodia and stereocilia length remains unclear . However , since the over - expression of twinfilin - 2 in stereocilia led to decreased cilia length , I propose that twinfilin - 2 promotes actin filament disassembly in these structures by promoting uncapping of actin filament barbed ends . 29 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY 5 . Concluding remarks and future perspectives In this study , we elucidated the role of GMF and twinfilin in regulation of dendritic actin networks . We show that GMF regulates lamellipodia dynamics by promoting disassembly of the Arp2 / 3 - positive actin networks , and has thus an important role in collective cell migration in vivo ( publication I ) . Similar to GMF , also twinfilin promotes disassembly of dendritic actin arrays , but through a very distinct mechanism . We show that twinfilin regulates the dynamics of heterodimeric capping protein by uncapping filament barbed ends and subsequently allows actin monomer dissociation from filament barbed ends . Thus , twinfilin also promotes rapid actin disassembly and dynamics of lamellipodia protrusions ( publication III ) . Finally , we revealed the mechanism of twinfilin - phosphoinositide interaction . This explains how the actin - binding function of twinfilin is inhibited by plasma membrane PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 . Moreover , we show that , through direct competition , phosphoinositides most likely inhibit also the CP - binding function of twinfilin ( publication II ) . The current “textbook” model of actin dynamics in lamellipodia gives a rather simplified view on the topic . Filaments are thought to polymerize at barbed ends near the plasma membrane and depolymerize at pointed ends at the rear of lamellipodia . However , our work here and several other studies have shown that the mechanism of actin filament disassembly is far more complex process , with several proteins with partially overlapping functions maintaining the turnover of dendritic actin network . Our data ( publication III ) and a study by Wioland and others ( Wioland et al . , 2017 ) suggest that filaments are depolymerized from both barbed and pointed ends after the dissociation of CP from the barbed ends . Together , the recently identified actin filament pointed end depolymerization machinery ( Kotila et al . , 2019 ; Shekhar et al . , 2019 ) , previously established ADF / cofilin - Aip1 disassembly machineries ( Gressin et al . , 2015 ; Jansen et al . , 2015 ) , and twinfilin - CP interplay can promote rapid actin filament disassembly by severing filaments and promoting their depolymerization from both pointed and barbed ends . Additionally , GMF further enhances actin filament disassembly by debranching dendritic actin networks [ publication I , ( Haynes et al . , 2015 ) ] . Our data together with other studies show that dendritic actin network undergoes “global treadmilling” ( Carlier and Shekhar , 2017 ) , where new filaments are nucleated and elongated close to lamellipodia , but filaments are disassembled from multiple points in the network though severing and depolymerization ( figure 8 ) . Thus , filament disassembly in cells is very rapid process . However , the global treadmilling model requires that filament disassembly machinery must be “switched off” close to the distal edge of lamellipodia and then “switched on” at correct time . I propose that multiple mechanisms trigger the timing of rapid disassembly . Phosphoinositides , especially PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , in the plasma membrane inhibit several actin disassembly factors ( Saarikangas et al . , 2010 ; Senju and Lappalainen , 2019 ) , including ADF / cofilin ( Yonezawa et al . , 1990 ) and twinfilin [ ( Palmgren et al . , 2001 ) , publication II ] . Thus , it is possible that these proteins are inactive or partially inactive near the plasma membrane , and bind actin filaments only further away from the membrane . Since these proteins bind phosphoinositides in a concentration - dependent manner , [ ( Senju et al . , 2017 ) , publication II ] , a decrease in phosphoinositide concentration in the plasma membrane upon lamellipodia retraction ( Idevall - Hagren and De Camilli , 2015 ) might trigger the release of these disassembly factors from the membrane , and begin the disassembly process . Second trigger for actin filament disassembly might be filament “aging” through hydrolysis of ATP in actin , and subsequent release of the phosphate group from ADP - Pi - actin ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Both twinfilin and ADF / cofilin have higher affinity towards ADP - actin than ATP - actin ( Maciver and Weeds , 1994 ; Ojala et al . , 2002 ) . Additionally , GMF was shown to have 30 MARKKU HAKALA higher affinity towards the ADP - bound Arp2 / 3 - complex ( Boczkowska et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , it is possible that filament aging serves as a trigger for actin disassembly machinery to interact with “depolymerization - ready” ADP - actin filaments . In this context , it is important to note that ADF / cofilin accelerates the dissociation of phosphate from actin filament from 500 seconds to 30 seconds ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000b ) . Thus , the interaction of ADF / cofilin with actin filaments might accelerate filament aging , and further enhance the association of filament disassembly machinery with actin filaments . The third trigger of actin disassembly , Rho GTPase - mediated inhibition and activation of the disassembly factors is the most complex one . Both ADF / cofilin and GMF can be inactivated through phosphorylation of a serine residue at the amino - terminal region of the proteins ( Boczkowska et al . , 2013 ; Van Troys et al . , 2008 ) . At least in the case of ADF / cofilin , LIM kinases , which act downstream of RhoA , are the main kinases to phosphorylate and inactivate activities of the protein ( Van Troys et al . , 2008 ) . On the other hand , certain phosphatases , which dephosphorylate ADF / cofilin , act downstream of Rac1 and Cdc42 . Additionally , as discussed above , RhoA acts also through PTEN to regulate the amount of PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 in the plasma membrane ( Li et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , Rho GTPases are able to regulate actin dynamics through direct phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of actin - binding proteins , as well as through altering the membrane phosphoinositide composition . Figure 8 . A working model for actin filament turnover in lamellipodia . ( A ) Filaments are polymerized near the plasma membrane . ( B ) Capping Protein caps filament barbed ends to funnel actin monomers to growing barbed ends . Twinfilin is recruited to barbed ends by interaction with Capping Protein . ( C ) Twinfilin uncaps filaments and thus promotes actin disassembly ( D ) from barbed ends . ( E ) GMF debranches the network through interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex . ( F ) ADF / cofilin decorated filaments are rapidly disassembled at the rear of lamellipodia by CAP and Aip1 . ( G ) CAP promotes nucleotide exchange in actin monomer to re - charge them for the next round of actin polymerization . 31 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Although this study and other recent publications have provided important new insights into actin dynamics , many important open questions concerning the molecular mechanism of actin disassembly machinery regulation remain . Whereas kinases and phosphatases regulating ADF / cofilin are quite well known by now ( Van Troys et al . , 2008 ) , more work is needed to understand how GMF and twinfilin are regulated by kinase pathways . Additionally , new approaches are required to uncover the complex regulatory mechanism of the entire actin disassembly machinery . One emerging opportunity is to take advantage of the minimal in vitro reconstitution systems to dissect the function of each individual actin regulator in a more complex system , which contains controlled amounts of other actin - binding proteins as well as other factors , such as reconstituted membrane . The combined use of microfluidic single filament assays ( Jégou et al . , 2011a ) , in vitro dendritic network growth assays ( Manhart et al . , 2019 ) , encapsulated cytoskeletal systems ( Bashirzadeh and Liu , 2019 ; Dürre et al . , 2018 ) , and complex reconstituted motility approaches ( Siton - Mendelson and Bernheim - Groswasser , 2016 ; Vendel et al . , 2019 ) will shed light on the role of individual proteins in context of other proteins and cellular components . Moreover , new tools , which allow scientist control the amount of proteins in precise manner in cells or in vivo ( Li et al . , 2019 ) , will supplement the in vitro toolbox , and allow the comparison of results obtained in the test tube and in living organisms . 32 MARKKU HAKALA 6 . References Abercrombie M , Heaysman JEM , Pegrum SM . 1970 . The locomotion of fibroblasts in culture I . Movements of the leading edge . Exp Cell Res 59 : 393 – 398 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4827 ( 70 ) 90646 - 4 Aerbajinai W , Liu L , Chin K , Zhu J , Parent CA , Rodgers GP . 2011 . Glia maturation factor - γ mediates neutrophil chemotaxis . J Leukoc Biol 90 : 529 – 538 . doi : 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0710424 Aerbajinai W , Liu L , Zhu J , Kumkhaek C , Chin K , Rodgers GP . 2016 . Glia maturation factor - γ regulates monocyte migration through modulation of β 1 - integrin . J Biol Chem 291 : 8549 – 8564 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M115 . 674200 Agathon A , Thisse C , Thisse B . 2003 . The molecular nature of the zebrafish tail organizer . Nature 424 : 448 – 452 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature01822 Akamatsu M , Vasan R , Serwas D , Ferrin MA , Rangamani P , Drubin DG . 2020 . Principles of self - organization and load adaptation by the actin cytoskeleton during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Elife 9 : e49840 . doi : 10 . 7554 / elife . 49840 Almeida - Souza L , Frank RAW , García - Nafría J , Colussi A , Gunawardana N , Johnson CM , Yu M , Howard G , Andrews B , Vallis Y , McMahon HT . 2018 . A flat BAR protein promotes actin polymerization at the base of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 174 : 325 – 337 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 020 Amano M , Chihara K , Kimura K , Fukata Y , Nakamura N , Matsuura Y , Kaibuchi K . 1997 . Formation of actin stress fibers and focal adhesions enhanced by Rho - kinase . Science 275 : 1308 – 1311 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 275 . 5304 . 1308 Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD . 2006 . Mechanism of actin filament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / cofilin . Mol Cell 24 : 13 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 08 . 006 Arber S , Barbayannis FA , Hanser H , Schneider C , Stanyon CA , Bernard O , Caroni P . 1998 . Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM - kinase . Nature 393 : 805 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 31729 Asai K , Fujita K , Yamamoto M , Hotta T , Morikawa M , Kokubo M , Moriyama A , Kato T . 1998 . Isolation of novel human cDNA ( hGMF - γ ) homologous to Glia Maturation Factor - β gene . Biochim Biophys Acta - Gene Struct Expr 1396 : 242 – 244 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 4781 ( 97 ) 00222 - 4 Ayscough KR . 2000 . Endocytosis and the development of cell polarity in yeast require a dynamic F - actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol 10 : 1587 – 1590 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 00 ) 00859 - 9 Ayscough KR , Stryker J , Pokala N , Sanders M , Crews P , Drubin DG . 1997 . High rates of actin filament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J Cell Biol 137 : 399 – 416 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 137 . 2 . 399 Bailly M , Ichetovkin I , Grant W , Zebda N , Machesky LM , Segall JE , Condeelis J . 2001 . The F - actin side binding activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for actin nucleation and lamellipod extension . Curr Biol 11 : 620 – 625 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00152 - X Balcer HI , Goodman AL , Rodal AA , Smith E , Kugler J , Heuser JE , Goode BL . 2003 . Coordinated regulation of actin filament turnover by a high - molecular - weight Srv2 / CAP complex , cofilin , profilin , and Aip1 . Curr Biol 13 : 2159 – 69 . doi : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2003 . 11 . 051 Balzer CJ , Wagner AR , Helgeson LA , Nolen BJ . 2019 . Single - turnover activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by Dip1 may balance nucleation of linear versus branched actin filaments . Curr Biol 29 : 3331 - 3338 . e7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2019 . 08 . 023 Balzer CJ , Wagner AR , Helgeson LA , Nolen BJ . 2018 . Dip1 co - opts features of branching nucleation to create linear actin filaments that activate WASP - bound Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 28 : 3886 – 3891 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2018 . 10 . 045 Barzik M , Kotova TI , Higgs HN , Hazelwood L , Hanein D , Gertler FB , Schafer DA . 2005 . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J Biol Chem 280 : 28653 – 28662 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M503957200 Barzik M , McClain LM , Gupton SL , Gertler FB . 2014 . Ena / VASP regulates mDia2 - initiated filopodial length , dynamics , and function . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 2604 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 02 - 0712 Bashirzadeh Y , Liu AP . 2019 . Encapsulation of the cytoskeleton : Towards mimicking the mechanics of a cell . Soft Matter 15 : 8425 – 8436 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c9sm01669d 33 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , Strasser GA , Maly I V . , Chaga OY , Cooper JA , Borisy GG , Gertler FB . 2002 . Antagonism between Ena / VASP Proteins and Actin Filament Capping Regulates Fibroblast Motility . Cell 109 : 509 – 521 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00731 - 6 Beeler JF , LaRochelle WJ , Chedid M , Tronick SR , Aaronson SA . 1994 . Prokaryotic expression cloning of a novel human tyrosine kinase . Mol Cell Biol 14 : 982 – 988 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 14 . 2 . 982 Beeler JF , Patel BK , Chedid M , LaRochelle WJ . 1997 . Cloning and characterization of the mouse homolog of the human A6 gene . Gene 193 : 31 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0378 - 1119 ( 97 ) 00073 - 5 Benesch S , Polo S , Lai FP , Anderson KI , Stradal TEB , Wehland J , Rottner K . 2005 . N - WASP deficiency impairs EGF internalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Sci 118 : 3103 – 3115 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02444 Beningo KA , Dembo M , Kaverina I , Small JV , Wang YL . 2001 . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 153 : 881 – 887 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 4 . 881 Bertling E , Hotulainen P , Mattila PK , Matilainen T , Salminen M , Lappalainen P . 2004 . Cyclase - associated protein 1 ( CAP1 ) promotes cofilin - induced actin dynamics in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 2324 – 34 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 01 - 0048 Bhattacharya N , Ghosh S , Sept D , Cooper J . 2006 . Binding of myotrophin / V - 1 to actin - capping protein : Implications for how capping protein binds to the filament barbed end . J Biol Chem 281 : 31021 – 31030 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M606278200 Bieling P , Li T De , Weichsel J , McGorty R , Jreij P , Huang B , Fletcher DA , Mullins RD . 2016 . Force feedback controls motor activity and mechanical properties of self - assembling branched actin networks . Cell 164 : 115 – 127 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 11 . 057 Billault - Chaumartin I , Martin SG . 2019 . Capping Protein insulates Arp2 / 3 - assembled actin patches from formins . Curr Biol 29 : 3165 - 3176 . e6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2019 . 07 . 088 Blanchoin L , Amann KJ , Higgs HN , Marchand JB , Kaiser DA , Pollard TD . 2000a . Direct observation of dendritic actin filament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 : 1007 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35010008 Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 2002 . Hydrolysis of ATP by polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not profilin . Biochemistry 41 : 597 – 602 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi011214b Blanchoin L , Pollard TD , Mullins RD . 2000b . Interactions of ADF / cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and profilin in remodeling of branched actin filament networks . Curr Biol 10 : 1273 – 1282 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 00 ) 00749 - 1 Bockhorn J , Dalton R , Nwachukwu C , Huang S , Prat A , Yee K , Chang Y - F , Huo D , Wen Y , Swanson K , Qiu T , Lu J , Park SY , Dolan ME , Perou C , Olopade O , Clarke M , Greene G , Liu H . 2013a . MicroRNA - 30c inhibits human breast tumour chemotherapy resistance by regulating TWF1 and IL - 11 . Nat Comm 4 : e1393 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms2393 Bockhorn J , Yee K , Chang Y - F , Prat A , Huo D , Nwachukwu C , Dalton R , Huang S , Swanson K , Perou C , Olopade O , Clarke M , Greene G , Liu H . 2013b . MicroRNA - 30c targets cytoskeleton genes involved in breast cancer cell invasion . Breast Cancer Res Treat 137 : 373 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10549 - 012 - 2346 - 4 Boczkowska M , Rebowski G , Dominguez R . 2013 . Glia maturation factor ( GMF ) interacts with Arp2 / 3 complex in a nucleotide state - dependent manner . J Biol Chem 288 : 25683 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . C113 . 493338 Bombardier JP , Eskin JA , Jaiswal R , Corrêa IR , Xu M - QQ , Goode BL , Gelles J . 2015 . Single - molecule visualization of a formin - capping protein “decision complex” at the actin filament barbed end . Nat Commun 6 : 8707 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9707 Bosch EP , Zhong W , Lim R . 1989 . Axonal signals regulate expression of glia maturation factor - beta in Schwann cells : an immunohistochemical study of injured sciatic nerves and cultured Schwann cells . J Neurosci 9 : 3690 – 3698 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 09 - 10 - 03690 . 1989 Botelho RJ , Teruel M , Dierckman R , Anderson R , Wells A , York JD , Meyer T , Grinstein S . 2000 . Localized biphasic changes in phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate at sites of phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 151 : 1353 – 1367 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 151 . 7 . 1353 Boulant S , Kural C , Zeeh JC , Ubelmann F , Kirchhausen T . 2011 . Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 1124 – 1132 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2307 Bovellan M , Romeo Y , Biro M , Boden A , Chugh P , Yonis A , Vaghela M , Fritzsche M , Moulding D , Thorogate R , Jégou A , Thrasher AJ , Romet - Lemonne G , Roux PP , Paluch EK , Charras G . 2014 . Cellular control of cortical actin nucleation . Curr Biol 24 : 1628 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 069 Bray D , White J . 1988 . Cortical flow in animal cells . Science 239 : 883 – 888 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 3277283 Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Urbanke C , Resch GP , Small JV , Faix J . 2008 . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin filament elongation . EMBO J 27 : 2943 – 2954 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2008 . 211 34 MARKKU HAKALA Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Vinzenz M , Stradal TEB , Small JV , Curth U , Dickinson RB , Faix J . 2011 . Molecular mechanism of Ena / VASP - mediated actin - filament elongation . EMBO J 30 : 456 – 467 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2010 . 348 Brüser L , Bogdan S . 2017 . Adherens junctions on the move - membrane trafficking of E - cadherin . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 9 : a029140 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a029140 Bugyi B , Kellermayer M . 2019 . The discovery of actin : “to see what everyone else has seen , and to think what nobody has thought . ” J Muscle Res Cell Motil . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10974 - 019 - 09515 - z Burke TA , Christensen JR , Barone E , Suarez C , Sirotkin V , Kovar DR . 2014 . Homeostatic actin cytoskeleton networks are regulated by assembly factor competition for monomers . Curr Biol 24 : 579 – 585 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 01 . 072 Burridge K . 2017 . Focal adhesions : a personal perspective on a half century of progress . FEBS J 284 : 3355 – 3361 . doi : 10 . 1111 / febs . 14195 Burridge K , Fath K , Kelly T , Nuckolls G , Turner C . 1988 . Focal adhesions : Transmembrane junctions between the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton . Annu Rev Cell Biol 4 : 487 – 525 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cb . 04 . 110188 . 002415 Cabeen MT , Jacobs - Wagner C . 2010 . The bacterial cytoskeleton . Annu Rev Genet 44 : 365 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2007 . 12 . 006 Cadwell CM , Su W , Kowalczyk AP . 2016 . Cadherin tales : Regulation of cadherin function by endocytic membrane trafficking . Traffic 17 : 1262 – 1271 . doi : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12448 Cao W , Goodarzi JP , De La Cruz EM . 2006 . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative cofilin - actin filament interactions . J Mol Biol 361 : 257 – 267 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 06 . 019 Carlier MF , Pantaloni D . 1986 . Direct evidence for ADP - inorganic phosphate - F - actin as the major intermediate in ATP - actin polymerization . Rate of dissociation of inorganic phosphate from actin filaments . Biochemistry 25 : 7789 – 7792 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi00372a001 Carlier MF , Pantaloni D , Evans JA , Lambooy PK , Korn ED , Webb MR . 1988 . The hydrolysis of ATP that accompanies actin polymerization is essentially irreversible . FEBS Lett 235 : 211 – 214 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 5793 ( 88 ) 81264 - X Carlier MF , Romet - Lemonne G , Jégou A . 2014 . Actin filament dynamics using microfluidics . Methods Enzymol 540 : 3 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 397924 - 7 . 00001 - 7 Carlier MF , Shekhar S . 2017 . Global treadmilling coordinates actin turnover and controls the size of actin networks . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18 : 389 – 401 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2016 . 172 Carlsson L , Nyström LE , Sundkvist I , Markey F , Lindberg U , Lindberg C . 1977 . Actin polymerizability is influenced by profilin , a low molecular weight protein in non - muscle cells . J Mol Biol 115 : 463 – 483 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 77 ) 90166 - 8 Castrillon DH , Wasserman SA . 1994 . Diaphanous is required for cytokinesis in Drosophila and shares domains of similarity with the products of the limb deformity gene . Development 120 : 3367 – 3377 . Changede R , Sheetz M . 2017 . Integrin and cadherin clusters : A robust way to organize adhesions for cell mechanics . BioEssays 39 : 1600123 . doi : 10 . 1002 / bies . 201600123 Charras G , Paluch E . 2008 . Blebs lead the way : how to migrate without lamellipodia . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 730 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2453 Chatah NEH , Abrams CS . 2001 . G - protein - coupled receptor activation induces the membrane translocation and activation of phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase I α by a Rac - and Rho - dependent pathway . J Biol Chem 276 : 34059 – 34065 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M104917200 Chen H , Fre S , Slepnev V , Rosaria Capua M , Takei K , Butler MH , Di Fiore PP , De Camilli P . 1998 . Epsin is an EH - domain - binding protein implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature 394 : 793 – 797 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 255243a0 Chesarone MA , Dupage AG , Goode BL . 2010 . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 : 62 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2816 Chong LD , Traynor - Kaplan A , Bokoch GM , Schwartz MA . 1994 . The small GTP - binding protein Rho regulates a phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase in mammalian cells . Cell 79 : 507 – 513 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 94 ) 90259 - 3 Chugh P , Clark AG , Smith MB , Cassani DAD , Dierkes K , Ragab A , Roux PP , Charras G , Salbreux G , Paluch EK . 2017 . Actin cortex architecture regulates cell surface tension . Nat Cell Biol 19 : 689 – 697 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3525 Clark MG , Teply J , Haarer BK , Viggiano SC , Sept D , Amberg DC . 2006 . A genetic dissection of Aip1p’s interactions leads to a model for Aip1p – cofilin cooperative activities . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 1971 – 1984 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 Collins A , Warrington A , Taylor K a , Svitkina T . 2011 . Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr Biol 21 : 1167 – 75 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 05 . 048 35 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Dang I , Gorelik R , Sousa - Blin C , Derivery E , Guérin C , Linkner J , Nemethova M , Dumortier JG , Giger FA , Chipysheva TA , Ermilova VD , Vacher S , Campanacci V , Herrada I , Planson A - GG , Fetics S , Henriot V , David V , Oguievetskaia K , Lakisic G , Pierre F , Steffen A , Boyreau A , Peyriéras N , Rottner K , Zinn - Justin S , Cherfils J , Bièche I , Alexandrova AY , David NB , Small JV , Faix J , Blanchoin L , Gautreau A . 2013 . Inhibitory signalling to the Arp2 / 3 complex steers cell migration . Nature 503 : 281 – 284 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature12611 Dannhauser PN , Ungewickell EJ . 2012 . Reconstitution of clathrin - coated bud and vesicle formation with minimal components . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 634 – 639 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2478 David C , McPherson PS , Mundigl O , De Camilli P . 1996 . A role of amphiphysin in synaptic vesicle endocytosis suggested by its binding to dynamin in nerve terminals . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 : 331 – 335 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 93 . 1 . 331 De Franceschi N , Hamidi H , Alanko J , Sahgal P , Ivaska J . 2015 . Integrin traffic - the update . J Cell Sci 128 : 839 – 852 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 161653 De La Cruz EM . 2005 . Cofilin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin filaments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J Mol Biol 364 : 557 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2004 . 11 . 065 De Melo L , Sant’anna C , Reis S , Lourenço D , De Souza W , Lopes U , Cunha - E - Silva NL . 2008 . Evolutionary conservation of actin - binding proteins in Trypanosoma cruzi and unusual subcellular localization of the actin homologue . Parasitology 135 : 955 – 965 . doi : 10 . 1017 / S0031182008004496 Derivery E , Sousa C , Gautier JJ , Lombard B , Loew D , Gautreau A . 2009 . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev Cell 17 : 712 – 723 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 010 Dimchev G , Steffen A , Kage F , Dimchev V , Pernier J , Carlier M - F , Rottner K . 2017 . Efficiency of lamellipodia protrusion is determined by the extent of cytosolic actin assembly . Mol Biol Cell 28 : 1311 – 1325 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 05 - 0334 Dominguez R , Holmes KC . 2011 . Actin structure and function . Annu Rev Biophys 40 : 169 – 186 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 042910 - 155359 Dürre K , Keber FC , Bleicher P , Brauns F , Cyron CJ , Faix J , Bausch AR . 2018 . Capping protein - controlled actin polymerization shapes lipid membranes . Nat Commun 9 : 1630 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 03918 - 1 Edwards M , McConnell P , Schafer D , Cooper J . 2015 . CPI motif interaction is necessary for capping protein function in cells . Nat Commun 6 : 8415 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9415 Edwards M , Zwolak A , Schafer DA , Sept D , Dominguez R , Cooper JA . 2014 . Capping protein regulators fine - tune actin assembly dynamics . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3869 Eghiaian F , Rigato A , Scheuring S . 2015 . Structural , mechanical , and dynamical variability of the actin cortex in living cells . Biophys J 108 : 1330 – 1340 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2015 . 01 . 016 Evangelista M , Pruyne D , Amberg DC , Boone C , Bretscher A . 2002 . Formins direct Arp2 / 3 - independent actin filament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 260 – 269 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb718 Falck S , Paavilainen V , Wear M , Grossmann JG , Cooper J , Lappalainen P . 2004 . Biological role and structural mechanism of twinfilin - capping protein interaction . EMBO J 23 : 3010 – 3019 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7600310 Fenix AM , Taneja N , Buttler CA , Lewis J , Van Engelenburg SB , Ohi R , Burnette DT . 2016 . Expansion and concatenation of nonmuscle myosin IIA filaments drive cellular contractile system formation during interphase and mitosis . Mol Biol Cell 27 : 1465 – 1478 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 10 - 0725 Ferrell JE , Huests WH . 1984 . Phosphoinositide metabolism and the morphology of human erythrocytes . J Cell Biol 98 : 1992 – 1998 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 98 . 6 . 1992 Friedl P , Gilmour D . 2009 . Collective cell migration in morphogenesis , regeneration and cancer . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 445 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2720 Friedl P , Wolf K . 2010 . Plasticity of cell migration : a multiscale tuning model . J Cell Biol 188 : 11 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200909003 Fujii T , Iwane AH , Yanagida T , Namba K . 2010 . Direct visualization of secondary structures of F - actin by electron cryomicroscopy . Nature 467 : 724 – 728 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09372 Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL . 2000 . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 1 : 161 – 171 . doi : 10 . 1034 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2000 . 010208 . x Fujiwara I , Remmert K , Hammer J . 2010 . Direct observation of the uncapping of capping protein - capped actin filaments by CARMIL homology domain 3 . J Biol Chem 285 : 2707 – 2720 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M109 . 031203 Fujiwara I , Remmert K , Piszczek G , Hammer J . 2014 . Capping protein regulatory cycle driven by CARMIL and V - 1 may promote actin network assembly at protruding edges . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 : E1970 - 9 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1313738111 36 MARKKU HAKALA Fujiwara I , Takahashi S , Tadakuma H , Funatsu T , Ishiwata S . 2002 . Microscopic analysis of polymerization dynamics with individual actin filaments . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 666 – 673 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb841 Fyrberg EA , Bond BJ , Hershey ND , Mixter KS , Davidson N . 1981 . The actin genes of drosophila : Protein coding regions are highly conserved but intron positions are not . Cell 24 : 107 – 116 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 81 ) 90506 - 7 Fyrberg EA , Kindle KL , Davidson N , Sodja A . 1980 . The actin genes of drosophila : a dispersed multigene family . Cell 19 : 365 – 378 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 80 ) 90511 - 5 Galland R , Leduc P , Guérin C , Peyrade D , Blanchoin L , Théry M . 2013 . Fabrication of three - dimensional electrical connections by means of directed actin self - organization . Nat Mater 12 : 416 – 421 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat3569 Gandhi M , Achard V , Blanchoin L , Goode BL . 2009 . Coronin switches roles in actin disassembly depending on the nucleotide state of actin . Mol Cell 34 : 364 – 374 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2009 . 02 . 029 Gandhi M , Smith BA , Bovellan M , Paavilainen V , Daugherty - Clarke K , Gelles J , Lappalainen P , Goode BL . 2010 . GMF is a cofilin homolog that binds Arp2 / 3 complex to stimulate filament debranching and inhibit actin nucleation . Curr Biol 20 : 861 – 867 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2010 . 03 . 026 Gasman S , Kalaidzidis Y , Zerial M . 2003 . RhoD regulates endosome dynamics through Diaphanous - related Formin and Src tyrosine kinase . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 195 – 204 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb935 Gauthier NC , Fardin MA , Roca - Cusachs P , Sheetz MP . 2011 . Temporary increase in plasma membrane tension coordinates the activation of exocytosis and contraction during cell spreading . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 : 14467 – 14472 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1105845108 Gauthier NC , Monzo P , Gonzalez T , Doye A , Oldani A , Gounon P , Ricci V , Cormont M , Boquet P . 2007 . Early endosomes associated with dynamic F - actin structures are required for late trafficking of H . pylori VacA toxin . J Cell Biol 177 : 343 – 354 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200609061 Geisbrecht ER , Montell DJ . 2002 . Myosin VI is required for E - cadherin - mediated border cell migration . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 616 – 620 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb830 Goldschmidt - Clermont PJ , Furman MI , Wachsstock D , Safer D , Nachmias VT , Pollard TD . 1992 . The control of actin nucleotide exchange by thymosin beta 4 and profilin . A potential regulatory mechanism for actin polymerization in cells . Mol Biol Cell 3 : 1015 – 1024 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 3 . 9 . 1015 Golub T , Caroni P . 2005 . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - dependent microdomain assemblies capture microtubules to promote and control leading edge motility . J Cell Biol 169 : 151 – 165 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200407058 Gomez TS , Billadeau DD . 2009 . A FAM21 - containing WASH complex regulates retromer - dependent sorting . Dev Cell 17 : 699 – 711 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 009 Goode B , Drubin D , Lappalainen P . 1998 . Regulation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast by twinfilin , a ubiquitous actin monomer - sequestering protein . J Cell Biol 142 : 723 – 733 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 142 . 3 . 723 Goode BL , Sweeney MO , Eskin JA . 2018 . GMF as an actin network remodeling factor . Trends Cell Biol 28 : 749 – 760 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2018 . 04 . 008 Gorbatyuk VY , Nosworthy NJ , Robson SA , Bains NPSSS , Maciejewski MW , dos Remedios CG , King GF . 2006 . Mapping the phosphoinositide - binding site on chick cofilin explains how PIP2 regulates the cofilin - actin interaction . Mol Cell 24 : 511 – 522 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2006 . 10 . 007 Gorelik R , Yang C , Kameswaran V , Dominguez R , Svitkina T . 2011 . Mechanisms of plasma membrane targeting of formin mDia2 through its amino terminal domains . Mol Biol Cell 22 : 189 – 201 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E10 - 03 - 0256 Goroncy A , Koshiba S , Tochio N , Tomizawa T , Sato M , Inoue M , Watanabe S , Hayashizaki Y , Tanaka A , Kigawa T , Yokoyama S . 2009 . NMR solution structures of actin depolymerizing factor homology domains . Protein Sci 18 : 2384 – 2392 . doi : 10 . 1002 / pro . 248 Gottlieb TA , Ivanov IE , Adesnik M , Sabatini DD . 1993 . Actin microfilaments play a critical role in endocytosis at the apical but not the basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells . J Cell Biol 120 : 695 – 710 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 120 . 3 . 695 Gressin L , Guillotin A , Guérin C , Blanchoin L , Michelot A . 2015 . Architecture dependence of actin filament network disassembly . Curr Biol 25 : 1437 – 47 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 04 . 011 Haeger A , Wolf K , Zegers MM , Friedl P . 2015 . Collective cell migration : guidance principles and hierarchies . Trends Cell Biol 25 : 556 – 566 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2015 . 06 . 003 Hanahan D , Weinberg RA . 2011 . Hallmarks of cancer : The next generation . Cell 144 : 646 – 674 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 02 . 013 Hanahan D , Weinberg RA . 2000 . The hallmarks of cancer . Cell 100 : 57 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81683 - 9 37 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Hayakawa K , Sekiguchi C , Sokabe M , Ono S , Tatsumi H . 2019 . Real - time dingle - molecule kinetic analyses of AIP1 - enhanced actin filament severing in the presence of cofilin . J Mol Biol 431 : 308 – 322 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2018 . 11 . 010 Haynes EM , Asokan SB , King SJ , Johnson HE , Haugh JM , Bear JE . 2015 . GMF β controls branched actin content and lamellipodial retraction in fibroblasts . J Cell Biol 209 : 803 – 812 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201501094 Heasman SJ , Carlin LM , Cox S , Ng T , Ridley AJ . 2010 . Coordinated RhoA signaling at the leading edge and uropod is required for T cell transendothelial migration . J Cell Biol 190 : 553 – 563 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201002067 Helenius A . 2018 . Virus Entry : Looking Back and Moving Forward . J Mol Biol 430 : 1853 – 1862 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2018 . 03 . 034 Helfer E , Nevalainen E , Naumanen P , Romero S , Didry D , Pantaloni D , Lappalainen P , Carlier M - F . 2006 . Mammalian twinfilin sequesters ADP - G - actin and caps filament barbed ends : implications in motility . EMBO J 25 : 1184 – 1195 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . emboj . 7601019 Herman IM . 1993 . Actin isoforms . Curr Opin Cell Biol 5 : 48 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 05 ) 80007 - 9 Hilton D , Aguilar R , Johnston A , Goode B . 2018 . Species - specific functions of twinfilin in actin filament depolymerization . J Mol Biol 430 : 3323 – 3336 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2018 . 06 . 025 Holmes KC , Popp D , Gebhard W , Kabsch W . 1990 . Atomic model of the actin filament . Nature 347 : 44 – 49 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 347044a0 Hotulainen P , Lappalainen P . 2006 . Stress fibers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J Cell Biol 173 : 383 – 394 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200511093 Hotulainen P , Paunola E , Vartiainen MK , Lappalainen P . 2005 . Actin - depolymerizing factor and cofilin - 1 play overlapping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 649 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 07 - 0555 Hu S , Dasbiswas K , Guo Z , Tee YH , Thiagarajan V , Hersen P , Chew TL , Safran SA , Zaidel - Bar R , Bershadsky AD . 2017 . Long - range self - organization of cytoskeletal myosin II filament stacks . Nat Cell Biol 19 : 133 – 141 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3466 Huckaba TM , Gay AC , Pantalena LF , Yang HC , Pon LA . 2004 . Live cell imaging of the assembly , disassembly , and actin cable - dependent movement of endosomes and actin patches in the budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 167 : 519 – 530 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200404173 Idevall - Hagren O , De Camilli P . 2015 . Detection and manipulation of phosphoinositides . Biochim Biophys Acta 1851 : 736 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbalip . 2014 . 12 . 008 Idevall - Hagren O , Dickson EJ , Hille B , Toomre DK , De Camilli P . 2012 . Optogenetic control of phosphoinositide metabolism . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109 : E2316 - - 23 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1211305109 Ikeda K , Kundu RK , Ikeda S , Kobara M , Matsubara H , Quertermous T . 2006 . Glia maturation factor - gamma is preferentially expressed in microvascular endothelial and inflammatory cells and modulates actin cytoskeleton reorganization . Circ Res 99 : 424 – 433 . doi : 10 . 1161 / 01 . RES . 0000237662 . 23539 . 0b Inagaki M , Aoyama M , Sobue K , Yamamoto N , Morishima T , Moriyama A , Katsuya H , Asai K . 2004 . Sensitive immunoassays for human and rat GMFB and GMFG , tissue distribution and age - related changes . Biochim Biophys Acta - Gen Subj 1670 : 208 – 216 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2003 . 12 . 006 Innocenti M , Gerboth S , Rottner K , Lai FPL , Hertzog M , Stradal TEB , Frittoli E , Didry D , Polo S , Disanza A , Benesch S , Di Fiore PP , Carlier MF , Scita G . 2005 . Abi1 regulates the activity of N - WASP and WAVE in distinct actin - based processes . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 969 – 976 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1304 Iseppon F , Napolitano LMR , Torre V , Cojoc D . 2015 . Cdc42 and RhoA reveal different spatio - temporal dynamics upon local stimulation with Semaphorin - 3A . Front Cell Neurosci 9 : 333 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fncel . 2015 . 00333 Iwasa J , Mullins RD . 2007 . Spatial and temporal relationships between actin - filament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr Biol 17 : 395 – 406 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 02 . 012 Jansen S , Collins A , Chin SM , Ydenberg CA , Gelles J , Goode BL . 2015 . Single - molecule imaging of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nat Commun 6 : 7202 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms8202 Jégou A , Carlier MF , Romet - Lemonne G . 2011a . Microfluidics pushes forward microscopy analysis of actin dynamics . Bioarchitecture 1 : 271 – 276 . doi : 10 . 4161 / bioa . 1 . 6 . 19338 Jégou A , Niedermayer T , Orbán J , Didry D , Lipowsky R , Carlier MF , Romet - Lemonne G . 2011b . Individual actin filaments in a microfluidic flow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the properties of profilin . PLoS Biol 9 : e1001161 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1001161 38 MARKKU HAKALA Johnston A , Collins A , Goode B . 2015 . High - speed depolymerization at actin filament ends jointly catalysed by twinfilin and Srv2 / CAP . Nat Cell Biol 17 : 1504 – 1511 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3252 Johnston A , Hilton D , McConnell P , Johnson B , Harris M , Simone A , Amarasinghe G , Cooper J , Goode B . 2018 . A novel mode of Capping Protein - regulation by twinfilin . Elife 7 : e41313 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 41313 Kabsch W , Mannherz HG , Suck D , Pai EF , Holmes KC . 1990 . Atomic structure of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature 347 : 37 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 347037a0 Kage F , Winterhoff M , Dimchev V , Mueller J , Thalheim T , Freise A , Brühmann S , Kollasser J , Block J , Dimchev G , Geyer M , Schnittler H - J , Brakebusch C , Stradal TEB , Carlier M - F , Sixt M , Käs J , Faix J , Rottner K . 2017 . FMNL formins boost lamellipodial force generation . Nat Commun 8 : 14832 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms14832 Kaksonen M , Roux A . 2018 . Mechanisms of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 19 : 313 – 326 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm . 2017 . 132 Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG . 2003 . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 : 475 – 487 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00883 - 3 Kaksonen M , Toret C , Drubin D . 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 : 404 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1940 Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 320 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 09 . 024 Kempuraj D , Khan MM , Thangavel R , Xiong Z , Yang E , Zaheer A . 2013 . Glia maturation factor induces interleukin - 33 release from astrocytes : Implications for neurodegenerative diseases . J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 8 : 643 – 650 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11481 - 013 - 9439 - 7 Khatau SB , Hale CM , Stewart - Hutchinson PJ , Patel MS , Stewart CL , Searson PC , Hodzic D , Wirtz D . 2009 . A perinuclear actin cap regulates nuclear shape . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 : 19017 – 19022 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0908686106 Kim K , McCully ME , Bhattacharya N , Butler B , Sept D , Cooper JA . 2007 . Structure / function analysis of the interaction of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate with actin - capping protein : implications for how capping protein binds the actin filament . J Biol Chem 282 : 5871 – 5879 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M609850200 Kim K , Yamashita A , Wear M , Maéda Y , Cooper J . 2004 . Capping protein binding to actin in yeast : biochemical mechanism and physiological relevance . J Cell Biol 164 : 567 – 80 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200308061 Kishimoto T , Sun Y , Buser C , Liu J , Michelot A , Drubin DG . 2011 . Determinants of endocytic membrane geometry , stability , and scission . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 : E979 – E988 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1113413108 Kjeken R , Egeberg M , Habermann A , Kuehnel M , Peyron P , Floetenmeyer M , Walther P , Jahraus A , Defacque H , Kuznetsov SA , Griffiths G . 2004 . Fusion between Phagosomes , Early and Late Endosomes : A Role for Actin in Fusion between Late , but Not Early Endocytic Organelles . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 345 – 358 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E03 Kobielak A , Pasolli HA , Fuchs E . 2004 . Mammalian formin - 1 participates in adherens junctions and polymerization of linear actin cables . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 21 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1075 Korn ED . 1982 . Actin polymerization and its regulation by proteins from nonmuscle cells . Physiol Rev 62 : 672 – 737 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 1982 . 62 . 2 . 672 Kotila T , Kogan K , Enkavi G , Guo S , Vattulainen I , Goode BL , Lappalainen P . 2018 . Structural basis of actin monomer re - charging by cyclase - Associated protein . Nat Commun 9 : 1892 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 04231 - 7 Kotila T , Wioland H , Enkavi G , Kogan K , Vattulainen I , Jégou A , Romet - Lemonne G , Lappalainen P . 2019 . Mechanism of synergistic actin filament pointed end depolymerization by cyclase - associated protein and cofilin . Nat Commun 10 : 5320 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 13213 - 2 Kovar DR , Pollard TD . 2004 . Insertional assembly of actin filament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 : 14725 – 14730 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0405902101 Kozma R , Ahmed S , Best A , Lim L . 1995 . The Ras - related protein Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral actin microspikes and filopodia in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts . Mol Cell Biol 15 : 1942 – 1952 . Krishnan K , Moens PDJ . 2009 . Structure and functions of profilins . Biophys Rev 1 : 71 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12551 - 009 - 0010 - y Kuang X , Jiang X , Chen C , Su X , Shi Y , Wu J , Zhang P , Zhang X , Cui Y , Ping Y , Bian X . 2016 . Expressions of glia maturation factor - β ; by tumor cells and endothelia correlate with neovascularization and poor prognosis in human glioma . Oncotarget 7 : 85750 – 85763 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 5509 39 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Kübler E , Riezman H . 1993 . Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J 12 : 2855 – 2862 . doi : 10 . 1002 / j . 1460 - 2075 . 1993 . tb05947 . x Kuhn JR , Pollard TD . 2005 . Real - time measurements of actin filament polymerization by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . Biophys J 88 : 1387 – 1402 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 104 . 047399 Kyheröinen S , Vartiainen MK . 2019 . Nuclear actin dynamics in gene expression and genome organization . Semin Cell Dev Biol . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2019 . 10 . 012 Lai F , Szczodrak M , Block J , Faix J , Breitsprecher D , Mannherz H , Stradal T , Dunn G , Small JV , Rottner K . 2008 . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J 27 : 982 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2008 . 34 Lämmermann T , Bader BL , Monkley SJ , Worbs T , Wedlich - Söldner R , Hirsch K , Keller M , Förster R , Critchley DR , Fässler R , Sixt M . 2008 . Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin - independent flowing and squeezing . Nature 453 : 51 – 55 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06887 Langanger G , Moeremans M , Daneels G , Sobieszek A , De Brabander M , De Mey J . 1986 . The molecular organization of myosin in stress fibers of cultured cells . J Cell Biol 102 : 200 – 209 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 102 . 1 . 200 Lappalainen P , Drubin DG . 1997 . Cofilin promotes rapid actin filament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 : 78 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 40418 Lappalainen P , Fedorov E V , Fedorov AA , Almo SC , Drubin DG . 1997 . Essential functions and actin - binding surfaces of yeast cofilin revealed by systematic mutagenesis . EMBO J 16 : 5520 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 16 . 18 . 5520 Lappalainen P , Kessels MM , Cope MJ , Drubin DG . 1998 . The ADF homology ( ADF - H ) domain : a highly exploited actin - binding module . Mol Biol Cell 9 : 1951 – 1959 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . 9 . 8 . 1951 Lazarides E . 1976 . Actin , α - actinin , and tropomyosin interaction in the structural organization of actin filaments in nonmuscle cells . J Cell Biol 68 : 202 – 219 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 68 . 2 . 202 Legg JA , Bompard G , Dawson J , Morris HL , Andrew N , Cooper L , Johnston SA , Tramountanis G , Machesky LM . 2007 . N - WASP involvement in dorsal ruffle formation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts . Mol Biol Cell 18 : 678 – 687 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E06 Lehtimäki J , Hakala M , Lappalainen P . 2017 . Actin filament structures in migrating cells In : Jockusch BM , editor . Hand . Exp . Pharm . Basel , Switzerland : Springer International Publishing . pp . 123 – 152 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 164 _ 2016 _ 28 Li S , Prasanna X , Salo VT , Vattulainen I , Ikonen E . 2019 . An efficient auxin - inducible degron system with low basal degradation in human cells . Nat Methods 16 : 866 – 869 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 019 - 0512 - x Li YL , Ye F , Cheng XD , Hu Y , Zhou CY , Lü WG , Xie X . 2010 . Identification of glia maturation factor beta as an independent prognostic predictor for serous ovarian cancer . Eur J Cancer 46 : 2104 – 2118 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejca . 2010 . 04 . 015 Li Z , Dong X , Wang Z , Liu W , Deng N , Ding Y , Tang L , Hla T , Zeng R , Li L , Wu D . 2005 . Regulation of PTEN by Rho small GTPases . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 399 – 404 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1236 Liang Y , Niederstrasser H , Edwards M , Jackson CE , Cooper JA . 2009 . Distinct roles for CARMIL isoforms in cell migration . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 5290 – 5305 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 Lieber AD , Yehudai - Resheff S , Barnhart EL , Theriot JA , Keren K . 2013 . Membrane tension in rapidly moving cells is determined by cytoskeletal forces . Curr Biol 23 : 1409 – 1417 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 063 Lim R , Miller JF , Zaheer A . 1989 . Purification and characterization of glia maturation factor beta : a growth regulator for neurons and glia . Proc Natl Acad Sci 86 : 3901 – 3905 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 86 . 10 . 3901 Lim R , Zaheer A , Khosravi H , Freeman JH , Halverson HE , Wemmie JA , Yang B . 2004 . Impaired motor performance and learning in glia maturation factor - knockout mice . Brain Res 1024 : 225 – 232 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2004 . 08 . 003 Lin M - CC , Galletta BJ , Sept D , Cooper JA . 2010 . Overlapping and distinct functions for cofilin , coronin and Aip1 in actin dynamics in vivo . J Cell Sci 123 : 1329 – 1342 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 065698 Ling K , Schill NJ , Wagoner MP , Sun Y , Anderson RA . 2006 . Movin’ on up : the role of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 in cell migration . Trends Cell Biol 16 : 276 – 284 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2006 . 03 . 007 Lippert DND , Wilkins JA . 2012 . Glia maturation factor gamma regulates the migration and adherence of human T lymphocytes . BMC Immunol 13 : 21 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1471 - 2172 - 13 - 21 Liu YJ , Le Berre M , Lautenschlaeger F , Maiuri P , Callan - Jones A , Heuzé M , Takaki T , Voituriez R , Piel M . 2015 . Confinement and low adhesion induce fast amoeboid migration of slow mesenchymal cells . Cell 160 : 659 – 672 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 01 . 007 Loisel T , Boujemaa R , Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F . 1999 . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 44183 40 MARKKU HAKALA Luan Q , Nolen BJ . 2013 . Structural basis for regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex by GMF . Nat Struct Mol Biol 20 : 1062 – 1068 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 2628 Machacek M , Hodgson L , Welch C , Elliott H , Pertz O , Nalbant P , Abell A , Johnson GL , Hahn KM , Danuser G . 2009 . Coordination of Rho GTPase activities during cell protrusion . Nature 461 : 99 – 103 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature08242 Machesky LM , Atkinson SJ , Ampe C , Vandekercldaove J . 1994 . Purification of a cortical complex containing two unconventional actins from Acanthamoeba by affinity chromatography on profilin - agarose . J Cell Biol 127 : 107 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 127 . 1 . 107 Machesky LM , Insall RH . 1998 . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 8 : 1347 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 98 ) 00015 - 3 Machesky LM , Mullins RD , Higgs HN , Kaiser D a , Blanchoin L , May RC , Hall ME , Pollard TD . 1999 . Scar , a WASp - related protein , activates nucleation of actin filaments by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96 : 3739 – 3744 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 96 . 7 . 3739 Machesky LM , Reeves E , Wientjes F , Mattheyse FJ , Grogan A , Totty NF , Burlingame AL , Hsuan JJ , Segal AW . 1997 . Mammalian actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex localizes to regions of lamellipodial protrusion and is composed of evolutionarily conserved proteins . Biochem J 328 : 105 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1042 / bj3280105 Maciver SK , Weeds AG . 1994 . Actophorin preferentially binds monomeric ADP - actin over ATP - bound actin : consequences for cell locomotion . FEBS Lett 347 : 251 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 5793 ( 94 ) 00552 - 4 Maekawa M , Ishizaki T , Boku S , Watanabe N , Fujita A , Iwamatsu A , Obimata T , Ohashi K , Mizuno K , Narumiya S . 1999 . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton yhrough protein kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 : 895 – 898 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 285 . 5429 . 895 Mahaffy RE , Pollard TD . 2006 . Kinetics of the formation and dissociation of actin filament branches mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophys J 91 : 3519 – 3528 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 080937 Mangione MSC , Gould KL . 2019 . Molecular form and function of the cytokinetic ring . J Cell Sci 132 : jcs226928 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 226928 Manhart A , Icheva TA , Guerin C , Klar T , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Thery M , Blanchoin L , Mogilner A . 2019 . Quantitative regulation of the dynamic steady state of actin networks . Elife 8 : e42413 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 42413 Maninova M , Caslavsky J , Vomastek T . 2017 . The assembly and function of perinuclear actin cap in migrating cells . Protoplasma 254 : 1207 – 1218 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00709 - 017 - 1077 - 0 Martin K , Reimann A , Fritz RD , Ryu H , Jeon NL , Pertz O . 2016 . Spatio - temporal co - ordination of RhoA , Rac1 and Cdc42 activation during prototypical edge protrusion and retraction dynamics . Sci Rep 6 : 21901 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep21901 Mattila PK , Lappalainen P . 2008 . Filopodia : molecular architecture and cellular functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 446 – 54 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2406 Mattila PK , Quintero - Monzon O , Kugler J , Moseley JB , Almo SC , Lappalainen P , Goode BL . 2004 . A high - affinity interaction with ADP - actin monomers underlies the mechanism and in vivo function of Srv2 / cyclase - associated protein . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 5158 – 5171 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 06 - 0444 McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A . 1997 . Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin filament dynamics and cellular function . J Cell Biol 138 : 771 – 781 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 4 . 771 McMahon HT , Boucrot E . 2011 . Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12 : 517 – 533 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3151 Meacham C , Ho E , Dubrovsky E , Gertler F , Hemann M . 2009 . In vivo RNAi screening identifies regulators of actin dynamics as key determinants of lymphoma progression . Nat Genet 41 : 1133 – 1137 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 451 Mejillano M , Kojima S , Applewhite D , Gertler F , Svitkina T , Borisy G . 2004 . Lamellipodial versus filopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery . Cell 118 : 363 – 373 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 07 . 019 Mekel M , Kozlov AG , Mooren OL , Lohman TM . 2020 . Comparative analysis of CPI - motif regulation of biochemical functions of actin capping protein . bioRxiv 1 – 40 . doi : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 02 . 06 . 936211 Mercer J , Schelhaas M , Helenius A . 2010 . Virus entry by endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 79 : 803 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2013 / 469538 Merrifield CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W . 2002 . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 691 – 698 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb837 Miki H , Takenawa T . 2002 . WAVE2 serves a functional partner of IRSp53 by regulating its interaction with Rac . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 293 : 93 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 291X ( 02 ) 00218 - 8 41 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Miki H , Yamaguchi H , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T . 2000 . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 : 732 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35047107 Miyoshi T , Tsuji T , Higashida C , Hertzog M , Fujita A , Narumiya S , Scita G , Watanabe N . 2006 . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : Evidence of frequent filament severing . J Cell Biol 175 : 947 – 955 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200604176 Montell DJ . 2008 . Morphogenetic cell movements : Diversity from modular mechanical properties . Science 322 : 1502 – 1505 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1164073 Montell DJ . 2003 . Border - cell migration : The race is on . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 4 : 13 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1006 Moore PB , Huxley HE , DeRosier DJ . 1970 . Three - dimensional reconstruction of F - actin , thin filaments and decorated thin filaments . J Mol Biol 50 : 279 – 296 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0022 - 2836 ( 70 ) 90192 - 0 Mooseker MS , Tilney LG . 1975 . Organization of an actin filament - membrane complex . J Cell Biol 67 : 725 – 743 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 67 . 3 . 725 Morel E , Parton RG , Gruenberg J . 2009 . Annexin A2 - dependent polymerization of actin mediates endosome biogenesis . Dev Cell 16 : 445 – 457 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 01 . 007 Moriyama K , Yahara I . 2002 . Human CAP1 is a key factor in the recycling of cofilin and actin for rapid actin turnover . J Cell Sci 115 : 1591 – 601 . Mueller J , Szep G , Nemethova M , de Vries I , Lieber AD , Winkler C , Kruse K , Small JV , Schmeiser C , Keren K , Hauschild R , Sixt M . 2017 . Load Adaptation of Lamellipodial Actin Networks . Cell 171 : 188 - 200 . e16 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2017 . 07 . 051 Mulholland J , Preuss D , Moon A , Wong A , Drubin D , Botstein D . 1994 . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J Cell Biol 125 : 381 – 391 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 125 . 2 . 381 Mullins RD , Heuser JA , Pollard TD . 1998 . The interaction of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : nucleation , high affinity pointed end capping , and formation of branching networks of filaments . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 : 6181 – 6186 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 95 . 11 . 6181 Muriel O , Tomas A , Scott CC , Gruenberg J . 2016 . Moesin and cortactin control actin - dependent multivesicular endosome biogenesis . Mol Biol Cell 27 : 3305 – 3316 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 12 - 0853 Nadkarni A V . , Brieher WM . 2014 . Aip1 destabilizes cofilin - saturated actin filaments by severing and accelerating monomer dissociation from ends . Curr Biol 24 : 2749 – 2757 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 09 . 048 Nakagawa H , Miyamoto S . 1998 . Actin - filaments localize on the sorting endosomes of 3Y1 fibroblastic cells . Cell Struct Funct 23 : 283 – 290 . doi : 10 . 1247 / csf . 23 . 283 Nakano K , Kuwayama H , Kawasaki M , Numata O , Takaine M . 2010 . GMF is an evolutionarily developed ADF / cofilin - super family protein involved in the Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Cytoskeleton 67 : 373 – 382 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20451 Nevalainen E , Skwarek - Maruszewska A , Braun A , Moser M , Lappalainen P . 2009 . Two biochemically distinct and tissue - specific twinfilin isoforms are generated from the mouse Twf2 gene by alternative promoter usage . Biochem J 417 : 593 – 600 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20080608 Nicolau D V . , Lard M , Korten T , Van Delft F , Persson M , Bengtsson E , Månsson A , Diez S , Linke H . 2016 . Parallel computation with molecular - motor - propelled agents in nanofabricated networks . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 : 2591 – 2596 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1510825113 Niewiadomska P , Godt D , Tepass U . 1999 . DE - cadherin is required for intercellular motility during Drosophila oogenesis . J Cell Biol 144 : 533 – 547 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 144 . 3 . 533 Nobes CD , Hall A . 1995 . Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 : 53 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 95 ) 90370 - 4 O’Neill PR , Castillo - Badillo JA , Meshik X , Kalyanaraman V , Melgarejo K , Gautam N . 2018 . Membrane flow drives an adhesion - independent amoeboid cell migration mode . Dev Cell 46 : 9 - 22 . e4 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2018 . 05 . 029 Ohashi E , Tanabe K , Henmi Y , Mesaki K , Kobayashi Y , Takei K . 2011 . Receptor Sorting within Endosomal Trafficking Pathway is Facilitated by Dynamic Actin Filaments . PLoS One 6 : e19942 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0019942 Oikawa T , Yamaguchi H , Itoh T , Kato M , Ijuin T , Yamazaki D , Suetsugu S , Takenawa T . 2004 . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 binding is necessary for WAVE2 - induced formation of lamellipodia . Nat Cell Biol 6 : 420 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1125 42 MARKKU HAKALA Ojala P , Paavilainen V , Vartiainen M , Tuma R , Weeds A , Lappalainen P . 2002 . The two ADF - H domains of twinfilin play functionally distinct roles in interactions with actin monomers . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 3811 – 3821 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 03 - 0157 Ojala PJ , Paavilainen VO , Lappalainen P . 2001 . Identification of yeast cofilin residues specific for actin monomer and PIP2 binding . Biochemistry 40 : 15562 – 15569 . doi : 10 . 1021 / bi0117697 Ono S , McGough A , Pope BJ , Tolbert VT , Bui A , Pohl J , Benian GM , Gernert KM , Weeds AG . 2001 . The C - terminal tail of UNC - 60B ( actin depolymerizing factor / cofilin ) is critical for maintaining its stable association with F - actin and is implicated in the second actin - binding site . J Biol Chem 276 : 5952 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M007563200 Oser M , Condeelis J . 2009 . The cofilin activity cycle in lamellipodia and invadopodia . J Cell Biochem 108 : 1252 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 22372 Paavilainen V , Hellman M , Helfer E , Bovellan M , Annila A , Carlier M - F , Permi P , Lappalainen P . 2007 . Structural basis and evolutionary origin of actin filament capping by twinfilin . Proc Natl Acad Sci 104 : 3113 – 3118 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0608725104 Paavilainen V , Merckel M , Falck S , Ojala P , Pohl E , Wilmanns M , Lappalainen P . 2002 . Structural conservation between the actin monomer - binding sites of twinfilin and actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin . J Biol Chem 277 : 43089 – 43095 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M208225200 Paavilainen V , Oksanen E , Goldman A , Lappalainen P . 2008 . Structure of the actin - depolymerizing factor homology domain in complex with actin . J Cell Biol 182 : 51 – 59 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200803100 Palmgren S , Ojala P , Wear M , Cooper J , Lappalainen P . 2001 . Interactions with PIP2 , ADP - actin monomers , and capping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinfilin . J Cell Biol 155 : 251 – 260 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200106157 Paluch EK , Raz E . 2013 . The role and regulation of blebs in cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 : 582 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2013 . 05 . 005 Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F . 1993 . How profilin promotes actin filament assembly in the presence of thymosin β 4 . Cell 75 : 1007 – 1014 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 93 ) 90544 - Z Papayannopoulos V , Co C , Prehoda KE , Snapper S , Taunton J , Lim WA . 2005 . A polybasic motif allows N - WASP to act as a sensor of PIP2 density . Mol Cell 17 : 181 – 191 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2004 . 11 . 054 Pavlov D , Muhlrad A , Cooper J , Wear M , Reisler E . 2007 . Actin filament severing by cofilin . J Mol Biol 365 : 1350 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2006 . 10 . 102 Peglion F , Llense F , Etienne - Manneville S . 2014 . Adherens junction treadmilling during collective migration . Nat Cell Biol 16 : 639 – 651 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2985 Pelkmans L , Fava E , Grabner H , Hannus M , Habermann B , Krausz E , Zerial M . 2005 . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 436 : 78 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature03571 Peng A , Belyantseva I , Hsu P , Friedman T , Heller S . 2009 . Twinfilin - 2 regulates actin filament lengths in cochlear stereocilia . J Neurosci 29 : 15083 – 15088 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2782 - 09 . 2009 Petrie RJ , Yamada KM . 2012 . At the leading edge of three - dimensional cell migration . J Cell Sci 125 : 5917 – 5926 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 093732 Picco A , Mund M , Ries J , Nédélec F , Kaksonen M . 2015 . Visualizing the functional architecture of the endocytic machinery . Elife 2015 : e04535 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04535 Plantard L , Arjonen A , Lock JG , Nurani G , Ivaska J , Strömblad S . 2010 . PtdIns ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 is a regulator of myosin - X localization and filopodia formation . J Cell Sci 123 : 3525 – 3534 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 069609 Pol A , Ortega D , Enrich C . 1997 . Identification of cytoskeleton - associated proteins in isolated rat liver endosomes . Biochem J 327 : 741 – 746 . doi : 10 . 1042 / bj3270741 Pollard T . 1986 . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J Cell Biol 103 : 2747 – 2754 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 103 . 6 . 2747 Pollard TD . 2007 . Regulation of actin filament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 36 : 451 – 477 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . biophys . 35 . 040405 . 101936 Pollard TD , Borisy GG . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 : 453 – 465 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00120 - x Ponti A , Machacek M , Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G . 2004 . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 : 1782 – 1786 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1100533 43 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Poukkula M , Kremneva E , Serlachius M , Lappalainen P . 2011 . Actin - depolymerizing factor homology domain : a conserved fold performing diverse roles in cytoskeletal dynamics . Cytoskeleton 68 : 471 – 490 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20530 Prochniewicza E , Janson N , D . Thomas D , Enrique M . De La Cruz . 2005 . Cofilin increases the torsional flexibility and dynamics of actin filaments . J Mol Biol 353 : 990 – 1000 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2005 . 09 . 021 Pruyne D , Evangelista M , Yang C , Bi E , Zigmond S , Bretscher A , Boone C . 2002 . Role of formins in actin assembly : nucleation and barbed - end association . Science 297 : 612 – 615 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1072309 Ramalingam N , Franke C , Jaschinski E , Winterhoff M , Lu Y , Brühmann S , Junemann A , Meier H , Noegel AA , Weber I , Zhao H , Merkel R , Schleicher M , Faix J . 2015 . A resilient formin - derived cortical actin meshwork in the rear drives actomyosin - based motility in 2D confinement . Nat Commun 6 : 8496 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9496 Ramalingam N , Zhao H , Breitsprecher D , Lappalainen P , Faix J , Schleicher M . 2010 . Phospholipids regulate localization and activity of mDia1 formin . Eur J Cell Biol 89 : 723 – 732 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2010 . 06 . 001 Raucher D , Sheetz MP . 2000 . Cell spreading and lamellipodial extension rate is regulated by membrane tension . J Cell Biol 148 : 127 – 136 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 148 . 1 . 127 Ridley AJ . 2015 . Rho GTPase signalling in cell migration . Curr Opin Cell Biol 36 : 103 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2015 . 08 . 005 Ridley AJ , Hall A . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth factors . Cell 70 : 389 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 92 ) 90163 - 7 Ridley AJ , Paterson HF , Johnston CL , Diekmann D , Hall A . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 : 401 – 410 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 92 ) 90164 - 8 Ridley AJ , Schwartz M a , Burridge K , Firtel R a , Ginsberg MH , Borisy G , Parsons JT , Horwitz AR . 2003 . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 : 1704 – 1709 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1092053 Rogers S , Wiedemann U , Stuurman N , Vale R . 2003 . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J Cell Biol 162 : 1079 – 1088 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200303023 Rohatgi R , Ho HY , Kirschner MW . 2000 . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J Cell Biol 150 : 1299 – 1310 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 150 . 6 . 1299 Romero S , Le Clainche C , Didry D , Egile C , Pantaloni D , Carlier M - F . 2004 . Formin is a processive motor that requires profilin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 : 419 – 429 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2004 . 09 . 039 Rørth P . 2009 . Collective Cell Migration . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 25 : 407 – 429 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 042308 . 113231 Rottner K , Behrendt B , Small J V , Wehland J . 1999 . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 321 – 2 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 13040 Rotty JD , Wu C , Haynes EM , Suarez C , Winkelman JD , Johnson HE , Haugh JM , Kovar DR , Bear JE . 2015 . Profilin - 1 serves as a gatekeeper for actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 - dependent and - independent pathways . Dev Cell 32 : 54 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 026 Ruprecht V , Wieser S , Callan - Jones A , Smutny M , Morita H , Sako K , Barone V , Ritsch - Marte M , Sixt M , Voituriez R , Heisenberg CP . 2015 . Cortical contractility triggers a stochastic switch to fast amoeboid cell motility . Cell 160 : 673 – 685 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 01 . 008 Rzadzinska A , Nevalainen E , Prosser H , Lappalainen P , Steel K . 2009 . MyosinVIIa interacts with Twinfilin - 2 at the tips of mechanosensory stereocilia in the inner ear . PLoS One 4 : e7097 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0007097 Saarikangas J , Zhao H , Lappalainen P . 2010 . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton - plasma membrane interplay by phosphoinositides . Phys Rev 90 : 259 – 289 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00036 . 2009 Sagot I , Klee SK , Pellman D . 2002 . Yeast formins regulate cell polarity by controlling the assembly of actin cables . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 42 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb719 Saleem M , Morlot S , Hohendahl A , Manzi J , Lenz M , Roux A . 2015 . A balance between membrane elasticity and polymerization energy sets the shape of spherical clathrin coats . Nat Commun 6 : e6249 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms7249 Schafer D , Jennings P , Cooper J . 1996 . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J Cell Biol 135 : 169 – 79 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 135 . 1 . 169 Schafer D , Welch M , Machesky L , Bridgman P , Meyer S , Cooper J . 1998 . Visualization and molecular analysis of actin assembly in living cells . J Cell Biol 143 : 1919 – 1930 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 143 . 7 . 1919 Schaks M , Giannone G , Rottner K . 2019 . Actin dynamics in cell migration . Essays Biochem 63 : 483 – 495 . doi : 10 . 1042 / EBC20190015 44 MARKKU HAKALA Schirenbeck A , Bretschneider T , Arasada R , Schleicher M , Faix J . 2005 . The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is required for the formation and maintenance of filopodia . Nat Cell Biol 7 : 619 – 625 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1266 Sellers JR . 2000 . Myosins : A diverse superfamily . Biochim Biophys Acta - Mol Cell Res 1496 : 3 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 4889 ( 00 ) 00005 - 7 Senju Y , Kalimeri M , Koskela E V , Somerharju P , Zhao H , Vattulainen I , Lappalainen P . 2017 . Mechanistic principles underlying regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by phosphoinositides . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114 : E8977 – E8986 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1705032114 Senju Y , Lappalainen P . 2019 . Regulation of actin dynamics by PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 in cell migration and endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 56 : 7 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2018 . 08 . 003 Shekhar S , Chung J , Kondev J , Gelles J , Goode B . 2019 . Synergy between Cyclase - associated protein and Cofilin accelerates actin filament depolymerization by two orders of magnitude . Nat Commun 10 : 5319 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 13268 - 1 Shekhar S , Pernier J , Carlier M - F . 2016 . Regulators of actin filament barbed ends at a glance . J Cell Sci 129 : 1085 – 1091 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 179994 Shiu JY , Aires L , Lin Z , Vogel V . 2018 . Nanopillar force measurements reveal actin - cap - mediated YAP mechanotransduction . Nat Cell Biol 20 : 262 – 271 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 017 - 0030 - y Sigismund S , Confalonieri S , Ciliberto A , Polo S , Scita G , di Fiore PP . 2012 . Endocytosis and signaling : Cell logistics shape the eukaryotic cell plan . Physiol Rev 92 : 273 – 366 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00005 . 2011 Simonetti B , Cullen PJ . 2019 . Actin - dependent endosomal receptor recycling . Curr Opin Cell Biol 56 : 22 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2018 . 08 . 006 Sinnar S , Antoku S , Saffin J - M , Cooper J , Halpain S . 2014 . Capping protein is essential for cell migration in vivo and for filopodial morphology and dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 25 : 2152 – 2160 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E13 - 12 - 0749 Siton - Mendelson O , Bernheim - Groswasser A . 2016 . Toward the reconstitution of synthetic cell motility . Cell Adhes Migr 10 : 461 – 474 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 19336918 . 2016 . 1170260 Small JV , Rottner K , Kaverina I , Anderson KI . 1998 . Assembling an actin cytoskeleton for cell attachment and movement . Biochim Biophys Acta - Mol Cell Res 1404 : 271 – 281 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0167 - 4889 ( 98 ) 00080 - 9 Small J V , Isenberg G , Celis JE , Celis . 1978 . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature 272 : 638 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 272638a0 Smith LA , Aranda - Espinoza H , Haun JB , Dembo M , Hammer DA . 2007 . Neutrophil traction stresses are concentrated in the uropod during migration . Biophys J 92 : L58 – L60 . doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 102822 Stachowiak JC , Schmid EM , Ryan CJ , Ann HS , Sasaki DY , Sherman MB , Geissler PL , Fletcher DA , Hayden CC . 2012 . Membrane bending by protein - protein crowding . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 944 – 949 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2561 Steffen A , Faix J , Resch GP , Linkner J , Wehland J , Small JV , Rottner K , Stradal TEB . 2006 . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 2581 – 2591 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E05 - 11 - 1088 Stewart MP , Helenius J , Toyoda Y , Ramanathan SP , Muller DJ , Hyman AA . 2011 . Hydrostatic pressure and the actomyosin cortex drive mitotic cell rounding . Nature 469 : 226 – 231 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09642 Stritt S , Beck S , Becker I , Vögtle T , Hakala M , Heinze K , Du X , Bender M , Braun A , Lappalainen P , Nieswandt B . 2017 . Twinfilin 2a is a regulator of platelet reactivity and turnover in mice . Blood 130 : 1746 – 1756 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2017 - 02 - 770768 Suarez C , Carroll RT , Burke TA , Christensen JR , Bestul AJ , Sees JA , James ML , Sirotkin V , Kovar DR . 2015 . Profilin regulates F - actin network homeostasis by favoring formin over Arp2 / 3 complex . Dev Cell 32 : 43 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2014 . 10 . 027 Suarez C , Roland J , Boujemaa - Paterski R , Kang H , McCullough BR , Reymann AC , Guérin C , Martiel JL , De La Cruz EM , Blanchoin L . 2011 . Cofilin tunes the nucleotide state of actin filaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr Biol 21 : 862 – 868 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 03 . 064 Suetsugu S , Yamazaki D , Kurisu S , Takenawa T . 2003 . Differential roles of WAVE1 and WAVE2 in dorsal and peripheral ruffle formation for fibroblast cell migration . Dev Cell 5 : 595 – 609 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 03 ) 00297 - 1 Sun Y , Carroll S , Kaksonen M , Toshima JY , Drubin DG . 2007 . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 turnover is required for multiple stages during clathrin - and actin - dependent endocytic internalization . J Cell Biol 177 : 355 – 367 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200611011 Svitkina T . 2018a . The actin cytoskeleton and actin - based motility . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 10 : a018267 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a018267 Svitkina T . 2018b . Ultrastructure of the actin cytoskeleton . Curr Opin Cell Biol 54 : 1 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2018 . 02 . 007 45 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Svitkina TM , Bulanova EA , Chaga OY , Vignjevic DM , Kojima S , Vasiliev JM , Borisy GG . 2003 . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J Cell Biol 160 : 409 – 421 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200210174 Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG . 1997 . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 139 . 2 . 397 Sweeney HL , Hammers DW . 2018 . Muscle contraction . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 10 : a023200 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a023200 Takeda S , Minakata S , Koike R , Kawahata I , Narita A , Kitazawa M , Ota M , Yamakuni T , Maéda Y , Nitanai Y . 2010 . Two distinct mechanisms for actin capping protein regulation - steric and allosteric inhibition . PLoS Biol 8 : e1000416 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000416 Takenawa T , Suetsugu S . 2007 . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 37 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2069 Taoka M , Ichimura T , Wakamiya - Tsuruta A , Kubota Y , Araki T , Obinata T , Isobe T . 2003 . V - 1 , a protein expressed transiently during murine cerebellar development , regulates actin polymerization via interaction with capping protein . J Biol Chem 278 : 5864 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M211509200 Taylor MJ , Perrais D , Merrifield CJ . 2011 . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS Biol 9 : e1000604 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000604 Tilney LG , Derosier DJ , Mulroy MJ . 1980 . The organization of actin filaments in the stereocilia of cochlear hair cells . J Cell Biol 86 : 244 – 259 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 86 . 1 . 244 Tojkander S , Ciuba K , Lappalainen P . 2018 . CaMKK2 regulates mechanosensitive assembly of contractile actin stress fibers . Cell Rep 24 : 11 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2018 . 06 . 011 Tojkander S , Gateva G , Husain A , Krishnan R , Lappalainen P . 2015 . Generation of contractile actomyosin bundles depends on mechanosensitive actin filament assembly and disassembly . Elife 4 : e06126 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 06126 . Tojkander S , Gateva G , Lappalainen P . 2012 . Actin stress fibers - assembly , dynamics and biological roles . J Cell Sci 125 : 1855 – 1864 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 098087 Tojkander S , Gateva G , Schevzov G , Hotulainen P , Naumanen P , Martin C , Gunning PW , Lappalainen P . 2011 . A molecular pathway for myosin II recruitment to stress fibers . Curr Biol 21 : 539 – 550 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 03 . 007 Tran D , Gascard P , Berthon B , Fukami K , Takenawa T , Giraud F , Claret M . 1993 . Cellular distribution of polyphosphoinositides in rat hepatocytes . Cell Signal 5 : 565 – 581 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0898 - 6568 ( 93 ) 90052 - N Tsuiki H , Asai K , Yamamoto M , Fujita K , Inoue Y , Kawai Y , Tada T , Moriyama A , Wada Y , Kato T . 2000 . Cloning of a rat glia maturation factor - γ ( rGMFG ) cDNA and expression of its mRNA and protein in rat organs . J Biochem 127 : 517 – 523 . doi : 10 . 1093 / oxfordjournals . jbchem . a022635 Uraji J , Scheffler K , Schuh M . 2018 . Functions of actin in mouse oocytes at a glance . J Cell Sci 131 : jcs218099 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 218099 Uruno T , Liu J , Zhang P , Fan YX , Egile C , Li R , Mueller SC , Zhan X . 2001 . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 259 – 266 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35060051 Uruno T , Remmert K , Hammer J . 2006 . CARMIL is a potent capping protein antagonist : Identification of a conserved CARMIL domain that inhibits the activity of capping protein and uncaps capped actin filaments . J Biol Chem 281 : 10635 – 10650 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M513186200 Van Troys M , Huyck L , Leyman S , Dhaese S , Vandekerkhove J , Ampe C . 2008 . Ins and outs of ADF / cofilin activity and regulation . Eur J Cell Biol 87 : 649 – 67 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2008 . 04 . 001 Vartiainen M , Ojala P , Auvinen P , Peränen J , Lappalainen P . 2000 . Mouse A6 / twinfilin is an actin monomer - binding protein that localizes to the regions of rapid actin dynamics . Mol Cell Biol 20 : 1772 – 1783 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 20 . 5 . 1772 - 1783 . 2000 Vartiainen M , Sarkkinen E , Matilainen T , Salminen M , Lappalainen P . 2003 . Mammals have two twinfilin isoforms whose subcellular localizations and tissue distributions are differentially regulated . J Biol Chem 278 : 34347 – 34355 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M303642200 Velle KB , Fritz - Laylin LK . 2019 . Diversity and evolution of actin - dependent phenotypes . Curr Opin Genet Dev 58 – 59 : 40 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . gde . 2019 . 07 . 016 Vendel KJA , Tschirpke S , Shamsi F , Dogterom M , Laan L . 2019 . Minimal in vitro systems shed light on cell polarity . J Cell Sci 132 : jcs217554 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217554 46 MARKKU HAKALA Venkatesh K , Mathew A , Koushika SP . 2019 . Role of actin in organelle trafficking in neurons . Cytoskeleton . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21580 Verkhusha V V . , Tsukita S , Oda H . 1999 . Actin dynamics in lamellipodia of migrating border cells in the Drosophila ovary revealed by a GFP - actin fusion protein . FEBS Lett 445 : 395 – 401 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0014 - 5793 ( 99 ) 00124 - 6 Vignjevic D , Kojima SI , Aratyn Y , Danciu O , Svitkina T , Borisy GG . 2006 . Role of fascin in filopodial protrusion . J Cell Biol 174 : 863 – 875 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200603013 Virtanen JA , Vartiainen MK . 2017 . Diverse functions for different forms of nuclear actin . Curr Opin Cell Biol 46 : 33 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2016 . 12 . 004 Wahlström G , Vartiainen M , Yamamoto L , Mattila P , Lappalainen P , Heino T . 2001 . Twinfilin is required for actin - dependent developmental processes in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 155 : 787 – 796 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200108022 Wang D , Zhang L , Zhao G , Wahlström G , Heino T , Chen J , Zhang Y . 2010 . Drosophila twinfilin is required for cell migration and synaptic endocytosis . J Cell Sci 123 : 1546 – 1556 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 060251 Wang H , Chen Z , Chang H , Mu X , Deng W , Yuan Z , Yao F , Liu Y , Mai R , Wu B . 2017 . Expression of glia maturation factor γ is associated with colorectal cancer metastasis and its downregulation suppresses colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion in vitro . Oncol Rep 37 : 929 – 936 . doi : 10 . 3892 / or . 2017 . 5361 Watanabe N , Kato T , Fujita A , Ishizaki T , Narumiya S . 1999 . Cooperation between mDia1 and ROCK in Rho - induced actin reorganization . Nat Cell Biol 1 : 136 – 143 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 11056 Weaver AM , Karginov A V . , Kinley AW , Weed SA , Li Y , Parsons JT , Cooper JA . 2001 . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr Biol 11 : 370 – 374 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 01 ) 00098 - 7 Weinberg J , Drubin DG . 2012 . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in budding yeast . Trends Cell Biol 22 : 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2011 . 09 . 001 Weiner OD , Neilsen PO , Prestwich GD , Kirschner MW , Cantley LC , Bourne HR . 2002 . A PtdInsP3 - and Rho GTPase - mediated positive feedback loop regulates neutrophil polarity . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 509 – 512 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb811 Welch MD , DePace AH , Verma S , Iwamatsu A , Mitchison TJ . 1997 . The human Arp2 / 3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved subunits and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin filament assembly . J Cell Biol 138 : 375 – 384 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 138 . 2 . 375 Welch MD , Rosenblatt J , Skoble J , Portnoy DA , Mitchison TJ . 1998 . Interaction of human Arp2 / 3 complex and the Listeria monocytogenes ActA protein in actin filament nucleation . Science 281 : 105 – 108 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 281 . 5373 . 105 Winkelman JD , Bilancia CG , Peifer M , Kovar DR . 2014 . Ena / VASP Enabled is a highly processive actin polymerase tailored to self - assemble parallel - bundled F - actin networks with Fascin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111 : 4121 – 4126 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1322093111 Winter D , Lechler T , Li R . 1999 . Activation of the yeast Arp2 / 3 complex by Bee1p , a WASP - family protein . Curr Biol 9 : 501 – 504 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0960 - 9822 ( 99 ) 80218 - 8 Winter D , Podtelejnikov A V , Mann M , Li R . 1997 . The complex containing actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 is required for the motility and integrity of yeast actin patches . Curr Biol 7 : 519 – 529 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0960 - 9822 ( 06 ) 00223 - 5 Wioland H , Guichard B , Senju Y , Myram S , Lappalainen P , Jégou A , Romet - Lemonne G . 2017 . ADF / cofilin accelerates actin dynamics by severing filaments and promoting their depolymerization at both ends . Curr Biol 27 : 1956 - 1967 . e7 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 05 . 048 Wioland H , Jegou A , Romet - Lemonne G . 2018 . Torsional stress generated by ADF / cofilin on cross - linked actin filaments boosts their severing . Proc Natl Acad Sci 116 : 2595 – 2602 . doi : 10 . 1101 / 380113 Wioland H , Suzuki E , Cao L , Romet - Lemonne G , Jegou A . 2019 . The advantages of microfluidics to study actin biochemistry and biomechanics . J Muscle Res Cell Motil . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10974 - 019 - 09564 - 4 Witke W . 2004 . The role of profilin complexes in cell motility and other cellular processes . Trends Cell Biol 14 : 461 – 469 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2004 . 07 . 003 Wolf K , Mazo I , Leung H , Engelke K , von Andrian UH , Deryugina EI , Strongin AY , Bröcker E - B , Friedl P . 2003 . Compensation mechanism in tumor cell migration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J Cell Biol 160 : 267 – 277 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200209006 Wu YI , Frey D , Lungu OI , Jaehrig A , Schlichting I , Kuhlman B , Hahn KM . 2009 . A genetically encoded photoactivatable Rac controls the motility of living cells . Nature 461 : 104 – 108 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature08241 47 REVISING THE ACTIN DISASSEMBLY MACHINERY Yamada KM , Sixt M . 2019 . Mechanisms of 3D cell migration . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 20 : 738 – 752 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0172 - 9 Yamada S , Uchimura E , Ueda T , Nomura T , Fujita S , Matsumoto K , Funeriu D , Miyake M , Miyake J . 2007 . Identification of twinfilin - 2 as a factor involved in neurite outgrowth by RNAi - based screen . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 363 : 926 – 930 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2007 . 09 . 069 Yamashiro - Matsumura S , Matsumura F . 1986 . Intracellular localization of the 55 - kD actin - bundling protein in cultured cells : Spatial relationships with actin , alpha - actinin , tropomyosin , and fimbrin . J Cell Biol 103 : 631 – 640 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 103 . 2 . 631 Yang C , Czech L , Gerboth S , Kojima S , Scita G , Svitkina T . 2007 . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and filopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol 5 : e317 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 0050317 Yang N , Higuchi O , Ohashi K , Nagata K , Wada A , Kangawa K , Nishida E , Mizuno K . 1998 . Cofilin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature 393 : 809 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 31735 Yarar D , Waterman - Storer CM , Schmid SL . 2005 . A dynamic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 964 – 975 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 09 - 0774 Ydenberg C , Johnston A , Weinstein J , Bellavance D , Jansen S , Goode B . 2015 . Combinatorial genetic analysis of a network of actin disassembly - promoting factors . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 72 : 349 – 361 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 21231 Ydenberg CA , Padrick SB , Sweeney MO , Gandhi M , Sokolova O , Goode BL . 2013 . GMF severs actin - Arp2 / 3 complex branch junctions by a cofilin - like mechanism . Curr Biol 23 : 1037 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 04 . 058 Yin G , Du M , Li R , Li K , Huang X , Duan D , Ai X , Yao F , Zhang L , Hu Z , Wu B . 2018 . Glia maturation factor beta is required for reactive gliosis after traumatic brain injury in zebrafish . Exp Neurol 305 : 129 – 138 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . expneurol . 2018 . 04 . 008 Yonezawa N , Homma Y , Yahara I , Sakai H , Nishida E . 1991 . A short sequence responsible for both phosphoinositide binding and actin binding activities of cofilin . J Biol Chem 266 : 17218 – 17221 . Yonezawa N , Nishida E , Iida K , Yahara I , Sakai H . 1990 . Inhibition of the interactions of cofilin , destrin , and deoxyribonuclease I with actin by phosphoinositides . J Biol Chem 265 : 8382 – 8386 . Zaheer A , Fink BD , Lim R . 1993 . Expression of glia maturation factor β mRNA and protein in rat organs and cells . J Neurochem 60 : 914 – 920 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 4159 . 1993 . tb03237 . x Zaheer A , Haas JT , Reyes C , Mathur SN , Yang B , Lim R . 2006 . GMF - knockout mice are unable to induce brain - derived neurotrophic factor after exercise . Neurochem Res 31 : 579 – 584 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11064 - 006 - 9049 - 3 Zaheer A , Zaheer S , Sahu SK , Knight S , Khosravi H , Mathur SN , Lim R . 2007 . A novel role of glia maturation factor : Induction of granulocyte - macrophage colony - stimulating factor and pro - inflammatory cytokines . J Neurochem 101 : 364 – 376 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 4159 . 2006 . 04385 . x Zaheer S , Thangavel R , Wu Y , Khan MM , Kempuraj D , Zaheer A . 2013 . Enhanced expression of glia maturation factor correlates with glial activation in the brain of triple transgenic Alzheimer’s disease mice . Neurochem Res 38 : 218 – 225 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11064 - 012 - 0913 - z Zhao H , Hakala MK , Lappalainen P . 2010 . ADF / cofilin binds phosphoinositides in a multivalent manner to act as a PIP ( 2 ) - density sensor . Biophys J 98 : 2327 – 2336 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2010 . 01 . 046 Zhao H , Lappalainen P . 2012 . A simple guide to biochemical approaches for analyzing protein - lipid interactions . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 2823 – 2830 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 07 - 0645 Zigmond SH . 2004 . Formin - induced nucleation of actin filaments . Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 : 99 – 105 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2003 . 10 . 019 Zigmond SH , Evangelists M , Boone C , Yang C , Dar AC , Sicheri F , Forkey J , Pring M . 2003 . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr Biol 13 : 1820 – 1823 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2003 . 09 . 057 Zoncu R , Perera RM , Sebastian R , Nakatsu F , Chen H , Balla T , Ayala G , Toomre D , De Camilli P V . 2007 . Loss of endocytic clathrin - coated pits upon acute depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 3793 – 3798 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0611733104 Zuo P , Fu Z , Tao T , Ye F , Chen L , Wang X , Lu W , Xie X . 2013 . The expression of glia maturation factors and the effect of glia maturation factor - γ on angiogenic sprouting in zebrafish . Exp Cell Res 319 : 707 – 717 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2013 . 01 . 004 ISBN 978 - 951 - 51 - 5945 - 8 HELSINKI 2020