Stage - specific Assays for Coated Pit Formation and Coated Vesicle Budding In Vitro Sandra L . Schmid and Elizabeth Smythe Departments of Cell and Molecular Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , California 92037 Abstract . Internalization of biotin - S - S - 1251 - transferrin ( 1251 - BSST ) into semiintact A431 cells were assessed by two different criteria which have allowed us to dis - tinguish partial reactions in the complex overall pro - cess of receptor - mediated endocytosis . Early events resulting in the sequestration of ligand into deeply in - vaginated coated pits were measured by inaccessibility of 1251 - BSST to exogenously added antibodies . Later events involving coated vesicle budding and membrane fission were measured by resistance of 1251 - BSST to reduction by the membrane impermeant - reducing agent , MesNa . Acquisition of Ab inaccessibility oc - curred very efficiently in this cell - free system ( ti50 % of total cell - associated 1251 - BSST became inaccessible ) and could be inhibited by anti - clathrin mAbs and by antibodies directed against the cytoplasmic domain of R CEPTOR - MEDIATED endocytosis is a complex pro - cess involving several biochemically distinct stages . These include : ( a ) recruitment ofcoat proteins to the plasma membrane and nucleation of coated pit formation ; ( b ) assembly of coat constituents leading and coated pit growth ; ( c ) specific sequestration of receptors into coated pits ; ( d ) membrane invagination ; and ( e ) coat closure and membrane fission leading to coated vesicle budding . These processes are well defined morphologically . Biochemically , many of the coat constituents have been identified , cloned , and the nature oftheir interactions in the coat structure have been defined ( see reviews by Brodsky , 1988 ; Morris et al . , 1989 ; Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ; Keen , 1990 ) . Signals on the cytoplasmic tails of receptors which direct them into coated pits have been functionally and structurally mapped ( Chen et al . , 1990 ; Collawn et al . , 1990 ) . Despite this wealth ofmolecular and structural information , very little is known about what regulates coated pit assembly , growth , in - vagination , and coated vesicle budding . An understanding of the dynamic processes involved in coated pit assembly and budding will require the use of cell - free assays which faithfully reconstitute these events . The de - velopment of such assays has recently begun ( Moore et al . , 1987 ; Smythe et al . , 1989 ; Podbilewicz and Mellman , 1990 ) . Using an assay that measured the sequestration of prebound 1251 - transferrin ( 1251 - Tfn ) from anti - transferrin an - 0 TheRockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 91 / 09 / 869 / 12 $ 2 . 00 TheJournal of Cell Biology , Volume 114 , Number 5 , September 1991 869 - 880 (cid:9) 869 the transferrin - receptor . In contrast , acquisition of MesNa resistance occurred less efficiently ( ti10 - 20 % of total cell - associated 1251 - BSST ) and showed differen - tial sensitivity to inhibition by anti - clathrin and anti - transferrin receptor mAbs . Both partial reactions were stimulated by ATP and cytosol ; indicating at least two ATP - requiring events in receptor - mediated endocytosis . The temperature dependence of both reactions was similar to that for 1251 - BSST internaliza - tion in intact cells with no activity being observed be - low 10°C . Morphological studies using gold - labeled ligands confirmed that internalization of transferrin receptors into semiintact A431 cell occurred via coated pits and coated vesicles and resulted in delivery of ligand to endosomal structures . tibodies , Smythe et al . ( 1989 ) demonstrated the receptor - mediated internalization of 1251 Tfn into semiintact A431 cells . Although relatively inefficient ( - 10 - 15 % of total bound 1251 - Tfn became inaccessible to antibody ) , Tfn se - questration was stimulated by ATP and cytosol and required elevated temperatures . Detailed morphological analysis of these events using Tfn - HRP and serial - thin section analysis suggested that both ATP and cytosol were required at two distinct stages for Tfn - receptor - mediated endocytosis : de novo coated pit formation and coated vesicle budding . Two other cell - free assays havebeen developed to measure coated pit formation and endocytosis . Anderson and col - leagues ( Moore etal . , 1987 ; Mahaffery et al . , 1989 ) have de - veloped an assay that measures clathrin assembly onto the inner plasma membrane surface ofcells from which endoge - nous coats had been stripped . Using this assay , clathrin from crude cytosolic fractions , or highly purified from bovine brain coated vesicles , assembled efficiently forming coated pits , which were indistinguishable from those on untreated membranes . Clathrin assembly appeared not to require ATP or other cytosolic factors and occurred equally well at 4° or 37°C . Podbilewicz and Mellman ( 1990 ) have recently reported an assay measuring 1251 - Tfn internalization into an acid - resistant compartment at the basolateral membrane of perforated MDCK cells grown on filters in which the apical plasma membrane has been disrupted . 1251 - Tfn internaliza - tion in this assay was also efficient ( 60 - 80 % of intact cells ) but did not require addition of either ATP or cytosol . Results concerning the energy requirements for receptor - mediated endocytosis in vivo have also been inconsistent . Although several groups have reported that receptor - me - diated endocytosis is blocked in ATPdepleted cells ( Haigler et al . , 1980 ; Ceichanover et al . , 1983 ; Hertel et al . , 1986 ) , others have suggested that a single round of endocytosis can occur in ATP - depleted cells ( Clarke and Weigel , 1985 ; Lar - kin et al . , 1985 ) . In an attempt to resolve this issue , we have recently used two assays for the receptor - mediated endocy - tosis oftransferrin which distinguish between internalization into bona fide coated vesicles and sequestration of ligand in deeply invaginated coated pits ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ) . We found that although the sequestration of ligand into deeply invaginated coated pits occurred efficiently in cells depleted of ATP , internalization of ligand into sealed coated vesicles was markedly inhibited . These results suggested an explanation for inconsistencies in the literature and demon - strated that ATP is in fact required for receptor - mediated en - docytosis in intact cells . The demonstration of an ATP requirement for receptor - mediated endocytosis in vivo , in turn suggests that faithful reconstitutionofendocytic events in vitro should also be ATP dependent . To further explore in enzymological detail the energy requirements and molecular requirements for coated pit formation and coated vesicle budding we have modified the assay originally described by Smythe et al . ( 1989 ) to in - crease its efficiency . In addition we have used these two as - says for transferrin internalization to measuring receptor - mediated endocytosis in semiintact A431 cells , allowing us to distinguish the requirements for coated pit invagination and coated vesicle budding . Materials and Methods Materials Yeast hexokinase , rabbit creatine phosphokinase , ATP , 2 - deoxyglucose , creatine phosphate and 2 - mercaptoethanesulfonic acid ( MesNa ) ' were ob - tained from Sigma Chemicals ( St . Louis , MO ) . Na125I was obtained from Amersham Corp . ( Arlington Heights , IL ) . Avidin - Sepharose was from Pierce Chemical Co . ( Rockford , IL ) . Staph - A cells ( " Pansorbin " ) were ob - tained fromCalBiochem - Behring Corp . ( La Jolla , CA ) . All otherchemicals were reagent grade . Cell Lines andAntibodies A431 cells were obtained fromG . Warren ( Imperial Cancer Research Foun - dation , London ) and were grown in DME media ( Gibco Laboratories , Grand Island , NY ) supplemented with 10 % FCS and Pen / Strep . Cells were passaged every 2 - 3 d by trypsinization . K562 cells , also obtained from G . Warren , were maintained in suspension in a - MEM containing 5 % FCS and Pen / Strep at cell densities between 105 and 106 cells / ml . Sheep anti - transferren antiserum was a gift from the Scottish Antibody Production Unit ( Carluke , Scotland ) . Rabbit anti - mouse IgG was obtained from CalBiochem - Behring Corp . X19 and X22 anti - clathrin mAbs were a generous gift ofFrances Brodsky ( University ofCalifornia , San Francisco , CA ) and were supplied as purified IgG , mAbs by Donald Simonetti from Brodsky ' s laboratory . HTRH68 ( which recognizes the cytoplasmic domain ofthetransferrin receptor ) and HTRD65 ( which recognizes the ectodomain ofthe transferrin receptor ) were generously providedby SuhailaWhite and Ian Trowbridge ( SalkInstitute , La Jolla , CA ) . Theseantibodies were further 1 . Abbreviations used in thispaper : BSST , biotin - S - S - transferren ; MesNa , 2 - mercaptoethanesulfonic acid ; NHS - S - S - biotin , sulfosuccinimidyl 2 - ( bio - tinamids ) ethyl - 1 , 3 - dithiopropionate . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 114 , 1991 purified by affinity chromatography using the Immunopure ( A / G ) Immuno - globulin Purification Kit from Pierce Chemical Co . Preparation ofCytosol Cytosol fractions were prepared from either K562 cells or from bovine brain . K562 cells were washed in KSHM ( 100 mM KAcetate , 85 mM su - crose , 1 mM MgAcetate and 20 mM Hepes - NaOH , pH 7 . 4 ) and homogenized in tit vol KSHM using a ball - bearing homogenizer ( Balch and Rothman , 1985 ) . Cytosol was collected from the postnuclear superna - tant after centrifugation in an SW41 rotor ( Beckman Instruments Inc . , Palo Alto , CA ) at - 200 , 000 ge , , for 1 h . Bovine brains were obtained from Federal Beef ( Los Angeles , CA ) and were frozen on dry ice immediately after slaughter and stored at - 70°C until use . For cytosol preparations , - 100 g ofbrain was thawedand washed in KSHM . Brain was homogenized in - 2 vol KSHM using a Dounce homogenizer with five passes each of the A and B pestles . The homogenate was centrifuged at 10 , 000 g for 15 min and the supernatant was subjected to second centrifugation in a Ti45 rotor ( Beckman Instruments ) at40 , 000 rpm for 1 h . Cytosolic fractions from both K562 cells were stored , after rapid freezing , in aliquots at - 70°C for use . Cytosolic fractions were prepared at high concentrations ( - 10 mg / ml ) to maximize activity . Bovine brain cytosol fully substitutes for human K562 cytosol in both Ab - inaccessibility and MesNa - resistance assays ( data not shown ) . Preparation ofBiotinylated Ligands Human diferric transferrin ( Boehringer - Mannheim Biochemicals , Indi - anapolis , IN ) was biotinylated using NHS - SS - Biotin ( PierceChemical Co . ) and iodinated exactly as previously described ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ) . BiotinylatedHTR - D65 was prepared as follows . Purified mAb HTRD65 ( 240jig ) was incubated with 9 . 7 Ag ( - 10 - fold molar excess ) NHS - SS - Biotin for 60 min at room temperature in 100 mM NaCl , 50 mM Na Pi , pH 7 . 2 . Unreacted NHS - SS - Biotin was removed by a G25 spin - desalt column and the biotinylated mAb was iodinated in the presence of iodogen exactly as described for 1251 - BSST . 1251 - BSS - HTR - D65 was stored in aliquots at - 70°C and was stable for at least 2 mo . Assayfor Internalization of í 25 7 - BSSTinto Semiintact A431 Cells Assays were performed essentially as described by Smythe et al . ( 1989 ) , withthe following modifications to increase efficiency ofinternalizationand consistency of results . 6 . 5 x 106 cells were seeded 20 - 24 h before experi - ments onto 150 x 25 - mm culture dishes ( Falcon Labware , Becton Dick - inson Co . , Oxnard , CA ) so that they were 80 - 90 % confluent before scrap - ing . Dishes were washed four times at 4°C with KSHM and semiintact A431 cells were removed by scraping with a rubber policeman . Cells were dilutedto 15 ml in KSHM , incubated for - 5 minon ice andpelleted ( 800 g for 4 min ) . Scraped cells were > 90 - 95 % semiintact as assessed by Try - pan blue permeability . Semiintact cells were then gently resuspended on ice into 250 - 300 Al KSHM / dish containing 40 pg / ml 1251 - BSST and 8 mg / nd BSA . Each 15 - cm dish provided sufficient cells for25 - 30 assays . 10 Al ofcells werethen dispensed into Eppendorftubes containingthe remain - ing assay reagents in 30 Al . The tubes were rapidly transferred to 37°C for the indicated incubationtimes . Completeassaymixtures ( 40Al totalvolume in KSHM ) contained - 2 x 105 semiintact cells , 4 pg / ml 125 1 - BSST , 2 mg / ml BSA , either an ATPregenerated system ( consisting of 1 mM ATP , 5 mM creatine phosphate and 0 . 2 IU creatine phosphokinase ) or an ATP - depleting system ( consisting of 5 mM 2 - deoxyglucose and 30 U / ml hexo - kinase ) and cytosol . Sentiintactcells were incubated in thecontinuous pres - ence of saturating concentrations of ligand to ensure that each endocytic event was scored . Following incubation at 37°C , tubes were returned to ice and the extent of 1251 - BSST internalization quantitated either by Ab - inaccessibility or MesNa - resistance assays . Both assays yield a significant signal overbackground ( 10 - 20 : 1 for Ab inaccessibility , - 3 - 5 : 1 for MesNa - resistance ) . Data is reproducible , with backgrounds of2 - 5 % for Ab inac - cessibility , 5 - 10 % for MesNa resistance and duplicates of t5 % of signal . Efficiency varies somewhat frompreparation to preparation as indicated by error bars in many of the experiments . Ab Inaccessibility Assay . This assay is a slight modification of that de - scribed by Smythe et al . ( 1989 ) and was performed exactly as described by Schmid and Carter ( 1990 ) . Total cell - associated 1251 - BSST was determined by adding the counts in the Staph - A pellet and supernatant of samples in - cubated at 37°C in the absence ofATP Data in general are expressed as the percentage of cell - associated 1251 - BSST , which is inaccessible to Ab pre - 870 cipitation ( i . e . , counts perminute in Staph - A supernatant / cpm in Staph - A pellet + counts perminute in Staph - A supernatant x 100 % ) . MesNa Resistance Assay . This assay was performed exactly as de - scribed by Schmid andCarter ( 1990 ) , except that 10 mM MesNa was sub - stituted for 50 mM glutathione in each wash step . Control experiments showed thatboth reducing reagents gave identical results . To determinetotal cell - associated 1251 - BSST , samples incubated at 37°C in the absence of ATPwere pelleted to remove unbound 125I - BSST and resuspended in 200 wl PBS containing 50 mM iodoacetamide and 1 % TX - 100 . Total cell - associated 1251 - BSST was adsorbed to avidin - Sepharose which waswashed and counted . Data in general are expressed as the percentage of cell - associated 1251 - BSST which is resistant to reduction by MesNa ( i . e . , counts perminute in avidin - Sepharose pelletafter MesNareduction / counts per minute in avidin - Sepharose pellet in nonreduced sample x 100 % ) . For both assays , the value for total cell - associated 1231 - BSST , deter - mined at 37°C was20 - 30 % higher than thatobtained for maximumbinding at 4°C . However , total cell - associated 12Sí - BSST did not significantly in - crease after incubation in the presence of ATP , cytosol , or with the length ofincubation ( N5 - 30 min ) at 37°C . This result suggests that although ATP and cytosol - dependent receptor - recycling could be measured directly in this preparation ofsemüntact A431 cells ( data notshown ) , it is unlikely that the increased signal we obtained in the continuous presence of 125I - BSST was due to receptor recycling . Test of Tfn - R Recycling in SemiintactA431 Cells The approach taken to measure Tfn - R recycling in setnüntact A431 cells was essentially as described for MDBK cells by Podbilewitz and Mellman ( 1990 ) . Intact A431 cells were incubatedfor 30 minat 37°C in the presence of4pg / ml 1251 - BSST . The cells were placed on ice and surface bound 125I - BSST was removed by washing repeatedly over - 15 min with 50 mM NaAcetate , 100 mM NaCI , pH 4 . 5 containing 100 gg / ml desferioxamine ( CIBA - Geigy , Basel , Switzerland ) , followed by repeated washes with PBS containing - 100 , ug / ml desferioxamine . Semiintact cells were prepared and incubatedexactly as describedfor theinternalization assay . Tfn - R recycling was assayed by thereappearance ofAb - accessiblecounts perminute in the media and on the cell surface . Morphological Characterization of Tfn - R Internalization in SemiintactA431 Cells Colloidal gold ( 5 . 9 run , mean diameter ) waspurchased from TedPella , Inc . ( Redding , CA ) . Initial attempts to useTfn - gold as amorphological marker proved unsuccessful , therefore themAbHTR - D65 wasconjugated to gold to follow Tfn - Rinternalization . Gold conjugates were prepared andpurified as describedby Leunissen and DeMey ( 1987 ) . HTRD65 - gold wasstored at4°Cin PBScontaining N20 % sucrose andwasused within2wk ofprepa - ration . Before use , the gold - labeled antibody was pelleted ( TOO rotor ; Beckman Instruments ) at 40 , 000 rpm for 60 min and resuspended in KSHM . Incubations for morphological studies were exactly as describedfor bio - chemical studies except that they were scaled up sixfold ( i . e . , 240 Al total volume , Nl x 106 cells / incubation ) and cells were incubated in the pres - ence of HTR - D65 - gold . After incubation , the cells were returned to ice , pelleted to remove unbound HTR - D65 - gold and resuspended in 1 % glutaraldehyde , 3 % paraformaldehyde , 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 . Pellets were postfixed with 1 % OsO4 in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , embedded in epon andsectioned for microscopy by Dr . Chang - MingChang of theResearch Institute of ScrippsClinic EM laboratory . Quantitation of gold particles wasperformed at themicroscope by random examination of complete semiintact cell profiles at a magnification of 23 , 500 . Results Stage - specific CellfreeAssaysfor Receptor - mediated Endocytosis of 11sl - II To begin to characterize the molecular requirements and mechanisms for receptor - mediated endocytosis we have modified acell - free assayforendocytosis oftransferrin orig - inally described by Smythe et al . ( 1989 ) to increase both effi - ciency and consistency of results . In addition , 1251 - Tfn was biotinylated via a cleavable disulfide bond ( referred to as Schmid and Smythe Coated Pit and Vesicle Formation In Vitro N c ^ , o E FNym NN 871 60000 50000 40000 30000 20000 10000 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Time ( minutes ) 0 (cid:9) 0 0 MesNa - resistance Ab - inaccessibility Figure 1 . Ab inaccessibility andMesNa - resistance assays give the same kinetics and extent for internalization of 1251 - BSST into in - tact A431 cells . A431 cells ( 4 x 105 ) were seeded onto 35 - mm dishes 1 dbefore use . Plates were preincubated at 37°C in serum - free media to remove endogenous transferrin 30 min before use . Duplicate plates were incubated forthe indicated times at 37°C in the presence of 4 ug / mI 125I - BSST in serum - free media . Plates were then transferred to ice and internalized 125I - BSST was deter - minedeither by Ab inaccessibility ( e ) or MesNaresistance ( o ) as follows . For Ab inaccessibility , plates were incubated with 500 Al PBS containing 3 ul of anti - transferyin rabbit serum for 90 min at 4°C . Theantibody solution was removedandcellswere solubilized by addition of 300 ttl PBS containing 1 % TX - 100 , 1 mM MgC12 , 0 . 2 % BSA , and 5 ug / ml unlabeled transferrin . Transferrin - anti - transferrin immune complexes were adsorbed to Staph A cells ( 30 pl of a 10 % suspension ) and Ab - inaccessible 125I - BSST recovered in theStaph A - supernatant wascounted on agammacounter ( Beck - man Instruments ) . For MesNa resistance , plates were washed at 4°C with 10 mM MesNain 50 mM Tris pH 8 . 6 , 100mM NaCl and incubated in this solution for30 min . Thesewashing andincubation stepswere repeated twice , followed by a final wash in PBS contain - ing50 mM iodoacetamide . Thecells were lysed in 300Al PBS con - taining 1 % TX - 100 , 0 . 2 % BSA , and50 mM iodoacetamide . MesNa - resistant 1251 - BSST was quantitated after adsorption to avidin - Sepharose beads ( 50 Al of a 50 % suspension ) . 1251 - BSST ) andwas used as a ligand , so that two distinct as - says fortransferrin internalizationcouldbeused ( Schmidand Carter , 1990 ) . In the first assay , Ab inaccessibility ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ) , internalization of 115I - BSST was measured af - ter allowing anti - transferrin antibodies td bind to surface - bound 1251 - BSST . Following addition of detergent and ex - cess unlabeled transferrin , surface bound 1251 - BSSTIgG complexeswere adsorbed to Staph - A cells . The Staph - A su - pernatant was counted and taken as a measure of internal - ized , Ab - inaccessibleligand . In the second assay , MesNare - sistance ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ) , internalization was measured by incubating cells in the presence of the mem - braneimpermeant - reducing agent , MesNa ( 2 - mercaptoeth - anesulfonic acid ) . Internalized , MesNa - resistant 1251 - BSST was then quantitated by adsorption of biotinylated - 1251 - Tfn to avidin - Sepharose after addition of IAA ( to quench re - maining reducing agent ) and detergent . These two assays gave identical results for transferrin internalization in intact A431 cells ( Fig . 1 ) , confirming that they were both valid measurements of the extent of 1251 - BSST internalization . W CiN 60 1 50 g á 40 a (cid:9) 20 - 10 15 20 25 30 Time ( min ) Figure 2 . Internalization of 125 1 - BSST into semi - intact A431 cells : acquisition of Ab inaccessibility is more efficient than acquisition of MesNa resistance . Semiintact A431 cells were incubated in the presence of 4 fig / ml 125 1 - BSST at 37°C for the indicated times . The cells were returned to ice and the extent of internalization of 1251 - BSST was determined by either Ab inaccessibility ( a ) or MesNa resistance ( o ) , exactly as described in Materials and Methods . Data , which represent the average of five experiments , are expressed as the percentage of total cell - associated 1251 - BSST . Backgrounds ( t = 0 min ) which ranged from 2 - 4 % for Ab inacces - sibility and 4 - 8 % for MesNa resistance , have been subtracted . ( In - set ) For comparative purposes , representative results from a single experiment are plotted as raw data ( i . e . , counts per minute Ab inac - cessible or MesNa resistant , 0 min backgrounds not subtracted ) . 12II - BSSTAcquires Ab Inaccessibility More Efficiently than MesNa Resistance in SemiintactA431 Cells In contrast to the results obtained in intact cells ( Fig . 1 ) , the data in Fig . 2 suggest that Ab inaccessibility and MesNa re - sistance measure distinct steps in " 5I - BSST internalization into semiintact cells . Acquisition of Ab inaccessibility was efficient ( N50 % of total bound internalized ) and occurred with kinetics similar to Tfn uptake in intact A431 cells ( t1 , 2 N 7 . 5 min ) . In contrast , acquisition ofMesNa resistance oc - curred with lower efficiency ( N10 - 20 % of total bound ) and with more rapid kinetics ( tin - 2 . 5 min ) . Similar results ob - tained in previous studies measuring the internalization of 1251 - BSST into intact cells depleted of ATP ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ) suggested that although both assays measure transferyin internalization into sealed coated vesicles , Ab in - accessibility can , in addition , score the sequestration of transferrin into deeply invaginated coated pits . In this in - terpretation , the additional signal obtained with the Ab inac - cessibility assay ( Fig . 2 ) would be due to early events leading to the formation of deeply invaginated pits that remain acces - sible to MesNa . The use of these two assays for measuring " ' I - BSST internalization into semiintact A431 cells thus provides a basis for measurement of partial reactions and for biochemical dissection of the complex series of events lead - ing to receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin . TheJournal of Cell Biology , Volume 114 , 1991 Ab Inaccessibility and MesNa Resistance Measure Biochemically Distinct Events in Tfn Internalization To test whether these two assays were in fact measuring dis - tinct events involved in Tfn internalization , we first com - pared their energy and cytosolic requirements . The data in Fig . 3 show the cumulative results from a number of experi - ments in which semiintact cells were allowed to internalize 121I - BSST for 30 min at 37°C in the presence or absence of added cytosol , and in the presence of either an ATP - regen - erating system or an ATP - depleting system . Both the acquisi - tion of Ab inaccessibility and of MesNa resistance were stimulated by ATP Although there was significant acquisi - tion of Ab inaccessibility in the absence of ATP ( 10 - 15 % over 4°C backgrounds ) , there is no significant ATP - independent signal for acquisition of MesNa resistance . Sequestration of ligands into deeply invaginated pits was however stimulated approximately four to fivefold in the presence of ATP A comparison between the ATP - dependent signal for acquisition of MesNa resistance and Ab inaccessi - bility shows that a significant portion of the ATP - dependent Ab inaccessibility signal ( 30 - 40 % of total ) cannot be ac - counted for by the ATP - dependent MesNa - resistant signal ( - 15 - 20 % of total ) . This additional signal ( accounting for 15 - 20 % of total cell - associated ' III - BSST ) presumably arises from another earlier ATP - requiring step in receptor - mediated endocytosis that leads to enhanced sequestration of ligand into deeply invaginated coated pits . Cytosolic factors appear to be required for acquisition of both Ab inaccessibility and MesNa resistance although both assays showed a significant signal in the absence of added cytosol ( Fig . 3 ) . The cytosol - independent signal obtained using the MesNa - resistance assay corresponded to - 50 % of Figure 3 ATP and cytosol stimulate acquisition ofboth Ab inacces - sibility and MesNa resistance . Incubations were for 30 min at 37°C and were performed as described in Materials and Methods . Inter - nalization of 1251 - BSST was assessed by either Ab inaccessibility ( solid bars ) or MesNa resistance ( striped bars ) . ( 4°C ) Complete incubation performed at 4°C for 30 min ; ( Complete ) incubation in the presenceof 5 mg / ml K562 cytosol and anATPregenerating sys - tem ; ( - cytosol ) incubation in the absence of added cytosol ; ( ATP ) incubation in the presence of 5 mg / ml K562 cytosol and an ATP depleting system ; ( ATP - dependent ) the difference between the sig - nal obtained after complete incubation and that obtained in the ab - sence of ATP Data shown are the average of seven experiments . 872 15 g ~ 10 ` m x ~ gs F . . ; 0 0 10 20 30 45 C ) MrW c ÜN ó c do . u o n MrW W C _ OfN Ó C L d a Temperature ( °C ) Temperature ( °C ) Intact cells - A - Complete o (cid:9) - ATP o (cid:9) - Cytosol . Intact cells - A - Complete o (cid:9) - Cytosol Multiple Events in Transferrin Internalization Are Temperature Dependent Schmid and Smythe Coated Pit and Vesicle Formation In Vitro Figure 4 . ' 25I - BSST internalization both in vivo and in vitro is strongly temperature dependent . Internalization assays using semi - intact or intactcells were performed as described in Fig . 3or Fig . 1 and incubated at the indicated temperatures for 30 min . The extent of internalization of ' 251 - BSST was assessed either Ab inaccessi - bility ( top ) orby MesNaresistance ( bouom ) . Thedataare expressed as the percent of maximum signal obtained at 37°C to allow com - parison between different assay conditions . Actual values for the percent of total cell - associated ' 251 - BSST which was internalized under the various assay conditions andassessed by either Ab inac - cessibility or MesNa resistance , respectively , were as follows : in - tact cells ( * ) , 202 % , 195 % ; semiintact cells , complete incubation ( o ) , 43 . 7 % , 21 % ; semiintact cells - cytosol ( o ) , 19 . 6 % , 14 % ; semiintact cells - ATP ( o ) , 12 % , 2 % ( not shown ) . the maximum signal that was obtained at cytosol concentra - tions of ti 2 . 5 - 3 mg / ml brain cytosol . Thecytosol - indepen - dent signal obtained using the Ab - inaccessibility assay cor - responded to - 30 - 40 % ofthe maximum signal that required 4 - 5 mg / ml bovine brain cytosol ( data not shown ) . These results suggested a higher cytosol requirement for acquisi - tion of Ab inaccessibility than for MesNa resistance . Receptor - mediatedendocytosis in intact cells is temperature dependent with no detectable internalization occurring at temperatures below 10°C ( Marsh et al . , 1980 ; Fig . 4 , closed circles ) . In contrast , clathrin coat assembly is spontaneous and occurs efficiently at 4°C . Indeed , Anderson and col - leagues ( Moore et al . , 1987 ; Mahaffey et al . , 1989 ) have demonstrated that the assembly of coated pits onto stripped plasma membranes also occurs in a temperature - indepen - dent manner . We therefore examined the temperature depen - dence of both acquisition of Ab inaccessibility and MesNa resistance in order to investigate whether spontaneous coat assembly could lead to the productive sequestration ofligand . Figure S . Anti - clathrin mAb X22 inhibits 1251 - BSST acquisition of Ab inaccessibility in semiintact cells . Semiintact cells were prein - cubated at 4°C in the presence of 5 mg / ml bovine brain cytosol , anATP - regenerating system andthe indicated concentration ofanti - clathrin mAb X22 for 30 min . 1251 - BSST and BSA were added from a 1OX stock for final concentrations of4 and 2 mg / ml , respec - tively andthe cells were transferred to 37°C for 30 min . A shows the raw data from one representative experiments . B shows data averaged from four independent experiments . The data is expressed as apercent of the cytosol - dependent levels ( i . e . , the difference be - tween the complete incubation and incubation in the absence of cytosol ) obtained in the absence of mAb . 873 0 c 0 c d vc 140 120 100 80 d 60 100 200 300 400 Concentration rnAb ( ltg / ml ) Figure 6 . Effect of anti - transferrin receptor antibodies on 1251 - BSST acquisition ofAb inaccessibility . Semiintact cells were prein - cubated at 4°C in the presence of 5 mg / ml bovine brain cytosol , an ATP - regenerating system and the indicated concentrations of ei - ther oftwo anti - transferrinreceptormAbs HTR - D65 , which recog - nizes the ectodomain of the transferrin receptor or HTR - H68 , which recognizes the cytoplasmic - domain ofthe transferrin recep - tor . 1251 - BSST and BSA were added and cells were incubated for 30 min at 37°C as described in Fig . 5 . Data are the cumulative results from 4 independent experiments and expressed as described in Fig . 5 B . Semiintact A431 cells were incubated at the indicated tem - peratures for 30 min and then removed to ice for determina - tion of Ab - inaccessible or MesNa - resistant 1251 - BSST . The results , which are expressed as a percentage of the maximal activity for each assay obtained after 30 min at 37°C , are shown in Fig . 4 . As can be seen , the acquisition of both Ab inaccessibility ( top ) and MesNa resistance ( bottom ) was highly temperature - sensitive and closely paralleled results obtained in intact cells . " ' I - BSST did not acquire Ab inac - cessibility attemperatures below 10°C . Acquisition of MesNa resistance in vitro appeared to require temperatures over 15°C . This did not appear to be the case in intact cells where Ab inaccessibility and MesNa resistance showed the same temperature dependencies ( Fig . 5 , a and b , closed circles ) . Surprisingly , even the partial cytosol and ATP - independent reactions detected using both assays showed temperature de - pendencies comparable to intact cells . These results suggest that although the spontaneous assembly of coated pits might be occurring in these semiintact A431 cells , it does not lead to productive sequestration of ligand either from antibody or MesNa . Table L Comparison of Inhibitory Effects ofmAbs X22 and HTR - H69 on 125 1 - BSST Internalization as Assessed by Either Ab Inaccessibility or MesNa Resistance No antibody Ab inaccessibility assay (cid:9) 100 % MesNa resistance assay (cid:9) 100 % Anti - clathrin Antibodies Inhibit Ransferrin Internalization In Vitro . Incubations and assays were performed in the presence of either X22 or HTR - H68 as described in Figs . 5 and 6 . Results are expressed as the percent of total 12 ' I - BSST internalized after 30 min at 37°C relative to control ( no antibody ) incubations . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 114 , 1991 Although spontaneous clathrin and coat protein assembly cannot account for the sequestration of ligand we detect , it is clear that if our assay is a valid reflection of the events involved in Tfn receptor mediated endocytosis , directed clathrin assembly should play a role in the early events lead - ing to acquisition of Ab - inaccessible 1251 - BSST . To test this we examined the effect of mAbs which inhibit clathrin as - sembly on " ' I - BSST internalization using the Ab inaccessi - bility assay . As indicated in Fig . 5 ( A ) , incubation of semi - intact cells in the presence of both cytosol and ATP results in efficient sequestration of bound 1251 - BSST from exoge - nously added antibodies . This signal is reduced approxi - mately fourfold in the absence of ATP and approximately twofold in the absence of cytosol . Preincubation of bovine brain cytosol with the anti - clathrin mAb X22 ( Brodsky , 1985 ; Blank and Brodsky , 1986 ) before addition of cells and incubation at 37°C to allow for 1251 - BSST internalization resulted in an - 60 % inhibition of the extent of inaccessibil - ity of 1251 - BSST to antibody . This level of residual activity which could not be inhibited even in the presence of an - 50 - fold excess of X22 to clathrin was comparable to the cytosol - independent signal we obtained and corresponded to the level of internalization obtained in the absence of cytosol . The cytosol - independent signal was not affected by anti - clathrin antibodies and effective inhibition required preincu - bation of the cytosolic fraction , suggesting that anti - clathrin mAbs efficiently inhibit only the cytosol - dependent inter - nalization of 1251 - BSST . For this reason , the cumulative data in Fig . 5 B has been expressed as the percent of the cytosol - dependent Ab - inaccessibility signal inhibited by X22 . 90 of the cytosol - dependent sequestration of 1251 - BSST from antibody canbe inhibited by X22 . In the presence of5 mg / ml bovine brain cytosol , half - maximal inhibition occurred at - 150 pg / ml X22 , which represents an - 10 - 15 - fold molar excess of mAb ( assuming that clathrin represents - 0 . 1 % of total cellular protein in most cell types and 0 . 1 % of cytosolic protein in bovine brain [ Goud et al . , 1985 ] ) . The anti - clathrin mAb X19 ( Brodsky , 1985 ; Blank and Brodsky , 1986 ) gave similar results although it appeared in initial studies to require slightly higher concentrations ( data not shown ) . Nonspecific IgG of the same subclass had little or no effect . Inhibition by X22 ( at 500 p , g / ml ) could be fully protected by the addition of a 1 . 5 - fold molar excess of bovine brain clathrih , demonstrating the specificity ofthe inhibition despite the high concentrations of antibody required . The ability ofX22 to inhibit acquisition ofAb inaccessibility dur - ing internalization of 1251 - BSST into semiintact A431 cells is consistent with a role for cytosolic clathrin in the process and supports the validity of this assay system . 874 Incubation conditions X22 ( 0 . 5 mglml ) (cid:9) HTR - H68 ( 0 . 4 mglml ) 51±8 % (cid:9) 53±13 % 56±14 % (cid:9) 84±l2 % Antibodies to the Cytoplasmic Domain ofthe Transfertin Receptor Inhibit Transfertin Internalization In Vitro The cytoplasmic tail of the transferrin receptor is essential for efficient internalization via coated pits ( Iacopetta et al . , 1988 ; Jing et al . , 1990 ) and recently an " endocytosis " signal ( YXRF ) in the cytoplasmic domain of the transferrin recep - tor has been functionally and structurally defined ( Collawn et al . , 1990 ) . Therefore to further test the validity ofthis cell - free assay for Tfn internalization , we explored the effect of mAbs directed toward the cytoplasmic domain of the transferrin receptor on 125 1 - BSST internalization . Semiin - tact A431 cells , cytosol and ATP were preincubated at 4°C for 15 - 30 min in the presence of mAb HTR - H68 , which recognizes the cytoplasmic domain of the transferrin recep - tor . As a control we used mAb HTR - D65 , which recognizes the ectodomain of the transferrin receptor . After addition of 1 25 1 - BSST , the cells were transferred to 37°C for 30 min to allow internalization , removed to ice and analyzed for Ab - inaccessible 125 1 - BSST . As seen in Fig . 6 , HTR - H68 , the cy - toplasmic domain - specific mAb , completely inhibited the cytosol - dependent sequestration of 125 1 - BSST into an Ab - inaccessible compartment in semiintact cells . Half - maximal inhibition was obtained at - 50 ttg / ml antibody . In contrast , at lower concentrations HTR - D65 , the ectodomain - specific mAb stimulated 125 1 - BSST sequestration into an Ab - inac - cessible compartment . This stimulation could be due to micro - clustering of receptors by the multivalent IgG leading to more efficient inclusion into coated pits . Higher concen - trations of HTR - D65 had a slight inhibitory effect , perhaps due to the formation of larger aggregates which might be less efficiently internalized . Consistent with in vivo findings , these results suggest that the mechanisms involved in vitro in efficient internalization of 125 1 - BSST require specific in - teractions with cytoplasmic tails of Tfn - Rs . Table II . Internalization of ' 2 SI - H7R - D65 and Gold - HTR - D65 into Semiintact A431 Cells Schmid and Smythe Coated Pit and Vesicle Formation In Vitro (cid:9) 875 TheEffects ofAnti - clathrin andAntiTfn - Receptor mAbs on ' 25 I - BSSTAcquisition ofMesNa Resistance We next compared the effects of both X22 and HTR - H68 on the acquisition of MesNa resistance with their effects on the acquisition of Ab inaccessibility . Semiintact A431 cells and cytosol were preincubated at 4°C with either X22 or HTR - H68 for 30 min before addition of 125 I - BSST and incubation for 30 min at 37°C . After internalization of 125 1 - BSST , the cells were returned to ice and assayed by either Ab inaccessi - bility or MesNa resistance . The results appear in Table I . Somewhat unexpectedly the anti - clathrin mAb , X22 , sig - nificantly inhibited the ATPdependent acquisition of MesNa resistance . The extent of inhibition was below cytosol - inde - pendent levels and was at least comparable to that seen for Ab inaccessibility ( see Table I ) . These results suggest either that clathrin assembly is required for a significant portion of the MesNa - resistant signal , or that these antibodies also in - hibit the function of assembled clathrin structures . When the effects of the anti - transferrin receptor mAb , HTR - H68 were examined , a quantitatively different result was obtained . Although preincubation of cells with HTR - H68 significantly inhibited the overall acquisition of Ab inaccessibility ( - 65 % ) , overall acquisition of MesNa resis - tance was much less sensitive ( - 25 % inhibition ) . It is im - portant to consider these results in terms of the internali - zation of the total cell - associated 125 1 - BSST . Thus , 65 inhibition of Ab inaccessibility corresponds to a 25 % inhibi - tion in internalization of total cell - associated ' III - BSST , compared with a 25 % inhibition of MesNa resistance which accounts for < 5 % inhibition . These results are consistent with the interpretation that most of the transferrin receptors involved in internalization of 125 1 - BSST into a MesNa resis - tant compartment were resistant to anti - transfertin antibod - ies , and perhaps already localized in coated pits . ( a ) ' z ' 1 - BSS - HTR - D65 , the anti - transferrin receptor ectodomain antibody , was biotinylated and iodinated as described in Materials and Methods . Semiintact A431 cells were incubated for 30 min at 37°C in the presence of 4 pg / ml ' 2 ' I - BSS - HTR - D65 and in the presence or absence of ATP and bovine brain cytosol , as indicated . After incubation , the extent of " ' I - BSS - HTR - D65 internalization was assessed by either Ab - inaccessibility ( solid bars ) exactly as described for ' z ' I - BSST except that rabbit anti - mouse IgG ( 1 Ag / assay ) was used as a second antibody and a nonspecific unlabeled mouse IgG , ( 0 . 5 t + / ml ) was used in the lysis buffer ; or MesNa resistance ( striped bars ) , exactly as described for ' 2 ' 1 - BSST . ( b ) parallel samples were incubated with 4 pg / ml HTR - D65 labeled with 6 nm gold particles as described in Materials and Methods . Quantitation of gold particles was performed at the microscope by random examination ofcell profiles at a magnification of 23 , 500 . Each semiintact cell profile was completely examined and all detectable gold particles were counted and found to be distributed amongst these four classes of structures : non - coated regions of the cell surface ; coated structures either open to the cell surface or within two vesicle diameters of the cell surface ; closed coated structures more than two vesicle diameters from the cell surface ; and in large uncoated vesicles within the cytosol . No other structures ( i . e . , Golgi apparatus or mitochondria ) were seen to contain gold particles . CP , coated pits ; CV , coated vesicles ; PM , plasma membrane ; SV , smooth vesicles . Total gold counted ( No . ofcell profiles ) n No . gold / cell profile PM CP CV % SV ( b ) 4°C incubation Bind / then fix 344 ( 8 ) 43 67 . 4 32 . 6 0 0 Fixed / then bind 314 ( 9 ) 35 72 . 6 27 . 4 0 0 37°C incubation Complete 407 ( 5 ) 81 63 17 1 . 5 18 - ATP 455 ( 5 ) 91 89 8 . 6 0 2 . 4 - cytosol 471 ( 3 ) 157 83 10 . 6 . 2 6 . 2 Ab - inaccessible ` l - HTR - D65 ( % oftotal ) MesNa resistance ' s ' I - HTR - D65 ( % of total ) ( a ) 37°C incubation Complete 62 32 - ATP 26 3 - cytosol 15 12 Figure 7 . Morphological characterization of internalization of gold - labeled HTR - D65 into semiintact cells : requirement for ATP and cytosol . ( a , c ) Semiintact cells incubated in the presence of both cytosol ( 5 mg / ml bovine brain ) and an ATP regenerating system . ( d ande ) Semiintact cells incubated in the presence ofcytosol andan ATP - depleting system . Note the clusters ofgold particles in well - formed coated pits which were often seen in ATP - depleted samples . ( f ) Semiintact cells incubated in the absence of cytosol and the presence of an ATP - regenerating system . Note the clustered gold particles on the cell surface ( indicated by arrows ) indicative of ligand aggregation , which were seen in all samples . Bar , 250 nm . Morphological Examination ofTfn Receptor Internalization in SemiintactA431 Cells Processes involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis have been well defined morphologically . To establish a morpho - logical basis for the events occurring in vitro , we conjugated mAb HTRD65 to 5 nm gold particles to follow transferrin receptor internalization in the semiintact cell preparations . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 114 , 1991 As a control , and to provide a biochemical correlate to our morphological studies , we prepared 125I - BSS - D65 in an analogous manner to 1251 - BSST as a ligand for biochemical studies . Semiintact A431 cells were incubated in the pres - ence or absence of cytosol , ATP and 1251 - BSS - D65 mAb for 30 min at 37°C . After return to ice , acquisition of Ab inac - cessibility was assessed using rabbit - anti - mouse IgG to precipitate surface - bound 4251 - BSS - D65 mAb . MesNa resis - 876 tance was measured exactly as described for " ' I - BSST As can be seen ( Table II a ) internalization of ' III - BSS - 1365 oc - curred with identical properties to 1 25 I - BSST . The acquisi - tion of Ab inaccessibility occurred with greater efficiency than the acquisition of MesNa resistance . Internalization as assessed by both assays displayed the same cytosol and ATP - dependencies observed for internalization of 125 I - BSST . Parallel samples of semiintact A431 cells were incubated in the presence of 5 nm gold - labeled HTR - 1365 , fixed and prepared for EM . The structures involved in internalization of gold - labeled HTR1365 mAb into semiintact A431 cells appeared indistinguishable from those involved in intact A431 cells ( data not shown ) . Gold particles were observed on the cell surface , in coated pits , coated vesicles and in smooth membrane structures ( presumably endosomes ) deep within the cell ( Fig . 7 , a - c ) . In contrast , when cells were in - cubated in the absence of ATP , gold particles were not ob - served in intracellular compartments . In many cases , coated pits on semüntact cells incubated in the absence of either ATP or cytosol appeared very heavily labeled with gold par - ticles ( Fig . 7 , d and e ) . Heavily labeled coated pits were not detected in A431 cells incubated in the presence of cytosol and ATP Although not quantitated , these observations sug - gested that when coated vesicle budding is inhibited , trans - ferrin receptors might accumulate in this intermediate . The results from the morphological studies are quantitated in Table II b . Consistent with the biochemical data , we ob - served a twofold decrease in the fraction ofgold - 1365 present in coated pits and a seven - fold decrease in the fraction ofgold particles in internal smooth and coated vesicles when semi - intact cells were incubated in the presence ofcytosol , but ab - sence of ATP Similarly , in the absence of cytosol but pres - ence of ATP , we observed a twofold decrease in coated pit labeling and a threefold decrease in smooth vesicle labeling . The lower apparent efficiencies for coated pit localization ( 17 % ) and internalization ( 20 % ) determined morphologi - cally as compared with the biochemical determinations ( 60 % Ab inaccessible , 30 % MesNa resistance ) could be due in part to detrimental effects of the gold conjugation on the efficiency ofmAb internalization and in part to non - specific and / or subsaturating levels of gold - mAb binding . Clusters of gold particles outside of coated pits were often observed ( see for example Fig . 7 f ) . These morphological studies confirm that internalization into semiintact A431 cells oc - curred via the normal cellular pathway of coated pits , coated vesicles , and endosomes . Discussion We have developed stage - specific cell - free assays for the receptor - mediated endocytosis of transferrin which should enable detailed biochemical dissection of the molecular re - quirements and mechanisms involved in this complex cellu - lar process . Several criteria support the conclusion that the receptor - mediated endocytosis oftransferrin into semiintact cells is a valid reflection of events occurring in intact cells . ( a ) Internalization of Tfn in vitro is ATP dependent . In con - trast , sequestration of Tfn into deeply invaginated pits can occur in the absence of ATP , consistent with results in intact cells ( Schmid and Carter , 1990 ) . ( b ) Tfrt internalization in vitro requires cytosol as would be expected since clathrin and Schmid and Smythe Coated Pit and Vesicle Formation In Vitro other coat proteins are thought to assemble from cytosolic pools . ( c ) The temperature dependence of Tfn - internaliza - tion in vitro is identical to the temperature dependence of in - ternalization into intact A431 cells . ( d ) Tfn internalization in vitro is efficiently inhibited by anti - clathrin antibodies and by antibodies directed towards the cytoplasmic domain ofthe Tfn receptor . ( e ) Morphological analysis of the internaliza - tion of gold - labeled anti - Tfn - R mAbs into semiintact cells demonstrated that internalization occurs via coated pits and coated vesiclesand results in delivery of gold - labeled anti - bodies to endosomal structures . Our data also support the interpretation that partial reac - tions along the complex overall pathway ofcoated pit assem - bly , invagination and budding are occurring during Tfn up - take into semiintact A431 cells . Since Tfn receptors are constitutively internalized ( Hopkins and Trowbridge , 1983 ; Watts , 1985 ) , at any time Tfn receptors on the cell surface will be heterogeneously distributed at various stages of en - docytosis . This heterogeneous distribution would contribute to our ability to detect partial reactions using the Ab inacces - sibility and MesNa resistance assays . These partial reactions can be biochemically distinguished on the basis of their cytosol dependence , ATP dependence , kinetics , temperature dependence , and sensitivity to anti - clathrin and anti - trans - ferrin receptor antibodies . One model that summarizes these partial reactions and their distinguishing properties is shown in Fig . 8 . The com - plex overall process of Tfn - receptor endocytosis could be de - scribed as occurring in the following biochemically distinct stages : initiation / nucleation of coat assembly , coated pit growth , invagination , and budding / membrane fission . We propose that the earliest event , initiation / nucleation is slow based on the differences between the kinetics of acquisition of Ab inaccessibility and of acquisition of MesNa resistance and on previous morphological studies that demonstrated very rapid conversion of shallow coated pits to deep coated pits ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ) . We further suggest that this step accounts for the additional ATPdependent signal we obtain using the Ab - inaccessible assay . This conclusion is based on the following evidence . First , previous morphological stud - ies demonstrated that the conversion of shallow coated pits to deeply invaginated pits occurred efficiently in the absence ofboth ATP and cytosol but that an increase in the total num - ber of coated pits required both ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ) . It should be noted that the morphological criteria used to dis - tinguish shallow pits from deeply invaginated pits in these studies did not correspond to the ability of these pits to se - quester ligand from Ab . Although the latter reaction was 80 - 90 % efficient and occurred within 5 min , Ab inaccessi - bility was only 10 - 15 % efficient and required 10 - 15 min in these experiments . Secondly , previous biochemical studies ( Moore et al . , 1987 ; Mahaffey et al . , 1989 ) have demon - strated that clathrin assembly into coated pits is ATP - inde - pendent . As indicated by the authors , since only 70 - 80 % of plasma membrane - associated clathrin was removed in these studies , this ATP - independent clathrin assembly was likely to be occurring at pre - existing nucleated sites and therefore would , in our model , constitute coated pit growth . The ATP - independent Ab inaccessibility signal we observe was not dependent on cytosol ( data not shown ) , nor can it be inhib - ited by anti - clathrin antibodies , therefore we propose that it results from invagination of fully grown coated pits lead - 877 Figure 8 . Model for events involved in coated pit formation and coated vesicle budding and a summary of properties which distinguish these events . Receptor - mediated endocytosis can be described as occurring via at least four biochemically distinct events : initiation or nucleation of de novo coated pit assembly , growth of preexisting coated pits , invagination of fully formed coated pits and the budding / membrane fusion event leading to coated vesicle formation . Since transferrin receptors are constitutively internalized , at any time they would be expected to populate each of these proposed intermediate stages . Furthermore , we have used two assays which enable detection of not only the final product , coated vesicle budding , but also partial reactions leading the formation of deeply invaginated coated pits . Taking advantage ofthese features , we have begun to biochemically dissect this complex overall process . The results supporting this working model are discussed in the text . ing to the sequestration of ' III - BSST . Although we were unable to distinguish whether coated pit growth was also ATPdependent , the results of others ( Moore et al . , 1987 ; Mahaffey et al . , 1989 ) would suggest that ATP is not re - quired . The absolute dependence on ATP for acquisition of MesNa resistance suggests that the final budding / mem - brane fission event constitutes a second ATP - dependent event , again consistent with previous morphological findings ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ) . The results obtained using anti - clathrin and anti - trans - ferrin receptor antibodies are also consistent with this model . Both X22 and HTR - H68 totally inhibit the cytosol - dependent acquisition of Ab inaccessibility . This suggests that both the initiation / nucleation and growth stages are in - hibited , consistent with their predicted requirements for as - sembly of cytosolic clathrin and for interactions with the cy - toplasmic domains of Tfn - Rs . In contrast , neither X22 nor HTR - H68 appears to inhibit the cytosol - independent acqui - sition of Ab inaccessibility . These results suggest that invagi - nation ofcompleted coated pits is not sensitive to these anti - bodies , although detailed morphological studies would be TheJournal of Cell Biology , Volume 114 , 1991 needed to confirm this interpretation . In contrast , the anti - clathrin antibody severely inhibited the acquisition of MesNa resistance suggesting that although this antibody does not affect invagination , it might inhibit budding of preformed coated pits . This possibility would not be unexpected since X22 binds to and cross - links clathrin cages ( Blank and Brod - sky , 1986 ) . Acquisition of MesNa resistance was also par - tially inhibited by HTR - H68 . Inhibition at this late stage could be due to mAb binding to the cytoplasmic domains of Tfn - Rs so as to prevent their migration into preformed , bud - ding coated pits . Alternatively , either the antibody might in - teract weakly with Tfn - R in coated pits to disrupt budding or a small fraction of the overall MesNa resistance signal might be due to budding of newly formed coated pits . We cannot distinguish between these possibilities . Our ability to inhibit Tfn internalization into semiintact cells using anti - clathrin antibodies confirms and extends previous studies by Draper et al . ( 1990 ) which demonstrated a 40 - 50 % inhibition by the anti - clathrin antibody X19 using the assay originally developed by Smythe et al . ( 1989 ) . Al - though these investigators did not assess the ATP or cytosol 878 dependence of Ab inaccessibility in A431 cells , they sug - gested that the residual activity obtained in the presence of excess X19 mAb mightbe due to internalization ofligand al - ready present in fully formed coated pits . Our ability to in - hibit 90 °10 of the cytosol - dependent acquisition of Ab inac - cessibility is consistent with this interpretation . High ratios of mAb to clathrin were also required for inhibition in this previous study ( half - maximal inhibition required an - 50 - fold molar excess of X19 : clathrin ) . These relatively high ratios of mAb : clathrin required for inhibition in vitro are , however , consistent with two previous results involving inhi - bition of endocytosis in intact cells following delivery of a 5 - 30 - fold molar excess of these antibodies ( Doxsey et al . , 1987 ; Chin et al . , 1989 ) . Both Ab inaccessibility and MesNa resistance were stimu - lated by added cytosol . However , we were unable to demon - strate absolute cytosol dependence using either assay . These cytosol - independent signals might be due to one or a combi - nation of the following factors : ( a ) Incomplete wash out of A431 cytosol from semiintact cells . This possibility is sup - ported by the day to day variability in cytosol dependence we observe and by our morphological data in which reduced , but not abolished , delivery of internalized ligand to endo - somes was detected in the absence of added cytosol . Endo - some fusion in vitro in a variety of systems is cytosol de - pendent ( reviewed by Gruenberg and Howell , 1989 ) . ( b ) Detection of partial reactions which might be cytosol inde - pendent . This possibility is supported by previous morpho - logical studies that demonstrated that the invagination of shallow pits occurred efficiently in the absence of cytosol ( Smythe et al . , 1989 ) . ( c ) The activity of cytosolic factors previously recruitedto the membrane . This possibility would be similar to results obtained in vitro for vesicular intra - Golgi transport in which late membrane fusion events which appear cytosol independent are , in fact , driven by cytosolic factors which have assembled onto the vesicle and target membranes ( Rothman and Orci , 1989 ) . Why is coated vesicle budding so inefficient in these semi - intact cell preparations ? One possibility could be our inabil - ity to reconstitute the different ionic conditions that normally exist on either side of the plasma membrane . Likewise , if ionic transients of any kind are required , these might be difficult to reconstitute in the open system used here . The low extent of coated vesicle budding is consistent with this signal being derived from that population of Tfn receptors already in a late stage of coated pit formation . This speculation is supported by the observation that antibodies that recognize the cytoplasmic domain of Tfn - R only partially inhibit the acquisition of MesNa resistance under conditions in which there is substantial inhibition of acquisition ofAb inaccessi - bility . This result would be predicted if Tfn - Rs already in coated pits were less accessible to these cytoplasmic domain antibodies than those outside of coated pits . Thus , we pro - pose that an additional step in coated vesicle budding , re - ferred to in Fig . 8 as ` activation ' might be required before coated vesicles can bud from the cell surface . Only coated pits which have undergone this activation step in vivo will successfully bud in vitro . More work will be required to clearly demonstrate the existence of this step and to deter - mine its molecular requirements . Every step which we are able to distinguish biochemically leading to productive sequestration of 125 1 - BSST from ei - Schmid and Smythe Coated Pit and Vesicle Formation In Vitro ther Ab or MesNa displayed temperature dependence simi - lar to that for receptor - mediated endocytosis in intact A431 cells . This striking result suggests that the spontaneous as - sembly of coat proteins observed in other systems ( Moore et al . , 1987 ; Mahaffey et al . , 1989 ) and which probably oc - curs in our system , does not lead to the productive sequestra - tion of ligands . These findings , as well as the apparent ATP - dependence of both early and late events involved in coated pit and coated vesicle formation , suggest a catalytic role for as yet , unidentified ' noncoat protein ( s ) in mediating and / or regulating coat assembly and coated vesicle budding in intact cells . We are currently using these assays to identify these factors from bovine brain cytosol . We gratefully acknowledge the gifts of mAbs from both Ian Trowbridge ( The Salk Institute ) andFrances Brodsky ( UCSF ) . We thankLaura Carter for excellent technical assistance with some of the experiments , Stephen Kinney forhelp with electron microscopy , andTom Redelmeier andBill Balch for helpful discussions . Thiswork wassupportedby grantsfrom the National Institutes ofHealth ( GM42445 andCA27489 ) andfrom theLucille P . Markey Charitable Trust to S . L . Schmid . E . Smythe was supported by a North Atlantic Treaty Organization / Science andEngineering Research Council Postdoctoral Fel - lowship ; S . L . Schmid is a Lucille P . Markey Scholar . Received for publication 20 February 1991 and in revised form 29 April 1991 . References Balch , W . E . , andJ . E . Rothman . 1985 . Characterizationof protein transport between successive compartments ofthe Golgiapparatus : asymmetric prop - erties of the donor andacceptor activities in acell - free system . Arch . Bio - chem . Biophys . 240 : 413 - 425 Blank , G . S . , andF . M . Brodsky . 1986 . Site - specificdisruption of clathrin as - sembly produces novel structures . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 5 : 2087 - 2095 . Brodsky , F . M . 1985 . Clathrin structure characterized with monoclonal anti - bodies . I . Analysis ofmultiple antigenic sites . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2047 - 2054 . Brodsky , F . M . 1988 . Living with clathrin : its role in intracellular membrane traffic . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 242 : 1396 - 1402 . Chen , W . - J . , J . L . Goldstein , andM . S . Brown . 1990 . NPXY , asequence often foundin cytoplasmic tails , is requiredfor coated pit - mediated internalization of thelow density lipoprotein receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 3116 - 3123 . Chin , D . J . , R . M . Straubinger , S . Acton , I . Nithke , andF . M . Brodsky . 1989 . 100 - kDapolypeptides in peripheral Cahrin - coatedvesicles are required for receptor - mediatedendocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 9289 - 9293 . Ciechanover , A . , A . L . Schwartz , A . Dautry - Varsat , andH . F . Lodish . 1983 . Kinetics of internalization and recycling of transferrin andthe transferrin receptor in a human hepatoma cell line . J . Biol . Chem . 256 : 9681 - 9689 . Clarke , B . L . , and P . H . Weigel . 1985 . Recycling of the asialoglycoprotein receptor in isolated rat hepatocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 260 : 128 - 133 . Collawn , J . F . , M . Stangel , L . A . Kuhn , W . Esekogwu , S . Jing , I . S . Trow - bridge , andJ . A . Tainer . 1990 . Transferrinreceptorinternalization sequence YXRF implicates atight turn as the structural recognition motif for endocy - tosis . Cell . 63 : 1061 - 1072 . Doxsey , S . J . , F . M . Brodsky , G . S . Blank , andA . Helenius . 1987 . Inhibition of endocytosis by anti - Cahrin antibodies . Cell . 50 : 453 - 463 . Draper , R . K . , Y . Goda , F . M . Brodsky , and S . R . Pfeffer . 1990 . Antibodies to clathrin inhibit endocytosis but not recycling to the trans Golginetwork in vitro . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 248 : 1539 - 1541 . Goud , B . , C . Huet , and D . Louvard . 1985 . Assembled andunassembled pools of clathrin : aquantitative study using enzyme immunoassay . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 521 - 527 . Gruenberg , J . , andK . E . Howell . 1989 . Membrane traffic in endocytosis : in - sights from cell - free assays . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 : 453 - 482 . Haigler , H . T . , F . R . Maxfield , M . C . Willingham , andI . Pastan . 1980 . Dan - sylcadaverin inhibits internalization of I ' ll - epidermal growth factor in BALB 3T3 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 255 : 1230 - 1241 . Hertel , C . , S . J . Coulter , andJ . P . Perkins . 1986 . Theinvolvement of cellular ATP in receptor - mediated internalization of epidermal growth factor and hormone - induced internalization of 0 - adrenergic receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 5974 - 5980 . Hopkins , C . R . , andI . S . Trowbridge . 1983 . Internalizationandprocessing of transferrin andthe transferrin receptor in humancarcinoma A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 508 - 521 . 879 Iacopetta , B . J . , S . Rothenberger , and L . C . Kuhn . 1988 . A role for the cyto - plasmic domain in transferrin receptor sorting and coated pit formation dur - ing endocytosis . Cell . 54 : 485 - 489 . Jing , S . , T . Spencer , K . Miller , C . Hopkins , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1990 . Role ofthe human transferrin receptorcytoplasmic domain in endocytosis : local - ization of a specific signal sequence for internalization . J . Cell . Biol . 110 : 283 - 294 . Keen , J . H . 1990 . Clathrin and associated assembly and disassembly proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 59 : 415 - 438 . Larkin , J . M . , W . C . Donzell , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1985 . Modulation of intracellular potassium andATP : effects oncoated pit function in fibroblasts and hepatocytes . J . Cell . Physiol . 124 : 372 - 378 . Leunissen , J . L . M . , and J . R . DeMey . 1987 . Preparation of gold probes . / n Immuno - Gold Labeling in Cell Biology . A . J . Verkleij andJ . L . M . Leunis - sen , editors . CRC Press Inc . , Boca Raton , FL . 3 - 16 . Mahaffey , D . T . , M . S . Moore , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1989 . Coat proteins isolated from clathrin coated vesicles can assemble into coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 1615 - 1624 . Marsh , M . , and A . Helenius . 1983 . Penetration of Semliki Forest virus form acidic prelysosomal vacuoles . Cell . 32 : 931 - 940 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 114 , 1991 Moore , M . S . , D . T . Mahaffey , F . M . Brodsky , andR . G . W . Anderson . 1987 . Assembly of clathrin - coated pits onto purified plasma membranes . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 236 : 558 - 563 . Morris , S . A . , S . Ahle , and E . Ungewickell . 1989 . Clathrin - coated vesicles . Curr . Op . Cell Biol . 1 : 684 - 690 . Pearse , B . M . F . , and M . S . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin : adaptors and sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 - 171 . Podbilewicz , B . , and I . Melhnan . 1990 . ATP and cytosol requirements for transferren recycling in intact anddisrupted MDCK cells . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 9 : 3477 - 3487 . Rothman , J . E . , and L . Orci . 1989 . Movements ofproteins through the Golgi stack : a molecular dissection ofvesicular transport . FASER ( Fed . Am . Soc . Exp . Biol . ) J . 4 : 1460 - 1465 . Schmid , S . L . , and L . L . Carter . 1990 . ATP is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in intact cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 2307 - 2318 . Smythe , E . , M . Pypaert , J . Lucocq , and G . Warren . 1989 . Formation ofcoated vesicles from coated pits in broken A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 843 - 853 . Watts , C . 1985 . Rapid endocytosis of the transferrin receptor in the absence of bound transferrin . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 633 - 637 . 880