Relational vs . attributive interpretation of nominal compounds differentially engages angular gyrus and anterior temporal lobe Christine Boylan ⇑ , John C . Trueswell , Sharon L . Thompson - Schill Department of Psychology , University of Pennsylvania , United States a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 22 October 2015 Revised 22 December 2016 Accepted 26 January 2017 Available online 23 February 2017 a b s t r a c t The angular gyrus ( AG ) and anterior temporal lobe ( ATL ) have been found to respond to a number of tasks involving combinatorial processing . In this study , we investigate the conceptual combination of nominal compounds , and ask whether ATL / AG activity is modulated by the type of combinatorial operation applied to a nominal compound . We compare relational and attributive interpretations of nominal com - pounds and ﬁnd that ATL and AG both discriminate these two types , but in distinct ways . While right AG demonstrated greater positive task - responsive activity for relational compounds , there was a greater negative deﬂection in the BOLD response in left AG for relational compounds . In left ATL , we found an earlier peak in subjects’ BOLD response curves for attributive interpretations . In other words , we observed dissociations in both AG and ATL between relational and attributive nominal compounds , with regard to magnitude in the former and to timing in the latter . These ﬁndings expand on prior studies that posit roles for both AG and ATL in conceptual processing generally , and in conceptual combination specif - ically , by indicating possible functional specializations of these two regions within a larger conceptual knowledge network . (cid:1) 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Language’s inﬁnite generative capacity allows us to produce utterances ranging from the prosaic , as in ‘‘Close the door , ” to the ridiculous , as in ‘‘Hold the newsreader’s nose squarely , waiter , or friendly milk will countermand my trousers” ( Stephen Fry , A Bit of Fry and Laurie ) . Less ridiculous , but no less novel , sentences are uttered every day , and the ability of a reader or listener to understand such novel sentences , the propositional meanings of which cannot be retrieved from memory , requires a compositional algorithm that takes word meanings and combines them in such a way as to produce a more complex meaning . The neural substrates of this compositional algorithm remain elusive , in part because we still lack consensus on a typology of compositional operations . Many approaches to the study of composition have beneﬁtted from a clear distinction between syntactic and semantic composi - tion ( Kuperberg , Sitnikova , & Lakshmanan , 2008 ; Pylkkänen & McElree , 2006 ) . Studies on Jabberwocky sentences demonstrate that subjects parse Jabberwocky phrases into syntactic hierarchical constituents similar to their natural language counterparts , even without knowing what the phrase means ( e . g . ‘‘the mouse that eats our cheese” vs . the Jabberwocky version ‘‘the couse that rits our treeve” ( example from Pallier , Devauchelle , & Dehaene , 2011 ) ) . Studies of complement coercion also suggest that syntactic and semantic argument structures are not isomorphic : evidence from behavioral , eye - tracking , and electrophysiological measures demonstrate a processing cost where semantic material unex - pressed in the syntax must be inserted in order to coerce a coher - ent argument structure ; e . g . ‘‘The man began the book” is interpreted as ‘‘The man began [ reading / writing ] the book” via implicit insertion of some event information ( Baggio , Choma , van Lambalgen , & Hagoort , 2010 ; Kuperberg , Choi , Cohn , Paczynski , & Jackendoff , 2009 ; McElree , Pylkkänen , Pickering , & Traxler , 2006 ; Pylkkänen & McElree , 2007 ; Traxler , McElree , Williams , & Pickering , 2005 ) . In this study , we proceed one step further , and suggest that within the domain of semantic composition , there is evidence for a distinction between two basic combinatorial operations , even when syntax is held constant . Speciﬁcally , we investigate the case of noun - noun compounds , in which the structure is always a mod - iﬁer noun followed by a head noun ( e . g . mountain lake , where the syntax dictates this is a lake ( in the mountains ) , not a mountain ( in a lake ) ) . Noun - noun compounds are a tractable case of minimal composition and are particularly interesting because the ﬁrst noun – the modiﬁer noun – can be either ‘‘attributive” ( as in zebra clam , where zebra denotes the attribute ‘‘striped” ) or ‘‘relational” ( as in mountain lake where ‘‘mountain” is not an attribute but an object http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bandl . 2017 . 01 . 008 0093 - 934X / (cid:1) 2017 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . ⇑ Corresponding author at : Institute for Research in Cognitive Science , University of Pennsylvania , 3401 Walnut Street , Suite 400A , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA . E - mail address : chboylan @ sas . upenn . edu ( C . Boylan ) . Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Brain & Language journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / b & l bearing a spatial relation with ‘‘lake” ) . Attributive combinations are similar to predicating combinations , which can be paraphrased as ‘‘a [ noun ] that is [ adjective ] , ” such as red ball ( ‘‘a ball that is red” ) . Non - predicating combinations , on the other hand , cannot be paraphrased in such a way : e . g . tennis ball is not ‘‘a ball that is tennis , ” but rather is ‘‘a ball for playing tennis” ( Downing , 1977 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ; Levi , 1978 ) . Attributive noun - noun com - pounds can be paraphrased as ‘‘a [ head noun ] that is [ modiﬁer noun ] - like” , as in zebra clam – ‘‘a clam that is zebra - like” ( likely ‘‘a clam that is striped” ) . Relational noun - noun compounds are more complex in that they are non - predicating , and derive their meaning from some extrinsic predicating relation ( e . g . ‘‘a ball for playing tennis” ) ( Levi , 1978 ; Murphy , 1990 ) . We ﬁnd evidence that relational and attributive interpretations of noun compounds differentially engage two regions of the brain otherwise broadly implicated in semantic composition : the angu - lar gyrus ( AG ) and the anterior temporal lobe ( ATL ) . Below , we dis - cuss how the distinction between relational and attributive combination may shed light on the functional differences between these two putative neural ‘‘hubs” of semantic composition . 1 . 1 . A tale of two hubs : The angular gyrus and anterior temporal lobe Mounting evidence suggests ATL and AG are involved in seman - tic processing , generally , and in semantic composition , speciﬁcally ; however , only recently has there been effort to characterize their division of labor . Both have been characterized as ‘‘semantic hubs , ” owing to functional and anatomical patterns that are consistent with multimodal convergence ( Binder & Desai , 2011 ; Lambon Ralph , 2014 ; Patterson , Nestor , & Rogers , 2007 ; Seghier , 2012 ) . The ATL is uniquely situated at the end of a caudal - to - rostral stream of information processing feeding from primary sensory and motor areas and association cortex ( Binder & Desai , 2011 ; Binder , Desai , Graves , & Conant , 2009 ; Binney , Parker , & Lambon Ralph , 2012 ; Felleman & Van Essen , 1991 ) . Moving anteriorly along the temporal lobe , one ﬁnds a caudal - to - rostral hierarchy emerge as neuronal responses are more tuned to complex stimuli and more invariant to low - level sensory variation ; such a hierarchy has been established along both visual ( Felleman & Van Essen , 1991 ) and auditory ( Rauschecker & Scott , 2009 ) streams . This ‘‘graded convergence” may provide a mechanism both for attribu - tive feature combination and , in the limit , for maximally invariant amodal , abstract conceptual representations . The culmination of this graded convergence up the temporal lobe ( Rauschecker & Scott , 2009 ; Stringer & Rolls , 2002 ) is a basal rostral region of ATL shown to have very limited extra - temporal connectivity and high intra - temporal connectivity ( Binney et al . , 2012 ) . Such neu - roanatomical sequestration may be conducive to representing abstract , modality - invariant semantics . Thus , ATL is a prime candi - date for attributive semantic composition . In one of the ﬁrst studies investigating the neural correlates of minimal two - word composition , Baron , Thompson - Schill , Weber , and Osherson ( 2010 ) found evidence from fMRI pattern analyses that the left ATL subserved the combination of concepts such that the superimposition of individual patterns of the simplex concepts YOUNG and MAN ( as represented by various face stimuli ) reliably predicted the activation pattern for the complex concept YOUNG MAN . Consistent with this ﬁnding , a magnetoencephalography ( MEG ) study of visually presented two - word phrases comparing nouns in minimal compositional contexts ( red boat ) with nouns in non - compositional contexts ( in which a non - word letter string was concatenated with a real word , e . g . xkq boat ) found increased composition - related activity in left ATL ( Bemis & Pylkkänen , 2011 ) . There is a growing body of functional and tractographic studies to suggest that the representational unit of property - based composi - tion in left ATL may be multimodal sensorimotor features , particu - larly visual concrete properties of object - concepts in more ventromedial regions of ATL , and possibly more abstract auditory - visual properties in more dorsolateral regions of ATL ( Coutanche & Thompson - Schill , 2014 ; Hoffman , Binney , & Lambon Ralph , 2015 ) , corroborating the notion of the left ATL as hub of the so - called ventral ‘‘what” pathway . In addition to the ATL , researchers have also ascribed the label ‘‘semantic hub” to the AG , as it lies at the junction between tempo - ral , parietal , and occipital lobes and thus receives a conﬂuence of auditory , somatosensory , spatial , and visual inputs . Conceptual combination studies of the sort described above ( Bemis & Pylkkänen , 2012 ) have demonstrated involvement of both left AG and left ATL , and several studies implicate bilateral AG in the con - trast between well - formed sentences on the one hand and word lists , pseudowords , or scrambled sentences on the other ( Bavelier et al . , 1997 ; Bottini et al . , 1994 ; Humphries , Binder , Medler , & Liebenthal , 2007 ; Humphries et al . , 2006 ) . AG also shows greater activity for semantic violations vs . congruent well - formed sen - tences ( Kang , Constable , Gore , & Avrutin , 1999 ) , particularly semantic incongruities violating verb - argument structure and the - matic constraints rather than real - world knowledge ( Kuperberg et al . , 2008 ; Newman , Pancheva , Ozawa , Neville , & Ullman , 2001 ) , and also for connected discourse vs . unrelated sentences ( Fletcher et al . , 1995 ; Homae , Yahata , & Sakai , 2003 ; Xu , Kemeny , Park , Frattali , & Braun , 2005 ) . This broad proﬁle of effects has led some to suggest that the AG may play a potentially domain - general role in semantic information integration structured around events . Not all studies investigating conceptual combination ﬁnd acti - vation in both left ATL and bilateral AG . Of those stimuli that elicit differential activity in AG but not in left ATL , one ﬁnds that the type of composition may more often be based on thematic relations rather than attributive combination . Graves , Binder , Desai , Conant , and Seidenberg ( 2010 ) compared familiar meaningful noun - noun compounds , such as lake house , with reversed phrases , such as house lake , the meanings of which were not obvious ; they found that right AG , along with other right - lateralized tem - poroparietal areas , showed greater activation for processing the more obviously combinatorial phrases . Interestingly , the authors noted that most of their noun - noun stimuli were interpreted as denoting thematic relations between head and modiﬁer nouns ; that is , most compounds consisted of nouns participating in some spatial relation ( as in ‘‘ a house on a lake ” ) or event - based relation rather than picking out an attribute of the modiﬁer noun . It is likely that these stimuli were probing semantic thematic relations in par - ticular rather than combinatorial semantics in general . 1 . 2 . Relational vs . attributive interpretation of nominal compounds In order to further distinguish between property - based associa - tions and relation - based associations between concepts , consider the following nominal compound : robin hawk . Wisniewski ( 1996 ) found that people’s interpretations of a novel compound of this sort could be characterized in one of two ways . Some individuals applied a property of the concept ‘‘robin , ” such as a red breast , to the head noun ‘‘hawk , ” to arrive at an interpretation like ‘‘a red - breasted hawk . ” Others found a thematic relation between the two birds , noting that a hawk might hunt a robin , and interpreted ‘‘robin hawk” as ‘‘a hawk that preys on robins . ” In the ﬁrst type of interpretation , ‘‘robin” indicated some attribute or feature com - mensurate with the head noun ‘‘hawk , ” while in the second type of interpretation , the modiﬁer noun ‘‘robin” was not broken down into features , but rather participated in a thematic relation with the head noun ‘‘hawk . ” It is worth noting here that the terminology ‘‘relational” and ‘‘attributive” bear the misfortune of being both very common and C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 9 denoting very different qualities depending on the theoretical framework . For instance , there are certain non - deverbal ‘‘rela - tional” nouns , like sister , boss , edge , height , etc . , that seem to take implicit semantic arguments ( Partee & Borschev , 2003 ) , but we do not consider such relational nouns here . However , ‘‘relational” and ‘‘attributive” eschew the perhaps overly syntactic typology of , say , ‘‘predicating vs . non - predicating , ” in describing a phe - nomenon we argue arises from conceptual - semantic affordances ; that is , robin hawk is interpretable as ‘‘a hawk that hunts robins” only because of the association between hawk and hunting , even though the ‘‘hunting” relation is unstated ( cf . robin chicken , which would be unlikely to invite such a predator - prey relation ) . There - fore , we will refer to these nominal compound types as ‘‘relational” and ‘‘attributive . ” Earlier literature assumed that the thematic relation was the primary means of interpreting nominal compounds : the consensus was that only after failing to ﬁnd a plausible thematic relation binding the modiﬁer and head nouns did people derive a property - based interpretation ( Downing , 1977 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ; Shoben & Gagné , 1997 ; Wisniewski & Gentner , 1991 ) . Later proposals recognized attributive interpretations as somewhat dis - tinct , but still considered property - based combinations too infre - quent to be considered a different process ; while Wisniewski and Love ( 1998 ) reported that attributive interpretations accounted for 29 % of their nominal compounds , other samples reported attributives occurring as little as 1 % of the time in corpora ( Downing , 1977 ; Gagné , 2000 ; Warren , 1978 ) . Parsimony dictated that attributive interpretations were simply another kind of rela - tion , namely a resemblance relation ( where zebra clam is merely a clam that resembles a zebra ) , and a single - process model pre - vailed ( Costello & Keane , 2000 ; Gagné , 2000 ) . One prominent for - mulation of single - process conceptual combination is the Competition Among Relations in Nominals ( CARIN ) theory ( Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ) . Under this account , the modiﬁer noun ( zebra in zebra clam , or mountain in mountain lake ) is not incorpo - rated into the head noun’s representation , but rather a relation ( e . g . noun RESEMBLE modiﬁer , or noun LOCATED modiﬁer , respec - tively ) is inserted that links the two concepts . Moreover , under CARIN , some relations will be considered prior to others , depend - ing on the lexical items being combined ( e . g . LOCATED is a more apt relation than ABOUT when construing the compound mountain lake ) . This model stipulates that the RESEMBLE relation ( that is , the attributive interpretation ) is largely dispreferred . However , further study found evidence for a categorical distinc - tion between a relation - linking process like that described under CARIN , and another process , by which a property or attribute of the modiﬁer is ‘‘transferred” to the head noun ( attributive combi - nation ) . Several studies found that the interpretation of ambiguous nominal compounds ( such as robin hawk ) could be manipulated based on priming the ambiguous item with relational or attributive compounds . Wisniewski and Love ( 1998 ) found that ambiguous targets were more likely to be interpreted attributively when fol - lowing an attributive - biased compound , but more likely to be interpreted as relational when preceded by a relational prime . This suggests that attributive and relational processes are categorically distinct processes ( but cf . Gagné , 2000 ) . Estes ( 2003 ) followed this work with another priming study , testing whether relational inter - pretations occurred serially prior to attributive interpretations , or whether these processes occurred in parallel . He found that both comprehension and reaction times were facilitated when target combinations matched prime combinations in attribution or rela - tion . Moreover , Estes ( 2003 ) tested the CARIN model’s serial rela - tion prediction that there should be an interaction between prime type and target type : if relation precedes attribution , then an attributive prime should interfere with interpretation of a rela - tional target while a relational target should not hinder compre - hension of an attributive target . That is , under the CARIN account , an attributive prime would involve additional ( attribu - tive ) processing not otherwise induced during a relational prime , and this extra processing would interfere with comprehension of a relational target . Estes ( 2003 ) did not ﬁnd such an interaction , and interpreted these ﬁndings as inconsistent with CARIN . How - ever , this null result is not particularly damning to the CARIN model , and evidence arbitrating whether attributive and relational compound interpretation involve distinct processes remains equivocal . 1 . 3 . Relational and attributive semantics in the brain The distinction between property - and relation - based semantic processes also appears in the neuropsychological semantic mem - ory literature . Here , one abiding question has been : Do relational and attributive conceptual combinations arise from neuroanatom - ically separable components of the semantics , or are they sub - sumed by the same combinatorial operation ? If the latter , are these operations hierarchically disposed in some way : that is , are relational interpretations preferred over attributive interpreta - tions , or vice versa ? In the semantic memory literature , the distinction between so - called taxonomic and thematic associations serve as a parallel to what we have described as attributive and relational associations , respectively . The literature on taxonomic and thematic associa - tions does not relate explicitly to nominal compound interpreta - tion , or even conceptual combination per se , and the experimental paradigms focus rather on speech errors , priming , and judgment of semantic association between words that are not part of a compositional phrase . However , we argue that the semantic ontology of ‘‘properties” vs . ‘‘relations” underlying the distinction between taxonomic and thematic associations also deﬁnes the distinction between attributive and relational interpre - tations of compounds , and thus both literatures should be explored in tandem . Just as the conceptual combination literature includes theories in which attributive and relational combination are part of the same process and not categorically distinct ( as in CARIN ) , so does the semantic memory literature accommodate models whereby taxonomic and thematic relations are not or need not be distin - guished . For instance , under many connectionist frameworks , the - matic relations are reiﬁed into features , such that the concept dog might be linked not only to nodes for ‘‘furry , ” ‘‘warm - blooded , ” and ‘‘loyal , ” but also nodes for explicitly relation - based facts , such as ‘‘bears live young , ” ‘‘is led on a leash , ” and ‘‘chews / buries bones” ( Rogers & McClelland , 2004 ) . Another account holds that taxo - nomic properties are the constituents of thematic relations : for instance , the thematic relation chew , between , say , dog and bone , is supervenient on knowledge of the properties of dog and bone , so that thematic processing cannot occur without taxonomic pro - cessing ( Lewis , Poeppel , & Murphy , 2015 ) . This account is sup - ported by an MEG priming study ﬁnding that activity in left ATL was only sensitive to property - based taxonomic associations , while both taxonomic and thematic associations predicted activity in the left temporoparietal junction ( TPJ ) , inclusive of AG ( Lewis et al . , 2015 ) . Both these accounts contrast with a model whereby thematic relations constitute a qualitatively different level of rep - resentation from taxonomic features or properties , where the unit of representation is the event rather than the feature ( Boylan , Trueswell , & Thompson - Schill , 2015 ) . Another study , however , found evidence of a double dissocia - tion between taxonomic and thematic semantic errors in left ATL and left AG , respectively ( Schwartz et al . , 2011 ) . Speakers’ semantic errors can be divided into either taxonomic category errors ( that is , uttering an incorrect word , but one which has commensurate fea - 10 C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 tures , such as when ‘‘apple” is named as ‘‘pear” ) or thematic rela - tion errors ( that is , uttering ‘‘dog” when ‘‘bone” was intended , reﬂecting the thematic relation between ‘‘dog” and ‘‘bone” ) . Schwartz et al . ( 2011 ) examined the taxonomic and thematic errors produced by 86 post - stroke aphasics in a picture - naming task and conducted voxel - based lesion - symptom mapping ( VLSM ) on each error type separately ( with shared variance between error types regressed out ) . Taxonomic errors were mapped to left ATL lesions , while thematic errors were localized to left AG . This double dissociation between ATL and AG supports the view that the ATL and AG support categorically distinct semantic computations , cor - responding to property - based and relation - based operations , respectively . The current study examines the neural dissociation between property - and relation - based conceptual combination in order to discern ( 1 ) whether these processes are indeed functionally dis - tinct and ( 2 ) whether they might allow us to better characterize the roles of AG and ATL in semantic combination . While the double dissociation of the sort reported in Schwartz et al . ( 2011 ) would be indicative of entirely dissociable systems , it is also possible that a common underlying semantic process derives both sorts of combi - nation . Midway between these two hypotheses is the possibility that these two types of combination are both functionally and neu - rally distinct , but recruit overlapping brain networks . We ﬁnd evidence for ( 1 ) a single dissociation in bilateral AG showing more task - responsive activity for relational compounds than attributive compounds , and ( 2 ) a timing difference in ATL , speciﬁcally an earlier ATL response to attributive compounds than relational compounds . This order is not consistent with that put forth in the CARIN model , which predicts that relational combina - tions are processed prior to attributive combinations , but is consis - tent with a model where the distinction between attributive and relational processing could be more ﬂuid in ATL . 2 . Material and methods 2 . 1 . Participants Eighteen subjects ( eleven female ) participated in this study . Subjects ranged in age from 18 to 42 years , and all were right - handed native speakers of English with normal or corrected - to - normal vision and no reported history of neurologic problems . Sub - jects gave written informed consent and were provided monetary compensation ( $ 20 / h ) for their time . The human subjects review board at the University of Pennsylvania approved all experimental procedures . 2 . 2 . Stimuli 2 . 2 . 1 . Stimulus design We drew our nominal compound stimuli from two studies investigating the effects of attributive - and relational - biased com - pounds ( Estes , 2003 ; Wisniewski & Love , 1998 ) . Of the stimuli used in these studies , we chose the 64 most attributive - biased and 64 most relational biased items according to a norming study we con - ducted via Amazon Mechanical Turk ( Buhrmester , Kwang , & Gosling , 2011 ) . Subjects ( n = 17 , none of whom participated in the fMRI study ) were asked to write their interpretations of each noun compound and indicate their familiarity with the noun com - pound on a 1 – 5 Likert scale , and three independent coders desig - nated these interpretations as either attributive or relational . Coder agreement was over 95 % , and where coders’ designations diverged , the primary author’s designation was used ( Boylan ) . Cri - teria for qualitative deﬁnitions of relational and attributive com - pounds were taken from Estes ( 2003 ) and Wisniewski and Love ( 1998 ) . Relational and attributive items were matched on unigram ( log ) frequency ( M attributive = 1 . 07 , s . d . = 0 . 57 ; M relational = 1 . 15 , s . d . = 0 . 60 ; SUBTLEXus ; bigram frequencies were not possible because many compounds were infrequent or novel ) , compound length ( M attributive = 11 . 98 , s . d . = 2 . 46 ; M relational = 12 . 13 , s . d . = 2 . 84 ) , compound familiarity ( Likert scale 1 – 5 , from 17 - subject norming study on Amazon Mechanical Turk : M attributive = 2 . 29 , s . d . = 0 . 51 ; M relational = 2 . 40 , s . d . = 0 . 49 ) , and word association ( latent semantic analysis ( LSA ) over general reading at 1st year college level ; M attributive = 0 . 12 , s . d . = 0 . 15 ; M relational = 0 . 14 , s . d . = 0 . 12 ) ( Brysbaert & New , 2009 ; Laham , 1998 ) . Compounds ranged from relatively unfamiliar or novel ( least familiar attributive compound : tiger paper ; least familiar relational compound : pine mushroom ) to relatively common ( most familiar attributive compound : bullet train ; most familiar relational compound : wood stove ) . We found that the attributive modiﬁer nouns ( ﬁrst nouns in the two - word compounds ) were less frequent than the head nouns ( M attributive _ modiﬁer = 0 . 82 , s . d . = 0 . 45 ; M attributive _ head = 1 . 32 , s . d . = 0 . 58 ) while the converse was true for relational compounds ( M relational _ modiﬁer = 1 . 24 , s . d . = 0 . 61 ; M relational _ head = 1 . 08 , s . d . = 0 . 58 ) . Ramiﬁcations for the attributive compounds’ ‘‘modiﬁer markedness” are addressed in the Discussion section below . 2 . 2 . 2 . Norming for relational - attributive bias In order to measure the variability in the interpretations of our noun - noun compound stimuli , and thus the degree of bias toward attributive and relational combination , we combined responses from the Mechanical Turk stimulus norming survey with responses taken from a survey of our fMRI subjects after they left the scanner . Both surveys asked subjects to describe what they thought each noun compound meant , with the slightly amended instruction to the fMRI participants that they write down the interpretations they had entertained while viewing the stimuli inside the scanner . Responses from a total of 35 subjects per item ( 17 from Mechanical Turk norming , 18 from fMRI subjects ) were coded as either attribu - tive or relational ( see 2 . 2 . 1 for coding practices ) . Fig . 1 shows the distribution of attributive and relational bias by item , order - ranked from unanimously attributive interpretations to unanimously relational interpretations . The average ‘‘relational bias” for an item categorically labeled as relational in the Estes and Wisniewski & Love studies was 89 . 6 % ( SD = 0 . 14 ) ; likewise , the average ‘‘attributive bias” for an attributive item was 94 . 5 % , ( SD = 0 . 10 ) . Despite having identiﬁed 128 items from the Mechan - ical Turk survey as relatively biased toward either relational or attributive meanings , additional responses from fMRI subjects con - ﬁrmed that some items were much more ambiguous than others . For instance , while the item ‘‘cow parsnip” was originally desig - nated as relational - biased ( example interpretation : ‘‘a parsnip fed to a cow” ) , as was ‘‘pine mushroom” ( e . g . ‘‘mushroom that grows on pine trees” ) , additional responses indicated these items were equally likely to have attributive readings , where interpretations such as ‘‘a parsnip shaped like a cow , ” and ‘‘mushroom that looks like a pine cone” were offered for ‘‘cow parsnip” and ‘‘pine mush - room , ” respectively . 2 . 3 . Experimental task and design The subject’s task on each trial was to read two simultaneously centrally presented words constituting a nominal compound and indicate by button press ( 1 ) when they had decided on a coherent meaning for the compound and ( 2 ) whether a subsequent ‘‘probe” matched the meaning they had in mind . The nominal compound was presented for 2 s , and was immediately followed by a ﬁxation cross , on screen for 6 or 8 s , during which time the subject need only passively view the screen after pressing the button to indicate they had arrived at an interpretation . This ﬁxation period was fol - C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 11 lowed by a probe phrase ( 2 s ) , which either matched the modal interpretation for a given item ( as determined in the Mechanical Turk survey ; e . g . ‘‘a prickly carpet” for ‘‘cactus carpet” ) or was a dispreferred interpretation ( e . g . ‘‘a carpet on which a cactus stands” for ‘‘cactus carpet” ) , where one out of eight trials had a dis - preferred probe . The probe phrase served as a prompt for the sub - ject to indicate by button press whether the probe matched their initial interpretation . We included the probe ( not split by attribu - tive / relational ) as a separate event in our model , and imposed a relatively long ( 8 – 10 s ) and jittered separation between compound and probe , in order to avoid probe processing effects from bleeding into the compound interpretation event . This was followed by a 6 – 8 - s ﬁxation - cross ITI . The ordering of the attributive and rela - tional events was scheduled using optseq2 ( http : / / surfer . nmr . mgh . harvard . edu / optseq ) . The entire experiment consisted of 8 runs of 16 trials each . After leaving the scanner , subjects were given a questionnaire which asked them to write down what they had thought each nominal compound meant when they had viewed them in the scanner . 2 . 4 . Image acquisition FMRI data were collected at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania on a 3T Siemens Trio System using a 32 - channel multiple - array head coil . Four types of image sequences were col - lected for each participant : ( 1 ) a standard low - resolution anatomic localizer ; ( 2 ) a high - resolution , T1 - weighted sequence for localization of fMRI activity in standard stereotactic space ; ( 3 ) T2 ⁄ - weighted images from 8 experimental runs ; ( 4 ) a B 0 ﬁeld map sequence for subsequent geometric unwarping of T2 ⁄ - weighted images . After acquiring T1 - weighted anatomical images ( TR = 1630 ms , TE = 3 . 11 ms , TI = 1100 ms , voxel size = 0 . 9 mm (cid:1) 0 . 9 mm (cid:1) 1 . 0 mm , ﬂip angle 15 (cid:3) ) , we collected T2 ⁄ - weighted images using a gradient - echo echoplanar pulse sequence ( TR = 2000 ms , TE = 30 ms , voxel size = 2 mm (cid:1) 2 mm (cid:1) 2 mm , ﬂip angle = 60 (cid:3) , BW = 1578 Hx / Px , 60 slices , with a multi - band acceler - ation factor of 3 ) . 2 . 5 . Analysis 2 . 5 . 1 . Image analysis and ROIs FMRI data were pre - processed ofﬂine using the AFNI ( Cox & Jesmanowicz , 1999 ) software package . The ﬁrst four volumes of each functional run were removed so as to allow the signal to reach steady - state magnetization . Functional images were slice - time corrected , and a motion correction algorithm employed in AFNI registered all volumes to a mean functional volume . Images were then unwarped via B 0 ﬁeld maps ( using FSL software ; http : / / www . fmrib . ox . ac . uk / fsl ) to reduce non - linear magnetic ﬁeld dis - tortions . We applied a high - pass ﬁlter of 0 . 01 Hz on each run to remove low frequency trends . Functional data were registered to the individual subject’s anatomical MRI . Transient spikes in the sig - nal were removed using AFNI’s 3dDespike . Our a priori ROIs were left and right anterior temporal lobes and left and right angular gyri , which we delimited using AFNI’s CA _ ML _ 18 _ MNIA atlas . Our anterior temporal ROIs spanned labels ‘‘left / right temporal pole” and ‘‘left / right medial temporal pole” , while our angular gyrus ROIs circumscribed only the atlas’s ‘‘left / right angular gyrus” ROI ( see Fig . 2 ) . Using AFNI’s TENT function , we modeled the hemodynamic response function ( HRF ) as a ﬁnite impulse response ( FIR ) basis set ﬁt to each condition , with bin - width equal to the 2 - s TR , and 9 knots ( TRs ) modeled for a given trial . We used the full individu - ally ﬁtted 9 - knot FIR HRFs to assess differences in the shapes and timecourses of the BOLD responses to attributive and relational compounds ( see below ) ; however , for our initial voxel selection and our analysis of relational - attributive combinatorial bias , we collapsed the FIR output : While the FIR model outputs 9 TENT functions and thus 9 beta estimates per condition per voxel , we selected the beta estimate of the largest magnitude ( positive or negative ) within a given TENT series such that our design matrix had one beta estimate per condition per voxel . Fig . 1 . Plot of relational - attributive combinatorial bias ( normed on 35 participants , inclusive of 18 fMRI subjects ) . Fig . 1 shows the distribution of attributive and relational combinatorial bias by item , order - ranked from unanimously attributive ( relational bias = 0 ) interpretations to unanimously relational ( relational bias = 1 ) interpretations . Blue indicates those items marked as relational in Estes ( 2003 ) and Wisniewski and Love ( 1998 ) studies and red indicates those marked as attributive in those studies . This aggregate combinatorial bias measure was included as a continuous covariate in one model , while the individual subject response ( attributive / relational ) was treated as a categorical variable in a model of individual BOLD timecourses . ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) 12 C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 To identify task - activated voxels for inclusion in further analy - sis , we ﬁrst conducted a GLM with FIR regressors for task and ﬁx - ation ITI . The task TENT series was time - locked to the onset of the nominal compound , and the ITI TENT began at the onset of the ﬁx - ation ITI ( 10 – 12 s after the onset of the nominal compound ) . To investigate effects of relational - attributive combinatorial bias in each ROI , we used a model with covariates for task and jittered probe event , where task TENTs were again time - locked to the nom - inal compound presentation and probe TENTS synced to the onset of the probe question ( 8 – 10 s post compound onset ) , along with a continuous covariate for the relational - attributive bias ( see Fig . 1 ) of the noun compound in each trial . Head movement and global signal were included as covariates of no interest in both models . In addition to investigating effects of relational - attributive bias , we also utilized subjects’ post - scanning surveys to label each item / trial as relational or attributive based on individual subjects’ responses . We then extracted the peristimulus BOLD signal time - course starting at the onset of each trial , where TR0 was the onset of presentation of the noun compound , to TR8 post - stimulus onset ( total of 9 TRs ) . TR0 was subtracted from each condition so that the starting point of the BOLD time series was aligned across condi - tions ( Staresina , Fell , Do Lam , Axmacher , & Henson , 2012 ) . This is analogous to the procedure of ‘‘baseline - correcting” in EEG analy - sis . Thus , only TRs 1 – 8 ( 2 – 16 s post stimulus onset ) entered statis - tical timecourse analysis . We averaged FIR parameter estimates across voxels in each ROI in the participant’s native space , and the resulting values entered into subsequent BOLD timecourse analyses . 3 . Results 3 . 1 . Task - responsive voxels in anatomical ROIs In a group - level contrast targeting bilateral AG and bilateral ATL , we found several clusters of voxels with a reliable ( p < 0 . 01 , uncorrected ) activation difference between task ( comprehension of nominal compound ) and ITI ﬁxation baseline , where the task condition collapsed attributive and relational trials together ( Fig . 2 ) . Two distinct clusters of activity were revealed in left AG , where one cluster was positively activated for task relative to base - line ( cluster centroid : [ (cid:3) 45 (cid:3) 5438 ] Talairach coordinates ) and another more posterior , inferior cluster was more active during baseline relative to task ( cluster centroid : [ - 39 – 67 35 ] Talairach coordinates ) . This motivated us to treat positively and negatively activated task - responsive voxels as distinct functional subregions within the anatomical left AG ROI . Other clusters in right AG and left ATL were largely positively task - responsive , and so did not prompt any functional division between above - and below - ﬁxation task activation ( see outlined ROIs in Fig . 2 ) . No signiﬁcant task - responsive clusters survived even a liberal threshold in right ATL , and so this anatomical region was not analyzed further . 3 . 2 . Combinatorial bias predicts activity in left and right AG 3 . 2 . 1 . Categorical analysis For each subject , we identiﬁed the 50 most positive task - responsive voxels in each of our three ROIs : right AG , left AG , and left ATL . We also identiﬁed the 50 most negative task - responsive voxels in left AG , for a total of four functional ROIs . The location and distribution of these top 50 task - responsive vox - els varied greatly across subjects for each ROI , precluding clear anatomical delineation of positive vs . negative task - responsive regions within left AG for a given subject , even though group - level clusters suggest an anatomical divide along PGa / PGp ( Noonan , Jefferies , Visser , & Lambon Ralph , 2013 ; see Discussion ) . Based on subjects’ post - scanning survey responses , we were able to code each trial as attributive or relational at the individual sub - ject level . Using this categorical coding scheme for each fMRI sub - ject , we found no signiﬁcant difference between attributive and relational conditions in positive task - responsive left ATL voxels ( t ( 34 ) = 0 . 26 , p = 0 . 80 ) or positive task - responsive left AG voxels ( t ( 34 ) = 0 . 18 , p = 0 . 86 ) . We found signiﬁcantly more positive activity for the relational condition relative to the attributive in right AG positive task - responsive voxels ( t ( 34 ) = 2 . 89 , p = 0 . 0067 ) . Looking at negative task - responsive activity in left AG , we found signiﬁ - cantly greater negative activation for the relational condition rela - tive to the attributive ( i . e . more positive activity in the attributive condition ; t ( 34 ) = 2 . 12 , p = 0 . 042 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 . Continuous analysis Because we found a gradient of bias in our compound norming study , ranging from highly relational ( all subjects indicating a relational interpretation ) to ambiguous ( some subjects indicating relational interpretations , others attributive interpretations ) to highly attributive , we also examined the effect of relational - attributive bias ( referred to henceforth as simply ‘‘combinatorial bias , ” see Fig . 1 ) on BOLD signal amplitude . This combinatorial bias measure was the average relational / attributive rating across both the norming study responses and the fMRI subjects’ post - scanning survey for a combined total of 35 ratings per item . This analysis was conducted within each of the same four 50 - voxel ROIs ( positive task - responsive voxels in left ATL , right ATL , left AG , and also negative task - responsive voxels in left AG ) in each subject . Within the 50 most task - responsive voxels in right AG , we found a signiﬁcant main effect of combinatorial bias ( t ( 17 ) = 2 . 44 , Fig . 2 . Whole - brain task - responsive voxel activity ( task vs . ITI ﬁxation baseline ) . ROIs circumscribed : left ATL ( red ) , left AG ( yellow ) , and right AG ( blue ) at Talairach coordinates [ (cid:3) 45 (cid:3) 5738 ] . C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 13 p = 0 . 01 ) , where voxel activity was more positive the more rela - tional the bias . This effect obtained for a wide range of ROI sizes within right AG ( see Fig . 3a ) . No such effect was observed in task - responsive voxels in left ATL ( t ( 17 ) = 0 . 84 , p = 0 . 20 ; see Fig . 3b ) or in positive task - responsive voxels in left AG ( t ( 17 ) = 0 . 38 , p = 0 . 35 ; see Fig 3c ) . Activity in those 50 voxels that responded most negatively to task ( relative to baseline ) in left AG was marginally predicted by combinatorial bias ( t ( 17 ) = 1 . 23 , p = 0 . 11 ) . A signiﬁcant main effect of combinatorial bias emerges when the size of the negatively task - responsive left AG ROI is increased to 90 voxels ( t ( 17 ) = 2 . 73 , p = 0 . 005 ) , and this effect is also reliable for ROI sizes larger than 90 voxels ( p < 0 . 01 , see Fig . 3d ; in these ROIs , voxel activity was more negative the more relational the bias ) . It is interesting to note that while we expected to ﬁnd evidence of increased competition for the more ambiguous compounds ( that is , the compounds near 0 . 5 bias in Fig . 1 ) , we failed to ﬁnd differ - ential activation related to increased ambiguity in either our ATL and AG ROIs or in a targeted analysis of left inferior frontal gyrus ( left IFG ) . Neither did we see an effect of either attributive / rela - tional interpretation or degree of ambiguity ﬁrst button - press reaction time ( the participant’s button press indicating conver - gence on an interpretation before being shown the probe ) . Thus we do not ﬁnd evidence for an effect of ambiguity per se , but rather the degree of relational or attributive bias along the combinatorial bias gradient . 3 . 3 . BOLD timecourse of attributive interpretation differs by ROI Finding evidence that combinatorial bias predicts the magni - tude of the response in both left and right AG , we then asked whether relational and attributive combination effects might also show distinct BOLD timecourses across ROIs . In particular , we were interested in whether the timecourse of BOLD activity in ATL would reveal a distinction between attributive and relational pro - cessing that was not apparent in the previous analysis . Using the same task - responsive voxel selection criteria as above , we compared the timecourse of BOLD activity for relational and attributive combinations in the 50 most task - responsive vox - els in right AG , left AG ( negatively task - responsive voxels only ) , and left ATL . In this analysis , we treated relational and attributive combination categorically , coding each trial condition based on individual subjects’ responses in a post - scan survey . Activity for relational combination signiﬁcantly differed from attributive combination between 6 and 12 s post stimuls onset in both right AG and left AG ( p < 0 . 05 ; see Fig . 4 ) . Interestingly , activ - ity associated with attributive combination was greater than rela - tional activity in left ATL at a markedly early 4 s post - stimulus onset ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Examining the latencies of each subject’s effect peak ( using a nonparametric Wilcoxon signed rank test ) , we found that the response to attributive trials peaked signiﬁcantly earlier than the relational effect in left ATL ( p = 0 . 01 ) . This is not due to differences in subjects’ attributive and relational response times for the ﬁrst Fig . 3 . Beta coefﬁcients from subject - wise parametric analysis of voxel activity by combinatorial bias ( see Fig . 1 ) across a range of voxels within ( a ) right AG , ( b ) left ATL , ( c ) left AG , positively task - responsive voxels only , and ( d ) left AG , negatively task - responsive voxels only . Voxels chosen by most positive ( or , in ( d ) , negative ) t statistics for the task - vs . - baseline contrast ( see Fig . 2 ) in each anatomical ROI . Error ribbon indicates ±1 SEM . 14 C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 button press ( indicating when the subject arrives at an interpreta - tion of the noun compound ) , as we observed no signiﬁcant differ - ence in RT between conditions ( t ( 17 ) = 0 . 51 , p = 0 . 61 ; M attributive = 2 . 65 s ( SD = 0 . 28 ) ; M relational = 2 . 70 s ( SD = 0 . 26 ) ) . Time - to - peak analysis also revealed that both conditions peak ear - lier in left ATL than in right AG ( p < 0 . 01 ) . While inferring temporal properties of neural activity from BOLD timecourses has its limita - tions , this provides intriguing evidence that left ATL activity may also reﬂect a distinction between attributive and relational combi - nation in addition to activity in bilateral AG . 4 . Discussion This study sought to determine whether , and how , relational and attributive interpretations of nominal compounds differen - tially engaged putative ‘‘semantic hubs , ” the left ATL and bilateral AG . We found evidence that both relational and attributive pro - cesses engaged ATL and AG , but that each brain region responded very differently to the relational - attributive dichotomy . Both right and left AG showed differential responses to relational and attribu - tive compounds , with relational compounds diverging more from the baseline period than attributive compounds . However , while right AG responded more to both compound types than to baseline , the direction of this activation was reversed in left AG , such that left AG responded more at baseline than to compound interpreta - tion . This proﬁle of activation in left AG was consistent with its role in the so - called default network . Left ATL did not show a combina - torial bias effect per se , but the time course of individual subjects’ BOLD response curves indicated that attributive interpretations induced an earlier peak response than relational interpretations . Thus , while the magnitude of response in left and right AG was greater to relational combination than attributive combination , the timing , but not the magnitude , of left ATL response varied across the two combination types . These combined ﬁndings support an account whereby rela - tional and attributive operations are not dissociable by a coarse neuroanatomical divide , but rather are encoded differently in dif - ferent regions . The multiple , potentially redundant , instantiations of a combinatorial relational - attributive code across the brain pro - vide compelling evidence that the relational - attributive distinction is a productive one . While these data suggest that bilateral AG is more engaged in computing relational combination , comparison with the left ATL proﬁle does not constitute a true double dissoci - ation between relational and attributive processes . While we do not ﬁnd evidence to support a full dual - route , parallel process model of relational and attributive processing , we ﬁnd that these combinatorial operations may be instantiated in overlapping net - works across ATL and AG . The time course of attributive and rela - tional BOLD response in the left ATL suggests that attributive processing may be facilitated relative to relational processing , rather than attributive ‘‘relations” being the interpretations of last resort ( as predicted by the CARIN model ) . This is broadly consistent with certain claims that attributive feature extraction and re - combination must occur before relational information can be pro - cessed . The earlier ATL response peak for attributive compounds may also be facilitated by what we call ‘‘modiﬁer markedness” : the fact that these attributive compounds contain modiﬁer nouns that are less frequent than the subsequent head noun , and perhaps therefore more salient . 4 . 1 . Angular gyrus and thematic relations 4 . 1 . 1 . AG sensitivity to thematic relations as verbs Bilateral AG , and more prominently left AG , have been impli - cated in a wide range of linguistic and non - linguistic semantic pro - cesses ( see Seghier , 2012 , for review ) , but our study pursues an emerging hypothesis that AG speciﬁcally subserves the semantics of thematic relations . There is increasing evidence that AG may be selectively activated by thematic role information carried on Fig . 4 . Peristimulus FIR curves of attributive ( red ) vs . relational ( blue ) activation in each ROI . FIR curves shown are from the 50 most positively task - responsive voxels for the task - vs . - ﬁxation contrast in each anatomical ROI , except for left AG , where only the 50 most negatively task - responsive voxels are shown . Attributive and relational interpretations were coded based on a given subject’s interpretations taken from post - scan surveys . Error bars indicate ±1 SEM . Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant effect of condition at given time point ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Upper panel : Right AG ; Middle panel : Left AG ; Lower panel : Left ATL . ( For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 15 verbs in particular . For instance , in one group of studies , experi - menters looking at 1 - , 2 - , and 3 - argument verbs ( that is , intransi - tive , transitive , and ditransitive verbs , respectively ) found that activation in bilateral angular and supramarginal gyrus ( BA 39 and 40 ) correlated parametrically with the number of thematic roles that can attach to a given verb , even when the verb was pre - sented in isolation ( Meltzer - Asscher , Schuchard , den Ouden , & Thompson , 2013 ; Thompson , Bonakdarpour , & Fix , 2010 ; Thompson et al . , 2007 ) . Boylan et al . ( 2015 ) also found that multi - voxel patterns in left AG tracked information relating to the presence of a shared verb in pairs of two - word phrases , demon - strating that AG represents information speciﬁc to verbs , perhaps event structure or thematic relations mediated by verbs . While left AG has been implicated in the detection of syntactic errors ( Embick , Marantz , Miyashita , O’Neil , & Sakai , 2000 ; Kuperberg et al . , 2003 ) , it is also involved in the detection of semantic incongruities , particularly when the semantics of an argument violates the semantic constraints of a verb ( Kang et al . , 1999 ; Kuperberg et al . , 2008 ; Newman et al . , 2001 ) . This suggests that the sensitivity of AG to thematic roles and verb structure is not limited to the syntactic composition alone , but also to the semantic content ( Pallier et al . , 2011 ) . It may be that left AG acts as an interface between semantic memory and syntactic structure , mapping semantic - thematic relations onto structural constraints surrounding verbs and their arguments . Indeed , electrophysiologi - cal and neuroimaging studies support an overlap between ( morpho - ) syntactic and semantic - thematic verb violations . Kuperberg et al . ( 2008 ) compared three different types of verb vio - lations : ( 1 ) semantic – thematically violated verbs ( e . g . ‘‘at breakfast the eggs would eat” ) ( 2 ) morphosyntactically violated verbs ( e . g . ‘‘at breakfast the boys would eats” ) and ( 3 ) real - world violations ( e . g . ‘‘at breakfast the boys would plant” ) . They found that , unlike real - world violations , both semantic - thematic and morpho - syntactic violations elicited activity in a frontal / inferior parietal / basal ganglia network . This was consistent with previous electro - physiological ﬁndings showing that semantic - thematic and syn - tactic violations evoked a P600 event - related potential ( ERP ) that is distinct from the N400 produced by real - world incongruities ( Hoeks , Stowe , & Doedens , 2004 ; Kuperberg , 2007 ; Kuperberg et al . , 2003 ) . Kuperberg et al . ( 2008 ) suggested that this frontal / AG / basal ganglia activity , as well as the P600 activity reported in previous studies to the same types of semantic violations , reﬂected prolonged attempts to combine the structural constraints of the verb with semantic properties of the Agent NP argument . This description is also consistent with previous hypotheses suggesting such activity might underlie an attempt to relate the goal - directed action denoted by the verb with properties of the Agent ( Buccino et al . , 2001 ; Chao & Martin , 2000 ; Damasio et al . , 2001 ; Fogassi et al . , 2005 ) . 4 . 1 . 2 . Lateralized effects of thematic relations in AG If thematic role knowledge , particularly on the verb , is privileged content of the semantic space of AG , then how do we account for the AG activation proﬁle of stimuli like nominal compounds , which do not contain any verb ? Likewise , taxonomic and thematic errors that localize to lesions in ATL and AG comprise errors on nouns , not verbs . We argue that the verb functions as a ‘‘spell - out” of a the - matic relation , and stimuli like relational nominal compounds require positing implicit verbs and events ( as in ‘‘a hawk that hunts robins” for robin hawk ) . It is also interesting to note that word pairs in a thematic error , such as ‘‘dog” and ‘‘bone , ” can be described as related via such an implicit verb / event ; in the ‘‘dog - bone” case , ‘‘chews” or ‘‘buries , ” etc . That is , thematic knowledge is precisely knowledge of verbs and their arguments : that is , in conceiving of the relation , one is accessing the very semantic information that identiﬁes the verb , or that the verb denotes . We speculate that the verb may be the minimal linguistic expression of the fundamen - tal thematic and event - based concepts that AG subserves . It may also be that the degree to which a thematic relation is grammaticalized – for instance , whether it is spelled out in an explicit verb – accounts for the subtly different proﬁles of activity between right and left AG , and even within left AG itself . Graves et al . ( 2010 ) study of nominal compounds vs . their non - attested reversals found BOLD activity in right AG , but not left , increased for familiar nominal compounds like lake house ( as compared with house lake ) . The authors offer an extended version of Beeman et al . ( 1994 ) right hemisphere ‘‘coarse semantic coding hypothesis” to account for how noun - noun compounds might engage right AG but not left AG . They describe the dynamics of left and right AG by way of attractor networks , where such a network settles into an attractor basin when it optimizes the error space in the map - ping between inputs ( words ) and outputs ( meanings ) . Whereas left AG is suggested to have relatively narrow attractor basins , reﬂect - ing highly speciﬁc and constrained mappings between words and meanings , right AG may contain wider , shallower basins . With less discrete minima , right AG would support more extensive overlap in meanings . Graves and colleagues propose that this increased ‘‘overlap” in right AG is what supports conceptual combination . Wesuggest these attractor dynamics may explain a more subtle difference than that between the representation of words / concepts ( left AG ) and their combinatorial instances ( right AG ) . After all , if the distinction between left and right AG representations were a matter of ‘‘lexicalized meanings” vs . ‘‘compositional meanings” , it becomes difﬁcult to defend that the Graves et al . compounds were the latter and not the former . Familiar relational stimuli in the Graves et al . study were items like ‘‘rock star” and ‘‘lake house” : arguably highly lexicalized , if not idiomatic . Instead , we suggest that both left and right AG support conceptual combination , but the greater ‘‘semantic reach” afforded by wide , shallow attractor basins in right AG may accommodate access to the extrinsic rela - tion necessary for interpreting compounds like dog bone that lack the explicit ( morpho ) syntactic information about the relation ( i . e . ‘‘a bone that a dog chews on” ) . Where explicit syntactic informa - tion detailing the agent , theme , and relation between dog and bone ( ‘‘chews on” ) is lacking , right AG is able to impute the extrinsic relation . While left AG relies on explicit morphosyntactic cues to arrive at highly constrained meanings , right AG can ﬁnd implicit relational content in the process of determining a coherent mean - ing between two nouns . This would account for why verb - based minimal composition , where the thematic relation is grammatical - ized and explicit , would be derived in the narrow attractor basins of left AG ( Boylan et al . , 2015 ) , while the more ﬂuid meanings afforded by nominal compounds are derived in the wider semantic net of right AG . That is , the left AG may be more engaged in syntactic - based relational combination , while the right AG medi - ates more semantic - based relational combination , particularly of novel nominal compounds as in our stimuli . 4 . 1 . 3 . AG and the default mode network The effect of combinatorial bias we found in right AG accords with the Graves et al . ( 2010 ) nominal compound effect in that region , and the distinction between relational and attributive interpretations adds another dimension to the characterization of right AG as a combinatorial hub . However , our nominal compound effect in negatively task - activated voxels in left AG is rather more novel . It has been noted that left AG is functionally heterogeneous , and recent work has begun to map this heterogeneity to subregions within left AG and surrounding areas . Of particular interest is the role of certain regions of the AG in the ‘‘default mode network” ( DMN ) ( Raichle et al . , 2001 ) , a network of regions showing more positive activation in the absence of a task . Left AG’s involvement 16 C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 in the default network has invited the contention that differential activation in this region indexes task - unrelated difﬁculty effects independent of the content or representation of the stimuli . While certain regions of AG do indeed appear to index difﬁculty effects , the baseline - active ( ‘‘deactivated” ) regions of AG do not follow this pattern . In a meta - analysis of studies comparing semantic tasks with high - vs . - low demands on executive control , Noonan et al . , 2013 , found a functional divergence between dorsal AG ( bilateral , including dorsal / anterior AG and boundaries with superior mar - ginal gyrus ( SMG ) and inferior parietal sulcus ( IPS ) ) and left mid AG ( somewhat closer to PGp than PGa ) , with respect to executive and representational roles in semantic processing . Dorsal AG showed reliably greater activation in high > low executive seman - tic control conditions , and was characterized as allocating atten - tion to semantic representations in a task - dependent and goal - driven manner . However , dorsal AG’s role in semantic control was contrasted with mid AG , the activity of which was modulated by the semantic representational content of stimuli even when matched on task demands . Crucially , mid AG was associated with the DMN , showing more positive activation in the absence of a task . Noonan et al . ( 2013 ) note that centers of activation in the putatively functionally distinct regions of dorsal AG and mid AG lie at Talairach coordinates [ (cid:3) 41 (cid:3) 5545 ] and [ (cid:3) 39 (cid:3) 6530 ] , respec - tively . These align well with the two clusters of activation we observed for the task - vs . - baseline contrast in left AG : a more dorsal cluster of positive activation at [ (cid:3) 45 (cid:3) 5438 ] and a more posterior , inferior cluster of more negative activation at [ (cid:3) 39 (cid:3) 6735 ] . We ﬁnd that the latter cluster aligns both anatomically and function - ally with the left mid AG region of the DMN . Unlike the more dorsal cluster , the left mid AG cluster showed a combinatorial bias effect . Several studies also ﬁnd stimulus - dependent activity unrelated to task difﬁculty in this region : some found this region showed more negative activity to abstract items than to concrete items ( prima facie similar to our ﬁnding that relational compounds elicited more negative activity relative to attributive items in left mid AG ) ( Binder , Westbury , McKiernan , Possing , & Medler , 2005 ; Noonan et al . , 2013 ; Wang , Conder , Blitzer , & Shinkareva , 2010 ) . Other studies found this region responded more negatively to perceptual decisions than semantic decisions , while both stimuli elicited a negative divergence from baseline ( as did both types of nominal compound stimuli relative to baseline in our study ) ( Seghier , Fagan , & Price , 2010 ) . Outside the domain of language , Grabner , Ansari , Koschutnig , Reishofer , and Ebner ( 2013 ) found greater ( more positive , less ‘‘deactivated” ) left mid AG activity in more dif - ﬁcult arithmetic tasks , inconsistent with the model characterizing this region as reﬂecting task difﬁculty , and consistent with the hypothesis that this region supports symbol - referent mapping . Given that we did not ﬁnd evidence that relational compounds were more difﬁcult to interpret than attributive compounds , our differential activity in the left mid AG is unlikely to be an effect of task difﬁculty . Thus , our ﬁndings are consistent with a model whereby left AG task - negative activity reﬂects categorical differ - ences in the semantic content of the stimuli , rather than differ - ences in executive semantic control required to complete the task . 4 . 1 . 4 . A stimulus - speciﬁc negative BOLD response ? While we characterize the left mid AG and right AG effects as similarly indexing a greater magnitude of activation for relational interpretations , this is based on the absolute value of activation relative to baseline . It is entirely possible that the left mid AG effect should rather be characterized as an ‘‘attributive > relational” effect when considered as a local vascular and / or neural suppres - sion . Proposed hemodynamic mechanisms for negative BOLD responses include ‘‘blood stealing” or ‘‘blood sharing , ” whereby blood is diverted to active regions and away from the site of the negative BOLD response . However , these purely vascular explana - tions are not sufﬁcient to predict the negative BOLD response pro - ﬁles found in our study and several visual studies ( Bressler , Spotswood , & Whitney , 2007 ; Shmuel et al . , 2002 ; Smith , Williams , & Singh , 2004 ) . Shmuel , Augath , Oeltermann , and Logothetis ( 2006 ) , while showing that negative BOLD activity is correlated with decreased neuronal activity measured via simulta - neous electrical recordings , also demonstrated that the local decrease in neuronal activity predicted the spatiotemporal proper - ties of the negative BOLD pattern better than surrounding positive BOLD activity did . This suggests that local neural suppression drives the negative BOLD response . Moreover , recent studies suggest that such neural suppression may be more stimulus - speciﬁc than most attentional accounts pre - dict . It is well known that attention directed to a given location corresponds with an increase in neural activity at that region ( even in the absence of visual / auditory stimulation ) and a decrease in neural activity at unattended regions . This predicts that attentional neural suppression will occur over relatively broad swathes of ( unattended ) sensory space , however ( Bressler et al . , 2007 ) . Recent studies show that negative BOLD responses to stimuli are spatially ( retino - and tonotopically ) constrained and highly tuned to certain properties of the stimulus ( Bressler et al . , 2007 ; Linke , Vicente - Grabovetsky , & Cusack , 2011 ) . Thus , it could be that neural sup - pression itself carries stimulus - speciﬁc information . On the other hand , for a reduction in signal to carry such stimulus - speciﬁc infor - mation , it may be that the ﬁring trace of center - surround responses in a sub - voxel population of neurons is dominated by the surround suppression , even though the most narrowly tuned neurons are being excited ( Bressler et al . , 2007 ; Linke et al . , 2011 ; Müller & Kleinschmidt , 2004 ) . While the mechanism for stimulus - tuned negative BOLD activ - ity requires further study , negative BOLD responses across the brain are potentially equally informative as positive BOLD responses . In the current study , the mechanism by which informa - tion relevant to relational compounds might be more ‘‘suppressed” in left AG is unclear : the pattern of suppression may itself be part of the representation of the relation between the two nouns , or it could be that more inhibition of unrelated information is required to resolve the meaning of a relational compound compared with an attributive compound . Further study is required to disentangle these options . 4 . 2 . Anterior temporal lobe and semantic composition While bilateral AG appears to index the relational - attributive distinction by way of different overall activation for the duration of the task , left ATL may derive both relational and attributive com - binations , but with a temporal offset in activation peak for the rela - tional combination as compared with the attributive . It is unclear whether the relational meaning is delayed , perhaps due to the need to access an extrinsic relation linking the two nouns , or the attributive reading is facilitated . Attributive compound interpreta - tion may be facilitated for a number of reasons . For one , it may be that the modiﬁer noun ( the ﬁrst noun ) is salient by way of being less frequent . We ﬁnd that the attributive modiﬁer nouns ( ﬁrst nouns in the two - word compounds ) are less frequent than the head nouns , while the converse is true for relational compounds . This ‘‘modiﬁer markedness” on the attributive compounds may consist not only in the frequency disparity between the modiﬁer and head nouns within an attributive compound , but also in the fact that the modiﬁer noun in attributive compounds is signiﬁ - cantly less frequent than the modiﬁer noun in relational com - pounds ( p < 0 . 001 ) . Modiﬁer markedness may serve as a predictive cue in biasing toward attributive interpretation , and this early cue may account for the earlier peak in the left ATL BOLD response to attributive compounds . Indeed , several studies have C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 17 found the left ATL to be the locus of semantically mediated predic - tive facilitation ( Fruchter , Linzen , Westerlund , & Marantz , 2015 ; Lau , Weber , Gramfort , Hämäläinen , & Kuperberg , 2014 ) . However , the facilitation we observe for the attributive ‘‘modiﬁer marked - ness” is likely not semantic : attributive nouns were no more or less semantically associated than relational nouns ( association mea - sured by LSA ) . It is also unclear how ‘‘early” the frequency - based cue on the modiﬁer is : the modiﬁer is only infrequent relative to a downstream head noun , or to other modiﬁer nouns in relational compounds . Methods more sensitive to the neural timecourse of nominal compound interpretation may elucidate which lexical and semantic factors contribute to facilitating attributive readings . These ﬁnding nonetheless present an intriguing alternative to a strict dual - process hypothesis for attributive and relational combi - nation . The temporal delay in computing relational combinations in left ATL is consistent with a theory whereby feature extraction and attribute - based composition occur prior to relation - based , the - matic information , but are , at least at some level , derived by the same combinatorial process . In such a model , ‘‘properties” are predicates , and thematic relations can be reiﬁed into features of object concepts such that ‘‘walks on a leash” is as much a property of dog as simple adjectives like ‘‘furry” or ‘‘loyal . ” Since language is ﬂexible in this regard , able to express the verb - / event - based rela - tional concept ‘‘bears live young” in the adjective ‘‘viviparous , ” and to convert between verbs ( relations between nouns ) and par - ticiples ( properties / attributes of nouns ) , etc . , it is perhaps unsur - prising that there be a means of converting relational and attributive concepts along a single dimension , where incorporation of an extrinsic relation is simply an added ‘‘feature” . While rela - tional and attributive combinations may be qualitatively distin - guished in AG , it might be that these differences are collapsed in left ATL . Indeed , in a study directly comparing how conceptual combination and object - concept speciﬁcity engage left ATL , Westerlund and Pylkkänen ( 2014 ) concluded that combination and speciﬁcity effects in left ATL likely arise from a single feature - binding operation . Note that relational nominal compounds are exactly like attributive nominal compounds in that the ﬁrst ( modiﬁer ) noun is indicating what kind of thing the second ( head ) noun is . That is , regardless of whether one interprets robin hawk attributively or relationally , it is still a hawk object - concept of the robin qualiﬁer type . Thus attributive and relational modiﬁcation might be of a piece when the operation is to determine the level of speciﬁcity robin hawk has relative to hawk . The crucial difference is that rela - tional combination requires the integration of an extrinsic relation , while attributive combination rather selects which feature of the head noun is to be emphasized or substituted with the salient attri - bute of the modiﬁer noun . In the attributive case , the modiﬁer noun selects from among features already denoted in the set { robin , hawk } to yield ‘‘a hawk that is robin - like” , whereas a rela - tional compound requires retrieval of some ‘‘feature” outside the set { robin , hawk } : namely , the ‘‘prey” or ‘‘hunt” relation ( ‘‘a hawk that hunts robins” . This integration of an extrinsic relation / feature may account for the delay in left ATL BOLD response for relational combination relative to attributive combination . 4 . 3 . Limitations , future directions , and conclusions In this study , we ﬁnd evidence that both left and right AG treat relational combination as distinct from attributive combination . Given that activity in left AG has been found to track certain prop - erties of verb argument structure ( Boylan et al . , 2015 ) we propose that left AG might subserve more explicit thematic relations , partic - ularly when expressed as verbs . This proﬁle of left AG contrasts with that of right AG , which has previously been shown to track the combinatorial strength of nominal compounds ( Graves et al . , 2010 ) which lack a verb or explicit thematic relation , but which nonetheless might accommodate integration of implicit thematic relations . The function of left and right AG in composing explicit and implicit thematic relations aligns with a version of the ‘‘coarse semantic coding hypothesis” whereby left AG subserves narrower attractors such that connectivity between ( thematic ) associations might constitute tighter , denser semantic networks , while right AG supports more ﬂexible ( thematic ) associations between con - cepts in wider , shallower attractor basins . While this model of attractor dynamics is an intriguing one , it remains to be directly tested in right and left AG . These results invite further study to pin - point how right and left AG differ with regard to semantic combination . We also found evidence that relational and attributive combina - tion are temporally differentiated in left ATL . Inferring temporal signatures of neural activity from BOLD response curves has its caveats , however , given the potential nonlinearities between neu - ral structures and the vasculature ( Henson , Shallice , Josephs , & Dolan , 2002 ) . Thus the left ATL timecourse would beneﬁt from fur - ther study using methods , such as EEG or MEG , with higher tempo - ral resolution than fMRI . Rather surprisingly , we did not ﬁnd evidence of increased com - petition for the more ambiguous compounds in our ATL , AG , or IFG targeted ROIs . This negative ﬁnding invites careful comparison between what we call the ‘‘combinatorial bias” of a noun com - pound along a perhaps simpliﬁed , one - dimensional relational - attributive axis , and the more general question of ambiguity and reference resolution , particularly concerning the role of left IFG . While the current study had a range of combinatorial biases , fur - ther research is needed to target both relational / attributive ambi - guity as well as multiple ambiguities at a ﬁner granularity than attributive vs . relational ( e . g . noun compounds with multiple pos - sible attributive readings , not just an attributive vs . relational ambiguity ) . Our failure to ﬁnd an effect of ambiguity is trouble - some for the CARIN model in particular , which is about competi - tion between different relations . The interaction between ambiguity and the relational - attributive distinction has not been explored , and it is possible that , contrary to CARIN and other mod - els , there may even be an ‘‘ambiguity advantage” effect . Analogous to the ﬁnding from lexical decision studies that words with multi - ple related meanings ( polysemes ) show a processing advantage where words with a few un related meanings ( homonyms ) do not show such an advantage , it is possible that nominal compounds with multiple related attributive meanings ( or multiple related relational meanings ) show a facilitation effect relative to com - pounds with either one meaning or a few unrelated meanings ( Rodd , Gaskell , & Marslen - Wilson , 2004 ) . Finally , while our aim was to determine a productive typology of conceptual combination where attributive and relational inter - pretations are distinct , we did not delineate a typology at any ﬁner grain than attributive vs . relational . Our post - scanning survey indi - cated that a given compound might have range of possible inter - pretations , sometimes constrained to relational meanings , sometimes to attributive , and sometimes ambiguous enough to invite both relational and attributive meanings . Yet the hetero - geneity within the semantic space of attributive vs relational inter - pretations may differ , such that the space of possible relational meanings might be dilated relative to the space of attributive meanings , or vice versa . This problem of deﬁning a productive typology of possible predicates and relations has been a pressing issue in the conceptual combination for the past 40 decades ( some prominent models and approaches to be found in e . g . Downing , 1977 ; Gagné & Shoben , 1997 ; Levi , 1978 ; Murphy , 1990 ) , but is not yet resolved . Further study is warranted , in which the stimuli are chosen to better sample the range and heterogeneity of attribu - tive and relational items than we did here . 18 C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 Acknowledgments This research was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants R0I - DC009209 and R01 - EY021717 to S . T . - S . and an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to C . B . The authors wish to thank members of the Thompson - Schill and Trueswell labs , as well as participants in the Common Ground seminars at the Institute for Research in Cognitive Science at the University of Pennsylvania . Appendix A . Item Type Compound 1 attributive tiger paper 2 attributive warehouse brain 3 attributive spider ﬂowers 4 attributive gymnast squirrel 5 attributive grease ﬁsh 6 attributive octopus chair 7 attributive skunk cigar 8 attributive balloon pregnancy 9 attributive blimp belly 10 attributive catapult promotion 11 attributive inferno radiator 12 attributive medicine music 13 attributive rocket sprinter 14 attributive junkyard desk 15 attributive razor insult 16 attributive surgeon ﬁsh 17 attributive cardinal ﬂower 18 attributive needle grass 19 attributive ice marriage 20 attributive volcano pimple 21 attributive parasite citizen 22 attributive mosquito ﬂy 23 attributive zebra clam 24 attributive cactus carpet 25 attributive turtle jogger 26 attributive boomerang lie 27 attributive megaphone talker 28 attributive kangaroo rat 29 attributive willow oak 30 attributive pillow lips 31 attributive piranha lawyer 32 attributive snow goose 33 attributive butter grip 34 attributive leopard lizard 35 attributive porcupine ﬁsh 36 attributive molasses trafﬁc 37 attributive dinosaur computer 38 attributive magnet smile 39 attributive mule deer 40 attributive barrel cactus 41 attributive umbrella tree 42 attributive gem idea 43 attributive feather luggage 44 attributive sponge memory 45 attributive lemon paint 46 attributive vampire insect 47 attributive shark politician 48 attributive sedative voice 49 attributive mirror pond 50 attributive funnel tornado 51 attributive thunder applause Appendix A . ( continued ) Item Type Compound 52 attributive leech boyfriend 53 attributive soldier ant 54 attributive twig legs 55 attributive mushroom cloud 56 attributive silk hair 57 attributive elbow macaroni 58 attributive sandpaper skin 59 attributive pen knife 60 attributive handlebar moustache 61 attributive hourglass body 62 attributive iron ﬁst 63 attributive pie chart 64 attributive bullet train 65 relational pine mushroom 66 relational orchard oriole 67 relational milk virus 68 relational lounge beer 69 relational copper horse 70 relational patio cigarette 71 relational water celery 72 relational cow parsnip 73 relational daisy extract 74 relational rodeo magazine 75 relational sailing hat 76 relational honey soup 77 relational ﬂoor television 78 relational winter mushroom 79 relational glass rose 80 relational acorn woodpecker 81 relational harbor porpoise 82 relational prisoner grafﬁti 83 relational nose sound 84 relational bowling sweater 85 relational pasta jar 86 relational battle theory 87 relational servant scandal 88 relational mustard spot 89 relational gender comedy 90 relational motorcycle documentary 91 relational bacon tongs 92 relational ﬁnger nerve 93 relational cracker tray 94 relational rugby shoes 95 relational microwave sandwich 96 relational telescope observation 97 relational onion tears 98 relational pancake spatula 99 relational concrete fountain 100 relational burrito stain 101 relational council mandate 102 relational storage hutch 103 relational mountain snake 104 relational sugar tea 105 relational jungle bird 106 relational ocean nausea 107 relational city riots 108 relational employee vote 109 relational scalpel incision 110 relational gambling policy 111 relational sympathy bouquet 112 relational room cabinets ( continued on next page ) C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 19 Appendix A . ( continued ) Item Type Compound 113 relational party dance 114 relational chest rash 115 relational conference chairman 116 relational gold ﬂakes 117 relational doctor testimony 118 relational baseball injury 119 relational grill steak 120 relational song book 121 relational quartz clock 122 relational lapel microphone 123 relational raisin cereal 124 relational sign post 125 relational desk stapler 126 relational ﬂower season 127 relational cream sauce 128 relational wood stove References Baggio , G . , Choma , T . , van Lambalgen , M . , & Hagoort , P . ( 2010 ) . Coercion and compositionality . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 22 ( 9 ) , 2131 – 2140 . Baron , S . G . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , Weber , M . , & Osherson , D . ( 2010 ) . An early stage of conceptual combination : Superimposition of constituent concepts in left anterolateral temporal lobe . Cognitive Neuroscience , 1 ( 1 ) , 44 – 51 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17588920903548751 . Bavelier , D . , Corina , D . , Jezzard , P . , Padmanabhan , S . , Clark , V . P . , Karni , A . , . . . Rauschecker , J . P . ( 1997 ) . Sentence reading : A functional MRI study at 4 T . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 9 ( 5 ) , 664 – 686 . Beeman , M . , Friedman , R . , Grafman , J . , Perez , E . , Diamond , S . , & Lindsay , M . ( 1994 ) . Summation priming and coarse semantic coding in the right hemisphere . Cognitive Neuroscience , Journal of , 6 ( 1 ) , 26 – 45 . Bemis , D . K . , & Pylkkänen , L . ( 2011 ) . Simple composition : A magnetoencephalography investigation into the comprehension of minimal linguistic phrases . The Journal of Neuroscience , 31 ( 8 ) , 2801 – 2814 . Bemis , D . K . , & Pylkkänen , L . ( 2012 ) . Basic linguistic composition recruits the left anterior temporal lobe and left angular gyrus during both listening and reading . Cerebral Cortex , 23 , 1859 – 1873 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhs170 . Binder , J . R . , & Desai , R . H . ( 2011 ) . The neurobiology of semantic memory . Trends in Cognitive Sciences . Binder , J . R . , Desai , R . H . , Graves , W . W . , & Conant , L . L . ( 2009 ) . Where is the semantic system ? A critical review and meta - analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies . Cerebral Cortex , 19 ( 12 ) , 2767 – 2796 . Binder , J . R . , Westbury , C . , McKiernan , K . , Possing , E . , & Medler , D . ( 2005 ) . Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts . Cognitive Neuroscience , Journal of , 17 ( 6 ) , 905 – 917 . Binney , R . J . , Parker , G . J . M . , & Lambon Ralph , M . A . ( 2012 ) . Convergent connectivity and graded specialization in the rostral human temporal lobe as revealed by diffusion - weighted imaging probabilistic tractography . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 24 ( 10 ) , 1998 – 2014 . Bottini , G . , Corcoran , R . , Sterzi , R . , Paulesu , E . , Schenone , P . , Scarpa , P . , . . . Frith , C . D . ( 1994 ) . The role of the right hemisphere in the interpretation of ﬁgurative aspects of language . Brain , 117 , 1241 – 1253 . Boylan , C . , Trueswell , J . C . , & Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2015 ) . Compositionality and the angular gyrus : A multi - voxel similarity analysis of the semantic composition of nouns and verbs . Neuropsychologia , 78 , 130 – 141 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2015 . 10 . 007 . Bressler , D . , Spotswood , N . , & Whitney , D . ( 2007 ) . Negative BOLD fMRI Response in the Visual Cortex Carries Precise Stimulus - Speciﬁc Information . PLoS ONE , 2 ( 5 ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0000410 . Brysbaert , M . , & New , B . ( 2009 ) . Moving beyond Kucˇera and Francis : A critical evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of a new and improved word frequency measure for American English . Behavior Research Methods , 41 ( 4 ) , 977 – 990 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BRM . 41 . 4 . 977 . Buccino , G . , Binkofski , F . , Fink , G . R . , Fadiga , L . , Fogassi , L . , Gallese , V . , . . . Freund , H . - J . ( 2001 ) . Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner : An fMRI study . European Journal of Neuroscience , 13 ( 2 ) , 400 – 404 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 9568 . 2001 . 01385 . x . Buhrmester , M . , Kwang , T . , & Gosling , S . D . ( 2011 ) . Amazon’s mechanical turk a new source of inexpensive , yet high - quality , data ? Perspectives on Psychological Science , 6 ( 1 ) , 3 – 5 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1745691610393980 . Chao , L . L . , & Martin , A . ( 2000 ) . Representation of manipulable man - made objects in the dorsal stream . NeuroImage , 12 ( 4 ) , 478 – 484 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / nimg . 2000 . 0635 . Costello , F . J . , & Keane , M . T . ( 2000 ) . Efﬁcient creativity : Constraint - guided conceptual combination . Cognitive Science , 24 ( 2 ) , 299 – 349 . Coutanche , M . N . , & Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2014 ) . Creating concepts from converging features in human cortex . Cerebral Cortex , 25 , 2584 – 2593 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhu057 . Cox , R . W . , & Jesmanowicz , A . ( 1999 ) . Real - time 3D image registration for functional MRI . Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , 42 ( 6 ) , 1014 – 1018 . Damasio , H . , Grabowski , T . J . , Tranel , D . , Ponto , L . L . B . , Hichwa , R . D . , & Damasio , A . R . ( 2001 ) . Neural correlates of naming actions and of naming spatial relations . NeuroImage , 13 ( 6 ) , 1053 – 1064 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / nimg . 2001 . 0775 . Downing , P . ( 1977 ) . On the creation and use of English compound nouns . Language , 53 ( 4 ) , 810 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 412913 . Embick , D . , Marantz , A . , Miyashita , Y . , O’Neil , W . , & Sakai , K . L . ( 2000 ) . A syntactic specialization for Broca’s area . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 97 ( 11 ) , 6150 – 6154 . Retrieved from http : / / www . pnas . org / content / 97 / 11 / 6150 . short . Estes , Z . ( 2003 ) . A tale of two similarities : Comparison and integration inconceptual combination . Cognitive Science , 27 ( 6 ) , 911 – 921 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cogsci . 2003 . 01 . 001 . Felleman , D . J . , & Van Essen , D . C . ( 1991 ) . Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex . Cerebral Cortex , 1 ( 1 ) , 1 – 47 . Fletcher , P . C . , Happe , F . , Frith , U . , Baker , S . C . , Dolan , R . J . , Frackowiak , R . S . J . , & Frith , C . D . ( 1995 ) . Other minds in the brain : A functional imaging study of ‘‘theory of mind” in story comprehension . Cognition , 57 ( 2 ) , 109 – 128 . Fogassi , L . , Ferrari , P . F . , Gesierich , B . , Rozzi , S . , Chersi , F . , & Rizzolatti , G . ( 2005 ) . Parietal lobe : From action organization to intention understanding . Science , 308 ( 5722 ) , 662 – 667 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1106138 . Fruchter , J . , Linzen , T . , Westerlund , M . , & Marantz , A . ( 2015 ) . Lexical Preactivation in Basic Linguistic Phrases . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 1 – 24 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1162 / jocn _ a _ 00822 . Gagné , C . L . ( 2000 ) . Relation - based combinations versus property - based combinations : A test of the CARIN theory and the dual - process theory of conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 42 ( 3 ) , 365 – 389 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jmla . 1999 . 2683 . Gagné , C . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1997 ) . Inﬂuence of thematic relations on the comprehension of modiﬁer – noun combinations . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 ( 1 ) , 71 – 87 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 23 . 1 . 71 . Grabner , R . H . , Ansari , D . , Koschutnig , K . , Reishofer , G . , & Ebner , F . ( 2013 ) . The function of the left angular gyrus in mental arithmetic : Evidence from the associative confusion effect . Human Brain Mapping , 34 ( 5 ) , 1013 – 1024 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hbm . 21489 . Graves , W . W . , Binder , J . R . , Desai , R . H . , Conant , L . L . , & Seidenberg , M . S . ( 2010 ) . Neural correlates of implicit and explicit combinatorial semantic processing . NeuroImage , 53 ( 2 ) , 638 – 646 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2010 . 06 . 055 . Henson , R . N . A . , Shallice , T . , Josephs , O . , & Dolan , R . J . ( 2002 ) . Functional magnetic resonance imaging of proactive interference during spoken cued recall . NeuroImage , 17 ( 2 ) , 543 – 558 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / nimg . 2002 . 1229 . Hoeks , J . C . J . , Stowe , L . A . , & Doedens , G . ( 2004 ) . Seeing words in context : The interaction of lexical and sentence level information during reading . Cognitive Brain Research , 19 ( 1 ) , 59 – 73 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cogbrainres . 2003 . 10 . 022 . Hoffman , P . , Binney , R . J . , & Lambon Ralph , M . A . ( 2015 ) . Differing contributions of inferior prefrontal and anterior temporal cortex to concrete and abstract conceptual knowledge . Cortex , 63 , 250 – 266 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cortex . 2014 . 09 . 001 . Homae , F . , Yahata , N . , & Sakai , K . L . ( 2003 ) . Selective enhancement of functional connectivity in the left prefrontal cortex during sentence processing . NeuroImage , 20 ( 1 ) , 578 – 586 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1053 - 8119 ( 03 ) 00272 - 6 . Humphries , C . , Binder , J . R . , Medler , D . , & Liebenthal , E . ( 2006 ) . Syntactic and semantic modulation of neural activity during auditory sentence comprehension . Cognitive Neuroscience , Journal of , 18 ( 4 ) , 665 – 667 . Humphries , C . , Binder , J . R . , Medler , D . A . , & Liebenthal , E . ( 2007 ) . Time course of semantic processes during sentence comprehension : An fMRI study . NeuroImage , 36 ( 3 ) , 924 – 932 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2007 . 03 . 059 . Kang , A . M . , Constable , R . T . , Gore , J . C . , & Avrutin , S . ( 1999 ) . An event - related fMRI study of implicit phrase - level syntactic and semantic processing . NeuroImage , 10 ( 5 ) , 555 – 561 . Kuperberg , G . R . ( 2007 ) . Neural mechanisms of language comprehension : Challenges to syntax . Brain Research , 1146 , 23 – 49 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2006 . 12 . 063 . Kuperberg , G . R . , Choi , A . , Cohn , N . , Paczynski , M . , & Jackendoff , R . ( 2009 ) . Electrophysiological correlates of complement coercion . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 22 ( 12 ) , 2685 – 2701 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1162 / jocn . 2009 . 21333 . Kuperberg , G . R . , Holcomb , P . J . , Sitnikova , T . , Greve , D . , Dale , A . M . , & Caplan , D . ( 2003 ) . Distinct patterns of neural modulation during the processing of conceptual and syntactic anomalies . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 15 ( 2 ) , 272 – 293 . Kuperberg , G . R . , Sitnikova , T . , & Lakshmanan , B . M . ( 2008 ) . Neuroanatomical distinctions within the semantic system during sentence comprehension : Evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging . NeuroImage , 40 ( 1 ) , 367 – 388 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2007 . 10 . 009 . Laham , D . ( 1998 ) . Latent Semantic Analysis at CU Boulder , http : / / lsa . colorado . edu / . 20 C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 Lambon Ralph , M . A . ( 2014 ) . Neurocognitive insights on conceptual knowledge and its breakdown . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B : Biological Sciences , 369 ( 1634 ) , 20120392 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2012 . 0392 . Lau , E . F . , Weber , K . , Gramfort , A . , Hämäläinen , M . S . , & Kuperberg , G . R . ( 2014 ) . Spatiotemporal signatures of lexical - semantic prediction . Cerebral Cortex . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhu219 . bhu219 . Levi , J . N . ( 1978 ) . The syntax and semantics of complex nominals . Academic Press . Lewis , G . A . , Poeppel , D . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 2015 ) . The neural bases of taxonomic and thematic conceptual relations : An MEG study . Neuropsychologia , 68 , 176 – 189 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2015 . 01 . 011 . Linke , A . C . , Vicente - Grabovetsky , A . , & Cusack , R . ( 2011 ) . Stimulus - speciﬁc suppression preserves information in auditory short - term memory . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 ( 31 ) , 12961 – 12966 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102118108 . McElree , B . , Pylkkänen , L . , Pickering , M . J . , & Traxler , M . J . ( 2006 ) . A time course analysis of enriched composition . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 13 ( 1 ) , 53 – 59 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03193812 . Meltzer - Asscher , A . , Schuchard , J . , den Ouden , D . - B . , & Thompson , C . K . ( 2013 ) . The neural substrates of complex argument structure representations : Processing ‘‘alternating transitivity” verbs . Language and Cognitive Processes , 28 ( 8 ) , 1 – 15 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01690965 . 2012 . 672754 . Müller , N . G . , & Kleinschmidt , A . ( 2004 ) . The attentional ‘‘spotlight”s’ penumbra : Center - surround modulation in striate cortex . NeuroReport , 15 ( 6 ) , 977 – 980 . Murphy , G . ( 1990 ) . Noun phrase interpretation and conceptual combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 29 , 259 – 288 . Newman , A . J . , Pancheva , R . , Ozawa , K . , Neville , H . J . , & Ullman , M . T . ( 2001 ) . An event - related fMRI study of syntactic and semantic violations . Journal of Psycholinguistic Research , 30 ( 3 ) , 339 – 364 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 1010499119393 . Noonan , K . A . , Jefferies , E . , Visser , M . , & Lambon Ralph , M . A . ( 2013 ) . Going beyond inferior prefrontal involvement in semantic control : Evidence for the additional contribution of dorsal angular gyrus and posterior middle temporal cortex . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 1824 – 1850 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1162 / jocn _ a _ 00442 . Pallier , C . , Devauchelle , A . D . , & Dehaene , S . ( 2011 ) . Cortical representation of the constituent structure of sentences . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 ( 6 ) , 2522 – 2527 . Retrieved from http : / / www . pnas . org / content / 108 / 6 / 2522 . short . Partee , B . H . , & Borschev , V . ( 2003 ) . Genitives , relational nouns , and argument - modiﬁer ambiguity . Modifying Adjuncts , 4 , 67 – 112 . Patterson , K . , Nestor , P . J . , & Rogers , T . T . ( 2007 ) . Where do you know what you know ? The representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain . Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 8 ( 12 ) , 976 – 987 . Pylkkänen , L . , & McElree , B . ( 2006 ) . The syntax - semantics interface : On - line composition of sentence meaning . Handbook of Psycholinguistics , 2 , 537 – 577 . Pylkkänen , L . , & McElree , B . ( 2007 ) . An MEG Study of Silent Meaning . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 19 ( 11 ) , 1905 – 1921 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1162 / jocn . 2007 . 19 . 11 . 1905 . Raichle , M . E . , MacLeod , A . M . , Snyder , A . Z . , Powers , W . J . , Gusnard , D . A . , & Shulman , G . L . ( 2001 ) . A default mode of brain function . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 98 ( 2 ) , 676 – 682 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 98 . 2 . 676 . Rauschecker , J . P . , & Scott , S . K . ( 2009 ) . Maps and streams in the auditory cortex : Nonhuman primates illuminate human speech processing . Nature Neuroscience , 12 ( 6 ) , 718 – 724 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nn . 2331 . Rodd , J . M . , Gaskell , M . G . , & Marslen - Wilson , W . D . ( 2004 ) . Modelling the effects of semantic ambiguity in word recognition . Cognitive Science , 28 ( 1 ) , 89 – 104 . Rogers , T . T . , & McClelland , J . L . ( 2004 ) . Semantic cognition : A parallel distributed processing approach . MIT Press . Schwartz , M . F . , Kimberg , D . Y . , Walker , G . M . , Brecher , A . , Faseyitan , O . K . , Dell , G . S . , . . . Coslett , H . ( 2011 ) . Neuroanatomical dissociation for taxonomic and thematic knowledge in the human brain . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 ( 20 ) , 8520 – 8524 . Seghier , M . L . ( 2012 ) . The angular gyrus : Multiple functions and multiple subdivisions . The Neuroscientist , 19 ( 1 ) , 43 – 61 . Seghier , M . L . , Fagan , E . , & Price , C . J . ( 2010 ) . Functional subdivisions in the left angular gyrus where the semantic system meets and diverges from the default network . Journal of Neuroscience , 30 ( 50 ) , 16809 – 16817 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3377 - 10 . 2010 . Shmuel , A . , Augath , M . , Oeltermann , A . , & Logothetis , N . K . ( 2006 ) . Negative functional MRI response correlates with decreases in neuronal activity in monkey visual area V1 . Nature Neuroscience , 9 ( 4 ) , 569 – 577 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nn1675 . Shmuel , A . , Yacoub , E . , Pfeuffer , J . , Van de Moortele , P . - F . , Adriany , G . , Hu , X . , & Ugurbil , K . ( 2002 ) . Sustained negative BOLD , blood ﬂow and oxygen consumption response and its coupling to the positive response in the human brain . Neuron , 36 ( 6 ) , 1195 – 1210 . Shoben , E . J . , & Gagné , C . L . ( 1997 ) . Thematic relations and the creation of combined concepts . In Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 31 – 50 ) . Washington , D . C . , US : American Psychological Association . Smith , A . T . , Williams , A . L . , & Singh , K . D . ( 2004 ) . Negative BOLD in the visual cortex : Evidence against blood stealing . Human Brain Mapping , 21 ( 4 ) , 213 – 220 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hbm . 20017 . Staresina , B . P . , Fell , J . , Do Lam , A . T . A . , Axmacher , N . , & Henson , R . N . ( 2012 ) . Memory signals are temporally dissociated in and across human hippocampus and perirhinal cortex . Nature Neuroscience , 15 ( 8 ) , 1167 – 1173 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nn . 3154 . Stringer , S . M . , & Rolls , E . T . ( 2002 ) . Invariant object recognition in the visual system with novel views of 3D objects . Neural Computation , 14 ( 11 ) , 2585 – 2596 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1162 / 089976602760407982 . Thompson , C . K . , Bonakdarpour , B . , & Fix , S . F . ( 2010 ) . Neural mechanisms of verb argument structure processing in agrammatic aphasic and healthy age - matched listeners . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 22 ( 9 ) , 1993 – 2011 . Thompson , C . K . , Bonakdarpour , B . , Fix , S . C . , Blumenfeld , H . K . , Parrish , T . B . , Gitelman , D . R . , & Mesulam , M . - M . ( 2007 ) . Neural correlates of verb argument structure processing . Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 19 ( 11 ) , 1753 – 1767 . Traxler , M . J . , McElree , B . , Williams , R . S . , & Pickering , M . J . ( 2005 ) . Context effects in coercion : Evidence from eye movements . Journal of Memory and Language , 53 ( 1 ) , 1 – 25 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jml . 2005 . 02 . 002 . Wang , J . , Conder , J . A . , Blitzer , D . N . , & Shinkareva , S . V . ( 2010 ) . Neural representation of abstract and concrete concepts : A meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies . Human Brain Mapping , 31 ( 10 ) , 1459 – 1468 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hbm . 20950 . Warren , B . ( 1978 ) . Semantic patterns of noun - noun compounds . Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis . Gothenburg Studies in English Goteborg ( Vol . 41 , pp . 1 – 266 ) . . Westerlund , M . , & Pylkkänen , L . ( 2014 ) . The role of the left anterior temporal lobe in semantic composition vs . semantic memory . Neuropsychologia , 57 , 59 – 70 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2014 . 03 . 001 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1996 ) . Construal and Similarity in Conceptual Combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 35 ( 3 ) , 434 – 453 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jmla . 1996 . 0024 . Wisniewski , E . J , & Gentner , D . ( 1991 ) . On the combinatorial semantics of noun pairs : Minor and major adjustments to meaning . In Understanding word and sentence . Advances in psychology ( pp . 241 – 284 ) . England : North Holland : Oxford . Wisniewski , E . J . , & Love , B . C . ( 1998 ) . Relations versus Properties in Conceptual Combination . Journal of Memory and Language , 38 , 177 – 202 . Xu , J . , Kemeny , S . , Park , G . , Frattali , C . , & Braun , A . ( 2005 ) . Language in context : Emergent features of word , sentence , and narrative comprehension . Neuroimage , 25 ( 3 ) , 1002 – 1015 . C . Boylan et al . / Brain & Language 169 ( 2017 ) 8 – 21 21