1 Direct observation of coordinated assembly of individual native centromeric nucleosomes Andrew R . Popchock 1 , Joshua D . Larson 2 , Julien Dubrulle 3 , Charles L . Asbury 2 , and Sue Biggins 1 * 1 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Basic Sciences Division , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center , Seattle , WA 98109 , USA 2 Department of Physiology and Biophysics , University of Washington , Seattle , WA , USA 3 Shared Resources , Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center , Seattle , WA 98109 , USA * Author for correspondence ( sbiggins @ fredhutch . org ) Keywords : Centromeric nucleosome / Centromere / Kinetochore / Chromosome segregation / TIRF microscopy 2 Abstract Eukaryotic chromosome segregation requires the kinetochore , a megadalton - sized machine that forms on specialized centromeric chromatin containing CENP - A , a histone H3 variant . CENP - A deposition requires a chaperone protein HJURP that targets it to the centromere , but it has remained unclear whether HJURP has additional functions beyond CENP - A targeting and why high AT DNA content , which disfavors nucleosome assembly , is widely conserved at centromeres . To overcome the difficulties of studying nucleosome formation in vivo , we developed a microscopy assay that enables direct observation of de novo centromeric nucleosome recruitment and maintenance with single molecule resolution . Using this assay , we discover that CENP - A can arrive at centromeres without its dedicated centromere - specific chaperone HJURP , but stable incorporation depends on HJURP and additional DNA - binding proteins of the inner kinetochore . We also show that homopolymer AT runs in the yeast centromeres are essential for efficient CENP - A deposition . Together , our findings reveal requirements for stable nucleosome formation and provide a foundation for further studies of the assembly and dynamics of native kinetochore complexes . 3 Introduction Replicated chromosomes must be accurately segregated to opposite poles during mitosis , a process that relies on their attachment to mitotic spindle microtubules via a conserved megadalton - sized protein network called the kinetochore ( Biggins , 2013 ; Cheeseman , 2014 ; Kixmoeller et al , 2020 ; Musacchio & Desai , 2017 ; Santaguida & Musacchio , 2009 ) . Errors in this process can lead to the rapid accumulation of mis - segregated chromosomes resulting in a cellular condition called aneuploidy , a hallmark of cancerous cells ( Gordon et al , 2012 ; Herman et al , 2015 ; Holland & Cleveland , 2009 ; Sheltzer et al , 2011 ) . To ensure the fidelity of this process , kinetochores are assembled each cell cycle onto defined regions of chromosomes called centromeres ( Clarke & Carbon , 1985 ; Cleveland et al , 2003 ; McAinsh & Marston , 2022 ) . Among different organisms , centromeres vary in size and architecture and are epigenetically defined by the recruitment of a specialized H3 histone variant called CENP - A ( Palmer et al , 1991 ; Sullivan et al , 1994 ) . The centromere - specific targeting and deposition of CENP - A relies upon an essential conserved chaperone protein , HJURP ( Camahort et al , 2007 ; Dunleavy et al , 2009 ; Foltz et al , 2009 ; Mizuguchi et al , 2007 ; Stoler et al , 2007 ) . Once established , this specialized CENP - A nucleosome is then recognized by specific kinetochore proteins that enable complete kinetochore complex formation ( McKinley & Cheeseman , 2016 ) . CENP - A deposition onto centromeres is tightly regulated in cells as ectopic mis - incorporation contributes to chromosomal instability ( CIN ) ( Shrestha et al , 2017 ) . Consistent with this , CENP - A and HJURP overexpression , which can be driven by p53 loss , are common among various cancer types and have emerged as therapeutic cancer targets because higher levels are correlated with poor prognosis ( Filipescu et al , 2017 ; Mahlke & Nechemia - Arbely , 2020 ) . Centromeric nucleosomes are critical for chromosome segregation , so it is surprising that the only widely conserved feature of centromeric DNA , its AT - rich content , is canonically a poor template for nucleosome assembly in reconstitutions with purified recombinant proteins ( Kunkel & Martinson , 1981 ; Prunell , 1982 ) . As a result of this , reconstitutions of assembled centromeric histones with centromeric DNA in vitro results in intrinsically unstable nucleosomes , making it difficult to study the functional role of the 4 AT - rich centromeric DNA ( Dechassa et al , 2011 ; Dechassa et al , 2014 ; Xiao et al , 2011 ) . Recent breakthrough structural studies of CENP - A nucleosomes assembled with native centromeric DNA have found a more loosely associated centromeric DNA - nucleosome complex , which may provide distinct binding sites for the recruitment of DNA - binding kinetochore proteins ( Guan et al , 2021 ; Zhou et al , 2019 ) . However , these reconstitutions required the use of a single - chain antibody fragment ( scFv ) to stabilize the nucleosome in both yeast and human reconstitutions ( Guan et al . , 2021 ; Zhou et al . , 2019 ) . More complex reconstitutions that included additional kinetochore proteins required modification of the centromeric DNA sequence to include the nucleosome positioning Widom 601 DNA ( Dendooven et al , 2022 ; Guan et al . , 2021 ; Lowary & Widom , 1998 ; Yan et al , 2018 ) , underscoring the difficulty of reconstituting stable kinetochore structures on centromeric DNA . While a more complete reconstitution of the constitutively centromere - associated network ( CCAN ) kinetochore proteins assembled onto a CENP - A nucleosome was achieved on α - satellite DNA , the functional role of AT - rich centromeric DNA remains unclear ( Yatskevich et al , 2022 ) . In contrast to most eukaryotes , budding yeast have sequence - specific point centromeres consisting of similar but not identical ~ 125 bp DNA segments containing three different centromere - defining elements , CDEI , CDEII and CDEIII ( Biggins , 2013 ; Carbon , 1984 ; Carbon & Clarke , 1984 ) . CDEI and CDEIII have consensus sites to recruit the centromere binding factors 1 and 3 ( Cbf1 and CBF3 ) , respectively . One function of Cbf1 is to protect centromeres from transcription to ensure chromosome stability ( Cai & Davis , 1990 ; Hedouin et al , 2022 ) , while the CBF3 complex ( consisting of Ctf3 , Cep3 , Skp1 and Ndc10 ) coordinates with the Cse4 ( CENP - A in humans ) specific chaperone Scm3 ( HJURP in humans ) to promote the deposition of Cse4 CENP - A at CDEII ( Camahort et al . , 2007 ; Cho & Harrison , 2011b ; Cole et al , 2011 ; Guan et al . , 2021 ) . Similar to other organisms , the CDEII element lacks sequence homology but consists of highly AT - rich DNA ( Guan et al . , 2021 ) . Changes in the length or AT - content of CDEII compromise centromere stability in vivo for unknown reasons ( Clarke & Carbon , 1985 ; Cumberledge & Carbon , 1987 ; Gaudet & Fitzgerald - Hayes , 1987 ) . More recently , the presence of homopolymeric runs of A and T within the CDEII elements were identified to play a significant role in centromere function in vivo ( Baker & Rogers , 2005 ) , but the underlying 5 mechanism requiring these homopolymeric runs remains unknown due to the inherent instability of these nucleosomes in vitro ( Dechassa et al . , 2011 ; Dechassa et al . , 2014 ; Xiao et al . , 2011 ) . One possibility is that these sequences play a role in exclusion of the canonical H3 nucleosome , as H3 eviction has been proposed as a potential function of centromeres ( Dechassa et al . , 2011 ; Shukla et al , 2018 ) . Due to their difficulty to study in cells , it remains unclear why these CDEII centromere sequences are essential in vivo yet are such poor templates for nucleosome formation and kinetochore assembly in vitro . To resolve this paradox between the requirements for centromere sequence in nucleosome formation in vitro versus in vivo , it is imperative to determine what additional factors stabilize centromeric nucleosomes in a physiological context . Recent structural reconstitutions that contain a Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome in complex with additional inner kinetochore proteins ( CCAN ) have identified significant interactions between centromeric DNA and inner kinetochore proteins around the nucleosome ( Guan et al . , 2021 ; Yan et al , 2019 ) . These reconstitutions have provided insight into potential candidate factors , yet the use of non - native centromeric DNA limits model testing . Unfortunately , studying the formation of centromeric nucleosomes in cells is extremely challenging because the centromeres are too close to be resolved individually by light microscopy and because they remain fully occupied for most of the cell cycle ( Dhatchinamoorthy et al , 2017 ; Joglekar et al , 2006 ) . To address these limitations , we developed a new technique utilizing total internal reflection fluorescent microscopy ( TIRFM ) to enable direct observation of centromeric nucleosome formation with single molecule resolution . Our approach was inspired by the “colocalization single molecule spectroscopy” ( CoSMoS ) studies of DNA transcription and RNA splicing complexes ( Friedman et al , 2006 ; Friedman & Gelles , 2012 ; Hoskins et al , 2011 ) . In our adaptation of the technique , individual centromere DNAs are linked sparsely to a glass surface and formation of single Cse4 CENP - A nucleosomes on the individual DNAs is observed in cell extract in real time . To achieve this resolution , Saccharomyces cerevisiae was used as a model system due to their simplified and sequence - defined point centromeres that contain only a single Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome ( Cole et al . , 2011 ; Furuyama & Biggins , 2007 ) . Stable recruitment of Cse4 CENP - A was highly specific and dependent upon native centromere sequence , recapitulating in vivo requirements for 6 nucleosome formation . Through continuous visualization of individual centromeres , we observed unexpectedly dynamic association of Cse4 CENP - A . Specifically , we found that Cse4 CENP - A deposition occurred in two distinct steps : first , a “targeting” step , consisting of a reversible binding of Cse4 CENP - A for which Scm3 HJURP was dispensable , followed by a second “stabilization” step , for which Scm3 HJURP and DNA - binding inner kinetochore proteins were required . Stabilization was blocked by constraining both ends of the centromeric DNA template , suggesting that it also requires DNA wrapping around the Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome . Stabilization was also significantly influenced by both the sequence composition of the CDEII element and the subsequent binding of inner kinetochore proteins during kinetochore assembly . Together , these findings shed new light on the mechanisms that catalyze formation of a robust centromeric DNA - based platform for kinetochore assembly and provide a foundation to address additional steps in the kinetochore assembly process . Results Efficient recruitment of Cse4 CENP - A to individual centromeric DNAs . To study the requirements and dynamics of centromeric nucleosome assembly , we adapted our recently developed method for bulk assembly of yeast kinetochores de novo in cell extracts ( Lang et al , 2018 ) , modifying it for single molecule imaging via TIRFM . Template DNAs consisting of the chromosome III centromere ( 117 bp ) , with ~ 70 bp of pericentromeric DNA plus ~ 250 bp of linker DNA on each side ( referred to as ‘CEN DNA’ ) , were linked sparsely to a streptavidin - functionalized coverslip surface through biotin tags ( Crawford et al , 2008 ) ( Figure 1A ) . Dye - labels added to the free ends of the DNAs allowed their visualization at the single molecule level . Introducing whole cell extracts prepared from strains with fluorescent kinetochore proteins into the chamber enabled the recruitment and retention of the labeled kinetochore proteins on ~ 1000 individual CEN DNA molecules to be monitored in a single field of view . Initially , we performed simple endpoint analyses , where we incubated cell lysate for 90 min with surface - linked CEN DNAs , washed the lysate from the chamber and then measured colocalization from individual images . 7 We first tested whether Cse4 CENP - A and the CBF3 complex , which is required for Cse4 CENP - A localization in vivo , were specifically recruited to the individual CEN DNA molecules ( Cho & Harrison , 2011a ; Lang et al . , 2018 ) . Using extracts from cells expressing endogenously tagged Ndc10 - mCherry , a CBF3 complex component ( Figure 1B ) , we observed high endpoint colocalization of Ndc10 on CEN DNA ( ~ 70 % , Figure 1C - left panel ) . To ensure specific colocalization , we tested a mutant CEN DNA template ( CDEIII mut ) with two substitutions that prevent CBF3 complex binding ( Lang et al . , 2018 ; McGrew et al , 1986 ) . Ndc10 - mCherry endpoint colocalization on this mutant template was nearly abolished ( Figure 1C - right panel ) . We next sought to monitor endpoint colocalization of Cse4 CENP - A - GFP using an internal Cse4 tag that is fully functional ( Figure 1D ) , as it was previously shown that the position of the GFP tag in Cse4 affects protein function ( Wisniewski et al , 2014 ) . Cse4 CENP - A - GFP showed high endpoint colocalization of ~ 50 % ( Figure 1E - left panel ) . This localization was specific because it was nearly abolished on the CDEIII mut DNA template ( Figure 1E - middle panel ) , consistent with the CBF3 complex being required for Cse4 CENP - A centromere localization ( Cho & Harrison , 2011a ; Lang et al . , 2018 ) . Likewise , proteasomal degradation of the essential chaperone Scm3 HJURP also prevented Cse4 CENP - A from colocalizing to CEN DNAs ( Lang et al . , 2018 ; Nishimura et al , 2009 ) ( Figure 1E - right panel ) . To further probe the fidelity of the assay , we quantified the stoichiometry of Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A via photobleaching assays . The Ndc10 - mCherry that colocalized with CEN DNA photobleached predominantly in two steps ( Appendix Figure S1A - B ) with a step distribution similar to other previously characterized dimeric proteins ( Popchock et al , 2018 ; Popchock et al , 2017 ) . This is consistent with structural studies showing that Ndc10 is a homodimer within the CBF3 complex and with the range of stoichiometries reported in vivo ( Cho & Harrison , 2011a ; Guan et al . , 2021 ; Joglekar et al . , 2006 ; Leber et al , 2018 ; Wisniewski et al . , 2014 ) . The Cse4 CENP - A that colocalized with CEN DNA yielded similar results , with the majority of Cse4 CENP - A - GFP photobleaching in two steps ( Appendix Figure S1C - D ) , as expected based on nucleosome reconstitutions and consistent with fluorescence and photobleaching analyses of Cse4 CENP - A at centromeres in vivo ( Aravamudhan et al , 2013 ; Camahort et al . , 2007 ; Guan et al . , 2021 ; Joglekar et al . , 2006 ) . Taken together , these results show that recruitment of Cse4 CENP - A onto individual CEN DNAs depends on the 8 known requirements in vivo and suggest that the copy numbers of both Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A recruited onto the DNAs match their copy numbers at kinetochores in vivo . Cse4 CENP - A binds more stably when preceded by CBF3 complex component Ndc10 . We next set out to monitor the dynamics of Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A centromere targeting by performing continuous time - lapse TIRFM . We tagged Ndc10 with mCherry in cells also expressing GFP - labeled Cse4 CENP - A to allow simultaneous detection in separate color channels ( Figure 2A ) . To assist in the analysis of colocalization events taking place on hundreds of CEN DNA templates simultaneously , we developed an automated analysis software package in MATLAB ( see Methods ) . Briefly , we collected a 45 min TIRFM time - lapse with acquisitions every 5 sec in the protein channels ( 488 nm and 568 nm ) and every 60 sec in the DNA channel ( 647 nm ) . The software identified CEN DNAs and then subsequently monitored both protein channels to determine colocalization residence lifetimes at each CEN DNA ( Figure 2A ) , enabling the rapid quantification of many independent colocalization events within a single field of view . We applied this analysis to simultaneously measure residence lifetimes for both Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A ( Figure 2A , Figure EV1A ) . Kaplan - Meier analysis of the estimated survival functions showed that Cse4 CENP - A had a shorter median lifetime ( approximately half ) than the median Ndc10 lifetime ( Figure 2B ) . We note that occasionally one of the proteins was present when imaging began or persisted until the acquisition ended ( censored events ) . To avoid the potential exclusion of long - lived residences and because these censored events were typically < 5 % of the total residences observed , they were included in this analysis . To ensure that the dynamic Cse4 CENP - A behavior we observed was not a consequence of a particular CEN sequence , we performed residence lifetime assays on several CEN templates from different chromosomes . The median Cse4 CENP - A lifetimes were similar between varying chromosome CEN templates ( 103 s , 103 s , and 109 s ) , all shorter than the median survival time of Ndc10 ( Appendix Figure S2A ) . Consistent with this , we also confirmed similar Cse4 CENP - A endpoint colocalization recruitment on several different CEN templates ( Appendix Figure S2B , C ) . During this analysis , we found that the Cse4 CENP - A - CEN DNA endpoint colocalization was lower in genetic backgrounds where Cse4 CENP - A and another kinetochore protein were fluorescently tagged compared 9 to when only Cse4 CENP - A was tagged , likely due to mild genetic interactions between tagged proteins . However , this did not prevent analyses of the arrival times and residence lifetimes of the tagged components relative to one another . The dynamic behavior of Cse4 CENP - A was surprising since it has been reported to be stably bound to centromeres in vivo outside of S phase ( Joglekar et al , 2008 ; Wisniewski et al . , 2014 ) . However , the transient Cse4 CENP - A - CEN DNA interactions that we readily detected in our single molecule assays would be undetectable in vivo due to reduced signal - to - noise and poorer time resolution . We considered two factors that could contribute to the dynamic Cse4 CENP - A behavior we observed . First , the cellular extracts could contain negative regulatory factors , such as chromatin remodelers that counter nucleosome formation . To test this , we removed the lysate and analyzed protein stability on the CEN DNA . Remarkably , Cse4 CENP - A and Ndc10 exhibited ~ 70 % retention on CEN DNA after 24 hrs incubation in buffer at 25 °C ( Figure EV1B , C ) , suggesting there are factors in the lysate that actively disrupt the centromeric nucleosome . Second , we considered the possibility that photobleaching could make Cse4 CENP - A appear dynamic . To address this , we estimated the photo - stability of the fluorophores by measuring their respective lifetimes under our imaging parameters and found that the Ndc10 residence lifetimes ( Figure EV1D ) were more potentially limited by photo - stability than the Cse4 CENP - A lifetimes ( Figure EV1E ) , the majority of which were not truncated by photobleaching . Despite photobleaching limiting some residence lifetimes , the relationships we observed in residence lifetime assays were consistent with trends observed in the endpoint colocalization assays . For example , the longer median lifetime of Ndc10 compared to Cse4 CENP - A ( 102 s vs . 79 s ) correlated with higher endpoint colocalization ( 70 % vs . 47 % ) . Taken together , these data suggest that Cse4 CENP - A is initially more dynamic than Ndc10 at centromeres , prior to its stable incorporation . To further dissect the lifetime differences between Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A , we sought to determine if the presence of Ndc10 affected the behavior of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA . To do this , we identified instances where a Cse4 CENP - A residence coincided with Ndc10 at any time on the same CEN DNA , termed “ternary residence” . To assess whether the formation of a ternary Ndc10 residence altered Cse4 CENP - A stability on CEN DNA , we sought to estimate the off - rates of Cse4 CENP - A in the ternary versus non - ternary contexts . 10 Although 84 % of the total Cse4 CENP - A ternary residence time had Ndc10 associated , we wanted to rigorously ensure there was no selection bias for long - lived Cse4 CENP - A residences because they are more likely to form ternary associations . We therefore further divided the ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences according to the timing of Ndc10 association . When Ndc10 arrived prior to or simultaneously with Cse4 CENP - A , we included the entire residence time ( Ndc10 first - T 1 , T 2 , Figure 2C ) . In the cases where Cse4 CENP - A association preceded Ndc10 , we only included the residence time after Ndc10 arrived ( Ndc10 last - T 5 , Figure 2C ) . Because we could not differentiate between Ndc10 turnover or photobleaching , we included the entirety of a continuous Cse4 CENP - A residence pulse after initial ternary association with Ndc10 , regardless of Ndc10 residence length or subsequent associations . For the non - ternary Ndc10 residences ( T 3 , T 4 , Figure 2C ) , we included any Cse4 residence prior to the arrival of Ndc10 as well as Cse4 CENP - A residences where Ndc10 was never present . To estimate off - rates for ternary and non - ternary Cse4 CENP - A , we counted the numbers of off - events observed in each category , N t and N n respectively , and divided each by the total observed times from each residence pool , T t = SUM ( of all T 1 , T 2 , and T 5 ) to calculate the off - rate 𝑘 ! ( Figure 2C ) and T n = SUM ( of all T 3 and T 4 ) to calculate the off - rate 𝑘 " ( Figure 2C ) . The off - rate for ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A was significantly lower than for non - ternary Ndc10 , 22 / hr vs 29 / hr , indicative of stabilization of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA after ternary Ndc10 association ( Figure 2D ) . We also performed Kaplan - Meier analysis to estimate their survival lifetimes and found a significant increase in the median lifetime of ternary Ndc10 compared to non - ternary Ndc10 residences ( 88 s vs . 69 s , Figure 2E ) . Consistent with this stabilization , the proportion of Cse4 CENP - A residences that were long lived ( > 300s ) after ternary Ndc10 association increased approximately two - fold ( Figure EV1F ) . While we did not estimate on - rates , comparison of Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A residence pulses when organized by their initiation times showed more rapid association of Ndc10 to CEN DNA ( Figure 2F ) . This potential for differing on - rates may explain why when ternary associations were formed , Ndc10 typically preceded Cse4 CENP - A arrival to the CEN DNA ( Figure 2G ) . We note that it was surprising to see Cse4 CENP - A at the CEN DNA in the absence of Ndc10 . To determine whether Ndc10 is present but undetectable in these instances , we analyzed Cse4 CENP - A lifetimes on the mutant CDEIII mut CEN DNA 11 template which abolishes Ndc10 association . Although overall Cse4 CENP - A associations were reduced , we observed transient Cse4 CENP - A associations with significantly reduced residence lifetimes on CDEIII mut CEN DNA , suggesting that Cse4 has some intrinsic CEN DNA binding in the absence of CBF3 ( Figure EV1G , H ) . Taken together , these observations are consistent with in vivo findings , where it has been established that Ndc10 is required for Scm3 HJURP - dependent Cse4 CENP - A deposition , and where Ndc10 is thought to coordinate with the Cbf1 complex to promote nucleosome formation ( Cho & Harrison , 2011a ) . The chaperone Scm3 HJURP is a limiting cofactor that promotes stable Cse4 CENP - A association . The biphasic Cse4 CENP - A localization behavior , with many short colocalizations ( < 120 s ) and fewer long colocalizations ( > 300 s ) , was not fully correlated with Ndc10 occupancy , as 60 % of ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences were still short - lived . We therefore further investigated this behavior by simultaneously visualizing Cse4 CENP - A and its essential chaperone protein Scm3 HJURP , which exhibits DNA - binding activity and is required for Cse4 CENP - A centromere localization in cells ( Camahort et al . , 2007 ; Mizuguchi et al . , 2007 ; Stoler et al . , 2007 ; Xiao et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 3A ) . Residence lifetimes for Scm3 HJURP on CEN DNA were shorter than Cse4 CENP - A lifetimes ( Figure 3A , B , Figure EV2A , B ) , consistent with its faster turnover rate in vivo ( Wisniewski et al . , 2014 ) . To estimate the fraction of time Scm3 HJURP and Cse4 CENP - A colocalized together on CEN DNA , we analyzed the ternary Scm3 residence times . We found that Scm3 HJURP co - occupied the CEN DNA an average of 56 . 0 % ( n = 393 ) of the total Cse4 CENP - A residence time , a lower occupancy rate than that of Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A ( 84 . 3 % ) , as expected given its more rapid turnover . Strikingly , we discovered a high proportion of total Cse4 CENP - A residences that occurred without Scm3 HJURP ( 0 . 78 vs . 0 . 22 , Figure 3C ) , which was unexpected because Scm3 HJURP is thought to be required to target Cse4 CENP - A to centromeres in vivo ( Camahort et al . , 2007 ; Stoler et al . , 2007 ) . We next assayed whether the two distinct Cse4 CENP - A residence subpopulations , ternary Scm3 and non - ternary Scm3 , behaved differently by quantifying their estimated off - rates as described for Ndc10 ( Figure 2C ) . We found a significant decrease in the average 12 off - rate of ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences when compared to non - ternary Scm3 ( 26 hr - 1 vs . 21 hr - 1 , Figure 3D ) . Consistent with this observed stabilization of Cse4 CENP - A after Scm3 HJURP association and the requirement for Scm3 HJURP to localize Cse4 CENP - A to centromeres in vivo , the proportion of Cse4 CENP - A residences that were long lived ( > 300s ) increased approximately two - fold among the ternary Scm3 events ( Figure 3E ) . We also performed Kaplan - Meier analysis to estimate their survival lifetimes and found a significant increase in the median lifetime of ternary Scm3 residences when compared to non - ternary Scm3 ( 108 s vs . 79 s , Figure 3F ) . Together , these results are consistent with Scm3 HJURP stabilizing Cse4 CENP - A at centromeres and then rapidly exchanging after Cse4 CENP - A incorporation ( Wisniewski et al . , 2014 ) . To further dissect the role of Scm3 HJURP in Cse4 CENP - A centromere localization , we calculated the off - rates for Scm3 HJURP in ternary Cse4 and non - ternary Cse4 contexts . Unlike Cse4 CENP - A , Scm3 HJURP was not significantly stabilized after ternary association with Cse4 CENP - A , as the off - rates and median lifetimes of both contexts were similar ( Figure EV2C , D ) . These findings are consistent with a model of Scm3 HJURP turnover after association with Cse4 CENP - A . Next , we assayed the relative arrival order of Cse4 CENP - A versus Scm3 HJURP on CEN DNA . Contrary to models that suggest the chaperone delivers Cse4 CENP - A to centromeres , only ~ 20 % of the ternary Scm3 residences resulted from co - arrival of Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP ( Figure EV2E ) . The remaining ternary associations consisted of 46 % where Scm3 HJURP preceded Cse4 CENP - A and 34 % where Cse4 CENP - A preceded Scm3 HJURP ( Figure EV2E ) . Residence lifetimes of these differing ternary pools were similar , with no significant difference in estimated survival plots ( Figure EV2F ) . This is consistent with our findings that Cse4 CENP - A can interact with the centromere in the absence of Scm3 HJURP ( Figure 3C ) and suggests that Scm3 HJURP catalyzes stable Cse4 CENP - A incorporation at centromeric DNA instead of delivering it to the centromere . Cse4 CENP - A centromere targeting is thought to occur through Scm3 HJURP binding to Ndc10 , so we next monitored their behavior on mutant CDEIII mut CEN DNA that lacks Ndc10 in lifetime residence assays ( Figure EV3A ) . Strikingly , Scm3 HJURP residences were significantly increased when compared to those on CEN DNA ( Figure EV3B ) , suggesting its intrinsic DNA - binding activity may be the primary driver of its CEN DNA binding and that stable Cse4 CENP - A association is required for its turnover ( Xiao et al . , 2011 ) . In 13 contrast , Cse4 CENP - A residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA had a much shorter median survival time compared to its CEN counterpart ( Figure EV2C ) , consistent with Ndc10 and Scm3 HJURP stabilizing its association . In addition , the stabilization of Cse4 CENP - A after Scm3 HJURP association that was observed on CEN DNA ( Figure 3D ) was lost , as the lifetimes of ternary Scm3 and non - ternary Scm3 residences on CDEIII mut CEN were similar ( Figure EV3C ) . Taken together , these data are consistent with a requirement for Ndc10 in the localization of Cse4 CENP - A but not necessarily through Scm3 recruitment . One possibility is there is cooperativity between Ndc10 and Scm3 HJURP and both DNA - binding proteins must be present simultaneously at CEN DNA to promote stable Cse4 CENP - A incorporation . Our finding that there was a population of Cse4 CENP - A lacking its chaperone led us to test whether the chaperone is limiting for stable Cse4 CENP - A centromere localization . To do this , we modified the availability of the Cse4 CENP - A / Scm3 HJURP complex in vivo to assess resulting changes in Cse4 CENP - A behavior . The E3 ubiquitin ligase Psh1 and the chaperone Scm3 HJURP directly compete for Cse4 CENP - A binding ( Zhou et al , 2021 ) . We therefore reasoned that the amount of Cse4 CENP - A - Scm3 HJURP complex in cells should be reduced by overexpressing Psh1 and , conversely , that the amount of Cse4 CENP - A - Scm3 HJURP complex might be increased by overexpressing Scm3 HJURP . To test these predictions , we introduced an ectopic copy of either Psh1 or Scm3 HJURP under an inducible GAL promoter into cells containing labeled Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP . Inducing short pulses of either protein did not significantly alter the total levels of Cse4 CENP - A in whole cell extracts ( Figure EV4A ) . However , a short pulse of Scm3 HJURP overexpression did lead to a significant increase in the endpoint colocalization of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA , while overexpression of Psh1 had the opposite effect ( Figure EV4B , C ) . The median lifetime of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA was also significantly increased when Scm3 HJURP was overexpressed and significantly decreased when Psh1 was overexpressed ( Figure EV4D ) . These lifetime changes correlated with the propensity for Cse4 CENP - A to form ternary residences with Scm3 HJURP on the CEN DNA ( Figure EV4E ) , suggesting they reflect changes in the availability of the complex . To assess if these perturbations to Cse4 CENP - A were consequential in cells , we grew cells under constant induction and found significant growth phenotypes when the Cse4 CENP - A - Scm3 HJURP complex was limited 14 ( Figure EV4F ) . These data indicate that Scm3 HJURP is limiting for stable centromeric nucleosome formation in our single molecule assembly assay and suggest that availability of the Cse4 CENP - A - Scm3 HJURP complex is likewise important for cell viability . Stable Cse4 CENP - A association is blocked when centromere DNAs are tethered at both ends . Our observation of two subpopulations of Cse4 CENP - A molecules on CEN DNAs , including brief binders and longer - residing molecules that correlated with Scm3 HJURP , suggested a two - stage process for Cse4 CENP - A deposition that begins with transient , chaperone - independent targeting and is followed by chaperone - dependent stabilization . We hypothesized that the transition to more stable Cse4 CENP - A binding might require wrapping of the CEN DNA around the Cse4 CENP - A - containing histone octamer . If wrapping were indeed required for stabilization , then restricting the ability of the DNA to adopt a wrapped configuration should inhibit its stabilization on CEN DNA . To test this prediction , we created CEN DNA templates with biotins located at both ends to enable double - ended attachment to the coverslip surface . Tethering both ends of the template should limit its ability to twist or shorten , and thus to encircle a Cse4 CENP - A histone octamer , behaviors which are proposed to be essential for Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome formation on centromeric DNA ( Furuyama & Henikoff , 2009 ; Guo et al , 2021 ) . To allow both ends to be tethered simultaneously to the coverslip surface , an additional biotin handle was introduced ( instead of an organic dye ) onto a shortened 250 bp version of the CEN DNA ( Figure 4A ) . We first tested for a nucleosome - protected DNA fragment using a bulk assembly assay , in which template DNAs are linked to streptavidin - coated magnetic beads , incubated with cell extract to allow kinetochore assembly , and then washed , as done previously ( Lang et al . , 2018 ) . In addition to the double - tethered template , controls using a single - tethered CEN template of the same length as well as a mutant CDEIII mut template were also performed . After the assembly reactions , a mild micrococcal nuclease ( MNase ) digestion was performed to preferentially cut the unbound DNA in - between any assembled nucleosomes . Subsequent analysis of the DNA by gel electrophoresis showed strong protection of ~ 140 bp of the single - tether template , but almost no protection of the double - tethered template ( Figure 4B ) . The CDEIII mut template , which does not stably recruit 15 Cse4 CENP - A ( Lang et al . , 2018 ) , was completely unprotected as expected . Protection of the single - tether template was presumably due to formation of Cse4 CENP - A - containing nucleosomes , because this DNA fails to recruit H3 ( Lang et al . , 2018 ) . These observations suggest that spatial restriction of the template can prevent Cse4 nucleosome assembly . We next sought to analyze Cse4 CENP - A behavior on individual double - tethered CEN DNA templates in our TIRFM assay . Because the double tethered templates lacked an organic dye for visualization , we used Ndc10 - mCherry as a fiducial marker for the CEN DNAs due to its high colocalization percentage ( Figure 1C ) , rapid arrival , stable colocalization behavior , and our finding that most Cse4 CENP - A colocalizations occur after Ndc10 ( Figure 2F , G ) . Endpoint colocalization of Cse4 CENP - A was reduced more than 2 - fold on the double - tethered CEN DNAs relative to single - tethered controls ( Figure 4C , D ) . Likewise , time - lapse experiments revealed that median Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes on double - tethered CEN DNAs were significantly shorter than on single - tethered templates ( 79 s vs . 67 s , Figure 4E , F ) . Median lifetimes on single - tethered templates were comparable to those of the previously measured ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences ( 79 s vs . 88 s , Figure 4E , F , Table 1 ) . But median lifetimes of Cse4 CENP - A on double - tethered templates were significantly shorter , and closer to non - ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences ( 67 s vs . 69 s , Figure 4E , F , Table 1 ) . As an alternative to physical restriction to prevent CEN DNA wrapping of Cse4 CENP - A , we designed a dye - labeled and single - tethered , severely truncated 80 - bp template ( CDEIII - 80bp CEN ) , that is too short to form a single wrap around the Cse4 CENP - A - containing core particle ( Figure EV5A , B ) . Cse4 CENP - A residences were transient on CDEIII - 80bp CEN DNA ( Figure EV5C ) with a shortened median lifetime that was comparable to the median lifetime of ternary residences on double - tethered templates ( 71 s vs . 67 s , Figure 4E , F , Figure EV5D ) . The median lifetimes of Cse4 CENP - A residences on either mutant CEN DNA ( CDEIII - 80bp or double - tethered ) were closer to the median lifetime of non - ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences when compared to their ternary Scm3 counterparts ( 79 s vs . 108 s ) . Thus , physical restriction of the CEN DNA template , either by shortening it or limiting its mobility , prevents stable association of Cse4 CENP - A , quantitatively reproducing the transient binding seen in the absence of either Ndc10 or the chaperone protein Scm3 HJURP . These 16 observations suggest that stable deposition of Cse4 requires physical wrapping of the CEN DNA around the histone core , that both Ndc10 and Scm3 HJURP have an important role in the wrapping process , and that wrapping of centromeric DNA is a key kinetic hurdle in CEN nucleosome formation . DNA - binding CCAN elements stabilize the centromeric nucleosome . Given the inherent instability of bare centromeric nucleosomes in vitro ( Dechassa et al . , 2014 ; Xiao et al . , 2011 ) , we hypothesized that additional stabilization after nucleosome formation might be provided by the binding of centromeric DNA - associated CCAN proteins . Such an additional stabilization step would explain our observations where Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP colocalized together on CEN DNA without yielding long ( > 300 s ) Cse4 CENP - A residences ( Figure 3E ) . To test this idea , we focused on two conserved CCAN proteins that recent structural studies showed interact with CEN DNA , Chl4 CENP - N and Okp1 CENP - Q ( Guan et al . , 2021 ; Yan et al . , 2019 ) . Although CENP - C also exhibits significant DNA association within the reconstitution of the human CCAN ( Yatskevich et al . , 2022 ) , we chose not to target Mif2 CENP - C due to its absence from the yeast structural model . Chl4 CENP - N binds close to the Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome and forms a DNA - binding groove that binds the centromere and stabilizes an extended DNA section adjacent to the nucleosome ( Figure 5A ) . Mutation of this Chl4 CENP - N DNA - binding groove ( chl4 K13S ) exhibits genetic interactions with mutants in Cse4 CENP - A , making it an ideal candidate to test its contribution to nucleosome stability ( Yan et al . , 2019 ) . Okp1 CENP - Q forms a heterodimer with Ame1 CENP - U that has DNA binding activity and has been proposed to interact with an N - terminal extension of Cse4 CENP - A within the nucleosome structure ( Hinshaw & Harrison , 2019 ; Hornung et al , 2014 ; Yan et al . , 2019 ) ( Figure 5A ) . We therefore assayed Cse4 CENP - A endpoint colocalization in chl4 K13S and okp1 - AID extracts and found that it was significantly impaired , even though total Cse4 CENP - A levels in the extracts were not significantly altered ( Figure 5B - D ) . Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes in both chl4 K13S and okp1 - AID extracts were also significantly reduced ( Figure 5E , F ) . This disruption in centromeric nucleosome maintenance suggests that other kinetochore proteins that bind to CEN DNA also help to stabilize the nucleosome . 17 DNA composition of centromeres contributes to genetic stability through Cse4 CENP - A recruitment . We next sought to investigate the role of centromeric DNA sequence in centromeric nucleosome formation since it has been difficult to reconstitute stable centromeric nucleosomes in vitro ( Guan et . al . , 2021 , Dechassa et . al . , 2011 , Yan et . al . , 2019 ) . To do so , we took advantage of earlier work , where a synthetic library of centromeric DNAs with randomized CDEII sequences was screened for members that can functionally replace native centromeres in vivo . This screen revealed that synthetic centromere function correlates strongly with high homopolymeric A + T content , defined as continuous “runs” of four or more A or T residues ( A n≥4 or T n≥4 ) , within CDEII ( Baker & Rogers , 2005 ) . Synthetic centromeres in which a high fraction of CDEII residues ( > 0 . 38 ) occurred in runs of A n≥4 or T n≥4 were genetically more stable than synthetic centromeres with lower fractions of homopolymeric A + T runs within CDEII ( < 0 . 38 ) , although all chromosomes with synthetic centromeres were less stable in vivo when compared to a WT centromere . We therefore refer to the synthetic centromeres with more AT runs as “unstable” and those with less AT runs as “very unstable” mutants ( Figure 6A ) . To test whether these differences in CDEII sequence and genetic stability correlate with the ability of the templates to retain Cse4 CENP - A , we performed endpoint colocalization assays , using two unstable and two very unstable mutant CEN DNAs ( Baker & Rogers ) . While all four mutants recruited lower levels of Cse4 CENP - A compared to WT CEN DNA , the unstable mutants recruited higher levels of Cse4 CENP - A than their very unstable counterparts ( Figure 6B , C ) , and Cse4 CENP - A recruitment levels across the different templates correlated strongly with the fraction of CDEII residues in homopolymeric A + T runs ( Figure 6D ) and with the stability of chromosome inheritance in vivo ( Figure 6D , inset ) . Time - lapse experiments with the same four mutants showed that the average number of Cse4 CENP - A residences observed per CEN DNA in a 45 min imaging sequence also correlated with homopolymeric A + T run content and CEN functionality in vivo ( Figure 6E , left ) . This relationship was apparently independent of Scm3 HJURP , because the average number of Scm3 HJURP residences observed per CEN DNA remained consistent across the mutants ( Figure 6E , right ) . Consistent with this Scm3 HJURP - independent behavior , the proportion of ternary Cse4 CENP - A - Scm3 HJURP residences was 18 similar in “Very Unstable” CDEII mutant CEN DNA when compared to CEN DNA ( Appendix Figure S3A ) , but there was a significant increase in the estimated off - rates of ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on “Very Unstable” CDEII mutant CEN DNA ( Appendix Figure S3B ) . These results suggest that despite not affecting Scm3 HJURP - Cse4 CENP - A ternary residence initiation , very unstable CDEII mutants might restrict Scm3 HJURP - catalyzed stabilization of Cse4 CENP - A . To further explore the role of DNA sequence , we generated several other templates that maintained high percentages of A and T residues ( high % A / T ) yet had very little homopolymeric A n≥4 or T n≥4 run content . A CDEII mutant that contained a substitution of satellite DNA from human chromosomes ( α - sat ) failed to recruit stable Cse4 CENP - A in endpoint colocalization assays despite its high % A / T ( Figure 6D ) . The hybrid sequence combining CDEIII and Widom 601 ( Widom - 601 - hybrid ) that readily forms centromeric nucleosomes in recombinant reconstitutions ( Yan et al . , 2019 ) ( Appendix Figure S4A ) also failed to recruit stable Cse4 CENP - A in endpoint colocalization assays ( Figure 6D ) . To ensure that the Widom - 601 - hybrid CEN DNA was not saturated by the canonical H3 histone , we also monitored H3 incorporation . The Widom - 601 - hybrid CEN DNA incorporated low levels of H3 , similar to WT CEN DNA , in both bulk assembly assays ( Appendix Figure S4B ) and endpoint colocalization assays ( Appendix Figure S4C , D ) . Such low levels of H3 incorporation were unexpected , as Widom - 601 readily forms stable H3 nucleosomes when reconstituted ( Lowary & Widom , 1998 ) , but this may point to differences in de novo histone formation that have yet to be fully studied . Removal of the CDEIII sequence from the Widom - 601 - hybrid to prevent CBF3 binding yielded an approximately 2 - fold increase in H3 incorporation ( Appendix Figure S4C , D ) , suggesting that CBF3 may negatively regulate H3 binding at centromeres . Taken together , these data highlight a critical functional role for homopolymeric A + T run content within CDEII for stable Cse4 CENP - A recruitment . Discussion Here , we report adaptation of a cell - free system to autonomously assemble native centromeric nucleosomes on individual centromeric DNA molecules with CoSMoS to enable the study of native centromeric nucleosome formation at spatiotemporal 19 resolutions not previously accessible . Continuous monitoring revealed that several cofactors coordinate to promote stable Cse4 CENP - A recruitment and maintenance at the centromere . These cofactors include the DNA - binding CBF3 component Ndc10 , as well as the conserved chaperone Scm3 HJURP . We found that Scm3 HJURP was a limiting cofactor that promoted stable centromeric Cse4 CENP - A association but was not required for transient centromere association . Stabilization of Cse4 CENP - A likely occurred through catalysis of centromeric DNA wrapping because we observed that physical restriction of the DNA impaired stable recruitment of Cse4 CENP - A . Guided by recent structural kinetochore reconstitutions ( Yan et . al . , 2019 , Guan et . al . , 2021 ) , we also found that the centromeric nucleosome must be stabilized by DNA - associated kinetochore proteins within the CCAN , highlighting the tight coordination of kinetochore assembly at the inner kinetochore . This finding may in part explain the instances where Cse4 CENP - A colocalized on CEN DNA with its chaperone Scm3 HJURP yet failed to remain stably associated . In those instances , the Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome may have successfully formed , but subsequent association of CCAN kinetochore proteins failed to occur , permitting dissolution of the nucleosome complex ( Figure 7 ) . We also interrogated the CDEII DNA element and identified a role for sequence composition in stable centromeric nucleosome recruitment which correlated with centromere stability in cells . Taken together , this assay enabled the assessment at high resolution of the native nucleosome assembly process on centromeric DNA as well as a functional role of centromere DNA sequence composition . Formation of a native centromeric nucleosome Despite over a decade of ongoing study , reconstituting Cse4 CENP - A nucleosomes with yeast centromeric DNA has remained remarkably elusive . Recent structural studies have started to shed light on these complexes , yet there are fundamental differences between these reconstitutions and native kinetochore assemblies . One such example is our finding that the Widom 601 - hybrid sequence that readily stabilized the Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome in vitro was a poor template for Cse4 CENP - A recruitment and stable nucleosome formation de novo ( Figure 6E ) . Structural models using non - native CEN DNA required significant rearrangements around the centromeric nucleosome to permit CCAN 20 assembly , including dissociation of the CBF3 complex ( Guan et al . , 2021 ; Yan et al . , 2019 ) . However , we did not observe a significant reduction in CBF3 complex colocalization , even after sufficient incubation to allow full de novo kinetochore assembly ( Lang et al . , 2018 ) . Our findings are consistent with observed CBF3 behavior in cells ( Joglekar et al . , 2008 ) and highlight both the potential significant differences between in vitro reconstitutions of kinetochore complexes and their native counterparts as well as the significant advantage of assembling kinetochores under native conditions . Our work suggests the major functional role of the Scm3 HJURP chaperone at centromeres may be Cse4 CENP - A incorporation into stable nucleosomes instead of centromere targeting ( Camahort et al . , 2007 ; Cho & Harrison , 2011b ) . We found that Scm3 HJURP is a limiting kinetochore assembly factor required to catalyze stable Cse4 CENP - A recruitment ( Figure 3 , 4 ) . The population of Cse4 CENP - A that localized to CEN DNA in the absence of Scm3 HJURP was presumably bound to other chaperone proteins it is known to associate with , such as CAF - 1 , Spt6 , and DAXX ( Bobkov et al , 2020 ; Hewawasam et al , 2018 ; Lacoste et al , 2014 ) . It should be acknowledged that it is possible that transient Cse4 CENP - A binding may be driven in some part through mass action due to high concentrations of CEN DNA and in vivo , this transient binding may not be physiologically relevant . However , our data shows that these associations are insufficient for stable nucleosome formation in the absence of Scm3 HJURP . Given that physical restriction of DNA wrapping severely limited stable association of Cse4 CENP - A ( Figure 4 ) , we further propose that Scm3 HJURP promotes stable Cse4 CENP - A recruitment through catalysis of centromeric DNA wrapping , consistent with its activity in vitro ( Dechassa et . al . , 2011 , Xiao et . al . , 2011 ) . While several chaperones have been shown to limit ectopic Cse4 CENP - A deposition ( Gkikopoulos et al , 2011 ; Hewawasam et al . , 2018 ; Ranjitkar , 2010 ) , it is likely that Scm3 HJURP promotes specific deposition at centromeres through two non - exclusive mechanisms : ( 1 ) tethering of Cse4 CENP - A via Scm3 HJURP - Ndc10 binding to promote centromeric DNA wrapping and ( 2 ) stabilization of a Cse4 CENP - A - centromere DNA intermediate through the AT - rich DNA binding domain of Scm3 HJURP ( Xiao et al . , 2011 ) . While we aim to further investigate this mechanism , either possibility yields a model of Scm3 HJURP - catalyzed Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome formation that is supported by in vitro reconstitutions , where it was found that Scm3 HJURP was required to 21 form a Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome on the highly AT - rich ( and thus inherently unfavorably for histone wrapping ) centromeric DNA ( Dechassa et al . , 2011 ; Xiao et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , this model is consistent with in vivo studies that showed Scm3 HJURP coordinates with Ndc10 to deposit Cse4 CENP - A at the centromere and is persistent at centromeres after Cse4 CENP - A deposition , although undergoing rapid exchange ( Wisniewski et al . , 2014 ; Xiao et al . , 2011 ) . A functional role for the essential centromere element CDEII The single molecule TIRFM colocalization assays developed here enabled direct assessment of a functional role of the centromeric CDEII element , a question that has been extremely difficult to address in vivo . While there is no sequence conservation across CDEII elements in yeast , they are often among the loci with the highest A / T % across the genome ( Baker & Rogers , 2005 ) . Although high A / T % is not a universal feature of all centromeres ( Melters et al , 2013 ) , it is a widely conserved feature across centromeres in both yeast and higher organisms despite being unfavorable for core histone wrapping ( Struhl & Segal , 2013 ) . Our work uncovered a role for CDEII sequence composition in stable Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome recruitment and suggests that homopolymeric A + T run content contributes to stable incorporation of Cse4 CENP - A . The requirement for A + T run content is highlighted by the failure of the canonical nucleosome - targeting Widom 601 - based centromere ( Widom 601 - hybrid ) , which has high A / T % but contains little A + T run content , to stably recruit Cse4 CENP - A in our assay ( Figure 6E ) , despite readily forming in reconstitutions ( Xiao et al . , 2011 ) . This points to potentially significant differences in the formation of native centromeric complexes and their recombinant counterparts . In addition , it remains an open question whether yeast CDEII element sequences have evolved to maximize Cse4 CENP - A recruitment and stability or have evolved to a point where Cse4 CENP - A stability is sufficient to maintain centromere identity , as no A + T run beyond 8 nucleotides occurs within CDEII sequences despite occurring outside of centromeric loci ( Baker & Rogers , 2005 ) . Organisms with more complex centromeric architectures that maintain high A / T % fail to substitute for CDEII function in yeast centromeres , likely due to the lack of high A + T run content ( Figure 6E ) . 22 Our work also supports a previously proposed model where A / T - rich centromeric DNA functions to restrict canonical histone formation ( Dechassa et al . , 2014 ; Drew & Travers , 1985 ; Stormberg & Lyubchenko , 2022 ; Xiao et al . , 2011 ) . This model is consistent with findings in other organisms where H3 histone eviction was an inherent property of centromeric DNA and with our own findings that H3 has low occupancy on the CEN templates ( Baker & Rogers , 2005 ; Shukla et al . , 2018 ) . This potential functional role of centromere sequence and / or centromere - binding kinetochore proteins in H3 - eviction may be providing a drive to the genetic conservation of AT - rich DNA amongst centromere sequences . We speculate that in yeast , additional DNA - binding kinetochore proteins arose to aid in overcoming this kinetic barrier and to protect centromere function . This may be a consequence of the fact that despite a lack of meiotic drive , yeast centromeres are among the fastest evolving regions of the yeast genome and are thus sensitive to negative selection resulting in complete loss of centromere identity ( Bensasson et al , 2008 ) . Rapid purifying selection may also explain the accumulation of homopolymeric A + T run content within CDEII , which we found correlated to stable Cse4 CENP - A recruitment . This was somewhat unexpected , as homopolymeric repeats were found to resist nucleosome formation ( Liebl & Zacharias , 2021 ) . However , it has been reported that stretches of A - repeats impose a net curvature into dsDNA and that the DNA bend at centromeres contributes to their stability in cells ( Beutel & Gold , 1992 ; Murphy et al , 1991 ; Widom , 2001 ) . We therefore propose that homopolymeric A + T runs are cooperative with additional DNA - associated kinetochore proteins to facilitate nucleosome stability and kinetochore assembly and may explain the observed requirement for the A / T - rich DNA - binding Scm3 HJURP to catalyze centromeric DNA wrapping of Cse4 CENP - A ( Figure 3 , 4 ) . The precise mechanism by which these A + T runs contribute to nucleosome formation remains open for further study , but at the very least may provide context for the required coordination of several DNA - binding proteins that are in close proximity to the Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome ( Figure 7 ) . Adaptation of the assay developed here to study downstream kinetochore assembly will enable the study of the contributions of various kinetochore proteins from within the vast network required to form a functional kinetochore scaffold . This assay may also be adapted to study the dynamics of other histones and chaperones as well as to 23 further recapitulate a native centromere “cell - like” environment by including processes such as centromere replication , which precludes kinetochore assembly in cells ( Bobkov et al . , 2020 ; Furuyama & Biggins , 2007 ; Gkikopoulos et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , templates that include more complex chromatin structures surrounding the centromere that may provide additional information about the roles pericentromeric chromatin plays in maintenance of centromere identity and function . Such adaptations may be needed to better understand how such an initially tenuous assembly pathway with stringent prerequisite conditions occurs so rapidly and with such fidelity in cells throughout passage of every cell cycle . The mechanisms that drive this process and that may be abrogated in various cellular disease states are a critical area of study . Materials and Methods Yeast Methods The S . cerevisiae strains used in this study are listed in Supplemental Table 1 and are derivative of SBY3 ( W303 ) . Standard genetic crosses , media and microbial techniques were used . Cse4 was tagged internally at residue 80 with eGFP including linkers on either side ( pSB1617 ) and then expressed from its native promoter at an exogenous locus in a cse4 D background ( SBY19926 ) . Genes that were changed to include endogenously tagged fluorescent protein alleles ( mCherry ) or epitope tags ( - 13myc ) or auxin - inducible degrons ( - IAA7 ) were constructed at the endogenous loci by standard PCR - based integration techniques ( Longtine et al , 1998 ) and confirmed by PCR . The mutant chl4 - K13S was made via PCR - based integration from a vector ( pSB2182 ) containing the CHL4 gene with 13 mutations present ( Yan et al . , 2019 ) . The plasmids and primers used to generate strains are listed in Supplemental Tables 2 and 3 , respectively . All liquid cultures were grown in yeast peptone dextrose rich ( YPD ) media . To arrest cells in mitosis , log phase cultures were diluted in liquid media to a final concentration of 30 µ g / mL benomyl and grown for another three hours until at least 90 % of cells were large - budded . For strains with auxin inducible degron ( AID ) alleles ( scm3 - AID , okp1 - AID ) , all cultures used in the experiment were treated with 500 µ M indole - 3 - acetic acid ( IAA , dissolved in DMSO ) for the final 60 min of growth as described previously ( Lang et al . , 24 2018 ; Miller et al , 2016 ; Nishimura et al . , 2009 ) . For strains with galactose inducible alleles ( pGAL - PSH1 , pGAL - SCM3 ) , cultures were grown in raffinose and then treated with 4 % galactose for the final 60 min of growth . Growth assays were performed by diluting log phase cultures to OD600 ~ 1 . 0 from which a 1 : 5 serial dilution series was made . This series was plated on YPD and YP plates that contained 4 % Galactose and incubated at 23 ̊C . Preparation of DNA templates and Dynabeads Plasmid pSB963 was used to generate the WT CEN DNA templates and pSB972 was used to generate the CEN mut template used in this study . Derivatives of pSB963 were altered using mutagenic primers and Q5 site - directed mutagenesis kit ( NEB ) to generate vectors containing CEN9 , unstable1 , unstable2 , very unstable1 , very unstable2 , a - sat , and 80bp - CDEIII sequences ( pSB3338 , pSB3336 , pSB3416 , pSB3337 , pSB3415 and pSB3335 , respectively ) . CDEII mutants were taken directly from high - loss and low - loss pools from Baker & Rodgers , 2005 , where very unstable1 is equivalent to H1 , very unstable2 is equivalent to H14 , unstable1 is equivalent to L1 , and unstable2 is equivalent to L5 . Widom - 601 template was equivalent to the one used in structural studies ( Guan et al . , 2021 ) where CENIII ( 92 - 137 ) was inserted into corresponding region of 601 sequence ( pSB3264 ) . For a - sat CEN DNA , the CDEII region of the CEN template was mutated to a fragment of a - satellite DNA from H . sapiens X - chromosome based on structural studies containing CENP - A ( Yatskevich et al . , 2022 ) . DNA templates were generated by PCR using a 5’ - ATTO647 - funtionalized ( IDT DNA ) 5’ primer with homology to linker DNA upstream of ~ 60 bp of pericentromeric DNA and the centromere ( SB7843 ) and a 5’ - biotinylated ( IDT DNA ) 3’ primer with linker DNA , an EcoRI restriction site , and homology to linker DNA downstream of ~ 60 bp of pericentromeric DNA and the centromere ( SB3879 ) to yield ~ 750 bp dye - labeled assembly templates . For the 80 bp CDEIII mutant , plasmid pSB963 was amplified with primers SB7843 and SB7844 to generate a CDEIII - containing mutant of 80 bp total length . For CEN7 , template pSB2953 was amplified with primers SB5699 and SB7842 to generate a dye - labeled and biotinylated 750 bp assembly template . For the double - tethered CEN DNA template , biotinylated primers SB7845 and SB3878 were used to generate a 250 bp template . The single - tethered 250 bp control 25 template was generated using primers SB7846 and SB3878 . The Widom - 601 template ( pSB2887 ) and Widom - 601 - CDEIII hybrid template ( pSB3264 ) were amplified with primers SB5699 and SB7842 to generate dye - labeled and biotinylated 750 bp templates . Supplemental Table 2 includes the plasmids used in this study and Supplemental Table 3 includes the primer sequences used to PCR amplify the DNA templates . PCR products were purified using the Qiagen PCR Purification Kit . In the case of bulk assembly for Mnase assays , purified CEN DNA was conjugated to Streptadivin - coated Dynabeads ( M - 280 Streptavidin , Invitrogen ) for 2 . 5 hr at room temperature , using 1 M NaCl , 5 mM Tris - HCl ( pH7 . 5 ) , and 0 . 5 mM EDTA as the binding and washing buffer . For single molecule TIRFM assays , purified DNA was diluted in dH 2 O to a final concentration ~ 100pM . Whole Cell Extract preparation for kinetochore assembly assays For a standard bulk kinetochore assembly assay in vitro , cells were grown in liquid YPD media to log phase and arrested in mitosis in 500 mL and then harvested by centrifugation . All subsequent steps were performed on ice with 4 ̊C buffers . Cells were washed once with dH2O with 0 . 2 mM PMSF , then once with Buffer L ( 25 mM HEPES pH 7 . 6 , 2 mM MgCl2 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA pH 7 . 6 , 0 . 5 mM EGTA pH 7 . 6 , 0 . 1 % NP - 40 , 175 mM K - Glutamate , and 15 % Glycerol ) supplemented with protease inhibitors ( 10 mg / ml leupeptin , 10mg / ml pepstatin , 10mg / ml chymostatin , 0 . 2 mM PMSF ) , and 2 mM DTT . Cell pellets were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and then lysed using a Freezer / Mill ( SPEX SamplePrep ) , using 10 rounds that consisted of 2 min of bombarding the pellet at 10 cycles per second , then cooling for 2 min . The subsequent powder was weighed and then resuspended in Buffer L according to the following calculation : weight of pellet ( g ) x 2 = number of mL of Buffer L . Resuspended cell lysate was thawed on ice and clarified by centrifugation at 16 , 100 g for 30 min at 4 ̊C , the protein - containing layer was extracted with a syringe and then aliquoted and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen . The resulting soluble whole cell extracts ( WCE ) generally had a concentration of 50 – 70 mg / mL . The pellets , powder , and WCE were stored at - 80 ̊C . Bulk assembly assays followed by Mnase treatment . 26 De novo kinetochore assembly was performed with whole cell extract from SBY21110 ( Ndc10 - mCherry , Cse4 - GFP ) as previously described ( Lang et al . , 2018 ) . Briefly , 1 mL of whole cell extract and 50 µ l of DNA coated M280 Dynabeads ( single - tether CEN , double - tether CEN , or CEN mut ) were incubated at room temperature for 90 min to allow kinetochore assembly . Following the final wash , beads were resuspended in 90 µ L of Buffer L ( see above ) supplemented with 100 µ g / mL BSA , 10 µ L of 10X Micrococcal Nuclease Reaction Buffer ( NEB ) and 1000 gel units of Micrococcal Nuclease ( NEB , # M0247S ) and incubated at 30 ̊C for 10 min under constant mixing . The reaction was stopped with addition of EGTA to 10 mM . After removal of magnetic beads , the aqueous phase was phenol - extracted followed by ethanol precipitation of DNA and resuspended in dH 2 0 and run on a 1 % agarose gel . Resolved DNA were visualized via SYBR Gold nucleic acid dye ( Invitrogen ; S11494 ) on ChemiDoc Imager ( Bio - Rad ) . Immunoblotting For immunoblots , proteins were transferred from SDS - PAGE gels onto 0 . 22 μM cellulose paper , blocked at room temperature with 4 % milk in PBST , and incubated overnight at 4 °C in primary antibody . Antibody origins and dilutions in PBST were as follows : α - Cse4 ( 9536 ( Pinsky et al , 2003 ) ; 1 : 500 ) , α - H3 Alexa Fluor 555 ( Invitrogen ; 17H2L9 ; 1 : 3 , 000 ) , α - PGK1 ( Invitrogen ; 4592560 ; 1 : 10 , 000 ) . The anti - Scm3 antibodies were generated in rabbits against a recombinant Scm3 protein fragment ( residues 1 - 28 ) of the protein by Genscript . The company provided affinity - purified antibodies that we validated by immunoprecipitating Scm3 from yeast strains with Scm3 - V5 and confirming that the antibody recognized a protein of the correct molecular weight that was also recognized by α - V5 antibody ( Invitrogen ; R96025 ; 1 : 5000 ) . We subsequently used the antibody at a dilution of 1 : 10 , 000 . Secondary antibodies were validated by the same methods as the primary antibodies as well as with negative controls lacking primary antibodies to confirm specificity . Blots were then washed again with PBST and incubated with secondary antibody at room temperature . Secondary antibodies were α - mouse ( NA931 ) or α - rabbit ( NA934 ) , horseradish peroxidase - conjugated purchased from GE Healthcare and used at 1 : 1000 dilution in 4 % milk in PBST . Blots were then washed again with PBST and ECL substrate from Thermo Scientific used to visualize the proteins on ChemiDoc Imager ( Bio - 27 Rad ) . Uncropped and unprocessed scans of gels and blots are provided in the Source Data file . Single molecule TIRFM slide preparation . Coverslips and microscope slides were ultrasonically cleaned and passivated with PEG as described previously ( Larson & Hoskins , 2017 ; Larson et al , 2014 ) . Briefly , ultrasonically cleaned slides were treated with vectabond ( Vector Laboratories ) prior to incubation with 1 % ( w / v % ) biotinylated mPEG - SVA MW - 5000K / mPEG - SVA MW - 5000K ( Lysan Bio ) in flow chambers made with double - sided tape . Passivation was carried out overnight at 4 ̊C . After passivation , flow chambers were washed with Buffer L and then incubated with 0 . 3 M BSA / 0 . 3M Kappa Casein in Buffer L for 5 min . Flow chambers were washed with Buffer L and then incubated with 0 . 3M Avidin DN ( Vector Laboratories ) for 5 min . Flow chambers were then washed with Buffer L and incubated with ~ 100 pM CEN DNA template for 5 min and washed with Buffer L . For endpoint colocalization assays , slides were prepared as follows : Flow chambers were filled with 100 µ L of WCE containing protein ( s ) of interest via pipetting and wicking with filter paper . After addition of WCE , slides were incubated for 90 min at 25°C and then WCE was washed away with Buffer L . Flow chambers were then filled with Buffer L with oxygen scavenger system ( Aitken et al , 2008 ) ( 10 nM PCD / 2 . 5 mM PCA / 1mM Trolox ) for imaging . For immunofluorescence of H3 , after 90 min , chambers were washed with Buffer L and then incubated for 30 min with Buffer L and 1 : 300 diluted antibody ( Invitrogen 17H2L9 ) . Chambers were then washed with Buffer L prior to imaging in Buffer L with oxygen scavenger system ( above ) . For real - time colocalization assays , slides were prepared as follows : On the microscope , 100 µ L WCE spiked with oxygen scavenger system was added to flow chamber via pipetting followed by immediate image acquisition . Single molecule TIRFM colocalization assays image collection and analysis All images were collected on a Nikon TE - 2000 inverted TIRF microscope with a 100x oil immersion objective ( Nikon Instruments ) with an Andor iXon X3 DU - 897 EMCCD camera . Images were acquired at 512 px x 512 px with a pixel size of . 11 µm / px at 10MHz . Atto - 647 labeled CEN DNAs were excited at 640 nm for 300 ms , GFP - tagged proteins were 28 excited at 488 nm for 200 ms , and mCherry - tagged proteins were excited at 561 nm for 200 ms . For endpoint colocalization assays , single snapshots of all channels were acquired . For real - time colocalization assays images in 561 nm channel and 488 nm channel were acquired every 5 s with acquisition of the DNA - channel ( 647 nm ) every 1 min for 45 min total ( 541 frames ) using Nikon Elements acquisition software . Snapshots were processed in a CellProfiler 4 image analysis ( Stirling et al , 2021 ) pipeline using RelateObjects module to determine colocalization between DNA channel ( 647 nm ) and GFP ( 488 nm ) and mCherry ( 561 nm ) channels . Results were quantified and plotted using MATLAB ( The Mathworks , Natick , MA ) . Adjustments to example images ( contrast , false color , etc . ) were made using FIJI ( Schindelin et al , 2012 ) and applied equally across entire field of view of each image . For real - time colocalization assay , a custom - built image analysis pipeline was built in MATLAB ( R2019b ) to extract DNA - bound intensity traces for the different fluorescent species , to convert them into ON / OFF pulses and to generate the empirical survivor function data . First , the image dataset was drift - corrected using either fast Fourier Transform cross - correlations or translation affine transformation depending on the severity of the drift . DNA spots were identified after binarizing the DNA signal using global background value as threshold , as well as size and time - persistency filtering . Mean values of z - normalized fluorescent markers intensities were measured at each DNA spot at each time frame , and local background was subtracted . Z - normalized traces were then binarized to ON / OFF pulses by applying a channel - specific , manually adjusted threshold value unique to all traces in a given image set . Pulse onsets , durations and overlaps between channels were then derived . For plotting clarity , z - normalized traces shown in the figures were zero - adjusted so that the baseline signal lies around zero . Pulses in ON state at the end of the image acquisition ( right censored ) were annotated and included as unweighted in lifetime estimates . Kaplan - Meier analysis and log rank tests were performed in MATLAB ( R2021a ) . Adjustments to example plot images ( contrast ) as well as generation of example plot source movies were made using FIJI ( Schindelin et al . , 2012 ) . 29 Statistical tests Right - censored lifetimes were included in an unweighted Kaplan - Meier analysis to estimate survival functions , censored events typically comprised < 5 % of observed lifetimes . Survival functions including 95 % confidence intervals were plotted using KMplot ( Curve Cardillo G . ( 2008 ) . KMPLOT : Kaplan - Meier estimation of the survival function . http : / / www . mathworks . com / matlabcentral / fileexchange / 22293 ) and P - values for comparing the Kaplan – Meier survival plots are provided in the figure legends and were computed using the log - rank test within Logrank ( Cardillo G . ( 2008 ) . LogRank : Comparing survival curves of two groups using the log rank test http : / / www . mathworks . com / matlabcentral / fileexchange / 22317 ) . Different lifetime plots were considered significantly different with a P - value less than 0 . 05 . Significance between off - rates were determined by two - tailed unpaired t - tests . Data Availability Section Custom software written in MATLAB ( R2021a ) was used for TIRF colocalization residence lifetime analysis and plot generation . The source code is publicly available at https : / / github . com / FredHutch / Automated - Single - Molecule - Colocalization - Analysis . All primary datasets used for analysis in all figures are available at Zenodo , https : / / zenodo . org / and assigned the identifier ( 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 7939301 ) . All primary data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request . Acknowledgements All imaging was performed at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center Cellular Imaging Core ( supported by the Fred Hutch / University of Washington Cancer Consortium P30 CA015704 ) , and we thank Jin Meng and Lena Schroeder for their experimental help . We also thank members of the S . B . and C . L . A . labs for critical reading of the manuscript . A . R . P . was supported by postdoctoral fellowship NIH F32GM136010 . J . D . L was supported by CVP training grant 5T32HL7312 - 39 and a Washington Research Foundation Fellowship Award . C . L . A . was supported by R01GM079373 and R35GM134842 . S . B . was supported by NIH R01GM064386 and is also an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . 30 Author contributions A . R . P conceptually designed and performed experiments , analyzed data , and wrote the manuscript with input from all authors ; J . D . L . conceptually designed experiments and edited the manuscript . J . D . designed data analysis software and reviewed and edited the manuscript . C . L . A . and S . B . conceptually designed and supervised experiments and reviewed and edited the manuscript . Disclosure and competing interests statement . The authors declare no conflict of interest . REFERENCES Aitken CE , Marshall RA , Puglisi JD ( 2008 ) An oxygen scavenging system for improvement of dye stability in single - molecule fluorescence experiments . Biophys J 94 : 1826 - 1835 Aravamudhan P , Felzer - Kim I , Joglekar AP ( 2013 ) The budding yeast point centromere associates with two Cse4 molecules during mitosis . Curr Biol 23 : 770 - 774 Baker RE , Rogers K ( 2005 ) Genetic and Genomic Analysis of the AT - Rich Centromere DNA Element II of S . cerevisiae . Genetics Bensasson D , Zarowiecki M , Burt A , Koufopanou V ( 2008 ) Rapid evolution of yeast centromeres in the absence of drive . Genetics 178 : 2161 - 2167 Beutel BA , Gold L ( 1992 ) In vitro evolution of intrinsically bent DNA . J Mol Biol 228 : 803 - 812 Biggins S ( 2013 ) The composition , functions , and regulation of the budding yeast kinetochore . Genetics 194 : 817 - 846 Bobkov GOM , Huang A , van den Berg SJW , Mitra S , Anselm E , Lazou V , Schunter S , Feederle R , Imhof A , Lusser A et al ( 2020 ) Spt6 is a maintenance factor for centromeric CENP - A . Nat Commun 11 : 2919 31 Cai M , Davis RW ( 1990 ) Yeast centromere binding protein CBF1 , of the helix - loop - helix protein family , is required for chromosome stability and methionine prototrophy . Cell 61 : 437 - 446 Camahort R , Li B , Florens L , Swanson SK , Washburn MP , Gerton JL ( 2007 ) Scm3 is essential to recruit the histone H3 variant cse4 to centromeres and to maintain a functional kinetochore . Mol Cell 26 : 853 - 865 Carbon J ( 1984 ) Yeast centromeres : structure and function . Cell 37 : 351 - 353 Carbon J , Clarke L ( 1984 ) Structural and functional analysis of a yeast centromere ( CEN3 ) . J Cell Sci Suppl 1 : 43 - 58 Cheeseman IM ( 2014 ) The kinetochore . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 : a015826 Cho US , Harrison SC ( 2011a ) Ndc10 is a platform for inner kinetochore assembly in budding yeast . Nat Struct Mol Biol 19 : 48 - 55 Cho US , Harrison SC ( 2011b ) Recognition of the centromere - specific histone Cse4 by the chaperone Scm3 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 : 9367 - 9371 Clarke L , Carbon J ( 1985 ) The structure and function of yeast centromeres . Annu Rev Genet 19 : 29 - 56 Cleveland DW , Mao Y , Sullivan KF ( 2003 ) Centromeres and kinetochores : from epigenetics to mitotic checkpoint signaling . Cell 112 : 407 - 421 Cole HA , Howard BH , Clark DJ ( 2011 ) The centromeric nucleosome of budding yeast is perfectly positioned and covers the entire centromere . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 : 12687 - 12692 Crawford DJ , Hoskins AA , Friedman LJ , Gelles J , Moore MJ ( 2008 ) Visualizing the splicing of single pre - mRNA molecules in whole cell extract . RNA 14 : 170 - 179 Cumberledge S , Carbon J ( 1987 ) Mutational analysis of meiotic and mitotic centromere function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 117 : 203 - 212 Dechassa ML , Wyns K , Li M , Hall MA , Wang MD , Luger K ( 2011 ) Structure and Scm3 - mediated assembly of budding yeast centromeric nucleosomes . Nat Commun 2 : 313 Dechassa ML , Wyns K , Luger K ( 2014 ) Scm3 deposits a ( Cse4 - H4 ) 2 tetramer onto DNA through a Cse4 - H4 dimer intermediate . Nucleic Acids Res 42 : 5532 - 5542 32 Dendooven T , Zhang Z , Yang J , McLaughlin SH , Schwab J , Scheres SHW , Yatskevich S , Barford D ( 2022 ) Cryo - Em structure of the complete inner kinetochore of the budding yeast point centromere . BioRxiv https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 12 . 12 . 520091 [ preprint ] Dhatchinamoorthy K , Shivaraju M , Lange JJ , Rubinstein B , Unruh JR , Slaughter BD , Gerton JL ( 2017 ) Structural plasticity of the living kinetochore . J Cell Biol 216 : 3551 - 3570 Drew HR , Travers AA ( 1985 ) DNA bending and its relation to nucleosome positioning . J Mol Biol 186 : 773 - 790 Dunleavy EM , Roche D , Tagami H , Lacoste N , Ray - Gallet D , Nakamura Y , Daigo Y , Nakatani Y , Almouzni - Pettinotti G ( 2009 ) HJURP is a cell - cycle - dependent maintenance and deposition factor of CENP - A at centromeres . Cell 137 : 485 - 497 Filipescu D , Naughtin M , Podsypanina K , Lejour V , Wilson L , Gurard - Levin ZA , Orsi GA , Simeonova I , Toufektchan E , Attardi LD et al ( 2017 ) Essential role for centromeric factors following p53 loss and oncogenic transformation . Genes Dev 31 : 463 - 480 Foltz DR , Jansen LE , Bailey AO , Yates JR , 3rd , Bassett EA , Wood S , Black BE , Cleveland DW ( 2009 ) Centromere - specific assembly of CENP - A nucleosomes is mediated by HJURP . Cell 137 : 472 - 484 Friedman LJ , Chung J , Gelles J ( 2006 ) Viewing dynamic assembly of molecular complexes by multi - wavelength single - molecule fluorescence . Biophys J 91 : 1023 - 1031 Friedman LJ , Gelles J ( 2012 ) Mechanism of transcription initiation at an activator - dependent promoter defined by single - molecule observation . Cell 148 : 679 - 689 Furuyama S , Biggins S ( 2007 ) Centromere identity is specified by a single centromeric nucleosome in budding yeast . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 14706 - 14711 Furuyama T , Henikoff S ( 2009 ) Centromeric nucleosomes induce positive DNA supercoils . Cell 138 : 104 - 113 Gaudet A , Fitzgerald - Hayes M ( 1987 ) Alterations in the adenine - plus - thymine - rich region of CEN3 affect centromere function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol 7 : 68 - 75 Gkikopoulos T , Singh V , Tsui K , Awad S , Renshaw MJ , Scholfield P , Barton GJ , Nislow C , Tanaka TU , Owen - Hughes T ( 2011 ) The SWI / SNF complex acts to constrain distribution of the centromeric histone variant Cse4 . EMBO J 30 : 1919 - 1927 33 Gordon DJ , Resio B , Pellman D ( 2012 ) Causes and consequences of aneuploidy in cancer . Nat Rev Genet 13 : 189 - 203 Guan R , Lian T , Zhou BR , He E , Wu C , Singleton M , Bai Y ( 2021 ) Structural and dynamic mechanisms of CBF3 - guided centromeric nucleosome formation . Nat Commun 12 : 1763 Guo MS , Kawamura R , Littlehale ML , Marko JF , Laub MT ( 2021 ) High - resolution , genome - wide mapping of positive supercoiling in chromosomes . Elife 10 : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 67236 Hedouin S , Logsdon GA , Underwood JG , Biggins S ( 2022 ) A transcriptional roadblock protects yeast centromeres . Nucleic Acids Res 50 : 7801 - 7815 Herman JA , Toledo CM , Olson JM , DeLuca JG , Paddison PJ ( 2015 ) Molecular pathways : regulation and targeting of kinetochore - microtubule attachment in cancer . Clin Cancer Res 21 : 233 - 239 Hewawasam GS , Dhatchinamoorthy K , Mattingly M , Seidel C , Gerton JL ( 2018 ) Chromatin assembly factor - 1 ( CAF - 1 ) chaperone regulates Cse4 deposition into chromatin in budding yeast . Nucleic Acids Res 46 : 4440 - 4455 Hinshaw SM , Harrison SC ( 2019 ) The structure of the Ctf19c / CCAN from budding yeast . Elife 8 : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2017 . 09 . 002 Holland AJ , Cleveland DW ( 2009 ) Boveri revisited : chromosomal instability , aneuploidy and tumorigenesis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 : 478 - 487 Hornung P , Troc P , Malvezzi F , Maier M , Demianova Z , Zimniak T , Litos G , Lampert F , Schleiffer A , Brunner M et al ( 2014 ) A cooperative mechanism drives budding yeast kinetochore assembly downstream of CENP - A . J Cell Biol 206 : 509 - 524 Hoskins AA , Friedman LJ , Gallagher SS , Crawford DJ , Anderson EG , Wombacher R , Ramirez N , Cornish VW , Gelles J , Moore MJ ( 2011 ) Ordered and dynamic assembly of single spliceosomes . Science 331 : 1289 - 1295 Joglekar AP , Bouck D , Finley K , Liu X , Wan Y , Berman J , He X , Salmon ED , Bloom KS ( 2008 ) Molecular architecture of the kinetochore - microtubule attachment site is conserved between point and regional centromeres . J Cell Biol 181 : 587 - 594 Joglekar AP , Bouck DC , Molk JN , Bloom KS , Salmon ED ( 2006 ) Molecular architecture of a kinetochore - microtubule attachment site . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 581 - 585 34 Kixmoeller K , Allu PK , Black BE ( 2020 ) The centromere comes into focus : from CENP - A nucleosomes to kinetochore connections with the spindle . Open Biol 10 : 200051 Kunkel GR , Martinson HG ( 1981 ) Nucleosomes will not form on double - stranded RNa or over poly ( dA ) . poly ( dT ) tracts in recombinant DNA . Nucleic Acids Res 9 : 6869 - 6888 Lacoste N , Woolfe A , Tachiwana H , Garea AV , Barth T , Cantaloube S , Kurumizaka H , Imhof A , Almouzni G ( 2014 ) Mislocalization of the centromeric histone variant CenH3 / CENP - A in human cells depends on the chaperone DAXX . Mol Cell 53 : 631 - 644 Lang J , Barber A , Biggins S ( 2018 ) An assay for de novo kinetochore assembly reveals a key role for the CENP - T pathway in budding yeast . Elife 7 Larson JD , Hoskins AA ( 2017 ) Dynamics and consequences of spliceosome E complex formation . Elife 6 : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 415992 Larson JD , Rodgers ML , Hoskins AA ( 2014 ) Visualizing cellular machines with colocalization single molecule microscopy . Chem Soc Rev 43 : 1189 - 1200 Leber V , Nans A , Singleton MR ( 2018 ) Structural basis for assembly of the CBF3 kinetochore complex . EMBO J 37 : 269 - 281 Liebl K , Zacharias M ( 2021 ) Accurate modeling of DNA conformational flexibility by a multivariate Ising model . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118 : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2021263118 Longtine MS , McKenzie A , 3rd , Demarini DJ , Shah NG , Wach A , Brachat A , Philippsen P , Pringle JR ( 1998 ) Additional modules for versatile and economical PCR - based gene deletion and modification in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast 14 : 953 - 961 Lowary PT , Widom J ( 1998 ) New DNA sequence rules for high affinity binding to histone octamer and sequence - directed nucleosome positioning . J Mol Biol 276 : 19 - 42 Mahlke MA , Nechemia - Arbely Y ( 2020 ) Guarding the genome : CENP - A - chromatin in health and cancer . Genes ( Basel ) 11 : 10 . 3390 / genes11070810 McAinsh AD , Marston AL ( 2022 ) The four causes : The functional architecture of centromeres and kinetochores . Annu Rev Genet 56 : 279 - 314 McGrew J , Diehl B , Fitzgerald - Hayes M ( 1986 ) Single base - pair mutations in centromere element III cause aberrant chromosome segregation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol 6 : 530 - 538 McKinley KL , Cheeseman IM ( 2016 ) The molecular basis for centromere identity and function . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 17 : 16 - 29 35 Melters DP , Bradnam KR , Young HA , Telis N , May MR , Ruby JG , Sebra R , Peluso P , Eid J , Rank D et al ( 2013 ) Comparative analysis of tandem repeats from hundreds of species reveals unique insights into centromere evolution . Genome Biol 14 : R10 10 . 1186 / gb - 2013 - 14 - 1 - r10 Miller MP , Asbury CL , Biggins S ( 2016 ) A TOG protein confers tension sensitivity to kinetochore - microtubule attachments . Cell 165 : 1428 - 1439 Mizuguchi G , Xiao H , Wisniewski J , Smith MM , Wu C ( 2007 ) Nonhistone Scm3 and histones CenH3 - H4 assemble the core of centromere - specific nucleosomes . Cell 129 : 1153 - 1164 Murphy MR , Fowlkes DM , Fitzgerald - Hayes M ( 1991 ) Analysis of centromere function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using synthetic centromere mutants . Chromosoma 101 : 189 - 197 Musacchio A , Desai A ( 2017 ) A molecular view of kinetochore assembly and function . Biology ( Basel ) 6 10 . 3390 / biology6010005 Nishimura K , Fukagawa T , Takisawa H , Kakimoto T , Kanemaki M ( 2009 ) An auxin - based degron system for the rapid depletion of proteins in nonplant cells . Nat Methods 6 : 917 - 922 Palmer DK , O ' Day K , Trong HL , Charbonneau H , Margolis RL ( 1991 ) Purification of the centromere - specific protein CENP - A and demonstration that it is a distinctive histone . Proc Natl Acad Sci US A 88 : 3734 - 3738 Pinsky BA , Tatsutani SY , Collins KA , Biggins S ( 2003 ) An Mtw1 complex promotes kinetochore biorientation that is monitored by the Ipl1 / Aurora protein kinase . Dev Cell 5 : 735 - 745 Popchock AR , Jana S , Mehl RA , Qiu W ( 2018 ) Engineering heterodimeric kinesins through genetic incorporation of noncanonical amino acids . ACS Chem Biol 13 : 2229 - 2236 Popchock AR , Tseng KF , Wang P , Karplus PA , Xiang X , Qiu W ( 2017 ) The mitotic kinesin - 14 KlpA contains a context - dependent directionality switch . Nat Commun 8 : 13999 Prunell A ( 1982 ) Nucleosome reconstitution on plasmid - inserted poly ( dA ) • poly ( dT ) . EMBO J 1 : 173 - 179 36 Ranjitkar P , Press , M . O . , Yi , X . , Baker , R . , MacCoss , M . J , Biggins , S ( 2010 ) An E3 ubiquitin ligase prevents ectopic localization of the centromeric histone H3 variant via the centromere targeting domain . Mol Cell 40 : 455 - 464 . Santaguida S , Musacchio A ( 2009 ) The life and miracles of kinetochores . EMBO J 28 : 2511 - 2531 Schindelin J , Arganda - Carreras I , Frise E , Kaynig V , Longair M , Pietzsch T , Preibisch S , Rueden C , Saalfeld S , Schmid B et al ( 2012 ) Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 : 676 - 682 Sheltzer JM , Blank HM , Pfau SJ , Tange Y , George BM , Humpton TJ , Brito IL , Hiraoka Y , Niwa O , Amon A ( 2011 ) Aneuploidy drives genomic instability in yeast . Science 333 : 1026 - 1030 Shrestha RL , Ahn GS , Staples MI , Sathyan KM , Karpova TS , Foltz DR , Basrai MA ( 2017 ) Mislocalization of centromeric histone H3 variant CENP - A contributes to chromosomal instability ( CIN ) in human cells . Oncotarget 8 : 46781 - 46800 Shukla M , Tong P , White SA , Singh PP , Reid AM , Catania S , Pidoux AL , Allshire RC ( 2018 ) Centromere DNA destabilizes H3 nucleosomes to promote CENP - A deposition during the cell cycle . Curr Biol 28 : 3924 - 3936 e3924 Stirling DR , Swain - Bowden MJ , Lucas AM , Carpenter AE , Cimini BA , Goodman A ( 2021 ) CellProfiler 4 : improvements in speed , utility and usability . BMC Bioinformatics 22 : 433 Stoler S , Rogers K , Weitze S , Morey L , Fitzgerald - Hayes M , Baker RE ( 2007 ) Scm3 , an essential Saccharomyces cerevisiae centromere protein required for G2 / M progression and Cse4 localization . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 : 10571 - 10576 Stormberg T , Lyubchenko YL ( 2022 ) The Sequence Dependent Nanoscale Structure of CENP - A Nucleosomes . Int J Mol Sci 23 : 10 . 3390 / ijms231911385 Struhl K , Segal E ( 2013 ) Determinants of nucleosome positioning . Nat Struct Mol Biol 20 : 267 - 273 Sullivan KF , Hechenberger M , Masri K ( 1994 ) Human CENP - A contains a histone H3 related histone fold domain that is required for targeting to the centromere . J Cell Biol 127 : 581 - 592 37 Widom J ( 2001 ) Role of DNA sequence in nucleosome stability and dynamics . Q Rev Biophys 34 : 269 - 324 Wisniewski J , Hajj B , Chen J , Mizuguchi G , Xiao H , Wei D , Dahan M , Wu C ( 2014 ) Imaging the fate of histone Cse4 reveals de novo replacement in S phase and subsequent stable residence at centromeres . Elife 3 : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 02203 Xiao H , Mizuguchi G , Wisniewski J , Huang Y , Wei D , Wu C ( 2011 ) Nonhistone Scm3 binds to AT - rich DNA to organize atypical centromeric nucleosome of budding yeast . Mol Cell 43 : 369 - 380 Yan K , Yang J , Zhang Z , McLaughlin SH , Chang L , Fasci D , Ehrenhofer - Murray AE , Heck AJR , Barford D ( 2019 ) Structure of the inner kinetochore CCAN complex assembled onto a centromeric nucleosome . Nature 574 : 278 - 282 Yan K , Zhang Z , Yang J , McLaughlin SH , Barford D ( 2018 ) Architecture of the CBF3 - centromere complex of the budding yeast kinetochore . Nat Struct Mol Biol 25 : 1103 - 1110 Yatskevich S , Muir KW , Bellini D , Zhang Z , Yang J , Tischer T , Predin M , Dendooven T , McLaughlin SH , Barford D ( 2022 ) Structure of the human inner kinetochore bound to a centromeric CENP - A nucleosome . Science 376 : 844 - 852 Zhou BR , Yadav KNS , Borgnia M , Hong J , Cao B , Olins AL , Olins DE , Bai Y , Zhang P ( 2019 ) Atomic resolution cryo - EM structure of a native - like CENP - A nucleosome aided by an antibody fragment . Nat Commun 10 : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 10247 - 4 Zhou N , Shi L , Shan S , Zhou Z ( 2021 ) Molecular basis for the selective recognition and ubiquitination of centromeric histone H3 by yeast E3 ligase Psh1 . J Genet Genomics 48 : 463 - 472 38 A Lysate containing labeled protein of interest Microscope slide Coverslip Flow - chamber Tape TIRF Objective biotin PEG avidin CEN DNA CDEI biotin CDEII CDEIII ATTO647 TIRF Laser Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome KinetochoreKin TIRF Laser nn nucnucleoleosomsomee Ndc10 - mCherry * * ATTO647 Cse4 CENP - A * * mCherry CDEI CDEIII CD E II C B CDEIII mut CEN E ndpo i n t N d c 10 c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 CEN - ATTO647 / 640 nm excitation Ndc10 - mCherry / 540 nm excitation 540 nm excitation CEN3 Overlay CDEIII mut Cse4 CENP - A - GFP * * GFP Ndc10 CDEI CDEIII C D E II D E CDEIII mut WT CEN WT CEN3 scm3 - AID 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 E ndpo i n t C s e4 C E N P - A c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) Overlay CDEIII mut WT Cse4 CENP - A - GFP / 488 nm excitation CEN3 WT CEN3 scm3 - AID CEN - ATTO647 / 640 nm excitation * * ATTO647 39 Figure 1 . Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A assemble with high efficiency and specificity onto CEN DNAs in extract . A Schematic of the TIRFM colocalization assay . Yeast lysate containing a fluorescent protein ( s ) of interest is added to a coverslip with immobilized fluorescent CEN DNA . After incubation , the lysate is washed from the chamber and the CEN DNA and fluorescent kinetochore proteins are imaged via TIRFM . B Schematic of fluorescent label location around the centromeric nucleosome used in ( C ) for colocalization imaging . C Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization assays . Top panels show CEN DNA ( Top - left panel , blue circles ) or CDEIII MUT CEN DNA ( top - right panel , blue circles ) visualized in lysates containing Ndc10 - mCherry . Middle panels show the visualized Ndc10 - mCherry on CEN DNA ( middle - left panel ) or CDEIII MUT DNA ( middle - right panel ) with colocalization shown in relation to blue DNA circles . Bottom panels show overlay of DNA channel ( magenta ) with Ndc10 - mCherry ( yellow ) on CEN DNA ( bottom - left panel ) or CDEIII MUT DNA ( bottom - right panel ) . Graph shows the quantification of Ndc10 endpoint colocalization on CEN DNA and on CDEIII MUT CEN DNA ( 70 ± 7 . 6 % , 1 . 6 ± 0 . 3 % respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . D Schematic of fluorescent label location around the centromeric nucleosome used in ( E ) for colocalization imaging . E Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization imaging . Top panels show CEN DNA ( top - left panel , blue circles ) or CDEIII MUT CEN DNA ( top - middle panel , blue circles ) visualized in lysates that included Cse4 CENP - A - GFP or CEN DNA in lysates that lacked Scm3 HJURP ( scm3 - AID ) ( top - right panel , blue circles ) . Middle panels show Cse4 CENP - A - GFP visualized on CEN DNA ( middle - left panel ) or CDEIII MUT CEN DNA ( center panel ) or on CEN DNA in lysates lacking Scm3 HJURP ( scm3 - AID ) ( middle - right panel ) with 40 colocalization shown in relation to blue DNA circles . Bottom panels show overlay of CEN DNA channel ( magenta ) with Cse4 CENP - A - GFP ( green ) on CEN DNA ( bottom - left panel ) or CDEIII MUT DNA ( bottom - middle panel ) or on CEN DNA in lysates lacking Scm3 HJURP ( scm3 - AID ) ( bottom - right panel ) . Scale bars 3 µ m . Graph shows quantification of observed colocalization of Cse4 on CEN DNA and on CDEIII MUT CEN DNA or on CEN DNA in lysates that lacked Scm3 HJURP ( 47 ± 2 . 9 % , 3 . 5 ± 3 . 0 % and 0 . 6 ± 0 . 4 % respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . 41 D C F E G 0 2700 Time ( s ) Cse4 CENP - A Ndc10 Residence initiation Residence off - event ! Residence censorship + Post Ndc10 ternary residence Never / pre Ndc10 ternary residence Ndc10 First Ndc10 Last Cse4 CENP - A Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A Ndc10 ResidenceOverlay ResidenceOverlay T 3 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l T 4 T 5 T 2 T 1 + + + ! " ! # = = κ " ! $ % & " # $ ’ " # $ ( $ # ! " ! ( post Ndc10 residences ) ( post Ndc10 residence - off events ) = = κ # ! $ ) & " # $ * $ # ! # ( never / pre Ndc10 residences ) ( never / pre Ndc10 residence - off events ) ! B Censored Ndc10 residence lifetimes Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes Time ( s ) 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s n = 3231 n = 1049 * * * 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 median = 102 s median = 82 s A Cse4 CENP - A Ndc10 Merge 0 2700 Time ( s ) C E N DN A s 0 . 2 . 4 . 6 . 8 1 P r opo r t i on o f C s e4 C E N P - A - N d c 10 t e r na r y r e s i den c e e v en t s Ndc10 precedes Cse4 CENP - A Cse4 CENP - A precedes Ndc10 * Ternary Ndc10 Non - Ternary Ndc10 C s e4 C E N P - A o ff - r a t e s ( h r - 1 ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Censored Ternary Ndc10 Non - Ternary Ndc10 Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s n = 612 n = 539 median = 88 s median = 69 s Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes 0 200 400 600 800 1000 42 Figure 2 . Ndc10 stabilizes Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA . A Example graph of total identified colocalization residences observed on CEN DNA per imaging sequence . Each row represents one identified CEN DNA with all identified residences shown over entire imaging sequence ( 2700 s ) for Ndc10 ( magenta ) and Cse4 CENP - A ( green ) . Instances where Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A residence coincides ( white - merge ) represent simultaneous observation of both proteins on single CEN DNA , termed ternary residences . Complete series shown in Figure EV1A . B Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of CEN DNA residence lifetimes of Ndc10 ( magenta – median lifetime of 102 s , n = 3231 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and Cse4 CENP - A ( red – median lifetime of 79 s , n = 1049 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Significant difference between ternary Ndc10 residence lifetime survival plots ( * * * ) compared to Cse4 CENP - A ( two - tailed p - value of 0 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . C Schematic for off - rate estimate calculations with representative residence lifetime assay traces of Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA . Example kymographs of Cse4 CENP - A ( top - 488 nm ) and Ndc10 ( bottom - 568 nm ) in relation to a single identified CEN DNA ( arrow ) , with normalized intensity trace below ( grey ) as well as identified colocalization residences ( blue ) . Ndc10 First example ( left ) illustrates Ndc10 colocalization that precedes Cse4 CENP - A , yielding only Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences . Ndc10 Last example ( right ) illustrates Cse4 CENP - A colocalization that precedes Ndc10 , yielding both Non - Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences and Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residence after Ndc10 colocalization initiation . Images were acquired every 5 seconds with normalized fluorescence intensity shown in arbitrary units . Bottom panel includes formulas used to calculate the ternary Cse4 CENP - A off - rate , 𝑘 ! , where 𝑁 ! represents the total number of apparent Cse4 - GFP detachments recorded during ternary residences , and ∑ ( 𝑇 # + 𝑇 $ + 𝑇 % ) represents the total amount of ternary residence time observed . As well as the formula 43 for non - ternary Cse4 off - rate , 𝑘 " , where 𝑁 " represents the total number of apparent Cse4 - GFP detachments recorded during non - ternary residences , and ∑ ( 𝑇 & + 𝑇 ’ ) represents the total amount of non - ternary residence time observed . D Cse4 CENP - A has slower off - rates after colocalization with Ndc10 on CEN DNA . Quantification of the estimated Cse4 CENP - A off - rates of the Non - Ternary Ndc10 and Ternary Ndc10 pools ( 29 hr - 1 ± 2 hr - 1 and 22 hr - 1 ± 1 hr - 1 respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 1151 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Significant difference between off - rates ( * ) with a P - value of . 02 as determined by two - tailed unpaired t - test . E Kaplan - Meier analysis of Ternary Ndc10 residence lifetimes of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA ( purple – median lifetime of 88 s , n = 539 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and of Non - Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes ( teal – median lifetime of 69 s , n = 612 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . There is a significant difference ( * * ) between Ternary Ndc10 and Non - Ternary Ndc10 lifetime survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 7 . 4e - 4 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . F Example plot of total identified residences observed on CEN DNA per imaging sequence of Ndc10 ( left ) and Cse4 CENP - A ( right ) independently sorted by residence initiation time , starting at the top with initiation time of 0 s ( arrow ) . G Timing of all non - simultaneous Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A ternary residence events . The proportion when Ndc10 precedes Cse4 CENP - A is 0 . 83 ± . 06 and when Cse4 CENP - A precedes Ndc10 is 0 . 17 ± . 06 ( avg ± s . d . , n = 504 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Simultaneous arrival defined as residence initiation within 5 s of each other and comprise . 07 ± . 04 of all ternary residence events ( avg ± s . d . , n = 35 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . 44 A B D E F C P r opo r t i on o f C s e4 C E N P - A r e s i den c e e v en t s 0 . 2 . 4 . 6 . 8 1 Cse4 CENP - A - Scm3 HJURP ternary residences Cse4 CENP - A alone residences Cse4 CENP - A - GFP Scm3 HJURP - mCherry 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l Cse4 CENP - A Scm3 HJURP Merge 0 2700 Time ( s ) C E N DN A s * Non - Ternary Scm3 Ternary Scm3 C s e4 C E N P - A o ff - r a t e s ( h r - 1 ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Censored Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes Non - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s n = 305 n = 1230 * * 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 Long residences ( > 300 s ) Short residences ( < 120 s ) N on - T e r n a r y S c m 3 T e r n a r y S c m 3 0 . 2 . 4 . 6 . 8 P r opo r t i on o f C s e4 C E N P - A r e s i den c e e v en t s median = 108 s median = 79 s 45 Figure 3 . Cse4 CENP - A residence time on centromeric DNA is increased in the presence of its chaperone Scm3 HJURP . A Representative residence lifetime assay traces of Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP on a single CEN DNA . Top panel includes kymograph of Cse4 CENP - A ( top - 488 nm ) in relation to single identified CEN DNA ( arrow ) , with normalized intensity trace ( grey - bottom ) as well as identified residences ( blue ) . Bottom panel includes kymograph of Cse4 CENP - A ( bottom - 568 nm ) in relation to the same identified CEN DNA ( arrow ) , with normalized intensity trace ( grey - bottom ) as well as identified residences ( blue ) . Images acquired every 5 seconds with normalized fluorescence intensity shown in arbitrary units . B Example plot of total identified residences observed on CEN DNA per imaging sequence . Each row represents one identified CEN DNA with all identified residences shown over entire imaging sequence ( 2700 s ) for Cse4 CENP - A ( green ) and Scm3 HJURP ( magenta ) . Cases where Scm3 HJURP and Cse4 CENP - A residence coincides represent simultaneous observation of both proteins on single CEN DNA , termed ternary residence ( merge , white ) . Complete plot shown in Figure EV2A . C Quantification of the proportion of Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP ternary residences with CEN DNA compared to CEN DNA residences of Cse4 CENP - A alone ( 0 . 22 ± . 05 and 0 . 78 ± . 05 respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 1419 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Ternary residences include simultaneous Scm3 HJURP residence at any point during continuous Cse4 CENP - A residence on CEN DNA . D Quantification of the estimated off - rates of Cse4 CENP - A that never formed a ternary residence ( Non - Ternary Scm3 ) and of Cse4 CENP - A after ternary residence with Scm3 HJURP ( Ternary Scm3 ) on CEN DNA ( 26 hr - 1 ± 1 hr - 1 and 21 hr - 1 ± 2 hr - 1 respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 1535 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Significant difference between off - rates ( * ) with a P - value of . 03 as determined by two - tailed unpaired t - test . 46 E Quantification of the proportion of short residences ( < 120 s ) and long residences ( > 300 s ) of Cse4 CENP - A alone or in ternary residences on CEN DNA . Short and long Non - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences ( . 69 and . 08 respectively , n = 1063 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and short and long Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences ( . 54 and . 16 respectively , n = 305 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . F Longer residence lifetimes are measured for Cse4 CENP - A after Scm3 HJURP colocalizes . Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of the lifetimes of Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN DNA ( purple – median lifetime of 108 s , n = 305 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and Non - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN DNA ( green - of 79 s , n = 1230 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Significant difference ( * * ) between Ternary Scm3 and Non - Ternary Scm3 lifetime survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 2 . 1e - 3 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . 47 double - tether single - tether C s e4 C E N P - A - G F P N d c 10 - m C he rr y / C s e4 C E N P - A - G F P E ndpo i n t N d c 10 / C s e4 C E N P - A t e r na r y c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) double - tether single - tether 0 5 10 15 20 25 single - tether CDEIII mut single - tether Mnase treatment double - tether 100 bp 200 bp 300 bp 400 bp 600 bp D B C E F CDEIII - 80bp CEN - Cse4 CENP - A residence 0 400 800 1200 1600 2000 Time ( s ) 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l Time ( s ) z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l double tether - Cse4 CENP - A / Ndc10 ternary residence yyyyyyyy 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 0 400 800 1200 1600 2000 single tether - Cse4 CENP - A / Ndc10 ternary residence Time ( s ) 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 0 400 800 1200 1600 2000 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l A single - tether CDEI biotin CDEII CDEIII double - tether CDEI CDEII CDEIII * * Ndc10 - mCherry * * Ndc10 - mCherry * * N * * Nd 1 dc100 - mCherry * * Ndc1mChmChee 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Censored single - tether CEN DNA template double - tether CDEIII - 80bp Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes n = 3175 n = 675 n = 901 * * * ( n . s . ) median = 67 s median = 71 s median = 79 s 48 Figure 4 . Synthetic restriction of nucleosome formation severely restricts Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes on CEN DNA . A Schematic of single vs . double - tether CEN DNA TIRFM colocalization assay . B Kinetochores were assembled on beads containing either a 250 bp single - tether , a 250 bp double - tether or a 250 bp CDEIII mut CEN DNA . They were then treated with MNase , and the remaining DNA was visualized on an agarose gel . Black arrow indicates Cse4 CENP - A nucleosome protected DNA ( ~ 150 bp ) ; white arrow indicates theoretical location of undigested template DNA ( 250 bp ) . C Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization assays . Top panels show Cse4 CENP - A / Ndc10 ternary colocalizations visualized on single - tethered CEN DNA ( top - left panel ) or on double - tethered CEN DNA ( top - right panel ) with colocalization shown in relation to Ndc10 in yellow circles . Bottom panels show overlay of Ndc10 channel ( magenta ) with Cse4 CENP - A ( green ) . Scale bars 3 µ m . D Quantification of observed ternary colocalization of Cse4 CENP - A with Ndc10 ( right ) on single - tethered CEN DNA containing Ndc10 ( 19 . 9 ± 2 . 4 % , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) and on double - tethered CEN DNA ( 7 . 3 ± 1 . 1 % , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . E Representative residence lifetime assay traces of ternary Cse4 CENP - A residences with Ndc10 on single - tethered CEN DNA ( top ) , double - tethered CEN DNA ( middle ) or of Cse4 CENP - A residence on CDEIII - 80 bp CEN DNA ( bottom ) . Each example includes kymographs of Cse4 CENP - A ( 488 nm - top ) with normalized intensity trace ( grey - bottom ) as well as identified residences ( blue ) . Images acquired every 5 seconds with normalized fluorescence intensity shown in arbitrary units . F Residence times for Cse4 CENP - A on double - tethered CEN DNAs are shorter than on single - tethered CEN DNAs and equivalent to those on non - functional mutant CEN DNAs . 49 Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of ternary residences of Cse4 CENP - A with Ndc10 on single - tethered CEN DNA ( blue – median lifetime of 79 s , n = 675 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) , on double - tethered CEN DNA ( red – median lifetime of 67 sec , n = 3175 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) or Cse4 CENP - A lifetimes on CDEIII - 80 bp CEN DNA ( purple – median lifetime of 71 sec , n = 901 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . No significant difference ( n . s . ) between double - tethered 250 bp CEN DNA and 80 bp CDEIII CEN DNA lifetime survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 0 . 06 as determined by log - rank test ) . Significant difference ( * * * ) between double - tethered 250 bp CEN DNA and 250 bp single - tether DNA lifetime survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 1 . 4e - 10 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . 50 E 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 Time ( s ) - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l chl4 - K13S - Cse4 CENP - A okp1 - AID - Cse4 CENP - A 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 Time ( s ) - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l F WT - Cse4 CENP - A 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 Time ( s ) 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes Censored Genetic background WT chl4 - K13S okp1 - AID Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s * * * n = 348 n = 1419 n = 546 ( n . s . ) 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 median = 82 s median = 70 s median = 65 s okp1 - AID chl4 - k13S C s e4 - G F P C E N - A TT O - 647 / C s e4 - G F P C B D A W T α - Cse4 c h l 4 - K 13 S o k p1 - A I D α - Pgk1 * * Chl4 * * Okp1 Cse4 COMAComplex CEN DNA CEN DNA CCAN Complex chl4 - K13S okp1 - AID WT 0 5 10 15 20 25 E ndpo i n t C s e4 C E N P - A c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) 51 Figure 5 . DNA - binding CCAN proteins stabilize the nucleosome to provide a platform for kinetochore assembly . A Structure of the yeast CCAN in complex with Cse4 CENP - A with CEN DNA ( yellow ) , Cse4 CENP - A ( green ) , Chl4 CENP - N ( magenta ) and Okp1 CENP - Q ( purple ) , highlighting DNA - adjacent regions targeted by the chl4 - K13S mutant or proteasomal degradation of Okp1 CENP - Q ( okp1 - AID ) . Image of 6QLD ( Yan et al , 2019 ) created with Mol * ( Sehnal et al , 2021 ) . B Immunoblot analysis of whole cell extracts from WT , chl4 - K13S and okp1 - AID cells using indicated antibodies . C Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization assays . Top panels show visualized Cse4 CENP - A - GFP on CEN DNA in extracts from chl4 - K13S ( top - left panel ) or auxin - treated okp1 - AID strains ( okp1 - AID , top - right panel ) with colocalization shown in relation to identified CEN DNA in blue circles . Bottom panels show overlay of CEN DNA channel ( magenta ) with Cse4 CENP - A - GFP ( green ) , Scale bars 3 µ m . D Quantification of Cse4 CENP - A endpoint colocalization with CEN DNA in extracts from WT , chl4 - K13S , or okp1 - AID genetic backgrounds ( 19 ± 1 . 1 % , 8 ± 0 . 7 % , 5 ± 0 . 9 % , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . E Representative residence traces of Cse4 CENP - A signal on CEN DNA in WT ( top ) , chl4 - K13S ( middle ) , or okp1 - AID ( bottom ) extracts . Each example includes kymographs of Cse4 CENP - A ( 488 nm - top ) with normalized intensity trace ( grey - bottom ) as well as identified residences ( blue ) . Images acquired every 5 seconds with normalized fluorescence intensity shown in arbitrary units . F Kaplan - Meier analysis of Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes on CEN DNA in extracts from WT ( blue - median lifetime of 82 s , n = 1419 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) , chl4 - K13S ( red – median lifetime of 70 s , n = 546 over 3 52 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and okp1 - AID ( purple – median lifetime of 61 s , n = 348 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) genetic backgrounds . Significant difference ( * * * ) between WT extract and chl4 - K13S extract residence lifetime plots ( two - tailed p - value of 3 . 4e - 5 as determined by log - rank test ) . No significant difference ( n . s . ) between chl4 - K13S and okp1 - AID residence lifetimes in ( two - tailed p - value of . 40 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . 53 D E C s e4 C E N P - A - b i nd i ng e v en t s pe r C E N DN A v - unstable1 unstable1 unstable2 v - unstable2 CEN S c m 3 H J UR P - b i nd i ng e v en t s pe r C E N DN A 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 0 . 25 0 . 5 0 . 75 1 . 0 1 . 25 Fraction bp in Runs ( A n ≥ 4 or T n ≥ 4 ) E ndpo i n t C s e4 C E N P - A c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 5 10 15 20 25 CEN CDEII sequence unstable1 unstable2 v - unstable2 v - unstable1 Widom - 601 - hybrid α - sat gene t i c s t ab ili t y 0 5 10 15 200 0 . 5 1 G ene t i c S t ab ili t y EndpointCse4 CENP - A colocalization ( % ) unstable CEN very unstable A C B Random scramble of CDEII sequence chromosome loss rate ( loss events / division ) Library Consensus AAAAATTTTTTAAAA A / T runs ≥ 4 79 - 86 bp ( 86 - 98 % A / T ) 83 bp ( 93 % A / T ) CDEI CDEI CDEIII CDEIII “ very unstable” mutants “unstable” mutants CEN 5 . 8 X 10 - 4 1 . 2 X 10 - 3 3 . 2 X 10 - 2 reduced genetic stability low genetic stability WT genetic stability = = = 0 5 10 15 20 25 v - unstable1 unstable1 unstable2 v - unstable2 CEN E ndpo i n t C s e4 C E N P - A c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) un s t ab l e CD E II m u t an t C E N DN A v - un s t ab l e CD E II m u t an t C E N DN A Cse4 CENP - A - GFP 54 Figure 6 . DNA - composition of centromeres contributes to genetic stability through Cse4 CENP - A recruitment . A Overview of CDEII mutants generated for stability assays where overall % of A / T content was maintained while A / T run content was randomly varied and selected for genetic stability including reported chromosome loss rates of WT and CDEII mutant pools ( adapted from ( Baker & Rogers , 2005 ) . B Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization assays . Visualized Cse4 CENP - A - GFP on unstable1 CDEII - mutant DNA ( top panel ) or on v - unstable1 CDEII - mutant DNA ( bottom panel ) with colocalization shown in relation to identified CEN DNA in blue circles . Scale bars 3 µ m . C Quantification of endpoint colocalization of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN , unstable1 , unstable2 , v - unstable1 , and v - unstable2 CEN DNA ( 19 . 3 ± 1 . 1 % , 13 . 8 ± 0 . 6 % , 7 . 8 ± 0 . 5 % , 5 . 5 ± 1 . 0 % , 5 . 5 ± 1 . 1 % , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . D Stable Cse4 CENP - A recruitment depends upon CDEII sequence A / T run content . Plot of fraction of all CDEII bp that occur in homopolymeric A n≥4 or T n≥4 repeats ( fraction bp in runs ( N ≥ 4 ) in CEN , unstable1 , unstable2 , v - unstable1 , v - unstable2 , Widom - 601 hybrid and a - sat CEN DNA ( 0 . 53 , 0 . 49 , 0 . 41 , 0 . 26 , 0 . 17 , 0 . 05 , 0 . 10 ) , versus the observed colocalization of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN , unstable1 unstable2 , v - unstable1 , v - unstable2 , Widom - 601 hybrid and a - sat CEN DNA ( 19 . 3 ± 1 . 1 % , 13 . 8 ± 0 . 6 % , 7 . 8 ± 0 . 5 % , 5 . 5 ± 1 . 0 % , 5 . 5 ± 1 . 1 % , 3 . 1 ± 0 . 3 % , 1 . 7 ± 0 . 4 % ( avg ± s . d . n = 4 ) . Inset plot of Cse4 CENP - A endpoint colocalization percentage on CEN , unstable mutants ( average ) , and very unstable mutants ( average ) ( 19 . 9 % , 10 . 8 % and 5 . 5 % respectively ) versus genetic stability ( chromosome loss normalized to CEN ) of WT , unstable mutants , and very unstable mutants ( 1 . 0 , 0 . 48 and 0 . 02 respectively ) . 55 E Very unstable CDEII mutants have reduced average Cse4 CENP - A binding when compared to unstable counterparts . Average residences of Cse4 CENP - A per CEN DNA ( left ) on CEN , unstable1 , unstable2 , v - unstable1 , and v - unstable2 CEN DNA ( 1 . 02 ± 0 . 15 , 0 . 92 ± 0 . 24 , 0 . 54 ± 0 . 26 , 0 . 60 ± 0 . 17 , 0 . 45 ± 0 . 13 , avg ± s . e . m . n = 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and average residences of Scm3 HJURP per CEN DNA ( right ) on CEN , unstable1 , unstable2 , v - unstable1 , and v - unstable2 CEN DNA ( 0 . 59 ± 0 . 03 , 0 . 38 ± 0 . 08 , 0 . 40 ± 0 . 21 , 0 . 55 ± 0 . 11 , 0 . 37 ± 0 . 08 , avg ± s . e . m . n = 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . 56 Figure 7 . Formation of stable centromeric nucleosome requires tight coordination of centromeric DNA , Cse4 CENP - A with its chaperone Scm3 HJURP and CCAN kinetochore protein association . Schematic of centromeric nucleosome formation highlighting the different pathways that could lead to either short - lived or long - lived residences Cse4 CENP - A as measured in TIRFM resident lifetime assays . CDEII CDEI CDEIII CBF3c deposition DNA unwrapping ( influenced by A n ≥ 4 or T n ≥ 4 ) I n c r ea s i ng c o m p l e x s t ab ili t y Cse4 CENP - A or Scm3 HJURP alone CCAN association Cse4 CENP - A / Scm3 HJURP complex Scm3 HJURP association Scm3 HJURP Scm3 HJURP turnover DE CBF3c Cse4 CENP - A CBF3c Outer kinetochore assembly CCANC CBF3c Cse4 CENP - A Scm3 HJURP Nucleosome formation Short - lived associations Long - lived associations Outer kinetochore Kinetochore inetochore CCAN Centromeric nucleosome Cse4 CENP - A association 57 Table 1 : Median survival times of protein residences determined from various conditions tested and reported in this study . Protein Context 50 % Survival Time Ndc10 Residences on CEN DNA 102 s Cse4 CENP - A Residences on CEN ( in Ndc10 - mCherry extract ) 79 s Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN 88 s Non - Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN 69 s Residences on CEN3 ( in Scm3 HJURP - mCherry extract ) 82 s Residences on CEN7 ( in Scm3 HJURP - mCherry extract ) 74 s Residences on CEN9 ( in Scm3 HJURP - mCherry extract ) 78 s Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN 108 s Non - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN 79 s Scm3 HJURP First - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN 108 s Scm3 HJURP Last - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN 133 s Scm3 HJUR P Residences on CEN 61 s Residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA 75 s Ternary CENP - A Scm3 HJURP residences on CEN 70 s Non - Ternary CENP - A Scm3 HJURP residences on CEN 63 s Cse4 CENP - A Residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA 53 s Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA 45 s Non - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA 52 s Residences on CEN ( in pGAL - SCM3 extract ) 101 s Residences on CEN ( in pGAL - PSH1 extract ) 53 s Ternary residences with Ndc10 on 250bp single - tether CEN DNA 79 s Ternary residences with Ndc10 on 250bp double - tether CEN DNA 67 s Residences on CDEIII - 80bp CEN DNA 71 s Residences on CEN ( in chl4 - K13S extract ) 70 s Residences on CEN ( in okp1 - AID extract ) 65 s 58 2700 Time ( s ) 0 2700 Time ( s ) 0 2700 Time ( s ) 0 Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A Merge C E N DN A s A B E ndpo i n t N d c 10 c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) T = 0 h r s po s t 90 m i n i n c uba t i on on C E N DN A T = 24 h r s po s t 90 m i n i n c uba t i on on C E N DN A Ndc10 - mCherry 10 20 30 40 50 60 T = 24 hrs T = 0 hrs 0 E ndpo i n t C s e4 C E N P - A c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) C T = 0 h r s po s t 90 m i n i n c uba t i on on C E DN A T = 24 h r s po s t 90 m i n i n c uba t i on on C E N DN A Cse4 CENP - A - GFP 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 T = 24 hrs T = 0 hrs 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Censored GFP photobleaching Cse4 - GFP CEN colocalization n = 86 n = 1049 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 * * * median = 447 s median = 82 s E D 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Censored mCherry photobleaching Ndc10 - mCherry CEN colocalization n = 97 n = 3231 * * * 10 - 2 10 - 1 median = 449 s me dian = 102 s F Long residences ( > 300 s ) Short residences ( < 120 s ) Non - Ternary Ndc10 Ternary Ndc10 0 . 2 . 4 . 6 . 8 1 Proportion of Cse4 CENP - A residence events G H E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f u n c t i on s Time ( s ) CensoredCDEIII mut CEN DNA CEN DNA Cse4 CENP - A residences n = 1419 n = 471 * * * 0 200 400 600 800 1000 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 median = 82 s median = 53 s Cse4 CENP - A 2700 Time ( s ) 0 C E N DN A s 59 Figure EV1 . Ndc10 residence lifetimes are longer than those of Cse4 CENP - A , which are not severely limited by photobleaching , while both are extremely stable on CEN DNA once removed from lysate . A Example plot of Ndc10 and Cse4 CENP - A residence pulses on CEN DNA identified via residence lifetime assays during an entire imaging sequence acquisition . Each row represents one identified CEN DNA with all identified residences shown over entire imaging sequence ( 2700 s ) for Ndc10 ( left ) and Cse4 CENP - A ( center ) with merge of Ndc10 ( magenta ) and Cse4 CENP - A ( green ) indicating ternary residences ( white ) . B Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization assays . Visualized Ndc10 - mCherry on CEN DNA after 90 min incubation and removal of lysate ( 0 hrs - top panel ) or after 24 hrs incubation at RT in imaging buffer ( bottom panel ) with colocalization shown in relation to identified CEN DNA in blue circles . Scale bars 3 µ m . Graph shows quantification of Ndc10 endpoint colocalization on CEN DNA at 0 hrs and 24 hrs ( 50 ± 2 . 2 % , 35 ± 1 . 7 % respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . C Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization assays . Visualized Cse4 CENP - A GFP on CEN DNA after 90 min incubation and removal of lysate ( 0 hrs - top panel ) or after 24 hrs incubation at RT in imaging buffer ( bottom panel ) with colocalization shown in relation to identified CEN DNA in blue circles . Scale bars 3 µ m . Graph shows quantification of Cse4 CENP - A endpoint colocalization on CEN DNA at 0 hrs and 24 hrs ( 45 ± 4 . 4 % , 36 ± 1 . 4 % respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . D Kaplan - Meier analysis of mCherry photobleaching events ( red - median photobleaching lifetimes of 449 s ( n = 97 ) ) and Ndc10 residences on CEN DNA ( magenta - median lifetime of 102 s ( n = 3231 ) ) . There was a significant difference between mCherry photobleaching lifetimes and Ndc10 residence lifetime survival plots ( * * * ) on CEN ( two - tailed p - value of 0 as determined by log - rank test ) . 60 E Kaplan - Meier analysis of GFP photobleaching events ( yellow - median photobleaching lifetime of 447 s ( n = 86 ) ) and Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN DNA ( red – median colocalization lifetime of 88 s ( n = 1054 ) ) . There was a significant difference between GFP photobleaching lifetimes and Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetime survival plots ( * * * ) on CEN DNA ( two - tailed p - value of 0 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . F Quantification of the proportion of short residences ( < 120 s ) and long residences ( > 300 s ) of Non - Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A residences ( . 77 and . 06 respectively , n = 612 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) or Ternary Ndc10 Cse4 CENP - A ( . 60 and . 14 respectively , n = 539 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . G Example plot of residences of Cse4 CENP - A on CDEIII mut CEN DNA per imaging sequence . Each row represents one identified CEN DNA with all identified residences shown over entire imaging sequence ( 2700 s ) for Cse4 CENP - A . H Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes on CDEIII mut CEN DNA are reduced . Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of residence lifetimes of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA ( blue – median lifetime of 82 s , n = 1419 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA of Cse4 CENP - A ( red - of 52 s ( n = 471 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . There was a significant difference ( * * * ) between CEN DNA and CDEIII mut CEN DNA lifetime survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 0 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . 61 A B F E Cse4 CENP - A Scm3 HJURP 2700 Time ( s ) 0 2700 0 Time ( s ) Merge C E N DN A s Time ( s ) E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Censored Scm3 HJURP Last - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes Scm3 HJURP First - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 ( n . s ) n = 102 n = 142 median = 108 s median = 133 s C D Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s ( n . s ) n = 311 n = 1279 Censored Non - Ternary Cse4 Scm3 HJURP residence Ternary Cse4 Scm3 HJURP residence Scm3 HJURP CEN residences 0 200 400 600 800 1000 Scm3 HJURP Last Scm3 HJURP First Co - arrival 0 . 2 . 4 . 6 . 8 1 n = 102 n = 142 n = 61 Proportion of Cse4 CENP - A - Scm3 HJURP ternary residence events Censored Cse4 CENP - A - GFP Scm3 HJURP - mCherry CEN residences Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s n = 1419 n = 1115 * * * 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 ( n . s . ) Non - Ternary Cse4 Ternary Cse4 S c m 3 H J UR P o ff - r a t e s ( h r - 1 ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 median = 82 s median = 61 s median = 69 s median = 63 s 62 Figure EV2 . Scm3 HJURP has shorter residence lifetimes than Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA . A Example plot of Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP residences on CEN DNA per imaging sequence . Each row represents one identified CEN DNA with all identified residences shown over entire imaging sequence ( 2700 s ) Cse4 CENP - A ( left ) and Scm3 HJURP ( center ) with merge indicating Cse4 CENP - A ( green ) , Scm3 HJURP ( magenta ) and ternary residences ( white ) . B Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes on CEN DNA ( green – median lifetime of 82 s , n = 1419 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) , and residence lifetimes of Scm3 HJURP on CEN DNA ( magenta – median lifetime of 61 s , n = 1115 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) . Significant difference ( * * * ) between Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP residence survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 9 . 1e - 14 as determined by log - rank test ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . C Quantification of the estimated off - rates of Scm3 HJURP that never formed a ternary residence ( Non - Ternary Cse4 ) and of Scm3 HJURP after ternary residence with Cse4 CENP - A ( Ternary Cse4 ) on CEN DNA ( 114 s ± 13 s and 111 s ± 19 s respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 2050 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . No significant difference between off - rates ( n . s . ) with a P - value of . 87 as determined by two - tailed unpaired t - test . D Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of the lifetimes of Ternary Cse4 Scm3 HJURP residences on CEN DNA ( purple – median lifetime of 69 s , n = 311 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and Non - Ternary Cse4 Scm3 HJURP residences on CEN DNA ( green - of 63 s , n = 1279 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . No significant difference ( n . s . ) between Ternary Cse4 and Non - Ternary Cse4 survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of . 75 63 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . E Timing of all observed Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP ternary residence events . The proportion when Scm3 HJURP precedes Cse4 CENP - A ( Scm3 HJURP First ) is 0 . 46 , followed by . 34 when Cse4 CENP - A precedes Scm3 HJURP ( Scm3 HJURP Last ) , with a proportion of . 20 co - arrival events ( Co - arrival - defined as residence initiation within 5 s of each , n = 305 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . F Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of the lifetimes of Scm3 HJURP - First - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN DNA ( purple – median lifetime of 108 s , n = 142 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and Scm3 HJURP - Last - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CEN DNA ( green - of 133 s , n = 102 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . No significant difference ( n . s . ) between Scm3 HJURP - First and Scm3 HJURP - Last survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of . 59 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and 64 A C B Cse4 CENP - A Scm3 HJURP 2700 Time ( s ) 0 2700 Time ( s ) 0 2700 Time ( s ) 0 Merge C E N DN A s n = 2269 n = 1115 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Time ( s ) CensoredCDEIII mut CEN DNA CEN DNA Scm3 HJURP residences * * * 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 median = 61 s median = 75 s 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Time ( s ) Censored CDEIII mut CEN DNA colocalization Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes Non - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes n = 66 n = 433 ( n . s ) 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 median = 52 s 65 Figure EV3 . Cse4 CENP - A interacts transiently with CDEIII mut CEN DNA with or without its chaperone Scm3 HJURP . A Example plot of residences of Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP on CDEIII mut CEN DNA per imaging sequence . Each row represents one identified CEN DNA with all identified residences shown over entire imaging sequence ( 2700 s ) for Cse4 CENP - A ( left ) and Scm3 HJURP ( center ) with merge indicating Cse4 CENP - A ( green ) , Scm3 HJURP ( magenta ) and ternary residences ( white ) . B Scm3 HJURP residences are longer on CDEIII mut CEN DNA . Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of Scm3 HJURP residence lifetimes on CEN DNA ( blue - median lifetime of 61 s , n = 1115 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) , and residence lifetimes of Scm3 HJURP on CDEIII mut CEN DNA ( red - median lifetime of 75 s , n = 2269 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . There was a significant difference ( * * * ) between CEN DNA and CDEIII mut CEN DNA lifetime survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 5 . 13e - 13 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . C Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes are similar without Scm3 HJURP a on CDEIII mut CEN DNA . Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of ternary residence lifetimes of Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA ( blue – median lifetime of 45 s , n = 66 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and Non - Ternary Scm3 Cse4 CENP - A residences on CDEIII mut CEN DNA ( red - of 52 s ( n = 433 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . There was no significant difference ( n . s . ) between Non - Ternary Scm3 and Ternary Scm3 survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of . 27 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . 66 P r opo r t i on o f C s e4 C E N P - A / S c m 3 H J UR P t e r na r y r e s i den c e e v en t s WT pGAL - SCM3 pGAL - PSH1 0 . 5 . 10 . 15 . 20 . 25 . 30 . 35 WT pGAL - SCM3 pGAL - PSH1 WT pGAL - SCM3 pGAL - PSH1 YPD GAL W T p G A L - S C M 3 p G A L - P S H 1 α - Cse4 α - Scm3 α - Pgk1 Psh1 ( α - Myc ) A E B D F pGAL - PSH1 pGAL - SCM3 WT E ndpo i n t C s e4 C E N P - A c o l o c a li z a t i on ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 C WT pGAL - PSH1 pGAL - SCM3 C s e4 C E N P - A - G F P C E N - A TT O - 647 / C s e4 C E N P - A - G F P Censored Genetic background WT pGAL - SCM3 pGAL - PSH1 Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes n = 1419 n = 224 n = 3960 * * * * * * 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 median = 82 s median = 101 s median = 53 s 67 Figure EV4 . Scm3 HJURP - Cse4 CENP - A complex is limiting for stable centromeric association of Cse4 CENP - A . A Immunoblot analysis of whole cell extracts from WT , pGAL - SCM3 and pGAL - PSH1 cells using indicated antibodies ( all panels cropped from the same blot ) . B Example images of TIRFM endpoint colocalization assays . Top panels show visualized Cse4 CENP - A - GFP on CEN DNA in extracts from a WT genetic background ( top - left panel ) or extracts containing overexpressed Scm3 HJURP ( pGAL - SCM3 , top - middle panel ) or overexpressed Psh1 ( pGAL - PSH1 , top - right panel ) with colocalization shown in relation to identified CEN DNAs in blue circles . Bottom panels show overlay of DNA channel ( magenta ) with Cse4 CENP - A - GFP ( green ) . C Quantification of endpoint colocalization of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA in extracts from a WT genetic background , extracts that contain overexpressed Scm3 HJURP or extracts that contain overexpressed Psh1 ( 19 ± 1 . 1 % , 56 ± 1 . 6 % and 2 . 1 ± 0 . 4 % respectively , avg ± s . d . n = 4 experiments , each examining ~ 1 , 000 DNA molecules from different extracts ) . Scale bars 3 µ m . D Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of residence lifetimes of Cse4 CENP - A on CEN DNA in extracts from WT genetic background ( blue - median lifetime of 82 s , n = 1419 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) , or from extracts that contain overexpressed Scm3 HJURP ( red – median lifetime of 101 sec , n = 3960 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) or extracts that contain overexpressed Psh1 ( purple – median lifetime of 52 sec , n = 224 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Significant difference ( * * * ) between survival plots in WT extracts compared to those overexpressing Psh1 ( two - tailed p - value of 8 . 9e - 11 as determined by log - rank test ) or Scm3 HJURP ( two - tailed p - value of 0 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates . 68 E Proportion of ternary residences of Cse4 CENP - A with Scm3 HJURP on CEN DNA for WT extracts ( 0 . 22 ± . 05 , avg ± s . d . n = 1419 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) , extracts containing overexpressed Scm3 HJURP ( 0 . 25 ± . 07 , avg ± s . d . n = 3960 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and extracts containing overexpressed Psh1 ( 0 . 08 ± . 02 , avg ± s . d . n = 224 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . ( F ) Serial 5 - fold dilutions of the following yeast strains were plated and grown two days on YPD and three days on galactose ( GAL ) at 23 ° C : WT ( SBY21441 ) , pGAL - SCM3 ( SBY21443 ) , and pGAL - PSH1 ( SBY20836 ) . 69 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Time ( s ) - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l z - no r m a li z ed s i gna l Cse4 CENP - A Scm3 HJURP C B D A TIRF Laser Cse4 CENP - A - GFP Cbf3 ATTO647 Scm3 - mCherry S Cbf3 Cse4 CENP - A - GF y CDEIII - 80bp CEN 1 1 750 80 ATTO647 Biotin ATTO647 Biotin CDEI CDEII CDEIII Peri - CEN Linker ETBR 647nm 1 . 0 kb 750bp C E N 250bp C E N s i ng l e - t e t he r 250bp C E N doub l e - t e t he r C D E III - 80bp C E N 0 . 8 kb 0 . 6 kb 0 . 4 kb 0 . 2 kb 0 . 1 kb 1 . 0 kb 0 . 8 kb 0 . 6 kb 0 . 4 kb 0 . 2 kb 0 . 1 kb * * * Time ( s ) 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 E s t i m a t ed s u r v i v a l f un c t i on s Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes Censored CEN CDEIII - 80bp CEN n = 1419 n = 901 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 median = 82 s median = 71 s 70 Figure EV5 . Cse4 CENP - A residence lifetimes are significantly reduced on CDEIII - 80 bp mutant CEN DNA . A Schematic of overview of CDEIII - 80 bp mutant CEN DNA , the canonical CEN DNA is shortened to 80 bp to prevent nucleosome formation and then similarly functionalized to the coverslip via a single biotin at the 5’end and functionalized with an organic dye at the free 3’ end . B CEN assembly templates including WT 750 bp CEN DNA , 250 bp single - tether CEN DNA , 250 bp double - tethered CEN DNA and CDEIII - 80 bp CEN DNA as visualized via EtBr ( top panel ) or 647nm excitation ( bottom panel ) on a 1 % agarose gel . C Representative colocalization traces of Cse4 CENP - A and Scm3 HJURP on a single CDEIII - 80 bp CEN DNA . Top panel includes kymograph of Cse4 CENP - A ( top - 488 nm ) in relation to single identified CEN DNA ( arrow ) , with normalized intensity trace ( grey - bottom ) as well as identified colocalization pulses ( blue ) . Bottom panel includes kymograph of Scm3 HJURP ( bottom - 568 nm ) in relation to the same identified CEN DNA ( arrow ) , with normalized intensity trace ( grey - bottom ) as well as identified colocalization pulse ( blue ) . Cases where identified pulses in Scm3 HJURP and Cse4 CENP - A coincide represent observed colocalization of both proteins on single CDEIII - 80 bp CEN DNA . Images acquired every 5 seconds with normalized fluorescence intensity shown in arbitrary units . D Estimated survival function plots of Kaplan - Meier analysis of all identified CEN DNA colocalization events of Cse4 CENP - A ( blue - median lifetime of 82 s , n = 1619 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) and identified colocalization events on CDEIII - 80 bp CEN DNA of Cse4 CENP - A ( red – median lifetime of 71 s , n = 901 over 3 experiments of ~ 1000 DNA molecules using different extracts ) . Significant difference ( * * * ) between CEN DNA and CDEIII - 80 bp CEN DNA lifetime survival plots ( two - tailed p - value of 1 . 0e - 6 as determined by log - rank test ) . 95 % confidence intervals indicated ( dashed lines ) , right - censored lifetimes ( plus icons ) were included and unweighted in survival function estimates .