Innovonto : An Enhanced Crowd Ideation Platform with Semantic Annotation Hallway Test Abderrahmane Khiat , Maximilian Mackeprang and Claudia Müller - Birn TR - B - 18 - 02 2018 FACHBEREICH MATHEMATIK UND INFORMATIK SERIE B • INFORMATIK Abstract Crowd ideation platforms provide a promising approach for supporting the idea generation process . Research has shown that presenting a set of similar or diverse ideas to users during ideation leads them to come - up with more cre - ative ideas . In this paper , we describe Innovonto , a crowd ideation platform that leverages semantic web technologies and human collaboration to identify similar and diverse ideas in order to enhance the creativity of generated ideas . Therefore , the approach implemented captures ﬁrst the conceptualization of users’ ideas . Then , a matching system is employed to compute similarities be - tween all ideas in near real time . Furthermore , this technical report outlines the results obtained from the evaluation of Innovonto platform . The hallway study , conducted at our research group , allowed us to test each step of Innovonto plat - form as well as the proposed approach in assessing similarities between ideas . As results , we received 20 ideas and 23 feedbacks from 9 users . The analysis of the results shows good performance of Innovonto steps and conﬁrms the ﬁnd - ings of existing research . Keywords : Collaborative Ideation , Semantic Annotation , Ontology Match - ing , Brainstorming , Crowd Ideation , Creativity . 1 Introduction Crowd ideation platforms are designed to support users in generating creative and diverse ideas . Most of these platforms support the " brainstorming technique " due to its remarkable success that has been shown so far [ 24 ] . This technique seeks to increase the creativity and number of ideas by encouraging intensive exploration of ideas of others while restricting criticism [ 2 ] . Moving brainstorming from a collocated setting to an open online platform yields several beneﬁts : ( 1 ) a large number of the crowd allows the generation of a large number of ideas and ( 2 ) the heterogeneity of the crowd increases the potential for high quality ideas due to crowd’s different background [ 11 ] . However , new chal - lenges arise in distributed large - scale ideation platforms , for example , ( a ) many ideas are basic , mundane and repetitive [ 9 ] and ( b ) due to the number of ideas it’s eco - nomically unfeasible to sift through all of them in order to ﬁlter - out low quality ideas [ 9 ] . To increase the creativity 1 of ideas generated , most of research exposes ideas from a large collection of crowd ideas [ 6 ] to users during ideation . However , one promising approach regarding the exposure of ideas is to select a set of inspiring ideas systematically . Research has shown three ways of exposing inspiring ideas that help users during the ideation : ( 1 ) by showing diverse ideas which allow users to explore different creative paths to provide diverse ideas ; ( 2 ) by showing similar ideas which allow users to explore one creative path and develop ideas deeply ; ( 3 ) by building a map that clusters the ideas , which allows users to explore different clusters . However , a major issue in crowd ideation is " how to assess similarity between ideas in order to provide similar / diverse inspiring ideas from hundreds " [ 8 ] . Existing 1 In our work , we consider the creativity of ideas that responds to the dimensions of novelty , feasibility . 1 approaches either use automatic machine learning techniques or combine human judgments and machine learning ( For more details about existing approaches , we refer the reader to our prior work [ 4 ] ) . Unlike existing approaches , the Innovonto platform implements an approach based on semantic web technologies in order to select a set of similar / diverse ideas systematically . The proposed solution consists of two main steps : ( 1 ) capturing the conceptualization of users’ ideas and ( 2 ) employing a matching mechanism to cal - culate similarities between ideas in near real - time . The ﬁrst step is performed by annotating concepts ( see section 2 . 2 ) in the idea description text submitted by the user 2 . The correct conceptualization is interactively corrected by the user : When a concept has different meanings an image of each entity with a short description is shown to the ideator . The ideators then select the image for the concept they think best reﬂects their idea ( i . e . disambiguation of the meaning ) . For instance , the con - cept " window " could correspond as an architectural structure or window as a widget - as a graphical user interface element ; in this case , the user selects which one cor - responds to his concept by selecting the image . The second step is performed by employing structural , terminological and linguistic matchers to calculate similari - ties between all ideas . The rest of the paper is organized as follows : Section 2 provides a detailed de - scription of the Innovonto platform . Section 3 describes the methodology . Section 4 presents the results obtained from the conducted study . Sections 5 and 6 summarize our contributions and outline future work . 2 The INNOVONTO Platform This section describes in detail the main steps of the Innovonto platform . The Fig - ure 1 highlights the steps performed by the user . The step " see inspiring ideas " ( see Figure 1 ) is necessary to enhance the creativity of ideas to generate . This step which allows us to obtain inspiring ideas involves another process illustrated in the Figure 5 . SEE PROBLEM DESCRIPTION GENERATE IDEAS SEE INSPIRING IDEAS RATING IDEAS ANSWER QUESTIONS OVERVIEW IDEAS SEE & RATE SIMILAR IDEAS DE / SELECT IMAGES GENERATE ICON REFINE IDEA Figure 1 : Process of the Innovonto Platform . Furthermore , research has shown that ideators spend a limited amount of time within the ideation process [ 8 ] , therefore , we made some steps of the Innovonto platform optional ( steps colored in gray of the Figure 1 ) where the ideators can skip them anytime . The purpose of making some steps optional is to avoid distracting 2 Semantic annotation is the process of enriching and representing information with semantics [ 13 ] . 2 users from generating ideas . Moreover , the steps " See and Rate Similar Ideas " and " Rating Ideas " ( steps of the Figure 1 where the text is colored in red ) were not yet im - plemented in this ﬁrst iteration of Innovonto Platform . The interface that includes all Innovonto steps ( i . e . Home page ) is illustrated in Figure 2 . Figure 2 : Home Page of the Innovonto Platform 2 . 1 See Problem and Idea Generation Steps Most of the existing ideation platforms start with a problem description to gener - ate ideas . Based on existing research , the problem description should be simple , 3 described in short text and familiar to ideators . Figure 3 : Problem description interface of Innovonto Platform . In the ﬁrst iteration of Innovonto platform , we adapt this strategy , i . e . problem solving and asked users to generate ideas on " how to enhance our workspace " ( see Figure 3 ) . We choose this problem , because the users are familiar with their work environment and therefore come up with ideas easily . When the users come - up Figure 4 : Idea generation interface of Innovonto Platform . with ideas , they should give a title and a short description ( see Figure 4 ) . During the submission , the users are asked to select / de - select images that reﬂect the concepts of their ideas . The purpose of this mandatory step is explained in the next section . 4 2 . 2 Inspiration and Image Selection Steps This step is the main contribution of the Innovonto platform since it uses seman - tic web technologies to enhance creativity of generated ideas . A variety of research has been conducted to enhance the crowd ideation creativity by presenting a set of inspiring ideas . Therefore , the Innovonto platform implements this step as well to help users to get unstuck by showing diverse ideas . The process of this step ( from both the user and machine perspective ) is illustrated in Figure 5 . Figure 5 : Process of Selecting Idea and Generating the Solution Map . To get these inspiring ideas , our platform uses semantic web technologies to as - sess similarity between all generated ideas . The proposed approach [ 4 ] mitigates the problems of related work in the assessment of similarity : ( 1 ) statistical matching gives inferior results due to conceptual divergence ( i . e . using different vocabulary to describe the same meaning ) , since the ideas are presented in short texts . ( 2 ) human - computational approaches are based on human judgments ( e . g . asking the crowd to rate the similarity of users’ ideas or arrange them ) which are considered as tedious , repetitive and require a shared knowledge about ideas . The proposed approach consists of two main phases : idea annotation matching . These two phases are described as follows : 2 . 2 . 1 Idea Annotation Phase The proposed approach [ 4 ] starts ﬁrst by extracting concepts from the idea descrip - tion using NLP Stanford API 3 . The NLP Stanford algorithm analyzes the grammatical structure of the idea and identiﬁes nouns , verbs , etc . Next those concepts ( nouns ) are linked to entities from an external knowledge base DBpedia 4 and Wikidata 5 using SPARQL query1 . The query received as input the concepts extracted and returns resources found in DBpedia that have the same label as concept names . 3 Natural Language Processing https : / / nlp . stanford . edu / 4 www . dbpedia . org 5 www . wikidata . org 5 PREFIX rdfs : < http : / / www . w3 . org / 2000 / 01 / rdf - schema # > select ? resource where { ? resource rdfs : label ? concept } Listing 1 : SPARQL Query for Linking Concepts with DBpedia The main challenge of this step is to annotate concepts with their corresponding information ( i . e . adding more information about the extracted concepts ) . For this end , the image selection step is considered as mandatory in Innovonto platform . To validate the annotation with correct information , the ideator is asked to select a set of images for the extracted concepts that reﬂects his idea ( see ﬁgure 6 ) . Figure 6 : User Interface for the Validation of the Extracted Concepts Phase : Plants Idea . These images are obtained from the corresponding entities in DBpedia2 . The query received as input the concept URI found in DBpedia and returns the descrip - tion and image ( thumbnail ) . PREFIX dbo : < http : / / dbpedia . org / ontology / > select ? thumbnail ? description { conceptUri dbo : thumbnail ? thumbnail ; dbo : abstract ? description . FILTER ( langMatches ( lang ( ? description ) , EN ) ) . } Listing 2 : SPARQL Query for Getting description and image of Concepts from DBpe - dia 6 The image selected by the ideator for each concept allow us to store the correct concepts along with their superclasses and additional information ( e . g . concept de - scriptions ) using the two following SPARQL queries 3 4 . These information are ob - tained from Wikidata , therefore , the query 3 receive as input the resource found in DBpedia that has been validated by the user and returns the same resource in Wiki - data ( conceptQ ) . The second Query 4 returns all superclasses of the resource found in Wikidata . PREFIX dbpedia : < http : / / dbpedia . org / resource / > PREFIX owl : < http : / / www . w3 . org / 2002 / 07 / owl # > SELECT ? obj ? label WHERE { conceptUri ( owl : sameAs | ^ owl : sameAs ) ? obj FILTER ( CONTAINS ( str ( ? obj ) , " http : / / www . wikidata . org " ) ) } Listing 3 : SPARQL Query for retrieving the same DBpedia concept from Wikidata PREFIX wdt : < http : / / www . wikidata . org / prop / direct / > PREFIX wd : < http : / / www . wikidata . org / entity / > SELECT DISTINCT ? item ? label WHERE { wd : conceptQ + wdt : P279 + ? item . } ORDER BY DESC ( ? item ) Listing 4 : SPARQL Query for retrieving superclasses of a concept from wikidata 2 . 2 . 2 Matching Ideas Phase We implemented a matching system to calculate semantic similarities between the concepts that represent the ideas . The matching system implemented uses termi - nological , structural and linguistic matchers to cover the maximum heterogeneity . These matchers are combined using average strategy ( see equation 1 ) . For the ter - minological matcher , we used string similarity measures , namely the Levenshtein distance ( see equation 2 ) [ 22 ] . For linguistic matcher , we have used WordNet as an external dictionary to detect synonymous and antonymous concepts . The ap - proach uses Lin algorithm ( see equation 3 ) [ 26 ] on WordNet 6 to compute linguistic similarity . For the structural matcher , the system compares the external structure of concepts ( i . e . comparing superclasses ) obtained from external knowledge base ( DBpedia / Wikidata ) , more speciﬁcally the system uses the upper cotopic similarity ( see equation 5 ) , to reduce the conceptual heterogeneity [ 25 ] . Sim ( c , c (cid:48) ) = A + B + C 3 ( 1 ) Where A , B and C formulas are given as follows : 6 https : / / wordnet . princeton . edu 7 Levenshtein distance We calculated the similarity value using Levenshtein dis - tance as string - based algorithm . The Levenshtein distance between two strings a , b is given by lev a , b ( | a | , | b | ) where : lev a , b ( i , j ) =   max ( i , j ) i f min ( i , j ) = 0 min   lev a , b ( i − 1 , j ) + 1 lev a , b ( i , j − 1 ) + 1 other wise lev a , b ( i − 1 , j − 1 ) + 1 a i (cid:54) = b j ( 2 ) where 1 a i (cid:54) = b j is the indicator function equal to 0 when a i = b j and equal to 1 otherwise . Linguistic Matcher The Lin metric 3 measures the information contents of each term . This measure is applied on a Wordnet dictionary to get the information about the terms . The similarity value IC mis ( C1 , C2 ) < IC ( C1 ) and IC ( C2 ) is normalized be - tween 1 ( similar concepts ) and 0 . B = sim Lin ( C 1 , C 2 ) = 2 IC mis ( C 1 , C 2 ) IC ( C 1 ) + IC ( C 2 ) ( 3 ) We call concept C the most informative subsumer of two concepts C1 and C2 i . e . IC mis if concept C has the least probability among all shared subsumer between two concepts ( thus most informative ) . Where IC ( C ) is calculated as follows : IC ( C ) = − logp ( C ) = − log f req ( C ) f req ( root ) ( 4 ) The intuition behind information content is that , more frequent terms are more general and hence provide less “information” : freq ( C ) is the frequency of concept C , and freq ( root ) is the frequency of root concept of the ontology . Frequency includes the frequencies of subsumed concepts in an IS - A hierarchy . Structural Matcher We computed the structural similarity based on hierarchy of supercalsses obtained from ( DBpedia / Wikidata ) . Therefore , we applied the upper cotopic similarity , which computes the similarity as follows : Let π : O × O R is a similarity over a hierarchy H = ( h (cid:185) O ) , such that : C = π ( c , c (cid:48) ) = | UC ( c , H ) (cid:84) UC ( c (cid:48) , H ) | | UC ( c , H ) (cid:83) UC ( c (cid:48) , H ) | ( 5 ) Where UC ( c , H ) = { c’ ∈ H ; c (cid:185) c’ } is the set of super - classes of c . 8 Delivering Inspiring Ideas Our platform shows users a set of three diverse ideas by request , i . e . pull inspiration 7 . The most diverse ideas are obtained by selecting the ideas with low similarity value computed by matching system ( see ﬁgure 7 ) . We choose diverse ideas in order to help ideators to get unstuck by exploring different paths of creativity . Figure 7 : Inspiring Ideas Interface of Innovonto Platform . Solution Map To visualize an overview of the similarity between all ideas generated , we used t - distributed stochastic neighbor embedding ( tSNE ) : a dimensionality reduction al - gorithm to place the idea on a 2D surface 8 . The solution map can be used not only to enhance creativity but also to ( a ) observe which categories have a low number of ideas and ( b ) facilitating the ﬁltering of ideas for a given category . 2 . 3 Overview and Reﬁning Ideas Steps After submitting an idea , three options are available for the ideators ( 1 ) leaving the platform , ( 2 ) generating more ideas or ( 3 ) reﬁning submitted ideas ( see ﬁgure 8 ) . 7 The pull inspiration is supported by the SIAM ( Search for Ideas in Associative Memory ) model [ 12 ] to avoid ﬁxation . 8 t - SNE is a dimensionality reduction algorithm , that tries to learn a lower dimension placement of data - points by using gradient descent . The objective function is modeled so that it retains local clus - terings in the data , in contrast to other dimensionality reduction algorithms like principal component analysis . It is applied to the pairwise similarities of ideas , in order to map them to a 2 - dimensional space . 9 After submitting an idea , the users are redirected to an " idea generation page " where they can then generate more ideas ( see ﬁgure 1 ) . Otherwise , they can reﬁne a submitted idea by ﬁrst getting an overview of all their submitted ideas and then , select which one to reﬁne . The reﬁnement is per - formed by ( a ) answering reﬁnement questionnaire ( see ﬁgure 13 ) and ( b ) generating an icon for the idea ( see ﬁgure 14 ) . The purpose of the reﬁnement step is to get more information about idea , for instance to see if the idea can be feasible or not . We considered a reﬁnement questionnaire in this ﬁrst hallway test according to the problem to solve which is " how to improve the HCC workspace " . These ques - tions are as follows : • Who will beneﬁt from this idea ? • Which costs would be needed for your idea ( roughly estimated ) ? • Which challenges could be overcome with this idea ? • How could the idea be implemented differently ? Figure 8 : Deﬁne interface of Innovonto Platform ( list of not reﬁned ideas ) . 3 Methodology We conducted a hallway test to evaluate the platform as well as the proposed solu - tion in obtaining inspiring ideas . As we mentioned before obtaining inspiring ideas 10 helps crowd ideation platform to enhance the creativity of the ideas . We also exam - ine the effects of the mandatory step of image selection ( explained in section 2 . 2 ) as well as inspiring ideas during the idea generation process . In the following , we describe the methodology conducted during the hallway test . 3 . 1 Participants The participants involved in our experiment study were members of our workgroup , the Human Centered Computing Lab 9 ( HCC ) . We sent emails to all members , asking them to participate in our platform . We had 9 participants ( 5 male and 4 female ) . 3 . 2 Task of Generating Ideas We let the Innovonto platform open for three days , then , we asked participants to generate ideas on " How to improve the HCC Workgroup Space " . The participants deliberately did not receive a tutorial for the platform . The purpose of this was to observe how much difﬁculties they can encounter during navigating on our plat - form . We gave participants the freedom to choose when to start their idea generation without any time limitation , so not all participants had to generate ideas at the same time . In addition , our idea generation process supports the collaborative aspect by showing inspirational ideas from others . We show users the most diverse ideas ( i . e . ideas with low similarity ) from the already generated ones . Therefore , each ideator may have seen a different set of inspiring ideas due to a re - calculation of similarities between the generated ideas and the new one , once submitted . 3 . 3 Process Once being on the platform ( see ﬁgure 2 ) , the user could " take a tour " ( which an optional step ) , where different steps of the idea generation process are explained . The next step is to generate ideas , for this end , the user should read the problem ( in this case , " how to improve HCC workspace " , see ﬁgure 3 ) and then think about some ideas . However , during this step some options are available to help users to get unstuck and get inspired , such as seeing three most diverse ideas of other users ( see Figure 7 ) . We should note that seeing inspirational ideas is requested by the user . Another option that we considered to enhance creativity is showing users the most three similar ideas , however , this step was not implemented yet . When the users come up with ideas , they should give a title and a short descrip - tion and then submit them ( see Figure 4 ) . During the submission , a set of images appears asking if these images reﬂect the concepts of their ideas ( see Figure 6 ) . The users can then select or de - select the images that reﬂect or not the concepts of their idea . Once the idea is saved , the user can either leave the platform or generate more ideas or reﬁne the submitted ideas ( see Figure 8 ) . During the reﬁnement , the user 9 http : / / www . mi . fu - berlin . de / en / inf / groups / hcc / members 11 can ( 1 ) answer questions about the idea such as " Which costs would be needed for your idea ( roughly estimated ) ? " and ( 2 ) use a generative icon system to create an icon of their idea ( see Figures 13 and 14 ) . A DEMO presenting different steps of Innovonto platform is available online at https : / / photos . app . goo . gl / AJPPBp3qqXqiUwNl2 . 3 . 4 Measures and Analysis To evaluate the ﬁrst impressions about the Innovonto platform , we asked users at the end of the idea generation process to answer a survey based on the work pro - posed in [ 5 ] . The questions relate to the following three aspects of their ideation experience : 1 . Perception of helpfulness of ideas of others • Q1 : On average , the ideas of others that you saw were : Boring ( 1 ) , Interesting ( 7 ) • Q2 : Seeing ideas of others helped me come up with better ideas : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) • Q3 : Seeing ideas of others helped me come up with more ideas : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) • Q4 : Seeing ideas of others helped me get unstuck : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) 2 . Perception of helpfulness of the system • Q5 : The system gave me a sense of what ideas other people were explor - ing : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) • Q6 : Seeing ideas of others gave me a good sense of the range of possible solutions to this challenge : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) 3 . Mental effort and task difﬁculty • Q7 : How much mental effort ( e . g . , searching , remembering , thinking , deciding ) did the task take ? : Low mental effort ( 1 ) , High mental effort ( 7 ) • Q8 : The Image Extraction Step was : Boring ( 1 ) , Interesting ( 7 ) • Q9 : How was your performance impression of the Image Extraction Step ? : Very Slow ( 1 ) , Very Fast ( 7 ) The survey includes also two questions to obtain qualitative feedback , these two questions are as follows : • Q10 : In overall how do you evaluate the platform ? • Q11 : What would improvements would you suggest ? We used the mean ( M ) and standard deviation ( SD ) to evaluate the results ob - tained from the questions mentioned above . 12 4 Results In this section , we present the results obtained from the hallway test as well as the insights in order to enhance our platform in the future . 4 . 1 Number of submitted ideas As a result of the idea generation process , we received 20 ideas . As we mentioned before , the reﬁnement step was optional , for this end , 14 ideas were reﬁned . The list of ideas can be found in the appendix ( Figure 12 . We generated the solution map form the similarities obtained from the match - ing system . We observed clusters of ideas that describe the same concepts . This is explained by the fact that the semantic annotation allows to get the meaning of the idea and the matching allows a better assess the similarity between all ideas . In the ﬁrst iteration of the Innovonto platform , the solution map is only accessible by the administrator . Figure 9 : Solution Maps . The maps of ideas generated shows clusters of ideas that share the same concepts . For instance , the cluster labeled " door " means that the ideas of this cluster are about " door " . We should note that the clusters have been generated automatically through similarities calculated by matching system , how - ever , the labeling of clusters is done manually . 4 . 2 Survey Results and Discussion In the following , we present the results obtained from the survey . 13 Measures Questions M SD Perception of helpfulness of ideas of others - Q1 : On average , the ideas of others that you saw were : Boring ( 1 ) , Interesting ( 7 ) 5 1 . 49 - Q2 : Seeing ideas of others helped me come up with better ideas : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) 3 . 9 2 . 02 - Q3 : Seeing ideas of others helped me come up with more ideas : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) 4 . 5 1 . 84 - Q4 : Seeing ideas of others helped me get un - stuck : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) 4 1 . 76 Perception of helpfulness of the system - Q5 : The system gave me a sense of what ideas other people were exploring : Strongly dis - agree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) 5 . 2 1 . 69 - Q6 : Seeing ideas of others gave me a good sense of the range of possible solutions to this challenge : Strongly disagree ( 1 ) , Strongly agree ( 7 ) 3 . 7 2 . 16 Mental effort and task difﬁculty - Q7 : How much mental effort ( e . g . , searching , remembering , thinking , deciding ) did the task take ? : Low mental effort ( 1 ) , High mental effort ( 7 ) 3 . 9 1 . 52 - Q8 : The Image Extraction Step was : Boring ( 1 ) , Interesting ( 7 ) 4 . 5 1 . 27 - Q9 : How was your performance impression of the Image Extraction Step ? : Very Slow ( 1 ) , Very Fast ( 7 ) 5 . 1 1 . 85 Table 1 : List of questions about Innovonto Platform . The table presents the results of the evaluation in terms of mean and standard deviation by asking 10 users partic - ipated in ideation using Innonvonto platform . 14 4 . 2 . 1 Participantsperceivedthesystemselectedideasofothersassimilarlyhelp - ful Questions Q1 to Q4 in Table 1 measured the participants’ perception of the useful - ness of the ideas of others selected by the system . In the survey , the participants found that the users’ ideas are interesting ( Q1 ) ( see ﬁgure 10 ) , the system lead them to come - up with more ideas ( Q3 ) and help them to get unstuck ( Q4 ) , which means that the inspiration plays a signiﬁcant role in the ideation process . However , partic - ipants don’t ﬁnd that seeing other ideas helped them to come - up , with better ideas ( Q2 ) . This is can be explained by the fact that the problem was easy and the solutions can be easily perceived by most users . Figure 10 : Participants perceived that the ideas of others were interesting . 4 . 2 . 2 Participants perceived the system as similarly helpful Question Q5 to Q6 in Table 1 measured the participants’ perception of the usefulness of the ideation system . Most participants found that the system gives them a sense of what ideas other people were exploring ( Q5 ) , this is due to the inspiring ideas that they saw during ideation . However , the users see only three diverse ideas , for this end , they do not ﬁnd that the system gives them a range of possible solutions ( Q6 ) . 4 . 2 . 3 Participants perceived that the system does not require much mental ef - fort Question Q7 to Q9 in Table 1 measured the participants’ perception of the mental effort required by the system . In this part of the survey , we analyzed our contribution which is the image selection step . The users found that the image selection step interesting ( see Figure 11 ) and fast . 15 Figure 11 : Participants perceived that the image selection step was interesting . 4 . 3 Qualitative Feedback and Discussion We received 23 fulltext answer for the Questions Q10 and Q11 . The full list of feed - back can be found in the appendix . To obtain insights about the feedback , we pro - ceed as follows : ﬁrst we put the different step of our platform as categories , second we classiﬁed the comments based on keywords extracted from the comments . This process is achieved manually and the results of this analysis of users’ comments led to 6 aspects mentioned below . A short summary of the insights gained for each as - pect is given as follows : 1 . Insights about Image Selection Step : Most participants found the images that reﬂect the concepts of user idea interesting , however , they suggested that the images should be labeled . In addition , the image selection step needed further explanation in order to be understandable by users . 2 . Insights about Collaboration : The users want to work collaboratively , not only by seeing users’ ideas , but by commenting and rating the ideas . The rat - ing option is considered by our process , but it was not available during the test . However , we didn’t consider the commenting on ideas in order to avoid criticism . A study regarding this could be considered in the future in order to see if commenting should be included in the process or not . 3 . Insights about Reﬁnement : Creating an Icon for an Idea : Most participants like the icon - generator step , however , they found this step difﬁcult and took time and they suggested to be supported by the images extracted during the idea submission and make the icon - generator more easy . 4 . Insights about our Ideation Process : We should note that users were not will - ing to reﬁne their ideas which afﬁrm the fact that the ideators don’t spend much time in ideation . 16 5 . Insights about the Design of the Website : The participants suggested that our platform needs further development from the design part such as adding ani - mation , social features and colors . 5 Discussion Our preliminary study shows that exposing diverse ideas is helpful for users during the idea generation process which conﬁrms the ﬁndings of existing research . There - fore , it is necessary to assess similarity between ideas in order to select set of diverse ideas . To this end , the proposed approach uses semantic web technologies to an - notate users’ ideas and compute similarities using matching mechanism . However , our solution introduces a new step in ideation process which is the image selection . The preliminary evaluation shows that the participants found this step interest - ing and not as a tedious task . Furthermore , the survey shows that this step does not require a mental effort . In the ﬁrst evaluation of Innovonto platform , we have only studied the effect of showing the users a set of the most diverse ideas using our approach . We assumed based on previous work that showing most diverse set ideas allows ideators to come - up with more diverse ideas . However , we still need to compare our output in terms of diversity and creativity aspects with the traditional approaches ( i . e . asking users to assess similarity ) . The hallway study allowed us to receive initial feedback about our proposed so - lution , however , it is subject to some limitations . First , the study is not represen - tative of the target user group since , participants have a background as computer scientists and a general idea about the Innovonto project . Second the number of participants and generated ideas was low . Therefore , it is absolutely necessary to conduct further study regarding the idea generation process as well as the usability aspect . 6 Conclusion and Perspectives The Innovonto platform aims to support users in generating creative and diverse ideas . To achieve this goal , the Innovonto platform shows users a set of diverse ideas of other individuals during the ideation process . However , to obtain a set of diverse ideas , the implemented approach assesses similarity of a set of ideas based on se - mantic web technologies . It consists of two main parts : ( 1 ) concepts annotation and ( 2 ) a matching mechanism . Firstly , the concept annotation is performed by concept identiﬁcation , then search and linking concepts with Wikidata entities and a validation through user - based se - lection of images are carried out . Secondly , these annotated concepts along with their superclasses are used as a support to calculate the similarity between ideas using ontology - matching techniques . Using our approach , we can assess the simi - larity of two ideas , which can then be used further to select a set of diverse ideas ( low similarity rating ) that inspires the user to generate more creative ideas . 17 We conducted a ﬁrst hallway test to evaluate our platform Innovonto and the results obtained are so far quite promising . The users found the image selection step which has introduced a new step during ideation as interesting and not as a tedious task , which is a good insight for our solution . Furthermore , we generated the solution map which allows to get clusters of ideas . We are currently continuing the experimental study by ( 1 ) comparing our ap - proach with automatic and human computational approaches ( 2 ) conducting a us - ability test for the image selection , ( 3 ) implementing the remain steps " See Similar Ideas " and " Rating " . Furthermore , one of Innovonto platform is to generate cre - ative and diverse ideas from one perspective a new technology description instead of a problem - solving . In addition to showing users similar and divers ideas to en - hance creativity of ideas , we attempt to explore other ways of collaboration such as showing users a map of ideas ( solution map ) that obtained from the similarities calculated by the matching system . Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the Federal Ministry of Educa - tion and Research of Germany in the framework of Ideas to Market ( project number 03IO1617 ) . The authors would like to thank the HCC members for their participa - tion . References [ 1 ] A . Kozbelt , R . A . Beghetto and M . A . Runco , " Theories of creativity " . The Cam - bridge handbook of creativity , pp . 20 – 47 , 2010 . [ 2 ] Alex F . Osborn . 1963 . Applied imagination ; principles and procedures of cre - ative problem - solving . Scribner , NY , 1963 . [ 3 ] Pao Siangliulue , Kenneth Arnold , Krzysztof Gajos and Steven Dow . 2015 . To - ward collaborative ideation at scale - leveraging ideas from others to generate more creative and diverse ideas " . In Proceedings of CSCW , 2015 . [ 4 ] A . Khiat , M . Mackeprang , C . Müller - Birn , " Semantic Annotation for Enhancing Collaborative Ideation " , Semantics 2017 , Netherlands . [ 5 ] Pao Siangliulue , Joel Chan , Steven Dow and Krzysztof Gajos . 2016 . IdeaHound : improving large - scale collaborative ideation with crowd - powered real - time se - mantic modeling . In Proceedings of UIST . [ 6 ] Richard Marsh , Joshua Landau and Jason Hicks . 1996 . How examples may ( and may not ) constrain creativity . Memory and Cognition , 24 ( 5 ) , pp . 669 – 680 . [ 7 ] Nicholas Kohn and Steven Smith , 2011 . Collaborative ﬁxation : Effects of others’ ideas on brainstorming . Applied Cognitive Psychology 25 ( 3 ) , pp . 359 – 371 . 18 [ 8 ] Elahe Javadi , Judith Gebauer and Joseph Mahoney . 2013 . The impact of user interface design on idea integration in electronic brainstorming : an attention based view . Journal of AIS 14 , pp . 1 – 21 . [ 9 ] Osvald Bjelland and Robert Wood . 2008 . An inside view of IBM’s’ innovation jam’ " . MIT Sloan Management Review 50 ( 1 ) , pp . 32 – 40 . [ 10 ] Joel Chan , Steven Dang and Steven Dow . 2016 . IdeaGens : enabling expert facil - itation of crowd brainstorming . In Proceedings of CSCW , pp . 13 – 16 . [ 11 ] Victor Girotto , Erin Walker and Winslow Burleson . 2017 . The effect of periph - eral micro - tasks on crowd ideation . In Proceedings of CHI ’17 , pp . 1843 – 1854 . [ 12 ] P . Siangliulue , J . Chan , K . Z . Gajos and S . P . Dow , " Providing Timely Examples Improves the Quantity and Quality of Generated Ideas " , In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition , pp . 83 - 92 , 2015 . [ 13 ] Eyal Oren , Knud Möller , Simon Scerri , Siegfried Handschuh and Michael Sin - tek . 2006 . What are semantic annotations . Technical Report , DERI Galway . [ 14 ] Jerome Euzenat and Pavel Shvaiko . 2013 . Ontology matching . Berlin Heidel - berg . [ 15 ] Ranjitha Kumar , Arvind Satyanarayan , Cesar Torres , Maxine Lim , Salman Ah - mad , Scott Klemmer and Jerry Talton . 2013 . Webzeitgeist : design mining the web . In Proceedings of CHI . [ 16 ] Lixiu Yu , Aniket Kittur and Robert Kraut . 2014 . Distributed analogical idea gen - eration : inventing with crowds . In Proceedings of CHI . [ 17 ] Joel Chan , Pao Siangliulue , Denisa McDonald , Ruixue Liu , Reza Moradinezhad , Safa Aman , Erin Solovey , Krzysztof Gajos and Steven Dow . 2017 . Semantically Far Inspirations Considered Harmful ? Accounting for Cognitive States in Col - laborative Ideation . In Proceedings of C & C’17 . [ 18 ] Adam Green , David Kraemer , Jonathan Fugelsang , Jeremy Gray , Kevin Dun - bar . 2010 . Connecting long distance : Semantic distance in analogical reasoning modulates frontopolar cortex activity . Cerebral Cortex , 20 ( 1 ) , pp . 70 – 76 . [ 19 ] Ranjani Prabhakaran , Adam Green and Jeremy Gray . 2013 . Thin slices of cre - ativity : Using word utterances to assess creative cognition . journal of Be - havioural Research Methods . [ 20 ] Thomas Landauer , Peter Foltz and Darrell Laham . 1998 . Introduction to latent semantic analysis . Discourse Processes , 25 , pp . 259 – 284 . [ 21 ] J . Pennington , R . Socher , and C . D Manning , " Glove : Global vectors for word representation " , Proceedings of EMNLP , 12 , pp . 1532 – 1543 , 2014 . [ 22 ] Abderrahmane Khiat and Moussa Benaissa . 2015 . A new instance - based ap - proach for ontology alignment . IJSWIS journal , 11 ( 3 ) . 19 [ 23 ] Christoph Riedl , Norman May , Jan Finzen , Stephan Stathel , Viktor Kaufman and Helmut Krcmar . 2009 . An idea ontology for innovation management . IJSWIS journal , 5 ( 4 ) , pp . 1 – 18 . [ 24 ] DeRosa , Darleen M . , Carter L . Smith , and Donald A . Hantula . " The medium matters : Mining the long - promised merit of group interaction in creative idea generation tasks in a meta - analysis of the electronic group brainstorming liter - ature . " Computers in Human Behavior 23 . 3 ( 2007 ) : 1549 – 1581 [ 25 ] Abderrahmane Khiat and Moussa Benaissa . 2015 . Boosting reasoning - based approach by structural metrics for ontology alignment . JIPS journal , 2015 . [ 26 ] Dekang Lin . 1998 . An information - theoretic deﬁnition of similarity . In Proceed - ings of ICML , pp . 296 – 304 . 7 Appendix This section presents all ideas as well as the feedback that have been generated dur - ing the hallway test . 7 . 1 Ideas The list of all submitted ideas are illustrated in the ﬁgure 12 . 7 . 2 Feedback All the feedback obtained from the users are listed as follows : 1 . Image Selection Step ( 5 comments ) • No idea why I was asked to click on the pictures in the process - the pic - tures did not show up anywhere else . • The image extraction was too general . • Make sure that at least one image is found - my ﬁrst idea did not come up with pictures and I could not proceed . • de - select the images should be made more clear or just let the images be de - selected by default and let the people select the ﬁtting images . . . • The clarity of the extracted images is a little bit weak , i suggest to anno - tate images by some short explanation . • The Image Extraction Step didn’t worked on my pc ( macOS Sierra ) / browser ( Safari ) . So that would be nice if that would work the next time . 2 . Collaboration ( 4 comments ) • Otherwise it would be nice to have the chance to discuss about ideas and to get in touch with the other ideas makers . 20 Figure 12 : List of Ideas for Improving HCC Workspace . • Also commenting other ideas and viewing them completely is important but I guess that will be possible in the future ? ! • Rating the ideas did not work , would have loved to . . . • I was not aware of other peoples ideas while I was writing my ﬁrst one . 3 . Reﬁnement : creating a icon for an idea ( 6 comments ) • Fiddling with the icon took too long - I could not make it change the way I wanted . • The icon - generating process seems overly abstract and requires many steps . • Why icon - generating can’t this be supplemented by concept extraction as well ? • Take one of the pictures as icon ? 21 • improve tool for ikon creation . it is too difﬁcult to understand how it works . took too much time , otherwise could be fun . 4 . Process ( 5 comments ) • pictures of other work spaces would be more helpful in challenge . • Creating ideas was really easy and fast , but deﬁning them took a bit more time and I was a bit lazy with that in the end . • Can others already see my generated ideas even when I haven’t deﬁned them yet ? Because I can imagine that some just want to put an idea out there without deﬁning it yet . • Information should be given whether my ideas will be presented to the other participants personalized or anonymously . • The ordering of the process is not suitable . 5 . Design of the website ( 4 comments ) • doppelte Elemente reduzieren , Platz besser ausnutzen , Begriffe erklären ( deﬁne vs . create ) , unter create your own idea , Textﬁelds auf den Buttons sind nicht klickbar ( create idea " 7 ideas submitted " + ) . . . • I think this should be an immediate view . Overall , the website design could proﬁt from more animation . • Add social features . • It looks good for personal idea generating but visiting the ideas of the others were too late in the process . Thus , I would rather see it as platform for personal idea generation . 22 Figure 13 : Questionnaire interface of Innovonto Platform ( ﬁrst part of reﬁnement step ) . 23 Figure 14 : Icon generative interface of Innovonto Platform ( second part of reﬁne - ment step ) . 24