Designing for Negative Affect and Critical Reflection Abstract Our research seeks to explore how technologies , their affordances , and related practices support transformative learning , a process through which individuals engage with feelings of discomfort and other negative emotions . During fall of 2013 the second author worked with graduate students in a course that employed decolonizing pedagogies . Throughout the course the students experienced , reflected upon and evaluated our efforts to encourage critical reflection , a crucial stage of the transformative learning process . They used a suite of tools that support different types of interaction , making for unique learning experiences because of their variation on private - public , individualistic - collective , and rhetorical - discursive continuums . Through this work we argue for continued expansion of how ‘user experience’ is conceptualized within HCI , encouraging initiatives that address multi - faceted dimensions of the human experience . Author Keywords design ; negative affect ; critical reflection ; decolonization ACM Classification Keywords K . 4 . 2 [ Computing Milieux ] : Computers and Society - - - Social Issues ; H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Interfaces - - - theory and methods Introduction A focus of third - wave human - computer interaction ( HCI ) work [ 2 ] and a central principle of user experience ( UX ) [ 10 ] is that design should produce positive , even hedonic , experiences for individuals engaging with interactive technologies . However for contexts in which a negative reaction is intended , instrumental , or indeed inevitable , we argue that it is inappropriate to engineer a positive or “feel good” experience for the user . Yet the field of HCI has few examples of scholarship that investigates the deliberate Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . CHI 2014 , April 26 – May 1 , 2014 , Toronto , Ontario , Canada . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2474 - 8 / 14 / 04 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2581241 Helen Halbert The iSchool @ UBC University of British Columbia Vancouver , CA V6T 1Z1 helenhalbert @ gmail . com Lisa Nathan The iSchool @ UBC University of British Columbia Vancouver , CA V6T 1Z1 lisa . nathan @ ubc . ca Work - in - Progress CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 2569 design of interactions to provoke uncomfortable or distressing emotional responses ( e . g . , the de - gamification of military technologies [ 11 ] ) . This pilot project aims to contribute to this emerging body of work by exploring the context of negative emotions arising from societal tensions that are systematic and intergenerational instead of those contained and confined by an interaction . The purpose of the research was to explore the relationship between technological affordances and the experience of negative affect , and determine if and to what extent interaction design can support transformative learning , a process through which individuals engage with feelings of discomfort , stress , and uncertainty leading to significant changes in perspective . During fall of 2013 the second author worked with students in a blended graduate level seminar course that employed decolonizing pedagogies – teaching practices and philosophies with an aim to “create a sense of the complexity of colonial oppression and how it is systematically exercised” [ 12 p . 124 ] . Analysis of students’ learning experiences , their interactions with selected educational technologies , and their reflections on the effectiveness of our efforts is ongoing . Learning , Negative Emotion and Design The concept of transformative learning , first developed by sociologist Jack Mezirow , is often understood and referred to as perspective transformation : “the process of becoming critically aware of how and why our presuppositions have come to constrain the way we perceive , understand , and feel about our world” [ 15 , p . 14 ] . According to Mezirow’s theory , the multi - step process is first triggered by a disorienting dilemma resulting from a disconnect between one’s understanding of the world and one’s own concept of self . Instead of minimizing “mental discomfort” as predicted by theories from information science , psychology , and media and communication research ( e . g . , information avoidance , cognitive dissonance , and selective exposure [ 5 , 22 ] ) , individuals engaged in transformative learning are willing to prolong a state of internal inconsistency . Others have documented the experiences of transformative learning or pedagogies of discomfort [ 21 ] by individuals newly encountering anti - oppressive frameworks ( including anti - racist , anti - classist , anti - sexist / feminist , and others critical of expressions of oppression ) . Upsetting emotions such as denial , contempt , and guilt are commonly experienced , but there is also potential for the negative to foster constructive dialogue , encourage action and allyship , and improve individual self - esteem through increased awareness and mindfulness [ 19 ] . Although HCI researchers and designers have begun to explore the role of negative emotions in UX , most notably though work in serious games [ 14 ] and uncomfortable interactions [ 1 ] , the focus has been on engineering experiences which are ultimately intended to be engrossing and entertaining for the user ( e . g . , an impossibly difficult video game or a frightening narrative ) . Those that endeavor to “confront participants with difficult decisions involving culturally challenging issues” [ 1 , p . 2009 ] focus on the experiential as episodic , contained and confined by the interaction . Yet these issues often arise from societal tensions that are systematic and intergenerational , often unaddressed in the final design [ 9 ] . In addition , Why is transformative learning important ? Paulette Regan describes how an unsettling pedagogy “not only challenges mainstream [ Canadian ] society’s deeply held myths about history but also fosters a genuine willingness and ability among settlers to accept responsibility” [ 18 , p . 32 ) of past and perpetuating injustices . For example , UBC’s Vancouver campus is built in the heart of unceded Musqueam territory [ 16 ] . The Musqueam people lived on the land for over 9 , 000 years . As faculty and students new to the area learn the uncomfortable truths about this “land grab” and other injustices they benefit from , many have chosen to work with Musqueam to improve damaged relationships ( e . g . , creating learning objects for UBC faculty and students [ 16 ] ) . Work - in - Progress CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 2570 scholars often articulate the interaction as an experience to be manipulated , with rising action ( building suspense ) ; climax ( the moment of discomfort ) ; falling action ( release of tension ) ; and dénouement ( post - experience reminiscence and retelling ) [ 1 ] . For this study designing for negative affect does not entail the engineering of emotion as a contained experience . We are attempting to study design for mediation rather than manipulation . Given that contradicting evidence exists on the role of systems and settings—including discussion boards , content recommendation platforms , user anonymity , and collaborative editing software [ e . g . , 3 , 7 , 13 , 17 , 20 ] — in fostering dialogue or listening , encouraging reflection or empathy , supporting learning in unfamiliar and intimidating environments , and enabling perspective transformation , we are interested in exploring what socio - technical practices show promise for facilitating the experience of negative emotion and scaffolding the transformative learning process . Positioning the Project and the Authors We conducted our study with 11 graduate students from the iSchool at the University of British Columbia ( UBC ) enrolled in a class entitled Information Practice and Protocol in Support of Indigenous Initiatives . We argue that a focus of the course—the tensions between the norms of information professional practice and Indigenous protocols and values—as well as ‘problematic scenarios’ provided opportunities for discomfort for individuals preparing for a profession that promotes practices that can prove culturally insensitive , hegemonic or oppressive . The research team for the project consists of two non - Indigenous scholars . Neither claim to hold or have access to “Indigenous perspectives” . However , as settlers in Canada working with Indigenous colleagues on Indigenous initiatives , they have direct experience with the transformative learning process . Theoretical Framing While Mezirow’s theory begins with the experience of discomfort , it is only the first of many steps to transformative learning [ 4 ] . Many studies on the process have indicated that the second major stage of critical reflection—more so than any other—is essential to the process [ 4 , 15 , 20 ] . While many experience negative emotions when confronted with materials that question their assumptions and worldviews , only those that critically engage with the feelings develop the necessary foundation for perspective transformation . In this study , our interest was the degree to which interaction with and through specific technological features can frame critical reflection . We focused on supporting technological affordances and related practices instead of quantifying or verifying individual students’ learning processes or judgments of whether they were undergoing transformative learning at any given time , had already been ‘decolonized , ’ or had encountered decolonizing pedagogies previously . Methodology Throughout the course the students experienced , reflected upon and evaluated our efforts to encourage critical reflection through a suite of ‘tools’ or features that support different types of interaction . We chose three within Blackboard Learn 9 . 1 : the discussion board , the journal , and the group wiki tools . Blackboard was used as it is the learning management system Acknowledgements Problematic Scenarios : We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the Advisory Group for the iSchool @ UBC’s First Nations Curriculum Concentration . Members of the groups shared the problematic scenarios that were used throughout the course to create experiences of negative affect . These scenarios were drawn from their experiences as Indigenous and non - Indigenous information professionals contributing to Indigenous initiatives . Students : We also thank the individuals enrolled in LIBR 569a fall , 2013 for their participation . Consent : Dr . Richard Arias Hernandez for assistance with the consent protocols . Work - in - Progress CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 2571 provided by the university and was familiar to students . The features were selected according to their affordances and how they provide or do not provide the circumstances under which transformative learning ( and in particular , the stage of critical reflection ) can occur based on a review of related transformative learning literature [ 3 , 7 , 13 , 15 , 17 , 20 ] . Each tool offers students a different range of functionality , making for three unique interactions and learning experiences because of their varied private - public , individualistic - collective , and rhetorical - discursive continuums . At different points in the term , students were asked to engage with a specific tool when responding to a problematic scenario , a short description of a real - life situation that highlighted discriminatory , yet standard , information and archival practice . Additionally , students partook in three participatory - design - inspired workshops towards the end of the course in which they were provided activities and materials and encouraged to reflect on , critique , imagine , and “mock up” technologies that support critical reflection leading to transformative learning . The workshops were envisioned as an inclusive and collaborative design space with students as learning technology stakeholders [ 8 ] , and opportunities for students to further contribute to the research by engaging with other technological affordances outside of our initial selection . Additionally , through the application of participatory design methodologies , we sought to minimize the potential for information avoidance , disengagement , and self - censorship within the specific context of transformative learning , negative affect , and uncomfortable content in the classroom . We argue that taking on the role of designers provided students the distance necessary for reflection on the transformative learning process , and empowered students to speak more candidly on how to engage with course content . Planned Analysis At the end of the 13 - week term , grades were submitted and the authors gained access to student consent forms ( Dec , 2013 ) . We were relieved to learn that all 11 students agreed to let us use their course interactions and submissions for research . Through spring 2014 , we will use grounded theory as developed by Charmaz [ 6 ] to conduct qualitative content analysis of our data , which includes student - generated course materials ( e . g . responses , products of design workshops ) and final reflections on experiences with the course , its content , and activities in order to analyze engagement with technologies by students and how students used ( or did not use ) the technologies . We will draw upon quantitative measures of learning management use for the course ( e . g . number of posts , page views ) for further insight into how tool interactions influenced students’ critical reflection . The purpose of analysis is to determine if a set of hypotheses can be derived from students’ experiences with educational technologies while learning uncomfortable content . These will be investigated in future work with the goal of informing the design and implementation of systems that support the process of transformative learning . Challenges We limited our subject pool to students enrolled in the course on the topic of Indigenous initiatives . This was a deliberate—and ethically motivated—choice as the Work - in - Progress CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 2572 course presented an opportunity for us to study learning interactions in contexts of negative affect without having to unnecessarily subject participants to duress or distressing content ; students would have been exposed to the same information regardless of participation in the study by virtue of having enrolled in the course . Our subject pool was therefore relatively small and specific to the characteristics and demographics of our participants ( which included Aboriginal and non - Aboriginal students ) . While we attempted to account for the effect of the research context ( a course with an inherent power differential between instructor and students ) through the design of our study , participants may have still felt pressured to self - censor , especially given the sensitive subject matter . Future Work and Anticipated Contributions Future work consists of data analysis to identify themes and initial insights that will inform future research investigating the influence of design affordances on transformative learning . We anticipate specific contributions to include : 1 . Revealing the potential for interaction design to contribute to transformative learning experiences . 2 . Offering an initial set of criteria for system affordances and technology features that encourage the process of transformative learning , including critical reflection , perspective - taking , collaboration , and respectful communication . 3 . Building on these criteria to extend our understanding of interactive system design more broadly when negative affect is intended and indeed instrumental to learning outcomes . While this work focused on the process of transformative learning in the specific context of learning and coming to terms with the history and contemporary reality of relationships between non - Aboriginal and Aboriginal peoples in Canada , we believe the work has potential applications for many environments , particularly those with opportunities for actors to undergo paradigm shifts and engage with ‘pedagogies of discomfort’ . Most broadly , we argue for continued expansion of the way we conceptualize ‘user experience’ within HCI , specifically in reconsidering the field’s recent focus on the positive and pleasurable , encouraging diverse initiatives like serious gaming that explore multi - faceted dimensions of the human experience . References [ 1 ] Benford , S . , Greenhalgh , C . , Giannachi , G . , Walker , B . , Marshall , J . and Rodden , T . Uncomfortable interactions . Proc CHI’12 , ACM , ( 2012 ) , 2005 - 2014 . [ 2 ] Bødker , S . When second wave HCI meets third wave challenges . Proc . NordiCHI ’06 , ACM ( 2006 ) , 1 - 8 . [ 3 ] Boyer , N . R . , Maher , P . A . and Kirkman , S . Transformative learning in online settings : The use of Work - in - Progress CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 2573 self - direction , metacognition , and collaborative learning . Journal of Transformative Ed . , 4 ( 4 ) , ( 2006 ) , 335 - 361 . [ 4 ] Brock , S . E . Measuring the importance of precursor steps to transformative learning . Adult Education Quarterly , 60 ( 2 ) , ( 2010 ) , 122 - 142 . [ 5 ] Case , D . O . , Andrews , J . E . , Johnson , J . D . and Allard , S . L . Avoiding versus seeking : the relationship of information seeking to avoidance , blunting , coping , dissonance , and related concepts . Journal of the Medical Library Assoc . , 93 ( 3 ) , ( 2005 ) , 353 - 362 . [ 6 ] Charmaz , K . Constructing Grounded Theory : A practical guide through qualitative analysis . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications , 2006 . [ 7 ] Donnelly , R . The nexus of problem - based learning and learning technology : Does it enable transformative practice ? European Journal of Open , Distance and E - Learning . 2008 . [ 8 ] DiSalvo , C . , Nourbakhsh , I . , Holstius , D . , Akin A . , and Louw , M . The Neighborhood Networks project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . Proc PDC’08 , ACM , ( 2008 ) , 41 - 50 . [ 9 ] Friedman , B . & Nathan , L . P . Multi - lifespan information system design : A research initiative for the HCI community . Proc CHI’10 , ACM , ( 2010 ) , 2243 - 2246 . [ 10 ] Hassenzahl , M . and Tractinsky , N . User experience – A research agenda . Behaviour & Information Technology , 25 ( 2 ) , ( 2006 ) , 91 - 97 . [ 11 ] Hourcade , J . P . & Bullock - Rest , N . E . HCI for peace : A call for constructive action . Proc . CHI’11 , ACM , ( 2011 ) , 443 - 452 . [ 12 ] Iseke - Barnes , J . Pedagogies for decolonizing . Canadian Journal of Native Education , 31 ( 1 ) , ( 2008 ) , 123 - 148 . [ 13 ] Kriplean , T . , Toomim , M . , Morgan , J . , Borning , A . and Ko , A . Is this what you meant ? Promoting listening on the web with Reflect . Proc CHI’12 , ACM , ( 2012 ) , 1559 - 1568 . [ 14 ] Marsh , T . & Costello , B . Experience in Serious Games : Between Positive and Serious Experience . Proc . SGDA 2012 , Springer , ( 2012 ) , 255 - 267 . [ 15 ] Mezirow , J . Fostering critical reflection in adulthood : A guide to transformative and emancipatory learning . Jossey - Bass Publishers , San Fran . , USA , 1990 . [ 16 ] Musqueam Legal History Digital Media Archive . http : / / indigenousfoundations . arts . ubc . ca / , ( n . d . ) [ 17 ] Nonnecke , B . , Andrews , D . and Preece , J . Non - public and public online community participation : Needs , attitudes and behavior . Electronic Commerce Research , 6 ( 1 ) , 2006 . 7 - 20 . [ 18 ] Regan , P . Unsettling the settler within : Indian Residential Schools , truth telling and reconciliation . UBC Press , Vancouver , Canada , 2010 . [ 19 ] Tatum , B . D . Talking about race , learning about racism : The application of racial identity development theory in the classroom . Harvard Educational Review , 62 ( 1 ) , ( 1992 ) , 1 - 25 . [ 20 ] Taylor , E . W . An update of transformative learning theory : A critical review of the empirical research ( 1999 – 2005 ) . International Journal of Lifelong Education , 26 ( 2 ) , ( 2007 ) , 173 - 191 . [ 21 ] Zembylas , M . & McGlynn , C . Discomforting pedagogies : Emotional tensions , ethical dilemmas and transformative possibilities . British Educational Research Journal , 38 ( 1 ) , ( 2012 ) , 41 - 59 [ 22 ] Zillmann , D . & Bryant , J ( eds ) . Selective exposure to communication . Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , USA . 1985 . Work - in - Progress CHI 2014 , One of a CHInd , Toronto , ON , Canada 2574