PDF hosted at the Radboud Repository of the Radboud University Nijmegen The following full text is a publisher ' s version . For additional information about this publication click this link . http : / / hdl . handle . net / 2066 / 149462 Please be advised that this information was generated on 2019 - 03 - 30 and may be subject to change . Biopolymers in Vivo 568 - Pos Board B348 A Sensor for Quantiﬁcation of Macromolecular Crowding in Living Cells Arnold J . Boersma , Boqun Liu , Bert Poolman . University of Groningen , Groningen , Netherlands . The cell is highly crowded with biomacromolecules , and the excluded volume inﬂuences processes such as diffusion , folding , conformation , and aggregation or association of proteins and polynucleic acids . In Escherichia coli , the values reported for the total macromolecular content range from 200 to 400 mg / mL . Knowledge of the macromolecular crowding is needed to understand behavior and especially interactions of biomolecules in vivo , be it for drug development , fundamental knowledge , or to support computational efforts to model the living cell . Direct spatiotemporal read - out of the crowding would be a powerful asset to unravel the structure of the cytoplasm and the impact of excluded volume on protein function in living cells . Here , we introduce a Fo¨rster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) sensor for quantiﬁcation of the macromolecular crowding and apply the sensor in living cells . 569 - Pos Board B349 Desolvation Energy : A Rationale for Changes in Binding Afﬁnity as Measured by ITC Daryl K . Eggers , Jennifer M . Le , Duc N . Pham , Nhi T . Nham , Frankie A . Contreras . Chemistry , San Jose State University , San Jose , CA , USA . This study tests a new thermodynamic framework for aqueous binding equi - libria that features an explicit consideration for the change in hydration that occurs when two solvated surfaces come into contact . As an outcome of this approach , the standard state free energy of binding is deﬁned by the summation of two terms , the traditional term ( - RTln K ) plus a desolvation free energy term that is weighted by the number of complexes formed at equilibrium . The governing equation suggests that the equilibrium ratio ( K ) is not a constant ; this equation is supported ﬁrmly by results from isothermal titration calorimetry using the chelation of calcium ( II ) by EDTA as a model binding reaction . In addition , we demonstrate that secondary solutes can shift the equilibrium by altering the average free energy of bulk water ; molar so - lutions of urea , sucrose , and trehalose result in signiﬁcant changes in the equilibrium ratio without altering the standard state free energy , as deﬁned by our working equation . This investigation provides a fresh approach for characterizing concentrated , nonideal solutions , as relevant for understanding the driving forces behind molecular interactions in a cell or tissue . If the des - olvation equation is demonstrated to be correct for other binding reactions in general , this project could ignite a renaissance in the application of aqueous solution thermodynamics . 570 - Pos Board B350 Rapidly Inducible De Novo Synthesis of Hydrogels in Living Cells Takanari Inoue . Cell Biology , Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MD , USA . We report a design , synthesis and characterization of hydrogels inside living cells which will serve as a biomolecular sift . We achieve this by rapid induc - tion of a sol - gel phase transition . A hydrogel is deﬁned as a non - ﬂuid , cross - linked polymer network . Inducing polymerization of soluble multivalent molecules could thus lead to in situ hydrogel formation . To probe a spatio - temporally dynamic cellular processes , the phase transition must take place at a speciﬁc subcellular location in a rapidly inducible manner . To achieve this , we utilized a chemically inducible dimerization technique , through which a pair of protein domains bind to each other only in the presence of the corresponding chemical dimerizer . Our choice of protein pairs are FKBP ( FK506 binding protein ) and FRB ( FKBP - rapamycin biding domain ) which dimerize in the presence of rapamycin . For the in - cell hydrogel forma - tion , we induced polymerization of the multivalent FKBP ( FKBPX ) and FRB ( FRBX ) molecules spaced with a long peptide linker by adding a chemical dimerizer . By targeting the FRBX to a particular cellular location and FKBPX to the cytosol , we were able to rapidly produce a hydrogel in a spatio - temporally controlled manner . Subsequently , we performed biophysi - cal characterization of the synthetic gels both in vitro and in vivo and found that the gels allow passive diffusion of most of the proteins but not larger molecular complexes or cellular organelles . The present study is highly unique in its quality execution of rapidly inducing de novo synthesis of hydrogels in living cells . 571 - Pos Board B351 Excluded Volume Effects Inside the Living Cell David Gnutt 1 , Mimi Gao 1 , Oliver Brylski 1 , Matthias Heyden 2 , Simon Ebbinghaus 1 . 1 Physical Chemistry II , Ruhr University Bochum , Bochum , Germany , 2 Max - Planck - Institut fu¨r Kohlenforschung , Mu¨hlheim , Germany . Proteins andnucleicacids foldandbehaveinahighlyoccupiedmatrixofmacro - molecules , the cellular environment . Although this environment is ﬁlled up to a volume of 40 % with macromolecules , the effect of crowding on biochemical reactionsaswellasbiophysicalpropertiesofproteinshasbeenrarelyconsidered . Therefore , studies on macromolecular crowding are mainly conducted using ar - tiﬁcially created polymer based substances as mimics of the in cell environment . Still , acommonconcepthowtheexcludedvolumeeffectinthecellaffectsprotein folding , function and structure is lacking . Understandingtheseproperties will be importantto unravel theunderlyingmechanismofproteinmisfoldingandaggre - gation as well as the behavior of intrinsically disordered proteins in a living cell . We introduce a FRET based random coil polymer to characterize crowding both in vitro and inside a living cell . We ﬁnd different compression of the poly - mer in artiﬁcial crowding substances compared to protein crowders such as BSA or oocyte lysate . Injection of the probe inside cells conﬁrms this result and reveals a heterogeneous environment which , on average , shows compara - ble polymer conformations as in diluted buffer . The polymer conformation is used to quantify crowding differences in the cytosol and the nucleus as well as to identify crowding in cells inﬂuenced by different extrinsic conditions . Se - vere osmotic stress is used to probe compression of the polymer in the highly concentrated cytosolic environment . We conclude that the FRET labelled polymer provides a new approach to investigate and characterize the cellular solvation properties with high spatio - temporal resolution in a variety of systems and identify crowding differ - ences due to the architecture of the cellular matrix . Therefore , it will help to understand how the cell , as the native environment in which proteins evolved , might modulate and tune biomolecule properties and functions . 572 - Pos Board B352 Macromolecular Crowding in the Cytosol : Underappreciated or Overesti - mated ? Joost Groen 1 , David Foschepoth 1 , Arnold J . Boersma 2 , Hiromi Imamura 3 , Hans A . Heus 1 , Wilhelm T . S . Huck 1 . 1 Institute for Molecules and Materials , Radboud University Nijmegen , Nijmegen , Netherlands , 2 Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute , University of Groningen , Groningen , Netherlands , 3 Graduate School of Biostudies & The Hakubi Center for Advanced Research , Kyoto University , Kyoto , Japan . The cytosol of an E . coli cell is extremely crowded , containing 20 - 30 % ( v / v ) macromolecules . Such conditions are expected to increase activity coefﬁcients and result in excluded volume effects , driving complexation , multimerization and compact conformations of macromolecules . Experimentally , crowding is oftensimulatedbyhigh concentrationsofinert , unchargedhydrophilicpolymers such as PEG and Ficoll . However , recent studies strongly indicate that excluded volume effects can be attenuated by associative interactions of macromolecules withthecrowdingagent . Tosimulatecytosoliccrowding invitro , weusecell - free E . coli lysate in physiologically relevant concentrations . We study the effects of crowdingwithcelllysateandpolymericcrowdingagentsontheFRETefﬁciencyofaCFP / YFPcrowdingsensorandaFRET - basedATPsensor . Ifstrongexcluded volumeeffectsarepresentincells , quantiﬁcationofmetaboliteconcentrations in vivo by FRET - based constructs is severely complicated by the additional effects of excluded volume on FRET efﬁciency . We found that synthetic crowding agentsnotonlydecreaseassociationconstantsoftheATP - sensorforATPsignif - icantly , but also induce a strong increase in FRET efﬁciency by themselves . Our results indicate a strong excluded volume effect from polymeric crowding agents , while cell - free lysate does not show these effects . We hypothesize that in vivo , associative interactions can overcome excluded volume effects in some cases , whereas in other interactions depletion forces could be dominant . 573 - Pos Board B353 Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Multi - Protein Binding in Crowded EnvironmentsYoungchanKim 1 , Jeetain Mittal 2 . 1 Center for Computational Materials Science , Naval Research Laboratory , Washington , DC , USA , 2 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , Lehigh University , Bethlehem , PA , USA . Protein - protein interactions play an essential role in many biological pro - cesses inside a cell . The cellular medium is crowded with an ensemble of 114a Sunday , February8 , 2015