84 Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model ZHENYU HAN , Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology , Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , China SIRAN MA , Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , China CHANGZHENG GAO and ERZHUO SHAO , Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology , Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , China YULAI XIE , YANG ZHANG , and LU GENG , Digital Technology Research Department , Hitachi ( China ) Research & Development Corporation , China YONG LI , Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology , Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , China As the rapid - spreading disease COVID - 19 occupies the world , most governments adopt strict control policies to alleviate the impact of the virus . These policies successfully reduced the prevalence and delayed the epi - demic peak , while they are also associated with high economic and social costs . To bridge the microscopic epidemic transmission patterns and control policies , simulation systems play an important role . In this work , we propose an agent - based disease simulator for indoor public spaces , which contribute to most of the trans - mission in cities . As an example , we study Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport , which is one of the most bustling aviation hubs in China . Specifically , we design a high - efficiency mobility generation module to re - construct the individual trajectories considering both lingering behavior and crowd mobility , which greatly enhances the credibility of the simulated mobility and ensures real - time performance . Based on the individ - ual trajectories , we propose a multi - path disease transmission module optimized for indoor public spaces , which includes three main transmission paths as close contact transmission , aerosol transmission , and ob - ject surface transmission . We design a novel convolution - based algorithm to mimic the diffusion process , which can leverage the high concurrent capability of the graphics processing unit to accelerate the simu - lation process . Leveraging our simulation paradigm , the effectiveness of common policy interventions can be quantitatively evaluated . For mobility interventions , we find that lingering control is the most effective mobility intervention with 32 . 35 % fewer infections , while increasing social distance and increasing walking This work was supported in part by The National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No . 2018YFB1800804 , theNationalNatureScienceFoundationofChinaunderGrantsNo . U1936217 , No . 61971267 , No . 61972223 , No . 61941117 , and No . 61861136003 , Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant No . L182038 , Beijing National Re - search Center for Information Science and Technology under Grant No . 20031887521 , and research fund of Tsinghua University – Tencent Joint Laboratory for Internet Innovation Technology . Authors’ addresses : Z . Han , C . Gao , E . Shao , and Y . Li ( corresponding author ) , Beijing National Research Center for Informa - tion Science and Technology , Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing , China , 100084 ; emails : hanzy19 @ mails . tsinghua . edu . cn , gcz20 @ mails . tsinghua . edu . cn , sez20 @ mails . tsinghua . edu . cn , liyong07 @ tsinghua . edu . cn ; S . Ma , Department of Electronic Engineering , Tsinghua University , Beijing , China ; email : msr18 @ mails . tsinghua . edu . cn ; Y . Xie , Y . Zhang , and L . Geng , Digital Technology Research Dept . , Hitachi ( China ) Research & Development Corporation , Beijing , China ; emails : xieyl @ hitachi . cn , zhangyan @ hitachi . cn , lgeng @ hitachi . cn . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . 2157 - 6904 / 2023 / 09 - ART84 $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3593589 ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 2 Z . Han et al . speed have a similar effect with 15 . 15 % and 18 . 02 % fewer infections . It demonstrates the importance of intro - ducing crowd mobility into disease transmission simulation . For transmission processes , we find the aerosol transmission involves in 99 . 99 % of transmission , which highlights the importance of ventilation in indoor public spaces . Our simulation also demonstrates that without strict entrance detection to identify the input infections , only performing frequent disinfection cannot achieve desirable epidemic outcomes . Based on our simulation paradigm , we can shed light on better policy designs that achieve a good balance between disease spreading control and social costs . CCS Concepts : • Information systems → Decision support systems ; • Applied computing → Life and medical sciences ; Additional Key Words and Phrases : Disease transmission modeling , public space , mobility model , policy de - sign , COVID - 19 ACM Reference format : Zhenyu Han , Siran Ma , Changzheng Gao , Erzhuo Shao , Yulai Xie , Yang Zhang , Lu Geng , and Yong Li . 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model . ACM Trans . Intell . Syst . Technol . 14 , 5 , Article 84 ( September 2023 ) , 24 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3593589 1 INTRODUCTION With the sudden strike of COVID - 19 at the end of 2019 , policymakers around the world are desper - ate to control the spreading of the disease . Plenty of non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) are proposed , such as testing and quarantine policy [ 30 , 53 ] , stay - at - home orders [ 39 ] , limiting social gathering [ 12 , 24 ] , school closure [ 46 ] , and suspension of public transportation [ 14 ] . The ef - fectiveness of these macro - level interventions has been confirmed [ 12 , 31 ] , while long - term , strict interventions against COVID - 19 have a negative psychological impact on the public [ 4 ] , which leads to pandemic fatigue that decreases the compliance towards the policy interventions [ 9 , 36 ] . Therefore , a detailed understanding of these interventions is important to achieve a good balance between epidemic control and social costs . Modeling the transmission process in public spaces is an important factor to curb the disease , where most of the transmission happens . Previous research has identified varying infection risks in different point of interests ( POIs ) [ 41 , 52 , 53 ] , where restaurants , gyms and cafes are particularly risky [ 5 ] . More importantly , transportation systems , which often involve poor ventilation indoor environments , play an important role in the pandemic [ 23 , 43 ] . Specifically , air travel that connect regions over long distances has been identified as a driving factor for the global transmission of COVID - 19 [ 25 , 35 , 50 ] . Leveraging aggregated epidemic models such as susceptible - exposed - infectious - removed ( SEIR ) , these works successfully demonstrate the heterogeneity of epidemic transmission in cities through a macroscopic perspective . However , such aggregation prevents them from explaining the underlying mechanism for how NPIs affecting the transmission process between individuals , which is essential to formulate optimized control policies for public spaces . To eliminate the disadvantages of aggregated methods , agent - based models ( ABMs ) , such as the cellular automaton ( CA ) model [ 47 ] and social force model [ 16 ] , are used to support microscopic simulations . In public transportation scenarios , smart card data are used to construct individual encounter networks for epidemic simulation [ 23 , 37 ] . However , they adopt simple rules or equations to simulate individual trajectories , which fails to capture the emergence of crowd behaviors in public places . Evidence has shown that crowd behavior is essential to accurately model human mobility in public spaces [ 15 ] . Besides , the over - simplified transmission rules [ 20 , 37 ] also hinder the reliability of the simulation . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 3 Fig . 1 . Proposed disease simulation schema in the airport scenario . Our simulation mainly consists of four parts , where the individual mobility generation module reproduces individual trajectories according to real - world data . It is constrained by the implementation of policy interventions . Then the generated trajectory is used to perform disease simulation . According to the above discussion , we propose a novel disease simulator with realistic mobility behavior and transmission paths for indoor public spaces . As shown in Figure 1 , the mobility gen - eration module reconstructs individual - level trajectories through the input data , based on which a multi - path disease transmission module simulates different types of transmission in indoor pub - lic spaces . For the mobility generation module , we improve the reliability of the traditional social force mobility model by introducing lingering behavior and crowd mobility , which are calibrated by real - world population distribution . Furthermore , we optimize the algorithm with a local recep - tive field and caching mechanism in GPU implementation , which reduce the time consumption by 95 % . For the disease transmission module , we consider three common transmission processes for indoor scenarios , which include close contact transmission that represents personal interactions , aerosol transmission that represents polluted air in indoor places , and object surface transmission for seats , knobs , and so on , that are polluted by the virus . These transmission processes are imple - mented by a novel convolution - based algorithm inspired by real - world diffusion process , which can easily leverage GPUs to accelerate the computation process . Based on the proposed simulation paradigm , we study Terminal 1 of Guangzhou Baiyun Inter - national Airport , which is a representative aviation hub in China . We implement three common mobility intervention policies in the airport scenario , which are lingering control , increasing so - cial distance and increasing walking speed . Our result demonstrates that lingering control results a 32 . 35 % reduction of infected passengers , which greatly surpass other interventions . The intro - duction of crowd behavior is of critical importance to accurately model the transmission process in public spaces . Besides , based on the multi - path disease transmission module , we evaluate the importance of different transmission paths by performing backward contact tracing , where the aerosol transmission involves in nearly all the cases . We also investigate the effectiveness of infec - tion intervention policies for indoor scenario , such as increasing disinfection frequency and input risk intervention . Results show that without strict control of input infections , frequent disinfec - tion cannot effectively curb the disease spreading . Our simulation paradigm provides evidence for policymakers to formulate public control methods in public spaces , which can shed light on better policy design . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 4 Z . Han et al . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Human Mobility Simulation Human mobility determines the person - to - person contact patterns , which bridges the transmis - sion of infectious diseases such as COVID - 19 . Therefore , human mobility is the key to accurately simulate disease transmission among people . According to the scale of mobility , we categorize the literature into two categories : Macroscopic mobility simulation and microscopic mobility simulation . For macroscopic mobility simulation , aggregated mobility is used to quantify the risk of trans - mission . Based on regional mobility flow and simple models such as generalized linear model [ 22 ] or exponential model [ 18 ] , the prevalence of disease at the province or city level can be accu - rately simulated during the early stages [ 17 ] . Considering the scaling feature of human mobility , the GlEaM model [ 2 , 6 ] proposes a nested simulation paradigm for both short - scale commuting flows and long - range airline traffic , based on which the outbreak possibility of a global epidemic can be simulated . However , macroscopic mobility simulation cannot explain the underlying het - erogeneity in transmission , where a small proportion of infected people are responsible for a dis - proportionately high number of secondary infections , i . e . , the superspreading phenomenon [ 29 ] . Superspreading phenomena are common in indoor public spaces [ 28 , 32 ] , which contradicts the underlying homogeneous assumption of macroscopic mobility simulation . Different from macroscopic methods , microscopic mobility simulation leverages individual - level mobility to determine the transmission process . Agent - based models are widely used in micro - scopic mobility simulations , where each people is represented by a specific agent with predefined rules or equations . Kim et al . [ 20 ] leverage a simple cellular automaton to simulate the walking movement of people , where the model considers a single - direction movement with collision avoid - ance on a grided space . Given no other people in the way , each agent will perform uniform linear motion to the destination . Different from cellular automaton , the social force model [ 16 ] consid - ers the interaction between agents , obstacles , and destinations through Newton’s mechanic - based particle equations in a continuous space . Specifically , the attraction effect between agents with their destination is given in the following equations : (cid:2) e α ( t ) = (cid:2) r kα − (cid:2) r α ( t ) | (cid:2) r kα − (cid:2) r α ( t ) | , ( 1 ) (cid:2) F 0 α ( (cid:2) v α , v 0 α (cid:2) e α ) = 1 τ α (cid:2) v 0 α (cid:2) e α − (cid:2) v α (cid:3) , ( 2 ) where (cid:2) r k α represents the position of destination , and (cid:2) r α ( t ) means the current position of the agent . The vector (cid:2) e α ( t ) is the direction vector from the agent to the destination . Then the force of at - traction (cid:2) F 0 α is defined by the maximum velocity of the agent v 0 α , the current velocity (cid:2) v α and the direction vector (cid:2) e α ( t ) . τ α is the relaxation time , which tunes the strength of the force . It drives the agent in the desired direction and speed toward the destination . Besides , the social force model defines a repulsive force between agents to avoid collisions as follows : (cid:2) f αβ ( (cid:2) r αβ ) = −∇ (cid:2) r αβ V αβ [ b ( (cid:2) r αβ ) ] , ( 3 ) 2 b = (cid:4) ( (cid:4) (cid:2) r αβ (cid:4) + (cid:4) (cid:2) r αβ − v β Δ t (cid:2) e β (cid:4) ) 2 − ( v β Δ t ) 2 , ( 4 ) where V αβ ( b ) is a monotonic decreasing function of b with equipotential lines directing into the direction of motion , and b demonstrates the semi - minor axis of the ellipse . Similarly , the repulsive ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 5 force between agents and the obstacles is given by (cid:2) F αB ( (cid:2) r αB ) = −∇ (cid:2) r αB U αB ( (cid:4) (cid:2) r αB (cid:4) ) , ( 5 ) where U αB ( (cid:4) (cid:2) r αB (cid:4) ) is the repulsive and monotonically decreasing potential . (cid:2) r αB represents the vector between the pedestrian and the nearest location of the obstacle . Based on the above equations , the social force model provides a flexible method for real - world complex scenarios with multiple obstacles , where more realistic mobility behaviors with all - direction collision avoidance and acceleration process can be simulated . However , the social force model is extremely computing - intensive , which greatly limits its application in large - scale simulation . More importantly , both the cellular automation and social force model cannot depict crowd behavior , which is essential to depict real - world human contact patterns for disease trans - mission simulation . To tackle the above problems , we further modified the social force model with lingering behavior and crowd mobility , which greatly enhanced the reliability of the simulated pedestrian trajectories . Besides , we introduce a local receptive field and caching mechanism to the model to reduce the computation burden . 2 . 2 Disease Transmission Simulation Leveraging macroscopic and microscopic mobility , the transmission process of infectious disease can be simulated . For macroscopic disease simulation , Zhang et al . [ 53 ] and Yang et al . [ 51 ] leverage an age - specific mobility contact matrix to depict the interaction frequency between different age groups , then adopt an age - stratified SEIR model to simulate epidemic transmission at crowd level . According to the contact matrix , researchers can simulate the interaction pattern between different groups of people , revealing the effectiveness of common policy interventions such as inter - city travel restriction , school closure and self - isolation [ 12 , 24 ] . However , the underlying mechanisms of these interventions remain unclear . To further extend the granularity of transmission simulation , recent research focuses on micro - scopic disease simulation by constructing an individual contact network . For example , the effec - tiveness of community lockdown is evaluated by the stochastic SIR model on social networks [ 13 ] . Similarly , Abueg et al . [ 1 ] also use the individual social network to evaluate the performance of digital contact tracing . Furthermore , Murphy et al . [ 40 ] simulate several social networks , such as Barabási - Albert networks [ 3 ] and Erdős - Rényi networks [ 10 ] , then using a graph neural net - work ( GCN ) to capture the transmission dynamics lie in . These works focus on general individual contacts in society , which is quite different from indoor public spaces . For the transmission simulation in public spaces , a line of research leverages smart card data to capture the daily encounter network in public transportation , based on which the disease transmis - sion process is simulated [ 45 ] . Specifically , Ku et al . [ 23 ] collect the original - destination informa - tion in Seoul public transportation network , and infer the shortest transfer trip chain to allocate a specific subway for each passenger . By assuming all the passengers in the same subway have contacts , the authors propose a public transportation encounter network for disease transmission simulation . For the policy interventions , they consider the effect of compulsory mask - wearing and social distancing , where the model parameters for these interventions are set based on empirical data . Similarly , Mo et al . [ 37 ] introduce social activity contact network to the public transport network , which supports the transmission simulation for the whole population . However , these works adopt a homogeneous view of all the people , which cannot accurately reflect the diversity of behaviors , where vulnerable people may adopt more protective measures . Therefore , the inher - ent heterogeneity in the transmission process is ignored . Moreover , the simple contact network approach between passengers cannot fully reflect the varying transmission paths of infectious diseases . As an example , the transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 virus can transmit to others through ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 6 Z . Han et al . Fig . 2 . Illustration of Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport Terminal 1 . It contains one departure hall in the center , two connection halls , and six departure lounges . close contact , within the reach of the expired jet from infected people [ 26 , 48 ] . Another important transmission path is airborne spreading in poorly ventilated indoor scenarios [ 28 , 38 ] , where pol - luted aerosol can transmit the virus . Besides , the contaminated object surfaces such as doorknobs and handrails can also carry virus [ 49 ] . Facing these challenges , we propose a multi - path disease transmission module optimized for indoor public spaces , which simultaneously considers all the above transmission paths through a high - efficient convolution algorithm in GPU . It supports the simulation of flexible policy interventions in public spaces , providing more intuitions for epidemic control . 3 CONSTRUCTION OF THE SIMULATION SCENARIO : GUANGZHOU BAIYUN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT To set up a realistic scenario for disease simulation in indoor public spaces , we choose the departure hall of an airport as the implementation example , where the high population throughput and com - plex function zones support large - scale simulations . Besides , the strict security check and flight schedules provide accurate information of passenger flow information , enhancing the reliability of the scenario setup . As one of the most bustling aviation hubs in China , Terminal 1 of Guangzhou Baiyun Interna - tional Airport serves more than 70 , 000 departure passengers per day in 50 , 000 square meters . As shown in Figure 2 , it has a central departure hall , two connection halls , and six departure lounges . We label the boundary of the airport manually , which generates a binary matrix of 822 × 922 with boundaries as 1 . Based on the airport map , we further label several function zones according to the real - world airport scenario , including airport entrances , check - in windows , security checks , depar - ture lounges , shops , seats , and rest areas . These function zones are organized into a JSON file with their IDs and boundary polygons . During the simulation , passengers will follow real - world check - in procedures with the aid of these function zones , where passengers first get into the departure hall and check in , then go through the security checks for the destination departure lounges . Furthermore , we collect the flight schedules , passengers’ entry time and their destination de - parture gates as the auxiliary information for simulation , which is used to initialize the state of passengers . They are organized into CSV files , which can be easily correlated with each other to guide the whole simulation process . We also acquire the population distribution by Wi - Fi records in the airport to facilitate trajectory generation in the simulation paradigm . Leveraging these data , ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 7 Table 1 . Acquired Dataset for Disease Simulation Data Description Data Format Example Airport Map The boundary of the airport . Binary matrix of size 822 × 902 , where 1 represents the boundary . ⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣ 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 ⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ FunctionZones The boundary of different regions within the airport . JSON file that records the shape polygon of each zone . “DepartureGate1” : { “ID” : “DE001” , “Coord” : [ ( 10 , 20 ) , ( 10 , 30 ) , ( 40 , 20 ) , ( 40 , 30 ) ] } FlightSchedule Departure time and scheduled departure gate of each flight . CSV file with columns as FlightID , ScheduledTime , ActualTime , GateID CI8522 , 2016 / 9 / 22 03 : 30 , 2016 / 9 / 22 03 : 46 , A103 Entry Time Recorded arrival time of each passenger . CSV file with columns as PassengerID , EntryTime P0001 , 2016 / 9 / 21 13 : 12 : 20 DestinationFlight Recorded flight number of each passenger . CSV file with columns as PassengerID , FlightID P0001 , CZ6732 PopulationDistribution Number of passengers under each Wi - Fi access point . CSV file with columns as WIFIAPID , Coord , Time , Pop W1 - 2C - 6 < W1 - 2 - 06 > , ( 12 , 35 ) , 2016 / 9 / 16 07 : 01 : 01 , 5 we can reproduce trajectories with semantic information for a more reliable simulation , while we also stress that these data are not obligatory . Details of the dataset are available in Table 1 . We build the simulation scenario that maps the physical space into an image array , where each pixel represents a 0 . 8 m × 0 . 8 m square . Each passenger occupies a pixel during the simulation . Function zones are also represented in images , where different values represent different functions . There are 408 Wi - Fi access points distributed in T1 , which records the passenger number in each Wi - Fi region . This information can represent the population distribution in public spaces , which is helpful to reconstruct passenger flows . Our simulation is performed from 8 a . m . to 12 a . m . on September 12 , 2016 , which is a vanilla Monday that does not correspond to any festival . 4 AGENT - BASED INDOOR INFECTION SIMULATION MODEL In this section , we introduce our simulation method . First , in Section 4 . 1 , we describe the real - time mobility generation module that reconstructs individual trajectories with lingering behavior and crowd mobility in the airport . Then in Section 4 . 2 , we introduce a multi - path disease transmission module , where close contact transmission , aerosol transmission and object surface transmission are implanted through a high - efficient convolution algorithm . Besides , we perform backward con - tact tracing [ 21 ] to analyze the source of transmission and the effective reproduction number R t . To evaluate the effectiveness of common intervention policies in the airport , we introduce two types of interventions in Section 4 . 3 . Finally , in Section 4 . 4 , we summarize the whole algorithm for simulation and provide a detailed algorithm table for the simulator . 4 . 1 Individual Trajectory Generation Different from macroscopic models that focus on the transmission timelines in cities or countries , individual transmission patterns are of particular interest in indoor public spaces . It provides us the ability to reconstruct the fine - grained diffusion process in these places , which will be helpful to evaluate the effectiveness of policy interventions . In this work , we modified the social force model [ 16 ] to reconstruct individual trajectories with enhanced reliability and efficiency . The traditional social force model is under the guidance of three forces , including the attractive force of the destination , the pedestrian - obstacle repulsive force , and the pedestrian - pedestrian re - pulsive force , which are demonstrated in Equations ( 1 ) – ( 5 ) . It models the individual behaviors in a simple particle manner , where given no obstacles in the way , each agent will straightly go to the departure lounges . However , passengers in the airport may not directly go to the departure ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 8 Z . Han et al . Fig . 3 . Comparison of reproduced individual trajectories with real - world population distribution . Left : The heatmap of population distribution . Middle : Reconstructed passenger trajectories by traditional social force model . Right : Reconstructed passenger trajectories by our model . The lightness represents the population density . Traditional social force models generate unrealistic trajectories where everyone moves in a straight line toward their destinations . By introducing lingering behavior and crowd mobility , our model generates trajectories with higher quality , where the correlation between reproduced trajectories with ground - truth population distribution is improved by 11 . 84 % . lounges for the long waiting time , where nearby shops or cafes are popular choices . Therefore , the traditional social force model can lead to unexpected trajectories that disobey real - world sce - narios . To depict complicated human mobility behaviors in indoor public spaces , we introduce distribution - guided explorations to the traditional social force model . Specifically , we consider lingering behaviors during trajectory generation , where temporary destinations are generated in function zones like shopping areas and rest areas . The combination of lingering behavior generates crowd mobility , which is essential to capture real - world human mobility . To ensure the reliability of the simulated lingering behavior , we introduce the population distribution as the guidance sig - nal , which is collected from the Wi - Fi access points in the building . The probability of the lingering destination is positively correlated with the nearby population density on the way to the final des - tination , and the time duration of lingering is positively correlated with the difference between the scheduled flight time and the passenger’s arrival time . As demonstrated in Figure 3 , introduc - ing the lingering behavior and crowd mobility greatly increased the quality of the reproduced trajectories , where the correlation between reproduced trajectories and ground - truth population distribution is improved by 11 . 84 % . Another drawback of the traditional social force model is the huge computation complexity . The traditional social force model requires pairwise force calculation between every agent pair and agent - obstacle pair , which yields O ( n 2 t ) complexity . The above feature greatly hinders its ap - plication in large - scale simulation of real - world public spaces . To tackle the above problem , we introduce the local receptive field for each agent , where only nearby agents and obstacles are con - sidered to calculate the repulsive forces . Besides , we use a caching mechanism to store intermediate values in the calculation process , where the coordinates , velocity vectors , vectors between agent coordinates and next destinations are cached for the following calculation . To further accelerate the calculation , we implement the above algorithm by matrix calculation on GPU , which reduces the time consumption by 95 % and achieves a real - time performance . We summarize the trajectory generation process as Equation ( 6 ) shows : tracesList = genTraj ( airportMap , f uncZones , arrivalList , departureList , destList , crowdDist ) . ( 6 ) 4 . 2 Transmission Processes in Indoor Scenario According to the recovered individual trajectory , we can simulate individual - level infection pro - cesses in the airport . Compared with traditional agent - based solutions that only consider close ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 9 contact transmission , we propose a multi - path simulation module of three common transmission processes for indoor scenarios . The disease transmission processes are implemented by a novel convolution - based algorithm , which can leverage the high concurrent capability of GPU to accel - erate the simulation . During the simulation , we implement three disease transmission processes at the individual level , which include close contact transmission [ 26 , 48 ] , aerosol transmission [ 38 ] , and object surface transmission [ 49 ] . When healthy people are at a close distance from infected people , the expired jet flow containing virus may be transmitted to the healthy people . These small liquid particles will be discharged through coughing , sneezing , speaking , singing , or even breathing . Typically , within 1 m distance will cause such kinds of transmission according to the World Health Orga - nization guideline [ 49 ] . When the ventilation is bad , the contaminated air due to the expired jet flow will become aerosol that can spread the disease farther than close contact range . This kind of infection is common in indoor scenarios [ 27 ] , and it is considered one of the main reasons behind superspreading events . Finally , in public spaces such as airports , there are many surfaces that will be touched by many passengers . Seats , escalators , and check - in desks are particularly risky , since they may be contaminated by the virus . When healthy people touch these surfaces , they may also get the disease . To implement the above transmission processes in a high - efficient approach , we design a novel convolution - based algorithm , which is inspired by the real - world diffusion process of gas . As an example , the polluted aerosol will diffuse in a Gaussian process in a no - wind scenario , which can be transformed into a convolution approach with a Gaussian kernel . The convolution process can be easily implemented on GPUs through common deep learning tools , which can greatly increase the efficiency of the algorithm . Specifically , for close contact transmission , we generate a 2D - matrix M tcon ⊂ R m , n that depicts the simulated airport , where m , n depict the size of the airport and t is current timestamp . In matrix M con , locations that consist of infected people are set to 1 . Then , we define a 3 × 3 convolution kernel that diffuses the virus to adjacent locations . By accelerated GPU computation , we will get a matrix that records the change of infection at each location due to close contact . This process is demonstrated in the following equation : M tcon = conv ( genContactMatrix ( 0 , inf ectedList t − 1 ) , ContactKernel ) , ( 7 ) where 0 ⊂ R m , n is a zero matrix , and inf ectedList t maintains the list of infected people at time t in the system . For aerosol transmission , the diffusion pattern of aerosol follows a Gaussian kernel . We con - struct a dedicated 2D - matrix M t aero ⊂ R m , n to depict the aerosol transmission process . At each timestamp , we set locations that contain infected people as 1 in M t aero , then we apply 2D convolu - tion with a Gaussian kernel to update M t aero . Unlike close contact transmission , we preserve the previous matrix to depict the whole diffusion process of the contaminated trace , which is shown in the following equations : M 0 aero = genAeroMatrix ( 0 , inf ectedList 0 ) , ( 8 ) M taero = conv (cid:2) genAeroMatrix (cid:2) M t − 1 aero , inf ectedList t − 1 (cid:3) , GaussianKernel (cid:3) . ( 9 ) To better illustrate this process , refer Figure 4 for details . The aerosol areas will diffuse from positions where infected people have been to , where a longer time will result in larger polluted areas , but with a lower infection rate . To formalize the contact kernel and Gaussian kernel in close contact transmission and aerosol transmission , we demonstrate the kernel design in Figure 5 . For the contact kernel , assuming the central location is occupied by an infected passenger . The locations in her / his adjacency are in the ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 10 Z . Han et al . Fig . 4 . Illustration of the diffusion process of aerosol transmission . When an infected person moves , the exhaled aerosol diffuses in a Gaussian process from the historical trajectory . The area of aerosol will increase over time , while the density of the virus decreases . Color represents the possibility of getting infected in the corresponding area . Fig . 5 . Close contact kernel and Gaussian kernel for close contact transmission and aerosol transmission . For the close contact kernel , the infection risk is reciprocal with the distance to the center . Note that for close contact transmission , the center location is occupied by an infected passenger , while for aerosol transmission , the central location is the historical trajectory of infected passengers . So , we set the center as zero for the close contact kernel . range of close contact , with an infection rate reciprocal to the distance . For example , if the direct adjacent location has an infection risk of 1 , then the diagonal location will have an infection risk as √ 2 . Since the central location is already occupied , we omit the risk in the center . While for the Gaussian kernel for aerosol transmission , the central location is the diffused aerosol of an infected passenger , so the central risk is not 0 . The diffusion of aerosol follows a Gaussian process , which generates the Gaussian distribution in Figure 5 . Here , we normalize the two kernels to provide a uniform meaning . For object surface transmission , we maintain a surface index matrix that labels different kinds of object surfaces at the pixel level . At each timestamp , we traverse the infected list to filter people who stay on the object surface . Then , we generate the object surface matrix M tobj ⊂ R m , n where areas that contain infected people are infectious , as the following equation shows : M 0 obj = genObjMatrix ( 0 , sur f aceIndex , inf ectedList 0 ) , ( 10 ) M tobj = genObjMatrix (cid:2) M t − 1 obj , sur f aceIndex , inf ectedList t − 1 (cid:3) . ( 11 ) After performing the previous steps , we need to combine the infection states of these trans - mission processes and update the infection list . We clip each element in infection matrices M t con , M t aero , M tobj into [ 0 , 1 ] , generating probability matrices ˜ M t con , ˜ M t aero , ˜ M tobj . According to Equation ( 12 ) , P t = 1 − (cid:2) 1 − ˜ M tcon (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:2) 1 − ˜ M taero (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:2) 1 − ˜ M tobj (cid:3) , ( 12 ) where P t depicts the infection probability at each location in the airport , and (cid:7) means Hadamard product . Then for each healthy person , we look up the corresponding element in P t as the criterion ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 11 of infection , which will multiply a discount factor that depicts the age and gender of each passen - ger . We store this demographic information in demoList . Then , we generate a random number to determine whether this person gets infected . This process is depicted according to Equation ( 13 ) : inf ectedList t , healthyList t = updateInfect ( P t , healthyList t − 1 , demoList ) . ( 13 ) In our simulation , we omit the time for the happening of transmission . That means a person will be transmitted immediately if ( s ) he meets the infection criterion . This assumption is made to esti - mate the worst case that can happen . Besides , the transmission possibility will change from time to time in two aspects . First , for aerosol transmission , the range of polluted areas will increase over time , while the transmission possibility will decrease according to the diffusion process . Second , in our simulation , we determine the infection status of people in each timestamp , that is , per 1 s , according to the transmission possibility where ( s ) he locates . Therefore , for a person that stays in locations with high infection risk , the final infection state will follow a binomial distribution , making ( s ) he has a larger possibility to get infected over time . Another important advantage of agent - based simulation is that backward contact tracing can be performed to determine R t and the source of infection . It has been proven that backward contact tracing is important for disease control [ 21 ] , which can be easily simulated through our paradigm . For each newly infected person , we will trace the source of infection to a specific person . According to the infection probability matrices ˜ M tcon , ˜ M taero , ˜ M tobj , we determine how this person get infected . For close contact transmission and aerosol transmission , we find the nearest infected passenger as the source of infection . For object surface infection , since the virus can sustain for a long time and many different infected people may have visited the place , we do not perform backward tracing and simply record the type of infection . To evaluate the severity of transmission , we adopt two matrices as the average exposure ratio E avд and the effective reproduction number R t as follows : E avд = total effective exposures # infected people , ( 14 ) R t = (cid:5) inf ecteds secondary infecteds # infected people . ( 15 ) E avд evaluates the average number of effective exposed causes by each infected person , that is , how many times you met an infected passenger , breathed polluted aerosol , or touch a polluted object surface . R t depicts the transmission ability of the virus . Specifically , it evaluates how many new people can be transmitted per infected person . When R t > 1 , the disease can further transmit to more people and become an epidemic . We will examine the transmission ability in our simulation with previous epidemic research to validate our results . 4 . 3 Implementation of Policy Interventions To evaluate the effectiveness of common public policies to fight against COVID - 19 , we implement several interventions in our simulation paradigm . They can be categorized into two groups : Mo - bility intervention policies and infection intervention policies . We summarize these policies as follows . The mobility intervention policies aim to control passenger trajectories . These policies take place in the mobility generation module in our simulation paradigm . • Lingering Control : Reduce the exploration behavior of passengers . In our implementation , we let the passengers directly go to her / his destination departure gate , rather than going to the shopping areas . In that case , the effective contacts will be greatly reduced . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 12 Z . Han et al . • Increasing Social Distance : Increase the distance between passengers when possible . We in - crease the pedestrian - to - pedestrian repulsive force in the social force model to increase the distance between individuals . • Increasing Walking Speed : Increase the walking speed of passengers by escalators to reduce possible exposures . In our implementation , we simply set the maximum allowed speed to be 1 . 5 times of normal status . In the social force model , the pedestrian speed is not a constant , where an acceleration and deceleration process exists . So by allowing a higher maximum speed , we can easily get a natural simulation result . Another group of policies is infection intervention policies . These policies take place during the infection simulation . They have a clear definition in Section 5 , where we evaluate different scenarios to quantify their effects . • Disinfection Frequency : Change the disinfection frequency of the airport . Currently , public spaces are required to perform disinfection to prevent possible transmissions . We evaluate how the frequency of disinfection affects the disease spreading in the airport . • Input Risk Control : To evaluate different input risks for the airport , we evaluate the infection status given different potential infections that have already been infected before entering the airport . It can be achieved by performing temperature checks and nucleic acid tests for the passengers that hope to get in . 4 . 4 Algorithm Description First , we leverage the individual trajectory generation module to recover the trajectories of airport passengers . With each passenger’s arrival time , departure time and destination departure gate , we can easily recover the basic trajectory . Then according to the crowd distribution given by Wi - Fi records , we further combine lingering behaviors to enhance the generated trajectories , therefore they can obey the group behavior of people and increase the reliability of the results . Then the generated trajectory is supplemented with model completed personal information . According to the age distribution and gender distribution of the population set in the simulation parameters , we randomly assign these demographics to the passengers for the following transmission simulation . Second , we calculate the infection state of each agent in the whole simulation period . We per - form two convolutions to calculate close contact matrix and aerosol matrix M tcon , M taero , and calcu - late object surface transmission to generate M tobj . Then , we generate a unified probability matrix of infection P t as a look - up table and determine the infection status of each individual . Third , we perform backward contact tracing to calculate the distribution of three transmission processes and determine the average exposure ratio E avд and the effective reproduction number R t to quantify the infection status . The above processes are summarized in Algorithm 1 . 5 RESULTS AND EXPERIMENTS In this section , we first introduce the simulation setup , then provide a baseline scenario without any intervention policies to evaluate the reliability of the simulation . Furthermore , we conduct a series of experiments to evaluate how intervention policies affect the transmission pattern in the airport . According to these counterfactual experiments , we can shed light on better public policy designs . 5 . 1 Simulation Setup We map the Terminal 1 of Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport proportionally into a 902 × 822 matrix , where each position corresponds to a 0 . 8 m × 0 . 8 m physical square . We assume each ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 13 ALGORITHM 1 : : Agent - based Indoor Infection Simulation Require : Airport map airportMap , function zone labels f uncZones , arrival time list arrivalList , departure time departureList , destination gates destList , crowd distribution crowdDist Ensure : 1 : Initialize airport map matrix airportMap 2 : / * Generate Individual Trajectory * / 3 : tracesList = genTraj ( airportMap , f uncZones , arrivalList , departureList , destList , crowdDist ) 4 : / * Infection Simulation * / 5 : Initialize infection list inf ectList 0 by initial inf ection ratio 6 : Initialize demographic list demoList that contains age and gender for each passenger 7 : Initialize time points of disinfection disInf List 8 : for t = 0 to T do 9 : / * Get Current Passengers in the Airport Scenario * / 10 : currPassenдers = getCurrentPassengers ( tracesList , t ) 11 : healthyList t = currPassenдers − inf ectList t / * calculate difference set * / 12 : / * No Disinfection * / 13 : if t not in disInf List then 14 : / * Close Contact Transmission * / 15 : M tcon = conv ( genContactMatrix ( 0 , inf ectedList t − 1 ) , ContactKernel ) 16 : / * Aerosol Transmission * / 17 : M taero = conv ( genAeroMatrix ( M t − 1 aero , inf ectedList t − 1 ) , GaussianKernel ) 18 : / * Object Surface Transmission * / 19 : M tobj = genObjMatrix ( M t − 1 obj , surf aceIndex , inf ectedList t − 1 ) 20 : else 21 : / * With Disinfection * / 22 : / * Close Contact Transmission * / 23 : M tcon = conv ( genContactMatrix ( 0 , inf ectedList t − 1 ) , ContactKernel ) 24 : / * No Aerosol Transmission * / 25 : / * No Object Surface Transmission * / 26 : end if 27 : / * Summarize Probability Matrix * / 28 : ˜ M tcon , ˜ M taero , ˜ M tobj = clip ( M tcon , M taero , M tobj , 0 , 1 ) 29 : / * Calculate Infection Probability for Each Location * / 30 : P t = 1 − ( 1 − ˜ M tcon ) (cid:7) ( 1 − ˜ M taero ) (cid:7) ( 1 − ˜ M tobj ) 31 : inf ectedList t , healthyList t = updateInfect ( P t , healthyList t − 1 , demoList ) 32 : end for 33 : / * Backward Propagation * / 34 : secondInf ect = traceInf ( inf ectedList t , inf ectedList t − 1 , traceList ) 35 : closeCount , aeroCount , objCount = traceProcess ( inf ectedList t , inf ectedList t − 1 , traceList , f uncZones ) 36 : / * Calculate Metrics * / passenger exclusively occupies a single position in the matrix . For the simulation time period , we select a normal Monday , which does not correspond to any festival . Specifically , we perform all the simulations from 8 a . m . to 12 a . m . on September 12 , 2016 . It reflects normal commuting flow in the airport , which will be helpful to understand the transmission pattern in a defenseless scenario . According to our individual trajectory generation module , we reconstruct all the passenger flows in the selected time window . Note that we omit historical passengers who already get into the airport before the simulation , and we also ignore other non - passenger people such as airport employees . There are 11 , 809 passengers during the simulation , which acts as a lower boundary in this scenario . All the passengers have valid anonymous records that depict the real entry time , leave time and destination departure gate . Combined with Wi - Fi enhanced group distribution , we can trustfully reconstruct their trajectories in the airport . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 14 Z . Han et al . Table 2 . Mobility and Epidemiological Parameters of Our Proposed Simulation Paradigm Name Description Value Source Walking Speed Individual’s moving speed in the airport . 0 . 7 ∼ 1 . 5 m / s References [ 8 , 19 ] . Social Force Strength The strength of repulsive force between passengers . It is used to implement social distancing policy . 1 . 5 ∼ 4 Reference [ 16 ] and explored by experiments . Initial Infection Ratio Percentage of already infected people that enter the simulation . 5 % ∼ 20 % Explored by experiments . Close Contact Distance Effective range of close contact . 0 . 8 m Reference [ 49 ] . Age Distribution Passengers’ age distribution in the airport . See Figure 6 References [ 33 , 34 ] and explored by experiments . Age - Dependant Infection Rate Infection rate of different age groups for COVID - 19 . See Figure 7 References [ 7 , 42 ] . GenderDistribution Passengers’ gender distribution in the airport . 0 . 5 Explored by experiments . Gender - DependantInfectionRateRatio Infection rate ratio of males / females for COVID - 19 . 2 : 1 References [ 7 , 42 ] . DisinfectionFrequency Frequency of disinfection in the airport . It will clean all aerosol and surface object transmission for some time 30 / 60 / 90 / 120 / ∞ min Explored by experiments . ConvolutionKernelofCloseContact 3 × 3 convolution kernel that diffuse the virus from adjacent locations . See Figure 5 ( left ) Human design with clear physicalmeaning . ConvolutionKernelofAerosolTransmission 3 × 3 convolution kernel that follows 2D - Gaussian distribution . See Figure 5 ( right ) Human design with clear physicalmeaning . To build a simulation setup that best follows the real - world transmission patterns , we inves - tigate important parameters summarized in Table 2 . These parameters can be divided into two groups : One for trajectory generation , another for disease transmission . For trajectory generation , we set the walking speed and social force strength according to existing research [ 8 , 16 ] . For disease transmission , we determine the close contact distance according to the WHO guideline on social distancing [ 49 ] , which is 0 . 8 m . Therefore , only two adjacent passengers during the simulation have a chance to transmit the virus through the close contact process . Considering the varying in - fection rates and mortality rates for passengers with different demographics , we determine the age distribution and gender distribution through studies in airport scenarios [ 33 , 34 ] and set the age dis - tribution as shown in Figure 6 . Specifically , we consider the age distributions in 10 - year age groups to meet the statistics about age - dependent infection rates according to epidemic research [ 7 , 42 ] . We assume the gender distribution of passengers follows a 1 : 1 ratio , where males have a higher infection rate according to the statistics about COVID - 19 patients . For the implementation of dif - ferent transmission paths , we leverage the convolution process with different kernels to facilitate a high - efficient algorithm ( see Section 4 . 2 for details ) . The clear physical meaning of these con - volution kernels guarantees the design , where the close contact kernel selects the neighborhood passengers and the aerosol kernel diffuses the polluted aerosol in a Gaussian diffusion process . Note that the numerical scale of the values does not affect the transmission process , where the age - dependent infection rates are used to normalize the final infection state of each passenger . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 15 Fig . 6 . Age distribution of airport travelers . We con - sider the demographics of people in the airport in 10 - year age groups from 10 – 20 to 70 – 80 . Fig . 7 . Age - aware infection ratesfor COVID - 19 . Ac - cording to epidemiological research , elder people have a much higher risk facing COVID - 19 . Table 3 . Simulation Results for Real - world Scenarios Total Infection Newly Infection Close Contact Aerosol ObjectSurface E avд R t Number 4718 ± 58 3518 ± 52 239 ± 7 3517 ± 52 208 ± 16 1 . 28 ± 0 . 02 2 . 65 ± 0 . 10 Percentage 39 . 95 ± 0 . 49 % 29 . 79 ± 0 . 44 % 2 . 02 ± 0 . 06 % 29 . 78 ± 0 . 44 % 1 . 76 ± 0 . 14 % Mean values and standard deviations are provided . For each experiment setup , we perform five runs with randomized initial conditions to avoid the influence of small probability events . 5 . 2 Baseline Scenario To evaluate the correctness of the simulation results , we build a baseline scenario without any pol - icy interventions to mimic real - world scenarios in the early stage of COVID - 19 , where extensive empirical studies have provided valuable empirical metrics . We summarize the simulation results without any policy interventions in Table 3 . During this simulation , there are 1 , 180 ( 10 % ) input passengers as initial infected people , which finally cause 39 . 95 % of infections . Here , the total in - fection includes the people getting infected before entering the airport . While new infection only considers the infections that happened during the simulation period . As quantitative metrics , we calculate E avд and R t to evaluate our simulation . We find that our simulated E avд = 1 . 28 , which means each infected passenger will cause 1 . 28 times of effective ex - posures to healthy people on average . For the calculation of R t , considering the limited simulation time ( 4 h ) , we normalize it to cover the whole infectious period as the following equation : R t = (cid:5) inf ecteds secondary infecteds # infected people × 2 × 14 , ( 16 ) where we assume each infected people can transmit the virus for 8 h in a day according to the regular working period , and the infectious period is 14 days according to epidemiological re - search [ 11 , 50 ] . Based on our simulation , we have R t = 2 . 65 , which can be viewed as the upper bound of real - world R t , since the airport scenario is more risky than real - world life . Our simulated R t lies in the range of statistic data where Beijing has R t = 1 . 88 , Hong Kong has 1 . 70 , Singapore has 1 . 63 [ 50 ] , and the estimated highest value of 5 . 7 [ 44 ] . It suggests the effectiveness of our simulation paradigm , which can trustfully reconstruct the real - world transmission scenario . For the implemented three transmission processes , we trace the exposed history of each newly infected people and summarize in Figure 8 ( left ) . We find that aerosol transmission is of great ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 16 Z . Han et al . Fig . 8 . Effect of different transmission processes toward disease transmission in the airport . Left : Source of transmission for newly infected people . For each of the infection events during the simulation , we trace the historical contacts with different sources as close contact with infected people , exposure to polluted aerosol , and touching object surface that contains the virus . Note that one infected person can be exposed to different kinds of infection sources . Right : Timeline of the total number of infections . disease transmission demonstrates a linear increasing pattern . the error bar and shadowed area represent 99 % of confidential intervals . importance , where nearly all infected people have been exposed to the polluted aerosol . For close contact transmission and object surface transmission , they only account for 6 . 81 % and 5 . 90 % trans - mission . It indicates the importance of ventilation in indoor public spaces . Note that a single pas - senger can be influenced by different transmission processes , therefore , the sum of close contacts , aerosol and object surface transmission is greater than the 1 . To investigate the infection timeline , we record the cumulative number of total infected passen - gers and initially infected passengers in Figure 8 ( right ) . The increasing pattern follows a linear form , as shown in the blue line . It demonstrates a similar pattern with Mo et al . [ 37 ] , and the un - derlying reason might be we focus on the early stage of the transmission when the exponential growth approximates a linear function . It suggests that disease transmission in the airport is far from saturation , where a stronger virus or a more crowded population can easily lead to more infections . 5 . 3 Effectiveness of Mobility Intervention Policies To face the challenge of COVID - 19 , most countries have adopted strong intervention policies to control disease spreading , which are proven to be very effective [ 12 , 24 ] . In this section , we aim to investigate the effectiveness of common mobility intervention policies in the airport to provide quantitative analyses , which can shed light on better policy design . Unlike the simulation results in the last section where the sudden strike of COVID - 19 appears in an unsuspecting manner , we investigate three common mobility intervention policies in the airport to tackle the spreading virus . Increasing social distance policy will enlarge the distance between each passenger , which will be beneficial to defense close contact transmission and aerosol transmission . Increasing walking speed will leverage the escalators to increase the walking speed of people , which can reduce the time duration in the airport . Lingering control will reduce the exploration behaviors of passengers , such as visiting stores and cafes in the terminal building . This policy can reduce non - necessary exposure to the virus while maintaining the normal function of the airport . We maintain all the other parameters and only change mobility interventions during the sim - ulation as a comparison study , which yields Figure 9 ( left ) . We investigate the relative newly ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 17 Fig . 9 . Effectiveness of mobility interventions . Left : Relative number of newly infected people compared with no interventions . The most effective intervention is lingering control , while increasing social distance and increasing walking speed have a similar effect . Right : Timeline of new infections for different mobility controls . increasing social distance will cause longer waiting time when performing security checks , resulting in a higher infection than baseline . The error bar and shadowed area represent 99 % of confidential intervals . infected people between baseline scenario in Section 5 . 2 with these mobility interventions , where increasing social distance and increasing walking speed results in 15 . 15 % and 18 . 02 % fewer infec - tions , respectively . These two interventions have nearly equal effects in regard to disease control . However , lingering control demonstrates a much stronger benefit that achieves 32 . 35 % fewer in - fections . It suggests that we can achieve a good balance between efficiency and disease control at the same time , where controlling random exploration behaviors plays an important role . Finally , we examine the combined effect of these mobility interventions . It only results in 47 . 90 % of infec - tions compared with the baseline scenario . These simulations highlight the importance of mobility interventions in airports , which can effectively reduce the number of infections . To understand the temporal pattern of disease transmission under these mobility interventions , we summarize the cumulative infected people in Figure 9 ( right ) . Increasing walking speed , linger - ing control , and the all combined strategy follow a linear increasing pattern , while increasing social distance cause more infections at the beginning of the transmission . When passengers enter the airport and begin check in , a high social distance may cause extra waiting times and slow the pro - cessing speed . Similarly , when passengers go through security checks or narrow paths , stronger social distancing will extend the waiting time of each passenger . This effect contributes to the con - cave increasing pattern . Even though , increasing social distance still results in much less infection than the baseline scenario . In conclusion , we evaluate three common mobility intervention policies in the airport scenario , which have been proved to be effective . A great balance can be achieved between efficiency and disease control by these mobility interventions . 5 . 4 Effectiveness of Infection Probability Intervention Policies In this section , we focus on interventions for controlling the infection probability in the airport . Specifically , we investigate the disinfection frequency and input risks of the airport scenario . First , we can apply more frequent disinfection in the airport . It may reduce the virus in the air and object surfaces . Second , the airport can also introduce temperature checks to prevent infected passengers from entering the airport . We quantitatively evaluate these interventions to provide a better understanding of transmission control in public spaces . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 18 Z . Han et al . Fig . 10 . Effectiveness of disinfection with disease transmission . Left : Relative number of newly infected peo - ple compared with no disinfection . Increasing the disinfection frequency will not greatly change the number of infections due to the continuously coming input cases . Right : Timeline of new infections under different disinfection frequencies . The error bar and shadowed area represent 99 % of confidential intervals . 5 . 4 . 1 Disinfection Frequency . During the epidemic , many different interventions that aim to weaken the spreading ability of the virus have been conducted , such as compulsory mask - wearing , strengthening ventilation , and so on . Here , we simulate one common intervention in the airport scenario , which performs disinfection in the whole scene for all the object areas and air . This is an enhanced disinfection policy , since we cannot perform mass - scale air disinfection when public places are still functioning . In Figure 10 ( left ) , we conduct a series of simulations of different disinfection frequencies . We find that performing disinfection per 120 min can only reduce 3 . 33 % of infections compared with no disinfection . Besides , increasing the disinfection frequency from 120 to 30 min only has a 15 . 71 % gain . From Figure 10 ( right ) , we can find that the general transmission patterns under intervention do not receive great influence . We find that with no control over the source of infection , only performing disinfection has a limited effect to mitigate disease transmission in highly crowded public places such as airports . 5 . 4 . 2 Input Risks . Most public spaces only perform as a bridge that connects healthy people with infected people during the transmission process . This property highlights the importance of input risk control , which determines how many infected people can get into public places . Most public places have implemented temperature checks before entering , which is an example of input risk control policies . Here , we explore how the proportion of initially infected people affects disease transmission . Figure 11 ( left ) demonstrates the correlation between newly infected people and the percentage of initially infected people in the airport . Surprisingly , more initially infected people cause fewer new infections . We find that 5 % of initial infected people cause more new infections than 20 % , and the trend of change is in a monotone order ( although the percentage of change is limited ) . From Figure 11 ( right ) , we find that the increasing patterns are almost the same . More initial infected people reduce the possible transmission in the airport , resulting in this phenomenon . It indicates that a significant superspreading effect exists during the simulation , where a small percent of infected people cause lots of secondary infections . Combining with the disinfection simulations in the last section , we highlight the importance of implementing strict input risk control for indoor public spaces when facing strong contagious viruses such as COVID - 19 . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 19 Fig . 11 . Effectiveness of controlling input infections . Left : Relative number of newly infected people com - pared with 10 % of input infections . Right : Timeline of new infections under different percents of input infec - tions . The error bar and shadowed area represent 99 % of confidential intervals . 6 DISCUSSION 6 . 1 Research Implications The sudden strike of COVID - 19 pandemic tears the research community into two pieces : On the one hand , public health researchers and epidemiologists put forward effective non - pharmaceutical interventions to slow down the pace of the pandemic ; on the other hand , the cost - benefit evalua - tions of these proposed interventions received disproportionately less research attention . As time goes by , the disadvantages of these interventions emerge , which greatly affect the economy and society . Therefore , understanding the disease transmission patterns in public spaces is of critical importance to strike a balance between epidemic control and social costs . Existing agent - based models cannot trustfully evaluate policy interventions in public spaces for two reasons . First , the simple rules for simulating individual trajectories fail to capture the emer - gence of crowd behaviors , which is a non - negligible factor in disease spreading . Second , existing methods only consider person - to - person contact for transmission , which cannot depict the abun - dant aerosol transmission and object surface transmission in indoor public spaces . To tackle these challenges , we design a novel disease simulator with realistic individual mobility and transmission processes for large - scale indoor public spaces . For individual mobility generation , we introduce lingering behavior and crowd mobility , which successfully increases quality of reproduced trajec - tories by 11 . 84 % . Moreover , by introducing the local receptive field and caching mechanism on a GPU implementation , the time consumption is greatly reduced by 95 % . Second , for disease trans - mission modeling , we propose a multi - path disease transmission module that considers three main transmission processes in indoor public spaces , which leverages a convolution - based algorithm to achieve a high - efficient computation on GPUs . Based on the proposed disease simulator , we quantitatively evaluate common policy interven - tions in the airport scenario , where several novel observations emerge . First , we find that the time - line of transmission follows a linear pattern , which coincides with the findings of Mo et al . [ 37 ] . Public transportation has a high passenger throughput , where the contact duration between pas - sengers is short . Therefore , the transmission process focuses on the early stage , where the expo - nential growth approximates a linear function . It is a fundamental feature of public transportation systems in disease transmission , which differs from other scenarios . Second , by introducing lin - gering behavior and crowd mobility to the individual mobility module , our simulator can evaluate ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 20 Z . Han et al . Fig . 12 . System interface of our proposed simulator . Top : Real - time population heatmap of the simulated population flow . We can choose a passenger to see the simulated trajectories on the map , and evaluate the passenger information in the right panel . Bottom : Epidemic simulation under various interventions . We can change the policy interventions through the top buttons , where the real - time infection status of passengers is denoted as different colors on the map . We can overlay different function zones on the map to evaluate their risk level . The right panel provides an aggregated number of exposure and infections . group - level intervention policies , which is not possible for existing methods . We find that lingering control is the most effective policy among all the implemented mobility interventions , demonstrat - ing the importance of introducing crowd mobility to the simulation algorithm . On the contrary , our results show that individual - level social distancing policy might hinder epidemic control in queuing process , causing longer waiting time and more infections . Third , through the analyses of the transmission processes , we highlight the importance of aerosol transmission , which is the most important transmission pathway in indoor public spaces . Therefore , we call for high - efficient ven - tilation in these scenarios . Finally , we observe a counter - intuitive phenomenon that given fewer initial infected passengers , the number of newly infected people increases . It confirms a strong superspreading phenomenon in our simulation , where the number of infections is limited by the number of healthy people . Therefore , a stronger virus or a more crowded population can easily cause more infections . The superspreading phenomenon is rooted in the heterogeneity of human mobility [ 29 ] , which further highlights the importance of high - quality mobility generation . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 21 6 . 2 System Application We have developed a system interface that integrates all of the proposed algorithms for users , which is shown in Figure 12 . The interface is implemented as a web page , which invokes the algo - rithm backend and performs visualization . First , the interface can demonstrate the distribution of reconstructed trajectories as the heatmap in Figure 12 ( left ) . Furthermore , as shown in Figure 12 ( right ) , the interface can demonstrate the infection status and detailed information for each simu - lated passenger , providing a thorough contact tracing tool for understanding the disease spreading manner . It can also present a statistical result of infection status , which is helpful to quantify dif - ferent policy interventions . 6 . 3 Limitations and Future Works Although we take great efforts to increase the reliability of the simulation , several limitations still exist for future work . First , we only implemented one indoor public space due to limited data , which is Terminal 1 of Guangzhou Baiyun International Airport . In that case , we cannot cross - validate between different scenes . The transmission patterns may vary in airports , subway stations and shopping centers , even for the same virus . Future works can explore the transmission patterns in more scenarios to provide a more comprehensive understanding . Second , the simulated inter - ventions are limited in this work . We implement three mobility interventions and three infection interventions , while more complicated policies still exist . We can implement more realistic poli - cies in future works , which can provide more thorough analyses . Third , our simulator relies on epidemic research to determine model parameters , which limits the adaption to newly emerging diseases . We can implement optimization ability into the model to search parameters from existing cases to enhance its availability . 7 CONCLUSION In this work , we propose an individual mobility - based disease transmission model that aims to reconstruct the transmission patterns in public spaces . For individual mobility generation , we improve both the simulation quality and efficiency of traditional agent - based mobility simulation methods . By introducing lingering behavior and crowd mobility , our algorithm increases the correlation between reproduced trajectories and ground truth by 11 . 84 % . Moreover , we optimize the algorithm efficiency by introducing the local receptive field and caching mechanism , which , combined with matrix implementation on GPUs , successfully reduces the time consumption by 95 % . For disease transmission modeling , we propose a multi - path disease transmission module optimized for indoor public spaces , which includes three transmission processes that happen in indoor scenarios : Close contact transmission , aerosol transmission , and object surface transmis - sion . Inspired by the real - world diffusion process , we use a novel convolution - based algorithm leveraging the high concurrent capability of GPUs to accelerate the transmission simulation . Our framework facilitates the understanding of disease transmission patterns in public spaces , providing quantitative evaluations in an efficient manner . CODE AVAILABILITY The code for this work is available online https : / / github . com / 0oshowero0 / DiseaseSimulationInP ublicSpaces . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Matthew Abueg , Robert Hinch , Neo Wu , Luyang Liu , William Probert , Austin Wu , Paul Eastham , Yusef Shafi , Matt Rosencrantz , Michael Dikovsky et al . 2021 . Modeling the effect of exposure notification and non - pharmaceutical interventions on COVID - 19 transmission in Washington state . NPJ Dig . Med . 4 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 10 . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 22 Z . Han et al . [ 2 ] Duygu Balcan , Vittoria Colizza , Bruno Gonçalves , Hao Hu , José J . Ramasco , and Alessandro Vespignani . 2009 . Mul - tiscale mobility networks and the spatial spreading of infectious diseases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 51 ( 2009 ) , 21484 – 21489 . [ 3 ] Albert - László Barabási and Réka Albert . 1999 . Emergence of scaling in random networks . Science 286 , 5439 ( 1999 ) , 509 – 512 . [ 4 ] Tiziana Campisi , Socrates Basbas , Muhhamad Ahmad Al - Rashid , Giovanni Tesoriere , Georgios Georgiadis et al . 2021 . A region - wide survey on emotional and psychological impacts of COVID - 19 on public transport choices in Sicily , Italy . Trans . Transp . Sci 2 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 10 . [ 5 ] Serina Chang , Emma Pierson , Pang Wei Koh , Jaline Gerardin , Beth Redbird , David Grusky , and Jure Leskovec . 2021 . Mobility network models of COVID - 19 explain inequities and inform reopening . Nature 589 , 7840 ( 2021 ) , 82 – 87 . [ 6 ] Vittoria Colizza , Alain Barrat , Marc Barthelemy , Alain - Jacques Valleron , and Alessandro Vespignani . 2007 . Modeling the worldwide spread of pandemic influenza : Baseline case and containment interventions . PLOS Med . 4 , 1 ( 01 2007 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pmed . 0040013 [ 7 ] Nicholas G . Davies , Petra Klepac , Yang Liu , Kiesha Prem , Mark Jit , and Rosalind M . Eggo . 2020 . Age - dependent effects in the transmission and control of COVID - 19 epidemics . Nature Med . 26 , 8 ( 2020 ) , 1205 – 1211 . [ 8 ] Hongyu Deng , Dongheng Zhang , Yang Hu , and Yan Chen . 2020 . Estimating indoor human speed via radio signals . In Proceedings of the IEEE Global Communications Conference ( GLOBECOM’20 ) . IEEE , 1 – 6 . [ 9 ] Zhanwei Du , Lin Wang , Songwei Shan , Dickson Lam , Tim K . Tsang , Jingyi Xiao , Huizhi Gao , Bingyi Yang , Sheikh Taslim Ali , Sen Pei et al . 2022 . Pandemic fatigue impedes mitigation of COVID - 19 in Hong Kong . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 119 , 48 ( 2022 ) , e2213313119 . [ 10 ] Paul Erdos , Alfréd Rényi et al . 1960 . On the evolution of random graphs . Publ . Math . Inst . Hung . Acad . Sci 5 , 1 ( 1960 ) , 17 – 60 . [ 11 ] Luca Ferretti , Chris Wymant , Michelle Kendall , Lele Zhao , Anel Nurtay , Lucie Abeler - Dörner , Michael Parker , David Bonsall , and Christophe Fraser . 2020 . Quantifying SARS - CoV - 2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing . Science 368 , 6491 ( 2020 ) , eabb6936 . [ 12 ] Seth Flaxman , Swapnil Mishra , Axel Gandy , H . Juliette , T . Unwin , Thomas A . Mellan , Helen Coupland , Charles Whit - taker , Harrison Zhu , Tresnia Berah , Jeffrey W . Eaton et al . 2020 . Estimating the effects of non - pharmaceutical inter - ventions on COVID - 19 in Europe . Nature 584 , 7820 ( 2020 ) , 257 – 261 . [ 13 ] Marko Gosak , Maja Duh , Rene Markovič , and Matjaz Perc . 2021 . Community lockdowns in social networks hardly mitigate epidemic spreading . New J . Phys . 23 , 4 ( 2021 ) , 043039 . [ 14 ] Jeffrey E . Harris . 2020 . The Subways Seeded the Massive Coronavirus Epidemic in New York City . Working Paper 27021 . National Bureau of Economic Research . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3386 / w27021 [ 15 ] Dirk Helbing , Illés Farkas , and Tamas Vicsek . 2000 . Simulating dynamical features of escape panic . Nature 407 , 6803 ( 2000 ) , 487 – 490 . [ 16 ] Dirk Helbing and Peter Molnar . 1995 . Social force model for pedestrian dynamics . Phys . Rev . E 51 , 5 ( 1995 ) , 4282 . [ 17 ] Sean Jewell , Joseph Futoma , Lauren Hannah , Andrew C . Miller , Nicholas J . Foti , and Emily B . Fox . 2021 . It’s compli - cated : Characterizing the time - varying relationship between cell phone mobility and COVID - 19 spread in the US . NPJ Dig . Med . 4 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 152 . [ 18 ] Jayson S . Jia , Xin Lu , Yun Yuan , Ge Xu , Jianmin Jia , and Nicholas A . Christakis . 2020 . Population flow drives spatio - temporal distribution of COVID - 19 in China . Nature 582 , 7812 ( 2020 ) , 389 – 394 . [ 19 ] Hyun Gu Kang and Jonathan B . Dingwell . 2008 . Separating the effects of age and walking speed on gait variability . Gait Post . 27 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 572 – 577 . [ 20 ] Jooyoung Kim , Chiwon Ahn , and Seungjae Lee . 2018 . Modeling handicapped pedestrians considering physical char - acteristics using cellular automaton . Physica A : Stat . Mech . Appl . 510 ( 2018 ) , 507 – 517 . [ 21 ] Sadamori Kojaku , Laurent Hebert - Dufresne , Enys Mones , Sune Lehmann , and Yong - Yeol Ahn . 2021 . The effectiveness of backward contact tracing in networks . Nature Phys . 17 , 5 ( MAY 2021 ) , 652 + . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41567 - 021 - 01187 - 2 [ 22 ] Moritz U . G . Kraemer , Chia - Hung Yang , Bernardo Gutierrez , Chieh - Hsi Wu , Brennan Klein , David M . Pigott , Open COVID - 19 Data Working Group† , Louis du Plessis , Nuno R . Faria , Ruoran Li et al . 2020 . The effect of human mobility and control measures on the COVID - 19 epidemic in China . Science 368 , 6490 ( 2020 ) , 493 – 497 . [ 23 ] Donggyun Ku , Chihyung Yeon , Seungjae Lee , Kyuhong Lee , Kiyeon Hwang , Yuen Chong Li , and Sze Chun Wong . 2021 . Safe traveling in public transport amid COVID - 19 . Sci . Adv . 7 , 43 ( 2021 ) , eabg3691 . [ 24 ] ShengjieLai , NickW . Ruktanonchai , LiangcaiZhou , OliviaProsper , WeiLuo , JessicaR . Floyd , AmyWesolowski , Mauri - cio Santillana , Chi Zhang , Xiangjun Du et al . 2020 . Effect of non - pharmaceutical interventions to contain COVID - 19 in China . Nature 585 , 7825 ( 2020 ) , 410 – 413 . [ 25 ] Thien - Minh Le , Louis Raynal , Octavious Talbot , Hali Hambridge , Christopher Drovandi , Antonietta Mira , Kerrie Mengersen , and Jukka - Pekka Onnela . 2022 . Framework for assessing and easing global COVID - 19 travel restrictions . Sci . Rep . 12 , 1 ( 2022 ) , 1 – 13 . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . Disease Simulation in Airport Scenario Based on Individual Mobility Model 84 : 23 [ 26 ] JosephHun - weiLee , VincentChu , andVincentH . Chu . 2003 . TurbulentJetsandPlumes : ALagrangianApproach . Vol . 1 . Springer Science & Business Media . [ 27 ] Dyani Lewis . 2021 . COVID - 19 rarely spreads through surfaces . So why are we still deep cleaning . Nature 590 , 7844 ( 2021 ) , 26 – 28 . [ 28 ] Dyani Lewis . 2021 . Superspreading drives the COVID pandemic - and could help to tame it . Nature 590 , 7847 ( 2021 ) , 544 – 546 . [ 29 ] James O . Lloyd - Smith , Sebastian J . Schreiber , P . Ekkehard Kopp , and Wayne M . Getz . 2005 . Superspreading and the effect of individual variation on disease emergence . Nature 438 , 7066 ( 2005 ) , 355 – 359 . [ 30 ] Lars Lorch , Heiner Kremer , William Trouleau , Stratis Tsirtsis , Aron Szanto , Bernhard Schölkopf , and Manuel Gomez - Rodriguez . 2020 . Quantifying the effects of contact tracing , testing , and containment . Retrieved from https : / / arxiv . or g / abs / 2004 . 07641 . [ 31 ] Benjamin F . Maier and Dirk Brockmann . 2020 . Effective containment explains subexponential growth in recent con - firmed COVID - 19 cases in China . Science 368 , 6492 ( 2020 ) , 742 – 746 . [ 32 ] Dasha Majra , Jayme Benson , Jennifer Pitts , and Justin Stebbing . 2021 . SARS - CoV - 2 ( COVID - 19 ) superspreader events . J . Infect . 82 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 36 – 40 . [ 33 ] E . Mazareanu . Age distribution of air passengers in the United Kingdom ( UK ) in 2019 , by airport . Retrieved from https : / / www . statista . com / statistics / 304641 / age - distribution - of - air - passengers - by - airport - uk / . [ 34 ] E . Mazareanu . Distribution of passengers at Copenhagen Airport in 2019 , by age group . Retrieved from https : / / www . statista . com / statistics / 802883 / distribution - of - passengers - at - copenhagen - airport - in - denmark - by - age - group / . [ 35 ] Tigist F . Menkir , Taylor Chin , James A . Hay , Erik D . Surface , Pablo M . De Salazar , Caroline O . Buckee , Alexander Watts , Kamran Khan , Ryan Sherbo , Ada W . C . Yan et al . 2021 . Estimating internationally imported cases during the early COVID - 19 pandemic . Nature Commun . 12 , 1 ( 2021 ) , 311 . [ 36 ] Susan Michie , Robert West , and Nigel Harvey . 2020 . The concept of “fatigue” in tackling COVID - 19 . bmj 371 ( 2020 ) . [ 37 ] Baichuan Mo , Kairui Feng , Yu Shen , Clarence Tam , Daqing Li , Yafeng Yin , and Jinhua Zhao . 2021 . Modeling epidemic spreading through public transit using time - varying encounter network . Transport . Res . Part C : Emerg . Technol . 122 ( 2021 ) , 102893 . [ 38 ] Lidia Morawska , Julian W . Tang , William Bahnfleth , Philomena M . Bluyssen , Atze Boerstra , Giorgio Buonanno , Junji Cao , Stephanie Dancer , Andres Floto , Francesco Franchimon , Charles Haworth , Jaap Hogeling , Christina Isaxon , JoseL . Jimenez , JarekKurnitski , YuguoLi , MarcelLoomans , GuyMarks , LinseyC . Marr , LivioMazzarella , ArsenKrikor Melikov , Shelly Miller , Donald K . Milton , William Nazaroff , Peter Nielsen , V , Catherine Noakes , Jordan Peccia , Xavier Querol , Chandra Sekhar , Olli Seppanen , Shin - ichi Tanabe , Raymond Tellier , Kwok Wai Tham , Pawel Wargocki , Aneta Wierzbicka , and Maosheng Yao . 2020 . How can airborne transmission of COVID - 19 indoors be minimised ? Environ . Int . 142 ( Sep . 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . envint . 2020 . 105832 [ 39 ] Gage K . Moreno , Katarina M . Braun , Kasen K . Riemersma , Michael A . Martin , Peter J . Halfmann , Chelsea M . Crooks , Trent Prall , David Baker , John J . Baczenas , Anna S . Heffron et al . 2020 . Revealing fine - scale spatiotemporal differences in SARS - Cov - 2 introduction and spread . Nature Commun . 11 , 5558 ( 2020 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 40 ] Charles Murphy , Edward Laurence , and Antoine Allard . 2021 . Deep learning of contagion dynamics on complex networks . Nature Commun . 12 , 4720 ( 2021 ) , 1 – 11 . [ 41 ] Qiang Niu , Wanxian Wu , Jie Shen , Jiaxin Huang , and Qiling Zhou . 2021 . Relationship between built environment and COVID - 19 dispersal based on age stratification : A case study of Wuhan . Int . J . Environ . Res . Public Health 18 , 14 ( 2021 ) , 7563 . [ 42 ] Megan O’Driscoll , Gabriel Ribeiro Dos Santos , Lin Wang , Derek A . T . Cummings , Andrew S . Azman , Juliette Paireau , Arnaud Fontanet , Simon Cauchemez , and Henrik Salje . 2021 . Age - specific mortality and immunity patterns of SARS - Cov - 2 . Nature 590 , 7844 ( 2021 ) , 140 – 145 . [ 43 ] Francisco Calderón Peralvo , Patricia Cazorla Vanegas , and Elina Avila - Ordóñez . 2022 . A systematic review of COVID - 19 transport policies and mitigation strategies around the globe . Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 15 , ( 2022 ) , 100653 . [ 44 ] Steven Sanche , Yen Ting Lin , Chonggang Xu , Ethan Romero - Severson , Nick Hengartner , and Ruian Ke . 2020 . High contagiousness and rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 7 ( 2020 ) , 1470 – 1477 . [ 45 ] Lijun Sun , Kay W . Axhausen , Der - Horng Lee , and Xianfeng Huang . 2013 . Understanding metropolitan patterns of daily encounters . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 34 ( 2013 ) , 13774 – 13779 . [ 46 ] Russell M . Viner , Simon J . Russell , Helen Croker , Jessica Packer , Joseph Ward , Claire Stansfield , Oliver Mytton , Chris Bonell , and Robert Booy . 2020 . School closure and management practices during coronavirus outbreaks including COVID - 19 : A rapid systematic review . Lancet Child Adolesc . Health 4 , 5 ( 2020 ) , 397 – 404 . [ 47 ] John Von Neumann , Arthur W . Burks et al . 1966 . Theory of self - reproducing automata . IEEE Trans . Neural Netw . 5 , 1 ( 1966 ) , 3 – 14 . ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 . 84 : 24 Z . Han et al . [ 48 ] Jianjian Wei and Yuguo Li . 2016 . Airborne spread of infectious agents in the indoor environment . Amer . J . Infect . Control 44 , 9 ( 2016 ) , S102 – S108 . [ 49 ] World Health Organization . 2020 . Coronavirus disease ( COVID - 19 ) : How is it transmitted . Retrieved from https : / / www . who . int / emergencies / diseases / novel - coronavirus - 2019 / question - and - answers - hub / q - a - detail / coronavirus - disease - COVID - 19 - how - is - it - transmitted . [ 50 ] Joseph T . Wu , Kathy Leung , and Gabriel M . Leung . 2020 . Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the 2019 - nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan , China : A modelling study . Lancet 395 , 10225 ( 2020 ) , 689 – 697 . [ 51 ] Wan Yang , Sasikiran Kandula , Mary Huynh , Sharon K . Greene , Gretchen Van Wye , Wenhui Li , Hiu Tai Chan , Emily McGibbon , Alice Yeung , Don Olson et al . 2021 . Estimating the infection - fatality risk of SARS - Cov - 2 in New York City during the spring 2020 pandemic wave : A model - based analysis . Lancet Infect . Dis . 21 , 2 ( 2021 ) , 203 – 212 . [ 52 ] Tsz Leung Yip , Yaoxuan Huang , and Cong Liang . 2021 . Built environment and the metropolitan pandemic : Analysis of the COVID - 19 spread in Hong Kong . Build . Environ . 188 ( 2021 ) , 107471 . [ 53 ] Juanjuan Zhang , Maria Litvinova , Yuxia Liang , Yan Wang , Wei Wang , Shanlu Zhao , Qianhui Wu , Stefano Merler , Cécile Viboud , Alessandro Vespignani et al . 2020 . Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID - 19 outbreak in China . Science 368 , 6498 ( 2020 ) , 1481 – 1486 . Received 11 August 2022 ; revised 5 March 2023 ; accepted 26 March 2023 ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , Vol . 14 , No . 5 , Article 84 . Publication date : September 2023 .