Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 19 , 2339 – 2347 , May 2008 Src - mediated Cortactin Phosphorylation Regulates Actin Localization and Injurious Blebbing in Acinar Cells Vijay P . Singh and Mark A . McNiven Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Miles and Shirley Fiterman Center for Digestive Diseases , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN 55905 Submitted November 12 , 2007 ; Revised February 8 , 2008 ; Accepted March 3 , 2008 Monitoring Editor : Josephine Adams Suprastimulation of pancreatic acini is a well - known model for pancreatitis , and it is characterized by actin reorganization and cell blebbing . Currently , however , the mechanisms underlying regulation of these aberrant cytoskeletal and mem - brane dynamics and how they contribute to cell injury are unclear . We observed that suprastimulation results in a rapid activation of Src and relocalization of the actin - binding protein cortactin from the apical to the basolateral domain at the necks of membrane blebs . Furthermore , Src - mediated cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was markedly increased after suprastimulation . Pretreatment of acini with Src inhibitors or expression of a cortactin tyrosine phospho - inhibitory mutant reduced actin redistribution and bleb formation induced by suprastimulation in vitro . Importantly , inhibition of Src activity in rat models of suprastimulation - induced pancreatitis substantially reduced disease severity , as indicated by a reduction in serum amylase and pancreatic edema and a striking improvement in tissue histology . These ﬁndings indicate a novel , disease - relevant role for Src - mediated cortactin phosphorylation in aberrant reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , a mechanism that is likely to have implications in other types of cell injury . In addition , they suggest a potential use for Src inhibitors as an approach to reduce cell injury . INTRODUCTION Actin - mediated cortical blebbing plays an important role in both normal and pathological processes , ranging from apo - ptosis and necrotic cell death to cell migration and mitosis ( Gourlay and Ayscough , 2005 ; Paluch et al . , 2006 ) . Supra - stimulation ( SS ) of isolated pancreatic acini with high con - centrations of secretagogue such as the G protein - coupled receptor agonist cholecystokinin ( CCK ) or the CCK ana - logue caerulein ( CER ) leads to a block in zymogen secretion that is accompanied by signiﬁcant alterations in cell mor - phology and the actin cytoskeleton , including cell blebbing ( Burnham and Williams , 1982 ; Adler et al . , 1984 ; O’Konski and Pandol , 1990 ; Torgerson and McNiven , 1998 ) . In addi - tion , SS induces vacuole formation ( Watanabe et al . , 1984 ; Waterford et al . , 2005 ) , missorting and premature activation of nascent zymogens ( Saito et al . , 1987 ; Husain et al . , 2005 ) as well as aberrant zymogen release from the basal membrane domain ( Scheele et al . , 1987 ) . Indeed , SS results in cellular responses similar in many aspects to that observed in pan - creatitis ( Bhatia et al . , 2005 ; Pandol et al . , 2007 ) , indicating its relevance as a disease model both in vitro and in animals ( Lampel and Kern , 1977 ) . Along with actin , the actin - based motor protein myosin II undergoes a dramatic relocalization from the apical to the basolateral domain during SS of acini . Indeed , the activation of an actin – myosin network at the cell base seems to result in the formation of a contractile ring that mediates the protrusion of acinar cell blebs . In addition , these membra - nous extensions are extremely dynamic , forming within minutes of SS and undergoing cytoplasmic streaming as well as amoeboid - like movements . Importantly , cell blebs induced by SS do not seem to represent an apoptotic death response , because they can rapidly recede and reabsorb back into the cell upon removal of the insult ( Torgerson and McNiven , 1998 ) . Furthermore , the dramatic SS - induced changes in actin cytoskeletal organization in isolated acini seem to mimic those observed in the intact organ ( Fallon et al . , 1995 ; Jungermann et al . , 1995 ) . However , the mechanisms regulating changes in actin dynamics following SS are un - clear as to whether reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton directly contributes to acinar cell injury or is simply a con - sequence of cell damage . The actin - binding protein cortactin is a well - known com - ponent of the actin polymerization machinery in many cell types , and it is involved in the formation of branched actin networks that mediate membrane protrusion ( Weed and Parsons , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , cortactin is phosphorylated downstream of and regulates actin dynam - ics in response to various signaling pathways . Indeed , cor - tactin was identiﬁed as a major substrate of v - Src in trans - formed cells , and it is phosphorylated by various members of the Src family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases ( Daly , 2004 ; Lua and Low , 2005 ) . The Src family kinase members c - Src , Yes , and Lyn have been reported to be expressed in pancre - atic acinar cells as well as activated in response to SS ( Nozu et al . , 2000 ; Lynch et al . , 2004 ; Pace et al . , 2006 ) . Therefore , we hypothesized that the aberrant actin reorganization and cell blebbing in response to SS could be a result of inappropriate activation of Src and subsequent increased cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation . Moreover , because Src inhibitory drugs This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E07 – 11 – 1130 ) on March 19 , 2008 . Address correspondence to : Mark A . McNiven ( mcniven . mark @ mayo . edu ) . Abbreviations used : CCK , cholecystokinin ; CER , caerulein ; M3 cor - tactin , a cortactin tyrosine phospho - mutant in which three key tyrosine residues have been mutated to phenylalanine ; SS , supra - stimulation ; WT , wild type . © 2008 by The American Society for Cell Biology 2339 are commercially available , these could be used to test whether inhibition of Src activity in animal models of pan - creatitis alleviates disease severity . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Mayo Clinic ( Rochester , MN ) . Male ( 100 – 120 g ) Sprague Dawley rats ( Harlan , Indianapolis , IN ) were housed and fed under standard conditions . Caerulein , a CCK analogue , was from Research Plus ( Bayonne , NJ ) . Antibodies against phospho - tyrosine ( 4G10 ) and cortactin ( 4F11 ) were from Upstate Biotechnology ( Charlottesville , VA ) . Anti - pan - Src ( SC - 18 ) , anti - Fyn ( SC - 16 ) , and anti - c - Src ( H - 12 ) antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotech - nology ( Santa Cruz , CA ) . The antibody recognizing active Src family kinases , anti - phospho - Y416 ( PY416 ) , anti - Yes , and anti - Lyn antibodies were from BD Biosciences Transduction Laboratories ( Lexington , KY ) . The polyclonal anti - body against cortactin ( AB3 ) was produced by our laboratory ( Cao et al . , 2003 ) . Secondary antibodies for immunoﬂuorescence , conjugated to Alexa 488 or Alexa 594 , and ProLong Gold were from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA ) . HRP - conjugated goat anti - rabbit and goat anti - mouse secondary antibodies for Western blotting were from Afﬁnity BioReagents ( Golden , CO ) . Collage - nase type IV was from Worthington Biochemicals ( Lakewood , NJ ) . PP2 and SU6656 were from Calbiochem ( San Diego , CA ) , and they were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) as a 1000 (cid:1) stock . All other reagents were pur - chased from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Preparation and Use of Acini Acini were harvested in the presence of 100 U / ml collagenase in a buffer containing 20 mM HEPES at pH 7 . 4 , 120 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 10 mM glucose , 10 mM sodium pyruvate , 0 . 1 % bovine serum albumin , and 0 . 01 % soybean trypsin inhibitor as described previously ( Torg - erson and McNiven , 1998 ) . After isolation , acini were ﬁltered through a 70 - (cid:1) m mesh ( Fisher Scientiﬁc , Pittsburgh , PA ) , and they were kept at 37°C for 2 h before use . When indicated , acini were treated during the 2 - h incubation with either 20 (cid:1) M PP2 or 10 (cid:1) M SU6656 . Viability before use was (cid:2) 95 % , as indicated by trypan blue exclusion . For experiments involving adenoviral - mediated infection , acini were cultured for 16 h in RPMI 1640 medium ( Mediatech , Herndon , VA ) with 10 % fetal calf serum , 20 mM nicotinamide , 100 U / ml penicillin , and 100 (cid:1) g / ml streptomycin ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Adenovirus was prepared by the University of Iowa Gene Transfer Vector Core by using the RAPAd system ( U . S . Patent 6830 , 920B2 , Anderson et al . , 2000 ) . The cDNA sequence corresponding to rat cortactin isoform B ( GenBank accession no . NM _ 021868 ) was used for generating the wild - type ( WT ) cor - tactin construct . The cortactin tyrosine phospho - mutant in which tyrosines 384 , 429 , and 445 were mutated to phenylalanines ( M3 cortactin ) was subse - quently generated using the Stratagene QuikChange site - directed mutagen - esis kit ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) . Virion encoding for WT cortactin or M3 cortactin were incubated with cells at 10 7 plaque - forming units / ml . To detect the expression of either WT cortactin or M3 cortactin , 16 h after infection , cells were processed for immunoﬂuorescence or Western blot analysis by using the 4F11 or AB3 antibody , respectively . Immunoﬂuorescence Staining Acini were plated on plain glass coverslips , ﬁxed with 2 % paraformaldehyde , and permeabilized with 0 . 6 % Triton X - 100 as described previously ( Torgerson and McNiven , 1998 ) . Acini were then blocked with 5 % normal goat serum , incubated with primary antibodies ( 4F11 , diluted 1 : 1000 ; SC - 18 , diluted 1 : 300 ; and anti - Yes , diluted 1 : 1000 ) for 1 h at room temperature , washed , and incubated with secondary antibodies ( Alexa 488 - or Alexa 594 - conjugated , diluted 1 : 500 ) with or without rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin ( 100 nM ; Invitrogen ) for 30 min . After washing , acini were mounted in ProLong Gold ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Acini with six to 12 cells were randomly chosen and imaged using a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope ( Thornwood , NJ ) . Images were processed using Adobe Photoshop 6 . 0 ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . For quantitation of blebbing , the number of blebs was counted along with the number of cells . The result , reported as bleb number per 100 cells , represents the mean (cid:3) SEM for at least three independent experiments . Immunoprecipitation and Western Blot Analysis Acini or tissue were homogenized in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris at pH 7 . 2 , 150 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 2 mM dithiothreitol , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 25 mM NaF , 1 % NP - 40 , and Complete ( Roche Diagnsotics , India - napolis , IN ) protease inhibitor cocktail . Lysates were either boiled in 1 (cid:1) Laemmli sample buffer before Western blot analysis according to standard procedures or used for immunoprecipitation . In this case , lysates were incu - bated with 5 (cid:1) g / ml primary antibody for 2 h at 4°C , followed by addition of 4 mg of protein A beads for 1 h in the same buffer . The beads were then washed three times , boiled in 1 (cid:1) Laemmli sample buffer , and analyzed by Western blot . The following antibodies were used at the indicated dilutions for Western blot analyses : AB3 ( 1 : 1 , 000 , 000 ) , 4G10 ( 1 : 1000 ) , SC - 18 ( 1 : 500 ) , anti - PY416 ( 1 : 1000 ) , anti - Yes ( 1 : 5000 ) , H - 12 ( 1 : 200 ) , anti - Fyn ( 1 : 200 ) , and anti - Lyn ( 1 : 200 ) . Band intensity was quantiﬁed by densitometry using the Bio - Rad Image Analysis System with Molecular Analyst software and a Bio - Rad Model GS - 700 imaging densitometer ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . The levels of phosphorylated protein were normalized to total levels of the respective protein . For coimmunoprecipitation experiments , the levels of coimmunopre - cipitated protein were normalized to the levels of the primary immunopre - cipitated protein , i . e . , the protein against which the antibody used for immu - noprecipitation was made . The reported results are based on quantitation performed using at least two independent experiments for each assay . Blood and Tissue Preparation Animals ( 6 animals in each group ) were given single intraperitoneal injections of saline ( control ) or 20 (cid:1) g / kg caerulein in saline by using standard proce - dures . Blood and tissue samples were harvested 6 h later , and either frozen or ﬁxed in 4 % formaldehyde . When used , PP2 was dissolved in DMSO and injected intraperitoneally ( 3 mg / kg in 0 . 1 ml ) 30 min before caerulein . Ani - mals pretreated with vehicle were given DMSO only . Morphological Examination and Assays Five - micrometer sections of parafﬁn - embedded pancreas were stained with hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) . For immunohistochemistry of pancreas , 5 - (cid:1) m sections of tissue embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature compound ( Tissue - Tek , Sakura Finetek , Torrance , CA ) were ﬁxed with 4 % paraformal - dehyde and immunostained as described above . Serum amylase activity was measured colorimetrically using the Phadebas assay ( Pharmacia Diagnostics , Portage , MI ) . Edema was measured by subtracting the dry weight from the wet weight , and the data are reported as a percentage of wet weight . Statistical Analyses The results reported represent the mean (cid:3) SEM of values obtained from three or more experiments , and they were compared using the Student’s t test when the data consisted of only two groups or analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) when comparing three or more groups . If ANOVA indicated a signiﬁcant difference , the data were analyzed using Tukey’s method as a post hoc test for the difference between groups . A p value of 0 . 05 was considered signiﬁcant . RESULTS Suprastimulation of Pancreatic Acini Leads to Src - mediated Cortactin Phosphorylation along with Reorganization of the Actin Cytoskeleton Under resting conditions or after stimulation of pancreatic acini with physiological concentrations of CCK ( (cid:4) 0 . 1 nM ) , a rich network of ﬁlamentous actin is present at the apical membrane domain ( Figure 1aa (cid:5) ) , a partial disassembly of which supports the proper secretion of zymogens into the lumen ( Muallem et al . , 1995 ) . In contrast , stimulation with supraphysiologic concentrations of CCK ( 10 nM ) induces a marked redistribution of actin from the apical to the baso - lateral domain where it seems to support the formation of large , dynamic blebs ( Figure 1a (cid:6) ; Burnham and Williams , 1982 ; Adler et al . , 1984 ; O’Konski and Pandol , 1990 ; Torger - son and McNiven , 1998 ) . Interestingly , we observed that the actin - binding protein cortactin is also localized apically after stimulation with physiological concentrations of CCK ( Fig - ure 1b (cid:5) ) and that it becomes redistributed in a manner similar to that of actin after SS ( Figure 1b (cid:6) ) . The actin - binding and - regulatory properties of cortactin are modulated in response to tyrosine phosphorylation by nonreceptor tyrosine kinases such as Src family kinases ( Weed and Parsons , 2001 ; Daly , 2004 ; Lua and Low , 2005 ) . Therefore , we tested whether SS leads to tyrosine phosphor - ylation of cortactin and might thus accompany actin and cortactin redistribution . Here , pancreatic acini were isolated from rats , treated with various concentrations of CCK for 2 min , a time frame in which bleb formation occurs in the presence of SS , lysed , and subjected to immunoprecipitation by using antibodies against cortactin . Subsequently , the im - munoprecipitated samples were analyzed by Western blot for tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin by using anti - cortactin and anti - phospho - tyrosine ( 4G10 ) antibodies . Indeed , sup - V . P . Singh and M . A . McNiven Molecular Biology of the Cell 2340 raphysiological concentrations of CCK stimulated a two - to threefold increase in cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation compared with basal conditions or stimulation with phys - iological CCK concentrations ( Figure 1c ) . A more detailed analysis of SS - induced cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation indicated that this phosphorylation was rapid , peaking around 2 min , and that it was sustained for (cid:2) 30 min ( Figure 1d ) . Different Src family kinases ( c - Src , Yes , and Lyn ) have been found to be activated in response to SS of pancreatic acini ( Nozu et al . , 2000 ; Lynch et al . , 2004 ; Pace et al . , 2006 ) ; therefore , they might mediate cortactin tyrosine phosphor - ylation . Thus , we ﬁrst used immunoﬂuorescence analysis to determine the localization of Src ( anti - pan - Src antibody ) with respect to cortactin in isolated acini under basal condi - tions and after stimulation with different concentrations of CCK . Resting cells displayed a marked colocalization be - tween Src and cortactin at the apical membrane domain adjacent to the lumen , which extended down along the lateral membrane domains ( Figure 2aa (cid:5) ) . This codistribution of Src and cortactin was maintained after stimulation of acini with physiological concentrations of CCK ( 0 . 1 nM ) over 30 min ( Figure 2ee (cid:5) ) . Interestingly , after just 5 min of SS ( 10 nM CCK ) , both Src and cortactin translocated away from the apical lumen ( Figure 2bb (cid:5) ) , and by 30 min Src they seemed to become largely cytosolic , whereas cortactin accumulated along the necks of newly protruding blebs ( Figure 2cc (cid:5) ) . Importantly , this dramatic dissociation and redistribution of Src and cortactin was prevented in acini treated with the Src inhibitory drug PP2 ( 20 (cid:1) M ) for 2 h before SS ( Figure 2dd (cid:5) ) , supporting that Src - mediated phosphorylation of cortactin leads to its redistribution . As an extension of the morphological observations , we next used a biochemical approach to analyze the association between Src and cortactin under different conditions of CCK stimulation . Pancreatic acini were isolated , treated with dif - ferent concentrations of CCK for 2 min , and then subjected to immunoprecipitation by using an anti - pan - Src antibody . The immunoprecipitated samples were then analyzed by Western blot using antibodies against Src and cortactin . Under resting conditions or in acini treated with low con - centrations of CCK ( 10 pM ) , substantial levels of cortactin coimmunoprecipitated along with Src ( Figure 2f ) . However , the Src – cortactin complex seemed to dissociate in a CCK concentration - dependent manner , with essentially no com - plex being detected in acini treated with CCK concentrations representing SS . Importantly , dissociation of the Src – cortac - tin complex after SS was prevented by pretreating acini with Figure 1 . Cortactin is tyrosine phosphorylated upon SS of pancreatic acini and relocalizes to the necks of basolateral blebs . ( a – b (cid:6) ) Fluorescence mi - crographs of actin and cortactin in resting acini ( Control ) and in acini treated with physiological ( 0 . 1 nM ) or supraphysiological ( 10 nM ) concentrations of CCK . In resting cells , a rich apical network of actin surrounds the lumen ( a , arrow ) ; however , only a modest amount of cortactin localizes to this region ( b , arrow ) . Actin remains apical after stimulation with 0 . 1 nM CCK ( a (cid:5) , arrow ) , whereas the apical localization of cortactin is enhanced ( b (cid:5) , arrow ) . In contrast , SS with 10 nM CCK induces blebbing and a marked redistribution of both actin ( a (cid:6) ) and cor - tactin ( b (cid:6) ) to the necks of basal blebs ( arrows ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m ( a – b (cid:6) ) . ( c ) Cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation increases after SS with CCK . Acini were left un - treated ( Con ) or stimulated with logarithmically in - creasing doses of CCK ( 10 pM – 100 nM ) for 2 min before immunoprecipitation of lysates by using an antibody against cortactin . The samples were subse - quently analyzed by Western blot using an anti - phospho - tyrosine antibody ( 4G10 ) , and band inten - sity was quantiﬁed by densitometry . As depicted in the graph , cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was increased signiﬁcantly ( 2 - to 3 - fold ) at doses of 10 nM CCK or higher ( i . e . , SS ) . ( d ) Tyrosine phosphor - ylation of cortactin occurs rapidly in response to SS . Lysates from acini were analyzed as described in c ; however , in response to a single dose of 10 nM CCK at the indicated time points of 0 – 30 min . A marked increase in cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was observed within 2 min of SS , and it remained ele - vated over the 30 - min time course . Graphs represent the mean (cid:3) SEM from at least two independent experiments . * p (cid:2) 0 . 05 . Actin Dynamics in Acinar Cell Blebbing Vol . 19 , May 2008 2341 PP2 , thus inhibiting Src activity ( Figure 2f ) . Indeed , we observed a strong inverse correlation between the levels of tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin and the detection of a Src – cortactin complex over increasing concentrations of CCK ( Figure 2f , graph ) . Further analysis of the SS - induced dissociation of the Src – cortactin complex over a time course of 5 min indicated a rapid disassembly of the complex ( (cid:4) 2 min ) that correlated with Src activation , as determined by Western blot analysis of the immunoprecipitated samples with an antibody against a phospho - active form of Src ( phospho - Y416 , PY416 ; Figure 2g ) . Thus , these morpholog - ical and biochemical observations suggest that a Src – cortac - tin complex is present under resting and physiological stim - ulatory conditions . However , SS induces Src activation , leading to increased cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation , dis - sociation of the complex , and a differential redistribution of these proteins as well as the actin cytoskeleton . Activation of Src Induces Acinar Cell Damage after Suprastimulation As indicated above , several Src family members are ex - pressed in pancreatic acinar cells , and they become activated in response to SS ( Nozu et al . , 2000 ; Lynch et al . , 2004 ; Pace et al . , 2006 ) . The above - mentioned studies were performed using an anti - pan - Src antibody , which recognizes multiple Src kinase family members . Therefore , to discern the speciﬁc Src family member associated with cortactin , lysates from pancreatic acini were subjected to immunoprecipitation by using either the anti - pan - Src or an anti - cortactin antibody , and the samples were analyzed by Western blot for c - Src , Yes , Lyn , and Fyn . Interestingly , although all four Src family members were detected in whole cell lysates , only Yes was immunoprecipitated by the anti - pan - Src antibody ; further - more , Yes coimmunoprecipitated with cortactin ( Supple - mental Figure S1 , a and b ) . Subsequent analysis of lysates from resting and CCK - stimulated ( 10 pM – 10 nM ) acini im - munoprecipitated for Yes indicated that Yes is activated after SS , as determined by using the anti - PY416 antibody ( Supplemental Figure S1c ; Lynch et al . , 2004 ) . Finally , immu - noﬂuorescence analysis of resting acini and acini stimulated with either physiological ( 0 . 1 nM ) or supraphysiological ( 10 nM ) concentrations of CCK for 30 min supported that Yes and cortactin colocalize under physiological conditions ( Supplemental Figure S1 , d and e (cid:5) ) , whereas they become redistributed after SS ( Supplemental Figure S1 , f and f (cid:5) ) . Importantly , this relocalization of Yes and cortactin was prevented in acini treated with PP2 before SS ( Supplemental Figure S1 , g and g (cid:5) ) . These results suggest that Yes associates with cortactin under physiological conditions and mediates cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation after SS ; however , we cannot rule out a role for other Src family members . Thus , the term “Src” is used from here on with the intended meaning of Yes as well as potentially other Src kinases . Pharmacological inhibition of Src activity with PP2 , a small - molecule inhibitor of multiple Src family kinases , as well as SU6656 ( data not shown ; see below ) , another Src Figure 2 . SS induces Src - mediated cortactin phos - phorylation and dissociation of a Src - cortactin com - plex . ( a – e (cid:5) ) Fluorescence micrographs of acini stained for Src and cortactin . Under resting condi - tions ( Control ; a and a (cid:5) ) or after stimulation with physiological CCK concentrations ( 0 . 1 nM CCK ; e and e (cid:5) ) , Src and cortactin colocalize at the apical region of acini ( arrows ) . However , SS of acini ( 10 nM CCK ) induces a relocalization of cortactin to the basolateral membrane domain within 5 min ( b (cid:5) ) , which becomes more pronounced at 30 min as the acini bleb ( c (cid:5) , arrow ) . Src , in contrast , becomes cy - tosolic after SS ( b and c ) . Treatment of acini with the Src family kinase inhibitor PP2 before SS prevents the redistribution of cortactin and Src , because they both remain apical ( d and d (cid:5) , arrows ) . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m ( a – e (cid:5) ) . ( f ) A Src – cortactin complex , present at low concentrations of CCK , dissociates after SS . Lysates from resting acini ( Con ) or acini stimulated with increasing doses of CCK ( 10 pM – 10 nM ) or with 10 nM CCK (cid:7) PP2 were subjected to immunoprecipi - tation by using an anti - pan - Src antibody , and the samples were analyzed by Western blot using anti - bodies against cortactin and Src . Band intensity was quantiﬁed by densitometry , normalizing the cortac - tin levels to the Src levels . As indicated by the graph , the Src – cortactin complex dissociates in a dose - de - pendent manner with little , if any , complex being detected after SS . Pretreatment with PP2 , however , prevents this dissociation . ( g ) Dissociation of the Src – cortactin complex is rapid , and it correlates with cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation . Lysates from acini stimulated with 10 nM CCK for the indicated amounts of time ( 0 – 5 min ) were immunoprecipi - tated for Src and analyzed by Western blot , using antibodies against cortactin , Src , and activated Src ( PY416 ) . Band intensity was quantiﬁed by densitom - etry , normalizing the cortactin and activated Src lev - els to total Src levels . The Src – cortactin complex dissociates rapidly , within 1 min after SS . In addition , this dissociation correlates with increased cortactin phosphorylation ( see Figure 1D ) and Src activation ( graph ) . Graphs represent the mean (cid:3) SEM . V . P . Singh and M . A . McNiven Molecular Biology of the Cell 2342 family kinase inhibitory drug , prevented the dissociation of the Src – cortactin complex as well as redistribution of cor - tactin to the necks of basal membrane blebs normally ob - served after SS ( Figures 1 and 2 , and Supplemental Figure S1 ) . Therefore , we next tested whether treatment of acini with either of these Src inhibitors might inhibit acinar cell blebbing . Living and ﬁxed acini were imaged after SS with 10 nM CCK both in the presence and absence of treatment with Src inhibitors ( PP2 , 20 (cid:1) M ; SU6656 , 10 (cid:1) M ) , and bleb formation was quantiﬁed ( Figure 3 , a – g ) . In the absence of Src inhibitors , acini were observed to undergo signiﬁcant blebbing within 30 min of SS ( Figure 3 , a – a (cid:6) ) . In addition , imaging of ﬁxed acini treated in a similar manner and stained for cortactin and actin indicated a relocalization of these proteins to the necks of membrane blebs , as expected ( Figure 3 , bb (cid:5) ) . In striking contrast , acini treated with either PP2 ( Figure 3 , c – c (cid:6) ) or SU6656 ( Figure 3 , e – e (cid:6) ) before and during SS with CCK maintained a near normal shape over the 30 - min time period . Accordingly , immunoﬂuorescence analysis of Src inhibitor - treated acini revealed that the apical localization of cortactin and actin was maintained ( Figure 3d , d (cid:5) , f , and f (cid:5) ) . Quantitation of (cid:2) 100 acinar cells indicated a signiﬁcant reduction ( (cid:2) 75 % ) in blebbing in cells treated with either of the Src inhibitory drugs in combination with SS compared with cells treated with supraphysiological con - centrations of CCK alone ( Figure 3g ) . Importantly , Western blot analysis of acini treated with 10 nM CCK ( i . e . , SS ) in the presence or absence of either PP2 ( Figure 3h ) or SU6656 ( Figure 3i ) by using the anti - phospho - tyrosine antibody 4G10 indicated that both drugs inhibited cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation . Thus , Src - mediated phosphorylation of cortactin seems to regulate cell blebbing in response to SS of pancreatic acinar cells . Importantly , PP2 did not affect the secretory response of acini ( amylase activity ) under control conditions ( 5 . 6 (cid:7) 2 . 3 vs . 6 . 0 (cid:7) 2 . 5 % ) , or in response to physiological ( 0 . 1 nM ; 18 . 4 (cid:7) 1 . 8 % vs . 18 . 0 (cid:7) 2 . 3 % ) or supraphysiological ( 10 nM ; 11 . 0 (cid:7) 1 . 9 % vs . 11 . 0 (cid:7) 2 . 5 % ) concentrations of CCK . The reduction in acinar cell blebbing upon inhibition of Src family kinases could be a result of effects on proteins in addition to cortactin . Therefore , we next tested whether tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin plays a direct role in SS - induced acinar cell damage . Toward this end , a tyrosine phospho - mutant of cortactin was constructed in which three tyrosine residues shown previously to be predominant sites of Src - mediated phosphorylation ( Huang et al . , 1998 ) were mutated to phenylalanine and expressed in cultured acini after adenovirus - mediated infection . Subsequently , the ef - fects of this phospho - mutant protein , referred to as M3 cortactin , on cortactin localization and cell blebbing in re - sponse to SS were analyzed . Remarkably , acini expressing M3 cortactin maintained an apical cortactin and actin local - ization after SS ; more importantly , they did not undergo cell blebbing ( Figure 4 , a – a (cid:6) ) , which was in marked contrast to adjacent uninfected acini or acini infected with WT cortactin ( data not shown ) . In support of these observations , quanti - tation of (cid:2) 100 acinar cells indicated a (cid:2) 50 % reduction in SS - induced cell blebbing in cells expressing M3 cortactin compared with uninfected control cells or cells expressing WT cortactin ( Figure 4b ) . We observed that Src - mediated phosphorylation of cor - tactin after SS results in a dissociation of the endogenous Src – cortactin complex and a redistribution of these proteins . Therefore , we tested whether tyrosine phosphorylation of M3 cortactin was indeed reduced , and additionally , whether the Src – M3 cortactin complex was maintained in response to SS . Western blot analysis to quantitate the levels of adeno - viral overexpression of WT and M3 cortactin showed a 14 . 5 - and 10 . 3 - fold overexpression over controls ( data not shown ) . Furthermore , acini expressing WT or M3 cortactin revealed Figure 3 . Inhibition of Src reduces SS - in - duced cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation , cortactin and actin redistribution , and bleb formation . ( a – f (cid:5) ) Micrographs of living and ﬁxed acini after SS with 10 nM CCK in the absence or presence of either 20 (cid:1) M PP2 or 10 (cid:1) M SU6656 . Living acini were observed to form blebs over a 30 - min time course of SS with CCK ( a – a (cid:6) , arrows ) . Under similar con - ditions , immunoﬂuorescence analysis of ﬁxed acini showed a redistribution of cortactin and actin to the necks of basolateral blebs ( b and b (cid:5) ) . However , treatment of acini with either of the Src inhibitory drugs PP2 or SU6656 before and during SS resulted in a signiﬁ - cant reduction in bleb formation in living acini ( c – c (cid:6) and e – e (cid:6) , respectively ) as well as prevented cortactin and actin redistribution , as indicated by subsequent immunoﬂuores - cence analysis of ﬁxed acini ( d and d (cid:5) and f and f (cid:5) ) . Bars , 10 (cid:1) m ( a – f (cid:5) ) . ( g ) Quantitation of SS - induced acinar blebbing in the absence and presence of either PP2 or SU6656 re - vealed a substantial reduction ( (cid:2) 75 % ) in bleb formation in drug - treated acini ( 150 – 300 cells were counted for each treatment ) . ( h and i ) Treatment with Src family kinase inhibitors reduces cortactin tyrosine phos - phorylation after SS . Lysates from unstimu - lated acini ( 0 min , h ; Con , i ) or acini stimu - lated with 10 nM CCK alone or in the presence of either PP2 ( h ) or SU6656 ( i ) were immunoprecipitated for cortactin and analyzed by Western blot using antibodies against cortactin and phospho - tyrosine ( 4G10 ) . Actin Dynamics in Acinar Cell Blebbing Vol . 19 , May 2008 2343 a reduction in phospho - tyrosine levels of M3 cortactin after SS ( 1 . 25 - fold at 2 min ) , and , accordingly , an increased asso - ciation with Src compared with WT cortactin ( 2 . 85 - fold at 2 min ) ( Figure 4cd ) . Together , these results support a direct role for cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation in SS - induced acinar cell blebbing and injury . Inhibition of Src Family Kinases Mitigates Disease Severity in the Caerulein Rat Model of Pancreatitis Stimulation of isolated pancreatic acini or infusion of ani - mals with supraphysiological concentrations of secreta - gogue represent models for studying pancreatitis ( Bhatia et al . , 2005 ; Pandol et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , we next tested whether our in vitro results might translate to the intact pancreas in an animal model of pancreatitis . For these studies , we ﬁrst analyzed Src activation and cortactin phosphorylation over a 30 - min time course by using lysates of pancreata harvested from individual rats for each time point after intraperitoneal injection of the CCK analogue CER ( 20 (cid:1) g / kg ) . Similar to our in vitro results ( Figure 2g ) , there was a rapid 2 . 2 - fold activation of Src within 1 min of in vivo SS , and this was sustained over 30 min ( Figure 5ac ) . In addition , Western blot analysis using the anti - phospho - tyrosine antibody 4G10 af - ter immunoprecipitation of cortactin indicated that cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was increased within 5 min and that it was even more prominent at 30 min ( Figure 5b ) . Remarkably , intraperitoneal administration of 3 mg / kg PP2 30 min before a 30 - min stimulation with CER inhibited the SS - induced increase in cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation ( Figure 5d ) . In agreement with these biochemical results , morphological analysis of pancreas sections from control rats and rats treated with CER for 30 min in the presence or absence of PP2 showed that PP2 treatment prevented the CER - induced relocalization of actin and cortactin from the apical to the basolateral domain in vivo ( Figure 5 , e – g (cid:5) ) . Thus , in isolated acini as well as the intact pancreas , inhibi - tion of Src family kinases attenuates Src activation , cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation , and actin and cortactin redistri - bution in response to SS . We next tested in more detail whether PP2 treatment might protect against SS - induced pancreatitis by using three main criteria : serum amylase levels , pancreatic edema , and tissue histology ( Bhatia et al . , 2005 ; Pandol et al . , 2007 ) . For these experiments , control animals and rats exposed to 20 (cid:1) g / kg CER for 6 h in the presence or absence of PP2 were analyzed . An increase in serum amylase levels can be used as an indicator of loss of acinar cell polarity and subsequent cell death , resulting in aberrant release of zymogens into the blood space . In addition , as aberrant zymogen release , cell death , and inﬂammation increase , the pancreas becomes edematous . Indeed , treatment of rats with high concentra - tions of CER increased both of these parameters compared with control animals . Importantly , prophylactic treatment of rats with 3 mg / kg PP2 before CER administration markedly reduced the CER - induced aberrant release of amylase ( (cid:2) 50 % reduction ) as well as increase in edema ( Figure 6ab ) . However , most impressive was the morphological improve - ment of acinar structure as assessed by histology . Sections of normal pancreas displayed a polarized , well - organized ar - rangement of acini with zymogen granules clustered at the apical lumen ( Figure 6c ) . In contrast , SS with CER resulted in the formation of large intracellular vacuoles and extensive interstitial edema and inﬂammation ( Figure 6d ) . Remark - ably , the pancreata from rats pretreated with PP2 seemed undamaged , with well - organized acini that mimicked con - trol tissue ( Figure 6e ) . To test for an effect of the src inhibi - tors on inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration , we quantiﬁed the number of white blood cells observed in 25 high power ﬁelds ( HPF ) of each variable of pancreatic sections from CER - treated mice pretreated with either PP2 or vehicle . We observed a reduction of white cells in pancreatic tissue from the PP2 - treated animals ( 17 . 0 (cid:7) 2 . 0 HPF in the caerulein pancreatitis group to 4 . 9 (cid:7) 1 . 1 [ p (cid:4) 0 . 005 ] in the PP2 - pretreated group ) . Vehicle had no effect on this ( 19 . 6 (cid:7) 3 . 7 inﬂammatory cells / HPF ; p (cid:8) 0 . 53 ) . This observation sug - gests that the inhibition of src activity could also exert some positive protective effects on the pancreas by reducing aci - nar - based blebbing and inﬂammation as well . Figure 4 . Expression of a cortactin tyrosine phospho - mutant signiﬁcantly attenuates SS - induced acinar blebbing . ( a – a (cid:6) ) Fluorescence and merged ﬂuorescence (cid:7) brightﬁeld micro - graphs of an uninfected acinus ( right ) and an acinus expressing a cortactin mutant in which three key tyrosine residues have been mu - tated to phenylalanine ( M3 cortactin , left ) . Af - ter 30 min of SS , cells were stained for cortac - tin ( a ) and actin ( a (cid:5) ) . In uninfected cells , actin relocalized to the basolateral membrane do - main ( a (cid:5) and a (cid:6) , white arrows ) and cells formed large blebs ( a (cid:6) , small white arrows ) . In contrast , cells expressing M3 cortactin re - tained an apical actin network ( a (cid:5) and a (cid:6) , black arrowheads ) , and they did not form blebs . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m ( a – a (cid:6) ) . ( b ) Graph depicting the reduction in SS - induced bleb formation in cells expressing the cortactin tyrosine phos - pho - mutant , M3 cortactin ( (cid:2) 50 % ) , compared with uninfected control cells ( Con ) or cells expressing WT cortactin . Results represent the mean (cid:3) SEM from at least three independent experiments . ( c ) SS - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin is reduced in cells expressing the M3 cortactin mutant . Acini infected to express WT cortactin or M3 cortactin were stimulated with 10 nM CCK for the indicated amounts of time ( 0 – 5 min ) , lysed , and subjected to immunoprecipitation for cortactin followed by Western blot analysis using antibodies against cortactin and phospho - tyrosine ( 4G10 ) . ( d ) The Src family kinase Yes coimmunoprecipitates with M3 cortactin , but not WT cortactin , following SS . Cortactin was immunoprecipitated from acini expressing WT cortactin or M3 cortactin after 1 min of SS . The immunoprecipitated samples as well as whole cell lysate and nonspeciﬁc proteins bound to beads alone were analyzed by Western blot using an anti - Yes antibody . The IgG band , which is detected just below the Yes band , is indicated . * p (cid:2) 0 . 05 ( b ) . V . P . Singh and M . A . McNiven Molecular Biology of the Cell 2344 DISCUSSION Many studies using experimental models of acute pancre - atitis have focused on the consequences of SS of either Figure 5 . Src - mediated cortactin phosphorylation as well as relo - calization of cortactin and actin occurs during CER - induced pan - creatitis in vivo . ( a – c ) Src ( Yes ) is activated and cortactin is tyrosine phosphorylated in rats treated with supraphysiological concentra - tions of the CCK analogue CER , thus mimicking acute pancreatitis . Lysates were prepared from pancreata of animals after different times ( 1 – 30 min ) of CER administration ( 20 (cid:1) g / kg ) via intraperito - neal injection . Lysates from pancreata of untreated animals were used as a control ( Con ) . Whole cell lysates were analyzed by West - ern blot using an anti - Yes antibody and an antibody that recognizes the activated form of Src family kinases ( PY416 ) ( a ) . In addition , lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation for cortactin , and the resulting samples were analyzed by Western blot for cortactin and phospho - tyrosine ( 4G10 ) ( b ) . Bands representing Yes activation ( PY416 signal ) were quantiﬁed using densitometry , normalizing to total levels of Yes ( c ; n (cid:8) 3 ) . ( d ) PP2 treatment of intact pancreas reduces cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation . Lysates prepared from pancreata of untreated animals ( Con ) , animals treated with 20 (cid:1) g / kg CER for 30 min alone ( CER ) , or animals treated with 3 mg / kg PP2 for 30 min before injection with 20 (cid:1) g / kg CER for 30 min ( CER (cid:7) PP2 ) were immunoprecipitated for cortactin and ana - lyzed by Western blot using antibodies against cortactin and phos - pho - tyrosine ( 4G10 ) . ( e – g (cid:5) ) Inhibition of Src activity by PP2 pre - vents CER - induced actin and cortactin relocalization in vivo . Fluorescence micrographs of frozen sections of rat pancreas from animals treated as described in d , and they were stained for actin ( e , f , and g ) and cortactin ( e (cid:5) , f (cid:5) , and g (cid:5) ) . A prominent apical localiza - tion of actin and cortactin is observed in pancreas sections from control animals ( e and e (cid:5) , arrows ) ; however , they undergo a baso - lateral relocalization in response to SS with CER ( f and f (cid:5) , arrows ) . Remarkably , pretreatment with PP2 prevents this redistribution ( g and g (cid:5) , arrows ) . Bar , 10 (cid:1) m ( e – g (cid:5) ) . Figure 6 . Inhibition of Src family kinases signiﬁcantly reduces the severity of CER - induced pancreatitis in the intact animal . ( a and b ) Treatment of intact animals with PP2 reduces the CER - induced increase in serum amylase levels and pancreatic edema . Serum amylase ( a ) and pancreatic water content ( b ) were measured for untreated animals ( Con ) , or those given a single intraperitoneal injection of 20 (cid:1) g / kg CER , CER with vehicle ( CER (cid:7) Veh . ) , or 3 mg / kg PP2 dissolved in 0 . 1 ml of DMSO 30 min before CER injection and killed 6 h after the CER injection ( CER (cid:7) PP2 ) . ( c – e ) Actin Dynamics in Acinar Cell Blebbing Vol . 19 , May 2008 2345 isolated pancreatic acini or animals with different agonists . It is well documented that a dramatic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton is induced by these conditions both in vitro and in vivo ( Burnham and Williams , 1982 ; Adler et al . , 1984 ; O’Konski and Pandol , 1990 , 1993 ; Fallon et al . , 1995 ; Jungermann et al . , 1995 ; Torgerson and McNiven , 1998 ) . The mechanisms regulating this aberrant redistribution are un - clear ; moreover , it has yet to be determined whether this alteration in actin cytoskeletal organization plays a causal role in acinar cell injury or whether it is simply a result of cell damage . Here , we report an essential role for Src - regulated actin reorganization during acinar cell injury . Furthermore , we demonstrate that the actin - binding pro - tein cortactin , a known Src substrate , mediates this aber - rant reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in a tyrosine phosphorylation - dependent manner . Importantly , inhibi - tion of Src family kinases using either of the small - molecule inhibitors PP2 or SU6656 reduced acinar cell damage both in vitro and in the caerulein rat model of pancreatitis , indicat - ing the potential usefulness of Src inhibitory drugs in the therapeutic treatment of pancreatitis . Src family kinases , including Yes , have previously been found to be activated after SS of isolated acini ( Nozu et al . , 2000 ; Lynch et al . , 2004 ; Pace et al . , 2006 ) , and they are implicated indirectly in disassembly of the actin cytoskele - ton ( Leser et al . , 2000 ; Lynch et al . , 2004 ) . Here , we demon - strate a direct role for a SS - induced increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by a Src family kinase , most likely Yes , in relocalization of the actin cytoskeleton and acinar cell damage . Treatment of isolated acini with Src inhibitors ( PP2 or SU6656 ) before SS prevented the aberrant redistribution of the actin cytoskeleton and cell blebbing ( Figure 3 ) , suggesting that Src activation and subsequent actin reorganization play a causal role in cell damage . How - ever , various downstream Src substrates such as the focal adhesion protein Pyk2 ( Lynch et al . , 2004 ) , the cell – cell junc - tion protein p120 catenin ( Leser et al . , 2000 ) as well as others might be responsible for mediating the altered actin organi - zation and cell damage . Our observation that expression of a cortactin tyrosine phospho - mutant ( M3 cortactin ) prevents disassembly of the apical network of ﬁlamentous actin , while also leading to a signiﬁcant reduction in cell blebbing after SS ( Figure 4 ) , provides a direct link between Src acti - vation and aberrant actin reorganization during acinar cell injury . Most importantly , these ﬁndings support the concept that changes in actin cytoskeletal organization are a primary event in acinar cell damage . In essence , no cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation , no aberrant SS - induced actin rearrange - ment , no cell damage . In addition to our observations in isolated acini , these ﬁndings translated to the caerulein rat model of pancreatitis . Activation of Yes and cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation were rapidly increased in the intact pancreas of stimulated animals ; moreover , cortactin and actin underwent a dra - matic basolateral redistribution ( Figure 5 ) . Importantly , these effects as well as overall disease severity , as indicated by a decrease in serum amylase levels and pancreatic edema , and most remarkably , restoration of tissue integrity to near that of control animals , were alleviated by treatment of animals with the Src inhibitor PP2 before CER administra - tion ( Figures 5 and 6 ) . Thus , these results provide an exciting and necessary extension of previous studies implicating Src family kinases in pancreatic acinar cell injury , while high - lighting the in vivo relevance of aberrant Src - mediated cor - tactin phosphorylation and subsequent actin reorganization in cell damage during pancreatitis . The formation of basolateral cell blebs in isolated acini after SS is thought to be mediated by activation of an actin – myosin contractile network at the cell base ( Burnham and Williams , 1982 ; Adler et al . , 1984 ; O’Konski and Pandol , 1990 ; Torgerson and McNiven , 1998 ) . Because inhibition of Src activation and cortactin phosphorylation prevented cell blebbing ( Figures 3 and 4 ) , potentially the improper Src - induced , cortactin - mediated assembly of actin at the acinar cell base provides a means for actin – myosin contraction at a site in which it is not needed or preferred . We ( Torgerson and McNiven , 1998 ) and others ( Burnham et al . , 1988 ) have observed an increase in phosphorylated myosin light chain after SS of acini , and this correlates with activation of myosin II at the necks of cell blebs ( Torgerson and McNiven , 1998 ) . Interestingly , tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin has been demonstrated to bind myosin light chain kinase from endo - thelial cells and increase its activity , as indicated by in - creased myosin light chain phosphorylation ( Garcia et al . , 1999 ; Dudek et al . , 2004 ) . Similar to actin and myosin II , we observed that cortactin is redistributed to the necks of cell blebs after SS ( Figures 1 and 3 ) . Thus , SS - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by Yes may mediate redistri - bution as well as activation of the actin – myosin contractile network , thereby directly contributing to acinar cell bleb - bing and injury . Cortactin is involved in a variety of cellular processes , including migration , adhesion , and vesicle trafﬁcking . In addition , phosphorylation plays an important role in regu - lating the effects of cortactin on actin dynamics and cytoskel - etal organization ( Weed and Parsons , 2001 ; Daly , 2004 ; Lua and Low , 2005 ) . Thus , the increase in cortactin phosphory - lation after SS could lead to undesirable changes in cell – cell contacts , actin – myosin contractility , and / or membrane pro - trusion , thereby contributing to bleb formation and cell damage . The ﬁndings reported here emphasize the impor - tance of understanding how actin dynamics are regulated in pancreatic acinar cells , while providing signiﬁcant insight into the molecular basis of acinar cell injury . Most excitingly , these results highlight Src as an attractive therapeutic target for the treatment of acute pancreatitis , a disease for which no treatment currently exists . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Heather M . Thompson ( Mayo Clinic ) for help in preparing the manuscript . REFERENCES Adler , G . , Kern , H . F . , Pan , G . Z . , and Gardner , J . D . ( 1984 ) . Secretagogue - induced membrane alterations in dispersed acini from rat pancreas . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 33 , 234 – 241 . Anderson , R . D . , Haskell , R . E . , Xia , H . , Roessler , B . J . , and Davidson , B . L . ( 2000 ) . A simple method for the rapid generation of recombitant adenovirus vectors . Gene Ther . 7 , 1034 – 1038 . Bhatia , M . , Wong , F . L . , Cao , Y . , Lau , H . Y . , Huang , J . , Puneet , P . , and Chevali , L . ( 2005 ) . Pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis . Pancreatology 5 , 132 – 144 . Figure 6 ( cont ) . Pancreatic tissue integrity is restored in animals treated with PP2 before CER stimulation . Shown are micrographs of H & E histological sections of pancreata from rats treated as de - scribed in a and b ) . Sections from control pancreas ( c ) showed a normal acinar organization and staining , whereas CER treatment ( d ) induced large edematous voids , vacuolization , and cell damage . In contrast , tissue from rats treated with PP2 before CER adminis - tration ( e ) showed a morphology remarkably similar to that of control animals . V . P . Singh and M . A . McNiven Molecular Biology of the Cell 2346 Burnham , D . B . , Soling , H . D . , and Williams , J . A . ( 1988 ) . Evaluation of myosin light chain phosphorylation in isolated pancreatic acini . Am . J . Physiol . 254 , G130 – G134 . Burnham , D . B . , and Williams , J . A . ( 1982 ) . Effects of high concentrations of secretagogues on the morphology and secretory activity of the pancreas : a role for microﬁlaments . Cell Tissue Res . 222 , 201 – 212 . Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 . Daly , R . J . ( 2004 ) . Cortactin signalling and dynamic actin networks . Biochem . J . 382 , 13 – 25 . Dudek , S . M . , Jacobson , J . R . , Chiang , E . T . , Birukov , K . G . , Wang , P . , Zhan , X . , and Garcia , J . G . ( 2004 ) . Pulmonary endothelial cell barrier enhancement by sphingosine 1 - phosphate : roles for cortactin and myosin light chain kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 24692 – 24700 . Fallon , M . B . , Gorelick , F . S . , Anderson , J . M . , Mennone , A . , Saluja , A . , and Steer , M . L . ( 1995 ) . Effect of cerulein hyperstimulation on the paracellular barrier of rat exocrine pancreas . Gastroenterology 108 , 1863 – 1872 . Garcia , J . G . , Verin , A . D . , Schaphorst , K . , Siddiqui , R . , Patterson , C . E . , Csortos , C . , and Natarajan , V . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of endothelial cell myosin light chain kinase by Rho , cortactin , and p60 ( src ) . Am . J . Physiol . 276 , L989 – L998 . Gourlay , C . W . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2005 ) . The actin cytoskeleton : a key regulator of apoptosis and ageing ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 583 – 589 . Huang , C . , Liu , J . , Haudenschild , C . C . , and Zhan , X . ( 1998 ) . The role of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in the locomotion of endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 25770 – 25776 . Husain , S . Z . , Prasad , P . , Grant , W . M . , Kolodecik , T . R . , Nathanson , M . H . , and Gorelick , F . S . ( 2005 ) . The ryanodine receptor mediates early zymogen activation in pancreatitis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 102 , 14386 – 14391 . Jungermann , J . , Lerch , M . M . , Weidenbach , H . , Lutz , M . P . , Kruger , B . , and Adler , G . ( 1995 ) . Disassembly of rat pancreatic acinar cell cytoskeleton during supramaximal secretagogue stimulation . Am . J . Physiol . 268 , G328 – G338 . Lampel , M . , and Kern , H . F . ( 1977 ) . Acute interstitial pancreatitis in the rat induced by excessive doses of a pancreatic secretagogue . Virchows Arch . A Pathol . Anat . Histol . 373 , 97 – 117 . Leser , J . , Beil , M . F . , Musa , O . A . , Adler , G . , and Lutz , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of adherens junction protein p120 ( ctn ) by 10 nM CCK precedes actin break - down in rat pancreatic acini . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 278 , G486 – G491 . Lua , B . L . , and Low , B . C . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin phosphorylation as a switch for actin cytoskeletal network and cell dynamics control . FEBS Lett . 579 , 577 – 585 . Lynch , G . , Kohler , S . , Leser , J . , Beil , M . , Garcia - Marin , L . J . , and Lutz , M . P . ( 2004 ) . The tyrosine kinase Yes regulates actin structure and secretion during pancreatic acinar cell damage in rats . Pﬂugers Arch . 447 , 445 – 451 . Muallem , S . , Kwiatkowska , K . , Xu , X . , and Yin , H . L . ( 1995 ) . Actin ﬁlament disassembly is a sufﬁcient ﬁnal trigger for exocytosis in nonexcitable cells . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 589 – 598 . Nozu , F . , Owyang , C . , and Tsunoda , Y . ( 2000 ) . Involvement of phosphoino - sitide 3 - kinase and its association with pp60src in cholecystokinin - stimulated pancreatic acinar cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 79 , 803 – 809 . O’Konski , M . S . , and Pandol , S . J . ( 1990 ) . Effects of caerulein on the apical cytoskeleton of the pancreatic acinar cell . J . Clin . Invest . 86 , 1649 – 1657 . O’Konski , M . S . , and Pandol , S . J . ( 1993 ) . Cholecystokinin JMV - 180 and caerulein effects on the pancreatic acinar cell cytoskeleton . Pancreas 8 , 638 – 646 . Pace , A . , Tapia , J . A . , Garcia - Marin , L . J . , and Jensen , R . T . ( 2006 ) . The Src family kinase , Lyn , is activated in pancreatic acinar cells by gastrointestinal hormones / neurotransmitters and growth factors which stimulate its associ - ation with numerous other signaling molecules . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1763 , 356 – 365 . Paluch , E . , Sykes , C . , Prost , J . , and Bornens , M . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic modes of the cortical actomyosin gel during cell locomotion and division . Trends Cell Biol . 16 , 5 – 10 . Pandol , S . J . , Saluja , A . K . , Imrie , C . W . , and Banks , P . A . ( 2007 ) . Acute pancreatitis : bench to the bedside . Gastroenterology 132 , 1127 – 1151 . Saito , I . , Hashimoto , S . , Saluja , A . , Steer , M . L . , and Meldolesi , J . ( 1987 ) . Intracellular transport of pancreatic zymogens during caerulein supramaxi - mal stimulation . Am . J . Physiol . 253 , G517 – G526 . Scheele , G . , Adler , G . , and Kern , H . ( 1987 ) . Exocytosis occurs at the lateral plasma membrane of the pancreatic acinar cell during supramaximal secret - agogue stimulation . Gastroenterology 92 , 345 – 353 . Torgerson , R . R . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . The actin - myosin cytoskeleton mediates reversible agonist - induced membrane blebbing . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2911 – 2922 . Watanabe , O . , Baccino , F . M . , Steer , M . L . , and Meldolesi , J . ( 1984 ) . Supra - maximal caerulein stimulation and ultrastructure of rat pancreatic acinar cell : early morphological changes during development of experimental pancreati - tis . Am . J . Physiol . 246 , G457 – G467 . Waterford , S . D . , Kolodecik , T . R . , Thrower , E . C . , and Gorelick , F . S . ( 2005 ) . Vacuolar ATPase regulates zymogen activation in pancreatic acini . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 5430 – 5434 . Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Integration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 23 – 30 . Weed , S . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin : coupling membrane dynam - ics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 20 , 6418 – 6434 . Actin Dynamics in Acinar Cell Blebbing Vol . 19 , May 2008 2347