1 By equating the Brownian # uctuations k „ , where k is Boltzmanns constant , to the energy stored in a cantilever beam with spring constant k b , we see that the equivalent force caused by the # uctuations is F " J k b ( k „ ) . At 300 K and for a spring constant of 40 , 000 pN / l m , F " 13 pN . Smaller spring constants , if and when available , will reduce this force in proportion to the square root of this constant . * Tel . : 001 - 919 - 660 - 5307 ; fax : 001 - 919 - 660 - 8963 . E - mail address : r . hochmuth @ duke . edu ( R . M . Hochmuth ) Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22 Review Micropipette aspiration of living cells Robert M . Hochmuth * Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science , Duke Uni v ersity , Durham , NC 27708 - 0300 , USA Abstract The mechanical behavior of living cells is studied with micropipette suction in which the surface of a cell is aspirated into a small glass tube while tracking the leading edge of its surface . Such edges can be tracked in a light microscope to an accuracy of $ 25 nm and suction pressures as small as 0 . 1 } 0 . 2 pN / l m 2 can be imposed on the cell . Both soft cells , such as neutrophils and red cells , and more rigid cells , such as chondrocytes and endothelial cells , are studied with this technique . Interpretation of the measurements with basic continuum models leads to values for a cell ’ s elastic and viscous properties . In particular , neutrophils are found to behave as a liquid drop with a cortical ( surface ) tension of about 30 pN / l m and a viscosity on the order of 100 Pa s . On the other hand , chondrocytes and endothelial cells behave as solids with an elastic modulus of the order of 500 pN / l m 2 ( 0 . 5 kPa ) . ( 1999 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction We study the mechanical properties of living cells in order to understand their response to stress in the circu - lation and the tissues . For example , by characterizing the response of white cells to an applied pressure we learn how these cells # ow through the smallest vessels of the body and migrate within tissue to sites of infection . In addition , by measuring the response of cells to applied forces and stresses , we learn about the underlying struc - ture of a cell . Does it behave like a liquid or a solid ? What molecular structure is responsible for its behavior ? How do mechanical and chemical stimuli alter its behavior ? How do we study and measure the mechanical proper - ties of the cell ( Hochmuth , 1987 , 1993 ; Waugh and Hoch - muth , 1995 ) ? The cell must be deformed in some way by a known force or stress and its deformation must be measured . Usually , the surface of the cell is depressed ( indented ) or extended . Several instruments including the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) , the optical trap ( laser tweezers ) and micropipette suction , ( the subject of this paper ) can do this . Each has its own strengths and weak - nesses . The AFM ( Weisenhorn et al . , 1993 ; Radmacher et al . , 1996 ) , which is available commercially , and a prede - cessor called the cell poker ( Daily and Elson , 1984 ; Zahalak et al . , 1990 ) , depress ( indent ) a surface with a probe that moves at constant velocity , hence producing an increasing force . The force produced by the AFM is proportional to the de # ection of a beam that is very sti ! compared to the apparent surface sti ! ness of the cell that is being deformed . Thus , small forces that are of the order of 10 } 15 pN will be masked by thermal # uctuations 1 . Also , the variable shape of a typical AFM probe will determine the nature of the force - deformation curve . The laser tweezers usually are limited to the measurement of small forces on the order of 50 pN , although more power - ful lasers and better alignment of the system can produce forces that are an order of magnitude larger than this . Here a small bead is captured in an optical trap , the bead is touched to the surface of a cell and then the cell is moved away from the adherent bead , thus extending the surface and , usually , pulling membrane tethers from the surface ( Dai and Sheetz , 1995 ; Dai et al . , 1997 ; Hochmuth et al . , 1996 ) . The force of extension is determined by the de # ection of the bead in the trap perpendicular to the optical axis . Indenting the surface with a bead in an 0021 - 9290 / 99 / $ - see front matter ( 1999 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . PII : S 0 0 2 1 - 9 2 9 0 ( 9 9 ) 0 0 1 7 5 - X Table 1 ‘ Natural a SI units at the level of the cell ‘ Micro SI a Application Distance 1 l m ( 10 ~ 6 m ) All ( m ) Force 1 pN ( 10 ~ 12 N ) Molecular bonds ‘ soft a cells ( N ) 1 nN ( 10 ~ 9 N ) Sti ! cells Pressure , stress 1 pN / l m 2 ( 1 Pa ) Soft cells ( blood cells ) ( Pa ) 1 nN / l m 2 ( 1 kPa ) Sti ! cells Tension 1 pN / l m ( 10 ~ 3 mN / m ) Cortical elasticity of soft cells ( mN / m ) 1 nN / l m ( 1 mN / m ) Elasticity of lipid bilayer optical trap is unstable in that the bead will tend to slide along the optical axis , although a restoring force is gener - ated when the bead is displaced along the optical axis and this may act to stabilize the bead . Finally , micropipette suction , discussed here , produces a deformation that is the opposite of that produced by the AFM in that the cell surface is extended into the pipette rather than depressed into the interior of the cell . A novel application of micro - pipette suction is the biointerface probe ( Evans et al . , 1995 ) . Here a nearly in # ated red cell or lipid bilayer vesicle is aspirated into a small micropipette until the surface of the membrane outside of the pipette is spherical . A bead is attached to the membrane at a point that is diametrically opposite to the mouth of the pipette . The de # ection of the bead is proportional to the force exerted on it and the spring constant for this de # ection ( force per unit de # ec - tion ) can be adjusted by adjusting the suction pressure . The device can measure piconewton - level forces . It is ideally suited for measuring molecular bond forces ( Mer - kel et al . , 1999 ) although it also could be used to depress a surface in a manner akin to the AFM , but with a spring constant that can be adjusted to be several orders of magnitude less than that of the AFM . How do we model the mechanical behavior of cells ? We are at a primitive stage of our modeling in that we use simple continuum models . The two most popular models for analyzing cellular deformation treat the cell either as a homogeneous elastic solid or as a liquid surrounded by an elastic cortical shell . Surprisingly , these models make good predictions of the deformation response of the cell to known suction forces produced by the pipette . This is so in spite of the fact that the cells in general consist of a complex cytoplasm with granules , various types of " laments , a nucleus , and dissolved proteins . A model at the other extreme from a continuum one is the tensegrity model ( Ingber , 1998 ) . Here the loads are borne by struts in compression and cables in tension . Clearly , complex cells have tensegrity - like elements ( Wang et al . , 1993 ) although it is not likely that a signi " cant compressive load is borne by struts in compression . Rather , because the water content of most cells in of the order of 70 % or more , compressive loads are borne either in their entirety by water ’ s hydrostatic , isotropic pressure or partially by a hy - drostatic pressure plus a normal stress produced by an isotropic compression of a cell ’ s internal elastic structure . The modeling of cellular deformation in the future may combine elements of both continuum models and tense - grity models . This may be especially important for cells attached to surfaces at points of focal adhesion where molecular cross bridging occurs . 2 . Units at the cellular level A set of derived units of the SI system is naturally suited to studies of the mechanical properties of the neutrophil . These ‘ natural a units are shown in Table 1 . Distance is measured in l m , because cells are of the order of 10 l m in diameter and , therefore , cellular deformation will be of the order of 1 l m or more . Forces needed to deform soft cells , such as red cells or white cells , are of the order of 10 } 100 pN while those exerted on sti ! cells such as endothelial cells or chondrocytes are of the order of 1 nN . Because the diameter of pipettes are of the order of 1 } 10 l m and the forces range from 10 pN to 1 nN , we measure stresses and pressures in units of either pN / l m 2 or nN / l m 2 . These units are very convenient and , it so happens , familiar because 1 pN / l m 2 " 1 Pa and , thus , 1 nN / l m 2 " 1 kPa . Some cells behave as liquid drops and , thus , have a characteristic surface tension or ‘ corti - cal a tension . The natural unit for this constant is pN / l m . The shear modulus of red cell membrane also is mea - sured in pN / l m . On the other hand , the expansion of a lipid bilayer membrane , which behaves as a two - dimen - sional liquid , requires much larger tensions and , there - fore , the natural unit in this case is nN / l m . Again , this is a very familiar unit because 1 nN / l m " 1 mN / m " 1 dyne / cm . The traditional way of reporting values for surface tension is in units of dyne / cm . 3 . Micropipette aspiration A schematic diagram of the micropipette aspiration system , excluding the manometer and the micromanipu - lator , is shown in Fig . 1 . Fig . 1 ( a ) shows a common application where a cell suspended in a saline solution is partially aspirated into the mouth of the pipette . The round shape occurs either naturally in the case of white cells or spontaneously when cells are detached from a surface . As we will discuss , cells can behave as either a solid or a liquid . The response in either case to an aspiration pressure is similar until a hemispherical pro - jection is formed in the pipette . Beyond that point , a fur - ther increase in the suction pressure causes a liquid - like cell with a constant cortical tension to # ow completely into the pipette ( Evans and Yeung , 1989 ) while the sur - face of a solid cell will extend ( project ) into the pipette to 16 R . M . Hochmuth / Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22 Fig . 1 . Two micropipettes in a chamber . A pneumatic micromanipula - tor controls the movement of a micropipette along three orthogonal axes . ( a ) A spherical cell being aspirated into a micropipette with a suction pressure * P . ( b ) An attached cell being aspirated into a pip - ette . ( c ) A closely " tting cell or bead moving freely in a pipette like a piston in a cylinder . When static , the suction pressure times the cross - sectional area of the pipette equals the attachment force F . Fig . 2 . The tracking of a neutrophil as it moves freely in a pipette towards a " xed bead held by a second pipette . When * D " 0 , the cell has just touched the bead . At this point , the pressure is reversed and the cell either moves freely in the pipette and away from the bead ( dashed line ) or adheres to the bead and , eventually ceases its motion ( open circles ) . The cell motion of an adhering cell does not cease immediately becauseof the stretching of an elastic microvillus . This " gure shows that the edge of a cell can be tracked manually in monochromatic light with a cursor imposed electronically on the video screen to an accuracy of approximately $ 25 nm . ( Figure adapted from Shao et al . , 1998 . ) a new equilibrium position ( Theret et al . , 1988 ) . Fig . 1 ( b ) depicts the aspiration of a cell into a micropipette when the cell adheres to a bead . For example , the cell could be an endothelial cell cultured on a microcarrier bead with the microcarrier bead being held on its opposite side by another pipette . The resolution of the image of the aspi - rated portion of an attached cell is greatly improved when the cell is attached to a curved surface . Fig . 1 ( c ) shows a relatively new application in which a freely moving cell or bead subjected to a pressure drop in the pipette is allowed to adhere to another cell or bead held by a second pipette ( Shao and Hochmuth , 1996 ) . In all cases , the suction pressure and the location and move - ment of the edge of the cell in the pipette must be measured . The minimum value for the suction pressure * P is given by the minimum displacement downward of the water reservoir , which controls the hydrostatic head * h . Thus , * P . * / " o g * h . * / + 0 . 025 pN l m 2 , ( 1 ) where the minimum height adjustment of the reservoir is * h . * / + 2 . 5 l m . In practice this resolution is not achieved because of # uctuations in the system and be - cause of a slow drift in the null ( zero ) setting , probably because of evaporation . A practical lower bound is of the order of 0 . 1 } 0 . 2 pN / l m 2 . It is likely that the drift in the null setting , which is the point where there is no move - ment of the # uid in the pipette , is caused by evaporation which changes the curvature of the interface shown in Fig . 1 . For a nominal water surface tension of 50 nN / l m at the air } water interface and a radius of curvature of 1000 l m , the pressure drop across this interface would be ( 50 ] 10 3 / 1000 ) pN / l m 2 " 50 pN / l m 2 . Thus , a 1 % change , say , in this curvature caused by evaporation would cause a change in the zero pressure setting of 0 . 5 pN / l m . In the winter when the dew points are low , evaporation can be signi " cant and the null point must be checked every few minutes when working at the lower range of the suction pressures . The vapor pressure of water at room temperature limits the maximum suction pressure . Thus , the max - imum suction pressure is of the order of 96 nN / l m 2 . The results of the manual tracking of an edge with a cursor on the video screen is shown in Fig . 2 , which is adapted from the work of Shao et al . ( 1998 ) . Here a neu - trophil that moves freely in a pipette , as illustrated by Fig . 1 ( c ) , has adhered at a single point to a bead coated with an antibody to the membrane receptor . The bead is held in place by a second pipette . Initially , we create a small , " xed suction pressure by lowering the reservoir so that the cell moves slowly away from the bead . In Fig . 2 the suction pressure is 0 . 5 pN / l m 2 . We impose a small , positive air pressure on the water surface in the reservoir to move the cell towards the bead . Once the cell contacts the bead , we suddenly release the air pressure , which causes the cell to move away from the bead . If no adhesion occurs , the cell moves along the dashed line . Because adhesion occurs in this example , the motion of R . M . Hochmuth / Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22 17 Fig . 3 . Comparison of a human neutrophil ( a ) to a chondrocyte ( b ) . The neutrophil has a diameter of about 8 l m while the majority of chon - drocytes have diameters between about 12 and 16 l m . The scale bars indicate 2 l m , but note that the signi " cant shrinkage of the cell has occurred during the preparation of the cells for scanning electron microscopy . Fig . 4 . A neutrophil and a chondrocyte each being aspirated into a micropipette . The photomicrographs of the chondrocyte are adapted from Jones et al . ( 1999 ) . The scale bars indicate 5 l m . the cell is retarded and an equilibrium state is ap - proached asymptotically as shown by the experimental data points . In this case a small microvillus is being stretched to a length of about 1 l m . As we see in Fig . 2 , the # uctuations in the measurements near and at equilib - rium are of the order of $ 0 . 025 l m . Thus , the move - ment of an edge as observed in the optical microscope in monochromatic light can be tracked manually to an accuracy that is at least one - tenth of the wavelength of light . The force F on a static cell in a micropipette is simply the suction pressure * P times the cross sectional area of the pipette p R 2 1 . In the case of Fig . 2 , with a pipette diameter of about 10 l m , the force acting on the static cell is about ( 0 . 5 pN / l m 2 ) ( p / 4 ) ( 10 l m ) 2 " 40 pN . But as long as the cell is moving because of the stretching of the microvillus in this case , the force on the cell will be less than that exerted on the static cell . Its value is ( Shao and Hochmuth , 1996 ) F " * P p R 2 1 A 1 ! ; 5 ; & B , ( 2 ) where ; & is the free motion velocity of the cell ( the dashed curve in Fig . 2 ) and ; 5 is the velocity of the attached ( tethered ) cell . Note the ; 5 varies from an initial value equal to ; & when the force is zero according to Eq . ( 2 ) to a value of zero which gives the maximum force on the cell equal to the pressure drop times the cross - sec - tional area . We see that the fundamental independent ( imposed ) experimental variable in micropipette suction is the suc - tion pressure * P . The dependent variable is the response of the cell surface to the suction pressure . This response is either the extension of the surface of the cell into the pipette ‚ 1 or the movement of a cell or bead away from a point of attachment as shown by Fig . 2 . Often ‚ 1 is scaled with respect to the radius of the pipette : ‚ 1 / R 1 . Hence , when this ratio is unity , we have a hemispherical or a hemispherical - like projection into the pipette . 4 . Continuum models at equilibrium : liquid vs . solid Fig . 3 shows a scanning electron micrograph of two cells , a human neutrophil ( a ) and a chondrocyte ( b ) , that look nearly identical to each other except for their di ! er - ence in size . ( The diameter of a neutrophil is about 8 l m ( Ting - Beall et al . , 1993 ) while that of a chondrocyte varies between 12 and 16 l m ( Jones et al . , 1999 ) . Fig . 4 shows the same two kinds of cells after they have been aspirated completely into a micropipette . It is impossible to say if a cell behaves as a solid or a liquid just from an examina - tion of these two " gures . In fact , the neutrophil behaves as a liquid ( Evans and Yeung , 1989 ) while the chon - drocyte behaves as a solid ( Jones et al . , 1999 ) . Micropipette suction is unique in which it can clearly and dramatically show if a cell behaves as a liquid drop with constant cortical tension . This comes directly from the law of Laplace when applied to the suction of a cell into a micropipette until ‚ 1 / R 1 " 1 , the point where the cell forms a hemispherical projection into the pipette . For this case , * P " 2 „ # A 1 R 1 ! 1 R # B , A * P " * P # when ‚ 1 R 1 " 1 B , ( 3 ) where „ # is the cortical tension , R # is the radius of the cell outside the pipette and * P # is the critical pressure when ‚ 1 / R 1 " 1 . Because of the small suction pressures relative to the osmotic pressure of isotonic saline , the cell will deform at constant volume . A further increase in the suction pressure beyond the critical value will cause the radius of the cell outside the pipette to decrease and its 18 R . M . Hochmuth / Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22 Fig . 5 . The aspiration into a pipette of a liquid drop with a constant cortical tension „ # according to ( 3 ) . ‚ 1 is the length of extension of the drop into the pipette and R 1 is the radius of the pipette . When ‚ 1 / R 1 ’ 1 , the results are no longer stable to an increase in pressure . Thus , the cell # ows freely into the pipette when the pressure is increased beyond the point where ‚ 1 / R 1 " 1 . Cells such as neutrophils that # ow freely into pipettes at this point behave as liquid drops . Fig . 6 . Aspiration of a # accid ( a ) and swollen ( b ) red cell into a pipette . The diameter of the # accid red cell is approximately 8 l m and that of the swollen cell is about 6 l m . The scale bars indicate 5 l m . reciprocal to increase . It will be impossible to satisfy Eq . ( 3 ) for a cell at equilibrium and , therefore , the cell will # ow into the pipette , as shown for the human neutrophil by Evans and Yeung ( 1989 ) . A plot of Eq . ( 3 ) for the constant volume deformation of an 8 l m diameter liquid drop into pipettes of di ! erent diameters is shown in Fig . 5 . We can see in this " gure that the initial response of the cell for ‚ 1 / R 1 ( 1 is almost linear , which led others to treat the neutrophil as an elastic solid ( Schmid - Scho K n - bein et al . , 1981 ) . Nevertheless , it is impossible to satisfy Eq . ( 3 ) when the pressure is increased beyond the point where ‚ 1 / R 1 " 1 . Note , however , that for small diameter pipettes , the pressure is almost constant beyond this point . This is so because the cell radius barely decreases as the cell is drawn further into the pipette . There is another piece of evidence for the liquid behav - ior of the neutrophil besides its ability to # ow smoothly into a pipette once the suction pressure exceeds the critical pressure . That is , the cell behaves according to Eq . ( 3 ) when a neutrophil is aspirated to its critical point ( when ‚ 1 / R 1 " 1 ) into pipettes of di ! erent diameters for a constant value for „ # of 35 pN / l m ( Evans and Yeung , 1989 ) . Nevertheless , when Needham and Hochmuth ( 1992 ) aspirated cells into tapered pipettes so as to pro - duce a series of stable states and a signi " cant amount of area expansion , they saw evidence that the cortical ten - sion of the neutrophil could increase . They correlated this with the relative increase in apparent surface area of the neutrophil as it was aspirated further down the tapered tube and proposed a relative area expansion modulus of K A " 39 pN / l m and an extrapolated value for the cortical tension before any expansion of area of „ # " 24 pN / l m . Other analyses of neutrophils deformed by micro - pipette aspiration based on the solid model of Schmid - Scho K nbein et al . ( 1981 ) include work by Chien et al . ( 1987 ) . However , in their work only small deformations of the cell were studied whereby the cell appears to behave as an elastic solid as shown in Fig . 5 for the case where ‚ 1 / R 1 ( 1 . In an attempt to duplicate the # ow behavior of neu - trophils when they are aspirated into a pipette ( Evans and Yeung , 1989 ; Needham and Hochmuth , 1990 ) , Dong et al . ( 1991 ) used a Maxwell liquid to model the # ow of a neutrophil . However , even this more complicated model , compared to a Newtonian one of Evans and Yeung ( 1989 ) , would not " t the experimental data unless the values for the viscosity and elasticity of the cytoplasm were allowed to change continuously as the cell # owed into the pipette . A completely satisfactory constitutive equation for the # ow behavior of the cytoplasm of neu - trophils and other granulocytes has yet to be found . The natural shape of the human red cell , unlike most cells in suspension , is not spherical . Rather , it is shaped like a biconcave disk as shown in Fig . 6 ( a ) . Because its interior is a Newtonian liquid , the shape of the red cell comes from the natural shape of its membrane . The membrane has a shear rigidity ( Evans , 1973 ) in which it does not # ow into a pipette when subjected to a suction pressure as shown in Fig . 6 ( a ) . This resistance to shear comes from extension of the membrane in the radial direction and compression along the circumference as the cell is aspirated further into the pipette . This deformation has been analyzed based upon a constant area assump - tion ( Evans , 1973 ; Chien et al . , 1978 ; Waugh and Evans , 1979 ) . Chien et al . linearized this result to give * P ) R 1 k " 2 . 45 * ‚ 1 R 1 , A ‚ 1 R 1 B ’ 1 , ( 4 ) R . M . Hochmuth / Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22 19 Fig . 7 . Aspiration of a chondrocyte and an endothelial cell into a micropipette . Data for the chondrocyte are taken from Jones et al . ( 1999 ) and that for the endothelial cell are taken from Theret et al . ( 1988 ) . Chondrocytes continue to behave as an elastic solid for values for ‚ 1 / R 1 that are signi " cantly greater than one ( Jones et al . , 1999 ) . where k is the shear elastic modulus of the membrane . From Eq . ( 4 ) we see that the experimental determination of the slope of the * P vs . * ‚ 1 line gives a value for the elastic shear modulus k . Note that this value is propor - tional to the pipette radius squared . Because pipettes with radii that are only a factor of two to four times the wavelength of green light are used in these experiments , as shown in Fig . 6 ( a ) , errors in measurement of at least 20 % are common . In all cases , typical values for k are of the order of 6 } 9 pN / l m ( Hochmuth , 1987 ; Waugh and Hochmuth , 1995 ) . We make an interesting observation at this point and note that the shear modulus for the red cell membrane is about one - third to one - fourth that of the cortical tension of the neutrophil . Discher et al . ( 1994 , 1998 ) have shown that the underlying cytoskeleton of the red cell mem - brane possesses both a shear elasticity and a network dilatation elasticity and the ratio of the shear to the area elasticity is of the order of 1 : 2 to 1 : 4 . This suggests that a similar cytoskeletal network may exist at the inner surface of the neutrophil . When swollen as shown in Fig . 6 ( b ) , the red cell mem - brane has an extraordinary resistance to further expan - sion ( Waugh and Evans , 1989 ) . The membrane behaves as a two dimensional liquid with a tension at lysis of the order of 10 nN / l m and with an expansion modulus on the order of 500 nN / l m ( Hochmuth , 1987 ; Waugh and Hochmuth , 1995 ) . Lipid bilayers made from a variety of phospholipids with and without cholesterol show an extraordinary range in values for the area expansion modulus from about 57 to 1734 nN / l m ( Needham and Nunn , 1990 ) . When cells that behave as solids are aspirated into a micropipette , obviously they do not # ow into the pip - ette when the aspiration length ‚ 1 exceeds the pipette radius R 1 . The aspiration length increases linearly with the suction pressure regardless of the value for ‚ 1 as shown by the experimental data in Fig . 7 for chon - drocytes ( Jones et al . , 1999 ) and endothelial cells ( Theret et al . , 1988 ) . Jones et al . ( 1999 ) further show that chon - drocytes continue to behave as an elastic solid for values for ‚ 1 / R 1 that are signi " cantly greater than one . In both cases the cells are spherical in shape . This is the natural shape for the chondrocyte and the shape assumed by an endothelial cell when it is detached from the surface on which it is cultured . Note that the plot in Fig . 7 has the independent experimental variable plotted along the y - axis ( ordinate ) so that the slope of the line is proportional to the elasticity of the material and that Fig . 7 can be compared to the theoretical plots shown in Fig . 5 . Pro - bably it is a coincidence that the results in Fig . 7 for both chondrocyte and endothelial cell are identical . Similar but not identical responses are expected because both cells do have similar values for their elastic moduli . The analysis of Theret et al . ( 1988 ) for an in " nite , homogeneous half - space drawn into a micropipette gives the following result : * P " 2 p 3 E ‚ 1 R 1 U , ( 5 ) where E is the Young ’ s modulus for the homogeneous solid , * P is the suction pressure and U is a term that depends weakly on the ratio of the thickness of the pipette wall to the radius of the pipette . A typical value for U is U + 2 . 1 . Thus , the coe $ cient in Eq . ( 5 ) is ( 2 p U / 3 ) " 4 . 4 . Because the slope of the line in Fig . 7 is 452 pN / l m 2 , the value for E in this case is only E " 103 pN / l m 2 . Endothelial cells subjected to a shear stress of 1 pN / l m 2 for 3 and 14 h had a value for the Young ’ s modulus , as calculated by Eq . ( 5 ) , of E + 400 pN / l m 2 ( Theret et al . , 1988 ) . ( In a later study by Sato et al . ( 1990 ) of the viscoelastic response of endothe - lial cells to be discussed below , the sum of the two elastic constants from this study gives a value of about 280 pN / l m 2 . ) Young ’ s modulus for chondrocytes is slightly larger : E " 650 pN / l m 2 with a very large stan - dard deviation approximately equal to the value for E ( Jones et al . , 1999 ) . It is possible to calculate an equivalent cortical tension for solid cells that are aspirated into pipettes by equating Eqs . ( 3 ) } ( 5 ) at the point where ‚ 1 / R 1 " 1 : ( „ # ) % 26 * 7 ! - % / 5 + 2 . 2 ER 1 1 ! A R 1 R # B + 2 . 2 ER 1 , ( 6 ) 20 R . M . Hochmuth / Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22 2 When the cell " rst contacts the pipette , the leading edge ‘ jumps a into the pipette , indicating a decidedly non - Newtonian behavior at the beginning of the entry process . where we have assumed in Eq . ( 6 ) that the radius of the pipette is signi " cantly smaller than the radius of the cell . Thus , for a typical value of E " 500 pN / l m 2 and a typi - cal pipette radius of 2 l m , ( „ # ) % 26 * 7 ! - % / 5 " 2200 pN / l m " 2 . 2 nN / l m . This value is 100 times larger than the corti - cal tension of the neutrophil , indicating that endothelial cells and chondrocytes are signi " cantly sti ! er than the extraordinarily soft neutrophil ( and red cell ) . The process of detachment of endothelial cells from their substrate could change their mechanical properties . Experiments should be performed with the cells attached to the surface on which they are cultured , as illustrated schematically by Fig . 1 ( b ) . However , in this case the in " nite half - space model is not appropriate . Other models , probably numerical ones using " nite element analysis , need to be developed . The other di $ culty in determining the mechanical properties of endothelial cells is that the endothelial cell remodels when subjected to mechanical stress ( Sato et al . , 1987 ) . The process of deforming an attached cell with a micropipette may cause it to sti ! en as it remodels its mechanical structure in response to the deformation . However , if the remodel - ing process is su $ ciently slow , then the baseline elasticity could be measured and the change in the elasticity with time as the cell remodels could be studied . Portions of cells , such as the microvilli on the surface of neutrophils ( Fig . 3 ( a ) ) also respond elastically to a force as shown by Fig . 2 ( Shao et al . , 1998 ) . This experiment , described above , determines the elastic spring constant for neutrophil microvilli . Its value is about 40 pN / l m , which is similar to the value for the cortical tension of the neutrophil and about four times bigger than the shear modulus of red cell membrane . It is similar in value to the area expansion modulus of the neutrophil measured by Needham and Hochmuth ( 1992 ) . Again we are led to speculate that the elastic cytoskeleton of the red cell membrane is similar to that of the neu - trophil membrane . 5 . Viscous continuum models : liquid and solid As we have discussed , the neutrophil behaves as a liquid drop and # ows readily into a micropipette of smaller diameter . The rate at which a cell # ows into a pipette d ‚ 1 / d t is constant over much of the entry phase , indicating a Newtonian - like behavior 2 . Thus , it is easily measured and then used to calculate the viscosity of the cytoplasm of the neutrophil ( Evans and Yeung , 1989 ; Needham and Hochmuth , 1990 ) . A simple expression for the calculation of a value for the viscosity g is ( Needham and Hochmuth , 1990 ) g " R 1 * p A d ‚ 1 d t B m ( 1 ! R 1 / R ) , ( 7 ) where ‚ 1 is the length of the extended portion of the cell in the pipette and R is the radius of the spherical portion outside the pipette at the point where d ‚ 1 / d t is measured . The constant m is obtained from the theory of Evans and Yeung ( 1989 ) and has a value of m + 6 . Somewhat larger values for m are suggested by the recent and extensive numerical solutions to this problem by Drury and De - mbo ( 1999 ) . In any case , Needham and Hochmuth ( 1990 ) used Eq . ( 7 ) to calculate a value of 135 pN s / l m 2 ( 135 Pa s ) for the viscosity of cytoplasm at room temper - ature for 151 neutrophils from " ve di ! erent donors . Re - call that the viscosity of water is about 10 ~ 3 Pa s at room temperature , so the viscosity of cytoplasm is about 10 5 times larger than that of water . With fewer cells and donors and for studies at lower suction pressures , Evans and Yeung ( 1989 ) obtained a value of 200 Pa s for the viscosity of cytoplasm . Micropipette suction also can be used to study the viscous response of solid cells such as endothelial cells and chondrocytes . This is done by subjecting the surface of the cell to a step change in pressure and measuring the rate at which the extended length into the pipette ‚ 1 approaches a steady - state value such as those shown in Fig . 7 . Sato et al . ( 1990 ) analyzed this problem based upon the semi - in " nite half - space model and a standard viscoelastic solid model in which a Maxwell element ( elastic and viscous elements in series ) is in parallel with another elastic element . Their experiments were done with cultured aortic endothelial cells from pigs . The cells were detached from the surface either by chemical or mechanical means . In either case the typical value for the viscosity based on calculations with the standard vis - coelastic solid model is about 7500 Pa s . This result indi - cates that the viscosity of the cytoplasm of endothelial cells is signi " cantly larger than that of neutrophils . Al - though no value for viscosity was given by Jones et al . ( 1999 ) in their study of chondrocytes , the very slow vis - coelastic creep into a suction pipette when the chon - drocyte was subjected to a step change in pressure indicates similarly large values for the viscosity of the chondrocyte in comparison to that of the neutrophil . 6 . Discussion It should be clear that micropipette suction o ! ers a versatile method for measuring the material properties of living cells . Its range of suction pressures , from 0 . 1 pN / l m 2 to almost atmospheric , and forces , from about 10 pN to 10 4 nN , is unsurpassed by other R . M . Hochmuth / Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22 21 techniques . Edges can be tracked to an accuracy of $ 25 nm . It can measure the elastic and viscous proper - ties of very soft materials like red cells and white cells and those of sti ! er , more viscous cells such as endothelial cells and chondrocytes . However , it is not a perfect instrument because in its basic form there can be signi " cant evapor - ation in the chamber and a drift in the null ( zero ) setting for the pressure . Also , it demands training and skill on the part of the experimenter . Finally , as with all experi - ments that deform cells and cell surfaces , the results must be interpreted with the use of mechanical models . At present , only continuum and , usually , homogeneous models have been solved , either exactly or by " nite ele - ment analyses . In the future , more complex models with internal structure , multiple phases and domains and complex boundary conditions are needed for the correct interpretation of experiments with the micropipette . Acknowledgements I greatly acknowledge the help of H . Ping Ting - Beall in performing many of these experiments , taking the photo - graphs and reading the manuscript . This work was sup - ported by NIH - NHLBI grant HL23728 . References Chien , S . , Sung , K . L . P . , Schmid - Scho K nbein , G . W . , Skalak , R . , Schmal - zer , E . A . , Usami , S . , 1987 . Rheology of leukocytes . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 516 , 333 } 347 . Chien , S . , Sung , K . L . P . , Skalak , R . , Usami , S . , Usami , A . C . , 1978 . Theoretical and experimental studies on viscoelastic properties of erythrocyte membrane . Biophysical Journal 24 , 463 } 487 . Dai , J . , Sheetz , M . P . , 1995 . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophysical Journal 68 , 988 } 996 . Dai , J . , Ting - Beall , H . P . , Sheetz , M . P . , 1997 . The secretion - coupled endocytosis correlates with membrane tension changes in RBL 2H3 cells . Journal of General Physiology 110 , 1 } 10 . Daily , B . , Elson , E . L . , 1984 . Cell Poking : Determination of the elastic area compressibility modulus of the erythrocyte membrane . Biophysical Journal 45 , 671 } 682 . Discher , D . E . , Boal , D . H . , Boey , S . K . , 1998 . Simulations of the eryth - rocyte cytoskeleton at large deformation . II . Micropipette aspira - tion . Biophysical Journal 75 , 1584 } 1597 . Discher , D . E . , Mohandas , N . , Evans , E . A . , 1994 . Molecular maps of red cell deformation : hidden elasticity and in situ connectivity . Science 266 , 1032 } 1035 . Dong , C . , Skalak , R . , Sung , K . L . P . , 1991 . Cytoplasmic rheology of passive neutrophils . Biorheology 28 , 557 } 567 . Drury , J . L . , Dembo , M . , 1999 . Hydrodynamics of micropipette aspira - tion . Biophysical Journal 76 , 110 } 128 . Evans , E . A . , 1973 . New membrane concept applied to the analysis of # uid shear and micropipette - deformed red blood cells . Biophysical Journal 13 , 941 } 954 . Evans , E . , Ritchie , K . , Merkel , R . , 1995 . Sensitive force technique to probe molecular adhesion and structural linkages at biological interfaces . Biophysical Journal 68 , 2580 } 2587 . Evans , E . , Yeung , A . , 1989 . Apparent viscosity and cortical tension of blood granulocytes determined by micropipet aspiration . Biophysi - cal Journal 56 , 151 } 160 . Hochmuth , R . M . , 1987 . Properties of red blood cells . In : Skalak , R . , Chien , S . ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Bioengineering . McGraw - Hill Book Company , New York , pp . 12 . 1 } 12 . 17 . Hochmuth , R . M . , 1993 . Measuring the mechanical properties of indi - vidual human blood cells . Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 115 , 515 } 519 . Hochmuth , R . M . , Shao , J . - Y . , Dai , J . , Sheetz , M . P . , 1996 . Deformation and # ow of membranes into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophysical Journal 70 , 359 } 369 . Ingber , D . E . , 1998 . The architecture of life , Scienti " c American 48 } 57 . Jones , W . R . , Ting - Beall , H . P . , Lee , G . M , Kelley , S . S . , Hochmuth , R . M . , Guilak , F . , 1999 . Alterations in the Young ’ s modules and volumetric properties of chondrocytes isolated from normal and osteoarthritic human cartilage . Journal of Biomechanics , in press . Merkel , R . , Nassoy , P . , Leung , A . , Richie , K . , Evans , E . , 1999 . Energy landscapes of receptor - ligand bonds explored with dynamic force spectroscopy . Nature 397 , 50 } 53 . Needham , D . , Hochmuth , R . M . , 1990 . Rapid # ow of passive neu - trophils into a 4 l m pipet and measurement of cytoplasmic viscos - ity . Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 112 , 269 } 276 . Needham , D . , Hochmuth , R . M . , 1992 . A sensitive measure of surface stress in the resting neutrophil . Biophysical Journal 61 , 1664 } 1670 . Needham , D . , Nunn , R . S . , 1990 . Elastic deformation and failure of lipid bilayer membranes containing cholesterol . Biophysical Journal 58 , 997 } 1009 . Radmacher , M . , Fritz , M . , Kacher , C . M . , Cleveland , J . P . , Hansma , P . K . , 1996 . Measuring the viscoelastic properties of human platelets with the atomic force microscope . Biophysical Journal 70 , 556 } 567 . Sato , M . , Levesque , M . J . , Nerem , R . M . , 1987 . Micropipette aspiration of cultured bovine aortic endothelial cells exposed to shear stress . Arteriosclerosis 7 , 276 } 286 . Sato , M . , Theret , D . P . , Wheeler , L . T . , Ohshima , N . , Nerem , R . M . , 1990 . Application of the micropipette technique to the measurement of cultured porcine aortic endothelial cell viscoelastic properties . Jour - nal of Biomechanical Engineering 112 , 263 } 268 . Schmid - Scho K nbein , G . W . , Sung , K . - L . P . , Tozeren , H . , Skalak , R . , Chien , S . , 1981 . Passive mechanical properties of human leukocytes . Biophysical Journal 36 , 243 } 256 . Shao , J . - Y . , Hochmuth , R . M . , 1996 . Micropipette suction for measuring piconewton forces of adhesion and tether formation from neu - trophil membranes . Biophysical Journal 71 , 2892 } 2901 . Shao , J . Y . , Ting - Beall , H . P . , Hochmuth , R . M . , 1998 . Static and dynamic lengths of neutrophil microvilli . Proceedingof National Academy of Sciences USA 95 , 6797 } 6802 . Theret , D . P . , Levesque , M . J . , Sato , M . , Nerem , R . M . , Wheeler , L . T . , 1988 . The application of a homogeneous half - space model in the analysis of endothelial cell micropipette measurements . Transac - tions of the ASME 110 , 190 } 199 . Ting - Beall , H . P . , Needham , D . , Hochmuth , R . M . , 1993 . Volume and osmotic properties of human neutrophils . Blood 81 , 2774 } 2780 . Wang , N . , Butler , J . P . , Ingber , D . E . , 1993 . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 260 , 1124 } 1127 . Waugh , R . , Evans , E . A . , 1979 . Thermoelasticity of red blood cell mem - brane . Biophysical Journal 26 , 115 } 132 . Waugh , R . E . , Hochmuth , R . M . , 1995 . Mechanics and deformability of hematocytes . In : Bronzino , J . D . ( Ed . ) , The Biomedical Engineering Handbook . CRC Press , Boca Raton , pp . 474 } 486 . Weisenhorn , A . L . , Khorsandi , M . , Kasas , S . , Gotzos , V . , Butt , H . - J . , 1993 . Deformation and height anomaly of soft surfaces studied with an AFM . Nanotechnology 4 , 106 } 113 . Zahalak , G . I . , McConnaughey , W . B . , Elson , E . L . , 1990 . Determination of cellular mechanical properties by cell poking , with an application to leukocytes . Journal Biomechanical Engineering 112 , 283 } 294 . 22 R . M . Hochmuth / Journal of Biomechanics 33 ( 2000 ) 15 } 22