Available online at www . sciencedirect . com BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 Critical - like self - organization and natural selection : Two facets of a single evolutionary process ? Julianne D . Halley ∗ , David A . Winkler CSIRO Molecular and Health Technologies , Private Bag 10 , Clayton South MDC 3169 , Australia Received 14 September 2007 ; received in revised form 18 January 2008 ; accepted 21 January 2008 Dedicated to Valentina Janzen ( deceased ) . Abstract We argue that critical - like dynamics self - organize relatively easily in non - equilibrium systems , and that in biological systems such dynamics serve as templates upon which natural selection builds further elaborations . These critical - like states can be modiﬁed by natural selection in two fundamental ways , reﬂecting the selective advantage ( if any ) of heritable variations either among avalanche participants or among whole systems . First , reproducing ( avalanching ) units can differentiate , as units adopt systematic behavioural variations . Second , whole systems that are exposed to natural selection can become increasingly or decreasingly critical . We suggest that these interactions between SOC - like dynamics and natural selection have profound consequences for biological systems because they could have facilitated the evolution of division of labour , compartmentalization and computation , key features of biological systems . The logical conclusion of these ideas is that the fractal geometry of nature is anything but coincidental , and that natural selection is itself a fractal process , occurring on many temporal and spatial scales . Crown Copyright © 2008 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : Natural selection ; Self - organization ; Fractal geometry ; Criticality 1 . Introduction Fluctuations inevitably appear in any system having many degrees of freedom . At static equilibrium , such ﬂuctuations decay and ultimately disappear ( Chaisson , 2004 ) . However , under driving or non - equilibrium conditions , ﬂuctuations often becometoogreatforasystemtodamp , andsystemsmayundergo reorganization towards a dynamic equilibrium ( Chaisson , 2004 ; Nicolis and Prigogine , 1977 ) . Provided energy input is maintained , such non - equilibrium systems develop complex spatiotemporal patterning , that is , they ‘self - organize’ ( Ball , 2001 ; Gollub and Langer , 1999 ) . Self - organization has profound implications for our understanding of chemical and biological pattern formation ( Ball , 2001 ; Bonabeau et al . , 1997 ; Camazine et al . , 2001 ; Farmer and Packard , 1986 ; Ferri ` ere and Fox , 1995 ; Gisiger , 2001 ; Glass and Mackey , 1988 ; Gleick , 1987 ; Kauffman , 1995 ; Nicolis , 1995 ; Papa and da Silva , 1997 ; Parisi , 1993 ; Ruthen , 1993 ; Sol´e et al . , 1999 ; Theise , 2004 ) , although the concept is frequently overlooked in standard textbooks on ∗ Corresponding author . Tel . : + 61 3 9545 8113 ; fax : + 61 3 9545 2446 . E - mail address : julianne . halley @ csiro . au ( J . D . Halley ) . chemistry and biology . In biology , this is partly due to a lack of understanding about how self - organization integrates with the modern evolutionary synthesis , particularly natural selection . Although the principal claims of modern evolutionary biol - ogy are accepted as fundamentally valid by most biologists ( Futuyma , 2005 ) , the tacit implication is that natural selec - tion is the primary source of order in biological organisms ( Kauffman , 2000 ) . However , this is cast into doubt by increas - ing evidence that self - organization also plays a pivotal role in the behaviour , development and evolution of biological organ - isms . Self - organization is particularly striking at the subcellular level , where the behaviour of matter is profoundly affected by physical and chemical interactions ( Lehn , 2002 ; Whitesides and Grzybowski , 2002 ) . For example , Denton et al . ( 2003 ) argue that even though numerous subcellular processes reﬂect the sculpt - ing inﬂuence of natural selection , the core order at such scales necessarily reﬂects self - organization and physical law , because it is this that directly determines the behaviour and arrangement of atoms and molecules . Although there is abundant evidence that natural selection is a powerful force in evolution , a growing number of researchers argue that it necessarily acts in concert with self - organization ( Kauffman , 1991 , 1993 , 1995 ; Sol´e et al . , 1999 ; Weber , 1998 ) . 0303 - 2647 / $ – see front matter . Crown Copyright © 2008 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biosystems . 2008 . 01 . 005 J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 149 From the smallest of scales to the largest , self - organization is present at most ( if not all ) levels of biology ( Aon et al . , 2004 ; Bassingthwaighte et al . , 1994 ; Bolliger et al . , 2003 ; Elbert et al . , 1994 ; Hess and Mikhailov , 1994 ; Kaplan and Kaplan , 1991 ; Mangel , 1994 ; Seeley , 2002 ; Sornette , 2000 ; Tabony , 1994 ) . This parallels the ubiquity of self - organization in the non - biological world . The striking complexity that exists in both living and non - living non - equilibrium systems , as well as the Universe as a whole , raises questions that are absolutely fundamental to our understanding of the nature of physical laws ( Kadanoff , 1987 ) . In evolutionary biology , it has become apparent that there is a need for new theoretical frameworks that explain how nat - ural selection and self - organization interact ( Kauffman , 1995 ; Richardson , 2001 ; Sol´e et al . , 1999 ) . In this paper we pro - pose the basic elements of such a theory . We explain how self - organized systems that are supercritical ( branching ratio > 1 ) in limiting environments are driven back to critical - like states ( branching ratios near 1 ) , and how this process pro - vides a fractal - like template on which natural selection can act . 2 . Self - organized Criticality ( SOC ) The theory of self - organized criticality ( Bak et al . , 1987 , 1988 ; Jensen , 1998 ) , which proposed that certain non - equilibrium systems self - organize to critical states analogous to critical equilibrium systems , attracted a great deal of atten - tion because it could account for the fractal properties of nature ( Mandelbrot , 1982 ) . The publication of SOC theory stimulated an enormous amount of research , spanning almost every sci - entiﬁc discipline ( Bak , 1996 ; Clar et al . , 1996 ; Freeman and Watkins , 2002 ; Jensen , 1998 ; Turcotte , 1999 ) . The characteris - tic ‘punctuated equilibrium’ behaviour of SOC systems , where periods of stasis intersperse bursts of activity , seems especially conspicuous in such diverse examples as biological evolution and earthquakes ( the Gutenberg - Richter law ) ( Bak , 1996 ; Bak and Paczuski , 1993 , 1995 ) . These particular examples suggest that there may be little difference between large catastrophic events and small ordinary events which fall on the same distri - bution ( Bak and Paczuski , 1995 ) . In the context of evolution , this suggests that mass extinctions need not have resulted from exter - nal events , such as comet impact , but may reﬂect internal system dynamics . Similarly , the traditional classiﬁcation of solar ﬂares into nanoﬂares , microﬂares and giant ﬂares may be superﬂuous if all emerge similarly through self - organized critical dynamics ( Bak and Paczuski , 1993 ) . SOC was quickly labelled as a candi - date for a general theory of complexity in nature ( Bak , 1996 ; Bak and Paczuski , 1995 ; Waldrop , 1992 ) , despite growing realization that there were some problems with the idea . A satisfactory deﬁnition of SOC remains elusive ( Turcotte , 1999 , 2001 ) . Although most authors agree that Bak’s original sand pile model is an example of SOC dynamics , this consensus does not extend to other popular models , such as the slider - block earthquake or forest ﬁre models ( Turcotte , 2001 ) . The applica - tion of SOC to systems of large spatial and temporal extent is particularly controversial , as only limited data sets are available . Even when data are abundant ( e . g . earthquakes ) , the problem of determining whether SOC is responsible for the observed patterns is not simple ( Dickman et al . , 2000 ) . Apart from confusion surrounding suitable deﬁnitions and applications of SOC , there have also been several criticisms of the theory itself . The primary difference between a non - equilibrium SOC system and a 2nd order equilibrium phase transition is that criticality in the latter is maintained through the ﬁne - tuning of some control parameter ( i . e . , temperature ) , whereas criticality in an SOC system apparently self - organizes as energy and matter ﬂow through the system ( Bak , 1996 ; Bak and Paczuski , 1993 ; Bak et al . , 1987 , 1988 ) . For example , to observe scale invariance in the Ising model of the critical state of iron at equilibrium , the external magnetic ﬁeld must be set to zero and temperature tuned to its critical value ( Grinstein , 1991 ) . As originally deﬁned , the sand pile model seems to involve no tuneable parameters , merely a simple toppling rule governing avalanche propagation and the development of a self - organized critical state ( Dickman et al . , 1998 ) . However , in most examples of SOC the rate of driving was either ‘extremal’ or near zero ( Bak et al . , 1988 ; Clar et al . , 1996 ; Dickman et al . , 1998 , 2000 ; Jensen , 1998 ) . In systems with extremal driving , a global supervision prevented all but the most distant sites ( rather than statistically typical sites ) from receiving inputs of energy ( Paczuski et al . , 1996 ) . Such a requirement seems peculiar for self - organizing systems ( Dickman et al . , 2000 ) . Similarly , if the driving rate must be tuned towards zero to observe critical ﬂuctuations , it is questionable that the systems are self - organizing ( Sornette et al . , 1995 ; Vespignani and Zapperi , 1997 ; Vespignani et al . , 1996 , 1997 ) . As well as a tuneable driving rate , a conventional assump - tion of most SOC models is that avalanches are instantaneous relative to the timescale of driving ( Carlson and Swindle , 1995 ; Christensen and Olami , 1992 ; Dendy and Helander , 1998 ) . For example , in the sand pile model , sand grains are dropped singly and the system allowed to stabilize before additional grains are added . There is a forced separation of time scales between driv - ing and avalanche propagation . Similarly , the forest ﬁre model is critical only in the limit of a double separation of time scales , i . e . , the time taken for a cluster of trees to burn down is much shorter than the time taken for trees to grow , which is again much shorter than the time between lightning strikes that set trees alight ( Clar et al . , 1996 ; Turcotte , 1999 ) . Another major source of contention in the SOC literature was the requirement of local conservation ( Christensen and Olami , 1992 ; de Carvalho and Prado , 2000 ; Feder and Feder , 1991 ; Hwa and Kardar , 1989 ; Kinouchi and Prado , 1999 ; Middleton and Tang , 1995 ; Socolar et al . , 1993 ) . In locally conservative sys - tems , no energy is lost as heat or sound , and interactions between units are elastic . Since some form of dissipation is inevitably present in Nature , the existence of SOC in non - conservative models was considered desirable ( de Carvalho and Prado , 2000 ) . The stick - slip model of earthquake dynamics was introduced as an example of SOC that was locally non - conservative ( Feder and Feder , 1991 ; Olami et al . , 1992 ) . Unlike the sand pile model , thestick - slipmodelcomprisedasinglerigiddrivingplate , aﬁxed plate and a network of blocks between these two plates . The blocks were driven by relative movement between the plates , 150 J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 and each block connected to its four nearest neighbours and to the driving plate above it by springs ( Olami et al . , 1992 ) . As the driving plate moves , the forces on the blocks increases to some threshold value , after which the blocks slip . Slippage of any one block redeﬁnes forces on the four nearest neighbours , and can initiate a chain reaction of slip events , analogous to avalanche propagation in the sand pile model . In the stick - slip model , the parameter α reﬂects the level of energy conserva - tion . If α equals 0 . 25 , the model is strictly conservative because each time a block slips , 0 . 25 units of energy are transferred to each of four nearest neighbours ( see de Carvalho and Prado ( 2000 ) for further details ) . Based on the usual numerical evi - dence ( avalanche statistics ) , the stick - slip model was presented as an example of SOC that displayed robust SOC behaviour over a wide range of conservation levels ( i . e . , for α < 0 . 25 ) ( Christensen and Olami , 1992 ; de Carvalho and Prado , 2000 ; Grassberger , 1994 ; Middleton and Tang , 1995 ; Olami et al . , 1992 ; Socolar et al . , 1993 ) . However , later investigations contra - dict this result , arguing instead that the model is critical only in the conservative regime , where it becomes equivalent to a criti - cal branching process ( Br¨oker and Grassberger , 1997 ; Chabanol and Hakim , 1997 ; de Carvalho and Prado , 2000 ; Kinouchi and Prado , 1999 ) . Branching processes model the reproduction of a population of units , each of which generates offspring with some probabil - ity per unit time . For example , the ﬁrst and one of the simplest branching processes is the Galton – Watson branching process , which explains the disappearance of family names among the British peerage ( Adami and Chu , 2002 ; Watson and Galton , 1874 ) . The average branching rate , σ , is the average number of offspring spawned by individuals within the branching pro - cess or , in the context of the sand pile model , the average number of sand grains set in motion by the movement of another grain . If the average branching rate is greater than one ( σ > 1 ) , the branching process ( lineage ) expands and is supercritical . Con - versely , if σ < 1 the branching process invariably expires and is subcritical . Avalanches in SOC models can ‘reignite’ because of the continual , albeit slow , addition of matter / energy ( i . e . , sand grains in the sand pile model , stress energy in the earthquake model ) . If σ = 1 , the system is genuinely critical and although avalanches invariably die out , they can take a long time to do so . Despite the relative simplicity of this approach to deter - mine whether a system is genuinely critical , the issue of whether the non - conservative slip - stick model is critical is still debated ( Christensen et al . , 2001 ; Lise and Paczuski , 2002 ) . Shortly after publication of the sand pile model , laboratory studies were also undertaken to determine whether real sand piles displayed SOC . Experiments involved dropping sand onto the centre of a sand pile ( Held et al . , 1990 ; Rosendalhl et al . , 1993 ) , the random sprinkling of sand over the surface of a sand pile and slowly rotating drums partially ﬁlled with sand ( Bretz et al . , 1992 ; Jaeger et al . , 1989 ) . It soon became clear that only very small sand piles produced power law distribu - tions of avalanches , and therefore sand piles in general are not self - organized critical ( Jensen , 1998 ) . However , the disparity between numerical models of SOC and the dynamics of actual sand piles is explicable if inertial forces are considered ( Frette et al . , 1996 ; Prado and Olami , 1992 ) . Once in motion , sand grains accumulate kinetic energy and are not easily stopped . Therefore , above a certain size avalanches invariably propa - gate , producing quasi - periodic or oscillatory dynamics . Frette and co - workers generated avalanches in rice grain piles in a similar manner to the sand pile model , and found that both critical and oscillatory behaviour could be generated depend - ing on the aspect ratio ( length divided by width ) of grains used . Grains with large aspect ratios ( elongated rice grains ) produced power law distributions consistent with SOC , while shorter , more rounded grains produced oscillatory behaviour ( Frette et al . , 1996 ; Kardar , 1996 ) . The higher effective friction between elongated rice grains appeared crucial for obtaining critical dynamics . General theories always elicit healthy scepticism from sci - entists working in speciﬁc ﬁelds ( Jensen , 1998 ) and SOC is no exception . Although fractal - like patterns emerge in avalanche statistics in numerical SOC models , it has become clear that SOC ( as originally described ) is not as universal as initially claimed as it requires some form of ﬁne - tuning , such as a driv - ing rate that approaches zero ( Dickman et al . , 2000 ; Frette et al . , 1996 ; Kardar , 1996 ) . Potentially even more damaging to SOC theory was the discovery that the original sand pile model did not produce 1 / f noise ( Jensen et al . , 1989 ) , as was originally pro - posed ( Bak et al . , 1987 ) , but a less interesting 1 / f 2 signal ( Jensen et al . , 1989 ; Halley , 1996 ; Schroeder , 1991 ) . Although further work revealed that variants of the sand pile model could show 1 / f noise ( Christensen et al . , 1992 ) , by then the proposition that SOC was a robust mechanism for 1 / f noise was much less con - vincing . SOC now has a controversial reputation . In its original form at least , SOC fails to provide a robust explanation for the ubiquity of fractals in nature . 3 . Self - organization of Almost - critical Dynamics : A More Realistic View of Fractal Evolution An issue with SOC was the limited range of scale invari - ance observed in some numerical models , and whether such models were genuinely critical or almost critical ( de Carvalho and Prado , 2000 ; Kinouchi and Prado , 1999 ) . Similar criticisms applied to the term fractal ( Avnir et al . , 1998 ) . Strict fractal objects require inﬁnite power law scaling ( Avnir et al . , 1998 ) , which restricts utility of the concept ( Turcotte , 1999 , 2001 ) and fails to address the limited range of scale invariance observed in nature . Real systems report fractal - like behaviour that typically spans only 0 . 5 – 2 orders of magnitude , although some examples span larger ranges ( Malcai et al . , 1997 ) . The lower cut - off gener - ally reﬂects the size of the system components , while the upper cut - off scales with system size and reﬂects other limiting fac - tors , such as mechanical strength , growth rates , or depletion of resources ( Avnir et al . , 1998 ) . The real question is not whether particular models are genuinely critical or perfectly fractal , but whether a wide range of natural systems show similar behaviour under a general set of conditions ( Turcotte , 2001 ) . The earthquake SOC model suggested that organization to a near critical state required less ﬁne tuning than organization to genuine criticality , which occurs only at special points in param - J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 151 eter space ( Kinouchi and Prado , 1999 ) . Around these points , near critical dynamics occur over larger regions of parameter space . Near critical dynamics generate approximate scale invari - ance , which is difﬁcult to distinguish from genuine criticality unless the average branching rate ( σ ) of units participating in avalanchesiscalculated ( deCarvalhoandPrado , 2000 ; Kinouchi and Prado , 1999 ) . Branching processes must have an average branching rate σ of 1 to be genuinely critical ( Adami and Chu , 2002 ) . If σ > 1 , systems are supercritical but in a limiting envi - ronment this potential may not be realized . A ﬁnite system size will restrict the average branching rate so that it decreases toward ( or below ) one . Therefore , near critical dynamics can easily be generated by branching processes with an average branching rate greater than one that are immersed in a limited environ - ment . This is an important point for our argument in the next section . Recent work on a new class of SOC models that are driven rapidlyfromequilibriumrevealsthatsimilarcritical - likedynam - ics can emerge in systems that face extreme non - equilibrium conditions ( Halley et al . , 2004 ) . Such systems were coined rapid self - organized systems ( RSOC ) to contrast them with tra - ditional SOC models where the driving rate approaches zero ( Halley et al . , 2004 ) . Robust self - organization to near critical dynamics also characterises a model of Barkhausen noise , which occurs in magnetic materials exposed to ramped magnetic ﬁelds ( Perkovic et al . , 1995 ) . Even at equilibrium , ﬂuctuations that are system - spanning at the critical point remain signiﬁcant well beyond this point Ball ( 1999 ) . Together , these ﬁndings strongly indicate that critical - like behaviour occurs relatively easily in non - equilibrium systems , regardless of the rate at which sys - tems are driven from equilibrium . Indeed , in limited systems near critical dynamics may be difﬁcult to avoid if the average branching rate is greater than one . As with other general theories , SOC and RSOC capture aspects of system behaviour , but cannot account for all relevant details ( Jensen , 1998 ) , particularly in real , non - ideal natural sys - tems . Models of SOC typically do not make clear predictions about how real - world parameters inﬂuence system behaviour ( Sethna et al . , 2001 ) . Given the non - ideality of real systems , it is unlikely that SOC or RSOC will give rise to robust scale invariance over all spatiotemporal scales . More likely , a distor - tion of power law behaviour will be observed , reﬂecting the constraints of the environment in which the dynamics arose . Genuine criticality ( that displayed by numerical SOC models ) is an ideal , unlikely to fully describe the dynamics of natu - ral systems , just like the Ising model only approximates the magnetization of iron . For example , the earth’s crust or schizo - sphere is a frequently cited potential example of SOC ( Bak and Paczuski , 1993 ; Clar et al . , 1996 ; Jensen , 1998 ; Turcotte , 1999 ) , but not all fault systems show a power law distribu - tion of earthquakes . Although faults with irregular branching geometry display power law statistics , those with more regular geometry ( e . g . San Andreas fault ) display power law distribu - tions for small events , while larger earthquakes that rupture the entire fault are quasiperiodic ( Stirling et al . , 1996 ; Wesnousky , 1994 ) . In addition , the Gutenberg - Richter distribution of earth - quakes sometimes reveals a break point corresponding to the limited depth of schizosphere in particular regions . This break point arises because small earthquakes occurring entirely within the schizosphere have a different power law exponent than the biggest earthquakes , which are somewhat constrained by limited schizosphere width ( Scholz , 1991 ) . Similarly , a recent study on rainfall patterns revealed a power law distribution of drought periods with a slight deviation at a time interval of 1 day , reﬂect - ing the daily meteorological cycle ( Peters et al . , 2002 ) . To summarise , genuine SOC is best considered an ideal , unnatural state . Deviations from this ideal observed in real world systems reﬂect either the inﬂuence of a ( limiting ) environment or , in evolving systems , the sculpting inﬂuence of natural selec - tion . For example , time delays between successive ﬁrings of neurons from the visual cortex of the macaque follow a power law distribution that ﬂattens out for very small time intervals , a deviation that reﬂects the refractory period of neurons , which imposes an upper bound on the cell ﬁring rate ( Gisiger , 2001 ; Papa and da Silva , 1997 ) . 4 . A More Realistic Conception of SOC and its Integration with Natural Selection Problems with SOC theory arise from the emergence of crit - icality in the apparent absence of ﬁne - tuning . If scale invariance could be observed over large regions of the relevant parame - ter space rather than only at a particular point , these problems should be overcome ( Dickman et al . , 1998 ) . We suggest that the problem with SOC also lies in a preoccupation with clas - siﬁcation of Universality Classes , and whether or not speciﬁc models of SOC are genuinely critical or approximately critical . Universality Classes include diverse systems with the property that all systems falling into the same class have the same power law exponent—suggesting that there are features in common among the underlying microscopic mechanisms responsible for the observed scale invariant behaviour ( Stanley et al . , 2000 ) . The fundamental question is whether a wide range of natural systems show similar behaviour under a general set of condi - tions ( Turcotte , 2001 ) . If they do , then such behaviour may act as a template upon which natural selection grafts additional elab - orations . We now discuss a more relaxed conception of SOC that can act in concert with modern evolutionary theories like natural selection . In considering how natural selection and self - organization interact , we deﬁne self - organized criticality as the collective patterning resulting from interplay between two factors : ( 1 ) a population of reproducing individuals and ( 2 ) a limited environ - ment . These two factors are ubiquitous in biology . Moreover , the similarity between SOC deﬁned in this way and the process of natural selection immediately becomes apparent . The theory of natural selection can be understood as a logical argument . It operates when the following four conditions are met : ( 1 ) reproduction , ( 2 ) heredity , ( 3 ) variation in individual charac - ters among members of the population , and ( 4 ) variation in the ﬁtness of individuals according to the state they have for a heri - table character ( Ridley , 2004 ) . Any SOC system will be subject to natural selection if its components can inherit characteris - 152 J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 tics , these characteristics vary , and these variations inﬂuence ﬁtness . Althoughalimitingenvironmentisnotlistedasoneofthe conditions for natural selection to operate , Ridley ( 2004 ) does discuss the implications of a limiting environment on excess fecundity , where females produce more offspring than survive ( Ridley , 2004 ) . Excess fecundity ( a branching rate of greater than 1 ) is universal in nature and drives competition to survive and reproduce ( Ridley , 2004 ) . We include a limiting environment in our deﬁnition of SOC to show how a roughly critical state is generated easily from interplay between an intrinsically supercritical branching pro - cess and a limiting environment . This is because , unlike ‘true’ criticality , which occurs at a single point in parameter space , crit - ical like dynamics can be generated by many combinations of supercritical branching rates and limiting environments . A lim - iting environment simultaneously drives selection of variations that have higher ﬁtness through competition , and also drives a supercritical self - organized system back to a critical - like state . Note that if system components are spatially homogenous , their interaction will generate a branching pattern similar to avalanche patterns in numerical SOC models . That is , such interplay will effectively generate a fractal - like default template that can be modiﬁed by natural selection . The nonlinearity and scale invari - ance ( fractal like ) properties of self - organized systems that are in a critical - like state of course will be limited in scale in real systems for reasons we have elucidated . However , these SOC properties are of primary importance in the interaction of the SOC state and natural selection . Our deﬁnition of SOC does not require the system to be ﬁne - tuned . Near - critical dynamics emerge spontaneously whenever a system exhibits a branching ratio greater than 1 , in a limited environment , conditions that are ubiquitous in biology . Viewed in this way , self - organization and natural selection seem intimate partners in a larger process of evolution . 5 . SOC and Natural Selection Interact in Two Fundamental Ways 5 . 1 . Natural Selection Within an SOC System : Differentiation of Reproducing Units Naturalselectionrequiresreproduction , inheritance , andvari - ation in individual characteristics that differ in ﬁtness ( Ridley , 2004 ) . Hence , natural selection can occur within an SOC system of reproducing units , when these units have these key proper - ties . The ﬁrst way that a SOC system might be modiﬁed by natural selection is through differences in behaviour of indi - viduals comprising the SOC system . Individuals would differ in their ability to reproduce ( affecting branching ratios ) , and if these behavioural variations were heritable , differentiation of individuals will ensue according to natural selection . This process is illustrated in the cartoon in Fig . 1 . Fig . 1a rep - resents our conception of an SOC system where a population of units ( small circles ) reproduces ( branches ) in a ﬁnite , bounded system ( large circle ) . Note the variation ( ﬁlled or unﬁlled small circles ) among branching units . If this variation is heritable and associated with a differential branching rate , systems may Fig . 1 . ( a ) Initial SOC - like template that exhibits variation among avalanche participants . The ﬁrst type of interaction between SOC - like dynamics and nat - ural selection is through differentiation of units . ( b ) Illustrates a pattern that may result if one type of unit out competed the other . ( c ) Illustrates fragmenta - tion of the population into two subpopulations that interact with each other . ( d ) Shows how this population could be further separated through incorporation of a boundary , dividing it into two separate populations , each of which may evolve a distinct collective behaviour . ( e and f ) Illustrate how avalanches in particular regions could be selectively stabilized through interaction with some form of stabilizing force . become increasingly differentiated , with one type of unit assum - ing dominance over the other ( Fig . 1b ) . If the variations are beneﬁcial in a particular spatial region or with their own kind , the population may begin to fragment into two interacting popu - lations ( Fig . 1c ) . It is easy to imagine how this population could be further fragmented through incorporation of some bound - ary to separate the different individuals , which may begin to evolve separately , perhaps with separate branching character - istics ( Fig . 1d ) . Interestingly , the simulations of Stern ( 1999 ) suggest that if noisy disturbances are sufﬁciently unpredictable , networks may evolve protected subsystems to shield sensitive computation machinery from the unpredictable effects of noise . Finally , if there were some regions where avalanches of distur - bance were particularly beneﬁcial , additional factors may evolve to stabilize avalanches in this region ( Fig . 1e and f ) . Such factors might encourage avalanche growth or reduce their decay . This type of interaction between self - organization and selection pro - cesses appears to lie behind the dynamics of microtubule capture of chromosome kinetochores . Brieﬂy , those microtubules that happen to contact kinetochores are captured and selectively sta - bilized ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ; Mitchison et al . , 1986 ; Zhai et al . , 1995 ) . In a similar manner , an initial proliferation of neuronsiscurtailedbyselectiveretentionofthosethatbestinner - vate a speciﬁc territory ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . These ideas are discussed further in Section 6 and in Appendix A . 5 . 2 . Natural Selection Acting on Populations of SOC - like Systems Apart from natural selection acting on individuals within a single SOC system , natural selection might also act on popu - lations of SOC systems , according to any selective advantage provided by differences in critical - like ﬂuctuations . Biologi - cal systems have become compartmentalized in countless ways , ranging from subcellular , organ , tissue and circulatory levels to J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 153 the hierarchical levels of task allocation and division of labour in social insect colonies . Given their non - equilibrium nature , it is plausible that for at least some of these biological compartments , critical - like states evolved from supercritical states , facilitated by the build up and propagation of an internal stressor . Such ﬂuctuations may have had little impact on system performance , and were selectively neutral . However , system spanning super - critical ﬂuctuations would tend to destabilize aspects of system behaviour , compromising system performance . For example , distant parts of a system might interact , and system bound - aries might be felt deep within the system ( Tadi´c and Dhar , 1997 ) . Examples where large ﬂuctuations could be particularly harmful include DNA replication and protein synthesis ( Elf et al . , 2003 ) . If critical - like ﬂuctuations compromised system per - formance , they might have been selected against , with systems drawing away from their supercritical points over time . In some cases critical - like dynamics may provide unforeseen but bene - ﬁcial properties . For example , such dynamics may have been useful to control systems that require ultrasensitive responses ( Elf et al . , 2003 ) . Fluctuations in metabolite concentrations ( Elf et al . , 2003 ) , waves of calcium ions ( Jung et al . , 1998 ) and mem - brane potential of cortical neurons ( Fujisawa et al . , 2006 ) might have originated in this way . Collective modiﬁcation of critical - like dynamics would be responsible for the evolution of subcritical , genuinely critical or supercriticaldynamics , withnaturalselectionactingontheentire system . Modiﬁcation of the critical - like state would be reﬂected in modiﬁcation of the power law distribution ( fractal behaviour ) of disturbances . See Adami and Chu ( 2002 ) for further details . Fig . 2a shows our conception of SOC , similar to Fig . 1a but with - out individual variation . Instead , here the variation is manifest at the system level not the individual component level , with some systems closer to or further from criticality . Fig . 2b and c shows how this variation could be modiﬁed according to its selective advantage , which would depend on the context in which critical - like ﬂuctuations occurred . If such ﬂuctuations were beneﬁcial , over time they would be selected for , and the system would move closer to criticality and become increasingly sensitive to dis - turbances ( disturbances would become more system - spanning ) ( Fig . 2b ) . Such systems could become oscillatory if avalanches overlapped , and theoretical work reveals a close link between SOC - like dynamics and periodic oscillations ( Drossel , 1996 ) that are common in biological systems ( Danø et al . , 1999 ; Goldbeter , 1996 ; Rapp , 1987 ) . Conversely , if ﬂuctuations were detrimental , over time systems might move further from crit - icality , become less sensitive , and disturbances will tend to be local rather than system - spanning ( Fig . 2c ) . We discuss this idea further in Section 6 . 6 . Summary and Implications In this paper we have deﬁned SOC in a more relaxed fashion to facilitate its incorporation into modern evolutionary the - ory . We deﬁne SOC as the collective patterning resulting from interplay between two factors : ( 1 ) a population of reproducing individuals and ( 2 ) a limited environment . A limiting environ - ment simultaneously drives selection of variations that have higher ﬁtness through competition , and also drives a supercriti - cal self - organized system back to a critical - like state . Deﬁned in this way , SOC and natural selection appear as intimate partners in a larger process of evolution . Interestingly , using our deﬁnition of SOC natural selection may act both within a single SOC system , as well as between separate SOC systems , which compete in a larger environment . Hence , natural selection may itself be a fractal phenomenon . This idea appears to be in accord with the notion that natural selection operates at many different scales in biology . However , such discussion is outside the scope of this paper . Nonetheless , the potential for systems to split into two interacting SOC - like populations ( Fig . 1c and d ) , each of which may act as a template for further elaboration further supports this idea . We also considered how SOC - like states could act as tem - plates that could be elaborated by natural selection . First , natural selectioncouldactwithinasingleSOCsystemandresultininter - nal differentiation . Second , natural selection could act on entire systems , moving them closer to or further from genuine criti - cality . Interestingly , Kirschner ( 1992 ) emphasizes the particular value of cellular mechanisms that are able to generate multiple complex outcomes . The very properties that make such sys - tems sensitive to environmental inﬂuence also appear to endow systems with an ability to generate a high proportion of func - tional outcomes in evolution ( Kirschner , 1992 ) . Self - organizing critical - like dynamics , as deﬁned in this manuscript , could be a prime example of this . Once a SOC - like state appears , it enables the system to investigate multiple spatial scales . Any scales that happen to provide some sort of ﬁtness beneﬁt can be selectively stabilized , either over evolutionary time or over shorter timescales comparable to that characterising individual avalanche lifetimes . In this paper , we barely touched upon the diversity of structures that these evolutionary mechanisms could promote . However , we feel that iteration between self - organizing critical - like ﬂuctuations and natural selection could facilitate the evolution of a great diversity of patterns . In particular , it is easy to imagine how such iteration could facilitate the evolution of two ubiquitous features of biological systems : compartmentalization and division of labour . Another intriguing speculation , analysis of which is beyond the scope of this work , is that the interactions discussed in this paper may have played a crucial role in the evolution of informa - tion processing . Critical - like dynamics comprise a curious mix of order and disorder , and for this reason are associated with the edge of chaos ( Bonabeau , 1997 ) , a dynamical regime that pos - sesses great potential for information storage , transmission and modiﬁcation , the basic requirements of computation ( Langton , 1990 ) . For this reason , we propose that if critical - like dynamics develop in biological systems , their tendency to remain near - critical over evolutionary time is proportional to the system’s need for ( or ability to beneﬁt from ) computation . Recent studies support this idea , as evidence for SOC in biology has primarily been found in complex systems specialized for information pro - cessing , such as the human brain ( Beggs and Plenz , 2003 , 2004 ) . The ant and the microtubule examples discussed below are also involved in computing good solutions to complex problems . 154 J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 Fig . 2 . Self - organization of a critical - like dynamics in many different systems , which compete in a limited environment ( large boxes ) . Some systems have a greater intrinsic average branching rate than others . Depending on the selective advantage of critical - like ﬂuctuations , natural selection may act on entire systems , so the population of SOC - like states changes over evolutionary time . If SOC - like ﬂuctuations are beneﬁcial , systems may draw closer to their critical points and become increasingly sensitive to disturbance ( internal or otherwise ) ( b ) . Conversely , if ﬂuctuations are disadvantageous they may be selected against , with systems drawing further away from their critical points over time ( c ) . Here , the selected variation exists at the system level , as opposed to variation at the level of individual avalanches ( Fig . 1 ) . A ﬁnal important point to note is that the examples we chose to illustrate our ideas still resemble critical - like sys - tems . We hypothesize that in other cases initially critical - like dynamics would be modiﬁed beyond all recognition ( power law behaviour no longer observed ) . More speciﬁcally , if critical - like ﬂuctuations are detrimental , they may be overwhelmed by the inexorable sculpting inﬂuence of natural selection . For example , the power law could be broken to emphasize particular spatial scales , or it could gradually alter to a completely different distri - bution , such as a bell curve or bimodal distribution , if only one or two avalanche magnitudes were advantageous . Effectively , the SOC - like state provides a fractal - like default that may be modiﬁed by natural selection . In biological systems , ranging from the biochemical , cellu - lar , physiological and neuronal scales , nonlinear dynamics can limit or enlarge the range of phenotypes attainable by selection , as small shifts in parameters governing the system can result in qualitative changes in system dynamics ( Ferri ` ere and Fox , 1995 ) . Structures that arose from interaction between SOC - like dynamics and natural selection may leave only subtle clues of their evolutionary origins . Unfortunately , this will make test - ing of these ideas in some systems complicated experimentally , although computational models may yield valuable information on the validity of these ideas . Such effort could be very reward - ing . The computational experiments may suggest designs for physical experiments that would provide more sound valida - tion , and may suggest how to analyse existing experiments in the light of these hypotheses to yield useful knowledge . The examples in Appendix A are our initial attempts to use existing data to support the theoretical model . Given that noisy distur - bancescanfacilitatetheevolutionof‘protectedsubsystems’ , one wonders whether SOC - like dynamics contributed to the evolu - tion of the myriad cellular organelles , as well as their internal differentiation . Acknowledgements The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments , criticisms , and suggestions from Martin Burd , Suzanne Sadedin , Aidan W . Sudbury , and Fima C . Klebaner . We also acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the CSIRO Complex Systems Science group for a workshop on the interaction of self - organization and natural selection . Appendix A . Illustrative Examples A . 1 . Example 1 . Groups of Feeding Argentine Ants At rich sources of food , groups of foraging Argentine ant workers self - organize to almost critical states , characterised by a rough power law distribution of disturbance avalanches ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ) . Each avalanche comprises a series of disturbance events during which feeding ants stop feed - ing and begin wandering around , having some probability of disturbing additional feeding ants . Interestingly , the largest dis - turbance avalanches observed occurred when food sources were crowded and feeding ants were visibly bloated ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ) . Although these background noise patterns resembled dynam - ics of SOC models , there were two important differences . First , in the absence of external disturbances ( Halley and Elgar , 2001 ) , avalanches in ant groups were noticeably subcritical , propa - gating through only small portions of feeding groups . This subcritical background appeared to function as a collective intel - ligence because it ‘absorbed’ trivial disturbance ( in the form of one or two misguided ants ) , thereby enabling groups to collec - tively identify signiﬁcant hazards requiring a full alarm wave response . An alarm wave is a supercritical propagation of dis - turbance that occurs when a threshold number of feeding ants is disturbed ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ; Halley and Elgar , 2001 ) . Poised in the vicinity of a critical point , ant groups appeared able to balance advantages of rapid alarm communication with the costs of interrupted foraging from trivial disturbances ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ) . The second difference between SOC - like patterns in ant groups and ideal models is the presence of behavioural differences among ants . Visibly bloated ants left food sources relatively quickly following disturbance and were more likely to leave following disturbance ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ) . These two differences between ideal models of SOC and the SOC - like dynamics of real ant groups inspired the proposition that there are two fundamental ways that SOC - like states can be modiﬁed by selection over evolutionary time . First , groups could move closer to or further from criticality . The subcritical nature of disturbances in ant groups may reﬂect this initial inter - action . More speciﬁcally , the vicinity of the critical point may reﬂect a trade - off between sensitivity to signiﬁcant danger and J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 155 insensitivity to trivial events ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ) . There are several ways that this could be achieved , including modiﬁcation of the average behavioural characteristics of both feeding and wandering ants . The SOC - like dynamics could be further reﬁned through modiﬁcation of behavioural variation among avalanche participants . An example of this interaction is the systematic behavioural variations among fat and thin ants ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ) . The combined effect of these two classes of modiﬁcation ( maintenance of subcritical dynamics plus differentiation of individual behaviour ) could result in considerable competitive advantages that could be selected for ( Halley and Burd , 2004 ) . The background pattern constantly ushers sated ( and therefore valuable ) ants back to the safety of the nest , and the subcritical - ity enables groups to solve complex trade - offs between feeding and mortality risk . A . 2 . Example 2 . Microtubules and Actin Filaments Eukaryotic cell shape and internal organization is generated and maintained largely through the organization of extensive arrays of a few highly conserved structural proteins , includ - ing actin and tubulin ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . Actin and tubulin self - assemble into actin ﬁlaments and microtubules , respectively , and the details of this process have been discussed elsewhere ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ; Wade and Hyman , 1997 ) . We discuss both structures because they illustrate dif - ferent solutions to two different problems , both of which appear to have been solved through similar iteration between SOC - like dynamics and natural selection . A . 2 . 1 . Dynamic Instability of Microtubules Microtubules are extremely dynamic structures , assembling and disassembling in only a few minutes ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . The self - assembly of microtubules does not require energy , but their disassembly does . This energy is provided by GTP hydrolysis , as tubulin is an enzyme as well as a struc - tural component . Unless stabilized in some way , assembled polymers ( microtubules ) shrink back towards organizing cen - tres from which they originate ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . The continual supply of energy forces the system to undergo ‘dynamic instability’ , which is characterised by rapid growth among some microtubules and rapid shrinkage among others . Although this organization may appear wasteful , requiring a continual supply of energy , the random and continuous explo - ration of cellular space by the microtubule population facilitates the development of appropriate microtubule conﬁgurations that are selectively stabilized and utilized ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . During cell division , each chromosome must attach to one of two spindles , which comprise the microtubule organiz - ing centres of each daughter cell . Each chromosome attaches to a spindle via the kinetochore , which is tiny target corresponding to only 0 . 001 % of the volume of the cell . This self - organizing pro - cess provides cells with both ﬂexibility and robustness , because randomness in chromosome distribution as well as variability in cell morphology are well tolerated ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . Viewed from our perspective , dynamic instability comprises a SOC - like state that can be modiﬁed by selection in two fundamental ways . Firstly , the dynamics of tubulin assem - bly could become more or less critical . Although speculating on the dynamics of microtubule populations when they ﬁrst appeared in biological systems is problematic , it is reasonable that avalanches of tubulin self - assembly may have existed . The initial appearance of tubulin may have been subcritical , with insufﬁcient tubulin subunits to extend to the far reaches of cellular space . If this was the case , a simple ampliﬁcation of gene expression may have been sufﬁcient to provide extra tubu - lin units so that their self - assembling avalanches increasingly began to span the system . It may also be possible that micro - tubules were initially branched and over evolutionary time the branching was selected against to ensure that each microtubule connected with only one kinetochore . Microtubules in plant cells still branch ( Cyr , 2005 ) . The second way the SOC - like dynamics of microtubule dynamic instability could be modiﬁed is through differentiation of individual behaviour . This may have occurred through vari - ations in individual subunits , whose chemical properties were modiﬁed and reﬁned . Chemical modiﬁcation of the tubulin pre - cursormayaffectitsabilitytoformlargerorsmalleroligomersorcouldaffectitsefﬁcacyasanenzyme , thereby altering the energy available to the self - organized system and , consequently , system dynamics . Alternatively , individual microtubules may have been retained because they happened to connect with a target kineto - chore . Those that contact a kinetochore are selectively captured and stabilized ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . This also con - stitutes a form of differentiation among avalanche participants . However , in this case natural selection occurs on a much shorter time scale . Instead of acting on individual organisms ( modi - fying microtubule behaviour over evolutionary timescales ) , in this case natural selection acts between individual microtubules within a single cell . A . 2 . 2 . Propulsive Actin Networks The driving force behind cell motility is the polymerization of actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge of a cell ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . These actin ﬁlaments form branching arrays where the barbed or fast growing ends face forward . Maly and Borisy’s ( 2001 ) analysis of the life cycle of actin ﬁlaments , with natural selection acting within the population of actin ﬁlaments in a single cell , resonates strongly with the focus of this work . The growth of an actin ﬁlament begins with nucleation upon an existing ﬁlament , a process that Maly and Borisy term repro - duction . The mean angle between the parent ﬁlament and its branch is 67 ◦ in their system ( Xenopus keratocytes ) ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ; Svitkina and Borisy , 1999 ) . The orientation of new ﬁlaments therefore depends on the orientation of ﬁlaments on which they nucleate . In other words , there is inheritance of orientation ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . In addition , in the dense actin network , a branch cannot ﬂuctuate freely and may become trapped in a deviated orientation . Maly and Borisy term this “mutation of orientation” . Nucleation of ﬁlaments typically occur at the cell’s leading edge , and hence those ﬁlaments that are oriented too far from 156 J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 the leading edge do not produce branches and hence do not ‘reproduce’ ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . In addition , termination of ﬁlament growth also depends on orientation , as those ﬁlaments thatarenotobstructedbythecellsurfacearecappedwithprotein . Together , theclosertheorientationtotheleadingedge , thelonger the ﬁlament tip remains uncapped and the longer it stays at the leading edge and branches . Other ﬁlaments are selected against ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . We consider this system of steady state polymerization and depolymerization ( Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) a strik - ing example of SOC - like dynamics , where the branching rate must roughly be equal to unity , indicating a critical branch - ing process ( Adami and Chu , 2002 ; de Carvalho and Prado , 2000 ; Kinouchi and Prado , 1999 ) . Applying our framework , we suggest two different ways that this system has been modiﬁed by natural selection . Again , the dynamics could have become more or less critical . There is some evidence to suggest that since its origin , the system has become more critical . To main - tain continuous polymerization at leading edges , actin must be constantly depolymerized and subunits recycled ( Welch et al . , 1997 ) . Pure actin ﬁlaments can depolymerize by simple dis - sociation of monomers from free ﬁlament ends ( Welch et al . , 1997 ) . However , actin ﬁlaments at leading edges turn over much more rapidly than expected , which suggests that additional fac - tors that promote depolymerization or ﬁlament severing may be present ( Theriot and Mitchison , 1991 ; Welch et al . , 1997 ) . In addition , high concentrations of actin monomer are required to drive actin polymerization during protrusion ( Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) . Hence , over evolutionary time , natural selec - tion may have increased the concentration of actin monomers , as well as promoting additional mechanisms to facilitate more rapid recycling of actin monomers . The second way natural selection could modify these dynam - ics is differentiation of individual behaviour in similar ways to that described above for microtubules . As well as chemi - cal modiﬁcation over evolutionary timescales , natural selection also acts on ﬁlament orientation within the propulsive actin net - work in the leading edge of a single cell ( Maly and Borisy , 2001 ) . A . 3 . Example 3 . Neuronal Avalanches The complexity of many nervous systems far exceeds that which could be directly speciﬁed in the genome ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . Hence , developmental principles , including self - organization , play a key role in construction of the network and its maintenance throughout life ( Bornholdt and R¨ohl , 2003 ; Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . During development , a surplus of neurons and connections is produced , but from these only those that best innervate a speciﬁc territory are retained ( Gerhart and Kirschner , 1997 ) . Unlike most other cells , neurons have long branching processes ( dendrites and axons ) , which collect infor - mation from surrounding neurons or disseminate it ( Chklovskii , 2004 ) . Neural processing involves the integration of information from hundreds or thousands of other neurons and the redistri - bution of information back to the network ( Beggs and Plenz , 2003 ) . Recent empirical work reveals that background activity pat - terns of neural networks are near - critical ( Beggs and Plenz , 2003 , 2004 ) . Avalanches of neuronal activity sweep through the system in patterns that may remain stable for hours , and can be approximated by a critical branching process ( Beggs and Plenz , 2003 , 2004 ) . Given that the background activity pattern of neural networks is SOC - like , our theory suggests two primary ways that natural selection can interact with it . As before , the dynamics can become more or less critical , such that neuronal avalanches become more or less likely to span the system . There are several ways that this could be achieved , including growth of additional neurons , branching processes and spines . The adult brain apparently maintains the capacity for synapse formation and elimination ( Chklovskii et al . , 2004 ) . Alternatively , modiﬁ - cation of neuron calibre could also modify the critical - like state , as thicker axons increase conduction velocity ( Chklovskii and Stepanyants , 2003 and refs . therein ) . The second way in which critical - like dynamics could be modiﬁed is modiﬁcation variations among neurons to ﬁne - tune the collective response . In neural networks , variations abound . The brain is segregated into many different regions , populated by highly specialized neurons that selectively respond to spe - ciﬁc input features ( Sporns , 2002 ) . In addition , segregation of the vertebrate cerebral cortex into white and grey matter appears to reﬂect wiring optimization ( Wen and Chklovskii , 2005 ) . The wiring of the cortical network now appears to resemble a skele - ton of strong connections in a sea of weaker ones ( Song et al . , 2005 ) . Between different neuronal classes , the numbers and dimensions of axonal and dendritic branches also vary system - atically ( Chklovskii , 2004 ) . Regional differences in initiation sites of critical neuronal avalanches ( Beggs and Plenz , 2004 ) may reﬂect systematic incorporation of variations among neu - rons , much like the behavioural differences among fat and thin ants . References Adami , C . , Chu , J . , 2002 . Critical and near - critical branching processes . Phys . Rev . E 66 , 011907 . Aon , M . A . , Cortassa , S . , O’Rourke , B . , 2004 . Percolation and criticality in a mitochondrial network . PNAS 101 , 4447 – 4452 . Avnir , D . , Bihan , O . , Malcai , O . , 1998 . Is the geometry of nature fractal ? Nature 279 , 39 – 40 . Bak , P . , 1996 . How Nature Works . Springer - Verlag , New York . Bak , P . , Paczuski , M . , 1993 . Why nature is complex . Phys . World 6 , 39 – 43 . Bak , P . , Paczuski , M . , 1995 . Complexity , contingency , andcriticality . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 6689 – 6696 . Bak , P . , Tang , C . , Wiesenfeld , K . , 1987 . Self - organizedcriticality : anexplanation of 1 / f noise . Phys . Rev . Lett . 59 , 381 – 384 . Bak , P . , Tang , C . , Wiesenfeld , K . , 1988 . Self - organized criticality . Phys . Rev . A 38 , 364 – 374 . Ball , P . , 1999 . Transitions still to be made . Nature 402 , C73 – C76 . Ball , P . , 2001 . The Self - made Tapestry . Oxford University Press , New York . Bassingthwaighte , J . B . , Liebovitch , L . S . , West , B . J . , 1994 . Fractal Physiology . American Physiological Society , New York . Beggs , J . M . , Plenz , D . , 2003 . Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits . J . Neurosci . 23 , 11167 – 11177 . Beggs , J . M . , Plenz , D . , 2004 . Neuronal avalanches are diverse and precise activity patterns that are stable for many hours in cortical slice cultures . J . Neurosci . 24 , 5216 – 5229 . J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 157 Bolliger , J . , Sprott , J . C . , Mladenoff , D . J . , 2003 . Self - organization and complex - ity in historical landscape patterns . OIKOS 100 , 541 – 553 . Bonabeau , E . , 1997 . Flexibility at the edge of chaos : a clear example from foraging in ants . Acta Biotheor . 45 , 29 – 50 . Bonabeau , E . , Theraulaz , G . , Deneubourg , J . - L . , Aron , S . , Camazine , S . , 1997 . Self - organization in social insects . Trends Ecol . Evol . 12 , 188 – 193 . Bornholdt , S . , R¨ohl , T . , 2003 . Self - organizedcriticalneuralnetworks . Phys . Rev . E 67 , 066118 - 066111 – 066118 - 066115 . Bretz , M . , Cunningham , J . B . , Kurczynski , P . L . , Nori , F . , 1992 . Imaging of avalanches in granular materials . Phys . Rev . Lett . 69 , 2431 – 2434 . Br¨oker , H . - M . , Grassberger , P . , 1997 . Random neighbor theory of the Olami - Feder - Christensen earthquake model . Phys . Rev . E 56 , 3944 – 3952 . Camazine , S . , Deneubourg , J . - L . , Franks , N . , Theraulaz , G . , Bonabeau , E . , 2001 . Self - organization in Biological Systems . Princeton University Press , New Jersey . Carlson , J . M . , Swindle , G . H . , 1995 . Self - organized criticality : sandpiles , singu - larities , and scaling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 6712 – 6719 . Chabanol , M . - L . , Hakim , V . , 1997 . Analysis of a dissipative model of self - organized criticality with random neighbours . Phys . Rev . E 56 , R2343 – R2346 . Chaisson , E . , 2004 . Complexity : an energetics agenda . Complexity 9 , 14 – 21 . Chklovskii , D . B . , 2004 . Synaptic connectivity and neuronal morphology : two sides of the same coin . Neuron 43 , 609 – 617 . Chklovskii , D . B . , Mel , B . W . , Svoboda , K . , 2004 . Cortical rewiring and infor - mation storage . Nature 431 , 783 – 788 . Chklovskii , D . B . , Stepanyants , A . , 2003 . Power - lawforaxondiametersatbranch point . BMC Neuroscience 4 , 18 . Christensen , K . , Hamon , D . , Jensen , H . J . , Lise , S . , 2001 . Comment on “Self - Organized Criticality in the Olami - Feder - Christensen Model” . Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 039801 . Christensen , K . , Olami , Z . , 1992 . Scaling , phase transitions , and nonuniversal - ity in a self - organized critical cellular - automaton model . Phys . Rev . A 46 , 1829 – 1838 . Christensen , K . , Olami , Z . , Bak , P . , 1992 . Deterministic 1 / f noise in noncon - servative models of self - organized criticality . Phys . Rev . Lett . 68 , 2417 – 2420 . Clar , S . , Drossel , B . , Schwabl , F . , 1996 . Forest ﬁres and other examples of self - organized criticality . J . Phys . : Condensed Matter 8 , 6803 – 6824 . Cyr , R . , 2005 . How and Y plant microtubules branch . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 927 . Danø , S . , Graae Sørensen , P . , Hynne , F . , 1999 . Sustained oscillations in living cells . Nature 402 , 320 – 322 . de Carvalho , J . X . , Prado , C . P . C . , 2000 . Self - organized criticality in the Olami - Feder - Christensen model . Phys . Rev . Lett . 84 , 4006 – 4009 . Dendy , R . O . , Helander , P . , 1998 . Appearance and nonappearance of self - organized criticality in sandpiles . Phys . Rev . E 57 , 3641 – 3644 . Denton , M . J . , Dearden , P . K . , Sowerby , S . J . , 2003 . Physicallawnotnaturalselec - tion as the major determinant of biological complexity in the subcellular realm : newsupportforthepre - Darwinianconceptionofevolutionbynatural law . BioSystems 71 , 297 – 303 . Dickman , R . , Mu˜noz , M . A . , Vespignani , A . , Zapperi , S . , 2000 . Paths to self - organized criticality . Braz . J . Phys . 30 , 27 – 41 . Dickman , R . , Vespignani , A . , Zapperi , S . , 1998 . Self - organized criticality as an absorbing - state phase transition . Phys . Rev . E 57 , 5095 – 5105 . Drossel , B . , 1996 . Self - organized criticality and synchronization in a forest - ﬁre model . Phys . Rev . Lett . 76 , 936 – 939 . Elbert , T . , Ray , W . J . , Kowalik , Z . J . , Skinner , K . E . G . , Birbaumer , N . , 1994 . Chaos and physiology : deterministic chaos in excitable cell assemblies . Physiol . Rev . 74 , 1 – 47 . Elf , J . , Paulsson , J . , Berg , O . G . , Ehrenberg , M . , 2003 . Near - critical phenomena in intracellular metabolite pools . Biophys . J . 84 , 154 – 170 . Farmer , J . D . , Packard , N . H . , 1986 . Evolution , games , and learning : models for adaptation in machines and nature . An Introduction to the Proceedings of the CNCS Conference , Los Alamos , May 1985 . Physica D 22 , vii – xii . Feder , H . J . S . , Feder , J . , 1991 . Self - organized criticality in a stick - slip process . Phys . Rev . Lett . 66 , 2669 – 2672 . Ferri ` ere , R . , Fox , G . A . , 1995 . Chaos and evolution . Trends Ecol . Evol . 10 , 480 – 485 . Freeman , M . P . , Watkins , N . W . , 2002 . The heavens in a pile of sand . Science 298 , 979 – 980 . Frette , V . , Christensen , K . , Malthe - Sørenssen , A . , Feder , J . , Jøssang , T . , Meakin , P . , 1996 . Avalanche dynamics in a pile of rice . Nature 379 , 49 – 52 . Fujisawa , S . , Matsuki , N . , Ikegaya , Y . , 2006 . Single neurons can induce phase transitionsofcorticalrecurrentnetworkswithmultipleinternalstates . Cereb . Cortex 16 , 639 – 654 . Futuyma , D . J . , 2005 . Evolution . Sinauer Associates , Inc . , Sunderland , MA , U . S . A . Gerhart , J . , Kirschner , M . , 1997 . Cells , Embryos , and Evolution . Blackwell Science , MA . Gisiger , T . , 2001 . Scale invariance in biology : coincidence of footprint of a universal mechanism ? Biol . Rev . 76 , 161 – 209 . Glass , L . , Mackey , M . C . , 1988 . From Clocks to Chaos : The Rhythms of Life . Princeton University Press , New Jersey . Gleick , J . , 1987 . Chaos . Sphere Books , London . Goldbeter , A . , 1996 . Biochemical Oscillations and Cellular Rhythms : The Molecular Bases of Periodic and Chaotic Behaviour . Cambridge University Press . Gollub , J . P . , Langer , J . S . , 1999 . Pattern formation in nonequilibrium physics . Rev . Mod . Phys . 71 , S396 – S403 . Grassberger , P . , 1994 . Efﬁcient large - scale simulations of a uniformly driven system . Phys . Rev . E 49 , 2436 – 2443 . Grinstein , G . , 1991 . Generic scale invariance in classical nonequilibrium sys - tems . J . Appl . Phys . 69 , 5441 – 5446 . Halley , J . D . , Burd , M . , 2004 . Nonequilibriumdynamicsofsocialgroups : insights from foraging Argentine ants . Insectes Sociaux 51 , 226 – 231 . Halley , J . D . , Elgar , M . A . , 2001 . The response of foraging Argentine ants , Linep - ithema humile , to disturbance . Aust . J . Zool . 49 , 59 – 69 . Halley , J . D . , Warden , A . C . , Sadedin , S . , Li , W . , 2004 . Rapid self - organized crit - icality : fractal evolution in extreme environments . Phys . Rev . E 70 , 036118 . Halley , J . M . , 1996 . Ecology , evolution and 1 / f - noise . TREE 11 , 33 – 37 . Held , G . A . , Solina II , D . H . , Keane , D . T . , Haag , W . J . , Horn , P . M . , Grinstein FG . , 1990 . Experimental study of critical - mass ﬂuctuations in an evolving sandpile . Phys . Rev . Lett . 65 , 1120 – 1123 . Hess , B . , Mikhailov , A . , 1994 . Self - organization in living cells . Science 264 , 223 – 224 . Hwa , T . , Kardar , M . , 1989 . Dissipative transport in open systems : an investiga - tion of self - organized criticality . Phys . Rev . Lett . 62 , 1813 – 1816 . Jaeger , H . M . , Liu , C . - H . , Nagel , S . R . , 1989 . Relaxation at the angle of repose . Phys . Rev . Lett . 62 , 40 – 43 . Jensen , H . J . , 1998 . Self - organized Criticality . Cambridge University Press , UK . Jensen , H . J . , Christensen , K . , Fogedby , H . C . , 1989 . 1 / f noise , distribution of lifetimes , and a pile of sand . Phys . Rev . B 40 , 7425 – 7427 . Jung , P . , Cornell - Bell , A . , Madden , K . S . , Moss , F . , 1998 . Noise - induced spiral waves in astrocyte syncytia show evidence of self - organized criticality . J . Neurophysiol . 79 , 1098 – 1101 . Kadanoff , L . P . , 1987 . On complexity . Phys . Today ( March ) , 7 – 8 . Kaplan , Kaplan , N . R . , 1991 . The self - organization of human psychological functioning . Behav . Sci . 36 , 161 – 178 . Kardar , M . , 1996 . Avalanche theory in rice . Nature 379 , 22 . Kauffman , S . , 1995 . At Home in the Universe . Oxford University Press , New York . Kauffman , S . A . , 1991 . Antichaos and adaptation . Sci . Am . 265 , 78 – 84 . Kauffman , S . A . , 1993 . The Origins of Order : Self - organization and Selection in Evolution . Oxford University Press , New York . Kauffman , S . A . , 2000 . Investigations . Oxford University Press , New York . Kinouchi , O . , Prado , C . P . C . , 1999 . Robustness of scale invariance in models with self - organized criticality . Phys . Rev . E 59 , 4964 – 4969 . Kirschner , M . W . , 1992 . Evolution of the cell . In : Grant , P . R . , Horn , H . S . ( Eds . ) , Molds , Molecules , and Metazoa : Growing Points in Evolutionary Biology . Princeton University Press , New Jersey . Langton , C . G . , 1990 . Computation at the edge of chaos : phase transitions and emergent computation . Physica D 42 , 12 – 37 . Lehn , J . - M . , 2002 . Toward self - organization and complex matter . Science 295 , 2400 – 2403 . Lise , S . , Paczuski , M . , 2002 . Nonconservative earthquake model of self - organized criticality on a random graph . Phys . Rev . E 88 , 228301 . 158 J . D . Halley , D . A . Winkler / BioSystems 92 ( 2008 ) 148 – 158 Malcai , O . , Lidar , D . A . , Biham , O . , Avnir , D . , 1997 . Scaling range and cutoffs in empirical fractals . Phys . Rev . E 56 , 2817 – 2828 . Maly , I . V . , Borisy , G . G . , 2001 . Self - organization of a propulsive actin net - work as an evolutionary process . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 , 11324 – 11329 . Mandelbrot , B . B . , 1982 . The Fractal Geometry of Nature . Freeman , San Fran - cisco . Mangel , M . , 1994 . Barrier transitions driven by ﬂuctuations , with applications to ecology and evolution . Theor . Popul . Biol . 45 , 16 – 40 . Middleton , A . A . , Tang , C . , 1995 . Self - organized criticality in nonconserved systems . Phys . Rev . Lett . 74 , 742 – 745 . Mitchison , T . , Evans , L . , Schulze , E . , Kirschner , M . , 1986 . Sites of microtubule assembly and disassembly in the mitotic spindle . Cell 45 , 515 – 527 . Mitchison , T . J . , Cramer , L . P . , 1996 . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomo - tion . Cell 84 , 371 – 379 . Nicolis , G . , 1995 . Introduction to Nonlinear Science . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Nicolis , G . , Prigogine , I . , 1977 . Self - organization in Nonequilibrium Systems . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Olami , Z . , Jacob , H . , Feder , S . , Christensen , K . , 1992 . Self - organized criticality in a continuous , nonconservative cellular automaton modeling earthquakes . Phys . Rev . Lett . 68 , 1244 – 1247 . Paczuski , M . , Maslov , S . , Bak , P . , 1996 . Avalanche dynamics in evolution , growth , and depinning models . Phys . Rev . E 53 , 414 – 443 . Papa , A . R . R . , da Silva , L . , 1997 . Earthquakes in the brain . Theory Biosci . 116 , 321 – 327 . Parisi , G . , 1993 . Statistical physics and biology . Phys . World 6 , 42 – 47 . Perkovic , O . , Dahmen , K . , Sethna , J . P . , 1995 . Avalanches , barkhausen noise , and plain old criticality . Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 4528 – 4531 . Peters , O . , Hertlein , C . , Christensen , K . , 2002 . A complexity view of rainfall . Phys . Rev . Lett . 88 , 018701 . Prado , C . P . C . , Olami , Z . , 1992 . Inertia and break of self - organized criticality in sandpile cellular - automata models . Phys . Rev . A 45 , 665 – 669 . Rapp , P . E . , 1987 . Why are so many biological systems periodic ? Prog . Neuro - biol . 29 , 261 – 273 . Richardson , R . C . , 2001 . Complexity , self - organization and selection . Biol . Phi - los . 16 , 655 – 683 . Ridley , M . , 2004 . Evolution . Blackwell Publishing . Rosendalhl , J . , Vekic , M . , Kelley , J . , 1993 . Persistent self - organization of sand - piles . Phys . Rev . E 47 , 1401 – 1404 . Ruthen , R . , 1993 . Adapting to complexity . Sci . Am . 268 , 130 – 135 . Scholz , C . H . , 1991 . Earthquakes and faulting : self - organized critical phenom - ena with a characteristic dimension . In : Riste , T . , Sherrington , D . ( Eds . ) , Spontaneous Formation of Space - Time Structures and Criticality . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Netherlands , pp . 41 – 56 . Schroeder , M . , 1991 . Fractals , Chaos , Power Laws : Minutes from an Inﬁnite Paradise . W H Freeman and Company , New York . Seeley , T . D . , 2002 . When is self - organization used in biological systems ? Biol . Bull . 202 , 314 – 318 . Sethna , J . P . , Dahmen , K . A . , Myers , C . R . , 2001 . Crackling noise . Nature 410 , 242 . Socolar , J . E . S . , Grinstein , G . , Jayaprakash , C . , 1993 . On self - organized critical - ity in nonconserving systems . Phys . Rev . E 47 , 2366 – 2376 . Sol´e , R . V . , Manrubia , S . C . , Benton , M . , Kauffman , S . , Bak , P . , 1999 . Criticality and scaling in evolutionary ecology . Trends Ecol . Evol . 14 , 156 – 160 . Song , S . , Sj¨ostr¨om , P . J . , Reigl , M . , Nelson , S . , Chklovskii , D . B . , 2005 . Highly nonrandom features of synaptic connectivity in local cortical circuits . PLoS Biol . 3 , 507 – 519 . Sornette , D . , 2000 . Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences . Chaos , Fractals , Self - Organization and Disorder : Concepts and Tools . Springer , Berlin . Sornette , D . , Johansen , A . , Dornic , I . , 1995 . Mapping self - organized criticality onto criticality . Journal de Physique I ( France ) 5 , 325 – 335 . Sporns , O . , 2002 . Networkanalysis , complexity , andbrainfunction . Complexity 8 , 56 – 60 . Stanley , H . E . , Amaral , L . A . N . , Gopikrishnan , P . , Ivanov , P . C . , Keitt , T . H . , Plerou , V . , 2000 . Scaleinvarianceanduniversality : organizingprinciplesincomplex systems . Physica A 281 , 60 – 68 . Stern , M . D . , 1999 . Emergence of homeostasis and “noise imprinting” in an evolution model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 10746 – 19751 . Stirling , M . W . , Wesnousky , S . G . , Shimazaki , K . , 1996 . Fault trace complexity , cumulative slip , and the shape of the magnitude - frequency distribution for strike - slip faults : a global survey . Geophys . J . Int . 123 , 833 – 868 . Svitkina , T . M . , Borisy , G . G . , 1999 . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in Lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . Tabony , J . , 1994 . Morphological bifurcation involving reaction - diffusion pro - cesses during microtubule formation . Science 264 , 245 – 248 . Tadi´c , B . , Dhar , D . , 1997 . Emergent spatial structures in critical sandpiles . Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 , 1519 – 1522 . Theise , N . D . , 2004 . Perspective : stem cells react ! Cell lineages as complex adaptive systems . Exp . Hematol . 32 , 25 – 27 . Theriot , J . A . , Mitchison , T . J . , 1991 . Actin microﬁlament dynamics in locomot - ing cells . Nature 352 , 126 . Turcotte , D . L . , 1999 . Self - organizedcriticality . Rep . Prog . Phys . 62 , 1377 – 1429 . Turcotte , D . L . , 2001 . Self - organized criticality : does it have anything to do with criticality and is it useful ? Nonlinear Process . Geophys . 8 , 193 – 196 . Vespignani , A . , Zapperi , S . , 1997 . Order parameter and scaling ﬁelds in self - organized criticality . Phys . Rev . Lett . 78 , 4793 – 4796 . Vespignani , A . , Zapperi , S . , Loreto , V . , 1996 . Renormalization of nonequilib - rium systems with critical stationary states . Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 4560 – 4563 . Vespignani , A . , Zapperi , S . , Loreto , V . , 1997 . Dynamically driven renormaliza - tion group . J . Stat . Phys . 88 , 47 – 79 . Wade , R . H . , Hyman , A . A . , 1997 . Microtubule structure and dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 12 – 17 . Waldrop , M . M . , 1992 . Complexity : TheEmergingScienceattheEdgeofChaos . Simon and Schuster , New York . Watson , H . W . , Galton , F . , 1874 . On the probability of the extinction of families . J . Anthropol . Inst . Great Britain and Ireland 4 , 138 – 144 . Weber , B . H . , 1998 . Origins of order in dynamical models . Biol . Philos . 13 , 133 – 144 . Welch , M . D . , Mallavarapu , A . , Rosenblatt , J . , Mitchison , T . J . , 1997 . Actin dynamics in vivo . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 54 – 61 . Wen , Q . , Chklovskii , D . B . , 2005 . Segregation of the brain into gray and white matter : a design minimizing conduction delays . PLoS Comput . Biol . 1 , e78 . Wesnousky , S . G . , 1994 . The Gutenberg - Richter or characteristic earthquake distribution , which is it ? Bull . Seismol . Soc . Am . 84 , 1940 – 1959 . Whitesides , G . M . , Grzybowski , B . , 2002 . Self - assembly at all scales . Science 295 , 2418 – 2421 . Zhai , Y . , Kronebusch , P . J . , Borisy , G . G . , 1995 . Kinetochoremicrotubuledynam - ics and the metaphase – anaphase transition . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 721 – 734 .