Summary . Endocytosis is an essential eukaryotic process that , in many systems , has been reported to require a functional actin cytoskeleton . The process of endocytosis is critical for controlling the protein – lipid composition of the plasma membrane and uptake of nutrients as well as pathogens and also plays an important role in regulation of cell sig - nalling . While several distinct pathways for endocytosis have been characterised , all of these require remodelling of the cell cortex . The im - portance of a dynamic actin cytoskeleton for facilitating endocytosis has been recognised for many years in budding yeast and is increasingly supported by studies in mammalian cells . Current evidence suggests that cortical patches are sites of endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and that these sites are composed of sequentially forming protein com - plexes . Distinct stages in complex formation are characterised by the presence of different activators of F - actin polymerisation . Disassembly of the complexes is also essential for the endocytosis to proceed . Mu - tants lacking the kinases Ark1 and Prk1 accumulate actin and endocytic machinery in a single large clump in cells . Phosphorylation of endocytic proteins including Sla1p is proposed to cause their removal from the complex and allow later stages of the invagination process to occur . De - phosphorylation of endocytic components may then allow subsequent reincorporation into new sites of endocytic complex assembly . Keywords : Saccharomyces cerevisiae ; cortical actin patch ; Endocytotic protein Sla1p ; Endocytic protein Pan1p ; Protein phosphatase I Glc7p . Cortical actin patch assembly and the interface with the endocytic machinery It is now over 20 years since the organisation of actin in Saccharomyces cerevisiae was ﬁrst described ( Adams and Pringle 1984 ) . This early work described the presence of two major F - actin structures in yeast cells which are pres - ent throughout the cell cycle – cortical actin patches and actin cables . These latter structures have more recently been demonstrated to be critical for the generation of cell polarity in yeast cells and are proposed to be tracks for movement of mitochondria , vacuoles , peroxisomes , and secretory vesicles from the mother to the budding daugh - ter cell ( reviewed in Bretscher 2003 ) . Our understanding of the role of actin patches has also advanced signiﬁcantly in the last three years . These latest advances also explain why many previous studies gave conﬂicting results for the possible interaction of actin with the endocytic machinery as it appears that the composition of actin patches changes through their lifetime ( Kaksonen et al . 2003 ) . Several ap - proaches have been key in forming our current ideas about actin patches and their role in endocytosis . Genetics studies and cortical patch formation In S . cerevisiae , the ﬁrst evidence for a link between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton came from genetic screens for endocytic mutants ( Benedetti et al . 1994 , Kübler and Riezman 1993 , Kübler et al . 1994 , Raths et al . 1993 ) . Many of these endocytic ( end ) mutants were subse - quently determined to have defects in the actin cytoskele - ton or were shown to be identical to genes encoding proteins already demonstrated to associate with actin . In particular , the screen identiﬁed End4 / Sla2p , a protein that is able to directly bind to actin and has homology to the mammalian talin protein in its C terminus ( Raths et al . 1993 ) ; End5p / Vrp1 , the yeast homologue of the actin regu - lator verprolin ; End6p / Rvs161p , one of the two yeast am - phiphysin homologues ; and indeed End7p , which was actin itself ( Munn et al . 1995 ) . These data strongly indi - Protoplasma ( 2005 ) 226 : 81 – 88 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00709 - 005 - 0107 - 5 PROTOPLASMA Printed in Austria Coupling actin dynamics to the endocytic process in Saccharomyces cerevisiae K . R . Ayscough * Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology , University of Shefﬁeld , Shefﬁeld Received February 7 , 2005 ; accepted March 30 , 2005 ; published online October 20 , 2005 © Springer - Verlag 2005 * Correspondence and reprints : Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology , University of Shefﬁeld , Firth Court , Western Bank , Shefﬁeld S10 2TN , United Kingdom . cated the importance of a functional actin cytoskeleton in the process of endocytosis . One feature of the endocytic process in yeast cells made apparent by the genetic studies is that there appears to be a signiﬁcant degree of functional overlap among proteins . When genes for these proteins are deleted alone , often the deletion confers only subtle or no observable phenotype . However , combinations of deletions often cause extremely harmful effects and some combina - tions are lethal . In several cases this has been suggested to indicate the presence of distinct endocytic pathways . The presence of a single pathway may compensate , at least in part , for the absence of the other , while loss of two path - ways causes very marked loss in ability to undergo endo - cytosis ( Dewar et al . 2002 , Goode and Rodal 2001 ) . Cortical patch formation and the effect of drugs affecting actin The use of cell - permeant drugs also indicated the impor - tance of an intact actin cytoskeleton for the process of en - docytosis ( examples are shown in Fig . 1 ) . Addition of the drug Latrunculin A , which binds to actin monomer and pre - vents its incorporation into new ﬁlaments , causes rapid dis - assembly of all actin structures in S . cerevisiae . This loss of ﬁlamentous actin correlates with an abrogation in endocy - tosis ( Ayscough et al . 1997 ) . Another drug , jasplakinolide , induces F - actin stability and prevents turnover such that all actin becomes incorporated in a single large F - actin clump ( Ayscough 2000 ) . This drug was used in yeast cells to demonstrate that F - actin alone was not sufﬁcient for endo - cytosis to occur . Rather , the actin had to be dynamic and be able to reorganise in response to cell requirements during the endocytic process . Use of immunoelectron microscopy to study cortical actin structures Early immunoelectron microscopy studies revealed actin lo - calisation at sites of membrane invagination ( Mulholland et al . 1994 ) . The colocalisation of other actin - binding pro - teins at this site led to the suggestion that actin may play a part in formation or function of these membrane structures . However , at this time it was not known whether these were sites of endocytosis . Indeed , later studies investigating local - isation of the pheromone receptor Ste2p and actin showed little overlap in localisation of the two proteins and on that occasion the authors concluded that actin did not in fact lo - calise at sites of endocytosis , though Ste2p itself was clearly partially localised within invaginations ( Mulholland et al . 1999 ) . As described below , it now seems possible that the reason for this negative result was due to the sequential complex formation at endocytic sites . Rather than actin never colocalising with the receptor during endocytosis , these snap - shots identiﬁed stages prior to endocytosis of re - ceptor . More recent electron microscopy studies provide fur - ther evidence that the cortical patches are associated with 82 K . R . Ayscough : Actin dynamics and endocytosis Fig . 1A – C . Effect of drugs on the organisation of the actin cytoskeleton in S . cerevisiae . Yeast cells were grown to logarithmic growth phase ( op - tical density at 600 nm , 0 . 5 ) and treated with dimethyl sulfoxide as a control for solvent effects ( 5 % ) ( A ) , 200 (cid:1) M latrunculin A ( B ) , or 10 (cid:1) M jasplakinolide ( C ) each for 15 min . As shown , the normal small punctate patches and elongated cables of actin are completely disassem - bled following latrunculin A addition , while jasplakinloide leads to the accumulation of large F - actin aggregates . Bar : 5 (cid:1) m invaginations ( Rodal et al . 2005 ) and in particular the form of these invaginations is altered in strains with mutations in genes known to be involved in the endocytic process . For example , mutations in Pan1p ( pan1 - 3 ) , which is known to play a role in formation of endocytic patches and which is also an activator of the Arp2 / 3 complex , cause the formation of long invaginations that can be visualised by electron mi - croscopy ( Wendland et al . 1996 ) . This mutation is postu - lated to arrest at a speciﬁc stage of uptake such that initial stages of invaginations can occur but later stages such as scission of the endocytic vesicle are blocked . It should be noted that demonstration of these invaginations as exten - sions of normal endocytic events remains to be formally demonstrated . A similar phenotype is also seen with a muta - tion in the myosin Myo5p ( a class1 myosin ) , which is also postulated to play a role in initial movement of the vesicle from the membrane or possibly in the scission event itself ( Jonsdottir and Li 2004 ) . Fluorescence microscopy and real - time imaging Initial studies using actin - binding proteins Cap2p and Abp1p or indeed actin itself tagged with green - ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) revealed that actin patches moved at signiﬁ - cant rates in the cell ( up to 0 . 5 (cid:1) m / s ) ( Doyle and Botstein 1996 , Waddle et al . 1996 ) . For many years it has been difﬁ - cult to match this observation with our understanding of en - docytosis which is likely to take place at a single site on the membrane . However , observations using dual - colour imag - ing of cortical patch components have led to great advances in our understanding of the endocytic process . Warren and colleagues ( Warren et al . 2002 ) tagged an actin - binding pro - tein , Abp1 , with a GFP variant ( cyan - ﬂuorescent protein [ CFP ] ) and the endocytic adaptor protein Sla1p with yellow - ﬂuorescent protein ( YFP ) . Interestingly , both distinct and overlapping complexes were observed , leading to the sug - gestion that Sla1p might localise to the membrane ﬁrst ( Sla1 only spots ) and then recruit Abp1p to patches ( overlapping spots ) . Abp1 only spots could then exist as preformed com - plexes that become associated at endocytic sites , or Sla1p might disassemble from the overlapping spots leaving Abp1 only spots . The existence of overlapping and distinct com - plexes can also be highlighted in biochemical fractionation studies ( Gourlay et al . 2003 ) ( example shown in Fig . 2 ) . The mechanism was clariﬁed in a set of elegant experiments per - formed by Kaksonen et al . ( 2003 ) , when the movement of pairs of 6 different actin and endocytic markers was com - pared . A model of these results is depicted in Fig . 3 . This data gave the ﬁrst clear evidence for the formation of se - quential formation of complexes during the formation of en - docytic vesicles . Actin - binding proteins ( and presumably actin itself ) are only recruited at the later stages of the process , and following their incorporation , two types of movement are seen , an initial slow movement followed by the fast movement that had been noted in the initial GFP tagging experiments . This set of experiments has been able to explain a great number of previously conﬂicting observa - tions . In particular , it explains why many cortical patch pro - teins only show partial overlap with actin localisation and why proteins like Sla1p appear to move very little , while proteins like actin show both slow and fast movements in the cell . Finally , a further signiﬁcant ﬁnding was that the timing of the events is extremely reproducible , suggesting both temporal and spatial regulation of complex formation . Each endocytic event , including scission and inward move - ment , is proposed to take in the region of 45 – 60 s . Las17p , the yeast homologue of WASP , is the earliest marker so far tested . It shows little if any movement during its lifetime within the patch . After about 10 s , Sla1p , Sla2p , and Pan1p enter the patch . These proteins are initially nonmotile ( about 10 – 15 s ) but then show some slow movement ( about 5 s ) . This movement occurs shortly after recruitment of actin and actin - binding proteins . Sla1p and Pan1p are then disassem - bled from the complex , and this is followed by rapid move - ment of the endocytic vesicle into the cell . This last stage is most variable in time and is thought to represent the time for the vesicle to travel to , and dock with , an endosome . Further information about these steps has emerged from recently published real - time imaging of uptake of the lipophilic dye FM 4 - 64 and localisation of Abp1 - GFP ( Huckaba et al . 2004 ) . These studies reveal that actin and FM 4 - 64 colo - calise and move into the cell together . In mother cells , this K . R . Ayscough : Actin dynamics and endocytosis 83 Fig . 2 . Identiﬁcation of overlapping and distinct complexes by sucrose density gradient fractionation of yeast cell extracts . Cell extracts were prepared and separated on a 3 – 30 % sucrose gradient as described ( Warren et al . 2002 ) . Fractions were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis ( SDS - PAGE ) and speciﬁc components of cortical patches identiﬁed by Western blotting . Fractions were loaded from 3 – 30 % left to right on the gel . As shown , Sla1p and End3p early markers of endocytic patches are present in large com - plexes , while Abp1 is present in an overlapping complex as well as in a smaller complex . This latter complex is presumed to correspond to the stage following disassembly of much of the cortical complex and move - ment of the endocytic vesicle into the cell inward movement appears to be along actin cables . The actin disassembles at a point when the endocytic vesicles with which it is associated reach an internal compartment that can be labelled with FM 4 - 64 – thought most likely to be an endosome . Actin remodelling and endocytosis Current studies indicate that F - actin localises to the cortical endocytic complex after it has formed , which would suggest that , at least in S . cerevisiae , actin does not play a role in or - ganising regions of the membrane as endocytic “hotspots” . Indeed the initial actin localisation appears to coincide with a slow - movement step ( Huckaba et al . 2004 , Kaksonen et al . 2003 ) . Given our understanding of the endocytic process from other organisms , this would be postulated to corre - spond to a step of invagination , vesicle closure , and possibly scission . The exact role of actin remodelling during the en - docytic process remains relatively poorly understood . In mammalian cells , Merriﬁeld et al . ( 2002 ) used evanescent ﬁeld microscopy to observe single clathrin - coated vesicles as they invaginated at the plasma membrane . They observed that inward movement occurred immediately after a brief burst of dynamin recruitment and was accompanied by tran - 84 K . R . Ayscough : Actin dynamics and endocytosis Fig . 3 . Schematic depicting the stages of se - quential complex assembly and disassembly during the endocytic process . The model is based largely on the data from Kaksonen et al . ( 2003 ) . On the basis of visualisation of GFP - tagged proteins , distinct stages in the life cycle of a cortical patch were proposed . Las17p characterises stage 1 patches which are rela - tively long lived ( (cid:2) 30 s ) but almost static . Other proteins that are likely to be localised at this stage include verproplin ( Vrp1p ) as it is required for localisation of Las17 p itself ( Smith et al . 2001 ) . It is not yet clear whether the patches at this stage recognise any speciﬁc cargoes . Stage 2 patches are designated as patches that exist for an intermediate amount of time ( about 30 s ) . These patches are ini - tially static but then show some limited slow movement . This stage of the patch is charac - terised by the presence of the endocytic pro - teins Sla1p , Sla2p , and Pan1p . At this stage there are known interactions with cargoes such as the pheromone receptor Ste2p ( Howard et al . 2002 ) . The ﬁnal stages of patch develop - ment are denoted by recruitment of actin and associated proteins . This is observed as slow movement , during which time the endocytic proteins are still present , followed by loss of endocytic proteins and a short rapid burst of movement as polymerisation is proposed to be driving movement of the endocytic vesicle into the cell . Possible roles for kinases ( Ark1 / Prk1 ) and the phosphatase Glc7p in disassembly and recycling of components are also depicted . L Las17p , S1 Sla1p , S2 Sla2p , P1 Pan1p , C cargo , A actin , A1 Abp1p , A2 / 3 Arp2 / 3 com - plex ; P phosphorylation sient actin assembly . They postulated that dynamin may pro - vide the trigger , and actin may provide the force for move - ment into the cytosol . Yeast dynamin however does not appear to be involved in the endocytic process at any stage . However , some proteins that are likely to function in the actin remodelling process have been identiﬁed , though the rearrangements that they facilitate are not known . The ﬁrst class of proteins likely to be important are the Arp2 / 3 activa - tor proteins . The study of Kaksonen et al . ( 2003 ) ( Fig . 3 ) in - dicated that the nonmotile , slow - , and fast - movement stages of vesicle formation were each associated with the recruit - ment of a distinct activator protein for Arp2 / 3 . In turn , these activators are able to drive polymerisation of actin , possibly in response to distinct signals . These activators may also re - cruit modulators that cause actin polymerisation to occur at speciﬁc sites or which produce ﬁlaments of a particular na - ture . For example , different activators may cause F - actin to form short , dynamic ﬁlaments ; longer more stable ﬁlaments ; or even ﬁlaments that could form a contractile ring to drive vesicle scission . Two other molecules that may play a role in modulating actin structures in these early steps in endocytosis are Myo5p and Sla2p . Myo5 cortical localisation immediately precedes the initiation of the fast movement of an actin - containing structure . A mutation in Myo5 results in an increased Myo5 patch lifespan and a delay in the onset of fast vesicle move - ment . The endocytic defect and accumulation of invagina - tions in the myo5 mutant cells would be consistent with inefﬁcient scission , though the exact role of Myo5p in facili - tating this step is not yet known ( Jonsdottir and Li 2004 ) . Sla2p is a highly conserved protein . Its mammalian homo - logue Huntingtin interacting protein - 1 ( HIP1R ) has also been shown to reside in forming endocytic vesicles ( Engqvist - Goldstein et al . 2001 ) . Deletion of sla2 causes a signiﬁcant reduction in ﬂuid - phase endocytosis and dual - labelling ﬂuo - rescence microscopy of Sla1p and actin indicates the for - mation of enlarged structures at the membrane that may represent partial arrest of the endocytic process possibly because the appropriate actin structures cannot be formed ( Gourlay et al . 2003 , Raths et al . 1993 ) . The fast movement that is observed following recruitment of actin is most likely to represent the propulsion of the vesi - cle into the cell . At this stage many of the initial cortical patch proteins appear to be disassembled and the inward movement is a more limited complex comprising actin and actin regulatory proteins . It is still not clear if this movement can occur in a manner similar to the “comet - tail” - like move - ment of listerias within mammalian cells , or whether the movement occurs by attachment and retrograde ﬂow of actin cables . Certainly in the mother cell this directed move - ment appears to occur ( Huckaba et al . 2004 ) . However , in daughter cells the movement does appear to be mostly non - linear and it is possible that an actin - propelled comet - tail type movement is sufﬁcient for the short distance to move to one of the many endosomes . Cortical patch disassembly : the role of Ark / Prk family kinases Just as stages of assembly have been described , it is likely that disassembly of cortical patches also takes place in se - quential regulated steps . While less is known in detail about patch disassembly , one family of proteins proposed to play a key role in this process are the Ark / Prk protein kinases ( Smythe and Ayscough 2003 ) . The importance of these proteins is reﬂected in the phenotype of their dele - tion . Single deletions of ARK1 or PRK1 in fact have no discernable phenotype . However , the double deletion has a dramatic effect on organisation of the actin cytoskeleton and the cells show no detectable uptake of ﬂuid - phase markers such as Lucifer Yellow ( Cope et al . 1999 , Zeng and Cai 1999 ) . When immunoﬂuorescence microscopy is used to determine localisation of actin - binding proteins and endocytic marker proteins , it is observed that all the proteins are found in a single clump in the cell . This data indicated that Ark1p and Prk1p are important for turnover of the actin - endocytic complex . In addition , it suggested that proteins that remain within the complex are causing the inappropriate polymerisation or stabilisation of F - actin when they are not removed from it . This is illustrated in Fig . 4 , in which the endocytic adaptor protein Sla1p is shown at cortical sites in wild - type cells . In the absence of Ark1p and Prk1p activity , it is found within the large en - docytic - actin clumps . The presence of Sla1p in the clumps ﬁts with its predicted role on actin regulation as an in - hibitor of actin turnover ( Ayscough et al . 1999 ) . Presum - ably , if Sla1p remains associated with the invaginating patches , the appropriate remodelling of actin is not able to occur . Restoration of wild - type Prk1p , but not kinase - dead Prk1p , allows recovery of Sla1p and actin localisation and resumption of endocytosis . Sla1p and Pan1p are in fact pivotal in this process of cortical patch disassembly . Both proteins have been shown to be substrates of the Ark1 and Prk1 kinases and for Sla1p it appears that switching on Prk1p activity causes it to disassemble from the complex ( Zeng et al . 2001 ) . Thus , phosphorylation of key compo - nents of the initial actin - endocytic complex causes their disassembly from the forming vesicle and allows the sub - sequent fast movement of the vesicle away from the plasma membrane . K . R . Ayscough : Actin dynamics and endocytosis 85 Completing the cycle : dephosphorylation of endocytic components As described above , phosphorylation of key actin regulatory components is thought to drive them from the complex and allow progression of the endocytic vesicle into the cell . The question then arises , once phosphorylated , what becomes of these proteins ? Possible fates would be degradation , as they can no longer be incorporated into new complexes , or de - phosphorylation , allowing them to be recycled and function in the initiation of new endocytic invaginations . This latter model is depicted in Fig . 3 . Circumstantial evidence for de - phosphorylation of both Sla1p and Pan1p has been reported insofar as both have been detected in two hybrid interactions with the yeast protein phosphatase - 1 Glc7p ( Bader et al . 2003 , Tu et al . 1996 , Venturi et al . 2000 ) . Glc7p is an essen - tial phosphatase that localises primarily to the nucleus but which has also been detected at the plasma membrane . It has many identiﬁed substrates and regulatory subunits and consequently mutations in the gene are thought to often affect multiple processes ( Baker et al . 1997 , Bloecher and Tatchell 2000 ) . However , comparison of Western blots for Sla1p in wild - type cells , cells lacking ark1 and prk1 , or in 86 K . R . Ayscough : Actin dynamics and endocytosis Fig . 5A , B . Changes in Sla1p bands detectable by Western blotting in (cid:3) ark1 (cid:3) prk1 and glc7 - 13 strains . A Whole - cell extracts were made from cells expressing wild - type ARK1 and PRK1 or from cells in which both of these genes were deleted . Extracts were separated by SDS - PAGE , transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes and the blots probed with antibodies to Sla1p . The gel shows an increase in mobility in the mutant (cid:3) ark1 (cid:3) prk1 strain indicating that Sla1p is nor - mally phosphorylated by these actin - regulating kinases . B Whole - cell extracts were made from cells expressing wild - type GLC7 or a mutant form of the gene , glc7 - 13 . These were separated by SDS - PAGE , trans - ferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes , and the blots probed with antibodies to Sla1p . The gel shows a decrease in mobility in the mutant glc7 strain indicating that Sla1p is normally dephosphorylated by the Glc7 protein Fig . 4 . Localisation of actin and Sla1p - myc in wild - type and (cid:3) ark1 (cid:3) prk1 mutant strains . Cells were grown to log phase and then processed for double - labelling immunoﬂuo - rescence as described ( Warren et al . 2002 ) . Left panels show actin localisation , while right panels show localisation of Sla1 - myc . Sla1 - myc and actin show partial colocalisa - tion in wild - type cells and complete colocali - sation in the large clumps in the (cid:3) ark1 (cid:3) prk1 cells . The (cid:3) ark1 (cid:3) prk1 strain was then transformed with a plasmid carrying ei - ther full - length PRK1 or kinase - dead prk1 and these cells were processed as described . Only fully active Prk1p is able to rescue the clumping phenotype and restore actin and Sla1p localisation . Bar : 10 (cid:1) m cells expressing a mutant allele of GLC7 , glc7 - 13 , indicate that in the absence of a fully functional Glc7p , there is an effect on the size of Sla1p when visualised on a Western blot indicative of an increase in the steady - state level of Sla1p phosphorylation in the cell ( Fig . 5 ) . Concluding remarks Many advances have been made in the last 2 – 3 years in our understanding of the composition of cortical actin patches in S . cerevisiae and how these patches can now be consid - ered an integral part of the endocytic machinery . However , there still remain important aspects of the endocytic process that are unresolved . Most strikingly , little is understood of the mechanistic role of the plethora of proteins that localise to the cortical patches . More than 25 proteins have been reported to have at least an overlapping localisation with cortical actin and the molecular function of these is largely unknown . However , key roles that are likely to be revealed include deformation of the membrane – possibly one role for the several identiﬁed components that contain ENTH domains ( Hurley and Wendland 2002 ) – and cargo selec - tion . So far , the only speciﬁc interaction described for cargo selection is the interaction of Sla1p with the endocytic NPFXD - like motif of the pheromone receptor Ste2p ( Howard et al . 2002 ) . As the broad spectrum of techniques discussed in this review indicate , these advances in our un - derstanding are likely to come from many routes . However , it is likely that clear data await the in vitro reconstitution of vesicle formation or the advent of improved methods of visualising actin at the level of electron microscopy . Acknowledgments Thanks to Dana Gheorghe for critical reading of the manuscript . Work in the laboratory of K . R . A . is supported by an MRC Senior Research Fellowship ( G117 / 394 ) . References Adams AEM , Pringle JR ( 1984 ) Relationship to actin and tubulin distri - bution to bud growth in wild type and morphogenetic mutant Saccha - romyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 98 : 934 – 945 Ayscough KR ( 2000 ) Endocytosis and the development of cell polarity in yeast require a dynamic F - actin cytoskeleton . Curr Biol 10 : 1587 – 1590 – Stryker J , Pokala N , Sanders M , Crews P , Drubin DG ( 1997 ) High rates of actin ﬁlament turnover in budding yeast and roles for actin in establishment and maintenance of cell polarity revealed using the actin inhibitor latrunculin - A . J Cell Biol 137 : 399 – 416 – Eby JJ , Lila T , Dewar H , Kozminski KG , Drubin DG ( 1999 ) Sla1p is a functionally modular component of the yeast cortical actin cytoskele - ton required for correct localization of both Rho1p - GTPase and Sla2p , a protein with talin homology . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 1061 – 1075 Bader GD , Betel D , Hogue CW ( 2003 ) BIND : the Biomolecular Interac - tion Network Database . Nucleic Acids Res 31 : 248 – 250 Baker SH , Frederick DL , Bloecher A , Tatchell K ( 1997 ) Alanine - scan - ning mutagenesis of protein phosphatase type I in the yeast Saccha - romyces cerevisiae . Genetics 145 : 615 – 626 Benedetti H , Raths S , Crausaz F , Riezman H ( 1994 ) The END3 gene en - codes a protein that is required for the internalization step of endocy - tosis and for actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast . Mol Biol Cell 5 : 1023 – 1037 Bloecher A , Tatchell K ( 2000 ) Dynamic localization of protein phos - phatase type 1 in the mitotic cell cycle of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 149 : 125 – 140 Bretscher A ( 2003 ) Polarized growth and organelle segregation in yeast : the tracks , motors , and receptors . J Cell Biol 160 : 811 – 816 Cope M , Yang S , Shang C , Drubin DG ( 1999 ) Novel protein kinases Ark1p and Prk1p associate with and regulate the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast . J Cell Biol 144 : 1203 – 1218 Dewar H , Warren DT , Gardiner FC , Gourlay CG , Satish N , Richardson MR , Andrews PD , Ayscough KR ( 2002 ) Novel proteins linking the actin cytoskeleton to the endocytic machinery in Saccharomyces cere - visiae . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 3646 – 3661 Doyle T , Botstein D ( 1996 ) Movement of yeast cortical actin cytoskele - ton visualized in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93 : 3886 – 3891 Engqvist - Goldstein AEY , Warren RA , Kessels MM , Keen JH , Heuser J , Drubin DG ( 2001 ) The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin as - sembly in vitro . J Cell Biol 154 : 1209 – 1223 Goode BL , Rodal AA ( 2001 ) Modular complexes that regulate actin as - sembly in budding yeast . Curr Opin Microbiol 4 : 703 – 712 Gourlay CW , Dewar H , Warren DT , Costa R , Satish N , Ayscough KR ( 2003 ) An interaction between Sla1p and Sla2p plays a role in regulating actin dynamics and endocytosis in budding yeast . J Cell Sci 116 : 2551 – 2564 Howard JP , Hutton JL , Olson JM , Payne GS ( 2002 ) Sla1p serves as the targeting signal recognition factor for NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D - mediated endocy - tosis . J Cell Biol 157 : 315 – 326 Huckaba TM , Card Gay A , Pantalena LF , Yang H - C , Pon LA ( 2004 ) Live cell imaging of the assembly , disassembly and actin cable - depen - dent movement of endosomes and actin patches in the budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 167 : 519 – 530 Hurley JH , Wendland B ( 2002 ) Endocytosis : driving membranes around the bend . Cell 111 : 143 – 146 Jonsdottir GA , Li R ( 2004 ) Dynamics of yeast myosin I : evidence for a possible role in scission of endocytic vesicles . Curr Biol 14 : 1604 – 1609 Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG ( 2003 ) A pathway for association of re - ceptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 : 475 – 487 Kübler E , Riezman H ( 1993 ) Actin and ﬁmbrin are required for the inter - nalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J 12 : 2855 – 2862 – Schimmoller F , Riezman H ( 1994 ) Calcium independent calmodulin requirement for endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J 13 : 5539 – 5546 Merriﬁeld CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W ( 2002 ) Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 4 : 691 – 698 Mulholland J , Preuss D , Moon A , Wong A , Drubin D , Botstein D ( 1994 ) Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J Cell Biol 125 : 381 – 391 – Konopka J , Singer - Kruger B , Zerial M , Botstein D ( 1999 ) Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol Biol Cell 10 : 799 – 817 Munn AL , Stevenson BJ , Geli MI , Riezman H ( 1995 ) end5 , end6 , and end7 – mutations that cause actin delocalization and block the inter - nalization step of endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 6 : 1721 – 1742 Raths S , Rohrer J , Crausaz F , Riezman H ( 1993 ) end3 and end4 : two mutants defective in receptor - mediated endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Biol 120 : 55 – 65 K . R . Ayscough : Actin dynamics and endocytosis 87 Rodal AA , Kozubowski L , Goode BL , Drubin DG , Hartwig JH ( 2005 ) Actin and septin ultrastructures at the budding yeast cell cortex . Mol Biol Cell 16 : 372 – 384 Smith MG , Sudhindra SR , Pon LA ( 2001 ) The life cycle of actin patches in mating yeast . J Cell Sci 114 : 1505 – 1513 Smythe E , Ayscough KR ( 2003 ) The Ark1 / Prk1 family of protein kinases – regulators of endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . EMBO Rep 4 : 246 – 251 Tu JL , Song WJ , Carlson M ( 1996 ) Protein phosphatase type 1 interacts with proteins required for meiosis and other cellular processes in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae . Mol Cell Biol 16 : 4199 – 4206 Venturi GM , Bloecher A , Williams - Hart T , Tatchell K ( 2000 ) Genetic in - teractions between GLC7 , PPZ1 and PPZ2 in Saccharomyces cere - visiae . Genetics 155 : 69 – 83 Waddle J , Karpova T , Waterson R , Cooper J ( 1996 ) Movement of corti - cal actin patches in yeast . J Cell Biol 132 : 861 – 870 Warren DT , Andrews PD , Gourlay CG , Ayscough KR ( 2002 ) Sla1p cou - ples the yeast endocytic machinery to proteins regulating actin dy - namics . J Cell Sci 115 : 1703 – 1715 Wendland B , McCaffery JM , Xiao Q , Emr SD ( 1996 ) A novel ﬂuores - cence - activated cell sorter - based screen for yeast endocytosis mutants identiﬁes a yeast homologue of mammalian eps15 . J Cell Biol 135 : 1485 – 1500 Zeng GS , Cai MJ ( 1999 ) Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton organization in yeast by a novel serine / threonine kinase Prk1p . J Cell Biol 144 : 71 – 82 – Yu XW , Cai MJ ( 2001 ) Regulation of yeast actin cytoskeleton - regula - tory complex Pan1p / Sla1p / End3p by serine / threonine kinase Prk1p . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 3759 – 3772 88 K . R . Ayscough : Actin dynamics and endocytosis