Measuring discursive inﬂuence across scholarship Aaron Gerow a , 1 , Yuening Hu b , Jordan Boyd - Graber c , d , e , f , David M . Blei g , h , i , and James A . Evans j , k , 1 a Department of Computing , Goldsmiths , University of London , New Cross , London SE14 6NW , United Kingdom ; b Cloud AI , Google , Sunnyvale , CA 94809 ; c Department of Computer Science , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 ; d University of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 ; e iSchool , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 ; f Language Science Center , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 ; g Department of Statistics , Columbia University , New York , NY 10027 ; h Department of Computer Science , Columbia University , New York , NY 10027 ; i Data Science Institute , Columbia University , New York , NY 10027 ; j Department of Sociology , University of Chicago , Chicago , IL 60637 ; and k Computation Institute , University of Chicago , Chicago , IL 60637 Edited by Peter S . Bearman , Columbia University , New York , NY , and approved February 12 , 2018 ( received for review November 18 , 2017 ) Assessing scholarly inﬂuence is critical for understanding the col - lective system of scholarship and the history of academic inquiry . Inﬂuence is multifaceted , and citations reveal only part of it . Cita - tion counts exhibit preferential attachment and follow a rigid “news cycle” that can miss sustained and indirect forms of inﬂu - ence . Building on dynamic topic models that track distributional shifts in discourse over time , we introduce a variant that incor - porates features , such as authorship , afﬁliation , and publication venue , toassesshowthesecontextsinteractwithcontenttoshape future scholarship . We perform in - depth analyses on collections of physicsresearch ( 500 , 000abstracts ; 102years ) andscholarshipgen - erally ( JSTOR repository : 2 million full - text articles ; 130 years ) . Our measure of document inﬂuence helps predict citations and shows how outcomes , such as winning a Nobel Prize or afﬁliation with a highly ranked institution , boost inﬂuence . Analysis of citations alongside discursive inﬂuence reveals that citations tend to credit authors who persist in their ﬁelds over time and discount credit for works that are inﬂuential over many topics or are “ahead of their time . ” In this way , our measures provide a way to acknowledge diversecontributionsthattakelongerandtravelfarthertoachievescholarlyappreciation , enabling us to correct citation biases and enhance sensitivity to the full spectrum of scholarly impact . scholarly inﬂuence | science of science | probabilistic modeling S cholarship is a complex and chaotic process by which authors create , share , and promote new concepts , theories , meth - ods , data , and ﬁndings . Subsequent research adopts scholarly innovations through direct contact with the original work or through follow - on research , review articles , seminars , and per - sonal conversation . Researchers may acknowledge such inﬂu - ence by citing the work on which they draw or passively adopt - ing the vocabulary , ideas , assumptions , approaches , or insights without explicit references . In this way , citations constitute an important but incomplete signal of inﬂuence , the full spec - trum of which includes direct and indirect—acknowledged and ignored—inﬂuences from across the scholarly landscape . We hold that a key dimension of inﬂuence involves the ability to change scholarly discourse , which itself interacts with contextual features , such as the status of publication venues , authors’ name - sakes , and institutions that host the research . Here , we seek to detect discursive inﬂuence and the factors that shape it . Research impact is commonly assessed by the number of explicit references to a document , author , or journal . A refer - ence list represents a complex combination of considerations , including perceived inﬂuence of important arguments , methods , data , or ﬁndings but also , what authors , reviewers , and editors believe should be cited to appease readers or enhance their own status . Scientometrics provides measures of author , journal , and institutional impact ( 1 ) , which tabulate functions of the citation distribution over articles and time . New “alt metrics” go beyond citations to assess online views , downloads , likes , and tweets or estimate readership , cocitation , and diversity ( 2 , 3 ) . Like cita - tions , these metrics provide an informative but distorted portrait of inﬂuence : they exhibit rich - get - richer feedback ( 4 – 6 ) and man - ifest manipulation by authors and editors ( 7 – 9 ) . Authors may cite their own work to drive trafﬁc to prior articles ( 10 , 11 ) . Less nefariously , citations may certify membership in a community , reveal intellectual alliances , or reﬂect the status aspirations of a paper ( 12 – 14 ) . Moreover , authors are often unable to cite all of their inﬂuences , selecting citations based on cognitive avail - ability and space constraints ( 15 , 16 ) . Over time , citations of a paper tend to decay due to a preference for recentness ( 17 ) , even when a paper continues to be inﬂuential . Further compli - cating the matter , citation cultures differ across disciplines and time periods ( 18 , 19 ) . The primary artifact of scholarly work is not citations but text . Here , we offer a measure of inﬂuence based on text and context as they shape future discourse . We use scholarly discourse to ref - erence the amalgam of language in academic publications , that traces a sequence of communication and scholarly argument . We adopt a broad notion of discourse as the overall state of schol - arship expressed in published work . This approach avoids some challenges of discourse analysis while raising new ones . Analyz - ing speciﬁc aspects of scholarly conversation requires a selection process , the result of which may not generalize . Alternatively , analyzing a vast number of publications presents technical chal - lenges . To model more general notions of discourse , we use a class of probabilistic techniques called topic models that extract patterns of term – document co - occurrence and yield semantically related word distributions called “topics . ” Here , we develop a dynamic topic model designed to explain not only which documents are inﬂuential but how their inﬂu - ence is derived from content and its interaction with features , like authorship , afﬁliation , and publication venue . We build on models of lexical change ( 20 , 21 ) and in particular , the document Signiﬁcance Scientiﬁc and scholarly inﬂuence is multifaceted , shifts over time , and varies across disciplines . We present a dynamic topic model to credit documents with inﬂuence that shapes future discourse based on their content and contextual features . We trace discursive innovation in scholarship and identify the inﬂuence of particular articles along with their authors , afﬁl - iations , and journals . In collections of science , social science , and humanities research spanning over a century , our mea - sure helps predict citations and reveals signals that recognize authors who make diverse contributions and whose contribu - tions take longer to be appreciated , allowing us to compen - sate for bias in citation behavior . Author contributions : A . G . , Y . H . , J . B . - G . , D . M . B . , and J . A . E . designed research ; A . G . , Y . H . , J . B . - G . , and J . A . E . performed research ; A . G . , Y . H . , J . B . - G . , and J . A . E . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; A . G . and J . A . E . analyzed data ; and A . G . , Y . H . , J . B . - G . , D . M . B . , and J . A . E . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution - NonCommercial - NoDerivatives License 4 . 0 ( CC BY - NC - ND ) . Data deposition : The source code of the model’s implementation has been deposited on GitHub and is available at https : / / github . com / gerowam / inﬂuence . 1 To whom correspondence may be addressed . Email : a . gerow @ gold . ac . uk or jevans @ uchicago . edu . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1719792115 / - / DCSupplemental . Published online March 12 , 2018 . 3308 – 3313 | PNAS | March 27 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 13 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1719792115 S O C I A L S C I E N C E S A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S inﬂuence model ( DIM ) ( 22 ) . In the DIM , documents receive a score based on how they change future topics , but the model offers no mechanism to explain the composition of inﬂuence . Our variant offers such an explanation by explicitly modeling document - level covariates alongside content . This allows for comparing different kinds of authors , institutions , and publica - tion venues for each topic individually . We afﬁrm the value of such features , as they help predict citations in a widely studied corpus of computational linguistics research ( 23 ) . We also intro - duce a mechanism to assess a document’s contribution over time by simulating future discourse without it . This dynamic measure of contribution helps address the limited scope of citations and provide a composite understanding of scholarly inﬂuence . Robust Model of Inﬂuence We consider a document to be inﬂuential to the extent that it affects future discourse . Probabilistic topic models enable the analysis of such discourse in large text collections ( 24 – 26 ) . Top - ics { k 0 , · · · , k K } are discovered from lexical co - occurrence in a set of documents and refer to probability distributions over observed words , the most likely of which typify a topic ( 27 ) . In time - ordered texts , dynamic topic models derive topics from documents binned into periods { t 0 , · · · , t T } , allowing topics to change over time ( 20 ) . Each document is ﬁt with a document – topic mixture , θ d , and each word is ﬁt with a topic assignment z d , k , n ∈ N over the vocabulary N . The ﬁrst ( and to our knowl - edge , only ) model to explicitly measure how individual docu - ments change future topics is the DIM ( 22 ) . DIM learns docu - ment inﬂuence in a topic , (cid:96) d , k , based on how it changes future topics but does not explain its composition . Topic models have proven effective for analyzing scientiﬁc lit - erature ( 21 , 28 , 29 ) , although they make assumptions about the data . In particular , such models assume that a speciﬁed number of topics are present throughout . Statistically , words are assigned to topics as those topics semantically shift from “background” topics ( composed of collection - wide words ) to speciﬁc , coherent topics . Choosing the number of topics , K , is important and has empirical implications , but it can be interpreted as the number of retained discursive dimensions ( 27 , 30 ) . Choosing the number of topics was done in a theoretically motivated , data - driven fashion using static models of the same data ﬁt with many topics to iden - tify a reasonable threshold for how many topics the data used ( SI Appendix ) . This approach approximates a Bayesian nonparamet - ric search over possible numbers of topics ( 31 , 32 ) and allows us to discover the topic complexity for each corpus . Our variant adds an important explanatory mechanism to establish how inﬂuence arises . By incorporating a latent regres - sion on document covariates , the model estimates the marginal effect of authorship , institution , and journal on inﬂuence . Al - though a modest technical innovation , this enables robust expla - nations of discursive inﬂuence and its origins . A document’s inﬂuence in a particular topic , (cid:96) d , k , is a product of its content and its interaction with associated contexts traced in article metadata . The coefﬁcients that solve the latent regression , denoted µ k , offer estimates of how covariates add or detract from inﬂuence in each topic . As we will see , this opens a range of insights into how schol - arly inﬂuence unfolds . Results The model produces three important results : ( i ) topics ( word mixtures over time , ˆ β t , k , and topic mixtures within documents , θ k ) , ( ii ) variational estimates of inﬂuence ( ˆ (cid:96) d , k ) , and ( iii ) esti - mated marginal effects of covariates on inﬂuence ( ˆ µ k ) . A corpus of computational linguistics research ( Association for Compu - tational Linguistics Anthology Reference Corpus ; ACL - ARC ) ( 23 ) was used to compare our variant with DIM . Despite the additional complexity , our model performed comparably with DIM in terms of convergence in the likelihood bound and per - plexity . Estimates of inﬂuence in DIM correlated with citation counts : ρ = 0 . 22 ( K = 10 ) , ρ = 0 . 21 ( K = 20 ) , ρ = 0 . 21 ( K = 50 ) , and ρ = 0 . 18 ( K = 75 ) . Our variant yielded signiﬁcantly stronger and substantially larger correlations : ρ = 0 . 28 ( K = 10 ) , ρ = 0 . 27 ( K = 20 ) , ρ = 0 . 23 ( K = 50 ) , and ρ = 0 . 22 ( K = 75 ; Fisher z transform ; all p < 0 . 01 . This conﬁrms that the exogenous fea - tures captured by our model have an observable effect on pre - dicting citations . Furthermore , modeling these additional fea - tures adds explanation to our notion of discursive inﬂuence . Inﬂuence in Physics . A collection of research published by the American Physical Society ( APS ) was used to estimate a static 500 - topic model , discover an optimal 37 - topic solution , and then , ﬁt our 37 - topic dynamic inﬂuence model . The APS collection provides a rich citation environment , where 90 % of documents in the sample were cited by other APS publications . Most of the resulting topics typify subﬁelds and allow us to trace the emergence of modern concepts in physics ( SI Appendix ) . We found that document inﬂuence ( I d ) ( Eq . 8 ) correlated with cita - tion counts , C d , at ρ = 0 . 32 ( p < 0 . 01 ) . Some anecdotal results afﬁrm that discursive innovations are meaningful and substan - tive . For example , specialization is traced by authors’ outsized marginal inﬂuence in a few , related topics ( Fig . 1 A ) . Ed Wit - ten has driven advances in cosmology and string theory , Arno Penzias’ radio telescope contributed greatly to understanding the big bang and the development of new cosmic detector arrays , and Philip Anderson cofounded spin - glasses as a model of magnetic phase transitions . Witten’s byline lends a positive effect for inﬂu - ence in cosmology - related topics as does Penzias’ byline in detec - tors and atomic physics and Anderson’s byline in lattice quan - tum chromodynamics and superconductors among others . Nobel Laureates , overall , have a signiﬁcantly more positive effect on their document’s inﬂuence than those without a Nobel ( Fig . 1 D ) . Discursive inﬂuence provides a way to measure impact . Fig . 2 lays out four kinds of papers based on their relative discur - sive inﬂuence and citation count . Each quadrant is characterized by high – low bins . Empirically , we deﬁne these quadrants rela - tive to median inﬂuence and number of citations . Papers in the high / high and low / low quadrants participate in the standard sci - entiﬁc cycle of credit , where discursive contributions are cited by future work . Here , the signals from citations and discursive inﬂuence substitute for one another , with neither adding much information to the assessment of impact . Papers in the off - diagonal quadrants , however , adhere less cleanly to this pattern . Citations and discourse here constitute complementary signals in at least three ways . First , citations exhibit preferential attachment , favoring authors who persist in narrow subﬁelds of science , whereas discourse identiﬁes greater inﬂuenceforitinerantscientistswhosecareersspandiversetopics . Second , citations tend to follow a skewed , log - normal distribution overtimewithrapiduptakefollowedbyadiminishingtailofatten - tion . As such , citation patterns favor articles that receive most of their references within this scientiﬁc news cycle . Document inﬂu - ence , however , credits papers that are enduringly inﬂuential as well as so - called “sleeping beauty” ( SB ) papers , which experience a delay before discovery and tend to have high document inﬂu - ence ( Fig . 1 C ) . Third , citations uniquely capture nondiscursive contributions , like the provision of new data or critiques , whereas inﬂuence captures both direct and indirect innovations . We propose that scientists and scholars experience profes - sional pressure to cite touchstone works of authors with an established presence in their ﬁeld . Authors who contribute to more diverse topics post high discursive inﬂuence but are less likely to receive high citations . We measure author establish - ment through persistence ( Eq . 11 ) , calculated as the inverse entropy of authors’ sum of document – topic mixtures , scaled by their proliﬁcness . Author persistence correlates with their most cited papers ( ρ = 0 . 57 , p < 0 . 01 ) , much more than with the same author’s most inﬂuential paper ( ρ = 0 . 34 , p < 0 . 01 ) . More per - sistent authors receive more citations , but on average have less inﬂuential documents ( Fig . 1 B ) . Authors who remain productive in a narrow range of topics are more likely to have a highly cited paper than if they make more scattered contributions . Papers in Gerow et al . PNAS | March 27 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 13 | 3309 B A C D Fig . 1 . ( A ) Box plots of author coefﬁcients for each APS topic . Medians are shown as a red line within each box , the ﬁrst quartiles are within the box , and the second and third quartiles are within bands . CMP , condensed matter physics ; HEP , high energy physics . Note the wider distributions for more general topics 1 and 36 . Overlaid are coefﬁcients for three physicists . Positive values mean that an author’s byline adds inﬂuence , whereas a negative value means it detracts . A positive coefﬁcient does not necessarily mean that a document is highly inﬂuential itself , only that it was more inﬂuential than if it had it been written by the average author . ( B ) Locally weighted scatter plot smoothing ( LOWESS ) curves comparing document inﬂuence ( dashed red line ; left y axis ) and citations ( solid blue line ; right y axis ) with author persistence ( Eq . 11 ) ( x axis ) . A consistent and statistically signiﬁcant trend is established : more persistent authors tend to produce more highly cited but less inﬂuential documents , whereas less persistent authors have more inﬂuential but less cited documents . ( C ) LOWESS curve ﬁt to the plot of documents’ inﬂuence vs . their SB score . Error bars are ± 2 SE of the mean in both dimensions . ( D ) Distribution of authors’ marginal effect on inﬂuence for Nobel Laureates compared with all other authors . the high citation / low inﬂuence bin include those from authors whose papers one “must cite , ” a self - reinforcing process where papers by persistent authors become required scholarly bound - ary markers . Authors of papers in this region are more persistent than those in any other quadrant ( SI Appendix , Fig . S15 ) . Con - versely , papers in the low - citations / high - inﬂuence bin dispropor - tionately credit itinerant authors who contribute to many ﬁelds . We ﬁnd that norms of citation encourage attention to recent work . We evaluate this by examining how articles make dynamic contributions to discourse over time . Although document inﬂu - ence is a static attribute representing a paper’s effect on overall discourse , sometimes this inﬂuence occurs immediately , while in other cases , it takes time to foment . To establish the dynamics of discursive impact , we measure a document’s topic contribution by estimating how different future topics would have been with - out it ( Eq . 10 ) . Fig . 3 illustrates this dynamic contribution for two different kinds of SB papers . Felix Bloch’s 1946 “Nuclear induc - tion” ( 33 ) is typical in that it had a small impact on most topics but a sizeable one on a few . It is also typical in that it received a spike of citations shortly after publication , which then began to decay . Near the turn of the century , we see a signiﬁcant spike in both the article’s citations and its contribution of the Hall effect to the condensed matter physics topic . This is when transistors in microchips became small enough to be affected by the quan - tum Hall effect and the nuclear magnetic moments described by Bloch . A second paper , the top cited in our sample from 1947 , is a “pure” SB , which garnered relatively few citations until a sud - den spike in 2004 . Philip Wallace’s “The band theory of graphite” ( 34 ) described the structure of graphene , which at the time , was only observable on an iron ﬁlm . Theoretically , graphene was exceptionally strong and “growable” in a block structure , but the technology to characterize and isolate it without a substrate was not discovered until 2004 , which was awarded the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics . Wallace’s paper ( 34 ) contributed modestly to most topics and signiﬁcantly to a few , but in 2001 , its contribu - tion to the materials topic jumps signiﬁcantly . With a sample of 500 articles from each percentile of docu - ment inﬂuence , we assessed the variance and half - life of citations compared with topic contribution . Half - life is the number of time steps after which the score is one - half what it was initially . Doc - uments in higher percentiles of inﬂuence have longer half - lives , and in every percentile , citations have lower variance and shorter half - lives than topic contribution ( SI Appendix ) . This suggests a conventional “statute of limitations” through which scholars no longer need to cite older articles with persistent inﬂuence , pos - sibly because those ideas have entered popular consciousness or becausetheiroriginalauthorsarenolongeraroundtoclaimthem . Other articles defy the scientiﬁc news cycle not because they are persistently inﬂuential , but because they garner little atten - tion for a long period before a spike of citation attention , not unlike Wallace’s paper ( 34 ) discussed above . The SB index ( 35 ) identiﬁes such articles as a function of the convexity and time - to - maximum citations over time . An article that is dormant for a long time , after which it suddenly receives a burst of citations , has a high SB score , whereas the typical article , which receives a burst of citations on publication that decay thereafter , receives a low score . SB scores correlated four times more strongly with docu - ment inﬂuence ( r = 0 . 20 , p < 0 . 01 ) than with citations ( r = 0 . 05 , p < 0 . 01 ) , suggesting that papers ahead of their time nevertheless receive fewer citations than their inﬂuence would predict . Such high - inﬂuence / low - citation articles violate the standard inﬂuence trajectory . Finally , high citation / low inﬂuence papers contain important nontextual features , while high - inﬂuence / low - citations papers tend to have inﬂuence that may not be credited in citations . For example , the most cited paper in the ACL - ARC collection intro - duced the Penn Treebank ( 36 ) , an important resource that accel - erated research in parsing . Nevertheless , it was the resource and 3310 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1719792115 Gerow et al . S O C I A L S C I E N C E S A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S Low / High High discursive influence - Innovative ideas - Dispersed impact across topics and time Low citations - Persistently impactful - Delayed or distant impact High / High High discursive influence - Large , broad impact - Boosted by covariates High citations - Acknowledged by peers - Self - reinforcing Low / Low Low discursive influence - Small , narrow impact - Detracted by covariates Low citations - Ignored by peers - Self - reinforcing High / Low Low discursive influence - Non - textual influence - Focused contribution to established fields ( topics ) High citations - Persistent , focused authors - Preferential attachment G r ea t e r I n f l uen c e Influence vs . Citations More Citations Fig . 2 . A framework for scholarly impact : citations vs . discursive inﬂuence . not conceptual innovations that made up its impact ( 22 ) . When we mapped comment - and reply - type APS publications to the framework of Fig . 2 , 54 % were in the lower right quadrant , where they are highly cited but have low inﬂuence . Critical comments and replies kill existing lines of inquiry rather than birth new ones , offering corrections , rebuttals , or direct refutations with - out producing new concepts or terminology . As a result , they attract citations but do not stimulate discursive emulation . Only 6 % were in the high inﬂuence / low citations region . Many highly inﬂuential but undercited papers tended to be authored by early innovators whose discursive contributions became pervasive over generations . This is also artiﬁcially the case for articles in the ﬁrst years of the corpus that channel ideas borrowed from documents published prior to our sample . We empirically deﬁned the ﬁrst year to the year during which mean document inﬂuence was within 2 SDs of the global mean as a burn - in period , up until 1942 for APS . Excluding these early papers , high citation / low inﬂuence papers are from authors who contributed innovations that are primarily nontextual in nature ( data , methods , research - killing refutations , etc . ) , while high - inﬂuence / low - citation papers are from conceptual innova - tors whose language has become assumed within a ﬁeld . Scholarly Reach in JSTOR Repository . While physics forms a com - munity with shared publishing habits , research in JSTOR offers a wider sample of academic traditions . After estimating a static , 500 - topic model and discovering that using 53 topics best char - acterized the corpus , we ﬁt the 53 - topic dynamic model to full texts in JSTOR and found that citations were modestly corre - lated with document inﬂuence ( ρ < 0 . 17 , p < 0 . 01 ) over all top - ics . The diversity of JSTOR means that our sample includes doc - uments from vastly different citation cultures . The correlation between citation counts and inﬂuence within individual topics was varied and weak . When citations were scaled by document – topic mixtures ( θ d , k C d ) , however , the correlations were all sig - niﬁcantly more positive ( SI Appendix , Table S6 ) . This suggests that , while subjects have different citation habits , our measure of inﬂuence is sensitive to the subject variation captured by distinct topics . Using JSTOR’s subject taxonomy , citations were grouped by their distance : zero , one , or two . Most citations are within sub - ject ( i . e . , distance 0 ) , while 10 % have distance 1 and 5 % have distance 2 . Both outgoing and incoming citations show a pref - erence for inﬂuential papers ( Fig . 4 B and C ) . This shows that inﬂuential papers reach farther across disciplines in their refer - ences . Likewise , inﬂuential papers are cited from farther away . Inﬂuential papers are both more likely to cite work beyond their subject and to be cited from other subjects . Moreover , inﬂuential articles that receive citations from distant work have a higher ratio of inﬂuence to citations than works of more local interest . This suggests that the citation statute of limitations illustrated above may operate in not only time but also scientiﬁc space , releasing scholars from the obligation to cite inﬂuential work that is sufﬁciently old or topically distant from the inﬂuenced work , where the originating authors are not present to claim them . Predicting citations is notoriously difﬁcult ( 15 , 17 ) , in part because many papers are never cited . Looking at which papers receive any citations ( 29 % in JSTOR ) , more inﬂuential papers were more likely to be cited outright ( Fig . 4 A ) . Document inﬂu - ence is also predictive in citation models : a logit model predict - ing citedness with document inﬂuence and publication date , t d , of the form C d > 0 ∼ I d × t d + 1 estimated a strong positive effect for document inﬂuence [ β ( I d ) = 0 . 42 , P > | z | = 0 . 000 ] . Inﬂuence also helps predict actual citation counts . Using logistic link neg - ative binomial regressions of the same form as above , the fully speciﬁed model estimated similar effects with β ( I d ) = 0 . 33 ( SI Appendix ) . Similar models ﬁt to each topic produced compara - ble results . We also found topicwise variation in how citation is related to inﬂuence for authors . Authors’ marginal impact on their documents’ inﬂuence was more strongly correlated with their citation counts ( ˆ µ Auth × C Auth ) in humanities and social sci - ences ( e . g . , philosophy , literary theory , and education topics ) . In mathematical and natural science ﬁelds ( e . g . , cell biology , physical chemistry , and various statistics topics ) , the correlation was considerably weaker and in many cases , nonexistent ( SI Appendix , Table S7 ) . This suggests that authors in “narra - tively” driven areas are much more likely to have citations con - ferred on them for having inﬂuenced the total ﬂow of discourse than authors from empirical and formal ﬁelds , who may be more likely credited for more speciﬁc contributions . The relationship between inﬂuence and citations in JSTOR is topic - speciﬁc , but some documents contribute to a variety of top - ics . We sampled some of the most cited documents in each per - centile of the inﬂuence distribution that were published after the burn - in cutoff ( 1930 for JSTOR ) ( SI Appendix , Fig . S9 ) . In the lowest percentile , the top - cited document was 1939’s “A system for marking turtles for future identiﬁcation” by Fred R . Cagle ( 37 ) . The paper , which lives up to its title , remains highly cited in ecology and zoology research . By explaining a technique , “A sys - tem for marking turtles for future identiﬁcation” offers little in the way of topic contribution : 9 topics were signiﬁcantly changed by its publication , while the remaining 44 go unchanged . Cagle’s Fig . 3 . Topic contributions ( Eq . 10 ) and citations for Felix Bloch’s “Nuclear induction” ( 33 ) ( Upper ) and Philip Wallace’s “The band theory of graphite” ( 34 ) ( Lower ) . Both papers featured the typical contribution proﬁle where they affect change in a few topics , which diminishes slowly over time . Each paper also exhibits a late spike in citations matched by a coincident spike in contribution to a speciﬁc topic ( labeled ) . Gerow et al . PNAS | March 27 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 13 | 3311 B A C Fig . 4 . ( A ) Violin plot of document inﬂuence ( y axis ; kernel density esti - mate bandwidth = 0 . 1 ) for cited and uncited documents in JSTOR grouped by decade ; 2010 is omitted as incomplete . ( B and C ) Histograms and density estimates of ( B ) incoming and ( C ) outgoing citations among JSTOR docu - ments grouped by distance in the subject tree . paper ( 37 ) typiﬁes low - inﬂuence / high - citation papers that make technical offerings adopted by future research , but that do not incite discursive shifts . In the 50th percentile , 1965’s “Popula - tion ﬂuctuations and clutch - size in the great tit” by C . M . Perrins ( 38 ) was the most cited ( 504 times within sample ) . Perrins’ dis - cursive contribution is spread over a range of topics and time . It immediately shifted discourse in biology - and ecology - related topics , ﬁelds where it continues to be cited today as a landmark paper . After publication , topics in statistics , group behavior , sex - ual health , medicine , and psychology adopted some of the con - ceptual terminology and remained changed to the end of the corpus . These contributions owe much to Perrin’s use of terms about population dynamics , movement , procreation , and individ - ual variation . Finally , the highest cited paper in the 90th per - centile of inﬂuence was Sam Peltzman’s 1976 “Toward a more general theory of regulation , ” ( 39 ) which had an inﬂuence + 3 . 5 SD above the mean and 701 citations . Recall that inﬂuence is a latent variable ﬁt within the model , while contribution is a post hoc estimate of how different topics would have been with - out a given document . Peltzman’s 1976 paper ( 39 ) has a typi - cal contribution proﬁle—signiﬁcantly inﬂuencing a few topics but only slightly altering most—although it sits near the top of the inﬂuence distribution . This is because much of its inﬂuence was derived extrinsically : it was published by an eminent researcher ( who in 2013 , Wired magazine listed as 1 of 28 top scientists with - out a Nobel Prize ) in the high - impact Journal of Law and Eco - nomics , and it was published by the University of Chicago Press , a leadingpublisherofeconomicsresearch . “Towardamoregeneral theory of regulation” exempliﬁes a conﬁguration to which many researchers can relate : good papers are often made more so with contextual boosts , like authorship , venue , and publisher . Discussion Our measure of inﬂuence tracks changes in future discourse and explicitly identiﬁes the content and context of previous doc - uments that affect these discursive shifts . Document inﬂuence provides a direct measure of impact that allows us to disentan - gle many dimensions of inﬂuence across domains of science and scholarship . The model also estimates lasting contributions to topics over time and helps discover inﬂuential but undercited work . Our measures not only help predict citations better than previous similar models , but they provide an explanation of what drives inﬂuence . Most importantly , the model reveals how dis - cursive innovations are adopted and credited . Alongside cita - tions , discursive inﬂuence brings us closer toward a full - spectrum estimate of scholarly impact . Assessing scholarly inﬂuence is a retrospective task , and it can be distorted by conﬂating citations with impact . Not only does our method enable previously impossible analyses of discursive inﬂuence , it could help authors decide what to cite and why . On the one hand , citations provide a simpliﬁed , censored , and synoptic trace of acknowledged inﬂuence—an important trace of impact . On the other hand , contributing change to scholarly discourse is another measurable kind of inﬂuence that can be explained over time , across individual subjects , and with respect to authors , institutions , and publication venues , all of which con - tribute to the complex evolution of scholarship . Materials and Methods The APS collection contains 509 , 007 abstracts from 1913 to 2015 coded with type ( article , review , commentary , etc . ) , journal , authors , and their institu - tional afﬁliations . To avoid spurious metadata , only papers with an author found twice and an afﬁliation that occurred three times were retained . This resulted in 74 , 459 covariates , τ , over 251 , 382 documents dating from 1918 to 2015 . Stop words , infrequent words , and statistically uninteresting words ( bytermfrequency – inversedocumentfrequency ) werediscarded . The ﬁnal vocabulary contained 15 , 312 tokens . The model was ﬁt with 37 topics , a value chosen by assessing topic use in a static , Bayesian nonparametric model with 500 topics ( SI Appendix ) . Labels were given by three researchers with doctoral degrees in physics . The JSTOR collection consists of over 2 million documents from 1894 to 2014 ; 28 , 861 covariates were coded in τ representing authorship , jour - nal / venue , publisher , and discipline . Documents were excluded if they did not have at least one author with three or more documents or if they were classiﬁed in disciplines with a 20 - y gap , representing subject instability or death ( e . g . , railroad science ) . The ﬁnal sample contained 428 , 034 full - text articles . ThevocabularywasprocessedsimilarlytoAPSandresultedin20 , 155 tokens . A model with 53 topics was estimated , with the number of top - ics selected by ﬁtting a 500 - topic static model . Topics were labeled by the authors and assisted by Google Scholar . Discussion of the data , model speci - ﬁcation , a closer inspection of the resulting topics , and the labeling process are in SI Appendix . The Generative Model . We assume that inﬂuence is drawn from a Gaussian , the mean of which is given by a projection on τ t , d : (cid:96) d , k ∼N ( µ k τ d , σ 2 (cid:96) I ) , [ 1 ] where µ is a K × S matrix of topic - speciﬁc coefﬁcients . We assume that µ is drawn from a centered Gaussian of speciﬁed variance : µ k ∼N ( 0 , σ 2 µ I ) . [ 2 ] The generative process for each time slice t is as follows . 1 ) Draw topics β t + 1 | β t , ( w , (cid:96) , z ) t , 1 : Dt ∼ N ( β t + exp ( − β t ) (cid:80) d (cid:96) d (cid:80) n w d , n z d , n , σ 2 I ) 2 ) Draw coefﬁcients µ k ∼N ( 0 , σ 2 µ I ) 3 ) For each document d at time t : a ) Draw θ t , d ∼ Dir ( α ) b ) For each word w t , d , n i ) Draw z t , d , n ∼ Mult ( θ t , d ) ii ) Draw w t , d , n ∼ Mult ( π ( β t , zt , d , n ) ) c ) Draw (cid:96) t , d ∼N ( µτ t , d , σ 2 (cid:96) I ) , where π ( x ) maps the multinomial parameters x to their mean . Approximate Inference . The model has latent variables for words , docu - ments , time slices , topics , and covariate coefﬁcients . Collapsed Gibbs sam - pling and direct expectation maximization are precluded by nonconjugacy in the topic parameters { β 1 , ··· , β T } . Instead , the model estimates varia - tional parameters that minimize the Kullback – Leibler ( KL ) divergence to the true posterior . Here , the topic parameters are a Gaussian chain governed by the variational parameters { ˆ β k , 1 , ··· , ˆ β k , T } that describe their means . The latent variable µ is also ﬁt by variational estimation to the approximate ˆ µ . The variational distribution for a document’s inﬂuence is given by the Gaus - sian of the mean inﬂuence and speciﬁed variance . This variational distribu - tion , q ( β , (cid:96) , θ , z , µ | ˆ β , ˆ (cid:96) , γ , φ , ˆ µ ) , is K (cid:89) k = 1 q ( β k , 1 , ··· , β k , T | ˆ β k , 1 , ··· , ˆ β k , T ) × K (cid:89) k = 1 q ( µ k | ˆ µ k ) × T (cid:89) t = 1 (cid:32) Dt (cid:89) d = 1 q ( θ t , d | γ t , d ) q ( (cid:96) t , d | ˆ (cid:96) t , d ) × Nt , d (cid:89) n = 1 q ( z t , d , n | φ t , d , n ) (cid:33) . [ 3 ] The simpliﬁed objective is ﬁt by expectation maximization . Two terms of the evidence lower bound are related to (cid:96) , which requires expectation - and 3312 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1719792115 Gerow et al . S O C I A L S C I E N C E S A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S maximization - step updates that incorporate the projection in Eq . 1 . We deﬁne X = Diag ( exp ( − β t , k ) ) ( w t ◦ z t , k ) and ∆ β t , k = β t + 1 , k − β t , k . With S covariates , τ d is an S - length vector , and τ is an S × D matrix coding observed covariates across D . Thus , µ is a K × S matrix , the values of which will con - verge to an estimate of each covariate’s effect on (cid:96) . The lower bound of ˆ (cid:96) t , d , k is given by L ˆ (cid:96) t , k = 1 σ 2 E q (cid:104) X T ∆ β t , k (cid:105) ˆ (cid:96) t , k − 1 2 σ 2 E q (cid:104) X T X (cid:105) ˆ (cid:96) 2 t , k − 1 2 σ 2 d ( ˆ (cid:96) t , k − ˆ µ k τ t ) 2 . [ 4 ] This provides the E - step update for inﬂuence : ˆ (cid:96) t , k ← (cid:32) E q (cid:104) X T X (cid:105) + σ 2 σ 2 d I (cid:33) − 1 (cid:16) E q (cid:104) X T ∆ β t , k (cid:105) + ˆ µ k τ t (cid:17) . [ 5 ] The lower bound of ˆ µ then is given by L ˆ µ k = (cid:88) t (cid:88) d (cid:88) k − 1 2 σ 2 (cid:96) ( ˆ (cid:96) t , d , k − ˆ µ k τ t , d ) 2 − (cid:88) k ˆ µ 2 k 2 σ 2 µ . [ 6 ] This yields the M - step update for the coefﬁcients : ˆ µ T k ← (cid:32)(cid:88) t (cid:88) d τ t , d τ T t , d + σ 2 (cid:96) σ 2 µ I (cid:33) − 1 (cid:88) t (cid:88) d τ t , d ˆ (cid:96) t , d , k . [ 7 ] ˆ µ is initialized by random draws from a centered , multivariate Gaussian , and its maximum likelihood estimation is done by variational expectation maximization . Model - Derived Metrics . Document inﬂuence is the sum topic - proportional inﬂuence : I d = (cid:88) k θ d , k ˆ (cid:96) t , d , k . [ 8 ] This offers a plausible interpretation : a document’s inﬂuence is proportional to how much it changes the topics from which it draws . Whereas ˆ (cid:96) d , k is a static feature , the topic contribution of a document over time is also accessible . An estimate of document contribution to a topic k at time t (cid:48) can be computed by simulating the topic without document d : ˆ β ( − d ) t (cid:48) , k = (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) ˆ β t (cid:48) , k − ( w d z d , k ˆ (cid:96) d , k ) (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13) 1 . [ 9 ] This provides a conservative estimate , because it overlooks topic drift . The contribution can then be measured as the divergence between the topic with and without d : Contribution ( d , t (cid:48) ) = KL (cid:16) ˆ β t (cid:48) , k , ˆ β ( − d ) t (cid:48) , k (cid:17) . [ 10 ] Wedeﬁneauthorpersistence usingtheinverseindependententropyover their documents’ topic mixtures and their proliﬁcness in terms of documents andtimespan . Givenanauthor’ssetofdocuments A , wedeﬁnepersistenceas Persistence ( A ) = (cid:32) 1 − H (cid:16) (cid:107) (cid:80) d ∈ A θ d (cid:107) 1 (cid:17) (cid:100) H (cid:101) K (cid:33) · ( | A | + ∆ t ( A ) ) , [ 11 ] where H ( p ) computestheentropyofprobabilitydistribution p as (cid:80) i p i log ( p i ) and (cid:100) H (cid:101) K is the maximum possible entropy for a K vector . The ﬁrst term – inverse entropy over an author’s total document – topic mixture – is scaled up by the number of documents | A | and the number of years over which they were published , ∆ t ( A ) . This measure is unbounded : authors can be ever more persistent given more time and documents in the same topics . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . A . G . was supported by a fellowship from the Izaak Walton Killam Foundation . A . G . and J . A . E . were supported by a grant from the Templeton Foundation ( to the Metaknowledge Research Network ) . J . B . - G . is supported by National Science Foundation ( NSF ) Grant NCSE - 1422492 . J . A . E . is also supported by Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research Grant FA9550 - 15 - 1 - 0162 and NSF Grant SBE1158803 . 1 . Hirsch JE ( 2007 ) Does the h index have predictive power ? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 19193 – 19198 . 2 . Bergstrom CT , West JD , Wiseman MA ( 2008 ) The eigenfactor metrics . J Neurosci 28 : 11433 – 11434 . 3 . FershtA ( 2009 ) Themostinﬂuentialjournals : Impactfactorandeigenfactor . ProcNatl Acad Sci USA 106 : 6883 – 6884 . 4 . Price DdS ( 1976 ) A general theory of bibliometric and other cumulative advantage processes . J Am Soc Inf Sci 27 : 292 – 306 . 5 . Wang M , Yu G , Yu D ( 2008 ) Measuring the preferential attachment mechanism in citation networks . Phys A 387 : 4692 – 4698 . 6 . Newman MEJ ( 2004 ) Coauthorship networks and patterns of scientiﬁc collaboration . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 5200 – 5205 . 7 . Alberts B ( 2013 ) Impact factor distortions . Science 340 : 787 – 787 . 8 . Wilhite AW , Fong EA ( 2012 ) Coercive citation in academic publishing . Science 335 : 542 – 543 . 9 . Wenneras C , Wold A ( 2001 ) Nepotism and sexism in peer - review . Women , Science , and Technology , eds Wyer M , Barbercheck M , Cookmeyer D , Ozturk H , Wayne M ( Routledge , London ) , pp 46 – 52 . 10 . Bartneck C , Kokkelmans S ( 2010 ) Detecting h - index manipulation through self - citation analysis . Scientometrics 87 : 85 – 98 . 11 . Zhivotovsky L , Krutovsky K ( 2008 ) Self - citation can inﬂate h - index . Scientometrics 77 : 373 – 375 . 12 . Adam D ( 2002 ) Citation analysis : The counting house . Nature 415 : 726 – 729 . 13 . Uzzi B , Mukherjee S , Stringer M , Jones B ( 2013 ) Atypical combinations and scientiﬁc impact . Science 342 : 468 – 472 . 14 . WhalenRetal . ( 2016 ) Citationdistance : Measuringchangesinscientiﬁcsearchstrate - gies . Companion to the 25th International World Wide Web Conference ( WWW 2016 ) ( InternationalWorldWideWebConferencesSteeringCommittee , Republicand Canton of Geneva , Switzerland ) , pp 419 – 423 . 15 . Stringer MJ , Sales - Pardo M , Amaral LAN ( 2008 ) Effectiveness of journal ranking schemes as a tool for locating information . PLoS One 3 : e1683 . 16 . MacRoberts MH , MacRoberts BR ( 2010 ) Problems of citation analysis : A study of uncited and seldom - cited inﬂuences . J Assoc Inf Sci Technol 61 : 1 – 12 . 17 . Wang D , Song C , Barab´asi AL ( 2013 ) Quantifying long - term scientiﬁc impact . Science 342 : 127 – 132 . 18 . Althouse BM , West JD , Bergstrom CT , Bergstrom T ( 2009 ) Differences in impact factor across ﬁelds and over time . J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol 60 : 27 – 34 . 19 . Harzing AW , Alakangas S , Adams D ( 2014 ) hIa : An individual annual h - index to accommodate disciplinary and career length differences . Scientometrics 99 : 811 – 821 . 20 . Blei DM , Lafferty J ( 2006 ) Dynamic topic models . Proceedings of the 23rd Interna - tionalConferenceonMachineLearning ( ICML2006 ) ( InternationalMachineLearning Society , La Jolla , CA ) , pp 113 – 120 . 21 . Wang X , McCallum A ( 2006 ) Topics over time : A non - Markov continuous - time model of topical trends . Proceedings of the 12th ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ( SIGKDD 2006 ) ( ACM Press , New York ) , pp 424 – 433 . 22 . Gerrish S , Blei DM ( 2010 ) A language - based approach to measuring scholarly impact . Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learn - ing ( ICML 2010 ) ( International Machine Learning Society , La Jolla , CA ) , pp 375 – 382 . 23 . BirdSetal . ( 2008 ) TheACLAnthologyReferenceCorpus : Areferencedatasetforbibli - ographic research in computational linguistics . Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation ( LREC 2008 ) ( European Language Resources Association , Paris ) , pp 1755 – 1759 . 24 . Blei DM , Ng AY , Jordan MI ( 2003 ) Latent Dirichlet allocation . J Mach Learn Res 3 : 993 – 1022 . 25 . Blei DM ( 2012 ) Probabilistic topic models . Commun ACM 55 : 77 – 84 . 26 . Grifﬁths TL , Steyvers M ( 2004 ) Finding scientiﬁc topics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101 : 5228 – 5235 . 27 . Chang J , Gerrish S , Wang C , Boyd - graber JL , Blei DM ( 2009 ) Reading tea leaves : How humans interpret topic models . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , eds Bengio Y , Schuurmans D , Lafferty J , Williams C , Culotta A ( Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation , La Jolla , CA ) , Vol 22 , pp 288 – 296 . 28 . WangC , BleiD , HeckermanD ( 2008 ) Continuoustimedynamictopicmodels . Proceed - ings of the 24th Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( UAI 2008 ) ( AUAI Press , Corvallis , OR ) , pp 579 – 586 . 29 . ShwedU , BearmanPS ( 2010 ) Thetemporalstructureofscientiﬁcconsensusformation . Am Sociol Rev 75 : 817 – 840 . 30 . Wallach HM , Murray I , Salakhutdinov R , Mimno D ( 2009 ) Evaluation methods for topicmodels . Proceedingsofthe26thInternationalConferenceonMachineLearning ( ICML 2009 ) ( Sage Publications , Los Angeles ) , pp 1105 – 1112 . 31 . Orbanz P , Teh YW ( 2011 ) Modern Bayesian nonparametrics . Advances in Neural Information Processing 24 , eds Shawe - Taylor J , Zemel RS , Bartlett PL , Pereira F , Weinberger KQ ( Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation , La Jolla , CA ) . 32 . Orbanz P , Teh YW ( 2011 ) Bayesian nonparametric models . Encyclopedia of Machine Learning , eds Sammut C , Webb GI ( Springer , Berlin ) , pp 81 – 89 . 33 . Bloch F ( 1946 ) Nuclear induction . Phys Rev 70 : 460 – 474 . 34 . Wallace PR ( 1947 ) The band theory of graphite . Phys Rev 71 : 622 – 634 . 35 . KeQ , FerraraE , RadicchiF , FlamminiA ( 2015 ) Deﬁningandidentifyingsleepingbeau - ties in science . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112 : 7426 – 7431 . 36 . Marcus MP , Marcinkiewicz MA , Santorini B ( 1993 ) Building a large annotated corpus of English : The Penn treebank . Comput Linguist 19 : 313 – 330 . 37 . Cagle FR ( 1939 ) A System of marking turtles for future identiﬁcation . Copeia 1939 : 170 – 173 . 38 . Perrins CM ( 1965 ) Population ﬂuctuations and clutch - size inthe great tit , Parus major L . J Anim Ecol 34 : 601 – 647 . 39 . Peltzman S ( 1976 ) Toward a more general theory of regulation . J Law Econ 19 : 211 – 240 . Gerow et al . PNAS | March 27 , 2018 | vol . 115 | no . 13 | 3313