a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0309674v2 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 14 J a n 2004 Polymer - Induced Bundling of F - actin and the Depletion Force M . Hosek Physics Department Indiana University Bloomington , Indiana 47405 J . X . Tang Physics Department Brown University Providence , Rhode Island 02192 ( Dated : December 2 , 2013 ) The inert polymer polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) induces a ”bundling” phenomenon in F - actin so - lutions when its concentration exceeds a critical onset value C o . Over a limited range of PEG molecular weight and ionic strength , C o can be expressed as a function of these two variables . The process is reversible , but hysteresis is also observed in the dissolution of the bundles , with ionic strength having a large inﬂuence . Additional actin ﬁlaments are able to join previously formed bundles . PEG polymers are not incorporated into the actin bundles . Estimates of the Asakura - Oosawa depletion force , Coulomb repulsion , and van der Waals potential are combined in order to explain the bundling eﬀect and hysteresis . Conjectures are presented concerning the apparent limit in bundle size . PACS numbers : 87 . 16 . Ka , 82 . 35 . Rs , 82 . 35 . Pq , 61 . 25 . Hq I . INTRODUCTION Cells and tissues are crowded with macromolecules such as proteins , DNA , and various polymers . While the ligand - substrate speciﬁc binding model forms the cen - tral dogma of biochemistry , many protein - protein inter - actions are facilitated in large part by physical drives such as the excluded volume eﬀect , electrostatic inter - action , and depletion force . Chemically inert polymers such as polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) and dextran are often added into solutions of biomolecules in order to mimic the crowded biochemical environment and understand vari - ous biomolecular functions ranging from protein ﬁlament assembly [ 1 ] , ion channel opening and closing [ 2 ] , to tran - scription of DNA [ 3 ] . This study focuses on the physical eﬀects of PEG on the lateral aggregation of a ﬁlamentous protein assembly , with the goal of a ﬁrst principle expla - nation of its aggregation property . Similar phenomena occur in many cellular and physiological settings , which by large are dictated by the common physical mecha - nisms , although often in more complicated and less de - ﬁned conditions . The protein selected for this study is actin . Actin is a ubiquitous cytoskeletal protein of molecular weight ( MW ) 42000 Dalton . In solutions of low ionic strength it exists as a globular monomer , G - actin . As [ K + ] or [ Na + ] is increased beyond 50 mM , the monomers poly - merize into helical ﬁlaments ( 37 nm pitch ) of side - by - side monomers incorporated into two strands [ 4 , 5 ] , known as ﬁlamentous actin , or F - actin . F - actin is polydisperse in length , and consists of 370 monomers per µ m unit length . The diameter of F - actin is 8 nm . At pH 8 , the linear charge density is about 4 e / nm and surface charge density 0 . 15 e / nm 2 . This value is derived from the amino acid sequence of α - skeletal muscle actin , where each monomer has a net charge of − 12 e [ 4 , 6 ] . In a di - lute solution F - actin is a freely undulating ﬁlament with a bending modulus k c such that the persistence length L p = k c / kT = 17 µ m [ 7 , 8 ] . This length is larger than an averaged ﬁlament length of F - actin . In the study of lateral aggregation of F - actin as induced by ﬂexible poly - mers such as PEG , the eﬀect of ﬂexibility of F - actin is negligible , and the ﬁlaments are treated as charged col - loidal rods . The physical insight into the interaction of free poly - mers with colloidal particles was ﬁrst achieved by Asakura and Oosawa ( AO ) a half century ago [ 9 ] . The essential prediction from the AO treatment is that an at - tractive force is generated between two colloidal particles in the presence of non - interacting polymers . The eﬀect , known widely as the depletion force , is essentially of en - tropic origin , and has been calculated for various sizes and geometries of the colloids [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 ] . To apply the AO model , ﬂexible polymers are typi - cally treated as freely interpenetrating hard spheres of radius R AO , which are excluded from the colloid sur - face by a thin layer of thickness R AO . It was shown [ 9 ] that this shell creates a positive free energy diﬀerence , ∆ F = PV = PR AO A c , where P is the osmotic pressure due to the polymer , and A c the surface area of the colloid . If two colloidal particles share part of this volume , the volume accessible to the polymers is increased . Conse - quently , the total entropy of the system is increased and thus the free energy of the system is lowered . In terms 2 FIG . 1 : Cross - section of two aligned cylinders with a deple - tion , or exclusion , layer . R A is the F - actin radius , R g is the PEG radius of gyration , and D is the axis - to - axis separation of the actin cylinders . On the left is a cartoon of the two cylinders surrounded by PEG , represented as self - avoiding random walks on a cubic lattice , N = 180 , corresponding to PEG 8000 [ 10 ] . In this case C is well below C ∗ . In the AO scheme on the right , the colloidal rods are surrounded by interpenetrating hard spheres of eﬀective radius R AO . The attractive interaction is PδV , where δV is the product of the hatched overlap area and an arbitrary length L . of the Helmholtz free energy , ∆ F ( V , T ) = ∂F ∂V δV = PδV . ( 1 ) For an ideal gas , ∂S∂V = PT , thus it is clear that the AO interaction is entropically driven . However , osmotic pres - sure and volume of exclusion are more accessible to mea - surement and calculation . The geometry of the colloids and their depletion layer is portrayed in Fig 1 . The vol - ume of the exclusion layer is a function of the polymer radius of gyration R g , the radius of the colloidal rods R A , and the axis - to - axis separation between the rods D . It has been shown [ 11 ] for an ideal random chain polymer that R AO = 2 R g / √ π , where R g is the radius of gyration . Polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) has long been used as an agent for precipitation and crystallization of proteins . PEG is a polymer that ﬁnds water a ”good” solvent , in that it assumes the conﬁguration of an almost ideal self - avoiding random walk [ 15 ] , with radius of gyration R g ∼ MW 3 / 5 [ 16 ] . As the polymer concentration C ex - ceeds a value C ∗ , the molecules begin to overlap , and direct scaling arguments [ 16 ] show that the correlation length ξ begins to decrease as ( C / C ∗ ) − 3 / 4 . The thick - ness of the polymer depletion layer at the colloid sur - face [ 12 ] scales with ξ , with the polymer monomer num - ber density continuously passing from zero at the colloid surface to its bulk value . The nature of this proﬁle is the subject of continuing investigation . Nevertheless , in a continuum approach Eqn . 1 becomes a volume integral , ∆ F = R P ( r ) dV . Two analytical treatments have been proposed recently to calculate the correlation length ξ and osmotic pressure P in the semidilute regime . The renormalization group theory [ 14 ] yields expressions [ 17 , 18 ] for ξ and P as func - tions of polymer concentration and molecular weight . A second treatment has been developed by Schweizer and co - workers [ 10 , 19 ] , which employs the polymer reference interaction site model ( PRISM ) . The numerical results from these two treatments agree with each other in a range of concentrations spanning the dilute and semidi - lute regimes . The predictions also agree well with the available experimental data . Therefore , results from both treatments are applied later in this work in calculating the depletion force . Interacting charged colloids in saline solution are typ - ically modeled as bodies with Coulomb repulsion and attractive short - range dispersion forces , a combination known as the DLVO theory [ 20 , 21 ] . The electrostatic interaction in this situation is modeled with the Poisson - Boltzmann equation , which describes the relation be - tween charge density ρ and electrical potential φ , under the assumption that the ionic charges deviate from their bulk concentration n 0 according to the Boltzmann law . For monovalent ions : ∇ 2 φ = − ρ / ǫ ρ = e ( n + − n − ) = n 0 e [ e − φe / kT − e φe / kT ] or ∇ 2 φ = 2 n 0 e sinh ( φe / kT ) / ǫ . With boundary conditions of moderate surface charge , the solutions of this equation are associated with a char - acteristic exponential decay length known as the Debye screening length κ − 1 , which for monovalent ions is pro - portional to 1 / √ n 0 . Dispersion forces are the result of mutually induced dipole attraction between two bodies , and as such fol - low a 1 / r 6 law for interaction potential [ 20 ] , and are of course shorter in range than the electrostatic interaction . At high enough salt concentration , the electrostatic re - pulsion between colloidal particles of like charge can be - come weaker than the attractive dispersion force . As a result , the colloids precipitate . The rest of the paper is organized as follows . Section II describes materials and methods employed for this work . Section III presents quantitative data and microscopic observations about the formation of F - actin bundles that result when the PEG concentration exceeds a critical on - set value C o . Much of the analytical eﬀort is made in 3 section IV , by employing what are basically estimates of the electrostatic repulsion , van der Waals attractions ( the DLVO theory ) , and the depletion eﬀect . Qualita - tive explanations are made concerning onset of bundle formation , hysteresis , as well as the bundle size limit . Limitations of the present treatment and the experiments performed are also discussed . II . MATERIALS AND METHODS A . Materials G - actin was prepared from acetone powder of rabbit skeletal muscle after Spudich and Watt [ 22 ] and stored as 0 . 2 mL aliquots , 7 . 9 g / L , at - 80 o C until use . G - actin was polymerized by ﬁrst diluting to 3 . 2 g / L with ”G - buﬀer” , and then adding 3 M KCl to bring [ KCl ] to 150 mM . Polymerization to F - actin was immediately evi - dent by a rapid increase in viscosity . Polymerization was always allowed to proceed for several hours . ”G - buﬀer” is 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM ATP , 0 . 5 mM NaN 3 , 0 . 5 mM DTT , 2 . 0 mM tris - HCl at pH 8 . 0 . To create stock solu - tions where [ KCl ] > 0 . 3 M , the salt was added directly to G - buﬀer . PEG of molecular weights 4000 to 20000 were purchased from Sigma and PEG 35000 from Alfa - Aesar . Radiolabeled PEG was obtained from American Radio - labeled Chemicals ( ARC - 1565 , 3 H - labeled PEG 35000 ) and 14 C labeled PEG 4000 from Amersham Biosciences , Inc . ( CFA508 ) . B . Light Scattering Measurement of C o Ninety degree light scattering was measured by adopt - ing a Perkin - Elmer LS - 5B luminescence spectrophotome - ter [ 6 ] using a 1 mL culture tube ( 4 . 5 mm ID ) to hold the sample . The tube was aligned with the probe beam for the least refraction by the glass tube and maximum illu - mination of the sample . Monochromatic light of 550 nm wavelength was used for illumination and detection , with spectral slit width selected from 3 to 15 nm to keep the detected light in the linear range of the photomultiplier . Once a measurement was commenced by adding the ini - tial PEG for a certain KCl concentration , the spectropho - tometer settings were kept unchanged for consistency . Concentrated PEG solution was typically added in vol - umes of 5 µ L for a typical increment of 0 . 2 % in the w / w percentage of PEG . Thorough mixing was achieved using a long , 0 . 2 mL pipet tip with a cut end ( ∼ 1 mm dia ) , and shear was minimized by keeping the ﬂow rate below 0 . 2 mL / 1 sec . During the ﬁrst couple of mixing cycles , the contrast in the index of refraction in the mixture was seen to quickly diminish . This observation suggests that the mixture became homogeneous following several cy - cles of pipeting . F - actin concentration was 0 . 3 g / L with a sample volume of 0 . 4 mL . C o was characterized by a sudden rise in turbidity , developing in less than 60 sec - onds , and a corresponding increase in light scattering . C . The amount of PEG in the bundle structure Approximately 2000 Bq ( 2000 counts / s ) of 3 H labeled PEG 35000 was added to 0 . 7 mL F - buﬀer , 600 mM KCl , in a glass test tube of 1 cm diameter . The sample was then mixed with 0 . 2 mL of 3 . 2 g / L F - actin . To in - duce bundling , 10 µ L increments of 13 % w / w unlabeled PEG 35000 in F - buﬀer containing 0 . 6 M KCl were added with thorough yet gentle mixing . When the light scatter - ing ( turbidity ) characteristic of bundling was observed , one more 10 µ L aliquot was added , and the mixture was allowed to sit for 10 min . This resulting w / w concen - tration of PEG solution for the onset of bundling is de - noted C o . Then the entire sample was transfered to a 1 . 5 mL plastic Eppendorf vial and centrifuged at 1200 g for 5 min . in a swinging bucket rotor . The supernate S 0 was extracted and the pellet was immediately resus - pended in 100 µ L of 7 % w / w unlabeled PEG F - buﬀer containing 600 mM KCl . At this point 1 . 2 mL more of the same unlabeled PEG buﬀer was added and any re - maining clumps resuspended by pipet . To minimize shear in resuspension , the ﬂow rate was limited to 100 µ L / sec in pipeting , and the pipet tip had the nozzle cut for a 0 . 5 mm opening . After allowing the resuspension to re - equilibrate for 30 min , the protein was pelleted again at 8000 g for 5 min . in a swinging bucket rotor , and the supernate S 1 ex - tracted . To minimize the pellet mass , the vial was again centrifuged at 13000 g for 5 min . in a ﬁxed angle rotor , and the last remaining supernate removed with capillary action . The total weight of the vial was then obtained to 50 µ g accuracy , and the pellet weight W pellet derived from the vial tare . The pellet was then suspended in 100 µ L of 2 % SDS and quantitatively washed into 5 mL of scintillation ﬂuid ( IRL BioSafe II ) . 10 µ L samples of S 0 and S 1 were added to 5 mL of scintillation ﬂuid , and the activity measured with a Beckman LS6500 scintilla - tion counter . D . Hysteresis in bundle formation For a given KCl concentration ( 100 mM or 600 mM ) and 0 . 3 g / L F - actin , PEG 35000 was added in 0 . 2 % in - crements , with thorough but gentle mixing . When the qualitative change in turbidity associated with bundle formation was observed , the mixture was allowed to equi - librate for 30 minutes . Then , the sample was split into 0 . 3 mL aliquots , and each centrifuged at 2000 g . An appropriate volume was removed from the top , and re - placed with F - buﬀer to reduce the PEG concentration . The bundles were then gently resuspended with a cut pipet tip . After 12 hours at 4 o C , the bundles were pel - leted at 2000 g × 7 min . and the supernate removed . 4 Centrifugation was repeated to remove remaining traces of F - buﬀer . The bicinchoninic acid method ( Sigma B - 9643 ) was used to assay the remaining bundled protein in the pellet . DTT from the F - buﬀer was found to inter - fere with this assay , but was not signiﬁcant in relation to the ﬁnal amount of measured protein . E . Numerical solution of cylindrical PB equation A ’shooting’ technique [ 23 ] , with potential φ as the in - dependent variable [ 24 ] , was applied to numerically gen - erate solutions to the PB equation with boundary con - ditions for an inﬁnite cylinder . Exploiting the symme - try of the problem , we set φ i ( r i ) = i ∆ φ for i = 0 , 1 , . . . . Debye - Huckel theory tells us that the counter charge den - sity ρ between r i and r i + 1 is 2 n 0 e sinh ( ¯ φ i e / kT ) / ǫ , where ¯ φ i = ( φ i + φ i + 1 ) / 2 . Charge conservation is expressed with the relationship λ i + 1 = λ i + ∆ r 2 πr i ρ ( ¯ φ i ) where λ i represents the net linear charge density enclosed within the i th shell . This , with the following approxima - tion of Gauss’s Law ∆ φ ∆r = λ i + 1 2 πr i ǫ allows a quadratic equation to be solved for ∆r : ∆ φ = ∆ r ( ∆ r 2 πr i ρ ( ¯ φ i ) + λ i ) / 2 πr i ǫ After an initial guess of r 0 = B , φ 0 = 0 for the outer boundary condition , r i is calculated iteratively . If , at r i ∼ R actin , λ i ∼ − λ actin , the solution set r i ( φ i ) is ac - cepted . If not , a new B is chosen . A value of 0 . 1 mV = kT / 250 is used for ∆ φ . Typically the charge balance condition is satisﬁed to within 2 % . III . RESULTS A . Threshold and reversibility of bundle formation Four parameters of phase separation were explored : PEG MW , PEG concentration C , ionic strength , and actin concentration . The solution pH was held ﬁxed at 8 . 0 . As polymer concentration C is increased , a sudden increase in light scattering marks the concentration C o where the onset of bundling is induced [ 1 , 6 , 25 ] . At monovalent ionic strength near 100 mM and PEG MW 8000 or below , the turbidity of the sample is low as the structures are small . These small structures were also measured by ﬂuorescent imaging ( data not shown ) . For 35 kD PEG , the light scattering is stronger , as the struc - tures are much larger in both length and diameter . The eﬀects of PEG MW and the solution ionic strength on C o are shown in Fig 2 . The data clearly suggest an in - terplay of Debye screening length and polymer R g . These curves can be ﬁt with the following semi - empirical func - tion : C o = a 0 + a 1 / ( 1 + [ KCl ] / 5 mM ) 2 ( 2 ) where C o is percent w / w of PEG . a 1 is found to be a rather strong function of molecular weight . A powerlaw ﬁt yields a 1 = 70 . 0 ( MW / 8000 ) − 2 . 0 . Separate measure - ments at 600 mM KCl show that a 0 is a weak function of molecular weight , a 0 = 1 . 0 ( MW / 8000 ) − 0 . 5 . The term 1 / ( 1 + [ KCl ] / 5 mM ) could be interpreted as the result of mass action ion association between the total bound charge of the F - actin Q − 0 and the solution potassium ions of concentration [ K + ] : Q − + K + K A ⇀↽ QK K A = [ QK ] [ K + ] [ Q − ] ( 3 ) Hence [ Q − ] = [ Q − 0 ] / ( 1 + K A [ K + ] ) where K A = 1 / ( 5 mM ) is the association constant in this ligand binding model [ 26 ] . One can speculate that an eﬀective charge [ Q − ] dominates the electrostatic interac - tion at lower ionic strength , where the repulsion between two F - actins , proportional to [ Q − ] 2 , is overcome by a de - pletion force proportional to the osmotic pressure at the onset of bundling . Similar empirical ﬁts can be applied to the mobility of fd virus as a function of monovalent and divalent ionic strength [ Q . Wen and J . X . Tang , un - published data ] . Measurements show small eﬀect of protein concentra - tion on C o over the range of 0 . 2 g / L to 0 . 8 g / L F - actin , although the kinetics for bundle formation , as indicated by light scattering , were appreciably slower for the lowest F - actin concentration ( data not shown ) . Also , the bundling process is reversible . After PEG concentration passes C o , the protein may be sedimented by centrifugation and resuspended in F - buﬀer with a re - sulting disappearance of turbidity . PEG may then again be added to induce bundles . Hysteresis is seen in the disappearance of the bundles if the polymer concentration is increased beyond C o and then , by dilution , decreased below C o . As shown in Fig 3 , there is a pronounced eﬀect of ionic strength , with bundles formed at a higher ionic strength more stable . 5 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 KCl , mM 0 2 4 6 8 C o , % w / w PEG 8kD PEG 20kD PEG 35kD FIG . 2 : The eﬀects of PEG MW and ionic strength on bundling critical concentration C o , as detected by the onset of light scattering . The lines through the points are semi - empirical ﬁts using Eqn . 2 , where K A = 1 / ( 5 mM ) for each data set , but with an adjustable baseline a 0 for each MW . F - actin concentration for this data set is 0 . 3g / L . 0 0 . 5 1 C / C o 0 0 . 5 1 fr ac ti on p e ll e t 0 0 . 5 1 0 0 . 5 1 fr ac ti on p e ll e t 600 mM KCl 100 mM KCl FIG . 3 : Hysteresis in the dissolution of PEG 35000 - induced bundles at [ KCl ] = 100 mM and 600 mM . The PEG concen - tration is normalized to C / C o , and the amount of recovered protein ( bundles ) is plotted as the fraction of the total pro - tein . For C ≤ C o , there were virtually no bundles formed . As PEG is added , almost all the F - actin went into bundles and was pelleted . After this , as the PEG concentration was lowered in suspension , many of the bundles did not dissolve until C was lowered by over 50 % . B . Nucleation and growth Immediately after the polymer concentration reaches C o , actin ﬁlaments coalesce into thin strings ( Fig 4 , left ) . After a few minutes , with mild intermittent mixing , the typical size increases ( Fig 4 , middle ) . Then , with mild intermittent mixing over 30 min , these initial structures grow into polydisperse structures larger in diameter and length ( Fig 4 , right ) . The bundles in the ﬁrst image have roughly 10 5 F - actin ﬁlaments each ; those in the ﬁnal im - age are at least an order of magnitude more massive . Therefore , some consideration must be given to the ki - netics of bundle formation . The series of images in Fig 4 shows a typical time progression of the actin bundles induced by PEG 35000 . It should be noted that there is no role of PEG concentration heterogeneity in the matu - ration , as the polymer concentration is entirely homoge - neous after the mixing process completed within the ﬁrst few seconds . It was found , however , through separate ex - periments , that additional mixing at the later stages also aﬀected the kinetics of the bundle growth . The physical mechanism of this additional observation is clear in that as the bundle size increases , diﬀusion becomes progres - sively ineﬃcient in facilitating the self - assembly . When F - actin is added to a solution where C = 5 C o , large aggregates with sheet - or balloon - like structure are formed . This must largely be associated with the macro - scopic , slow mixing process of viscous media , easily seen as discontinuities of index of refraction on the mm length scale . Furthermore , actin will coalesce without mixing of the PEG solution . If a 10 µ L drop of F - actin is placed on the surface of a denser 5 % PEG solution , the concen - trated protein is found as one mass on the surface . Under all circumstances , there were no signs of slow spinodal decomposition or coexistence of phases . It appears that individual labeled actin ﬁlaments show no size preference when they combine with previously formed , unlabeled bundles . When new phalloidin - labeled F - actin is introduced , the ﬂuorescence seems to be uni - formly distributed . As is in Fig 5 , the DIC images co - localize with that of the TRITC ﬂuorescence , suggest - ing that individual F - actin ﬁlaments attach themselves to the previously formed bundles . Also , it was possible to show that preformed bundles do not exchange mate - rial , as phalloidin - labeled bundles mixed with unlabeled bundles show separate DIC and ﬂuorescence populations ( data not shown ) . C . PEG is not part of the bundle structure As described in Methods , an elaborate procedure was designed to address the question whether PEG is an in - tegral part of the F - actin bundle structure . Following a systematic set of measurements , it was concluded that less than 0 . 1 % w / w PEG was found to be tightly bound or trapped with the bundles . This result directly con - ﬁrms that PEG - induced bundle formation is the result of the depletion eﬀect , rather than a putative PEG bind - ing or cross - linking of F - actin . IV . DISCUSSION We interpret the data in Fig 2 as an interplay between the attractive depletion force and the electrostatic repul - 6 FIG . 4 : F - actin bundle formation and progression following the gradual addition of PEG 35000 to just past C o . The three representative pictures show bundles immediately after the gradual addition of PEG 35000 to just past C o ( left panel ) , after 5 min . ( middle ) , and after 30 min . ( right ) . [ KCl ] = 100 mM . Images are 160 × 160 µ m , taken with a Nikon TE300 microscope , 10X phase contrast . The samples were ﬂowed into a channel of 70 µ m thickness created by placing two pieces of double sided tape between a microscope slide and a cover slip . F - actin concentration is 0 . 2 g / L . FIG . 5 : Left panel : 40X ﬂuorescence image of PEG 35000 bundles mixed with sparsely labeled ( TRITC - phalloidin ) F - actin . Right panel : 40X DIC image at same location . The sample thickness in these images is less than 10 µ m , so bundles are much more sparse in these images than in Fig 4 . Image size is 170 µ m × 135 µ m . sion of two negatively charged cylinders in a monovalent salt solution . We present approximations showing that it is reasonable to expect the depletion force to cause F - actin to laterally aggregate . Inclusion of a van der Waals attraction oﬀers an explanation of the large hysteresis at high ionic strength , although it is not clear exactly how much this interaction contributes to the ﬁnal bundled state . In the following three sections we calculate the electro - static , depletion , and van der Waals potentials between two inﬁnite , parallel F - actin cylinders in order to un - derstand the onset of bundle formation . Based on the results of these calculations , issues such as the observed hysteresis and bundle size are discussed . A . Depletion Attraction As described in the Introduction , the depletion layer and osmotic pressure create an additional free energy for a single colloidal particle in a polymer solution . If the layer thickness were constant for all polymer concentra - tions and the osmotic pressure diﬀerence linear in concen - tration , this positive free energy would be R P dV , where P continuously passes from P b at the colloid particle sur - face to zero in the surrounding solution . Since this is not 7 the case , the energy is found by integration over volume and concentration [ 17 ] W = Z V Z C ′ b = C b C ′ b = 0 dV ( 1 − C ( r ) C ′ b ) ∂ P b ∂ C ′ b dC ′ b ( 4 ) where C ( r ) is the local polymer concentration ; the bulk polymer concentration is C ′ b , and the local osmotic pres - sure P b is a function of C ′ b . This expression for integrating total free energy is in analogy with an electrostatic charg - ing process to calculate , for example , the energy required to charge a capacitor . Following the qualitative reasoning of the AO theory , the free energy for two interacting colloidal particles , as expressed in Eqn . 4 , should become less positive as the two approach , indicating an attractive depletion force . To calculate the interaction , one places the two particles at separation D and zero polymer concentration . Then the polymer bulk concentration is parametrically ramped to the ﬁnal value C b , with Eqn . 4 used to evaluate W . This process has the qualitative and intuitively appealing feature of generating a depletion force with a range of the order of R g for all concentrations . We denote this change in free energy W as the particles approach from inﬁnity as U D . We employ osmotic pressure data and ξ values from the PRISM theory [ 10 ] , and an ansatz about overlapping depletion regions [ 17 ] to estimate the attractive depletion potential U D . For osmotic pressure P ( C ) , we adopt a virial equation P = B 1 C + B 2 C 2 from the literature [ 10 ] . The values for B 1 and B 2 thus determined are presented in Table I . We use the proposal [ 17 ] that the polymer concentra - tion in the overlap region C ( r ) can be expressed as a product of the separate concentrations : C ( r ) = C 1 ( r ) C b C 2 ( r ) C b C b ( 5 ) where C b is the bulk concentration and C 1 and C 2 are the proﬁles surrounding the two colloids at inﬁnite sep - aration . C ( r ) is in eﬀect the product of two probabil - ity densities . The concentration proﬁle near an isolated cylinder is assigned a cone - shaped function of width 2 ξ : C i ( r ) = C b r − R A 2 ξ ; R A < r < R A + 2 ξ With the virial expressions for P ( C b ) and the deple - tion proﬁle C ( r ) from Eqn . 5 , we numerically evaluate Eqn . 4 . Letting C b take the values of C o in Fig 2 for PEG 35000 , namely 1 . 6 , 1 . 08 , 0 . 97 , and 0 . 80 % w / w ( cor - responding to 100 mM , 140 mM , 175 mM , and 500 mM KCl respectively ) , we show the numerical results of U D in Fig 6 . This more elaborate methods of calculating the attractive potential U D yield values less than the AO hard sphere model , typically by a factor of ﬁve . TABLE I : A list of 4 parameters for PEG used in this study . B 1 and B 2 are the ﬁrst and second viral coeﬃcients in the formula P = B 1 C + B 2 C 2 where C is percent w / w and the osmotic pressure P is in the unit of Pa . The values for R g and C ∗ are derived from Kulkanari et . al . [ 10 ] and are consistent with other measurements [ 15 ] . PEG MW B 1 B 2 R g ( nm ) C ∗ ( % w / w ) 8000 3112 . 5 771 . 1 4 . 7 3 . 0 20000 1245 . 0 641 8 . 2 1 . 4 35000 711 574 11 . 4 0 . 9 B . van der Waals attraction The standard formula for the van der Waals interac - tion [ 21 ] for two parallel cylinders , based on the Der - jaguin approximation , seemed to have an unreasonably long range , so a numerical integration of the potential was done , based on the 1 / r 7 force between two elements of identical material . Assuming two elements of material separated by r experience a force F = A 6 π 2 d 3 r 1 d 3 r 2 / r 712 where A is the Hamaker constant [ 20 ] , we see that an el - ement dx 1 dy 1 dz 1 and a rod of area dx 2 dy 2 separated by S experience a force F = A 6 π 2 5 π 16 dx 1 dy 1 dz 1 dx 2 dy 2 / S 6 . Considering a circular slice of F - actin , height dz , and a parallel cylinder of F - actin with lattice size dz , one can numerically calculate the total F for a series of sepa - rations D , then numerically integrate Fdx to obtain a potential U vdW ( D ) for this slice . This function is shown in Fig 6 for A = 0 . 1 kT , L = 100 nm . C . Electrostatic Repulsion For a single cylinder of surface charge density σ , in salt solution of ionic strength I , the potential solution of the linearized Poisson - Boltzmann equation is known to be [ 27 , 28 ] φ ( r ) = σK 0 ( κr ) / ǫκK 1 ( R A κ ) ( 6 ) where K 0 and K 1 are modiﬁed Bessel functions , and κ − 1 is the Debye screening length [ 20 ] ; for monovalent salts , κ − 1 = 0 . 3 nm / √ I where I is the value of ionic stength in moles / L . The numerical results described in Methods match closely Eqn . 6 for I = 100 mM . The inset of Fig 6 shows numerical solutions φ ( r ) for KCl from 100 to 600 mM . We should mention in passing that with divalent coun - terions , and for cylinders of smaller diameter and higher surface charge , φ ( r ) does not have the approximate form φ = φ 0 exp ( − ( r − R A ) κ ) . Under these conditions there is a sudden rise in potential as r → R A . For a cylin - der of modest surface charge , the system free energy is φ 0 Q / 2 [ 20 , 29 ] . In this situation , the surface potential is less than kT / e = 25 mV , and the positive entropic energy of the counterion cloud is equal to its negative electrostatic energy [ 30 ] , so change in system free energy 8 4 5 6 7 8 9 r ( nm ) 1 10 100 φ ( m V ) 10 15 20 25 30 D , nm - 10kT 0 10kT e n e r gy , J 0 U D U vdW U E FIG . 6 : Numerical values for U vdW , U D , and U E . For U E , monovalent salt ranges from 100 mM to 600 mM . For the U D family , PEG 35000 concentration has the values in Fig 2 : 1 . 60 , 1 . 08 , 0 . 95 , and 0 . 80 percent w / w . The cylinder radius and surface charge are those of fully charged F - actin , R = 4 nm , λ = 4 e / nm , For U vdW , a Hamaker constant A = 0 . 1 kT was chosen . L = 100nm . Inset : φ ( r ) for monovalent salt from 100 mM to 600 mM . is reﬂected as change in surface potential . For F - actin in 100 mM KCl , the electrostatic potential at the surface is calculated to be 30 mV ( see inset of Fig 6 ) . Therefore , F - actin with monovalent counter ions is in the linear regime of the PB equation . In contrast , DNA ( 5 . 9 e / nm , 0 . 9 nm diameter ) has a signiﬁcantly higher surface potential , and non - linear eﬀects must be taken into account . We do not have a calculation of electrostatic interac - tion U E ( D ) for two parallel cylinders in proximity . How - ever , because the highest value for φ ( r ) ( the surface po - tential ) is not much greater than kT / e , we use the sum φ 1 ( r ) + φ 2 ( r ) as an approximate solution : ∇ 2 ( φ 1 + φ 2 ) ∼ sinh ( φ 1 e kT + φ 2 e kT ) ∼ sinh ( φ 1 e kT ) + sinh ( φ 2 e kT ) We take the change in free energy as the two cylinders are forced together to be like two charges in free space : U E ( D ) = Z S 1 φ 2 σ 1 dS 1 ( 7 ) For D > 2 R + κ − 1 this is a very reasonable approxi - mation [ 28 ] . We neglect the eﬀect in the region where the dielectric of one cylinder displaces the counterions of the other , assuming the protein cylinder has the same dielectric constant as the surrounding medium . In Fig 6 we show the numerical integration of Eqn . 7 for [ KCl ] = 100 mM to 600 mM for fully charged F - actin . These results match the low surface charge example of Harries [ 28 ] . 10 15 20 25 D ( nm ) - 10kT 0 10kT t o t a l U ( J ) 100mM KCl , 1 . 6 % p35kD 500mM KCl , 0 . 8 % p35kD 500mM KCl , 0 % p35kD FIG . 7 : Sum of U E , U D , and U vdW for fully charged ( 4 e / nm ) F - actin . Values for [ KCl ] and PEG - 35kD are taken from the data of Fig 2 . L = 100 nm . D . Prediction of bundle formation Our interpretation is that the depletion potential is suﬃcient to allow the ﬁlaments to ﬁnd a lower energy condensed phase , which is normally denied by Coulomb repulsion , a view consistent with the standard DLVO the - ory . The qualitative feature to be appreciated is the role of ionic strength in making the vdW interaction accessi - ble . Shown in Fig 7 is the sum U D + U E + U vdW for three representative conditions : 500 mM KCl , 0 . 8 % PEG 35kD ; 100 mM KCl , 1 . 6 % PEG 35kD ; and 500 mM KCl , 0 % PEG . The calculations appear successful in ex - plaining features of the results at 500 mM ionic strength , predicting bundle formation with 0 . 8 % PEG 35kD , con - sistent with Fig 2 . With a rather low Hamaker constant , A = 0 . 1 kT , the electrostatic repulsion is large enough to stabilize the suspension at 0 % PEG , as it must . Ac - cording to Eqn . 7 , fully charged F - actin in 100 mM KCl has a large value of U E that totally prohibits the role of van der Waals forces in the bound state . This is contra - dictory with the experimental result . Both 100 mM and 500 mM PEG 35kD bundles are similar in appearance , although hysteresis has a wider range for 500 mM KCl , as seen in Fig 3 . While the choice of the low Hamaker con - stant A = 0 . 1 kT is an obvious cause of the imbalance , it is hard to justify using diﬀerent values for Hamaker con - stant at diﬀerent ionic strengths . Additional mechanisms unaccounted for in our treatment are discussed below . Counterion ﬂuctuation and redistribution [ 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 ] clearly play important roles in leading to an over - all attractive interaction . These eﬀects have not been taken into consideration in our simple electrostatic cal - culations . Since the eﬀects are more pronounced at lower ionic strength , it is not surprising that our calculated U E 9 based on PB theory overestimates the repulsion ( Fig 6 ) . at low ionic strength . Most of these works seem to focus on polyelectrolytes of high surface charge density , such as DNA , in the presence of multivalent counterions . These theories may also be expanded to treat systems of rela - tively weak surface charge , such as F - actin . The semi - quantitative ﬁts to the data shown in Fig 2 suggest ligand binding as an alternative mechanism for predicting bundle formation . With a mass action lig - and ( counterion ) binding interpretation ( Eqn . 3 ) with K A = 1 / ( 5 mM ) , half the negative charge would be neu - tralized at 5 mM KCl , which implies a surface charge down by a factor of 100 at 500 mM . This surface charge could certainly not support a stable suspension . A weaker association constant , say K A = 1 / ( 100 mM ) , fails to produce the ﬂat baseline of C o at higher salt . Ex - periments [ 34 , 35 ] focused mainly on F - actin’s tightly bound divalent ions Ca 2 + and Mg 2 + have demonstrated eﬀects of [ K + ] in the rapid phase of ﬂuorescence induc - tion , indicating low aﬃnity K + binding constants from 1 / ( 10 mM ) to 1 / ( 100 mM ) . The data in Fig 2 , together with the fact that F - actin is stable at the highest mono - valent ionic strength , seem to demand that F - actin main - tain a signiﬁcant fraction of unneutralized charge at high salt . Indeed , the electrophoretic mobility measurements for ﬁlamentous phages fd and M13 suggest that the ﬁla - ments remain charged up to 500 mM KCl [ Q . Wen and J . X . Tang , unpublished data ] . A recent study by Yu and Carlsson [ 36 ] directly ad - dresses the question of F - actin electrostatic interaction . This work includes electrostatic and entropic terms in ligand ( counterion ) binding as well as the actual spacial conﬁguration of the charged groups of the protein struc - ture . These authors point out a role of induced charge condensation as the two ﬁlaments begin to interact : as the surface potential of one ﬁlament is increased by the other , the eﬀective K A of each site is raised by a fac - tor exp ( eφ 2 / kT ) , lowering the repulsion by increasing the counterion binding . The actual interaction is found with a largest - error - correction algorithm seeking the low - est energy , which is a function of the charge of all sites . Their treatment may be expanded to predict features of PEG - induced bundle formation , which goes beyond the scope of this work . E . Distinction from polyvalent cation induced bundle formation The mechanism of polymer - induced bundling is dis - tinct from the bundling induced by divalent metal ions , cationic complexes , and basic polypeptides [ 6 , 25 , 37 ] . The most salient feature is the inhibiting nature of mono - valent salts for the latter vs . the enhancing eﬀect for the former . Secondly , polyvalent counterions such as basic polypeptides and cationic complexes function as some binding agent in F - actin bundles . An opposite role is held by PEG , which does not bind F - actin , as conﬁrmed in this study with the sedimentation assay using radio - labeled PEG . In addition , we show in this work that un - der some conditions the PEG - induced bundles are mor - phologically diﬀerent in size . Another distinct property from polyvalent cation in - duced bundle formation is that no resolubilization was found with high polymer concentration or high ionic strength ( 2 . 5 M KCl ) , in that the structures were sta - ble under these conditions . In contrast , for most col - loidal systems , precipitation occurs with the addition of multivalent ions , only to go back into suspension with increased concentration of the multivalent counte - rions . Long known for some classical colloids , this has recently been shown for the bacteriophages fd and M13 viruses [ 37 ] . This phenomenon has been predicted for F - actin by recent theoretical calculations [ 36 ] . However , experimental test of such a prediction has yet to be per - formed . There is an apparent multitude of proteins which ei - ther bind to F - actin , aﬀect the polymerization of actin , or enhance the lateral aggregation of F - actin [ 25 ] . In view of the distinction between the polyvalent counte - rion induced bundling and the one by depletion eﬀect shown in this work , it is helpful to assess their respec - tive contributions to the related biochemical functions . Under the unifying tie of electrostatic eﬀects , however , this work implies a strong relevance of polyelectrolyte physics to the observation that so many biochemically unrelated proteins bind F - actin and induce formation of actin bundles . Is the binding capability due largely to the cylindrical geometry of actin ﬁlaments , which tends to diminish electrostatic stability [ 27 , 30 ] ? F . Hysteresis The hysteresis in the dissolution of PEG induced actin bundles ( Fig 3 ) can be qualitatively explained by the following scenario : At zero polymer , ﬁlament / ﬁlament contact is prohibited by the electrostatic barrier . As the height of this barrier is overcome with the depletion po - tential U D from increased polymer concentration , F - actin is allowed into the vdW binding conﬁguration . If the polymer concentration is then lowered , the tightly bound state remains stranded inside the U E barrier . This can be seen in Fig 7 for the case of 500 mM KCl . G . What limits the bundle size ? Suppose that the total surface charge of a bundle in - creases with size , while the surface charge density re - mains constant . Recall that Eqn . 6 shows that the self - energy goes as λ 2 / √ IR ∼ σ 2 R / √ I . If the surface charge density is a constant value ( that of an individual F - actin ) , this electrostatic self - energy per unit length of a bundle would increase as the bundle radius R . Assuming the depletion potential to be of depth ξ , U D per unit length 10 would scale as ξ 1 / 2 R 3 / 2 , which is the shaded area of Fig 1 for small ξ / R . ¿From these considerations , there is no obvious limit in size because U D outraces U E with increasing diameter 2 R . This simple scaling argument also predicts that linear polyelectrolytes of larger diam - eter are more prone to bundling when other parameters are comparable . The ﬁnal bundle structure is not necessarily a hexag - onal array of rods , but rather it could be the product of diﬀusion limited aggregation [ 38 ] . Such structures are expected to show surface roughness greater than the stan - dard statistical deviation proportional to the square root of the accumulation . From Fig 5 we know that an in - dividual ﬁlament ﬁnds a low energy conﬁguration on a previously formed bundle . However , the situation is dif - ferent for two matured bundles , where , due to surface contour , the relative interaction ( contact ) area fails to scale with diameter . Such a structure is easily broken up by the turbulence of light mixing . Thus there is a point in the hierarchy of assembly when the macroscopic hy - drodynamic forces exceed the surface - surface interaction . This argument explains why the bundles do not collapse into one large mass , but assume polydisperse structures which show no tendency to combine with each other after a certain level of self - assembly . The arguments above based on the surface roughness do not fully explain how bundles might reach some equi - librium size limit . The experimental observations are in - conclusive whether an equilibrium size distribution exists or is practically attainable . PEG 8kD bundles appear to stop growing at smaller sizes ( data not shown ) than those induced by PEG 35kD ( Fig 4 and Fig 5 ) , which clearly grow into large structures , their extent perhaps only lim - ited by the progressively slow kinetics . In the test tube experiments , the eﬀect of diﬀusion may be surpassed by the sedimentation eﬀect due to gravity for the large bun - dles observed . Additional experiments are necessary in order to assess which eﬀects are dominant in determining the actin bundle size . The hysteresis data also implies an inhomogeneity , or variation in ’ﬁtness’ , among the actin bundles . Some of the structures ’survive’ with reduced polymer while oth - ers have dissolved back to dispersed actin ﬁlaments . The inhomogeneity may be related to defects in the struc - ture of the bundles , or more simply a wide variation of the bundle sizes . Additional experiments may also be designed to test these diﬀerent proposals . H . Concluding remarks Our calculations are to be taken as reasonable esti - mates of the forces involved in bundle formation . More exact calculations , especially of the electrostatic interac - tion , presumably including a role of mass action counter - charge accumulation , should help explain many aspects of the results quantitatively . Nevertheless , results from the simple experiments reported here provide an oppor - tunity to expand the understanding of some basic prob - lems in lateral aggregation of protein ﬁlaments . V . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to thank Prof . David Daleke for his generosity . This work was supported by NSF - DMR 9988389 , NIH - HL 67286 , and by Indiana University . [ 1 ] A . Suzuki , M . Yamazaki , and T . Ito , Biochemistry 28 , 6513 ( 1989 ) . [ 2 ] V . A . Parsegian , R . P . Rand , and D . C . Rau , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 97 ( 8 ) , 3987 ( 2000 ) . [ 3 ] N . Y . Sidorova and D . Rau , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 93 , 12272 ( 1996 ) . [ 4 ] P . Sheterline and J . Sparrow , Protein Proﬁle 1 , 1 ( 1994 ) . [ 5 ] K . Holmes , D . Popp , W . Gebhard , and W . Kabsch , Na - ture 347 , 44 ( 1990 ) . [ 6 ] J . X . Tang and P . A . Janmey , J . Biol . Chem . 271 ( 15 ) , 8556 ( 1996 ) . [ 7 ] F . Gittes , B . Mickey , A . Nettleton , and J . Howard , J . Cell Bio . 120 , 923 ( 1993 ) . [ 8 ] H . Isambert , P . Venier , A . C . Maggs , A . Fat - toum , R . Kassab , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier , J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 11437 ( 1995 ) . [ 9 ] S . Asakura and F . Oosawa , J . Chem . Phys . 22 , 1255 ( 1954 ) . [ 10 ] A . M . Kulkarni , A . P . Chatterjee , K . S . Schweizer , and C . F . Zukoski , J . Chem . Phys . 113 ( 21 ) , 9863 ( 2000 ) . [ 11 ] A . A . Louis , P . G . Bolhuis , E . J . Meijer , and J . P . Hansen , J . Chem . Phys . 117 ( 4 ) , 1893 ( 2002 ) . [ 12 ] A . A . Louis , P . G . Bolhuis , E . J . Meijer , and J . P . Hansen , J . Chem . Phys . 116 ( 23 ) , 10547 ( 2002 ) . [ 13 ] R . Tuinier , H . N . W . Lekkerkerker , and D . G . A . L . Aarts , Phys . Rev . E 65 , XXX ( 2002 ) . [ 14 ] L . Schafer , Excluded Volume Eﬀects in Polymer Solutions ( Springer Verlag , Berlin , 1999 ) . [ 15 ] K . Devanand and J . C . Selser , Macromolecules 24 ( 22 ) , 5943 ( 1991 ) . [ 16 ] P . deGennes , Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics ( Cor - nell University , Ithaca , 1979 ) . [ 17 ] R . Tuinier and H . N . W . Lekkerkerker , Eur . Phys . J . E 6 , 129 ( 2001 ) . [ 18 ] T . Ohta and Y . Oono , Phys . Lett . 89A , 460 ( 1982 ) . [ 19 ] D . Chandler , Studies in Statistical Mechanics ( vol . 8 , E . W . Montroll and J . L . Lebowitz , editors , 1988 ) . [ 20 ] E . J . W . Verwey and J . T . G . Overbeek , Theory of the Stability of Lyophobic Colloids ( Elsevier , Amsterdam , 1948 ) . [ 21 ] J . N . Israelachvili , Intermolecular and Surface Forces ( Academic Press , 1985 ) . [ 22 ] J . Spudich and S . Watt , J . Biol . Chem . 246 , 4866 ( 1971 ) . [ 23 ] W . H . Press , S . A . Teukolsky , W . T . Vettering , and 11 B . P . Flannery , Numerical Recipes in fortran ( Cam - bridge , 1992 ) . [ 24 ] J . R . Philip and R . A . Wooding , Jour . Chem . Phys . 52 , 953 ( 1970 ) . [ 25 ] J . X . Tang , T . Ito , T . Tao , P . Traub , and P . A . Janmey , Biochem . 36 , 12600 ( 1997 ) . [ 26 ] J . G . Dewey , Biopolymers 29 , 1793 ( 1990 ) . [ 27 ] B . H . Zimm and M . L . Bret , J . Biomolec . Structure and Dynamics 1 , 461 ( 1983 ) . [ 28 ] D . Harries , Langmuir 14 , 3149 ( 1998 ) . [ 29 ] B . Sharp , K . A . and Honig , J . Phys . Chem . 94 , 7684 ( 1990 ) . [ 30 ] F . Oosawa , Polyelectrolytes ( Marcel Dekker , 1971 ) . [ 31 ] B . - Y . Ha and A . J . Liu , Phys . Rev . Lett . 79 , 1289 ( 1997 ) . [ 32 ] A . - W . Lau and P . Pincus , Phys . Rev . E 66 , 41501 ( 2002 ) . [ 33 ] J . Ray and G . S . Manning , Langmuir 10 , 2450 ( 1994 ) . [ 34 ] M . Carlier , D . Pantolini , and E . D . Korn , J . Biol . Chem . 261 , 10778 ( 1986 ) . [ 35 ] H . J . Kinosian , L . A . Selden , J . E . Estes , and L . C . Ger - shman , J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 9721 ( 1989 ) . [ 36 ] X . Yu and A . E . Carlsson , Biophys . J . 85 , 3532 ( 2003 ) . [ 37 ] J . X . Tang , P . A . Janmey , A . Lyubartsev , and L . Nor - denskiold , Biophys . J . 83 , 566 ( 2002 ) . [ 38 ] A . L . Barabasi and H . E . Stanley , Fractal Concepts in Surface Growth ( University of Cambridge , 1995 ) .