PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Heuristic Decision Making Gerd Gigerenzer and Wolfgang Gaissmaier Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition , Max Planck Institute for Human Development , 14195 Berlin , Germany ; email : gigerenzer @ mpib - berlin . mpg . de Annu . Rev . Psychol . 2011 . 62 : 451 – 82 The Annual Review of Psychology is online at psych . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - psych - 120709 - 145346 Copyright c (cid:2) 2011 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 0066 - 4308 / 11 / 0110 - 0451 $ 20 . 00 Key Words accuracy - effort trade - off , business decisions , ecological rationality , legal decision making , medical decision making , social intelligence Abstract As reﬂected in the amount of controversy , few areas in psychology have undergone such dramatic conceptual changes in the past decade as the emerging science of heuristics . Heuristics are efﬁcient cognitive pro - cesses , conscious or unconscious , that ignore part of the information . Because using heuristics saves effort , the classical view has been that heuristic decisions imply greater errors than do “rational” decisions as deﬁned by logic or statistical models . However , for many decisions , the assumptions of rational models are not met , and it is an empirical rather than an a priori issue how well cognitive heuristics function in an uncer - tain world . To answer both the descriptive question ( “Which heuris - tics do people use in which situations ? ” ) and the prescriptive question ( “When should people rely on a given heuristic rather than a complex strategy to make better judgments ? ” ) , formal models are indispensable . We review research that tests formal models of heuristic inference , in - cluding in business organizations , health care , and legal institutions . This research indicates that ( a ) individuals and organizations often rely onsimpleheuristicsinanadaptiveway , and ( b ) ignoringpartoftheinfor - mation can lead to more accurate judgments than weighting and adding all information , for instance for low predictability and small samples . The big future challenge is to develop a systematic theory of the build - ing blocks of heuristics as well as the core capacities and environmental structures these exploit . 451 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Contents INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 452 Scope of Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 453 WHAT IS A HEURISTIC ? . . . . . . . . . . . 454 Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 454 Less - Can - Be - More : Managers’ One - Good - Reason Decisions . . . . 455 The Adaptive Toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . 456 WHY HEURISTICS ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 456 Accuracy - Effort Trade - Off . . . . . . . . . 456 Ecological Rationality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 457 METHODOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 458 Comparative Versus Singular Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 459 Test of Individuals Versus Group Means . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 459 Testing the Adaptive Versus Universal Use of Heuristics . . . . . 459 Prediction Versus Fitting . . . . . . . . . . . 459 RECOGNITION - BASED DECISION MAKING . . . . . . . . . . . . 460 Recognition Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 460 Fluency Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 462 Neural Basis of Recognition and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 463 ONE - REASON DECISION MAKING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 463 One - Clever - Cue Heuristics . . . . . . . . 463 Take - the - Best . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 464 Fast - and - Frugal Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . 467 TRADE - OFF HEURISTICS . . . . . . . . . 469 Tallying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 469 Mapping Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 470 1 / N Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 470 SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE . . . . . . . . . . 471 Recognition - Based Decisions . . . . . . . 471 One - Reason Decision Making . . . . . . 472 Trade - Off Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 472 Social Heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 472 Moral Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 473 CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 473 INTRODUCTION How are decisions made ? Three major answers have been proposed : The mind applies logic , statistics , or heuristics . Yet these mental tools have not been treated as equals , each suited to a particular kind of problem , as we believe they should be . Rather , rules of logic and statistics have been linked to rational reasoning and heuristics linked to error - prone intuitions or even irrationality . Since the 1970s , this oppo - sition has been entrenched in psychological research , from the heuristics - and - biases pro - gram ( Tversky & Kahneman 1974 ) to various two - system theories of reasoning ( Evans 2008 ) . Deviations from logical or statistical principles became routinely interpreted as judgmental biases and attributed to cognitive heuristics such as “representativeness” or to an intuitive “System 1 . ” The bottom line was that people often rely on heuristics , but they would be bet - ter off in terms of accuracy if they did not . As Kahneman ( 2003 ) explained in his Nobel Memorial Lecture : “Our research attempted to obtain a map of bounded rationality , by exploring the systematic biases that separate the beliefs that people have and the choices they make from the optimal beliefs and choices assumed in rational - agent models” ( p . 1449 ) . In this research , it is assumed that the conditions for rational models hold and can thus deﬁne optimal reasoning . The “father” of bounded rationality , Simon ( 1989 ) , however , asked a fundamentally different question , leading to a different research program . Simon’squestion : “Howdohumanbeingsrea - son when the conditions for rationality postu - lated by the model of neoclassical economics are not met ? ” ( p . 377 ) As Simon ( 1979 , p . 500 ) stressed in his No - bel Memorial Lecture , the classical model of ra - tionality requires knowledge of all the relevant alternatives , their consequences and probabili - ties , and a predictable world without surprises . These conditions , however , are rarely met for the problems that individuals and organizations face . Savage ( 1954 ) , known as the founder of modern Bayesian decision theory , called such perfect knowledge small worlds , to be distin - guished from large worlds . In large worlds , part 452 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 of the relevant information is unknown or has to be estimated from small samples , so that the conditions for rational decision theory are not met , making it an inappropriate norm for opti - malreasoning ( Binmore2009 ) . Inalargeworld , as emphasized by both Savage and Simon , one can no longer assume that “rational” models automatically provide the correct answer . Even small deviations from the model conditions can matter . In fact , small - world theories can lead to disaster when applied to the large world , as Stiglitz ( 2010 ) noted with respect to the ﬁ - nancial crash of 2008 : “It simply wasn’t true that a world with almost perfect information was very similar to one in which there was per - fectinformation” ( p . 243 , emphasisadded ) . And Sorros ( 2009 ) concluded that “rational expecta - tions theory is no longer taken seriously outside academic circles” ( p . 6 ) . In recent years , research has moved beyond small worlds such as the ultimatum game and choice between monetary gambles . To test how well heuristics perform in large worlds , one needs formal models of heuristics . Such tests are not possible as long as heuristics are only vaguely characterized bygeneral labels , because labels cannot make the precise predictions that statistical techniques can . When heuristics were formalized , a surpris - ing discovery was made . In a number of large worlds , simple heuristics were more accurate than standard statistical methods that have the same or more information . These results be - came known as less - is - more effects : There is an inverse - U - shaped relation between level of accuracy and amount of information , computa - tion , or time . In other words , there is a point where more is not better , but harmful . Starting in the late 1990s , it was shown for the ﬁrst time that relying on one good reason ( and ignoring the rest ) can lead to higher predictive accuracy than achieved by a linear multiple regression ( Czerlinski et al . 1999 , Gigerenzer & Goldstein 1996 ) and a three - layer feedforward connec - tionist network trained using the back propa - gation algorithm ( Brighton 2006 , Chater et al . 2003 , Gigerenzer & Brighton 2009 ) . These results put heuristics on par with standard statistical models of “rational” cognition ( see Gigerenzer 2008 ) . Simon ( 1999 ) spoke of a “revolution in cognitive science , striking a great blow for sanity in the approach to human rationality . ” The revolution Simon referred to could not have happened without formal models and the power of modern computers . Moreover , it is a “revolution” in the original sense of the term , buildingonearlierdemonstrationsoftherobust beauty of simple models . These include Dawes & Corrigan ( 1974 ) and Einhorn & Hogarth ( 1975 ) , who showed that simple equal weights predict about as well as—and sometimes better than—multiple regression with “optimal” beta weights . Their important work has not received the recognition it deserves and is not even men - tioned in standard textbooks in econometrics ( Hogarth 2011 ) . Although the study of heuristics has been typically considered as purely descriptive , less - is - more effects open up a prescriptive role for heuristics , resulting in two research questions : Description : Which heuristics do people use in which situations ? Prescription : When should people rely on a given heuristic rather than a complex strategy to make more accurate judgments ? Scope of Review We review a ﬁeld that is in a fundamental tran - sition , focusing on the major new ideas . The literature on heuristics does not speak with one voice , and we do not attempt to cover it ex - haustively . Rather than presenting a patchwork of ideas to the reader , we organize this review within a theoretical framework and restrict it to ( a ) formal models of heuristics and ( b ) infer - ences rather than preferences . The ﬁrst restriction excludes explanation by mere labels but also by verbally stated pro - cesses that have not been formalized , such as the tools - to - theories heuristic in scientiﬁc dis - covery ( Gigerenzer 1991 ) . Formal models al - low rigorous tests of both descriptive and pre - scriptive questions . “Inference” refers to tasks www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 453 Small world : a situation in which all relevant alternatives , their consequences , and probabilities are known , and where the future is certain , so that the optimal solution to a problem can be determined Large world : a situation in which some relevant information is unknown or must be estimated from samples , and the future is uncertain , violating the conditions for rational decision theory Less - is - more effects : when less information or computation leads to more accurate judgments than more information or computation Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 for which a unique criterion exists , whereas “preference” ( or preferential choice ) refers to tasks where no such criteria exist , as in matters of taste . The advantage of studying inference is that the accuracy of a strategy can be deter - mined . At the same time , we agree with Weber & Johnson ( 2009 ) that inferences and prefer - ences draw on the same cognitive processes ; in fact , most heuristics covered in this review can be used for preferential choice as well , as illus - tratedwithexamples fromconsumerchoice and health . Note that the general term “decision making” is used here to cover both inferences and preferences . We begin with a brief , incomplete history ( for more , see Groner et al . 1983 ) , deﬁne the term heuristic , and provide an illustration of the use of heuristics in organizations , including an empirical demonstration of a less - is - more effect . WHAT IS A HEURISTIC ? The term heuristic is of Greek origin and means , “serving to ﬁnd out or discover . ” Ein - stein included the term in the title of his Nobel prize – winning paper from 1905 on quantum physics , indicating that the view he presented was incomplete but highly useful ( Holton 1988 , pp . 360 – 361 ) . Max Wertheimer , who was a close friend of Einstein , and his fellow Gestalt psychologists spoke of heuristic meth - ods such as “looking around” to guide search for information . The mathematician George Polya distinguished heuristics from analytical methods : For instance , heuristics are needed to ﬁnd a proof , whereas analysis is for checking a proof . Simon and Allen Newell , a student of Polya , developed formal models of heuristics to limit large search spaces . Luce ( 1956 ) , Tversky ( 1972 ) , Dawes ( 1979 ) , and others studied mod - els of heuristics , such as lexicographic rules , elimination - by - aspect , and equal - weight rules . Payne and colleagues ( 1993 ) provided evidence fortheadaptiveuseoftheseandotherheuristics in their seminal research . Similarly , behavioral biologists studied experimentally the rules of thumb ( their term for heuristics ) that animals use for choosing food sites , nest sites , or mates ( Hutchinson & Gigerenzer 2005 ) . After an initial phase dominated by logic , researchers in artiﬁcial intelligence ( AI ) began to study heuristics that can solve problems that logic and probability cannot , such as NP - complete ( computationally intractable ) problems . While AI researchers began to study how heuristics make computers smart , psychologists in the 1970s became interested in demonstrating hu - man reasoning errors , and they used the term heuristic to explain why people make errors . This change in the evaluation of heuristics went hand - in - hand with replacing models of heuristics by general labels , such as “availabil - ity” and , later , “affect . ” Unlike in biology and AI , heuristics became tied to biases , whereas the content - free laws of logic and probability became identiﬁed with the principles of sound thinking ( Kahneman 2003 , Tversky & Kahneman 1974 ) . The resulting heuristics - and - biasesprogramhashadimmenseinﬂuence , contributing to the emergence of behavioral economics and behavioral law and economics . Deﬁnition Many deﬁnitions of heuristics exist . Kahneman & Frederick ( 2002 ) proposed that a heuristic assesses a target attribute by another property ( attribute substitution ) that comes more read - ily to mind . Shah & Oppenheimer ( 2008 ) pro - posed that all heuristics rely on effort reduction by one or more of the following : ( a ) examin - ing fewer cues , ( b ) reducing the effort of re - trieving cue values , ( c ) simplifying the weight - ingofcues , ( d ) integratinglessinformation , and ( e ) examining fewer alternatives . Although both attribute substitution and effort reduction are involved , attribute substitution is less speciﬁc because most inference methods , including multiple regression , entail it : An unknown cri - terion is estimated by cues . For the purpose of this review , we adopt the following deﬁnition : A heuristic is astrategy that ignores part of the information , withthegoalofmakingdecisions more quickly , frugally , and / or accurately than more complex methods . 454 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier Heuristics : strategies that ignore information to make decisions faster , more frugally , and / or more accurately than more complex methods Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Let us explain the terms . Heuristics are a subset of strategies ; strategies also include com - plex regression or Bayesian models . The part of the information that is ignored is covered by Shah and Oppenheimer’s list of ﬁve aspects . The goal of making judgments more quickly and frugally is consistent with the goal of effort reduction , where “frugal” is often measured by the number of cues that a heuristic searches . Of course , there is no strict dichotomy between heuristic and nonheuristic , as strategies can ignore more or less information . The goal of making judgments more accurately by ignoring information is new . It goes beyond the classical assumption that a heuristic trades off some accuracy for less effort . Unlike the two - system models of reasoning that link heuristics to unconscious , associative , and error - prone processes , no such link is made in this review . Every heuristic reviewed in this article can also be relied upon consciously and is deﬁned as a rule . The amount of error it generates can be measured and compared to other strategies . Consider the following illustration . Less - Can - Be - More : Managers’ One - Good - Reason Decisions Commercial retailers need to distinguish those customers who are likely to purchase again in a given time frame ( active customers ) from those who are not ( inactive customers ) . These com - panies have a large database containing the amount , kind , and date of every customer’s pre - viouspurchases . Basedonthisinformation , how can an executive predict which customers will be active in the future ? Statistically sophisticated academics might opt for a Bayesian analysis , regression analy - sis , or some other optimizing strategy to pre - dict the probability that a customer with a given purchase history is active at some fu - ture time . Researchers in business share this vi - sion , and the state - of - the - art approach is the Pareto / NBD model ( negative binomial distri - bution ; Schmittlein & Peterson 1994 ) . This model assumes that purchases follow a Poisson process with a purchase parameter λ , that cus - tomer lifetimes follow an exponential distribu - tion with a dropout rate parameter μ , and that , across customers , purchase and dropout rates are distributed according to a gamma distri - bution . However , most managers in Europe , North America , Japan , Brazil , and India rely on “intuitive” heuristics rather than on this or similar statistical forecasting methods ( Parikh 1994 ) . W¨ubben & Wangenheim ( 2008 ) re - ported that experienced managers use a simple recency - of - last - purchase rule : Hiatus heuristic : If a customer has not pur - chasedwithinacertainnumberofmonths ( the hiatus ) , the customer is classiﬁed as inactive ; otherwise , the customer is classiﬁed as active . The managers of an apparel retailer and an airline relied on nine months as the hiatus , whereas the hiatus of an online CD retailer was six months . Note that by relying on re - cency only , the managers ignore information such as the frequency and the spacing of previ - ous purchases . Yet how accurate is the heuristic compared to the Pareto / NBD model ? To in - vestigate this question , the Pareto / NBD model was allowed to estimate its parameters from 40 weeks of data and was tested over the follow - ing40weeks . Thehiatusheuristicdoesnotneed to estimate any parameters . For the apparel re - tailer , the hiatus heuristic correctly classiﬁed 83 % of customers , whereas the Pareto / NBD model classiﬁed only 75 % correctly . For the airline , the score was 77 % versus 74 % , and for the online CD business , the two methods tied at 77 % ( W¨ubben & Wangenheim 2008 ) . Similar results were found for forecasting future best customers and for a second complex statistical model . This study demonstrated empirically a less - is - more effect : The complex model had all the informationthesimpleheuristicusedandmore , performed extensive estimations and computa - tions , but nevertheless made more errors . The study also showed how important it is to for - malize a heuristic so that its predictions can be tested and compared to competing models . www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 455 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Adaptive toolbox : the cognitive heuristics , their building blocks ( e . g . , rules for search , stopping , decision ) , and the core capacities ( e . g . , recognition memory ) they exploit Ecologicalrationality : the study of ecological rationality investigates in which environments a given strategy is better than other strategies ( better—not best—because in large worlds the optimal strategy is unknown ) Accuracy - effort trade - off : the traditional explanation why people use heuristics , assuming that effort is traded against accuracy . Not generally true ( see less - is - more effects ) The Adaptive Toolbox Formal models of heuristics represent progress over labels , but precision alone is not enough to build a science of heuristics . For instance , be - havioral biology has experimentally identiﬁed various rules of thumb that animals use , which often look like curiosities in the absence of an overarching theory ( Hutchinson & Gigeren - zer 2005 ) . Further progress requires a theo - retical framework that reaches beyond a list of heuristics . One step toward such a theory is to look for common building blocks , from which the various heuristics are constructed as an organizing principle . This would allow re - ducing the larger number of heuristics to a smaller number of components , similar to how the number of chemical elements in the peri - odic table is built from a small number of parti - cles . Three building blocks have been proposed ( Gigerenzer et al . 1999 ) : 1 . Search rules specify in what direction the search extends in the search space . 2 . Stopping rules specify when the search is stopped . 3 . Decision rules specify how the ﬁnal deci - sion is reached . For instance , the hiatus heuristic searches for recency - of - last - purchase information ; stops when it is found , ignoring further information ; and uses a nine - month threshold to make the decision . Similarly , Simon’s ( 1955 ) satisﬁcing heuristic searches through options in any order , stops as soon the ﬁrst option exceeds an aspi - ration level , and chooses this option . Many but not all heuristics are composed of these three building blocks ; thus , the list of building blocks is incomplete . The collection of heuristics and building blocks an individual or a species has at its dis - posal for constructing heuristics , together with the core mental capacities that building blocks exploit , has been called the adaptive toolbox ( Gigerenzer et al . 1999 ) . Core capacities in - clude recognition memory , frequency monitor - ing , object tracking , and the ability to imitate . These vary systematically between species and individuals . Heuristics can be fast and frugal only because the core capacities are already in place . How are heuristics selected for a given problem ? Although some authors implied that the selection problem is unique to heuristics ( Gl¨ockner et al . 2010 , Newell 2005 ) , it equally applies to statistical models of mind . There are many such models . Even if one proposes that the mind has only one tool in its statistical toolbox , such as Bayes , regression , or neural network , the strategy selection problem trans - lates into the question of how parameter values are selected for each new problem ( Marewski 2010 ) . Several principles appear to guide learning which strategy to select . First , heuristics and their underlying core capacities can be ( partly ) hardwired by evolution , as it appears to be in bees’ collective decision about the location of a new hive ( Seeley 2001 ) and in perceptual mechanisms for inferring the extension of ob - jects in three - dimensional space ( Kleffner & Ramachandran 1992 ) . The second selection principle is based on individual learning ; a for - malmodelisRieskamp & Otto’s ( 2006 ) strategy selection learning theory . Third , heuristics can be selected and learned by social processes , as in imitation and explicit teaching of heuristics ( e . g . , Snook et al . 2004 ) . Finally , the content of individual memory determines in the ﬁrst place which heuristics can be used , and some heuris - tics’ very applicability appears to be correlated with their “ecological rationality” ( see below ) . For instance , the ﬂuency heuristic is most likely to be applicable in situations where it is also likely to succeed ( Marewski & Schooler 2010 ) . WHY HEURISTICS ? Two answers have been proposed to the ques - tion of why heuristics are useful : the accuracy - effort trade - off , and the ecological rationality of heuristics . Accuracy - Effort Trade - Off The classical explanation is that people save ef - fort with heuristics , but at the cost of accuracy 456 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 ( Payneetal . 1993 , Shah & Oppenheimer2008 ) . In this view , humans and other animals rely on heuristics because information search and com - putation cost time and effort ; heuristics trade - off some loss in accuracy for faster and more frugal cognition . There are two interpretations of this trade - off : ( a ) Rational trade - offs . Not every decision is important enough to warrant spending the time to ﬁnd the best course of action ; thus , people choose shortcuts that save effort . The program on the adaptive decision maker ( Payne et al . 1993 ) is built on the assumption that heuris - tics achieve a beneﬁcial trade - off between ac - curacy and effort . Here , relying on heuristics can be rational in the sense that costs of effort are higher than the gain in accuracy . ( b ) Cog - nitive limitations . Capacity limitations prevent us from acting rationally and force us to rely on heuristics , which are considered a source of judgmental errors . The accuracy - effort trade - off is regularly touted as a potentially universal law of cogni - tion . Yet the study on the hiatus heuristic il - lustrated that this assumption is not generally correct . The hiatus heuristic saves effort com - pared to the sophisticated Pareto / NBD model , but is also more accurate : a less - is - more effect . Ecological Rationality Less - is - more effects require a new conception of why people rely on heuristics . The study of theecologicalrationalityofheuristics , orstrate - gies in general , is such a new framework : “A heuristic is ecologically rational to the degree that it is adapted to the structure of the envi - ronment” ( Gigerenzer et al . 1999 , p . 13 ) . Smith ( 2003 ) used this deﬁnition in his Nobel lecture and generalized it from heuristics to markets and institutions . The study of ecological ra - tionality ﬂeshes out Simon’s scissors analogy : “Human rational behavior ( and the rational be - havior of all physical symbol systems ) is shaped by a scissors whose two blades are the structure of task environments and the computational ca - pabilities of the actor” ( Simon 1990 , p . 7 ) . If one looks only at one blade , cognition , one cannot understand why and when it succeeds or fails . The study of ecological rationality addresses two related questions : How does cognition ex - ploit environmental structures , and how does it deal with error ? Exploiting environmental structure . In which environments will a given heuristic suc - ceed , and in which will it fail ? Environmental structures that have been identiﬁed include ( Todd et al . 2011 ) : 1 . Uncertainty : how well a criterion can be predicted . 2 . Redundancy : the correlation between cues . 3 . Sample size : number of observations ( rel - ative to number of cues ) . 4 . Variability in weights : the distribution of the cue weights ( e . g . , skewed or uniform ) . For instance , heuristics that rely on only one reason , such as the hiatus heuristic and take - the - best heuristic ( see below ) , tend to succeed ( relative to strategies that rely on more rea - sons ) inenvironmentswith ( a ) moderatetohigh uncertainty ( Hogarth & Karelaia 2007 ) and ( b ) moderate to high redundancy ( Dieckmann & Rieskamp 2007 ) . For customer activity , un - certainty means that it is difﬁcult to predict fu - ture purchases , and redundancy might be re - ﬂected in a high correlation between length of hiatus and spacing of previous purchases . The study of ecological rationality results in com - parative statements of the kind “strategy X is more accurate ( frugal , fast ) than Y in environ - ment E ”orinquantitativerelationsbetweenthe performance of strategy X when the structure of an environment changes ( e . g . , Baucells et al . 2008 , Karelaia 2006 , Martignon & Hoffrage 2002 ) . Speciﬁc ﬁndings are introduced below . Dealing with error . In much research on rea - soning , a bias typically refers to ignoring part of the information , as in the base rate fallacy . This can be captured by the equation : Error = bias + ε , ( 1 ) where ε is an irreducible random error . In this view , if the bias is eliminated , good www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 457 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 inferences are obtained . In statistical theory ( Geman et al . 1992 ) , however , there are three sources of errors : Error = bias + variance + ε , ( 2 ) where bias refers to a systematic deviation be - tween a model and the true state , as in Equation 1 . To deﬁne the meaning of variance , consider 100 people who rely on the same strategy , but each one has a different sample of observations from the same population . Because of sampling error , the 100 inferences may not be the same . Across samples , bias is the difference between themeanpredictionandthetruestateofnature , and variance is the expected squared deviation aroundthismean . Toillustrate , thenine - month hiatus heuristic has a bias but zero variance , because it has no free parameters to adjust to speciﬁc samples . In contrast , the Pareto / NBD model has free parameters and is likely to suf - fer from both variance and bias . Variance de - creases with increasing sample size , but also with simpler strategies that have fewer free pa - rameters ( and less ﬂexible functional forms ; Pitt et al . 2002 ) . Thus , a cognitive system needs to draw a balance between being biased and ﬂexi - ble ( variance ) rather than simply trying to elim - inate bias . In the extreme , as illustrated by the nine - monthhiatus , thetotaleliminationofvari - ance at the price of higher bias can lead to bet - ter inferences . This “bias - variance dilemma” helps to explicate the rationality of simple heuristics and how less can be more ( Brighton & Gigerenzer 2008 , Gigerenzer & Brighton 2009 ) . The study of ecological rationality is re - lated to the view that human cognition is adapted to its past environment ( Cosmides & Tooby 2006 ) , yet it should not be confused with the biological concept of adaptation . A match between a heuristic and an environmen - tal structure does not imply that the heuristic evolved because of that environment ( Hutchin - son & Gigerenzer 2005 ) . The distinction be - tweenecologicalandlogicalrationalityislinked to that between correspondence and coher - ence ( Hammond 2007 ) , but it is not identi - cal . If correspondence means achieving a goal in the world rather than cohering to a rule of logic , correspondence and ecological rational - ity refer to similar goals—although the study of the latter adds a mathematical analysis of the relation between heuristic and environ - ment . If correspondence , however , means that the mental representation corresponds to the world , as in a fairly accurate mental model or in Shepard’s ( 2001 ) view of the mind as a mirror reﬂecting the world , then ecological rational - ity is different . A heuristic is functional , not a veridical copy of the world . Ecological rationality does not mean that all people are perfectly adapted to their environ - ment . As Simon ( 1992 ) noted , if that were the case , one would only need to study the environ - ment to predict behavior ; the study of heuristics would be obsolete . METHODOLOGICALPRINCIPLES Formal models of heuristics are indispensable for progress , yet remain the exception in psy - chology . Much of the research ﬁrst documents an error of judgment and thereafter attributes it to a heuristic . In a widely cited experiment , Tversky & Kahneman ( 1973 ) reported that cer - tain letters were falsely judged to occur more frequently in the ﬁrst than the third position in English words . They attributed this error to the availability heuristic : Words with a letter in the ﬁrst position come to mind more eas - ily . Note that availability was introduced after the fact , without any independent measure or test . Once the heuristic is formalized , conclu - sions change . Sedlmeier and colleagues ( 1998 ) deﬁned and modeled the two most common meanings of availability—the speed of retrieval of the ﬁrst word and the number of retrieved words within a constant time period . Neither version of the availability heuristic could pre - dict participants’ frequency estimates . Instead , estimated frequencies were best predicted by actual frequencies , consistent with the classi - cal ﬁndings by Attneave ( 1953 ) . Formal models protect against the seductive power of general labels . 458 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 We are concerned about the replacement of formal models by general labels in parts of psychology . For instance , Tversky’s ( 1977 ) seminal model of similarity makes testable predictions ( e . g . , the asymmetry of similarity ) , whereas the widely cited label “representative - ness” can predict little but is so ﬂexible that it is consistent with many judgments , including opposite intuitions ( Ayton & Fischer 2004 ) . Similarly , research on the adaptive decision maker ( Payne et al . 1993 ) and the adaptive tool - box ( Gigerenzer et al . 1999 ) has studied formal models of heuristics , which have been ignored in two - system theories of reasoning in favor of a “System 1” ( Evans 2008 ) . The problem with two - system theories “is the lack of any predic - tive power and the tendency to employ them as an after - the - fact explanation” ( Keren & Schul 2009 , p . 544 ) . Moving backward from existing models to labels is a rare event in science , which typically proceeds in the opposite direction . The study of formal models entails four methodological principles . Comparative Versus Singular Tests All models are wrong . But some predict better than others and lead to novel questions . There - fore , tests of cognitive strategies need to be comparative , that is , test several models . This differs from the widespread practice of null hy - pothesis testing , where only one model ( the null ) is speciﬁed . Test of Individuals Versus Group Means Numerous studies have documented system - atic individual differences in the use of heuris - tics ( e . g . , Lee & Cummins 2004 , Nosofsky & Bergert 2007 ) , including in old age ( Mata et al . 2007 ) . In the presence of individual differences , tests of group mean differences can be highly misleading ( see Pachur et al . 2008 ) . Testing the Adaptive Versus Universal Use of Heuristics Research has shifted from asking whether people use one heuristic in all situations to asking whether heuristics are applied in situa - tions where these are ecologically rational . For instance , Br¨oder began by asking whether all people use the take - the - best heuristic all the time , but soon asked whether people rely on take - the - best in situations where it is ecolog - ically rational , for instance , when cue validi - ties are highly skewed ( Br¨oder & Schiffer 2003 , 2006 ) . Prediction Versus Fitting Prediction takes place when the data have not yet been observed and a model with ﬁxed pa - rameter values is used to predict them ; ﬁtting takes place when the data have already been ob - served and the parameters of a model are cho - sen so that they maximize the ﬁt ( such as R 2 ) . In general , the more free parameters a model has , the better the ﬁt , but this does not hold for predictions . In a large world where parameters need to be estimated from small or unreliable samples , the function between predictive accu - racy and the ﬂexibility of a model ( e . g . , num - ber of free parameters ) is typically inversely U - shaped . Both too few and too many parameters can hurt performance ( Pitt et al . 2002 ) . Com - peting models of strategies should be tested for their predictive ability , not their ability to ﬁt already known data . In the next sections , we review four classes of heuristics . The ﬁrst class exploits recognition memory , the second relies on one good reason only ( and ignores all other reasons ) , the third weights all cues or alternatives equally , and the fourth relies on social information . As men - tioned in the introduction , formal models of heuristics allow asking two questions : whether they can describe decisions , and whether they can prescribe how to make better decisions than , say , a complex statistical method . The prescriptive question is particularly relevant for organizations , from business to health care . Organizations seem ideally suited to the appli - cation of heuristics because of the inherent un - certainty and the pressure to act quickly . One might therefore presume that plenty of studies have investigated fast - and - frugal heuristics in www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 459 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 organizations . Notso , asHodgkinson & Healey ( 2008 ) pointed out . Our working hypothesis is that heuristic decision making in individu - als and organizations can be modeled by the same cognitive building blocks : rules of search , stopping , and decision . RECOGNITION - BASED DECISION MAKING The recognition memory literature indicates that a sense of recognition ( often called famil - iarity ) appears in consciousness earlier than rec - ollection ( Ratcliff & McKoon 1989 ) . The ﬁrst class of heuristics exploits this core capacity . Recognition Heuristic The goal is to make inferences about a crite - rion that is not directly accessible to the de - cision maker , based on recognition retrieved from memory . This is possible in an environ - ment ( reference class ) R where the recognition of alternatives a , b ∈ R positively correlates with their criterion values . For two alternatives , the heuristic is deﬁned as ( Goldstein & Gigerenzer 2002 ) : Recognition heuristic : If one of two alterna - tives is recognized and the other is not , then infer that the recognized alternative has the higher value with respect to the criterion . The higher the recognition validity α for a given criterion , the more ecologically rational it is to rely on this heuristic and the more likely people will rely on it . For each individual , α can be computed by α = C / ( C + W ) , where C is the number of correct inferences the recognition heuristic would make , computed acrossall pairsinwhich onealternativeisrecog - nized and the other is not , and W is the number of wrong inferences . A number of studies addressed the ques - tion of whether people rely on the recognition heuristic in an ecologically rational way . For in - stance , namerecognitionofSwisscitiesisavalid predictor of their population ( α = 0 . 86 ) but not their distance from the center of Switzer - land ( α = 0 . 51 ) . Pohl ( 2006 ) reported that 89 % of inferences accorded with the model in judg - ments of population , compared to only 54 % in judgments of the distance . More generally , there is a positive correlation of r = 0 . 64 be - tween the recognition validity and the propor - tion of judgments consistent with the recogni - tion heuristic across 11 studies ( Pachur et al . 2011 ) . Similarly , old and young people alike adjust their reliance on the recognition heuris - tic between environments with high versus low recognition validities , even though old people have poorer recognition memory ( Pachur et al . 2009 ) . The recognition heuristic is a model that relies on recognition only . This leads to the testable prediction that people who rely on it will ignore strong , contradicting cues ( so - called noncompensatory inferences ) . Several studies that taught participants between one and three contradicting cues , typically of higher validity than α ( Newell & Fernandez2006 ; Pachuretal . 2008 ; Richter & Sp¨ath 2006 , experiment 3 ) , re - ported that mean accordance rates decreased . A reanalysis of these studies at an individual level , however , showed that typically about half of the participants consistently followed the recog - nition heuristic in every single trial , even in the presence of up to three contradicting cues ( Pachur et al . 2008 ) . The model of the recognition heuristic does not distinguish between pairs where the model leads to a correct inference and pairs where it leads to a wrong inference . However , the mean accordance rates were 90 % and 74 % , respec - tively ( Pohl 2006 , Hilbig & Pohl 2008 ) . To - gether with the effect of contradicting cues , this result indicated that some people did not follow the recognition heuristic , although the overall accordance rates remain high . Various authors concludedthatpeoplereliedonacompensatory strategy , such as weighting and adding of all cues ( e . g . , Hilbig & Pohl 2008 , Oppenheimer 2003 ) . None of the studies above , however , 460 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier Recognition - based decisions : a class of heuristics that bases judgments on recog - nition information only , ignoring other cues ( e . g . , recognition and fluency heuristic ) Errata Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 formulated and tested a compensatory strategy against the recognition heuristic , leaving the strategies that participants relied on unknown . One study since tested ﬁve compensatory mod - elsandfoundthatnonecouldpredictjudgments better than the simple model of the recognition heuristic ( Marewski et al . 2010 ) . The recognition heuristic model also makes another bold prediction : If α > β , and α , β are independent of n , then a less - is - more effect will be observed . Here , β is the knowledge validity , measured as C / ( C + W ) for all pairs in which both al - ternatives are recognized , and n is the num - ber of alternatives an individual recognizes . A less - is - more effect means that the function be - tween accuracy and n is inversely U - shaped rather than monotonically increasing . Some studiesreportedless - is - moreeffectsempirically among two , three , or four alternatives ( Frosch et al . 2007 , Goldstein & Gigerenzer 2002 ) and in group decisions ( Reimer & Katsikopoulos 2004 ) , whereas others failed to do so ( Pachur & Biele 2007 , Pohl 2006 ) , possibly because the effectispredictedtobesmall [ seeKatsikopoulos ( 2010 ) for an excellent analysis of the evidence ] . Usingasignaldetectionanalysis , Pleskac ( 2007 ) showed how the less - is - more effect depends on the false alarms and miss rates in the recogni - tion judgments . Dougherty et al . ( 2008 ) criticized the model of the recognition heuristic for treating recog - nition as binary input ( threshold model ) rather than continuously . In contrast , Br¨oder & Sch¨utz ( 2009 ) argued that the widespread cri - tique of threshold models is largely invalid . In a reanalysis of 59 published studies , they con - cluded that threshold models in fact ﬁt the data better in about half of the cases . Predicting Wimbledon . Although much of the work has addressed the descriptive ques - tion of what proportion of people rely on the heuristic when it is ecologically rational , the prescriptive question is how well the heuristic can compete with well - established forecasting instruments ( Goldstein & Gigerenzer 2009 ) . For instance , Serwe & Frings ( 2006 ) reported that collective recognition of amateur play - ers ( who knew only half of the contestants ) turned out to be a better predictor of the 2004 Wimbledon tennis match outcomes ( 72 % cor - rect ) than did the Association of Tennis Pro - fessionals ( ATP ) Entry Ranking ( 66 % ) , ATP Champions Race ( 68 % ) , and the seeding of the Wimbledon experts ( 69 % ) . Scheibehenne & Br¨oder ( 2007 ) found the same surprising re - sult for Wimbledon 2006 . Predicting elections . Gaissmaier & Marewski ( 2010 ) put the recognition heuristic to a test in predicting federal and state elections in Germany . Surprisingly , forecasts based on name recognition were almost as accurate as inter - viewing voters about their voting intentions . This particularly h e ld true when predicting the success of small parties , for which no polls are usually available because those polls would require huge samples . In contrast to surveys of voting intentions , recognition - based forecasts can be computed from small , “lousy” samples . Investment . In three studies on predicting the stock market , Ortmann et al . ( 2008 ) re - ported that recognition - based portfolios ( the set of most - recognized options ) , on average , outperformed managed funds such as the Fi - delity Growth Fund , the market ( Dow or Dax ) , chance portfolios , and stock experts . In con - trast , Boyd ( 2001 ) found no such advantage when he used college students’ recognition of stocksratherthanthatofthegeneralpublic . Itis imperative to understand why and under what conditions this simple heuristic can survive in ﬁnancial markets without making a systematic marketanalysis . Thisremainsanopenquestion . Consumer choice . The recognition heuris - tic could be a ﬁrst step in consideration set formation ( Marewski et al . 2010 ) , as it allows the choice set to be quickly reduced . This idea is consistent with research that suggests that priming a familiar brand increases the probabil - ity that it will be considered for purchase ( e . g . , Coates et al . 2004 ) . Brand recognition can be even more important than attributes that are a www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 461 Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 more direct reﬂection of quality . For instance , in a blind test , most people preferred a jar of high - quality peanut butter to two alternative jars of low - quality peanut butter . Yet when a familiar brand label was attached to one of the low - quality jars , the preferences changed . Most ( 73 % ) now preferred the jar with the label they recognized , and only 20 % preferred the unla - beled jar with the high - quality peanut butter ( Hoyer & Brown 1990 ) . Brand recognition may well dominate the taste cues , or the taste cues themselves might even be changed by brand recognition—people “taste” the brand name . Fluency Heuristic The recognition heuristic is mute about the underlying recognition process , just as Bayes’ rule is mute about source of prior probabilities . Dougherty et al . ( 2008 ) argued that it needs to beembeddedinatheoryoftherecognitionpro - cess . Schooler & Hertwig ( 2005 ) implemented the heuristic based on the ACT - R ( Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational ) model of mem - ory , which showed how forgetting—a process often seen as nuisance and handicap—can be functional in the context of inference , gener - ating less - is - more effects . In this same work , the ﬂuency heuristic was formulated for situ - ations when both alternatives are recognized , thatis , whentherecognitionheuristiccannotbe applied : Fluency heuristic : If both alternatives are rec - ognizedbutoneisrecognizedfaster , theninfer that this alternative has the higher value with respect to the criterion . The ﬂuency heuristic builds on earlier work on ﬂuency ( Jacoby & Dallas 1981 ) . For in - stance , ﬂuent processing that stems from previ - ous exposure can increase the perceived truth of repeated assertions ( Hertwig et al . 1997 ) and the perceived fame of names ( Jacoby et al . 1989 ) , and it is related to the mere exposure effect ( Zajonc 1968 ) . People’s sense of ﬂuency has been reported to predict the performance of stocks ( Alter & Oppenheimer 2006 ) . By formalizing the ﬂuency heuristic , Schooler & Hertwig ( 2005 ) clearly deﬁned the difference between the recognition and ﬂuency heuristics and contributed to the progress in replacing verbal labels with computational models . The ﬂuency heuristic is ecologically rational if the speed of recognition is correlated with the criterion , that is , the ﬂuency validity > 0 . 5 . Hertwig et al . ( 2008 ) reported that the validity of ﬂuency for predicting variables such as sales ﬁgures and wealth was always lower than recognition validity , although always above chance . Subsequently , they showed that people can accurately tell the difference between two recognition latencies if the difference exceeded 100 ms , and that across three environments , the mean proportions of inferences consistent with the ﬂuency heuristic were 74 % , 63 % , and 68 % , respectively . Accordance rates were as high as 82 % when differences in recognition latencies were large . Deriving the ﬂuency heuristic’s prediction for individual people and individual items is a strong test . Yet it is not how the impact of ﬂuency is commonly tested in social and cognitive psychology , where researchers tend to manipulate ﬂuency experimentally and observe the consequences . Fluency also plays a role when alternatives are not given ( as in a two - alternative choice ) but need to be generated from memory . Johnson & Raab ( 2003 ) proposed a variant of the ﬂuency heuristic when alternatives are sequentially re - trieved rather than simultaneously perceived : Take - the - ﬁrst heuristic : Choose the ﬁrst al - ternative that comes to mind . Johnson & Raab ( 2003 ) showed experienced handball players video sequences from a pro - fessional game and asked what they would have done—e . g . , pass the ball to the player at the left or take a shot . On average , the ﬁrst op - tion that came to mind was better than later options and when more time was given to in - spect the situation . This result was replicated for basketball players ( Hepler 2008 ) . Klein’s ( 2004 ) recognition - primed decision model for 462 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 expertise appears to be closely related to the take - the - ﬁrst heuristic . Neural Basis of Recognition and Evaluation Although a number of studies have shown that people do not automatically use the recogni - tion heuristic when it can be applied , it is less clear how this evaluation process can be mod - eled . A functional magnetic resonance imag - ing study tested whether the two processes , recognition and evaluation , can be separated on a neural basis ( Volz et al . 2006 ) . Participants were given two tasks : The ﬁrst involved only a recognition judgment ( “Have you ever heard of Modena ? Milan ? ” ) , while the second involved an inference in which participants could rely on the recognition heuristic ( “Which city has the larger population : Milan or Modena ? ” ) . For mere recognition judgments , activation in the precuneus , an area that is known from inde - pendent studies to respond to recognition con - ﬁdence ( Yonelinas et al . 2005 ) , was reported . In the inference task , precuneus activation was also observed , as predicted , and activation was detected in the anterior frontomedian cortex ( aFMC ) , which has been linked in earlier stud - ies to evaluative judgments and self - referential processing . The aFMC activation could repre - sent the neural basis of this evaluation of eco - logical rationality . Furthermore , the neural ev - idence suggests that the recognition heuristic may be relied upon by default , consistent with the ﬁnding that response times were consid - erably faster when participants’ inferences fol - lowed the recognition heuristic than when they did not ( Pachur & Hertwig 2006 , Volz et al . 2006 ) . ONE - REASON DECISION MAKING Whereas the recognition and ﬂuency heuris - tics base decisions on recognition information , other heuristics rely on recall . One class looks for only one “clever” cue and bases its decision on that cue alone . The hiatus heuristic is one One - reason decisions : a class of heuristics that bases judgments on one good reason only , ignoring other cues ( e . g . , take - the - best and hiatus heuristic ) example . A second class involves sequential search through cues , and it may search for more than one cue but also bases its deci - sion on only one . Examples include lexico - graphic rules ( Fishburn 1974 , Luce 1956 ) and elimination - by - aspect ( Tversky 1972 ) . These heuristics were originally developed for prefer - ences ; here , we focus on models of inferences . One - Clever - Cue Heuristics Many animal species appear to rely on a sin - gle “clever” cue for locating food , nest sites , or mates . For instance , in order to pursue a prey or a mate , bats , birds , and ﬁsh do not compute tra - jectories in three - dimensional space , but sim - ply maintain a constant optical angle between their target and themselves—a strategy called the gaze heuristic ( Gigerenzer 2007 , Shaffer et al . 2004 ) . In order to catch a ﬂy ball , baseball outﬁelders and cricket players rely on the same kind of heuristics rather than trying to compute the ball’s trajectory ( McLeod & Dienes 1996 ) . Similarly , to choose a mate , a peahen investi - gates only three or four of the peacocks dis - playing in a lek and chooses the one with the largest number of eyespots ( Petrie & Halliday 1994 ) . When are one - clever - cue heuristics ecolog - ically rational ? The answer is not entirely clear at this point in time , but candidates are envi - ronments where the variability of cue weights and redundancy is moderate to high and sam - ple size is small ( see Hogarth & Karelaia 2007 , Katsikopoulos et al . 2010 , McGrath 2008 ) . Geographic proﬁling . Thetaskofgeographic proﬁling is to predict where a serial criminal is most likely to live given the sites of the crimes . Typically , geographical proﬁling is performed by sophisticated statistical software programs , such as CrimeStat , that calculate a probabil - ity distribution across possible locations . Snook and colleagues ( 2005 ) were among the ﬁrst to challenge the “complexity equals accuracy” as - sumptions in the ﬁeld of proﬁling . They tested the circle heuristic , which predicts the crim - inal’s most likely location in the center of a www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 463 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 circle drawn through the two most distant sites of crime . It relies on one cue only , the largest distance . In a comparison with 10 other proﬁl - ing strategies , the heuristic predicted the loca - tions best . Complex proﬁling strategies appear tobecomemoreaccurateifthenumberofcrime locations known is nine or higher . Snook et al . ( 2004 ) taught two heuristics ( including the cir - cle heuristic ) to laypeople in criminology and reported that after a single session , laypeople became about as accurate in predicting offender locations as the CrimeStat algorithm . These re - sults led to a heated debate with proponents of optimization algorithms in proﬁling ( e . g . , Rossmo 2005 ) . Take - the - Best The take - the - best heuristic is a model of how people infer which of two alternatives has a higher value on a criterion , based on binary cue values retrieved from memory . For conve - nience , the cue value that signals a higher cri - terion value is 1 , and the other cue value is 0 . Take - the - best consists of three building blocks : 1 . Search rule : Search through cues in order of their validity . 2 . Stopping rule : Stop on ﬁnding the ﬁrst cue that discriminates between the alter - natives ( i . e . , cue values are 1 and 0 ) . 3 . Decision rule : Infer that the alternative with the positive cue value ( 1 ) has the higher criterion value . Take - the - best simpliﬁes decision making by stopping after the ﬁrst cue and ordering cues unconditionally according to validity v , which is given by : v = C / ( C + W ) , where C is the number of correct inferences when a cue discriminates , and W is the num - ber of wrong inferences . Alternative search rules such as success ( Martignon & Hoffrage 2002 , Newell et al . 2004 ) and discrimination ( Gigerenzer & Goldstein 1996 ) have been in - vestigated . Todd & Dieckmann ( 2005 ) studied alternative simple principles for learning cue orders . Karelaia ( 2006 ) showed that a “conﬁr - matory” stopping rule—stop after two cues are found that point to the same alternative—leads to remarkably robust results across varying cue orders , which is ecologically rational in situ - ations where the decision maker knows little about the validity of the cues . A striking discovery was that take - the - best can predict more accurately than linear multiple regression models ( Czerlinski et al . 1999 ) . It can even predict more accurately than complex nonlinear strategies . Figure 1 shows the predictive accuracy of an exemplar - based model ( nearest - neighbor classiﬁer ) , Quinlan’s decision - tree induction algorithm C4 . 5 , and classiﬁcation and regression trees ( CARTs ) , compared to take - the - best . In both tasks , and across most sample sizes , take - the - best achieves higher predictive accuracy than each of the three complex strategies ( Brighton & Gigerenzer 2011 ) . This is not to say that re - lying on one good reason is always better , but the result in Figure 1 is the most frequently ob - tained in a total of 20 environments . Note that CARTs have been designed to be robust against estimation error ( variance ) due to small samples and other factors . These complex algorithms can mimic the outcome of take - the - best in the sense that they are models that include take - the - best as a special case . Yet , although their greater ﬂexibility leads to better ﬁt of known data , more general models do not necessarily lead to better predictions of unknown data . As noted above , take - the - best orders cues unconditionally , unlike the other models in Figure 1 . Ordering cues conditionally , that is , taking their interdependencies into account , may seem a more rational strategy . In fact , in a small world where all cue validities are perfectly known , conditional validity leads to higher ( or at least equal ) accuracy than unconditional va - lidity ( Schmitt & Martignon 2006 ) . However , in large worlds as in Figure 1 , where the cue order needs to be estimated from samples , this no longer holds . If one makes take - the - best more sophisticated by ordering cues con - ditionally ( greedy take - the - best ) , the predic - tive accuracy drops to the level of the complex 464 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 A 0 20 40 60 80 50 55 60 65 70 75 City Populations Sample size , n M ean p r ed i c t i v e a cc u r a cy Take - the - best Nearest Neighbor C45CARTGreedy TTB B 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 50 55 60 65 70 75 Mammal Lifespans Sample size , n M ean p r ed i c t i v e a cc u r a cy Take - the - best Nearest Neighbor C45CARTGreedy TTB Figure 1 A competition between take - the - best and three well - known learning algorithms [ nearest neighbor classiﬁer , Quinlan’s decision - tree induction algorithm C4 . 5 , and classiﬁcation and regression tree ( CART ) ] , also including a greedy version of take - the - best ( TTB ) that orders cues by conditional validity instead of unconditional validity . Mean predictive accuracy in cross - validation is plotted as a function of the sample size of the training set . The two tasks were deciding ( A ) which of two German cities has more inhabitants , and ( B ) which of two mammal species lives longer on average ( Brighton & Gigerenzer 2011 ) . strategies ( Figure 1 ) . This suggests that the predictive power of take - the - best stems mostly from the search rule rather than the stopping rule . The ecological rationality of take - the - best has been studied in three different situations : ( a ) when the cue order is known ( Katsikopoulos & Martignon 2006 , Martignon & Hoffrage 2002 ) , ( b ) when error is introduced in that knowledge ( Hogarth & Karelaia 2007 ) , and ( c ) when the order of cues needs to be inferred from samples ( Brighton 2006 , Gigerenzer & Brighton 2009 ) . Taken together , these results suggest two structures of environments that take - the - best can exploit : moderate to high cue redundancy and moderate to high variability in cue weights . Many experimental studies asked the descriptive question whether take - the - best can predict people’s inferences ( e . g . , Br¨oder 2003 , Br¨oder & Gaissmaier 2007 , Br¨oder & Schiffer 2006 , Newell & Shanks 2003 , Rieskamp & Hoffrage 1999 ) . Dieckmann & Rieskamp ( 2007 ) ﬁrst showed that in environments with high redundancy , take - the - best is as accurate as and more frugal than na¨ıve Bayes ( a strategy that integrates all cues ) , and then experimentally demonstrated that in high - redundancy environments , take - the - best pre - dicted participants’ judgments best , whereas in low - redundancy environments , compensatory strategies predicted best , indicating adaptive strategy selection . Rieskamp & Otto ( 2006 ) showed that in an environment with high vari - ability of cue validities , judgments consistent with take - the - best increased over experimental trials from 28 % to 71 % , whereas in an envi - ronment with low variability , they decreased to 12 % . Br¨oder ( 2003 ) reported similar selection of take - the - best dependent on the variability or cue validities . In several experiments , individuals classiﬁed as take - the - best users for tasks where the heuristic is ecologically rational showed higher IQs than those who were classi - ﬁed as compensatory decision makers , suggest - ingthatcognitivecapacityasmeasuredbyIQ“is not consumed by strategy execution , but rather by strategy selection” ( Br¨oder & Newell 2008 , p . 209 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 465 Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Bergert & Nosofsky ( 2007 ) formulated a stochastic version of take - the - best , tested it against a weighted additive model at the individual level , and concluded that the vast majority of participants adopted the take - the - best heuristic . Comparing take - the - best with both weighted additive and exemplar models of categorization , Nosofsky & Bergert ( 2007 ) found that most participants did not use an exemplar - based strategy but instead followed the response time predictions of take - the - best . Br¨oder & Gaissmaier ( 2007 ) analyzed ﬁve pub - lished experiments and one new experiment , and reported that in all instances when decision outcomes indicated the use of take - the - best , decision times increased monotonically with the number of cues that had to be searched in memory , as predicted by take - the - best’s search and stopping rules . Taken together , these stud - ies indicate systematic individual differences in strategy use and adaptive use of take - the - best . Garc´ıa - Retamero & Dhami ( 2009 ) tested how policemen , professional burglars , and laypeople infer which of two residential prop - erties is more likely to be burgled . Both ex - pert groups’ inferences were best modeled by take - the - best , and laypeople’s inferences by a weighted additive rule . The latter may reﬂect that laypeople need to explore all the infor - mation , whereas experts know what is relevant , consistent with ﬁndings of the literature on ex - pertise ( Ericsson et al . 2007 , Reyna & Lloyd 2006 , Shanteau 1992 ) . Concerns were raised by Juslin & Persson ( 2002 ) that take - the - best is not so simple after all but requires complex computations for ordering the cues ; Dougherty et al . ( 2008 ) and Newell ( 2005 ) voiced similar concerns . First , it is true that estimating validity order can sometimes be nontrivial , yet it is simpler than estimating other kinds of weights such as regression weights . Second , people estimate order from samples rather than by calculating the “true” order from perfect knowledge about the entire population , as Juslin and Persson as - sumed . Even with minute sample sizes of two to ten—resulting in estimated orders that deviate from the true order—take - the - best predicted more accurately than multiple regression when both were provided with continuous cue values ( Katsikopoulos et al . 2010 ) . Finally , a person does not need to learn cue orders individually but instead can learn from others , as through teaching and imitation ( Gigerenzer et al . 2008 ) . Consumer choice . How do consumers decide which product to buy among an ever - increasing assortment on the Internet or on supermarket shelves ? The classical methodology to answer this question has been conjoint analysis , which assumes a weighted linear combination of fea - tures or cues . When John Hauser , a propo - nent of conjoint analysis , began to test mod - els of heuristics , he found to his surprise that sequential heuristics predict consumer choices well ( Hauser et al . 2009 ) . Examples are deci - sions between computers ( Kohli & Jedidi 2007 ) and smartphones ( Yee et al . 2007 ) . In particu - lar , heuristics are important early in the deci - sion process to form a consideration set , which consists of eliminating most products from fur - ther consideration . Once the consideration set is formed , consumers evaluate the remaining options more carefully ( Gaskin et al . 2007 ; see also Reisen et al . 2008 ) . Within their considera - tion set of potential suppliers , they then appear to trade off price and reliability to reach their ﬁnal choice . Literature search . How should an organi - zation design a search algorithm for priori - tizing literature searches from the PsycINFO database ? Leeandcolleagues ( 2002 ) engineered two methods for identifying articles relevant to a given topic of interest ( e . g . , eyewitness testimony ) , one a variant of take - the - best , the other a Bayesian model using all available in - formation . Lee et al . tested both methods on ten actual literature searches and measured the methods’ performances against effort ( i . e . , the proportion of the articles read by the user ) and accuracy ( i . e . , proportion of relevant arti - cles found ) . The variant of take - the - best was as good as or better than the Bayesian model , par - ticularly in searches in which the proportion of relevant articles was small . 466 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Fast - and - Frugal Trees One way to model classiﬁcation is in terms of trees . For instance , Bayes’ rule can be rep - resented as a tree with 2 m leaves , where m is the number of binary cues or attributes . Natural frequencies provide such a represen - tation . Yet when the number of cues grows , a Bayesian analysis—with or without natu - ral frequencies—becomes computationally in - tractable or fraught with estimation error be - cause one typically has too few data points for the thousands of leaves of such a gigantic tree . A fast - and - frugal tree has only m + 1 leaves and thus is likely more robust . It has building blocks similar to take - the - best ( Martignon et al . 2003 ) : 1 . Search rule : Search through cues in a pre - determined order . 2 . Stopping rule : Stop search as soon as a cue leads to an exit . 3 . Decision rule : Classify the object accordingly . Fast - and - frugal trees are used by experts in many ﬁelds , from emergency screening to bail de - cisions ( see Figure 2 ) . Martignon et al . ( 2008 ) tested the accuracy of fast - and - frugal trees in 30 classiﬁcation problems from ﬁelds such as medicine , sports , and economics . They re - ported that complex benchmark strategies in - cluding logistic regression excelled in data ﬁt - ting , but fast - and - frugal trees were close or identical to these strategies in their predictive accuracy . Emergency medicine . When patients ar - rive at the hospital with severe chest pain , emergency physicians have to decide quickly whether they suffer from acute ischemic heart disease and should be assigned to the inten - sive coronary care unit ( ICU ) . In a Michigan hospital , doctors preferred to err on what they believed was the safe side by sending about 90 % of the patients to the ICU , although only about 25 % of these actually had a myocardial Figure 2 Fast - and - frugal trees for medical and legal decisions . The tree on the left prescribes how emergency physicians can detect acute ischemic heart disease . It only asks up to three yes / no questions , namely whether the patient’s electrocardiogram shows a certain anomaly ( “ST segment changes” ) , whether chest pain is the patient’s primary complaint , and whether there is any other factor ( Green & Mehr 1997 ) . The tree on the right describes how magistrates at a London court decided whether to bail a defendant or to react punitively by imposing conditions such as curfew or imprisonment . The logic is defensive and “passes the buck . ” The tree predicted 92 % of bail decisions correctly ( Dhami 2003 ) . Abbreviations : MI , myocardial infarction ; N . A . , not applicable ; NTG , nitroglycerin ; T , T - waves with peaking or inversion . www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 467 Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 infarction ( Green & Mehr 1997 ) . The result was an overly crowded ICU , a decrease in qual - ity of care , an increase in cost , and a risk of seri - ousinfectionamongthosewhowereincorrectly assigned . Something had to be done . Green & Mehr ( 1997 ) tried two solutions : ( a ) a lo - gistic regression , the Heart Disease Predictive Instrument ( HDPI ) , and ( b ) a fast - and - frugal tree . To use the HDPI , doctors received a chart with some 50 probabilities , checked the pres - ence and absence of symptoms , and inserted the relevant probabilities into a pocket calculator . The fast - and - frugal tree ignored all probabil - ities and asked only a few yes - or - no questions ( Figure 2 ) . Ultimately , the tree was more accu - rate in predicting actual heart attacks than the HDPI : It sent fewer patients who suffered from a heart attack wrongly into a regular bed and also nearly halved physicians’ high false - alarm rate . Last but not least , the tree was transparent , easy to memorize , and easy to modify , and was accepted by physicians who disliked relying on a logistic regression they barely understood . Easy memorization is an important feature of fast - and - frugal trees , particularly in emer - gency situations . After the terrorist attacks on September 11 , 2001 , START ( Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment ; Cook 2001 ) helped paramedics to quickly classify victims into two major categories : those who needed medical treatment immediately and those whose treat - ment could be delayed . A tree with only two cues—age and duration of fever—was devel - oped to decide upon macrolide prescription in young children with community - acquired pneumonia ( Fischer et al . 2002 ) . This tree was slightly less accurate than a scoring system based on logistic regression ( 72 % versus 75 % ) , but it does not require any expensive technol - ogy and thus can be applied to millions of chil - dren worldwide who would otherwise not have access to healthcare . How to model physicians’ thinking ? Tak - ing for granted that physicians use heuristics for diagnosing patients , the medical commu - nity quickly adopted the heuristics - and - biases view and has left it mainly unrevised as of today ( Croskerry 2009 ) . For instance , Elstein ( 1999 ) described heuristics as “mental shortcuts com - monly used in decision making that can lead to faulty reasoning or conclusions” ( p . 791 ) and blamed them for many errors in clinical rea - soning . Some researchers , however , recognize theirpotentialtoimprovedecisions . McDonald ( 1996 ) , for one , wrote , “admitting the role of heuristics confers no shame” ( p . 56 ) . Rather , the goal should be to formalize and understand heuristics so that their use can be effectively taught , which could lead to less practice varia - tion and more efﬁcient medical care . “The next frontier will involve fast and frugal heuristics ; rules for patients and clinicians alike” ( Elwyn et al . 2001 , p . 358 ) . For diagnosis , which is a form of classiﬁ - cation , fast - and - frugal trees potentially model how physicians make decisions . For treatment choice , all heuristics described above are po - tential models . Both fast - and - frugal trees and other heuristics differ from traditional models of medical decision making , such as logistic regression for classiﬁcation and expected utility maximization for choice . Dhami & Harries ( 2001 ) compared a fast - and - frugal tree ( “matching heuristic” ) to a linear regression model on general practitioners’ decisions to prescribe lipid - lowering drugs for a set of hypothetical patients . Both models ﬁtted prescription decisions equally well , but the simple tree relied on less information . Similar results were obtained by Smith & Gilhooly ( 2006 ) and Backlund et al . ( 2009 ) . These studies reported only ﬁtting—not predicting— physicians’ judgments , which is a limitation . More direct evidence comes from the routine use of fast - and - frugal trees by physicians in cancer screening and HIV tests . Bail decisions . Heuristics matter in the law in multiple respects . They play a role in the mak - ing of law ( Haidt et al . 2006 ) as well as in lit - igation ( Hastie & Wittenbrink 2006 ) . In both domains , there has been debate whether heuris - tics are a problem or a solution ( Gigerenzer & Engel 2006 ) . 468 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 One of the initial decisions of the legal sys - tem is whether to bail a defendant uncondi - tionally or to react punitively by conditions such as curfew or imprisonment . In England and Wales , around two million bail decisions are made every year by benches of two or three magistrates , 99 . 9 % of whom are mem - bers of the local community without legal training . How do they make these decisions ? When magistrates were interviewed , they gen - erally responded that they thoroughly exam - ined and weighed all information in a complex way ( Dhami & Ayton 2001 ) . However , when Dhami ( 2003 ) observed several hundreds of tri - als in two London courts , she found that the average time magistrates spent on a case was 6 to 10 minutes and that their decisions could be predicted better with a fast - and - frugal tree ( “matching heuristic” ) than with weighting and adding all information ( Figure 2 ) . The logic of the tree appears to be to “pass the buck , ” because it copies the punitive decisions of the prosecution , a previous court , or the police . It violates due process because it ignores rel - evant information about the defendant . In the two courts , the fast - and - frugal trees predicted 92 % and 85 % of all decisions correctly ( cross - validation ) , compared to 86 % and 73 % by a weightedadditivemodelthatwouldcorrespond to due process and what magistrates responded in the interviews . TRADE - OFF HEURISTICS Unlike recognition - based and one - reason deci - sions , the third class of heuristics weights cues oralternativesequallyandthusmakestrade - offs ( compensatory strategies ) . Tallying Whereas take - the - best ignores cues ( but in - cludes a simple form of weighting cues by or - dering them ) , tallying ignores weights , weight - ing all cues equally . It entails simply counting the number of cues favoring one alternative in comparison to others . Trade - offs : a class of heuristics that weights all cues or alternatives equally and thus makes trade - offs ( e . g . , tallying and 1 / N ) 1 . Search rule : Search through cues in any order . 2 . Stopping rule : Stop search after m out of a total of M cues ( with 1 < m ≤ M ) . If the number of positive cues is the same for both alternatives , search for another cue . If no more cues are found , guess . 3 . Decision rule : Decide for the alternative that is favored by more cues . Dawes ( 1979 ; Dawes & Corrigan 1974 ) showed that tallying was about as accurate as multiple regression and sometimes even better . Inamoreextensivetestacross20environments , Czerlinski et al . ( 1999 ) demonstrated that tal - lying had , on average , a higher predictive accu - racy than multiple regression . The challenge is to figure out when this is the case . Einhorn & Hogarth ( 1975 ) found that unit - weight models were successful in comparison to multiple regression when the ratio of alternatives to cues was 10 or smaller , the linear predictability of the criterion was small ( R 2 ≤ 0 . 5 ) , and cues were highly redundant . Relatively few studies have identiﬁed condi - tions under which people would use a tally - ing strategy . Interestingly , it seems that more people prefer to dispense with particular cues ( as in one - reason decision making ) than with cue order or weights ( Br¨oder & Schiffer 2003 , Rieskamp & Hoffrage 2008 ; but see Wang 2008 ) . One reason for the relatively low preva - lence of tallying could be that these studies used only few cues , typically four or ﬁve . Below we provide two illustrations of the prescriptive use of tallying in institutions ( for more , see Astebro & Elhedhli 2006 , Graefe & Armstrong 2009 , Lichtman 2008 , Wang 2008 ) . Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( MRI ) or simple bedside rules ? There are about 2 . 6 million emergency room visits for dizzi - ness or vertigo in the United States every year ( Kattah et al . 2009 ) . The challenging task for the emergency physician is to detect the rare cases where dizziness is due to a dangerous brainstem or cerebellar stroke . Frontline mis - diagnosis of strokes happens in about 35 % of the cases . One solution to this challenge couldbetechnology . GettinganearlyMRIwith www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 469 Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 diffusion - weighted imaging takes 5 to 10 min - utes plus several hours of waiting time , costs more than $ 1 , 000 , and is not readily available everywhere . However , Kattah et al . ( 2009 ) de - veloped a simple bedside eye exam that actu - ally outperforms MRI and takes only about one minute : It consists of three tests and raises an alarm if at least one indicates a stroke . This simple tallying rule correctly detected 100 % of those patients who actually had a stroke ( sen - sitivity ) , whereas an early MRI only detected 88 % . Out of 25 patients who did not have a stroke , the bedside exam raised a false alarm in onlyonecase ( i . e . , 4 % falsepositiverate = 96 % speciﬁcity ) . Even though the MRI did not raise anyfalsealarms , thebedsideexamseemsprefer - able in total , given that misses are more severe than false alarms and that it is faster , cheaper , and universally applicable . Avoiding avalanche accidents . Hikers and skiers need to know when avalanches could oc - cur . The obvious clues method is a tallying heuristic that checks how many out of seven cues have been observed en route or on the slope that is evaluated ( McCammon & H¨ageli 2007 ) . These cues include whether there has been an avalanche in the past 48 hours and whether there is liquid water present on the snow surface as a result of recent sudden warm - ing . When more than three of these cues are present on a given slope , the situation should be considered dangerous . With this simple tal - lying strategy , 92 % of the historical accidents ( where the method would have been applicable ) could have been prevented . Mapping Model How do people arrive at quantitative estimates based on cues ? The mapping model assumes that people tally the number of relevant cues with an object’s positive values ( von Helversen & Rieskamp 2008 ) . The estimate is the median criterion value of objects with the same number of positive cues . The mapping model captured people’s judgment better than a linear regres - sion and an exemplar model when the criterion values followed a skewed distribution . Sentencing decision . In the adversarial U . S . legalsystem , thevastmajorityofcasesareclosed by plea bargaining , where the prosecution and defense negotiate a sentence , which is then rat - iﬁed by a judge . In contrast , in Germany and many other countries , plea bargaining before a casegoestocourtisanexceptionratherthanthe rule . Here , thejudgehastodetermineanappro - priate sentence proportional to the offender’s guilt , within the range of the minimum and maximum sentence speciﬁed for each offense . The single most important factor inﬂuencing judges’ decisions is the prosecution’s sentenc - ing recommendation . How should the prose - cutionmakeitsrecommendation ? TheGerman penal code lists over 20 factors to consider . The legal literature recommends a three - step strat - egy : Determine ﬁrst all relevant factors and the direction of their effect on the sentence ( aggra - vating or mitigating ) , then weight these by their importance , and add them up to determine the sentence . Von Helversen & Rieskamp ( 2009 ) analyzed trial records of sentencing and tested ﬁve models of how sentencing decisions have been made in theft , fraud , and forgery , includ - ing a linear regression model . The best predic - tions of actual sentences were obtained by the mapping model , a heuristic model of quantita - tive estimation , based on a simple tallying rule described above . As von Helversen & Rieskamp ( 2009 ) pointed out , this result “provides further evidence that legal decision makers rely heav - ily on simple decision heuristics . . . and suggests thatelicitingtheseemployedheuristicsisanim - portant step in understanding and improving legal decision making” ( pp . 389 – 390 ) . 1 / N Rule Another variant of the equal weighting princi - ple is the 1 / N rule , which is a simple heuristic for the allocation of resources ( time , money ) to N alternatives : 1 / N rule : Allocate resources equally to each of N alternatives . This rule is also known as the equality heuristic ( Messick 1993 ) . Sharing an amount 470 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 of money equally is the modal response in the one - shot ultimatum game for adults and also the most frequent split in children’s group de - cisions , contrary to the predictions of game the - ory ( Takezawa et al . 2006 ) . Investment . When deciding how to allocate ﬁnancial resources among N options , some in - dividuals rely on the 1 / N rule ( Benartzi & Thaler 2001 ) , which allocates ﬁnancial re - sources equally across all alternatives . The 1 / N rule was compared to 14 optimizing mod - els , including a Nobel Prize – winning model , Markowitz’s mean - variance portfolio , in seven investment problems ( DeMiguel et al . 2009 ) . To estimate the models’ parameters , each opti - mizing strategy received 10 years of stock data and then had to predict the next month’s per - formanceonthisbasis . Thesameprocedurewas repeated , with a moving window , for the next month , and so forth , until no data were left . Note that 1 / N does not have any free parame - ters that need to be estimated . Nevertheless , it came out ﬁrst on certainty equivalent returns , second on turnover , and ﬁfth on the Sharpe ra - tio . None of the complex optimizing models could consistently beat it . SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE According to the social intelligence hypothesis , also called the Machiavellian intelligence hy - pothesis ( Whiten & Byrne 1997 ) , highly so - cial species such as humans and other social primates should be intellectually superior to less social ones because the social environ - ment is more complex , less predictable , and moreintellectuallychallenging . InHumphrey’s ( 1976 / 1988 ) words , social primates “must be able to calculate the consequences of their own behavior , to calculate the likely behaviours of others , to calculate the balance of advan - tage and loss” ( p . 19 ) . For the sake of argu - ment , let us assume that the social world is indeed more complex and unpredictable than the nonsocial one . Would social intelligence thereforerequiremorecomplexcognition ? Not necessarily , according to the following two hy - potheses ( Hertwig & Herzog 2009 ) : 1 . Social intelligence does not require com - plex mental calculation ; it also works with heuristics . 2 . The same heuristics that underlie nonso - cial decision making also apply to social decisions ( but not vice versa ) . The justiﬁcation for hypothesis 1 is the same as for complex nonsocial problems : The more unpredictable a situation is , the more infor - mation needs to be ignored to predict the fu - ture . One reason for hypothesis 2 is that the distinction between social and nonsocial is a common oversimpliﬁcation in the ﬁrst place . Nevertheless , for the purpose of this review , we distinguish two meanings of social : whether the input into a strategy is social informa - tion ( e . g . , when imitating the behavior of a peer ) or not ( e . g . , features of digital cameras ) , and whether the task is a game against na - ture or a social game involving other humans ( Hertwig et al . 2011 ) . The goals of social intel - ligence go beyond accuracy , frugality , and mak - ing fast decisions . They include transparency , group loyalty , and accountability ( Lerner & Tetlock 1999 ) . Consistent with hypothesis 2 , heuristics from all three classes discussed above have been investigated in social situations . Below are a few examples . Recognition - Based Decisions Reimer & Katsikopoulos ( 2004 ) ﬁrst showed analytically that less - is - more effects are larger in group decisions than in individual decisions and subsequently demonstrated this effect em - pirically in an experiment in which another fascinating phenomenon emerged . Consider a group of three in which one member recog - nized only city a while the other two members recognized both cities a and b and individually chose b as the larger one . The majority rule predicts that b would always be selected , yet in 59 % of the cases , the ﬁnal group decision was a , following the one who had not heard of b . www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 471 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 One - Reason Decision Making As mentioned above , the behavior of most peo - ple in the one - shot ultimatum game is in - consistent with the classical economic predic - tions . Most researchers nevertheless retained the utility - maximizing framework and added free parameters for other - regarding disposi - tions ( e . g . , Fehr & Schmidt 1999 ) . In contrast , Rubinstein ( 2003 ) called for a radical change , “to open the black box of decision making , and come up with some completely new and fresh modeling devices” ( p . 1215 ) . Fischbacher and colleagues ( 2011 ) did so and modeled the in - dividual differences observed in the ultimatum game by fast - and - frugal trees of different sizes , involving one to four cues . The number of cues predicted how long decisions took . Trade - Off Heuristics Many parents try to divide their time every day between their N children equally by 1 / N . If par - ents have only two children , 1 / N will attain the long - term goal of providing each child with as much time as the other . But if there are three or more children ( excepting multiple births ) , only the ﬁrst - born and last - born have exclusive time with the parents , while the middle - borns have to share with their siblings throughout their childhood and thus end up receiving less time in total . The simple 1 / N rule predicts a complex pattern of care time for each child , a pattern observed in a survey of 1 , 296 families ( Hertwig et al . 2002 ) . This result illustrates that a heuris - tic and its goal ( fair division during childhood ) are not the same—the environment has the last word . The majority rule is a second example of a tallying rule applied to group decisions ; it also deﬁnes democratic voting systems ( Hastie & Kameda 2005 ) . Social Heuristics Although the heuristics discussed so far can be fed with both social and nonsocial information , there are genuinely social heuristics designed exclusively for social information . Examples include imitation heuristics , tit - for - tat , the social - circle heuristic , and averaging the judg - ments of others to exploit the “wisdom of crowds” ( Hertwig & Herzog 2009 ) . Imitate - the - successful , for instance , speeds up learn - ing of cue orders and can ﬁnd orders that excel take - the - best’s validity order ( Garcia - Retamero et al . 2009 ) . Social heuristics prove particularly helpful in situations in which the actor has little knowledge . The classic example is that of Francis Galton , who visited a livestock fair where villagers estimated the weight of an ox and was surprised to ﬁnd that their median and mean average estimates were only 9 and 1 pounds , respectively , off the actual weight of 1198 pounds ( Galton 1907 ) . A peculiar social rule is the default heuristic : “If there is a default , do nothing about it . ” Defaults are set by institutions and act as im - plicit recommendations ( Johnson & Goldstein 2003 ) . Every year , an estimated 5 , 000 Americans and 1 , 000 Germans die while wait - ing for a suitable organ donor . Although most citizens profess that they approve of organ donation , relatively few sign a donor card : only about 28 % and 12 % in the United States and Germany , respectively . In contrast , 99 . 9 % of the French and Austrians are potential donors . These striking differences can be explained by the default heuristic . In explicit - consent societies such as Germany , the law prescribes that nobody is a donor unless one opts in . In presumed - consent societies such as France , the default is that everyone is a donor unless one opts out . Although most people appear to fol - low the same heuristic , the result is drastically different because the legal environment differs . Very few studies use large - scale demo - graphic data to test social heuristics . For in - stance , marriagepatternsarestudiedbydemog - raphers without much attention to the social heuristics that generate these , and vice versa . Todd and colleagues ( 2005 ) had the ingenious methodological insight that the aggregate de - mographic data rule out certain heuristics and can be used to test various satisﬁcing strategies for mate choice . 472 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Moral Behavior Although moral behavior has long been at - tributed to conscious reﬂection , Haidt & Bjorklund ( 2008 ) argued that reasons are typi - cally used to justify behavior after the fact and that the causes are mostly unconscious or in - tuitive . Gigerenzer ( 2010 ) proposed that these unconscious causes are often social heuristics , such as imitating the behavior of peers in or - der to gain acceptance by the group . Note that one and the same social heuristic can lead to be - havior evaluated as moral or immoral , such as when imitating benevolent or malevolent peer behavior . This perspective on moral behavior is different from assuming that people have inter - nalized speciﬁc moral rules such as don’t steal and don’t kill . Moral behavior has been related to “sacred values” ( Fiske & Tetlock 1997 ) . If one under - stands sacred values as top cues in lexicographic heuristics , decisionsbetweenalternativeswhere a sacred value conﬂicts with a secular value ( e . g . , life versus money ) should be faster and eas - ier than when two sacred values ( e . g . , one life versus another ) conﬂict with each other , as re - portedbyHanselmann & Tanner ( 2008 ) . Baron & Ritov ( 2009 ) argued that , from a utilitarian perspective , this form of one - reason decision making can cause great problems for policy de - cisions as it could prevent trade - offs for the greater good . In the same vein , Sunstein ( 2005 ) asserted that moral heuristics can lead to great error , but added that we would not necessarily “be better off without them . On the contrary , such heuristics might well produce better re - sults , fromthemoralpointofview , thanthefea - sible alternatives” ( p . 535 ) . Cosmides & Tooby ( 2006 ) located the origins of moral heuristics in our ancestral world of tiny bands of individu - als . An example of a moral heuristic is an intu - itive search rule that looks for information that could reveal whether one has been cheated in a social contract . This heuristic correctly pre - dicts when information search in the Wason selection task contradicts propositional logic ( Gigerenzer 2000 ) . CONCLUSIONS We began this review with the observation that the three major tools for modeling decision making—logic , statistics , and heuristics—have not been treated equally , with each suited to a particular kind of problem . Instead , in psychol - ogy , heuristics became associated with errors and contrasted with logical and statistical rules that were believed to deﬁne rational thinking in all situations . Yet this view has been questioned for uncertain , large worlds where the assump - tions of rational models are not met . We re - viewed studies on decisions by individuals and institutions , including business , medical , and legal decision making , that show that heuristics canoftenbemoreaccuratethancomplex“ratio - nal” strategies . This puts heuristic on a par with statistical methods and emphasizes a new eco - logical question : In what environment does a given strategy ( heuristic or otherwise ) succeed ? This insight adds a prescriptive research pro - gram to that of the existing descriptive research program on heuristics . Pioneers such as Dawes , Hogarth , and Makridakis demonstrated years ago that simple forecasting methods can often predict better than standard statistical proce - dures ; as James March , one of the most inﬂuen - tial researchers in organizational decision mak - ing , put it more than 30 years ago , “If behavior that apparently deviates from standard proce - dures of calculated rationality can be shown to be intelligent , then it can plausibly be argued that models of calculated rationality are deﬁ - cient not only as descriptors of human behavior but also as guides to intelligent choice” ( 1978 , p . 593 ) . Nonetheless , a large community contin - ues to routinely model behavior with com - plex statistical procedures without testing these against simple rules . Yet a fundamental change in thinking about human and animal behav - ior seems to be occurring . Mathematical biol - ogists McNamara & Houston ( 2009 ) described this shift : “Although behavioral ecologists have built complex models of optimal behavior in simple environments , we argue that they need www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 473 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 to focus on simple mechanisms that perform well in complex environments” ( p . 675 ) . Formal models also help to answer the de - scriptive question of when people rely on what heuristic . As for the prescriptive question , a similar conﬂict is waged between those who ar - gue in favor of classical statistical techniques as models of the mind ( typically weighting and adding of all information ) and those who argue that many people consistently rely on heuristics . The best way to decide is compar - ative testing ; the difﬁculty is to understand the individual differences reported in most experiments . With all these new insights , we are left with big challenges . How should we develop a systematic theory of the building blocks of heuristics and the core capacities as well as environmental structures that these exploit ? To what extent can the emerging science of heuristic decision making provide a unifying framework for the study of the mind ? One way to proceed is theory integration , that is , to connect the simple heuristics framework with other theoretical frameworks in psychol - ogy . This is already happening with ACT - R ( Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational ) theory ( Schooler & Hertwig 2005 ) , signal detection theory ( Luan et al . 2010 , Pleskac 2007 ) , and the heuristics - and - biases program ( Read & Grushka - Cockayne 2010 ) . In physics , theory integration , such as quantum theory and relativity theory , is a primary goal . In psychology , theory integration is not accorded the importance it deserves ; instead , the ﬁeld still resembles a colorful loose patchwork . We envision that the study of cognitive heuristics may help to sew some of the pieces together . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Heuristics can be more accurate than more complex strategies even though they process less information ( less - is - more effects ) . 2 . A heuristic is not good or bad , rational or irrational ; its accuracy depends on the structure of the environment ( ecological rationality ) . 3 . Heuristics are embodied and situated in the sense that they exploit core capacities of the brain and their success depends on the structure of the environment . They provide an alternative to stable traits , attitudes , preferences , and other internal explanations of behavior . 4 . With sufﬁcient experience , people learn to select proper heuristics from their adaptive toolbox . 5 . Usually , thesameheuristiccanbeusedbothconsciouslyandunconsciously , forinferences and preferences , and underlies social as well as nonsocial intelligence . 6 . Decision making in organizations typically involves heuristics because the conditions for rational models rarely hold in an uncertain world . FUTURE ISSUES 1 . How do people learn , individually or socially , to use heuristics in an adaptive way ? And what prevents them from doing so ? ( For a start : Rieskamp & Otto 2006 ) 2 . Doesintelligencemeanknowingwhentoselectwhichstrategyfromtheadaptivetoolbox ? ( For a start : Br¨oder & Newell 2008 ) 474 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 3 . Are gut feelings based on heuristics , and if so , on which ? ( For a start : Gigerenzer 2007 ) 4 . To what extent is moral ( and immoral ) behavior guided by social heuristics ? ( For a start : Gigerenzer 2010 , Sunstein 2005 ) 5 . How does the content of the adaptive toolbox change over the life span and between cultures ? ( For a start : Mata et al . 2007 ) 6 . Can people adapt the use of heuristics to idiosyncrasies in their core capacities , such as differences in memory span , but also differences in knowledge ? ( For a start : Br¨oder & Gaissmaier 2007 ) 7 . Which heuristics do humans share with which animals , and why ? ( For a start : Hutchinson & Gigerenzer 2005 and commentaries ) 8 . Finally , the overarching goal : Develop a systematic theory of the building blocks of cog - nitive heuristics ( such as search , stopping , and decision rules ) anchored in core capacities and the social and physical structures they exploit . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Mirta Galesic , Sebastian Hafenbr¨adl , Ralph Hertwig , Ulrich Hoffrage , Konstantinos Katsikopoulos , Julian N . Marewski , and Lael J . Schooler for helpful comments , and Rona Unrau for editing the manuscript . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . LITERATURE CITED Alter AL , Oppenheimer DM . 2006 . Predicting short - term stock ﬂuctuations by using processing ﬂuency . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 9369 – 72 Astebro T , Elhedhli S . 2006 . The effectiveness of simple decision heuristics : forecasting commercial success for early - stage ventures . Manage . Sci . 52 : 395 – 409 Attneave E . 1953 . Psychological probability as a function of experienced frequency . J . Exp . Psychol . 46 : 81 – 86 Ayton P , Fischer I . 2004 . The hot hand fallacy and the gambler’s fallacy : two faces of subjective randomness ? Mem . Cogn . 32 : 1369 – 78 Backlund LG , Bring J , Skaner Y , Strender L - E , Montgomery H . 2009 . Improving fast and frugal in relation to regression analysis : test of 3 models for medical decision making . Med . Decis . Making 29 : 140 – 48 Baron J , Ritov I . 2009 . Protected values and omission bias as deontological judgments . In The Psychology of Learning and Motivation . Vol . 50 : Moral Judgment and Decision Making , ed . DM Bartels , CW Bauman , LJ Skitka , DL Medin , pp . 133 – 67 . San Diego , CA : Academic Baucells M , Carrasco JA , Hogarth RM . 2008 . Cumulative dominance and heuristic performance in binary multiattribute choice . Oper . Res . 56 : 1289 – 304 Benartzi S , Thaler RH . 2001 . Na¨ıve diversiﬁcation strategies in deﬁned contribution saving plans . Am . Econ . Rev . 91 : 79 – 98 Bergert FB , Nosofsky RM . 2007 . A response - time approach to comparing generalized rational and take - the - best models of decision making . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 331 : 107 – 29 Binmore K . 2009 . Rational Decisions . Princeton , NJ : Princeton Univ . Press www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 475 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Boyd M . 2001 . On ignorance , intuition and investing : a bear market test of the recognition heuristic . J . Psychol . Finan . Market . 2 : 150 – 56 Brighton H . 2006 . Robust inference with simplecognitive models . In Between a Rock and a Hard Place : Cognitive Science Principles Meet AI - Hard Problems . Papers from the AAAI Spring Symposium ( AAAI Tech . Rep . No . SS - 06 – 03 ) , ed . C Lebiere , B Wray , pp . 17 – 22 . Menlo Park , CA : AAAI Press Brighton H , Gigerenzer G . 2008 . Bayesian brains and cognitive mechanisms : harmony or dissonance ? In The Probabilistic Mind : Prospects for Bayesian Cognitive Science , ed . N Chater , M Oaksford , pp . 189 – 208 . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Brighton H , Gigerenzer G . 2011 . How heuristics exploit uncertainty . In Ecological Rationality : Intelligence in the World , ed . PM Todd , G Gigerenzer , ABC Res . Group . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . In press Br¨oder A . 2003 . Decision making with the “adaptive toolbox” : inﬂuence of environmental structure , intelli - gence , and working memory load . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 29 : 611 – 25 Br¨oder A , Gaissmaier W . 2007 . Sequential processing of cues in memory - based multi - attribute decisions . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 14 : 895 – 900 Br¨oder A , Newell BR . 2008 . Challenging some common beliefs : empirical work within the adaptive toolbox metaphor . Judgm . Decis . Mak . 3 : 205 – 14 Br¨oder A , Schiffer S . 2003 . Take the best versus simultaneous feature matching : probabilistic inferences from memory and effects of representation format . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 132 : 277 – 93 Br¨oder A , Schiffer S . 2006 . Stimulus format and working memory in fast and frugal strategy selection . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 19 : 361 – 80 Br¨oder A , Sch¨utz J . 2009 . Recognition ROCs are curvilinear—or are they ? On premature arguments against the two - high - threshold model of recognition . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 35 : 587 – 606 Chater N , Oaksford M , Nakisa R , Redington M . 2003 . Fast , frugal and rational : how rational norms explain behavior . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 90 : 63 – 86 CoatesSL , ButlerLT , BerryDC . 2004 . Implicitmemory : aprimeexampleforbrandconsiderationandchoice . Appl . Cogn . Psychol . 18 : 1195 – 211 Cook L . 2001 . The World Trade Center attack . The paramedic response : an insider’s view . Crit . Care 5 : 301 – 3 Cosmides L , Tooby J . 2006 . Evolutionary psychology , moral heuristics , and the law . See Gigerenzer & Engel 2006 , pp . 175 – 205 Croskerry P . 2009 . A universal model of diagnostic reasoning . Acad . Med . 84 : 1022 – 28 Czerlinski J , Gigerenzer G , Goldstein DG . 1999 . How good are simple heuristics ? See Gigerenzer et al . 1999 , pp . 97 – 118 Dawes RM . 1979 . The robust beauty of improper linear models in decision making . Am . Psychol . 34 : 571 – 82 Dawes RM , Corrigan B . 1974 . Linear models in decision making . Psychol . Bull . 81 : 95 – 106 DeMiguel V , Garlappi L , Uppal R . 2009 . Optimal versus naive diversiﬁcation : How inefﬁcient is the 1 / N portfolio strategy ? Rev . Financ . Stud . 22 : 1915 – 53 Dhami MK . 2003 . Psychological models of professional decision making . Psychol . Sci . 14 : 175 – 80 Dhami MK , Ayton P . 2001 . Bailing and jailing the fast and frugal way . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 14 : 141 – 68 Dhami MK , Harries C . 2001 . Fast and frugal versus regression models of human judgment . Think . Reasoning 7 : 5 – 27 Dieckmann A , Rieskamp J . 2007 . The inﬂuence of information redundancy on probabilistic inferences . Mem . Cogn . 35 : 1801 – 13 DoughertyMR , Franco - WatkinsAM , ThomasR . 2008 . Psychologicalplausibilityofthetheoryofprobabilistic mental models and the fast and frugal heuristics . Psychol . Rev . 115 : 199 – 213 Einhorn HJ , Hogarth RM . 1975 . Unit weighting schemes for decision making . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 13 : 171 – 92 Elstein AS . 1999 . Heuristics and biases : selected errors in clinical reasoning . Acad . Med . 74 : 791 – 94 Elwyn G , Edwards A , Eccles M , Rovner D . 2001 . Decision analysis in patient care . Lancet 358 : 571 – 74 Ericsson KA , Prietula MJ , Cokely ET . 2007 . The making of an expert . Harv . Bus . Rev . 85 : 114 – 21 Evans JS . 2008 . Dual - processing accounts of reasoning , judgment , and social cognition . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 59 : 255 – 78 Fehr E , Schmidt KM . 1999 . A theory of fairness , competition , and cooperation . Q . J . Econ . 114 : 817 – 68 476 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Fischbacher U , Hertwig R , Bruhin U . 2011 . How simple heuristics embody social intelligence in games . In Social Heuristics That Make Us Smart , ed . R Hertwig , U Hoffrage , ABC Res . Group . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . In press Fischer JE , Steiner F , Zucol F , Berger C , Martignon L , et al . 2002 . Use of simple heuristics to target macrolide prescription in children with community - acquired pneumonia . Arch . Pediatr . Adolesc . Med . 156 : 1005 – 8 Fishburn PC . 1974 . Lexicographic orders , utilities and decision rules : a survey . Manage . Sci . 20 : 1442 – 71 Fiske AP , Tetlock PE . 1997 . Taboo trade - offs : reactions to transactions that transgress the spheres of justice . Polit . Psychol . 18 : 255 – 97 Frosch C , Beaman CP , McCloy R . 2007 . A little learning is a dangerous thing : an experimental demonstration of ignorance - driven inference . Q . J . Exp . Psychol . 60 : 1329 – 36 GaissmaierW , MarewskiJN . 2010 . Forecastingelectionswithmererecognitionfromlousysamples A comparison of collective recognition , wisdome of crowds , and representative polls . Judgm . Decis . Mak . In press Galton F . 1907 . Vox populi . Nature 75 : 7 Garc´ıa - Retamero R , Dhami MK . 2009 . Take - the - best in expert - novice decision strategies for residential burglary . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 16 : 163 – 69 Garc´ıa - Retamero R , Takezawa M , Gigerenzer G . 2009 . Does imitation beneﬁt cue order learning ? Exp . Psychol . 56 : 307 – 20 Gaskin S , Evgeniou T , Bailiff D , Hauser J . 2007 . Two - stage models : identifying noncompensatory heuristics for the consideration set then adaptive polyhedral methods within the consideration set . Proc . Sawtooth Software Conf . 13 : 67 – 83 Geman S , Bienenstock E , Doursat R . 1992 . Neural networks and the bias / variance dilemma . Neural Comput . 4 : 1 – 58 Gigerenzer G . 1991 . From tools to theories : a heuristic of discovery in cognitive psychology . Psychol . Rev . 98 : 254 – 67 Gigerenzer G . 2000 . Adaptive Thinking : Rationality in the Real World . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Gigerenzer G . 2007 . Gut Feelings : The Intelligence of the Unconscious . New York : Viking Gigerenzer G . 2008 . Rationality for Mortals : How People Cope with Uncertainty . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Gigerenzer G . 2010 . Moral satisﬁcing : rethinking moral behavior as bounded rationality . Topics Cogn . Sci . 2 : 528 – 54 Gigerenzer G , Brighton H . 2009 . Homo heuristicus : why biased minds make better inferences . Topics Cogn . Sci . 1 : 107 – 43 Gigerenzer G , Engel C . 2006 . Heuristics and the Law . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Gigerenzer G , Goldstein DG . 1996 . Reasoning the fast and frugal way : models of bounded rationality . Psychol . Rev . 104 : 650 – 69 Gigerenzer G , Hoffrage U , Goldstein DG . 2008 . Fast and frugal heuristics are plausible models of cognition : reply to Dougherty , Franco - Watkins , and Thomas . Psychol . Rev . 115 : 230 – 39 Gigerenzer G , Todd PM , ABC Res . Group . 1999 . Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Gl¨ockner A , Betsch T , Schindler N . 2010 . Coherence shifts in probabilistic inference tasks . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . In press Goldstein DG , Gigerenzer G . 2002 . Models of ecological rationality : the recognition heuristic . Psychol . Rev . 109 : 75 – 90 Goldstein DG , Gigerenzer G . 2009 . Fast and frugal forecasting . Int . J . Forecast . 25 : 760 – 72 Graefe A , Armstrong J . 2009 . Forecasting elections from voters’ perceptions of candidates’ ability to handle issues . http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 1206683 Green L , Mehr DR . 1997 . What alters physicians’ decisions to admit to the coronary care unit ? J . Fam . Pract . 45 : 219 – 26 Groner M , Groner R , Bischof WF . 1983 . Approaches to heuristics : a historical review . In Methods of Heuristics , ed . R Groner , pp . 1 – 18 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum Haidt J , Baer S , Cosmides L , Epstein RA , Fikentscher W , et al . 2006 . What is the role of heuristics in making law ? See Gigerenzer & Engel 2006 , pp . 239 – 57 www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 477 Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Haidt J , Bjorklund F . 2008 . Social intuitionists answer six questions about moral psychology . In Moral Psychol - ogy : Vol . 2 . TheCognitiveScienceofMorality : IntuitionandDiversity , ed . WSinnott - Armstrong , pp . 181 – 217 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Hammond KR . 2007 . Beyond Rationality : The Search for Wisdom in a Troubled Time . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press Hanselmann M , Tanner C . 2008 . Taboos and conﬂicts in decision making : sacred values , decision difﬁculty , and emotions . Judgm . Decis . Mak . 3 : 51 – 63 Hastie R , Kameda T . 2005 . The robust beauty of majority rules in group decisions . Psychol . Rev . 112 : 494 – 508 HastieR , WittenbrinkB . 2006 . Heuristicsforapplyinglawstofacts . SeeGigerenzer & Engel2006 , pp . 259 – 80 Hauser JR , Ding M , Gaskin SP . 2009 . Non - compensatory ( and compensatory ) models of consideration - set decisions . In Proceedings of the Sawtooth Software Conference , Delray Beach , FL Hepler TJ . 2008 . Decision - making in sport : an examination of the take the ﬁrst heuristic and self - efﬁcacy theory . Doctoral dissert . , Michigan State Univ . Hertwig R , Davis JN , Sulloway FJ . 2002 . Parental investment : how an equity motive can produce inequality . Psychol . Bull . 128 : 728 – 45 HertwigR , GigerenzerG , HoffrageU . 1997 . Thereiterationeffectinhindsightbias . Psychol . Rev . 104 : 194 – 202 Hertwig R , Herzog SM , Schooler LJ , Reimer T . 2008 . Fluency heuristic : a model of how the mind exploits a by - product of information retrieval . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 34 : 1191 – 206 Hertwig R , Herzog SM . 2009 . Fast and frugal heuristics : tools of social rationality . Soc . Cogn . 27 : 661 – 98 Hertwig R , Hoffrage U , ABC Research Group . 2011 . Social Heuristics That Make Us Smart . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Hilbig BE , Pohl RF . 2008 . Recognizing users of the recognition heuristic . Exp . Psychol . 55 : 394 – 401 Hodgkinson GP , Healey MP . 2008 . Cognition in organizations . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 59 : 387 – 417 Hogarth RM . 2011 . When simple is hard to accept . In Ecological Rationality : Intelligence in the World , ed . PM Todd , G Gigerenzer , ABC Res . Group . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press . In press Hogarth RM , Karelaia N . 2007 . Heuristic and linear models of judgment : matching rules and environments . Psychol . Rev . 114 : 733 – 58 Holton G . 1988 . Thematic Origins of Scientiﬁc Thought . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Univ . Press . 2nd ed . Hoyer WD , Brown SP . 1990 . Effects of brand awareness on choice for a common , repeat purchase product . J . Consum . Res . 17 : 141 – 48 HumphreyN . 1976 / 1988 . Thesocialfunctionofintellect . In MachiavellianIntelligence , ed . RByrne , AWhiten , pp . 13 – 26 . Oxford , UK : Clarendon Hutchinson JMC , Gigerenzer G . 2005 . Simple heuristics and rules of thumb : where psychologists and be - havioural biologists might meet . Behav . Processes 69 : 87 – 124 Jacoby LL , Dallas M . 1981 . On the relationship between autobiographical memory and perceptual learning . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 110 : 306 – 40 JacobyLL , WoloshynV , KellyCM . 1989 . Becomingfamouswithoutbeingrecognized : unconsciousinﬂuences of memory produced by dividing attention . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 118 : 115 – 25 Johnson EJ , Goldstein DG . 2003 . Do defaults save lives ? Science 302 : 1338 – 39 Johnson JG , Raab M . 2003 . Take the ﬁrst : option generation and resulting choices . Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 91 : 215 – 29 Juslin P , Persson M . 2002 . PROBabilities from EXemplars ( PROBEX ) : a “lazy” algorithm for probabilistic inference from generic knowledge . Cogn . Sci . 26 : 563 – 607 Kahneman D . 2003 . Maps of bounded rationality : a perspective on intuitive judgment and choice . In Les Prix Nobel : The Nobel Prizes 2002 , ed . T Frangsmyr , pp . 449 – 89 . Stockholm : Nobel Found . Kahneman D , Frederick S . 2002 . Representativeness revisited : attribute substitution in intuitive judgment . In Heuristics and Biases : The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment , ed . T Gilovich , D Grifﬁn , D Kahneman , pp . 49 – 81 . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press KarelaiaN . 2006 . Thirstforconﬁrmationinmulti - attributechoice : Doessearchforconsistencyimpairdecision performance ? Organ . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process . 100 : 128 – 43 Katsikopoulos KV , Martignon L . 2006 . Naive heuristics for paired comparisons : some results on their relative accuracy . J . Math . Psychol . 50 : 488 – 94 478 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Katsikopoulos KV , Schooler LJ , Hertwig R . 2010 . The robust beauty of ordinary information . Psychol . Rev . In press Kattah JC , Talkad AV , Wang DZ , Hsieh YH , Newman - Toker DE . 2009 . HINTS to diagnose stroke in the acute vestibular syndrome . Three - step bedside oculomotor examination more sensitive than early MRI diffusion - weighted imaging . Stroke 40 : 3504 – 10 Keren G , Schul Y . 2009 . Two is not always better than one . A critical evaluation of two - system theories . Perspect . Psychol . Sci . 4 : 533 – 50 Kleffner DA , Ramachandran VS . 1992 . On the perception of shape from shading . Percept . Psychophys . 52 : 18 – 36 Klein G . 2004 . The Power of Intuition : How to Use Your Gut Feelings to Make Better Decisions at Work . New York : Currency / Doubleday Kohli R , Jedidi K . 2007 . Representation and inference of lexicographic preference models and their variants . Market . Sci . 26 : 380 – 99 Lee MD , Cummins TDR . 2004 . Evidence accumulation in decision making : unifying the “take the best” and the “rational” models . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 11 : 343 – 52 LeeMD , LoughlinN , LundbergIB . 2002 . Applyingonereasondecision - making : theprioritisationofliterature searches . Aust . J . Psychol . 54 : 137 – 43 Lerner JS , Tetlock PE . 1999 . Accounting for the effects of accountability . Psychol . Bull . 125 : 255 – 75 Lichtman AJ . 2008 . The keys to the White House : an index forecast for 2008 . Int . J . Forecast . 24 : 301 – 9 Luan S , Schooler L , Gigerenzer G . 2010 . A signal detection analysis of fast - and - frugal trees . Manuscr . under revision Luce RD . 1956 . Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination . Econometrica 24 : 178 – 91 March JG . 1978 . Bounded rationality , ambiguity , and the engineering of choice . Bell J . Econ . 9 : 587 – 608 Marewski JN . 2010 . On the theoretical precision , and strategy selectionproblemof asingle - strategy approach : a comment on Gl¨ockner , Betsch , and Schindler . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . In press MarewskiJN , GaissmaierW , SchoolerLJ , GoldsteinDG , GigerenzerG . 2010 . Fromrecognitiontodecisions : extendingandtestingrecognition - basedmodelsformulti - alternativeinference . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 17 : 287 – 309 Marewski JN , Schooler LJ . 2010 . Cognitive niches : An ecological model of emergent strategy selection . Manuscr . submitted Martignon L , Hoffrage U . 2002 . Fast , frugal , and ﬁt : simple heuristics for paired comparisons . Theory Decis . 52 : 29 – 71 Martignon L , Katsikopoulos KV , Woike J . 2008 . Categorization with limited resources : a family of simple heuristics . J . Math . Psychol . 52 : 352 – 61 Martignon L , Vitouch O , Takezawa M , Forster M . 2003 . Naive and yet enlightened : from natural frequencies to fast and frugal trees . In Thinking : Psychological Perspectives on Reasoning , Judgment , and Decision Making , ed . D Hardman , L Macchi , pp . 189 – 211 . Chichester , UK : Wiley Mata R , Schooler LJ , Rieskamp J . 2007 . The aging decision maker : cognitive aging and the adaptive selection of decision strategies . Psychol . Aging 22 : 796 – 810 McCammon I , H¨ageli P . 2007 . An evaluation of rule - based decision tools for travel in avalanche terrain . Cold Reg . Sci . Tech . 47 : 193 – 206 McDonald C . 1996 . Medical heuristics : the silent adjudicators of clinical practice . Ann . Intern . Med . 124 : 56 – 62 McGrath RE . 2008 . Predictor combination in binary decision - making situations . Psychol . Assess . 20 : 195 – 205 McLeod P , Dienes Z . 1996 . Do ﬁelders know where to go to catch the ball or only how to get there ? J . Exp . Psychol . : Hum . Percept . Perform . 22 : 531 – 43 McNamara JM , Houston AI . 2009 . Integrating function and mechanism . Trends Ecol . Evol . 24 : 670 – 75 Messick DM . 1993 . Equality as decision heuristic . In Psychological Perspectives on Justice : Theory and Application , ed . BA Mellers , J Baron , pp . 11 – 31 . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Newell BR . 2005 . Re - visions of rationality . Trends Cogn . Sci . 9 : 11 – 15 Newell BR , Fernandez D . 2006 . On the binary quality of recognition and the inconsequentiality of further knowledge : two critical tests of the recognition heuristic . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 19 : 333 – 46 Newell BR , Rakow T , Weston NJ , Shanks DR . 2004 . Search strategies in decision - making : the success of “success . ” J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 17 : 117 – 37 Newell BR , Shanks DR . 2003 . Take the best or look at the rest ? Factors inﬂuencing “one - reason” decision making . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 29 : 53 – 65 www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 479 Errata A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Nosofsky RM , Bergert FB . 2007 . Limitations of exemplar models of multi - attribute probabilistic inference . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 33 : 999 – 1019 OppenheimerD . 2003 . Notsofast ! ( andnotsofrugal ! ) : rethinkingtherecognitionheuristic . Cognition 90 : B1 – 9 Ortmann A , Gigerenzer G , Borges B , Goldstein DG . 2008 . The recognition heuristic : a fast and frugal way to investment choice ? In Handbook of Experimental Economics Results : Vol . 1 ( Handbooks in Economics No . 28 ) , ed . CR Plott , VL Smith , pp . 993 – 1003 . Amsterdam : North Holland Pachur T , Biele G . 2007 . Forecasting from ignorance : the use and usefulness of recognition in lay predictions of sports events . Acta Psychol . 125 : 99 – 116 PachurT , Br¨oderA , MarewskiJN . 2008 . Therecognitionheuristicinmemory - basedinference : Isrecognition a noncompensatory cue ? J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 21 : 183 – 210 Pachur T , Hertwig R . 2006 . On the psychology of the recognition heuristic : retrieval primacy as a key determinant of its use . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 32 : 983 – 1002 Pachur T , Mata R , Schooler LJ . 2009 . Cognitive aging and the adaptive use of recognition in decision making . Psychol . Aging 24 : 901 – 15 Pachur T , Todd PM , Gigerenzer G , Schooler LJ , Goldstein DG . 2011 . When is the recognition heuristic an adaptive tool ? In Ecological Rationality : Intelligence in the World , ed . PM Todd , G Gigerenzer , ABC Res . Group . New York : Oxford Univ . Press . In press Parikh J . 1994 . Intuition : The New Frontier of Management . Oxford , UK : Blackwell Business Payne JW , Bettman JR , Johnson EJ . 1993 . The Adaptive Decision Maker . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press Petrie M , Halliday T . 1994 . Experimental and natural changes in the peacock’s ( Pavo cristatus ) train can affect mating success . Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 35 : 213 – 17 PittMA , MyungIJ , ZhangS . 2002 . Towardamethodforselectingamongcomputationalmodelsforcognition . Psychol . Rev . 109 : 472 – 91 Pleskac TJ . 2007 . A signal detection analysis of the recognition heuristic . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 14 : 37 – 91 Pohl R . 2006 . Empirical tests or the recognition heuristic . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 19 : 251 – 71 Ratcliff R , McKoon G . 1989 . Similarity information versus relational information : differences in the time course of retrieval . Cogn . Psychol . 21 : 139 – 55 Read D , Grushka - Cockayne Y . 2010 . The similarity heuristic . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . In press Reimer T , Katsikopoulos K . 2004 . The use of recognition in group decision - making . Cogn . Sci . 28 : 1009 – 29 Reisen N , Hoffrage U , Mast FW . 2008 . Identifying decision strategies in a consumer choice situation . Judgm . Decis . Mak . 3 : 641 – 58 Reyna VF , Lloyd FJ . 2006 . Physician decision making and cardiac risk : effects of knowledge , risk perception , risk tolerance , and fuzzy processing . J . Exp . Psychol . Appl . 12 : 179 – 95 Richter T , Sp¨ath P . 2006 . Recognition is used as one cue among others in judgment and decision making . J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 32 : 150 – 62 Rieskamp J , Hoffrage U . 1999 . When do people use simple heuristics , and how can we tell ? See Gigerenzer et al . 1999 , pp . 141 – 67 Rieskamp J , Hoffrage U . 2008 . Inferences under time pressure : how opportunity costs affect strategy selection . Acta Psychol . 127 : 258 – 76 Rieskamp J , Otto P . 2006 . SSL : a theory of how people learn to select strategies . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 135 : 207 – 36 Rossmo DK . 2005 . Geographic heuristics or shortcuts to failure ? A response to Snook et al . 2004 . Appl . Cogn . Psychol . 19 : 651 – 54 Rubinstein A . 2003 . Economics and psychology ? The case of hyperbolic discounting . Int . Econ . Rev . 44 : 1207 – 16 Savage LJ . 1954 . The Foundations of Statistics . New York : Dover . 2nd ed . Scheibehenne B , Br¨oderA . 2007 . PredictingWimbledon2005tennisresultsbymereplayernamerecognition . Int . J . Forecast . 23 : 415 – 26 Schmitt M , Martignon L . 2006 . On the complexity of learning lexicographic strategies . J . Mach . Learn . Res . 7 : 55 – 83 Schmittlein DC , Peterson RA . 1994 . Customer base analysis : an industrial purchase process application . Market . Sci . 13 : 41 – 67 480 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Schooler LJ , Hertwig R . 2005 . How forgetting aids heuristic inference . Psychol . Rev . 112 : 610 – 28 Sedlmeier P , Hertwig R , Gigerenzer G . 1998 . Are judgments of the positional frequencies of letters system - atically biased due to availability ? J . Exp . Psychol . : Learn . Mem . Cogn . 24 : 754 – 70 Seeley TD . 2001 . Decision making in superorganisms : how collective wisdom arises from the poorly informed masses . In Bounded Rationality : The Adaptive Toolbox , ed . G Gigerenzer , R Selten , pp . 249 – 61 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Serwe S , Frings C . 2006 . Who will win Wimbledon ? The recognition heuristic in predicting sports events . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 19 : 321 – 32 Shaffer DN , Krauchunas SM , Eddy M , McBeath MK . 2004 . How dogs navigate to catch Frisbees . Psychol . Sci . 15 : 437 – 41 Shah AK , Oppenheimer DM . 2008 . Heuristics made easy : an effort - reduction framework . Psychol . Bull . 137 : 207 – 22 Shanteau J . 1992 . How much information does an expert use ? Is it relevant ? Acta Psychol . 81 : 75 – 86 Shepard RN . 2001 . Perceptual - cognitive universals as reﬂections of the world . Behav . Brain Sci . 24 : 581 – 601 Simon HA . 1955 . A behavioral model of rational choice . Q . J . Econ . 69 : 99 – 118 Simon HA . 1979 . Rational decision making in business organizations . Am . Econ . Rev . 69 : 493 – 513 Simon HA . 1989 . The scientist as problem solver . In Complex Information Processing : The Impact of Herbert A . Simon , ed . D Klahr , K Kotovsky , pp . 373 – 98 . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum Simon HA . 1990 . Invariants of human behavior . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 41 : 1 – 19 Simon HA . 1992 . What is an “explanation” of behavior ? Psychol . Sci . 3 : 150 – 61 Simon HA . 1999 . Appraisal . See Gigerenzer et al . 1999 , back cover SmithL , GilhoolyK . 2006 . Regressionversusfastandfrugalmodelsofdecision - making : thecaseofprescribing for depression . Appl . Cogn . Psychol . 20 : 265 – 74 Smith VL . 2003 . Constructivist and ecological rationality in economics . Am . Econ . Rev . 93 : 465 – 508 Snook B , Taylor PJ , Bennell C . 2004 . Geographic proﬁling : the fast , frugal and accurate way . Appl . Cogn . Psychol . 18 : 105 – 21 Snook B , Zito M , Bennell C , Taylor PJ . 2005 . On the complexity and accuracy of geographic proﬁling strategies . J . Quant . Criminol . 21 : 1 – 26 Sorros G . 2009 . The Crash of 2008 and What It Means : The New Paradigm for Financial Markets . New York : Public Affairs Stiglitz JE . 2010 . Freefall : America , Free Markets , and the Sinking of the World Economy . New York : Norton Sunstein CR . 2005 . Moral heuristics . Behav . Brain Sci . 28 : 531 – 73 Takezawa M , Gummerum M , Keller M . 2006 . A stage for the rational tail of the emotional dog : roles of moral reasoning in group decision making . J . Econ . Psychol . 27 : 117 – 39 ToddPM , BillariF , Sim˜aoJ . 2005 . Aggregateage - at - marriagepatternsfromindividualmate - searchheuristics . Demography 42 : 559 – 74 Todd PM , Dieckmann A . 2005 . Heuristics for ordering cue search in decision making . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol . 17 , ed . LK Saul , Y Weiss , L Bottou , pp . 1393 – 400 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Todd PM , Gigerenzer G , ABC Res . Group . 2011 . Ecological Rationality : Intelligence in the World . New York : Oxford Univ . Press Tversky A . 1972 . Elimination by aspects : a theory of choice . Psychol . Rev . 79 : 281 – 99 Tversky A . 1977 . Features of similarity . Psychol . Rev . 84 : 327 – 52 Tversky A , Kahneman D . 1973 . Availability : a heuristic for judging frequency and probability . Cogn . Psychol . 5 : 207 – 32 Tversky A , Kahneman D . 1974 . Judgment under uncertainty : heuristics and biases . Science 185 : 1124 – 30 Volz KG , Schooler LJ , Schubotz RI , Raab M , Gigerenzer G , von Cramon DY . 2006 . Why you think Milan is larger than Modena : neural correlates of the recognition heuristic . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 18 : 1924 – 36 von Helversen B , Rieskamp J . 2008 . The mapping model : a cognitive theory of quantitative estimation . J . Exp . Psychol . : Gen . 137 : 73 – 96 von Helversen B , Rieskamp J . 2009 . Predicting sentencing for low level crimes : comparing models of human judgment . J . Exp . Psychol . Appl . 15 : 375 – 95 www . annualreviews . org • Heuristic Decision Making 481 A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62CH17 - Gigerenzer ARI 3 November 2010 6 : 43 Wang XT . 2008 . Decision heuristics as predictors of public choice . J . Behav . Decis . Mak . 21 : 77 – 89 Weber EU , Johnson EJ . 2009 . Mindful judgment and decision making . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 60 : 53 – 86 Whiten A , Byrne RW . 1997 . Machiavellian Intelligence II : Evaluations and Extensions . New York : Cambridge Univ . Press W¨ubben M , von Wangenheim F . 2008 . Instant customer base analysis : managerial heuristics often “get it right . ” J . Mark . 72 : 82 – 93 YeeM , DahanE , HauserJ , OrlinJ . 2007 . Greedoid - basednoncompensatoryinference . Market . Sci . 26 : 532 – 49 Yonelinas AP , Otten LJ , Shaw KN , Rugg MD . 2005 . Separating the brain regions involved in recollection and familiarity in recognition memory . J . Neurosci . 25 : 3002 – 8 Zajonc RB . 1968 . Attitudinal effects of mere exposures . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 9 : 1 – 27 482 Gigerenzer · Gaissmaier A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62 - FrontMatter ARI 15 November 2010 17 : 50 Annual Review of Psychology Volume 62 , 2011 Contents Prefatory The Development of Problem Solving in Young Children : A Critical Cognitive Skill Rachel Keen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 Decision Making The Neuroscience of Social Decision - Making James K . Rilling and Alan G . Sanfey (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 23 Speech Perception Speech Perception Arthur G . Samuel (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 49 Attention and Performance A Taxonomy of External and Internal Attention Marvin M . Chun , Julie D . Golomb , and Nicholas B . Turk - Browne (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 73 Language Processing The Neural Bases of Social Cognition and Story Comprehension Raymond A . Mar (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 103 Reasoning and Problem Solving Causal Learning and Inference as a Rational Process : The New Synthesis Keith J . Holyoak and Patricia W . Cheng (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 135 Emotional , Social , and Personality Development Development in the Early Years : Socialization , Motor Development , and Consciousness Claire B . Kopp (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 165 Peer Contagion in Child and Adolescent Social and Emotional Development Thomas J . Dishion and Jessica M . Tipsord (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 189 vi A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62 - FrontMatter ARI 15 November 2010 17 : 50 Adulthood and Aging Psychological Wisdom Research : Commonalities and Differences in a Growing Field Ursula M . Staudinger and Judith Gl¨uck (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 215 Development in the Family Socialization Processes in the Family : Social and Emotional Development Joan E . Grusec (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 243 Psychopathology Delusional Belief Max Coltheart , Robyn Langdon , and Ryan McKay (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 271 Therapy for Speciﬁc Problems Long - Term Impact of Prevention Programs to Promote Effective Parenting : Lasting Effects but Uncertain Processes Irwin N . Sandler , Erin N . Schoenfelder , Sharlene A . Wolchik , and David P . MacKinnon (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 299 Self and Identity Do Conscious Thoughts Cause Behavior ? Roy F . Baumeister , E . J . Masicampo , and Kathleen D . Vohs (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 331 Neuroscience of Self and Self - Regulation Todd F . Heatherton (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 363 Attitude Change and Persuasion Attitudes and Attitude Change Gerd Bohner and Nina Dickel (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 391 Cross - Country or Regional Comparisons Culture , Mind , and the Brain : Current Evidence and Future Directions Shinobu Kitayama and Ayse K . Uskul (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 419 Cognition in Organizations Heuristic Decision Making Gerd Gigerenzer and Wolfgang Gaissmaier (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 451 Structures and Goals of Educational Settings Early Care , Education , and Child Development Deborah A . Phillips and Amy E . Lowenstein (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 483 Contents vii A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PS62 - FrontMatter ARI 3 November 2010 10 : 34 Psychophysiological Disorders and Psychological Dimensions on Medical Disorders Psychological Perspectives on Pathways Linking Socioeconomic Status and Physical Health Karen A . Matthews and Linda C . Gallo (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 501 Psychological Science on Pregnancy : Stress Processes , Biopsychosocial Models , and Emerging Research Issues Christine Dunkel Schetter (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 531 Research Methodology The Development of Autobiographical Memory Robyn Fivush (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 559 The Disaggregation of Within - Person and Between - Person Effects in Longitudinal Models of Change Patrick J . Curran and Daniel J . Bauer (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 583 Thirty Years and Counting : Finding Meaning in the N400 Component of the Event - Related Brain Potential ( ERP ) Marta Kutas and Kara D . Federmeier (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 621 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 52 – 62 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 000 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 52 – 62 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 000 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Psychology articles may be found at http : / / psych . AnnualReviews . org / errata . shtml viii Contents A nnu . R e v . P s y c ho l . 2011 . 62 : 451 - 482 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by U n i v e r s it y o f W a s h i ng t on on 02 / 03 / 12 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .