1 Comparison of Three Transcytotic Pathways for Distribution to Brain Metastases of Breast Cancer . Imran Khan 1 $ , Brunilde Gril 1 # , Anurag Paranjape 1 * , Christina Robinson 2 , Simone Difilippantonio 2 , Wojciech Biernat 3 , Michał Bie ń kowski 3 , Rafał P ę ksa 3 , Renata Duchnowska 4 , Jacek Jassem 5 , Priscilla K . Brastianos 6 , Philippe Metellus 7 , Emilie Bialecki 7 , Carolyn C . Woodroofe 8 , Haitao Wu 8 , Rolf Swenson 8 , Patricia S . Steeg 1 1 . Women’s Malignancies Branch , Center for Cancer Research , National Cancer Institute , Bethesda , MD 2 . Laboratory Animal Sciences Program , Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research ( FNLCR ) , Frederick , MD . 3 . Department of Pathology , Medical University of Gda ń sk , Poland . 4 . Department of Oncology , Military Institute of Medicine , Warsaw , Poland . 5 . Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy , Medical University of Gda ń sk , Poland . 6 . Division of Neuro - Oncology , Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA . 7 . Ramsay Général de Santé , Hôpital Privé Clairval , Département de Neurochirurgie and Aix - Marseille Université , Institut de Neurophysiopathologie – UMR 7051 , Marseille , France . 8 . Chemistry and Synthesis Center , National Heart , Lung and Blood Institute , NIH , Bethesda , MD . Running title : Albumin transcytosis in brain metastasis $ Corresponding Author : Imran Khan , Ph . D . , imran . khan @ nih . gov , Building 37 , Room 1126 , NCI , NIH , Bethesda MD 20892 USA # Current address : Tumor Metastasis Branch , Division of Cancer Biology , National Cancer Institute , National Institutes of Health , 9609 Medical Center Drive , Rockville , MD 20850 - 9745 * Current address : UPMC Center for Ultrasound Molecular Imaging and Therapeutics , University of Pittsburgh , 3550 Terrace St , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 Keywords : Brain metastasis , transcytosis , albumin , blood - tumor barrier , blood - brain barrier , transferrin receptor , LRP1 . Financial Support : This work was supported by the Intramural Program of the NCI . PSS receives research funding from Daichi - Sanyo . Conflict of Interest : The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest . 2 Word Count : 4888 Statement of Significance : Drug therapy for brain metastasis needs improvements . We surveyed transcytotic pathways as potential delivery systems in brain - tropic models and found that albumin has optimal properties . Albumin used a novel mechanism for endocytosis . 3 Abstract Advances in drug treatments for brain metastases of breast cancer have improved progression free survival but new , more efficacious strategies are needed . Most chemotherapeutic drugs infiltrate brain metastases by moving between brain capillary endothelial cells , paracellular distribution , resulting in heterogeneous distribution , lower than that to systemic metastases . Herein , we tested three well - known transcytotic pathways through brain capillary endothelial cells as potential avenues for drug access : Transferrin receptor ( TfR ) peptide , Low density lipoprotein receptor 1 ( LRP1 ) peptide , Albumin . Each was far - red labeled , injected into two hematogenous models of brain metastases , circulated for two different times , and their uptake quantified in metastases and uninvolved ( nonmetastatic ) brain . Surprisingly , all three pathways demonstrated distinct distribution patterns in vivo . Two were suboptimal : TfR distributed to uninvolved brain but poorly in metastases , while LRP1 was poorly distributed . Albumin distributed to virtually all metastases in both model systems , significantly greater than in uninvolved brain ( P < 0 . 0001 ) . Further experiments revealed that albumin entered both macrometastases and micrometastases , the targets of treatment and prevention translational strategies . Albumin uptake into brain metastases was not correlated with the uptake of a paracellular probe ( biocytin ) . We identified a novel mechanism of albumin endocytosis through the endothelia of brain metastases consistent with clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) , involving the neonatal Fc receptor ( FcRn ) , galectin - 3 ( Gal - 3 ) and glycosphingolipids . Components of the CIE process were found on metastatic endothelial cells in human craniotomies . The data suggest a reconsideration of albumin as a translational mechanism for improved drug delivery to brain metastases and possibly other CNS cancers . 4 Introduction Brain ( CNS ) metastases of breast and lung cancers and melanoma confer serious physical and neurocognitive effects and contribute to patients’ deaths ( rev . in ( 1 - 3 ) ) . Patients with two subtypes of metastatic breast cancer , tumors with HER2 amplification / overexpression ( HER2 + ) , and tumors that are hormone receptor negative , HER2 normal ( triple - negative ) are at highest risk . Standard treatments include surgery , stereotactic radiation therapy to the lesions , whole brain radiation therapy , and steroids for edema . Drug therapies for breast cancer brain metastases have a checkered history . The most brain permeable drugs , such as molecular inhibitors of HER2 , offer only months of increased progression free - or overall survival ( 4 , 5 ) . Many other drugs , however , even those with known systemic activity in the metastatic setting were virtually inactive in the CNS ( 6 , 7 ) . In agreement , drug distribution to brain metastases in hematogenous model systems is heterogeneous ( 8 - 13 ) and remains ~ a log below that of systemic metastases ( 11 ) . The limited efficacy of drugs for CNS metastases is a major hurdle to advances in patient care . In addition to normal pharmacokinetic parameters of metabolism , protein binding , excretion , edema etc . , drug distribution to brain metastases necessarily involves traversal through the blood - tumor barrier ( BTB ) , an alteration of the normal capillary blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) that protects brain parenchyma ( rev . in ( 14 ) ) . Most drugs studied to date traverse the BTB paracellularly : Endothelial cells of the normal BBB are connected by continuous tight - and adherens junctions which break down to some extent in the BTB allowing drug passage between cells . An alternative route of drug distribution to brain metastases is transcytosis , through the capillary endothelia and other cells . Transcytosis is a complex series of mechanisms for the intracellular transport of macromolecules within membrane - bound vesicles . In the normal brain needed metabolites enter via receptor - mediated transport , carrier - mediated transport , lipid transport , lipid diffusion and , to a very limited extent , macropinocytosis of soluble compounds ( rev . in ( 15 , 16 ) ) . Transcytotic pathways vary in initial modes of cell membrane endocytosis ( clathrin - coated pits , caveolae , clathrin - independent endocytosis , etc . ) . Intracellular vesicles can route to lysosomal degradation , recycle back to the cell membrane , or move across the cell to release their contents . 5 Several drugs connected to transcytotic pathway ligands have been preclinically tested in either the normal brain , non - cancer CNS diseases such as Alzheimers’ , primary CNS malignancies or brain metastases . We have little research to explain disparate results , which would guide future development efforts . For instance , the transferrin receptor ( TfR ) pathway delivers iron to the normal brain via receptor mediated transcytosis and has been linked to a number of drugs or used to coat nanoparticles ( rev . in ( 17 ) ) . Antibodies to TfR have shown brain transcytosis that is dependent on antibody avidity in Alzheimers’ studies ( 18 ) ; in normal brain , conjugation of TfR antibodies or Tf peptides bound to quantum dots yielded low brain distribution , with the former trapped in endothelial cells ( 19 , 20 ) . To our knowledge , TfR - based investigations in brain metastases have not been reported . Another transcytotic pathway investigated is the low density lipoprotein receptor related protein 1 ( LRP1 ) which initiates endothelial transcytosis and is critical for Tau uptake and spread in neurodegenerative diseases ( 21 ) . A clinical trial of Angiopep , a LRP1 peptide conjugated to paclitaxel , showed some disease benefit but the trial missed its primary endpoint ( 22 ) . In a brain metastasis model system Angiopep conjugated to paclitaxel resulted in a 161 - fold increase in drug levels compared to free drug in uninvolved brain , but only < 10 - fold increase in experimental hematogenous metastases ( 12 ) , suggesting a propensity for normal brain transcytosis over brain metastasis . Another investigation used LRP peptide - conjugated liposomes in an intracranial xenograft where membrane fluidity was a significant factor in controlling intracranial tumor growth ( 23 ) . A third pathway , albumin , has also been used to coat nanoparticles , either temporarily to improve solubility or in a more stable manner ( rev in ( 24 ) ) ; some preclinical efficacy in primary brain tumor and brain metastasis models has been reported ( 25 , 26 ) . The transcytotic pathway for albumin in normal or diseased brain is unresolved and could include binding to the endothelial neonatal Fc receptor ( FcRn ) ( 27 ) or other proteins including SPARC ( 28 ) , or entry via fluid filled large pinocytotic vesicles ( 29 , 30 ) . These studies differ by transcytotic pathway , associated drugs , and formulations . In the current manuscript we have attempted to identify an optimal transcytotic pathway in brain metastasis models , which can then be further developed to optimize drugs and formulations . Questions resolved herein include : ( a ) are all transcytotic pathways equally capable of delivering a ligand to a brain metastasis ? ( b ) Conversely , to what extent does each pathway traverse 6 metastases versus uninvolved brain ? Uptake of a toxic drug by uninvolved brain could result in adverse effects . ( c ) Do transcytotic pathways enable ligand distribution into both macrometastases and micrometastases ? The ability to penetrate micrometastases may be fundamental to brain metastatic prevention efforts . Our data in two model systems at two timepoints show an unexpected clear superiority of albumin . With this finding a second major gap in our research knowledge appeared : If albumin preferentially transcytoses through the BTB via fluid filled pinocytotic vesicles , why don’t other drugs pass via the same mechanism ? We have resolved this question , developing evidence that albumin uses a protein - specific macropinocytotic endocytic pathway with features of clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) , involving the FcRn , galectins and membrane lipids . Finally , we demonstrate the relevance of this transcytotic pathway model data demonstrating CIE proteins in human breast cancer brain metastases craniotomy specimens . The data provide a fundamental mechanistic background for translational efforts to improve drug penetration and efficacy for brain metastases and possibly other CNS malignancies . 7 Materials and Methods Cell line origins and authentication . The origins and validation of the triple - negative 231 - BR ( 31 ) and the HER2 - overexpressing JIMT1 - BR ( 32 ) are previously reported ( see Supplementary methods ) . For in vitro BBB and BTB assays , immortalized human astrocytes ( HAL ) and pericytes ( HPL ) were generated using SV40 Large T antigen ( 33 ) . The mouse brain endothelial line bEnd . 3 was used . Culture conditions are listed in Supplementary methods . Animal Experiments - General Information . All animal experiments were performed under the regulation of the Animal Care and Use Committee ( ACUC ) of the National Cancer Institute ( NCI ) . Five - seven week old female athymic NIH nu / nu mice were injected in the left cardiac ventricle with 1 . 75 x 10 5 231 - BR or JIMT1 - BR cells as described , with metastasis formation in 3 - 4 weeks ( 32 ) . Upon sectioning , brain metastases were divided into macrometastases , longer than 300 µm in a single dimension , comparable in size to a 3 mm MRI - detectable lesion in a human ; micrometastases were smaller lesions . Further details are in Supplementary methods . Comparison of three transcytosis ligands . Three known transcytosis ligands , similarly labeled , were compared for distribution to metastases in vivo . After the development of brain metastases and on the day of necropsy , mice were injected IV with a far - red fluorescent probe of either albumin , transferrin peptide or LRP - 1 peptide ; the probes circulated for a short ( 0 . 5 - 1h ) or longer ( 4 - 6h ) period , followed by perfusion . Whole brain sections were scanned for far - red and eGFP fluorescence using a Zeiss AxioScan . Z1 Slide Scanner . Mean fluorescence intensity of each probe in uninvolved ( metastasis free , U ) brain and brain metastases ( M ) were quantitated by ZEN 2 software . Comparison of transcytosis versus paracellular permeability : 231 - BR and JIMT1 - BR cells were injected into mice and developed brain metastases . After brain metastasis formation and on the day of necropsy far - red - Albumin ( Alexa Fluor™ 647 - albumin ) and Biocytin - TMR was injected ( IV ) and circulated for 60 and10 min , respectively , followed by the perfusion . Whole brain sections were scanned for far - red , red and eGFP fluorescence or H & E staining using a Zeiss AxioScan . Z1 Slide Scanner . Mean fluorescence intensity of each probe was quantitated by ZEN 2 software . 8 In vitro blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) and blood - tumor barrier ( BTB ) assays . The in vitro BBB / BTB assays reflecting paracellular permeability was previously established ( 33 ) in 24 - well plates with transwell inserts . Herein , inserts with 0 . 4 µm ( Corning , # 353095 ) and 3 µm pores ( Corning , # 353096 ) were tested . Albumin endocytosis and transcytosis was evaluated by addition of 50 μ g / ml Alexa Fluor™ 594 - albumin or Alexa Fluor™ 488 - albumin to the top of the assay , and culture for 30 min . Endpoints included ( 1 ) endocytosis within endothelial cells , ( 2 ) albumin transcytosis to the lower fluid compartment , and ( 3 ) albumin transcytosis and uptake into astrocytes in the lower compartment ( see Supplementary methods ) . For inhibitor studies , after establishment of BBB / BTB endothelial cells were serum deprived for 1 hour in Opti - MEM . Cells were pre - treated with inhibitors for 30 min at nontoxic concentrations ( see Supplementary methods ) . shRNA - mediated knockdown of endothelial clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) genes . shRNA knockdown of genes associated with CIE was performed in bEnd . 3 cells as described in Supplemental methods . Sequence of different shRNA lentiviral particle is given in Supplementary table 1 . Glycoprotein Isolation . Glycoproteins were isolated using a glycoprotein isolation kit ( 89804 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) as per the manufacturer’s protocol . 50 µg of proteins were loaded on SDS PAGE gel for assessing the level of FcRn and SPARC glycosylation using their antibodies . Co - immunoprecipitation ( Co - IP ) . Protein – protein interactions between Galectin - 3 and FcRn were studied using Co - Immunoprecipitation Kit ( ab206996 , Abcam ) ( see Supplementary methods ) . Colocalization using confocal microscopy . Mouse bEnd . 3 endothelial cells were cultured in chamber slides and stained by immunofluorescence for FcRn or Galectin - 3 as described in Supplemental methods . Confocal microscopy was used to visualize staining . Immufluorescence ( IF ) of frozen human brain metastasis specimens . IF staining was performed as described previously on flash frozen human brain metastasis craniotomy specimens , collected under approved protocols ( see Supplementary methods ) . 9 Immunohistochemistry ( IHC ) of human brain metastasis specimens . Formalin - fixed , paraffin embedded blocks of human craniotomy specimens were collected as described in Supplementary methods . All procedures were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( LifeSpan , Inc . ) . The immunoreactivity was scored semi - quantitatively on a 0 - 3 + intensity basis in the endothelial , cancer , and brain parenchymal compartments . Graphic representation and statistical analysis . See Supplementary methods . 10 Results Comparison of three transcytotic pathway ligands for brain metastatic distribution . Far - red emitting fluorescent labeled ligands / proteins for three transcytosis pathways in the CNS preclinical literature were compared in vivo to identify those with maximal penetration of brain metastases as compared to uninvolved brain . Tumor cells from two model systems , the HER2 + JIMT1 - BR and triple negative MDA - MB - 231 - BR ( 231 - BR ) were each injected into the left ventricle of nude mice and metastases permitted to form . Both brain - tropic cell lines were EGFP labeled but expression was unstable in vivo . On the day of necropsy animals received an intravenous ( IV ) dose of far - red labeled transferrin or LRP1 peptide or Alexa Fluor™ 647 - albumin , also far - red emitting . Based on an analysis of paracellular and transcytotic pathways in stroke ( 34 ) , both a short ( 30m - 1h ) and a longer ( 4 - 6h ) circulation times were used , before mice were perfused to remove probe from the bloodstream and necropsied ( Fig . 1A ) . Whole brain sections were scanned and image analysis of probe intensity performed on 10 macro - and 10 micrometastases / brain that were detected by green fluorescence and confirmed by H & E staining of the adjacent tissue section . Ten areas of uninvolved brain / mouse were also imaged . Graphs depicting ligand intensity for macrometastases and micrometastases in the JIMT1 - BR brain - tropic model are shown on Fig . 1B - E ; graphs combining the data for all metastases are on Supplementary Fig . S1 ; ligand distribution in healthy mice are plotted on Fig . 1F - G . Representative images of brain sections , macrometastases and micrometastases are shown on Fig . 2 . Injection of the far - red dye alone as a control showed a low level of expression in both the uninvolved brain and metastases . LRP1 peptide was present at only low concentrations in all lesions at all timepoints . Intensity did not differ between uninvolved brain and lesions and was not significantly different from dye alone . TfR peptide exhibited a distinct pattern of uptake : TfR appeared higher overall than the far - red control at the early timepoint ( compared to dye alone all metastases 1h , P = 0 . 0467 and micrometastases 1h , P = 0 . 0468 ) . TfR distribution was numerically but not statistically higher in uninvolved brain than in metastases ( no significance in macrometastasis , micrometastases , or all metastases 1h P = 0 . 8337 , 6h P = 0 . 9982 ) , a trend that is obvious on immunofluorescent micrographs ( white arrows ) outside of the metastatic lesions ( Fig 2A - B ) . In contrast , Far - red - albumin demonstrated significantly greater uptake in metastases than uninvolved brain at all timepoints ( compared to uninvolved brain - P < 0 . 0001 for all metastases , macrometastases and micrometastases at 1h and 6hrs ) . Albumin uptake was similar in both 11 micrometastatic and macrometastatic lesions , the latter comparable in length to a 3mm MRI - detectable lesion in a human brain . Albumin distribution within metastases was heterogeneous in intensity but widespread ( Fig . 2A - B ) . Far - red - albumin levels in uninvolved brain were not significantly different from the dye alone control ( All metastases 1h P = 0 . 9988 , 6h P = 0 . 8764 - Supplemenary Fig . S1A - B ) . In a separate experiment each probe was injected into healthy mice that had not received tumor cells ( Fig . 1F - G ) . No significant differences were observed between dye alone and any of the transcytotic ligands at either timepoint . Data on albumin transcytosis at each timepoint is shown for comparison , suggesting that uptake in uninvolved brain was equivalent to normal brain . Similar trends were apparent in the 231 - BR brain - tropic triple negative metastasis model ( Fig . 3A - F , Supplementary Figs S2 - S3 ) . LRP - 1 peptide distribution into metastases was not significantly distinct from the dye alone control and difficult to visualize ( Fig . 3E - F ) . TfR peptide distribution was higher in uninvolved brain than brain metastases at the 0 . 5 - 1h timepoint ( compared to uninvolved dye alone - all metastases 1h P = 0 . 0157 , macrometastases P = 0 . 0055 and micrometastases P = 0 . 0935 ; uninvolved brain vs metastases - no significance ) , but near the far - red control at the longer 4 - 6h timepoint ( no significance compared to dye alone uninvolved brain or uninvolved brain vs . metastases ) . Images confirmed a higher TfR distribution in uninvolved brain ( white arrows ) than in metastases ( Fig . 3E - F ) . Far - red - albumin distribution again demonstrated significant uptake into macrometastases and micrometastases at all timepoints , higher than that of uninvolved brain or dye control ( Compared to uninvolved brain - P < 0 . 0001 for all metastases , macrometastases and micrometastases at 0 . 5 - 1h and 4 - 6hrs ) . Albumin distribution was heterogeneous within a macrometastasis ; occasional spots of albumin intensity in uninvolved brain often corresponded to single - few infiltrating tumor cells ( Fig . 3E - F ) . Taken together , the data establish that the three well - known transcytotic pathways studied are present at relatively low intensities in uninvolved brain . Only one of the three pathways , albumin , consistently and significantly distributed to brain metastases . Albumin uptake was comparable in macrometastases , the object of therapeutic experiments , as well as micrometastases that may be important to prevention of future metastatic outgrowth . Because of its promising distribution pattern , we studied albumin uptake into metastases further . 12 Albumin transcytosis is distinct from paracellular marker distribution . We asked if albumin distribution into experimental metastases differed from that of a more typical paracellular entry method . Mice with 231 - BR or JIMT1 - BR brain metastases were dosed IV with Far - red - Albumin ( Albumin - Alexa Fluor TM 647 ) and Biocytin TMR ( Tetramethylrhodamine Biocytin ) , a compound of approximate drug size ( 869 Da ) used as a probe of paracellular permeability ( 34 , 35 ) , before perfusion and necropsy . Data for all metastases , separated into macro - and micrometastases are shown on Fig . 4A - B . Representative pictures showing distribution of Far - red - Albumin and Biocytin TMR in JIMT1 - BR and 231 - BR metastases are shown on Fig . 4C and D , respectively . In the JIMT1 - BR model system distribution of albumin and biocytin in uninvolved brain was relatively low and comparable at all timepoints ( Fig . 4A ) . Biocytin expression showed a mean 73 . 2 % and 68 . 5 % increase in intensity as compared to uninvolved brain in macrometastases and micrometastases , respectively ( macrometastases , P = 0 . 0019 ; micrometastases , P = 0 . 0006 ) . This increased distribution was far less than that for albumin , which was 216 . 3 % and 224 . 3 % increased over uninvolved brain for macrometastases and micrometastases , respectively ( P < 0 . 0001 for both macrometastases and micrometastases ) . Similar trends were observed in the 231 - BR model system , with albumin distribution a mean of 44 . 2 % and 81 . 0 % higher than uninvolved brain in macrometastases and micrometastases respectively ( P < 0 . 0001 for both macrometastases and micrometastases ) ( Fig . 4B ) . Photomicrographs show metastases in both model systems with observable albumin fluorescence and minimal if any discernable biocytin ( Fig . 4C - D ) . The data show that albumin distribution to metastases in two model systems is distinct and generally higher than a paracellular permeation probe . Development of an in vitro model system incorporating albumin transcytosis . To ask what role the blood - brain barrier ( BBB ) and blood - tumor barrier ( BTB ) may be playing in these distribution patterns , we turned to in vitro models . We previously reported an in vitro model system for paracellular distribution of compounds through a BBB or BTB ( 33 ) . Briefly , brain endothelial cells were cultured to confluence on the top side of a 0 . 4 µm porous filter , with pericytes cultured on the bottom side . The filter was then placed atop a chamber containing astrocytes in culture medium , with ( BTB ) or without ( BBB ) tumor cells ( Fig . 5A ) . This model faithfully reflected Texas red dextran paracellular permeability in vivo ( 36 ) . When Alexa Fluor™ 13 594 - albumin was applied to this configuration , no endocytosis or transcytosis was observed . After many modifications , revision of one feature enabled transcytosis . Albumin endocytosis into endothelial cells ( Fig . 5B ) and transcytosis into the lower chamber ( Fig . 5C ) was observed only with wider , 3 . 0 µm pores . Permeability of doxorubicin via paracellular permeability was slightly higher in BTB than BBB cultures but did not vary with pore size ( Fig . 5D ) . To ask how the larger pores could influence endocytosis , confocal microscopy was performed through the width of the 3 . 0 µm porous filter and demonstrated that cell processes from phalloidin / NG2 stained pericytes invaded through these larger pores to establish connections with the endothelium ( Figure 5E ) , similar to their peg - and - socket physical interaction in the normal BBB ( 37 ) . Transcytosis of albumin in this model was also confirmed by its presence on astrocytes in the lower chamber ( Fig . 5F - G ) ; both brain - tropic cell lines produced comparable results ( Fig . 5F - H ) . Albumin costained with Rab11a , a vesicular trafficking protein known to be involved in transcytosis ( 38 ) , in the endothelial layer ( Fig . 5I ) . Albumin transcytosis by macropinocytosis , but dependent on FcRn . To translate albumin uptake patterns into effective drug delivery , an understanding of its permeation patterns in the normal brain versus metastases is needed . Herein , we investigated the endocytic process by which albumin penetrates endothelia ( Fig . 6A - B ) . Incubation of in vitro BTB cultures with Fillipin III or Chlorpromazine , inhibitors of caveolin - dependent ( 39 ) and clathrin - dependent ( 40 ) endocytosis , respectively , had no significant effect on albumin endocytosis . Ethylisopropylamiloride ( EIPA ) , an inhibitor of macropinocytosis ( 41 ) , inhibited albumin endothelial endocytosis by 95 . 5 % ( p < 0 . 0001 ) in JIMT1 - BR ( Figure 6A ) and 80 . 3 % ( p < 0 . 0001 ) in 231 - BR model systems ( Figure 6B ) . Macropinocytosis , translated as “big drinking” , is the intake of fluid and soluble constituents in large vesicles . As a nonselective process , however , fluid and whatever is dissolved in it is taken up in classical macropinocytosis . It would make little sense that chemotherapeutic drugs would not be similarly taken up and readily distributed to brain metastases , in contrast to voluminous experimental data . A potential answer to this conundrum lies within the general category of macropinocytosis : A protein - binding macropinocytotic pathway has been described , termed clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) , also known as clathrin - independent carrier ( CLIC ) , glycolipid and lectin hypothesis ( GL - Lec ) , or GPI - enriched compartment ( GEEC ) . As an 14 example , the membrane protein CD44 , via extracellular N - glycosylation , binds galectin 3 ( Gal - 3 ) which , as a pentamer , coalesces multiple CD44 proteins . When coalesced in a membrane region containing high levels of glycosphingolipids , an endocytic pit forms ( 42 ) . If this mechanism were to apply to albumin , it must bind an endothelial membrane protein . At least two prominent endothelial proteins have been reported to bind albumin , FcRn ( 27 ) and secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine ( SPARC or Osteonectin ) ( 28 ) . An albumin binding protein gp60 was previously reported but we could not identify it with current antibodies on western blots . FcRn is highly expressed in normal BBB endothelia where it binds and recycles both albumin and IgG back to the bloodstream ( 43 ) . Partial knockdown of FcRn in brain endothelial cells by two shRNAs was performed ( Fig . 6C ) . When albumin was incubated with models expressing either shFcRn or scrambled shRNA , endocytosis was significantly reduced ( > 80 % , p < 0 . 0001 ) in the FcRn knockdowns ( Fig . 6D ) ; reduced albumin endocytosis was noted in BTB cultures containing either JIMT1 - BR or 231 - BR tumor cells ( Fig . 6E - F ) . FcRn knockdown also reduced transcytosis of albumin to the lower chamber of BTB cultures by ~ 37 % ( P = 0 . 004 ) ( Fig . 6G ) . No effect on doxorubicin paracellular permeability was observed ( Fig . 6H ) . The data indicate that a major portion of albumin endocytosis and transcytosis in the BTB is not via nonselective macropinocytosis but involved an FcRn - mediated pathway . Albumin macropinocytosis through the BTB displays features of CIE . We asked if albumin endocytosis , via FcRn binding , fit a general profile of CIE described for CD44 in vitro . Brain endothelial FcRn was N - glycosylated ( Fig . 7A ) , in agreement with previous data in rat kidney cells ( 44 ) . Brain endothelial FcRn bound Gal - 3 in two - way co - immunoprecipitations ( Fig . 7B - C , input controls on Supplementary Fig . S4 ) . Gal - 3 costained with FcRn in endothelial cultures using immunofluorescence experiments ( Fig . 7D ) . Gal - 3 was then knocked down from brain endothelial cells using two shRNAs ( Fig . 7E ) . When these cells were incubated with albumin , endocytosis was reduced by 80 % in the Gal - 3 shRNA cultures ( p < 0 . 0001 ) ( Figure 7F - H ) . A reduction in albumin endocytosis was also observed if membrane glycosphingolipids were depleted from endothelial cells using a Glucosylceramide synthase ( GCS ) inhibitor ( 45 ) ( Figure 7I - K ) . Endocytosis of albumin was dynamin - independent ( Supplementary Fig . S5A - D ) and dependent on cdc42 ( Supplementary Fig . S6A - B ) , also consistent with a CIE mechanism . 15 SPARC is an extracellular matrix modifying protein made by brain endothelial cells with FcRn binding properties ( 46 ) . shRNA knockdown of SPARC only heterogeneously decreased albumin endocytosis in two clones ( Supplementary Fig . S7A - B ) . SPARC was also non - glycosylated ( Supplementary Fig . S7C ) . These data eliminated SPARC from further consideration as an albumin CIE pathway . Taken together , in vitro data using BBB and BTB cultures demonstrate that albumin likely transcytoses the BTB , at least in part , by a CIE mechanism ( Fig . 7L ) . Data suggests that albumin binds FcRn , which as an N - glycosylated protein binds Gal - 3 , resulting in receptor aggregation in a sphingolipid dense membrane region , resulting in invagination . Albumin CIE proteins in human brain metastases . Whether the albumin CIE transcytotic pathway is evident in human brain metastases is important for potential translational development . Initial studies were conducted with a limited number of frozen craniotomy specimens , suitable for IF . A specimen , representative of 4 / 9 examined , shows localization of collagen IV to identify BTB capillaries and co - localization of Gal - 3 . The adjacent section was stained for FcRn and also shows patchy co - localization , which could be consistent with its coalescence into membrane domains ( Fig . 8A ) . Additional studies were performed by IHC using formalin - fixed , paraffin embedded craniotomy specimens from multiple cancer histologies . Staining for Gal - 3 on metastatic capillary endothelial cells was found in 60 % of breast cancer and 50 % of ovarian cancer craniotomies but only 17 % of lung cancer specimens ( Fig . 8B - C ) . Staining was intracellular , which could reflect synthesis or intracellular sorting and trafficking , and luminal , consistent with an extracellular glycocalyx / CIE structure . A single specimen contained a margin of uninvolved brain in which Gal - 3 was less prominent ( Figure 8D ) . Interestingly , recent data comparing primary High grade serous ovarian cancer to its matched brain metastases highlights alteration of a complex network included the intracellular vesicular transport , along with cell cycle , lipid metabolism , cell junction organization etc . ( 47 ) . In addition to brain metastasis endothelial cells , Gal - 3 expression was quantified on cancer cells , neurons , glial cells and macrophages in craniotomies on a 0 - 3 + intensity scale ( Fig . 8E , Supplementary Fig . S8 ) . While mainly absent on brain cells , intense staining was seen in 16 cancer cells . These data suggest that a drug delivery via the CIE pathway could also operate in tumor cells , but spare most normal brain neurons . 17 Discussion In an effort to improve therapy for patients with brain metastases , or primary brain cancers , multiple investigators have reported preclinical studies using drugs linked to , or encapsulated in transcytotic pathways operative in the brain . Few of these have made it into the clinic or been FDA approved . These studies differ in at least four respects : the transcytotic pathway being drugged ; the drug ; its formulation / dose / schedule ; the model system . Unfortunately , multiple variables make comparisons and conclusions difficult . Herein , we have conducted a survey of one variable , the transcytosis pathway , as a fundamental step toward rational design of new , efficacious therapeutics . Three well - known transcytotic pathways , TfR , LRP1 and albumin were all labeled with a far - red fluorophore in order to compare their distribution patterns side - by - side . Peptides were used for TfR and LRP1 to enable far - red labeling . The probes were circulated in animals bearing two hematogenous models of breast cancer brain metastases , each for two time periods , before probe in the circulation was removed by perfusion and tissue uptake quantified . Each transcytosis pathway produced a distinct distribution pattern . In addition , brain metastatic distribution did not covary with uninvolved brain distribution . These data strongly support the use of metastatic models for probe and drug distribution translational studies . It will be of interest to quantitate the distribution of these probes in primary CNS tumors to determine whether these trends are BTB - or tumor histology specific . Albumin showed a distinct distribution pattern with features thought to be optimal for therapeutic translation . Almost all lesions were positive for albumin in both model systems and at both timepoints tested , suggesting it can effectively deliver a drug to metastases . Both macrometastases and micrometastases labeled comparably , which are targets for therapy and prevention of outgrowth of additional lesions , respectively . Albumin uptake by uninvolved or normal brain was comparable to the far - red dye control and nearly invisible on photomicrographs . Drug uptake into normal brain may be irrelevant if the target is not expressed , for instance a mutated oncogene . Alternatively , chemo - and molecular therapeutics that target wild type proteins found in the brain , if taken up into normal brain , could cause profound toxicities . Albumin distribution was also greater than , and independent of biocytin - TMR , a paracellular permeability probe , suggesting that this pathway may yield distinct uptake patterns 18 from traditional paracellularly distributed drugs . The only potential weakness in albumin distribution that we observed was its heterogeneous intensity within a lesion , so that not all tumor cells would receive equal exposure . Albumin is known to enter normal brain endothelia via binding to the FcRn , and to then be endocytosed and recycled back to the circulation , or directed to the lysosome for breakdown to provide amino acids , never reaching the brain parenchyma in significant concentrations . Antibodies also bind FcRn , and this contributes to their relatively long half - lives ( 27 ) . We have investigated how albumin permeates the BTB using an improved in vitro model system . Many in vitro models of the BBB and BTB have been reported , each with strengths and deficiencies ( 48 ) . The current assay was modified from a previously reported culture system that demonstrated paracellular drug and probe distribution ( 36 ) . Enlarging the pores separating endothelia from pericytes allowed cell connections and transcytosis . Albumin endocytosed into endothelial cells and transcytosed past the pericytes into culture medium and onto astrocytes in the lower chamber . Endocytosis was largely by macropinocytosis and was dependent on FcRn , based on shRNA knockdown experiments . In vitro assays with brain endothelial cells demonstrated that FcRn , via N - glycosylation bound Gal - 3 , and worked in concert with membrane glycosphingolipids . These data support a BTB endocytic process termed clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) . Future research will determine how albumin - linked cargoes are routed post - endocytosis to a transcytotic endpoint . We observed increased co - immunofluorescence staining of albumin with the Rab11a , a marker of transcytosis , in BTB compared to BBB models . Endothelial cells with features of CIE ( such as Gal - 3 staining ) are present in the BTB of human craniotomy specimens . Also , the methods of drug traversal through the remaining BTB and parenchymal cells and matrices between the endothelium and tumor cells must be identified . Interestingly , tumor cells were highly Gal - 3 + and macrophages ( microglia ) were uniformly Gal - 3 + at lower levels , suggesting that an albumin CIE pathway may be operative in other parts of the metastatic brain for drug delivery . Albumin has been a focus of research for many years with varying conclusions . Albumin can coat nanoparticles to increase their solubility and adsorption , such as nab - paclitaxel , but differing conclusions have been drawn over the stability of this formulation ( 26 , 49 ) . Stability of albumin binding to drug ( directly or indirectly ) would be required for a transcytotic function in the CNS . Albumin has a track record of stable conjugation to peptides or drugs to improve their 19 half - life or preferential accumulation pattern , which has led to FDA approval of Levemir ® ( insulin detemir ) and similar products for enhancing insulin bioavailability and distribution ( 50 - 52 ) . Nanoparticles have been coated with albumin in many preclinical experiments for metastatic cancer . A recent formulation of an albumin stably coating a nanoparticle and containing a PI3K γ inhibitor and paclitaxel , when administered with checkpoint therapy , shrank metastatic mammary tumors in a genetically engineered mouse model ( 26 ) and may represent an example of an efficacious stable formulation that can be tested for brain metastases . Two reports of stable incorporation of albumin into nanoparticles have produced promising results in brain cancers : A BSA - tetramethylindotricarbocyanide iodide ( DIR ) nanoparticle showed limited distribution in the normal mouse brain but a several - fold enhancement in brains containing intracerebrally inoculated glioma ; in vitro uptake of albumin - DIR by endothelial cells was sensitive to depletion of membrane cholesterol but did not alter the expression of paracellular permeability proteins such as ZO - 1 or Occludin ( 25 ) , consistent with a transcytotic mechanism . Wan et al . prepared human serum albumin - phosphatidylcholine nanoparticles containing the selective EGFR and HER2 small molecule inhibitor lapatinib . In a 4T1 - luc brain metastasis model system , lapatinib - loaded nanoparticles distributed to the metastatic brain better than to the normal brain , and to a metastatic brain 5 . 4 - fold better than free drug after IV injection . Brain metastatic mouse survival increased 61 % in response to the nanoparticle formulation over free drug ( 53 ) . Taken together , the data urge reconsideration of stably linked albumin as a transcytotic mechanism for drug treatment of brain metastases and possibly other CNS cancers . 20 Acknowledgements This project has been funded in whole or in part with Federal funds from the National Cancer Institute , National Institutes of Health , under Contract No . HHSN261201500003I . The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human Services , nor does mention of trade names , commercial products , or organizations imply endorsement by the U . S . Government . The human tissue samples from France were provided by AP - HM tumor bank AC - 2013 - 1786 , BB - 0033 - 00097 . 21 References : 1 . Boire A , Brastianos PK , Garzia L , Valiente M . Brain metastasis . Nature Reviews Cancer 2020 ; 20 : 4 - 11 2 . Achrol AS , Rennert RC , Anders C , Soffietti R , Ahluwalia MS , Nayak L , et al . Brain metastases . Nature Reviews Disease Primers 2019 ; 5 3 . Arvanitis CD , Ferraro GB , Jain RK . The blood - brain barrier and blood - tumour barrier in brain tumours and metastases . Nature Reviews Cancer 2020 ; 20 : 26 - 41 4 . Lin NU , Borges V , Anders C , Murthy RK , Paplomata E , Hamilton E , et al . Intracranial Efficacy and Survival With Tucatinib Plus Trastuzumab and Capecitabine for Previously Treated HER2 - Positive Breast Cancer With Brain Metastases in the HER2CLIMB Trial . Journal of Clinical Oncology 2020 ; 38 : 2610 - 9 5 . Jacot W , Pons E , Frenel JS , Guiu S , Levy C , Heudel PE , et al . Efficacy and safety of trastuzumab emtansine ( T - DM1 ) in patients with HER2 - positive breast cancer with brain metastases . Breast Cancer Res Treat 2016 ; 157 : 307 - 18 6 . Boogerd W , Dalesio O , Bais EM , Vandersande JJ . Response of brain metastases from breast cancer to systemic chemotherapy . Cancer 1992 ; 69 : 972 - 80 7 . Walbert T , Gilbert MR . The role of chemotherapy in the treatment of patients with brain metastases from solid tumors . International Journal of Clinical Oncology 2009 ; 14 : 299 - 306 8 . Gril B , Wei D , Zimmer A , Robinson C , Khan I , Difilippantonio S , et al . A HER2 Antibody Drug Conjugate controls growth of breast cancer brain metastasis in hematogenous xenograft models , with heterogeneous blood - tumor barrier penetration unlinked to a passive marker . Neuro - oncol 2020 : noaa118 . doi : 10 . 1093 / neuonc / noaa118 9 . Samala R , Thorsheim HR , Goda S , Taskar K , Gril B , Steeg PS , et al . Vinorelbine Delivery and Efficacy in the MDA - MB - 231BR Preclinical Model of Brain Metastases of Breast Cancer . Pharmaceutical Research 2016 ; 33 : 2904 - 19 10 . Taskar KS , Rudraraju V , Mittapalli RK , Samala R , Thorsheim HR , Lockman J , et al . Lapatinib Distribution in HER2 Overexpressing Experimental Brain Metastases of Breast Cancer . Pharmaceutical Research 2012 ; 29 : 770 - 81 11 . Lockman PR , Mittapalli RK , Taskar KS , Rudraraju V , Gril B , Bohn KA , et al . Heterogeneous Blood - Tumor Barrier Permeability Determines Drug Efficacy in Experimental Brain Metastases of Breast Cancer . Clinical Cancer Research 2010 ; 16 : 5664 - 78 12 . Thomas FC , Taskar K , Rudraraju V , Goda S , Thorsheim HR , Gaasch JA , et al . Uptake of ANG1005 , A Novel Paclitaxel Derivative , Through the Blood - Brain Barrier into Brain and Experimental Brain Metastases of Breast Cancer . Pharmaceutical Research 2009 ; 26 : 2486 - 94 13 . Terrell - Hall TB , Nounou MI , El - Amrawy F , Griffith JIG , Lockman PR . Trastuzumab distribution in an in - vivo and in - vitro model of brain metastases of breast cancer . Oncotarget 2017 ; 8 : 83734 - 44 14 . Steeg PS . The blood - tumour barrier in cancer biology and therapy . Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology 2021 ; 18 : 696 - 714 15 . Villaseñor R , Lampe J , Schwaninger M , Collin L . Intracellular transport and regulation of transcytosis across the blood - brain barrier . Cell Mol Life Sci 2019 ; 76 : 1081 - 92 16 . Keaney J , Campbell M . The dynamic blood - brain barrier . Febs Journal 2015 ; 282 : 4067 - 79 17 . Johnsen KB , Burkhart A , Thomsen LB , Andresen TL , Moos T . Targeting the transferrin receptor for brain drug delivery . Progress in Neurobiology 2019 ; 181 18 . Yu YJ , Zhang Y , Kenrick M , Hoyte K , Luk W , Lu YM , et al . Boosting Brain Uptake of a Therapeutic Antibody by Reducing Its Affinity for a Transcytosis Target . Science Translational Medicine 2011 ; 3 22 19 . Paris - Robidas S , Brouard D , Emond V , Parent M , Calon F . Internalization of targeted quantum dots by brain capillary endothelial cells in vivo . Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 2016 ; 36 : 731 - 42 20 . Manich G , Cabezon I , del Valle J , Duran - Vilaregut J , Camins A , Pallas M , et al . Study of the transcytosis of an anti - transferrin receptor antibody with a Fab ' cargo across the blood - brain barrier in mice . European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 2013 ; 49 : 556 - 64 21 . Rauch JN , Luna G , Guzman E , Audouard M , Challis C , Sibih YE , et al . LRP1 is a master regulator of tau uptake and spread . Nature 2020 ; 580 : 381 - 5 22 . Kumthekar P , Tang SC , Brenner AJ , Kesari S , Piccioni DE , Anders C , et al . ANG1005 , a Brain - Penetrating Peptide - Drug Conjugate , Shows Activity in Patients with Breast Cancer with Leptomeningeal Carcinomatosis and Recurrent Brain Metastases . Clinical Cancer Research 2020 ; 26 : 2789 - 99 23 . Orthmann A , Zeisig R , Suss R , Lorenz D , Lemm M , Fichtner I . Treatment of Experimental Brain Metastasis with MTO - Liposomes : Impact of Fluidity and LRP - Targeting on the Therapeutic Result . Pharmaceutical Research 2012 ; 29 : 1949 - 59 24 . Elsadek B , Kratz F . Impact of albumin on drug delivery - New applications on the horizon . Journal of Controlled Release 2012 ; 157 : 4 - 28 25 . Liang J , Gao C , Zhu Y , Ling C , Wang Q , Huang Y , et al . Natural Brain Penetration Enhancer - Modified Albumin Nanoparticles for Glioma Targeting Delivery . ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2018 ; 10 : 30201 - 13 26 . Song YD , Bugada L , Li RT , Hu HX , Zhang LC , Li CY , et al . Albumin nanoparticle containing a PI3K gamma inhibitor and paclitaxel in combination with alpha - PD1 induces tumor remission of breast cancer in mice . Science Translational Medicine 2022 ; 14 27 . Sand KMK , Bern M , Nilsen J , Noordzij HT , Sandlie I , Andersen JT . Unraveling the interaction between FcRn and albumin : opportunities for design of albumin - based therapeutics . Frontiers in Immunology 2015 ; 5 : 1 - 21 28 . Liddelow SA , Dziegielewska KM , Mollgard K , Phoenix TN , Temple S , VandeBerg JL , et al . SPARC / osteonectin , an endogenous mechanism for targeting albumin to the blood - cerebrospinal fluid interface during brain development . European Journal of Neuroscience 2011 ; 34 : 1062 - 73 29 . Vorbrodt AW , Dobrogowska DH , Lossinsky AS . Ultrastructural study on the interaction of native and cationized albumin - gold complexes with mouse brain microvascular endothelium . Journal of Neurocytology 1996 ; 25 : 645 - 57 30 . Vorbrodt AW , Trowbridge RS . Ultrastructural study of transcellular transport of native and cationized albumin in cultured sheep brain microvascular endothelium . Journal of Neurocytology 1991 ; 20 : 998 - 1006 31 . Palmieri D , Bronder JL , Herring JM , Yoneda T , Weil RJ , Stark AM , et al . Her - 2 overexpression increases the metastatic outgrowth of breast cancer cells in the brain . Cancer Res 2007 ; 67 : 4190 - 8 32 . Palmieri D , Duchnowska R , Woditschka S , Hua E , Qian YZ , Biernat W , et al . Profound Prevention of Experimental Brain Metastases of Breast Cancer by Temozolomide in an MGMT - Dependent Manner . Clinical Cancer Research 2014 ; 20 : 2727 - 39 33 . Gril B , Paranjape A , Woditschka S , Hua E , Dolan E , Hanson J , et al . Reactive astrocytic S1P3 signaling modulates the blood - tumor barrier in brain metastases . Nature Communications 2018 ; In press 23 34 . Knowland D , Arac A , Sekiguchi KJ , Hsu M , Lutz SE , Perrino J , et al . Stepwise Recruitment of Transcellular and Paracellular Pathways Underlies Blood - Brain Barrier Breakdown in Stroke . Neuron 2014 ; 82 : 603 - 17 35 . Urdang ZD , Bills JL , Cahana DY , Muldoon LL , Neuwelt EA . Toll - like Receptor 4 Signaling and Downstream Neutrophilic Inflammation Mediate Endotoxemia - Enhanced Blood Labyrinth Barrier Trafficking . Otology & Neurotology 2020 ; 41 : 123 - 32 36 . Gril B , Paranjape AN , Woditschka S , Hua E , Dolan EL , Hanson J , et al . Reactive astrocytic S1P3 signaling modulates the blood - tumor barrier in brain metastases . Nature Communications 2018 ; 9 37 . Daneman R , Zhou L , Kebede AA , Barres BA . Pericytes are required for blood - brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis . Nature 2010 ; 468 : 562 - U238 38 . Muller SK , Wilhelm I , Schubert T , Zittlau K , Imberty A , Madl J , et al . Gb3 - binding lectins as potential carriers for transcellular drug delivery . Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery 2017 ; 14 : 141 - 53 39 . Orlandi PA , Fishman PH . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : Evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . Journal of Cell Biology 1998 ; 141 : 905 - 15 40 . Wang S , Sharma P , Schoenlein P , Ely B . A protein histidine kinase is involved in polar organelle development in Caulobacter crescentus . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993 ; 90 : 630 - 4 41 . Koivusalo M , Welch C , Hayashi H , Scott CC , Kim M , Alexander T , et al . Amiloride inhibits macropinocytosis by lowering submembranous pH and preventing Rac1 and Cdc42 signaling ( vol 188 , pg 547 , 2010 ) . Journal of Cell Biology 2010 ; 189 42 . Lakshminarayan R , Wunder C , Becken U , Howes MT , Benzing C , Arumugam S , et al . Galectin - 3 drives glycosphingolipid - dependent biogenesis of clathrin - independent carriers . Nature Cell Biology 2014 ; 16 : 592 - 603 43 . Pyzik M , Sand KMK , Hubbard JJ , Andersen JT , Sandlie I , Blumberg RS . The Neonatal Fc Receptor ( FcRn ) : A Misnomer ? Frontiers in Immunology 2019 ; 10 : 24 44 . Kuo TT , de Muinck EJ , Claypool SM , Yoshida M , Nagaishi T , Aveson VG , et al . N - Glycan Moieties in Neonatal Fc Receptor Determine Steady - state Membrane Distribution and Directional Transport of IgG . Journal of Biological Chemistry 2009 ; 284 : 8292 - 300 45 . Alam S , Fedier A , Kohler RS , Jacob F . Glucosylceramide synthase inhibitors differentially affect expression of glycosphingolipids . Glycobiology 2015 ; 25 : 351 - 6 46 . Tilling T , Korte D , Hoheisel D , Galla HJ . Basement membrane proteins influence brain capillary endothelial barrier function in vitro . Journal of neurochemistry 1998 ; 71 : 1151 - 7 47 . Duchnowska R , Supernat AM , Peksa R , Lukasiewicz M , Stokowy T , Ronen R , et al . Pathway - level mutation analysis in primary high - grade serous ovarian cancer and matched brain metastases . Sci Rep 2022 ; 12 : 20537 48 . Helms HC , Abbott NJ , Burek M , Cecchelli R , Couraud PO , Deli MA , et al . In vitro models of the blood - brain barrier : An overview of commonly used brain endothelial cell culture models and guidelines for their use . Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 2016 ; 36 : 862 - 90 49 . I AB . Abraxane - For the adjuvant treatment of node - positive breast cancer administered sequentially to standard doxorubicin - containing combination chemotherapy . In : Meeting ODAC , editor . Volume 52006 . 50 . Elsadek B , Kratz F . Impact of albumin on drug delivery - - new applications on the horizon . J Control Release 2012 ; 157 : 4 - 28 51 . Liu Z , Chen , X . Simple bioconjugate chemistry serves great clinical advances : albumin as a versitile platform for diagnosis and precision therapy . Chem Soc Rev 2016 ; 45 24 52 . Kratz F , Elsadek B . Clinical impact of serum proteins on drug delivery . J Control Release 2012 ; 161 : 429 - 45 53 . Wan X , Zheng XY , Pang XY , Pang ZQ , Zhao JJ , Zhang ZM , et al . Lapatinib - loaded human serum albumin nanoparticles for the prevention and treatment of triple - negative breast cancer metastasis to the brain . Oncotarget 2016 ; 7 : 34038 - 51 25 Figure legends Figure 1 . Comparison of three transcytosis pathways for uptake in the HER2 + JIMT1 - BR experimental brain metastasis model of breast cancer . A . Experimental design . Mice were injected with enhanced green fluorescent protein ( eGFP ) labeled JIMT1 - BR HER2 + brain - tropic breast tumor cells ( JIMT1 - BR ) or MDA - MB - 231 - BR brain - tropic triple negative breast tumor cells ( 231 - BR ) into the left cardiac ventricle . Tumor cells circulated throughout the body and brain metastases developed in 3 - 10 weeks . Before necropsy mice were injected with Far - red emitting fluorescent labeled ligands / proteins ( Transferrin receptor peptide , TfR ; Low density lipoprotein receptor 1 peptide , LRP1 ; Albumin ) which circulated for a short ( 0 . 5 - 1h ) or longer ( 4 - 6h ) period . Mice were perfused under deep anesthesia to remove label from the circulation . Whole brain sections were scanned for GFP and Far - red intensity in macrometastases and micrometastases . B - E . Mean and individual animal levels of each probe fluorescence intensity in uninvolved ( metastasis free , U ) brain and brain metastases ( M ) , by metastasis size and time of circulation . F - G . The experiment was repeated with normal ( uninjected ) mice at two circulation timepoints , with albumin data from B - E shown for comparison . Statistical differences were calculated using One - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) by comparing uninvolved brain ( U ) to metastases ( M ) across all the groups . * * * * , P < 0 . 0001 . Figure 2 . Photomicrographs of three transcytosis pathways for uptake in the HER2 + JIMT1 - BR experimental brain metastasis model of breast cancer . For the experiment described in Fig . 1 , representative photomicrographs of whole brain sections and metastases from each section ( white dotted line ) are shown for each transcytosis ligand and circulation time . For each metastasis a merged view of Far - red fluorescence of the transcytosis ligand and eGFP from tumor cells is shown and , beneath it , a Far - red channel only photo . Scale bar 125 µm . White arrows highlight TfR uptake in uninvolved brain . Figure 3 . Comparison of three transcytosis pathways for uptake in the triple - negative 231 - BR experimental brain metastasis model of breast cancer . An experiment described in Fig 1A was conducted using MDA - MB - 231 - BR ( 231 - BR ) brain - tropic cells . A - D . Mean and individual animal fluorescence intensity levels of each probe in uninvolved ( metastasis free , U ) brain and brain metastases ( M ) , by metastasis size and time of circulation . E - F . Representative photomicrographs of metastases from each experimental arm ( white dotted line ) showing a merged view of Far - red fluorescence of the transcytosis ligand and eGFP from tumor cells along with far - red channel alone . Magnification scale bars as shown ( 125 µm ) . White arrows highlight TfR uptake in uninvolved brain . Statistical differences were calculated using One - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) by comparing uninvolved brain ( U ) to metastases ( M ) across all the groups . * * * * , P < 0 . 0001 . 26 Figure 4 . Far - red - Albumin distribution to metastatic colonies and micrometastases is distinct from paracellular distribution . Mice with either JIMT1 - BR or 231 - BR metastases received IV Far - red - Albumin and Tetramethylrhodamine Biocytin ( Biocytin TMR ) , a marker of paracellular permeability ; probes circulated for 60 and 10 min , respectively , followed by perfusion . All lesions in a whole brain section were analyzed for fluorescent uptake pattern . A - B . Means and individual animal data of each probe fluorescence intensity for uninvolved brain , all metastases ( left ) , macrometastases ( center ) and micrometastases ( right ) are plotted . A . JIMT1 - BR model system . B . 231 - BR model system . C - D . Representative photomicrographs of a metastatic area with Far - red fluorescence of albumin , red fluorescence of Biocytin TMR , tumor cells expressing eGFP and their merge for JIMT1 - BR ( C ) and 231 - BR ( D ) model systems are shown . Scale bar 125 µm . Statistical differences were calculated using One - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) by comparing uninvolved brain to metastatic area / macrometastases / micrometastases across all the groups . Figure 5 . An in vitro assay of BBB and BTB function that demonstrates albumin endocytosis and transcytosis . A - D . Comparison of cultures using 3 µm and 0 . 4 µm porous filters . A . Experimental design . 50 µg / ml Alexa Fluor™ 594 - albumin was applied to the top chamber and incubated for 30 min . B . Percentage of endothelial cells exhibiting albumin endocytosis . C . Transcytosis of Alexa Fluor™ 594 - albumin after 2 hrs incubation was measured by Red fluorescence in the lower chamber ( n = 5 ) . D . Application of doxorubicin to the in vitro assays for 45 min demonstrated no effect of filter pore size on paracellular permeability , quantified by doxorubicin fluorescence in the bottom well ( n = 3 ) . E . Confocal microscopy through a 3 µm filter from a completed BTB assay stained for pericytes with NG2 and DAPI or Phalloidin and DAPI ; demonstrating invasive NG2 + pericyte processes reaching through the larger pores toward endothelial cells . F - H . Data using 3 µm porous filters . F . Percentage of endothelial cells exhibiting albumin endocytosis in normal ( blood - brain barrier , BBB ) and tumor cell containing ( blood - tumor barrier , BTB ) cultures ( n = 4 ) . G . Transcytosis of albumin through the cultures described in F onto astrocytes in the lower chamber ( n = 4 ) . H . Photomicrographs of endothelial cells from F . Red , albumin ; Blue , DAPI . I . Co - immunofluorescence of endothelial cells from BBB and BTB cultures for albumin ( Red ) and Rab11a ( Green ) with blue DAPI staining . Magnification bar , 10 µm . All experiments show mean + / - SEM with experiments conducted at least four times , until specified . Statistical differences were calculated using One - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) . Figure 6 . Albumin transcytosis through the blood - tumor barrier ( BTB ) uses macropinocytosis , but dependent on FcRn . A - B . Using the in vitro assay of BTB function ( Fig . 5A ) , inhibitors of endocytic pathways were applied 30 min before addition of 50 µg / ml Alexa Fluor™ 488 - albumin for 30 min . Brain endothelial endocytosis of albumin was quantified 27 in cultures with : A . JIMT1 - BR or B . 231 - BR tumor cells , respectively ( n = 6 ) . Scale bar 20 µm . C - H . Endothelial knockdown of FcRn disrupts albumin endocytosis and transcytosis . C . FcRn was knocked down in mouse brain endothelial cells using two independent shRNAs ; the FcRn band is the top of a doublet as indicated by an arrow . D - G . Alexa Fluor™ 594 - albumin was applied to in vitro BTB cultures and its endocytosis into endothelial cells was evaluated . D . Representative photomicrographs . Red , Albumin ; Blue , DAPI . E - F . Percentage of albumin + endothelial cells in JIMT1 - BR and 231 - BR BTB assays , respectively . G . Transcytosis assays measuring albumin fluorescence into the lower chamber ( n = 4 ) . H . Paracellular movement of doxorubicin in 231 - BR model BTB culture into culture medium of lower well . Figure 7 . Albumin transcytosis through blood - tumor barrier ( BTB ) cultures demonstrates features of clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) . A . A lysate of brain endothelial cells was separated into glycosylated and non - glycosylated fractions using Concanavilin A based glycoprotein isolation kit and probed for FcRn . B - C . Brain endothelial FcRn bound Galectin - 3 ( Gal - 3 ) in two - way co - immunoprecipitations . D . Co - immunofluorescence of FcRn and Gal - 3 in cultured brain endothelial cells . Green , FcRn ; Red , Gal - 3 , Blue , DAPI . E . Western blot of Gal - 3 knockdown by two independent shRNAs compared to a scrambled shRNA control in mice brain endothelial cells . F - H . Representative photographs ( F ) of endothelial endocytosis of Alexa Fluor™ 594 - albumin using endothelial cells from E in an in vitro BTB assay on both model systems and its quantitation ( G - JIMT1 - BR , H - 231 - BR ) ( n = 4 ) ; scale bar 10 µm . I - K . Glycosphingolipids are required for albumin endocytosis . Endothelial cells were treated with 30 µM of PPMP ( DL - threo - 1 - Phenyl - 2 - palmitoylamino - 3 - morpholino - 1 - propanol ) for 1 h to deplete glycosphingolipids . Endocytosis of Albumin was determined using an in vitro BTB assay with JIMT1 - BR ( I , J ) and 231 - BR ( I , K ) and representative photographs and quantitation are shown ( n = 6 ) , scale bar 10 µm . All experiments were performed at least four times and statistical differences were calculated using One - way ANOVA . L . Schematic of albumin endocytosis into the BTB endothelium . Albumin ( pink ) binds FcRn ( blue ) in regions of high membrane glycosphingolipids ( orange ) . N - glycosylation of FcRn ( gray ) binds to pentameric Gal - 3 ( green ) resulting in coalescence to form a membrane invagination . Figure 8 . Galectin - 3 ( Gal - 3 ) positivity is a consistent feature of the blood - tumor barrier of human brain metastases . A . Co - immunofluorescence of a snap frozen brain metastasis of human breast cancer showing Gal - 3 colocalization with BTB vessels outlined by collagen IV . In an adjacent section the same structures demonstrate colocalization with FcRn . B - C . Gal - 3 immunohistochemical staining of formalin - fixed , paraffin embedded resected human brain metastases . B . Representative photographs of Gal - 3 staining patterns , on the luminal surface of , or within the BTB ( black arrows highlighting perivascular , endothelial and negative staining - left to right ) . C . Percentage of craniotomy specimens from three cancer histologies expressing BTB endothelial Gal - 3 . D . Single example of a craniotomy specimen with a border of uninvolved brain , which demonstrated less Gal - 3 staining . E . Gal - 3 staining patterns of other components of 28 brain metastases of breast cancer , expressed as a percentage of specimens with 0 - 3 + intensity staining ( n = 10 ) . Scale bars : 50 µm . Intracardiac Metastasis formation 0 . 5 - 6h circulation , Perfuse , Necropsy Inject iv Far - red - ligand JIMT - 1 - BR / MDA - MB - 231BR A B Macrometastases , 1h Schema C Micrometastases , 1h LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin Dye alone U M U M U M U M M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 * * * * 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin Dye alone U M U M U M U M M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y * * * * 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin Dye alone U M U M U M U M M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y D Macrometastases , 6h E Micrometastases , 6h 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin Dye alone U M U M U M U M * * * * * * * * M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y F G Fig . 1 U - Uninvolved brain M - Metastases 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 Healthy Mice U M Albumin JIMT1BR * * * * 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 Healthy Mice U M Albumin JIMT1BR M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y * * * * Fig . 2 LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide M e r g e d F a r - r e d Albumin A B LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin M e r g e d F a r - r e d Fig . 3 LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin M e r g e d F a r - r e d M e r g e d F a r - r e d 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 U M U M U M U M 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 U M U M U M U M 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin Dye alone U M U M U M U M 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 LRP1 Receptor Peptide Transferrin Peptide Albumin Dye alone U M U M U M U M M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * A B C D E F Macrometastases , 0 . 5 - 1h Micrometastases , 0 . 5 - 1h Macrometastases , 4 - 6hrs Micrometastases , 4 - 6hrs U - Uninvolved brain M - Metastases Fig . 4 A B JIMT1 - BR 0 5000 10000 15000 0 5000 10000 15000 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 Uninvolved Brain Metastatic Area M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y Far - red - Albumin Biocytin - TMR Uninvolved Brain Macrometastases Uninvolved Brain Micrometastases M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 0 10000 20000 30000 Uninvolved Brain Metastatic Area * * * * * * * * * * * * 0 10000 20000 30000 * * * * * * * * * * M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y 0 10000 20000 30000 M e a n F l u o r e s c e n c e I n t e n s i t y Uninvolved Brain Macrometastases Uninvolved Brain Micrometastases * * * * * * * * * * * C D JIMT1 - BR 231 - BR 231 - BR Far - red - Albumin Biocytin TMR GFP Merged Far - red - Albumin GFP Biocytin TMR Merged BBB BBB BTB BTB 0 . 4 µm 3 µm Red - Albumin Endothelial cells Filter Pericytes + / - Tumor cells Astrocytes B A DAPI / NG2 Abluminal Luminal DAPI / Phalloidin C D E F G H I Albumin Merged Rab11a BBB B T B % o f A l bu m i n + E C s ( + / - S E M ) BBB BBB BTB BTB 0 . 4 µm 3 µm 0 10 20 30 40 * * * * 0 2 4 6 8 * * * BBB BBB BTB BTB 0 . 4 µm 3 µm M e a n A l bu m i n f l u o r e s c e n c e ( + / - S E M ) 0 2 4 6 BBB BBB BTB BTB 0 . 4 µm 3 µm ns ns M e a n D o x o r ub i c i n f l u o r e s c e n c e ( + / - S E M ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 BBB BTB * * * * * * * * % o f A l bu m i n + E C s ( + / - S E M ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 BBB BTB % o f A l bu m i n + a s t r o c y t e s i n l o w e r w e ll ( + / - S E M ) * * * * * BBB BTB ( 231 - BR ) BTB ( JIMT - 1 - BR ) Albumin / DAPI Fig . 5 A B C D Albumin CP + Albumin Fillipin + - Albumin EIPA + Albumin Albumin CP + Albumin Fillipin + Albumin EIPA + Albumin G F c R n β - A c t i n FcRn KD 231 - B R J I M T 1 - B R Scr sh 53 sh 54 FcRn KD F E H Fig . 6 0 10 20 30 % o f A l bu m i n + E C s * * * * * * * * 0 10 20 30 40 % o f A l bu m i n + E C s * * * * * * * * 231 - BR JIMT1 - BR 0 1 2 3 4 5 * * * * M e a n A l bu m i n f l u o r e s c e n c e ( + / - S E M ) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 M e a n D o x o r u b i c i n f l u o r e s c e n c e ( + / - S E M ) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 * * * * % o f A l bu m i n + E C s 0 20 40 60 80 % o f A l bu m i n + E C s * * * * D FcRn ( + Alexa - 488 ) DAPI Gal - 3 ( + Alexa - 594 ) Merged E 0 20 40 60 % o f A l bu m i n + E C s * * * * * * * * 0 5 10 15 20 25 * * * * * * * * % o f A l bu m i n + E C s 0 10 20 30 40 * * * * * * * * % o f A l bu m i n + E C s 0 10 20 30 * * * * * * * * % o f A l bu m i n + E C s F G H I J F c R n B - FcRn IP : IgG α FcRn - Gal3 IP : IgG α Gal - 3 - Gal3 - FcRn C A K L Fig . 7 β - A c t i n G a l e c t i n - 3 Gal - 3 KD Scrambled sh863 sh864 Scrambled sh863 sh864 Gal - 3 KD 231 - BR A l bu m i n P P M P A l bu m i n + P P M P JIMT1 - BR Section : 1 1 2 Collagen IV Galectin3 DAPI FcRn B Histology : Fraction ( % ) Specimens with Endothelial Positivity : Breast 6 / 10 ( 60 % ) Ovarian 6 / 12 ( 50 % ) Lung 2 / 12 ( 17 % ) D A C E Staining intensity : 3 + 2 + 1 + 0 0 20 40 60 80 100 P e r c e n t o f c r a n i o t o m y s p e c i m e n s Perivascular staining Negative Endothelial staining Fig . 8