Chalatsi et al . , 1 Autophagy in parvalbumin interneurons is required for inhibitory transmission and memory via regulation of synaptic proteostasis Theodora Chalatsi 1 , Laura M . J . Fernandez 1 , Jules Scholler 2 , Laura Batti 2 , Angeliki Kolaxi 1 , Leonardo Restivo 1 , Anita Lüthi 1 , Manuel Mameli 1 and Vassiliki Nikoletopoulou 1 * 1 Department of Fundamental Neurosciences , Rue du Bugnon 9 , CH - 1005 , Lausanne , Switzerland ; 2 Wyss Center , Chemin des Mines 9 , CH - 1202 , Geneva , Switzerland * Corresponding author : vassiliki . nikoletopoulou @ unil . ch Chalatsi et al . , 2 Summary With the emerging role of the autophagic machinery in healthy brain development and aging , there is a pressing need to better characterize its functions in different neuronal populations , providing cellular insight into autophagy - related brain diseases . Here , we generated and characterized mice with conditional ablation of atg5 in GABAergic neurons expressing parvalbumin ( PV - atg5KO ) , mostly comprising fast - spiking interneurons , as well as Purkinje cells in the cerebellum . Using light - sheet microscopy to image PV neurons throughout the brain , we reveal that autophagy is required for the sustenance of Purkinje cells but not of PV - interneurons . Yet , proteomic analysis showed that autophagy deficiency in cortical and hippocampal PV - interneurons alters the proteostasis of key synaptic proteins , as well as the surface expression of glutamate receptor subunits . Consistently , hippocampal autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons exhibit reduced inhibitory neurotransmission and PV - atg5KO mice display excitation - inhibition imbalance in the hippocampus and memory deficits . Our findings demonstrate a neuronal type - specific vulnerability to autophagy deficiency , while also identifying PV - interneurons as cellular substrates where autophagy is required for memory . Keywords : autophagy , memory , inhibitory neurotransmission , parvalbumin , interneurons , Purkinje cells , neuronal death Chalatsi et al . , 3 Introduction In humans , genetic mutations resulting in diminished autophagic activity manifest as complex neurodevelopmental disorders , entailing epilepsy and impaired cognitive performance ( Ebrahimi - Fakhari et al . , 2016 ) , or late - onset neurodegenerative diseases ( Nixon , 2013 ) . However , the roles of autophagy in the sustenance and synaptic transmission of diverse neurons remain insufficiently characterized . In mammals , the developmental ablation of core autophagy genes , such as atg5 ( Hara et al . , 2006 ; Kuijpers et al . , 2021 ) , a tg7 ( Komatsu et al . , 2006 ) or wdr45 ( Zhao et al . , 2015 ) , leads to progressive and widespread neuronal death . In these studies , autophagy genes were ablated in multiple cell types of the brain , including progenitors and their derived neurons , astrocytes and oligodendrocytes , making it difficult to ascertain whether different types of post - mitotic neurons require autophagy in a cell - autonomous manner for their survival or sustenance . Beyond neuronal survival , accumulating evidence suggests that autophagy also regulates several aspects of the physiology of glutamatergic neurons . These include the development and maturation of excitatory synapses , by facilitating the pruning of their dendritic spines ( Tang et al . , 2014 ) , long - term synaptic depression ( LTD ) , through the degradation of post - synaptic proteins ( Compans et al . , 2021 ; Kallergi et al . , 2022 ; Pan et al . , 2021 ) and basal excitatory neurotransmission , by regulating presynaptic ER - homeostasis and calcium stores ( Kuijpers et al . , 2021 ) . In agreement with its emergent synaptic functions , autophagy was also found to be essential in the hippocampus for memory and learning ( Glatigny et al . , 2019 ; Pandey et al . , 2021 ) . Yet the cellular substrates where autophagy is required for these complex behaviors remain elusive . This is largely due to lack of knowledge on whether autophagy also regulates the sustenance and synaptic properties of other neuronal populations , such as interneurons , which provide inhibition into the neuronal networks they are embedded in . We hypothesized that the memory deficits associated with impaired brain autophagy may involve the dysfunction of Parvalbumin ( PV ) - expressing neurons . In the cortex and hippocampus , PV is mostly expressed by fast - spiking interneurons ( Hippenmeyer et al . , 2005 ) . Despite comprising a small fraction of the brain ' s neuronal network , these cells are characterized by unique morphological and molecular properties that make them key players of excitation - inhibition balance and GABAergic disinhibition between circuitries ( Nahar et al . , 2021 ) . As well as being heavily implicated in neuro - psychiatric diseases ( Kaar et al . , 2019 ; Nakazawa et al . , 2012 ; Ruden et al . , 2021 ) , PV - expressing neurons have high metabolic demands ( Gotti et al . , 2021 ; Inan et al . , Chalatsi et al . , 4 2016 ; Kontou et al . , 2021 ) , rendering them potentially vulnerable to different types of stress ( Page et al . , 2019 ) including autophagy impairment . To address this hypothesis , we generated and characterized mice with conditional ablation of a tg5 in PV - expressing neurons . We demonstrate that Purkinje cells are selectively eliminated in the absence of functional autophagy , while the survival and sustenance of PV - interneurons are unaffected . Moreover , we reveal a pivotal role of autophagy in regulating the proteostasis and inhibitory neurotransmission of PV - interneurons , whose impairment has direct repercussions on the hippocampal network and on memory . Results To determine the functional repertoire of autophagy in PV - expressing neurons , we crossed the pv - cre deleter mice ( Hippenmeyer et al . , 2007 ) with mice carrying floxed alleles of atg5 ( Hara et al . , 2006 ) . The resulting pv - cre ; atg5 f / f progeny ( referred to hereafter as PV - atg5KO ) was generated at the expected mendelian ratios . Upon reaching adulthood ( three - month - old ) , PV - atg5KOs presented a significant reduction in body weight when compared to their atg5 f / f littermates ( referred to here as control ) ( Figure S1A , B ) . The two genotypes consumed similar amount of food , suggesting that differences in weight cannot be ascribed to altered feeding behavior in PV - atg5KOs ( Figure S1C ) . After crossing the pv - cre and PV - atg5KO animals to the robust Ai9 cre - dependent Td - Tomato ( TdT ) reporter strain ( Madisen et al . , 2010 ) , we confirmed that a very high percentage of TdT - positive cells could be co - labelled using antibodies against PV in multiple brain areas ( Figure S1D ) , as illustrated by representative images from the hippocampus and the somatosensory cortex ( Figure S1E ) . Next , we FACS - sorted TdT - positive cells from pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ( control ) and pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ( PV - atg5KO - TdT ) adult brains and performed JESS - Western blot analysis using antibodies against the autophagic substrate p62 ( also known as Sqstm1 ) . As shown in Figure S1F , p62 protein levels were significantly increased in neuronal lysates prepared from PV - atg5KO - TdT mice , when compared to the control , indicating a successful impairment of autophagic degradation within these cells . In line with this , we prepared protein lysates from the cerebellar cortex of adult ( three - month - old ) control and PV - atg5KO mice , a brain area containing a much higher proportion of PV - expressing cells . Western blot analyses indicated a significant accumulation of p62 ( Figure S1G ) , as well as of another autophagy receptor , Alfy ( also known as Wdfy3 ) ( Figure S1H ) in PV - atg5KO cerebellar lysates , both of which are known to accumulate when autophagic degradation is impaired . Moreover , analysis with an antibody against Atg5 , Chalatsi et al . , 5 recognizing the Atg5 - Atg12 complex at 60KD , further confirmed a significant reduction of the Atg5 protein in PV - atg5KO when compared to control ( Figure S1I ) . In the cerebellum , PV is expressed by two distinct GABAergic populations : 1 ) the Purkinje cells , inhibitory projection neurons that co - express calbindin and are located in the Purkinje cell layer , and 2 ) the PV - interneurons found in the molecular layer . A previous study reported that autophagy is required for the maintenance of Purkinje cells , whereby the conditional ablation of atg7 using a pcp2 - cre deleter mouse led to their rapid degeneration ( Komatsu et al . , 2007 ) . In line with these findings , immunolabeling cerebellar cryosections with antibodies against PV and Calbindin confirmed the drastic loss of more than half of the Purkinje cells in six - month - old PV - atg5KO brains ( Figure 1A , B ) . Moreover , at three - months - of - age , the vast majority of Purkinje cells were immuno - reactive for active caspase - 3 ( Figure S1J , K ) , suggesting that the loss of these neurons is progressive . Consistent with the degeneration of Purkinje cells , three - month - old PV - atg5KO mice exhibited impaired motor coordination in a rotarod test , demonstrating a significant reduction in their mean latency to fall from the rotarod ( Figure S1L ) and across three consecutive trials ( Figure S1M ) when compared to control littermates . These data provide further support to the hypothesis that autophagy is required in Purkinje cells for their sustenance and for the expression of cerebellar - dependent behaviors . In contrast , the number of PV - immunoreactive ( and Calbindin - negative ) interneurons in the cerebellar molecular cell layer was comparable between six - month - old control and PV - atg5KO mice ( Figure 1C ) . Similarly , we did not observe any immunoreactivity for active caspase - 3 in the cerebellar molecular cell layer of PV - atg5KO ( Figure S1J , arrowheads , and S1N ) . Together , these observations invite the speculation that distinct PV - expressing cell populations exhibit differential vulnerability to autophagy perturbation . In order to assess the requirement of autophagy for PV - neuron maintenance across the brain in an unbiased manner , we then used CLARITY combined with light sheet imaging and machine learning ( outlined in Figure 1D ) to compare the number of PV - positive neurons between three - month - old pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ( control ) and pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ( PV - atg5KO - TdT ) mice . In line with Figure 1A - B , we found a significant reduction in the number of TdT - positive Purkinje cells in the PV - atg5KO - TdT brains when compared to controls ( Figure 1E ) , confirming the fidelity of this approach in assessing changes in the number of PV - neurons . Interestingly however , further analysis of eight major brain regions known to contain PV - interneurons indicated no significant differences in the number of TdT - positive cells in PV - atg5KO when compared to age - matched controls ( Figures 1F - M ; expressed as percentage of control in panels 1E - M and as total cell counts in Suppl . Table 1 ) . Furthermore , no significant differences were observed in the volume Chalatsi et al . , 6 of these brain structures between the two genotypes ( Suppl . Table 1 ) , and a TUNEL assay of three - and six - month - old brain sections confirmed the absence of apoptosis in the PV - atg5KO across the forebrain ( Suppl . Table 4 ) . Taken together , these results demonstrate that autophagy is not required for the survival of PV - interneurons across the brain . Given the fundamental role of autophagy in protein turnover , we then speculated that despite not compromising the maintenance of PV interneurons , impaired autophagy may cause deficits in their proteostasis that could directly or indirectly impact their function . To test this hypothesis , we FACS - sorted TdT - positive parvalbumin interneurons from the isocortex and hippocampus of three - month old control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) mice and analyzed them by quantitative proteomics . Principal component analysis indicated a clear segregation of the four control and four knockout replicates based on genotype ( Figure S2A ) . Mass - spectrometry analysis identified a total of 5963 proteins that were detected by at least two unique peptides ( Suppl . Table S2 ) . As analysis was performed after FACS - sorting , which can result in breakage of synapses , we first wanted to ensure that synaptic proteins were adequately identified . To this end , we compared our list of identified proteins with the SynGO database and found 824 synaptic proteins present in our list , representing 13 . 82 % of the total proteins detected in our analysis ( Figure 2A ) . The detected synaptic proteins comprised 66 . 77 % of the entire synaptic proteome ( Figure S2B ) , however , did not include any neurotransmitter receptors , presumably due to the limitations posed by FACS - sorting . We also identified 438 mitochondrial proteins , representing 7 . 35 % of the total proteins detected in our analysis ( Figure 2A ) , and 38 . 42 % of the MitoCarta 3 . 0 mitochondrial protein database ( Rath et al . , 2021 ) ( Figure S2C ) . Finally , we detected 392 ER and 534 Golgi proteins , representing 6 . 6 % and 8 . 96 % of the total identified proteins ( Figure 2A ) , respectively , and comprising 74 . 95 % ( Figure S2D ) and 47 . 38 % of the ER and Golgi proteomes ( Figure S2E ) , respectively ( Thul et al . , 2017 ) . In order to characterize the effects of autophagy ablation on the PV interneuron proteome , we set a p - value of 0 . 02 ( - log10 ( 0 . 02 ) = 1 . 7 ) as the cutoff for determining the proteins that are differentially abundant between control and PV - atg5KO - TdT samples . This was based on the enrichment of the positive control p62 ( Sqstm1 ) in the PV - atg5KO - TdT sample ( Figure 2B ) . As expected , Atg5 was significantly decreased and Alfy ( Wdfy3 ) , another selective aggrephagy receptor , was significantly increased in the PV - atg5KO - TdT sample , as expected ( Figure 2B ) . Furthermore , we found 281 proteins that were differentially expressed between the two genotypes , 162 of which were enriched and 119 were less abundant in the PV - atg5KO - TdT sample , when compared to the control ( Figure 2C ) . Both the significantly enriched and less abundant proteins included synaptic , mitochondrial , ER and Golgi proteins ( as summarized in Chalatsi et al . , 7 Figure 2D ) . Notably , while all the ER proteins found to be dysregulated in autophagy - deficient excitatory neurons ( Kuijpers et al . , 2021 ) were detected in our mass - spectrometry analysis ( Figure S2F ) , no significant differences in expression were found between genotypes ( Figure S2F , G ) . Interestingly , this was also the case for three selective ER - phagy receptors , namely Calcoco1 , Rtn3 and Atl3 . Indeed , only four ER proteins ( Avl9 , Pggt1b , Prex2 , Derl1 ) were significantly enriched in the PV - atg5KO - TdT sample , none of which have known roles in calcium homeostasis . Taken together , these results suggest that contrary to what was found in glutamatergic neurons , ER homeostasis may not be impacted in autophagy - deficient interneurons , as is the case for excitatory glutamatergic neurons . Comparison of the differentially abundant proteins with the SynGO database indicated that 9 synaptic proteins were significantly downregulated ( Wasf1 , Atp2b4 , Camk4 , Frrs1l , Nos1 , Phb , Rab11 , Rplp2 and Vps33b ) and 23 synaptic proteins were significantly enriched ( Rps6kc1 , Tanc1 , Rab3b , Add3 , Cask , Tubb2b , Pfn1 , Vcp , septin - 6 , Synj2 , Tbc1d2b , Rock2 , Ywhah , Gnb5 , Atp2b1 , Stx2 , Scg2 , Rheb , Ywhaz , Sacm1l , Pafah1b1 , Add1 , Rps10 ) in PV - atg5KO - TdT neurons , when compared to control . Cellular component enrichment analysis of the deregulated synaptic proteins indicated that they are mainly localized in the postsynaptic specialization of asymmetric synapses , while some also showed a presynaptic localization ( Figure 2E ; schematically summarized in Figure 2F ) . The only deregulated synaptic protein involved in calcium homeostasis was Atp2b4 , a plasma membrane calcium ATPase that localizes to the presynaptic membrane , which was found to be significantly decreased in autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons , as confirmed by JESS - Western blot analysis ( Figure S2H ) . Another deregulated synaptic protein , Wasf1 , is a key component of the WAVE protein complex , a key regulator of the actin cytoskeleton formation through interactions with the Arp2 / 3 complex . In addition , recent work demonstrated that this machinery also links diverse cell surface receptors to the actin cytoskeleton , including the NMDA receptor subunit NR2B ( Chen et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , we examined whether expression of NR2B is affected in autophagy - deficient PV neurons . To this end , we performed Jess - Western analysis of the TdT - positive PV - interneurons sorted from control or PV - atg5KO - TdT mice using an antibody against NR2B and found a significant reduction in its total levels in the autophagy - deficient interneurons when compared to the control ( Figure 2G ) . In addition , we performed NR2B surface immunolabelling on hippocampal sections of control and PV - atg5KO - TdT mice and found that autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons exhibit a significant reduction in surface NR2B levels when compared to the control ( Figure 2H ) . In addition , another protein that was significantly downregulated is Frrs1l , an outer component of AMPA receptors ( Madeo et al . , 2016 ; Schwenk et al . , 2012 ) . With recent work Chalatsi et al . , 8 indicating that loss of Frrs1l leads to intracellular retention of GluA2 subunits ( Madeo et al . , 2016 ) , we also compared the surface expression of GluA2 in hippocampal sections of control and PV - atg5KO - TdT mice . We found that autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons exhibited a significant reduction in surface GluA2 levels ( Figure 2I ) . By contrast , surface labeling for the GluA1 subunit showed no differences between genotypes ( Figure 2J ) . Taken together , these findings indicated that autophagy - deficiency leads to changes in neurotransmitter receptor composition on the membrane of PV - interneurons . We then hypothesized whether these changes in synaptic proteostasis have repercussions on their function , subsequently affecting the networks in which they are embedded . To test this , we focused on the hippocampal CA1 region , where PV expression is restricted to inhibitory interneurons , mostly comprising of basket cells ( Donato et al . , 2015 ; Donato et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , to examine whether atg5 deletion influences PV neuronal excitability , we performed patch clamp recordings of current - evoked action potentials from acute brain slices of three - month - old - control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) mice ( Figure 3A ) . On average , the input - output curve in PV neurons from slices of PV - atg5KO - TdT mice presented a rightward shift compared to their control littermates , indicative of reduced neuronal excitability within this neuronal population ( Figure 3A , B ) . Next , we examined whether this reduced PV excitability has repercussion on GABAergic neurotransmission onto neighboring pyramidal cells ( PC ) in the CA1 region . Recording of spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic currents ( sIPSCs ) from PC unraveled a reduction in the frequency , but not amplitude of events ( Figure 3C , D ) , concomitantly with an increased paired - pulse ratio of evoked IPSCs ( Figure 3E , F ) . Additionally , we probed excitatory ( −60 mV , EPSC ) and inhibitory synaptic transmission ( + 5 mV , IPSC ) which revealed enhanced EPSC to IPSC ratio ( EPSC / IPSC ) in PC from PV - atg5KO - TdT mice compared to control littermates ( Figure 3G , H ) . Taken together , these results support a diminished PV neuronal excitability , which accounts for a reduction in synaptic inhibition onto PC . The enhanced excitation / inhibition ratio onto PC , urged us to further investigate the presence of spontaneous epileptic seizures , as observed in mice with conditional ablation of autophagy in forebrain excitatory neurons ( Tang et al . , 2014 ) ( Overhoff , 2022 ) and human patients with mutations in autophagy genes ( Fassio et al . , 2020 ) . To this end , we performed frontal and parietal electroencephalogram ( EEG ) recordings in combination with electromyogram ( EMG ) in three - month - old control ( N = 8 mice ) and PV - atg5KO ( N = 7 mice ) animals for three consecutive light - dark phases . Animals cycled between the three vigilance states wake , non - rapid - eye - movement sleep ( NREM ) and rapid - eye - movement sleep ( REM ) , as evident by standard spectral Chalatsi et al . , 9 EEG signatures . Analysis of these recordings using the Epi - AI online peer - reviewed tool ( Wei et al . , 2021 ) , confirmed the absence of overt spontaneous epileptic seizures in the PV - atg5KO mice ( Figure 3I ) , indicating that perturbed autophagy in PV - positive cells may not contribute to epileptic phenotypes . As PV - interneuron activity has been implicated in memory ( Ognjanovski et al . , 2017 ; Tripodi et al . , 2018 ; Xia et al . , 2017 ) and anxiety ( Courtin et al . , 2014 ) , we then sought to determine whether impaired autophagy affects cognition via changes in PV - interneuron excitability . To this end , three - month - old control and PV - atg5KO mice were subjected to a fear conditioning test , a paradigm of associative memory ( see Methods , summarized in Figure 4A ) . While control and PV - atg5KO animals exhibited comparable freezing percentages during training , PV - atg5KO animals exhibited a significant reduction in freezing on the test day when compared to control littermates ( Figure 4B ) . Differences in freezing cannot be attributed to an impaired ability of PV - atg5KO animals to perceive the stimulus since both genotypes showed a significant increase in reactivity upon shock delivery ( Figure 4C ) . To further probe the involvement of autophagy in the regulation of memory processes , control and PV - atg5KO mice were subjected to a novel object recognition test , a paradigm of recognition memory ( see Methods , summarized in Figure 4D ) . The difference in time spent with the familiar or the novel object is measured as a discrimination index ( DI ) and it is a proxy for the memory for the familiar object . PV - atg5KO mice exhibited a significant decrease in their discrimination index compared to control littermates , indicating a defective memory for the familiar object ( Figure 4E ) . This deficit was neither due to differences in initial preference ( Figure 4F ) nor to differences in the cumulative duration spent exploring the objects ( Figure 4G ) . Taken together , these findings indicate that autophagy deficiency in parvalbumin neurons is sufficient to induce profound deficits in both associative and recognition memory . Lastly , to determine whether autophagy - deficient PV neurons impact anxiety - like behaviors , we tested control and PV - atg5KO mice in three anxiety tests : a ) the elevated plus maze ( EPM ) , b ) the light / dark box ( LD ) , and c ) the open field test ( OFT ) ( see Methods , summarized in Figures 4H - L ) . In all three tests , no significant differences were observed in the cumulative duration that PV - atg5KO animals spent in the open arm ( Figure 4I ) , in the light compartment ( Figure 4K ) or in the center of the arena ( Figure 4M ) when compared to control littermates . Moreover , the total locomotion of control and PV - atg5KO animals was comparable in all three tests ( Figure S3A - C ) . Taken together , these findings suggest that the described proteostatic and synaptic deficits of autophagy - deficient PV neurons , as well as of the networks in which they take part , do not culminate into changes in anxiety - like behaviors . Chalatsi et al . , 10 Discussion Emerging evidence from animal models suggests that the well - conserved autophagic machinery , which is fundamental for the turnover of proteins and organelles , is implicated in higher order behaviors that depend on the orchestrated function of multiple neuronal populations . However , our knowledge of the roles of autophagy at cellular and synaptic levels is thus far limited to glutamatergic and other projections neurons . Here we expanded this knowledge to other neuronal populations , demonstrating that autophagy regulates the homeostasis and physiology of parvalbumin - expressing interneurons , safeguarding hippocampal network dynamics and memory . While the physiological roles of autophagy in interneurons were overlooked , interneurons have already been implicated in the pathology of congenital diseases of autophagy , such as tuberous sclerosis complex ( TSC ) , a disorder that manifests with severe synaptic and psychiatric deficits , including memory deficits ( Ridler et al . , 2007 ) , epilepsy , developmental delay , and autism ( Henske et al . , 2016 ) . In this disorder , autosomal dominant germline mutations in TSC1 or TSC2 genes lead to the hyperactivation of the mTORC1 pathway , an important positive regulator of protein translation and negative regulator of autophagy . Interestingly , mice with condition ablation of tsc1 in GABAergic interneuron progenitor cells ( Fu et al . , 2012 ) exhibit reduced numbers of GABAergic cells and synapses in the forebrain . Here , we directly tested whether autophagy regulates PV - interneuron numbers and whether it safeguards their maintenance in the brain but found no evidence for such a role . Instead , across all tested brain areas , PV - interneuron numbers where comparable between control mice and those lacking atg5 conditionally in PV - expressing neurons . Therefore , we conclude that autophagy is dispensable for the survival and maintenance of postmitotic PV - interneurons . We speculate that the interneuron loss observed in the tsc1 - conditional knockout model may be due to the concomitant deregulation of the translation machinery . Alternatively , it may also be due to the fact that ablation of tsc1 starts embryonically in GABAergic neuron progenitors , consistent with previous work showing that mTOR signaling regulates the early proliferation of these cells ( Ka et al . , 2017 ) . In this study , we directly examined for the first time the requirement of autophagy for inhibitory neurotransmission , focusing on PV - expressing interneurons of the hippocampus . We report that autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons are less excitable , compared to controls . Consistently , we also found reduced inhibitory input to neighboring excitatory neurons of the hippocampus of PV - atg5KO animals , compared to control littermates . Together , these findings demonstrate that autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons exhibit reduced basal transmission , which accounts for an imbalance in the excitation - inhibition equilibrium in the hippocampus . Our findings Chalatsi et al . , 11 help explain previous work , showing that loss of tsc1 reduces inhibitory synaptic transmission ( Bateup et al . , 2013 ; Khlaifia et al . , 2022 ) and results in fewer and smaller synapses formed by PV - interneurons , which are responsible for social deficits ( Amegandjin et al . , 2021 ) . As synaptic deficits of PV - interneurons are likely to also pertain to human TSC patients , restoring autophagy specifically in these cells may represent a novel strategy for reinstating inhibitory transmission and network balance , to ameliorate some aspects of the cognitive impairment pathology , such as memory , learning and sociability . A recent study reported that autophagy - deficient excitatory glutamatergic neurons exhibit enhanced basal transmission , which was attributed to the failed turnover of presynaptic ER and the consequent elevation of intracellular calcium stores ( Kuijpers et al . , 2021 ) . Taken together with our findings , it emerges that under basal conditions , autophagy regulates excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmission in diametrical ways , restricting the former , whereas enhancing the latter . The mechanisms by which autophagy regulates these two types of transmission may also be distinct . Unlike excitatory neurons , autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons do not exhibit impaired proteostasis of ER proteins or accumulation of selective ER - phagy receptors , although these proteins are well - detected in our proteomic analysis . We cannot exclude that calcium levels are implicated in the reduced inhibitory transmission of autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons , as the proteomic analysis of these neurons revealed significantly decreased levels of Atp2b4 , a P - type plasma membrane calcium ATPase ( PMCA ) , which is localized in the presynaptic membrane ( Stafford et al . , 2017 ) . However , we also found a significant reduction in Frrs1l and Wasf1 , which are involved in the plasma membrane retention and targeting of AMPA receptor and NMDA receptor subunits , respectively . This led us to reveal that autophagy indirectly regulates the surface levels of GluA2 and NR2B in PV - interneurons , both of which may be directly implicated in the reduced excitability of these neurons when autophagy is impaired . More generally , it also appears that the autophagic machinery sequesters and turns over distinct cellular substrates in different neuronal populations , adding yet another aspect of selectivity to its contribution to protein and organelle homeostasis . Finally , we found that while anxiety is unaffected , PV - atg5KO animals exhibit deficits in associative and recognition memory , two major components of declarative memory that mainly involve the hippocampus , among other brain areas . Previous work has clearly shown that conditional deletion of AMPA or NMDA receptor subunits in PV neurons causes reduced excitability of fast - spiking PV interneurons in the hippocampus , leading to impaired hippocampal network synchrony and memory deficits ( Korotkova et al . , 2010 ) ( Fuchs et al . , 2007 ) . Consistently , pharmacogenetic inhibition of hippocampal PV - expressing interneurons impairs hippocampal Chalatsi et al . , 12 network dynamics , leading to deficits in the consolidation of associative memory ( Ognjanovski et al . , 2017 ) . Therefore , we believe that the memory deficits of PV - at g5KO animals are attributed to the diminished activity of PV - interneurons in the hippocampus and not related to the loss of the cerebellar Purkinje cells , which are instead involved in implicit memories , including procedural memories and motor learning ( De Zeeuw and Ten Brinke , 2015 ) . In conclusion , it emerges that the requirement of autophagy for proper brain function relies on cell - type specific functions in different neuronal subpopulations . Here , we have highlighted the distinct roles played by autophagy in PV - expressing neurons . Whether autophagy regulates the neurotransmission of other types of inhibitory neurons , such as those expressing somatostatin , calretinin , VIP or other markers , remains to be investigated by future studies , in order to gain a complete picture on the collective impact of autophagy impairment on multi - neuronal networks . Chalatsi et al . , 13 Chalatsi et al . , 14 Figure 1 : Selective elimination of Purkinje cells and not of interneurons upon genetic autophagy impairment . A ) Representative confocal images of cerebellar sections from six - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre + / - ; atg5 f / f ) littermates . Immunostaining with antibodies against Calbindin ( CALB , green ) and Parvalbumin ( PV , red ) , as well as with the nuclear dye Hoechst ( blue ) was performed . ( Arrows : Purkinje cells , arrowheads : cerebellar interneurons , GL : Granular layer , PJ : Purkinje cell layer , ML : molecular layer ) . Scale bar : 50μm . B - C ) Graphs showing the relative percentage of the number of PV - PJ cells and PV - interneurons , respectively , in the of cerebellar cortex of control ( atg5 f / f ) and mutant PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) . Statistical analyses were performed on the number of cerebral sections that were counted using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( * * p = 0 . 0091 t = 2 . 941 , df = 17 and ns p = 0 . 1168 t = 1 . 653 , df = 17 respectively ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 3 animals per genotype . D ) Overview of the experimental pipeline for whole brain imaging and analysis . Three - month old control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and mutant PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) littermates were analyzed . Scale bar : 1mm . E - M ) Top rows : Representative heatmaps from the brain segmented masks from cerebellar cortex ( E ) , isocortex ( F ) , hippocampal formation ( G ) , striatum ( H ) , medial and lateral septum ( I ) , basolateral amygdala ( J ) , lateral amygdala ( K ) , thalamus ( L ) and hypothalamus ( M ) . Scale bar : 1mm . Bottom rows : Graphs showing the number of TdT tg / + counted cells in the relative specific area , expressed as percentage of the average of the control . Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( * p = 0 . 0232 , t = 3 . 229 , df = 5 ( E ) and ns p = 0 . 4177 , t = 0 . 8828 , df = 5 ( F ) , ns p = 0 . 7674 , t = 0 . 3123 , df = 5 ( G ) , ns p = 0 . 8389 , t = 0 . 2128 , df = 5 ( H ) , ns p = 0 . 7549 , t = 0 . 3298 , df = 5 ( I ) , ns p = 0 . 1840 , t = 1 . 541 , df = 5 ( J ) , ns p = 0 . 5714 , t = 0 . 6053 , df = 5 ( K ) , ns p = 0 . 5332 , t = 0 . 6690 , df = 5 ( L ) and ns p = 0 . 9087 , t = 0 . 1206 , df = 5 ( M ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 4 and 3 animals for control and PV - atg5KO - TdT , respectively . Chalatsi et al . , 15 Chalatsi et al . , 16 Figure 2 : Autophagy regulates the proteostasis of PV - interneurons A ) The part of a whole graph shows the representation of synaptic ( 13 . 8 % ) , mitochondrial ( 7 . 35 % ) , ER ( 6 . 6 % ) and Golgi ( 8 . 9 % ) proteins in our list of identified proteins , as determined by comparison with the SynGO , MitoCarta , ER and Golgi databases , respectively . B ) Volcano plot showing the 5963 proteins which are detectable by proteomics analysis in PV FACS sorted cells ( grey dots : - log10 ( p - value ) < 1 . 7 , light blue dots : 1 . 7≤ - log10 ( p - value ) < 3 , dark blue dots : - log10 ( p - value ) ≥3 ; ( - log10 ( 0 . 02 ) = 1 . 7 ) and ( - log10 ( 0 . 001 ) = 3 ) . C ) Graph showing the differentially expressed proteins including synaptic , mitochondrial , ER and Golgi proteins . Significance was set at p < - log10 ( p - value ) ≥1 . 7 ; ( - log10 ( 0 . 02 ) = 1 . 7 ) . D ) Heatmap showing the 162 proteins which were found to be enriched and the 119 proteins decreased in the mutant cells , compared to control , showing their hierarchical clustering . Significance was set at p < - log10 ( p - value ) ≥1 . 7 ; ( - log10 ( 0 . 02 ) = 1 . 7 ) . E ) Graph showing the cellular component enrichment analysis of the deregulated synaptic proteins . F ) Graphical representation of the localization of the 32 differentially abundant synaptic proteins in the pre - and post - synaptic compartments of PV - interneurons ( red dots : enriched , blue dots : decreased ) . G ) JESS Western blot analysis with an antibody against NR2B in PV FACS sorted cell lysates of three - month - old control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and mutant PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) littermates . Graph showing the protein levels of NR2B normalized to the total protein levels . Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( * * p = 0 . 0072 , t = 3 . 109 , df = 15 ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 8 and 9 animals for control and PV - atg5KO - TdT , respectively . H - J ) Immunohistochemistry with antibodies against NR2B ( H ) , GluA2 ( I ) and GluA1 ( J ) in CA1 hippocampal area of control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and mutant PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) cells , respectively . PV - interneurons are genetically labeled with Td - tomato ( purple ) . Graphs showing the relative percentage of their surface expression , respectively . Statistical analyses were performed using Student’s t test ( * p = 0 . 0126 , t = 2 . 649 , df = 31 , a * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , t = 5 . 69 , df = 44 and ns p = 0 . 246 , t = 1 . 20 , df = 19 respectively ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 4 animals pergenotype . Scale bar : 5μm . Chalatsi et al . , 17 Chalatsi et al . , 18 Figure 3 : Autophagy - deficient PV - interneurons exhibit functional adaptations leading to E / I imbalance A ) Current - clamp sample traces ( 400 pA injection , top ) and the action potentials evoked by current steps ( bottom ) from PV neurons , from slices of control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and mutant PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) , three - month old mice were recorded . B ) Graph showing input - output plot from control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) ( n = 14 , N = 3 ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) PV neurons ( n = 16 , N = 3 ) . Statistical analysis was performed using two - way repeated measures ANOVA followed by Sidak post hoc test ; F ( 5 , 140 ) = 23 . 85 ( * * * * p < 0 . 005 ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . C ) Representative traces of sIPSC from slices of control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) three - month old mice . D ) Graphs showing the frequency and amplitude of sIPSCs from control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and mutant PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) ( n = 21 , N = 3 ) . Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( * p = 0 . 0298 , t = 2 . 289 , df = 28 and ns p = 0 . 8654 , t = 0 . 1710 , df = 28 , respectively ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . E ) Representative traces of paired - pulse ratio ( IPSC 2 / IPSC 1 ) from three - month old control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) mice . F ) Graph showing the paired - pulse ratio ( IPSC 2 / IPSC 1 ) from control ( pv - cre ; TdT rg / + ) ( n = 8 , N = 2 ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) ( n = 12 , N = 2 ) . Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( * p = 0 . 0310 , t = 2 . 340 , df = 18 ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . G ) Representative traces of excitation to inhibition ratio ( EPSC / IPSC ) from three - month old control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) mice . H ) Graph showing the excitation to inhibition ratio ( EPSC / IPSC ) from three - month old control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) ( n = 8 , N = 2 ) and PV - atg5KO - TdT ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) ( n = 14 , N = 3 ) mice . Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( * p = 0 . 0351 , t = 2 . 261 , df = 20 ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . I ) Representative 90 - sec traces and corresponding time - frequency plots as heatmaps from EEG / EMG recordings from three - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) mice . Chalatsi et al . , 19 EPM LD box OFT NOR Test Training Testing 24h FCT Test Training Testing 24h 2X 0 . 5mA , 1sec T r a i n T e s t T r a i n T e s t 0 20 40 60 80 100 % f r ee z i ng ✱✱✱✱ n s be f o r ea ft e r be f o r ea ft e r 0 10 20 30 40 V e l o c i t y ( c m / s ) ✱✱✱✱ ✱✱✱✱ - 20 0 20 40 60 80 D i sc r i m i na t i on I nde x ( % T i m e ) ✱✱ A B A B 0 10 20 30 I n i t i a l P r e f e r en c e n s n s T r i a l 1 T r i a l 2 T r i a l 3 0 10 20 30 C u m u l a t i v e du r a t i on A C 0 5 0 1 0 0 1 50 2 0 0 # o f P u r k i n j e c e ll s ( % o f c on t r o l ) ✱✱ c on t r o l PV - a t g5 K O control PV - atg5KO 0 5 0 1 0 0 1 50 2 0 0 # o f P u r k i n j e c e ll s ( % o f c on t r o l ) ✱✱ c on t r o l PV - a t g5 K O control PV - atg5KO 0 5 0 1 0 0 1 50 2 0 0 # o f P u r k i n j e c e ll s ( % o f c on t r o l ) ✱✱ c on t r o l PV - a t g5 K O control PV - atg5KO 0 50 100 150 200 # o f P u r k i n j e c e ll s ( % o f c on t r o l ) ✱✱ control PV - atg5KO control PV - atg5KO 0 50 100 150 200 # o f P u r k i n j e c e ll s ( % o f c on t r o l ) ✱✱ control PV - atg5KO control PV - atg5KO D B E F G 0 10 20 30 40 % C u m u l a t i v e D u r a t i on i n open a r m s ns 0 20 40 60 80 % C u m u l a t i v e D u r a t i on i n li gh t c o m pa r t m en t ns 0 5 10 15 % C u m u l a t i v e D u r a t i on i n c en t e r z one ns H I J K L M Chalatsi et al . , 20 Figure 4 : Animals with autophagy deficiency in PV - expressing neurons exhibit deficits in memory . A ) Overview of the experimental pipeline for fear conditioning test ( FCT ) . B - C ) Graphs showing the percentage of freezing responses and the speed before and after electrical shock in FCT test from three - month old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates . Statistical analyses were performed using two - way repeated measures ANOVA followed by Sidak post hoc test ; F ( 1 , 19 ) = 13 . 17 , ( train day ns p = 0 . 5732 and test day * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) and F ( 1 , 19 ) = 1 . 255 , ( before and after in control * * * * p < 0 . 0001 and in PV - atg5KO * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ) , respectively . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 10 and 11 animals for control and PV - atg5KO , respectively . D ) Overview of the experimental pipeline for novel object recognition test ( NOR ) . E - G ) Graphs showing the discrimination index ( DI ) in testing day ( E ) and the initial preference ( F ) and the cumulative duration ( G ) spending in objects per trails in training day . Three - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were assessed in NOR test . DI was calculating by the following formula : DI = [ time in novel object - familiar one / total time in objects ] X100 % . Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( * * p = 0 . 0088 , t = 2 . 747 , df = 42 ) for DI and two - way repeated measures ANOVA followed by Sidak post hoc test for the other two analyses ( for initial preference F ( 1 , 80 ) = 0 . 08937 , for control ns p = 0 . 6333 and PV - atg5KO ns p = 0 . 8728 ) and ( for cumulative duration F ( 2 , 88 ) = 0 . 02500 , for trial 1 : ns p = 0 . 9999 , for trial 2 : ns p = 0 . 9815 and for trial 3 : ns p = 0 . 9974 , respectively ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 20 and 24 animals for control and PV - atg5KO , respectively . H ) Overview of the experimental pipeline for elevated plus maze test ( EPM ) and representative tracking traces from a control ( atg5 f / f ) and a PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) mouse . I ) Graph showing the percentage of cumulative duration in open arms during the EPM test . Two - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and mutant PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were assessed in this test . Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( ns p = 0 . 4565 , t = 0 . 7602 , df = 19 ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 8 and 13 animals for control and PV - atg5KO , respectively . J ) Overview of the experimental pipeline for light dark box test ( LD box ) and representative tracking traces from one control ( atg5 f / f ) and one PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) mouse . Chalatsi et al . , 21 K ) Graph showing the percentage of cumulative duration in light compartment during the LD box test . Two - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were assessed in this test . Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( ns p = 0 . 94120 . 4565 , t = 0 . 07473 , df = 19 ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 8 and 13 animals for control and PV - atg5KO , respectively . L ) Overview of the experimental pipeline for open field test ( OFT ) and representative tracking traces from one control ( atg5 f / f ) and one PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) mouse . M ) Graph showing the percentage of cumulative duration in center zone during the OFT test . Two - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were assessed in this test . Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired , two - tailed Student’s t test ( ns p = 0 . 4358 , t = 0 . 7961 , df = 19 ) . Bars represent mean values ±SEM . N = 8 and 13 animals for control and PV - atg5KO , respectively . Chalatsi et al . , 22 Data availability statement Requests for resources and reagents should be addressed to the Lead Contact , Vassiliki Nikoletopoulou ( vassiliki . nikoletopoulou @ unil . ch ) . All raw MS data together with MaxQuant output tables are available via the Proteomexchange data repository ( www . proteomexchange . org ) . Project Name : Autophagy is dispensable for the maintenance of parvalbumin interneurons but required for their inhibitory neurotransmission and memory . Project accession : PXD035264 . Username : reviewer _ pxd035264 @ ebi . ac . uk Password : mlWXmW0O Author contributions L . B . performed light sheet microscopy experiments and J . S developed tools for the analysis of these experiments . L . R . designed the behavioral experiments . L . F . and A . L . designed and performed the EEG experiments with help from A . K . M . M . performed all slice electrophysiology experiments . T . C . performed all other experiments and analyses and contributed to writing the manuscript . V . N . led the study and contributed to writing the manuscript . This work was supported by an ERC starting grant ( 714983 - Neurophagy ) to V . N . , by the SNSF ( 31003A _ 175549 ) to M . M . , by the Swiss National Science Foundation ( no . 310030 - 184759 to A . L . ) and by Etat de Vaud to A . L . Acknowledgements We thank Maxime Alessandri for his support with the Epi - Ai platform . We also thank Dr . Erin Wosnitzka for critical reading of the manuscript . Behavioral experiments where run in the NeuroBehavioral Analysis Unit ( Neuro - BAU ) of the Department of Fundamental Neuroscience , FBM / UNIL . We acknowledge all members of the A . L . for help and support . Chalatsi et al . , 23 Methods Animal care This study was performed in Greece and in Switzerland . Therefore , the animal protocols for the experiments performed in Greece were approved by the FORTH Animal Ethics Committee ( FEC ) based on the European Union guidelines on animal experimentation , while those performed in Switzerland were approved by the Swiss veterinary services of the Canton Vaud ( Licenses VD3460 , VD3461 ) . In both cases , special attention was paid to the implementation of the 3Rs , housing , the environmental conditions and analgesia , in order to ensure the animals’ welfare . Mice were housed in Individually Ventilated Cages ( IVCs ; Innovive , France ) in groups of 3 - 5 per cage . Water and food were provided ad libitum with constant temperature ( 22˚C ) , humidity ( 55 % ) , air changes ( 60 / hour ) and a 12h / 12h light / dark cycle ( 7am ON / 7pm OFF ) , except for mice that are tested in EEG experiment where cycle was 9am ON / 9pm OFF ) . All mice were littermates and were randomly allocated to experimental conditions . A C57BL / 6 genetic background of at least for 20 generations was common in all crossings . We worked with the following genetically modified mice : atg5 f / f ( Hara et al . , 2006 ) , pv - cre + / - ( B6 ; 129P2 - Pvalbtm1 ( cre ) Arbr / J - Jax lab # strain 008069 ) ( Hippenmeyer et al . , 2007 ) and a cre reporter TdT tg / + ( B6 . Cg - Gt ( ROSA ) 26Sortm9 ( CAG - tdTomato ) Hze / J ) ( Madisen et al . , 2010 ) . A tg5 f / f mice were crossed with the pv - cre + / - mice to ablate atg5 in parvalbumin positive GABAergic neurons , generating ( pv - cre + / - ; atg5 f / f ) PV - atg5KO mice . pv - cre + / - and PV - atg5KO mice were also crossed with TdT tg / + mice to label the PV positive neurons ( pv - cre + / - ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) PV - atg5KO - TdT . Male pv - cre + / - mice were not included in the breeding to exclude any possibility of unwanted germline recombination and global recombination due to the low expression of PV in sperm . The weight of control ( atg5 f / f ) , ( pv - cre + / - ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre + / - ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates was monitored systematically and compared at two specific time points , namely at three - weeks and at three - months of age . Western Blotting Western blot was performed as previously described ( Nikoletopoulou et al . , 2017 ) with minor modifications . Briefly , tissues were lysed in RIPA Buffer ( 50mM Tris - Cl pH 7 . 4 , 150mM NaCl , 1mM EDTA , 1 % TritonX - 100 , 0 , 1 % SDS and 0 , 1 % sodium deoxycholate , supplemented with protease inhibitors . Tissues were sonicated for 20 seconds on ice and centrifuged twice for 30min at 16 . 200g in order to precipitate the DNA . BCA Protein Assay Kit was used to measure the protein concentration following manufacturer’s instructions and the proteins were separated using ( 7 . 5 - 15 % ) polyacrylamide gel and were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane which has a 0 . 2μm pores size ( Millipore ) . The total protein levels were visualized and normalized on the Chalatsi et al . , 24 membrane , using the No - Stain™ Protein Labeling Reagent , according to the manufacturer’s instruction . Then , the membrane was incubated in 5 % skim milk for 1hour and overnight in the primary antibody at 4°C . The membranes were washed three times ( 3x10min ) with TPBS pH 7 . 4 ( 137mM NaCl , 2 . 7mM KCl , 10mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 . 8mM KH 2 PO 4 , 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 ) and were incubated with a secondary horseradish peroxidase - conjugated - HRP antibody ( 1 : 10000 ) for 1h at room temperature . The membranes were washed three times ( 3x10min ) with TPBS and incubated with chemiluminescent solution ( SuperSignal West Pico and Femto Substrate - ThermoFisher Scientific ) according to the manufacturer’s instruction . The primary antibodies with their dilution which used for western blotting are presented in Table 1 . Data were calculated as the optical density ratio ( OD ) of the sample / total protein . All data were also expressed as the percentages of the average of the control group . Bands were quantified using Fiji Image J software , using the module of analyzing gels . Tissue fixation and cryo - protection For adult brain collection , all adult mice were transcardially perfused with cold 4 % PFA ( 4 % PFA in PBS pH 7 . 4 ) . Then brains were dissected and 3 hours post - fixation at 4°C was performed and then incubated in 30 % sucrose in PBS at 4°C until fully penetrated , for cryoprotection . Adult brains were then embedded in Tissue - Tek ( Tissue - Tek O . C . T . Compound ) on dry ice and stored at 80°C for cryo - sectioning . All brains were cut into coronal or sagittal sections of 16μm and were placed on Superfrost Plus slides . Tissue slices were dried at 37°C for 2 - 3 hours and stored at - 80°C . For immunostaining , the process is described below in methods . Immunostaining Immunostaining was performed as previously described ( Nikoletopoulou et al . , 2017 ) . In brief , following fixation , 16μm - thick brain sections were rinsed in PBS pH 7 . 4 ( 137mM NaCl , 2 . 7mM KCl , 10mM Na 2 HPO 4 , 1 . 8mM KH 2 PO 4 ) and incubated for 1 hour in blocking solution containing 1 % BSA and 0 . 2 - 0 . 5 % Triton - X ( depending on the antibody ) , in PBS pH 7 . 4 . Then , the sections were incubated in blocking solution containing primary antibody overnight at 4°C . Blocking solution without primary antibody was applied in separate samples to test for non - specific labeling . The primary antibodies and their final concentrations are summarized in the resource Table 1 . Subsequently , sections were rinsed three times ( 3x10min ) in PBS and incubated with the secondary antibodies , prepared in PBS , as indicated in resource table 2 , for 1 hour at room temperature . The nuclear dye Hoechst was used ( 1 : 5000 ) to stain nuclei . Tissue was rinsed three times ( 3x10min ) in PBS and mounted onto slides . Confocal images of fluorescently labeled Chalatsi et al . , 25 proteins were captured using the LSM 900 ( Zeiss ) . Images were analyzed by Fiji Image J or Imaris Softaware ( 9 . 6 . 1 version ) . TUNEL assay TUNEL staining was performed using the in - situ cell death detection kit ( Roche ) in sagittal paraffin sections of 4μm . DNase treatment was applied to the tissue as a positive control , following the manufacturer’s instructions . Tissue dissociation and FACS Brains from control ( pv - cre ; TdT tg / + ) , mutants PV - atg5KOtdT ( pv - cre - ; atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) and negative control ( atg5 f / f ; TdT tg / + ) , three - month - old , were isolated in cold PBS . The isocortex and hippocampal formation were dissected , and individual cells were isolated using the papain dissociation system , following manufacturer’s instruction . Subsequently , myelin elimination was performed using a Percoll gradient . 90 % of Percoll in PBS was prepared and the pH was adjusted to 7 . 4 ( Percoll Solution ) . 3ml of PBS and 1ml of the Percoll Solution was added the myelin - cleared material and mixed well . Then , 4ml of PBS was added to create two phases . Subsequently , the samples were centrifuged at 3000rcf for 10min at 4°C , with acceleration ramp at 1 and braking ramp at 0 . The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1ml PBS ( Zehnder et al . , 2021 ) . The whole process is carried out on ice . Cell sorting ( FACS ) was performed using a MoFlo AstriosEQ High speed cell sorter . CLARITY and 3D image acquisition . Mice were transcardially perfused with 4 % PFA and the brain was dissected and was postfixed overnight in 4 % PFA . Brains were clarified following the CLARITY protocol ( Chung and Deisseroth , 2013 ) , using X - CLARITY TM system . Brains were immersed in a refractive index matching solution ( RIMS ) containing Histodenz ( Sigma Aldrich ) for at least 24 hours before being imaged . Imaging was performed using a mesoSPIM system at Wyss Center , Geneva ( Voigt et al . , 2019 ) . The microscope consists of a dual - sided excitation path using a fiber - coupled multiline laser combiner ( 405 , 488 , 561 and 647 nm , Toptica MLE ) and a detection path comprising a 42 Olympus MVX - 10 zoom macroscope with a 1× objective ( Olympus MVPLAPO 1× ) , a filter wheel ( Ludl 96A350 ) , and a scientific CMOS ( sCMOS ) camera ( Hamamatsu Orca Flash 4 . 0 V3 ) . The excitation paths also contain galvo scanners for light - sheet generation and reduction of shadow artifacts due to absorption of the light - sheet . In addition , the beam waist is scanned using electrically tunable lenses ( ETL , Optotune EL - 16 - 40 - 5D - TC - L ) synchronized with the rolling Chalatsi et al . , 26 shutter of the sCMOS camera . This axially scanned light - sheet mode ( ASLM ) leads to a uniform axial resolution across the field - of - view ( FOV ) of 5μm . Image acquisition is done using custom software written in Python . Z - stacks were acquired with a zoom set at 1 . 25X at 5μm spacing , respectively resulting in an in - plane pixel size of 5 . 26 X 5 . 26μm ( 2048x2048 pixels ) . Excitation wavelength of the td - Tomato and autofluorescence channels were set at 561 and 488nm , respectively with an emission filter , 593 / 40 LP and 530 / 43 nm bandpass filter respectively ( BrightLine HC , AHF ) . Images were stitched and reconstructed in 3D using Arivis Vision 4D software . Registration to the Allen Reference Atlas , Mask Extraction and Segmentation Brain registration to Allen Brain Atlas Mouse brains were un - anisotropically down - sampled and registered to the 25µm Allen brain mouse atlas ( Lein et al . , 2007 ) using the AMAP pipeline ( Niedworok et al . , 2016 ) through Brainreg frontend ( Tyson et al . , 2021 ) using the autofluorescence channel . The affine registration was computed using 5 steps and the registration was computed for each affine step . The freeform registration was computed using 5 steps and the registration was computed on the last 3 steps only . The bending weight energy was set to 0 . 9 which was a good tradeoff for accommodating sample imperfections while maintaining high regularization to avoid overfitting the data . All other parameters were kept as default . Mask creation for sub - region segmentation To accelerate the segmentation in Arivis Vision 4D software , we restricted the volume on which the segmentation was performed by using a binary mask of the volume of interest . To create the binary masks , we used a custom developed tool which interface with the Allen Brain Atlas API and automatically generates any region as a binary mask . This tool allows to create a mask using Allen Brain Atlas region names or acronyms . It automatically and efficiently looks for children’s regions to create masks and allows the user to batch create masks when the input is a list of regions . The output binary masks were produced at 25µm isotropic resolution for memory footprint efficiency and resampled later in Arivis Vision 4D software at the sample resolution for the segmentation step . Segmentation The masked region was imported into Arivis Vision 4D software and used for the creation of 3D masked region for cell counting analysis . Td - Tomato positive cells ( PV - cells ) and neuronal fibers Chalatsi et al . , 27 were classified using random forest machine learning - based algorithm ( ML ) . Due to the diversity of the brain areas and heterogeneity of background of whole brains scans , the ML algorithm was trained blindly for each brain area and sample . Based on the ML training the 3D objects were segmented and filtered by features , as volume ( voxel count ) and object sphericity using Arivis Vision 4D software . The raw counted cells were normalized by masked region volume . Proteomic Analysis Protein Digestion Replicate samples were digested according to a modified version of the iST method ( Kulak et al . , 2014 ) ( named miST method ) . Briefly , frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 30ul miST lysis buffer ( 1 % Sodium deoxycholate , 100mM Tris pH 8 . 6 , 10mM DTT ) by vortexing . Resuspended samples were heated at 95°C for 5min . Samples were then diluted 1 : 1 ( v : v ) with water containing 4mM MgCl2 and Benzonase ( Merck # 70746 , 100x dil of stock = 250 Units / μl ) and incubated for 15 minutes at RT to digest nucleic acids . Reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding ¼ vol of 160mM chloroacetamide ( final 32mM ) and incubating at 25°C for 45min in the dark . Samples were adjusted to 3mM EDTA and digested with 0 . 2μg Trypsin / LysC mix ( Promega # V5073 ) for 1 hour at 37°C , followed by a second 1 hour digestion with a second and identical aliquot of proteases . To remove sodium deoxycholate , two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1 % TFA were added to the digests , and the samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange ( SCX ) plate ( Oasis MCX ; Waters Corp . , Milford , MA ) by centrifugation . After washing with isopropanol / 1 % TFA , peptides were eluted in 200ul of 80 % MeCN , 19 % water , 1 % ( v / v ) ammonia . Liquid Chromatography - tandem Mass spectrometry Eluates after SCX desalting were dried and resuspended in variable volumes of 0 . 05 % trifluoroacetic acid , 2 % acetonitrile to equilibrate concentrations . 1μg of each sample was injected on column for nanoLC - MS analysis . MS analysis Data - dependent LC - MS / MS analyses of samples were carried out on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) interfaced through a nano - electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system ( Dionex ) . Peptides were separated on a reversed - phase custom packed 40cm C18 column ( 75μm ID , 100Å , Reprosil Pur 1 . 9μm particles , Dr . Maisch , Germany ) with a 4 - 90 % acetonitrile gradient in 0 . 1 % formic acid ( total time 140min ) . Full MS survey scans were performed at 120 ' 000 resolution . A data - dependent acquisition method Chalatsi et al . , 28 controlled by Xcalibur 4 . 2 software ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) was used that optimized the number of precursors selected ( “top speed” ) of charge 2 + to 5 + while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 0 . 6sec . HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32 % , with a precursor isolation window of 1 . 6m / z , and MS / MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap . Peptides selected for MS / MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60sec . MS Data analysis Tandem MS data were processed by the MaxQuant software ( version 1 . 6 . 14 ) ( Cox and Mann , 2008 ) incorporating the Andromeda search engine ( Cox et al . , 2011 ) . The UniProt Mus musculus reference proteome ( RefProt ) database of August 26th , 2020 was used ( 55’508 sequences ) , supplemented with sequences of common contaminants . Trypsin ( cleavage at K , R ) was used as the enzyme definition , allowing 2 missed cleavages . Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification . N - terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications . All identifications were filtered at 1 % FDR at both the peptide and protein levels with default MaxQuant parameters . MaxQuant data were further processed with Perseus software ( Tyanova et al . , 2016 ) . iBAQ ( Schwanhausser et al . , 2011 ) values were used for quality control assessment , after which LFQ values ( Cox et al . , 2011 ) were used for quantitation after log2 transformation . Only protein groups were retained which had all four valid values in at least one condition . In the resulting table , missing values were imputed with values determined from a normal distribution ( parameters used in Perseus : width 0 . 3 and down - shift 2 . 2 SD ) . Jess - WB analysis Cell pellets were resuspended in SDS lysis buffer ( 50mM Tris pH 6 . 8 , 2 % SDS , 5 % glycerol , 2mM DTT , 2 . 5mM EDTA , 2 . 5mM EGTA , 4mM NaVO4 , 20mM NaF complemented with Complete Protease inhibitors and PhosStop ( Roche ) ) and heated 10min at 65°C . Then , 4 . 8μl of protein extracts were subjected to the capillary - based immunoassay Jess system ( ProteinSimple ) using the 12 - 230kDa separation module ( ProteinSimple SM - W004 ) with the Replex ( RP - 001 ) and the Total Protein ( DM - TP01 ) modules according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Analyses were performed using the Compass software version 6 . 1 . Peaks were determined using the dropped line method and data were normalized to the Total Protein . Chalatsi et al . , 29 In vitro electrophysiology The mice 11 - 13 weeks were anesthetized ( ketamine / xylazine ; 150mg / 100mg / kg ) , sacrificed , and their brains were transferred in ice - cold carbogenated ( 95 % O 2 / 5 % CO 2 ) solution , containing ( in mM ) choline chloride 110 ; glucose 25 ; NaHCO 3 25 ; MgCl 2 7 ; ascorbic acid 11 . 6 ; sodium pyruvate 3 . 1 ; KCl 2 . 5 ; NaH 2 PO 4 1 . 25 ; CaCl 20 . 5 . Coronal brain slices ( 250μm thickness ) were prepared and transferred for 5min to warmed solution ( 34°C ) of identical composition , before transfer at room temperature in carbogenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid ( ACSF ) containing ( in mM ) NaCl 124 ; NaHCO 3 26 . 2 ; glucose 11 ; KCl 2 . 5 ; CaCl 2 2 . 5 ; MgCl 2 1 . 3 ; NaH 2 PO 4 1 . During recordings , slices were immersed in ACSF and continuously super fused at a flow rate of 2 . 5mL min−1 at 32°C . Neurons were patch - clamped using borosilicate glass pipettes ( 2 . 7 – 4MΩ ; Phymep , France ) under an Olympus - BX51 microscope ( Olympus , France ) . Signal was amplified , filtered at 5kHz and digitized at 10kHz ( Multiclamp 200B ; Molecular Devices , USA ) . Data were acquired using Igor Pro with NIDAQ tools ( Wavemetrics , USA ) . Access resistance was continuously monitored with a −4mV step delivered at 0 . 1Hz . Extracellular stimulation from AMPI ISO - Flex stimulator was delivered through glass electrodes placed nearby the pyramidal cell patched . Current - clamp recordings were obtained using an internal solution containing ( in mM ) : potassium gluconate 140 ; KCl 5 ; HEPES 10 ; EGTA 0 . 2 ; MgCl 2 2 ; Na 2 ATP 4 ; Na 3 GTP 0 . 3 mM ; creatine phosphate 10 . Current - clamp experiments were performed by a series of current steps ( negative to positive ) injected to induce action potentials ( - 20 , 0 , 20 , 80 , 160 , 320 , 400pA injection current , 800ms ) . For recordings in voltage - clamp configuration , evoked EPSCs were recorded at - 60mV while evoked and spontaneous inhibitory currents were recorded at + 5mV . Internal solution contained ( in mM ) CsMeSO 3 120 , CsCl 10 , HEPES 10 , EGTA 10 , creatine phosphate 5 ; Na 2 ATP 4 ; Na 3 GTP 0 . 4 , QX - 314 5 . All drugs were purchased from HelloBio . Polysomnographic EEG / EMG recordings Control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates , three - month - old , were used under a 12h / 12h light / dark cycle ( light onset at 9 : 00 AM ) . EEG and EMG electrodes were implanted as described ( Fernandez et al . , 2017 ) . Briefly , animals underwent a gas anesthesia ( 1 - 2 % isoflurane with O 2 ) and gold - plated electrodes were implanted over the dura mater through frontal and parietal bones in order to acquire frontal and parietal EEG recordings . Two EMG electrodes ( gold pellets ) were inserted into the neck muscles . A silver wire ( Harvard Apparatus ) implanted in the bone of cerebellum was used as ground and neutral reference to record referential EEG signals . Electrodes were glued to the skull ( cyanoacrylate ) , soldered to a male - to - male connector , and covered with dental cement ( Palavit , Heraeus Kulzer GmbH ) . Chalatsi et al . , 30 Paracetamol ( 2mg / ml ) was diluted into the drinking water for 7 days of recovery after the surgery , and an additional week of adaptation to the freely moving cabling system . Animals were monitored according to a score sheet established with the Veterinarian Authorities . Signals were recorded in freely moving conditions with animals in their home cage , amplified , digitized and acquired ( RHD2132 amplifier chip , connected to a RHD USB interface board C3100 from Intan Technologies , Los Angeles , CA ) at 1000Hz sampling frequency via Matlab recording software and Intan Matlab toolbox . Seizure and epileptic events detection For the seizure and epileptic event detection , we used the following free online software ( https : / / lifescience . ucd . ie / Epi - AI / ) , as described ( Wei et al . , 2021 ) . Behavioral analyses Open field test ( OFT ) Two - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre - ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were habituated in the behavioral room in single cages for at least 1 hour before each experiment . Anxiety - like behavior was assessed in a PVC square open field arena ( L = 45cm , W = 45cm and H = 30cm ) with gray opaque walls , where a central square zone was virtually marked 15cm from the four walls of the arena . The ambient illumination was 20lx in the chamber ( measurement without infrared light ) . Infrared light ( 850nm ) was used during the experiment to improve the contrast and tracking detection . Mice were placed for 20min in the arena and their body - center was tracked with EthoVision XT15 ( Noldus Information Technology , Wageningen , The Netherlands ) . Total distance ( cm ) , velocity ( cm / s ) , number of entries in the center zone , and the percentage of time spent in the center zone were scored . Mice were tested between 10 : 00am and 3 : 00pm . Light / Dark test Two - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre - ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were tested for their preference for the dark or light compartment of a two - chambered arena , using the Noldus Light / Dark set up . In this set up , the dark compartment ( L = 20cm , W = 20cm , H = 20 cm ) is smaller than the light compartment ( L = 40cm , W = 20cm , H = 20cm ) . The two compartments were separated by a manually - operated sliding door . The walls and ceiling of the dark compartment were permeable to infrared light , allowing optimal mouse tracking . The ambient illumination was 3 - 4lx in the dark and 600 - 700lx in the light compartment ( measurement without infrared light ) . Mice were habituated in single cages inside the experimental room for at least 1 hour prior the test . Chalatsi et al . , 31 During the test , every mouse was placed in the dark compartment with the door closed . After 10sec , the sliding door was opened manually , allowing free transition between compartments for 5min . The frequency to shuttle between compartments and the time spent in each compartment were scored using EthoVision XT15 ( Noldus Information Technologies ) . The frequency of transition between the areas , the duration , the total distance ( cm ) and the velocity ( cm / s ) were measured throughout the test session . Mice were tested between 10 : 00am and 3 : 00pm . Elevated Plus Maze ( EPM ) Two - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre - ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates , were subjected to Elevated Plus Maze ( EPM ) for evaluation of anxiety - like behavior . The EPM ( Noldus Information Technologies ) is a cross - shaped arena elevated from the floor ( H : 47cm ) consisting of two open and two closed arms ( dimensions of each arm : L = 36cm , W = 6cm ) . The arms are infra - red backlit to optimize the tracking of the mouse in closed arms . The ambient illumination was measured in the closed arm ( 4 - 6lx ) , in the center ( 40 - 60lx ) , and in the open arm ( 104 - 108lx ) . The mice were habituated in single cages inside the testing room for 1 hour before the test . Each mouse was individually placed in the center of the EPM facing one of the close arms and was allowed to freely explore the maze for 5min . The number of transitions between the open and closed arms , the percent time spent inside the zones of the maze , the total distance traveled ( cm ) , and the velocity ( cm / s ) were monitored with EthoVision XT15 ( Noldus Information Technologies ) . Anxiety - like was measured as an increase in closed arms activity ( either duration or number entries ) . Mice were tested between 10 : 00am and 3 : 00pm . Spontaneous activity Test Spontaneous activity of two to three - month - old Control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates was measured in the PhenoTyper 3000 ( Noldus Information Technologies ) . The PhenoTyper 3000 is a home - cage for mice ( L : 30cm x W : 30cm ) optimized for video tracking , via EthoVisionXT14 ( Noldus Information Technologies ) . Mice were placed in the Phenotypers during the light phase ( 2 : 00 - 3 : 00pm ) and were housed in this cage for 72 hours without any further human handling . Regular food and water were provided ad libitum during this time . Video tracking started at 7 : 00pm . A set of spontaneous behavior parameters ( described in ( Loos et al . , 2014 ) were collected : Food and water consumption , locomotion , sheltering , dark light index , dark light phase transition . Chalatsi et al . , 32 Rotarod Test Three - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were subjected to the rotarod test in order to evaluate their motor coordination and balance as previously described ( Dominguez - Iturza et al . , 2019 ) . Each mouse was habituated in a single cage inside the experimental room for at least 1 hour . The ambient illumination of the experimental room was 25 - 30lx . Mice were habituated on the rotarod apparatus for 2min at constant speed ( 4rpm ) . After 10min , they were tested on rotarod for 3 trials of 5min with an inter - trial interval of 10 min . The speed of rotarod was accelerated from 4rpm to 40rpm during the 5 - min trial . The latency to fall off from the rod was recorded . The average latency to fall as well as the latency to fall per trial were measured in these 5min trials . Mice were tested between 10 . 00am and 3 : 00pm . Novel Object Recognition Test ( NOR ) Three - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were subjected to a two - day NOR test . On each day , mice were habituated in single cages inside the experimental room , at least 1 hour before testing . The first day , mice are individually placed inside an open arena ( L = 45cm , W = 45 cm and H = 30cm ) with gray PVC opaque walls in dim light conditions ( 20lx ) . The arena was filled with bedding ( 2cm ) in all trials . On the first day , the mouse was habituated inside the empty arena for two 10 - min - trials . During the following three trials ( inter trial interval = 5min ) , two identical objects ( lego ) were placed in the arena and the mouse was free to explore the objects for 10min . At the end of third object exploration trial , the mouse was brought back to its own home cage in the animal vivarium . Twenty - four hours later , mice were individually placed inside the arena for one trial with one familiar object and a novel object . The objects were located at the same distance from each wall ( 15cm ) . Mouse activity was tracked with EthoVision XT 14 software ( Noldus Information Technologies ) . The distance travelled per trial , the time spent exploring each object , the object exploration time per each trial , and the discrimination index were measured . Discrimination index was calculated using the following formula : Discrimination Index ( % ) = [ time spent exploring the novel object new - time spent exploring the familiar one / total time spending in objects ] X100 % . Mice were tested between 10 : 00am and 3 : 00pm . Fear Conditioning Test Three - month - old control ( atg5 f / f ) and PV - atg5KO ( pv - cre ; atg5 f / f ) male littermates were subjected to a two - day Contextual Fear Conditioning test . Mice were first habituated in single cages inside the experimental room at least 1 hour before testing . Each mouse was placed individually in the fear conditioning chamber ( Ugo Basile , srl ) , which is composed of 4 transparent Plexiglas walls Chalatsi et al . , 33 and an electrified metal grid floor . After 2 minutes of free exploration , two mild foot - shocks ( 0 . 5mA , 2sec ) separated by one minute interval , were delivered through the grid - floor . Thirty seconds after the termination of the second foot - shock , the mouse was placed back to its own home cage . Memory for the association between the context and the aversive stimulus was probed 24 hours later for 5min inside the same conditioning chamber used during the training session . An overhead camera connected to the software Ethovision XT15 ( Noldus Information Technology ) automatically monitors freezing behavior ( i . e . crouched posture and absence of any movement except respiratory movements ) throughout the training and test sessions . Percentage of time spent freezing during the test session is used as a proxy measure for the memory of the association formed during the training session . The current of the foot shock was measured in every experiment to ensure that it corresponds to 0 . 5mA . Mice were tested between 10 : 00am and 3 : 00pm . Statistical analysis Analyses were performed via GraphPad Prism software for behavioral test and for molecular and biochemical analysis . The statistical tests are reported in the respective figure legend . Briefly , unpaired two - tailed Student’s t - tests were used for comparison between two groups . For comparison of two groups and two variances , two - way ANOVA , Multiple - t - test with Tukey or Bonferroni or Holm - Sidak’s multiple comparison correction was used among groups . For all data analysis , p < 0 . 05 was considered as significant and reported as follows : * p < 0 . 05 , * * p≤0 . 01 , * * * p≤0 . 001 and * * * * p≤0 . 0001 . Results were presented as mean and standard error of mean ( ±SEM ) . Power Analysis An a priori power analysis was conducted using G * Power version 3 . 1 ( Faul et al . , 2007 ) to determine the sample size required to test differences between control and PV - atg5KO mice in anxiety - like tests ( EPM , LD box and OFT ) . Results showed the minimum sample size to achieve 80 % power 1 - β = 0 . 8 ( probability of Type II error ) for detecting a medium effect , at a significance criterion of α = 0 . 05 ( probability of Type I error ) and analyzed with a two - tailed Student ' s t test . The results are presented in the Suppl . Table 5 . Chalatsi et al . , 34 Resources and reagents table Table 1 : Used chemicals and kit were listed in this table Chemical Supplier Cat # cOmplete™ , Mini , EDTA - free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail MERCK 11836170001 BCA Protein Assay Kit Life Technologies Europe BV 23225 No Stain protein labeling reagent Life Technologies Europe BV A44449 Hoechst 33342 HelloBio HB0787 Tissue - Tek O . C . T . Compound Sysmex 4583 FD Rapid GolgiStain™ Kit Holzel Diagnostika PK401 - C In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit , Fluorescein Roche 11684795910 DNase I Solution STEMCELL 7900 Papain Dissociation System BioConcept ( Worthington Biochemical Corporation ) LK003150 HistodenzTM MERCK D2158 X - CLARITY™ Hydrogel Solution KitLogos Byosystem C1310X SDS Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Brunschwig 45900 - 0010 Antibody table Table 2 : Used antibodies were listed in this table . Antibody Company , Cat # Dilution ( process ) LC3B - rabbit Sigma , L7543 1 : 1000 ( WB , IHC ) LC3B - mouse Santa cruz - sc , 271625 1 : 1000 ( WB , IHC ) p6 SQSTM1 ( p62 ) - mouse Calbiochem , DR1057 1 : 5000 ( WB ) SQSTM1 ( p62 ) - g . pig Progen , GP62 - C 1 : 2000 ( IHC ) ALFY ( WDFY3 , B - 4 ) Santa cruz - sc , sc - 514569 1 : 1000 ( WB ) Chalatsi et al . , 35 Gephyrin - mouse Synaptic Systems , SYSY147021 1 : 500 ( WB , IHC ) Parvalbumin - mouse Swant , 235 1 : 1000 ( WB , IHC ) Parvalbumin - rabbit Swant , PV27 1 : 2000 ( WB , IHC ) Calbidin D - 28k - rabbit Swant , CB - 38a 1 : 5000 ( IHC ) Active - Caspase 3 - rabbit R & D systems , AF835 1 : 200 ( IHC ) RFP - rabbit Rockland , 42896 1 : 1000 ( WB , IHC ) GABA A receptor γ2 subunit - rabbit Synaptic Systems , 224003 1 : 1000 ( WB , IHC ) vGAT - g . pig Synaptic Systems , 131004 1 : 500 ( WB , IHC ) GAD2 / GAD65 - mouse Synaptic Systems , 198111 1 : 500 ( WB , IHC ) NMDAR2A ( GluN2A ) - rabbit Alomone ( AGC - 002 ) 1 : 500 ( WB , IHC ) NMDAR2B ( GluN2B ) - rabbit Alomone ( AGC - 003 ) 1 : 500 ( WB , IHC ) GluA2 C - terminus - mouse Synaptic Systems , 182211 1 : 100 ( WB ) GluA2 N - terminus - gpig Alomone ( AGP - 073 ) 1 : 100 ( IHC ) ATP2B4 - rabbit Sigma ( SAB2100184 ) 1 : 500 ( WB ) b3 - Tubulin / Tuj1 - mouse Santa cruz - sc , 80005 1 : 5000 ( WB , IHC ) b3 - Tubulin / Tuj1 - rabbit Abcam , ab18207 1 : 1000 ( WB , IHC ) Alexa 488 - rabbit ab150077 1 : 1000 ( IHC ) Alexa 594 - mouse ab150116 1 : 1000 ( IHC ) Alexa 647 - g . pig ab150187 1 : 1000 ( IHC ) IgG ( Dylight 800 4xPEG ) - mouse Invitrogen , SA5 - 35521 1 : 10000 ( WB ) IgG ( H + L ) - rabbit Jackson , 211 - 035 - 109 1 : 10000 ( WB ) IgG ( H + L ) - mouse Jackson , 715 - 035 - 150 1 : 10000 ( WB ) Chalatsi et al . , 36 Rabbit HRP Biotechne , DM - 001 1X , ( Jess WB ) Mouse HRP Biotechne , DM - 002 1X , ( Jess WB ) Chalatsi et al . , 37 Amegandjin , C . A . , Choudhury , M . , Jadhav , V . , Carrico , J . N . , Quintal , A . , Berryer , M . , Snapyan , M . , Chattopadhyaya , B . , Saghatelyan , A . , and Di Cristo , G . ( 2021 ) . Sensitive period for rescuing parvalbumin interneurons connectivity and social behavior deficits caused by TSC1 loss . Nat Commun 12 , 3653 . Bateup , H . S . , Johnson , C . A . , Denefrio , C . L . , Saulnier , J . L . , Kornacker , K . , and Sabatini , B . L . ( 2013 ) . Excitatory / inhibitory synaptic imbalance leads to hippocampal hyperexcitability in mouse models of tuberous sclerosis . Neuron 78 , 510 - 522 . Chen , B . , Brinkmann , K . , Chen , Z . , Pak , C . W . , Liao , Y . , Shi , S . , Henry , L . , Grishin , N . V . , Bogdan , S . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2014 ) . The WAVE regulatory complex links diverse receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . Cell 156 , 195 - 207 . Chung , K . , and Deisseroth , K . ( 2013 ) . CLARITY for mapping the nervous system . Nat Methods 10 , 508 - 513 . Compans , B . , Camus , C . , Kallergi , E . , Sposini , S . , Martineau , M . , Butler , C . , Kechkar , A . , Klaassen , R . V . , Retailleau , N . , Sejnowski , T . J . , et al . ( 2021 ) . NMDAR - dependent long - term depression is associated with increased short term plasticity through autophagy mediated loss of PSD - 95 . Nat Commun 12 , 2849 . Courtin , J . , Chaudun , F . , Rozeske , R . R . , Karalis , N . , Gonzalez - Campo , C . , Wurtz , H . , Abdi , A . , Baufreton , J . , Bienvenu , T . C . , and Herry , C . ( 2014 ) . Prefrontal parvalbumin interneurons shape neuronal activity to drive fear expression . Nature 505 , 92 - 96 . Cox , J . , Neuhauser , N . , Michalski , A . , Scheltema , R . A . , Olsen , J . V . , and Mann , M . ( 2011 ) . Andromeda : a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment . J Proteome Res 10 , 1794 - 1805 . De Zeeuw , C . I . , and Ten Brinke , M . M . ( 2015 ) . Motor Learning and the Cerebellum . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7 , a021683 . Dominguez - Iturza , N . , Lo , A . C . , Shah , D . , Armendariz , M . , Vannelli , A . , Mercaldo , V . , Trusel , M . , Li , K . W . , Gastaldo , D . , Santos , A . R . , et al . ( 2019 ) . The autism - and schizophrenia - associated protein CYFIP1 regulates bilateral brain connectivity and behaviour . Nat Commun 10 , 3454 . Donato , F . , Chowdhury , A . , Lahr , M . , and Caroni , P . ( 2015 ) . Early - and late - born parvalbumin basket cell subpopulations exhibiting distinct regulation and roles in learning . Neuron 85 , 770 - 786 . Donato , F . , Rompani , S . B . , and Caroni , P . ( 2013 ) . Parvalbumin - expressing basket - cell network plasticity induced by experience regulates adult learning . Nature 504 , 272 - 276 . Ebrahimi - Fakhari , D . , Saffari , A . , Wahlster , L . , Lu , J . , Byrne , S . , Hoffmann , G . F . , Jungbluth , H . , and Sahin , M . ( 2016 ) . Congenital disorders of autophagy : an emerging novel class of inborn errors of neuro - metabolism . Brain 139 , 317 - 337 . Fassio , A . , Falace , A . , Esposito , A . , Aprile , D . , Guerrini , R . , and Benfenati , F . ( 2020 ) . Emerging Role of the Autophagy / Lysosomal Degradative Pathway in Neurodevelopmental Disorders With Epilepsy . Front Cell Neurosci 14 , 39 . Faul , F . , Erdfelder , E . , Lang , A . G . , and Buchner , A . ( 2007 ) . G * Power 3 : a flexible statistical power analysis program for the social , behavioral , and biomedical sciences . Behav Res Methods 39 , 175 - 191 . Fernandez , L . M . J . , Lecci , S . , Cardis , R . , Vantomme , G . , Beard , E . , and Luthi , A . ( 2017 ) . Quantifying Infra - slow Dynamics of Spectral Power and Heart Rate in Sleeping Mice . J Vis Exp . Fu , C . , Cawthon , B . , Clinkscales , W . , Bruce , A . , Winzenburger , P . , and Ess , K . C . ( 2012 ) . GABAergic interneuron development and function is modulated by the Tsc1 gene . Cereb Cortex 22 , 2111 - 2119 . Fuchs , E . C . , Zivkovic , A . R . , Cunningham , M . O . , Middleton , S . , Lebeau , F . E . , Bannerman , D . M . , Rozov , A . , Whittington , M . A . , Traub , R . D . , Rawlins , J . N . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Recruitment of parvalbumin - positive interneurons determines hippocampal function and associated behavior . Neuron 53 , 591 - 604 . Gotti , G . C . , Kikhia , M . , Wuntke , V . , Hasam - Henderson , L . A . , Wu , B . , Geiger , J . R . P . , and Kovacs , R . ( 2021 ) . In situ labeling of non - accommodating interneurons based on metabolic rates . Redox Biol 38 , 101798 . Hara , T . , Nakamura , K . , Matsui , M . , Yamamoto , A . , Nakahara , Y . , Suzuki - Migishima , R . , Yokoyama , M . , Mishima , K . , Saito , I . , Okano , H . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice . Nature 441 , 885 - 889 . Chalatsi et al . , 38 Henske , E . P . , Jozwiak , S . , Kingswood , J . C . , Sampson , J . R . , and Thiele , E . A . ( 2016 ) . Tuberous sclerosis complex . Nat Rev Dis Primers 2 , 16035 . Hippenmeyer , S . , Huber , R . M . , Ladle , D . R . , Murphy , K . , and Arber , S . ( 2007 ) . ETS transcription factor Erm controls subsynaptic gene expression in skeletal muscles . Neuron 55 , 726 - 740 . Inan , M . , Zhao , M . , Manuszak , M . , Karakaya , C . , Rajadhyaksha , A . M . , Pickel , V . M . , Schwartz , T . H . , Goldstein , P . A . , and Manfredi , G . ( 2016 ) . Energy deficit in parvalbumin neurons leads to circuit dysfunction , impaired sensory gating and social disability . Neurobiol Dis 93 , 35 - 46 . Ka , M . , Smith , A . L . , and Kim , W . Y . ( 2017 ) . MTOR controls genesis and autophagy of GABAergic interneurons during brain development . Autophagy 13 , 1348 - 1363 . Kaar , S . J . , Angelescu , I . , Marques , T . R . , and Howes , O . D . ( 2019 ) . Pre - frontal parvalbumin interneurons in schizophrenia : a meta - analysis of post - mortem studies . J Neural Transm ( Vienna ) 126 , 1637 - 1651 . Kallergi , E . , Daskalaki , A . D . , Kolaxi , A . , Camus , C . , Ioannou , E . , Mercaldo , V . , Haberkant , P . , Stein , F . , Sidiropoulou , K . , Dalezios , Y . , et al . ( 2022 ) . Dendritic autophagy degrades postsynaptic proteins and is required for long - term synaptic depression in mice . Nat Commun 13 , 680 . Khlaifia , A . , Honore , E . , Artinian , J . , Laplante , I . , and Lacaille , J . C . ( 2022 ) . mTORC1 function in hippocampal parvalbumin interneurons : regulation of firing and long - term potentiation of intrinsic excitability but not long - term contextual fear memory and context discrimination . Mol Brain 15 , 56 . Komatsu , M . , Waguri , S . , Chiba , T . , Murata , S . , Iwata , J . , Tanida , I . , Ueno , T . , Koike , M . , Uchiyama , Y . , Kominami , E . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration in mice . Nature 441 , 880 - 884 . Komatsu , M . , Wang , Q . J . , Holstein , G . R . , Friedrich , V . L . , Jr . , Iwata , J . , Kominami , E . , Chait , B . T . , Tanaka , K . , and Yue , Z . ( 2007 ) . Essential role for autophagy protein Atg7 in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis and the prevention of axonal degeneration . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , 14489 - 14494 . Kontou , G . , Antonoudiou , P . , Podpolny , M . , Szulc , B . R . , Arancibia - Carcamo , I . L . , Higgs , N . F . , Lopez - Domenech , G . , Salinas , P . C . , Mann , E . O . , and Kittler , J . T . ( 2021 ) . Miro1 - dependent mitochondrial dynamics in parvalbumin interneurons . Elife 10 . Korotkova , T . , Fuchs , E . C . , Ponomarenko , A . , von Engelhardt , J . , and Monyer , H . ( 2010 ) . NMDA receptor ablation on parvalbumin - positive interneurons impairs hippocampal synchrony , spatial representations , and working memory . Neuron 68 , 557 - 569 . Kuijpers , M . , Kochlamazashvili , G . , Stumpf , A . , Puchkov , D . , Swaminathan , A . , Lucht , M . T . , Krause , E . , Maritzen , T . , Schmitz , D . , and Haucke , V . ( 2021 ) . Neuronal Autophagy Regulates Presynaptic Neurotransmission by Controlling the Axonal Endoplasmic Reticulum . Neuron 109 , 299 - 313 e299 . Lein , E . S . , Hawrylycz , M . J . , Ao , N . , Ayres , M . , Bensinger , A . , Bernard , A . , Boe , A . F . , Boguski , M . S . , Brockway , K . S . , Byrnes , E . J . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Genome - wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain . Nature 445 , 168 - 176 . Madeo , M . , Stewart , M . , Sun , Y . , Sahir , N . , Wiethoff , S . , Chandrasekar , I . , Yarrow , A . , Rosenfeld , J . A . , Yang , Y . , Cordeiro , D . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Loss - of - Function Mutations in FRRS1L Lead to an Epileptic - Dyskinetic Encephalopathy . Am J Hum Genet 98 , 1249 - 1255 . Madisen , L . , Zwingman , T . A . , Sunkin , S . M . , Oh , S . W . , Zariwala , H . A . , Gu , H . , Ng , L . L . , Palmiter , R . D . , Hawrylycz , M . J . , Jones , A . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . A robust and high - throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole mouse brain . Nat Neurosci 13 , 133 - 140 . Nakazawa , K . , Zsiros , V . , Jiang , Z . , Nakao , K . , Kolata , S . , Zhang , S . , and Belforte , J . E . ( 2012 ) . GABAergic interneuron origin of schizophrenia pathophysiology . Neuropharmacology 62 , 1574 - 1583 . Niedworok , C . J . , Brown , A . P . , Jorge Cardoso , M . , Osten , P . , Ourselin , S . , Modat , M . , and Margrie , T . W . ( 2016 ) . aMAP is a validated pipeline for registration and segmentation of high - resolution mouse brain data . Nat Commun 7 , 11879 . Nikoletopoulou , V . , Sidiropoulou , K . , Kallergi , E . , Dalezios , Y . , and Tavernarakis , N . ( 2017 ) . Modulation of Autophagy by BDNF Underlies Synaptic Plasticity . Cell Metab 26 , 230 - 242 e235 . Chalatsi et al . , 39 Nixon , R . A . ( 2013 ) . The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease . Nat Med 19 , 983 - 997 . Ognjanovski , N . , Schaeffer , S . , Wu , J . , Mofakham , S . , Maruyama , D . , Zochowski , M . , and Aton , S . J . ( 2017 ) . Parvalbumin - expressing interneurons coordinate hippocampal network dynamics required for memory consolidation . Nat Commun 8 , 15039 . Overhoff , e . a . ( 2022 ) . Autophagy regulates neuronal excitability by controlling cAMP / Protein Kinase A signaling . Biorxiv preprint . Page , C . E . , Shepard , R . , Heslin , K . , and Coutellier , L . ( 2019 ) . Prefrontal parvalbumin cells are sensitive to stress and mediate anxiety - related behaviors in female mice . Sci Rep 9 , 19772 . Pan , Y . , He , X . , Li , C . , Li , Y . , Li , W . , Zhang , H . , Wang , Y . , Zhou , G . , Yang , J . , Li , J . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Neuronal activity recruits the CRTC1 / CREB axis to drive transcription - dependent autophagy for maintaining late - phase LTD . Cell Rep 36 , 109398 . Rath , S . , Sharma , R . , Gupta , R . , Ast , T . , Chan , C . , Durham , T . J . , Goodman , R . P . , Grabarek , Z . , Haas , M . E . , Hung , W . H . W . , et al . ( 2021 ) . MitoCarta3 . 0 : an updated mitochondrial proteome now with sub - organelle localization and pathway annotations . Nucleic Acids Res 49 , D1541 - D1547 . Ridler , K . , Suckling , J . , Higgins , N . J . , de Vries , P . J . , Stephenson , C . M . , Bolton , P . F . , and Bullmore , E . T . ( 2007 ) . Neuroanatomical correlates of memory deficits in tuberous sclerosis complex . Cereb Cortex 17 , 261 - 271 . Ruden , J . B . , Dugan , L . L . , and Konradi , C . ( 2021 ) . Parvalbumin interneuron vulnerability and brain disorders . Neuropsychopharmacology 46 , 279 - 287 . Schwanhausser , B . , Busse , D . , Li , N . , Dittmar , G . , Schuchhardt , J . , Wolf , J . , Chen , W . , and Selbach , M . ( 2011 ) . Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control . Nature 473 , 337 - 342 . Schwenk , J . , Harmel , N . , Brechet , A . , Zolles , G . , Berkefeld , H . , Muller , C . S . , Bildl , W . , Baehrens , D . , Huber , B . , Kulik , A . , et al . ( 2012 ) . High - resolution proteomics unravel architecture and molecular diversity of native AMPA receptor complexes . Neuron 74 , 621 - 633 . Stafford , N . , Wilson , C . , Oceandy , D . , Neyses , L . , and Cartwright , E . J . ( 2017 ) . The Plasma Membrane Calcium ATPases and Their Role as Major New Players in Human Disease . Physiol Rev 97 , 1089 - 1125 . Tang , G . , Gudsnuk , K . , Kuo , S . H . , Cotrina , M . L . , Rosoklija , G . , Sosunov , A . , Sonders , M . S . , Kanter , E . , Castagna , C . , Yamamoto , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Loss of mTOR - dependent macroautophagy causes autistic - like synaptic pruning deficits . Neuron 83 , 1131 - 1143 . Thul , P . J . , Akesson , L . , Wiking , M . , Mahdessian , D . , Geladaki , A . , Ait Blal , H . , Alm , T . , Asplund , A . , Bjork , L . , Breckels , L . M . , et al . ( 2017 ) . A subcellular map of the human proteome . Science 356 . Tripodi , M . , Bhandari , K . , Chowdhury , A . , Mukherjee , A . , and Caroni , P . ( 2018 ) . Parvalbumin Interneuron Plasticity for Consolidation of Reinforced Learning . Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 83 , 25 - 35 . Tyanova , S . , Temu , T . , Sinitcyn , P . , Carlson , A . , Hein , M . Y . , Geiger , T . , Mann , M . , and Cox , J . ( 2016 ) . The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of ( prote ) omics data . Nat Methods 13 , 731 - 740 . Tyson , A . L . , Rousseau , C . V . , Niedworok , C . J . , Keshavarzi , S . , Tsitoura , C . , Cossell , L . , Strom , M . , and Margrie , T . W . ( 2021 ) . A deep learning algorithm for 3D cell detection in whole mouse brain image datasets . PLoS Comput Biol 17 , e1009074 . Wei , L . , Boutouil , H . , R , R . G . , Mamad , O . , Heiland , M . , Reschke , C . R . , Del Gallo , F . , P , F . F . , Henshall , D . C . , Lowery , M . , et al . ( 2021 ) . Detection of spontaneous seizures in EEGs in multiple experimental mouse models of epilepsy . J Neural Eng 18 . Xia , F . , Richards , B . A . , Tran , M . M . , Josselyn , S . A . , Takehara - Nishiuchi , K . , and Frankland , P . W . ( 2017 ) . Parvalbumin - positive interneurons mediate neocortical - hippocampal interactions that are necessary for memory consolidation . Elife 6 . Zhao , Y . G . , Sun , L . , Miao , G . , Ji , C . , Zhao , H . , Sun , H . , Miao , L . , Yoshii , S . R . , Mizushima , N . , Wang , X . , et al . ( 2015 ) . The autophagy gene Wdr45 / Wipi4 regulates learning and memory function and axonal homeostasis . Autophagy 11 , 881 - 890 . EPM % of Cumulative duration in the open arm d ( effect size ) 0 . 27 N of required sample size ( power 1 - β = 0 . 8 ) 209 Supplementary Table 5 : Power Analysis LD box OFT % of Cumulative duration in the light comp % of Cumulative duration in the center 0 . 03 0 . 35 14984 130