Protein Drift - Diﬀusion Dynamics and Phase Separation in Curved Cell Membranes and Dendritic Spines : Hybrid Discrete - Continuum Methods Patrick D . Tran , 1 , ∗ Thomas A . Blanpied , 2 and Paul J . Atzberger 3 , † 1 Physics , College of Creative Studies , University of California , Santa Barbara ( UCSB ) 2 Department of Physiology , University of Maryland 3 Department of Mathematics and Mechanical Engineering , University of California , Santa Barbara ( UCSB ) , We develop methods for investigating protein drift - diﬀusion dynamics in heterogeneous cell mem - branes and the roles played by geometry , diﬀusion , chemical kinetics , and phase separation . Our hybrid stochastic numerical methods combine discrete particle descriptions with continuum - level models for tracking the individual protein drift - diﬀusion dynamics when coupled to continuum ﬁelds . We show how our approaches can be used to investigate phenomena motivated by protein kinetics within dendritic spines . The spine geometry is hypothesized to play an important biological role regulating synaptic strength , protein kinetics , and self - assembly of clusters . We perform simu - lation studies for model spine geometries varying the neck size to investigate how phase - separation and protein organization is inﬂuenced by diﬀerent shapes . We also show how our methods can be used to study the roles of geometry in reaction - diﬀusion systems including Turing instabilities . Our methods provide general approaches for investigating protein kinetics and drift - diﬀusion dynamics within curved membrane structures . I . INTRODUCTION In cellular biology , the morphological shapes of cell membranes play important roles in protein transport and kinetics . Cell membranes often take on shapes having characteristic geometries or topologies associated with biological function [ 1 – 7 ] . Membranes arising in cell bi - ology consist of heterogeneous mixtures of lipids , pro - teins , and other small molecules [ 1 ] . The individual and collective dynamics of membrane associated molecules carry out diverse functions in cellular processes ranging from signaling to motility [ 1 , 8 – 12 ] . Membranes are ef - fectively two dimensional ﬂuid - elastic structures result - ing in processes that can be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than their counter - parts occuring in bulk three dimensional ﬂuids [ 13 – 16 ] . Investigating such cellular processes using computational simulation requires the ability to capture these eﬀects and the geometric and topological contri - butions of curved membrane structures to protein drift - diﬀusion dynamics and kinetics . We introduce computational methods based on a hy - brid approach coupling discrete and continuum descrip - tions . For low concentration species , we track individ - ual proteins as discrete particles . For other species , we track contributions using continuum ﬁelds . We circum - vent many of the challenges of diﬀerential geometry and directly approximating surface PDEs by developing dis - crete localized models that capture geometric eﬀects . In this way , behaviors of our model emerge on larger length - scales in a manner capturing the relevant underlying physical phenomena , while avoiding some of the more ∗ patrickduytran @ gmail . com † atzberg @ gmail . com common challenges associated with direct application of PDE discretizations and diﬀerential geometry . We also provide stochastic local models to account for discrete eﬀects and other ﬂuctuations . Many computational methods have been introduced for studying membranes . Methods modeling at the level of continuum ﬁelds and partial diﬀerential equation ( PDE ) descriptions include continuum concentration and phase ﬁelds in vesicles in [ 17 ] , protein aggregation in [ 18 ] , and phase separation in [ 19 ] . Methods modeling at the level of particles include Monte - Carlo ( MC ) Methods and Kinetic MC ( KMC ) in [ 20 – 27 ] , Molecular Dynam - ics ( MD ) studies in [ 28 – 30 ] , and Coarse - Grained ( CG ) Models in [ 31 , 32 ] . Some work has been done on hybrid discrete - continuum approaches for membranes in [ 33 – 39 ] , and taking into account geometric eﬀects in [ 36 , 40 ] , and through point - cloud representations in [ 27 , 41 – 44 ] . Our methods provide new ways for handling hybrid discrete - continuum stochastic descriptions for protein drift - diﬀusion dynamics and kinetics within heteroge - neous curved membranes . We focus particularly on the roles played by phase separation , geometry , and ﬂuctua - tions arising from discrete number eﬀects . We develop stochastic methods for bidirectional coupling between protein dynamics and evolving phase ﬁelds . For captur - ing geometric contributions for general shapes , we also introduce numerical approaches using the induced met - ric from the embedding space which allows for avoiding the need for potentially cumbersome calculations using explicit expressions from diﬀerential geometry . We also introduce methods for tracking proteins both at the level of continuum mean - ﬁeld concentration ﬁelds and beyond mean - ﬁeld theory at the level of discrete individual pro - teins with stochastic trajectories . Our work is motivated by understanding protein inter - actions within cell curved membranes , such as neuronal a r X i v : 2 1 10 . 00725v2 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 1 8 A ug 2022 2 dendritic spines . Dendritic spines are small ∼ 500nm structures that are attached along the larger shaft of the dendrites of neurons [ 45 , 46 ] . These are critical structures in the brain mediating the input of synaptic communi - cations between neurons . Dendritic spines have unique morphologies that physiologically change in molecular composition , size , and shape to modulate the synaptic strength between neurons as part of long - term learning and memory [ 46 – 49 ] . The important connection between membrane geometry and synaptic strength is an active area of current theoretical and experimental research [ 50 – 62 ] . Recent advances in microscopy and single - particle tracking techniques are providing some indicators of the underlying processes regulating protein transport and ki - netics within spines [ 47 , 63 – 69 ] . A hypothesis which we explore with our methods is that protein complexes can locally nucleate liquid - liquid phase separations that couple to proteins to inﬂuence both diﬀusive transport and kinetics . Our work is mo - tivated by the recent observations concerning the roles of SynGAP binding to PSD - 95 resulting in complexes that phase separate playing a role in organizing pro - teins in dendritic spines in forming the post - synaptic den - sity [ 70 , 71 ] . In our initial work presented here , we do not commit in models yet to speciﬁc proteins , but focus more generally on mechanisms by which protein diﬀusion and phase separation can drive cluster formation and aug - ment reaction kinetics consistent with such observations . For exploring such hypotheses , we focus on the develop - ment of methods for quantitative biophysical models and computational simulations capable of investigating such eﬀects . For this purpose , we develop spatial - temporal biophysical models using our introduced hybrid discrete - continuum approach to investigate the roles of geometry and phase separation in protein diﬀusion and kinetics . We discuss details for our modeling approach for pro - tein drift - diﬀusion dynamics in Section II and our simula - tion studies in Section III . We discuss the drift - diﬀusion dynamics of proteins coupled to phase ﬁelds and dis - cretizations for curved membranes having general shapes in Sections II A , II B , II C , and II D . We investigate the accuracy of our numerical approximations in Section II E . We demonstrate how our methods can be used to com - pute ﬁrst passage times and other statistics for mem - branes of general shape , in some cases without the need for costly Monte - Carlo sampling , in Section II F . We perform simulations using our methods of discrete and continuum systems in III . We develop continuum ﬁeld methods for reaction - diﬀusion systems with pattern forming Turing instabilities capturing the contributions of geometry in Section III A . We develop mechanistic models for dendritic spine shapes and perform simula - tion to investigate the roles of geometric eﬀects , het - erogeneities arising from phase separation , and discrete number eﬀects in Section III B and Section III C . The introduced methods provide general approaches for in - vestigating protein transport and kinetics within hetero - geneous cell membranes . FIG . 1 . Markov - Chain Discretization of Particle Drift - Diﬀusion on Curved Surfaces . The surface is discretized us - ing a triangulation with random walks between centriods x i and x j having jump rates M ij determined by the local ge - ometry ( top - left ) which can be expressed as a Markov - Chain ( bottom ) . The Markov - Chain discretization yields a back - ward equation for Ω allowing readily for computation of ﬁrst - passage times τ ( FPTs ) for reaching the boundary ∂ Ω and other statistics without the need in some cases for Monte - Carlo sampling ( top - right ) . II . HYBRID DISCRETE PARTICLE - CONTINUUM APPROACH FOR CURVED SURFACES We develop models using a hybrid discrete particle and continuum ﬁeld approach for investigating transport and reactions within curved surfaces , see Figure 1 . For low concentration chemical species , we introduce approaches for modeling at the level of tracking individual particles . For larger concentrations , we develop continuum ﬁeld de - scriptions and methods for curved surfaces . We also ac - count for the bi - directional coupling between the discrete particles and continuum ﬁelds . A . Particle Drift - Diﬀusion Dynamics We discuss a few results related to the drift - diﬀusion dynamics of particles useful in developing our meth - ods . We then approximate the particle dynamics using a Markov - Chain process [ 72 ] with jump rates based on estimating the local geometry , see Figure 1 . The drift - diﬀusion dynamics of a particle immersed within a viscous ﬂuid is given by the Langevin equa - tion [ 73 , 74 ] m d V t = − γ V t dt − ∇ U ( X t ) d t + (cid:112) 2 k B Tγ d W t , ( 1 ) where d X t = V t dt . This is to be interpreted as an Itˆo process [ 73 , 75 ] . The γ is the drag , U ( x ) is a potential energy , k B is Boltzmann’s constant , and T is the tem - perature [ 74 ] . The d W t are increments of the Wiener process [ 73 , 75 ] . The diﬀusion coeﬃcient is given by D = k B T / γ . We remark that in some cases the protein diﬀusion can also be inﬂuenced by local protein - induced deformations 3 of the membrane [ 16 ] , crowding eﬀects ( sub - super diﬀu - sive and other regimes ) [ 76 , 77 ] , or cytoskeletal interac - tions [ 24 , 78 ] . Our methods could be combined with such models for local deformation and crowding by augment - ing the Markov - Chain jump rates . In the present work , we treat the membrane as having on average an eﬀec - tively constant shape . We focus on models in the normal diﬀusive regime with explicit modeling of protein species , binding partners , or obstacles . We treat additional con - tributions through eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcients or in the formulated protein interaction forces . When m / γ (cid:28) (cid:96) 2 / D , where (cid:96) is the radius of the par - ticle , the inertial contributions are negligible . In this regime , the Langevin equation can be reduced to the over - damped Smoluchowski equation d X t = − 1 γ ∇ U ( X t ) d t + √ 2 D d W t . ( 2 ) This can be expressed in terms of probability densities ρ ( x , t ) for when X t = x . This satisﬁes the Fokker - Planck ( FP ) equation ∂ρ ∂t = −∇ · J , J = (cid:18) − 1 γ ∇ U (cid:19) ρ − D ∇ ρ . ( 3 ) When U = 0 , this has the well - known Green’s Function for Euclidean space K ( x (cid:48) , x ; t ) = 1 ( 4 πDt ) d / 2 exp (cid:18) − ( x (cid:48) − x ) 2 4 Dt (cid:19) . ( 4 ) From the FP equation , the K ( x (cid:48) , x ; t ) has the interpreta - tion of the probability of a particle starting with X 0 = x and diﬀusing to location X t = x (cid:48) over the time dura - tion t . We will use a related approach to determine our Markov - Chain jump rates . The FP equation has a steady - state ρ ∗ with detailed balance if J [ ρ ∗ ] = − γ − 1 ∇ Uρ ∗ − D ∇ ρ ∗ = 0 . ( 5 ) For a smooth U ( x ) with a suﬃcient growth rate as | x | → ∞ , the FP equation has steady - state with detailed - balance for the distribution ρ ∗ ( x ) = 1 Z exp (cid:18) − U ( x ) kT (cid:19) . ( 6 ) This is the Gibbs - Boltzmann distribution , and Z is the partition function normalizing this to be a probability density [ 74 ] . B . Markov - Chain Discretization for Particle Drift - Diﬀusion Dynamics on Curved Surfaces We model the drift - diﬀusion dynamics of individ - ual particles on curved surfaces using discrete Markov - Chains with the jump rates based on the local geometry . The surface is discretized into a triangulated mesh and each particle is tracked by the triangle which it occupies . We use that the surface metric is induced by the sur - rounding embedding space [ 79 , 80 ] . We use for the local jump rates M ij = C i exp (cid:18) − | x i − x j | 2 (cid:15) 2 (cid:19) . ( 7 ) To approximate the diﬀusion over the time - scale ∆ t on the surface M , we use (cid:15) = √ 4 D ∆ t . The x i ∈ M are the centers of the surface triangulation . The C i denotes the normalization constant when summing over index j ensuring that M is a right stochastic matrix [ 72 ] . We remark in our methods the approach of using the induced metric from the embedding allows for captur - ing the geometric contributions while avoiding the po - tentially cumbersome expressions that can arise from a more explicit treatment using diﬀerential geometry . Our methods utilize that the distances between points on the surface correspond to the arc - length determined by the path as measured using the embedding space and its as - sociated notion of distance . As a result , in our meth - ods the discretized surface inherits its metric without the need for further analytic derivations . Further properties of our methods include that the discretizations for curved surfaces are based on Markov - Chain transitions and as a consequence will have mass conservation up to numerical round - oﬀ errors . The kernel M ij has been shown in the limit of reﬁning the surface sampling to approximate diﬀusion under the surface Laplace - Beltrami operator D ∆ M [ 81 , 82 ] . This has been shown to have the accuracy lim N →∞ N (cid:88) j = 1 ( M ij − I ij ) u j = ε 2 4 ∆ M u ( x i ) + O (cid:18) 1 N 1 / 2 , ε 4 (cid:19) . ( 8 ) The O holds with (cid:15) → 0 . The N is the number of points sampling M subject to a uniformity condi - tion [ 42 , 81 , 82 ] . The u j = u ( x j ) samples a smooth test function u . Intuitively , this follows since the stochastic matrix M converges to the operator as exp (cid:0) ε 2 ∆ M / 4 (cid:1) = exp ( D ∆ t ∆ M ) (cid:39) exp ( D ∆ t ∆ ) and exp ( D ∆ t ∆ M ) (cid:39) I + D ∆ t ∆ M (cid:39) I + D ∆ t ∆ , where ∆ = ∇ · ∇ is the stan - dard Laplacian . The last two terms are motivated by the Taylor expansions of the exponential and the geometric terms as (cid:15) → 0 . Since the the surface properties will only be approx - imated when there are a suﬃcient number of sample points in the support of the kernel , for a given N there is a trade - oﬀ in the choice of (cid:15) . If (cid:15) is too large the approx - imation will not be of local surface properties . If (cid:15) is too small only the center point will contribute signiﬁcantly to the kernel . We investigate further this trade - oﬀ in (cid:15) and the resulting approximation accuracy in Section II E . We remark that our approach can also readily be mod - iﬁed to obtain models for proteins in super - sub diﬀusive regimes . One way this can be accomplished is by con - structing random walks that are non - local on the mesh 4 FIG . 2 . Approximation of Laplace - Beltrami for (cid:15) and r 0 . Shown is the relative error of the Markov - Chain surface dis - cretization compared with the Laplace - Beltrami operator on the unit sphere S 2 . The case without area correction in equa - tion ( 10 ) are shown as solid lines and with the area correc - tion with dotted lines . There is a trade - oﬀ in (cid:15) to make it suﬃciently large to contain enough points sampling the sur - face while also maintaining locality . For the truncation radius r 0 ≥ 1 . 5 the optimum is around (cid:15) (cid:39) 1 . having long - tails or making state transitions between ad - ditional non - spatial states . These models could be con - structed from theoretical considerations or empirical ob - servations of autocorrelation statistics [ 76 ] . C . Detailed Balance and Area Corrections To incorporate the contributions of the drift arising from U in equation ( 1 ) , we consider the Gibbs - Boltzmann distribution expressed as ρ ( x ) = Z − 1 exp ( − βU ( x ) ) , with β = ( k B T ) − 1 the inverse thermal energy . We seek discretizations preserving statistical structure , such as detailed - balance as in [ 83 , 84 ] . For our curved surfaces , we seek discretizations for methods that have at steady - state the surface Gibbs - Boltzmann distribution with de - tailed balance [ 74 ] . We can express the evolution of the discrete probability in terms of net ﬂuxes as p ( n + 1 ) i = p ( n ) i + (cid:88) j , j (cid:54) = i J ( n ) ij , J ( n ) ij = p ( n ) j M ji − p ( n ) i M ij . ( 9 ) At steady - state p ( n + 1 ) k = p ( n ) k = p ∗ k we design our transi - tion rates so that the we have a discrete surface Gibbs - Boltzmann distribution with approximate detailed bal - ance . The discrete detailed - balance J ij = 0 gives the conditions p ∗ i = exp ( − βU i ) A i / Z , M ij M ji = p ∗ j p ∗ i = exp ( − βU j ) A j exp ( − βU i ) A i , ( 10 ) where U k = U ( x k ) and Z = (cid:80) i exp ( − βU i ) A i . Motivated by these conditions , we discretize using the transition rates M ij = C i exp (cid:18) − | x i − x j | 2 ε 2 (cid:19) × exp (cid:18) U ( x i ) − U ( x j ) 2 k B T (cid:19) × exp (cid:18) 1 2 ln A j A i (cid:19) , ( 11 ) where C i normalizes the M ij to be a probability when summing over the index j . The conditions hold up to the normalization ratio C i / C j → 1 as the discretization is reﬁned with N → ∞ , (cid:15) → 0 . Algorithm 1 Hybrid Reaction - Diﬀusion Method X 0 i ← initialize particle positions . S 0 i ← initialize particle states . q 0 ← initialize ﬁelds . n ← 0 . while n < numsteps do (cid:46) Update particles using jump rates from Section II C . X n + 1 i ← x b , Pr (cid:8) X n + 1 i = x b | X ni = x a (cid:9) = M ba ( q n , { S nk } ) . (cid:46) Check for chemical reactions C and update the states . S n + 1 i ← s a , Pr (cid:8) S n + 1 i = s a | X n + 1 i = x b , { X nk } k (cid:54) = i , { S nk } (cid:9) . (cid:46) Update the ﬁelds . q n + 1 ← Ψ ( q n ) . n ← n + 1 . end while D . Chemical Reactions and Field Coupling We also formulate methods for capturing chemical re - actions . We introduce for each particle X i ( t ) an asso - ciated ”state” variable S i ( t ) . The S i ( t ) can be thought of tracking the chemical species to which X i belongs at time t . We consider a collection of chemical reactions C = { c (cid:96) } m(cid:96) = 1 . For c (cid:96) we model the reaction using a Smoluchowski reaction radius r (cid:96) and probability p (cid:96) . For a second - order reaction , this means if two particles X ni and X nj have (cid:107) X ni − X nj (cid:107) < r (cid:96) , then we take probability p (cid:96) for a reaction to occur . For ﬁrst - order reactions , we just take p (cid:96) = p (cid:96) ( ∆ t ) for each particle for the probability a reaction occurs over the time - step . We also allow for coupling of the particles to underlying ﬁelds q = q ( x , t ) . We discretize q in time and space using the lattice with q na ∼ q ( x a , t n ) . As we discuss in later sections , the ﬁelds can inﬂuence the local jump rates and reactions . The evolution of the ﬁeld is modeled using q n + 1 = Ψ ( q n ) . The case of multiple ﬁelds can be handled by taking q to be vector - valued . We shall discuss in more detail speciﬁc evolution models for concentration ﬁelds in Section III A and phase - ﬁelds in Section III B . We give a summary of the steps in our method in Algorithm 1 . E . Approximation Errors To obtain accurate diﬀusive dynamics we consider how 5 parameter choices inﬂuence the jump rates and the ap - proximation of the Laplace - Beltrami operator discussed in Section II C . We investigate the accuracy of the sur - face discretizations and the trade - oﬀs in the choice of (cid:15) between suﬃcient sampling and maintaining locality . We perform our studies for the surface of the unit sphere S 2 , which has the Laplace - Beltrami operator ∆ M with eigenfunctions corresponding to the spherical harmon - ics [ 80 , 85 , 86 ] . In the comparisons , our numerical op - erator M is obtained from equation ( 11 ) and the scalings indicated in ( 8 ) to yield the approximation L = ( M − I ) (cid:39) ( (cid:15) 2 / 4 ) ∆ M . In practice for eﬃcient calculations , the M ij is constructed by truncating the kernel only to use neigh - bors x j within the distance r 0 with | x i − x j | < r 0 . We consider the errors for a test function v given by e LB [ v ] = (cid:18) 4 (cid:15) 2 ( M − I ) − ∆ S 2 (cid:19) v . ( 12 ) In Figure 2 , we show the relative errors based on (cid:15) rel = (cid:107) e LB [ v ] (cid:107) 1 / (cid:107) ∆ S 2 [ v ] (cid:107) 1 , where (cid:107) · (cid:107) 1 is the L 1 - norm averag - ing over the surface . We consider case when v is the spherical harmonic corresponding to v = v ( x , y , z ) = z restricted to the surface . The sphere is discretized us - ing a triangular mesh with nearly uniform elements hav - ing N = 10 , 0000 nodal points . We consider how the error varies for diﬀerent choices of (cid:15) ∈ [ 0 . 25 , 2 . 0 ] and r 0 ∈ [ 0 . 5 , 2 . 0 ] . Letting δx = min ij | x i − x j | , we ﬁnd that when (cid:15) (cid:28) δx there are insuﬃcient number of points in the support of the kernel to estimate the surface geome - try and the error becomes large . We ﬁnd when (cid:15) (cid:29) δx is large there are many points within the support of the kernel , but the area of support is not localized enough to provide a good estimate of the operator . We also show both the case with and without the area correction terms . We ﬁnd for our relatively uniform triangulations these give comparable overall errors here . For our dis - cretizations of the sphere based on N = 10 , 000 points and r 0 ≥ 1 . 5 , we ﬁnd that the optimal choice is (cid:15) (cid:39) 1 , see Figure 2 . F . Role of Geometry in First - Passage Times and Other Statistics We perform analysis to develop some results showing how our methods can be used for investigating the role of geometry of the ﬁrst - passage times and other statistics associated with the drift - diﬀusion dynamics of particles on curved surfaces . Our Markov - Chain discretizations al - low in some cases for computing eﬃciently statistics with - out the need to resort to Monte - Carlo sampling , provided the state space is not too large . We consider statistics of the form u ( n ) i = E (cid:34) f ( X ( N ) ) + N − 1 (cid:88) k = n g ( X ( k ) , t ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( n ) = x i (cid:35) . ( 13 ) FIG . 3 . First - Passage Times for Spine Shapes . First passage times are computed when a protein starts at the top of the bulb - like head region and reaches the boundary . To investi - gate the role of the neck region verses other aspects of the shapes , three cases are considered for the boundary location , ( i ) at the base of the spine , ( ii ) in the middle of the neck , and ( iii ) within the spherical head region just above the neck . The results show that the neck region plays the dominant role in the geometry . As the neck narrows , the diﬀusion of the pro - tein to leave the head region and enter the tubular domain has a ﬁrst - passage time that signiﬁcantly increases from the geometry . Let u ( k ) be the column vector with components [ u ( k ) ] i = u ( k ) i . The f , g : M → R are any two smooth functions on the surface M . Let [ f ] i = f ( x i ) and [ g ( (cid:96) ) ] i = g ( x i , (cid:96) ) be column vectors . We also consider statistics of the form w ( Ω ) i = E (cid:34) f ( X ( τ Ω ) ) + τ Ω − 1 (cid:88) k = 0 g ( X ( k ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i (cid:35) . ( 14 ) For the domain Ω , the τ Ω = inf { k ≥ 0 | X ( k ) (cid:54)∈ Ω } is the stopping time index for the process to reach the boundary ∂ Ω . Each of these statistics can be computed without sampling by the following results . Theorem 1 . The statistics u ( k ) of equation 13 satisﬁes u ( n − 1 ) = M u ( n ) + g ( n − 1 ) ( 15 ) u ( N ) = f . ( 16 ) Proof . ( see Appendix A ) Theorem 2 . The statistics w ( Ω ) in equation 14 satisﬁes ( ˆ M − ˆ I ) w = − g ( 17 ) ∂ w = f . ( 18 ) The ∂ w extracts entries for all indices with x i ∈ ∂ Ω . The ˆ M , ˆ I refers to the matrix only with the rows with indices in the interior of Ω . 6 FIG . 4 . Role of Topology and Geometry on Pattern Formu - lation . The Gray - Scott reaction - diﬀusion shows diﬀerent pat - terns depending on the shape of the surface . Shown are the cases of ( i ) square , ( ii ) cylinder , ( iii ) sphere , and ( iv ) torus . The surfaces have area one and when there are edges we use reﬂecting boundary conditions . For the shapes ( i ) - ( ii ) spot - ted patterns emerge having roughly a hexagonal pattern . For spherical topology ( iii ) a regular hexagonal pattern without defects is no longer possible , and instead striped patterns mix with spots . For the case of a torus ( iv ) , which can sustain a hexagonal pattern in principle , the heterogeneity of the cur - vature appears to drive the formation of localized stripe - like patterns . These results indicate that both the geometry and topology can signiﬁcantly impact pattern formation . Proof . ( see Appendix A ) In the case that f = 0 , g = 1 , this becomes the First - Passage Time ( FPT ) statistic w i = E [ τ Ω | X ( 0 ) = x i ] . These results allow for the statistics of equation 13 and 14 to be computed eﬃciently without the need for Monte - Carlo sampling provided the state space is not too large . Motivated by observations that the neck geometry ap - pears to be a strong factor in compartmentalization in dendritic spines [ 68 , 87 ] , we compute the ﬁrst passage times of protein diﬀusions for diﬀerent spine shapes in Figure 3 . The geometries were generated from isosurfaces in a technique commonly referred to as meatballs [ 88 ] . We used several spheres to form the tubular region and another sphere for the bulb region . The geometry was obtained as the isosurface using the level set function of the form f ( x ) = (cid:80) k φ k ( | x − x k | ) , where φ ( r ) = c k / r 2 . The surface was triangulated at a reﬁned spatial resolu - tion to obtain around N = 29 , 000 nodal points for each shape . First passage times are computed for when a protein starts at the top of the head region with the bulb - like shape and reaches the boundary . To investigate the role played by the neck region compared to the inﬂuence of the other aspects of the geometry , three cases are con - sidered for the boundary location . These are boundaries located ( i ) at the base of the spine , ( ii ) in the middle of the neck , and ( iii ) within the spherical head just above the neck . These results indicate that compared to the other geometric features , the width of the neck region plays the dominant role in the ﬁrst passage times . As the neck narrows , the ﬁrst - passage time for the protein diﬀusion signiﬁcantly increases from these changes in the geometry , see Figure 3 . Parameter Description Value (cid:15) u diﬀusion scale for u 1 . 0 × 10 − 2 (cid:15) v diﬀusion scale for v 5 . 0 × 10 − 3 r 0 diﬀusion cut - oﬀ radius 1 . 0 a u + 2 v → 3 v reaction rate 4 . 0 × 10 − 2 b v → p reaction rate 6 . 0 × 10 − 2 T sim total time duration 5 . 0 × 10 3 ∆ t time - step 1 . 0 × 10 − 1 n rk Runge - Kutta steps 100 TABLE I . Parameters for Gray - Scott Reaction - Diﬀusion Sys - tem in Figure 4 . FIG . 5 . Evolution of Turing Instabilities for Gray - Scott Reac - tions . Shown is the evolution of the reaction - diﬀusion pattern formation process on the dendritic spine shape having the nar - rowest neck , label A ( notation the same as in Figure 3 ) . The pattern progresses ﬁrst by forming within the bulb - like head region , and then spreads through the neck to form patterning on the tubular part of the domain . The time - steps are shown for n = 0 , 400 , 800 , 1200 , 1600 , 2000 . III . SIMULATIONS A . Turing Instabilities on Curved Surfaces We show how our discretization approach can be used to develop methods for performing simulations of gen - eral reaction - diﬀusion processes on curved surfaces of dif - ferent shapes . We consider reaction - diﬀusions , such as the pattern formation process based on Turing’s insta - bility mechanism [ 89 ] , where the geometry and topol - ogy of the domain can impact the patterns that are ob - tained [ 90 , 91 ] . Consider the system with two molecular species with concentrations u , v ∂u ∂t = D u ∆ M u + f ( u , v ) , ∂v ∂t = D v ∆ M v + g ( u , v ) . ( 19 ) The diﬀusivities D u and D v will in general be diﬀerent . Through the non - linear reaction terms , the diﬀerence in diﬀusivity can cause the homogeneously mixed concen - trations to become unstable resulting in pattern genera - tion [ 89 , 90 ] . We consider Gray - Scott reactions [ 92 ] , which can ex - hibit diﬀerent patterns depending on the initial condi - tions and interactions with noise and other perturba - 7 Parameter Description Value (cid:15) u diﬀusion scale for u 1 . 0 × 10 − 1 (cid:15) v diﬀusion scale for v 5 . 0 × 10 − 2 r 0 diﬀusion cut - oﬀ radius 1 . 0 a u + 2 v → 3 v reaction rate 4 . 0 × 10 − 2 b v → p reaction rate 6 . 0 × 10 − 2 T sim total time duration 2 . 0 ∆ t time - step 1 . 0 × 10 − 3 n rk Runge - Kutta steps 1 TABLE II . Parameters for Gray - Scott Reaction - Diﬀusion Sys - tem in Figures 5 and 6 . FIG . 6 . Gray - Scott Reaction - Diﬀusion Pattern Formation on Dendritic Spine Neck Shapes . Starting with the steady - state ( u ∗ , v ∗ ) = ( 1 , 0 ) , given this is stationary and the evolution is deterministic , we apply a perturbation in the shape of a circular patch on the top of the head region with the bulb - like shape with ( u , v ) = ( 0 . 5 ± 10 % , 0 . 25 ± 10 % ) . The perturbations are independent uniform variates at each lattice site . The reactions settle down into the patterns shown for time - step 2000 . Striped patterns manifest near the base of the head region and mixed spotted patterns within the tubular region . tions [ 90 , 93 ] . For the Gray - Scott reactions [ 92 ] , the terms are f ( u , v ) = − uv 2 + a ( 1 − u ) and g ( u , v ) = uv 2 − ( a + b ) v . The rate parameters a , b are for the chem - ical reactions u + 2 v a −→ 3 v and v b −→ p . We start with a homogeneous steady - state solution for the system ( u , v ) = ( 1 , 0 ) , and add small perturbations based on uniform random noise ± 10 % of the steady - state at each location x i within a region Γ ⊆ Ω . Throughout our simulations , we choose a = 0 . 04 , b = 0 . 06 , guided by the parameters of the phase diagram of [ 94 ] . We in - vestigate how the Gray - Scott patterns are inﬂuenced by diﬀerent geometries and topologies . Using our Markov - Chain discretizations , we develop numerical methods for the spatial - temporal evolution of the concentration ﬁelds . By equation ( 7 ) , we ob - tain a stochastic matrix M . The overall idea is to model the concentrations by u ( x , t ) = ( n u / A ) p u ( x , t ) , v ( x , t ) = ( n v / A ) p v ( x , t ) , where A is the surface area . The p = [ p u , p v ] , with [ p n ] i = p ( x i , t n ) , are obtained from the probability evolution for the Markov - Chain given by p n = p n + 1 M . In this way , we obtain a model that ap - proximates the diﬀusive evolution of the continuous con - centration ﬁelds . To model the full reaction - diﬀusion system in our sim - ulations , we split the time - step integration into a dif - fusive step and a reaction step . For the diﬀusive step ∆ t , we use our Markov - Chain discretization in Sec - tion II C to update the concentration ﬁelds q = ( u , v ) . This provides a mean - ﬁeld model for the concentration ﬁeld , with q n + 1 / 2 = Ψ 1 ( q n ) corresponding to u n + 1 / 2 = u n M , v n + 1 / 2 = v n M . The M is the transition matrix for the surface diﬀusion derived in Section II C . For the reactions , we use the smaller time - steps δt = ∆ t / n rk which are integrated with the fourth - order Runge - Kutta method RK4 [ 95 , 96 ] . This gives q n + 1 = Ψ 2 ( q n + 1 / 2 ) . We alternate between these steps in our simulations to obtain q n + 1 = Ψ ( q n ) = Ψ 2 ( Ψ 1 ( q n ) ) . As we discussed in Section II B , the M approximates the Laplace - Beltrami operator . This ensures with enough spatial resolution the evolution will approximate diﬀu - sion on a surface . One way to view our model is as a meshfree way to discretize the surface reaction - diﬀusion PDEs . This provides simulation methods correspond - ing to the mean - ﬁeld concentration ﬁelds of the protein species . Our approaches for the diﬀusion also can be used more generally to go beyond the mean - ﬁeld model by using dis - crete particle simulations with individual random walk - ers . These would have the same distribution as our continuum model when taking appropriate limits . Our methods allow for either ( i ) to perform stochastic simu - lations of random walks tracking individual particles to account for discrete spatial - temporal ﬂuctuations from ﬁ - nite number eﬀects , or ( ii ) to perform deterministic sim - ulations tracking the probability distribution of the walk - ers . For the reaction - diﬀusion studies we use approach ( ii ) . For later studies involving phase separation , we use approach ( i ) . We consider the Gray - Scott reaction - diﬀusion process on the following geometries ( i ) ﬂat sheet with bound - aries , ( ii ) ﬁnite cylinder with boundaries , ( iii ) surface of a sphere , ( iv ) surface of a torus , see Figure 4 . The sur - faces have area one and when there are boundary edges we use reﬂecting boundary conditions . For the shapes ( i ) - ( ii ) spotted patterns emerge having roughly a hexag - onal pattern . For the spherical topology ( iii ) a regular hexagonal pattern without defects is no longer possible , and instead striped patterns mix with spots . For the case of a torus ( iv ) , which can sustain a hexagonal pattern in principle , the heterogeneity of the curvature appears to drive the formation of localized stripe - like patterns . The results obtained with our methods indicate that both the geometry ( curvature and scale eﬀects ) and the topology can impact signiﬁcantly the pattern formation process . We remark that Turing instabilities as a mechanism for pattern formation were originally motivated by a lin - ear stability analysis on periodic domain performed by 8 FIG . 7 . Chemical Kinetics and Phase Separation . We con - sider chemical kinetics where molecular species A , B diﬀuse freely and react to form C by A + B → C . The molecular species C can nucleate phase q = − 1 . The drift - diﬀusion of C is coupled to the local phase by equation 22 . This results in a bi - directional conﬁnement force from the phase ﬁeld q acting on C to keep within regions with q = − 1 . This also results in an equal - and - opposite force acting on the phase ﬁeld from equation 22 driving nucleation and phase separation . A . M . Turing in [ 89 ] . Extending the analysis to general manifolds is non - trivial given the challenges of analyz - ing even for the linearized dynamics the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues associated with the Laplace - Beltrami based - diﬀusions and roles of curvature and topology . Some work in this direction has been done in the lit - erature in the case of specialized geometry , such as the sphere [ 97 , 98 ] . The results of our methods for Turing in - stabilities yield patterns comparable to those seen in such previous studies . In the spherical case we ﬁnd that there is a transition from striped to spotted patterns in the sphere size [ 99 ] . We also ﬁnd that the hexagonal spotted patterns with defects manifest with arrangements similar to [ 97 , 98 ] . We also consider more complicated shapes for the Gray - Scott reactions given by our mechanistic dendritic spine geometries with diﬀerent neck sizes , see Figures 5 , 6 . These shapes consist of a bulb - like head region ( rep - resenting the spine ) which is connected by a neck struc - ture to a tube - like region ( representing the dendrite ) . We vary the shapes by changing the thickness of the neck - like structure joining the two regions . The evolution of the pattern formation process for the geometry with the narrowest and widest neck shapes are shown in Figure 5 . For the narrowest necks , the conﬁnement in the head re - gion appears to result in stripe - like patterns that also extend through the neck . In the larger tube - like region , the spotted patterns form inter - mixed with the stripe pattern , see Figure 6 . These results indicate how local regions can exhibit diﬀerent patterning depending on the local geometry . B . Dendritic Spines and Protein Kinetics We develop a mechanistic model for dendritic spines to investigate the dependence of protein transport and ki - netics on geometry and heterogeneities arising from phase separation . Our investigations are motivated from exper - FIG . 8 . Dendritic Spine Model : Role of Geometry in Phase Separation . The dendritic spine model consists of a head re - gion connected by a neck region to a tubular domain . The active proteins A , B in the model all originate at the top of the head region . The phase separation occurring in the two cases is shown for ( i ) a narrow neck constricting the protein diﬀu - sion and spread of the phase separation ( top ) , ( ii ) a wide neck through which the proteins can readily diﬀuse and the phase can separate ( bottom ) . The phase q = 1 is red and q = − 1 is blue , shown are time - steps 50 , 300 , and 2000 . At around time - step ∼ 300 ( middle ) , the the protein diﬀusion and phase separation comes into contact with the neck region . In the narrow case , the neck region acts eﬀectively like an entropic barrier for the diﬀusion arising from the geometry . Parameter Description Value α 1 GL phase interfacial tension 1 . 0 × 10 6 α 2 GL phase polarity 1 . 0 × 10 4 α 3 GL protein - phase coupling 1 . 0 a protein phase radius 0 . 1 N A , B initial protein count 1000 (cid:15) diﬀusion scale for proteins 0 . 1 r 0 diﬀusion cut - oﬀ radius 0 . 5 p A + B → C reaction probability 0 . 01 T sim total time duration 200 . 0 ∆ t time - step 0 . 1 n rk Runge - Kutta steps 100 TABLE III . Parameters for Dendritic Spine Phase Separation . iments on SynGAP and PSD - 95 proteins , where phase separation may play a role in driving receptor organiza - tion [ 70 ] . Phase separation can arise from nucleation or modulating local concentrations in the cell membrane , which is a heterogeneous mixture of lipids , proteins , and other small molecules [ 1 , 100 , 101 ] . In our mechanistic model , we investigate how the spine geometry and phase separation can inﬂuence reaction ki - netics . We start with a two species system . The A and B molecular species are tracked at the individual parti - cle level . In the absence of phase separation , this would diﬀuse freely over the membrane surface . As a starting point , we study the basic chemical kinetics A + B → C . The discrete particles react with probability p when com - ing within a reaction distance r < r 0 . This is motivated by Smoluchowski reaction kinetics [ 102 – 105 ] . 9 To model such eﬀects at a coarse - level , we track a con - tinuum phase ﬁeld φ = φ ( x , t ) which can couple to the local diﬀusive motions of the discrete protein particles . We consider in our initial model the case of a local or - der parameter associated with phase separation based on Ginzburg - Landau ( GL ) theory [ 106 , 107 ] . Other phase - separation phenomena and approaches also could be con - sidered in principle within our framework , such as the second - order Allen - Cahn [ 108 ] or the conservative fourth - order Cahn - Hilliard [ 109 ] , with additional work on the numerical methods for the operators on curved surfaces and coupling with the Markov - Chain discretization [ 110 ] . For notational convenience , we will denote q (cid:39) φ ( x ) , so q : M → R for the phase variable map for the curved surface M . This gives at lattice site i , q i (cid:39) φ ( x i ) . The GL functional is ˆ V 0 [ φ ] = (cid:82) M ( ∇ φ ( x ) ) 2 + ˆ V 2 [ φ ] ( x ) dx . The ﬁrst term accounts for a line tension between phases and the second term drives the phase to ± 1 with local energy density ˆ V 2 [ φ ] = K ( 1 − φ 2 ) 2 . To capture similar eﬀects as ˆ V 0 [ q ] , we use the simpliﬁed discrete model V 0 [ q ] = 1 n 2 (cid:88) i (cid:88) j (cid:54) = i V 1 [ q i , q j ] + 1 n (cid:88) i V 2 [ q i ] , ( 20 ) with V 1 [ q i , q j ] = α 1 W ij ( q i − q j ) 2 , V 2 [ q ] = α 2 ( 1 − q 2 ) 2 . ( 21 ) The ﬁrst term models the interfacial tension , where the coeﬃcient W ij = W ( r ij ) decays in r ij = | x i − x j | . The second term models the order parameter which lo - cally is at a minimum for q = ± 1 . The α 1 , α 2 > 0 control the strength of the interfacial tension and the phase variable ordering . We use for the decay coeﬃcient W ij = exp (cid:0) − r 2 ij / ε 2 (cid:1) which is truncated for large r ij (cid:29) (cid:15) . To couple protein motions X ( t ) and their ability to induce local phase ordering in q , we use the free energy term V ( i ) 3 [ q , X ] = α 3 ( q i − ( − 1 ) ) 2 η a ( x i − X ) . ( 22 ) The α 3 > 0 controls the strength of this coupling . The η a gives a kernel function with support localized around the protein location X = X ( t ) . This term drives the phase ﬁeld toward q = − 1 in a region around the protein location X ( t ) . We use η a ( r ) = exp (cid:0) − r 2 / a 2 (cid:1) and V 3 [ q , X ] = 1 n (cid:88) i V ( i ) 3 [ q , X ] . ( 23 ) The free energy for full system ( q , X ) with protein con - ﬁguration X and phase - ﬁeld q is V [ q , X ] = V 0 [ q ] + (cid:88) k V 3 [ q , X k ] . ( 24 ) The discrete protein positions [ X ] k = X k are updated using the Markov - Chain discretization in equation ( 11 ) FIG . 9 . Dendritic Spine Model : Average Phase . The proteins C can nucleate phase with q = − 1 . Shown are how the ge - ometry impacts phase evolution for ﬁve diﬀerent sizes for the neck region with labels A - F ordered from narrowest to widest as in Figure 6 . The phase separation is found to slow down considerably for the narrowest neck ( label A ) relative to the widest neck ( label F ) . The diﬀerences emerge around around time - step ∼ 300 , when the bulb - like head region is saturated . We see over the 2000 time - steps the widest neck results in almost the entire domain including the tubular region con - verting to phase q = − 1 . For the narrowest neck shape , we see at time - step 2000 the phase separation is primarily iso - lated to the head head region and surrounding area , while the rest of the domain remains primarily q = 1 . The average is taken over the entire surface . for the drift - diﬀusion dynamics . The energy for the pro - tein conﬁguration is given by U ( X ) = V [ q , X ] . The time evolution of the phase ﬁeld is given by dq i dt = −∇ q i V [ q , X ] . ( 25 ) This is discretized and integrated over sub - time - steps δt = ∆ t / n rk using Runge - Kutta RK4 [ 95 , 96 ] . Modeling the discrete system using the common free energy V en - sures the bi - directional coupling gives equal - and - opposite forces between the phase - ﬁeld q and the proteins X . We perform simulations to investigate how the den - dritic spine geometry impacts the protein reaction kinet - ics and phase - separation , see Figure 7 and Table I . The proteins couple to the phase separation by having the ability to drive nucleation of local patches with q = − 1 near the protein location X ( t ) . The geometries were cho - sen with the neck region taking on shapes varying from narrow to wide , see Figure 4 . The protein species A , B are modeled as originating in the top head region of the spine . This could arise for instance if these species corre - spond to tracking proteins only after they have become activated in this region . The proteins can then diﬀuse , and may induce local phase - separation through the cou - pling V 3 . The proteins can also interact to form a com - plex which is tracked by molecular species C . We show how the phase separation proceeds over time as the size of the neck region varies in Figure 8 . As the neck region narrows , the protein diﬀusion and the 10 FIG . 10 . Dendritic Spine Model : Proteins C in the Head Region . Shown are the number of proteins C within the bulb - like head region over time . We see the reactions producing C proceed almost independent of the geometry up to time - step ∼ 300 . Afterwards , the shapes with the narrowest necks results in far more C proteins being produced and retained within the head region . This shows how phase - separation can serve to enhance retaining proteins near the top of the spine . phase separation are restricted to be localized in the head region . As the neck becomes wide , the protein diﬀusion and phase separation can readily proceed to spread more rapidly into the tubular region , see Figures 8 , 9 . Further eﬀects arise from the coupling of the proteins with the local phase . The protein dynamics are impacted by both the geom - etry and the local phase . In our simulation studies , the coupling coeﬃcients are taken to be α A 3 = α B 3 = 0 and α C 3 = 1 . 0 . For this case C can nucleate phase separation nearby since it prefers the phase ﬁeld have q = − 1 . This also results for C experiencing a trapping force within regions with q = − 1 , from the free energy in equation ( 22 ) . This restricts the movements of C . The evolu - tion of the creation of of molecular species C is shown in Figure 10 . The number of C formed and retained in the head region is signiﬁcantly impacted by the neck geometry and phase separation . When the neck is nar - row , the conﬁnement of A , B and the phase separation to the head region , both enhances the creation of C by more frequent A − B encounters and in C ’s retention to the head region from the phase trapping forces . As the neck becomes wide , the A , B can diﬀuse more freely and when the phase does nucleate it can more rapidly spread throughout the whole domain . This results in a much smaller number of C being created and retained in the head region . Our basic mechanistic model shows that the morphol - ogy and phase separation can interact to serve together to enhance retaining proteins near the top of the den - dritic spine . These results are expected to carry over to more complicated chemical kinetic systems . The further interactions between diﬀusion , kinetics , phase separation , and the geometry can regulate in diﬀerent ways the spa - Parameter Description Value α 1 GL phase interfacial tension 1 . 0 × 10 6 α 2 GL phase polarity 1 . 0 × 10 4 α 3 GL protein - phase coupling 0 – 10 . 0 a protein phase radius 0 . 1 N A , B initial protein count 1000 (cid:15) diﬀusion scale for proteins 0 . 1 r 0 diﬀusion cut - oﬀ radius 0 . 5 p A + A → 2 A reaction probability 0 . 001 q A → B decay probability 0 . 001 T sim total time duration 200 . 0 ∆ t time - step 0 . 1 n rk Runge - Kutta steps 100 TABLE IV . Parameters for the dendritic spine phase separa - tion simulations . tial arrangements and the local eﬀective rates of reactions in curved cell membranes . C . Protein Clustering and Role of Phase Separation We investigate how phase separation can impact pro - tein kinetics and clustering . Consider the case of states where proteins in state A are in an active state receptive to binding and proteins in state B are dormant . Consider the competing reactions for forming dimers A + A p −→ 2 A , A q −→ B . ( 26 ) The p and q denote here the reaction probabilities . The protein - phase - ﬁeld interactions are modeled using our ap - proach in Section III B . We take the phase ﬁeld to impact the proteins in states A and 2 A with the same strength , α A 3 = α 2 A 3 . In contrast , we take proteins in the dormant state B to not interact with the phase ﬁeld , α B 3 = 0 . To study the eﬀects of the phase ﬁeld , we vary α A 3 over the range from 0 . 0 ( no interaction ) to 1 × 10 1 ( strong in - teraction ) . We investigate in simulations the number of dimers 2 A proteins that are formed over time for diﬀerent levels of phase ﬁeld interaction α A 3 and as the phase sepa - ration progresses . The 2 A counts are given in Figure 11 . We ﬁnd in the strongest coupling cases the phase ﬁeld can signiﬁcantly impact the reaction kinetics promoting clustering and dimer formation . The details of the pa - rameters used in our simulations are given in Table IV . The results show that phase - ﬁeld separation can play signiﬁcant roles impacting reaction kinetics within mem - branes . In this case promoting the formation of clusters . The underlying mechanisms has to do with the forma - tion for proteins of local environments with initially small phase - separated domains that serve to conﬁne the diﬀu - sion of the proteins . Relative to free diﬀusion over the entire membrane surface , the phase conﬁnement results in diﬀusion with the phase domain and more frequent en - counters between co - conﬁned proteins . In this way , the binding kinetics are enhances relative to the free diﬀu - 11 FIG . 11 . Dendritic Spine Model : Shown are the number of proteins 2 A within the bulb - like head region over time . We see that increasing the interaction strength α 3 ( legend ) be - tween proteins A and the phase ﬁeld promotes the formation of clusters 2 A . sion . From the greater slope in the increase in the num - ber of clusters formed for case α A 3 = 1 × 10 1 vs α A 3 = 0 , we see the phases have the greatest impact when there are small phase domains . The smaller domains results in more frequent encounters between conﬁned proteins . As the phase separation progresses the domains become larger and merge with the eﬀect of the phase - coupling on the reactions become less pronounced . These results show how phase separation and domain formation can be utilized within cell membranes to sig - niﬁcantly augment the reaction kinetics without chang - ing the reaction characteristics of the individual proteins . These simulation methods provide further ways to in - vestigate the collective kinetics of proteins and the roles played by phase composition and the membrane geome - try . IV . CONCLUSIONS We have developed biophysical models for investigat - ing protein kinetics within heterogeneous cell membranes of arbitrary shape . The introduced methods allow for studying at the continuum and discrete protein - level the drift - diﬀusion dynamics and reaction kinetics taking into account the roles of geometry and coupling to membrane phase separation . We have shown that coupling of kinetics to phase separation and geometry can signiﬁcantly enhance or inhibit reactions and cluster formation processes . These initial results suggest a few mechanisms by which biological membranes may utilize phase separation and geometry to drive kinetics and organization of proteins within cell membranes . V . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors P . J . A . and P . T . would like to acknowl - edge support for this research from the grants NSF Grant DMS - 1616353 and DOE Grant ASCR PHILMS DE - SC0019246 . The author T . A . B . would like to acknowl - edge support from grant NIH R37MH080046 . P . T . would like to acknowledge a Goldwater Fellowship and Col - lege of Creative Studies Summer Undergraduate Fellow - ship . P . J . A . would like to acknowledge a hardware grant from Nvidia . Authors also would like to acknowledge UCSB Center for Scientiﬁc Computing NSF MRSEC ( DMR1720256 ) and UCSB MRL NSF CNS - 1725797 . [ 1 ] B . Alberts , A . Johnson , J . Lewis , D . Morgan , M . C . Raﬀ , K . Roberts , P . Walter , J . H . Wilson , and T . Hunt , Molecular biology of the cell , 6th Edition ( Garland Sci - ence , 2014 ) . [ 2 ] A . Roux , D . Cuvelier , P . Nassoy , J . Prost , P . Bassereau , and B . Goud , The EMBO Journal 24 , 1537 ( 2005 ) . [ 3 ] A . B . Noske , A . J . Costin , G . P . Morgan , and B . J . Marsh , The 4th International Conference on Electron TomographyThe 4th International Conference on Elec - tron Tomography , Journal of Structural Biology 161 , 298 ( 2008 ) . [ 4 ] J . Adler , A . Shevchuk , P . Novak , Y . Korchev , and I . Parmryd , Nat . Methods 7 , 170 ( 2010 ) . [ 5 ] S . Aimon , A . Callan - Jones , A . Berthaud , M . Pinot , G . Toombes , and P . Bassereau , Preprint 000 , 0000 ( 2013 ) . [ 6 ] V . Vogel and M . Sheetz , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 265 ( 2006 ) . [ 7 ] R . Kusters and C . Storm , Physical Review E 89 , 032723 ( 2014 ) . [ 8 ] G . K . Voeltz and W . A . Prinz , Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 , 258 ( 2007 ) . [ 9 ] R . Parthasarathy and J . T . Groves , Soft Matter 3 , 24 ( 2007 ) . [ 10 ] T . R . Powers , G . Huber , and R . E . Goldstein , Phys . Rev . E 65 , 041901 ( 2002 ) . [ 11 ] O . Kahraman , N . Stoop , and M . M . M¨uller , New Jour - nal of Physics 14 , 095021 ( 2012 ) . [ 12 ] T . P . David Nelson , Steven Weinberg , Statistical Me - chanics of Membranes and Surfaces ( World Scientiﬁc Publishing , 2004 ) . [ 13 ] P . G . Saﬀman and M . Delbr¨uck , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 72 , 3111 ( 1975 ) . [ 14 ] R . Peters and R . J . Cherry , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 79 , 4317 ( 1982 ) . [ 15 ] Y . A . Domanov , S . Aimon , G . E . S . Toombes , M . Ren - ner , F . Quemeneur , A . Triller , M . S . Turner , and P . Bassereau , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 12605 ( 2011 ) . [ 16 ] F . Quemeneur , J . K . Sigurdsson , M . Renner , P . J . Atzberger , P . Bassereau , and D . Lacoste , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 5083 ( 2014 ) . [ 17 ] K . Liu , G . R . Marple , J . Allard , S . Li , S . Veerapaneni , and J . Lowengrub , Soft matter 13 , 3521 ( 2017 ) . 12 [ 18 ] A . Mahapatra , D . Saintillan , and P . Rangamani , Soft Matter , ( 2021 ) . [ 19 ] V . Yushutin , A . Quaini , S . Majd , and M . Olshanskii , In - ternational journal for numerical methods in biomedical engineering 35 , e3181 ( 2019 ) . [ 20 ] R . W . Pastor , Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 4 , 486 ( 1994 ) . [ 21 ] T . Sintes and A . Baumg¨artner , Physica A 249 , 571 ( 1998 ) . [ 22 ] R . A . Kerr , T . M . Bartol , B . Kaminsky , M . Dittrich , J . - C . J . Chang , S . B . Baden , T . J . Sejnowski , and J . R . Stiles , SIAM journal on scientiﬁc computing : a publi - cation of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathe - matics 30 , 3126 ( 2008 ) . [ 23 ] J . Sch¨oneberg , A . Ullrich , and F . No´e , BMC Biophysics 7 , 11 ( 2014 ) . [ 24 ] O . Kahraman , Y . Li , and C . A . Haselwandter , EPL ( Eu - rophysics Letters ) 115 , 68006 ( 2016 ) . [ 25 ] A . J . Mauro , J . K . Sigurdsson , J . Shrake , P . J . Atzberger , and S . A . Isaacson , Journal of Computa - tional Physics 259 , 536 ( 2014 ) . [ 26 ] S . Collins , M . Stamatakis , and D . G . Vlachos , BMC Bioinformatics 11 , 218 ( 2010 ) . [ 27 ] R . Sawhney and K . Crane , ACM Transactions on Graphics 39 ( 2020 ) . [ 28 ] S . J . M . D . P . Tieleman and H . J . C . Berendsen , Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1331 , 235 ( 1997 ) . [ 29 ] K . Goossens and H . De Winter , J . Chem . Inf . Model . 58 , 2193 ( 2018 ) . [ 30 ] J . Grouleﬀ , S . J . Irudayam , K . K . Skeby , and B . Schiøtt , Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Biomembranes 1848 , 1783 ( 2015 ) , lipid - protein interactions . [ 31 ] B . J . Reynwar , G . Illya , V . A . Harmandaris , M . M . Muller , K . Kremer , and M . Deserno , Nature 447 , 461 ( 2007 ) . [ 32 ] S . J . Marrink , H . J . Risselada , S . Yeﬁmov , D . P . Tieleman , and A . H . de Vries , The Journal of Phys - ical Chemistry B 111 , 7812 ( 2007 ) , pMID : 17569554 , http : / / pubs . acs . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1021 / jp071097f . [ 33 ] B . A . Camley and F . L . H . Brown , Phys . Rev . Lett . 105 , 148102 ( 2010 ) . [ 34 ] A . Naji , P . J . Atzberger , and F . L . H . Brown , Phys . Rev . Lett . 102 , 138102 ( 2009 ) . [ 35 ] Y . Wang , J . K . Sigurdsson , E . Brandt , and P . J . Atzberger , Phys . Rev . E 88 , 023301 ( 2013 ) . [ 36 ] J . K . Sigurdsson , F . L . Brown , and P . J . Atzberger , Journal of Computational Physics 252 , 65 ( 2013 ) . [ 37 ] E . Reister and U . Seifert , Eur . Phys . Lett . 71 , 859 ( 2005 ) . [ 38 ] E . Reister - Gottfried , S . M . Leitenberger , and U . Seifert , Phys . Rev . E 81 , 031903 ( 2010 ) . [ 39 ] N . Oppenheimer and H . Diamant , Biophysical Journal 96 , 3041 ( 2009 ) . [ 40 ] D . Rower , M . Padidar , and P . J . Atzberger , arXiv ( 2019 ) . [ 41 ] C . B . Macdonald , B . Merriman , and S . J . Ruuth , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 , 9209 ( 2013 ) , https : / / www . pnas . org / content / 110 / 23 / 9209 . full . pdf . [ 42 ] B . Gross and P . Atzberger , Journal of Computational Physics 371 , 663 ( 2018 ) . [ 43 ] R . Lai and J . Li , SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 39 , A2231 ( 2017 ) . [ 44 ] B . J . Gross , P . Kuberry , and P . J . Atzberger , arXiv preprint arXiv : 2102 . 02421 ( 2021 ) . [ 45 ] V . A . Alvarez and B . L . Sabatini , Annual Re - view of Neuroscience 30 , 79 ( 2007 ) , pMID : 17280523 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . neuro . 30 . 051606 . 094222 . [ 46 ] R . Yuste and W . Denk , Nature 375 , 682 ( 1995 ) . [ 47 ] H . E . Lu , H . D . MacGillavry , N . A . Frost , and T . A . Blanpied , The Journal of Neuroscience 34 , 7600 ( 2014 ) . [ 48 ] B . E . Herring and R . A . Nicoll , Annual Review of Physiology 78 , 351 ( 2016 ) , pMID : 26863325 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - physiol - 021014 - 071753 . [ 49 ] R . A . Nicoll , Neuron 93 , 281 ( 2017 ) . [ 50 ] D . Holcman and Z . Schuss , The Journal of Mathemati - cal Neuroscience 1 , 10 ( 2011 ) . [ 51 ] T . P . Li , Y . Song , H . D . MacGillavry , T . A . Blanpied , and S . Raghavachari , Journal of Neuroscience 36 , 4276 ( 2016 ) , https : / / www . jneurosci . org / content / 36 / 15 / 4276 . full . pdf . [ 52 ] L . Wang , A . Dumoulin , M . Renner , A . Triller , and C . G . Specht , PLOS ONE 11 , 1 ( 2016 ) . [ 53 ] M . Adrian , R . Kusters , C . Storm , C . C . Hoogenraad , and L . C . Kapitein , Biophysical Journal 113 , 2261 ( 2017 ) . [ 54 ] W . Chen and E . De Schutter , Neuroinformatics 15 , 1 ( 2017 ) . [ 55 ] C . Simon , I . Hepburn , W . Chen , and E . De Schutter , Journal of Computational Neuroscience 36 , 483 ( 2014 ) . [ 56 ] J . Cartailler , T . Kwon , R . Yuste , and D . Holcman , Neu - ron 97 , 1126 ( 2018 ) . [ 57 ] A . Cugno , T . M . Bartol , T . J . Sejnowski , R . Iyengar , and P . Rangamani , Scientiﬁc Reports 9 , 11676 ( 2019 ) . [ 58 ] M . Borczyk , M . A . ´Sliwi´nska , A . Caly , T . Bernas , and K . Radwanska , Scientiﬁc Reports 9 , 1693 ( 2019 ) . [ 59 ] J . - J . Tapia , A . S . Saglam , J . Czech , R . Kuczewski , T . M . Bartol , T . J . Sejnowski , and J . R . Faeder , Mcell - r : A particle - resolution network - free spatial modeling frame - work , in Modeling Biomolecular Site Dynamics : Meth - ods and Protocols , edited by W . S . Hlavacek ( Springer New York , New York , NY , 2019 ) pp . 203 – 229 . [ 60 ] C . A . Miermans , R . P . T . Kusters , C . C . Hoogenraad , and C . Storm , PLOS ONE 12 , 1 ( 2017 ) . [ 61 ] J . Tønnesen and U . V . N¨agerl , Frontiers in Psychiatry 7 , 101 ( 2016 ) . [ 62 ] J . Nishiyama and R . Yasuda , Neuron 87 , 63 ( 2015 ) . [ 63 ] M . Heine , L . Groc , R . Frischknecht , J . - C . B´e¨ıque , B . Lounis , G . Rumbaugh , R . L . Huganir , L . Cognet , and D . Choquet , Science 320 , 201 ( 2008 ) . [ 64 ] N . A . Frost , H . E . Lu , and T . A . Blanpied , PLoS ONE 7 , e36751 ( 2012 ) . [ 65 ] N . A . Frost , H . Shroﬀ , H . Kong , E . Betzig , and T . A . Blanpied , Neuron , Neuron 67 , 86 ( 2010 ) . [ 66 ] D . Holcman and R . Yuste , Nature Reviews Neuroscience 16 , 685 ( 2015 ) . [ 67 ] F . Jaskolski , B . Mayo - Martin , D . Jane , and J . M . Hen - ley , Journal of Biological Chemistry 284 , 12491 ( 2009 ) . [ 68 ] J . Tønnesen , G . Katona , B . R´ozsa , and U . V . N¨agerl , Nature Neuroscience 17 , 678 ( 2014 ) . [ 69 ] L . Groc and D . Choquet , Science 368 , eaay4631 ( 2020 ) , https : / / www . science . org / doi / pdf / 10 . 1126 / science . aay4631 . [ 70 ] M . Zeng , Y . Shang , Y . Araki , T . Guo , R . L . Huganir , and M . Zhang , Cell 166 , 1163 ( 2016 ) . [ 71 ] M . Zeng , J . D´ıaz - Alonso , F . Ye , X . Chen , J . Xu , Z . Ji , R . A . Nicoll , and M . Zhang , Neuron 104 , 529 ( 2019 ) . [ 72 ] S . M . Ross , Stochastic Processes ( Wiley , 1996 ) . 13 [ 73 ] C . W . Gardiner , Handbook of stochastic methods , Series in Synergetics ( Springer , 1985 ) . [ 74 ] L . E . Reichl , A Modern Course in Statistical Physics ( Jon Wiley and Sons Inc . , 1997 ) . [ 75 ] B . Oksendal , Stochastic Diﬀerential Equations : An In - troduction ( Springer , 2000 ) . [ 76 ] F . H¨oﬂing and T . Franosch , Reports on progress in physics . Physical Society ( Great Britain ) 76 , 046602 ( 2013 ) . [ 77 ] D . Fanelli and A . J . McKane , Phys . Rev . E 82 , 021113 ( 2010 ) . [ 78 ] T . Takenawa and S . Suetsugu , Nature Reviews Molec - ular Cell Biology 8 , 37 ( 2007 ) . [ 79 ] A . Pressley , Elementary Diﬀerential Geometry ( Springer , 2001 ) . [ 80 ] R . Abraham , J . Marsden , and T . Rat , iu , Manifolds , Ten - sor Analysis , and Applications , v . 75 ( Springer New York , 1988 ) . [ 81 ] A . Singer , Applied and Computational Harmonic Anal - ysis 21 , 128 ( 2006 ) , special Issue : Diﬀusion Maps and Wavelets . [ 82 ] M . Belkin and P . Niyogi , Journal of Computer and Sys - tem Sciences 74 , 1289 ( 2008 ) , learning Theory 2005 . [ 83 ] J . C . Latorre , P . Metzner , C . Hartmann , and C . Sch¨utte , Commun . Math . Sci . 9 , 1051 ( 2011 ) . [ 84 ] H . WANG , C . S . PESKIN , and T . C . ELSTON , Journal of Theoretical Biology 221 , 491 ( 2003 ) . [ 85 ] C . M¨uller , Spherical Harmonics ( Springer , 1966 ) . [ 86 ] K . Atkinson and W . Han , Spherical Harmonics and Approximations on the Unit Sphere : An Introduction ( Springer , 2010 ) . [ 87 ] S . Hugel , M . Abegg , V . de Paola , P . Caroni , B . H . G¨ahwiler , and R . A . McKinney , Cerebral Cortex 19 , 697 ( 2009 ) . [ 88 ] J . F . Blinn , ACM Trans . Graph . 1 , 235 – 256 ( 1982 ) . [ 89 ] A . M . Turing , Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London . Series B , Biological Sciences 237 , 37 ( 1952 ) . [ 90 ] N . Britton , Essential Mathematical Biology , Springer Undergraduate Mathematics Series ( Springer London , 2005 ) . [ 91 ] J . Murray , Mathematical Biology II : Spatial Models and Biomedical Applications , Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics ( Springer New York , 2013 ) . [ 92 ] P . Gray and S . Scott , Chemical Engineering Science 39 , 1087 ( 1984 ) . [ 93 ] P . J . Atzberger , Journal of Computational Physics 229 , 3474 ( 2010 ) . [ 94 ] J . E . Pearson , Science 261 , 189 ( 1993 ) . [ 95 ] R . L . Burden and D . Faires , Numerical Analysis ( Brooks / Cole Cengage Learning , 2010 ) . [ 96 ] A . Iserles , A First Course in the Numerical Analysis of Diﬀerential Equations , 2nd ed . , Cambridge Texts in Ap - plied Mathematics ( Cambridge University Press , 2008 ) . [ 97 ] C . Varea , J . L . Arag´on , and R . A . Barrio , Phys . Rev . E 60 , 4588 ( 1999 ) . [ 98 ] A . Jamieson - Lane , P . H . Trinh , and M . J . Ward , in Mathematical and computational approaches in advanc - ing modern science and engineering ( Springer , 2016 ) pp . 641 – 651 . [ 99 ] J . Hinz , J . van Zwieten , M . M¨oller , and F . Vermolen , arXiv 10 . 48550 / ARXIV . 1910 . 12588 ( 2019 ) . [ 100 ] K . Simons and W . L . C . Vaz , Ann . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 33 , 269 ( 2004 ) . [ 101 ] D . Lingwood and K . Simons , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) 327 , 46 ( 2010 ) . [ 102 ] M . v . Smoluchowski , Zeitschrift f¨ur Physikalische Chemie 92U , 129 ( 1918 ) . [ 103 ] D . T . Gillespie , A . Hellander , and L . R . Petzold , The Journal of chemical physics 138 , 05B201 1 ( 2013 ) . [ 104 ] S . A . Isaacson , The Journal of chemical physics 139 , 054101 ( 2013 ) . [ 105 ] S . Isaacson , D . McQueen , and C . S . Peskin , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 3815 ( 2011 ) . [ 106 ] P . Hohenberg and A . Krekhov , Physics Reports 572 , 1 ( 2015 ) , an introduction to the Ginzburg – Landau theory of phase transitions and nonequilibrium patterns . [ 107 ] V . L . Ginzburg and L . D . Landau , Zh . Eksp . Teor . Fiz . 20 , 1064 ( 1950 ) . [ 108 ] S . M . Allen and J . W . Cahn , Acta Metallurgica 27 , 1085 ( 1979 ) . [ 109 ] J . W . Cahn and J . E . Hilliard , The Jour - nal of Chemical Physics 28 , 258 ( 1958 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1063 / 1 . 1744102 . [ 110 ] B . Gross , N . Trask , P . Kuberry , and P . Atzberger , Jour - nal of Computational Physics 409 , 109340 ( 2020 ) . 14 Appendix A : Results on Statistics of Markov - Chains and Backward Equations We discretize the particle drift - diﬀusion dynamics on the surface using a Markov - Chain with jump rates M ij . The First Passage Time ( FPT ) and other statistics can be computed eﬃciently from the Markov - Chain without the need for Monte - Carlo sampling when the discrete state space is not too large . We show how results similar to the Backward - Kolmogorov PDEs [ 75 ] can be obtained for our discrete Markov - Chains . Theorem 1 . Let u be a column vector with components in i associated with the statistics u ( n ) i = E (cid:34) f ( X ( N ) ) + N − 1 (cid:88) t = n g ( X ( t ) , t ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( n ) = x i (cid:35) . ( A1 ) The statistics u ( k ) satisfy u ( n − 1 ) = M u ( n ) + g ( n − 1 ) ( A2 ) u ( N ) = f . ( A3 ) The M is the right - stochastic matrix of the Markov - Chain . For a given choice of functions f , g , we collect the values [ f ] i = f ( x i ) and [ g ( (cid:96) ) ] i = g ( x i , (cid:96) ) as column vectors f , g ( (cid:96) ) . Proof . For the initial condition X ( n ) = x i , let the matrix P ( m ) have the components P ( m ) ij = p ( m ) j . For m ≥ n , the p ( m ) j is the solution of p ( (cid:96) + 1 ) = p ( (cid:96) ) M , starting with p ( n ) j = [ p ] ( n ) j = δ ij . The δ ij is the Kronecker δ - function . For m = n , we have P ( n ) ij = δ ij . This gives u ( n ) i = E (cid:34) f ( X ( N ) ) + N − 1 (cid:88) t = n g ( X ( t ) , t ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( n ) = x i (cid:35) = (cid:88) j P ( N ) ij f ( x j ) + N − 1 (cid:88) t = n (cid:88) j P ( t ) ij g ( x j , t ) = (cid:88) j (cid:88) k P ( n ) ik ( M N − n ) kj f ( x j ) + N − 1 (cid:88) t = n (cid:88) j (cid:88) k P ( n ) ik ( M t − n ) kj g ( x j , t ) = (cid:88) j ( M N − n ) ij f ( x j ) + N − 1 (cid:88) t = n (cid:88) j ( M t − n ) ij g ( x j , t ) = (cid:34) M N − n f + N − 1 (cid:88) t = n M t − n g ( t ) (cid:35) i = (cid:104) M u ( n + 1 ) + g ( n ) (cid:105) i . ( A4 ) At time t = N , only the term with f contributes and we obtain u ( N ) i = [ f ] i . Theorem 2 . Let w be a column vector with components associated with the ﬁrst - passage - time statistics w i ≡ E (cid:34) f ( X ( τ Ω ) ) + τ Ω − 1 (cid:88) t = 0 g ( X ( t ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i (cid:35) , ( A5 ) where τ Ω = inf { k ≥ 0 | X ( k ) / ∈ Ω } . The w satisﬁes the linear equation ( ˆ M − ˆ I ) w = − g ( A6 ) ∂ w = f . ( A7 ) The ∂ w extracts entries for all indices with x i ∈ ∂ Ω . The ˆ M refers to the rows with indices in the interior of Ω . Proof . Since the equation is linear , we will ﬁrst consider the case with f = 0 , g (cid:54) = 0 and then the case with f (cid:54) = 0 , g = 0 . The general solution is then the sum of these two cases . For the case with f = 0 , g (cid:54) = 0 we have w i = E (cid:34) τ − 1 (cid:88) t = 0 g ( X ( t ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i (cid:35) = ∞ (cid:88) n = 0 E (cid:34) n − 1 (cid:88) t = 0 g ( X ( t ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i , τ = n (cid:35) Pr { τ = n } = ∞ (cid:88) n = 0 g ( x i ) Pr { τ = n } + ∞ (cid:88) n = 0 (cid:88) x j ∈ Ω Pr { X ( 1 ) = x j | X ( 0 ) = x i } Pr { τ = n } × E (cid:34) n − 1 (cid:88) t = 1 g ( X ( t ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i , X ( 1 ) = x j , τ = n (cid:35) = g ( x i ) + (cid:88) x j ∈ Ω M ij ∞ (cid:88) n = 0 Pr { τ = n } × E (cid:34) n − 1 (cid:88) t = 1 g ( X ( t ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i , X ( 1 ) = x j , τ = n (cid:35) = g ( x i ) + (cid:88) x j ∈ Ω M ij w j . ( A8 ) In matrix form , ˆ w = g + ˆ M w , ( A9 ) where ˆ w , ˆ M refers to the entries in the rows with indices of points in the interior of the domain Ω . This can be expressed as ( ˆ M − ˆ I ) w = − g . ( A10 ) The ˆ I is the linear map that extracts entries within the interior of the domain Ω . 15 We next consider the case with f (cid:54) = 0 and g = 0 . Similarly , this follows from w i = E (cid:20) f ( X ( τ ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i (cid:21) = ∞ (cid:88) n = 0 E (cid:20) f ( X ( n ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i , τ = n (cid:21) Pr { τ = n } = ∞ (cid:88) n = 0 (cid:88) x j ∈ Ω Pr { X ( 1 ) = x j | X ( 0 ) = x i } Pr { τ = n } × E (cid:20) f ( X ( n ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i , X ( 1 ) = x j , τ = n (cid:21) = (cid:88) x j ∈ Ω M ij ∞ (cid:88) n = 0 Pr { τ = n } × E (cid:20) f ( X ( n ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 1 ) = x j , τ = n (cid:21) = (cid:88) x j ∈ Ω M ij w j . ( A11 ) For x i ∈ ∂ Ω we have w i = E (cid:20) f ( X ( τ ) ) (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) X ( 0 ) = x i (cid:21) = f ( x i ) , since τ = 0 in this case . In matrix form this gives ∂ w = f and ( ˆ M − ˆ I ) w = 0 . ( A12 ) The ∂ w extracts the entries with indices i corresponding to the boundary ∂ Ω . Putting both cases together we have that w satisﬁes for general f , g the linear system ( ˆ M − ˆ I ) w = − g ∂ w = f . ( A13 ) These results provide approaches for computing eﬃ - ciently the statistics u and w without the need in some cases for Monte - Carlo sampling when the state space is not too large . These results provide an analogue of the Backward - Kolmogorov PDEs in the setting of our Markov - Chain discretizations of particle drift - diﬀusion dynamics on curved surfaces .