The plasma membrane as a capacitor for energy and metabolism Supriyo Ray , 1 , 2 Adam Kassan , 1 , 2 Anna R . Busija , 1 , 2 Padmini Rangamani , 3 and Hemal H . Patel 1 , 2 1 Department of Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System , San Diego , California ; 2 Department of Anesthesiology , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , California ; and 3 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , California Ray S , Kassan A , Busija AR , Rangamani P , Patel HH . The plasma membrane as a capacitor for energy and metabolism . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 310 : C181 – C192 , 2016 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 . —When considering which components of the cell are the most critical to function and physiology , we naturally focus on the nucleus , the mitochondria that regulate energy and apoptotic signaling , or other organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum , Golgi , ribosomes , etc . Few people will suggest that the membrane is the most critical element of a cell in terms of function and physiology . Those that consider the membrane critical will point to its obvious barrier function regulated by the lipid bilayer and numerous ion channels that regulate homeostatic gradients . What becomes evident upon closer inspection is that not all membranes are created equal and that there are lipid - rich microdo - mains that serve as platforms of signaling and a means of communication with the intracellular environment . In this review , we explore the evolution of membranes , focus on lipid - rich microdomains , and advance the novel concept that membranes serve as “capacitors for energy and metabolism . ” Within this framework , the membrane then is the primary and critical regulator of stress and disease adaptation of the cell . membrane ; cholesterol ; metabolism ; rafts ; caveolae ; energy WHAT IS LIFE ? The answer can be literal , basic , and simple—the name of a breakfast cereal or a book written by Erwin Schrödinger—or more complex and abstract , invoking the phil - osophical and spiritual . The dictionary ( thefreedictionary . com ) deﬁnition states , “the property or quality that distinguishes living organisms from dead organisms and inanimate matter , manifested in functions such as metabolism , growth , reproduction , and re - sponse to stimuli or adaptation to the environment originating from within the organism . ” In the most simpliﬁed and primary sense , life is manifest in a single cell and in a teleological view is something dependent on the plasma membrane . Since its obser - vation in the seventeenth century with microscopy , the plasma membrane has been the focus of numerous investigations , and many advances in our understanding of the plasma membrane have been achieved thus far ( 24a ) . The plasma membrane is known to be a major coordinator between extracellular signals and intracellular responses , and it also plays a crucial role to link intracellular processes to cell - cell interactions and tissue organi - zation ( 131 ) . Therefore , the plasma membrane is involved in vast aspects of cellular function : from intracellular endosomes and extracellular vesicles to receptor signaling , presentation of surface proteins , and protein secretion ( 4 ) . The lipid bilayer plays an important role in compartmentaliza - tion and organization of the intracellular environment and various organelles necessary for homeostatic and specialized functions . The plasma membrane is a semipermeable barrier that provides protection from the extracellular environment and localizes mem - brane receptors and ion channels involved in signal transduction . Particular examples of membrane microdomains such as lipid rafts and caveolae have been studied in the context of localization of these signaling receptors and ion channels . However , very few researchers associate the plasma membrane , and its varied lipid - ordered domains , as a specialized cellular organelle important in regulating cellular metabolism and extracellular environment to cell / organelle communication . Here we review 1 ) the evolution of membranes , considering lipid diversity , 2 ) the implication of membrane mechanics and elasticity for cell function , 3 ) the implication of cholesterol and other bioactive lipids as facilitators of metabolism by regula - tion of oxygen or providing direct raw materials to regulate cell function , and 4 ) the communication of the plasma membrane with intracellular components . Ultimately we link these obser - vations to the role membranes play as capacitors for regulating energy , metabolism , and communication . Evolution of Membranes Lipids are amphipathic molecules—they have a hydrophilic head group and a hydrophobic tail group . In an aqueous environment , they spontaneously self - assemble such that the tails are protected from water . Lipids reorder the hydrogen bonds of water molecules forming a cagelike structure around the lipid , decreasing the entropy of water ( 22 ) . This decrease in entropy is directly proportional to the surface area of the nonpolar regions of the lipids . The nonpolar regions of lipids in turn come together through hydrophobic interactions ( 22 ) . These interactions become stronger while reaching thermody - namic stability by reducing the number of water molecules surrounding the hydrophobic tail region of the lipids ( Fig . 1 ) . Modern cell membranes are made of glycerol phospholipids , although it is believed that early membranes self - assembled Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : H . H . Patel , Univ . of California , San Diego , Dept . of Anesthesiology , VASDHS ( 9125 ) , 3350 La Jolla Village Dr . , San Diego , CA 92161 ( e - mail : hepatel @ ucsd . edu ) . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 310 : C181 – C192 , 2016 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 . Review http : / / www . ajpcell . org C181 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m from monocarboxylate - and alcohol - derived one - chained am - phiphilic molecules ( 79 , 85 , 161 ) . Bacteria and eukaryotes have similar biochemistry and have ester - linked fatty acid phospholipids based on glycerol - 3 - phosphate ( G3P ) ( 49 , 73 , 79 , 85 ) . The discovery of glycerol - 1 - phosphate ( G1P ) ether linked to isoprenoid chains in Archaea and bacteria represents a major breakthrough in membrane evolution ( 49 , 81 , 117 ) . The glycerol moieties for all the phospholipids in Archaea and bacteria are of opposite chiralities ( 80 ) . The hydrophobic tail is fatty acid based in bacteria , while in archae it is isoprenoid based ( 49 , 61 , 85 ) . This highlights the difference in chemical composition and biogenesis pathways ( i . e . , unique enzymes for lipid synthesis ) in the archaeal and bacterial / eukaryotic mem - branes . This variation in lipids and their formation has given rise to the concept of the existence of a “last universal common ancestor” ( LUCA ) , which was likely self - replicating genetic elements in hydrothermal vents living in bubbles made up of inorganic components and not bound by typical lipid mem - branes ( 61 , 85 , 161 ) . The idea that early life did not have membrane structures was supported by studies suggesting that phospholipid biosynthesis appeared much later in evolution , independent of the lineage that gave rise to archae and bacteria ( 78 , 80 ) . The conundrum with this theory was evidence that the LUCA contained at least 100 genes ( 81 ) . To provide for this level of complexity , compartmentalization likely had to exist early on to facilitate concentration rather than diffusion of components to allow for a critical mass to be achieved , initi - ating biochemical processes . This paradox was resolved by Martin and Russell , who suggested that the LUCA had miner - als instead of phospholipids that served the role of providing a deﬁned barrier to concentrate cell components in order for life to initiate and evolve ( 95 ) . The transition from inorganic to organic components deﬁn - ing the plasma membrane has also been controversial . At the heart of this controversy is the origin of life—a topic no less controversial or resolved . The “ﬁrst life form” needed to balance existence , stability , growth , replication , and adapta - tion , and central to these pressures was a functional membrane . According to the early membrane hypothesis , cellularization occurred with simple lipids that were synthesized by inorganic transition metals or with enzymes that were nonstereospeciﬁc , eventually giving rise to precells ( 18 , 71 , 145 ) , whereas some suggest that precells had ancient enzymes able to synthesize both G1P and G3P ( 155 ) . The exchange of electrically charged compounds is shrouded in mystery , as ions penetrate hydro - phobic membrane lipid through membrane proteins in the form of ion channels and translocases ( Fig . 2 ) . The chicken - and - egg question to resolve this problem is , “What came ﬁrst , mem - branes or membrane proteins ? ” Two solutions emerged . One suggests that early cells likely had less restricted transport of materials , as resources for growth and adaptation were exter - nally derived , suggesting that cells were heterotrophic . Support for such a concept was provided by studies showing that using simple fatty acids and their derivatives to model early proto - cells resulted in the generation of bilayer vesicles capable of internalizing nucleotides that could be used for replication reactions , suggesting that early , simple cells could possibly have acquired components for growth and replication from the external environment independent of speciﬁc transport machin - ery ( 31 , 92 ) . Such a model would allow cells and membranes to evolve and adapt as external pressures amassed components over a signiﬁcant period of time to derive speciﬁc biochemical reactions , leading to the complexity we observe in modern cells to allow for specialization of function . The second solu - tion suggested that the lipid bilayer evolved at the same time as membrane proteins along with the membrane bioenergetics ( 16 , 59 , 98 ) . Given either of these paths , it is clear that the modern cell has evolved a highly functional lipid bilayer that contains a variety of components capable of facilitating growth and adaptation . Lipid Diversity , Lipid - Sterol Asymmetry , and Lipochaperone Function As the cell membrane evolved , there was a concerted reﬁnement of the lipid composition but also an increase in complexity driven by not only the asymmetric distribution of these lipids but also the incorporation of membrane - Fig . 1 . Self - assembly of biological membranes . Lipids are amphiphilic molecules . In aqueous environments , they self - assemble to form micelles or bilayers such that the hydrophilic head groups interface with water while the hydrophobic tails are protected . Left : free lipids in water have their hydrophobic tails exposed . The hydrogen bonds within water are broken or rearranged to account for the new hydrophobic entities . Center : the lipids can arrange themselves into a micelle , so that all the hydrophobic groups are protected from exposure to water . Right : the fatty acid chains in 2 - tailed lipids are often too long to ﬁt in micelles without exposure of the hydrophobic groups to water . Therefore , lipids often form bilayers and water forms a hydrogen bond cage along the surface of the head groups . Review C182 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m localized proteins that allowed for more complex cellular functions . The plasma membranes of modern animal cells contain four major phospholipids [ i . e . , phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) , phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) , phosphatidylserine ( PS ) , and sphingomyelin ( SM ) ] ( 24a ) ( Fig . 3 ) . The outer leaﬂet of the plasma membrane consists mainly of PC and SM , whereas PE and PS are the predominant phospholipids of the inner leaﬂet ( 24a ) . A ﬁfth phospholipid , phosphati - dylinositol , is also localized to the inner leaﬂet ( 24a ) . In addition to the phospholipids , the plasma membranes con - tain glycolipids and cholesterol ( 24a ) . How plasma mem - branes are compartmentalized and organized and how lipids and proteins contribute to this is currently being intensively investigated . There is overwhelming evidence that the plasma membrane is not a homogeneous or random structure ( 88 ) but rather highly asymmetric , with different proteins and lipid compositions in the two leaﬂets organized to facilitate speciﬁc cellular functions ( 28 , 133 ) . Lipid rafts are speciﬁc domains of the plasma membrane rich in cholesterol and sphingolipids ( 140 , 152 ) . Lipid rafts are Cl - Na + K + Na + Na + K + K + Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Cl - Na + Na + Na + K + Na + Na + Na + K + Na + Na + Na + Na + AP - AP - AP - AP - Anionic Protein Chloride ion Potassium Ion Sodium Ion K + K + AP - AP - Na + Cl - Cl - Fig . 2 . Ionic environment around the membrane . Membranes play an important role not only in compartmentalization of cellular compartments but also in maintaining an electrostatic potential across the membrane . In modern biological membranes , ion channels play an important role in regulating the homeostatic gradients of ions across the membrane and maintaining the membrane voltage potential . Figure illustrates the large variety of ions present in the cellular milieu . Phosphatidylcholine Sphingomyelin Phosphatidylethanolamine Phosphatidylserine Phosphatidylinositol Cholesterol Fig . 3 . Diversity of membrane lipids . Modern biological membranes are made of different types of lipids including phospholipids , sph - ingomyelin , and cholesterol . Changes in local concentration of these lipids can lead to mi - crodomains in the membrane and potentially lipid rafts . This complexity and diversity is a large evolutionary advance over early mem - branes that were thought to self - assemble from monocarboxylate - and alcohol - derived 1 - chained amphiphilic molecules . Review C183 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m liquid ordered as they are enriched in cholesterol , whereas the remainder of the bilayer is in a liquid - disordered phase ( 14 ) . Furthermore , these cholesterol - enriched domains are more rigid than the surrounding membrane and are detergent resis - tant ( 120 ) , and they form distinct sites in the membrane for organizing signaling proteins that drive cellular processes ( 111 ) . Caveolae are a subset of lipid rafts that form distinct ﬂasklike , invaginated subcellular structures on the plasma membrane resistant to detergent solubilization ( 103 , 123 , 141 ) . Caveolae are enriched in cholesterol , glycosphingolipids , SM , and caveolin protein in addition to other signaling proteins ( 15 , 82 , 90 , 121 , 132 , 153 , 154 ) . In many cell types , caveolae can be arranged singly or in chains or grapelike clusters ( 103 , 104 , 108 , 109 ) . Caveolae may function in protein trafﬁcking , signal transduction , and endocytosis ( 115 , 116 ) . Although studies have suggested indirect involvement in metabolism through enrichment of signaling molecules that regulate processes such as biochemical and redox signaling ( 110 , 111 ) , assessment of their lipid and protein compositions suggests a potential for direct contribution to cellular energy and metabolism . Differences exist in the two leaﬂets of the plasma mem - brane , leading to lipid asymmetry . Synaptic plasma membranes ( SPMs ) have been studied in much detail to shed light on this aspect . Like most plasma membranes , the inner leaﬂet ( i . e . , cytofacial leaﬂet ) is rich in PE and PS ; however , the outer leaﬂet ( i . e . , exofacial leaﬂet ) is rich in SM and PC ( 34 , 75 ) . In mouse SPM , cholesterol asymmetry is observed , with more cholesterol on the inner leaﬂet than on the outer leaﬂet ( 63 – 66 ) . This distribution can change with stress . Mice fed ethanol have a twofold increase in outer leaﬂet cholesterol ( although the total cholesterol from the both leaﬂets remains the same ) ( 1 , 138 , 162 ) , and aging also leads to increased outer leaﬂet cholesterol compared with young mice ( 64 ) . Previous evidence suggests that depletion of SM by sphingomyelinase altered the distribution of cholesterol and increased the pool of intracel - lular cholesterol ( 125 ) and also made the cholesterol more susceptible to oxidation ( 142 ) . Cholesterol has highest afﬁnity for SM and less for phospholipids such as PC and PS . It has been shown that afﬁnity for phospholipids such as PC and PS is curvature dependent ( 163 ) . P - glycoprotein ( P - gp ) , which belongs to the family of multiple drug resistance ABC trans - porters , has been shown to stimulate cholesterol distribution from the inner to the outer leaﬂet of the plasma membrane ( 48 , 67 ) . Whether such asymmetry in cholesterol affects lipid raft formation is unclear , but studies suggest alteration in mem - brane lipid rafts and caveolae with age leading to neurological and cardiac dysfunction ( 45 , 55 , 114 ) . Recent evidence has indicated the ability of caveolin expression to rescue neuro - cognitive decline with age ( 91 ) . Such ﬁndings suggest the critical role of ordered membrane domains in regulating cell physiology . Although folding of proteins is largely directed by their amino acid sequence , the surrounding environment , especially lipids , is important in protein folding , misfolding , and unfold - ing ( 6 , 137 ) . This is true for soluble , peripheral , and integral membrane proteins . Studies in mutant Escherichia coli have shown that absence of PE caused misfolding of the membrane protein lactose permease although insertion into the membrane was unaffected ( 7 , 8 ) . For heme , even substituting PE with PS , phosphatidylglycerol , or cardiolipin did not lead to refolding into the correct conformation ( 32 ) , suggesting a highly ordered and speciﬁc role for lipids in protein folding . In recent exper - iments , it was shown that plant - derived ricin toxin A subunit , which belongs to the A - B family of toxins , unfolded in the presence of anionic lipids ( 128 ) . Ricin A chain has a very stable secondary structure even after detaching from its B subunit . In the presence of anionic lipids present in specialized cellular membrane such as the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , an unfolding of the toxin was induced , resulting in ER exit to the cytosol where the toxin can refold to induce toxicity . In contrast to ricin toxin , cholera toxin , which belongs to the A - B 5 family of toxins derived from bacteria Vibrio cholerae , spon - taneously unfolds after dissociating from B subunit and is extruded out of the ER for degradation . Because of lysine over arginine bias , it escapes ubiquitination and proteasomal degra - dation . In the cytosol , the A subunit refolds and interacts with ADP ribosylation factor - 6 and ADP ribosylates GTP - bound G s (cid:2) , locking it in the active state ( 3 , 69 , 147 ) . Recently , it has been shown that the inner leaﬂet of plasma membrane may facilitate refolding of the unfolded cholera toxin A subunit , likely in a lipid raft - speciﬁc mechanism ( 127 ) . Mechanics of Biological Membranes and How Their Elasticity Affects Function and Interaction with Proteins Unique lipids within membranes create diversity at multiple levels , one such being unique mechanical properties that have important implications for function . In an aqueous medium , lipids aggregate into quasi - two - dimensional bilayer sheets and adopt a conﬁguration that minimizes the exposure of their hydrophobic parts . In the plane of the membrane the membrane resembles a nearly incompressible viscous ﬂuid , while in bending it behaves somewhat like an elastic solid . In - plane lipid ﬂow has been observed in experimental systems such as tether formation and micropipette aspiration of membranes ( 40 ) . In cellular processes , the plasma membrane is thought to have a membrane “reservoir” that can act as a source of lipids ( 126 ) . This reservoir allows for lipid ﬂow during dynamic events such as spreading , motility , and endocytosis ( 126 ) and may be critical to stress adaptation and metabolism . Continuum models of bilayer membranes have been used to study the deformation of membranes and to explain many biological phenomena . The most popular model of lipid bilay - ers is the Helfrich model ( 56 ) , in which the energy per unit area of the membrane depends only on the mean and Gaussian curvatures of the membrane . This model has been widely used to study the shape of red blood cells ( 37 , 68 ) and to explain biological phenomena such as the formation of membrane tubes ( 35 ) and the shapes of lipid vesicles ( 70 , 101 , 139 ) . The basis for this modeling effort is the same principle that is the basis for the deﬁnition of equilibrium : equilibrium is attained when the free energy of the system is minimum . In this case , the membrane is assumed to be at mechanical equilibrium and the modeling effort is based on the principle of virtual work . This principle states that when the system energy is minimized , the resulting state is the same as one of mechanical equilibrium . By using the principle of virtual work , we are assuming that mechanical equilibrium occurs more rapidly than the other biochemical processes ( this is a reasonable assumption in the cellular environment ) . It is important to recognize here that mechanical equilibrium does not mean thermodynamic or chemical equilibrium . Review C184 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m One of the fascinating observations about lipid membranes is that they can be described with a Hamiltonian function , which corresponds to the total energy of the system , using just the geometry of the membrane through curvatures . Ignoring ﬂuctuations of the membrane , the elastic energy per unit area , W , is given by the Helfrich Hamiltonian ( 56 ) , W (cid:2) k B (cid:2) H (cid:3) C (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) k (cid:2) K Here , H is the mean curvature , given by ( (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) (cid:3) 2 ) / 2 ( see Fig . 4 for how the curvatures (cid:3) 1 and (cid:3) 2 are deﬁned ) , and K is the Gaussian curvature , given by (cid:3) 1 (cid:3) 2 . C is the spontaneous curvature of the membrane—it results from a break in sym - metry in individual monolayers ( “up - down” ) —such as due to differential partitioning of membrane molecules with noncy - lindrical shapes . k B is the bending modulus , and k (cid:2) is the Gaussian modulus . The ﬁrst term in the above equation explic - itly accounts for the local elastic energy penalty due to any deviation of the local mean curvature of the membrane , H , from the preferred , so - called spontaneous curvature , C . The second term penalizes the existence of a Gaussian curvature . Thus the elastic energy of the membrane can be written solely in terms of its geometric properties . This is a remarkable aspect of lipid membranes because it indicates that for length scales only a few times bigger than the thickness of the membrane ( the membrane is roughly 5 nm thick , and this theory applies above the thermal wavelength of the membranes , which is roughly 20 nm ) , the behavior of the membrane can be de - scribed solely in terms of its geometric properties . This feature has been proven experimentally and theoretically many times but was ﬁrst recognized in independent works by Helfrich ( 56 ) , Canham ( 17 ) , and Evans ( 39 ) . Then , the total energy of the membrane is just the integral of W over the membrane area , A . Since the membrane has a high stretch modulus ( it is easier to bend the membrane than to stretch it ) , it is often treated as incompressible . To represent this incompressibility , a Lagrange multiplier , (cid:5) , often inter - preted as membrane tension , is added to augment the Hamil - tonian . The total energy is written as E (cid:2) (cid:4) (cid:2) k b (cid:2) H (cid:3) C (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) kK (cid:3) d A (cid:4) (cid:5) d A The minimum energy state associated with mechanical equi - librium of the membrane results from minimizing the total membrane energy E . The mathematics behind this operation is quite complex ; the interested reader is referred to References 36 and 118 . However , the result is a partial differential equa - tion , called the “shape equation , ” that gives the relationship between membrane shape through H and K and externally applied forces and / or protein - induced spontaneous curvature ( 35 , 89 ) . The elegance of this approach lies in the ability to predict the shape of the membrane ( cellular and vesicular ) under different conditions . Perhaps the most famous example of the use of the Helfrich Hamiltonian was to describe how the biconcave shape of the red blood cell could be interpreted as one of the solutions to the shape equation ( 17 , 56 , 139 ) . While many cellular features such as the cytoskeleton and membrane protein com - position were ignored in this model , it is nonetheless fascinat - ing that the shape of a red blood cell could be described with an equation for mechanical equilibrium by minimizing the associated elastic energy . This was the advent of mechanobi - ology at the cellular level and ushered in the use of energy to describe not just metabolism but also mechanical forces and membrane shapes ( further discussed below ) . Another seminal work that highlights the application of this model is the formation of membrane tubes ( 35 ) . Tubes and membrane tethers are oft - observed features in cells . By mod - eling the force acting on the membrane as a point load ( an idealization ) and the resulting tether as a cylinder , Derenyi and coworkers were able to describe the relationship between the radius of the tube , membrane tension , and the bending modu - lus . Furthermore , they were able to predict the force - length relationship for membrane tethers and the force required to form the cylindrical tube . These examples highlight how en - ergy considerations can give insight into the response of lipid membranes from a mechanical standpoint . Recently , there have been further developments in the ﬁeld of membrane mechanics . The elastic models used thus far to study lipid membranes focus mainly on length scales that are much larger than the thickness of the bilayer . The Helfrich model assumes that the lipids are aligned normal to the mem - brane surface at all times and that curvatures are of the order of the bilayer thermal wavelength ( (cid:6) 20 nm ) . This approach captures the changes in membrane shape that occur at large length scales larger than the thickness of the bilayer ( (cid:6) 5 nm ) . There are , however , circumstances under which lipids are not aligned normal with the surface . The lipids are then said to tilt relative to the membrane surface ; this in turn induces a change in membrane thickness , which is simply the projection of the lipid length onto the surface normal . Lipid molecules are chiral : they possess a directionality and generally need not be aligned normal to the membrane surface . For example , the tilt N N r r 1 / κ 1 τ 1 N τ 2 1 / κ 2 N r τ 1 τ 2 Fig . 4 . Continuum modeling of the membrane . Theory can help us understand how membranes behave at the continuum level . The membrane can be represented as a 2 - dimensional surface ; this representation allows us to think about the mechanical properties of the membrane . The 2 principal curvatures (cid:3) 1 and (cid:3) 2 are calculated with methods of differential geometry , and represent the local change in the shape of the surface . The 2 principal curvatures of the membrane have been used to describe the curvature - dependent elastic energy of the membrane . In mechanical equilibrium , all forces acting on the mem - brane must be balanced , and therefore the energy of the membrane must be minimized . This approach relates the energetics of the membrane to the shape of the membrane at mechanical equilibrium . Review C185 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m angle of gel - phase dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine ( DPPC ) was found to be (cid:6) 32° ( 150 ) . Even in the liquid phase , lipids can tilt in regions adjacent to protein inclusions ( 158 ) . Mem - brane ﬁssion and fusion are critical cellular processes that take place at lengths comparable to the membrane thickness ( (cid:6) 5 nm ) . Lipids may also exhibit tilt in the neighborhood of an inserted protein and manifest associated defect structures . We have recently developed a continuum framework to study this process ( 124 ) . Experimentally observed ripple phases are char - acterized by oscillatory thickness variations induced by spa - tially nonuniform tilt ( 86 ) . Membrane fusion has been studied with dissipative particle dynamics ( DPD ) approaches ( 51 , 52 ) . These studies have shown that when two fusing membranes are in close proximity the lipids tilt , splay , and ﬂip from one monolayer to another ( 51 , 52 , 93 ) . These models are beginning to shed light on how the energetics of the membrane at different levels can be harnessed into mechanical forces and the role they play in governing membrane morphology and topology . The evolutionary diversity that has emerged in the plasma membrane is quite astounding . The early role of the membrane was to serve as a passive barrier to concentrate chemical components in a cell to provide for a critical mass to initiate life . Modern membranes have evolved to the point of highly organized shape and structure facilitated by ordered and dis - ordered lipids , encrusted with a complement of proteins that allow for further complexity of function . What is curious is how the pressure to evolve emerged . Cholesterol and Oxygen : Coevolution of Membranes and Metabolism Once the existence and replication of unicellular organisms was established , the evolutionary pressure was to build organ - isms of increasing complexity that ultimately led to the gen - eration of eukaryotic cells capable of multicellular organiza - tion , function , and growth and enhanced survival while facing mounting environmental stressors . Biochemical processes that utilize biological fuel to synthesize energy were necessary to facilitate organization , function , growth , and survival . The ﬁrst of many natural resources that cells needed to adapt for use was oxygen . The early atmosphere lacked oxygen , but a sharp rise was seen around 3 billion years ago with cyanobacteria gen - erating oxygen via photosynthesis ( 113 ) . It is curious that major events in maximum organismal size and “growth spurts” in evolution are marked by spikes in atmospheric oxygen ( 112 , 113 ) . Interestingly , atmospheric oxygen levels were the highest ( somewhere near 30 % ) when dinosaurs roamed the Earth , with a sharp decline around the same time as mass extinction events , and then stabilized to modern - day levels over the past 100 – 200 million years ( 113 ) . The oxygen paradox highlights the mystery that oxygen is so critical a fuel for the metabolic machinery of life yet so toxic to all forms of life inhabiting this planet ( 130 ) . The key to this paradox are the two simple , yet biologically fundamental , redox reactions : the ﬁrst reaction , which is essentially the reverse of photosynthesis in which mitochondria utilize oxygen to enzymatically generate a proton gradient fueling oxidative phosphorylation , and the second reaction , where oxygen in excess is consumed to generate reactive species that induce cellular damage ( 84 , 160 ) . To maximize the ﬁrst reaction and minimize the second , oxygen levels needed to remain under tight control ( 105 ) . It has been suggested that the evolutionary response to this paradox was the creation of cholesterol within membranes to tame oxygen for biological use , a primary feature that linked membranes and metabolism ( 13 , 74 , 97 ) . Cholesterol is a critical component of the plasma membrane . It is necessary for the generation of lipid rafts , which provide a liquid - ordered domain in membranes that create platforms for signaling ( 120 ) . There is debate regarding the coevolution of cholesterol with oxygen , where some suggest that cholesterol came ﬁrst and others suggest that oxygen had to be present initially ( 13 ) . The latter theory is more largely accepted , as numerous steps in the synthesis of cholesterol require molec - ular oxygen ( 97 ) , suggesting that it may have served as an adaptation in membranes to accommodate for rising levels of atmospheric oxygen to allow organisms to survive on land . The link between oxygen , cholesterol , and the drive to eukaryotic evolution is further supported by the fact that cholesterol is abundant in eukaryotic membranes but almost completely absent in prokaryotes and in intracellular organelles thought to have derived from symbiotic relationships ( i . e . , mitochondria ) ( 97 , 135 ) . In addition , plants that generate oxygen through photosynthesis have membrane compositions in which sterols represent a third to half of total lipids ( 47 ) . As a component of the membrane that allowed for adaptation , cholesterol serves a number of functions for eukaryotes . Given the oxygen paradox described above , the initial function of cholesterol was likely to act as a barrier to limit the exposure of the intracellular environment to oxygen and its radicals that could contribute to injury of cellular components , and such a concept is supported by studies in CHO cells showing variances in membrane oxygen gradients relative to cholesterol content ( 74 ) . Other examples include the mammalian lens of the eye , which is a highly structured compartment made up of ﬁber cells that have signiﬁcantly enriched levels of cholesterol . In oxygen perme - ability studies , it has been shown that at near - physiological temperatures lipid extracts from calf lenses with high choles - terol content had the most limited oxygen diffusion relative to other artiﬁcial mixtures with lower cholesterol content ( 159 ) . In such scenarios , the barrier function , to bind up and limit oxygen exposure of the internal cellular environment , is an important feature of cholesterol . The effect was to limit cellular oxygen concentration to curb the toxic generation of free radicals to protect from injury . An intriguing alternative thesis our group and others have proposed advances the concept of the membrane and choles - terol within it acting as a capacitor for energy and metabolism by acting as a storage molecule for cellular substrates that can be utilized under stress conditions . One of the richest sources of organ - level caveolae and cholesterol is the lung , an organ primarily involved in oxygen uptake and exchange , where in response to hypoxia there is an upregulation of membrane cholesterol ( 10 ) . At the cellular level , the highest density of membrane caveolae is in endothelial cells , cells that line luminal surfaces of vessels ( 96 ) that are critical for delivering oxygen . Early evidence in myocardial ischemia - reperfusion injury showed that rampant ultrastructural injury to the plasma membrane ( 100 ) was a likely trigger and interventions such as preconditioning in which sublethal stresses protect from sub - sequent lethal injury resulted from preservation of the mem - brane ultrastructure ( 99 , 100 ) . Our group has shown that Review C186 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m preconditioning results in increased membrane order , choles - terol content , and formation of caveolar microdomains ( 151 ) . In fact , mice genetically engineered to overexpress caveolin in the cardiac myocyte show increased adaptation to stress in - cluding ischemia - reperfusion injury and pressure overload , two processes that have clearly been linked to a mismatch in oxygen availability and proper utilization ( 60 , 151 ) . Studies also show that mice lacking caveolin are more sensitive to cardiovascular stress and disease ( 110 , 111 ) . Recent evidence from our group suggests that caveolae , which are heavily enriched in cholesterol , may form nanocontacts with mitochon - dria ( discussed below ) close to the plasma membrane to more efﬁciently manage metabolism and energy especially in stress adaptation , and this general principle may be conserved evo - lutionarily and broadly applicable to cancer , neurodegenera - tion , and many other diseases that are metabolically dependent ( 44 ) . Studies have shown that in response to stress cholesterol content of the mitochondrion ( a compartment that typically has no cholesterol ) rises , leading to mitochondrial dysfunction ( 2 , 107 , 134 ) , and this is further conﬁrmed in caveolin - knockout animals ( 9 ) . Therefore , it appears that if injury damages mem - brane structures or membranes have limited caveolin content leading to an inability to concentrate cholesterol to temper and regulate metabolism , the end result is uncontrolled delivery and accumulation of cholesterol and presumably oxygen to mitochondria , leading to cellular injury . Hughes et al . have shown in yeast that sterols can act as oxygen sensors , an observation also conﬁrmed in mammalian cells ( 33 , 62 ) , sug - gesting that membrane cholesterol content may be critical not only to limiting the amount of oxygen delivered to the cell but , more importantly , to how a cell physiologically responds and adapts to perturbations in oxygen availability for metabolic processes . With regard to the earlier discussion of membrane mechan - ics and elasticity , how does energy minimization relate to oxygen transport and cholesterol in red blood cells ? First , the membrane bending modulus is a function of membrane com - position , and an increase in membrane cholesterol is known to increase the membrane bending modulus ( 25 ) . This means that it is going to cost more energy to deform a membrane with higher cholesterol content . An effective readout of the mem - brane properties is that the shape of the red blood cell and different values of bending modulus ( depending on the mem - brane composition and cholesterol content ) are indicative of different shapes . A mathematical modeling study related the shape of red blood cells to oxygen transport and showed that shape changes can explain the loss in oxygen ﬂux across the membrane ( 156 ) . Thus relatively simple mechanical models can provide insight into the relationship between cell shape and transport properties . Bioactive Lipids In applying the idea of a capacitor to membrane lipids themselves , a more recent concept has emerged where lipids have been shown to be biologically active . That is , they can be stored in the membrane as dormant , inert structural compo - nents that have the potential to be released and activated upon a speciﬁc cellular cue . We will not discuss in detail the emerging ﬁeld of bioactive lipids ; however , the reader is encouraged to refer to excellent topical reviews in this area ( see Refs . 11 , 29 , 53 , 54 , 106 , although many more examples exist in the literature ) . We will highlight some background in this area and point to selected examples that link to energy and metabolism . The ﬁrst description of “bioactive lipids” can be drawn from the classic description of the cleavage of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) , a phospholipid localized to the plasma membrane , by phospholipase A to form diacylglycerol and inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate , which act as second messengers to activate protein kinase C ( 102 ) . Many more lipid - derived signaling molecules including arachidonic acid ( which can give rise to a multitude of additional lipid mediators through speciﬁc processing by enzymes such as cyclooxygenase , li - poxygenase , and cytochrome P - 450 ) , ceramide , sphingosine - 1 - phosphate , and other lysophospholipids have been identiﬁed ( 11 , 53 , 54 ) . There is some evidence suggesting that lipid rafts may contain and enrich biologically active lipids and precur - sors such as arachidonic acid ( 120 , 122 ) providing a conduit to modulate cell metabolism . These activated metabolites then regulate cellular function under various physiological and pathophysiological settings . It is important to note that oxygen is a key cofactor in many enzymes used to further functionalize arachidonic acid and lipid peroxidation has also been shown to activate many lipids including cholesterol ( 29 ) . Membrane Communication with Intracellular Components There is direct correlation between membrane complexity and variety of lipids as is evident by comparison of the prokaryotic and eukaryotic membranes . The diversity and complexity of eukaryotes are such that , whereas hundreds of lipid species can be attributed to prokaryotes , thousands are associated with the eukaryotes . This enhanced diversity of lipids entails higher membrane complexity and function in the eukaryotes . The rise of double membrane - bound intracellular organelles is one such example . Each organelle such as the ER , endosomes , the Golgi , etc . , is rich in one or more types of unique lipids . The lipid variety dictates association of partic - ular types of proteins and compartmentalizing enzymes and metabolism . This also provides a unique identity to each of the organelles and prevents them from coalescing into one another . The lipid diversity guarantees a much more stable , robust membrane that can withstand changes in the surrounding pH , temperature , and osmolarity ( 148 ) . The remainder of this review focuses on the role of membrane lipid domain commu - nication of plasma membrane with intracellular components ; many of these features are critical for energy and metabolism . Evolution of endomembranes and membrane - endoplasmic and membrane - mitochondrial interactions . It has been widely believed that the endomembrane originated from de novo vesicle formation . The biggest proponents of this theory , Matin and Muller , proposed that eukaryotes evolved because of the symbiosis of archaebacterium and (cid:2) - proteobacterium that are considered ancestors of mitochondria ( 94 ) . This symbiosis was largely driven by hydrogen exchange . According to this hy - pothesis , it was assumed that the evolution of endomembranes took place inside the cytoplasm of archaebacteria after symbi - osis with (cid:2) - proteobacterium that had the genes for fatty acid ester lipid biosynthesis after assimilation into the archae ge - nome . Since (cid:2) - proteobacterium is a eubacterium , it slowly replaced the archae ether - linked lipids with ester - linked lipids . Review C187 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Alternative theories suggest that the endomembranes evolved from the plasma membrane by folding inward , which could have been in the form of invagination , tabulation , or vesicula - tion ( 5 , 20 , 21 , 30 , 38 , 72 ) . In either condition , the plasma membrane subsequently had to be involved in regulating the intracellular environment . Independent of signaling cascades utilizing second messengers and regulator proteins , this was achieved by physical association and communication between the plasma membrane and intracellular compartments . Plasma membrane and endoplasmic reticulum connection . Plasma membranes have been identiﬁed to interact at ubiqui - tous sites with ER in almost all eukaryotes ( 19 ) . These contact sites are believed to have multiple functions ( 87 , 143 , 149 ) , including an evolutionarily conserved role in the regulation of lipid composition and metabolism at the plasma membrane ( 143 , 149 ) . This connection involves mainly calcium signaling processes ( 57 ) regulating fundamental biological processes such as memory , vision , fertilization , muscle contraction , pro - liferation , cell migration , immune response , and transcription . A classical well - known contact site is the spatial arrangement between the ER and the plasma membrane known as transverse tubules ( 136 ) . To trigger muscle contraction , the massive inﬂux of Ca 2 (cid:4) into the cytosol activates myosin movement along actin ﬁlaments in the sarcomeres . This Ca 2 (cid:4) inﬂux is achieved by the opening of voltage - gated plasma membrane Ca 2 (cid:4) chan - nels , such as the dihydropyridine receptor , and the synchro - nized opening of the main sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca 2 (cid:4) chan - nel , the ryanodine receptor ( 12 , 57 ) . A physical coupling at the contact sites between the plasma membrane and the sarcoplas - mic reticulum ensures this synchronized coordination . ER has one of the most elaborate network of membranes inside the cells . This network is important for regulating cross talk between the ER and other organelles and the plasma mem - brane . The ER - plasma membrane junction , apart from under - going mutual exchange of lipids and ions , can also regulate signaling , cellular architecture , plasma membrane domain or - ganization , and ER shape . This is predominantly found in yeast but has also been described in immune cells , insect photore - ceptors , plant cells , and neurons ( 58 ) . At the contact site , ER adjacent to the plasma membrane has been shown to be devoid of ribosomes ( 41 , 43 ) . The distance between ER and plasma membrane has been measured as (cid:6) 30 nm in yeast , but in mammalian cells it has been shown to be as close as 10 nm ( 119 ) . This denotes that the spacing between the two organelles is regulated . Plasma membrane and mitochondrial connection . The plasma membrane has been reported to be in close contact with mitochondria in several mammalian cell types . For instance , in HeLa cells , (cid:6) 10 % of the plasma membrane is covered with mitochondria ( 46 ) . It is not clear whether plasma membrane directly comes in contact with mitochondria , and this area is still under intensive investigation . Mitochondria appear to be connected indirectly to the plasma membrane in rat leukemia cells and cardiomyocytes through an ER stack , a connection important for calcium signaling ( 26 ) . A recent proteomic study suggests that the plasma membrane connexin Cx32 , a struc - tural subunit of gap junctions , interacts with mitochondrial proteins in murine hepatocytes ( 42 ) . However , in an interesting recent ﬁnding , the ﬁrst molecular and functional characteriza - tion of a mitochondrion - plasma membrane contact site was reported in yeast ( 77 , 83 ) . Electron tomography revealed direct contacts of mitochondria and invaginations of the plasma membrane without participation of the ER ( 77 ) . Stomatin - like protein 2 ( SLP - 2 ) , which is expressed predominantly in mito - chondria , belongs to the stomatin - prohibitin - ﬂotillin - HﬂC / K superfamily ( 23 , 27 , 76 , 146 ) . These proteins are involved in organizing the cardiolipin - rich microdomains and regulate mi - tochondrial function as well as biogenesis . Studies show that there are two populations of SLP - 2 , one over the mitochondria and the other on the plasma membrane . During T - cell activa - tion , both populations coalesce together at the immunological synapse . SLP - 2 was shown to compartmentalize mitochondria as well as plasma membrane into functional domains . Further - more , it has also been shown that there is an exchange of membrane between plasma membrane and mitochondria in T cells ( 24 , 129 ) . Our group and others have recently shown in heart and cardiac myocytes that caveolae and mitochondria are in close proximity and upon stress these microdomains form a physical interaction that may be dependent on G protein activation ( 44 , 157 ) and may speciﬁcally target such mitochon - dria for posttranslational modiﬁcation and regulation ( 144 ) . Such data suggest that membrane associations with intracellu - lar compartments may involve both physical and signal - regu - lated processes . Conclusion Was life spontaneous or predesigned ? This is a debate that has burned for eons and is likely never to be fully extinguished . A key aspect of the cell that propelled life to evolve and grow into more complex cells and ultimately multicellular organisms was the plasma membrane . It evolved from serving a basic function as a barrier to a cellular component critical to main - taining and regulating cellular physiology and metabolism . A unique feature of the eukaryotic membrane , which includes lipids such as cholesterol , allowed for this unique transition . Thus , the plasma membrane becomes a critical feature of this most basic deﬁnition of what it means to be alive . Given the diversity of membrane lipids , their protein composition , and their primacy in exposure and response to the external envi - ronment and stressors , it is likely that modulators of membrane biology may be a key and largely overlooked target in devel - oping novel therapeutics for a variety of diseases . GRANTS This work was supported by National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute Grants HL - 091071 ( H . H . Patel ) , HL - 107200 ( H . H . Patel ) , and HL - 066941 ( H . H . Patel ) , and VA Merit BX001963 ( H . H . Patel ) . DISCLOSURES No conﬂicts of interest , ﬁnancial or otherwise , are declared by the author ( s ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Author contributions : S . R . , A . K . , P . R . , and H . H . P . drafted manuscript ; S . R . , A . K . , A . R . B . , P . R . , and H . H . P . edited and revised manuscript ; S . R . , A . K . , A . R . B . , P . R . , and H . H . P . approved ﬁnal version of manuscript ; A . R . B . , P . R . , and H . H . P . prepared ﬁgures . REFERENCES 1 . Bae MK , Jeong DK , Park NS , Lee CH , Cho BH , Jang HO , Yun I . The effect of ethanol on the physical properties of neuronal membranes . Mol Cells 19 : 356 – 364 , 2005 . 2 . Baggetto LG , Clottes E , Vial C . Low mitochondrial proton leak due to high membrane cholesterol content and cytosolic creatine kinase as two Review C188 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m features of the deviant bioenergetics of Ehrlich and AS30 - D tumor cells . Cancer Res 52 : 4935 – 4941 , 1992 . 3 . Banerjee T , Taylor M , Jobling MG , Burress H , Yang Z , Serrano A , Holmes RK , Tatulian SA , Teter K . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 acts as an allosteric activator for the folded but not disordered cholera toxin A1 polypeptide . Mol Microbiol 94 : 898 – 912 , 2014 . 4 . Bissig C , Gruenberg J . Lipid sorting and multivesicular endosome biogenesis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5 : a016816 , 2013 . 5 . Blobel G . Intracellular protein topogenesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77 : 1496 – 1500 , 1980 . 6 . Bogdanov M , Dowhan W . Lipid - assisted protein folding . J Biol Chem 274 : 36827 – 36830 , 1999 . 7 . Bogdanov M , Dowhan W . Phospholipid - assisted protein folding : phos - phatidylethanolamine is required at a late step of the conformational maturation of the polytopic membrane protein lactose permease . EMBO J 17 : 5255 – 5264 , 1998 . 8 . Bogdanov M , Umeda M , Dowhan W . Phospholipid - assisted refolding of an integral membrane protein . Minimum structural features for phos - phatidylethanolamine to act as a molecular chaperone . J Biol Chem 274 : 12339 – 12345 , 1999 . 9 . Bosch M , Mari M , Herms A , Fernandez A , Fajardo A , Kassan A , Giralt A , Colell A , Balgoma D , Barbero E , Gonzalez - Moreno E , Matias N , Tebar F , Balsinde J , Camps M , Enrich C , Gross SP , Garcia - Ruiz C , Perez - Navarro E , Fernandez - Checa JC , Pol A . Caveolin - 1 deﬁciency causes cholesterol - dependent mitochondrial dys - function and apoptotic susceptibility . Curr Biol 21 : 681 – 686 , 2011 . 10 . Botto L , Beretta E , Daffara R , Miserocchi G , Palestini P . Biochemical and morphological changes in endothelial cells in response to hypoxic interstitial edema . Respir Res 7 : 7 , 2006 . 11 . Brash AR . Arachidonic acid as a bioactive molecule . J Clin Invest 107 : 1339 – 1345 , 2001 . 12 . Brette F , Orchard C . Resurgence of cardiac t - tubule research . Physiol - ogy ( Bethesda ) 22 : 167 – 173 , 2007 . 13 . Brown AJ , Galea AM . Cholesterol as an evolutionary response to living with oxygen . Evolution 64 : 2179 – 2183 , 2010 . 14 . Brown DA , London E . Structure of detergent - resistant membrane do - mains : does phase separation occur in biological membranes ? Biochem Biophys Res Commun 240 : 1 – 7 , 1997 . 15 . Brown DA , Rose JK . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell sur - face . Cell 68 : 533 – 544 , 1992 . 16 . Brown JR , Doolittle WF . Root of the universal tree of life based on ancient aminoacyl - tRNA synthetase gene duplications . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92 : 2441 – 2445 , 1995 . 17 . Canham PB . The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the biconcave shape of the human red blood cell . J Theor Biol 26 : 61 – 81 , 1970 . 18 . Cao TB , Saier MH Jr . The general protein secretory pathway : phylo - genetic analyses leading to evolutionary conclusions . Biochim Biophys Acta 1609 : 115 – 125 , 2003 . 19 . Carrasco S , Meyer T . STIM proteins and the endoplasmic reticulum - plasma membrane junctions . Annu Rev Biochem 80 : 973 – 1000 , 2011 . 20 . Cavalier - Smith T . The origin of cells : a symbiosis between genes , catalysts , and membranes . Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 52 : 805 – 824 , 1987 . 21 . Cavalier - Smith T . The phagotrophic origin of eukaryotes and phyloge - netic classiﬁcation of Protozoa . Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 52 : 297 – 354 , 2002 . 22 . Chandler D . Interfaces and the driving force of hydrophobic assembly . Nature 437 : 640 – 647 , 2005 . 23 . Chevallet M , Lescuyer P , Diemer H , van Dorsselaer A , Leize - Wagner E , Rabilloud T . Alterations of the mitochondrial proteome caused by the absence of mitochondrial DNA : a proteomic view . Elec - trophoresis 27 : 1574 – 1583 , 2006 . 24 . Christie DA , Kirchhof MG , Vardhana S , Dustin ML , Madrenas J . Mitochondrial and plasma membrane pools of stomatin - like protein 2 coalesce at the immunological synapse during T cell activation . PLoS One 7 : e37144 , 2012 . 24a . Cooper GM . The Cell : A Molecular Approach . Sunderland , MA : Sinauer , 2000 . 25 . Cooper RA . Inﬂuence of increased membrane cholesterol on membrane ﬂuidity and cell function in human red blood cells . J Supramol Struct 8 : 413 – 430 , 1978 . 26 . Csordas G , Varnai P , Golenar T , Roy S , Purkins G , Schneider TG , Balla T , Hajnoczky G . Imaging interorganelle contacts and local cal - cium dynamics at the ER - mitochondrial interface . Mol Cell 39 : 121 – 132 , 2010 . 27 . Da Cruz S , Xenarios I , Langridge J , Vilbois F , Parone PA , Martinou JC . Proteomic analysis of the mouse liver mitochondrial inner mem - brane . J Biol Chem 278 : 41566 – 41571 , 2003 . 28 . Daleke DL . Regulation of transbilayer plasma membrane phospholipid asymmetry . J Lipid Res 44 : 233 – 242 , 2003 . 29 . Davies SS , Guo L . Lipid peroxidation generates biologically active phospholipids including oxidatively N - modiﬁed phospholipids . Chem Phys Lipids 181 : 1 – 33 , 2014 . 30 . De Duve C . Evolution of the peroxisome . Ann NY Acad Sci 168 : 369 – 381 , 1969 . 31 . Deamer DW . Origins of life : how leaky were primitive cells ? Nature 454 : 37 – 38 , 2008 . 32 . Debnath D , Bhattacharya S , Chakrabarti A . Phospholipid assisted folding of a denatured heme protein : effect of phosphatidylethanolamine . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 301 : 979 – 984 , 2003 . 33 . DeBose - Boyd RA . Feedback regulation of cholesterol synthesis : sterol - accelerated ubiquitination and degradation of HMG CoA reductase . Cell Res 18 : 609 – 621 , 2008 . 34 . Demchenko AP , Yesylevskyy SO . Nanoscopic description of biomem - brane electrostatics : results of molecular dynamics simulations and ﬂu - orescence probing . Chem Phys Lipids 160 : 63 – 84 , 2009 . 35 . Derenyi I , Julicher F , Prost J . Formation and interaction of membrane tubes . Phys Rev Lett 88 : 238101 , 2002 . 36 . Deserno M . Fluid lipid membranes : from differential geometry to curvature stresses . Chem Phys Lipids 185 : 11 – 45 , 2015 . 37 . Deuling HJ , Helfrich W . Red blood cell shapes as explained on the basis of curvature elasticity . Biophys J 16 : 861 – 868 , 1976 . 38 . Devos D , Dokudovskaya S , Alber F , Williams R , Chait BT , Sali A , Rout MP . Components of coated vesicles and nuclear pore complexes share a common molecular architecture . PLoS Biol 2 : e380 , 2004 . 39 . Evans EA . Bending resistance and chemically induced moments in membrane bilayers . Biophys J 14 : 923 – 931 , 1974 . 40 . Fischer TM . Is the surface area of the red cell membrane skeleton locally conserved ? Biophys J 61 : 298 – 305 , 1992 . 41 . Flucher BE . Structural analysis of muscle development : transverse tubules , sarcoplasmic reticulum , and the triad . Dev Biol 154 : 245 – 260 , 1992 . 42 . Fowler SL , Akins M , Zhou H , Figeys D , Bennett SA . The liver connexin32 interactome is a novel plasma membrane - mitochondrial signaling nexus . J Proteome Res 12 : 2597 – 2610 , 2013 . 43 . Franzini - Armstrong C , Jorgensen AO . Structure and development of E - C coupling units in skeletal muscle . Annu Rev Physiol 56 : 509 – 534 , 1994 . 44 . Fridolfsson HN , Kawaraguchi Y , Ali SS , Panneerselvam M , Niesman IR , Finley JC , Kellerhals SE , Migita MY , Okada H , Moreno AL , Jennings M , Kidd MW , Bonds JA , Balijepalli RC , Ross RS , Patel PM , Miyanohara A , Chen Q , Lesnefsky EJ , Head BP , Roth DM , Insel PA , Patel HH . Mitochondria - localized caveolin in adaptation to cellular stress and injury . FASEB J 26 : 4637 – 4649 , 2012 . 45 . Fridolfsson HN , Patel HH . Caveolin and caveolae in age associated cardiovascular disease . J Geriatr Cardiol 10 : 66 – 74 , 2013 . 46 . Frieden M , Arnaudeau S , Castelbou C , Demaurex N . Subplasmalem - mal mitochondria modulate the activity of plasma membrane Ca 2 (cid:4) - ATPases . J Biol Chem 280 : 43198 – 43208 , 2005 . 47 . Furt F , Simon - Plas F , Mongrand S . Lipids of the plant plasma membrane . Plant Plasma Membr 19 : 3 – 30 , 2011 . 48 . Garrigues A , Escargueil AE , Orlowski S . The multidrug transporter , P - glycoprotein , actively mediates cholesterol redistribution in the cell membrane . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 10347 – 10352 , 2002 . 49 . Gattinger A , Schloter M , Munch JC . Phospholipid etherlipid and phospholipid fatty acid ﬁngerprints in selected euryarchaeotal monocul - tures for taxonomic proﬁling . FEMS Microbiol Lett 213 : 133 – 139 , 2002 . 51 . Grafmuller A , Shillcock J , Lipowsky R . The fusion of membranes and vesicles : pathway and energy barriers from dissipative particle dynamics . Biophys J 96 : 2658 – 2675 , 2009 . 52 . Grafmuller A , Shillcock J , Lipowsky R . Pathway of membrane fusion with two tension - dependent energy barriers . Phys Rev Lett 98 : 218101 , 2007 . Review C189 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 53 . Grzelczyk A , Gendaszewska - Darmach E . Novel bioactive glycerol - based lysophospholipids : new data—new insight into their function . Biochimie 95 : 667 – 679 , 2013 . 54 . Hannun YA , Obeid LM . Principles of bioactive lipid signalling : lessons from sphingolipids . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 139 – 150 , 2008 . 55 . Head BP , Peart JN , Panneerselvam M , Yokoyama T , Pearn ML , Niesman IR , Bonds JA , Schilling JM , Miyanohara A , Headrick J , Ali SS , Roth DM , Patel PM , Patel HH . Loss of caveolin - 1 accelerates neurodegeneration and aging . PLoS One 5 : e15697 , 2010 . 56 . Helfrich W . Elastic properties of lipid bilayers : theory and possible experiments . Z Naturforsch C 28 : 693 – 703 , 1973 . 57 . Helle SC , Kanfer G , Kolar K , Lang A , Michel AH , Kornmann B . Organization and function of membrane contact sites . Biochim Biophys Acta 1833 : 2526 – 2541 , 2013 . 58 . Henkart M , Landis DM , Reese TS . Similarity of junctions between plasma membranes and endoplasmic reticulum in muscle and neurons . J Cell Biol 70 : 338 – 347 , 1976 . 59 . Hilario E , Gogarten JP . The prokaryote - to - eukaryote transition re - ﬂected in the evolution of the V / F / A - ATPase catalytic and proteolipid subunits . J Mol Evol 46 : 703 – 715 , 1998 . 60 . Horikawa YT , Panneerselvam M , Kawaraguchi Y , Tsutsumi YM , Ali SS , Balijepalli RC , Murray F , Head BP , Niesman IR , Rieg T , Vallon V , Insel PA , Patel HH , Roth DM . Cardiac - speciﬁc overexpres - sion of caveolin - 3 attenuates cardiac hypertrophy and increases natri - uretic peptide expression and signaling . J Am Coll Cardiol 57 : 2273 – 2283 , 2011 . 61 . Huber R , Eder W , Heldwein S , Wanner G , Huber H , Rachel R , Stetter KO . Thermocrinis ruber gen . nov . , sp . nov . , a pink - ﬁlament - forming hyperthermophilic bacterium isolated from Yellowstone Na - tional Park . Appl Environ Microbiol 64 : 3576 – 3583 , 1998 . 62 . Hughes AL , Todd BL , Espenshade PJ . SREBP pathway responds to sterols and functions as an oxygen sensor in ﬁssion yeast . Cell 120 : 831 – 842 , 2005 . 63 . Igbavboa U , Avdulov NA , Chochina SV , Wood WG . Transbilayer distribution of cholesterol is modiﬁed in brain synaptic plasma mem - branes of knockout mice deﬁcient in the low - density lipoprotein receptor , apolipoprotein E , or both proteins . J Neurochem 69 : 1661 – 1667 , 1997 . 64 . Igbavboa U , Avdulov NA , Schroeder F , Wood WG . Increasing age alters transbilayer ﬂuidity and cholesterol asymmetry in synaptic plasma membranes of mice . J Neurochem 66 : 1717 – 1725 , 1996 . 65 . Igbavboa U , Eckert GP , Malo TM , Studniski AE , Johnson LN , Yamamoto N , Kobayashi M , Fujita SC , Appel TR , Muller WE , Wood WG , Yanagisawa K . Murine synaptosomal lipid raft protein and lipid composition are altered by expression of human apoE 3 and 4 and by increasing age . J Neurol Sci 229 – 230 : 225 – 232 , 2005 . 66 . Igbavboa U , Hamilton J , Kim HY , Sun GY , Wood WG . A new role for apolipoprotein E : modulating transport of polyunsaturated phospho - lipid molecular species in synaptic plasma membranes . J Neurochem 80 : 255 – 261 , 2002 . 67 . Igbavboa U , Sun GY , Weisman GA , He Y , Wood WG . Amyloid beta - protein stimulates trafﬁcking of cholesterol and caveolin - 1 from the plasma membrane to the Golgi complex in mouse primary astrocytes . Neuroscience 162 : 328 – 338 , 2009 . 68 . Iglic A . A possible mechanism determining the stability of spiculated red blood cells . J Biomech 30 : 35 – 40 , 1997 . 69 . Inoue T , Tsai B . How viruses use the endoplasmic reticulum for entry , replication , and assembly . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5 : a013250 , 2013 . 70 . Jaric M , Seifert U , Wintz W , Wortis M . Vesicular instabilities : the prolate - to - oblate transition and other shape instabilities of ﬂuid bilayer membranes . Phys Rev E Stat Phys Plasmas Fluids Relat Interdiscip Topics 52 : 6623 – 6634 , 1995 . 71 . Jekely G . Did the last common ancestor have a biological membrane ? Biol Direct 1 : 35 , 2006 . 72 . Jekely G . Small GTPases and the evolution of the eukaryotic cell . Bioessays 25 : 1129 – 1138 , 2003 . 73 . Kates M , Yengoyan LS , Sastry PS . A diether analog of phosphatidyl glycerophosphate in Halobacterium cutirubrum . Biochim Biophys Acta 98 : 252 – 268 , 1965 . 74 . Khan N , Shen J , Chang TY , Chang CC , Fung PC , Grinberg O , Demidenko E , Swartz H . Plasma membrane cholesterol : a possible barrier to intracellular oxygen in normal and mutant CHO cells defective in cholesterol metabolism . Biochemistry 42 : 23 – 29 , 2003 . 75 . Kiessling V , Wan C , Tamm LK . Domain coupling in asymmetric lipid bilayers . Biochim Biophys Acta 1788 : 64 – 71 , 2009 . 76 . Kirchhof MG , Chau LA , Lemke CD , Vardhana S , Darlington PJ , Marquez ME , Taylor R , Rizkalla K , Blanca I , Dustin ML , Madrenas J . Modulation of T cell activation by stomatin - like protein 2 . J Immunol 181 : 1927 – 1936 , 2008 . 77 . Klecker T , Scholz D , Fortsch J , Westermann B . The yeast cell cortical protein Num1 integrates mitochondrial dynamics into cellular architec - ture . J Cell Sci 126 : 2924 – 2930 , 2013 . 78 . Koga Y . Early evolution of membrane lipids : how did the lipid divide occur ? J Mol Evol 72 : 274 – 282 , 2011 . 79 . Koga Y , Kyuragi T , Nishihara M , Sone N . Did archaeal and bacterial cells arise independently from noncellular precursors ? A hypothesis stating that the advent of membrane phospholipid with enantiomeric glycerophosphate backbones caused the separation of the two lines of descent . J Mol Evol 46 : 54 – 63 , 1998 . 80 . Koga Y , Morii H . Biosynthesis of ether - type polar lipids in archaea and evolutionary considerations . Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 71 : 97 – 120 , 2007 . 81 . Koonin EV . Comparative genomics , minimal gene - sets and the last universal common ancestor . Nat Rev Microbiol 1 : 127 – 136 , 2003 . 82 . Kurzchalia TV , Dupree P , Parton RG , Kellner R , Virta H , Lehnert M , Simons K . VIP21 , a 21 - kD membrane protein is an integral compo - nent of trans - Golgi - network - derived transport vesicles . J Cell Biol 118 : 1003 – 1014 , 1992 . 83 . Lackner LL , Ping H , Graef M , Murley A , Nunnari J . Endoplasmic reticulum - associated mitochondria - cortex tether functions in the distri - bution and inheritance of mitochondria . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : E458 – E467 , 2013 . 84 . Lane N . Oxygen : The Molecule That Made the World . Oxford , UK : Oxford Univ . Press , 2002 . 85 . Langworthy TA , Smith PF , Mayberry WR . Lipids of Thermoplasma acidophilum . J Bacteriol 112 : 1193 – 1200 , 1972 . 86 . Lenz O , Schmid F . Structure of symmetric and asymmetric “ripple” phases in lipid bilayers . Phys Rev Lett 98 : 058104 , 2007 . 87 . Levine T , Loewen C . Inter - organelle membrane contact sites : through a glass , darkly . Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 : 371 – 378 , 2006 . 88 . Lingwood D , Simons K . Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizing principle . Science 327 : 46 – 50 , 2010 . 89 . Lipowsky R . Spontaneous tubulation of membranes and vesicles reveals membrane tension generated by spontaneous curvature . Faraday Discuss 161 : 305 – 331 , 2013 . 90 . Liu P , Anderson RG . Compartmentalized production of ceramide at the cell surface . J Biol Chem 270 : 27179 – 27185 , 1995 . 91 . Mandyam CD , Schilling JM , Cui W , Egawa J , Niesman IR , Keller - hals SE , Staples MC , Busija AR , Risbrough VB , Posadas E , Grog - man GC , Chang JW , Roth DM , Patel PM , Patel HH , Head BP . Neuron - targeted caveolin - 1 improves molecular signaling , plasticity , and behavior dependent on the hippocampus in adult and aged mice . Biol Psychiatry ( October 7 , 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biopsych . 2015 . 09 . 020 . 92 . Mansy SS , Schrum JP , Krishnamurthy M , Tobe S , Treco DA , Szostak JW . Template - directed synthesis of a genetic polymer in a model protocell . Nature 454 : 122 – 125 , 2008 . 93 . Marrink SJ , Mark AE . The mechanism of vesicle fusion as revealed by molecular dynamics simulations . J Am Chem Soc 125 : 11144 – 11145 , 2003 . 94 . Martin W , Muller M . The hydrogen hypothesis for the ﬁrst eukaryote . Nature 392 : 37 – 41 , 1998 . 95 . Martin W , Russell MJ . On the origins of cells : a hypothesis for the evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic prokaryotes , and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells . Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 358 : 59 – 83 , 2003 . 96 . Massey KA , Schnitzer JE . Caveolae and cancer . Recent Results Cancer Res 180 : 217 – 231 , 2010 . 97 . Mouritsen OG , Zuckermann MJ . What’s so special about cholesterol ? Lipids 39 : 1101 – 1113 , 2004 . 98 . Mulkidjanian AY , Galperin MY , Koonin EV . Co - evolution of primor - dial membranes and membrane proteins . Trends Biochem Sci 34 : 206 – 215 , 2009 . 99 . Murry CE , Jennings RB , Reimer KA . Preconditioning with ischemia : a delay of lethal cell injury in ischemic myocardium . Circulation 74 : 1124 – 1136 , 1986 . 100 . Murry CE , Richard VJ , Reimer KA , Jennings RB . Ischemic precon - ditioning slows energy metabolism and delays ultrastructural damage during a sustained ischemic episode . Circ Res 66 : 913 – 931 , 1990 . Review C190 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 101 . Nelson P , Powers T , Seifert U . Dynamical theory of the Pearling instability in cylindrical vesicles . Phys Rev Lett 74 : 3384 – 3387 , 1995 . 102 . Nishizuka Y . Intracellular signaling by hydrolysis of phospholipids and activation of protein kinase C . Science 258 : 607 – 614 , 1992 . 103 . Palade GE . Fine structure of blood capillaries . J Appl Phys 24 : 1424 , 1953 . 104 . Palade GE , Bruns RR . Structural modulations of plasmalemmal vesi - cles . J Cell Biol 37 : 633 – 649 , 1968 . 105 . Papa S , Skulachev VP . Reactive oxygen species , mitochondria , apopto - sis and aging . Mol Cell Biochem 174 : 305 – 319 , 1997 . 106 . Papackova Z , Cahova M . Fatty acid signaling : the new function of intracellular lipases . Int J Mol Sci 16 : 3831 – 3855 , 2015 . 107 . Parlo RA , Coleman PS . Enhanced rate of citrate export from choles - terol - rich hepatoma mitochondria . The truncated Krebs cycle and other metabolic ramiﬁcations of mitochondrial membrane cholesterol . J Biol Chem 259 : 9997 – 10003 , 1984 . 108 . Parton RG , Molero JC , Floetenmeyer M , Green KM , James DE . Characterization of a distinct plasma membrane macrodomain in differ - entiated adipocytes . J Biol Chem 277 : 46769 – 46778 , 2002 . 109 . Parton RG , Way M , Zorzi N , Stang E . Caveolin - 3 associates with developing T - tubules during muscle differentiation . J Cell Biol 136 : 137 – 154 , 1997 . 110 . Patel HH , Insel PA . Lipid rafts and caveolae and their role in compart - mentation of redox signaling . Antioxid Redox Signal 11 : 1357 – 1372 , 2009 . 111 . Patel HH , Murray F , Insel PA . Caveolae as organizers of pharmaco - logically relevant signal transduction molecules . Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 48 : 359 – 391 , 2008 . 112 . Payne JL , Boyer AG , Brown JH , Finnegan S , Kowalewski M , Krause RA Jr , Lyons SK , McClain CR , McShea DW , Novack - Gottshall PM , Smith FA , Stempien JA , Wang SC . Two - phase increase in the maxi - mum size of life over 35 billion years reﬂects biological innovation and environmental opportunity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 24 – 27 , 2009 . 113 . Payne JL , McClain CR , Boyer AG , Brown JH , Finnegan S , Kow - alewski M , Krause RA Jr , Lyons SK , McShea DW , Novack - Gottshall PM , Smith FA , Spaeth P , Stempien JA , Wang SC . The evolutionary consequences of oxygenic photosynthesis : a body size perspective . Pho - tosynth Res 107 : 37 – 57 , 2011 . 114 . Peart JN , Pepe S , Reichelt ME , Beckett N , See Hoe L , Ozberk V , Niesman IR , Patel HH , Headrick JP . Dysfunctional survival - signaling and stress - intolerance in aged murine and human myocardium . Exp Gerontol 50 : 72 – 81 , 2014 . 115 . Pelkmans L , Burli T , Zerial M , Helenius A . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunctional transport and sorting devices in endocytic membrane trafﬁc . Cell 118 : 767 – 780 , 2004 . 116 . Pelkmans L , Helenius A . Endocytosis via caveolae . Trafﬁc 3 : 311 – 320 , 2002 . 117 . Pereto J , Lopez - Garcia P , Moreira D . Ancestral lipid biosynthesis and early membrane evolution . Trends Biochem Sci 29 : 469 – 477 , 2004 . 118 . Philips R , Kondev J , Theriot J , Orme N , Garcia H . Physical Biology of the Cell . New York : Garland Science , 2009 . 119 . Pichler H , Gaigg B , Hrastnik C , Achleitner G , Kohlwein SD , Zellnig G , Perktold A , Daum G . A subfraction of the yeast endoplasmic reticulum associates with the plasma membrane and has a high capacity to synthesize lipids . Eur J Biochem 268 : 2351 – 2361 , 2001 . 120 . Pike LJ . Lipid rafts : bringing order to chaos . J Lipid Res 44 : 655 – 667 , 2003 . 121 . Pike LJ , Casey L . Localization and turnover of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in caveolin - enriched membrane domains . J Biol Chem 271 : 26453 – 26456 , 1996 . 122 . Pike LJ , Han X , Chung KN , Gross RW . Lipid rafts are enriched in arachidonic acid and plasmenylethanolamine and their composition is independent of caveolin - 1 expression : a quantitative electrospray ioniza - tion / mass spectrometric analysis . Biochemistry 41 : 2075 – 2088 , 2002 . 123 . Rajendran L , Simons K . Lipid rafts and membrane dynamics . J Cell Sci 118 : 1099 – 1102 , 2005 . 124 . Rangamani P , Benjamini A , Agrawal A , Smit B , Steigmann DJ , Oster G . Small scale membrane mechanics . Biomech Model Mechano - biol 13 : 697 – 711 , 2014 . 125 . Rao AM , Igbavboa U , Semotuk M , Schroeder F , Wood WG . Kinetics and size of cholesterol lateral domains in synaptosomal membranes : modiﬁcation by sphingomyelinase and effects on membrane enzyme activity . Neurochem Int 23 : 45 – 52 , 1993 . 126 . Raucher D , Sheetz MP . Characteristics of a membrane reservoir buff - ering membrane tension . Biophys J 77 : 1992 – 2002 , 1999 . 127 . Ray S , Taylor M , Banerjee T , Tatulian SA , Teter K . Lipid rafts alter the stability and activity of the cholera toxin A1 subunit . J Biol Chem 287 : 30395 – 30405 , 2012 . 128 . Ray S , Taylor M , Burlingame M , Tatulian SA , Teter K . Modulation of toxin stability by 4 - phenylbutyric acid and negatively charged phos - pholipids . PLoS One 6 : e23692 , 2011 . 129 . Rezaul K , Wu L , Mayya V , Hwang SI , Han D . A systematic charac - terization of mitochondrial proteome from human T leukemia cells . Mol Cell Proteomics 4 : 169 – 181 , 2005 . 130 . Rosen GM . Free Radicals : Biology and Detection by Spin Trapping . New York : Oxford Univ . Press , 1999 . 131 . Rossy J , Ma Y , Gaus K . The organisation of the cell membrane : do proteins rule lipids ? Curr Opin Chem Biol 20C : 54 – 59 , 2014 . 132 . Rothberg KG , Heuser JE , Donzell WC , Ying YS , Glenney JR , Anderson RG . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 : 673 – 682 , 1992 . 133 . Rothman JE , Lenard J . Membrane asymmetry . Science 195 : 743 – 753 , 1977 . 134 . Rouslin W , MacGee J , Wesselman AR , Adams RJ , Gupte S . Canine myocardial ischemia : increased mitochondrial cholesterol , a marker of mitochondrial membrane injury . J Mol Cell Cardiol 12 : 1475 – 1482 , 1980 . 135 . Saenz JP , Sezgin E , Schwille P , Simons K . Functional convergence of hopanoids and sterols in membrane ordering . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 14236 – 14240 , 2012 . 136 . Sandow A . Excitation - contraction coupling in muscular response . Yale J Biol Med 25 : 176 – 201 , 1952 . 137 . Sarnataro D , Campana V , Paladino S , Stornaiuolo M , Nitsch L , Zurzolo C . PrP C association with lipid rafts in the early secretory pathway stabilizes its cellular conformation . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 4031 – 4042 , 2004 . 138 . Schroeder F , Morrison WJ , Gorka C , Wood WG . Transbilayer effects of ethanol on ﬂuidity of brain membrane leaﬂets . Biochim Biophys Acta 946 : 85 – 94 , 1988 . 139 . Seifert U , Berndl K , Lipowsky R . Shape transformations of vesicles : phase diagram for spontaneous - curvature and bilayer - coupling models . Phys Rev A 44 : 1182 – 1202 , 1991 . 140 . Simons K , Ikonen E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 : 569 – 572 , 1997 . 141 . Simons K , Toomre D . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 1 : 31 – 39 , 2000 . 142 . Slotte JP , Hedstrom G , Rannstrom S , Ekman S . Effects of sphingo - myelin degradation on cell cholesterol oxidizability and steady - state distribution between the cell surface and the cell interior . Biochim Biophys Acta 985 : 90 – 96 , 1989 . 143 . Stefan CJ , Manford AG , Emr SD . ER - PM connections : sites of information transfer and inter - organelle communication . Curr Opin Cell Biol 25 : 434 – 442 , 2013 . 144 . Sun J , Nguyen T , Aponte AM , Menazza S , Kohr MJ , Roth DM , Patel HH , Murphy E , Steenbergen C . Ischaemic preconditioning preferen - tially increases protein S - nitrosylation in subsarcolemmal mitochondria . Cardiovasc Res 106 : 227 – 236 , 2015 . 145 . Szostak JW , Bartel DP , Luisi PL . Synthesizing life . Nature 409 : 387 – 390 , 2001 . 146 . Taylor SW , Fahy E , Zhang B , Glenn GM , Warnock DE , Wiley S , Murphy AN , Gaucher SP , Capaldi RA , Gibson BW , Ghosh SS . Characterization of the human heart mitochondrial proteome . Nat Bio - technol 21 : 281 – 286 , 2003 . 147 . Teter K , Jobling MG , Sentz D , Holmes RK . The cholera toxin A1 3 subdomain is essential for interaction with ADP - ribosylation factor 6 and full toxic activity but is not required for translocation from the endoplas - mic reticulum to the cytosol . Infect Immun 74 : 2259 – 2267 , 2006 . 148 . Thomas JA , Rana FR . The inﬂuence of environmental conditions , lipid composition , and phase behavior on the origin of cell membranes . Orig Life Evol Biosph 37 : 267 – 285 , 2007 . 149 . Toulmay A , Prinz WA . Lipid transfer and signaling at organelle contact sites : the tip of the iceberg . Curr Opin Cell Biol 23 : 458 – 463 , 2011 . 150 . Tristram - Nagle S , Zhang R , Suter RM , Worthington CR , Sun WJ , Nagle JF . Measurement of chain tilt angle in fully hydrated bilayers of gel phase lecithins . Biophys J 64 : 1097 – 1109 , 1993 . 151 . Tsutsumi YM , Horikawa YT , Jennings MM , Kidd MW , Niesman IR , Yokoyama U , Head BP , Hagiwara Y , Ishikawa Y , Miyanohara A , Review C191 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Patel PM , Insel PA , Patel HH , Roth DM . Cardiac - speciﬁc overexpres - sion of caveolin - 3 induces endogenous cardiac protection by mimicking ischemic preconditioning . Circulation 118 : 1979 – 1988 , 2008 . 152 . van Meer G , Simons K . Lipid polarity and sorting in epithelial cells . J Cell Biochem 36 : 51 – 58 , 1988 . 153 . Vinten J , Johnsen AH , Roepstorff P , Harpoth J , Tranum - Jensen J . Identiﬁcation of a major protein on the cytosolic face of caveolae . Biochim Biophys Acta 1717 : 34 – 40 , 2005 . 154 . Vinten J , Voldstedlund M , Clausen H , Christiansen K , Carlsen J , Tranum - Jensen J . A 60 - kDa protein abundant in adipocyte caveolae . Cell Tissue Res 305 : 99 – 106 , 2001 . 155 . Wachtershauser G . From pre - cells to Eukarya—a tale of two lipids . Mol Microbiol 47 : 13 – 22 , 2003 . 156 . Wang CH , Popel AS . Effect of red blood cell shape on oxygen transport in capillaries . Math Biosci 116 : 89 – 110 , 1993 . 157 . Wang J , Schilling JM , Niesman IR , Headrick JP , Finley JC , Kwan E , Patel PM , Head BP , Roth DM , Yue Y , Patel HH . Cardioprotective trafﬁcking of caveolin to mitochondria is Gi - protein dependent . Anes - thesiology 121 : 538 – 548 , 2014 . 158 . Watkins EB , Miller CE , Majewski J , Kuhl TL . Membrane texture induced by speciﬁc protein binding and receptor clustering : active roles for lipids in cellular function . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 : 6975 – 6980 , 2011 . 159 . Widomska J , Raguz M , Subczynski WK . Oxygen permeability of the lipid bilayer membrane made of calf lens lipids . Biochim Biophys Acta 1768 : 2635 – 2645 , 2007 . 160 . Woese CR , Kandler O , Wheelis ML . Towards a natural system of organisms : proposal for the domains Archaea , Bacteria , and Eucarya . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87 : 4576 – 4579 , 1990 . 161 . Woese CR , Magrum LJ , Fox GE . Archaebacteria . J Mol Evol 11 : 245 – 251 , 1978 . 162 . Wood WG , Gorka C , Schroeder F . Acute and chronic effects of ethanol on transbilayer membrane domains . J Neurochem 52 : 1925 – 1930 , 1989 . 163 . Yesylevskyy SO , Demchenko AP , Kraszewski S , Ramseyer C . Cho - lesterol induces uneven curvature of asymmetric lipid bilayers . Scienti - ﬁcWorldJournal 2013 : 965230 , 2013 . Review C192 MEMBRANES , ENERGY , AND METABOLISM AJP - Cell Physiol (cid:129) doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 00087 . 2015 (cid:129) www . ajpcell . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 247 on J une 2 1 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p c e ll . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m