A Novel Class of Clathrin - coated Vesicles Budding from Endosomes Willem Stoorvogel , Viola Oorschot , and Hans J . Geuze Department of Cell Biology , Faculty of Medicine , Institute of Biomembranes , Utrecht Universiteit , The Netherlands Abstract . Clathrin - coated vesicles transport selective integral membrane proteins from the plasma mem - brane to endosomes and from the TGN to endosomes . Recycling of proteins from endosomes to the plasma membrane occurs via unidentified vesicles . To study this pathway , we used a novel technique that allows for the immunoelectron microscopic examination of trans - ferrin receptor - containing endosomes in nonsectioned cells . Endosomes were identified as separate discontin - uous tubular - vesicular entities . Each endosome was decorated , mainly on the tubules , with many clathrin - coated buds . Endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds were discerned from plasma membrane - derived clathrin - coated vesicles by three criteria : size ( 60 nm and 100 nm , respectively ) , continuity with endosomes , and the lack of labeling for a - adaptin . They were also distinguished from TGN - derived clathrin - coated vesi - cles by their location at the periphery of the cell , size , and the lack of labeling for ~ / - adaptin . In the presence of brefeldin A , a large continuous endosomal network was formed . Transferrin receptor recycling as well as the formation of clathrin - coated pits at endosomes was inhibited in the presence of brefeldin A . Together with the localization of transferrin receptors at endosome - associated buds , this indicates that a novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles serves an exit pathway from endosomes . The target organelles for endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles remain , however , to be identified . C ELLS accomplish selective removal of integral mem - brane proteins from the plasma membrane by en - docytosis . Endocytosis includes the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles that bud off from the plasma mem - brane into the cell . After uncoating , these vesicles fuse with sorting endosomes that are localized throughout the cyto - plasma . In sorting endosomes , composed of vacuoles with attached tubular extensions ( Geuze et al . , 1983 ; Hopkins et al . , 1990 ) , proteins are sorted and transported to differ - ent destinations . Soluble molecules , ligands that dissociate from their receptors in endosomes and fluid phase - endocy - tosed material , are largely transported from sorting endo - somes to lysosomes . In contrast , most endocytosed integral membrane proteins recycle efficiently to the plasma mem - brane , probably via the tubular endosomal extensions ( Geuze et al . , 1983 , 1987 ; Courtoy et al . , 1991 ; Trowbridge et al . , 1993 ) , either directly or via perinuclear recycling en - dosomes ( Ghosh and Maxfield , 1995 ) . However , many en - docytosed membrane proteins are not efficiently recycled to the plasma membrane . Examples are the cation - indepen - dent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ( MPR ) 1 ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1989 ; Riederer et al . , 1994 ) and TGN38 ( Wong and Address all correspondence to W . Stoorvogel , Laboratory of Cell Biology , Utrecht University , AZU Heidelberglaan 100 , Room H02 . 314 , 3584 CX Utrecht , The Netherlands . Tel . : ( 31 ) - 30 - 2506551 or 2507577 . Fax : ( 31 ) - 30 - 2541797 . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : BFA , brefeldin A ; MPR , cation - inde - pendent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ; TfR , transferrin receptor . Hong , 1993 ) that are transported to the TGN , and lysoso - mal glycoproteins ( for review see Fukuda , 1991 ; Guarnieri et al . , 1993 ) and the EGF receptor ( Felder et al . , 1990 ; Fut - ter et al . , 1993 ) that can be transported to lysosomes . Transport from sorting endosomes to the TGN ( Geuze and Morr6 , 1991 ) and the plasma membrane may occur via recycling endosomes ( Ghosh and Maxfield , 1995 ; Hopkins et al . , 1994 ) . The molecular machinery responsible for active sorting of integral membrane proteins in sorting endosomes has so far not been identified ( Trowbridge et al . , 1993 ; Luzio and Banting , 1993 ; Sandoval and Bakke , 1994 ) . Endo - some - derived vesicles serving exit pathways have also not been identified . Such vesicles can be expected to display cytoplasmic coats analogous to the four types of coated transport vesicles identified for other pathways : COP I - and COP II - coated vesicles , budding from Golgi cisternae ( for review see Rothman , 1994 ) and the ER ( Barlowe et al . , 1994 ) , respectively , and two types of clathrin - coated vesi - cles , formed at the plasma membrane and the TGN ( for reviews see Keen , 1990 ; Robinson , 1994 ) . Clathrin - coated vesicles are intermediates in the transport pathways from the plasma membrane to endosomes and from the TGN to endosomes . Specific sets of integral membrane proteins are incorporated in clathrin - coated vesicles through binding to cytosolic adaptor complexes , AP1 at the TGN and AP2 at the plasma membrane ( Pearse and Robinson , 1990 ; Robin - son , 1994 ) . The fungal metabolite brefeldin A ( BFA ) aided in the elucidation of the role of coat proteins in vesicular © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 96 / 01 / 21 / 13 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 132 , Numbers 1 & 2 , January 1996 21 - 33 21 transport . Originally , BFA has been acknowledged to cause the formation of long tubular extensions from the Golgi apparatus and to induce a redistribution of Golgi compo - nents to the ER ( Fujiwara et al . , 1988 ; Lippincott - Schwartz et al . , 1989 ; Doms et al . , 1989 ) . BFA also induces the for - mation of long membranous tubules at the TGN and at en - dosomes ( Lippincott - Schwartz et al . , 1991 ; Wood et al . , 1991 ; Hunziger et al . , 1991 ) . BFA exerts its effect by pre - venting binding of ARF as well as AP1 and 3 - COP to the TGN and cis - Golgi , respectively ( Randazzo et al . , 1993 , and references therein ) . The identical effect of BFA on the Golgi , TGN , and endosomes with respect to the induc - tion of long tubules suggests the presence of yet unidenti - fied , BFA - sensitive , coat proteins on endosomes . Such coats may be instrumental for selective and efficient recycling of integral membrane proteins from sorting endosomes to the plasma membrane , and / or for transport from endosomes to the TGN . The endocytic pathway is composed of a vacuolar sys - tem that is very heterogeneous in morphology , protein com - position , and subcellular distribution . To study exit pathways from endosomes at the ultrastructural level , we developed a novel technique that allows visualization and immunola - beling of the endocytic system in nonsectioned cells at the electron microscopic level . We show that endosomes do not form a continuous membranous tubular network . In - stead , transferrin receptor ( TfR ) - - containing clathrin - coated buds continuous with endosomal vacuoles and tubules were found . These endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds are distinct from plasma membrane - and TGN - derived clathrin - coated vesicles . In conclusion , clathrin - coated vesi - cles provide for an exit pathway from endosomes , via which recycling to the plasma membrane may occur . Materials and Methods Cell Culture A431 cells were cultured in high glucose DME supplemented with 10 % FCS , penicillin , and streptomycin according to standard procedures . For whole - mount immunocytochemistry , cells were grown on golden grids car - rying a carbon - coated Formvar film . The grids were incubated for 1 d in culture medium before cell seeding . Cells cultured on grids were used for experiments after 2 d of culturing . Endocytosis of TflHRP The Tf / HRP conjugate was prepared and analyzed as described ( Stoorvo - gel et al . , 1988 ) . The conjugate bound specifically and in a saturable man - ner to the TfR , its recycling kinetics were identical to that of nonconju - gated Tf , and Tf / HRP was retrieved as a complex in the culture medium after cycling through the cell ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1988 ) . After 1 h of contin - uous uptake , no Tf / HRP was mistargeted to lysosomes as determined by cell fractionation on Percoll density gradients ( not shown ) . To label the entire TfR pathway , cells were first washed with MEM , containing 20 mM Hepes / NaOH , pH 7 . 2 , lacking bicarbonate ( MEMH ) , and then incubated for I h at 37°C in MEMH containing 25 ~ g / ml Tf / HRP . When indicated , the medium was supplemented with 10 ixg / ml BFA for the last 1 - 30 min of incubation . For plasma membrane labeling , washed cells were first incubated for 30 min in MEMH at 37°C and then incubated for I h in MEMH containing 25 ixg / ml Tf / HRP at 0°C . After endocytic up - take or binding of Tf / HRP , the medium was removed and replaced imme - diately by MEMH at 0°C . The cells were washed twice with MEMH at 0°C ( ~ 5 s per wash ) and incubated for 30 min at 0°C in freshly prepared DAB buffer . DAB buffer contained 1 . 5 mg / ml DAB ( BDH Chemicals Ltd . , Poole , UK ) , 70 mM NaCI , 50 mM ascorbic acid ( Merck , Darmstadt , Ger - many ) , 20 mM Hepes ( Gibco BRL , Uxbridge , UK ) , and was adjusted to pH 7 . 0 using 5 N NaOH . After setting the pH , the solution was adjusted to 300 mosM using NaCI . The DAB buffer was supplemented with 0 . 02 % H202 just before use . When indicated , ascorbic acid was omitted from the DAB buffer to allow extracellular HRP - mediated DAB polymerization . Additional NaCI was added to this buffer to compensate the loss in osmo - larity . Preparing Cells for Immunocytochemistry After the HRP - mediated polymerization of DAB in endocytic compart - ments , cells were washed three times with PBS ( Dulbecco ' s PBS lacking CaCl2 and MgC12 ) at 0°C ~ Soluble cytosolic proteins were removed by per - meabilizing the cells in PBS , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM MgCl2 , 0 . 5 mg / ml saponin ( Merck ) at 0°C . Saponin binds to cholesterol in membranes , form - ing pores through which soluble cytosolic proteins leak out . Membrane - bound proteins , the nucleus , cytoskeleton , and proteins cross - linked to the DAB polymer remained cell associated ( Rijnboutt et al . , 1991 ) . After 30 min the cells were washed three times with PBS , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM MgC12 , and fixed for I h at 4°C with 1 % paraformaldehyde in PBS . When indicated , clathrin and adaptor complexes were removed from membranes before the paraformaldehyde fixation . Towards this goal , saponin - washed cells were incubated for 15 min at 0°C in 0 . 5 M Tris / HC1 , pH 7 . 4 ( Ma - haffey et al . , 1990 ) . Tris was removed by extensive washing with PBS be - fore fixation . All the following treatments were performed at room tem - perature . The cells were washed three times with PBS after which free reactive aldehyde groups were blocked during a 5 - rain incubation in PBS , 20 mM glycine . The grids were transferred to blocking buffer ( PBS , 0 . 5 mg / ml saponin , 20 mM glycine , 0 . 1 % cold water fish gelatin Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ; G - 7765 , 0 . 02 % NAN2 ) . The cells were immuno - dou - ble - labeled ( Slot et al . , 1991 ) using 5 - rim and 10 - rim protein A - colloidal gold particles . The cells were fixed with glutaraldehyde after each of the sequential labeling steps to permanently immobilize the colloidal gold la - bel and to exclude cross - labeling ( Slot et al . , 1991 ) . Cross - labeling was checked in control experiments in which the primary antibody of the sec - ond label was omitted and found negligible . Nonspecific labeling was checked using nonrelevant antibodies . The cytoplasmic tail of the TfR was labeled using mAb HTR - H68 . 4 ( Schmid and Smythe , 1991 ) which was pre - pared and provided generously by Dr . Trowbridge ( Salk Institute , La Jolla , CA ) . Monoclonal mouse anti - ~ - adaptin , 100 , 3 ( Able et al , , 1988 ) , and polyclonal rabbit anticlathrin light chain were gifts from Dr . Un - gewickell ( Washington University , St . Louis , MO ) . Another polyclonal antibody directed against clathrin light chain was obtained from Dr . Keen ( Thomas Jefferson University , Philadelphia , PA ) . The mAbs directed against clathrin light chain , CON . 1 ( N ~ ithke et al . , 1992 ) , clathrin heavy chain , X22 ( Brodsky , 1985 ) , and c ~ - adaptin , AP . 6 ( Chin et al . , 1989 ) were kindly provided by Dr . Brodsky ( University of California , San Francisco ) . Polyclonal anticlathrin heavy chain was a gift from Dr . Robinson ( Cam - bridge University , Cambridge , UK ) . Detection of all monoclonal antibod - ies was performed using rabbit anti - mouse Ig ( Dakopatts , Copenhagen , Denmark ) . After immunolabeling and fixation , the cells were extensively washed with H20 , and dehydrated by sequential passage through 50 , 70 , 90 , 96 % , and absolute ethanol . The ethanol was substituted by liquid CO2 , and the samples were dried using a critical point - drying apparatus . Finally , a film of evaporated carbon was applied on the samples while rotating the grids under varying angles . The grids were examined using a transmission elec - tron microscope ( Jeol USA , Peabody , MA ) at 60 - 80 kV . Cell surface 1251 Labeling , Immunoprecipitation , and SDS - PAGE Cells , cultured on 6 - cm dishes , were was ~ hed three times with MEMH and incubated for 60 min in MEMH at 37°C in a water bath to remove serum Tf . Next , the cell surface was lzsI labeled as described previously ( Stoorvo - gel et al . , 1989 ) . Endocytosis of surface 125I - labeled proteins was allowed for 30 min at 37°C in MEMH containing 25 ~ g / ml Tf / HRP . Endocytosis was stopped and excess Tf / HRP removed by washing the cells three times with PBS , 1 mM EDTA at 0°C . When indicated , the cells were incubated for I h in 1 ml PBS , 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mg / ml proteinase K at 0 ~ C on a rocker platform to digest plasma membrane proteins . The protease activity was stopped by the addition of 1 mM PMSF . The detached cells were collected and washed twice with PBS , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM PMSF by centrifugation for 5 min at 300 g at 0°C . Samples of the cell suspension were incubated in DAB buffer as described above . After the DAB cytochemistry , the cells were washed twice with PBS , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM PMSF by centrifuga - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 132 , 1996 22 tion for 5 min at 300 g and lysed for 10 min at 0°C in 0 . 5 ml PBS , 1 % Tri - ton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 mM PMSF , 0 . 02 % NAN3 , l mM EDTA . Nuclei were removed from the lysate by centrifugation for l min at 10 , 000 g , and TfR was immunoprecipitated according to standard procedures ( Stoorvo - gel et al . , 1989 ) . 12SI - TfR was analyzed by SDS - PAGE , and visualized and quantified using a Phosphor Imager ( Molecular Dynamics , Sunny - vale , CA ) . Results Endosomes were studied using a novel technique that al - lows for the visualization of endosomes in nonsectioned cells by transmission electron microscopy . Toward this purpose cells were cultured on Formvar - coated grids . The endocytic pathway traveled by the TfR was labeled with Tf / HRP dur - ing a 60 - min incubation at 37°C . After Tf / HRP uptake the cells were placed at 0°C in a buffer containing DAB , H202 , and ascorbic acid . Monomeric DAB easily penetrates non - fixed membranes , but is captured after HRP - catalyzed po - lymerization ( Courtoy et al . , 1984 ) . Ascorbic acid , a mem - brane - impermeable antioxidant , inhibited Tf / HRP - catalyzed DAB polymerization at the plasma membrane but not in endosomes . DAB polymerization in endosomes resulted in three advantageous effects : ( i ) Electron - dense DAB poly - mer served as an endosomal marker that was easily de - tected using electron microscopy . ( ii ) The endosomal pro - tein content , including integral membrane proteins , was cross - linked to the DAB polymer , resulting in the selective fixation of the endosomal structure . Nonendosomal pro - teins were not fixed . Consequently , cytosolic proteins could be removed after permeabilizing the cells with saponin . The resulting electron - lucent cells could then be studied , as whole - mount preparations , using transmission electron mi - croscopy . ( iii ) Efficient removal of cytosol assured maxi - mal accessibility of epitopes at the cytoplasmic surface of endosomes . Together with the whole - mount aspect , this resulted in very high labeling efficiencies . Both endosomes and the plasma membrane were labeled with peroxidase activity when cells were incubated at 37°C in the presence of Tf / HRP . A subsequent incubation in the presence of DAB and H202 resulted in the HRP - catalyzed deposition of DAB polymer at these two locations . For our whole - mount immunoelectron microscopical studies it was essential to prevent DAB polymerization at the plasma membrane . To study DAB polymerization at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 1 A ) , the surface of A431 cells was 12si la - beled , and Tf / HRP was bound to plasma membrane TfRs at 0°C . The cells were then incubated in the presence of DAB and H202 , washed , and lysed . As a consequence of the peroxidation reaction , membrane proteins were en - capsulated by DAB polymer rendering them detergent in - soluble . Analysis by SDS - PAGE revealed large 125I - labeled protein complexes that failed to migrate into the stacking gel ( Fig . 1 A , lane 1 ) . The addition of ascorbic acid to the DAB solution prevented the formation of 125I - labeled pro - tein aggregates ( Fig . 1 A , lane 2 ) , and the formation of a DAB precipitate on these cells was not detected ( not shown ) . We conclude that during the peroxidation reac - tion , ascorbic acid competed with DAB as reductant , yielding oxidized ascorbic acid , a soluble reaction product . Previously , we have reported that proteins present in HRP - containing endosomes became cross - linked to DAB poly - mer upon incubation of intact cells in the presence of DAB and H202 ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1991a ; Rijnboutt et al . , 1992 ; Strous et al . , 1993 ) . Consistent with this we found cross - linked 125I - labeled proteins after allowing uptake of en - docytosing surface 12SI - labeled proteins in the presence of Tf / HRP . The extracellular presence of ascorbic acid did not prevent cross - linking of endocytosed 125I - labeled pro - teins by endocytosed Tf / HRP , as evidenced by i25I - labeled aggregates recovered on top of the stacking gel ( Fig . 1 A , lane 3 ) . Some of the 125I - labeled proteins were lost during the incubation at 37°C , probably because they represent adhering serum proteins that dissociated from the culture dish at 37°C ( not shown ) . The TfR was used as a model protein to show that endocy - tosed proteins were efficiently cross - linked and that the extracellular presence of ascorbic acid did not interfere with this process ( Fig . 1 B ) . Surface 125I - labeled TfR was immunoprecipitated from a detergent extract and ana - lyzed by SDS - PAGE ( Fig . 1 B , lane 1 ) . A treatment of in - tact 125I - labeled cells with proteinase K at 0°C completely removed all surface 125I - TfR ( Fig . 1 B , lane 2 ) . After en - docytosis at 37°C in the presence of Tf / HRP , cell surface Figure 1 . Selective DAB polymerization in endosomes . Cell sur - face proteins were 1251 labeled at 0°C . Samples of total cell lysates ( A ) or immunoprecipitated 125I - TfR ( B ) were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . 125I - labeled cells were incubated in the presence of Tf / HRP ( TH ) at 0°C ( A , lanes I and 2 ; B , lane 5 ) or 37°C ( A , lane 3 ; B , lanes 3 and 4 ) or in the absence of Tf / HRP at 0°C ( B , lanes 1 and 2 ) . Some of the culture dishes were then in - cubated with proteinase K ( PK ) at 0°C to remove TfR at the plasma membrane ( B , lanes 2 - 4 ) . Next , some cell cultures were incubated in the presence of DAB and H202 only ( A , lane 1 ) , or in the presence of DAB , H202 , and ascorbic acid ( AA ) ( A , lanes 2 and 3 ; B , lanes 4 and 5 ) . 125I - TfR is indicated with an open trian - gle . Some nonreduced dimeric 1251 - TfR is found just below the 200 - kD marker . Molecular mass ( 200 , 92 , 69 , 46 , and 30 kD ) is in - dicated at the right ( arrowheads ) . Top of the running and stack - ing gel is indicated with arrows at the right . Stoorvogel et al . Clathrin - coated Vesicles from Endosomes 23 125I - TfR was removed by the proteinase K treatment leav - ing only internalized 125I - TfR intact ( Fig . 1 B , lane 3 ) . When similarly treated cells were additionally incubated in the presence of DAB , H202 , and ascorbic acid , endocy - tosed 125I - TfR was cross - linked to DAB polymer with an efficiency of 85 % ( Fig . 1 B , lane 4 ) . Of the 125I - labeled cross - linked endosomal protein complex , only a small pro - portion could be immunoprecipitated using anti - TfR anti - bodies , possibly due to epitope masking by DAB polymer , and was recovered as a complex on top of the stacking gel . In contrast to endosomal 125I - TfR , 125I - TfR at the plasma membrane was not cross - linked in the presence of ascorbic acid ( Fig . 1 B , lane 5 ) . Thus , ascorbic acid is a membrane - impermeable reducing agent that competed extracellularly , but not intracellularly , with DAB as a substrate for HRP . Next , we studied Tf / HRP - mediated DAB polymeriza - tion at the plasma membrane and in endosomes using whole - mount electron microscopy . TfRs at the plasma membrane were allowed to bind Tf / HRP at 0°C , after which the cells were incubated with DAB / H202 either in the ab - sence or presence of ascorbic acid . After DAB polymer - ization the cells were washed in the presence of saponin resulting in membrane permeabilization . Consequently , soluble proteins from the cytosol and intracellular vacu - oles leaked out of the cells ( Rijnboutt et al . , 1991 ) while membrane - associated proteins and proteins that were cross - linked to the DAB polymer remained cell associ - ated . Although saponin - induced pores have a reported di - ameter of 8 nm ( Dourmashkin et al . , 1962 ) , they allowed passage of protein A complexed to 5 nm and 10 nm colloi - dal gold . Upon saponin removal , permeabilization for pro - tein A - colloidal gold complexes was reversed ( not shown ) , indicating maintenance of the integrity of the plasma mem - brane . Due to the saponin treatment the cells became elec - tron lucent , allowing visualization of electron - dense DAB polymer . After the saponin treatment the cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde and immunolabeled . DAB poly - mer was detected at sites with a diameter of 100 nm which labeled for both clathrin ( 10 nm gold ) and ct - adaptin ( 5 nm gold ) , identifying them as plasma membrane - associated clathrin - coated pits ( Fig . 2 ) . When ascorbic acid was present during the DAB reaction , sites labeled for clathrin and et - adaptin were negative for DAB polymer ( not shown ) . Consequently , DAB staining in the presence of ascorbic acid , detected after endocytic uptake of Tf / HRP , must be attributed to endosome labeling . Endosomes Form a Continuous Tubular Network in the Presence of BFA But Not at Control Conditions Although endosomal tubules may have a considerable length ( Hopkins et al . , 1990 ; Tooze and Hollinshead , 1991 ) , it is not clear whether individual endosomes are connected with each other via a continuous membranous tubular net - work . However , it has been widely accepted that endo - somes form a large tubular network in the presence of BFA ( Lippincott - Schwartz et al . , 1991 ; Wood et al . , 1991 ; Hunziger et al . , 1991 ) . To address questions on the extent Figure 2 . Plasma membrane - associated clathrin - coated pits . Ceils were allowed to bind Tf / HRP for 60 min at 0°C . After removal of nonbound Tf / HRP , the cells were incubated at 0°C in the pres - ence of DAB and H202 . After removal of soluble cytosolic pro - teins in the presence of saponin , the cells were processed for whole - mount immunoelectron microscopy . The cells were la - beled with protein A complexed to 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold parti - cles for the demonstration of ct - adaptin ( AP . 6 ) and clathrin light chain ( polyclonal Ungewickell ) , respectively . DAB polymer and a - adaptin were found at clathrin - coated pits . One DAB - stained profile is labeled for et - adaptin only ( arrowhead ) . Bar , 0 . 2 I ~ m . of the endosomal tubular network in the absence of BFA , it had to be verified that the experimental conditions used to prepare the whole - mount preparations did not interfere with the continuity of endosomal tubules . To validate the Figure 3 . Endosomes form a tubular network in the presence but not in the absence of BFA . Cells were allowed to endocytose Tf / HRP for 60 min at 37°C . BFA was either absent ( A and B ) or present during the last 5 min of this incubation ( C ) . Then the cells were incu - bated at 0°C in the presence of H202 , DAB , and ascorbic acid . Soluble cytosolic proteins were removed by washing in the presence of The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 132 , 1996 24 saponin , and the cells were processed for whole - mount electron microscopy . The nucleus ( N ) and the edge of the cells ( E ) are indicated . ( A ) a low magnification of cell showing perinuclear and peripheral DAB staining . Bar , 10 I ~ m . ( B ) Numerous individual endosomes con - sisting of vacuoles ( arrowheads ) and tubules of sometimes considerable length ( arrows ) are identified by the electron - dense DAB pre - cipitate . Nonidentified , less electron - dense meshworks , probably representing cytoskeleton , are also visualized . Bar , 1 ixm . ( C ) A BFA - treated cell shows a continuous tubular network ( arrows ) ranging from the periphery to the perinuclear area of the cell . Endosomal vac - uoles , often discontinuous with the tubular network ( arrowhead ) were also encountered . Bar , 1 ~ m . Stoorvogel et al . Clathrin - coated Vesicles from Endosomes 25 Figure 4 . Endosome derived clathrin - coated vesicles . Cells were labeled with Tf / HRP and processed as in Fig . 3 A . After permeabiliza - tion and fixation , the cells were immuno - double - labeled with protein A complexed to 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold particles . ( A ) . Cells were la - beled with 10 - nm gold for the demonstration of clathrin heavy chain using the monoclonal X22 . A peripheral tubular DAB - labeled en - dosome continuous with many 60 - nm clathrin - coated buds is shown . Free DAB - positive vesicles with a diameter of 60 nm and labeled for clathrin ( arrows ) probably derived from the endosome . Non - clathrin - coated DAB - labeled 60 - nm vesicles ( possibly representing un - coated endosome - derived vesicles ; triangles ) and DAB - positive 100 - nm clathrin - coated vesicles , discontinuous with the endosome and presumably derived from the plasma membrane ( arrowheads ) are also present . ( B ) Cells were labeled with 5 - nm gold for the demon - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 132 , 1996 26 technique , we checked for the integrity of endosomal tu - bules after BFA treatment . A431 cells were incubated for 60 min at 37°C in the presence of Tf / HRP to ensure label - ing of the entire endocytic tract of TfR with peroxidase ac - tivity . BFA was either omitted or present during the last 1 - 30 min of this incubation . Subsequently , the cells were prepared for whole - mount electron microscopy . Individ - ual electron - lucent cells were observed with a contrasted nucleus , and electron - dense DAB polymer deposited at the perinuclear area and cell periphery ( Fig . 3 A ) . In the absence of BFA , hundreds of individual DAB - labeled en - dosomes were encountered in the periphery of each cell ( Fig . 3 B ) . We did not find DAB - labeled organelles after DAB cytochemistry on unfixed A431 cells when Tf / HRP was omitted ( not shown ) . Besides their DAB contents , en - dosomes were also identified by the presence of TfR as shown by abundant immuno - gold labeling ( see Fig . 6 ) . Endosomes were of variable shapes and sizes and consisted of interconnected tubules only or tubules connected to vacuoles . The lengths of these tubular endosomes varied from 100 nm to 3 Ixm . Besides peripheral endosomes , many DAB - positive structures were found in the perinuclear area packed so densely that the continuity between these structures could not easily be determined ( see Fig . 1 A ; for higher magnification , see Fig . 5 D ) . After 1 min in the presence of BFA , a significant increase in the average length of endosomal tubules was already detected ( not shown ) . After 5 min a large continuous DAB - stained en - dosomal network was found ( Fig . 3 C ) , consistent with ob - servations by others ( Lippincott - Schwartz et al . , 1991 ; Wood et al . , 1991 ; Hunziger et al . , 1991 ) . After a prolonged incu - bation in the presence of BFA ( up to 30 rain ) , tubular en - dosomes disappeared from the periphery of the cell and redistributed to the perinuclear area ( not shown ) . Similar observations were made for the human hepatoma cell line HepG2 , and the human epidermoid carcinoma cell line Hep2 ( not shown ) . These data show that endosomal tu - bules , when present , were not fragmented during sample preparation . Thus , it must be concluded that at normal cell culture conditions endosomes do not form a continuous membranous network . Endosomal Buds Coated with Clathrin On each individual endosome , buds with a uniform diame - ter of 60 nm were observed . Labeling of whole - mount cells with antibodies to clathrin light chain from three different sources and to clathrin heavy chain from two different sources ( see Materials and Methods ) revealed that both heavy and light chain clathrin are associated with these buds ( Fig . 4 , A and C ) . The continuity of these buds with endosomes was confirmed by stereo images ( not shown ) . Besides 60 - nm clathrin - labeled buds , occasionally 80 - 100 - nm buds that did not label for clathrin were also found associated with endosomes ( Fig . 4 B , arrowheads ) . In ad - dition to clathrin - coated buds on endosomes , free 60 - nm DAB - labeled clathrin - coated vesicles were encountered ( Fig . 4 A , open triangles ) . The endosome - associated clath - rin - coated buds and free DAB - labeled clathrin - coated vesicles were considerably smaller than plasma membrane - derived 100 - nm clathrin - coated vesicles ( Figs . 4 A , arrow - heads indicate 100 - nm clathrin - coated vesicles ; for labeling with anti - a - adaptin see Figs . 2 and 5 A ) . After a 5 - min in - cubation in the presence of BFA , clathrin - coated buds were absent on the tubular endosomal network ( not shown ) , in - dicating that their formation was inhibited by this drug . To further discriminate endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds from plasma membrane - derived clathrin - coated vesicles , we immuno - double - labeled for c ~ - adaptin and clathrin ( 5 nm and 10 nm gold , respectively ; Figs . 5 , A and B ) . Generally , endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds were negative for a - adaptin ( Fig . 5 A ) . Occasionally , however , little labeling for et - adaptin was found on clath - rin - labeled buds on endosomes ( Fig . 5 B , arrowheads ) , confirming that some c ~ - adaptin may be associated with en - dosomes ( Wang et al . , 1993 ; Seaman et al . , 1993 ) . In con - trast , plasma membrane - derived DAB - labeled 100 - nm clathrin - coated vesicles ( Fig . 5 A , arrow ) labeled heavily for a - adaptin , ct - adaptin was also found on clathrin - labeled , DAB - negative sites , representing clathrin - coated pits at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5 A , arrowhead ) . Endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds were thus discriminated from plasma membrane - - derived coated vesicles by their continuity with endosomes , the absence of c ~ - adaptin , and their size . To discriminate endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds from TGN - derived coated vesicles , we immuno - dou - hie - labeled for clathrin and - y - adaptin . Recycling endosomes and the TGN are localized in the perinuclear area and are closely associated with one another ( Hopkins et al . , 1994 ; Connolly et al . , 1994 ) . A dense mass of 60 - nm DAB - labeled tubules was found in the perinuclear area ( Fig . 5 D ) , anal - ogous to the recycling endosomes reported by others ( Ghosh and Maxfield , 1995 ; Hopkins et al . , 1994 ; Connolly et al . , 1994 ) . DAB - negative vesicles , labeled for clathrin ( 10 nm gold ) and " , / - adaptin ( 5 nm gold ) , were also found in this area ( Fig . 5 D , arrows ) and are characteristic for TGN - derived clathrin - coated vesicles ( Geuze and Morr6 , 1991 ; Klumperman et al . , 1993 ) . Due to the lack of con - trast of DAB - negative membranes , the diameter of these vesicles could not be measured . However , in cryosections they have a diameter of ~ 100 nm ( Klumperman et al . , 1993 ) , similar to that of plasma membrane - derived clath - rin - coated vesicles . In contrast to perinuclear clathrin - coated buds / vesicles , endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds were largely negative for ~ / - adaptin ( Fig . 5 C ) . Occa - sionally , some ~ - adaptin was detected on endosome - asso - ciated clathrin - coated buds ( Fig . 5 C , arrowheads ) . We conclude that endosome - associated elathrin - coated pits can be discerned from TGN - derived coated vesicles by their subcellular localization , size , and the absence of ~ / - adaptin . stration of clathrin light chain using the monoclonal CON . 1 . A peripheral tubular DAB - labeled endosome continuous with many 60 - nm clathrin - coated buds is shown . In addition , 100 - nm buds that are not labeled for clathrin can be seen ( arrowheads ) . ( C ) Cells were im - muno - double - labeled to demonstrate the simultaneous presence of clathrin light chain ( polyclonal Ungewickell ; 5 - nm gold ) and clath - rin heavy chain ( monoclonal X22 ; 10 - nm gold ) on DAB - labeled endosome - associated buds . Note the 100 - nm DAB - negative clathrin - coated pit or clathrin lattice at the plasma membrane ( arrowhead ) . Bars , 0 . 2 ~ m . Stoorvogel et al . Clathrin - coated Vesicles from Endosomes 27 Figure 5 . Endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles can be differentiated from plasma membrane - and TGN - derived clathrin - coated vesicles by the absence of ct - and ~ - adaptin . Cells were labeled with Tf / HRP and processed as in Fig . 3 A . After permeabilization and fix - ation , the cells were immuno - double - labeled with protein A complexed to 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold particles . ( A and B ) Cells were double - labeled with 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold for the demonstration of ct - adaptin and clathrin light chain ( polyclonal Ungewickell ) , respectively . ( A ) Peripheral tubular DAB - positive endosome continuous with 60 - nm clathrin - coated buds that are negative for et - adaptin is shown . In contrast , a DAB - negative clathrin - coated pit at the plasma membrane ( arrowhead ) and a 100 - nm DAB - positive plasma membrane - derived clathrin - coated vesicle ( arrow ) are labeled for oL - adaptin . ( B ) Occasionally , 60 - nm clathrin - coated buds on peripheral endosomes la - beled for a - adaptin ( arrowheads ) . ( C and D ) Cells were double - labeled with 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold for the demonstration of ~ / - adaptin and clathrin light chain ( polyclonal Ungewickell ) , respectively . ( C ) Only occasionally 60 - nm clathrin - coated buds on peripheral endo - somes labeled for ~ / - adaptin ( arrowheads ) . ( D ) In the perinuclear area many densely packed DAB - positive membranes were observed . Between this dense material , DAB - negative vesicles with an apparent diameter of 60 nm labeled for clathrin and " , / - adaptin ( arrows ) . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 132 , 1996 28 Endosome - associated 60 - nm Buds Contain TfR Analogous to plasma membrane - and TGN - derived clath - rin - coated vesicles , endosome - derived clathrin - coated ves - icles may be expected to carry a selected cargo of integral membrane proteins . We studied whether endosome - asso - ciated buds are labeled for TfR as a representative for the recycling pathway . Antibodies directed against the cyto - plasmic tail of the TfR were used to avoid epitopes that may have been masked by the DAB polymer . Only little TfR labeling ( 10 nm gold ) in clathrin - coated buds ( 5 nm gold ) as compared to the rest of the endosome was found ( Fig . 6 B , arrowheads ) . We anticipated that , due to steric hindrance , the clathrin coat interfered with labeling of the cytoplasmic tail of the TfR . To avoid this problem , we re - moved clathrin coats by incubating the saponin - permeabi - lized cells in 0 . 5 M Tris before the paraformaldehyde fixa - tion . This procedure , originally developed to strip clathrin coats from isolated plasma membranes ( Mahaffey et al . , 1990 ) , efficiently removed clathrin from endosomes and the plasma membrane ( not shown ) . The typical 60 - nm buds on endosomes ( Fig . 6 A , arrowheads ) , stripped from clath - rin , now efficiently labeled for TfR ( Fig . 6 A , 5 nm gold ) . To determine whether TfR was specifically incorporated in these buds , the distribution of MPR , an integral mem - brane protein sorted from the TfR in endosomes to be transported to the TGN , was also assessed . We were not able to detect a selective enrichment of TfR ( 5 nm gold ) nor MPR ( 10 nm gold ) in endosome - associated 60 - nm buds ( Fig . 6 A ) . However , an enrichment of TfR in clath - rin - coated buds by only 5 % may already be sufficient for efficient recycling ( see Discussion ) . In the presence of BFA , an endosomal network devoid of clathrin - coated buds was formed ( Fig . 6 C ) . This network was homogeneously la - beled for TfR ( 5 nm gold ) and MPR ( 10 nm gold ) . No lat - eral heterogeneity in the distribution of these proteins along these tubules was observed . Concurrent with the dis - appearance of clathrin - coated buds on endosomes in the presence of BFA , the expression of the TfR at the plasma membrane decreased twofold due to a relatively low ex - ternalization rate ( unpublished data ; see also Damke et al . , 1991 ; Schonhorn et al . , 1994 ) . This suggested that en - dosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles are involved in TfR recycling . Discussion We identified an exit from endosomes involving a novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles . These clathrin - coated ves - icles were distinguished from those originating from the plasma membrane and the TGN . Clathrin - coated buds on endosomes were visualized using a novel technique that allows for whole - mount immunoelectron microscopy of the endosomal apparatus at the electron microscopic level . It involves the selective fixation of endosomes with DAB polymer by using the peroxidase activity of endocytosed Tf / HRP . DAB polymerization by extracellular Tf / HRP was suppressed selectively using ascorbic acid ( Figs . 1 and 6 ) , yielding DAB staining of Tf / HRP - labeled endosomes only ( Fig . 3 ) . Endosomes are comprised of vacuolar and tubu - lar elements that localize to the periphery and in the peri - nuclear area of the cells consistent with earlier observations ( Geuze et al . , 1983 ; Hopkins et al . , 1990 ) . Both peripheral and perinuclear tubular DAB - labeled endosomes had a di - ameter of 60 nm , analogous to diameters reported by others ( Hopkins and Trowbridge 1983 ; Tooze and Hollinshead , 1991 ; Hopkins et al . , 1994 ) . After the initial realization that endocytosed proteins are sorted in a prelysosomal compartment which is composed of vesicular elements with attached tubular extensions ( Geuze et al . , 1983 ) , endosomal tubules with lengths / > 2 ~ m have been observed in electron microscopic images of thick sections of HRP - labeled cells ( Tooze and Hollinshead , 1991 ) , and in three - dimensional reconstructions using se - rial thin sections ( Marsh et al . , 1986 ) . Although already considerable , the tubule length in these studies may have been limited artificially due to fragmentation after chemi - cal fixation ( Hopkins et al . , 1990 ; Robinson and Karnovsky , 1991 ) . Light microscopic images of living cells incubated with fluorescently labeled transferrin suggested that nonfixed endosomes may even form a continuous network ( Hop - kins et al . , 1990 ) . However , our electron microscopic im - ages of nonsectioned DAB - fixed endosomes confirmed the earlier observations that endosomes do not form a contin - uous membranous network ( see Fig . 2 ) . In the present study , the tubular aspect of endosomes had been pre - served well during preparation since BFA - induced tubular endosomal networks were not disrupted ( Fig . 2 B ) . In ad - dition , in the absence of BFA , the tips of endosomal tu - bules were often coated with clathrin , which cannot be ex - plained when tubules would have been fragmented during the treatment . Although not continuously connected with one another , endosomes might form transient networks by fusion and fission events ( Gruenberg and Howell , 1989 ) . Such transient connections may contribute to the visual - ization of an apparent continuous network in living cells at the light microscopic level ( Hopkins et al . , 1990 ) . Cytoplasmic tails of integral membrane proteins in en - dosomes , and proteins associated with the cytoplasmic face of endosomes were immunolabeled using colloidal gold . Numerous clathrin - coated buds continuous with endoso - mal vacuoles and tubules were detected . In previous stud - ies , clathrin has occasionally been found associated with endosomes ( Geuze et al . , 1983 ; Killish et al . , 1992 ) . Un - identified coats on presumed endosomes have also been reported previously ( Geuze et al . , 1984 ; Allen et al . , 1992 ; Rabinowitz et al . , 1992 ) . However , in these studies endo - some - associated clathrin coats were scarce and were not discerned from plasma membrane - and TGN - derived clath - rin - coated membranes . In our opinion , the best marker available , generally thought to be highly enriched on TGN and not on endosomes , is - / - adaptin ( Robinson , 1994 ) . Similarly , AP2 is a specific marker for plasma membrane - derived clathrin - coated vesicles . On cryosections of cells , limited immunolabeling for AP1 and AP2 does not allow for the identification of endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds negative for AP1 or AP2 . In contrast , the novel tech - nique described here allows for immunolabeling of the entire surface of endosomes , thereby achieving a high labeling efficiency . This allowed us to discriminate clearly between - / - adaptin - labeled and ~ v - adaptin - negative clathrin - coated buds ( Fig . 5 , C and D ) . Thus , endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds could be discerned from TGN - derived coated vesicles by the absence of ~ / - adaptin and localization in the Stoorvogel et al . Clathrin - coated Vesicles from Endosomes 29 Figure 6 . Incorporation of TfR in endosomal buds . Cells were labeled with Tf / HRP and processed as in Fig . 3 A . ( A ) After permeabili - zation , the cells were washed with 0 . 5 M Tris to remove clathrin coats before fixation . The cells were immuno - double - labeled for TfR and MPR using 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold particles , respectively . Both 60 - nm ( arrowheads ) and 100 - nm buds ( arrows ) were labeled for TfR The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 132 , 1996 30 cell . In addition , TGN - derived coated vesicles have a di - ameter of ~ 100 nm ( Klumperman et al . , 1993 ) , which is significantly larger than the 60 - nm endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds . The clathrin - coated buds on endo - somes were also discerned from plasma membrane - derived coated vesicles by three criteria : size ( 60 nm and 100 nm , respectively ) , the absence of c ~ - adaptin , and conti - nuity with endosomes ( Figs . 2 and 5 A ) . Only occasionally - , / - adaptin ( Fig . 5 C ) and a - adaptin ( Fig . 5 B ) were found associated with peripheral Tf / HRP - labeled endosomes . In contrast , clathrin - coated vesicles derived from the plasma membrane and TGN labeled heavily for ot - adaptin ( Fig . 5 A ) and ~ - adaptin ( Fig . 5 D ) , respectively . Apparently , - , / - adaptin and a - adaptin are not exclusively localized at the TGN and the plasma membrane . The potential of AP2 to be targeted to endosomes was also illustrated by the lo - calization of AP2 on endosomes in the presence of cat - ionic amphiphilic drugs ( Wang et al . , 1993 ) and in the pres - ence of GTP ~ S or excess Ca 2÷ ( Seaman et al . , 1993 ) . Overexpression of TGN 38 / 41 , a TGN protein binding to AP1 adaptors , led to mislocalization of ~ / - adaptin to endo - somes ( Reaves and Banting , 1994 ) . Adaptors are thought to be recruited from the cytosol to specific membranes by largely unidentified adaptor receptors ( Moore et al . , 1987 ; Mahaffey et al . , 1990 ; Stamnes and Rothman , 1993 ; Traub et al . , 1993 ) . Possibly , residual interactions between adap - tors and their receptors in endosomes may explain the mi - nor amounts of a - adaptin and ~ / - adaptin found on endo - somes in the current study . Alternatively , adaptors may play a role in the docking of vesicles with endosomes ( Beck et al . , 1992 ) . Finally , the antibodies directed against ~ / - adaptin and / or a - adaptin may cross - react with unidenti - fied endosome - associated adaptins . Endosome - derived clathrin coated vesicles may be asso - ciated with yet unidentified adaptor complexes . In the nerve endings of neuronal cells , a clathrin assembly protein , AP180 , has been characterized to induce the assembly of clathrin in 60 - 70 - nm coats ( Morris et al . , 1993 , and refer - ences therein ) . Two other potential novel adaptor proteins , p47A and p47B , which show homology with the 50 - and 47 - kD subunits of the AP1 and AP2 adaptor complexes have been characterized ( Pevsner et al . , 1994 ) . Although the phys - iological functions of these proteins are unknown they may serve as adaptor subunits in the generation of clathrin - coated vesicles at endosomes . Why have endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds not been frequently encountered by immunocytochemistry on cryosections ? One plausible explanation could be that clath - rin - coated buds on endosomes may be relatively unstable and dissociate before chemical fixation with formaldehyde or glutaraldehyde . This notion is supported by the occa - sional detection of relatively high cytosolic clathrin con - centrations close to , but not in contact with , endosomal tu - bules on cryosections ( Geuze et al . , 1983 ) . HRP - driven cross - linking of endosomal integral membrane proteins to DAB polymer may preserve the cytoplasmic tails for adaptor / clathrin binding . Indeed , we found that nonfixed clathrin cages were stably associated with DAB - fixed en - dosomes during the saponin incubation , even in PBS lack - ing Mg 2÷ and EGTA ( not shown ) . The pathway ( s ) served by endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles remain speculative at this time . Previously , we showed that although TfR and MPR are enriched in early and late endosomes , respectively , the endosomal dis - tributions revealed an extensive overlap ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1991b ) . In the present study , we found labeling of both MPR and TfR in early endosome - associated clathrin - coated buds , but were not able to determine whether one of these antigens is selectively enriched in these structures . Epitopes on the cytoplasmic tails of these proteins were masked by the clathrin / adaptor coat for antibody binding ( Fig . 6 B ) . However , stripping of the clathrin coat from these buds in 0 . 5 M Tris allowed access to the epitopes ( Fig . 6 A ) . Stripped endosomal 60 - nm buds were heavily labeled for TfR , but MPR was not excluded . In these preparations , epitope accessibility may still suffer from steric hindrance due to dense packing of integral membrane proteins . Thus , no definite conclusions regarding the selectivity for incor - poration of integral membrane proteins in endosomal 60 - nm buds could be made . However , several findings argue in favor of the possibility that endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles are involved in the recycling pathway . First , clathrin - coated buds on endosomes are heavily labeled with DAB polymer and thus contain significant amounts of TfR - Tf / HRP . Second , after the Tris wash all 60 - nm buds on endosomes labeled heavily for the TfR . Third , clathrin - coated buds are quite numerous on typical peripheral early endosomes , organelles considered to sort recycling pro - teins from lysosomal targeted proteins . Fourth , BFA con - comitantly inhibited TfR recycling and the formation of clathrin - coated buds at endosomes . BFA interferes with the association of the cytoplasmic tail of MPR with AP1 ( LeBorgne et al . , 1993 ) , resulting in a two - to fourfold in - crease of its expression at the plasma membrane due to an increased externalization rate ( Damke et al . , 1991 ) . In con - trast , the expression of the TfR at the plasma membrane decreases twofold due to a relatively low externalization rate ( unpublished data ; see also Damke et al . , 1991 ; Schon - horn and Wessling - Resnick , 1994 ) . Endocytosed TfR exits the sorting endosome within 1 - 2 rain after uptake whereas the entire endocytic cycle takes ~ 10 min ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1987 ) . Thus , the exit from endosomes does not consti - tute the rate - limiting step of the TfR cycle through the cell . Consequently , inhibition of the egress of TfR from endosomes by BFA would need to be very effective ( ~ 10 times ) to achieve the measured twofold increase in the rate of recycling of the TfR . Concurrent with the inhibitory ef - fect of BFA on TfR recycling , clathrin - coated buds disap - and MPR . Label not associated with DAB polymer probably localizes to the plasma membrane . ( B ) Cells that were not washed with Tris before fixation were immuno - double - labeled for clathrin light chain ( CON . I ) and TfR using 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold particles , respec - tively . TfR was not labeled efficiently on 60 - nm clathrin - coated buds on endosomes ( arrowheads ) . ( C ) During the last 5 min of Tf / HRP uptake , BFA was present in the medium . The cells were immuno - double - labeled for TfR and MPR using 5 - nm and 10 - nm gold parti - cles , respectively . Extensive labeling for both proteins was found along the entire length of the endosomal tubules . Note the large DAB - positive vacuoles ( V ) that also labeled for both proteins . Bar in A , 0 . 2 Ixm , is representative for all figures . Stoorvogel et al . Clathrin - eoated Vesicles from Endosomes 31 peared from endosomes ( Fig . 6 C ) , suggesting their involve - ment in TfR recycling . In Dictiostelium there is genetic evidence for the involvement of clathrin in the secretion of mature et - mannosidase from lysosomes to the extracellular space ( Ruscetti et al . , 1994 ) . This secretion is thought to occur via a postlysosomal compartment ( Padh et al . , 1993 ) , possibly equivalent to endosomes . An alternative function for endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles , which cannot be excluded , is that they serve transport from endosomes to the TGN . Although endocy - tosed MPR is targeted first to early endosomes , its sorting from the endocytic pathway is considered to occur mainly at late endosomes ( Stoorvogel et al . , 1989 ; Riederer et al . , 1994 ) . Thus , it appears unlikely that clathrin - coated buds that are formed in great numbers at early endosomes serve a pathway from endosomes to the TGN . In addition , the finding by Draper et al . ( 1990 ) that , in permeabilized cells , anti - clathrin antibodies did not interfere with the traffick - ing of MPR from endosomes to the TGN also argues against this possibility . Besides 60 - nm clathrin - coated buds , 100 - nm buds lack - ing clathrin were also found on endosomes ( Fig . 3 A ) . These buds labeled for both TfR and MPR ( Fig . 6 A ) . Unlike the 60 - nm buds , 100 - nm buds did not require a treatment with 0 . 5 M Tris to be labeled for these proteins ( not shown ) , suggesting that these buds are either not coated or contain a nonclathrin coat that did not interfere with antigen ac - cessibility . Since these buds have the same diameter as plasma membrane - derived coated vesicles and TGN - derived clathrin - coated vesicles ( Klumperman et al . , 1993 ) , they may represent the fusion site for uncoated plasma membrane - derived or TGN - derived vesicles . Alternatively , they may represent the budding site for nonidentified transport vesicles . Recently , ARF6 has been implicated in vesicular transport between the plasma membrane and en - dosomes ( Peters et al . , 1995 ; D ' Souza - Schorey et al . , 1995 ) . Overexpression of a dominant negative ARF6 mutant , de - fective in GTP binding , resulted in impaired recycling of endocytosed transferrin ( D ' Souza - Schorey et al . , 1995 ) and the accumulation of 100 - 300 - nm vesicles with an unidenti - fied coat lacking clathrin ( Peters et al . , 1995 ) . These vesicles could represent either unfused endocytic structures that have either acquired or revealed a new coat , or recycling endosomal remnants ( Peters et al . , 1995 ) , and may be equiv - alent to the 100 - nm buds identified in the present study . In conclusion , we identified a novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles budding from endosomes , via which recy - cling to the plasma membrane may occur . Further evidence is required to positively identify endosome - derived clathrin - coated vesicles as transport intermediates in this pathway . We thank Ren6 Scriwanek for dark room services , and Brigitte Groothuis for technical assistance . We are grateful to Dr . Trowbridge , Dr . Un - gewickell , Dr . Keen , Dr . Brodsky , and Dr . Robinson for their gifts of anti - bodies . These investigations were sponsored by a senior investigatorship from the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . Received for publication 24 July 1995 and in revised form 2 October 1995 . References Ahle , S . , A . Mann , U . Eichelsbacher , and E . Ungewickell . 1988 . Structural rela - tionships between clathrin assembly proteins from the Golgi and the plasma membrane . EMBO ( Eur . MoL Biol . Organ . ) J . 7 : 919 - 929 . Allen , R . D . , C . C . Schroeder , and A . K . Fok . 1992 . Endosomal system in para - mecium : coated pits to early endosomes . J . Cell Sci . 101 : 449 - - 461 . Barlowe , C . , L . Orci , T . Yeung , M . Hosobuchi , S . Hamamoto , N . Salama , M . F . Rexach , M . Ravazzola , M . Amherdt , and R . Schekman . 1994 . COP II : a membrane coat formed by Sec proteins that drive vesicle budding from the endoplasmic reticulum . Cell 77 : 895 - 907 . Beck , K . A . , M . Chang , F . M . Brodsky , and J . H . Keen . 1992 . Clathrin assembly protein AP - 2 induces aggregation of membrane vesicles : a possible role for AP - 2 in endosome formation . J . Cell BioL 119 : 787 - 796 . Brodsky , F . M . 1985 . Clathrin structure characterized with monoclonal antibod - ies . I . Analysis of multiple antigenic sites . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 2047 - 2054 . Chin , D . J . , R . M . Straubinger , S . Acton , I . N ~ tthke , and F . M . Brodsky . 1989 . 100 - kDa polypeptides in peripheral clathrin - coated vesicles are required for receptor - mediated endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 9289 - 9293 . Connolly , C . N . , C . E . Futter , A . Gibson , C . R . Hopkins , and D . F . Cutler . 1994 . Transport into and out of the Golgi complex studied by transfecting cells with cDNAs encoding horseradish peroxidase . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 641 - 652 . Courtoy , P . J . 1991 . Dissection of endosomes . In Intracellular Trafficking of Proteins . J . C . Steer and J . Harford , editors . Cambridge University Press , New York . 103 - 156 . Courtoy , P . J . , J . Quintart , and P . Baudhuin . 1984 . Shift of equilibrium density induced by 3 , 3 ' - diaminobenzidine cytochemistry : a new procedure for the analysis and purification of peroxidase - containing organelles . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 870 - 876 . Damke , H . , J . Klumperman , K . von Figura , and T . Braulke . 1991 . Effects of brefeldin A on the endocytic route . Redistribution of mannose 6 - phosphate / insulin - like growth factor II receptors to the cell surface . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 24829 - 24833 . Doms , R . W . , G . Russ , and J . W . Yewdell . 1989 . Brefeldin A redistributes resi - dent and itinerant Golgi proteins to the endocytic reticulum . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 61 - 72 . Dourmashkin , R . R . , R . M . Dougherty , and R . J . C . Harris . 1962 . Electron mi - croscopic observations on Rous sarcoma virus and cell membranes . Nature ( Lond . ) . 194 : 1116 - 1119 . Draper , R . K . , Y . Goda , F . M . Brodsky , and S . R . Pfeffer . 1990 . Antibodies to clathrin inhibit endocytosis but not recycling to the trans - Golgi network in vitro . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 248 : 1539 - 1541 . D ' Souza - Schorey , C . , G . Li , M . I . Colombo , and P . D . Stahl . 1995 . A regulatory role for ARF6 in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 267 : 1175 - 1178 . Felder , S . , K . Miller , G . Moehren , A . Ullrich , J . Schlessinger , and C . R . Hop - kins . 1990 . Kinase activity controls the sorting of the epidermal growth fac - tor receptor within the multivesicular body . Cell . 61 : 623 - - 634 . Fujiwara , T . , K . Oda , S . Yokoda , A . Takatsuki , and Y . Ikehara . 1988 . Brefeldin A causes disassembly of the Golgi complex and accumulation of secretory proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 18545 - 18552 . Fukuda , M . 1991 . Lysosomal membrane glycoproteins . Structure , biosynthesis , and intracellular trafficking . £ Biol . Chem . 266 : 21327 - 21330 . Futter , C . E . , S . Felder , J . Schlessinger , A . Ullrich , and C . R . Hopkins . 1993 . Annexin I is phosphorylated in the multivesicular body during the process - ing of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Cell Biol . 120 : 77 - 83 . Geuze , H . J . , J . W . Slot , G . J . Strous , H . F . Lodish , and A . L . Schwartz . 1983 . In - tracellular site of asialoglycoprotein receptor - ligand uncoupling : double - label immunoelectron microscopy during receptor - mediated endocytosis . Cell . 32 : 277 - 287 . Geuze , H . J . , J . W . Slot , G . J . Strous , J . Peppard , K . von Figura , A . Hasilik , and A . L . Schwartz . 1984 . lntracellular receptor sorting during endocytosis : com - parative immunoelectron microscopy of multiple receptors in rat liver . Cell . 37 : 195 - 204 . Geuze , H . J . , J . W . Slot , and A . L . Schwartz . 1987 . Membranes of sorting or - ganelles display lateral heterogeneity in receptor distribution . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 1715 - 1723 . Geuze , H . J . , and D . J . Morrr . 1991 . Trans - Golgi reticulum . J . Electron Microsc . 17 : 24 - 34 . Ghosh , R . N . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1995 . Evidence for nonvectorial , retrograde transferrin trafficking in the early endosomes of HEp2 cells . Z Cell Biol . 128 : 549 - 561 . Gruenberg , J . , and K . E . Howell . 1989 . Membrane traffic in endocytosis : in - sights from cell - free assays . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 : 453 - 481 . Guarnieri , F . G . , L . M . Arterburn , M . B . Penno , Y . Cha , and J . T . August . 1993 . The motif tyr - x - x - hydrophobic residue mediates lysosomal membrane tar - geting of lysosome - associated membrane protein 1 . J . BioL Chem . 268 : 1941 - 1946 . Hopkins , C . R . , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1983 . Internalization and processing of transferrin and the transferrin receptor in human carcinoma A431 cells . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 508 - 521 . Hopkins , C . R . , A . Gibson , M . Shipman , and K . Miller . 1990 . Movement of in - ternalized ligand - receptor complexes along a continuous endosomal reticu - lum . Nature ( Lond . ) . 346 : 335 - 339 . Hopkins , C . R . , A . Gibson , M . Shipman , D . K . Strickland , and I . S . Trowbridge . 1994 . In migrating fibroblasts , recycling receptors are concentrated in nar - row tubules in the pericentriolar area , and then routed to the plasma mem - brane of the leading lamella . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 1265 - 1274 . Hunziger , W . . J . A . Whitney , and I . Mellman . 1991 . Selective inhibition of trans - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 132 , 1996 32 cytosis by brefeldin A in MDCK cells . Cell . 64 : 617 - 627 . Keen , J . H . 1990 . Clathrin and associated assembly and disassembly proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 59 : 415 - - 438 . Killisch , I . , P . Steinlein , K . RSmisch , R . Hollinshead , H . Beug , and G . Griffiths . 1992 . Characterization of early and late endocytic compartments of the trans - ferrin cycle . Transferrin receptor antibody blocks erythroid differentiation by trapping the receptor in the early endosome . J . Cell Sci . 103 : 211 - 232 . Klumperman , J . , A . Hille , T . Veenendaal , V . Oorschot , W . Stoorvogel , K . yon Figura , and H . J . Geuze . 1993 . Differences in the endosomal distributions of the two mannose 6 - phosphate receptors . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 997 - 1010 . LeBorgne , R . , A . Schmidt , F . Mauxion , G . Griffiths , and B . Hoflack . 1993 . Binding of AP - 1 Golgi adaptors to membranes requires phosphorylated cy - toplasmic domains of the mannose 6 - phosphate / insulin - like growth factor II receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 22552 - 22556 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , L . C . Yuan , J . S . Bonifacino , and R . D . Klausner . 1989 . Rapid redistribution of Golgi proteins into the ER in cells treated with brefel - din A : evidence for membrane cycling from Golgi to ER . Cell . 56 : 801 - 813 . Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , L . Yuan , C . Tipper , M . Amherdt , L . Orci , and R . D . Klausner . 1991 . Brefeldin A ' s effects on endosomes , lysosomes , and the TGN suggest a general mechanism for regulating organelle structure and membrane traffic . Cell . 67 : 601 - 616 . Luzio , J . P . , and G . Banting . 1993 . Eukaryotic membrane traffic : retrieval and retention mechanisms to achieve organelle residence . Trends Biochem . Sci . 18 : 395 - 398 . Mahaffey , D . T . , J . S . Peeler , F . M . Brodsky , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1990 . Clathrin - coated pits contain an integral membrane protein that binds the AP - 2 subunit with high affinity . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 16514 - 16520 . Marsh , M . , G . Griffiths , G . E . Dean , I . Mellman , and A . Helenius . 1986 . Three - dimensional structure of endosomes in BHK - 21 cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 83 : 2899 - 2903 . Moore , M . S . , D . T . Mahaffey , F . M . Brodsky , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1987 . Assembly of clathrin - coated pits onto purified plasma membranes . Science ( Wash . DC ) , 236 : 558 - 563 . Morris , S . A . , S . Schr6der , U . Plessman , K . Weber , and E . Ungewickell . 1993 . Clathrin assembly protein AP180 : primary structure , domain organization and identification of a clathrin binding site . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) Z 12 : 667 - 675 . N ~ ithke , I . S . , J . Heuser , A . Lupas , J . Stock , C . W . Turck , and F . M . Brodsky . 1992 . Folding and trimerization of clathrin subunits at the triskelion hub . Cell . 68 : 899 - 910 . Padh , H . , J . Ha , M . Lavasa , and T . L . Steck . 1993 . A post - lysosomal compart - ment in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 6742 - 6747 . Pearse , B . , and M . Robinson . 1990 . Clathrin , adaptors and sorting . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 6 : 151 - 171 . Peters , P . J . V . W . Hsu , C . Eng Ooi , D . Finazzi , S . B . Teal , V . Oorschot , J . G . Donaldson , and R . D . Klausner . 1995 . Overexpression of wild - type and mu - tant ARF1 and ARF6 : distinct perturbations of nonoverlapping membrane compartments . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 1003 - 1017 . Pevsner , J . , W . Volknandt , B . R . Wong , and R . H . Scheller . 1994 . Two rat ho - mologs of clathrin - associated adaptor proteins . Gene . 146 : 279 - 283 . Rabinowitz , S . , H . Horstmann , S . Gordon , and G . Griffiths . 1992 . Immunocy - tochemical characterization of the endocytic and phagolysosomal compart - ments in peritoneal macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 95 - 112 . Randazzo , P . A . , Y . C . Yang , C . Rulka , and R . A . Kahn . 1993 . Activation of ADP - ribosylation factor by Golgi membranes : evidence for a brefeldin A - and protease - sensitive activating factor on Golgi membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 9555 - 9563 . Reaves , B . , and G . Banting . 1994 . Overexpression of TGN38 / 41 leads to mislo - calization of ~ / - adaptin . FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Lett . 351 : 448 - 456 . Riederer , M . A . , T . Soldati , A . D . Shapiro , J . Lin , and S . R . Pfeffer . 1994 . Lyso - some biogenesis requires rab9 function and receptor recycling from endo - somes to the trans - Golgi network . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 573 - 582 . Rijnboutt , S . , H . M . F . G . Aerts , H . J . Geuze , J . M . Tager , and G . J . Strous . 1991 . Mannose 6 - phosphate * independent membrane - association of cathep - sin D , glucocerebrosidase and sphingolipid activating protein in HepG2 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 4862 - 4868 . Rijnboutt , S . , W . Stoorvogel , H . J . Geuze , and G . J . Strous . 1992 . Identification of subcellular compartments involved in biosynthetic processing of cathepsin D . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 15665 - 15672 . Robinson , J . M . , and M . J . Karnovsky . 1991 . Rapid - freezing cytochemistry : preservation of tubular lysosomes and enzyme activity . J . Histochem . Cy - tochem . 39 : 787 - 792 . Robinson , M . S . 1994 . The role of clathrin , adaptors and dynamin in endocyto - sis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 6 : 538 - 544 . Rothman , J . E . 1994 . Mechanisms of intracellular protein transport . Nature ( Lond . ) . 372 : 55 - 63 . Ruscetti , T . , J . A . Cardelli , M . L . Niswonger , and T . J . O ' Halloran . 1994 . Clath - rin heavy chain functions in sorting and secretion of lysosomal enzymes in Dictiostelium discoideum . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 343 - 352 . Sandoval , I . V . , and O . Bakke . 1994 . Targeting of membrane proteins to endo - somes and lysosomes . Trends Cell Biol . 4 : 292 - 297 . Schmid , S . L . , and E . Smythe . 1991 . Stage - specific assays for coated pit forma - tion and coated vesicle budding in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 114 : 869 - 880 . Schonhorn , J . E . , and M . Wessling - Resnick . 1994 . Brefeldin A down - regulates the transferrin receptor in K562 cells . Mol . Cell . Biochem . 135 : 159 - 169 . Seaman , M . N . J . , C . L . Ball , and M . S . Robinson . 1993 . Targeting and mistar - geting of plasma membrane adaptors in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 1093 - 1105 . Slot , J . W . , H . J . Geuze , S . Gigengack , G . E . Lienhard , and D . E . James . 1991 . Immuno - localization of the insulin regulatable glucose transporter in brown adipose tissue of the rat . J . Cell Biol . 113 : 123 - 135 . Stamnes , M . A . , and J . E . Rothman . 1993 . The binding of AP - 1 clathrin adaptor particles to Golgi membranes requires ADP - ribosylation factor , a small GTP - binding protein . Cell 73 : 999 - 1005 . Stoorvogel , W . , H . J . Geuze , and G . J . Strous . 1987 . Sorting of endocytosed transferrin and asialoglycoprotein occurs immediately after internalization in HepG2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 1261 - 1268 . Stoorvogel , W . , H . J . Geuze , J . M . Griffith , and G . J . Strous . 1988 . The path - ways of endocytosed transferrin and secretory protein are connected in the tr ans - Golgi reticulum . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 1821 - 1829 . Stoorvogel , W . , H . J . Genze , J . M . Griffith , A . L . Schwartz , and G . J . Strous . 1989 . Relations between the intracellular pathways of the receptors for transferrin , asialoglycoprotein , and mannose 6 - phosphate in human hep - atoma cells . Z Cell BioL 108 : 2137 - 2148 . Stoorvogel , W . , A . L . Schwartz , G . J . Strous , and R . J . Fallon . 1991a . A pool of intracellular phosphorylated asialoglycoprotein receptors which is not in - volved in endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 5438 - 5444 . Stoorvogel , W . , G . J . Strous , H . J . Geuze , and A . L . Schwartz . 1991b . Late en - dosomes derive from early endosomes by maturation . Cell . 65 : 417 - 427 . Strous , G . J . , P . van Kerkhof , G . van Meer , S . Rijnboutt , and W . Stoorvogel . 1993 . Differential effects of brefeldin A on transport of secretory and lysoso - mal proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 2341 - 2347 . Tooze , J . , and M . Hollinshead . 1991 . Tubular early endosomal networks in AtT20 and other cells . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 635 - 653 . Traub , L . M . , J . A . Ostrom , and S . Kornfeld . 1993 . Biochemical dissection of AP - 1 recruitment onto Golgi membranes . Z Cell Biol . 123 : 561 - 573 . Trowbridge , I . S . , J . F . Collawn , and C . R . Hopkins . 1993 . Signal - dependent membrane protein trafficking in the endocytic pathway . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 : 129 - 161 . Wang , L . H . , K . G . Rothberg , and R . G . W . Anderson . 1993 . Mis - assembly of clathrin lattices on endosomes reveals a regulatory switch for coated pit for - mation . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 1107 - 1117 . Wong , S . H . , and W . Hong . 1993 . The SXYQRL sequence in the cytoplasmic domain of TGN38 plays a major role in trans - Golgi network localization . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 22853 - 22862 . Wood , S . A . , J . E . Park , and W . J . Brown . 1991 . Brefeldin A causes a microtu - bule - mediated fusion of the trans - Golgi network and early endosomes . Cell . 67 : 591 - 600 . Stoorvogel et al . Clathrin - coated Vesicles from Endosomes 33