Author’s Accepted Manuscript Role of YAP / TAZ in cell - matrix adhesion - mediated signalling and mechanotransduction Sirio Dupont PII : S0014 - 4827 ( 15 ) 30139 - 7 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2015 . 10 . 034 Reference : YEXCR10098 To appear in : Experimental Cell Research Received date : 16 October 2015 Accepted date : 29 October 2015 Cite this article as : Sirio Dupont , Role of YAP / TAZ in cell - matrix adhesion - mediated signalling and mechanotransduction , Experimental Cell Research , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2015 . 10 . 034 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting galley proof before it is published in its final citable form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . www . elsevier . com / locate / yexcr Role of YAP / TAZ in Role of YAP / TAZ in Role of YAP / TAZ in Role of YAP / TAZ in cellcellcellcell - - - - matrix matrix matrix matrix adhesionadhesionadhesionadhesion - - - - mediated signalling and mediated signalling and mediated signalling and mediated signalling and mechanotransductionmechanotransductionmechanotransductionmechanotransduction Sirio Dupont Department of Molecular Medicine , University of Padua Medical School , Padua , Italy . E - mail : sirio . dupont @ unipd . it AbstractAbstractAbstractAbstract Signalling from the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) is a fundamental cellular input that sustains proliferation , opposes cell death and regulates differentiation . Through integrins , cells perceive both the chemical composition and physical properties of the ECM . In particular , cell behaviour is profoundly influenced by the mechanical elasticity or stiffness of the ECM , which regulates the ability of cells to develop forces through their contractile actomyosin cytoskeleton and to mature focal adhesions . This mechanosensing ability affects fundamental cellular functions , such that alterations of ECM stiffness is nowadays considered not a simple consequence of pathology , but a causative input driving aberrant cell behaviours . We here discuss recent advances on how mechanical signals intersect nuclear transcription and in particular the activity of YAP / TAZ transcriptional coactivators , known downstream transducers of the Hippo pathway and important effectors of ECM mechanical cues . Sirio Dupont , PhD Department of Molecular Medicine School of Medicine University of Padua via Bassi 58 / B 35131 Padua Italy ph . + 390498276095 fax + 390498276079 IIII NTRODUCTIONNTRODUCTIONNTRODUCTIONNTRODUCTION Cells within tissues are surrounded by a complex microenvironment , which is composed by the proteins and macromolecules that compose the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , by the interstitial fluids , by the chemical substances that diffuse in this medium , and by other neighbouring cells . A wealth of data is available on how cells perceive this microenvironment in terms of chemical signalling : this includes classical extracellular signals such as hormones and growth factors , diffusible morphogens , but also chemical compounds such as NO ( nitric oxide ) or even metabolic precursors and intermediates . Cells are however highly sensitive also to the physical properties of their surroundings , including light , heat , fluid movements and osmotic pressure . Similar to growth - factor receptors , molecular sensors exist that translate physical inputs into biochemical signalling events , such as for example rhodopsins , deflection of surface appendages like cilia , ion channels , or modification of membrane - associated structures like caveolae . In turn , these mechanically - induced pathways control a bewildering array of cell behaviors [ 1 - 4 ] . Among multiple physical inputs , the stiffness or elasticity of the ECM is a rather universal mechanical cue that cells perceive and that profoundly control cell behaviour , including the choice between proliferation and death , or biasing differentiation toward different fates according to the changing elasticity of the ECM [ 5 - 8 ] . Exactly how cells monitor the mechanical properties of the microenvironment remains to be determined . The current understanding of this latter ECM mechanosensing ability poses that cells probe the external resisting forces of the ECM and / or neighbouring cells by developing internal forces of increasing magnitude , and somehow measure the degree or velocity of substratum deformation ; in so doing , cells “read” external mechanical forces [ 9 - 11 ] . The ability to probe the mechanical properties of the extracellular space is mainly based on the actin cytoskeleton and on the adhesion complexes that physically connect the cytoskeleton to the ECM . This tenet is based on the observation that inhibiting F - actin polymerization induces similar biological responses to plating cells on soft substrata , and that cells on soft substrata cannot efficiently form F - actin bundles and stress fibers . More precisely , the ability of cells to develop internal forces is based on contractile actin bundles and thus on the activity of myosins and of their upstream regulators ( ROCK and / or MLCK ) , which are indeed also required for cells to sense the mechanical properties of the substratum . The main adhesion complexes that are involved in mechanosensing are the integrin - based focal adhesions [ 12 ] . Integrins are connected with F - actin bundles in a reciprocal feed - forward loop , with formation of nascent focal points promoting the growth of actin bundles , and force development by actin bundles in turn stabilizing and allowing the maturation of focal adhesions [ 8 , 13 , 14 ] . As such , when cells adhere to a stiff substratum through integrin - based adhesions , inhibition of integrins induces similar responses to plating cells on soft substrata . The idea that focal adhesions and contractile F - actin bundles are key for mechanosensing also suggested an involvement of RHO GTPases , well known regulators of stress fibers , and whose activity is also in a mutual reinforcing loop with focal adhesions and F - actin . A possible role for hemidesmosomes has not been extensively tested , possibly because these connect to intermediate filaments , that are considered to provide passive mechanical resistance to strains ; however these can be influenced by mechanical cues and are indirectly linked to the actin cytoskeleton , and might be relevant in tissues where they represent a main ECM receptor structure , such as in the skin [ 15 , 16 ] . Contractile F - actin structures are also present in multi - cellular structures , such as epithelia , but in this case the forces flow mainly across cell - cell adhesion complexes such as cadherin - based adherens junctions , and F - actin contractile bundles are organized along the cell perimeter , in the cortical region of the cytoplasm [ 17 ] . The interface between F - actin and adherens junctions is indeed an important mechanosensing hub [ 18 , 19 ] and forces applied though adherens junctions are important for the morphogenesis of epithelia [ 17 ] . However , despite some evident similarity with cell - substratum mechanosensing , cells respond to cell - cell adhesion mechanical cues in different , sometimes even opposite ways : cell crowding induces cellular responses similar to those induced by seeding individual cells on soft substrata , or inhibiting F - actin contractility . In part , this has been ascribed to the fact that formation of cell - cell junctions inhibits formation of stress fibers ; this however also suggests the interesting possibility that cells can “measure” different pools of contractile F - actin ( i . e . cadherin - linked cortical actin vs . integrin - linked stress fibers – see below ) . The functional observation that cell crowding , which involves the reduction of the cell - substratum adhesion surface , can induce the same biological responses of a soft ECM strongly contributed to the idea that mechanosensing of cell substratum rigidity and of cell geometry are two sides of the same coin [ 20 - 22 ] . Accordingly , seeding cells on top of a stiff 2D substratum , but restraining the adhesive area on which cells can spread , induces similar biological responses to soft substrata , both in terms of decreased formation of actin stress - fibers and reduced stability / maturation of focal adhesions , and in terms of more complex responses such as proliferation or differentiation [ 20 , 23 , 24 ] . This suggests that remodelling of cell morphology is an intrinsic feature enabling cells to gauge extracellular mechanical cues . While it is clear that this type of mechanical stimuli can have profound effects on cell behaviour , the mechanisms that translate these forces into biochemical signalling remain largely unknown . This review reports on recent progress in identifying the molecular players that connect mechanical stimuli to gene transcription , with particular emphasis on the YAP / TAZ transcriptional coregulators . YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ , , , , THEIR REGULATION THEIR REGULATION THEIR REGULATION THEIR REGULATION AND HOW THEY CONTROL AND HOW THEY CONTROL AND HOW THEY CONTROL AND HOW THEY CONTROL GENE TRANSCRIPTION GENE TRANSCRIPTION GENE TRANSCRIPTION GENE TRANSCRIPTION YAP and TAZ are powerful regulators of cell proliferation and survival , and play important roles in controlling organ growth , stem cell self - renewal and cell differentiation [ 25 - 27 ] . The main functions and regulations of YAP / TAZ are conserved throughout evolution , as indicated by studies on their Drosophila homolog Yorkie [ 26 , 28 , 29 ] . YAP and TAZ proteins shuttle between the cytoplasm and the nucleus . In the nucleus they interact with DNA - binding transcription factors , such as TEADs , and contribute to regulate gene expression [ 30 , 31 ] . In the cytoplasm , they can perform additional functions , including the regulation of Wnt signalling [ 32 , 33 ] . YAP and TAZ are regulated by multiple inputs and signalling pathways ( Figure 1 ) , including the Hippo kinase cascade , Wnt signalling and G - protein coupled receptors , and also metabolic pathways such as mevalonate biosynthesis , energy stress , autophagy and glycolysis [ 25 , 34 - 38 ] . The observation that YAP accumulates in the cytoplasm upon inhibitory inputs , together with the observation that mutant forms of YAP unable to bind TEADs are devoid of any biological activity , lead to the idea that the main biological function of YAP is to regulate gene expression in the nucleus . Accumulation of YAP and TAZ in the cytoplasm , or their ubiquitin - dependent degradation , is controlled by phosphorylation by LATS1 / 2 kinases at two main residues , S127 and S381 ( or S397 , depending on the YAP cDNA isoform considered ) ; the precise mechanism by which phosphorylation regulates YAP / TAZ localization and activity is still elusive , but it includes the binding of 14 - 3 - 3 proteins to S127 . These points have been recently discussed in a series of excellent and exhaustive reviews . DDDD ISCOVERY OF ISCOVERY OF ISCOVERY OF ISCOVERY OF YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ AS MECHANOTRANSDUCER AS MECHANOTRANSDUCER AS MECHANOTRANSDUCER AS MECHANOTRANSDUCERSSSS The serendipitous discovery that YAP / TAZ can be regulated by the F - actin cytoskeleton , and their connection with ECM stiffness and geometry sensing , was independently carried out by several groups . In particular , three main findings made this connection very strong from the very beginning : 1 ) in Drosophila cells and tissues , knockdown or mutation of key F - actin limiting factors , and in particular of the F - actin capping protein CAPZ , induce an increase of Yorkie activity , while F - actin inhibition causes Yorkie inhibition [ 39 , 40 ] . Noteworthy , CAPZ was identified in an unbiased screening for regulators of Yorkie , suggesting a quantitatively important role ; 2 ) in mammalian cell systems , YAP / TAZ activity and nucleo / cytoplasmic shuttling were found to be profoundly regulated by both ECM elasticity and cell geometry , and instrumental for cells to carry out the corresponding biological responses to mechanical inputs [ 41 , 42 ] . These studies also pointed to a key role of F - actin contractility as required element to sustain YAP / TAZ activity . 3 ) YAP / TAZ activity was found inhibited upon cell detachment , which also suggested a role for the actin cytoskeleton and RHO activity [ 41 , 43 ] . Collectively , these findings made a coherent picture indicating two main concepts : that YAP / TAZ activity in cell culture and in Drosophila tissues is sustained by F - actin ; and that this connection is relevant to enable cellular responses to mechanical cues such as ECM elasticity and cell geometry [ 44 ] . YAP / TAZ are thus nuclear and active when cells can spread over a stiff ECM substratum , cytoplasmic and inactive when cells take on a rounded shape ( Figure 2 ) . Importantly , the control of YAP / TAZ by mechanical cues is not only conserved between vetrebrates and invetrebrates , but is shared by very different cell types , including now epithelial and mesenchymal , embryonic and adult , primary and transformed cells , and can thus be considered a very general molecular mechanism . These concepts were further extended building along the analogy between cell crowding and a small cell shape , by showing that control of YAP / TAZ by cell geometry is actually a built - in mechanism underlying YAP / TAZ inhibition during contact - inhibition of growth [ 45 ] . Indeed contact inhibition occurs only when projected cell area falls below a certain threshold , and stretching a cell monolayer to increase cell area , but without disrupting cell - cell contacts , is sufficient to induce YAP nuclear localization and reactivate cell proliferation [ 45 , 46 ] ( Figure 2 ) . Contact inhibition obviously entails multiple parallel events in addition to remodelling of cell geometry , including formation of cell - cell junctions , reinforcing of apico - basal polarity , and activation of the Hippo kinase cascade [ 47 , 48 ] . However , at least in immortalized mammary cells , remodelling of the cytoskeleton is a dominant event required for contact inhibition of YAP / TAZ , because only upon depletion of F - actin capping / severing proteins it was possible to rescue YAP / TAZ activity and visualize the functional involvement of other YAP / TAZ regulatory inputs , including LATS1 / 2 [ 45 ] . As discussed here below , these studies established not only that YAP / TAZ activity and nucleo / cytoplasmic shuttling can be a faithful read - out of ECM mechanical cues and F - actin contractility ( see Box ) , but that YAP / TAZ are fundamental for cells to translate this information into coherent gene expression programs and cell behaviours . Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and stem cell differentiation Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and stem cell differentiation Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and stem cell differentiation Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and stem cell differentiation As anticipated in the introduction , much of what is known on mechanotransduction by ECM stiffness and cell geometry is based on the cellular phenotypes that are modulated by these mechanical cues . In particular , mesenchymal stem cells and their ability to differentiate into different cell types were key to the field : pioneering work introduced the notion that adhesive and mechanical cues could instruct cell differentiation acting dominantly over cytokine signalling , shifting the differentiation program of multipotent MSC from osteogenic cells in conditions of high adhesion / spreading , to myogenic cells in intermediate conditions , to adipogenic and neurogenic cells when cells are forced to take on a rounded small shape or lack of a tensile cytoskeleton [ 20 , 49 - 52 ] . It was thus important that the link between YAP / TAZ and mechanical cues was established by using the same cells and phenotypes , showing that YAP / TAZ activity is on its turn dominant over mechanical cues to sustain osteogenic differentiation and to oppose adipogenesis [ 41 ] . The requirement of YAP / TAZ for MSC differentiation has also been used to study YAP / TAZ function and regulatory inputs , including Wnt and PKA [ 32 , 53 , 54 ] , independently of mechanical cues . A possible link between mesenchymal stem cell differentiation and cytoskeletal / adhesive / mechanical cues had also been suggested by gene knockout experiments in mouse , where inactivation of p190RHOGAP induces defective adipogenesis because of increased RHO activity , and showed at least in vitro a bias toward myogenic differentiation [ 55 ] . The opposite phenotype , i . e . defective osteogenesis with increased adipogenesis , was instead observed in mice knockout for the MT1 - MMP metalloproteinase [ 56 , 57 ] . In this case , the authors observed that this differentiation defect could be recapitulated in vitro only when MSC were cultured embedded in a 3D collagen matrix , but not in 2D . They thus came to the interesting conclusion that MT1 - MMP - / - MSC are unable to remodel the collagen ECM and to “dig” enough space to permit efficient integrin adhesions , stress fiber formation , and YAP / TAZ activity ( Figure 2 ) . Of note , in this 3D culture conditions cell shape is dominant over ECM stiffness : 3D collagen gels are typically in a stiffness range that supports YAP / TAZ activity and osteogenesis [ 41 , 50 ] , but if the ECM cannot be remodelled the cells are kept in a small / rounded shape that inhibits YAP / TAZ [ 57 ] . Similarly , restraining cell - adhesion area over a 2D stiff substratum inhibits YAP / TAZ . These results would suggest that the ultimate determinant of YAP / TAZ activity downstream of mechanical cues is the degree of spreading , more than the actual elasticity of the ECM . This is also supported by the observation that cells sitting on soft micropillars and subjected to cyclic stretching can develop stress fibers , spread and activate YAP , even if the substratum is formally a soft one [ 58 ] . Another stem cell system where mechanical and cytoskeletal cues play key roles in regulating differentiation through YAP / TAZ are human pluripotent stem cells ( hPS ) . In conditions ( i . e . chemical medium ) favouring self - renewal and pluripotency , the GEF AKAP13 or AKAP - Lbc is required for hES self - renewal by regulating RHO / ROCK signalling , remodelling of the actomyosin cytoskeleton , and YAP / TAZ activity [ 59 ] . These findings are in line with previous data showing a requirement for TAZ for hES self - renewal [ 60 ] . Interestingly , the phenotype due to loss of AKAP - Lbc could be rescued at least in part by loss of Cofilin ( i . e . an increase in F - actin ) , or by an increase in YAP activity , indicating also here a key function of F - actin capping / severing proteins in mechanotransduction . Suprisingly , RHO / ROCK / actomyosin signalling has a well - known proapoptotic role in dissociated hES cells , which is regulated by a dedicated GEF , ABR [ 61 , 62 ] ; although the apoptotic mechanisms downstream of ROCK remain largely unknown , the general anti - apoptotic activity of YAP / TAZ , and their inactivation upon cell detachment from the substratum , make them unlikely candidates to mediate also these effects . This indicates that contractile actomyosin pools can perform opposite functions depending on the conditions . In keeping with the finding that YAP / TAZ actively support hES self - renewal , two recent studies showed that culturing hES cells on compliant substrata , leading to inhibition of YAP / TAZ , enhanced differentiation efficiency toward neural lineages , which could be recapitulated by inhibition of actomyosin contractility or direct YAP depletion [ 63 , 64 ] . It remains to be determined whether the ability of YAP / TAZ to inhibit hES cell differentiation depends on their well - known ability to promote proliferation , or rather on some more specific self - renewal - promoting function . Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and the cardiovascular system Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and the cardiovascular system Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and the cardiovascular system Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and the cardiovascular system Mechanical forces are particularly important in the cardio - vascular system [ 65 ] . The heart and vessels not only generate the driving force for circulation and actively regulate blood flow and pressure , but in turn respond and remodel themselves in response to fluid shear stress , laminar vs . turbulent flow , and blood pressure . These responses are important to guide the morphogenesis of the heart , blood and lymph vessels , but also for the formation of hematopoietic cells during embryogenesis [ 66 - 68 ] . Thus , not by chance endothelial cells are , together with MSC , a key model system to study mechanotransduction [ 23 , 69 , 70 ] and the involvement of YAP / TAZ [ 41 ] . A role for YAP / TAZ in vascular biology has been primarily suggested by the defects in the formation of the yolk sac vasculature observed in YAP germline or endothelial - specific knockout embryos [ 71 , 72 ] . Yap is also required in endothelial cells of the endocardium for the correct development of atrioventricular valves [ 72 ] . Interestingly , development of these structures id deeply influenced by hemodynamic forces [ 73 , 74 ] . A direct involvement of YAP in mechanoresponsive vascular remodelling was observed in lymph vessels , where Foxc2 deletion induced excessive fluid shear stress sensing , excessive TAZ activation , and pathological remodelling [ 75 ] . Moreover , YAP / TAZ participate in regulating key responses to cell - cell adhesions [ 76 ] , which are considered important shear stress mechanosensors in endothelial cells [ 65 ] . In future it will be interesting to better understand the role of YAP / TAZ in the vascular system , and if their regulation by mechanical cues is involved in vascular remodelling . Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and fibrosis Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and fibrosis Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and fibrosis Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and fibrosis One of the first experimental indications that cell shape and ECM physical ( rather than chemical ) properties were sufficient to influence cell proliferation has been obtained with fibroblasts [ 77 , 78 ] . Fibroblasts biology is deeply connected to the ECM , because fibroblasts are the main cell type responsible for ECM production in connective tissues . In several fibrotic pathologies fibroblasts are found in an activated form and actively contribute to ECM cross - linking and stiffening ; in turn , a stiffer ECM activates a fibrotic positive feedback loop by sustaining fibroblast activation , which maintains or even amplifies the disease [ 79 - 81 ] . A similar condition is found in the stroma of several solid tumours , where cancer cells can initiate ECM stiffening , or indirectly favour fibroblast activation through inflammatory reactions . These activated fibroblasts , or CAFs ( cancer - associated fibroblasts ) , in turn play an active role in ECM remodelling and produce soluble factors , ultimately conspiring with cancer cells to promote their migration and metastatic behaviour . Recent findings indicate that during idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis , CCL4 - induced hepatic stellate cell activation , and mammary tumour CAFs activation , this feedback loop is based on mechanical activation of YAP / TAZ in fibroblasts : not only YAP / TAZ are activated by ECM stiffness and are required for the activation and proliferation of fibroblasts , but they transcriptionally regulate key effectors of matrix stiffening and cell contractility , supporting inside - out collagen matrix remodelling [ 82 - 84 ] . These findings suggest that YAP / TAZ might represent interesting targets for therapies aimed at reducing tissue fibrosis , or at preventing excessive scar formation such as keloids . Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and Mechanical cues , YAP / TAZ and breastbreastbreastbreast cancercancercancercancer A system where ECM stiffness deeply influences cell behaviour is the mammary gland , and in particular mammary cancer [ 85 - 87 ] . Mammary gland develops embedded into soft adipose tissue , while tumors are typically stiffer than the normal tissue . This is due to remodelling of the ECM by cancer cells themselves , helped by stromal cells such as CAFs and inflammatory cells , and is commonly used as a diagnostic tool to screen patients for early lesions . ECM stiffening however is not only a consequence of tumour development , but is instead important to sustain cancer proliferation and malignant behaviours such as loss of apico - basal cell polarity , local invasiveness and migration , ultimately promoting metastasis [ 88 - 90 ] . Breast cancer cells are a model system to study ECM stiffness mechanosensing , and its connections with YAP / TAZ : cells inactivate YAP / TAZ and become growth arrested when cultured embedded in soft ECM mimicking the normal breast elasticity , while sustain YAP / TAZ activity , keep on proliferating and display invasive phenotypes in a stiffer ECM . YAP / TAZ are required for the phenotypes induced by a stiff ECM , and are sufficient to overcome the tumour - suppressive effects of a soft ECM . Moreover , reinforcing the actin cytoskeleton by depletion of capping / severing proteins is sufficient to reactivate YAP / TAZ on a soft matrix , restarting cell proliferation [ 45 ] . YAP / TAZ also sustain the production of Laminin511 and autocrine activation of integrins , which feedback on YAP / TAZ to sustain breast cancer cell tumorigenic activity [ 91 ] . This correlates well with the observation that YAP / TAZ activity is increased in more advanced and aggressive human mammary tumours in regions of higher collagen crosslinking [ 90 ] , and with the ability of YAP / TAZ to foster tumour - seeding ability and cancer stem cell content [ 48 , 92 ] . Finally , this might have implications for tumour treatment , as ECM stiffness promotes , though YAP / TAZ , the resistance of breast cancer cells to therapeutics [ 48 , 93 ] . Recent data connected YAP / TAZ activity also to normal mammary epithelium biology , where they favour the formation of basal / myoepithelial cells [ 94 ] . Interestingly , ECM stiffness can reduce luminal differentiation , by acting through YAP / TAZ , in young but not in aged human multipotent breast progenitors , which are less sensitive to ECM cues and YAP activity [ 95 ] . This would suggest and age - dependent regulation of YAP / TAZ mechanotransduction function , at least in the mammary gland . How How How How many mechanical cues can regulate many mechanical cues can regulate many mechanical cues can regulate many mechanical cues can regulate YAP / TAZ ? YAP / TAZ ? YAP / TAZ ? YAP / TAZ ? Data discussed so far established a connection between YAP / TAZ and specific mechanical cues such as ECM stiffness and cell geometry , such that YAP / TAZ localization and activity are now established read - outs for these phenotypes . Cells can be however exposed to other types of mechanical cues , raising the issue of which mechanical cues regulate YAP / TAZ , and which do not . Recent studies showed that shear stress facilitates MSC differentiation into osteogenic cells by sustaining TAZ [ 52 , 96 ] , and cyclic stretching is sufficient to promote formation of a tensile cytoskeleton , and thus of nuclear YAP , in fibroblasts seeded on a soft substratum [ 58 ] , or in cells undergoing contact inhibition [ 97 ] . Moreover , YAP / TAZ have been proposed to mediate pathological shear stress sensing in FoxC2 knockout lympatic vessels [ 75 ] . Given the pervasive presence of shear stresses and cyclic stretching in real tissues , these results may suggest novel physiological or pathological implications for the mechano - YAP / TAZ axis . HHHH OW OW OW OW IS IS IS IS YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ ACTIVITY CONNECTED T ACTIVITY CONNECTED T ACTIVITY CONNECTED T ACTIVITY CONNECTED TO MECHANICAL CUES O MECHANICAL CUES O MECHANICAL CUES O MECHANICAL CUES ? ? ? ? Despite many efforts , the jury is still out on the molecular mechanisms by which ECM stiffness and cell shape control YAP / TAZ activity ( Figure 3 ) . Several different mechanisms and molecules have been proposed to play a role , but none so far can fully account for YAP / TAZ regulation , i . e . from subcellular localization to transcriptional activity and biological readouts in the cellular model systems that defined mechanotransduction in the first place . ActoActoActoActomyosinmyosinmyosinmyosin The most important question , on which no clue is yet available , is what mediates the conversion of mechanical cues into biochemical signalling . Clearly myosin activity and tension across junctional structures is a fundamental element , but how this is translated into signalling mechanisms still eludes our understanding [ 9 , 11 ] . One obvious candidate is actin itself , or rather the ratio between polymerized F - actin and free G - actin : intuitively , when cells are confined or on a soft substratum , the disassembly of stress fibers should set free G - actin , and this could in turn inhibit YAP / TAZ in a similar manner to the regulation of MAL / MRTF cofactors [ 98 ] . This hypothesis is however at odds with the observation that keratynocytes on small patterns display increased G - actin and reduced MAL / MRTF activity [ 99 ] , and that unbalancing the F / G - actin ratio by means of overexpressed mutant actin was able to regulate MAL / MRTF but not YAP / TAZ activity [ 41 ] . Moreover , while it is true that soft ECM and small patterns inhibit stress fibers , it is also clear that cells in these conditions can still polymerize cortical phalloidin - positive F - actin structures ; in the case of contact - inhibition , as discussed above , cortical actin is even contractile and transduce forces between neighbouring cells , but nonetheless YAP / TAZ are inhibited . This may suggest that different pools of F - actin perform different functions . For example , small - molecule inhibition of ARP2 / 3 activity , typically producing branched F - actin structures , was uneffective in regulating YAP / TAZ , at difference with inhibition of Formins that preferentially promote formation of F - actin bundles [ 45 ] . Inactivation of YAP / TAZ once actomyosin is inhibited is a rather fast process , occurring in the range of 20 minutes - 1hour , and can also be reversed rather rapidly by washing out cytoskeleton inhibitors , by changing substrate stiffness or by stretching a cell monolayer to increase cell size [ 41 , 45 , 58 , 100 ] . Moreover , cytoplasmic accumulation of YAP induced upon inhibition of actomyosin can be reversed by treatment of cells with the CRM1 nuclear export inhibitor LeptomycinB [ 41 , 101 ] . Thus , even if we do not yet understand the underlying molecular mechanism , these observations indicate a direct regulation of YAP / TAZ by mechanical cues , which mainly affects the rate of YAP exclusion from the nuclear compartment , rather than its cytoplasmic retention ( Figure 3 ) . Focal adhesions and integrins Focal adhesions and integrins Focal adhesions and integrins Focal adhesions and integrins Another possibility is that some molecular component of the focal adhesions is regulated by mechanical tension , by changing its recruitment or enzymatic activity , and this component also regulates YAP / TAZ . In this case , F - actin contractility would act in a mutual reinforcing loop with focal adhesions , which would be the true mechanotransducer . Indeed some proteins , such as vinculin or zyxin , have been shown to be differentially recruited and / or to change conformation upon cytoskeletal tension , and the focal adhesion itself is a mechanosensitive structure that can change composition according to traction forces [ 102 - 104 ] ; accordingly , focal adhesions cannot fully mature when cells are seeded on small patterns , and likely on soft substrata . However , the studies on the mechanosensitive properties of focal adhesions have not been carried out in the same conditions used to study mechanoresponsive behaviours , and the relevance of key focal adhesion components for mechanoresponsive differentiation / growth remains uncharacterized . Experiments on focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) suggest a counterintuitive role , as FAK was found required to destabilize focal adhesions on small patterns , and thus for inhibition of growth [ 105 ] . Clearly , when integrins are the main receptors to allow cell spreading , integrins are fundamental for mechanosensitive phenotypes , and thus by association for YAP / TAZ activity : all the main mechanosensitive phenotypes that are induced through YAP / TAZ also depend on integrin - mediated adhesion [ 23 , 24 , 41 , 42 , 49 , 51 , 77 , 106 ] . Moreover , knockout of integrin - v in osteoblasts impairs fluid shear stress - induced transcription and YAP / TAZ nuclear localization [ 107 ] . Along the same line , the ILK adaptor protein , that participates in anchoring F - actin to focal adhesions and is required for force generation across integrins [ 108 ] , sustains YAP / TAZ nuclear localization [ 109 ] and is involved in the development of phenotype that could be related to YAP / TAZ , such as bleomycin - induced fibrosis [ 79 , 110 ] . Genetic inactivation of ILK in the liver induces however phenotypes consistent with YAP activation , such as enhanced proliferation and hepatomegaly [ 111 ] , and would thus indicate an antagonistic function of ILK in this organ . Data suggests a YAP / TAZ - promoting activity also for Src , which is closely related to integrins and focal - adhesions , in CAFs and cancer cells [ 84 , 112 ] , and for FAK and SRC in extreme conditions of serum deprivation , where integrins mainly support growth - factor signalling [ 113 ] ; a requirement for FAK was not observed however in normal conditions [ 43 ] . Finally , despite all data point to a key role of integrins , cell spreading over poly - L - Lysine coated substrata , where adhesion is not primarily mediated by focal adhesions [ 114 - 116 ] still support YAP nuclear localization [ 43 ] . This suggests that adhesion receptors alternative to integrins can equally support the mechano - YAP / TAZ axis , and that YAP / TAZ activity is sustained by mechanism ( s ) that are not specific for the type of adhesion or the type of integrin , but rather depends on downstream common events ( i . e . a tensed cytoskeleton and a spread cell shape ) . Cell morphology Cell morphology Cell morphology Cell morphology and membrane dynamics and membrane dynamics and membrane dynamics and membrane dynamics The possibility exists that one crucial regulatory element is cell morphology itself . Data discussed above indicates that cell shape is dominant over substratum stiffness , but the cellular effects of a rounded morphology has not been extensively characterized , besides the effects on stress fibers and focal adhesion maturation . Clearly , it is very hard to experimentally decouple stress fiber inhibition from changes in cell shape . Nonetheless , it is possible that a rounded morphology directly regulates some mechanosensor at the level of cell membranes , for example the recruitment of molecules able to detect membrane curvature , or by an indirect effect on endocytosis , which can be regulated by osmotic signals [ 2 , 117 ] . Moreover , mechanical cues are well known to regulate the activity of ion channels , such as TRPC or the recently identified mechanoresponsive Piezo channels [ 1 , 118 , 119 ] . Piezo1 was discovered as a channel mediating shear stress or stretch - induced Calcium currents , but was recently shown to also mediate spontaneous Calcium currents in neurons , in a manner dependent on cytoskeletal tension ; moreover , these currents are required in human neural stem cells to regulate the choice between astrogenesis and neurogenesis in response to matrix stiffness , and also influence YAP nuclear localization [ 120 ] . This might reflect the requirement of Piezo for integrin activation and cell adhesion [ 121 ] , or a more direct effect of Calcium signalling on YAP / TAZ that remains to be tested . An ideal system would be mesenchymal stem cells , where mechano - dependent Calcium currents have also been observed [ 122 , 123 ] . Nuclear mechanics Nuclear mechanics Nuclear mechanics Nuclear mechanics The nuclear envelope fomed by lamins play a crucial role in maintaining nuclear shape and positioning in cells , and provides the nucleus with cell - type specific mechanical properties [ 124 , 125 ] . Nuclear shapes responds to substratum mechanics , and this has been suggested to regulate mechanorepsonses [ 126 ] . The nuclear cytoskeleton is directly connected to cytosolic F - actin by the nesprin / sun protein complexes . The functional importance of this connection is indicated by their mutation in similar pathologies such as progeria [ 3 , 127 ] . This suggested the interesting hypothesis that mechanical signals such as tissue stiffness or cell shape can be directly transmitted to the nucleus , influencing protein nucleo / cytoplasmic transports or chromatin dynamics [ 128 ] . Recently , Swift et al . observed that Lamin A protein levels correlate with tissue stiffness and that Lamin A is unfolded and phosphorylated in response to mechanical stimuli , enhancing the sensitivity of MSC to mechanical - induced differentiation through RARG and possibly YAP proteins [ 129 ] . Moreover , a link between YAP and Nesprin / Lamin A was suggested in the context of muscle precursor cell and MSC differentiation [ 130 , 131 ] . The connection between the nucleus and F - actin might even be more direct : actin can shuttle in and out of the nucleus , and several observations suggest the potential for nuclear F - actin formation . This appears sufficient for example to regulate the activity of MAL / MRTF cofactors , and has been linked to the ability of oocytes to reprogram Oct4 transcription [ 132 - 135 ] . It is thus possible that YAP / TAZ activity is regulated directly in the nucleus by F - actin polymerization ; alternatively , given the recent connection between YAP / TAZ and super - enhancers [ 31 , 136 - 138 ] , the possibility also exists that nuclear F - actin and mechanics intersects YAP / TAZ activity at the level of chromatin . Hippo signalling Hippo signalling Hippo signalling Hippo signalling The observation that YAP / TAZ proteins are mainly localized to the cytoplasm when cells are seeded on a soft ECM , on a small adhesive pattern or when F - actin is inhibited suggested an involvement of the Hippo cascade , that triggers similar YAP cytoplasmic accumulation . This parallel extends to increased LATS activity and increased LATS - dependent YAP phosphorylation at key lysine residues when F - actin is inhibited [ 42 , 43 , 139 ] . The fact however that Phospho - S127 YAP , i . e . LATS - phosphorylated YAP , is found mainly in the nucleus when cells can freely spread on a stiff ECM [ 42 ] , contradicts the idea that LATS - phosphorylated YAP is automatically excluded form the nucleus . Moreover , when the involvement of LATS was challenged not by just looking at YAP phosphorylation , but at YAP / TAZ transcriptional activity and biological read - outs ( cell proliferation , differentiation , etc . ) , the results suggested that LATS activation was not a required event , or at least not sufficient to account for the regulation of YAP / TAZ by mechanical signals [ 41 , 45 , 140 , 141 ] . In line with the idea that LATS activation is only part of the mechano - YAP / TAZ axis , when YAP / TAZ are inhibited by cell crowding their activity cannot be significantly increased by LATS1 / 2 depletion , unless the cells have been also depleted of F - actin capping / severing proteins to reactivate actomyosin [ 45 ] . Similar results were obtained in Drosophila , where depletion of CAPZ and depletion of LATS cooperated in promoting tissue growth , which would not be expected if CAPZ works through LATS [ 39 , 40 ] . Finally , ECM stiffness is still able to regulate the invasive activity of breast cancer cells expressing Hippo - insensitive TAZ , indicating that Hippo and ECM stiffness act in parallel [ 45 ] . The picture is also complicated by the observation that MST and LATS kinases can also regulate F - actin directly ( i . e . independently on YAP / TAZ ) both in mammalian systems and in Drosophila [ 39 , 142 - 145 ] . During mechanotransduction , this makes hard to untangle whether LATS plays a primary role as direct YAP / TAZ inhibitor rather than an indirect inhibitor of F - actin formation . RHORHORHORHO The possibility exists that mechanical signals regulate YAP / TAZ through parallel and redundant mechanisms . For example , RHO is usually considered as an integral component of mechanosensing : RHO regulates ROCK and stress fiber formation , and it sustains focal adhesion maturation ; conversely , inhibition of RHO elicits similar phenotypes to small patterns , soft ECM substrata , or F - actin inhibition [ 20 , 55 ] . The finding that RHO is also required for YAP / TAZ activity suggested a coherent involvement [ 41 , 43 ] . Recent studies in the context of RHO regulation by mevalonate metabolism or Gq / 11 signaling however indicates that RHO regulates YAP / TAZ in a phosphorylation - dependent manner ( and thus , in a different way than F - actin and mechanical cues ) , but in a LATS - independent manner as well [ 35 , 140 , 141 ] . Collectively , this indicates that RHO contributes to the mechano - YAP / TAZ regulation , but that RHO is not sufficient to account for it . Indeed so far all data linking RHO to mechanoresponsive phenotypes is based on loss - of - function data , but evidence is lacking that activating RHO might be sufficient to overcome mechanical cues . ERK / JNK ERK / JNK ERK / JNK ERK / JNK / p38 / p38 / p38 / p38 signallingsignallingsignallingsignalling Several reports implied MAPK signalling in mechanotransduction responses , as MAPK activation can change according to mechanical stimuli . For example , the differential activation of ERK might reflect the inhibited response to growth - factor signalling observed in cells on soft ECM or upon crowding [ 146 - 149 ] . Moreover , the control of fibroblast proliferation in large vs . small patterned substrata entails the reciprocal control of Ternary complex factors by p38 and JNK signalling , ultimately impacting on early response gene transcription [ 150 ] . As for YAP / TAZ , JNK inhibition by the SP600125 small molecule inhibits YAP nuclear localization [ 97 ] . Similar results were obtained also in mesenchymal stem cells , where ERK or JNK inhibitors modulates TAZ activity and osteogenic differentiation in response to ECM stiffness [ 151 ] . While the requirement for the different MAPK branches differs widely in these studies , likely due to the extensive crosstalk between ERK , JNK and p38 signaling , a common emerging theme is that JNK is required to sustain YAP nuclear localization , in keeping with data in Drosophila where JNK sustains Yorkie activity in stressed conditions [ 152 , 153 ] ; it is not clear however whether JNK can be sufficient to rescue YAP / TAZ inhibition , or whether this indicates a parallel function for JNK . Caution should be taken also because mechanoresponsive phenotypes are not uniquely dependent on mechanical signals but also require “chemical” growth - factor signalling , whose MAPK - regulatory potential is wide ; moreover , data showing YAP / TAZ regulation were based on the use of a single small - molecule inhibitor of incomplete specificity [ 154 ] , and on transcription of CTGF and Cyr61 , whose transcription is directly regulated by MAPK - sensitive AP1 factors acting in concert with YAP / TAZ [ 31 ] . YAP / TAZ feedback on cell mechanics YAP / TAZ feedback on cell mechanics YAP / TAZ feedback on cell mechanics YAP / TAZ feedback on cell mechanics Given the important connection between cell mechanics and YAP / TAZ activity , it is perhaps not surprising that YAP / TAZ on their turn can affect the cytoskeleton and cell mechanics . This idea was mainly developed in the context of fibroblast biology , where YAP / TAZ are activated by ECM stiffening but also promote inside - out ECM remodelling stiffening [ 83 , 84 ] . Also in breast cancer cells , YAP / TAZ sustain an autocrine loop based on synthesis of Laminin 511 and integrin activation [ 91 ] . An unexpected connection between tissue mechanics and YAP was also found in medaka , where YAP is required for overall embryonic body tension [ 155 ] . Other connections between the cytoskeleton and YAP / TAZ activity Other connections between the cytoskeleton and YAP / TAZ activity Other connections between the cytoskeleton and YAP / TAZ activity Other connections between the cytoskeleton and YAP / TAZ activity The potential for regulation of YAP / TAZ activity by the cytoskeleton is wide , and likely goes beyond mechanotranduction as defined by the above - described inputs , cellular systems and phenotypic read - outs . Many YAP / TAZ - interacting proteins can bind actin , or can be in principle regulated by the cytoskeleton . This includes NF2 / merlin , angiomotins , alpha - catenin , MST , LATS , and CDC42 in mammalian systems [ 142 - 145 , 156 , 157 ] , and proteins functionally related to Hippo signalling in Drosophila such as Expanded , Zyxin , Ajuba , the atypical myosin Dchs , beta - pix and Spectrins [ 158 - 163 ] . However , in the tissues where they regulate YAP / TAZ , these proteins are intimately connected to cell - cell adhesion complexes and / or cortical actin [ 164 ] , which is per sé , at least in Drosophila , a regulator of Yorkie [ 161 - 163 ] . This is different from CAPZ , which regulates Yorkie / YAP not only in tissues and cell monolayers but also in isolated cells [ 40 , 45 ] . As discussed above , the cortical cytoskeleton has important mechanical functions and transduce forces within epithelia , and indeed NF2 localization and activity is regulated by cortical actomyosin tension in static vs . migrating epithelial cells , contributing to the regulation of long - range interactions required for collective cell migration [ 165 ] , even if the relevance for YAP / TAZ regulation has not been addressed . In the future , it will be important to determine whether these proteins are relevant for the responses to ECM stiffness and cell geometry , or whether they mediate distinct mechanical inputs from different pools of actin , all converging on YAP / TAZ regulation . Concluding remarks Concluding remarks Concluding remarks Concluding remarks The discovery of YAP / TAZ as readers and effectors of ECM mechanical cues and of F - actin cytoskeletal dynamics was a step further in understanding how cells perceive mechanical cues , but also opened a number of questions that I pointed out throughout the review . Several issues remain opened , and will deserve future studies , including what are the molecular mechanisms underlying YAP / TAZ regulation , what are the mechanisms translating physical forces into biochemical signalling , and whether these findings can help us to better understand the physiology and pathology of tissues and organisms . Indeed much remains to do to connect YAP / TAZ to mechanical forces during development , tissue homeostasis and disease . AcknowledgementsAcknowledgementsAcknowledgementsAcknowledgements Work in the Dupont lab is supported by AIRC ( Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro , grant IG15307 ) and WCR ( Worldwide Cancer Research , grant 15 - 1192 ) . We apologize to colleagues whose work we could not cite because of space constraints . BOX : using YAP / TAZ as read BOX : using YAP / TAZ as read BOX : using YAP / TAZ as read BOX : using YAP / TAZ as read - - - - outs outs outs outs and readers and readers and readers and readers of mechanical cues of mechanical cues of mechanical cues of mechanical cues The discovery of YAP / TAZ as downstream effectors of mechanical cues was rapidly adopted as a bona - fide read - out of mechanical cues and actomyosin tension . We here briefly summarize some technical tips to better visualize and quantitate variations in YAP / TAZ activity in response to mechanical inputs . 1 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ n 1 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ n 1 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ n 1 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ nucleo / cytoplasmic shuttling ucleo / cytoplasmic shuttling ucleo / cytoplasmic shuttling ucleo / cytoplasmic shuttling by by by by immunofluorescent stainings . immunofluorescent stainings . immunofluorescent stainings . immunofluorescent stainings . YAP endogenous subcellular localization ( as measured by the relative number of cells displaying prevalent nuclear , equal nuclear vs . cytoplasmic , or prevalent cytoplasmic staining ) rapidly and quantitatively responds to cytoskeletal cues [ 41 , 42 ] . This can be also implemented for automated image processing by calculating the ratio between nuclear vs . perinuclear intensity [ 35 , 166 ] . Care should be taken if using TAZ - specific antibodies , because TAZ is potently regulated at the level of proteasomal degradation [ 41 , 48 , 167 ] , and this likely targets the cytosolic fraction ; thus , some antibodies may visualize the remaining nuclear TAZ fraction also in conditions where YAP is excluded ( data not shown ) . It is also important to validate new antibodies and to double - check lot - to - lot variation with positive controls for nuclear exclusion , such as for example 5microM Cerivastatin [ 35 ] , or Latrunculin A treatment at doses sufficient to round - up cells [ 41 ] . 2 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity 2 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity 2 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity 2 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity by by by by LLLLuciferase uciferase uciferase uciferase reporters . reporters . reporters . reporters . Different luciferase reporters exist to monitor YAP / TAZ activity [ 30 , 41 , 168 , 169 ] , [ 30 , 41 , 168 , 169 ] . The advantage of using a transcriptional reporter is that it quantitatively integrates variations of YAP / TAZ activity and informs on their actual net biological activity . Mechanical regulation of YAP / TAZ has so far been visualized mainly based on the 8xGTIIC - luciferase reporter bearing multimerized TEAD binding elements ( deposited at Addgene as plasmid # 34615 ) , which also responds to several YAP / TAZ regulatory inputs including RHO , Statins , Glucose , Cell - crowding , NF2 , ROCK inhibition , Latrunculin A , and soft ECM substrata . Reporters based on the natural YAP / TEAD - responsive region of endogenous promoters , such as CTGF for example , are intrinsically less specific because they also contain other transcription - binding sites that can regulate the reporter in absence of variations in YAP / TAZ activity . It should also be noted that inhibition of F - actin ( with LatrunculinA ) or RHO inhibition ( by C3 or DN - RHO ) to perform functional epistasis experiments might be misleading , because this invariably inhibits YAP / TAZ activity , similarly to the use of YAP / TAZ siRNA . In other words , any YAP / TAZ activating input can be shown to act “trough F - actin” or “through RHO” , even if it does not regulates F - actin and RHO . 3333 ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity by ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity by ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity by ) Monitoring YAP or TAZ activity by endogenous gene target endogenous gene target endogenous gene target endogenous gene target transcriptiontranscriptiontranscriptiontranscription . . . . When YAP / TAZ are inhibited , this can be readily observed by performing real - time PCR for their endogenous gene targets . Actually this approach was used in several publications as a starting point to discover novel YAP / TAZ regulatory inputs and functions . Many targets are known that respond to YAP / TAZ , including CTGF , CYR61 and ANKRD1 . For these and others , growing information is available on the presence of TEAD and YAP binding elements on their regulatory sequences , likely indicating a direct regulation [ 30 , 31 , 136 , 137 ] . Clearly , the sole variation of endogenous target genes should not be taken as unique evidence of YAP / TAZ regulation . Target genes , including CTGF , can be regulated by a plethora of different transcription factors and signalling pathways , and not all target genes are always regulated coherently ; for example , treatment with Cytochalasin D inhibits F - actin and YAP / TAZ , but potently induces CTGF , Cyr61 and Aknrd1 , owing to the MAL / SRF - inducing activity of this particular drug [ 170 ] . Thus , multiple target genes should be monitored in parallel ; alternatively , the possibility is to perform genome - wide profiling experiments , where overlapping sets of regulates genes are more easily and quantitatively detected . FIGURE LEGENDS FIGURE LEGENDS FIGURE LEGENDS FIGURE LEGENDS Figure 1 . Figure 1 . Figure 1 . Figure 1 . YAP / TAZ activity YAP / TAZ activity YAP / TAZ activity YAP / TAZ activity is regulated by multiple inputs . is regulated by multiple inputs . is regulated by multiple inputs . is regulated by multiple inputs . YAP / TAZ can shuttle between the nucleus , where they bind TEAD transcription factors on DNA to regulate gene expression , and the cytoplasm . Several different pathways and cellular features can modulate the activity of YAP / TAZ . These include the Hippo pathway , that regulates YAP / TAZ through phosphorylation , baso - lateral polarity complexes and cell - cell adhesion molecules in epithelia , G - protein coupled receptor ( GPCR ) signalling through competing Gs and Gq / 11 small G proteins , WNT signalling through the APC / Axin destruction complex , but also autophagy , metabolic pathways and energy stress ( here depicted by one glucose and one mevalonate molecule ) . Inhibitory inputs and proteins are indicated in red ; activatory inputs in green . Figure 2 . Experimental manipulation of cell shape and ECM stiffness Figure 2 . Experimental manipulation of cell shape and ECM stiffness Figure 2 . Experimental manipulation of cell shape and ECM stiffness Figure 2 . Experimental manipulation of cell shape and ECM stiffness induceinduceinduceinduce corresponding corresponding corresponding corresponding regulation of regulation of regulation of regulation of YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ YAP / TAZ nuclear activity . nuclear activity . nuclear activity . nuclear activity . High levels of cytoskeletal contractility and internal cell resisting forces developed against the substratum sustain YAP / TAZ nuclear activity ( left column , dark green nuclei ) ; when the external conditions impose a small cell geometry and do not allow the development of actomyosin contractility , YAP / TAZ are inhibited ( right column , pale green nuclei ) . In turn , YAP / TAZ activity mediates mechanoresponsive cell behaviorus ( see text ) . In A , the adhesive area available for cell spreading is regulated by microcontact ECM printing ; in B , cells are seeded on top of synthetic or natural ECM scaffolds of high ( left ) vs . low ( right ) stiffness or elasticity , which differentially sustain cell spreading ; in C , cells are embedded into a stiff 3D ECM that entraps cells and impose a rounded morphology ( right ) , unless cells can partially degrade the ECM through secreted metalloproteinases to enables cell spreading ( left ) ; in D , cell crowding induces a reduction of the cell - substratum adhesive area ( right ) but stretching of the cell monolayer can reactivate YAP / TAZ ( left ) . Figure 3 . Proposed mechanisms connecting YAP / TAZ activity to ECM Figure 3 . Proposed mechanisms connecting YAP / TAZ activity to ECM Figure 3 . Proposed mechanisms connecting YAP / TAZ activity to ECM Figure 3 . Proposed mechanisms connecting YAP / TAZ activity to ECM stiffness and cell geometry sensing . stiffness and cell geometry sensing . stiffness and cell geometry sensing . stiffness and cell geometry sensing . The scheme indicates a cell in which mechanical cues sustain the development of high levels of actomyosin contractility , which in turn sustain YAP / TAZ nuclear transcription . Cells attach to the ECM through integrin receptors and their intracellular adaptors ( focal adhesions , FA ) , which mediate force transmission between the ECM and the F - actin cytoskeleton . Cells probe external resisting forces by pulling on focal adhesions , thanks to the contractile activity of non - muscle myosins ( NMII ) . Formation of focal adhesions and of contractile actomyosin bundles mutually sustain each other , either by direct effects on focal adhesion components , such as vinculin and talin , or through RHO / ROCK ( RHO kinase ) / MLCK ( myosin light chain kinase ) signalling . F - actin capping / severing proteins ( CAPZ , but also Cofilin and Gelsolin ) are key elements opposing the formation of actomyosin bundles . Development of high levels of F - actin contractility then promotes the activity of YAP / TAZ : available data indicate that this control possibly entail LATS1 / 2 activation , promotion of YAP / TAZ activity in a LATS - independent manner ( left ) , and promotion of YAP / TAZ activity through RHO signalling , which is also a LATS - independent event ( right ) . The molecular mediators of these regulatory interactions are still unknown ( factor X , kinase X ) . REFERENCESREFERENCESREFERENCESREFERENCES [ 1 ] S . S . Ranade , R . Syeda , A . Patapoutian , Mechanically Activated Ion Channels , Neuron . 87 ( 2015 ) 1162 – 1179 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2015 . 08 . 032 . [ 2 ] B . Sinha , D . Köster , R . Ruez , P . Gonnord , M . Bastiani , D . Abankwa , et al . , Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disassembly of caveolae , Cell . 144 ( 2011 ) 402 – 413 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 12 . 031 . [ 3 ] D . E . Jaalouk , J . Lammerding , Mechanotransduction gone awry , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2009 ) 63 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2597 . [ 4 ] Y . Sun , C . S . Chen , J . Fu , Forcing stem cells to behave : a biophysical perspective of the cellular microenvironment , Annu Rev Biophys . 41 ( 2012 ) 519 – 542 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 042910 - 155306 . [ 5 ] M . A . Wozniak , C . S . Chen , Mechanotransduction in development : a growing role for contractility , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2009 ) 34 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2592 . [ 6 ] P . C . D . P . Dingal , D . E . Discher , Combining insoluble and soluble factors to steer stem cell fate , Nat Mater . 13 ( 2014 ) 532 – 537 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat3997 . [ 7 ] A . Mammoto , D . E . Ingber , Cytoskeletal control of growth and cell fate switching , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 ( 2009 ) 864 – 870 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2009 . 08 . 001 . [ 8 ] A . L . Berrier , K . M . Yamada , Cell - matrix adhesion , J . Cell . Physiol . 213 ( 2007 ) 565 – 573 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 21237 . [ 9 ] T . D . Ross , B . G . Coon , S . Yun , N . Baeyens , K . Tanaka , M . Ouyang , et al . , Integrins in mechanotransduction , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2013 . 05 . 006 . [ 10 ] S . V . Plotnikov , A . M . Pasapera , B . Sabass , C . M . Waterman , Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ECM - rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration , Cell . 151 ( 2012 ) 1513 – 1527 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 11 . 034 . [ 11 ] V . Vogel , M . sheetz , Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 265 – 275 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1890 . [ 12 ] S . E . Winograd - Katz , R . Fässler , B . Geiger , K . R . Legate , The integrin adhesome : from genes and proteins to human disease , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 ( 2014 ) 273 – 288 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3769 . [ 13 ] J . T . Parsons , A . R . Horwitz , M . A . Schwartz , Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 ( 2010 ) 633 – 643 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2957 . [ 14 ] C . K . Miranti , J . S . Brugge , Sensing the environment : a historical perspective on integrin signal transduction , Nat . Cell Biol . 4 ( 2002 ) E83 – E90 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb0402 - e83 . [ 15 ] F . M . Watt , H . Fujiwara , Cell - extracellular matrix interactions in normal and diseased skin , Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology . 3 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005124 . [ 16 ] G . F . Weber , M . A . Bjerke , D . W . DeSimone , A mechanoresponsive cadherin - keratin complex directs polarized protrusive behavior and collective cell migration , Dev . Cell . 22 ( 2012 ) 104 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2011 . 10 . 013 . [ 17 ] T . Lecuit , A . S . Yap , E - cadherin junctions as active mechanical integrators in tissue dynamics , Nat . Cell Biol . 17 ( 2015 ) 533 – 539 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3136 . [ 18 ] C . Grashoff , B . D . Hoffman , M . D . Brenner , R . Zhou , M . Parsons , M . T . Yang , et al . , Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics , Nature . 466 ( 2010 ) 263 – 266 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09198 . [ 19 ] S . Yonemura , Y . Wada , T . Watanabe , A . Nagafuchi , M . Shibata , alpha - Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction development , Nat . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2010 ) 533 – 542 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2055 . [ 20 ] R . McBeath , D . M . Pirone , C . M . Nelson , K . Bhadriraju , C . S . Chen , Cell Shape , Cytoskeletal Tension , and RhoA Regulate Stem Cell Lineage Commitment , Dev . Cell . 6 ( 2004 ) 483 – 495 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 04 ) 00075 - 9 . [ 21 ] A . Puliafito , L . Hufnagel , P . Neveu , S . Streichan , A . Sigal , D . K . Fygenson , et al . , Collective and single cell behavior in epithelial contact inhibition , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1007809109 . [ 22 ] S . J . Streichan , C . R . Hoerner , T . Schneidt , D . Holzer , L . Hufnagel , Spatial constraints control cell proliferation in tissues , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . 111 ( 2014 ) 5586 – 5591 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1323016111 . [ 23 ] C . S . Chen , M . Mrksich , S . Huang , G . M . Whitesides , D . E . Ingber , Geometric control of cell life and death , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . 276 ( 1997 ) 1425 – 1428 . [ 24 ] F . M . Watt , P . W . Jordan , C . H . O ' Neill , Cell shape controls terminal differentiation of human epidermal keratinocytes , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . 85 ( 1988 ) 5576 – 5580 . [ 25 ] S . Piccolo , S . Dupont , M . Cordenonsi , The Biology of YAP / TAZ : Hippo Signaling and Beyond , Physiol . Rev . 94 ( 2014 ) 1287 – 1312 . doi : 10 . 1152 / physrev . 00005 . 2014 . [ 26 ] G . Halder , R . L . Johnson , Hippo signaling : growth control and beyond , Development . 138 ( 2011 ) 9 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 045500 . [ 27 ] A . M . Tremblay , F . D . Camargo , Hippo signaling in mammalian stem cells , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 23 ( 2012 ) 818 – 826 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2012 . 08 . 001 . [ 28 ] D . Pan , The hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer , Dev . Cell . 19 ( 2010 ) 491 – 505 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2010 . 09 . 011 . [ 29 ] A . Genevet , N . Tapon , The Hippo pathway and apico - basal cell polarity , Biochem . J . 436 ( 2011 ) 213 – 224 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20110217 . [ 30 ] B . Zhao , X . Ye , J . Yu , L . Li , W . Li , S . Li , et al . , TEAD mediates YAP - dependent gene induction and growth control , Genes Dev . 22 ( 2008 ) 1962 – 1971 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1664408 . [ 31 ] F . Zanconato , M . Forcato , G . Battilana , L . Azzolin , E . Quaranta , B . Bodega , et al . , Genome - wide association between YAP / TAZ / TEAD and AP - 1 at enhancers drives oncogenic growth , Nat . Cell Biol . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3216 . [ 32 ] L . Azzolin , F . Zanconato , S . Bresolin , M . Forcato , G . Basso , S . Bicciato , et al . , Role of TAZ as mediator of Wnt signaling , Cell . 151 ( 2012 ) 1443 – 1456 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 11 . 027 . [ 33 ] X . Varelas , B . W . Miller , R . Sopko , S . Song , A . Gregorieff , F . A . Fellouse , et al . , The Hippo pathway regulates Wnt / beta - catenin signaling , Dev . Cell . 18 ( 2010 ) 579 – 591 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2010 . 03 . 007 . [ 34 ] E . Enzo , G . Santinon , A . Pocaterra , M . Aragona , S . Bresolin , M . Forcato , et al . , Aerobic glycolysis tunes YAP / TAZ transcriptional activity , Embo J . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201490379 . [ 35 ] G . Sorrentino , N . Ruggeri , V . Specchia , M . Cordenonsi , M . Mano , S . Dupont , et al . , Metabolic control of YAP and TAZ by the mevalonate pathway , Nat . Cell Biol . 16 ( 2014 ) 357 – 366 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2936 . [ 36 ] M . DeRan , J . Yang , C . - H . Shen , E . C . Peters , J . Fitamant , P . Chan , et al . , Energy stress regulates hippo - YAP signaling involving AMPK - mediated regulation of angiomotin - like 1 protein , CellReports . 9 ( 2014 ) 495 – 503 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2014 . 09 . 036 . [ 37 ] N . Liang , C . Zhang , P . Dill , G . Panasyuk , D . Pion , V . Koka , et al . , Regulation of YAP by mTOR and autophagy reveals a therapeutic target of tuberous sclerosis complex , Journal of Experimental Medicine . 211 ( 2014 ) 2249 – 2263 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20140341 . [ 38 ] J . - S . Mo , Z . Meng , Y . C . Kim , H . W . Park , C . G . Hansen , S . Kim , et al . , Cellular energy stress induces AMPK - mediated regulation of YAP and the Hippo pathway , Nat . Cell Biol . 17 ( 2015 ) 500 – 510 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3111 . [ 39 ] B . G . Fernández , P . Gaspar , C . Brás - Pereira , B . Jezowska , S . R . Rebelo , F . Janody , Actin - Capping Protein and the Hippo pathway regulate F - actin and tissue growth in Drosophila , Development . 138 ( 2011 ) 2337 – 2346 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 063545 . [ 40 ] L . Sansores - Garcia , W . Bossuyt , K . - I . Wada , S . Yonemura , C . Tao , H . Sasaki , et al . , Modulating F - actin organization induces organ growth by affecting the Hippo pathway , Embo J . 30 ( 2011 ) 2325 – 2335 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 157 . [ 41 ] S . Dupont , L . Morsut , M . Aragona , E . Enzo , S . Giulitti , M . Cordenonsi , et al . , Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction , Nature . 474 ( 2011 ) 179 – 183 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature10137 . [ 42 ] K . - I . Wada , K . Itoga , T . Okano , S . Yonemura , H . Sasaki , Hippo pathway regulation by cell morphology and stress fibers , Development . 138 ( 2011 ) 3907 – 3914 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 070987 . [ 43 ] B . Zhao , L . Li , L . Wang , C . - Y . Wang , J . Yu , K . - L . Guan , Cell detachment activates the Hippo pathway via cytoskeleton reorganization to induce anoikis , Genes Dev . 26 ( 2012 ) 54 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 173435 . 111 . [ 44 ] G . Halder , S . Dupont , S . Piccolo , Transduction of mechanical and cytoskeletal cues by YAP and TAZ , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 ( 2012 ) 591 – 600 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3416 . [ 45 ] M . Aragona , T . Panciera , A . Manfrin , S . Giulitti , F . Michielin , N . Elvassore , et al . , A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors , Cell . 154 ( 2013 ) 1047 – 1059 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 07 . 042 . [ 46 ] B . W . Benham - Pyle , B . L . Pruitt , W . J . Nelson , Mechanical strain induces E - cadherin - dependent Yap1 and - catenin activation to drive cell cycle entry , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . 348 ( 2015 ) 1024 – 1027 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aaa4559 . [ 47 ] B . Zhao , X . Wei , W . Li , R . S . Udan , Q . Yang , J . Kim , et al . , Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control , Genes Dev . 21 ( 2007 ) 2747 – 2761 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1602907 . [ 48 ] M . Cordenonsi , F . Zanconato , L . Azzolin , M . Forcato , A . Rosato , C . Frasson , et al . , The Hippo transducer TAZ confers cancer stem cell - related traits on breast cancer cells , Cell . 147 ( 2011 ) 759 – 772 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 09 . 048 . [ 49 ] C . D . Toma , S . Ashkar , M . L . Gray , J . L . Schaffer , L . C . Gerstenfeld , Signal transduction of mechanical stimuli is dependent on microfilament integrity : identification of osteopontin as a mechanically induced gene in osteoblasts , J . Bone Miner . Res . 12 ( 1997 ) 1626 – 1636 . doi : 10 . 1359 / jbmr . 1997 . 12 . 10 . 1626 . [ 50 ] A . J . Engler , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , D . E . Discher , Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification , Cell . 126 ( 2006 ) 677 – 689 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 06 . 044 . [ 51 ] R . S . Carvalho , J . L . Schaffer , L . C . Gerstenfeld , Osteoblasts induce osteopontin expression in response to attachment on fibronectin : demonstration of a common role for integrin receptors in the signal transduction processes of cell attachment and mechanical stimulation , J . Cell . Biochem . 70 ( 1998 ) 376 – 390 . [ 52 ] F . M . Pavalko , N . X . Chen , C . H . Turner , D . B . Burr , S . Atkinson , Y . - F . Hsieh , et al . , Fluid shear - induced mechanical signaling in MC3T3 - E1 osteoblasts requires cytoskeleton - integrin interactions , AJP : Cell Physiology . 275 ( 1998 ) C1591 – C1601 . [ 53 ] F . - X . Yu , Y . Zhang , H . W . Park , J . L . Jewell , Q . Chen , Y . Deng , et al . , Protein kinase A activates the Hippo pathway to modulate cell proliferation and differentiation , Genes Dev . 27 ( 2013 ) 1223 – 1232 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 219402 . 113 . [ 54 ] J . - H . Hong , E . S . Hwang , M . T . McManus , A . Amsterdam , Y . Tian , R . Kalmukova , et al . , TAZ , a transcriptional modulator of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . 309 ( 2005 ) 1074 – 1078 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1110955 . [ 55 ] R . Sordella , W . Jiang , G . - C . Chen , M . Curto , J . Settleman , Modulation of Rho GTPase signaling regulates a switch between adipogenesis and myogenesis , Cell . 113 ( 2003 ) 147 – 158 . [ 56 ] T . - H . Chun , K . B . Hotary , F . Sabeh , A . R . Saltiel , E . D . Allen , S . J . Weiss , A pericellular collagenase directs the 3 - dimensional development of white adipose tissue , Cell . 125 ( 2006 ) 577 – 591 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 02 . 050 . [ 57 ] Y . Tang , R . G . Rowe , E . L . Botvinick , A . Kurup , A . J . Putnam , M . Seiki , et al . , MT1 - MMP - Dependent Control of Skeletal Stem Cell Commitment via a β1 - Integrin / YAP / TAZ Signaling Axis , Dev . Cell . ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2013 . 04 . 011 . [ 58 ] Y . Cui , F . M . Hameed , B . Yang , K . Lee , C . Q . Pan , S . Park , et al . , Cyclic stretching of soft substrates induces spreading and growth , Nat Comms . 6 ( 2015 ) 6333 – . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms7333 . [ 59 ] M . Ohgushi , M . Minaguchi , Y . Sasai , Rho - Signaling - Directed YAP / TAZ Activity Underlies the Long - Term Survival and Expansion of Human Embryonic Stem Cells , Cell Stem Cell . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2015 . 07 . 009 . [ 60 ] X . Varelas , R . Sakuma , P . Samavarchi - Tehrani , R . Peerani , B . M . Rao , J . Dembowy , et al . , TAZ controls Smad nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and regulates human embryonic stem - cell self - renewal , Nat . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2008 ) 837 – 848 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1748 . [ 61 ] K . Watanabe , M . Ueno , D . Kamiya , A . Nishiyama , M . Matsumura , T . Wataya , et al . , A ROCK inhibitor permits survival of dissociated human embryonic stem cells , Nat Biotechnol . 25 ( 2007 ) 681 – 686 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt1310 . [ 62 ] M . Ohgushi , M . Matsumura , M . Eiraku , K . Murakami , T . Aramaki , A . Nishiyama , et al . , Molecular pathway and cell state responsible for dissociation - induced apoptosis in human pluripotent stem cells , Cell Stem Cell . 7 ( 2010 ) 225 – 239 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2010 . 06 . 018 . [ 63 ] Y . Sun , K . M . A . Yong , L . G . Villa - Diaz , X . Zhang , W . Chen , R . Philson , et al . , Hippo / YAP - mediated rigidity - dependent motor neuron differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells , Nat Mater . 13 ( 2014 ) 599 – 604 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat3945 . [ 64 ] S . Musah , P . J . Wrighton , Y . Zaltsman , X . Zhong , S . Zorn , M . B . Parlato , et al . , Substratum - induced differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells reveals the coactivator YAP is a potent regulator of neuronal specification , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . 111 ( 2014 ) 13805 – 13810 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1415330111 . [ 65 ] C . Hahn , M . A . Schwartz , Mechanotransduction in vascular physiology and atherogenesis , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2009 ) 53 – 62 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2596 . [ 66 ] T . E . North , W . Goessling , M . Peeters , P . Li , C . Ceol , A . M . Lord , et al . , Hematopoietic stem cell development is dependent on blood flow , Cell . 137 ( 2009 ) 736 – 748 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 04 . 023 . [ 67 ] J . R . Hove , R . W . Köster , A . S . Forouhar , G . Acevedo - Bolton , S . E . Fraser , M . Gharib , Intracardiac fluid forces are an essential epigenetic factor for embryonic cardiogenesis , Nature . 421 ( 2003 ) 172 – 177 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature01282 . [ 68 ] H . J . Lee , N . Li , S . M . Evans , M . F . Diaz , P . L . Wenzel , Biomechanical force in blood development : Extrinsic physical cues drive pro - hematopoietic signaling , Differentiation . 86 ( 2013 ) 92 – 103 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . diff . 2013 . 06 . 004 . [ 69 ] D . E . Ingber , Fibronectin controls capillary endothelial cell growth by modulating cell shape , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . 87 ( 1990 ) 3579 – 3583 . [ 70 ] A . Mammoto , K . M . Connor , T . Mammoto , C . W . Yung , D . Huh , C . M . Aderman , et al . , A mechanosensitive transcriptional mechanism that controls angiogenesis , Nature . 457 ( 2009 ) 1103 – 1108 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature07765 . [ 71 ] E . M . Morin - Kensicki , B . N . Boone , M . Howell , J . R . Stonebraker , J . Teed , J . G . Alb , et al . , Defects in yolk sac vasculogenesis , chorioallantoic fusion , and embryonic axis elongation in mice with targeted disruption of Yap65 , Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 ( 2006 ) 77 – 87 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 26 . 1 . 77 - 87 . 2006 . [ 72 ] H . Zhang , A . von Gise , Q . Liu , T . Hu , X . Tian , L . He , et al . , Yap1 is required for endothelial to mesenchymal transition of the atrioventricular cushion , J . Biol . Chem . 289 ( 2014 ) 18681 – 18692 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 554584 . [ 73 ] J . L . Lucitti , E . A . V . Jones , C . Huang , J . Chen , S . E . Fraser , M . E . Dickinson , Vascular remodeling of the mouse yolk sac requires hemodynamic force , Development . 134 ( 2007 ) 3317 – 3326 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 02883 . [ 74 ] H . Tan , S . Biechler , L . Junor , M . J . Yost , D . Dean , J . Li , et al . , Fluid flow forces and rhoA regulate fibrous development of the atrioventricular valves , Dev . Biol . ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2012 . 11 . 023 . [ 75 ] A . Sabine , E . Bovay , C . S . Demir , W . Kimura , M . Jaquet , Y . Agalarov , et al . , FOXC2 and fluid shear stress stabilize postnatal lymphatic vasculature , J . Clin . Invest . 125 ( 2015 ) 3861 – 3877 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI80454 . [ 76 ] H . - J . Choi , H . Zhang , H . Park , K . - S . Choi , H . - W . Lee , V . Agrawal , et al . , Yes - associated protein regulates endothelial cell contact - mediated expression of angiopoietin - 2 , Nat Comms . 6 ( 2015 ) 6943 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms7943 . [ 77 ] J . Folkman , A . Moscona , Role of cell shape in growth control , Nature . 273 ( 1978 ) 345 – 349 . [ 78 ] S . Nakagawa , P . Pawelek , F . Grinnell , Extracellular matrix organization modulates fibroblast growth and growth factor responsiveness , Exp . Cell Res . 182 ( 1989 ) 572 – 582 . [ 79 ] J . D . M . B . S . S . A . T . K . A . S . S . A . M . T . D . J . T . Fei Liu , Feedback amplification of fibrosis through matrix stiffening and COX - 2 suppression , J . Cell Biol . 190 ( 2010 ) 693 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201004082 . [ 80 ] M . W . Parker , D . Rossi , M . Peterson , K . Smith , K . Sikström , E . S . White , et al . , Fibrotic extracellular matrix activates a profibrotic positive feedback loop , J . Clin . Invest . 124 ( 2014 ) 1622 – 1635 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI71386 . [ 81 ] B . Eckes , M . C . Zweers , Z . G . Zhang , R . Hallinger , C . Mauch , M . Aumailley , et al . , Mechanical tension and integrin alpha 2 beta 1 regulate fibroblast functions , J . Investig . Dermatol . Symp . Proc . 11 ( 2006 ) 66 – 72 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . jidsymp . 5650003 . [ 82 ] I . Mannaerts , S . B . Leite , S . Verhulst , S . Claerhout , N . Eysackers , L . F . R . Thoen , et al . , The Hippo pathway effector YAP controls mouse hepatic stellate cell activation , J . Hepatol . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jhep . 2015 . 04 . 011 . [ 83 ] F . Liu , D . Lagares , K . M . Choi , L . Stopfer , A . Marinkovic , V . Vrbanac , et al . , Mechanosignaling through YAP and TAZ drive fibroblast activation and fibrosis , AJP : Lung Cellular and Molecular Physiology . ( 2014 ) ajplung . 00300 . 2014 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00300 . 2014 . [ 84 ] F . Calvo , N . Ege , A . Grande - Garcia , S . Hooper , R . P . Jenkins , S . I . Chaudhry , et al . , Mechanotransduction and YAP - dependent matrix remodelling is required for the generation and maintenance of cancer - associated fibroblasts , Nat . Cell Biol . ( 2013 ) – . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2756 . [ 85 ] C . C . DuFort , M . J . Paszek , V . M . Weaver , Balancing forces : architectural control of mechanotransduction , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2011 ) 308 – 319 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3112 . [ 86 ] C . M . Nelson , M . J . Bissell , Of extracellular matrix , scaffolds , and signaling : tissue architecture regulates development , homeostasis , and cancer , Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology . 22 ( 2006 ) 287 – 309 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 22 . 010305 . 104315 . [ 87 ] P . Schedin , P . J . Keely , Mammary Gland ECM Remodeling , Stiffness , and Mechanosignaling in Normal Development and Tumor Progression , Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology . 3 ( 2011 ) a003228 – a003228 . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a003228 . [ 88 ] M . J . Paszek , N . Zahir , K . R . Johnson , J . N . Lakins , G . I . Rozenberg , A . Gefen , et al . , Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype , Cancer Cell . 8 ( 2005 ) 241 – 254 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2005 . 08 . 010 . [ 89 ] K . R . Levental , H . Yu , L . Kass , J . N . Lakins , M . Egeblad , J . T . Erler , et al . , Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling , Cell . 139 ( 2009 ) 891 – 906 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 10 . 027 . [ 90 ] I . Acerbi , L . Cassereau , I . Dean , Q . Shi , A . Au , C . Park , et al . , Human breast cancer invasion and aggression correlates with ECM stiffening and immune cell infiltration , Integr . Biol . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1039 / c5ib00040h . [ 91 ] C . Chang , H . L . Goel , H . Gao , B . Pursell , L . D . Shultz , D . L . Greiner , et al . , A laminin 511 matrix is regulated by TAZ and functions as the ligand for the α6Bβ1 integrin to sustain breast cancer stem cells , Genes Dev . 29 ( 2015 ) 1 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 253682 . 114 . [ 92 ] D . Chen , Y . Sun , Y . Wei , P . Zhang , A . H . Rezaeian , J . Teruya - Feldstein , et al . , LIFR is a breast cancer metastasis suppressor upstream of the Hippo - YAP pathway and a prognostic marker , Nat Med . 18 ( 2012 ) 1511 – 1517 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm . 2940 . [ 93 ] C . Lin , F . A . Pelissier , H . Zhang , J . Lakins , V . M . Weaver , C . Park , et al . , Microenvironment rigidity modulates responses to the HER2 receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor lapatinib via YAP and TAZ transcription factors , Mol . Biol . Cell . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 07 - 0456 . [ 94 ] A . Skibinski , J . L . Breindel , A . Prat , P . Galván , E . Smith , A . Rolfs , et al . , The Hippo Transducer TAZInteracts with the SWI / SNF Complexto Regulate Breast Epithelial Lineage Commitment , CellReports . ( 2014 ) 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2014 . 02 . 038 . [ 95 ] F . A . Pelissier , J . C . Garbe , B . Ananthanarayanan , M . Miyano , C . Lin , T . Jokela , et al . , Age - Related Dysfunction in Mechanotransduction Impairs Differentiation of Human Mammary Epithelial Progenitors , Cell Reports . 0 ( 2014 ) – . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2014 . 05 . 021 . [ 96 ] K . M . Kim , Y . J . Choi , J . - H . Hwang , A . R . Kim , H . J . Cho , E . S . Hwang , et al . , Shear stress induced by an interstitial level of slow flow increases the osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells through TAZ activation , PLoS ONE . 9 ( 2014 ) e92427 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0092427 . [ 97 ] V . A . Codelia , G . Sun , K . D . Irvine , Regulation of YAP by Mechanical Strain through Jnk and Hippo Signaling , Current Biology : CB . 24 ( 2014 ) 2012 – 2017 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 07 . 034 . [ 98 ] F . Miralles , G . Posern , A . - I . Zaromytidou , R . Treisman , Actin dynamics control SRF activity by regulation of its coactivator MAL , Cell . 113 ( 2003 ) 329 – 342 . [ 99 ] J . T . Connelly , J . E . Gautrot , B . Trappmann , D . W . - M . Tan , G . Donati , W . T . S . Huck , et al . , Actin and serum response factor transduce physical cues from the microenvironment to regulate epidermal stem cell fate decisions , Nat . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2010 ) 711 – 718 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2074 . [ 100 ] D . Mosqueira , S . Pagliari , K . Uto , M . Ebara , S . Romanazzo , C . Escobedo - Lucea , et al . , Hippo Pathway Effectors Control Cardiac Progenitor Cell Fate by Acting as Dynamic Sensors of Substrate Mechanics and Nanostructure , ACS Nano . 8 ( 2014 ) 2033 – 2047 . doi : 10 . 1021 / nn4058984 . [ 101 ] F . Ren , L . Zhang , J . Jiang , Hippo signaling regulates Yorkie nuclear localization and activity through 14 - 3 - 3 dependent and independent mechanisms , Dev . Biol . 337 ( 2010 ) 303 – 312 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2009 . 10 . 046 . [ 102 ] A . Carisey , C . Ballestrem , Vinculin , an adapter protein in control of cell adhesion signalling , European Journal of Cell Biology . 90 ( 2011 ) 157 – 163 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2010 . 06 . 007 . [ 103 ] H . Wolfenson , I . Lavelin , B . Geiger , Dynamic regulation of the structure and functions of integrin adhesions , Dev . Cell . 24 ( 2013 ) 447 – 458 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2013 . 02 . 012 . [ 104 ] M . L . Gardel , I . C . Schneider , Y . Aratyn - Schaus , C . M . Waterman , Mechanical integration of actin and adhesion dynamics in cell migration , Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology . 26 ( 2010 ) 315 – 333 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 011209 . 122036 . [ 105 ] D . M . Pirone , W . F . Liu , S . A . Ruiz , L . Gao , S . Raghavan , C . A . Lemmon , et al . , An inhibitory role for FAK in regulating proliferation : a link between limited adhesion and RhoA - ROCK signaling , J . Cell Biol . 174 ( 2006 ) 277 – 288 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200510062 . [ 106 ] C . D . Roskelley , P . Y . Desprez , M . J . Bissell , Extracellular matrix - dependent tissue - specific gene expression in mammary epithelial cells requires both physical and biochemical signal transduction , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . 91 ( 1994 ) 12378 – 12382 . [ 107 ] K . Kaneko , M . Ito , Y . Naoe , A . Lacy - Hulbert , K . Ikeda , Integrin αv in the mechanical response of osteoblast lineage cells , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 447 ( 2014 ) 352 – 357 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2014 . 04 . 006 . [ 108 ] S . A . Wickström , K . Radovanac , R . Fässler , Genetic analyses of integrin signaling , Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology . 3 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a005116 . [ 109 ] I . Serrano , P . C . McDonald , F . Lock , W . J . Muller , S . Dedhar , Inactivation of the Hippo tumour suppressor pathway by integrin - linked kinase , Nat Comms . 4 ( 2013 ) 2976 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms3976 . [ 110 ] K . Radovanac , J . Morgner , J . - N . Schulz , K . Blumbach , C . Patterson , T . Geiger , et al . , Stabilization of integrin - linked kinase by the Hsp90 - CHIP axis impacts cellular force generation , migration and the fibrotic response , Embo J . 32 ( 2013 ) 1409 – 1424 . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2013 . 90 . [ 111 ] V . Gkretsi , U . Apte , W . M . Mars , W . C . Bowen , J . - H . Luo , Y . Yang , et al . , Liver - specific ablation of integrin - linked kinase in mice results in abnormal histology , enhanced cell proliferation , and hepatomegaly , Hepatology . 48 ( 2008 ) 1932 – 1941 . doi : 10 . 1002 / hep . 22537 . [ 112 ] C . Taccioli , G . Sorrentino , A . Zannini , J . Caroli , D . Beneventano , L . Andrelucci , et al . , MDP , a database linking drug response data to genomic information , identifies dasatinib and statins as a combinatorial strategy to inhibit YAP / TAZ in cancer cells , Oncotarget . ( 2015 ) 1 – 12 . [ 113 ] N . - G . Kim , B . M . Gumbiner , Adhesion to fibronectin regulates Hippo signaling via the FAK - Src - PI3K pathway , J . Cell Biol . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201501025 . [ 114 ] L . M . Machesky , A . Hall , Role of actin polymerization and adhesion to extracellular matrix in Rac - and Rho - induced cytoskeletal reorganization , J . Cell Biol . 138 ( 1997 ) 913 – 926 . [ 115 ] N . A . Hotchin , A . Hall , The assembly of integrin adhesion complexes requires both extracellular matrix and intracellular rho / rac GTPases , J . Cell Biol . 131 ( 1995 ) 1857 – 1865 . [ 116 ] A . Bershadsky , A . Chausovsky , E . Becker , A . Lyubimova , B . Geiger , Involvement of microtubules in the control of adhesion - dependent signal transduction , Current Biology : CB . 6 ( 1996 ) 1279 – 1289 . [ 117 ] A . Diz - Muñoz , D . A . Fletcher , O . D . Weiner , Use the force : membrane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility , Trends Cell Biol . 23 ( 2013 ) 47 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2012 . 09 . 006 . [ 118 ] J . Li , B . Hou , S . Tumova , K . Muraki , A . Bruns , M . J . Ludlow , et al . , Piezo1 integration of vascular architecture with physiological force , Nature . 515 ( 2014 ) 279 – 282 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature13701 . [ 119 ] B . Coste , J . Mathur , M . Schmidt , T . J . Earley , S . Ranade , M . J . Petrus , et al . , Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically activated cation channels , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . 330 ( 2010 ) 55 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1193270 . [ 120 ] M . M . Pathak , J . L . Nourse , T . Tran , J . Hwe , J . Arulmoli , D . T . T . Le , et al . , Stretch - activated ion channel Piezo1 directs lineage choice in human neural stem cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1409802111 . [ 121 ] B . J . McHugh , R . Buttery , Y . Lad , S . Banks , C . Haslett , T . Sethi , Integrin activation by Fam38A uses a novel mechanism of R - Ras targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum , J . Cell . Sci . 123 ( 2010 ) 51 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 056424 . [ 122 ] T . - J . Kim , J . Seong , M . Ouyang , J . Sun , S . Lu , J . P . Hong , et al . , Substrate rigidity regulates Ca2 + oscillation via RhoA pathway in stem cells , J . Cell . Physiol . 218 ( 2009 ) 285 – 293 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 21598 . [ 123 ] T . - J . Kim , C . Joo , J . Seong , R . Vafabakhsh , E . L . Botvinick , M . W . Berns , et al . , Distinct mechanisms regulating mechanical force - induced Ca² ⁺ signals at the plasma membrane and the ER in human MSCs , eLife Sciences . 4 ( 2015 ) e04876 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04876 . [ 124 ] K . J . Chalut , A . E . Ekpenyong , W . L . Clegg , I . C . Melhuish , J . Guck , Quantifying cellular differentiation by physical phenotype using digital holographic microscopy , Integr . Biol . 4 ( 2012 ) 280 – 284 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c2ib00129b . [ 125 ] R . P . Martins , J . D . Finan , F . Guilak , D . A . Lee , Mechanical regulation of nuclear structure and function , Annu Rev Biomed Eng . 14 ( 2012 ) 431 – 455 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - bioeng - 071910 - 124638 . [ 126 ] C . H . Thomas , J . H . Collier , C . S . Sfeir , K . E . Healy , Engineering gene expression and protein synthesis by modulation of nuclear shape , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . 99 ( 2002 ) 1972 – 1977 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 032668799 . [ 127 ] N . Wang , J . D . Tytell , D . E . Ingber , Mechanotransduction at a distance : mechanically coupling the extracellular matrix with the nucleus , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 ( 2009 ) 75 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2594 . [ 128 ] N . Jain , K . V . Iyer , A . Kumar , G . V . Shivashankar , Cell geometric constraints induce modular gene - expression patterns via redistribution of HDAC3 regulated by actomyosin contractility , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1300801110 . [ 129 ] J . Swift , I . L . Ivanovska , A . Buxboim , T . Harada , P . C . D . P . Dingal , J . Pinter , et al . , Nuclear Lamin - A Scales with Tissue Stiffness and Enhances Matrix - Directed Differentiation , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . 341 ( 2013 ) 1240104 – 1240104 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1240104 . [ 130 ] A . T . Bertrand , S . Ziaei , C . Ehret , H . Duchemin , K . Mamchaoui , A . Bigot , et al . , Cellular microenvironments reveal defective mechanosensing responses and elevated YAP signaling in LMNA - mutated muscle precursors , J . Cell . Sci . 127 ( 2014 ) 2873 – 2884 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 144907 . [ 131 ] T . P . Driscoll , B . D . Cosgrove , S . - J . Heo , Z . E . Shurden , R . L . Mauck , Cytoskeletal to Nuclear Strain Transfer Regulates YAP Signaling in Mesenchymal Stem Cells , Biophys . J . 108 ( 2015 ) 2783 – 2793 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2015 . 05 . 010 . [ 132 ] K . Miyamoto , V . Pasque , J . Jullien , J . B . Gurdon , Nuclear actin polymerization is required for transcriptional reprogramming of Oct4 by oocytes , Genes Dev . 25 ( 2011 ) 946 – 958 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 615211 . [ 133 ] K . Miyamoto , M . Teperek , K . Yusa , G . E . Allen , C . R . Bradshaw , J . B . Gurdon , Nuclear Wave1 Is Required for Reprogramming Transcription in Oocytes and for Normal Development , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . 341 ( 2013 ) 1002 – 1005 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1240376 . [ 134 ] M . K . Vartiainen , S . Guettler , B . Larijani , R . Treisman , Nuclear actin regulates dynamic subcellular localization and activity of the SRF cofactor MAL , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . 316 ( 2007 ) 1749 – 1752 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1141084 . [ 135 ] C . Baarlink , H . Wang , R . Grosse , Nuclear Actin Network Assembly by Formins Regulates the SRF Coactivator MAL , Science ( New York , N . Y . ) . ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1235038 . [ 136 ] C . Stein , A . F . Bardet , G . Roma , S . Bergling , I . Clay , A . Ruchti , et al . , YAP1 Exerts Its Transcriptional Control via TEAD - Mediated Activation of Enhancers , PLoS Genet . 11 ( 2015 ) e1005465 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1005465 . [ 137 ] G . G . Galli , M . Carrara , W . - C . Yuan , C . Valdes - Quezada , B . Gurung , B . Pepe - Mooney , et al . , YAP Drives Growth by Controlling Transcriptional Pause Release from Dynamic Enhancers , Mol . Cell . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2015 . 09 . 001 . [ 138 ] I . Cebola , S . A . Rodríguez - Seguí , C . H . - H . Cho , J . Bessa , M . Rovira , M . Luengo , et al . , TEAD and YAP regulate the enhancer network of human embryonic pancreatic progenitors , Nat . Cell Biol . 17 ( 2015 ) 615 – 626 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3160 . [ 139 ] M . Kim , M . Kim , S . Lee , S . Kuninaka , H . Saya , H . Lee , et al . , cAMP / PKA signalling reinforces the LATS - YAP pathway to fully suppress YAP in response to actin cytoskeletal changes , Embo J . ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2013 . 102 . [ 140 ] X . Feng , M . S . Degese , R . Iglesias - Bartolome , J . P . Vaqué , A . A . Molinolo , M . Rodrigues , et al . , Hippo - Independent Activation of YAP by the GNAQ Uveal Melanoma Oncogene through a Trio - Regulated Rho GTPase Signaling Circuitry , Cancer Cell . ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2014 . 04 . 016 . [ 141 ] Z . Wang , Y . Wu , H . Wang , Y . Zhang , L . Mei , X . Fang , et al . , Interplay of mevalonate and Hippo pathways regulates RHAMM transcription via YAP to modulate breast cancer cell motility , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . 111 ( 2014 ) E89 – 98 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1319190110 . [ 142 ] S . Visser - Grieve , Z . Zhou , Y . - M . She , H . Huang , T . D . Cyr , T . Xu , et al . , LATS1 tumor suppressor is a novel actin - binding protein and negative regulator of actin polymerization , Cell Res . 21 ( 2011 ) 1513 – 1516 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cr . 2011 . 122 . [ 143 ] X . Dai , P . She , F . Chi , Y . Feng , H . Liu , D . Jin , et al . , Phosphorylation of angiomotin by Lats1 / 2 kinases inhibits F - actin binding , cell migration , and angiogenesis , Journal of Biological Chemistry . 288 ( 2013 ) 34041 – 34051 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M113 . 518019 . [ 144 ] X . Yang , K . Yu , Y . Hao , D . - M . Li , R . Stewart , K . L . Insogna , et al . , LATS1 tumour suppressor affects cytokinesis by inhibiting LIMK1 , Nat . Cell Biol . 6 ( 2004 ) 609 – 617 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1140 . [ 145 ] R . M . Densham , E . O ' Neill , J . Munro , I . König , K . Anderson , W . Kolch , et al . , MST kinases monitor actin cytoskeletal integrity and signal via c - Jun N - terminal kinase stress - activated kinase to regulate p21Waf1 / Cip1 stability , Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 ( 2009 ) 6380 – 6390 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 00116 - 09 . [ 146 ] P . P . Provenzano , D . R . Inman , K . W . Eliceiri , P . J . Keely , Matrix density - induced mechanoregulation of breast cell phenotype , signaling and gene expression through a FAK - ERK linkage , Oncogene . 28 ( 2009 ) 4326 – 4343 . doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2009 . 299 . [ 147 ] J . - H . Kim , A . R . Asthagiri , Matrix stiffening sensitizes epithelial cells to EGF and enables the loss of contact inhibition of proliferation , J . Cell . Sci . 124 ( 2011 ) 1280 – 1287 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 078394 . [ 148 ] E . A . Klein , L . Yin , D . Kothapalli , P . Castagnino , F . J . Byfield , T . Xu , et al . , Cell - cycle control by physiological matrix elasticity and in vivo tissue stiffening , Current Biology : CB . 19 ( 2009 ) 1511 – 1518 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 07 . 069 . [ 149 ] R . K . Assoian , M . A . Schwartz , Coordinate signaling by integrins and receptor tyrosine kinases in the regulation of G1 phase cell - cycle progression , Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 11 ( 2001 ) 48 – 53 . [ 150 ] M . A . Wozniak , C . Q . Cheng , C . J . Shen , L . Gao , A . O . Olarerin - George , K . - J . Won , et al . , Adhesion Regulates MAP Kinase / Ternary Complex Factor Exchange to Control a Proliferative Transcriptional Switch , Current Biology : CB . ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2012 . 08 . 050 . [ 151 ] J . - H . Hwang , M . R . Byun , A . R . Kim , K . M . Kim , H . J . Cho , Y . H . Lee , et al . , Extracellular Matrix Stiffness Regulates Osteogenic Differentiation through MAPK Activation , PLoS ONE . 10 ( 2015 ) e0135519 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0135519 . [ 152 ] C . - L . Chen , M . C . Schroeder , M . Kango - Singh , C . Tao , G . Halder , Tumor suppression by cell competition through regulation of the Hippo pathway , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . a . ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1113882109 . [ 153 ] G . Sun , K . D . Irvine , Regulation of Hippo signaling by Jun kinase signaling during compensatory cell proliferation and regeneration , and in neoplastic tumors , Dev . Biol . 350 ( 2011 ) 139 – 151 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2010 . 11 . 036 . [ 154 ] F . V . H . A . J . de M . R . C . B . G . J . Z . Joost CM Uitdehaag , A guide to picking the most selective kinase inhibitor tool compounds for pharmacological validation of drug targets , British Journal of Pharmacology . 166 ( 2012 ) 858 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1476 - 5381 . 2012 . 01859 . x . [ 155 ] S . Porazinski , H . Wang , Y . Asaoka , M . Behrndt , T . Miyamoto , H . Morita , et al . , YAP is essential for tissue tension to ensure vertebrate 3D body shape , Nature . ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature14215 . [ 156 ] M . Ernkvist , K . Aase , C . Ukomadu , J . Wohlschlegel , R . Blackman , N . Veitonmäki , et al . , p130 - angiomotin associates to actin and controls endothelial cell shape , Febs J . 273 ( 2006 ) 2000 – 2011 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1742 - 4658 . 2006 . 05216 . x . [ 157 ] A . Reginensi , R . P . Scott , A . Gregorieff , M . Bagherie - Lachidan , C . Chung , D . - S . Lim , et al . , Yap - and Cdc42 - dependent nephrogenesis and morphogenesis during mouse kidney development , PLoS Genet . 9 ( 2013 ) e1003380 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1003380 . [ 158 ] P . Gaspar , M . V . Holder , B . L . Aerne , F . Janody , N . Tapon , Zyxin antagonizes the FERM protein expanded to couple F - actin and Yorkie - dependent organ growth , Current Biology : CB . 25 ( 2015 ) 679 – 689 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 01 . 010 . [ 159 ] C . Rauskolb , G . Pan , B . V . V . G . Reddy , H . Oh , K . D . Irvine , Zyxin links fat signaling to the hippo pathway , PLoS Biol . 9 ( 2011 ) e1000624 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000624 . [ 160 ] P . Gaspar , N . Tapon , Sensing the local environment : actin architecture and Hippo signalling , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 31C ( 2014 ) 74 – 83 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2014 . 09 . 003 . [ 161 ] H . Deng , W . Wang , J . Yu , Y . Zheng , Y . Qing , D . Pan , Spectrin regulates Hippo signaling by modulating cortical actomyosin activity , eLife Sciences . 4 ( 2015 ) . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 06567 . [ 162 ] G . C . Fletcher , A . Elbediwy , I . Khanal , P . S . Ribeiro , N . Tapon , B . J . Thompson , The Spectrin cytoskeleton regulates the Hippo signalling pathway , Embo J . 34 ( 2015 ) 940 – 954 . doi : 10 . 15252 / embj . 201489642 . [ 163 ] K . K . L . Wong , W . Li , Y . An , Y . Duan , Z . Li , Y . Kang , et al . , β - Spectrin regulates the hippo signaling pathway and modulates the basal actin network , J . Biol . Chem . 290 ( 2015 ) 6397 – 6407 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 629493 . [ 164 ] S . Sun , B . V . V . G . Reddy , K . D . Irvine , Localization of Hippo signalling complexes and Warts activation in vivo , Nat Comms . 6 ( 2015 ) 8402 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9402 . [ 165 ] T . Das , K . Safferling , S . Rausch , N . Grabe , H . Boehm , J . P . Spatz , A molecular mechanotransduction pathway regulates collective migration of epithelial cells , Nat . Cell Biol . 17 ( 2015 ) 276 – 287 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3115 . [ 166 ] J . E . Sero , H . Z . Sailem , R . C . Ardy , H . Almuttaqi , T . Zhang , C . Bakal , Cell shape and the microenvironment regulate nuclear translocation of NF - κB in breast epithelial and tumor cells , Mol Syst Biol . 11 ( 2015 ) 790 . doi : 10 . 15252 / msb . 20145644 . [ 167 ] C . - Y . Liu , Z . - Y . Zha , X . Zhou , H . Zhang , W . Huang , D . Zhao , et al . , The hippo tumor pathway promotes TAZ degradation by phosphorylating a phosphodegron and recruiting the SCF { beta } - TrCP E3 ligase , J . Biol . Chem . 285 ( 2010 ) 37159 – 37169 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 152942 . [ 168 ] W . M . Mahoney , J . - H . Hong , M . B . Yaffe , I . K . G . Farrance , The transcriptional co - activator TAZ interacts differentially with transcriptional enhancer factor - 1 ( TEF - 1 ) family members , Biochem . J . 388 ( 2005 ) 217 – 225 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20041434 . [ 169 ] M . Mohseni , J . Sun , A . Lau , S . Curtis , J . Goldsmith , V . L . Fox , et al . , A genetic screen identifies an LKB1 - MARK signalling axis controlling the Hippo - YAP pathway , Nat . Cell Biol . 16 ( 2014 ) 108 – 117 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2884 . [ 170 ] C . Esnault , A . Stewart , F . Gualdrini , P . East , S . Horswell , N . Matthews , et al . , Rho - actin signaling to the MRTF coactivators dominates the immediate transcriptional response to serum in fibroblasts , Genes Dev . 28 ( 2014 ) 943 – 958 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 239327 . 114 . Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3