Demo : Facilitating In - situ Shared Use of IoT Actuators in Public Spaces Wonjung Kim wjkim @ nclab . kaist . ac . kr KAIST Seungchul Lee seungchul @ nclab . kaist . ac . kr KAIST Youngjae Chang yjchang @ nclab . kaist . ac . kr KAIST Taegyeong Lee tglee @ nclab . kaist . ac . kr KAIST Inseok Hwang i . hwang @ postech . ac . kr POSTECH Junehwa Song junesong @ nclab . kaist . ac . kr KAIST 1 INTRODUCTION Public spaces , where we gather , commune , and take a rest , are the essential parts of a modern urban landscape , enriching citizen’s everyday life [ 3 ] . How we share these spaces are considered an indicator of the quality of life . Public spaces thus have a responsibility to provide comfort and satisfaction to any visitors . However , in most times , the operations of the spaces are managed in rather an exclusive manner . An inherent obstruction of inclusive sharing of a public space sits in the exclusive modes of actuators’ control inter - faces . Existing control interfaces , structured as buttons and dials , premise the activation from a single owner , lacking ability to incorporate the various needs of visitors . Even with IoT - enabled actuators , the philosophy of one - on - one con - trol stays the same , e . g . , opening up access to authenticated owners . Therefore , while the space is open to the public , its operational details , i . e . , activation of actuators , are decided and managed without reflecting occupants’ preferences [ 1 ] . However , it is not straightforward to realize a democratic control of public actuators . Inherent uncertainty of the pub - lic spaces imposes several challenges in a system design . We cannot predict who the visitors are . The visitors freely enter / leave public places at arbitrary moments . Such visits are often short and / or happen only once . The visitors are stranger to each other ; having a synchronous discussion among them are highly unlikely to happen . Hence in the public spaces , conventional decision - making strategies ( e . g . , Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personalorclassroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . MobiSys ’21 , June 24 – July 2 , 2021 , Virtual , WI , USA © 2021 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8443 - 8 / 21 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3458864 . 3468444 HivemindApp Preference Aggregation Influence - aware Authorization 23 ℃ 20 ℃ 18 ℃ 24 ℃ · · · IoT Interop . Layer set _ temp ( value = 24 ) Actuator Figure 1 : Overview of Hivemind unanimous agreement ) and entitlement policy ( e . g . , main - taining a list of eligible voters ) are precluded . In this light , we propose a new socio - physical computing layer inter - playing between the public space visitors and the actuators , as illustrated in Figure 1 . It enables the visitors to instantly express their preferences as well as to know what the others want . It also provides a representative of the visi - tors , which seamlessly act upon the public actuator with its conventional interface . To this end , we present Hivemind , an IoT - based intermediary system that facilitates in - situ shared use of IoT actuators for the visitors in public spaces . Hive - mind transforms the conventional exclusive IoT actuators into true public actuators with ( i ) a multi - user interface freely accessible for any visitors and ( ii ) continual aggregation and reflection of visitors’ preferences . 2 HIVEMIND DESIGN Figure 3 illustrates the architecture of Hivemind . To enable a democratic control of public actuators , Hivemind addresses three key challenges . First , Hivemind should overcome the uncertainty of participation eligibility to the collective con - trol . Second , Hivemind should aggregate varying preferences 497 MobiSys ’21 , June 24 – July 2 , 2021 , Virtual , WI , USA Wonjung Kim et al . Figure 2 : Screenshots of Hivemind mobile - side app of different participants without requiring manual commu - nication between participants . Third , Hivemind should sup - port heterogeneous actuators while considering differences in vendor - specific APIs and actuator modalities . Refer the full paper [ 2 ] for detailed design and implementation . We present three key designs for Hivemind to address the above challenges . First , we propose influence - aware au - thorization . It dynamically entitles a control of an actuator to those who are physically affected by the actuator ( e . g . , visitors who can hear the music from the speaker ) . Second , Hivemind leverages utility function as a representation of the users’ preferences . With such representation , Hivemind quantifies the expected satisfaction level of users and auto - matically aggregates the varying preferences considering efficiency and fairness . Third , Hivemind adopts an interop - erability layer , which provides vendor - agnostic interfaces without any modification of IoT devices . Based on the schema of actuator variables , Hivemind generates an appropriate vot - ing UI ( See Figure 2 ) to the visitors and operates the actuator reflecting the aggregated decision . 2 . 1 Use case of Hivemind Peter , a graduate student , visits a local coffee shop . He soon realizes that it is a bit cold inside . At the very moment , the mobile app of Hivemind notifies Peter that he can collectively control the AC temperature . Peter launches the app and sees that the current temperature is set to 22 ◦ C . He enters his preferred temperature of 26 ◦ C into the app , which is immedi - ately collected by the Hivemind server . The Crowd Mediator of Hivemind aggregates the preferences of all participating visitors in the shop and then outputs 25 ◦ C that maximize the satisfaction of participants . The Hivemind server applies Influence - aware Authorizer Control Server Mobile App Nearby Monitor Actuator . . . Vote ( user preference ) Mediation result ( from preference aggregation ) Authorized user entries Admin config Discovered actuator notification user vote Voting UI Preference distribution Crowd Mediator Beacon IoT Actuator Broker Sensors ( e . g . , mic . ) Figure 3 : Architecture of Hivemind this value to the AC through its native API . Peter sees that the new temperature is still different from his preferred one . After checking the distribution of other visitors’ preferences , he agrees with this new decision . 3 DEMONSTRATION We will use a demo video to illustrate ( a ) the motivation for democratic collective control of public actuators , ( b ) key components of Hivemind , ( c ) operation flow of Hivemind from the perspective of a visitor in a public space , ( d ) use case scenarios of Hivemind in multiple types of public spaces . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by the MSIT ( Ministry of Sci - ence and ICT ) , Korea , under the ITRC ( Information Technol - ogy Research Center ) support program ( IITP - 2020 - 0 - 01778 ) supervised by the IITP ( Institute of Information & Communi - cations Technology Planning & Evaluation ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Bharathan Balaji , Jian Xu , Anthony Nwokafor , Rajesh Gupta , and Yu - vraj Agarwal . 2013 . Sentinel : occupancy based HVAC actuation using existing WiFi infrastructure within commercial buildings . In Proceed - ings of the 11th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems ( SenSys ’13 ) . 1 – 14 . [ 2 ] Wonjung Kim , Seungchul Lee , Youngjae Chang , Taegyeong Lee , Inseok Hwang , and Junehwa Song . 2021 . Hivemind : Social Control - and - Use of IoT towards Democratization of Public Spaces . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Mobile Systems , Applications , and Services ( MobiSys ’21 ) . [ 3 ] Ray Oldenburg . 1999 . The great good place : cafes , coffee shops , book - stores , bars , hair salons , and other hangouts at the heart of a community . Marlowe and Company . 498