Using the System Schema Representational Tool to Promote Student Understanding of Newton’s Third Law Brant E . Hinrichs Department of Physics , Drury University , 900 N . Benton Ave . , Springfield , MO 65802 Abstract . The Modeling Instruction program at Arizona State University has developed a representational tool , called a system schema , to help students make a first level of abstraction of an actual physical situation [ 1 ] . A system schema consists of identifying and labeling all objects of interest from a given physical situation , as well as all the different types of interactions between the objects . Given all the relevant objects and their interactions , students can explicitly identify which are part of their system and which are not , and then go on to model the interactions affecting their choice of system as either ( i ) mechanisms for energy transfer , or ( ii ) forces being exerted . In this paper , I describe the system schema tool , give examples of its use in the context of forces , and present some evidence on its effectiveness in helping students understand Newton’s Third Law . INTRODUCTION A strength of the Modeling Instruction ( MI ) curriculum developed by Arizona State University ( ASU ) is that it provides students with some basic representational tools for modeling physical objects and processes [ 1 ] . Quality tools are seen as vital for helping students build quality scientific models , a central goal of MI [ 2 ] . In addition , students who are comfortable using a range of tools in problem solving better approximate physics experts , who routinely create many different representations ( e . g . mathematical , graphical , diagrammatic ) in the analysis of a single problem [ 3 , 4 ] . Examples of representational tools include : graphs , motion maps , vector diagrams , system schema , pie charts , bar charts , free - body diagrams , etc . [ 3 ] . This paper focuses on a description , implementation , and evaluation of just one , the system schema . The second section of the paper describes system schema and gives several illustrative examples . The third section discusses how system schema were implemented in a calculus - based introductory physics course taken by all science majors at Drury University . The last section presents and discusses data from a portion of the Force Concept Inventory ( FCI ) [ 5 , 6 ] , as evidence for the effectiveness of the system schema in helping students understand Newton’s Third Law . See also [ 7 ] ( and especially Jiménez 1999 and 2001 in that paper ) for other recent related work in this area . WHAT IS A SYSTEM SCHEMA ? A system schema is used to represent an actual physical situation and is the first level of abstraction after a pictorial representation . It serves as a conceptual bridge for students to more abstract representations like free - body diagrams and Newton’s Laws . The Physics Teacher has a recent article that details typical implementation of system schema in high school modeling instruction [ 8 ] . This paper will instead focus on how system schema have been used in university level introductory courses [ 9 ] . There are differences between the two approaches ( see below ) but it is not the purpose of this paper to highlight them . Figs . 1 and 2 show typical introductory university level physical situations , corresponding system schema , and free - body diagrams for specified systems within each schema . Figs . 1 and 2 show a static and dynamic situation , respectively . Although it is not an exhaustive list , here are many of the basic rules that guide students in constructing system schema from a verbal or pictorial representation . ( 1 ) All objects are represented without any details of their shape or structure . ( 2 ) Two objects interact if they influence one another [ 10 ] . For example , in Fig . 1 , the book influences the brick ( it holds it up ) and the brick influences the book ( it squashes it a little ) . ( 3 ) Therefore , interactions between objects are represented by two - headed arrows , and labeled with the type of interaction . If object X influences object Y , object Y also influences object X . This is a built in mechanism that later helps students “explain” Newton’s 3 rd Law . ( 4 ) The introductory level course only deals with four interactions , namely three types of non - contact ( gravitational “g” , electric “e” , and magnetic “m” ) and one type of contact ( “c” ) . All contact interactions ( i . e . normal , frictional , etc . ) are lumped into one type , as compared to reference [ 8 ] which separates them out . A single type of contact is preferred because it simplifies the process of constructing system schemas , simplifies using them to help construct free - body diagrams ( see ( 10 ) below ) , and simplifies the physics model of what an interaction is . ( 5 ) Double - headed interaction arrows are drawn as solid lines if the interaction persists for the entire time interval the system schema is of interest ; otherwise they are drawn as dashed lines ( See Fig . 2b ) . ( 6 ) The gravitational interaction only occurs between a huge object , like the earth or moon , and any FIGURE 1 . ( a ) Pictorial representation of a physical situation . All objects are at rest . ( b ) System schema of this physical situation , with two of many possible systems identified [ 10 ] . The dashed ellipses represent system 1 ( S1 ) and system 2 ( S2 ) respectively . “c” labels a contact interaction , and “g” labels a gravitational interaction . ( c ) Free - body diagrams for the two systems identified in ( b ) . In a force label “c” means contact , “g” means gravitational . Also , for this particular scenario “B” means book , “R” means brick , “E” means earth , and “F” means floor . For example , the symbol c R B F → r means a contact force by the book on the brick . Note the mass of the brick has arbitrarily been chosen to be three times the mass of the book , thus g R E F → r is three times the length of g B E F → r . other object . ( 7 ) A system boundary is represented by drawing a dashed line around one or more objects . If forces are to be studied , here are rules students use to construct free - body diagrams from a completed system schema . ( 8 ) Each object or set of objects for which Newton’s Laws are to be written must be identified as a separate system [ 10 ] ( see Fig . 1 ) . ( 9 ) Define Force as a description of an interaction between two objects . ( 10 ) For each interaction that crosses a system boundary , there should be one and only one force on the corresponding free - body diagram for that system . Students find this rule enormously helpful especially for complicated systems involving multiple objects with multiple interactions . ( 11 ) The label for a force vector in a free - body diagram ( e . g . c R B F → r ) is constructed using the relevant labels from the system schema . See the caption of Fig . 1c for an illustrative example . FIGURE 2 . ( a ) Pictorial representation of an experiment with two low friction carts of differing masses . Cart A is launched toward cart B , which is initially at rest . After the collision ( not shown ) cart A has reversed direction ( not shown ) . ( b ) A single system schema for this complete experiment , with one of many possible systems identified . The dashed circle represents system 3 ( S3 ) . Note that in contrast to Fig . 1b , this system schema is for a physical situation that changes over time . Before , during , and after the collision is represented here by a single system schema . Therefore , the contact interaction between cart A and cart B is drawn as a dotted line rather than a solid line to indicate that it is not present for the entire time interval of interest of the schema . ( c ) Free - body diagrams for System 3 at different instants in time in the experiment . Force labels follow the same conventions described in Fig . 1c . g B E F → r c B R F → r g R E F → r ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) System 2 = Book ( B ) Floor Book Brick c B F F → r c R B F → r System 1 = Brick ( R ) Book Earth g g c c Brick S1 S2 Floor c g ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) i A v r A B 0 = i B v r System 3 = Cart A c A F F → r g A E F → r before collision during collision c A F F → r g A E F → r c A B F → r A B Earth c c c g g S3 c A F F → r g A E F → r after collision Floor c g 1 Class size each year was 19 , 14 , 18 , 18 , and 19 respectively . 2 For historical reasons , Drury uses the original 29 item FCI found in the appendix of [ 5 ] . 3 Four FCI Questions - 2 , 11 , 13 , and 14 - test Newton’s Third Law . CLASSROOM IMPLEMENTATION In 1999 , I began teaching at Drury University and used the Workshop Physics ( WP ) curriculum [ 11 , 12 ] for the first time . Because I was disappointed in my student’s understanding of the 3 rd Law , I worked especially hard in 2000 to help them improve , but their scores remained flat ( see Table 1 , years 1999 , 2000 ) . At a summer 2001 workshop at ASU I was introduced to modeling instruction for the university - level introductory course [ 9 ] , discourse management [ 13 ] , and system schema . Fall 2001 I switched from WP to using those methods . As it was a transition period in my teaching , FCI data from that year are not included in any subsequent composite analysis . The last two years ( 2002 - 03 ) I used the following procedure in teaching Newton’s Third Law . Shown the physical situation of Fig . 1a , students groups were asked to predict how the contact force by a 10kg ( lead ) brick on a 3kg book compared to the force by the book on the brick . They defended their answer with a system schema . Occasionally one group but frequently none came up with the “physics” answer . Most predicted the brick would exert a greater force because it was so much heavier . An instructor demo using force plates to measure the two forces revealed that they are in fact equal in magnitude but opposite in direction . At first , students were puzzled , but then at least one group always noticed that “this makes sense since c B R F → r and c R B F → r are the same interaction . ” The rest of the class quickly agreed and most seemed satisfied . Here then is the power of the system schema . It gives a visual and conceptual representation , in terms of objects and interactions , for the experimental results showing the 3 rd law . In a later unit on collisions , student groups were shown physical situations similar to Fig . 2a and asked to predict how the force by cart A on B compared to the force by cart B on A . They were asked to make predictions for a range of scenarios , varying both the masses and initial velocities of the two carts . Usually a quarter to a third of groups predicted the “physics” answer . Often these were groups that used a system schema to guide their thinking . Groups then performed experiments using a track , low friction carts , force probes , and a computer interface . Students who predicted incorrectly were initially puzzled by data indicating equal but opposite forces . But when asked whether or not their data was consistent with a system schema , they would draw one , and a light bulb would go off : “System schema even work for collisions ! They’ve got to be the same size because they’re the same interaction . ” Here is , I claim , a conceptual understanding reinforced by a representational tool . Lastly , though most students seemed to understand their data , to reinforce their “aha” moments , the instructor led a short class discussion on Elby’s idea of refining our intuition about “reacts more” in a collision to correspond with change in velocity rather than with force [ 14 ] . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Student understanding of Newton’s Third Law was measured using the Force Concept Inventory ( FCI ) [ 5 , 6 ] . The FCI was given as a pre - test the first day of class , and then as a post - test at the end of mechanics on the final exam , or on an exam sometime in the second semester during electricity & magnetism . Only data from students who took both the pre - test and post - test are reported here ( i . e . the data is matched ) . All data is from the same instructor , and from the calculus - based introductory physics course taken every year by all science majors at Drury University . Table 2 shows two composite sets of data . The first row is for classes from 1999 and 2000 that used Workshop Physics ( WP ) ( N = 31 ) . The second row is for classes from 2002 and 2003 that used modeling , system schema , and discourse management ( N = 28 ) . The pre - test data for both the entire FCI , as well as the four 3 rd Law questions , show that students in both populations were statistically similar at the start of the semester . Post - test data show that students in the second population performed much better than the first TABLE 1 . Individual class performance on the Force Concept Inventory ( FCI ) with and without use of system schema . System Fall Number of Matched Pre - test Avgs Matched Post - test Avgs Schema Semester Students ( N ) 1 FCI ( 29 ) 2 FCI 3 rd Law ( 4 ) 3 FCI 3 rd Law ( 4 ) 3 no 1999 17 11 . 1 ± 3 . 7 1 . 2 ± 1 . 1 2 . 8 ± 1 . 2 no 2000 14 12 . 1 ± 5 . 6 1 . 1 ± 1 . 0 2 . 7 ± 1 . 2 transition 2001 9 7 . 3 ± 3 . 1 0 . 9 ± 0 . 8 2 . 3 ± 1 . 4 yes 2002 15 10 . 2 ± 2 . 7 1 . 1 ± 1 . 0 3 . 6 ± 1 . 1 yes 2003 13 11 . 3 ± 3 . 3 1 . 1 ± 1 . 0 3 . 8 ± 1 . 0 on the four 3 rd Law questions . Levene ' s Test for Equality of Variances indicated that the variances of the post - test data were different [ 15 ] , so a 1 - tailed , unequal - variance student’s t - test was run in Excel . It indicated that we may safely reject the null - hypothesis that the difference in the means is due to random chance ( p = . 0003 at the 95 % confidence level ) . That is , the difference is statistically significant . Table 2 shows that modeling , discourse management , and system schema ( MDMSS ) can lead to excellent scores on the FCI 3 rd Law questions . It’s possible that students did better in 2002 - 03 than in 1999 - 2000 because I was less experienced and confident in my teaching my first years at Drury . However , I was unable to make any improvements in two years of using WP , but I was able to with MDMSS ( see Table 1 , years 2001 and 2002 ) . Perhaps I just “get” MDMSS better than I “get” WP . Indeed , some recent unpublished data suggest that more experienced WP instructors have data whose means are midway between the two reported here [ 16 ] . Although Table 2 does not show if system schema were the primary reason that students did better , a case can be made that it in particular helps students learn Newton’s 3rd Law . This is because WP and MDMSS are very similar except for the emphasis in MDMSS on use of representational tools , and especially system schema . Both are similar in their approach to the classroom , emphasizing students working in groups of 3 - 4 , real - time data collection to build models , and a 3 - cycle pedagogy of predict , experiment , and resolve - differences . And both are similar in their approach to teaching the 3 rd Law as well . Activities based on Fig . 2 in MDMSS are almost identical in style and substance to those in WP . A small difference is that MDMSS also includes the activity based on Fig . 1 . A main difference between MDMSS and WP is an emphasis on system schema . Students start in the third week of the class using system schema to qualitatively model energy concepts [ 3 ] . Long before the concept of force has been introduced , students get comfortable talking about objects and interactions . Further , I suggest that spontaneous comments by students about how 3 rd Law force pairs are the same size because they are “from the same interaction” indicate something more is going on than just appeal to experimental results . They suddenly seem more satisfied with their experimental results , perhaps because there is a “reasonable” mechanism to “explain” them . Perhaps by the time forces are studied , the system schema has become a valuable epistemological resource to them [ 14 ] . It would be an interesting experiment , now that I am more experienced , to return to teaching with WP and see how well my students did with the 3 rd Law . And then try teaching with WP but including extensive use of system schema as well . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Kathy Coy , Kerry Leibowitz , Dave Yount helped mightily with statistics . Miki patiently encouraged . Mani supported and provided extensive critical review . REFERENCES 1 . M . Wells , D . Hestenes , and G . Swackhamer , “A Modeling Method for High School Physics Instruction , ” Am . J . Phys . 63 , 606 - 619 ( 1995 ) . 2 . D . Hestenes , “Toward a Modeling Theory of Physics Instruction , ” Am . J . Phys . 55 , 440 - 454 ( 1987 ) . 3 . E . T . Brewe , “Inclusion of the Energy Thread in the Introductory Physics Curriculum : An Example of Long - Term Conceptual and Thematic Coherence , ” Ph . D . Thesis , Arizona State University , 2003 . 4 . F . Reif and J . I . Heller , " Knowledge structures and problem solving in physicists " , Educ . Psychol . 17 , 102 - 127 ( 1982 ) . 5 . D . Hestenes , M . Wells , and G . Swackhamer , “Force Concept Inventory , ” Phys . Teach . , 30 , 141 - 158 ( 1992 ) . 6 . http : / / modeling . asu . edu / R & E / Research html 7 . A . Savinainen , P . Scott , and J . Viiri , “Using a bridging representation and social interactions to foster conceptual change , ” Sci . Educ . 89 , 175 - 195 ( 2005 ) . 8 . L . Turner , “System Schemas , ” Phys . Teach . 41 , 404 - 408 ( 2003 ) . 9 . http : / / modeling . asu . edu / rup workshop / 10 . A . B . Arons , Teaching Introductory Physics , ( John Wiley & Sons Inc . , New York , 1997 ) , Part III , pp . 45 - 47 . 11 . P . Laws , " Millikan Lecture : Promoting Active Learning Based on Physics Education Research in Introductory Physics Courses , " Am . J . Phys . 65 , 14 - 21 ( 1997 ) . 12 . P . Laws , Workshop Physics Activity Guide , ( John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1997 ) . 855 pp . 13 . D . M . Desbien , “Modeling Discourse Management Compared to Other Classroom Management Styles in University Physics , ” Ph . D . Thesis , ASU , 2002 . 14 . D . Hammer , “Student Resources for Learning Introductory Physics . ” Am . J . Phys . , 68 , S52 - S59 ( 2000 ) . 15 . K . Coy , private communication , July 2004 . 16 . B . Callen , private communication , July 2004 . TABLE 2 . Composite student performance on the FCI , with and without use of system schema in instruction System Fall Number of Matched Pre - test Avgs Matched Post - test Avgs Schema Semester Students ( N ) FCI ( 29 ) 1 FCI 3 rd Law ( 4 ) 2 FCI 3 rd Law ( 4 ) 2 no 1999 , 2000 31 11 . 6 ± 4 . 6 1 . 2 ± 1 . 0 2 . 8 ± 1 . 2 yes 2002 , 2003 28 10 . 7 ± 3 . 0 1 . 1 ± 1 . 0 3 . 7 ± 0 . 8