University of Nebraska - Lincoln DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln Papers in Behavior and Biological Sciences Papers in the Biological Sciences 6 - 1 - 1979 Search Image Formation in the Blue Jay ( Cyanocitta cristata ) Alexandra T . Pietrewicz University of Massachusetts , Amherst Alan Kamil University of Nebraska - Lincoln , akamil1 @ unl . edu Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . unl . edu / bioscibehavior Part of the Behavior and Ethology Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Papers in the Biological Sciences at DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln . It has been accepted for inclusion in Papers in Behavior and Biological Sciences by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons @ University of Nebraska - Lincoln . Pietrewicz , Alexandra T . and Kamil , Alan , " Search Image Formation in the Blue Jay ( Cyanocitta cristata ) " ( 1979 ) . Papers in Behavior and Biological Sciences . Paper 65 . http : / / digitalcommons . unl . edu / bioscibehavior / 65 Predators guided by vision often prey differentially on different prey types ( 1 ) , a response frequently taken as evidence for a predator’s use of a specific search image ( 2 , 3 ) . This evi - dence has included a number of dif - ferent behavioral patterns , such as a predator’s choosing one prey type more frequently than would be ex - pected from the prey’s relative density ( 1 ) , a predator’s responding to a famil - iar prey type before responding to a newly introduced type ( 2 ) , or a pred - ator’s delaying before responding to a novel , cryptic prey type ( 3 ) . However , as Dawkins ( 4 ) and Krebs ( 5 ) have pointed out , the search image concept should be used only when the preda - tor’s ability to detect prey improves as a function of recent encounters with the prey type . Much of the existing evidence for search image can be ex - plained by prey preferences , by dif - ferences in palatability , ease of cap - ture , or handling time among the prey types , or avoidance of an unfamiliar food object ( 4 ) . We present data show - ing direct effects of search image upon the detection of prey . We studied blue jays searching for cryptic Catocala moths ( Noctuidae ) , which are normally preyed upon by jays in the wild ( 6 ) . We trained jays to respond differentially to the presence or absence of Catocala moths in pro - jected images ( 7 ) . To test for search im - age in these experienced birds , we con - trolled the sequence of images they encountered . The jays were exposed to a succession of slides of one prey type ; their detection of the moths in this se - ries was compared with that when the slide series contained two prey spe - cies intermixed ( 8 ) . The search im - age hypothesis predicts that the jays should be increasingly able to detect the moths with successive encounters with one cryptic prey type , but should not show rapid changes in detection when searching for two species in a se - ries of slides . Five blue jays , obtained in the Am - herst , Massachusetts , area when 10 to 12 days old and hand raised in the lab - oratory , were subjects . All birds had been trained to detect Catocala moths in projected images ( 7 ) and were familiar with the species used in this study . The birds were maintained at 80 percent of their free feeding weight through - out the experiment . The apparatus was a pigeon chamber ( Lehigh Val - ley Electronics ) . A food magazine was located centrally on the intelligence panel , with an 11 . 4 by 7 . 5 cm stimu - lus key mounted to the left of the mag - azine and a round advance key 2 . 54 cm in diameter mounted to the right . Slides were projected onto the stimu - lus key by a programmable projector ( Kodak Carousel ) mounted behind the panel . Reinforcement was half a Tene - brio larva delivered into the magazine by a feeder ( Davis Universal ) mounted on top of the chamber . Positive slides contained the im - age of a moth and negative slides con - tained no moth . Each trial began with the illumination of the advance key with red light . When the advance key was pecked once , an image was pro - jected onto the stimulus key . If the projected slide was positive , ten pecks at the stimulus key ( correct response ) resulted in reinforcement . Reinforce - ment was followed by a 10 second in - tertrial interval ( ITI ) to allow ingestion of the reward before the next trial be - gan . A peck at the advance key on pos - itive trials ( incorrect response ) pro - duced a 60 second ITI . On negative trials , the tenth peck at the stimulus key ( incorrect response ) was followed by a 60 second ITI , but one peck at the advance key ( correct response ) pro - duced a 4 second ITI . A detailed description of the slides has been reported ( 7 ) . For this study , two species of Catocala were used in the test slides : C . relicta ( white fore - wings with prominent stripes of black and gray , which usually rests head up on white birch ) ; and C . retecta ( gray forewings with a prominent disruptive pattern of brown lines , which usually rests head down on dark bark such as oak ) . These moths appeared only in cryptic conditions on their species typ - ical substrate ( 7 , 9 ) . Search image formation was tested by embedding one of three types of 16 slide series within a discrimina - tion session : “run , ” eight positive and eight matched negative slides , all pos - itives containing C . relictn , or all pos - itives containing C . retectn ; or “non - run , ” four positive slides of C . relicta and four positive slides of C . retecta , intermixed with eight matched neg - ative slides . Thus , in a run , the jays searched for one species of moth , and in a nonrun , they searched for two species . Published in Science , New Series , Vol . 204 , No . 4399 ( June 22 , 1979 ) , pp . 1332 – 1333 . Copyright © 1979 American Association for the Advancement of Science . Used by permission . Submitted October 6 , 1978 ; revised March 20 , 1979 . Search Image Formation in the Blue Jay ( Cyanocitta cristata ) Alexandra T . Pietrewicz and Alan C . Kamil Department of Psychology , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , MA 01003 Present address for A . T . Pietrewicz — Department of Psychology , Emory University , Atlanta , Ga 30322 Abstract Blue jays trained to detect Catocala moths in slides were exposed to two types of slide series containing these moths : series of one species and series of two species intermixed . In one species series , detection ability increased with successive encoun - ters with one prey type . No similar effect occurred in two species series . These results are a direct demonstration of a specific search image . 1332 The jays were exposed to these slides in sessions of 24 trials , two ses - sions a day ( with 1 . 5 hours between sessions ) for 12 days . Each session in - cluded the 16 slides in the test series ( run or nonrun ) and eight other slides ( four positive of a third species , C . cara , four negative ) randomly chosen from our collection . The test series of 16 slides began equally often on trials 3 , 4 , or 5 of the session in order to make the start of the test series less predict - able . The jays were exposed to a total of eight sessions containing a run of C . retectn , eight sessions containing a run of C . relicta , and eight sessions contain - ing nonruns . The positions of the eight positive slides within the test series were des - ignated positions 1 through 8 . The ef - fects of the position of the slide on detection were examined by analyz - ing percentage correct responses with analysis of variance . The percentage correct increased across position in both run ( C . relicta and C . retecta ) con - ditions , but not across position in non - runs ( Figure 1 ) . The interdependent ef - fects of test series type and position of the slides on performance resulted in a significant interaction of these fac - tors ( P < . 005 ) . There was also a signifi - cant main effect of test series type ( run or nonrun ) on performance ( P < . 025 ) . The jays responded at a mean of 87 . 8 percent correct on C . retecta runs , at 88 . 1 percent correct on C . relicta runs , and at 75 . 0 percent correct on nonruns . The percentage correct increased across position of the negative slides within the run conditions , but not within the nonrun condition ( Figure 2 ) . The differential effects of test se - ries type on performance on negative slides resulted in a significant interac - tion of these factors ( P < . 025 ) . In ad - dition , there was a main effect of test series type upon percentage correct on negative slides ( P < . 005 ) . The jays re - sponded at a mean of 87 . 7 percent cor - rect on negative slides within C . retecta runs , at 84 . 9 percent correct within C . relicta runs , and at 76 . 6 percent correct within nonruns ( 10 ) . These data provide , to our knowl - edge , the first direct evidence for search image as an improvement in the predator’s ability to detect a par - ticular prey type as a result of recent successive encounters with that prey type . Our procedures held all variables constant except the sequence in which prey types were encountered . Thus the changes in the performance of the jays can be explained only in terms of changes in detection , as the search im - age hypothesis requires ( 4 , 5 ) . These results also show that a pred - ator is better able to detect the absence of a prey type when search image is used . This effect can be observed only with procedures that require a record - able response to the absence of prey . However , this phenomenon is proba - bly of considerable importance , since it would allow a predator to quickly leave an area devoid of prey , and this response can be an important compo - nent of efficient foraging ( 11 ) . It is pos - sible that search image involves not only changes in the detection of a par - ticular prey type , but also changes in the efficiency with which the predator locates and scans an appropriate sub - strate . This possibility is supported by our results . Our results support the hypothe - sis that the visually guided predator experiences short term changes in its ability to detect cryptic prey , and these changes are determined by what the predator has most recently detected . Such a mechanism would undoubt - edly contribute to sudden intense pre - dation on one particular species , a re - sponse commonly observed in the wild ( 1 ) . Additional research is needed to investigate these perceptual changes with varying densities of available prey types . References and Notes 1 . L . Tinbergen , Arch . Neerl . Zool . 13 : 265 ( 1960 ) ; J . H . Mook , L . J . Mook , H . S . Heikens , ibid , p . 448 ; D . M . Ware , J . Fish . Res . Bd . Can . 28 : 1847 ( 1971 ) ; H . C . Muel - ler , Nature ( London ) 233 : 345 ( 1971 ) ; M . D . Rausher , Science 200 : 1071 ( 1978 ) . 2 . H . J . Croze , Z . Tierpsychol . Berh . 5 ( 1970 ) ; J . Alcock , Behaviour 46 : 174 ( 1973 ) ; J . A . Allen and B . Clarke , Nature ( London ) 220 : 501 ( 1968 ) . 3 . L . de Ruiter , Behaviour 4 : 222 ( 1952 ) . 4 . M . Dawkins , Anim . Behav . 19 : 566 ( 1971 ) . 5 . J . B . Krebs , In Perspectives in Ethology , P . P . G . Bateson and P . H . Klopfer , eds . ( Ple - num , New York , 1973 ) , pp 73 – 111 . 6 . T . D . Sargent , J . Lepid . Soc . 27 : 175 ( 1973 ) . 7 . A . T . Pietrewicz and A . C . Kamil , Science 195 : 580 ( 1977 ) . 8 . These birds were experienced only with the intermixed sessions . 9 . Slides were prepared in matched pairs , identical except for the presence or ab - sence of a moth , by pinning a dead moth into position on a tree , taking a picture of the scene , then removing the moth and taking another picture . 10 . Although the data here are grouped for all birds , these same effects of condition and position of the slides in the test se - ries were reflected in the performance of the individual birds . 11 . E . L . Chamov , thesis , University of Washington ( 1973 ) ; G . Thomas , Anim . Behav . 22 : 941 ( 1974 ) . 12 This research is part of a thesis submit - ted to the University of Massachusetts by ATP . We thank T . D . Sargent for his advice and for supplying the moths , and M . A . Novak and J . W . Donahoe for their constructive suggestions and com - ments . Supported in part by NSF grants GB - 30501 and BNS - 76 - 80275 S earch I mage F ormatIon In the B lue J ay ( C yanoCitta Cristata ) 1333 Figure 1 . Mean percentage correct re - sponses on positive ( moth ) slides within runs ( C . retecta and C . relicta ) and nonruns as a function of the position of each slide in the test series ( first through eighth positive slide ) . Figure 2 . Mean percentage correct re - sponses on negative ( no moth ) slides within each condition , as a function of the position of each slide in the test series ( first through eighth negative slide ) .