Conversations Gone Awry : Detecting Early Signs of Conversational Failure Justine Zhang , Jonathan P . Chang , Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , Lucas Dixon , Yiqing Hua , Dario Taraborelli , Nithum Thain Cornell University , Jigsaw , Wikimedia Foundation 1 Yin et al . , 2009 Sood et al . , 2012 Nobata et al . , 2016 Cheng et al . , 2017 Gambäck & Sikdar , 2017 Pavlopoulos et al . , 2017 Wulczyn et al . , 2017 “Wow , you’re coming off as a total d * * k . . . what the hell is wrong with you ? ” Motivating problem : toxic behaviour 2 Conversations can start civil… … but later derail Our goal : detecting early signals of eventual derailment 3 A B Testing intuitions of early signals : a guessing game 4 “Wow , you’re coming off as a total d * * k . . . what the hell is wrong with you ? ” Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . I would assume that it’s as reliable as any other mainstream news source . A B Why’s there no mention of it here ? Namely , an altercation with a foreign intelligence group ? True , by some standards the source has some weak points , but that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t exist . So what you’re saying is we should put a bad source in the article because it exists ? [ . . . ] [ . . . ] “Wow , you’re coming off as a total d * * k . . . what the hell is wrong with you ? ” 5 Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . I would assume that it’s as reliable as any other mainstream news source . A B Why’s there no mention of it here ? Namely , an altercation with a foreign intelligence group ? True , by some standards the source has some weak points , but that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t exist . So what you’re saying is we should put a bad source in the article because it exists ? [ . . . ] [ . . . ] “Wow , you’re coming off as a total d * * k . . . what the hell is wrong with you ? ” Try more examples at awry . infosci . cornell . edu 6 [ . . . ] Other humans : 72 % Accuracy Can we reconstruct some of this intuition ? 7 Civil Start : [ . . . ] ← Toxic Comment Identifying awry - turning conversations 8 Yin et al . , 2009 Sood et al . , 2012 Nobata et al . , 2016 Gambäck & Sikdar , 2017 Pavlopoulos et al . , 2017 Wulczyn et al . , 2017 Civil Start : ← Toxic Comment [ . . . ] rude , insulting , or disrespectful towards a person / group or that person / group’s actions , comments , or work ( no toxic behaviour ) Identifying awry - turning conversations 9 Civil Start : ← Personal Attack [ . . . ] ( one of the initial commenters eventually attacks the other ) Arazy et al . , 2013 Identifying awry - turning conversations 10 Civil Start : ← Personal Attack [ . . . ] → early signals 11 Civil Start : ← Personal Attack [ . . . ] ( different from disagreement ) Coser , 1956 De Dreu & Weingart , 2003 Galley et al . , 2004 Andreas et al . , 2012 Hillard et al . , 2012 Allen et al . , 2014 Wang & Cardie , 2014 Rosenthal & McKeown , 2015 inter alia 12 hmm UFOs ah yes UFOs controlling for context : awry - turning on - track haha UFOs uh , UFOs ? ! ? 13 ( same talk page ) 635 pairs Data : Wikipedia Talk Pages ( details in paper ; data available ! ) 14 A B direct questioning hedging Detecting early signals : ( im ) politeness Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . I would assume that it’s as reliable as any other mainstream news source . So what you’re saying is we should put a bad source in the article because it exists ? 15 Why’s there no mention of it here ? Namely , an altercation with a foreign intelligence group ? True , by some standards the source has some weak points , but that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t exist . Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . I would assume that it’s as reliable as any other mainstream news source . A B Goffman , 1955 Fraser , 1980 Brown & Levinson , 1987 So what you’re saying is we should put a bad source in the article because it exists ? “building rapport , softening potential conflicts” Detecting early signals : ( im ) politeness 16 Why’s there no mention of it here ? Namely , an altercation with a foreign intelligence group ? True , by some standards the source has some weak points , but that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t exist . Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . I would assume that it’s as reliable as any other mainstream news source . A B So what you’re saying is we should put a bad source in the article because it exists ? Goffman , 1955 Fraser , 1980 Brown & Levinson , 1987 D - N - M et al . , 2013 politeness . cornell . edu Detecting early signals : ( im ) politeness 38 politeness strategies features Why’s there no mention of it here ? Namely , an altercation with a foreign intelligence group ? True , by some standards the source has some weak points , but that doesn’t mean it shouldn’t exist . 17 Detecting early signals “let’s coordinate” Let me know if you agree with this… I have been working on creating a new section… Domain - specific intuition : 18 Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . Kittur & Kraut , 2008 “let’s coordinate” Detecting early signals : rhetorical intentions Zhang , Spirling & D - N - M , 2017 Automatically inferring idea : similar rhetorical intentions prompt similar responses Let me know if you agree with this… I have been working on creating a new section… 19 Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . Detecting early signals : rhetorical intentions Zhang , Spirling & D - N - M , 2017 If you can do it I would appreciate it . OK , I’ll take a look later . Nice work , thanks for helping . Let me know if you agree with this… I have been working on creating a new section… idea : similar rhetorical intentions prompt similar responses 20 Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . typical responses Detecting early signals : rhetorical intentions Zhang , Spirling & D - N - M , 2017 If you can do it I would appreciate it . OK , I’ll take a look later . Nice work , thanks for helping . Let me know if you agree with this… I have been working on creating a new section… idea : similar rhetorical intentions prompt similar responses 21 Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . typical responses Detecting early signals : rhetorical intentions Zhang , Spirling & D - N - M , 2017 If you can do it I would appreciate it . OK , I’ll take a look later . Nice work , thanks for helping . Coordination Let me know if you agree with this… I have been working on creating a new section… Is the St . Petersberg Times considered a reliable source by Wikipedia ? I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . I don’t think the bulk of this article should rely on this one so - so source , which seems to speculate about UFOs . 22 typical responses Detecting early signals : rhetorical intentions Coordination Moderation Factual Check Casual remark Action statement Opinion 12 rhetorical intention features It is hard to address both of these issues . 23 I’m going to maybe do a rewrite of the article . . . The census is not talking about families here . - 1 log odds 1 More likely to occur in awry - turning conversation Direct question Hedge 2nd person start Factual check Opinion Gratitude Greetings 2nd person 1st person start Coordination Comparing awry - turning and on - track conversations occurrence in first comment second comment 24 binomial p < 0 . 05 - 1 log odds 1 More likely to occur in awry - turning conversation Direct question Hedge 2nd person start Factual check Opinion Gratitude Greetings 2nd person 1st person start Coordination Comparing awry - turning and on - track conversations occurrence in first comment second comment 25 politeness is tied to conversational trajectory Goffman , 1955 Fraser , 1980 Brown & Levinson , 1987 Measuring the strength of our early signals A B [ . . . ] [ . . . ] How well do our signals ( politeness strategies , rhetorical intentions ) perform at the guessing game ? 26 Measuring the strength of our early signals random : 50 % 100 % Humans : 72 % 80 % accuracy over cases that humans got right Can we reconstruct human intuition ? Our extracted signals : 65 % 27 BOW / sentiment : 57 % Conclusion Conversations are dynamic : They can start civil… but later turn awry . We detect early signals ( politeness strategies , rhetorical intentions ) of eventual derailment , Us : 65 % Humans : 72 % [ . . . ] towards the level of human intuition… 28 Future work : early signals we might have missed [ . . . ] Humans : 72 % Us : 65 % 29 Future work : understanding the derailment process 30 Future work : other trajectories how might derailed conversations recover ? 31 Data and code : Cornell Conversational Analysis Toolkit convokit . infosci . cornell . edu Online guessing game : awry . infosci . cornell . edu 32 Questions ?