Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / action / journalInformation ? journalCode = tmes20 International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology ISSN : 0020 - 739X ( Print ) 1464 - 5211 ( Online ) Journal homepage : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / tmes20 Transferring specialized content knowledge to elementary classrooms : preservice teachers’ learning to teach the associative property Meixia Ding & Kayla Heffernan To cite this article : Meixia Ding & Kayla Heffernan ( 2018 ) Transferring specialized content knowledge to elementary classrooms : preservice teachers’ learning to teach the associative property , International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology , 49 : 6 , 899 - 921 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 0020739X . 2018 . 1426793 To link to this article : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0020739X . 2018 . 1426793 Published online : 13 Mar 2018 . Submit your article to this journal Article views : 62 View Crossmark data https : / / doi . org /  .  / X .  .  Transferring specialized content knowledge to elementary classrooms : preservice teachers’ learning to teach the associative property Meixia Ding a and Kayla Heffernan b a Department of Teaching and Learning , Temple University , Philadelphia , PA , USA ; b Department of Mathematics , University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg , Greensburg , PA , USA ARTICLEHISTORY Received  August  KEYWORDS Preservice elementary teachers ; knowledge transfer ; specialized content knowledge ; the associative property of multiplication ; case study ABSTRACT This study explores how preservice teachers ( PSTs ) transfer the intended specialized content knowledge ( SCK ) to elementary class - rooms . Focusing on the case of the associative property of multipli - cation , wecomparedthreePSTs’SCKduringenactedlessonsinfourth grade classrooms with their own learning in professional develop - ment ( PD ) settings . Findings revealed the PSTs’ successes and chal - lenges in unpacking an example task , especially in areas of making connectionsbetweenconcreteandabstractrepresentationsandask - ing deep questions that target quantitative interactions . Factors that may have supported or hindered PSTs’SCK transfer include the com - plex nature of teacher knowledge , the PD effort and the outside fac - tors such as the support from textbooks and cooperating teachers . Implications for teacher education and directions for future research are discussed . 1 . Introduction Preservice teachers’ ( PSTs ) learning to teach mathematics has been found to be challenging ( e . g . [ 1 – 4 ] ) . To support PSTs’ learning , researchers recently argued for the importance of specialized content knowledge ( SCK ) for teaching mathematics [ 5 ] . This is a type of content knowledge specifically needed for the teaching of mathematics . Although there are studies that have explored PSTs’ learning of SCK in teacher education ( e . g . [ 2 , 6 , 7 ] ) , very few have investigated how PSTs transfer the targeted knowledge to actual classroom settings . One reason for this lack of research may be due to its complexity of conducting studies of this type that demands access to both settings . This study undertakes this endeavour by explor - ing PSTs’ SCK transfer from a teacher education programme to elementary classrooms . By SCK transfer , we refer to the process of putting knowledge into action . As Osterloh and Frey [ 8 ] pointed out , the knowledge transfer itself cannot be observed and measured ; how - ever , its outcome can be . As such , this study tracks PSTs transform of several key indicators of SCK from a professional development ( PD ) setting to elementary classroom settings . In particular , we focus on teachers’ unpacking of example tasks through representation uses and deep questions . CONTACT Meixia Ding Meixia . ding @ temple . edu ©InformaUKLimited , tradingasTaylor & FrancisGroup INTERNATIONALJOURNALOFMATHEMATICALEDUCATIONINSCIENCEANDTECHNOLOGY 2018 , VOL . 49 , NO . 6 , 899 – 1 921 900 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN As Ball et al . [ 5 ] pointed out , the mathematical task of teaching ‘involves an uncanny kind of unpacking of mathematics that is not needed – or even desirable – in settings other than teaching’ ( p . 400 ) . Therefore , teachers ‘must hold unpacked mathematical knowledge because teaching involves making features of particular content visible to and learnable by students’ ( p . 400 ) . To aid this unpacking process , representation uses and deep questions are important SCK facets [ 5 ] , which are also stressed by the cognitive and classroom research [ 9 ] . To situate this study , we focus on one fundamental mathematical idea , the associa - tive property of multiplication . This property , along with the commutative and distributive properties , can be initially learned in arithmetic , which will lay a strong foundation for future learning of algebra [ 10 – 12 ] . As such , the targeted topic is also viewed as an early algebra topic [ 11 ] . Through the case of PSTs’ learning to teach the associative property , we ask : ( 1 ) How do PSTs learn to unpack example tasks through representation uses and ques - tioning in PD settings ? and ( 2 ) How do PSTs unpack example tasks through representation uses and questioning in the elementary classrooms ? 2 . Review of literature 2 . 1 . Specialized content knowledge ( SCK ) SCK is a key component of ‘mathematical knowledge for teaching’ ( MKT , [ 5 ] ) . MKT is developed from Shulman’s [ 13 ] Pedagogical Content Knowledge ( PCK ) by complementing it with two major components on subject matter knowledge : common content knowledge ( CCK ) and SCK . Consider , for example , the associative property of multiplication . Know - ing that ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 = 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) is an instance of the associative property of multiplication that can be considered as CCK , which may hold for many educated adults . However , being able to use specific representations to illustrate this property so that elementary students can make sense of it demands SCK . MKT also contains two main categories of PCK , that is , knowledge of content and students ( KCS ) and knowledge of content and teaching ( KCT ) . Using the example of the associative property of multiplication , knowing students’ com - mon misconceptions of this property is deemed as KCS while having ready strategies to deal with misconceptions belongs to KCT . According to Ball et al . [ 5 ] , among these four components , SCK is a unique type of content knowledge specifically needed for teaching ( as opposed to CCK ) and it does not demand knowledge of students and of teaching con - text ( as opposed to KCS and KCT ) . Due to these merits , Morris et al . [ 2 ] argued that SCK is a viable candidate for teacher education and thus should draw increasing attention of teacher education . In fact , Leavy [ 14 ] found that obtaining knowledge in one of the four major subcomponents of MKT can motivationally impact learning in the other subcom - ponents . Thus , by impacting SCK in this study , it is likely that the other components of knowledge will also be influenced . Although Ball et al . [ 5 ] have not provided a definition for SCK , these researchers suggest a list of ‘mathematics tasks of teaching’ ( p . 400 ) that makes this content knowledge special . In the list , the core aspects included teachers’ use of examples , representations and deep questions , which are in support of the educational and cognitive literature ( e . g . [ 9 ] ) . Addi - tionally , Pashler et al . recommended seven instructional principles as a practice guide for organizing instruction to improve student learning . Among these , recommendations on worked examples , representations and deep questions are mostly relevant to instruction INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 901 on a single mathematics lesson ( the remaining included ‘spacing learning over time’ , using pre - and post - quizzes , etc . ) . As such , we focus on these three core aspects as a conceptual framework when studying SCK transfer . In what follows , we elaborate on each aspect .  .  .  . Worked example For example , Ball et al . [ 5 ] suggested using an example to make a specific mathemati - cal point . Thus , teachers’ use of examples might serve as a window on teachers’ MKT [ 15 ] . These assertions were aligned with that of cognitive research where worked exam - ples ( problems with solutions given ) were found effective in developing students’ relevant schema for solving new problems [ 16 – 18 ] . Consequently , teachers’ use of worked examples prior to students’ own problem - solving was recommended to reduce cognitive load and enhance learning [ 9 ] . Past studies on worked examples were mainly conducted in labs by showing students complete solutions . Given that students’ learning is not passive , a teacher in a mathematics classroom should engage students in the process of working out an exam - ple and making the underlying principles explicit . This process demands teachers’ SCK to unpack an example through representation uses and asking deep questions .  .  .  . Representations Teachers’ representation use is another key component of SCK . Ball et al . [ 5 ] stressed ‘selecting representations for particular purposes , recognizing what is involved in using a particular representation , and linking representations to underlying ideas and to other representations’ ( p . 400 ) . Other researchers also argued for the use of representations to facilitate students’ modelling process [ 19 ] . There were multiple representations that may be classified as either concrete or abstract . One may consider a story situation or a pic - ture as more concrete than numerical symbols because the former may activate students’ first - hand experiences to aid learning [ 20 ] . In fact , the use of multiple representations has been advocated by the mathematical education field [ 21 ] . Previous studies also have shown that instruction involving multiple representations enhances mathematical understanding [ 22 , 23 ] . However , research also pointed out that all representations contain limitations , which calls for connection - making among these representations . For instance , concrete representations often carry surface information that may hinder students’ seeing the under - lying principle , while abstract representations are distant from students’ personal experi - ence , which can cause inert knowledge . Therefore , it is important to help students make connections between concrete and abstract representations [ 9 ] . Unfortunately , teachers in the United States often introduced multiple representations sequentially without making connections between various representations . This may decrease the potential for sup - porting student learning [ 24 ] . Recent research assertions favoured fading from concrete to abstract , which is also called concreteness - fading . In this sequence , representation ‘begins with concrete materials and gradually and explicitly fades toward more abstract ones’ ( [ 25 ] , p . 10 ) . This technique takes advantage of both concrete and abstract representations and is found to be most effective in supporting both learning and transfer of mathematical con - cepts [ 20 , 26 , 27 ] . However , literature shows that teachers and textbooks in the United States often hold a belief that is opposite from this learning sequence [ 28 ] . This is because word problems were treated as ‘harder’ than computation problems and consequently arranged after the computations . 902 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN  .  .  . Deep questions During the process of unpacking an example task , it is also important for teachers to ask deep questions to elicit students’ self - explanations of underlying concepts and relationships [ 29 ] . Ball et al . [ 5 ] suggested ‘asking productive mathematical questions , responding to stu - dents’ “why” questions , and giving or evaluating mathematical explanations’ ( p . 400 ) . Exam - ples of deep / productive questions include why , why is X important , what is the evidence of X , how did X occur , what if , what if not and how does X compare to Y [ 9 ] . Without teach - ers’ deep questions , students may not provide deep explanations . In fact , learning effect can be enhanced when students are prompted to self - explain a worked example solution [ 30 ] . Therefore , teacher questions , along with other responses to student explanations ( e . g . re - voicing , orchestrating ) , have been viewed as indicators of a teacher’s knowledge for teaching ( e . g . [ 31 ] ) and key factors of classroom instruction [ 32 , 33 ] . 2 . 2 . PSTs’ developing and transferring SCK to teach mathematics Prior studies reported PSTs’ difficulties in developing SCK [ 2 , 3 , 6 ] . For instance , to unpack a decimal task that exemplifies the learning goal , many PSTs could not identify the necessary subcomponents ( e . g . relationships between decimal units ) of the targeted concept [ 2 ] . This result was consistent with Simon and Blume [ 3 ] where PSTs who knew the compressed for - mula ( e . g . area = length × width ) , lacked the ability to justify why this formula made sense based on the subcomponents and representation uses . In terms of the associative property of multiplication targeted in this study [ algebraically , ( a × b ) × c = a × ( b × c ) ] , Ding et al . [ 34 ] conducted a survey with PSTs before their taking of the mathematics methods course . It was found that PSTs who knew what the associative property was ( CCK ) had difficulties making connections between pictures and corresponding number sentences when asked to illustrate the property ( SCK ) . One of the sources of difficulties was related to the PSTs’ weak understanding of a sub - concept , the meaning of multiplication ( e . g . 3 × 2 means 3 groups of 2 ) . For example , the PSTs tended to explain the meaning of a single quantity ( e . g . 3 tables , 2 plates ) rather than the interactions between quantities ( e . g . 3 tables of 2 plates ) . Focusing on single quantities only touched upon surface information , preventing the deep - learning that demands an understanding of the quantitative interactions [ 35 ] . In fact , some PSTs did not have a clear understanding of the meaning of multiplication , viewing 3 × 2 as meaning either ‘3 groups of 2’ or ‘2 groups of 3’ . Although there were different views on the meaning of a × b as ‘ a groups of b ’ or ‘ b groups of a ’ or both 1 , Wu [ 36 ] stressed the importance of consistency in applying the same meaning during teaching to avoid confusion : Note that we have implicitly set up a convention in the above definition of multiplication . The product 3 × 5 could be defined equally well as 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 , i . e . 3 added to itself five times , but we have chosen to use the other convention instead : 5 added to itself three times . What is important is that , once we adopt this convention , we stay with it throughout the book to avoid confusion . The same remark applies to your teaching in the classroom . ( p . 28 ) We agree with Wu that it is important to apply the same meaning of multiplication dur - ing teaching . In fact , we argue that this is an important SCK component because teachers with this type of mathematical knowledge can potentially develop students’ mathemati - cal reasoning and sense - making . Ding [ 6 ] reported that such SCK component is learn - able . With ‘spaced learning’ [ 9 ] over a semester , PSTs who were initially confused by the INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 903 meaning of multiplication ( a groups of b refer to a × b ) demonstrated success in consis - tently applying the meaning to illustrate the property in their end - of - semester test . To what extent such learned SCK may be transferred into elementary classrooms calls for further exploration . Although there are few studies conducting fine - grained comparison between PSTs’ learning in teacher education and their enacted teaching in classroom , prior research does document PSTs’ struggles in teaching mathematics . In Borko et al . [ 1 ] , a PST who had learned how to illustrate the standard algorithm for fraction division through a methods course , could not respond to a student’s question about why the procedure of ‘inverse and multiply’ worked . Even after drawing a concrete picture to justify the procedure , the PST became lost in the process of explanation and told students to simply follow the procedure . The authors attributed the PST’s failure in SCK transfer to her inadequate knowledge , along with her poor commitment . In addition , Sullivan [ 37 ] reported that PSTs who believed in the importance of using concrete aids did not virtually use them during teaching . These researchers found that PSTs’ reliance on textbooks stimulated their short - term goals , which led to rule - focused teaching with the use of concrete aids becoming less urgent . As such , it seems that textbooks may serve as another factor that affected PSTs’ transfer of the learned knowledge to teaching practices . In summary , prior studies either explored PSTs’ SCK development in teacher education or their enacted teaching in classroom setting . A detailed comparison of teachers’ SCK in both settings is generally lacking , which may otherwise serve as a critical avenue to under - stand PSTs’ successes and challenges in learning to teach . As such , our current study extends prior research to explore PSTs’ SCK transfer from a teacher PD setting to elementary class - rooms . Specifically , we will compare , between both settings , PSTs’ learning to teach the associative property of multiplication through using worked examples , representations and deep questions . It is expected that findings based on this case study can inform the field with ways to better prepare PSTs for teaching early algebra and beyond . 3 . Methods 3 . 1 . Participants and project This case study is part of a year - long project aiming to equip PSTs with the necessary SCK for teaching early algebra in elementary school in the U . S . Three participants who regis - tered for a mathematics methods course were recruited . This methods course contained 25 PSTs who were in their third - year at the university . Prior to this methods course , the PSTs took general education courses . This was the first but also last year for them to take the mathematics methods course . The recruiting process took place through an email list provided by the course instructor who was not part of this study . We tried to identify PSTs who had strong interests in learning to teach early algebra , demonstrated willingness to commit to the project and had availability to participate in the project activities . As a result , three Caucasian female PSTs ( pseudonyms Anna , Cindy and Kate ) were selected . Associ - ated with the methods course , these students would have field experiences in fourth grade classrooms during which they would implement the lesson plans conducted in the meth - ods course . Although the course instructor was not part of this study , she was willing to support the PSTs by allowing them to use the lesson plans and enacted teaching conducted 904 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN for our project as part of their methods course assignments . In addition , the course instruc - tor acknowledged that her course would not discuss how to teach the associative property of multiplication . Therefore , there would be no specific input from her regarding how to teach this topic . College admission files and knowledge and beliefs surveys indicated that Kate possessed the strongest content knowledge while Anna possessed the weakest ; while , in comparison with Kate , Anna and Cindy’s beliefs in student learning were more aligned with the reform spirit ( e . g . allowing students to construct their own understanding ) . For the larger project , PSTs were expected to first attend a 24 - h summer training over six inconsecutive days . The discussion was based on Carpenter et al . ’s [ 11 ] book about early algebra including the concept of equivalence , inverse relations , the basic properties ( com - mutativity , associativity , distributive ) , variable and expressions and solving equations . Dis - cussions included relevant CCK and SCK for each topic . For instance , we ensured the PST’s content knowledge of each concept ( e . g . the meaning of the ‘ = ’ , how addition and subtrac - tion are related , etc . ) . Next , we discussed how each of the concepts may be taught to students through typical example tasks with appropriate use of representations and questioning ( we will elaborate the procedures related to the associative property of multiplication in a later section ) . Relevant research findings were also shared with the PSTs . Specifically , we shared cross - cultural textbook differences in presenting these topics ( e . g . [ 38 ] ) and explained how these research findings may inform our unpacking of the relevant example tasks . After the summer training , PSTs were expected to teach the selected lessons in fourth grade class - rooms . Immediate pre - and post - instructional interviews were conducted with the PSTs . To support and enhance PSTs’ teaching , we conducted five pre - and post - lessons studies . The current study reports the part relevant to the associative property of multiplication . 3 . 2 . Task analysis For this study , Lesson 4 . 7 was selected for teaching from the fourth - grade textbook Houghton Mifflin Math [ 39 ] , a textbook used by the PSTs during their field experience . This was the only lesson that formally introduced the associative property . Although the text - book listed the objective as ‘learn to multiply three factors’ , it highlighted the ‘Associative Property’ under the ‘vocabulary’ section and in the example task ( see Figure 1 ) . As such , one may reasonably expect a teacher to help students obtain meaningful understanding of the associative property of multiplication . According to Ding [ 6 ] , this textbook lesson seemed to have two limitations . First , it directly presented the terminology of the associa - tive property of multiplication without any contextual support . In fact , the concrete example task – Upright bass strings come in sets of 4 . Suppose one box holds 2 sets of strings . If a musi - cian orders 3 boxes , how many strings will there be ? – has not been utilized to illustrate the meaning of the associative property ( see Figure 1 ) . The second limitation is due to the lack of referents of the suggested solution 4 × 3 × 2 . In the two ways of computation , ( 4 × 3 ) × 2 or 4 × ( 3 × 2 ) , most steps could not be explained based on the concrete situation ( e . g . there was no 4 groups of 3 corresponding to 4 × 3 ) . We anticipated the PSTs to utilize the example task but modify and unpack it through modelling and questioning . According to prior research [ 6 , 34 ] , instead of directly telling students what this property looks like , a PST may start with a concrete drawing of the prob - lem structure ( see Figure 2 ) . INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 905 Figure . TextbookpresentationoftheexampletaskinLesson .  . From HMMATH , StudentEdition , Grade  . Copyright ©  by Houghton Miﬄin Harcourt Publishing Company . All rights reserved . Reprinted by permission of the publisher , Houghton Miﬄin Harcourt Publishing Company . Possible drawing of the problem structure Two ways of viewing the above picture 1 st way : First to find 3 boxes of 2 sets ( 3 × 2 = 6 sets ) Then to find the total strings in 6 sets : ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 2 nd way : First to find 2 sets of 4 strings in each box ( 2 × 4 = 8 strings / box ) Then to find the total strings in 3 boxes : 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) Figure  . Possible drawing of problem structure for the string problem . 906 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN Figure 2 could be viewed in two ways . One may find the total number of sets ( 3 × 2 ) and then the total number of strings , resulting in the first solution ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 . Alterna - tively , one may first find the total number of strings in one box ( 2 × 4 ) and then the total number of strings in three boxes , resulting in the second solution 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) . A com - parison of the two solutions then generates the equation ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 = 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) , an instance of the associative property of multiplication . Given that the pictures – in compari - son with the number sentences – are relatively more concrete , the representational sequence ( from the story context , to drawing , to number sentence ) shows concreteness fading [ 20 ] . To unpack this example task , a teacher may ask deep questions to elicit student explana - tions of the meaning of each step ( e . g . ‘what does 3 × 2 refer to ? ’ ) . Such questions target the interaction between quantities , which is the key to deep initial learning [ 35 ] . In fact , such questions may prompt students to link the number sentence to its contextual referents ( 3 boxes of 2 sets / box , or 6 sets ) , and thus set the learning goal as sense - making beyond answer - seeking . 3 . 3 . Procedures and data analysis Our PD setting devoted to the associative property of multiplication contained a 1 - h sum - mer training and a 2 - h pre - lesson study ( see Table 1 ) . Kate missed the summer training due to time conflicts . During the training , we first dis - cussed the relevant CCK including the meaning of multiplication ( a × b refers to a groups of b ) , the associative property of multiplication and how it is different from the commutative property of multiplication . We ensured that the PSTs were aware of the fact that the commu - tative property refers to switching numbers around with the product remaining unchanged ( a × b = b × a ) while the associative property refers to different regrouping of the fac - tors ( not switching the numbers around ) with the product remaining unchanged ( a × b ) × c = a × ( b × c ) . Next , the instructor introduced research assertions ( e . g . [ 11 ] ) on using con - crete contexts to illustrate the basic properties . Based on these discussions , the two PSTs in attendance agreed with the importance of helping students make sense of the associativity . Anna asked how to draw pictures to represent ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 = 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) , which led to a discussion about how to illustrate the associativity . In addition to the summer workshop , we conducted a 2 - h pre - lesson study . All PSTs attended this pre - lesson study . The discus - sion focused on unpacking the textbook example task ( the string problem ) to illustrate the associative property of multiplication . After the PD training , each PST taught a 75 - min lesson based on Lesson 4 . 7 in the ele - mentary textbook , which was observed and videotaped . The PSTs were interviewed for their lesson images before teaching ( e . g . Can you walk me through what you plan to do ? ) Table  . Activities of the associative property in PD and elementary classroom settings . Setting Activity Content Time PD Summer training Research  h Pre - lesson study Elementary textbook / lesson plan discussion  h Elementary classroom Enacted teaching NA  min Pre - teaching interview Lesson images  –  min Post - teaching interview Teacher reﬂections  –  min PD Post - lesson study Video - based discussions  .  h INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 907 and lesson reflections ( e . g . Do you think you have accomplished your teaching goal ? ) after teaching . The interview , which was videotaped , informed the analysis of each lesson and the selection of video - clips for the follow - up post - lesson study . Consequently , during the post - lesson study conducted a few days after the enacted lesson , we watched and reflected upon each video - clip with focused discussions on better use of the worked example , repre - sentation and deep questions . All PSTs attended the post - lesson study . The pre - and post - lesson studies , pre - and post - instructional interviews and the enacted teaching were videotaped and transcribed . Employing the case study method [ 40 ] , we con - ducted several rounds of analysis of the video data . We first analysed what the PSTs may have learned from the PD setting , mainly through the discussion of unpacking the string word problem in the pre - lesson study . Features of the PST’s representation uses and ques - tioning during this discussion were noticed . Second , we analysed the PSTs’ enacted teach - ing focusing on the SCK components . To obtain a full picture , we first measured the PSTs’ efforts in using example tasks by calculating the portion of class time devoted to exam - ples . Since all PSTs taught self - generated examples beyond the string problem , we fur - ther analysed the problem structures in order to identify the variations among examples . We also examined the representational sequence ( e . g . from concrete to abstract , or from abstract to concrete ) used in each example task . Finally , we analysed the PSTs’ question - ing and tracked their follow - up responses when facing meaningful or non - meaningful stu - dent inputs with the goal to identify why PSTs’ deep questions may sometimes end with unsatisfactory results . We consider a student’s input meaningful if it is explainable based on the story context and does not contain a mathematical mistake ( e . g . a student may see 3 boxes of 8 strings and suggest 8 + 8 + 8 ) ; otherwise , non - meaningful . The PSTs’ follow - up responses ( e . g . accepting or defending a wrong answer or providing direct explanations for students ) were also documented . Two independent coders conducted the quantitative coding with reliability exceeding 90 % . To enrich the findings , we focused on each PST’s enacted teaching of the string problem , focusing on representation uses and questioning . Typical episodes were identified to illustrate the PSTs’ teaching moves . Furthermore , we compared and triangulated the PSTs’ teaching with the other data sources ( e . g . interviews and lessons studies ) to understand why they do what they do in classrooms . 4 . Results In this section , we report findings based on two research questions : How do PSTs learn to unpack example tasks through representation uses and questioning in the PD settings and in the elementary classrooms , respectively . Since rich discussions in the PD setting mainly occurred during the pre - lesson study , our finding for the first question was mainly taken from this event . In what follows , we report the findings for each research question , case by case . 4 . 1 . Developing SCK in PD setting During the pre - lesson study , our discussion focused on how to unpack the textbook exam - ple ( the string problem ) through representation uses and deep questions , which illustrates the intended instructional approaches ( e . g . help students make sense of the abstract prop - erty through word problem context ) agreed by the PSTs in the summer training . 908 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN  .  .  . Cindy in PD The pre - lesson study started with discussing Cindy’s PowerPoint that she planned for her upcoming classroom teaching . Using this PowerPoint , we first discussed the string problem . Initially , Cindy stated that she would give students enough time and would expect a solution of 4 × 3 × 2 . She would then ask students ‘what does the 4 mean ? What’s the 3 ? What’s the 2 ? ’ for her expected solution of 4 × 3 × 2 . The other PSTs all agreed with Cindy . As analysed in the Methods – Task Analysis section , the solution of 4 × 3 × 2 does not have a referent in the story situation ( see Figure 1 ) . In fact , Cindy’s questions focused on individual quan - tities and may not prompt deep initial learning [ 35 ] . Therefore , the instructor challenged the PSTs ‘What does 4 × 3 mean ? ’ and suggested they draw this problem situation . Cindy quickly sketched a picture similar to Figure 2 ( top ) . This finding was consistent with Ding et al . [ 34 ] in that drawing a diagram is not difficult for PSTs . Based on her drawing , Cindy commented , ‘We’ve got 3 boxes . Each box has 2 sets and each set has 4 strings . How many strings will there be ? Now we have a picture . I would write 4 × 2 × 3 … . I wouldn’t write 4 × 3 × 2’ . Cindy’s changing of idea indicated her increased understanding through draw - ing . It seems the pictorial representation permitted attention to the interaction between individual quantities ( e . g . there was an interaction between 4 and 2 but not between 4 and 3 ) . As such , although her solution 4 × 2 × 3 was non - perfect ( e . g . there is no ‘4 groups of 2’ but only ‘2 groups of 4’ in the context ) , it made more sense than the textbook solution . Cindy’s increased attention on quantitative interactions was also evident in later discussion of Kate’s solution , 3 × 2 × 4 . When the instructor asked , ‘Show me what 3 × 2 refers to using this picture’ , Cindy rephrased it as ‘We have 3 boxes of 2 sets . 3 groups of 2’ , showing her progress toward meaningful interactions .  .  .  . Anna in PD During the discussion of Cindy’s solution to the string problem , Anna questioned the neces - sity of stressing meanings , ‘I get what you’re saying , but I would never put that up there’ . This comment is unexpected as she asked for a picture to illustrate the associative property in the summer training . Nevertheless , later in discussions , Anna spontaneously announced that she would also write 4 × 2 × 3 : I would do 4 × 2 × 3 . I would say let’s break down the problem . Look at the first sentence . Upright base strings come in groups of 4 . I would draw 4 lines . Then I’d say suppose 1 box holds 2 sets of strings . So I would draw a box and draw the sets . I’d say okay , 2 groups of 4 . If a musician orders 3 boxes , how many strings will there be . Okay , so I have 3 boxes that look just like the first box . ( Anna’s suggestion ) As analysed in Cindy’s case , although the solution of 4 × 2 × 3 lacked mathematical rigour , it was more meaningful than the textbook solution . However , further discussion revealed Anna’s solution was based on the literal rather than structural information in the problem situation ( see Episode 1 ) : Episode 1 : Instructor : How many strings in one box ? Anna : 8 . Instructor : How did you get that ? Anna : 4 × 2 . Instructor : Why 4 × 2 ? INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 909 Anna : 2 groups of 4 . Instructor : 2 groups of 4 . So why not 2 × 4 ? Anna : Because the problem is written in a different order …Because they say 4 strings and there are 2 sets . In Episode 1 , Anna’s generation of the number sentence was not based on the structural information but the literal order in the problem statement ( 4 strings , 2 sets ) . This is a com - mon way of thinking held by many PSTs [ 34 ] . To challenge Anna , the instructor pointed out that we could rephrase the sentence , ‘one box has 2 sets and every set has 4 strings’ . This indicates a need to consider ‘how many groups of what’ . Based on these discussions , the instructor guided the PSTs to modify their proposed solution ‘4 × 2 × 3’ to the first solution to this problem , 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) . That is , first figuring out how many strings in one box ( 2 groups of 4 ) , then determine the total number of strings in three boxes ( 3 groups of 8 ) . In addition , Anna demonstrated a robust tendency to focus on individual numbers rather than quantitative interactions . For instance , when later discussing Kate’s solution of 3 × 2 × 4 , Anna quickly explained the meaning of ‘3 × 2’ as ‘3 boxes times 2 sets’ , which was less deep than Cindy’s response of ‘3 groups of 2’ .  .  .  . Kate in PD Kate kept quiet most of the time . During the discussion of the solution for the string prob - lem , Kate made a comment , ‘Not from drawing , but from algebraically , I was thinking 3 boxes , I would write 3 first . Each box has 2 sets , so 2 next , and each set has 4 strings . So I would write ( 3 × 2 ) × 4’ . Kate’s suggestion indicated the second solution to the string problem , first figuring out the total number of sets ( 3 × 2 = 6 ) , and then the total number of strings ( 6 × 4 = 24 ) . However , Kate generated the above solution based on her algebraic intuition rather than based on the concrete drawing . This indicates a lack of awareness of the connection between concrete and abstract representations . To support the PSTs , the instructor stressed the meaning of each step ( e . g . ‘how many groups of what’ ) , which served as a model to make connection between the concrete and abstract and to ask deep ques - tions in elementary classrooms . In addition , the instructor suggested asking comparison questions such as ‘Comparing the two solutions , what do you find ? ’ – another example of deep questioning . In fact , the instructor pointed out that if we compared the above two solutions , an instance of the associative property can be naturally generated : 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) = ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 .  .  .  . Summary The learning process during the PD setting contained productive struggles . The PSTs noticed the improper textbook presentation and drew pictures to illustrate the problem structure that was not in the textbook . Although they lacked the awareness of quantita - tive interactions , with the instructor’s consistent request for meaning , the PSTs collectively suggested two different solutions , which contributed to illustrate the associative property of multiplication . With the instructor’s continuous support , the PSTs also could explain the number sentences , attending to the quantitative interactions – critical evidence of their SCK gains . Overall , the intended approach – meaningfully solving a word problem in two 910 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN ways ( the numerical solutions of which can be compared to reveal the associative prop - erty ) – was fully discussed . Note that the instructor explicitly stated that the discussion of the string problem only serves as an example and the PSTs may teach with flexibility . 4 . 2 . Transferring SCK to classroom settings  .  .  . An overview of the enacted lessons After the PD setting , each PST taught their planned 75 - min lesson to fourth graders . Regarding the worked examples , in addition to the textbook string problem , the three PSTs presented self - created examples : Kit Kat problem and / or the counter problem . The Kit Kat problem stated , ‘There are 4 individual Kit Kat bars in a package . If I have 3 packages how many individual bars do I have ? ’ . The counter problem involved using a manipulative con - sisting of 3 baggies , each with 5 counters , and creating sets by clipping together groups of baggies . Table 2 summarizes the instructional time spent on each example task along with the problem structures of the sub - tasks . As indicated by Table 2 , each PST tried to unpack at least one example task ( 10 + min ) . However , the subtasks of the self - created examples appeared to be similar or even easier than the textbook example . Examining the representational sequence among the seven example tasks ( see Table 2 ) , four ( 57 % ) were from concrete to abstract . These concrete sit - uations often elicited meaningful responses . The remaining three examples were discussed either in an abstract context only ( n = 2 , 28 . 6 % ) or went from abstract to concrete ( n = 1 , 14 . 3 % ) . Consequently , students generated random number sentences with no referents to the word problem situation . Facing students’ meaningful or non - meaningful inputs , all PSTs asked questions ( R1 ) . To follow - up , the PSTs tended to either accept a wrong answer ( R2 ) , defend a wrong answer for students ( R3 ) , offer their own explanations ( R4 ) or ignore a student input ( R5 ) . Table 3 summarizes the frequency of each PST’s responses across example tasks . Table  . Worked examples in the enacted lessons . Example Time Number of task spent subtasks Structure of each subtask Representation sequence Cindy Kit Kat ’  ( a )  packages of  Concrete to abstract ( b )  packages of  ( box ) ( c )  boxes of  packages of  String ’  ( a )  boxes of  sets of  strings Concrete to abstract Anna String ’  ( a )  boxes of  sets of  strings Abstract to concrete Kit Kat ’  ( a )  packages of  Abstract only ( b )  packages of  ( box ) ( c )  boxes of  packages of  Counter ’  ( a )  bags of  Concrete to abstract ( b )  sets of  bags of  Kate Counter ’  ( a )  bags of  ( case ) Concrete to abstract ( b )  cases of  bags of  ( c )  bags of  ( case ) ( d )  cases of  bags of  ( e )  bags of  ( case ) ( f )  cases of  bags of  counters String ’  ( a )  boxes of  sets of  strings Abstract only Note : ’denotes  min . INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 911 Table  . Types of teacher responses in the example tasks . Teacher response Cindy Anna Kate R ( question )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  ) R ( accept )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  ) R ( defend )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  ) R ( explain )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  ) R ( ignore )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  )  % ( n =  ) In the next sections , we report each teacher’s enacted teaching starting with an overview followed by the detailed case of the string problem . In particular , the instructional flow of the string problem in each class is illustrated in Table 4 .  .  .  . Cindy’s enacted teaching Cindy taught two examples ( Kit Kat , string ) , which counted as 28 % of her total instruction time ( see Table 2 ) . Her representational sequence in both examples was from concrete to abstract . That is , she always started with a picture representing the problem structure that elicited students’ meaningful input . Facing students’ inputs , Cindy always asked questions ( R1 ) . In fact , as indicated by Table 3 , Cindy asked the highest proportion of questions . How - ever , her follow - up responses also contained accepting student wrong answers ( R2 ) and explaining for students ( R4 ) . Occasionally , she ignored students’ meaningful inputs ( R5 ) to proceed with what was planned . In the following , we illustrate her teaching of the string problem . Cindy spent 17 min on the string problem . Her class started with collectively drawing a picture to represent the string problem , which immediately elicited students’ meaningful inputs ( see Table 4 ) as indicated in Episode 3 : Table  . The case of PSTs’unpacking of the string problem . Cindy Anna Kate Representation use Concrete to abstract Abstract to concrete Abstract only Student initial input Meaningful Non - meaningful Meaningful Non - meaningful Meaningful Non - meaningful Teacher questions and follow - up responses R1 R4 R1 R4 R1 R1 R2 R1 R4 R1 R3 R2 R4 R3 R1 R2 R1 R3 R1 R2 912 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN Episode 3 : T : With this picture , can we pull numbers out for our equation ? S6 : 6 × 4 . T : 6 × 4 . Tell me why . You can come up to our picture if you want to . S6 : ( came to the board but inaudible . ) T : Okay , so you took 6 times 4 because there’s 6 sets and there are 4 in each set . ( To the class ) When we’re looking at this picture , would that be the right answer ? S3 : No . T : Let’s think about it . We have 6 sets and there are 4 in each set . What does that equal ? Ss : 24 … . S20 : But the 3 boxes … T : Okay . So Derri has 6 × 4 . What’s another way we can look at this ? … instead of 6 , Derri , how can we get three numbers for this problem ? What did you multiply ? The 3 boxes times 2 sets to get 6 , does that sound right ? S6 : 1 box of 8 and 2 sets of 4 . T : 1 box of 8 and each set has 4 . So 8 × 3 . Is that what you are saying ? S6 : I added them . T : Oh , you added 8 + 8 + 8 ? S6 : 8 + 4 + 4 + 4 … ( inaudible ) . T : So you would still need one more …to add on 4 and then 4 more . That’s why multipli - cation is helping us out because instead of having this problem 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 , that’s just what Derri said , 6 × 4 . It’s like using that repeated addition . Alright … T : So with this problem , our lesson is about multiplying three numbers . …I want you to get out your math notebooks . I want you to write down the three numbers you would multiply together for this problem … This episode reflects the complexity of classroom teaching due to the interaction between the teacher and multiple student resources . To some degree , Cindy’s teaching demonstrates SCK transfer in asking deep questions and using the pictorial representations to aid student understanding . When a student suggested the meaningful solution of 6 × 4 based on the picture , Cindy asked a deep question – ‘Tell me why’ . She made a sound teach - ing move by asking this student to come to the board to explain using the picture . When another student wondered why the ‘3’ representing boxes were not used , Cindy asked the broad question , ‘How can we get three numbers for this problem ? ’ . Asking for a number sentence that directly multiplies three numbers was an action to ignore students’ existing meaningful input ( see Table 4 ) . In fact , Cindy could have asked a specific question based on student input , ‘How did you get 6 ? ’ , which would lead to the first solution ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 . Instead , Cindy provided a direct explanation for students . Interestingly , Cindy’s direct explanation seemed to be unaccepted by the student . Derri ( S6 ) explained that he saw ‘1 box of 8 and 2 sets of 4’ . He continuously added the 4s to the 8 ( 8 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 ) , to which , Cindy successfully linked back to 6 × 4 . Although the students initially provided meaningful inputs , Cindy did not fully grasp the student inputs and resorted back to requesting a solution involving three numbers as indicated at the end of the episode . The class suggested 4 × 3 × 2 , 3 × 4 × 2 , 4 × 2 × 3 and 3 × 2 × 4 and found that all three number sentences arrived at the same answer . In the end , Cindy used 4 × 3 × 2 and directly added parentheses to it in both ways to reveal the INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 913 associative property of multiplication . This was exactly the textbook approach that Cindy criticized during the pre - lesson study . In other words , the discussion in Cindy’s class ended on the non - meaningful side ( see Table 4 ) . In fact , Cindy could have grasped the students’ inputs to orient student attention toward the first solution ‘6 × 4 = ( 3 × 2 ) × 4’ and the second solution ‘8 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 4 = 8 + 8 + 8 = 3 × 8 = 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) ’ , which could be further compared to reveal the associative property of multiplication , ( 3 × 2 ) × 4 = 3 × ( 2 × 4 ) . In the post - instructional interview , Cindy appeared to be satisfied with her lesson , ‘They understood how to set up a problem’ . She was particularly satisfied with her questions , ‘I tried to …say , you know , what does the 2 mean in this one , what does the 4 mean , what does the 3 mean in this one ? So they knew exactly what they were doing with those numbers and why they were doing those things’ . As previously analysed , asking for the meaning of individual numbers rather than the interactions between numbers lacked depth . It was not until the post - lesson study where the specific video - clips were discussed that Cindy made deep reflections on her lessons , ‘I should have said , okay 6 , what is 6 ? Okay , 6 is 3 boxes of 2 sets’ . She also agreed that the students’ meaningful inputs could be better grasped to form the two anticipated solutions so as to illustrate the associative property of multipli - cation . Overall , Cindy’s enacted teaching demonstrated SCK transfer , especially in using representations . However , her flexibility in responding to student inputs could improve .  .  .  . Anna’s enacted teaching Anna taught three worked examples ( string , Kit Kat , counter ) . Overall , Anna devoted the highest portion of instructional time to worked examples ( 48 % ) . In the pre - instructional interview , Anna explained that if students could not get the first example , she would then use subsequent examples to further their understanding . Anna’s representation sequence demonstrated an inconsistent style ( see Table 2 ) . When teaching the string problem , she first called for an equation , followed by a pictorial illustration ( abstract to concrete ) . In her Kit Kat problem , she only asked for an equation ( abstract only ) . In her counter prob - lem , she started with bags of counters ( concrete to abstract ) . During discussion of these example tasks , Anna did ask many questions ( R1 ) ; however , when students provided wrong responses , she either accepted the wrong answers ( R2 ) or defended for students ( R3 ) . In fact , among the three teachers , Anna tended to defend for students most frequently ( e . g . ‘The way that he multiplied used the commutative property’ ) . She also provided direct explanations for students ( R4 ) . The following demonstrates her enacted teaching of the string problem . After writing the key words of the string problem on the board , Anna requested equa - tions from students without concrete aids ( see Table 4 ) . Students provided non - meaningful responses that cannot be explained based on the story situation ( 4 × 2 = 8 , 8 × 3 = 24 ) . Anna responded with a deep question but rephrased it to focus on surface information : Episode 2 : T : Why did you do 4 × 2 = 8 first ? S8 : Because I had to get the answer to solve the missing number on the equation . T : What does the number 4 represent ? What is 4 , 4 what ? S8 : Four strings . T : Four ( underlines ‘4’ on board ) bass strings . 914 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN Figure  . Anna’s unpacking of the string problem . T : Okay , what’s your 2 ? S8 : Times 2 is in one box . It is holding 2 sets . T : So because you have 2 sets of 4 , right ? You put 4 × 2 , right ? Good , that’s right . ( Continue to discuss the meaning of ‘3’ until the class reach the answer of 24 ) . T : Good , let me show you something . I’m going to … draw this picture . ( Drawing on board , see Figure 3 ) … So if you have 4 strings in one set and you have 2 sets , so if this was an array , we would say we have 2 groups of 4 , right ? Is that how you would say that ? Because you can see these 2 groups , right ? So we have 2 groups of 4 , so I would write it 2 × 4 , right ? And then I have 3 whole boxes , with each group in it . So I would do that ‘ × 3’ . And if you were using associative property , I would say I would do 2 × 4 , right ? … I think it makes sense to do ( 2 × 4 ) × 3 . Does anybody have any questions about that ? In Episode 2 , Anna’s initial question ‘Why did you do 4 × 2 = 8 first ? ’ requested an expla - nation of quantitative interactions ; however , when this question was quickly rephrased to focus on individual numbers ( e . g . ‘What does the number 4 represent ? What is your 2 ? ’ ) , classroom conversation remained centred on surface information . Asking for the mean - ing of individual numbers would not produce a conflict between the concrete ( 2 groups of 4 ) and abstract representations ( 4 × 2 ) . As a result , Anna accepted and even defended students’ answers ( ‘So because you have 2 sets of 4 , right ? You put 4 × 2 , right ? Good , that’s right’ , see Table 4 ) . These teaching moves were consistent with the pre - lesson study where Anna was reluctant with stressing the meaning . Surprisingly , Anna went further to draw pictures during which she attempted to stress the meaning of multiplication ( e . g . ‘we have 2 groups of 4 , so I would write it 2 × 4’ ) . This teaching move indicates Anna’s signif - icant effort to transfer the intended SCK into elementary classroom . However , given that she first accepted and defended students’ wrong responses but then tried to stress mean - ing , inconsistency in instruction might have caused students’ confusion . In addition , while INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 915 attempting to stress meaning , Anna was only correct in the first but not the second step ( should be 3 groups of 8 ) . This again conveyed inconsistent messages to students . In fact , her mention of the associative property was out of place . As observed in later discussion , some students stated that they did not understand , further causing frustration for Anna . In the post - interview , Anna complained , ‘it was frustrating because they [ students ] didn’t under - stand anything I was saying …they weren’t paying attention , they didn’t care’ . Anna’s frus - tration drew her back to the skepticism on stressing meaning , which also brought out other concerns : I think that meaning is stupid , because yeah we want to teach meaning but … when you’re [ going to ] give them a test , like the worksheet that I gave them , that worksheet that they did had no meaning on it . It was all numbers , all procedure … So , when I try to teach them the meaning , they’re going , “just tell me the procedure , so I can memorize it , so I can do well on my test . ” That’s all they care about . ( Anna’s post - interview ) Anna’s complaint was evident in the existing textbook worksheets that simply asked stu - dents to multiply three numbers in different ways , which may not necessarily involve the associative property of multiplication . Anna’s complaint was also reflected by her cooper - ating teacher’s evaluation on her lesson , which seemed to weaken Anna’s reflections . Anna mentioned in the post - lesson study that the cooperating teacher commented , ‘I don’t know what you feel so badly about …they totally got it ! They just took the math test the other day and they did fine’ . In some sense , Anna’s reflections contained truth and it is always good to consider stu - dent motivation ; however , her reflections focused mainly on external factors ( e . g . students , assessments ) rather than internal factors ( e . g . teacher knowledge ) . Indeed , the deficiency of her own SCK was confirmed through the post - lesson study . When we discussed her own video - clip that contained ( 2 × 4 ) × 3 , Anna did not recognize the mistake in the second step . It was not until our later discussion of Kate’s lesson that Anna admitted she finally saw this a lot clearer .  .  .  . Kate’s enacted teaching Kate taught two worked examples ( counter , string ) , which together took 20 % of her class teaching time ( Table 2 ) . Note that although the counter problem took 10 min , this prob - lem contained six repetitive subtasks ( see Table 2 ) . As such , Kate went through each sub - task quickly . Like Anna’s representation sequences , Kate started her counter problem with bags of counters ( concrete to abstract ) while her string problem involved abstract equa - tions only . During the discussion , when students provided an incorrect response that was not supported by the modelling perspective , Kate tended to simply accept them without further discussions ( R2 ) . Kate did this most often ( e . g . ‘So you did , the four and the three equals twelve , times two’ ) . Similar to the other PSTs , she also provided direct explana - tions for the students ( R4 , see Table 3 ) . The following presents Kate’s teaching of the string problem . Kate’s class spent 5 min on the string problem , with the discussion remaining abstract ( see Table 4 ) . The class started with selecting the key quantities from the word problem . Next , students suggested an equation that did not have any reference to the story situa - tion . Further , various ways to find the answer for this equation were discussed , which were mistakenly linked to the associative property of multiplication . 916 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN Figure  . A wrong interpretation of the associative property of multiplication in Kate’s class . Episode 4 : T : First , let’s just as a class , what are some of the important pieces of information that you picked up on ? Katie . S13 : Sets of 4 . … ( Kate’s student picked 4 strings , 2 sets and 3 boxes ; Kate wrote ‘Each set = 4 ; 2 sets = 1 box ; 3 boxes = ordered’ on the overhead ) . T : So our equation , Tyler , do you want to come and write the equation that you got . S4 : [ Writes the equation , ( 4 × 2 ) × 3 , see Figure 4 , left ] . T : Tyler , why did you decide to group four and two ? S4 : Because four and two equals 8 and I know how to times 8’s and it’s easier . T : So it’s easier . Anyone else do it a different way ? Nicole , come to show us how you did it . S9 : ( Goes up to overhead ) This is how I did it , 4 times 2 times 3 equals , 4 × 3 = 12 ( draw a line to link 4 and 3 ) , 12 plus 12 , I know that because of the 2 , equals 24 ( see Figure 4 , right ) . T : So you did , the four and the three equals twelve , times two . Because you took it two times right ? So that is a different way of doing it and that just shows us again , what does that show us ? S9 : That shows us the associative property . T : The associative property of multiplication . Good job . In the above episode , without any concrete support , Kate’s class produced a number sentence ( 4 × 2 ) × 3 that did not reflect the problem structure and was corrected in our pre - lesson study . The follow - up discussion on finding the answer was limited to number manipulation . Although Kate asked students to explain why they did what they do , students’ responses were only related to which two numbers were easy to multiply . In the end , Kate guided the class to compare the two different solutions 4 × 3 × 2 = ( 4 × 3 ) × 2 = ( 4 × 2 ) × 3 and misinterpreted this as an instance of the associative property . Kate’s cooperating teacher re - emphasized this wrong interpretation at the end of the class . Such a misinterpretation might have supported Kate’s confidence in teaching as indicated by her post - instructional interview . Overall , in comparison with Anna and Cindy’s teaching , Kate’s lesson appeared smoother because she generally accepted all students’ answers without stressing any mean - ing of multiplication . In the post - lesson study , Kate explained that she decided not to spend too much time on the meaning of each step because ‘they all got it’ . In summary , Anna and Cindy made a greater effort in transferring the intended SCK into enacted classrooms ; however , students’ input brought challenges . As such , both teachers experienced some frustration . In contrast , Kate aimed to stress procedures and did not INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 917 transfer the intended SCK into classrooms . Consequently , she was satisfied with her enacted lesson . 5 . Discussion 5 . 1 . Successes and challenges in SCK transfer The current study extends prior studies on SCK [ 2 , 6 , 34 ] and explores the process of PSTs’ SCK transfer from teacher education to elementary classroom . Such an endeavour is rare in the literature likely due to its complexity in aligning the PD effort with the corresponding classroom teaching . Regardless of the complexity , a close inspection of such a transfer pro - cess and factors that may support or hinder this process is much needed if we want to help PSTs successfully obtain the necessary SCK for further teaching . Our exploration focused on a unique case , the associative property of multiplication , which is a fundamental mathe - matical idea emphasized by the Common Core [ 12 ] but overlooked in educational research . It is expected that our findings will inform the field about PSTs’ successes and challenges in SCK transfer and thus better prepare PSTs for future teaching . The targeted SCK components in this study were unpacking example tasks , mainly through the representational uses and questioning . Teachers’ abilities to select and use examples serve as a window on their MKT [ 15 ] . In this study , each PST did spend time unpacking at least one worked example in the enacted lesson ; however , discussions focused mainly on solving the word problem itself and then applying the associative property to find the answer . This was inconsistent with the purpose of illustrating the basic property through solving the example task . In this sense , the example task was not treated as a case of a principle [ 16 ] . Furthermore , all PSTs created their own example tasks in addition to the textbook example . However , the PSTs’ self - created tasks followed the exact form of the text - book examples . Simple repetitiveness of example tasks without variation does not promote students’ encoding of the key principle [ 41 ] . The PSTs were expected to unpack an example task through connecting concrete and abstract representations and asking deep questions to elicit student explanations [ 9 ] . These PSTs demonstrated partial success in transferring both subcomponents of SCK . For exam - ple , the PSTs either drew appropriate pictures or used manipulatives during the discussion of example tasks . These drawings and manipulatives served as concrete representations to help connect the problem situation with the abstract number sentences . When concrete representations were provided , some students offered meaningful inputs as part of the class conversation . In addition , at least two PSTs attempted to ask deep questions to help students understand the meaning of abstract symbols and refer them to the concrete representations . The PSTs’ success in this regard indicates that with appropriate training , PSTs have a poten - tial to transfer the intended SCK from PD to classroom settings . Our findings also reveal challenges in the PSTs’ representation uses and deep question - ing because these SCK components were only transferred to the initial but not later phases of instruction , which is similar to Zevenbergen’s [ 4 ] finding . With regard to representations , although PSTs in the PD setting agreed upon the importance of using concrete represen - tations for modelling , concrete representations in the enacted lessons were not sufficiently used for mathematical modelling and reasoning . For instance , Cindy expected students to 918 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN give an equation immediately following the construction of a picture . This indicates a pur - pose of answer - seeking , allowing students to multiply the numbers any way . If the purpose is to illustrate the abstract idea through modelling , PSTs must guide students to reason upon the drawing in different ways to generate different expressions that can together illustrate the associative property [ 6 ] . In fact , PSTs who did lead class discussion on con - crete representations failed to pursue deep conversations . For instance , while we stressed meaningful interpretations ( how many groups of what ) in the PD setting , the PSTs in the enacted teaching resorted to asking the meanings of individual quantities rather than quantitative interactions . In some occasions , they did stress quantitative relations ; yet , they were only successful in the first but not the second step . This was again similar to the findings of previous studies [ 4 , 6 , 34 ] . Teacher questioning demonstrated similar challenges . In most occasions , the PSTs asked an initial ‘why’ question without following - up with deep prompts . Instead , their follow - up teaching moves – accepting and defending wrong answers , providing own direct expla - nations and ignoring meaningful student inputs – all risk the abandoning of meaningful teacher – student interactions . Thompson and Thompson [ 33 ] emphasized that teachers must ‘be sensitive to children’s thinking during instruction and shape their instructional actions accordingly’ ( p . 279 ) . Classroom interaction may delineate from facilitating effec - tive learning when PSTs give up the follow - up questions too quickly . In fact , asking deep follow - up questions appears to be difficult even for in - service teachers [ 42 ] , which should draw attention of teacher education . In fact , although the PSTs asked the why questions , they only anticipated numerical but not relational responses . Focusing on numerical rather than relational calculation [ 43 ] is a common issue in current classrooms , which causes the lack of deep initial learning [ 35 ] . Overall , the above challenges in PSTs’ representation uses and questioning may partially explain why the PSTs lacked the abilities to unpack an exam - ple task to illustrate the underlying principle . 5 . 2 . Factors that may support or hinder PSTs’ SCK transfer Despite imperfections in carrying out lessons , the degree to which the PSTs transferred SCK to classrooms appears to associate with different learning gains . In the PD setting , Cindy demonstrated the most understanding of the intended SCK . Consequently , the SCK components were most visible in her enacted teaching . Regardless of the difference , one common factor that affects PSTs’ SCK transfer may relate to the complex nature of teacher knowledge demanded for actual teaching . SCK is a special type of content knowledge , not directly dependent on the knowledge of students and teaching [ 5 ] . However , when the PSTs try to transfer SCK from the PD setting to elementary classrooms , the complexity of the teaching context and student thinking seems to bring challenges . For instance , while the PSTs in this study could explain the meanings of each step during the PD setting , when elementary students in the enacted lesson presented unexpected solutions , the PSTs failed to ask deep questions to orient students’ attention toward meaningful interpretation . This indicates that SCK alone might not be sufficient for pursuing SCK transfer . Perhaps , if PSTs could have stronger knowledge about content , students and the teaching context ( KCS and KCT ) , they may be able to better capture students’ thinking and better exercise their SCK in the classroom context . PSTs’ lack of KCS and KCT may be related to their own weak CCK because these PSTs themselves possessed similar confusion , which might INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 919 have blinded their ability to see students’ mistakes . The above findings reveal that although there is a possibility to transfer the targeted SCK into classrooms , other components of teacher knowledge play a role [ 7 , 14 ] , making the SCK transfer process more challenging . Future studies might explore how these knowledge components may interact with each other during the process of SCK transfer . Another factor that affects PSTs’ SCK transfer may be related to the PD setting . The PD activities in this study only accumulated to 3 h , mainly through a one - time pre - lesson study . This was different from Ding [ 6 ] where PSTs had reoccurring opportunities to learn the targeted SCK . Perhaps , the challenges in our study echo the importance of spaced learn - ing [ 9 ] , which may allow the solidification of PSTs’ SCK and better transfer of it to class - rooms . In reality , many mathematics methods courses may at most afford one 2 – 3 h meet - ing ( like this study ) to discuss a specific topic like the associative property of multiplica - tion . Our findings , therefore , call for innovative ways to support PSTs’ learning in teacher education . Findings in this study also revealed outside factors beyond teachers’ own knowledge and the PD effort . First , the textbook could have better presented the example task in mathemat - ically and pedagogically meaningful ways , with worksheets that go beyond assessing pro - cedural knowledge . Sullivan [ 37 ] found that textbooks largely influence teaching , and PSTs’ reliance on the text leads to emphasis on short - term goals , which further leads to teaching practices that are procedural and rule - focused . As such , textbook designers may revise the presentation of example tasks and provide key points in representation uses and question - ing to support teacher learning [ 44 ] . Second , cooperating teachers’ knowledge and beliefs could be strengthened to better support PSTs’ learning . Given that cooperating teachers are a key factor that directly affects PSTs’ growth , teacher education may consider how to provide PD opportunities for cooperating teachers along with PSTs . With a more support - ive learning environment , there is greater likelihood that PSTs can be equipped with the necessary SCK and transfer the SCK into elementary classrooms to teach early algebra and beyond . Note 1 . This debate goes beyond the scope of this study . We agree with Wu that regardless of the inter - pretation , a teacher should use the chosen interpretation consistently to conduct mathematical reasoning . This study chose the first interpretation , a × b refers to ‘ a groups of b ’ , because this definition was used by the elementary mathematics textbook series when it initially defined mul - tiplication . Indeed , this is a more popular interpretation in the U . S . However , given that the focus of this study is on SCK , we focus on making connection between concrete representation ( e . g . 3 boxes of 2 sets / box ) and the corresponding abstract representation ( e . g . 3 × 2 ) . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the National Science Foundation CAREER award ( No . DRL - 1350068 ) at the Temple University and the Layman Award at the University of Nebraska - Lincoln to the first author . Any opinions , findings and conclusions in this study are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agency . Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors . 920 M . DING AND K . HEFFERNAN Funding This work was supported by the National Science Foundation [ grant number DRL - 1350068 ] . ORCID Meixia Ding http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 5820 - 0684 References [ 1 ] Borko H , Eisenhart M , Brown CA , et al . Learning to teach hard mathematics : do novice teach - ers and their instructors give up too easily ? J Res Math Educ . 1992 ; 23 : 194 – 222 . [ 2 ] MorrisA , HiebertJ , SpitzerS . Mathematicalknowledgeforteachinginplanningandevaluating instruction : what can preservice teachers learn ? J Res Math Educ . 2009 ; 40 : 491 – 529 . [ 3 ] Simon MA , Blume GW . Building and understanding multiplicative relationships : a study of prospective elementary teachers . J Res Math Educ . 1994 ; 25 : 472 – 494 . [ 4 ] Zevenbergen R . Primary preservice teachers’ understandings of volume : the impact of course and practicum experiences . Math Educ Res J . 2005 ; 17 : 3 – 23 . [ 5 ] Ball DL , Thames MH , Phelps G . Content knowledge for teaching : what makes it special ? J Teach Educ . 2008 ; 59 : 389 – 407 . [ 6 ] Ding M . Developing preservice elementary teachers’ specialized content knowledge for teach - ing fundamental mathematical ideas : The case of associative property . Int J STEM Educ . 2016 ; 3 ( 9 ) : 1 – 19 . [ 7 ] Wilkie KJ . Learning to teach upper primary school algebra : changes to teachers’ mathematical knowledge for teaching functional thinking . Math Educ Res J . 2016 ; 28 : 245 – 275 . [ 8 ] Osterloh M , Frey BS . Motivation , knowledge transfer , and organizational forms . Org Sc . 2000 ; 11 : 538 – 550 . [ 9 ] Pashler H , Bain PM , Bottge BA , et al . Organizing instruction and study to improve student learning . NCER 2007 - 2004 ed . Washington ( DC ) : National Center for Education Research ; 2007 . [ 10 ] Bruner , J . The process of education . Cambridge ( MA ) : Harvard University ; 1960 . [ 11 ] Carpenter TP , Franke ML , Levi L . Thinking mathematically : integrating arithmetic & algebra in elementary school . Portsmouth ( NH ) : Heinemann ; 2003 . [ 12 ] Common Core State Standards Initiative . Common core state standards for mathematics . Washington ( DC ) : National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Coun - cil of Chief State School Officers ; 2010 . Available from : http : / / www . corestandards . org / the - standards [ 13 ] Shulman LS . Those who understand : knowledge growth in teaching . Educ Res . 1986 ; 15 ( 2 ) : 4 – 14 . [ 14 ] Leavy A . Looking at practice : revealing the knowledge demands of teaching data handling in the primary classroom . Math Educ Res J . 2015 ; 27 : 283 – 309 . [ 15 ] Chick HL . Choice and use of examples as a window on mathematical knowledge for teaching . For Learn Math . 2009 ; 29 ( 3 ) : 26 – 30 . [ 16 ] Colhoun J , Gentner D , Loewenstein J . Learning abstract principles through principle - case comparison . In : Love BC , McRae K , Sloutsky VM , editors . Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ; July 23 – 26 , 2008 ; Washington , DC . Austin ( TX ) : Cognitive Science Society ; 2008 . p . 1659 – 1664 . [ 17 ] Sweller J . The worked example effect and human cognition . Learn Instr . 2006 ; 16 : 165 – 169 . [ 18 ] Sweller J , Cooper GA . The use of worked examples as a substitute for problem solving in learn - ing algebra . Cognition Instruct . 1985 ; 2 : 59 – 89 . [ 19 ] Lesh R , Doerr HM , editors . Beyond constructivism : models and modeling perspectives on mathematics problem solving , learning , and teaching . Mahwah ( NJ ) : Lawrence Erlbaum Asso - ciates ; 2003 . INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL EDUCATION IN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 921 [ 20 ] Goldstone RL , Son JY . The transfer of scientific principles using concrete and idealized simu - lations . J Learn Sci . 2005 ; 14 : 69 – 110 . [ 21 ] National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . Principles and standards for school mathemat - ics . Reston ( VA ) : National Council of Teachers of Mathematics ; 2000 . [ 22 ] Ainsworth S , Bibby P , Wood D . Examining the effects of different multiple representational systems in learning primary mathematics . J Learn Sci . 2002 ; 11 : 25 – 61 . [ 23 ] RichlandLE , ZurO , HolyoakKJ . Cognitivesupportsforanalogyinthemathematicsclassroom . Science . 2007 ; 316 : 1128 – 1129 . [ 24 ] Ding M , Chen W , Hassler R . Linear quantity models in the US and Chinese elementary math - ematics classrooms . Math Think Learn . In press . [ 25 ] Fyfe ER , McNeil NM , Son JY , et al . Concreteness fading in mathematics and science instruc - tion : a systematic review . Educ Psychol Rev . 2014 ; 26 ( 1 ) : 9 . [ 26 ] Fyfe ER , McNeil NM , Borjas S . Benefits of “concreteness fading” for children’s mathematics understanding . Learn Instr . 2015 ; 35 : 104 – 120 . [ 27 ] McNeil NM , Fyfe ER . “Concreteness fading” promotes transfer of mathematical knowledge . Learn Instr . 2012 ; 22 : 440 – 448 . [ 28 ] Koedinger K , Nathan M . The real story behind story problems : effects of representations on quantitative reasoning . J Learn Sci . 2004 ; 13 : 129 – 164 . [ 29 ] Craig SD , Sullins J , Witherspoon A , et al . The deep - level - reasoning - question effect : the role of dialogue and deep - level - reasoning questions during vicarious learning . Cognit Instruct . 2006 ; 24 : 565 – 591 . [ 30 ] Chi MTH , Bassok M , Lewis MW , et al . Self - explanations : how students study and use examples in learning to solve problems . Cogn Sci . 1989 ; 13 : 145 – 182 . [ 31 ] Seymour , Lehrer R . Tracing the evolution of pedagogical content knowledge as the develop - ment of interanimated discourses . J Learn Sci . 2006 ; 15 : 549 – 582 . [ 32 ] Hiebert J , Wearne D . Instructional tasks , classroom discourse , and student learning in second - grade arithmetic . Am Educ Res J . 1993 ; 30 : 393 – 425 . [ 33 ] Thompson PW , Thompson AG . Talking about rates conceptually , Part I : a teacher’s struggle . J Res Math Educ . 1994 ; 25 : 279 – 303 . [ 34 ] Ding M , Li X . , Capraro M . Preservice elementary teachers’ knowledge for teaching the asso - ciative property : A preliminary analysis . J Math Behav . 2013 ; 32 : 36 – 52 . [ 35 ] Chi MTH , VanLehn KA . Seeing deep structure from the interactions of surface features . Educ Psychol . 2012 ; 47 ( 3 ) : 177 – 188 . [ 36 ] Wu H . Understanding numbers in elementary school mathematics . Providence ( RI ) : American Mathematical Society ; 2011 . [ 37 ] Sullivan P . Factors inhibiting change : a case study of a beginning primary teachers . Math Educ Res J . 1989 ; 1 ( 2 ) : 1 – 16 . [ 38 ] Li X , Ding M , Capraro MM , et al . Sources of differences in children’s understandings of math - ematical equality : comparative analysis of teacher guides and student texts in China and in the United States . Cognit Instruct . 2008 ; 26 : 195 – 217 . [ 39 ] Greenes C , Larson M , Leiva MA , et al . Houghton Mifflin Math . Student ed . , grade 4 . Boston ( MA ) : Houghton Mifflin ; 2005 . [ 40 ] Stake RE . The art of case study research . Thousand Oaks ( CA ) : Sage ; 1995 . [ 41 ] Renkl A , Atkinson RK , Maier U , et al . From example study to problem solving : smooth tran - sitions help learning . J Exp Educ . 2002 ; 70 : 293 – 315 . [ 42 ] Franke ML , Webb NM , Chan AG , et al . Teacher questioning to elicit students’ mathematical thinking in elementary school classrooms . J Teach Educ . 2009 ; 60 : 380 – 392 . [ 43 ] Nunes T , Bryant P , Evans D , et al . Teaching children how to include the inversion principle in their reasoning about quantitative relations . Educ Stud Math . 2012 ; 79 : 371 – 388 . [ 44 ] Ball DL , Cohen DK . Reform by books : what is – or might be – the role of curriculum materials in teaching learning and instructional reform ? Educ Res . 1996 ; 25 ( 9 ) : 6 – 8 , 14 .