 Abstract — Sex dolls are passively jointed human - like structures . Their limited but non negligible dissemination may suggest future new modes of sexual and affective relationships with sex robots . Understanding the quality of the relationship between a owner and his / her sex doll could help us to anticipate the social consequences of future sex robots . In this framework , we propose , from available testimonies reporting a large range of behaviors including sexual relationships , destructive behaviors , or installation of the doll in the daily life of the owner , or romance with the doll generally expressed by photographies , to interpret the sex doll as a new form of transitional object in the words of Winnicott . Moreover , the hyper - sexualized appearance of the doll makes easier its fetishization as a “labor of signification” according to Baudrillard’s semiotic theory . If to cherish a transitional object in adulthood can be an indicator of depressive syndromes or borderline personality disorder , no emotional disorder is necessary linked to its private use . Further studies about sex dolls and robots could so take advantage of work that was already done with other forms of transitional objects for adults . I . I NTRODUCTION Sex robots , understood as autonomous robots able to share intimacy and daily life with their owners , do not yet exist . Their future existence will depend on the possibility to elaborate humanoid biped robots both efficient , not too much expensive and safe . On the contrary , sex dolls are already commercially available . Let us recall that a sex doll is mainly a passive human skeleton - like internal jointed structure on which is molded a soft artificial body with very similar genitalia [ 1 ] . As pointed by Aoki and Kimura [ 2 ] , sex dolls can be a mean for combating loneliness ; their increasing use could be a first stage towards a domestic use of future sex robots . Although their actual limited dissemination , academic studies tried to examine the motivations of sex doll owners [ 3 ] - [ 9 ] and , among recent studies , the question of child sex doll was often privileged without clear evidence about a link with pedophilia [ 10 ] - [ 12 ] . According to Döring and Pöschl’ national on - line survey made in 2018 , in Germany , “2 % of women and 9 % of men have already use a sex doll” ( [ 7 ] , p . e53 ) . These numbers are weak but non - negligible . In their attempt to review actual literature about sex dolls , Harper and Lievesley conclude that “there is an almost total lack of empirical evidence about the psychological and behavioral effects of owning [ sex dolls ] ” ( [ 13 ] , page 54 ) . According to them : “Research is urgently needed to test [ the ] assertions” of “the sexual objectification of women , the strengthening of rigid standards of sexual attraction , and an increased risk of sexual offending [ … ] as potential implications of doll ownership” ( ibid . page 54 ) . We do not aim to respond to this call . If we consider that sex doll is the first technical stage towards real sex robots , our purpose is limited to propose an interpretation of the sex doll phenomenon based on  B . Tondu is with the Université Fédérale de Toulouse , Allées Jules - Guesde , 31000 Toulouse , France ( e - mail : bertrand . tondu @ insa - toulouse . fr ) . testimonials both available in psycho - sociological studies [ 3 ] , [ 14 ] or through blogs and forums devoted to sex dolls , as already used , for example in [ 5 ] , [ 9 ] . As pointed by Ciambrone , Phua and Avery : “Buyers use these Dolls not just for sexual gratification but are also used for emotional support” ( [ 5 ] page 57 ) . Winnicott’s concept of transitional object will be considered for interpreting this large range of ways in which the sex doll is used by his / her owner . II . T HE S EX D OLL AS A T RANSITIONAL O BJECT S ETTLED IN AN I LLUSION A REA Winnicot , in his seminal paper , so describes his fundamental concepts [ 15 ] : “I have introduced the terms ' transitional object ' and ' transitional phenomena ' for designation of the intermediate area of experience , between the thumb and the teddy bear , between the oral erotism and true object - relationship [ … ] ” ( page 89 ) . Winnicott does not only specify the nature of the transitional object ; it also gives a list of “special qualities” : “ 1 . The infant assumes rights over the object , and we agree to this assumption . Nevertheless some abrogation of omnipotence is a feature from the start . 2 . The object is affectionately cuddled as well as excitedly loved and mutilated . 3 . It must never change , unless changed by the infant . 4 . It must survive instinctual loving , and also hating , and , if it be a feature , pure aggression . 5 . Yet it must seem to the infant to give warmth , or to move , or to have texture , or to do something that seems to show it has vitality or reality of its own . 6 . It comes from without from our point of view , but not so from the point of view of the baby . Neither does it come from within ; it is not an hallucination . Its fate is to be gradually allowed to be decathected , so that in the course of years it becomes not so much forgotten as relegated to limbo [ . . . ] . ” ( ibid . pages 93 - 94 ) . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 1 . Original schemes proposed by Winnicot for illustrating how the transitional object is an intermediary between child’s life and mother’s life ( a ) belonging to a so - called “illusion world” distinct from child’s inner world and daily life mother’s outer world ( b ) – redrawn from [ 15 ] , Figs . 1 and 2 . Sex Doll as a New Form of Transitional Object B . Tondu 2022 31st IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN ) August 29 - September 2 , 2022 . Naples , Italy . 978 - 1 - 7281 - 8859 - 1 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 ©2022 IEEE 409 2022 31 s t I EEE I n t e r n a ti on a l C on f e r e n ce on R obo t a nd H u m a n I n t e r ac ti v e C o mm un i ca ti on ( R O - M AN ) | 978 - 1 - 7281 - 8859 - 1 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / R O - M AN 53752 . 2022 . 9900803 To go further and to understand how a sex doll can be considered as a new form of transitional object , we need to specify what can be this “intermediate area of experience” for an adult in his / her relationship with his / her doll . According to Jones : “In discussing transitional objects , Winnicott is not just talking about ‘child’s play’ . Rather he is proposing a psychoanalytic theory of culture , which begins from the interpersonal matrix of infant and parent , moves to the development of creativity through play and the use of transitional objects , and ends with the symphonies of Beethoven , the paintings of Rembrandt , and the theories of Einstein” ( [ 16 ] , page 122 ) . This theory of culture can be understood as a “soften [ ing of ] Freud’s reality principle” ( ibid . page 124 ) . Freud’s reality principle is fundamentally linked to pleasure principle as highlighted by Laplanche and Pontalis : “One of the two principles which for Freud govern mental functioning . The reality principle is coupled with the pleasure principle , which it modifies : in so far as it succeeds in establishing its dominance as a regulatory principle , the search for satisfaction does not take the most direct routes but instead makes detours and postpones the attainment of its goal according to the conditions imposed by the outside world” ( [ 17 ] , article Reality Principle ) . In his philosophical critique of Freud’s concept of reality , Casey points out the fact that reality , for Freud , is essentially an external reality he proposes to specify “through a series of three contrasts : ( a ) fact vs . phantasy – the external realm is that of “hard fact” which cannot be altered by mere wish or imagination . [ . . . ] ( b ) material vs . psychological – external reality qua material is the physical world regarded as the proper object of natural science . [ … ] social vs . individual – the social is that aspect of the external world which is constituted by rules , customs and institutions . ” ( [ 18 ] , page 663 ) . Although Winnicott does seem to directly refer to Freud’s reality principle , it is clear that his proposal of introducing a “third part of the life of a human being , a part that we cannot ignore” he proposed to call “an intermediate area of experiencing , to which inner reality and external life both contribute” ( [ 15 ] , page 91 ) takes advantage of the ‘severe’ notion of reality postulated by Freud . We have tried in Fig . 2 to illustrate how this “intermediate area” is related to both the external world made of human beings and things and to the internal world of the ego , whose components can be divided into instincts , affects , thoughts and memories ( [ 18 ] , page 666 ) . All components of this inner world can then be applied to things extracted from the outer world but , always according to Freud’s theory and , we think , without altering Winnicott’s intent , it could be said that , in this “intermediate area” , the reality principle shall not apply . This intermediate area is an area for “illusory experience” whose consideration led Winnicott to the ambitious project of “studying the substance of illusion” ( [ 15 ] , page 91 ) . The great originality of Winnicott is to postulate that this new area of reality is not reserved for childhood but can be experienced in the adult life . However , it is essential to emphasize that the “intermediate area of illusion” is clearly defined by Winnicott as an area specific to the development of insane ideas : “We allow the infant this madness , and only gradually ask for a clear distinguishing between the subjective and that which is capable of objective or scientific proof” ( [ 19 ] , page 71 ) . But , just after , Winnicott adds : “If an individual claims special indulgence in respect of this intermediate area we recognize psychosis ; if the individual is an adult we use the epithet ‘mad’ . ( ibid . , page 71 ) . Today , there is however a division of opinion about the positive or negative character of the use of transitional objects by adults . In their analysis , Markt and Johnson show that : “Transitional object usage and pre - sleep ritual behaviors occurred in 5 % to 57 % of a young adult population” ( [ 20 ] , page 171 ) . They conclude that : “Childhood transitional objects may then be carried through adolescence and into adulthood resulting in transitional object usage in conjunction with other symptomology such as anxiety and depression” ( ibid . page 171 ) but they also claim that : “Not all transitional object users showed emotional disturbances” . For Hooley and Wilson - Murphy , “heavy emotional reliance on transitional objects in adulthodd may be an indicator of underlying pathology , particularly borderline personality disorder” ( [ 21 ] , p . 179 ) . But for other experts , the concept of transitional object is not a pathological sign at adulthood : according to Erkolahti and Nyström , “the use of a TO seems to be common in adolescence . Adolescents with more depressive symptoms more often used a TO . ” ( [ 22 ] , page 400 ) . Hyllienmark , on his side claims that : “an analysis of smoking during adolescence using Winnicott’s concepts of transitional object , transitional phenomena and intermediate area can illuminate how an individual manages the relations between the outer objective world and the inner world of subjective experience . Viewing smoking as a transitional phenomenon can yield diagnostic and therapeutic information and provide a better understanding of the psychological functions of smoking and the difficulties involved in giving it up” ( [ 23 ] , page 263 ) . Fig . 2 . Winnicott’s “intermediate area of experiencing” illustrated as an illusion area into which all characteristics of the ego can be projected on to selected things extracted from the outer world . The transitional object’s nature of the sex doll is fundamentally associated to a non purely sexual use of the doll . In their study , Su and his colleagues [ 9 ] “present a qualitative analysis of posts from a forum where people describe their interaction with sex dolls and their motivations for using them through text and photographs” ( page 13 : 1 ) . The authors report amazing photographies where Real Dolls , from Abyss American company , are shown in various daily life situations : reading , opening a curtain , on car , riding a lawnmower , in the dining room , playing guitar , or dancing and kissing his owner ( ibid . Figs . 2 , 3 , 11 , 12 , 13 ) . Such photographies are all the more difficult to shoot that Real Dolls , like all other sex dolls , are OUTER WORLD Humanbeings Thinks ILLUSION AREA Instincts Memories Thoughts Affects INNER WORLD OF THE EGO 410 not able to stand up , encouraging their owners to design and realize stands ( ibid . Fig . 10 ) . Looking at these photographies , it is clear that the doll owners , in these frozen moments , have created an original illusion world where Childhood’s teddy bears are substituted with hyper feminine dolls . It is also interesting to note that the doll can take the form of a near supernatural being in the case of most Japanese Love Doll with their enlarged eyes , produced by several specialized companies ( Orient Industries , Lovendoll , 4 Woods Dolls , … etc ) , or even fantastic hero as ordered by a woman to the American company Sinthetics , from a photography she addressed to the company [ 24 ] . In the book she dedicated to Japanese so called Love Doll , Agnès Giard [ 14 ] quotes the testimony of a certain Sakai Mitsugi who , in 2014 , then 51 years old , said : “The charm of dolls is very different from that of women . [ … ] The doll is better than a woman because it has no personality , no negative ideas and stays with you all the time” ( ibid . , page 215 ) . Kodama , one of Giard’s informants , is even more radical : “When we were younger , we dreamed of ideal love , because the girls were inaccessible . As adults , we remained attached to this impossible dream . What we were suffering from , finally , is not the lack of real women , it is the excess of imagination . This excess of imagination makes reality useless . Why go out ? Everything is already in us” ( ibid . , page 215 , our emphasis ) . These testimonies justify the need of an illusion area especially devoted to reconstruction of love . This is why , in our interpretation of the sex doll , as a transitional object , we propose to substitute for the mother figure , this of possible love partners who belong to the outer world but not present in the illusion area ( Fig . 3 . a ) . ( a ) ( b ) Fig . 3 . Proposed scheme , inspired by Winnicott , of the sex doll as a transitional object ( a ) leading the adult with his / her sex doll into an illusion area as in the case of this Japanese man seated in a public park with his love doll ( b ) – modified photography by AFP / Behrouz [ 25 ] . The outer reality still exists but it is now in competition with the alternative illusory reality carried out by the sex doll , as well emphasized at the end of the already cited documentary about the “world’s first male sex doll” [ 24 ] . The only interviewed woman thus describes the advantage of her male doll that she has just painfully pulled on her bed : the men who are interested in her , her «fuck buddies» she says , are either too present emotionally , or elusive after realizing the fantasy of sleeping with a porn star ; according to her , her sex doll presents neither the disadvantage of the former nor the disappointment of the latter . The Japanese man who allows to be photographed with his love doll in a city park ( Fig . 3 . b ) expresses the superiority of his illusory love affair with his doll versus a possible / improbable love affair with a real woman . According to Winnicott , it seems that “the substance of illusion” for remaining acceptable in the adult world , must not spill over into the area of “external life” because “ [ It ] yet becomes the hallmark of madness when an adult puts too powerful a claim on the credulity of others , forcing them to acknowledge a sharing of illusion that is not their own . ” ( [ 15 ] , page 90 ) . But , on the one hand , as pointed out by Winnicott himself , if the man seated near his love doll is an artist , it comes out for madness ; and , on the other hand , we do know if such eccentric behaviors will not belong to new norms in an indefinite future . III . V IOLENCE AGAINST S EX D OLLS The fundamental qualities of the transitional object express the omnipotence of the owner with respect to his / her transitional object . As pointed especially by properties 2 and 4 , it can be mutilated and survive to severe aggressions of his / her owner . Violence against sex dolls can be so significant that there is a “doctor” for repairing the dolls developed by the Abyss American company : Slave Fiero is indeed called the “Real Doll Doctor” . In his interview of Fiero , Laslocky [ 26 ] reports the following facts : “Recently Fiero “realigned” a doll’s vagina and anus and sold her for $ 5 , 000 to a fellow who arrived at his house , paid cash , and hauled the doll away in the bed of his pickup truck . ‘That doll was worth more than the truck he drove away in’ , Fiero remarks . Some of Fiero’s stories are the stuff of horror films . He once got an e - mail from two garbage collectors who found a Real Doll hacked to pieces in a dumpster . One owner sent Fiero a mutilated corpse of a doll . ‘The jaw in the doll was still in her skull , but behind her neck . Her hands were ripped off and fingers were missing . Her left breast was hanging on by a thread of skin , like your bras strap , ” he tells me , gesturing at my shoulder . ” Some photographies shown on the Fiero’s website ( realdolldoctor . com ) are disturbing due to their mimicry , blood excepted , with murder scenes . It is well known that we are prone to anthropomorphism i . e . we have a natural tendency to project our human qualities onto non - human entities . Although such projective anthropomorphism can be applied to all machines of our daily life , Darling [ 27 ] , in her analysis about “legal protection to social robots” emphasizes the difference between a robot and a toaster : “While toasters are designed to make toast , social robots are designed to act as our companions” ( page 3 ) . In some way , social robots , due to their highly human - like appearance and behavior induce a so strong projection of our human qualities onto these robots that Darling can claim : “if lifelike and alive is subconsciously muddled , then treating certain robots in a violent way could desensitize actors towards treating living things similarly” ( ibid . , page 23 ) . For Mamak [ 28 ] , the argument , according to which we have duties towards human - like entities , derives from Kant’s ethics and his famous passage about our obligations towards animals : “So if a man has his dog shot , because it can no longer earn a living for him , he is by no means in breach of any duty to the possible love partners sex doll adult 411 dog , since the latter is incapable of judgment , but he damages the kindly and humane qualities in himself , which he ought to exercise in virtue of his duties to mankind . [ . . . ] ; for a person who already displays such cruelty to animals is also no less hardened toward men” ( [ 29 ] , page 212 ) . As brilliantly analyzed by Coeckelbergh : “We have indirect duties to non - human entities such as dogs not because we have a duty to them , but because , as Kant argues in The Methaphysics of Morals , we have a direct duty to ourselves” ( [ 30 ] , page 342 ) . According to Coeckelbergh , if a direct moral standing cannot be given to a robot since it cannot experience suffering , an indirect moral standing must be considered : as for an animal , we must respect a robot to avoid our character to become vicious , and finally to be vicious towards human beings . In a more pragmatic way , Mamak proposes to consider “public violence rather than mere violence” avoiding so “the issue of the moral status of robots” . Violence against robots could then be banned as other behaviors in public places are banned “as swearing , going naked , and drinking alcohol” ( [ 28 ] , page 1 ) . According to such argument , to harm or even to destroy his / her sex doll would be a private legally behavior , but not obligatorily reprehensible since it is a thing and not a living being . To come back to Kant’s philosophy , let us mention this other important passage to be read in his aesthetic philosophy : “A bird ' s song proclaims his joyfulness and contentment with his existence . At least that is how we interpret nature , whether or not it has such an intention . But in order for us to take this interest in beauty , this beauty must always be that of nature : our interest vanishes completely as soon as we notice that we have been deceived , that only art was involved ; it vanishes so completely that at that point even taste can no longer find anything beautiful , nor sight anything charming . ” ( [ 31 ] , page 169 ) . Kant illustrates his with his famous example of the “roguish youngster [ hidden in a bush ] who ( with a reed or rush in his mouth ) knew how to copy that song in a way very similar to nature ' s” but disappointing every body as soon as his presence is revealed , because the spontaneity which only belongs to the real bird is missing . If only nature is beautiful , art can be appealing but it can also be despised and even destroyed . However , a sex - doll is a particular case of artifact . It involves the sexuality of whom uses it . And , for most of the specialists in human sexuality , it is possible to distinguish a normal sexuality from abnormal forms of sexuality . The possibility to act without any limit on a sex doll induces a new question : to be violent with his / her sex doll , could it to lead to experience sexual assault in the real life ? The question is most pressing for child sex doll . It should therefore be determined whether this new possibility to buy and use such very child - like artefacts including vagina , anus and mouth with fit an adult penis can lead to sexual abuse against reach children or prevent it . Tagaki , wo created Trottla , a Japanese company specialized in young girl sex dolls pretends he is a pedophile and that his dolls can be considered as a new way of preventing pedophile crimes : “ ‘We should accept that there is no way to change someone’s fetishes , ’ Tagaki insisted . ‘I am helping people express their desires , legally and ethically’ ” [ 32 ] . Citing Li’s study who shows that the effect of a robot was “more persuasive and engaging when physically present than onscreen” [ 33 ] , Maras and Shapiro consider that : “With each repetition , the pedophile’s needs increase , as does his desires for more extreme versions to achieve the same level of gratification . In summary , this evidence supports the notion that virtual child pornography in the form of child sex dolls and robots does incite lust in pedophiles and propels them towards future offenses with real children” [ 34 ] . According to these authors , “child sex dolls and robots should be prohibited” ( ibid . , page 17 ) . Although more cautious , Danaher expresses a similar conclusion when he claims that “such devices should be regulated by the criminal law” [ 35 ] . His position is based on an argument similar , in some extent , to that of the " Kantian dog " : “It can be a proper object of the criminal law to regulate conduct that is morally wrong” and “purely robotic acts of rape and child sexual abuse” are morally wrong . In some way , those arguments are similar to the anti - porn argument that a long habit in viewing porn movies could induce a desire of more and more violent movies . Recent studies seem to have shown that it was not true [ 36 ] . The conclusion to be drawn from this analysis is that the assumption of the sex doll as a transitional object makes possible to explain a large variation of behaviors , ranging from the staging of the doll ‘life’ to violent acts against the doll . The actual difficulties determining the positive or negative consequences of such habit recall , according to us , the difficulties to relate transitional objects in adult life with eventual psychological pathologies . The paradoxical sexual nature of this new form of transitional object must however be justified . IV . T HE F ETISHIZATION OF THE S EX D OLL In daily life , a transitional object is generally considered by parents of young children as a comforter and , without renouncing to Winnicott’s theory , it is important to recall the major critique of Winnicott’s concept developed by Bowbly for whom a transitional object is mainly a substitute for the mother or of a caregiver [ 37 ] . For Winnicott , as for Bowbly , the transitional object is not a sex impulse object ; it is essentially an object of appeasement . In a more radical way , Boubli claims : “ This type of object made up of the whole reverse of the impulse is an object of idealization , a dead object , the object of a set of commemoration of a completely devitalized image” ( [ 38 ] , page 167 ) . She reports this remarkable testimony of one 20 - year - old patient “who maintains the link to her comforter , which she continues to use as a consolation object in her moments of ill - being” ( ibid . , p . 126 ) : “Fundamentally , my boyfriend , in my bed , I wonder if I don’t tied to him like to a mother . The smell , the touch… It is enough for me . The genital relationship , I rejected it” ( ibid . , page 126 ) . In the case of this young girl , Boubli interprets this rejection of sexual intercourse as the consequence of an anguish of loss of the maternal relationship and its destruction if it is in competition with another attachment ; such anguish would justify the persistence of the comforter and this comforter , although his human nature , including the intimacy in bed , has no sexual 412 role . In order to overcome this apparent contradiction between the a priori sexual nature of the sex doll and the a priori non - sexual nature of the transitional object , we are trying to highlight the peculiar fetishization of the sex doll . Let us first recall that , according to the standard psychiatric manual DSM - 5 , three criteria have to be checked for a fetishistic disorder ( [ 39 ] F65 . 0 ) : “ A . Over a six month period , the individual has experienced sexual urges focused on a non - genital body part , or inanimate object , or other stimulus , and has acted out urges , fantasies , or behaviors . B . The fantasises , urges , or behaviors cause distress , or impairment in functioning . C . The Fetishistic ojbject is not article of clothing employed in cross dressing , or a sexual stimulation device , such as a vibrator” . Apparently , a sex - toy is not a fetish and a sex - doll , considered as an auto - erotic device , in accordance with both common meaning and psychoanalysis [ 40 ] , would not be a fetish . However , we know that the DSM evolves with time as pointed , for example , by Kafka : “In the DSM - III - R , Partialism , an ‘exclusive focus on part of the body’ , was cleaved from Fetishism and added to the Paraphilia Not Otherwise Specified category” . He then recommends “that the diagnostic criterion A for Fetishism be modified to reflect the reintegration of Partialism and that a fetishistic focus on non - sexual body parts be a specifier of Fetishism” ( [ 41 ] , page 357 ) . Today , just after the further reported three conditions A , B , C , the term ‘Partialism’ is well included among specifiers of the fetishistic disorder . This evolutive nature of the fetishism concept suggests what Jean Baudrillard calls a “semiological reduction” . In a chapter entitled “Fetishism and Ideology : The semiological Reduction” of his book For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign , Baudrillard indeed claims that “the fetishization of the commodity 1 is the fetishization of a product emptied of its concrete substance of labor and subjected to another type of labor , a labor of signification , that is , of coded abstraction ( the production of differences and of sign values ) ” ( [ 42 ] , page 93 ) . Applied to a sex doll , this would mean that the commodity sex doll , as soon it is bought , becomes subject of a fetishization process , launched by his / her owner for giving it a peculiar signification and , especially , a “sense of sentience” ( [ 8 ] , page 22 ) . This “labor of signification” , in the case of a sex doll , may be , as suggested by a member of the The Doll Forum , to look like a real girl i . e . to realize the semiotic transformation from a RD – for Real Doll – into a RG – for Real Girl . Commenting a photography showing a member of the forum kissing his doll , named Jaiden , another member claims : “ [ Jaiden ] looks like a RG , looking straight into your eyes” ( [ 9 ] , page 22 ) . In another post , a member talks about the necessary “transportation” of the doll : “We desire [ the dolls ] to be alive . We wish them to be acting like a real girl or at least 1 Let us recall that the term “Commodity fetishism” was first described by Marx in Capital : “This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour , so soon as they are produced as commodities , and which is therefore inseparable from the production of commodities” ( [ 43 ] , page 48 ) . In his chapter devoted to sex dolls , Ray [ 44 ] refers to this concept and to its use by Baudrillard but in a slightly different way we do here . close by to us in every situation . So , naturally , our Rds have experienced many means of transportation” ( ibid . , page 13 ) . In his another well - known book , Symbolic Exchange and Death , Baudrillard , criticizing fashion and the way women accept it for “playing over the signs of the body” ( [ 45 ] , page 94 ) claims the following , questionable because misogynist , sentence : “And if women are not fetishists it is because they perform this labor of continual fethishization on themselves , they become dolls ” and he adds : “We know that the doll is a fetish produced in order to be continually dressed” ( ibid . page 110 ) . Female sex dolls are not only artificial bodies with holes to be penetrated ; they are also dolls to be dressed and undressed as shown in all photographies reported in Su et al . ’ study . As written by these authors : “There is the potential for men to experiment in non - traditional gender roles in the kinds of care they give to dolls , in a space ( The Doll Forum ) where it is sanctioned . Indeed , taking care of dolls requires men to understand embodied experiences traditionnally practiced by women ( e . g . , with makeup and clothing ) ” ( [ 9 ] , page 29 ) . Although Baudrillard’s mentionned works are the products of their time ( the seventies ) with an orthodox lecture of Freud 2 , the semiotic analysis of fetishism they propose seems to us particularly relevant for interpreting the efforts made by sex doll owners for integrating their passive doll into their daily life . According to the personality of the doll’s owner , the “labor of signification” can include or not a sexuality with the doll . In this way , a sex doll is , according to us , a new form a transitional object for adult : beyond its comforter status , it would be characterized by a fetishization process , as described by Baudrillard , which settles in a more affirmative way the sex doll owner in the illusion area associated to the transitional phenomenon induced with his / her affective and cognitive links he / she established with the doll . V . C ONCLUSION From testimonies of sex doll owners , various behaviours are reported including expected sexual relationships but also destructive behaviors , or installation of the doll in their daily life at home , or romance with the doll generally expressed by photographies . We propose to justify such variety by using the concepts of transitional object and phenomenon . According to Winnicott’s terms : “The transitional object may eventually develop into a fetish object and so persist as a characteristic of the adult sexual life” ( [ 15 ] , page 93 ) . However , for post - Winnicott theoreticians , Winnicott’s concept of transitional object is applicable to children as to adults , as well synthesized by Jones : “ ( 1 ) It [ The transitional object ] involves the use of objects from the outer world in the service of projects originating in the inner world ; and ( 2 ) it creates an interpersonal psychological space that is in between the inner and outer worlds” ( [ 47 ] , p . 225 ) . This “interpersonal psychological space” is , in the words of Winnicott , an illusion area whose existence seems to be 2 According to Freud , “the normal prototype of fetishes is a man’s penis” ( [ 46 ] , page 137 ) and always according to him : “Probably no male human being is spared the fright of castration at the sight of a female genital” ( ibid . page 154 ) . 413 confirmed when we look at these photographies showing Real Dolls frozen in daily activities , all the more difficult to do considering that sex dolls are passively jointed structures . In our analysis , the transitional object in adulthood would result from a fetishization process that we propose to interpret in the framework of Baudrillards’ semiotic theory : the fetishization of the sex doll would be based on a “labor of signification” made by the sex doll owner with his / her way of life and love . As in other cases of transitional objects used in adulthood , to live with a sex doll would not induce anti - social behaviors , the sex doll owner being settled in an illusion area which is not the outer world . Even using sex child doll would not make a man a paedophile if it is not before . Moreover , the fact to consider a sex doll as a transitional object could guide a further psycho - sociological study about consequences to cherish a sex doll . In her analysis about sex dolls , Cassidy refers to the psychiatrist Douglas Tucker suggesting that “doll paraphilia could signal severe problems with trust , intimacy , or social anxiety” ( [ 4 ] , page 205 ) . Such conclusion is an accordance with what we can be read about transitional objects in adulthood : an indicator of possible depressive syndromes or borderline personality disorders but not obligatory a symptom of such pathological psychological disorders . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] K . Delvin , Turned on : Science , sex and robots , Bloomsbury Publishing , London , 2020 . [ 2 ] B . Y . Aoki and T . Kimura , “Sexuality and affection in the time of technological innovation : Artificial partners in the Japanese context” , Religions , 12 , 1996 ( 28 pages ) . [ 3 ] S . H . Valverde , The modern sex doll - owner : a descriptive analysis . Master thesis in psychology , California State Polytech . Univ . , 2012 . [ 4 ] V . Cassidy , “For the love of doll ( s ) : a patriarchal nightmare of cyborg couplings” , English Studio in Canada , 42 ( 1 - 2 ) , 203 - 215 , 2016 . [ 5 ] D . Ciambrone , V . Phua and E . N . Avery , “Gendered synthetic love : real dolls and the construction of intimacy” , Int . Review of Modern Sociology , 43 ( 1 ) , 59 - 78 , 2017 . [ 6 ] D . Knox , S . Huff and I . J . Chang , “Sex dolls - Creepy or healthy ? : attitudes of undergraduates” , J . of Pos . Sexuality , 3 ( 2 ) , 32 - 37 , 2017 . [ 7 ] N . Döring and S . Pöschl , “Sex toys , sex dolls , sex robots : our under - researched bed - fellows” , Sexologies , 27 , e51 - e55 , 2018 . [ 8 ] M . Langcaster - James and G . R . Bentley , “Beyond the sex doll : post - human companionship and the rise of the ‘Allodoll’ ” , Robotics , 2018 . [ 9 ] N . M . Su , A . Lazaz , J . Bardzell and S . Bardzell , “Of dolls and men : anticipating sexual intimacy with robots” , ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . , 26 ( 3 ) , Article 13 , May 2019 ( 41 pages ) . [ 10 ] L . Strikwerda , “Legal and moral implications of child sex robots” , In : Robot sex : Social and ethical implication , Edited by J . Danaher and N . McArthur editors , , MIT Press , Cambridge , 133 - 152 , 2017 . [ 11 ] C . Cox - George , S . Bewley , “I , sex robot : the health implications of child sex robots” , BMJ Sex . & Repro . Health , 44 ( 3 ) , 161 - 164 , 2018 . [ 12 ] R . Brown and J . Shelling , “Exploring the implications of child sex dolls” , Australian Institute of Criminology , 2019 . [ 13 ] C . A . Harper and R . Lievesley , “Sex doll ownership : an agenda for research” , Current Psychiatry Reports , 22 : 54 , 2020 ( 8 pages ) . [ 14 ] A . Giard . A desire of human . Love Doll in Japan , Belles Lettres , collection “Japon” , Paris , 2016 ( In French ) . [ 15 ] D . W . Winnicott , “Transitional objects and transitional phenomena – A study of the first not - me possession” , J . of Psycho - Analysis , 34 , 89 - 97 , 1953 . [ 16 ] J . W . Jones , “The Relational Self” , Journal of the American Academy of Religion , 59 ( 1 ) , 119 - 135 , 1991 . [ 17 ] J . Laplanche and J . B . Pontalis ( 1967 ) , The language of psychoanalysis , Routledge , New - York , 2018 . [ 18 ] E . S . Casey , “Freud ' s theory of reality : a critical account” , The Review of Metaphysics , 25 ( 4 ) , 659 - 690 , 1972 . [ 19 ] D . W . Winnicott , “Psychoses and child care” , The British Journal of Medical Psychology , 26 ( 1 ) , 68 - 74 , 1953 . [ 20 ] C . Markt and M . Johnson , “Transitional objects , pre - sleep rituals , and psychopathology” , Child Psych Hum Dev , 23 , 161 - 173 , 1993 . [ 21 ] J . M . Hooley and M . Wilson - Murphy , “Adult attachment to transitional objects and borderline personality disorder” , Journal of Personality Disorders , 26 ( 2 ) , pp . 179 - 181 , 2012 . [ 22 ] R . Erkolahti and M . Nyström , “The prevalence of transitional object use in adolescence : is there a connection between the existence of a transitional object and depressive symptoms ? ” , European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 18 ( 7 ) , pp . 400 - 406 , 2009 . [ 23 ] G . Hyllienmark , “Smoking as a transitional object” , British Journal of Medical Psychology , 59 ( 3 ) , pp . 263 - 267 , 1986 . [ 24 ] A . Murguia and K . Sciortino , “Making the world’s first male sex doll” , Vice Video , https : / / www . video . vice . com , 2016 . [ 25 ] J . Nevett , “Sex robots are turning japanese into an endanged species’ , Technocracy , News & Trends , July 25 2018 . [ 26 ] M . Laslocky , “Just like a woman” , Salon , October 11 , 2005 . [ 27 ] K . Darling , “Extending legal protection to social robots : the effects of anthropomorphism , empathy , and violent behavior towards robotic objects” , In : Robot Law , Edited by R . Calo , A . M . Froomkin and I . Kerr , Elgaronline , 2016 . [ 28 ] K . Mamak , “Should Violence Against Robots be Banned ? ” , International Journal of Social Robotics , 2021 , ( 11 pages ) . [ 29 ] I . Kant , Lectures on Ethics , In The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant ( trans : Heath P ) , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1997 . [ 30 ] M . Coeckelbergh , “Should we treat teddy bear 2 . 0 as a Kantian dog ? Four arguments for the indirect moral standing of personal social robots , with implications for thinking about animals and humans” , Mind and Machines , 31 , 337 - 360 , 2021 [ 31 ] I . Kant , Critique of Judgment ( trans : W . Pluhar ) , Hackett Publishing Company , Indianapolis / Cambridge , 1987 . [ 32 ] R . Morin , “Can child dolls keep pedophiles from offending” , The Atlantic , January 11 , 2016 . [ 33 ] J . Li , “The benefit of being physically present : a survey of experimental works comparing copresent robots , telepresent robots and virtual agents” , Int . J . of Human - Computer Studies , 77 , 23 - 37 , 2015 . [ 34 ] M . - H . Maras and L . R . Shapiro , “Child sex dolls and robots : more than just an uncanny valley” , Journal of Internet Law , Dec . , 3 - 20 , 2017 . [ 35 ] J . Danaher , “Robotic rape and robotic child sexual abuse : Should they be criminalized ? ” , Criminal Law and Philosophy , 11 ( 1 ) , 71 - 95 , 2017 . [ 36 ] E . Shor and K . Seida , “ ‘Harder and harder ? ’ Is mainstream pornography becoming increasingly violent and do viewers prefer violent content ? ” , Journal of Sex Research , 56 ( 1 ) , pp . 16 - 28 , 2019 . [ 37 ] J . Bowbly , Attachment and Loss , Basic Books , New York , 1969 . [ 38 ] M . Boubli , “The comforter in all its forms” , Special issue on Fetishism , Etudes psychanalytiques , 93 - 130 , 2012 ( In French ) . [ 39 ] American Psychiatric Association , D iagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders , 5 th Edition ( DSM - 5 ) , Arlington ( VA ) , 2013 . [ 40 ] B . Tondu , “Sex robots : Auto - erotic devices , fetishes or new form of transitional object for adults ? ” , Proc . of Int . Conf . on Social Robotics , Springer Verlag , 130 - 141 , 2021 . [ 41 ] M . P . Kafka , “The DSM diagnostic criteria for fetishism” , Arch . Sex . Behav . , 39 ( 2 ) , 357 - 362 , 2010 . [ 42 ] J . Baudrillard ( 1972 ) , Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign , trans : C . Levin , Telos Press , Candor ( NY ) , 1981 . [ 43 ] K . Marx ( 1867 ) , Capital : A critique of political economy , Vol . 1 , trans : S . Moore and E . Aveling , Edited by Charles H . Kerr , Chicago , 1906 . [ 44 ] P . Ray , “ ‘Synthetik love lasts forever’ : sex dolls and the ( post ? ) human condition” , In : Critical Posthumanism and Planetary Futures , Edited by D . Banerji and M . R . Paranjape , Springer India , Chap . 6 , 91 - 112 , 2016 . [ 45 ] J . Baudrillard ( 1976 ) , Symbolic Exchange and Death , Sage Publications Ltd , 1976 . [ 46 ] S . Freud ( 1927 ) , “Fetishism” , In : The complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud , XXI , trans : J . Strachey , Hogarth , London , 1950 . [ 47 ] J . W . Jones , “Knowledge in transition : toward a Winnicottian epistemology” , Psychoanalytic Review , 79 , 223 - 237 , 1992 . 414