From concept to implementation : The development of the emerging cloud computing industry in China Jiang Yu a , Xiao Xiao b , Yue Zhang a , n a Institute of Policy and Management , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Zhonguancun Beiyitiao 15 , 100190 Beijing , PR China b Copenhagen Business School , Howitzvej 60 , 2000 Frederiksberg , PR Denmark a r t i c l e i n f o Available online 17 November 2015 Keywords : China Cloud computing Emerging ICT innovation Government – business relationship Case study Actor network theory a b s t r a c t Cloud computing has emerged as an important ICT ( information and communication technology ) innovation that could potentially revolutionize the way computing resources are consumed and provided . In emerging economies , such innovation is regarded as the new way to provide information infrastructure that has the potential for further economic upgrading . In this paper , we investigate the initiation and growth process of the cloud computing industry in China , based on an in - depth case study . We discover that the development of China ' s cloud computing industry that emerged from an initial concept involves the co - evolution of technological and institutional infrastructure leading to a preliminary cloud ecosystem . We also ﬁ nd that such a process involves a wide range of different actors , from the government side to the business side , the interaction among which , in pursuing their own interests , drive the development of the cloud computing industry into being . Finally , situated in the institutional context of China , the government – business relationship is witnessed to have changed and evolved along development of such an emerging industry , demonstrating the important and unique roles of both sides in industrial ( or even national ) wide diffusion of the ICT innovation . & 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction In recent years , fast economic development in emerging countries has intensi ﬁ ed further the considerable need for information technologies and services . These emerging countries leverage different strategies to link the domestic infor - mation and communication technology ( ICT ) industry development with the rest of the world . As pointed out by Avgerou ( 2008 ) , one important means of understanding the future of ICT industry lies in emerging economies , which are playing an increasingly signi ﬁ cant role within the global economy . Compared with developed countries , emerging economies have some unique characteristics , such as immature capital markets , lack of resources necessary for innovation development , poor legal framework to protect property rights , and weak pools of vertical intermediaries ( Back , Parboteeah , & Nam , 2014 ; Mahmood & Mitchell , 2004 ) . Furthermore , emerging economies present a more dynamic and uncertain environment where changes are constant and complicated , both in terms of government regulations and market settings ( Back , Parboteeah , & Nam , 2014 ; Fang & Zou , 2010 ; Mahmood , Chung , & Mitchell , 2012 ) . Finally , the contexts of emerging economies are quite Contents lists available at ScienceDirect URL : www . elsevier . com / locate / telpol Telecommunications Policy http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . telpol . 2015 . 09 . 009 0308 - 5961 / & 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . n Corresponding author . Tel . : þ 86 10 59358509 . E - mail address : zhangyue @ casipm . ac . cn ( Y . Zhang ) . Telecommunications Policy 40 ( 2016 ) 130 – 146 different in terms of cultural background and political environment , which have profound implications for understanding certain ICT related phenomenon ( Xiao , Califf , Sarker , & Sarker , 2013 ) . In this paper , we focus our attention on one of the emerging economies – China . The world has witnessed the tre - mendous economic growth of China in recent decades , which has been given impetus by a series of changes in various aspects of the social and regulative systems , since the “ reform and openness ” policy implemented in the late 1970s . Parallel with such economic growth , we have also seen the impressive development of the ICT industry in China , which has been one of the major forces to transform China into a “ knowledge - based ” society . In recent decades , the development of the ICT sector has been given highest priority by the Chinese government in an effort to modernize the country ( Amiri , Campbell , & Ruan , 2013 ; Zhu , 2006 ) . As Martinsons ( 2005 ) puts it , “ more than any other country , China is being transformed by the application of IT , from a poor and isolated society to major force in the global economy . ” Such efforts have led to a series of revolutions in the ICT sector , including industry - level deregulation to decrease monopoly and introduce competition , internationalization and standardization ( Gao & Lyytinen , 2000 ; Xia , 2012 ; Zhang & Cheng , 2011 ; Zhu , 2006 ) . For instance , the gradual transformation of the telecommunication sector over the years resulted in controlled liberalization and limited competition ( Gao & Lyytinen , 2000 ) . This once again emphasizes the importance of contextualization in understanding technological progress in emerging economies ( Li , Gao , & Mao , 2014 ) . In this study , we focus on the emerging cloud computing industry in China , examining the process of its evolution and investigating the role of various actors in driving such evolution . Cloud computing represents a convergence of two major trends in information technology , which are IT ef ﬁ ciency and business agility ( Marston , Li , Bandyopadhyay , Zhang , & Ghalsasi 2011 ) . Since 2007 , the advent and spread of cloud computing , which represents a fundamental change in the way IT services are developed , deployed , scaled , updated , maintained and paid for , has been gradually changing the traditional ICT landscape in China . The market of China cloud computing services grew quickly and the overall cloud computing value chain is expected to grow to $ 122 billion by 2015 ( Larson , 2013 ) . The focus on cloud computing follows the call by Xiao et al . ( 2013 ) for more studies to consider emerging technologies , as previous ICT - related research in the context of emerging economies mostly focused on the adoption of well - established technologies such as various information systems and the Internet . These types of technological innovations are evolving in parallel with more socio - technical uncertainties than well - established ones both in emerging and advanced economies , and the applicability and use of such technologies are somewhat incomplete and unstable ( Morris , 2009 ; Rosenberg , 1994 ) . By exploring the process through which the cloud computing industry has developed , we aim to provide insights into the underlying mechanisms of the large - scale diffusion , deployment , and adoption process of emerging ICT innovations – cloud computing in this case – in China . To do so , a longitudinal study is conducted to investigate the evolution process of the cloud computing industry in China . Taking such a “ bottom - up ” approach to analyze the phenomenon will allow us to generate context - speci ﬁ c insights and understand how the particular social and political environment in China has in ﬂ u - enced or shaped such a process ( Walsham , 2001 ) . The rest of the paper is organized as follows : ﬁ rst , we discuss previous literature and present relevant theoretical background for our analysis . This is followed by a brief discussion of the methodology employed in this study , and our interpretation of the data with respect to the development of China ' s cloud computing industry . We discuss our ﬁ ndings and then offer our conclusions . 2 . Cloud computing Cloud computing is de ﬁ ned by the National Institution of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) as “ a model for enabling convenient , on - demand network access to a shared pool of con ﬁ gurable computing resources ( for example , networks , servers , storage , applications , and services ) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service - provider interaction ” ( Owens , 2010 ) . This new paradigm is regarded as an important solution for reducing IT investment costs , minimizing management effort , and improving business process ( Armbrust et al . , 2010 ) . According to NIST , cloud computing services are usually provided in three models : SaaS ( software as a service ) , 1 PaaS ( platform as a service ) , 2 and IaaS ( infrastructure as a service ) 3 ( Owens , 2010 ) . The cloud - based IT deployment model differs from traditional IT service models in several aspects . First and foremost , with minimal initial capital investment , it has signi ﬁ cantly lowered the entry cost of IT deployment , especially for smaller ﬁ rms ( Marston et al . , 2011 ) . This is com - plemented by the “ pay - as - you - go ” payment mode , which essentially transformed IT resources as measured service or another type of utility ( Yang & Tate , 2012 ) . Secondly , cloud computing utilizes on - demand network access as a means to connect users to a shared pool of IT resources , meaning that the amount of IT resources that can be accessed by almost everyone is unlimited ( Marston et al . , 2011 ) . Furthermore , the level of elasticity associated with cloud computing is much higher than traditional IT solutions , making it easy for the users to scale up and down the deployment ( Yang & Tate , 2012 ) . 1 Software as a Service ( SaaS ) is a software distribution model in which applications are hosted by a vendor or service provider and made available to customers over a network , typically the Internet ( Owens , 2010 ) . 2 Platform as a Service ( PaaS ) is a way to rent hardware , operating systems , storage and network capacity over the Internet ( Owens , 2010 ) . 3 Infrastructure as a Service ( IaaS ) is a provision model in which an organization outsources the equipment used to support operations , including storage , hardware , servers , and networking components ( Owens , 2010 ) . J . Yu et al . / Telecommunications Policy 40 ( 2016 ) 130 – 146 131