Supporting Complex Information Needs via Large - Scale Collaborative Search Felipe Moraes Delft University of Technology Delft , The Netherlands f . moraes @ tudelf . nl The need for exploration comes from users’ information needs that are highly complex : open - ended and multi - faceted information needs that are derived from complex search tasks such as learning tasks . Researchers have shown that exploratory search can be better supported through explicit search collaborations . More importantly , previous research has suggested that leveraging collaborations of a large group of users may lead to an improved user experience . However , there is still a lack of evidence in support of this hypothesis as past studies were usually conducted in restricted environments ( laboratory studies with small groups of participants and simulated work tasks ) . In this paper , we brieﬂy discuss how we will shed light on this research ﬁeld , and we present current work and future directions . Complex information needs ; Exploratory search ; Collaborative search ; 1 . INTRODUCTION Exploratory search encompasses complex information needs that are often open - ended and multi - faceted , in which users usually pose multiple queries and iteratively interact with the search results and the search engine results pages ( SERPs ) ( Marchionini 2006 ) . This need for exploration arises from various context - aware search tasks such as personal search , professional search , and learning as search tasks ( White and Roth 2009 ; White 2016 ; Goker et al . 2009 ) . The latter has received increasing research attention with recent advances in large - scale online learning oﬀered through portals such as Coursera 1 and edX 2 . Research on Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) and Information Retrieval ( IR ) have shown that exploratory search can be better supported in terms of eﬃciency , material coverage and knowledge gains when conducted in an explicit collaboration ( Shah 2010 ) . Importantly , previous work has suggested that search collaborations conducted in larger groups may lead to an improved user experience ; this is in contrast to the rather small groups of users ( up to 5 ) that have been the focus of collaborative search research so far ( Morris et al . 2010 ; Shah et al . 2016 ) . As many existing collaborative search studies are limited by the nature of the study ( lab - based , short - term , with a participant pool of less than 50 study participants , usually a homogeneous group working with 1 http : / / www . coursera . org 2 http : / / www . edx . org / simulated information needs ( Hearst 2014 ) ) , empirical evidence in support of this hypothesis is still missing . Our goal in this work is to scale collaborative search to a large number of searchers . Starting oﬀ with the ﬁndings in small - group collaborative search , we aim to develop an in - depth understanding of collaborative search “at scale” . In particular , we will design and build search tools that can be deployed in Massive Open Online Courses ( MOOCs ) , which oﬀer us ( i ) a large number of potential study participants ( i . e . “learners” ) 3 , ( ii ) real complex information needs derived from learners’ study needs , ( iii ) long - term search needs , and , ( iv ) a demographically heterogeneous group of searchers . In the process , we will also be able to verify and validate previous research ﬁndings , e . g . ( Golovchinsky et al . 2012 ; Morris and Horvitz 2007 ; Paul and Morris 2009 ) in a domain that is several magnitudes larger and more realistic than the lab setup of prior works . In this paper , we provide an overview of our research project in which the expected main contributions are : • Novel algorithmic mediation approaches to automatically divide the collaborative search space in the best possible manner by taking the search collaborators’ preferences , cultural backgrounds , and expertise into account . 3 Although privacy of the data shared among learners is a concern in this scenario , we consider it ( for now ) as out - of - scope . • Techniques to foster collaborators’ awareness of each others’ activities , that should incur a low cognitive cost . • Provide insights into the costs and beneﬁts of collaborations at such large scale and determine when the tipping point ( the costs of collaboration outweigh the beneﬁts ) is reached . • An open - source collaborative search framework that allows us to perform a wide range of live studies of the algorithms to be developed , and the setup of the collaborating groups . In the remaining sections of this paper we provide a brief discussion on our research design , current work , and future directions . 2 . RESEARCH DESIGN In this section , we brieﬂy discuss our research design for the doctoral research project . We have the following research statement : Research Statement An eﬀective exploratory search experience can be obtained via a large group of collaborators that share complex information needs . In particular , explicit , asynchronous , and distributed large - scale collaborative search with algorithmic mediation can lead to a more eﬀective search experience and greater coverage of the search space than individual search or small - group collaborative search . To provide empirical support for this statement , we designed this doctoral research project to be conducted in four research stages as shown in Figure 1 : 1 . Exploring Existing Technologies We will empirically investigate the boundaries of existing collaborative search technologies . For that , we will reproduce previous small - scale lab - studies in a large - scale environment ( by employing them in the MOOC setting ) , e . g . ( Golovchinsky et al . 2012 ; Morris and Horvitz 2007 ; Paul and Morris 2009 ) . As a result , we aim to show : ( i ) what group sizes can existing approaches to explicit collaboration search support eﬀectively ; ( ii ) what impact the group coherence and diversity have on search eﬀectiveness and coverage ; ( iii ) at what point the cognitive eﬀort of collaboration outweigh the beneﬁts ; ( iv ) whether guiding principles of small - group collaborative search ( Brennan et al . 2008 ) are valid in large - group settings ; and ( v ) what additional principles are required to enable large - group collaborations . 2 . Iterative Collaborative Search We will begin the design and development of a dedicated open - source large - group collaborative search framework . In this stage , we will investigate how iterative support Little et al . ( 2010 ) ; Fisher et al . ( 2012 ) can beneﬁt collaborative search . In particular , we will explore : ( i ) how can iterative search be supported algorithmically and based on which criteria should the search space be partitioned across collaborators ; ( ii ) how can users make sense of the iterative search process ; and ( iii ) for how many iterations can we observe positive eﬀects on knowledge gain , depth of understanding , and speed of content assimilation . 3 . Role - based Collaborative Search After investigating the trade - oﬀs of iterative collabora - tive search , we will turn to an alternative , orthogonal strategy : distributing diﬀerent roles to the collaborators based on their preferences , expertise , and availabil - ity ( Pickens et al . 2008 ; Shah et al . 2010 ) . In particular , we aim to show : ( i ) how many diﬀerent type of roles ( and which ones ) are beneﬁcial to assign in large - group collaborative search , and how can collaborators eﬀectively share a single role ; ( ii ) what eﬀects diﬀerent information retrieval strategies have on the eﬀectiveness of algorithmic mediation ; and ( iii ) what is the interplay between iterative collaborative search and role - based collaborative search , and does it lead to additional gains in our assessment metrics when combined in a single iterative and role - based collaborative search setup . 4 . Learning via Search Metrics The realization of empirical studies ( that is , the deployment of large - group collaborative search tools in actual MOOCs ) plays a vital role in the three stages outlined thus far . A valuable by - product of these to be deployed collaborative search prototypes will be query logs as well as the learner logs ( learners’ behaviour on the MOOC platform , including their actions on videos and their performance on quizzes ) the learners generate . In this stage , we will use the indicators of learning as a foundation to investigate : ( i ) how can the amount of learning that is taking place in the search process be quantiﬁed on a group and individual user level ; ( ii ) which models of user or group behavior are suﬃciently accurate and elementary to enable the development of feasible model - based learning metrics ; ( iii ) when and by whom ( all users or only a subset of users involved in the search ) does learning occur in the collaborative process . Exploring Existing Technologies Stage 1 Iterative Collaborative Search Stage 2 Role - based Collaborative Search Stage 3 Learning via Search Metrics Stage 4 Figure 1 : A diagram about relationship between the four diﬀerent stages . 3 . CURRENT WORK As a zero step towards this doctoral research project is the understanding of how learners individually search on the Web to complement their learning process . We are currently working on a Web search framework ( powered by Bing ) that will be deployed inside MOOCs , enabling learners to search on the Web from within the MOOC platform . This setup enables us to observe how learners translate their learning needs into searches and increase our understanding of individual learners search needs during the learning process . Once we obtain those insights , we will move towards our ﬁrst research stage and implement collaborative search tooling inside the framework . Our current work is guided by the following research questions : RQ 1 At what stages of the learning process ( Wilson and Wilson 2013 ) do learners search on the Web to increase their knowledge ? RQ 2 How does the complexity of the information needs relate to the learning process ? RQ 3 How do learners materialize their information needs ? To what extent does prior knowledge inﬂu - ences the expressiveness of learners’ information needs ? 4 . NEXT STEPS An immediately future direction of the current work is to investigate how to better support complex information needs for individual users . Speciﬁcally , we are interested in validating past research that relied on laboratory studies . Promising candidates here include comparing term suggestions and query suggestions ( Kelly et al . 2009 ) , distinguishing low - quality from high - quality query suggestions ( Kelly et al . 2010 ) , and comparing diﬀerent interfaces ( structured , standard and query suggestion ) ( Azzopardi et al . 2013 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author would like to thank Claudia Hauﬀ for her input . This work is part of the research programme LACROSSE with project number 612 . 001 . 605 and ﬁnanced by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research . The author also thanks the ACM Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval for the awarded ESSIR / FDIA 2017 travel grant . REFERENCES Azzopardi , L . , D . Kelly , and K . Brennan ( 2013 ) . How query cost aﬀects search behavior . In Proceedings of the 36th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval , pp . 23 – 32 . ACM . Brennan , S . E . , X . Chen , C . A . Dickinson , M . B . Neider , and G . J . Zelinsky ( 2008 ) . Coordinating cognition : The costs and beneﬁts of shared gaze during collaborative search . Cognition 106 ( 3 ) , 1465 – 1477 . Fisher , K . , S . Counts , and A . Kittur ( 2012 ) . Distributed sensemaking : Improving sensemaking by leveraging the eﬀorts of previous users . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’12 , New York , NY , USA , pp . 247 – 256 . ACM . Goker , A . , H . Myrhaug , and R . Bierig ( 2009 ) . Context and information retrieval . Information retrieval : Searching in the 21st century , 131 – 57 . Golovchinsky , G . , A . Dunnigan , and A . Diriye ( 2012 ) . Designing a tool for exploratory information seeking . In CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’12 , New York , NY , USA , pp . 1799 – 1804 . ACM . Hearst , M . A . ( 2014 , March ) . What’s missing from collaborative search ? Computer 47 ( 3 ) , 58 – 61 . Kelly , D . , A . Cushing , M . Dostert , X . Niu , and K . Gyllstrom ( 2010 ) . Eﬀects of popularity and quality on the usage of query suggestions during information search . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 45 – 54 . ACM . Kelly , D . , K . Gyllstrom , and E . W . Bailey ( 2009 ) . A comparison of query and term suggestion features for interactive searching . In Proceedings of the 32nd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval , pp . 371 – 378 . ACM . Little , G . , L . B . Chilton , M . Goldman , and R . C . Miller ( 2010 ) . Exploring iterative and parallel human computation processes . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Human Computation , HCOMP ’10 , New York , NY , USA , pp . 68 – 76 . ACM . Marchionini , G . ( 2006 , April ) . Exploratory search : From ﬁnding to understanding . Commun . ACM 49 ( 4 ) , 41 – 46 . Morris , M . R . , D . Fisher , and D . Wigdor ( 2010 , November ) . Search on surfaces : Exploring the potential of interactive tabletops for collaborative search tasks . Inf . Process . Manage . 46 ( 6 ) , 703 – 717 . Morris , M . R . and E . Horvitz ( 2007 ) . Searchtogether : An interface for collaborative web search . In Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , UIST ’07 , New York , NY , USA , pp . 3 – 12 . ACM . Paul , S . A . and M . R . Morris ( 2009 ) . Cosense : Enhancing sensemaking for collaborative web search . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’09 , New York , NY , USA , pp . 1771 – 1780 . ACM . Pickens , J . , G . Golovchinsky , C . Shah , P . Qvarfordt , and M . Back ( 2008 ) . Algorithmic mediation for collaborative exploratory search . In Proceedings of the 31st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’08 , New York , NY , USA , pp . 315 – 322 . ACM . Shah , C . ( 2010 ) . Collaborative information seeking : A literature review . Advances in Librarianship ( Advances in Librarianship , Volume 32 ) , Emerald Group Publishing Limited 32 , 3 – 33 . Shah , C . , R . Capra , and P . Hansen ( 2016 , January ) . Workshop on social and collaborative information seeking ( scis ) . SIGIR Forum 49 ( 2 ) , 117 – 122 . Shah , C . , J . Pickens , and G . Golovchinsky ( 2010 , November ) . Role - based results redistribution for collaborative information retrieval . Inf . Process . Manage . 46 ( 6 ) , 773 – 781 . White , R . W . ( 2016 ) . Interactions with search systems . Cambridge University Press . White , R . W . and R . A . Roth ( 2009 ) . Exploratory search : Beyond the query - response paradigm . Synthesis lectures on information concepts , retrieval , and services 1 ( 1 ) , 1 – 98 . Wilson , M . J . and M . L . Wilson ( 2013 ) . A comparison of techniques for measuring sensemaking and learning within participant - generated summaries . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 64 ( 2 ) , 291 – 306 .