The Knowledge Engineering Review , Vol . 00 : 0 , 1 – 6 . c (cid:13) 2005 , Cambridge University Press DOI : 10 . 1017 / In Press Printed in the United Kingdom Design , innovation and case - based reasoning ASHOK K . GOEL 1 and SUSAN CRAW 2 1 College of Computing , Georgia Institute of Technology , 801 Atlantic Drive , Atlanta , GA 30332 - 0280 , USA E - mail : ashok . goel @ cc . gatech . edu 2 School of Computing , The Robert Gordon University , Aberdeen AB25 1HG , Scotland , UK E - mail : S . Craw @ comp . rgu . ac . uk Abstract The design task is especially appropriate for applying , integrating , exploring , and pushing the boundaries of case - based reasoning . In this paper , we brieﬂy review the challenges that design poses for case - based reasoning , and survey research on case - based design ranging from early explorations to more recent work on innovative design . We also summarize the theoretical contributions this research has made to case - based reasoning itself . 1 Introduction “All design is redesign” has long been a popular cliche in design research . In fact , many design researchers developed theories of design based on this theme even before the invention of case - based reasoning ( CBR ) in artiﬁcial intelligence . To take just one example , in his seminal book , Christopher Alexander ( 1964 ) noted that designs of new villages in rural India almost always are tweaks , modiﬁcations , and adaptations of existing village designs . He also analyzed the similarities among the designs in terms of design patterns . Thus , the design task is especially appropriate for applying , integrating , exploring , and pushing the boundaries of CBR . Eight factors , however , conspire to make the design task very challenging for CBR . Breadth : Design pertains to all kinds of artifacts . The domain of the design task is extremely wide - ranging . Practical design domains in which CBR has been explored include architec - ture , engineering , computer software and human - machine interfaces . Also , within a domain such as engineering , design sub - domains range from civil engineering to chemical engineering to aerospace engineering to industrial engineering . Furthermore , even within a design sub - domain such as industrial engineering , design outputs range from designs of products and systems , to designs of processes and services . Stages : Design involves a multitude of stages . The design process starts with some design requirements , and ends in a realisation of a product that satisﬁces the requirements . Some of the common stages of product design are requirements analysis , preliminary design , detailed design , geometric modeling , simulation , optimisation , embodiment , prototype testing , manufacturing , and assembly . CBR so far has been explored largely for preliminary ( or conceptual ) design . Speciﬁcation : Design is very open - ended . In general , the speciﬁcation of the design problem may evolve during the design process . That is , the problem and the solution speciﬁcation may co - evolve . For example , a design problem may be underspeciﬁed and its speciﬁcation may need to be completed as part of the design process . As another example , a design problem may be over - constrained and some constraints may need to be relaxed to ﬁnd a satisﬁcing design solution . 2 a . goel & s . craw Complexity : Design is extremely complex . It generally involves a large number of interacting components . The number of components in even a simple problem in product design can be in the dozens or even the hundreds . The number of components in the design of a complex system can be in the thousands or the tens of thousands , even the millions . CBR so far has been explored for designing products in which the number of components is in the dozens . Collaboration : In practice , large - scale design typically is performed by teams of designers . A design team may be distributed both spatially and temporally . Thus , not only is the design team situated in a given social and cultural context , but also each individual designer works in the context of the team . Representation : Design typically involves consideration of both form and function . External representations of designs are usually multi - modal . The form of a design typically is represented as a 2 - D drawing ( sketch or diagram ) or as a 3 - D solid model . In contrast , functions and behaviors are typically represented using symbolic structures such as schemas and graphs , and performance is typically represented using numerical measures . Integration : There already exist a number of computer - aided design ( CAD ) tools and envi - ronments . Thus , in order to have impact on design practice , CBR tools for supporting interactive design need to be integrated with the CAD tools and embodied in the CAD environments . Creativity : While most everyday design is routine and mundane , much of interesting design is innovative and creative . Thus , on one hand , the design task in general poses the challenge of addressing the issues of innovation and creativity , and , on the other , it oﬀers an opportunity to explore these issues . It follows from the above that , at present , there is no real case - based theory of design , let alone any case - based technology or tool for supporting design in practice . Instead , research on case - based design so far represents only preliminary explorations into a vast space . In this summary , we brieﬂy review some of the major themes in case - based design research , but note that this review neither is , nor intended to be , exhaustive . Instead of trying to cover all related work , we focus on long lines of research that have not only explored CBR in design but also contributed to CBR in return . Maher & Pu ( 1997 ) provide details of some of the ideas and techniques described below . 2 Early explorations Navinchandra’s ( 1991 ) CYCLOPS was the ﬁrst system to explore CBR in interactive design . It provided landscape architects with access to annotated landscape drawings , where the annotations on a drawing explained some of the design decisions in the past case . However , CYCLOPS left the tasks of case adaptation and design evaluation to the architect . It was followed by Sycara et al . ’s ( 1991 ) CADET . Like CYCLOPS , the CADET system was also an interactive system that left the adaptation and evaluation tasks to the designer . It provided a mechanical engineer with access to designs of simple mechanical devices , where each design case contained a causal model of the design . The goal was to enable the designer to do model - based adaptation of the past design . Goel’s KRITIK ( Goel & Chandrasekaran , 1989 ; Goel et al . , 1997 ) was the ﬁrst autonomous case - based design system that addressed all the major subtasks of case - based design : retrieval , adaptation , evaluation and storage . KRITIK addressed the task of conceptual design in the domain of small , simple engineering devices . Given the speciﬁcation of the function F , generate a qualitative speciﬁcation of the structure S . Since it addressed the F −→ S task , it stored an inverse S −→ B −→ F mapping in the form a structure - behavior - function ( SBF ) model in each past case . The SBF model provided the vocabulary for indexing the design cases as well Design , Innovation and CBR 3 as strategies for retrieving , adapting , verifying , and storing design cases . JULIA ( Hinrichs 1992 ) was another early autonomous case - based design system . Although it operated in the informal domain of menu design , it addressed the important issue of changes in the design requirements during the design process . 3 Interactive design The early nineties saw an explosion of interest in exploring CBR in interactive design . There were three major themes in this phase . The ﬁrst theme was to annotate drawings of past designs not only with explanations of major design decisions but also with the outcomes of the designs ( what worked , what did not , and why ) , and the lessons learned from the outcomes . Kolodner and her colleagues built the ARCHIE series of interactive design aiding systems to explore this theme in the domain of building design ( Domeshek & Kolodner , 1992 ; Pearce et al . , 1992 ) . The second theme was to view design adaptation as a constraint satisfaction problem , and , hence to integrate CBR and constraint satisfaction . Smith , Faltings and their colleagues built the CADRE series of interactive design decision support systems that investigated this theme in the domain of building design ( Hua et al . , 1994 ; Dave et al . , 1994 ) . Their systems provided access to drawings of past designs and allowed the designer to make changes to these drawings . The system automatically propagated the constraints generated by the designer’s decisions and alerted the designer of any conﬂicts . The third theme was integration of case - based design support systems with CAD environments , which is important for building practical design support systems . Maher and her colleagues developed a series of interactive CAD systems ( e . g . , CADsyn , CaseCAD ) that explored this theme in the domain of structural design ( Maher & Zhang , 1993 ; Maher et al . , 1995 ) . Another important element of their work was the development of large repositories of design cases . Perhaps the most ambitious eﬀort in case - based interactive design was the FABEL system developed by Voß and her colleagues ( Gebhardt et al . , 1997 ) . The FABEL system was also an interactive design decision support system for the domain of building design . It contained large , complex cases represented as annotated drawings , and used a range of techniques ( e . g . , rule - based reasoning , model - based reasoning ) to help a designer in design adaptation . An especially noteworthy aspect of FABEL was its ability to retrieve drawings based on structural similarity with a query drawing . 4 Innovation in design By the mid - nineties , research on CBR was beginning to seriously explore innovation and creativity in design . Faltings & Sun’s ( 1996 ) interactive FAMING system investigated the design of a particular kind of mechanism embodied in antique wall clocks . An especially noteworthy aspect of FAMING ( which means invention in Chinese ) is its integration of functional reasoning with complex structural reasoning about shapes and spatial relations . FAMING perhaps was the ﬁrst case - based system to strongly couple functional and spatial reasoning . Bhatta developed the autonomous IDEAL system ( Bhatta & Goel , 1997 ; 1998 ) , which viewed the ability to transfer knowledge across distant domains as an important element of creativity . IDEAL abstracted teleological design patterns ( e . g . , open - loop feedback control ) from design cases in one domain ( e . g . , operational ampliﬁers ) and transferred them to design problems in another domain ( e . g . , gyroscopes ) . Its memory contained past design solutions at multiple abstraction levels ranging from design cases to design patterns , and it worked on design problems at diﬀerent levels of abstraction . Kolodner and her colleagues proposed an account of serendipity in creative design ( Wills & Kolodner , 1994 ) . In their account , a designer working on multiple design problems keeps diﬀerent design goals in a working memory . As a partial solution to one problem becomes available ( by internal problem solving or external input ) , the designer may connect the solution to a diﬀerent design goal , thus addressing a diﬀerent design problem . This account was later used to build a 4 a . goel & s . craw computational model of a historical case study about Alexander Graham Bell’s invention of the telephone ( Simina & Koldner , 1997 ) . G´omez de Silva Garza & Maher ( 1999 ) developed an evolutionary approach to design case adaptation . For design problems in which a function characterizing the ﬁtness of the desired design is known , they represented design cases as genotypes , and used genetic algorithms to adapt past designs to invent a variety of new designs . 5 Other directions All of the above theories and systems investigated CBR for preliminary phases of design in either architecture or engineering . However , there also has been some work that explored CBR in other domains of design and other phases of design . Smyth & Keane’s ( 1996 ) D´ej ` a Vu system was the ﬁrst system to investigate case - based software design . The autonomous D´ej ` a Vu system designed software for plant control . Two interesting aspects of D´ej ` a Vu were its use of a hierarchically organized library of cases to enable CBR at multiple levels of abstraction , and retrieval of cases based on the needs of the adaptation task . Simpson and his colleagues developed AskJef ( Barber et al . , 1992 ) , which was the ﬁrst system to investigate case - based reasoning to explore the design of human - machine interfaces . AskJef , an interactive multimedia system , provided an HCI designer with libraries of past cases , where each case contained a series of annotated versions in the evolution of a design . Chemical formulation is a design task where the ﬁnal solution is a recipe consisting of an approximately constant number of components with relatively limited interactions between them . Therefore , this task is less open - ended than many design tasks because the components are better speciﬁed . Several case - based design systems have been developed for formulation tasks . The original example is General Electric Plastics’ FormTool system , a colour matching system that is in everyday use ( Cheetham & Graf , 1997 ; Cheetham , 2004 ) . Further examples include pharmaceutical formulation for the design of tablets to deliver a speciﬁc dose of a drug ( Craw et al . , 1998 ; Wiratunga et al . , 2002 ) and the formulation of rubber compounds for tyres ( Bandini et al . , 2004 ; Bandini & Manzoni , 2001 ) , each of which highlights the need for adaptation knowledge to achieve a stable product that meets requirements . As mentioned in the introduction , design involves many stages such as requirements analysis , preliminary design , geometric modeling , etc . Much of the research on case - based design as described above has focused on preliminary design ( i . e . , conceptual , qualitative design ) . However , some work has also explored later phases of design , and in particular , the phase of assembly and disassembly of designs . Purvis & Pu’s ( 1995 ) COMPOSER was the ﬁrst system to use CBR for assembly planning in which the task was to develop a sequence of actions for assembling a product from its components . The autonomous COMPOSER system operated in the domain of simple mechanical devices , using constraint satisfaction techniques to adapt past cases of assembly planning . Murdock’s REM system ( Murdock & Goel , 2001 ) autonomously adapted the software architecture of a disassembly planner to generate an assembly planner . REM thus performed meta - case - based reasoning in which the architecture of an agent that solves some task is adapted to address a related task . 6 Contributions to CBR Two characteristics of the above research on CBR in design are especially noteworthy . Firstly , unlike much work on CBR , research on CBR in design has emphasized the importance of the adaptation task . This is in part because design cases can be quite complex and thus design adaptation is specially hard , and partly because of the diﬃculty of populating and organizing large case memories of complex designs . Secondly , research on CBR in design has not only applied and integrated CBR to design but also made signiﬁcant theoretical contributions to CBR itself . To summarize , research on CBR in design thus far has made the following main contributions to CBR : Design , Innovation and CBR 5 • grounded the computational process of CBR in content theories of domain models ( e . g . , KRITIK ( Goel & Chandrasekaran , 1989 ; Goel et al . , 1997 ) ) ; • integrated CBR with a variety of other computational techniques ranging from model - based reasoning ( e . g . , FABEL ( Gebhardt et al . , 1997 ) ) to constraint satisfaction problems ( e . g . , CADRE ( Hua et al . , 1994 ; Dave et al . , 1994 ) ) to genetic algorithms ( e . g . , ( G´omez de Silva Garza & Maher , 1999 ) ) ; • integrated functional reasoning and spatial reasoning ( e . g . , FAMING ( Faltings & Sun , 1996 ) ) ; • used cases and case - based reasoning at multiple levels of abstraction ( e . g . , D´ej ` a Vu ( Smyth & Keane , 1996 ) ) ; and • provided new insights into innovation ( e . g . , IDEAL ( Bhatta & Goel , 1997 ; 1998 ) ) . These contributions have been driven by the eight challenging factors of design that were highlighted at the start of this paper . They demonstrate the advanced CBR techniques that have resulted from the speciﬁc challenges of the design task . 7 Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Mary Lou Maher for early discussions about the landmark papers in case - based design that are central to this article . References Alexander , C . 1964 Notes on the synthesis of form . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Bandini , S . , Colombo , E . , Sartori , F . & Vizzari , G . 2004 Case based reasoning and production process design : The case of P - Truck curing . In Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on Case - Based Reasoning , pp . 504 – 517 . Berlin : Springer . Bandini , S . & Manzoni , S . 2001 CBR adaptation for chemical formulation . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Case - Based Reasoning , Vancouver , BC , pp . 634 – 647 . Berlin : Springer . Barber , J . , Bhatta , S . , Goel , A . , Jacobson , M . , Pearce , M . , Penberthy , L . , Shankar , M . , Simpson , R . & Stroulia , E . 1992 AskJef : Integration of case - based and multimedia technologies for interface design support . In Gero , J . S . , editor , Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design ’92 , pp . 457 – 474 . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Bhatta , S . & Goel , A . 1997 A functional theory of design patterns . In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , Nagoya , Japan , pp . 294 – 300 . Bhatta , S . & Goel , A . 1998 Learning generic mechanisms for innovative strategies in adaptive design . Journal of Learning Sciences 6 ( 4 ) : 367 – 396 . Cheetham , W . 2004 Tenth Anniversary of the Plastics Color Formulation Tool . In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp . 770 – 776 . Menlo Park , CA : AAAI Press / The MIT Press . Cheetham , W . & Graf , J . 1997 Case - Based Reasoning in Color Matching . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Case Based Reasoning , Providence , RI , pp . 1 – 12 . Berlin : Springer . Craw , S . , Wiratunga , N . & Rowe , R . 1998 Case - Based Design for Tablet Formulation . In Proceedings of the 4th European Workshop on Case - Based Reasoning , pp . 358 – 369 . Berlin : Springer . Dave , B . , Schmitt , G . , Faltings , B . & Smith , I . 1994 Case based design in architecture . In Gero , J . S . & Sudweeks , F . , editors , Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design ’94 , pp . 145 – 162 . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Domeshek , E . & Kolodner , J . L . 1992 . A case - based design aid for architecture . In Gero , J . S . , editor , Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design ’92 . Dordrecht : Kluwer . Faltings , B . & Sun , K . 1996 FAMING : Supporting innovative mechanism shape design . Computer - Aided Design , 28 ( 3 ) : 207 – 216 . Gebhardt , F . , Voß , A . , Gr¨ather , W . & Schmidt - Belz , B . 1997 Reasoning with complex cases . Norwell , MA : Kluwer . Goel , A . , Bhatta , S . & Stroulia , E . 1997 KRITIK : An early case - based design system . In Maher , M . & Pu , P . , editors , Issues and Applications of Case - Based Reasoning in Design , pp . 87 – 132 . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Goel , A . & Chandrasekaran , B . 1989 Functional representation of designs and redesign problem solving . In Proceedings of the 11th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp . 1388 – 1394 . Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kaufmann . G´omez de Silva Garza , A . & Maher , M . L . 1999 An evolutionary approach to case adaption . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Case - Based Reasoning , pp . 162 – 172 . Berlin : Springer . Hinrichs , T . 1992 Problem Solving in Open Worlds : A Case Study in Design . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 6 a . goel & s . craw Hua , K . , Smith , I . F . C . & Faltings , B . 1994 Integrated case - based building design . In Proceedings of the 1st European Workshop on Case - Based Reasoning , pp . 436 – 445 . Berlin : Springer . Maher , M . L . , Balachandran , B . & Zhang , D . M . 1995 Case - based reasoning in design . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Maher , M . & Pu , P . , editors , 1997 Issues and applications of case - based reasoning in design . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Maher , M . L . & Zhang , D . M . 1993 CADsyn : A case - based design process model . Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing 7 ( 2 ) : 97 – 110 . Murdock , J . W . & Goel , A . K . 2001 Meta - case - based reasoning : Using functional models to adapt case - based agents . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Case - Based Reasoning , pp . 407 – 421 . Berlin : Springer . Navinchandra , D . 1991 Exploration and innovation in design . New York : Springer . Pearce , M . , Goel , A . , Kolodner , J . , Zimring , C . , Sentosa , L . & Billington , R . 1992 Case - based decision support : A case study in architectural design . IEEE Expert , 7 ( 5 ) : 14 – 20 . Purvis , L . & Pu , P . 1995 Adaptation using constraint satisfaction techniques . In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Case Based Reasoning , pp . 289 – 300 . Berlin : Springer . Simina , M . & Kolodner , J . L . 1997 Creative design : Reasoning and understanding . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Case Based Reasoning , pp . 587 – 598 . Berlin : Springer . Smyth , B . & Keane , M . 1996 Design ` a la D´ej ` a Vu : Reducing the adaptation overhead . In Leake , D . B . , editor , Case - Based Reasoning : Experiences , Lessons and Future Directions , pp . 151 – 166 . Menlo Park , CA : AAAI Press / The MIT Press . Sycara , K . , Guttal , R . , Koning , J . , Narasimhan , S . & Navinchandra , D . 1991 CADET : a case - based synthesis tool for engineering design . International Journal of Expert Systems , 4 ( 2 ) 157 – 188 . Wills , L . M . & Kolodner , J . L . 1994 Towards More Creative Case - Based Design Systems . In Proceedings of the 12th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp . 50 – 55 . Menlo Park , CA : AAAI Press / The MIT Press . Wiratunga , N . , Craw , S . & Rowe , R . 2002 Learning to adapt for case - based design . In Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on Case - Based Reasoning , pp . 423 – 437 . Berlin : Springer .