VEGF Scaffolds Enhance Angiogenesis and Bone Regeneration in Irradiated Osseous Defects Darnell Kaigler , 1 Zhuo Wang , 2 Kim Horger , 3 David J Mooney , 4 and Paul H Krebsbach 2 ABSTRACT : Bone regeneration is challenging in sites where the blood supply has been compromised by radiation . We examined the potential of a growth factor ( VEGF ) delivery system to enhance angiogenesis and bone formation in irradiated calvarial defects . VEGF - releasing polymers significantly increased blood vessel density and vascular perfusion in irradiated defects and increased bone formation relative to control condi - tions . Introduction : Radiation therapy causes damage to tissues and inhibits its regenerative capacity . Tissue injury from radiation is in large part caused by a compromised vascular supply and reduced perfusion of tissues . The aim of this study was to determine if delivery of vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) from a biode - gradable PLGA ( copolymer of D , L - lactide and glycolide ) scaffold could enhance neovascularization and bone regeneration in irradiated osseous defects . Materials and Methods : An isolated area of the calvarium of Fisher rats was irradiated ( 12 Gy ) 2 weeks preoperatively , and two 3 . 5 - mm osseous defects were created in this area , followed by the placement of PLGA scaffolds or VEGF scaffolds ( PLGA scaffolds with incorporated VEGF ) into the defects . Laser Doppler perfusion imaging was performed to measure perfusion of these areas at 1 , 2 , and 6 weeks . Implants were retrieved at 2 , 6 , and 12 weeks , and histologic and (cid:1) CT analyses were performed to determine neovascular - ization and bone regeneration . Results : Histological analyses revealed statistically significant increases in blood vessel formation ( > 2 - fold ) and function ( 30 % ) within the VEGF scaffolds compared with PLGA scaffolds . Additionally , evaluation of bone regeneration through bone histomorphometric and (cid:1) CT analyses revealed significantly greater bone coverage ( 26 . 36 ± 6 . 91 % versus 7 . 05 ± 2 . 09 % [ SD ] ) and increased BMD ( 130 . 80 ± 58 . 05 versus 71 . 28 ± 42 . 94 mg / cm 3 ) in VEGF scaffolds compared with PLGA scaffolds . Conclusions : Our findings show that VEGF scaffolds have the ability to enhance neovascularization and bone regeneration in irradiated osseous defects , outlining a novel approach for engineering tissues in hypovascular environments . J Bone Miner Res 2006 ; 21 : 735 – 744 . Published online on February 6 , 2006 ; doi : 10 . 1359 / JBMR . 060120 INTRODUCTION I T IS ESTIMATED that survivors of cancer make up 3 . 5 % of the U . S . population , and of this number , about one half are treated with radiation therapy alone or with a combi - nation of other therapies . ( 1 , 2 ) Although radiation is a well - accepted therapeutic modality for carcinomas , there are un - fortunately many patients that do not have sustainable regional control of the disease . This frequently results in the need for these individuals to undergo resective surgery to remove the remaining affected tissue , but in most instances , includes the removal of adjacent healthy tissue as well . Even if radiation treatment and resective surgery are suc - cessful in eradicating all damaged cells and diseased tissues , the affected area is often left functionally compromised . Radiation treatment induces vascular damage and leads to reduced perfusion of healthy tissue . This , in turn , se - verely compromises the process of new blood vessel forma - tion ( angiogenesis ) and the ability of vessels to deliver oxy - gen and nutrients to normal tissues . The compromised nature of the irradiated healthy tissue inhibits its capacity to heal and regenerate , often resulting in fibrosis and scar - ring . ( 3 ) In the treatment of head and neck cancers , cranio - facial bone defects secondary to resective surgery and ra - diation therapy are particularly debilitating , not only physiologically but also psychologically . In addition , a small subset of irradiated patients require resection of bone be - cause of osteoradionecrosis , which is often a secondary complication of radiation therapy . The “gold standard” for The authors state that they have no conflicts of interest . 1 Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor Michigan , USA ; 2 Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor Michigan , USA ; 3 Department of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering , Uni - versity of Michigan , Ann Arbor Michigan , USA ; 4 Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences , Harvard University , Cambridge , Mas - sachusetts , USA . JOURNAL OF BONE AND MINERAL RESEARCH Volume 21 , Number 5 , 2006 Published online on February 6 , 2006 ; doi : 10 . 1359 / JBMR . 060120 © 2006 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 735 JO508491 735 744 May bone replacement in head and neck reconstruction of irra - diated sites is the use of vascularized autologous grafts . ( 4 ) Although current methods of reconstruction are frequently successful , there still exist multiple limitations to this therapy . These limitations include donor site morbidity , 5 – 10 % failure rates , several additional hours of surgical time , and great difficulties in precisely restoring the com - plex 3D structure of various osseous defects . ( 4 – 6 ) Tissue engineering approaches to reconstructing bone defects in the head and neck region are appealing because of the limitations of current therapy . A number of different strategies aimed at treating osseous defects include bone tissue grafting , cell harvesting and transplantation , gene therapy , and protein delivery . ( 7 – 13 ) Here we report an ap - proach to enhance blood vessel formation and function , as well as bone regeneration , in a rat model system of irradi - ated osseous defects compromised in their vasculature . Similar irradiation studies have been used to evaluate bone healing in irradiated calvarial defects in rats , and all have shown that irradiation significantly impairs the regenerative capacity of bone in these defects . ( 13 – 16 ) The approach used in our study uses a macroporous PLGA ( copolymer of D , L - lactide and glycolide ) scaffold ( pore sizes ranging from 250 to 425 (cid:1) m ) that readily allows for cell invasion and growth when implanted in vivo . ( 17 ) When using these scaffolds as growth factor delivery systems , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) can be incorporated and released in a sus - tained manner for several weeks , with the released VEGF remaining bioactive and capable of inducing significant an - giogenesis . ( 18 , 19 ) The hypothesis underlying this study is that delivery of VEGF from PLGA scaffolds can suffi - ciently enhance angiogenesis to enable bone regeneration in osseous defects compromised by radiation therapy . MATERIALS AND METHODS Animal irradiation Fisher rats weighing between 175 and 200 g were used for this study . For rats in the irradiation treatment group , a single 12 - Gy dose from a cobalt source ( 60 Co ) was deliv - ered to D max at a source - to - skin distance of 80 cm in an 11 . 47 - minute exposure . Radiation was delivered exclusively to the future surgical site . The pharynx and the rest of the body were shielded by a combination of beam collimation and Cerrobend blocks . ( 20 ) Rats were anesthetized with ke - tamine ( 50 mg / g ) and xylazine ( 5 mg / g ) during the radiation treatment , and the radiation dose was given 2 weeks before the surgical procedure . Potential side effects from the ra - diation were monitored afterward , specifically examining for weight loss , wound healing problems , tissue necrosis , alopecia , ocular problems , and unusual behavior . Animal procedures were approved by the University committee on the use and care of animals at the University of Michigan . Polymer matrix fabrication with incorporated VEGF PLGA ( 85 : 15 molar ratio ; i . v . (cid:1) 1 . 4 , Resomer 858 ; Hen - ley Chemicals , Montvale , NJ , USA ) was used in a gas - foaming process ( 21 ) to form matrices . Granular PLGA was ground ( after freezing in liquid nitrogen ) using a Science - ware MicroMill ( Bel - Art Products , Pequannock , NJ , USA ) and sieved to obtain particles between 106 and 250 (cid:1) m . Polymer matrices , containing recombinant human VEGF ( NCI Biological Resources Branch , Frederick , MD , USA ) , were formed by first mixing ground 85 : 15 PLGA with 3 (cid:1) g of VEGF and dissolving in an aqueous solution formulated with 0 . 5 % alginate . The PLGA / VEGF / alginate mixture was lyophilized ( Labconco Freeze Dryer , Kansas City , MO , USA ) overnight to form a dry powder and mixed with NaCl particles ( sieved to a particle size between 250 and 425 (cid:1) m ) . The powder was next loaded into a custom - built round mould ( diameter (cid:1) 4 . 763 mm ) and compressed for 60 s , at 1500 psi , in a Carver Laboratory Press ( Fred S . Carver , Menominee Fall , WI , USA ) . The matrices were placed in a pressure vessel and exposed to 800 psi CO 2 gas for 16 h . The pressure was rapidly ( < 2 minutes ) released to ambient , causing the polymer particles to foam and ultimately fuse to create porous polymer matrices with incorporated VEGF . Calvarial defect model Treatment of experimental animals was in accordance with the University of Michigan animal care guidelines , and all NIH animal handling procedures were observed . Rats were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of anesthet - ics ( 80 mg / kg ketamine and 10 mg / kg xylazine ) . A mid - longitudinal incision was made on the dorsal surface of the cranium , and care was taken to ensure that the periosteum was completely cleared from the surface of the cranium by scraping . A trephine bur was used to create two circular 3 . 5 - mm - diameter defects in the rat cranium , one on each side of the parietal suture . The full thickness of the cranial bone was removed , and scaffolds were immediately placed in the defects . The incision was closed with a continuous suture . Laser Doppler analysis One , 2 , and 6 weeks after implantation of the scaffolds , a laser Doppler blood flow meter ( Laser Doppler Perfusion Imager System [ LDPI ] ; Lisca , North Brunswick , NJ , USA ) was used to measure blood perfusion in the osseous defects . Perfusion was measured as the ratio of blood flow of VEGF scaffolds to blood flow of PLGA scaffolds . Animals were sedated during this procedure with 2 . 1 % isoflurane at an oxygen flow rate of 2 . 0 liters / minute . The calvaria of the rats were placed at a fixed reference point 5 cm from the scanner , and the LDPI uses a 12 - mW helium - neon laser beam that sequentially scans a 12 × 12 - cm surface area of interest to measure blood flow . As the scanning is per - formed , moving blood cells shift the frequency of incident light according to the Doppler principle . The photodiode collects the backscattered light , and the original light inten - sity variations are transformed into voltage variations in the range of 0 – 10 V . A perfusion output value of 0 V was calibrated as 0 % perfusion , whereas 10 V was calibrated as 100 % . On termination of scanning , a color - coded image representing blood flow distribution displays on a monitor . The perfusion signal was subdivided into six different in - tervals , each displayed as a separate color . Low or no per - KAIGLER ET AL . 736 fusion was displayed as dark blue , whereas the highest per - fusion interval was displayed as red . Histological staining After 2 , 6 , and 12 weeks , animals were killed with carbon dioxide , and the implants embedded in the surrounding na - tive bone were retrieved . The implants were fixed for 24 h at 4°C in 10 % zinc - buffered formalin , and after fixation , implants were analyzed using (cid:1) CT analysis as described later . Implants were subsequently decalcified through a 5 - day incubation in 10 % EDTA and paraffin embedded ( Histology Core Facility , University of Michigan School of Dentistry ) . Embedded matrices were cut into serial sections ( 5 (cid:1) m thick ) and placed on glass slides for histological stain - ing and analysis . Tissue sections were either stained with Gill’s 3 hematoxylin ( Sigma ) and aqueous eosin Y solution ( Sigma ) to visualize the overall tissue morphology or immuno - stained with antibodies raised against von Wil - lebrand factor ( Factor VIII ; DAKO ) . In performing immu - nostaining of tissue sections , the slides were first deparaf - finized through a descending series of EtOH and rehy - drated in H 2 0 , after which they were washed for 5 minutes in 3 % H 2 O 2 ( Sigma ) in PBS to quench endogenous peroxi - dase activity . To improve antigen exposure , the slides were boiled in citrate buffer ( Biocare Medical , Walnut Creek , CA , USA ) for 2 minutes , at 120°C , in a pressure cooker ( Biocare Medical ) . The sections were incubated for 10 min - utes with terminator blocking solution ( Biocare Medical ) to prevent nonspecific antibody – antigen interactions . A pri - mary antibody for von Willebrand factor was diluted 1 : 1000 in Da Vinci Green antibody diluent ( Biocare Medical ) , added dropwise onto each section , and allowed to incubate overnight at 4°C . The slides were washed for 10 minutes in PBS , dried of excess PBS , and incubated for 20 minutes with broad - spectrum biotinylated Universal Link ( Biocare Medical ) , which binds to any antibody raised in mice , rats , or rabbits . The slides were washed again with PBS and incubated for 15 minutes with streptavidin – horseradish per - oxidase ( HRP ; Biocare Medical ) , which has a strong bind - ing affinity for the biotinylated Universal Link . The HRP reaction was completed with the addition of 3 , 3 (cid:2) - diaminobenzidine ( DAB ; Zymed , South San Francisco , CA , USA ) for 30 s . The slides were finally dehydrated , mounted , and coverslipped . Histological analysis Tissue sections were visualized and photographed with an E - 800 light microscope ( Nikon ) . Samples from each con - dition were analyzed manually and digitally . Blood vessels present in the implants were analyzed for their total num - ber . Blood vessels were identified , after immunostaining for von Willebrand factor , at ×200 magnification . Bone histomorphometric analysis of sections stained with H & E was performed to quantitatively determine bone for - mation . Using an E - 800 light microscope , histologic sections from each implant at each time - point were scanned and imported into Adobe Photoshop ( Adobe Systems , Moun - tain View , CA , USA ) . Bone tissue area for each section was determined by dividing the total number of bone pixels by the total number of scaffold pixels based on color using Image Pro Plus Software . This value was plotted as bone area / tissue area . Identification of bone was based on mor - phology of eosin - stained tissue and the cells lining ( osteo - blasts ) and within ( osteocytes ) this tissue . µCT 3D reconstruction and bone morphometry Calvaria were scanned by (cid:1) CT ( (cid:1) CT MS8X - 130 ; EVS Corp . ) . The specimens were fitted in a cylindrical sample holder , 15 . 4 mm in diameter , with the coronal aspect of the calvarial bone in a horizontal position . Specimens were scanned with the scanning direction parallel to the coronal aspect of the calvarial bone . High - resolution scanning , with an in - plane pixel size and slice thickness of 24 (cid:1) m , was performed . To cover the entire thickness of the calvarial bone , the number of slices was set at 400 . GEMS Micro - View software was used to make a 3D reconstruction from the set of scans . To obtain a 3D image , a threshold value of 1100 was used . Using the 2D (cid:1) CT images of the specimen , the percentage of the defect that was covered with new bone tissue was calculated ( % bone coverage ) . From 3D images of the specimen , the total tissue volume ( TV , mm 3 ) , bone volume ( BV , mm 3 ) and BMD within the defects were measured directly . Statistical analysis The statistical analyses were performed with the Instat Software Program . For the neovascularization experiments where blood vessel counting was performed , 12 animals were used . In the laser Doppler and early bone formation analyses , six animals were studied , and one of these animals died after 6 weeks , which accounts for there being five ani - mals studied at the 12 - week time - point of bone regenera - tion . Descriptive analyses were performed initially , fol - lowed by the use of Student t - tests or one - way ANOVA , according to the experimental design . All data are plotted as mean ± SE . Statistically significant differences in the histomorphometric analyses were determined using one - tailed Student t - tests , and statistical significance was defined as p < 0 . 05 . RESULTS Irradiation compromises angiogenesis in osseous defects To examine the effect of radiation treatment on blood vessel formation in our model system , an isolated area of the calvaria of Fisher rats was administered a therapeutic equivalent 12 - Gy dose of radiation from a cobalt source ( 60 Co ) . The radiation was delivered to D max at a source - to - skin distance of 80 cm in an 11 . 47 - minute exposure . Eight weeks after implantation of the scaffolds , one of the ani - mals appeared to have lost a noticeable amount of weight . This animal was monitored more closely and died at 9 weeks . This sample was excluded from the 12 - week time - point , and it could not be determined whether radiation was the ultimate cause of death . There were no observed ad - verse side effects in any of the other animals after radiation treatment . Two weeks after radiation treatment , two 3 . 5 - VEGF SCAFFOLDS IN IRRADIATED DEFECTS 737 mm osseous defects were created in the irradiated site ( Fig . 1A ) . At the time of surgical creation of the defects , biode - gradable polymer scaffolds of PLGA , fabricated by a gas - foaming process , ( 21 ) were placed in the defect sites . These scaffolds were also placed in osseous defects created in the calvarium of rats that had not undergone radiation treat - ment . Two and 6 weeks after implantation of the scaffolds , the scaffolds were retrieved and analyzed for neovascular - ization , tissue perfusion , and new bone formation within the defect area . Analysis of histological sections 2 weeks after implantation of the scaffolds revealed that fewer blood ves - sels formed in scaffolds within irradiated defects relative to scaffolds placed in nonirradiated defects ( Figs . 1B and 1C ) . Quantification of the blood vessel densities at 2 weeks con - firmed the results of the histological examination and showed a statistically significant 37 % decrease in neovas - cularization within scaffolds placed in irradiated defects ( 36 . 0 vessels / mm 2 ) relative to neovascularization within scaffolds placed in nonirradiated defects ( 56 . 9 vessels / mm 2 ; Fig . 1D ) . Differences in neovascularization between scaf - folds in nonirradiated and irradiated defects were still evi - dent 6 weeks after implantation ( Fig . 1D ) . Laser Doppler perfusion analysis PLGA polymer scaffolds capable of growth factor deliv - ery were fabricated using a variation of the gas - foaming fabrication process . ( 22 ) Three micrograms of VEGF was in - corporated into these scaffolds ( VEGF scaffolds ) , as previ - ously described , ( 19 ) and these scaffolds and PLGA scaffolds were implanted into osseous defects created in rats that had been irradiated 2 weeks preoperatively . As a functional analysis of the effects of VEGF scaffolds on blood vessel formation within the osseous defects , LDPI was performed to assess blood flow to the defect areas . LDPI was con - ducted 1 , 2 , and 6 weeks after implantation of PLGA and VEGF scaffolds in nonirradiated and irradiated defects . One week after implantation of PLGA and VEGF scaffolds into osseous defects created in nonirradiated calvaria , LDPI images showed greater perfusion to defects with VEGF scaffolds ( Fig . 2A ) . This method of imaging and analysis was further characterized in additional experiments ( data not shown ) and showed reproducibility . It was thus used for all subsequent perfusion analyses . Two weeks after implantation of scaffolds , in both nonirradiated and irradi - FIG . 2 . Laser Doppler perfusion analysis ( LDPI ) . ( A ) LDPI image of a nonirradiated calvarium , 1 week after implantation of a PLGA scaffold ( right ) and a VEGF scaffold ( left ) into osseous defects ( circles ) . Blood flow to the defect area ( circle ) is indicated by the differences in color intensity ( red most highly perfused > yellow > green > blue > black ) throughout the areas of interest . Two weeks after implantation of scaffolds , circles indicate areas in which osseous defects were created in ( B ) nonirradiated or ( C ) irradiated defects , followed by placement of either PLGA ( right ) or VEGF ( left ) scaffolds . Defects implanted with VEGF scaffolds contained the highest areas of perfusion . ( D ) Quantification of vascular perfusion within the osseous defects revealed significant increases in perfusion in defects implanted with VEGF scaffolds . Perfusion of VEGF scaffolds was measured as a percentage increase in perfusion relative to perfusion of PLGA scaffolds . Values represent mean ± SE ( n (cid:1) 6 ) . FIG . 1 . Influence of irradiation on angiogenesis . ( A ) (cid:1) CT image of osseous defects created in rat calvarium 2 weeks after radiation treatment ( XRT ) . Two weeks after implantation of scaffolds into defects , qualitative histological analysis of new blood vessel formation in PLGA scaffolds revealed more blood vessels present within defects that were ( B ) nonirradiated relative to defects that were ( C ) irradiated . Arrows point to blood vessels ( well - defined luminal structure ) with positive immunostaining of von Willebrand factor . Magnification of photomicrograph images at ×200 . ( D ) Quantitative analysis of blood vessel densities counted manually ( ×200 ) and normalized to tissue area showed that XRT treatment significantly reduced blood vessel formation within the defect areas . Blood vessel densities were measured at 2 and 6 weeks after implantation of scaffolds . Values represent mean ± SE ( n (cid:1) 12 ) . * p < 0 . 05 . KAIGLER ET AL . 738 Fig 2 live 4 / C ated osseous defects , LDPI images showed that defect areas that were implanted with VEGF scaffolds were more highly perfused than defect areas implanted with PLGA scaffolds ( Figs . 2B and 2C ) . Quantitative analysis of blood perfusion revealed that , in nonirradiated defects , there was a 75 % ( p < 0 . 05 ) increase in perfusion of defect areas implanted with VEGF scaffolds relative to those with PLGA scaffolds ( Fig . 2D ) . Of great interest was the finding that , in irradi - ated defects , quantitative analysis revealed there was also a statistically significant increase ( 30 % ) in perfusion within defect areas implanted with VEGF scaffolds relative to areas implanted with PLGA scaffolds ( Fig . 2D ) . As a func - tional analysis , these results showed that the implantation of VEGF scaffolds increased blood flow within not only nonirradiated , but more importantly irradiated , osseous de - fects . Effects of VEGF delivery on neovascularization in irradiated sites Two and 6 weeks after implantation , scaffolds were re - trieved , and neovascularization was assessed through histo - logical analysis . Blood vessel densities within VEGF scaf - folds ( Fig . 3A ) were higher compared with blood vessel densities within PLGA scaffolds in these same defects ( Fig . 3B ) . Quantification of vessel densities revealed that there was a significant increase ( > 2 - fold ) in neovascularization within VEGF scaffolds ( 91 . 3 vessels / mm 2 at 2 weeks ; 76 . 8 vessels / mm 2 at 6 weeks ) relative to PLGA scaffolds ( 36 . 0 vessels / mm 2 at 2 weeks ; 29 . 9 vessels / mm 2 at 6 weeks ) im - planted into irradiated defects ( Figs . 3C and 3D ) . Further - more , this analysis also showed that implantation of VEGF scaffolds ( 91 . 3 vessels / mm 2 at 2 weeks ; 76 . 8 vessels / mm 2 at 6 weeks ) in irradiated defects enhanced blood vessel den - sities to levels exceeding those of densities within PLGA scaffolds ( 56 . 9 vessels / mm 2 at 2 weeks ; 38 . 3 vessels / mm 2 at 6 weeks ) implanted into nonirradiated defects ( Figs . 3E and 3F ) . Early bone regeneration in irradiated osseous defects Because the delivery of VEGF increased blood vessel formation and function in the compromised osseous de - fects , we sought to determine whether this boost in the angiogenic response correlated with wound healing of the defect measured by bone regeneration . The presence of early bone regeneration within these defects was performed through histological analysis 6 weeks after implantation of polymer scaffolds . Gross qualitative histological analysis of whole sections suggested that implantation of VEGF scaf - folds resulted in the formation of more bone tissue than implantation of PLGA scaffolds ( Figs . 4A and 4B ) . Bone tissue had a woven , trabecular appearance with little to no hematopoietic tissue present . High magnification images showed the presence of more organized and mature areas of bone , surrounded by immature regions of bone trabec - ulae , in VEGF scaffolds relative to PLGA scaffolds ( Figs . 4C and 4D ) . Quantitative histomorphometric analysis of bone formation revealed a significant ( 43 % ) increase in bone formation within VEGF scaffolds ( 46 . 2 % bone area / tissue area ) relative to bone formed within PLGA scaffolds ( 31 . 8 % bone area / tissue area ; Fig . 4E ) . Mature bone regeneration in osseous defects To determine the extent of bone formation within VEGF scaffolds in this irradiated model , histological and (cid:1) CT analyses were performed 12 weeks after implantation . Within a 3 . 5 - mm nonirradiated osseous defect , VEGF scaf - folds were capable of complete osseous bridging of the de - FIG . 3 . Neovascularization after VEGF delivery in irradiated sites . Photomicrographs of histological sections immunostained for von Willebrand factor to identify blood vessels formed in irradiated sites 2 weeks after implantation of ( A ) VEGF or ( B ) PLGA scaffolds . Very few blood vessels were present in the PLGA scaffolds relative to vessels formed in the VEGF scaffolds . Quantification of neovascularization within PLGA and VEGF scaffolds ( C ) 2 and ( D ) 6 weeks after radiation treatment ( ×200 magnification ) reveals a statistically significant increase ( > 2 - fold ) in vessels formed within defects implanted with VEGF scaffolds . Additional comparisons of treatment groups at ( E ) 2 and ( F ) 6 weeks showed that VEGF scaffolds in irradiated defects enhanced blood vessel densities to levels exceeding those of densities within PLGA scaffolds implanted into nonirradiated defects . Values represent mean ± SE ( n (cid:1) 12 ) . * p < 0 . 05 . VEGF SCAFFOLDS IN IRRADIATED DEFECTS 739 fect 12 weeks after implantation ( Fig . 5A ) , whereas PLGA scaffolds only exhibited partial bone bridging ( Fig . 5B ) . Within irradiated defects , histological examination of scaf - folds revealed greater bone bridging within VEGF scaffolds compared with PLGA scaffolds ( Figs . 5C and 5D ) . 3D re - constructions of the volume of mineralized tissue formed within the calvarial defects clearly showed that , in both irradiated and nonirradiated conditions , the VEGF scaf - folds contained more mineralized tissue than PLGA scaf - folds ( Fig . 5E ) . 2D comparisons of these scaffolds quanti - tatively showed that VEGF scaffolds ( 26 . 3 % coverage ) resulted in a significantly greater ( 3 - fold ) amount of bone healing , as measured by bone coverage , within the irradi - ated defect compared with bone healing by PLGA scaffolds ( 7 . 0 % ; Fig . 5E ) . An additional analysis of bone formation , BMD , was performed , and the results showed that there was also a significant increase ( 69 % ) in the BMD of bone tissue formed within the VEGF scaffolds ( 130 . 8 mg / cm 3 ) , relative to PLGA scaffolds ( 71 . 3 mg / cm 3 ) , in the irradiated defects ( Fig . 5F ) DISCUSSION There is a significant need for therapeutic strategies to enhance neovascularization and perfusion in tissues com - promised by irradiation . Radiation therapy acts on tumors by destroying rapidly dividing cancer cells ; however , it can also damage healthy tissues by killing actively dividing so - matic cells . It is well established that radiotherapy can have very serious , and in some cases life - threatening , effects by damaging blood vessels . ( 23 ) Radiation can negatively affect vascular function by causing atherosclerosis ( 24 – 26 ) and can have direct cellular effects on endothelial cells , causing them to separate from the basement membrane of capillar - ies and undergo apoptosis . ( 27 , 28 ) The need for treatment modalities that enhance neovascularization in irradiated tis - sues is especially important for bone regeneration , because bone formation is an angiogenesis - dependent process . ( 29 ) Our study showed that by delivering an angiogenic growth factor from a biodegradable polymeric scaffold , blood ves - sel formation and vascular perfusion can be enhanced in osseous defects where the blood supply has been compro - mised by radiation treatment . Additionally , this angiogenic response correlates with increased new bone formation in a clinically relevant model system . These findings are particu - larly interesting in that bone formation was observed in osseous defects without the addition of any known osteo - inductive proteins . Within irradiated defects , there has been a paucity of reports of successful strategies to enhance bone regenera - tion through the delivery of angiogenic growth factors . Other studies have exploited the use of BMPs in the repair of irradiated osseous defects by using large quantities of these osteoinductive proteins to induce bone formation . Nonetheless , without sufficient vascular support , these ap - proaches are not effective in an irradiated environ - ment . ( 14 , 15 ) We first examined the efficacy of our irradiated model system and showed that with 12 Gy of radiation delivered 2 weeks preoperatively , blood vessel formation in surgical defects implanted with control scaffolds ( PLGA scaffolds ) was significantly lower than blood vessel forma - tion in nonirradiated surgical defects implanted with PLGA scaffolds . We have previously reported a system capable of delivering VEGF in a controlled and localized manner ( 19 ) and have further shown its ability to enhance angiogenesis when implanted subcutaneously . ( 18 ) A key finding from this study is that delivery of VEGF from designed biomaterials can boost the angiogenic response in irradiated osseous de - fects to levels higher than those seen in nonirradiated de - fects where no VEGF is delivered . Although the increase in angiogenesis is an important finding , the net effect of this enhanced angiogenesis is even FIG . 4 . Early bone regeneration within osseous defects at 6 weeks . Photomicrographs of entire H & E - stained sections of ( A ) PLGA and ( B ) VEGF scaffolds retrieved 6 weeks after implantation into irradiated defects ( N , native bone around scaffold ) . High magnifi - cation ( ×200 ) images of insert areas from A and B of early bone tissue formation within ( C ) PLGA and ( D ) VEGF scaffolds suggested the presence of greater bone formation within VEGF scaffolds ( B , bone within scaffold ) . ( E ) In H & E - stained sections , bone histo - morphometric analysis was performed and confirmed that VEGF scaffolds led to a significantly greater amount of bone regeneration than PLGA scaffolds . Bone was measured as percent bone tissue relative to total tissue area within the scaffold sections . Values represent mean ± SE ( n (cid:1) 6 ) . * p < 0 . 05 . KAIGLER ET AL . 740 more critical . Perfusion at these sites is of paramount im - portance because an adequate blood supply will ultimately determine the extent to which regeneration of tissues can be achieved . Another strategy aimed at inducing angiogen - esis and improving tissue oxygenation after radiation therapy uses hyperbaric oxygen treatment . ( 30 – 33 ) However , despite the success of this approach in preclinical and clini - cal studies , its use has several disadvantages and contrain - FIG . 5 . Mature bone regen - eration at 12 weeks . H & E - stained sections of ( A ) VEGF and ( B ) PLGA scaffolds after implantation within nonirradi - ated defects . VEGF scaffolds resulted in complete bone bridging of the osseous defect , whereas PLGA scaffolds re - sulted in partial bone bridging ( N , native bone around defect ; M , mature bone within scaf - fold ) . H & E - stained sections of ( C ) PLGA and ( D ) VEGF scaffolds in irradiated osseous defects show that there was much greater bone bridging in the VEGF scaffolds relative to PLGA scaffolds . ( E ) 3D recon - structions of bone volume within scaffolds and quantita - tive (cid:1) CT analyses of mineral - ized tissue formation con - firmed the presence of a statistically significant increase in bone coverage within VEGF scaffolds compared with PLGA scaffolds in irradiated defects ( analyses from nonirra - diated defects is included for comparison ) . ( F ) (cid:1) CT analysis of BMD of bone formed in PLGA and VEGF scaffolds in nonirradiated and irradiated defects . Values represent mean ± SE ( n (cid:1) 5 ) . * p < 0 . 05 relative to PLGA ( no XRT ) ; * * p < 0 . 05 relative to PLGA ( XRT ) . VEGF SCAFFOLDS IN IRRADIATED DEFECTS 741 Fig 5 live 4 / C dications . ( 34 ) Therefore , the controlled growth factor re - lease system described here may alleviate the need for this expensive and time - consuming therapy . To assess the func - tionality of neovascularization associated with VEGF de - livery , perfusion at the sites of the irradiated defects was measured . The laser Doppler scanning results confirmed that not only was VEGF delivery successful in increasing blood vessel density in the defects but also resulted in re - generated tissue that was significantly more perfused . Although the vascularity data seem promising from a therapeutic standpoint , it is important to note that the clini - cal delivery of VEGF in patients undergoing reconstruction can potentially be harmful , particularly if the defect area was originally created by resection of a malignancy . This is especially true because it is well documented that VEGF contributes to the growth of tumors . However , there may be clinical situations that may be amenable to this type of strategy . As an example , previously irradiated regions un - dergoing craniofacial reconstruction are encountered in three different clinical scenarios : ( 1 ) secondary reconstruc - tion after a patient has been tumor - free for many years ; ( 2 ) reconstructive treatment after osteoradionecrosis , which usually occurs many years after successful cancer therapy has been rendered ; and ( 3 ) as immediate reconstruction after salvage surgery for patients who have failed radiation therapy as a primary treatment modality . In the first two scenarios , the effects of VEGF on microscopic residual dis - ease in the wound would be of less concern because these patients have generally remained tumor - free for many years and commonly are considered locally cured at the time of reconstruction . In these instances , regional or sys - temic distribution of the VEGF may be of greater concern because it may have adverse effects on small recurrences of primary tumors , which may be still clinically or radiographi - cally undetectable . In the last scenario , the adverse effects of VEGF on microscopic residual disease would potentially be problematic , and this issue warrants further study in animal models before considering clinical application . The ultimate therapeutic goal in the treatment of lost and damaged tissues after resective surgical procedures is re - generation of the lost tissue . Based on our histologic find - ings , there were regions of bone continuity bridging the span of the irradiated calvarial defects after the implanta - tion of VEGF scaffolds . However , a critical finding was observed after quantitative analysis of bone healing . Bone healing , as measured by total bone coverage , after implan - tation of VEGF scaffolds in irradiated defects was equiva - lent to bone healing of defects that were nonirradiated . Examining the quality of regenerated bone tissue through measures of BMD revealed that bone tissue within scaf - folds was not as highly mineralized as native bone found around the periphery of the original defect , and this may be because of the time frame of our study . However , the BMD of bone formed within VEGF scaffolds was significantly higher than in the small amount of bone formed within PLGA scaffolds . Furthermore , there was no difference in the BMD of bone within VEGF scaffolds implanted into either irradiated or nonirradiated defects . The ability of VEGF scaffolds to enhance bone forma - tion in irradiated defects can in part be attributed to the enhancement of neovascularization within the scaffolds . It has been well established that the presence of a supportive vasculature is essential in bone formation and regenera - tion ( 29 , 35 – 37 ) ; however , the possibility cannot be ruled out that VEGF delivery from scaffolds affects more than just the vasculature . VEGF is a potent endothelial cell mitogen previously thought to be devoid of consistent and appre - ciable mitogenic effects on other cell types . ( 38 – 41 ) However , there has been recent evidence showing mitogenic and tro - phic activities of VEGF on a few other non - endothelial cell types , ( 42 – 44 ) including osteoblasts , ( 45 , 46 ) bone marrow stro - mal cells , ( 47 ) and osteoclasts . ( 48 , 49 ) We did not observe any qualitative differences in osteoblast and osteoclast cell numbers between VEGF scaffolds and PLGA scaffolds ; however , further studies need to be conducted to elucidate the cellular mechanisms involved in these processes . In ad - dition , VEGF can exhibit synergistic activity with osteoin - ductive factors and can enhance recruitment of mesenchy - mal stem cells , prolong cell survival , and augment cartilage and bone formation in bone regenerative sites . ( 50 , 51 ) Thus , VEGF delivered from biomaterial scaffolds may be acting not only on the vasculature , but also directly on osteopro - genitor cells , osteoblasts , osteoclasts , and conjunctively with osteoinductive factors resident in the osseous defects . Taken together , these findings suggest that growth factor delivery from polymer scaffolds could be an important tool for regenerating and engineering tissues in which the vas - cular supply has been compromised . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank John Baker and Chris Strayhorn for providing histology support . The authors are grateful to the NIDCR for funding of an Individual Pre - doctoral Dental Scientist Fellowship ( F30 DE05747 ) to DK and for research funding to the laboratories of PHK ( RO1 - DE013835 ) . The authors thank NCI Biological Resources Branch for pro - viding VEGF for these studies . REFERENCES 1 . Ries LAG , Eisner MP , Kosary CL , Hankey BF , Miller BA , Clegg L , Mariott A , Feuer EJ , Edwards BK ( eds . ) 1975 – 2002 SEER Cancer Statistics Review . National Cancer Institute , Bethesda , MD , USA . 2 . Perez CABL 1998 Principles and Practice of Radiation Oncol - ogy , 3rd ed . Lippincott - Raven , Philadelphia , PA , USA . 3 . Hellman S 1993 Principles of radiation therapy . In : DeVita VTJ , Hellman S , Rosenberg SA ( eds . ) Cancer Principles and Practice of Oncology . Lippincott , Philadelphia , PA , USA , pp . 248 – 275 . 4 . Urken ML , Buchbinder D , Costantino PD , Sinha U , Okay D , Lawson W , Biller HF 1998 Oromandibular reconstruction us - ing microvascular composite flaps : Report of 210 cases . Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 124 : 46 – 55 . 5 . Urken ML , Bridger AG , Zur KB , Genden EM 2001 The scapular osteofasciocutaneous flap : A 12 - year experience . Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 127 : 862 – 869 . 6 . Kosmidou L , Toljanic JA , Moran WJ , Panje WR 1998 The use of percutaneous implants for the prosthetic rehabilitation of orbital defects in irradiated cancer patients : A report of clinical outcomes and complications . Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 13 : 121 – 126 . 7 . Friedlaender GE , Perry CR , Cole JD , Cook SD , Cierny G , Muschler GF , Zych GA , Calhoun JH , LaForte AJ , Yin S 2001 KAIGLER ET AL . 742 Osteogenic protein - 1 ( bone morphogenetic protein - 7 ) in the treatment of tibial nonunions . J Bone Joint Surg Am 83 ( Suppl 1 ) : S151 – S158 . 8 . Boyne PJ , Nakamura A , Shabahang S 1999 Evaluation of the long - term effect of function on rhBMP - 2 regenerated hemi - mandibulectomy defects . Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 37 : 344 – 352 . 9 . Franceschi RT , Wang D , Krebsbach PH , Rutherford RB 2000 Gene therapy for bone formation : In vitro and in vivo osteo - genic activity of an adenovirus expressing BMP7 . J Cell Bio - chem 78 : 476 – 486 . 10 . Murphy WL , Simmons CA , Kaigler D , Mooney DJ 2004 Bone regeneration via a mineral substrate and induced angiogenesis . J Dent Res 83 : 204 – 210 . 11 . Adamo AK , Szal RL 1979 Timing , results , and complications of mandibular reconstructive surgery : Report of 32 cases . J Oral Surg 37 : 755 – 763 . 12 . Krebsbach PH , Gu K , Franceschi RT , Rutherford RB 2000 Gene therapy - directed osteogenesis : BMP - 7 - transduced hu - man fibroblasts form bone in vivo . Hum Gene Ther 11 : 1201 – 1210 . 13 . Nussenbaum B , Rutherford RB , Teknos TN , Dornfeld KJ , Krebsbach PH 2003 Ex vivo gene therapy for skeletal regen - eration in cranial defects compromised by postoperative radio - therapy . Hum Gene Ther 14 : 1107 – 1115 . 14 . Wurzler KK , DeWeese TL , Sebald W , Reddi AH 1998 Radia - tion - induced impairment of bone healing can be overcome by recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein - 2 . J Cranio - fac Surg 9 : 131 – 137 . 15 . Khouri RK , Brown DM , Koudsi B , Deune EG , Gilula LA , Cooley BC , Reddi AH 1996 Repair of calvarial defects with flap tissue : Role of bone morphogenetic proteins and compe - tent responding tissues . Plast Reconstr Surg 98 : 103 – 109 . 16 . Nussenbaum B , Rutherford RB , Krebsbach PH 2005 Bone regeneration in cranial defects previously treated with radia - tion . Laryngoscope 115 : 1170 – 1177 . 17 . Nor JE , Christensen J , Mooney DJ , Polverini PJ 1999 Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) - mediated angiogenesis is associated with enhanced endothelial cell survival and induc - tion of Bcl - 2 expression . Am J Pathol 154 : 375 – 384 . 18 . Richardson TP , Peters MC , Ennett AB , Mooney DJ 2001 Poly - meric system for dual growth factor delivery . Nat Biotechnol 19 : 1029 – 1034 . 19 . Sheridan MH , Shea LD , Peters MC , Mooney DJ 2000 Bioab - sorbable polymer scaffolds for tissue engineering capable of sustained growth factor delivery . J Control Release 64 : 91 – 102 . 20 . Fields MT , Eisbruch A , Normolle D , Orfali A , Davis MA , Pu AT , Lawrence TS 2000 Radiosensitization produced in vivo by once - vs . twice - weekly 2’2’ - difluoro - 2’ - deoxycytidine ( gem - citabine ) . Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 47 : 785 – 791 . 21 . Mooney DJ , Baldwin DF , Suh NP , Vacanti JP , Langer R 1996 Novel approach to fabricate porous sponges of poly ( D , L - lactic - co - glycolic acid ) without the use of organic solvents . Bio - materials 17 : 1417 – 1422 . 22 . Shea LD , Smiley E , Bonadio J , Mooney DJ 1999 DNA deliv - ery from polymer matrices for tissue engineering . Nat Biotech - nol 17 : 551 – 554 . 23 . Dorresteijn LD , Kappelle AC , Boogerd W , Klokman WJ , Balm AJ , Keus RB , van Leeuwen FE , Bartelink H 2002 In - creased risk of ischemic stroke after radiotherapy on the neck in patients younger than 60 years . J Clin Oncol 20 : 282 – 288 . 24 . Atkinson JL , Sundt TM Jr , Dale AJ , Cascino TL , Nichols DA 1989 Radiation - associated atheromatous disease of the cervical carotid artery : Report of seven cases and review of the litera - ture . Neurosurgery 24 : 171 – 178 . 25 . McCready RA , Hyde GL , Bivins BA , Mattingly SS , Griffen WO Jr 1983 Radiation - induced arterial injuries . Surgery 93 : 306 – 312 . 26 . Levinson SA , Close MB , Ehrenfeld WK , Stoney RJ 1973 Ca - rotid artery occlusive disease following external cervical irra - diation . Arch Surg 107 : 395 – 397 . 27 . Phillips TL 1966 An ultrastructural study of the development of radiation injury in the lung . Radiology 87 : 49 – 54 . 28 . Zollinger HU 1970 Radiation vasculopathy . Pathol Eur 5 : 145 – 163 . 29 . Gerber HP , Vu TH , Ryan AM , Kowalski J , Werb Z , Ferrara N 1999 VEGF couples hypertrophic cartilage remodeling , ossifi - cation and angiogenesis during endochondral bone formation . Nat Med 5 : 623 – 628 . 30 . Marx RE 1983 A new concept in the treatment of osteoradio - necrosis . J Oral Maxillofac Surg 41 : 351 – 357 . 31 . Muhonen A , Muhonen J , Minn H , Kulmala J , Klossner J , Teras M , Knuuti J , Happonen RP 2002 The effects of irradia - tion and hyperbaric oxygen on bone formation during rabbit mandibular distraction . Arch Oral Biol 47 : 701 – 707 . 32 . Granstrom G , Tjellstrom A , Branemark PI 1999 Osseointe - grated implants in irradiated bone : A case - controlled study using adjunctive hyperbaric oxygen therapy . J Oral Maxillofac Surg 57 : 493 – 499 . 33 . Muhonen A , Haaparanta M , Gronroos T , Bergman J , Knuuti J , Hinkka S , Happonen RP 2004 Osteoblastic activity and neo - angiogenesis in distracted bone of irradiated rabbit mandible with or without hyperbaric oxygen treatment . Int J Oral Max - illofac Surg 33 : 173 – 178 . 34 . Foster JH 1992 Hyperbaric oxygen therapy : Contraindications and complications . J Oral Maxillofac Surg 50 : 1081 – 1086 . 35 . Hausman MR , Schaffler MB , Majeska RJ 2001 Prevention of fracture healing in rats by an inhibitor of angiogenesis . Bone 29 : 560 – 564 . 36 . Street J , Bao M , deGuzman L , Bunting S , Peale FV Jr , Ferrara N , Steinmetz H , Hoeffel J , Cleland JL , Daugherty A , van Bruggen N , Redmond HP , Carano RA , Filvaroff EH 2002 Vascular endothelial growth factor stimulates bone repair by promoting angiogenesis and bone turnover . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 9656 – 9661 . 37 . Colnot C , Thompson Z , Miclau T , Werb Z , Helms JA 2003 Altered fracture repair in the absence of MMP9 . Development 130 : 4123 – 4133 . 38 . Ferrara N , Henzel WJ 1989 Pituitary follicular cells secrete a novel heparin - binding growth factor specific for vascular en - dothelial cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 161 : 851 – 858 . 39 . Connolly DT , Heuvelman DM , Nelson R , Olander JV , Eppley BL , Delfino JJ , Siegel NR , Leimgruber RM , Feder J 1989 Tu - mor vascular permeability factor stimulates endothelial cell growth and angiogenesis . J Clin Invest 84 : 1470 – 1478 . 40 . Conn G , Bayne ML , Soderman DD , Kwok PW , Sullivan KA , Palisi TM , Hope DA , Thomas KA 1990 Amino acid and cDNA sequences of a vascular endothelial cell mitogen that is homologous to platelet - derived growth factor . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87 : 2628 – 2632 . 41 . Leung DW , Cachianes G , Kuang WJ , Goeddel DV , Ferrara N 1989 Vascular endothelial growth factor is a secreted angio - genic mitogen . Science 246 : 1306 – 1309 . 42 . Oberg - Welsh C , Sandler S , Andersson A , Welsh M 1997 Ef - fects of vascular endothelial growth factor on pancreatic duct cell replication and the insulin production of fetal islet - like cell clusters in vitro . Mol Cell Endocrinol 126 : 125 – 132 . 43 . Guerrin M , Moukadiri H , Chollet P , Moro F , Dutt K , Malecaze F , Plouet J 1995 Vasculotropin / vascular endothelial growth factor is an autocrine growth factor for human retinal pigment epithelial cells cultured in vitro . J Cell Physiol 164 : 385 – 394 . 44 . Sondell M , Lundborg G , Kanje M 1999 Vascular endothelial growth factor has neurotrophic activity and stimulates axonal outgrowth , enhancing cell survival and Schwann cell prolifera - tion in the peripheral nervous system . J Neurosci 19 : 5731 – 5740 . 45 . Mayr - Wohlfart U , Waltenberger J , Hausser H , Kessler S , Gun - ther KP , Dehio C , Puhl W , Brenner RE 2002 Vascular endo - thelial growth factor stimulates chemotactic migration of pri - mary human osteoblasts . Bone 30 : 472 – 477 . 46 . Zelzer E , McLean W , Ng YS , Fukai N , Reginato AM , Lovejoy S , D’Amore PA , Olsen BR 2002 Skeletal defects in VEGF ( 120 / 120 ) mice reveal multiple roles for VEGF in skel - etogenesis . Development 129 : 1893 – 1904 . VEGF SCAFFOLDS IN IRRADIATED DEFECTS 743 47 . Kaigler D , Krebsbach PH , West ER , Horger K , Huang YC , Mooney DJ 2005 Endothelial cell modulation of bone marrow stromal cell osteogenic potential . FASEB J 19 : 665 – 667 . 48 . Kodama I , Niida S , Sanada M , Yoshiko Y , Tsuda M , Maeda N , Ohama K 2004 Estrogen regulates the production of VEGF for osteoclast formation and activity in op / op mice . J Bone Miner Res 19 : 200 – 206 . 49 . Henriksen K , Karsdal M , Delaisse JM , Engsig MT 2003 RANKL and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) in - duce osteoclast chemotaxis through an ERK1 / 2 - dependent mechanism . J Biol Chem 278 : 48745 – 48753 . 50 . Peng H , Wright V , Usas A , Gearhart B , Shen HC , Cummins J , Huard J 2002 Synergistic enhancement of bone formation and healing by stem cell - expressed VEGF and bone morphoge - netic protein - 4 . J Clin Invest 110 : 751 – 759 . 51 . Huang YC , Kaigler D , Rice KG , Krebsbach PH , Mooney DJ 2005 Combined angiogenic and osteogenic factor delivery en - hances bone marrow stromal cell - driven bone regeneration . J Bone Miner Res 20 : 848 – 857 . Address reprint requests to : Paul H Krebsbach , DDS , PhD Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences School of Dentistry University of Michigan Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 1078 , USA E - mail : paulk @ umich . edu Received in original form August 12 , 2005 ; revised form November 28 , 2005 ; accepted January 30 , 2006 . KAIGLER ET AL . 744