Abstract - Axiomatic design can provide efficient tools and logical analyzing processes to obtaining good design . However , axiomatic design has its limitations . For example , function - structure model has not been standardized yet and also there is no method found , which can solve the design problems . In this paper , we propose to integrate functional basis and TRIZ as enabling technologies to be employed in axiomatic design . First , we introduce functional basis as the uniform expression for modeling to maximally reduce the diversities of the function - structure model obtained by using Zigzagging mapping . Second , we integrate functional basis and key words in contradiction , evolution and effect in TRIZ as the theoretical basis for problem solving in design . Keywords - Axiomatic design , functional basis , TRIZ I . INTRODUCTION Efficient design theory and its applications can greatly improve the quality of products , decrease their costs , and reduce market response time . Suh’s theory of Axiomatic Design ( AD ) [ 1 ] has been considered as a theoretical foundation of designs because it can provide efficient tools and logical analyzing processes to obtain good design . Axiomatic design makes it easier to integrate and analyze design requirements , solutions , and design processes in both conceptual design and detailed design . Since the axiomatic design was proposed in 1990 , it has been applied to many fields , such as product design [ 2 ] , manufacturing design [ 3 ] , software design [ 4 ] and control system design [ 5 ] , etc . However , axiomatic design has also caused the following issues . a ) How to standard the decomposition of a design ? The zigzagging is based on the function decomposition for building the function - structure model . But created models vary with designers . How to ensure the unification of the model is still an open issue . b ) How to solve the design problem ? Axiomatic design is a method to making decision and evaluation . However , it provides no means to solve the design problem . To address the above issues , we propose to integrate functional basis ( See [ 6 ] ) and TRIZ ( the Russian acronym for Theory of Inventive - Problem Solving ) as enabling technologies to be employed in axiomatic design . First , we introduce functional basis as the uniform expression for modeling to maximally reduce the diversities of the function - structure model that is obtained by using Zigzagging mapping . Second , we integrate functional basis and key words in contradiction , evolution and effect in TRIZ as the theoretical basis for problems solving in designs . Further , building the interface of axiomatic design and TRIZ software is the purpose that we use functional basis as a bridge between axiomatic design and TRIZ . The rest of this paper is organized as follows . In Section II , we provide some preliminary knowledge . In Section III , we give a conceptual design model using AD , functional basis and TRIZ . In Section IV , we conclude this paper . II . PRELIMINARY KNOWLEDGE A . Axiomatic Design In 1990 , N . P . Suh proposed the axiomatic design method . According to Suh’s method , design activity can be divided into four domains : the consumer domain , the functional domain , the physical domain and the process domain . The elements for these four domains are Customer Needs ( CNs ) , Functional Requirements ( FRs ) , Design Parameters ( DPs ) and Process Variables ( PVs ) , respectly . Fig . 1 shows the relationship of them . The design process involves interlinking of these two domains by the zigzag mapping process and the multi level decomposition structure in each domain at every hierarchical level of the design process [ 1 ] . In the functional domain , the customer needs are specified in the terms of FRs and Constrains ( Cs ) . To satisfy the specified FRs , DPs are conceived in the physical domain . The independence axiom , which demands maximizing the independence of the functional requirements , can be used to judge the rationality of design . The information axiom , which demands minimizing the information contents of the design , can be used to select the optimum design . B . TRIZ TRIZ was developed by Altshuller Genrich , a talented scientist and inventor , and his followers . The theoretical foundation of TRIZ is hundreds of thousands of invention descriptions in the world patent databases . Altshuller’s work with TRIZ began in the 1940s and , thus far much experience in applying TRIZ application to various areas of human activities has been amassed [ 7 ] . TRIZ includes many solution tools , such as technology evolution , contradiction , effect and ARIZ , etc . A Conceptual Design Model Using Axiomatic Design , Functional Basis and TRIZ Ruihong Zhang , Jianzhong Cha , Yiping Lu School of Mechanical , Electronic and Control Engineering , Beijing Jiaotong University , Beijing 100044 , P . R . China Email : ruihong0613 @ yahoo . com . cn , jzcha @ bjtu . edu . cn , yplu @ bjtu . edu . cn 1807 1 - 4244 - 1529 - 2 / 07 / $ 25 . 00 ©2007 IEEE Fig . 1 . Design domains in Axiomatic Design . Technology is always in evolution . Technology forecasting based on TRIZ is a set of the patterns and lines of technology evolution [ 8 ] . The technology evolution is very helpful in technology forecasting since they can identify the most promising directions in the development of a system . According to Altshuller Genrich , an inventive situation is usually inherent in some groups of the technical and / or physical contradictions in the technique . The technical contradiction represents the confliction between two subsystems of a system . Technical contradiction is the main contradiction in the design process . In TRIZ , 39 features are used to describe the technical contradictions and 40 inventive principles are given to address these contradictions . The physical contradiction implies inconsistent requirements to a physical condition of the same element of a technical system or the operation of a technological process . The separation principles can be used to resolve the physical contradictions . Effect can fulfill a function , and the function depends on the existence of effects . Knowledge of the effects that perform technical functions is a powerful tool in solving technical problems . Effects can be identified by analyzing hundreds of thousands of patents and finding relevance between a technical function by a design product described in a patent and an effect used as a principle for the product [ 9 ] . An effect is usually a principle for the product . C . Functional Basis In [ 6 ] , the following terms are used in the functional basis . 1 ) Product function : the general input / output relationship of a product having the purpose of performing an overall task , typically stated in verb - object form . 2 ) Sub - function : a description of part of a products overall task ( product function ) , stated in verb - object form . Sub - functions are decomposed from the product function and represent the more elementary tasks of the product . 3 ) Function : a description of an operation to be performed by a device or artifact , expressed as the active verb of the sub - function . 4 ) Flow : a change in material , energy or signal with respect to time . Expressed as the object of the sub - function , a flow is the recipient of the functions operation . The functional basis is a tool for use in generating a functional model in product design . It allows designers to describe a product’s overall function as a set of simpler sub - functions while showing their connectivity . With such a set , designers can express product function in a universal language . Regardless of the specific technique used to create a functional model , the basis identifies when an overall function is decomposed to a small , easily solvable sub - function and , thus , provides a common level of detail . Implied in this is the representation of product function in a common language , eliminating semantic confusion . The only requirement of the functional basis is that functions ( both overall and sub - ) must be expressed as a verb - object pair . The basis functions fill the verb spot and the basis flows provide the object . In [ 6 ] , Stone et al . also gave the sets of flows and functions definitions . Due to limitation of space , we will not discuss it in details here . Interested readers please refer to [ 6 ] . III . A CONCEPTUAL DESIGN MODEL USING AD , FUNCTIONAL BASIS AND TRIZ Fig . 2 gives the conceptual design process model using functional basis and TRIZ as the enabling technologies . The model includes eight steps as follows . Step 1 : Transform customers’ attributes to functional requirements using House Of Quality ( HOQ ) . Conceptual design begins with the product design specification ( PDS ) [ 10 ] . AD does not provide an effective method to transform customers’ attributes to functional requirements , so Quality Function Deployment ( QFD ) [ 11 ] is used to obtain the PDS . HOQ in QFD is a kind of product design specification . PDS is the input of the next step . Step 2 : Build function - structure model using AD . Through the zigzagging mapping between functional domain and physical domain , the designer can obtain the function hierarchy model , structure hierarchy model and the relationship between FRs and DPs . FRs and DPs are described by functional basis or features . We concluded the corresponding relationship between functional basis and features ( see Table I ) . The purpose to building the corresponding relationship is for creating the software interface of axiomatic design and TRIZ . The function hierarchy model and structure hierarchy model form the function - structure model . The relationship between FRs and DPs is expressed by design matrix . Step 3 : Judge the resulting design meeting given constraints or not . Constraints are a specification of characteristics that the design solution must possess to be acceptable to its customers . Constraints are described by functional basis or features . If any of the given constraints are violated , then go to Step 5 . Functional Requirements Customer Needs Design Parameters Process Variables Customer Domain Functional Domain Physical Domain Process Domain 1808 Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE IEEM Fig . 2 . Conceptual design process model . Step 4 : Judge the coupling of the design matrix . FRs and DPs in the design matrix generated in Step 2 are arranged randomly . To reduce design complexity , the design matrix needs to be rearranged using partitioning algorithm [ 12 ] . If the rearranged design matrix is diagonal or triangular , that is to say , the design satisfies the Independence Axiom , then go to Step 8 ; else go to Step 5 . Step 5 : Solve design problem using TRIZ . Evolution , contradiction and effect can be used to resolve the design problem . These solution tools may provide a generic solution to the designer . Then , the designer can resort to professional knowledge for a specialized solution . Step 6 : Re - judge whether the resulting design meets given constraints or not . If not , then go to Step 2 , else go to Step 7 . T ABLE I R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN F UNCTIONAL B ASIS AND F EATURES IN TRIZ Flows No . Features in TRIZ 1 Weight of moving object 2 Weight of stationary object 3 Length of moving object 4 Length of stationary object 5 Area of moving object 6 Area of stationary object 7 Volume of moving object 8 Volume of stationary object 12 Shape 13 Stability of the object ' s composition 14 Strength 15 Duration of action by moving object 16 Duration of action by stationary 23 Loss of substance 24 Loss of Information 25 Loss of Time 26 Quantity of substance / the matter 30 External harm affects the object Secondary or Tertiary Material and their Correspondents 31 Object - generated harmful factors 24 Loss of Information 25 Loss of Time 27 Reliability 28 Measurement accuracy 29 Manufacturing precision Auditory signal Olfactory signal Tactile signal Taste signal Visual signal Analog signal Discrete signal 30 External harm affects the object Tactile Temperature 17 Temperature Tactile Pressure 11 Pressure Coarse extent of tactile 29 Manufacturing precision 19 Use of energy by moving object 20 Use of energy by stationary object 21 Power Secondary or Tertiary energy 22 Loss of Energy Human Force Chemical Affinity Magnetomotive Force Rotational force Translational force fluctuation Amplitude 10 Force Acoustic pressure Biological pressure Hydraulic pressure Pneumatic pressure 11 Pressure Illumination intensity Sunlight Intensity Radical / nuclear intensity 18 Illumination intensity Thermal temperature 17 Temperature Human motion Acoustic Particle Velocity Biological volumetric flow Particle reaction rate Electrical Current Speed of light Speed of sunlight Hydraulic Volumetric Flow Magnetic Flux Rate Rotational Angular Velocity Translational Linear Velocity Frequency of fluctuation Pneumatic mass flow Radioactive / Nuclear decay rate 9 Velocity Technical Evolution Functional requirements described by functional basis Design parameters described by function basis or features Constraints described by functional basis or features Physical contradiction Technical contradiction Separate principles Inventive principles Generic solution in TRIZ Specialized solution End No Yes No Meet constraints ? Yes Effects Coupled ? PDS No Yes Meet constraints ? Coupled ? Yes No TRIZ 1809 Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE IEEM Step 7 : Re - judge the coupling of the design matrix . If not , then go to Step 2 , else go to Step 8 . Step 8 : Process model is complete . IV . CONCLUSION Although axiomatic design can provide efficient tools and logical analyzing processes to obtain good design , it also has its limitations . In this paper , we proposed to integrate functional basis and TRIZ as enabling technologies to be employed in axiomatic design . As the uniform expression for modeling , functional basis can reduce the diversities of the function - structure model obtained by using Zigzagging mapping . At the same time , creation of the relationship between functional basis and features can form the software interface between axiomatic design and TRIZ . We integrated functional basis and key words in contradiction , evolution and effect in TRIZ as the theoretical basis to solve the design problems . In this paper , we just provided some preliminary results on the relationship between functional basis and features in TRIZ , our future work will focus on further exploring the relationship between them and how to apply it to actual product design . ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology Foundation of Beijing Jiaotong University ( No . 2006XZ011 ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] N . P . Suh , Axiomatic design : advances and applications . New York : Oxford University Press , 2001 [ 2 ] M . K . Shjin , S . Hong , and G . J . Park , “Axiomatic design of the motor - driven tilt / telescopic steering system for safety and vibration” , Proc Inst Mech Engrs , vol . 215 , pp . 179 - 187 , 2001 [ 3 ] S . J . Chen , L . C . Chen , and L . Li , “Knowledge - based support for simulation analysis of manufacturing cells , ” Computer in Industry , vol . 44 , pp . 33 - 49 , 2001 [ 4 ] N . P . Suh , D . Sung - Hee , “Axiomatic design of software systems , ” Annals of the CIRP , vol . 49 , no . 1 , pp . 95 - 100 , 2000 [ 5 ] K . D . Lee , N . P . Suh , and J . H . Oh , “Axiomatic design of machine control system , ” Annals of the CIRP , 2001 , 50 ( 1 ) , pp . 109 - 114 [ 6 ] R . B . Stone and K . L . Wood , “Development of a functional basis for design , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , vol . 122 , no . 4 , pp . 359 - 370 , September 2000 [ 7 ] G . Altshuller , The innovation algorithm . Worcester : Technical Innovation Center , 1999 [ 8 ] B . Zlotin and A . Zusman , Directed Evolution Philosophy , Theory and Practice . Southfield : Ideation International Inc , 2001 [ 9 ] R . H . Tan , Innovation Design—TRIZ : Theory of Innovative Problem Solving ( In Chinese ) . Beijing : China Mechanic Press , 2002 [ 10 ] G . Paul and W . Beitz , Engineering Design : a Systematic Approach . Springer - Verlag , 2001 [ 11 ] K . Akao , Quality Function Deployment . Cambridge : Productivity Process , 1990 [ 12 ] T . L . Saaty , “How to make a decision : the analytic hierarchy process , ” European Journal of Operational Research , vol . 48 , pp . 9 – 26 , 1990 1810 Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE IEEM