Resource Higher - Order Inter - chromosomal Hubs Shape 3D Genome Organization in the Nucleus Graphical Abstract Highlights d SPRITE enables genome - wide mapping of higher - order interactions in the nucleus d SPRITE uncovers two major inter - chromosomal hubs arranged around nuclear bodies d 3D distance of DNA regions to these hubs is based on their functional properties d This organization constrains the overall 3D packaging of genomic DNA in the nucleus Authors Soﬁa A . Quinodoz , Noah Ollikainen , Barbara Tabak , . . . , Patrick McDonel , Manuel Garber , Mitchell Guttman Correspondence mguttman @ caltech . edu In Brief SPRITE enables genome - wide detection of multiple simultaneously occurring higher - order DNA interactions within the nucleus and provides a global picture of inter - chromosomal spatial arrangement around nuclear bodies . Higher - order inter - chromosomal hubs I na c t i v e A c t i v e nu c l e o l u s s p eck l e Nucleus speckle nucleolus rRNA chr12 chr19 Result Organized around nuclear bodies Interactions 1 . Multi - way 2 . RNA & DNA 3 . Long - range SPRITE Tag Split Sequence Pool repeat Quinodoz et al . , 2018 , Cell 174 , 744 – 757 July 26 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 024 Resource Higher - Order Inter - chromosomal Hubs Shape 3D Genome Organization in the Nucleus Soﬁa A . Quinodoz , 1 Noah Ollikainen , 1 Barbara Tabak , 2 Ali Palla , 1 Jan Marten Schmidt , 1 Elizabeth Detmar , 1 Mason M . Lai , 1 Alexander A . Shishkin , 1 Prashant Bhat , 1 , 3 Yodai Takei , 1 Vickie Trinh , 1 Erik Aznauryan , 1 Pamela Russell , 4 Christine Cheng , 5 Marko Jovanovic , 6 Amy Chow , 1 Long Cai , 1 Patrick McDonel , 2 Manuel Garber , 2 and Mitchell Guttman 1 , 7 , * 1 Division of Biology and Biological Engineering , California Institute of Technology , Pasadena , CA 91125 , USA 2 Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology and Program in Molecular Medicine , University of Massachusetts Medical School , Worcester , MA 01655 , USA 3 David Geffen School of Medicine , University of California , Los Angeles , Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA 4 Department of Biostatistics and Informatics , Colorado School of Public Health , Aurora , CO 80045 , USA 5 Department of Biology , Boston University , Boston , MA 02215 , USA 6 Department of Biological Sciences , Columbia University , New York , NY 10027 , USA 7 Lead Contact * Correspondence : mguttman @ caltech . edu https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 024 SUMMARY Eukaryotic genomes are packaged into a 3 - dimen - sional structure in the nucleus . Current methods for studying genome - wide structure are based on prox - imity ligation . However , this approach can fail to detect known structures , such as interactions with nuclear bodies , because these DNA regions can be too far apart to directly ligate . Accordingly , our over - all understanding of genome organization remains incomplete . Here , we develop split - pool recognition of interactions by tag extension ( SPRITE ) , a method that enables genome - wide detection of higher - order interactions within the nucleus . Using SPRITE , we recapitulate known structures identiﬁed by proximity ligation and identify additional interactions occurring across larger distances , including two hubs of inter - chromosomal interactions that are arranged around the nucleolus and nuclear speckles . We show that a substantial fraction of the genome exhibits preferen - tial organization relative to these nuclear bodies . Our results generate a global model whereby nuclear bodies act as inter - chromosomal hubs that shape the overall packaging of DNA in the nucleus . INTRODUCTION Although the same genomic DNA is packaged in the nucleus of each cell , different sets of genes are expressed in different cell states . Despite signiﬁcant progress over the past decade , there are still many unanswered questions about how the genome is organized within the nucleus and how these structures change across different cell states . Current methods for genome - wide mapping of 3 - dimensional ( 3D ) genome structure rely on proximity ligation ( e . g . , Hi - C ) , which works by ligating the ends of DNA regions that are in close spatial proximity in the nucleus followed by sequencing to map pairwise interactions . These methods have shown that the genome is largely organized around chromosome territories , such that most DNA interactions occur within an individual chro - mosome ( Gibcus and Dekker , 2013 ) . These interactions include chromatin loops that connect genomic DNA regions , such as en - hancers and promoters , local - interacting neighborhoods of DNA called ‘‘topologically associated domains’’ ( TADs ) , and compart - ments where DNA regions interact based on transcriptional ac - tivity ( Pombo and Dillon , 2015 ) . Another widely used method for studying nuclear structure is microscopy , which involves in situ imaging of DNA , RNA , and protein in the nucleus . These methods have shown that speciﬁc regions of the genome , including speciﬁc inter - chromosomal in - teractions , can organize around nuclear bodies ( Hu et al . , 2010 ) . For example , RNA polymerase I ( Pol I ) - transcribed rDNA genes , which are encoded on several distinct chromosomes , localize within the nucleolus ( Pederson , 2011 ) . In addition , speciﬁc ex - amples of RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) - transcribed genes have been shown to localize near the periphery of nuclear speckles ( Khanna et al . , 2014 ) , a nuclear body that contains various mRNA processing and splicing factors ( Spector and Lamond , 2011 ) . These observations and others ( Branco and Pombo , 2006 ; Lomvardas et al . , 2006 ) demonstrate that genome interac - tions can occur beyond chromosome territories and organize around nuclear bodies . Yet , despite the power of each of these methods for map - ping nuclear structure , there is a growing appreciation that mi - croscopy and proximity ligation measure different aspects of genome organization ( Giorgetti and Heard , 2016 ; Williamson et al . , 2014 ) . Speciﬁcally , microscopy measures the 3D spatial distances between DNA sites within single cells , whereas prox - imity ligation measures the frequency with which two DNA sites are close enough in the nucleus to directly ligate ( Dekker , 2016 ) . This difference is particularly signiﬁcant when consid - ering DNA regions that organize around nuclear bodies , which can range in size from 0 . 5 to 2 m m ( Pederson , 2011 ) , and there - fore may be too far apart to directly ligate . This may explain 744 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc . why proximity ligation methods do not identify known interac - tions between chromosomes that organize around speciﬁc nu - clear bodies . These differences between proximity ligation and microscopy highlight a challenge for generating comprehensive maps of genome structure . Speciﬁcally , it remains unclear whether the speciﬁc inter - chromosomal interactions identiﬁed by micro - scopy represent special cases or broader principles of global genome organization . Additionally , both methods are limited to measuring simultaneous contacts between a small number ( (cid:1) 2 – 3 ) of genomic regions and therefore cannot measure how multiple DNA sites simultaneously organize within the nucleus ( O’Sullivan et al . , 2013 ) . Accordingly , current methods cannot generateaglobalpictureofgenomeorganization , whichiscritical for addressing key questions , such as why some speciﬁc Pol II - transcribed regions associate with nuclear speckles whereas othersdonot ( Shoplandetal . , 2003 ) , whichDNAregionsorganize simultaneouslyaround thesamenuclearbody , andhowgenomic DNA is organized in the nucleus relative to multiple nuclear bodies , chromosome territories , and other features . To address these technical challenges , we develop a method called ‘‘split - pool recognition of interactions by tag extension’’ ( SPRITE ) that moves away from proximity ligation and enables genome - wide detection of multiple DNA interactions that occur simultaneously within the nucleus . Using SPRITE , we recapitu - late known genome structures identiﬁed by Hi - C , including chro - mosome territories , compartments , topologically associated do - mains , and loop structures , and identify that many of these occur within higher - order structures in the nucleus . Because SPRITE does not rely on proximity ligation , it identiﬁes interactions that occur across larger spatial distances than can be observed by Hi - C . These long - range interactions include two major hubs of inter - chromosomal interactions . By extending SPRITE to simul - taneously measure RNA and DNA interactions , we ﬁnd that these two inter - chromosomal hubs correspond to DNA organization around the nucleolus and nuclear speckles , respectively . More - over , DNA regions within these hubs can simultaneously orga - nize around the same nuclear body within individual cells . We show that gene - dense and highly transcribed Pol II regions orga - nize around nuclear speckles and that gene - poor , and therefore transcriptionally inactive , regions that are centromere - proximal organize around the nucleolus . In addition to the regions that directly associate with these nuclear bodies , we ﬁnd that a sub - stantial fraction of the genome exhibits preferential spatial posi - tioning relative to each of these nuclear bodies . Importantly , these preferential spatial distances quantitatively correspond to functional and structural properties , including the density of active Pol II within a genomic region . Together , our results pro - vide a global model of genome organization whereby nuclear bodies act as inter - chromosomal hubs that shape the overall 3D packaging of DNA in the nucleus . RESULTS SPRITE : A Genome - wide Method to Identify Higher - Order DNA Interactions in the Nucleus We sought to develop a genome - wide method that enables mapping of higher - order interactions that occur simultaneously between multiple DNA sites within the same nucleus . To do this , we developed SPRITE , a method that does not rely on prox - imity ligation . SPRITE works as follows : DNA , RNA , and protein are crosslinked in cells ; nuclei are isolated ; chromatin is frag - mented ; interacting molecules within an individual complex are barcoded using a split - pool strategy ; and interactions are identi - ﬁed by sequencing and matching all reads that contain identical barcodes ( Figure 1A ; STAR Methods ) . Speciﬁcally , we uniquely barcode each molecule in a cross - linked complex by repeatedly splitting all complexes across a 96 - well plate ( ‘‘split’’ ) , ligating a speciﬁc tag sequence onto all DNA molecules within each well ( ‘‘tag’’ ) , and then pooling these complexes into a single well ( ‘‘pool’’ ) . After several rounds of split - pool tagging , each molecule in an interacting complex con - tains a unique series of ligated tags , which we refer to as a bar - code ( Figure 1A ) . Because all molecules in a crosslinked com - plex are covalently linked , they will sort together in the same wells throughout each round of the split - pool tagging process and will contain the same barcode , whereas the molecules in separate complexes will sort independently and therefore will obtain distinct barcodes . Therefore , the probability that mole - cules in two independent complexes will receive the same bar - code decreases exponentially with each additional round of split - pool tagging . For example , after six rounds of split - pool tagging , there are (cid:1) 10 12 possible unique barcode sequences , which exceeds the number of unique DNA molecules present in the initial sample ( (cid:1) 10 9 ) . After split - pool tagging , we sequence all tagged DNA molecules and match all reads with shared barc - odes ( STAR Methods ) . We refer to all unique DNA reads that contain the same barcode as a SPRITE cluster ( Figure 1A ) . To conﬁrm that DNA reads within a SPRITE cluster represent interactions that occur in the same nucleus and are not formed by spurious association or aggregation in solution , we mixed crosslinked lysates from human and mouse cells prior to per - forming SPRITE and found that (cid:1) 99 . 8 % of all SPRITE clusters contained only human or mouse reads , but not both ( Figure S1A ; STAR Methods ) . SPRITE differs from previous methods in several ways . In contrast to Hi - C , SPRITE can measure multiple DNA molecules that simultaneously interact within an individual nucleus , can provide information about interactions that are heterogeneous from cell - to - cell , and is not restricted to measuring DNA interac - tions that are close enough in the nucleus to directly ligate . In contrast to genome architecture mapping ( GAM ) ( Beagrie et al . , 2017 ) , another proximity - ligation - independent method , SPRITE can be performed without requiring specialized equip - ment or training , is faster to perform , and does not require exten - sive whole genome ampliﬁcation . Furthermore , because SPRITE does not rely on proximity ligation or whole - genome ampliﬁca - tion , it can be extended beyond DNA to directly incorporate RNA simultaneously . We describe these speciﬁc features of SPRITE in the following sections . SPRITE Accurately Maps Known Genome Structures across Various Resolutions To test whether SPRITE can accurately map genome structure , we compared the results obtained by SPRITE to those measured by Hi - C . Speciﬁcally , we generated SPRITE maps in two Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 745 mammalian cell types that have been previously mapped by Hi - C : mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) and human lymphoblastoid cells ( GM12878 ) ( Rao et al . , 2014 ) . We generated (cid:1) 1 . 5 billion sequencing reads from each sample and matched reads containing the same barcode to obtain (cid:1) 50 million SPRITE clusters from each sample ( STAR Methods ) . These SPRITE clusters range in size from two reads to > 1 , 000 reads per cluster ( Figure S1C ) . To directly compare SPRITE Figure 1 . SPRITE Accurately Maps Known Genome Structures across Various Resolutions ( A ) Schematic of the SPRITE protocol . Crosslinked DNA is split into a 96 - well plate and tagged with a unique sequence ( colored circle ) and then pooled into one tube . This split - and - pool process is repeated with sequentially added tags . DNA is sequenced , and tags are matched to generate SPRITE clusters . ( B – D ) Comparison of SPRITE ( upper diagonal ) and Hi - C ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) ( lower diagonal ) in mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) ( B ) acrossall chromosomes at 1 - Mb resolution , ( C ) on chromosome 2 at 200 - kb resolution ( shown in log scale ) , and ( D ) within a 12 - Mb region at 40 - kb resolution . ( E ) ComparisonofSPRITE ( upperdiagonal ) andHi - C ( Raoetal . , 2014 ) ( lowerdiagonal ) inhumanGM12878cellswithina625 - kbregionat25 - kbresolution . CTCF binding ( ENCODE ) is colored based on motif orientation . See also Figure S1 and Table S5 . 746 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 and Hi - C , we converted SPRITE clusters into pairwise contact frequencies by enumerating all pairwise contacts observed within a single cluster and down - weighting each pairwise con - tact by the total number of molecules contained within the clus - ter ( Figure 1A ) . This normalization prevents large SPRITE clus - ters from disproportionately impacting the pairwise frequency maps ( STAR Methods ) . Overall , the pairwise contact maps generated with SPRITE are highly comparable to Hi - C maps , with similar structural features observed across all levels of genomic resolution . At a genome - wide level , we observe a clear preference for interactions that occur within the same chromosome ( Figure 1B ) . At a chromo - some - wide level , we observe similar A and B compartments as identiﬁed by Hi - C in both the mouse and the human data ( Spearman r = 0 . 85 , 0 . 93 , respectively ) ( Figures S1D – S1F ) . These correspond to locations of active and inactive transcrip - tion ( Gibcus and Dekker , 2013 ) . At 40 - kb resolution , we observe topologically associated domains ( TADs ) , where adjacent DNA sites organize into highly self - interacting domains separated by boundaries that preclude interactions with other neighboring re - gions ( Figure 1D ) . The location and strength of TAD boundaries , measured by insulation scores across the genome , are highly correlated in Hi - C and SPRITE for both mouse and human ( Spearman r = 0 . 90 , 0 . 94 ) ( Figures S1G – S1I ) . Finally , at 25 - kb resolution , we observe speciﬁc ‘‘looping’’ interactions that con - nect local regions that contain the expected convergent CTCF motif orientation previously described for loop structures ( Fig - ures 1E and S1J ) ( Sanborn et al . , 2015 ) . More generally , we ﬁnd that the loops previously identiﬁed by Hi - C are strongly en - riched within our SPRITE data at 10 - kb resolution ( Figures S1K and S1L ; STAR Methods ) . SPRITE Identiﬁes Higher - Order Interactions that Occur Simultaneously In addition to conﬁrming pairwise genome structures identiﬁed by Hi - C , SPRITE can also directly measure multiple DNA regions that simultaneously interact within an individual cell , which we refer to as higher - order interactions . Although microscopy and speciﬁc proximity - ligation methods can also map higher - order interactions ( Darrow et al . , 2016 ; Olivares - Chauvet et al . , 2016 ) , these are largely restricted to mapping 3 - way contacts . In contrast , SPRITE is not restricted in the number of simulta - neous DNA contacts . To explore the higher - order structures identiﬁed by SPRITE , we enumerated all interactions that occur simultaneously be - tween three or more independent genomic regions ( k R 3 ) , which we refer to as a k - mer . Similar to pairwise contact frequencies , one of the largest determinants of k - mer frequency in our data is the linear genomic distance separating each region in the k - mer . To account for this , we computed an enrichment score by normalizing the frequency of the observed k - mer by the average frequency observed across random k - mers that retain the same genomic distance ( Figure S2A ; STAR Methods ) . Overall , we identiﬁed > 310 , 000 k - mers ( 1 - Mb resolution , k = 3 – 14 regions ) that were observed in at least ﬁve independent SPRITE clusters , occurred at a frequency that exceeded 90 % of the random permutations , and occurred > 4 - fold more frequently than the average of the permuted regions ( Figure S2B ; Table S1A ; STAR Methods ) . Importantly , the frequency of observing even a single higher - order SPRITE cluster that does not represent a set of interactions that occur within the same indi - vidual cell is extremely low ( < 0 . 2 % of all clusters ; Figure S1A ) . These enriched k - mers include various higher - order genomic DNA structures , including active compartments , gene clusters , and consecutive loop structures . Active Compartments We observed highly enriched k - mers that connect multiple A compartment ( transcriptionally active ) regions that are non - contiguous and span large distances of the same chromosome . Speciﬁcally , we observed tens of thousands of individual SPRITE clusters that contain reads from at least three different A compartment regions that span at least 100 - Mb within an indi - vidual chromosome ( Figures 2A and S2C ; Tables S1B and S1C ) . This suggests that active DNA regions may interact within higher - order compartments ( Figure 2B ) . Gene Clusters We identiﬁed > 75 SPRITE clusters that connect three non - contiguous genomic regions within the human HIST1 clusters that encode 55 human histone genes ( Figure 2C ) . Notably , these SPRITE clusters skip the intervening transcriptionally inactive re - gions . The frequency of SPRITE clusters that connect the three HIST1 gene clusters was never observed in any of the 100 randomly permuted k - mers containing the same genomic dis - tance . This result suggests that multiple histone gene clusters simultaneously interact , consistent with observations that his - tone genes localize within speciﬁc nuclear bodies referred to as histone locus bodies ( Nizami et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 2D ) . Consecutive Loops Previous Hi - C studies suggested that consecutive loops may form higher - order interactions that bring together three distinct regions of the genome ( Sanborn et al . , 2015 ) . Consistent with this , we observe several examples of highly enriched k - mers that correspond to consecutive loop structures ( Figure S2D ) . For example , we observe > 19 SPRITE clusters that contain reads corresponding to three loop anchor points on human chromosome 8 ( Figure 2E ) . This suggests that multiple consec - utive loops may occur simultaneously within the same cell ( Figure 2F ) . In addition to these examples , we also observe > 11 , 000 enriched SPRITE k - mers corresponding to simultaneous 3 - way interactions of TAD regions containing multiple enhancers and highly transcribed regions previously reported by GAM ( Fig - ure S2E ; Tables S1D and S1E ) . Taken together , these results suggest that SPRITE can detect multiple DNA interactions that occur simultaneously . SPRITE Identiﬁes Interactions that Occur across Large Genomic Distances Because SPRITE does not rely on proximity ligation , which re - quires two DNA sites to be close enough to form a ligation junc - tion ( Dekker , 2016 ; Giorgetti and Heard , 2016 ) , we reasoned that SPRITE might identify additional interactions that occur at further nuclear distances than those identiﬁed by Hi - C ( Figure 3A ) . Indeed , we noticed that the number of pairwise contacts observed between two genomic regions as a function of their linear genomic distance ( ‘‘distance decay’’ ) occurs at different Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 747 rates when comparing the Hi - C and SPRITE data ( Figure S3A ) . Speciﬁcally , SPRITE identiﬁes a signiﬁcantly larger number of pairwise contacts that are present at larger linear genomic dis - tances . Importantly , these additional long - range interactions correspond to an increased number of contacts between spe - ciﬁc genomic regions expected to interact ( Table S2A ) . For example , we observe a signiﬁcant increase in interactions occur - ring between non - local active compartments separated by > 100 Mb ( Figure S3B ) . Because SPRITE uses fragmentation to generate clusters of crosslinked interactions within the nucleus , we reasoned that small SPRITE clusters may represent interactions that are close in 3D space , whereas larger SPRITE clusters may represent in - teractions crosslinked across farther distances ( Figure 3A ) . To test this , we stratiﬁed the SPRITE clusters based on their number of reads and generated pairwise contact maps . For small SPRITE clusters ( 2 – 10 reads ) , we observe a distance decay rate comparable to the rate observed by Hi - C , with most con - tacts occurring in close linear distances . Indeed , SPRITE clus - ters containing 2 – 10 reads also show pairwise contact maps that are similar to Hi - C ( Figure S3C ) . In contrast , for the larger SPRITE clusters ( 11 – 1 , 000 + reads ) , a larger number of contacts occur at longer genomic distances and the number of interac - tions at these longer distances increases with cluster size ( Fig - ure 3B ) . These different cluster sizes represent interactions that correspond to different structural features ( Table S2A ) . For example , the small clusters preferentially identify interactions within TADs and within local compartment regions , while larger clusters correspond to increased interactions between distinct TADs as well as distal compartment regions ( Figures 3C , S3C , and S3D ) . These results demonstrate that SPRITE captures longer - range interactions than are observed by Hi - C and that the distances that interactions occur can be measured using SPRITE clusters of different sizes ( Figure 3A ) . Inter - chromosomal Interactions Are Partitioned into Two Distinct Hubs We also observed many inter - chromosomal interactions that are identiﬁed within the larger SPRITE clusters ( 11 - 1000 + reads ) , but Figure 2 . SPRITE Identiﬁes Higher - Order Interactions that Occur Simultaneously ( A ) Compartment eigenvector showing A ( red ) and B ( blue ) compartments on mouse chromosome 2 ( top ) . Individual SPRITE clusters ( rows ) containing reads mapping to at least three distinct A - compartment regions ( * ) ( middle ) . Pairwise contact map at 200 - kb resolution ( bottom ) . ( B ) Schematic of multiple A compartment interactions . ( C ) H3K27ac chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing ( ChIP - seq ) signal across a 2 . 46 - Mb region on human chromosome 6 corresponding to three TADs containing 55 histone genes ( top ) . SPRITE clusters containing reads in all three TADs ( middle ) . Pairwise contact map at 25 - kb resolution ( bottom ) . ( D ) Schematic of higher - order interactions of HIST1 genes ( green ) . ( E ) CTCF motif orientations at three loop anchors on human chromosome 8 ( top ) . SPRITE clusters overlapping all three loop anchors ( middle ) . Pairwise contact map at 25 - kb resolution ( bottom ) . ( F ) Schematic of higher - order interactions between consecutive loop anchors . See also Figure S2 and Table S1 . 748 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 are not observed in the smaller clusters or by Hi - C ( Figures 3D and S3E – S3G ) . To explore these inter - chromosomal interactions , we built a graph connecting all 1 - Mb regions in the mouse genome con - taining a signiﬁcant pairwise interaction ( p value < 10 (cid:3) 10 ) ( Fig - ure 3E ) . These interactions segregate into two discrete ‘‘hubs , ’’ such that a large number of contacts occur within each hub , but no interactions occur between the two hubs . These hubs contain different functional properties : the ﬁrst hub corresponds to gene - poor and therefore transcriptionally inactive regions , whereas the second hub corresponds to gene - dense regions that are highly transcribed by RNA polymerase II , enriched for active chromatin modiﬁcations , and contain other features of active transcription ( Figures 3F and S3J ; see the STAR Methods ) . Based on these properties , we refer to these hubs as the ‘‘inactive hub’’ and ‘‘active hub , ’’ respectively ( Tables S2B and S2C ) . Importantly , we observed two similar inter - chromosomal hubs in the human genome that displayed comparable functional properties ( Figures S3K – S3N ; Tables S2D and S2E ) . Given the similar properties of the mouse and human hubs , we focused on mouse ES cells for our subsequent characterization of these hubs . RNA - DNA SPRITE Reveals that the Inactive Inter - chromosomal Hub Is Organized around the Nucleolus To understand where in the nucleus these inter - chromosomal interactions occur , we ﬁrst explored the inactive hub and noticed that several of the DNA regions in this hub are linearly close to genomic DNA regions that encode rRNAs ( see STAR Methods ) . Because rDNA regions are known to be organized and transcribed within the nucleolus ( Pederson , 2011 ) , we hy - pothesized that the inactive hub regions may organize around the nucleolus . To test this , we explored whether the DNA regions in this hub are associated with rRNA localization , which demarcates the nucleolus ( Pederson , 2011 ) . Speciﬁcally , we adapted the SPRITE protocol to enable simultaneous mapping of interactions between RNA and DNA molecules by ligating an RNA - speciﬁc adaptor that enable simultaneous tagging of both DNA and RNA during each round of the split - pool procedure ( see Figures S4A and S4B ; STAR Methods ) . Using this approach , we mapped the interactions of rRNA on genomic DNA and found it was spe - ciﬁcally enriched over the genomic DNA regions contained within the inactive hub ( Figure 4A ) . In fact , rRNA enrichment across the genome is correlated with how frequently a region contacts the inactive hub ( Figures 4A and S4C ) . Figure 3 . SPRITE Identiﬁes Interactions across Large Genomic Distances and across Chromosomes ( A ) Proximity - ligation methods identify interactions that are close enough to directly ligate ( green check ) , but miss those that are too far apart to ligate ( red x ) . SPRITE identiﬁes all crosslinked interactions within a complex and measures different DNA cluster sizes generated by fragmentation of the nucleus . ( B ) Relationship between contact frequency observed by Hi - C and different SPRITE cluster sizes relative to linear genomic distance in mESCs . ( C ) Contact frequency between a speciﬁc region ( R1 : 25 – 34 Mb ) and other regions on mouse chromosome 2 for different SPRITE cluster sizes and Hi - C . Red - shaded areas represent A compartment regions . ( D ) Interaction p values are shown for SPRITE clusters of size 2 – 10 reads ( lower diagonal ) and 1 , 001 + reads ( upper diagonal ) between mouse chromosomes 12 through 19 . ( E ) Circos diagram of two sets of signiﬁcant inter - chromosomal interactions are shown in blue ( inactive hub ) and red ( active hub ) . ( F ) Boxplots of gene density ( left ) and RNA polymerase II occupancy ( right ) for regions in the inactive hub ( blue ) , active hub ( red ) , or neither hub ( white ) . See also Figure S3 and Table S2 . Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 749 To conﬁrm that the inactive hub represents DNA sites located near the nucleolus in situ , we performed DNA ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) combined with immunoﬂuorescence for nu - cleolin , a protein marker of the nucleolus . Speciﬁcally , we selected DNA FISH probes for four genomic regions in the inac - tive hub and three control regions on the same chromosomes . We selected an additional control region on a chromosome lack - ing any inactive hub regions ( Figure 4B ) . We calculated the 3D distance between each allele and the nearest nucleolus and found that inactive hub regions are dramatically closer to the nucleolus than negative control regions ( average (cid:1) 750 nm closer ) ( Figure S4D ) . In the majority of cells analyzed , at least one allele of the inactive hub DNA regions directly contacts the periphery of the nucleolus ( (cid:1) 61 % of cells ) ( Figures 4C , 4D , S4D , and S4E ) . Therefore , we refer to this hub as the nucleolar hub . Our results conﬁrm previous observations that the nucle - olus can act as an anchor for inactive chromatin regions ( Pa - deken and Heun , 2014 ) . Because many genomic regions are contained within the nucleolar hub , we hypothesized that multiple DNA sites simul - taneously interact around a single nucleolus . Consistent with this , we observed > 1 , 200 SPRITE clusters that contain simul - taneous interactions between at least three distinct genomic regions on different chromosomes in the nucleolar hub ( Fig - ure 4E ; Table S3 ) . To conﬁrm these inter - chromosomal con - tacts occur through co - localization at the same nucleolus , we performed two - color DNA FISH combined with immunoﬂu - orescence for nucleolin and measured the frequency of co - as - sociation at the same nucleolus ( Video S1 ) . We observed that two regions in the nucleolar hub were (cid:1) 7 times more likely to co - occur around the same nucleolus compared to a nucleolar hub region and control region ( Figure S4F ) . Importantly , the frequency of co - occurrence of a pair of DNA sites at the same nucleolus measured by microscopy is highly correlated with the frequency at which these genomic DNA regions co - occur within the same SPRITE clusters ( Pearson r = 0 . 99 ) 050 150 250300 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1819 X 0 51015 202530 ● rRNA - DNA interactions Inactive Hub DNA contacts chr3 - C ( Control ) chr12 - I ( Inactive ) chr18 - I ( Inactive ) c h r 15 - I ( I na c t i v e ) c h r 19 - I ( I na c t i v e ) C D F DNA FISH probes B chr15 chr12 chr3 I I I I C C1 C2 C 12 % 16 % 46 % 64 % 77 % 83 % 0102030405060708090100 9 % chr3 C 8 % chr18 C1 chr19 C chr18 C2 chr15 I chr19 I chr12 I chr18 I Inactive hub sites Control sites P e r c en t age o f c e ll s w i t h r eg i on c on t a c t i ng nu c l eo l u s ( % ) ● ● ● ● ● ● 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 100 200 300 400 ControlInactive hub 2 μ m 2 μ m 2 μ m 2 μ m 2 μ m 2 μ m NucleolinDAPI NucleolinDAPI NucleolinDAPI NucleolinDAPI NucleolinDAPI NucleolinDAPI r = 0 . 99 chr18 chr19 chr10 chr11 chr12 chr19 chr18 chrs . 10 , 12 , 19 chrs . 12 , 18 , 19 chrs . 10 , 18 , 19 chrs . 10 , 12 , 18 , 19 E A r RN A - DN A c on t a c t s - l og 10 ( p ) I na c t i v e H ub C on t a c t s - l og 10 ( p ) Inactive Hub ( I ) Control ( C ) SP R I T E : C on t a c t F r equen cy DNA FISH : % cells w / 2 DNA sites co - associating at same nucleolus 200 100 SPRITEclusters RNA - DNA SPRITE DNA SPRITE Figure 4 . Genomic DNA in the Inactive Hub Is Organized around the Nucleolus ( A ) rRNA localization across the mouse genome identiﬁed using RNA - DNA SPRITE ( top ) compared to the DNA SPRITE contact frequency with regions in the inactive hub ( bottom ) . ( B ) Locations of probe regions used for DNA FISH experiments . ( C ) Example images from immunoﬂuorescence for nucleolin ( red ) combined with DNA FISH for six different pairs of DNA FISH probes ( orange and green ) and DAPI ( blue ) . ( D ) Percentage of cells that overlap nucleolin ( distance = 0 m m ) for eight different probe regions , four control regions ( gray ) , and four inactive hub regions ( blue ) measured in 50 – 155 cells / region . ( E ) Example of individual SPRITE clusters ( rows ) containing reads from different combinations of inactive hub regions ( blue ) on chromosomes 10 , 12 , 18 , and 19 binned at 1 - Mb resolution . ( F ) Comparison of co - association of two DNA sites on different chromosomes around the same nucleolus measured by microscopy ( x axis ) and SPRITE co - association frequency ( y axis ) for six pairs of regions ( see details in Figure S4F , n = 50 – 64 cells ) . See also Figure S4 , Table S3 , and Video S1 . 750 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 ( Figure 4F ) . This demonstrates that SPRITE quantitatively measures the frequency at which DNA sites co - occur at a nu - clear body within single cells . Together , these results provide a genome - wide map of DNA regions that spatially organize around the nucleolus . While other studies have previously mapped individual regions that contact the nucleolus across a population of cells ( Ne´meth et al . , 2010 ) , our results provide a genome - wide 3D picture of how mul - tiple DNA sites arrange simultaneously around the nucleolus in individual cells . The Active Inter - chromosomal Hub Is Organized around Nuclear Speckles WenoticedthatthegenomicDNAregionswithintheactivehubare strongly enriched for U1 spliceosomal RNA and Malat1 lncRNA localization ( Engreitz et al . , 2014 ) ( FigureS5A ) and the level of their localization is highly correlated with how frequently a DNA region interactswiththeactivehub ( Spearman r = 0 . 74and0 . 80 ) ( Figures 5A and S5B ) . Because the U1 and Malat1 RNAs are known to localize at nuclear speckles ( Hutchinson et al . , 2007 ) , a nuclear body that contains proteins involved in mRNA splicing and pro - cessing ( Spector and Lamond , 2011 ) , we hypothesized that in - ter - chromosomal interactions occurring between regions in the active hub may be spatially organized around nuclear speckles . To test this , we performed DNA FISH combined with immuno - ﬂuorescence for SC35 , a well - known protein marker of nuclear speckles . We selected FISH probes targeting three DNA regions contained in the active hub and two control regions on the same chromosome not in the active hub . We also selected another con - trol region within the inactive hub ( Figure 5B ) . We calculated the 3D distance between each region and the closest nuclear speckle and found that all three active hub regions are consistently closer to nuclear speckles compared with the three control regions ( Fig - ures 5C – 5E and S5C – S5G ) . Indeed , for active hub regions , we observe a dramatic increase in the number of cells where at least one allele directly touches a nuclear speckle relative to control re - gions ( (cid:1) 13 - fold ) ( Figure S5G ) . Despite this preferential organiza - tion near the nuclear speckle , the number of cells in which an active region directly contacts the nuclear speckle is relatively low ( (cid:1) 10 % of cells ) , which is consistent with previous Figure 5 . Genomic DNA in the Active Hub Is Organized around Nuclear Speckles ( A ) Malat1 lncRNA localization ( black ) ( Engreitz et al . , 2014 ) compared to SPRITE contact frequency with regions in the active hub ( red ) . ( B ) Locations of probe regions used for DNA FISH experiments . ( C ) Example images from immunoﬂuorescence for SC35 ( red ) combined with DNA FISH for six DNA regions ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) performed in formaldehyde - ﬁxed cells . Arrowhead , 3D distance to SC35 is noted . ( D ) Percentage of cells with at least 1 allele within 0 . 25 m m of SC35 ( n = 41 – 90 cells ) . See Figure S5E for further quantitation . ( E ) Cumulative frequency of minimum 3D distance to SC35 for active hub ( red ) and control ( gray ) regions . ( F ) Example individual SPRITE clusters ( rows ) containing reads from different combinations of three active hub regions on chromosomes 2 , 4 , 5 , and 11 . ( G ) Images of 2 active hub regions on different chromosomes that are close to the same nuclear speckle . See also Figure S5 and Table S4 . Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 751 observations by live - cell microscopy that individual genomic DNA interactions with a nuclear speckle are transient ( Khanna et al . , 2014 ) . Based on these observations , we refer to the DNA regions in this hub as the nuclear speckle hub . We hypothesized that nuclear speckle hub regions may simul - taneously organize around the same nuclear speckle . Indeed , we identiﬁed > 690 SPRITE clusters containing at least three distinct active hub regions that were present on different chromosomes ( Figure 5F ; Table S4 ) . Consistent with this , we observe two DNA sites in the speckle hub are > 8 times as likely to be within 1 m m of each other by microscopy compared to an active and control re - gion ( Figure S5H ) . Indeed , we observe two pairs of genomic DNA regions in the active hub preferentially organized near the same nuclear speckle in 2 out of 15 cells that were measured ( Fig - ure 5G ) . In contrast , we did not observe even a single example of an active hub and control region that were organized near the same speckle in 21 cells that were measured . However , because there are many nuclear speckles in a given cell ( (cid:1) 20 / nu - cleus ) and DNA interactions with an individual nuclear speckle can be transient ( (cid:1) 10 % of regions directly contact any speckle ) , it is challenging to robustly quantify the frequency at which multiple DNA regions simultaneously associate around the same nuclear speckle using microscopy ( see STAR Methods ) . Our results conﬁrm previous observations that speciﬁc actively transcribed regions can interact with nuclear speckles ( Brown et al . , 2008 ; Khanna et al . , 2014 ; Shopland et al . , 2003 ) and extend this observation genome - wide by providing a map of DNA interactions around nuclear speckles . Moreover , our re - sults suggest that multiple actively transcribed DNA regions can arrange simultaneously around nuclear speckles to form higher - order inter - chromosomal interactions . Nuclear Bodies Constrain the Overall 3D Organization of Genomic DNA in the Nucleus We considered that nuclear bodies might play an important role in deﬁning the overall arrangement of genomic DNA in the nu - cleus because they organize large hubs of inter - chromosomal in - teractions . To address this , we focused on how genomic regions that are not within these hubs are spatially positioned relative to each nuclear body . We considered three possibilities : these re - gions show ( 1 ) random spatial positioning with respect to either nuclear body ( random preference ) , ( 2 ) spatial positioning that lin - early decays as a function of genomic distance from a hub - asso - ciated region ( linear preference ) , or ( 3 ) speciﬁc non - linear spatial preferences to either nuclear body ( non - linear preference ) . To test these possibilities , we calculated the average number of SPRITE contacts for each 1 - Mb region in the genome relative to regions in the nucleolar or nuclear speckle hubs ( Figure 6A ) . Interestingly , we ﬁnd that a large fraction of genomic regions exhibit preferential contacts with either hub ( Figure 6A ) , such that regions that frequently contact the nucleolar hub are depleted relative to the nuclear speckle hub , and vice versa ( Fig - ure 6B ) . Importantly , these preferential contacts do not occur exclusively at regions in close linear distance to hub regions , as would be expected if this organization occurred through a linear ‘‘dragging’’ effect of the chromatin polymer . For example , several non - contiguous regions on mouse chromosome 11 have high speckle hub contact frequencies despite being linearly far from speckle hub regions ( Figure 6B ) . Moreover , several non - contiguous genomic regions preferentially contact the nucleolar hub even though chromosome 11 does not contain any nucleolar hub regions ( Figure 6B ) . These results suggest that a large frac - tion of genomic DNA regions show preferential non - linear spatial arrangement to either the nucleolus or nuclear speckle . To conﬁrm that these spatial preferences accurately represent 3D distances of DNA sites to these nuclear bodies in situ , we per - formed DNA FISH combined with immunoﬂuorescence for nu - cleolin or SC35 . Speciﬁcally , we selected nine DNA regions across a range of SPRITE contact frequencies relative to the nucleolus , including nucleolar hub regions , a speckle hub region , and four regions with different intermediate spatial preferences ( Figures S6B and S6C ) . In all cases , the 3D distances between each DNA region and the nucleolus is strongly correlated with its SPRITE contact frequency to the nucleolar hub ( Pearson r = 0 . 98 ) ( Figures 6C and S6D ) . Similarly , we selected nine DNA regions across a range of SPRITE contact frequencies rela - tive to the speckle hub , including speckle hub regions , a nucle - olar hub region , and three regions with different intermediate spatial preferences ( Figures S6B and S6C ) . The 3D distance be - tween each DNA region and a nuclear speckle is strongly corre - lated with its SPRITE contact frequency to the nuclear speckle hub ( Pearson r = 0 . 96 ) ( Figures 6D and S6B – S6D ) . These results demonstrate that SPRITE provides accurate quantitative mea - surements of 3D spatial distances across the nucleus . Functional and Structural Properties Deﬁne Preferential Organization to Nuclear Bodies To understand the basis of these spatial preferences , we exam - ined the structural and functional properties of the DNA regions positioned close to each nuclear body . Nucleolar Preference We found that regions that are linearly close to the centromere are closer to the nucleolus ( Figure 6E ) ( Spearman r = 0 . 76 ) . Notably , theseresultsareconsistentwithpreviousobservationsthatcentro - meres often co - localize on the periphery of the nucleolus ( Pollock and Huang , 2009 ; Tjong et al . , 2016 ) ( Figures S7A and S7B ) . How - ever , not all genomic regions close tocentromeresare close to the nucleolus because actively transcribed regions are excluded from the nucleolar compartment even when they reside in linear prox - imity to a centromere ( Figure S6E ) . Because actively transcribed regions are preferentially positioned away from the nucleolus , the genomicDNAregionsthatareclosertothenucleolustendtocorre - spond to inactive chromatin ( Figures S6A and S6E ) . Importantly , not all inactive regions are positioned close to the nucleolus , they can also arrange close to the nuclear lamina ( Peric - Hupkes et al . , 2010 ) . Given that the nuclear lamina is another nuclear structure known to organize inactive chromatin , we explored whether lamina - associated DNA regions form pref - erential interactions . Indeed , we observe an increased number of DNA contacts between genomic regions associated with the nu - clear lamina ; however , these lamina - associated interactions generally occur between regions that are linearly close to each other rather than between chromosomes ( Figures S7C and S7D ) . Although both compartments are associated with inactive chromatin , we do not observe a global relationship between genomic regions that are close to the nucleolar hub and regions 752 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 E A B 0 50 100 150 200 50 100 150 200 250 300 Distance from centromere ( Mb ) C on t a c t f r equen cy w i t h nu c l eo l a r hub Spearman ρ = - 0 . 76 F 0 25 0 2 . 5 H3K27ac FUBP3 ABL1 FIBCD1 LAMC3NUP214FAM78A 550 kb 0 25 0 2 . 5 RBM43 RIF1 NEB 550 kb Speckle hub SPRITE freq : RNA PolII H3K27ac Genes 37 Mb 0 25 0 1 . 5 0 2 . 5 Spearman ρ = 0 . 88 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 50 100 1 5 0 200 250 PolII density C on t a c t f r equen cy w i t h s pe ck l e hub 50 100 150 200 250 300 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 SPRITE : Nucleolar Hub Contact Frequency 0 . 5 μ m a w a y f r o m nu c l eo l u s r = 0 . 98 DNA F I S H : P e r c en t o f c e ll s 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 SPRITE : Speckle Hub Contact Frequency DNA F I S H : P e r c en t o f c e ll s 0 . 5 μ m a w a y f r o m s pe ck l e r = 0 . 96 Speckle hub SPRITE freq : 50 100 150 200 250 50 100 150 200 250 300 Speckle hub contact frequency N u c l eo l a r hub c on t a c t f r equen cy NucleolarPreference SpecklePreference No Preference 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 100 140 180 220 Position on chr11 ( Mb ) C on t a c t f r equen cy Nucleolar hub contact frequency Speckle hub contact frequency chr11 C D Figure 6 . Preferential DNA Distance to the Nucleolus , and Nuclear Speckles Constrain Overall Genome Organization ( A ) SPRITE contact frequency to the nucleolar hub ( y axis ) or speckle hub ( x axis ) for each 1 - Mb genomic bin in mESCs . ( B ) SPRITE contact frequency to the nucleolar hub ( blue ) or speckle hub ( red ) across mouse chromosome 11 . Red boxes represent active hub regions . ( C ) SPRITE contact frequency to the nucleolar hub ( x axis ) compared to DNA FISH contact frequency to the nucleolus as measured by microscopy across 50 – 155 cells / region ( y axis ) . ( D ) SPRITE contact frequency to the speckle hub ( x axis ) compared to DNA FISH contact frequency to nuclear speckles as measured by microscopy ( y axis ) across 50 – 51 cells / region . See Figures S6B – S6D for further details . ( E ) SPRITE contact frequencies with the nucleolar hub ( y axis ) and centromere distance ( x axis ) ( top ) and SPRITE contacts with the speckle hub ( y axis ) and Pol II density ( x axis , ENCODE ) ( bottom ) . ( F ) SPRITE contact frequency with the speckle hub compared to RNA Pol II and H3K27ac signal ( ENCODE ) across aregion on chromosome2 . Highly expressed ( red , fragmentsperkilobaseoftranscriptpermillion [ FPKM ] > 10 ) , moderatelyexpressed ( grayFPKM = 2 – 10 ) , orinactive ( blue , FPKM = 0 – 2 ) genesareindicated . Zoom - in : chr2 : 31 . 4 – 30 . 0 Mb ( left ) and chr2 : 51 . 7 – 52 . 3 Mb ( right ) in mES cells . See also Figure S6 . Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 753 that are associated with the nuclear lamina ( Figure S7E ) ( Spearman r = 0 . 01 ) . In contrast , regions that are closer to the nuclear speckle are highly depleted for nuclear lamina associa - tion ( Spearman r = (cid:3) 0 . 71 ) ( Figure S7F ) . Nuclear Speckle Preference Regions that are closer to nuclear speckles are strongly associ - ated with high levels of active Pol II transcription ( Spearman r = 0 . 88 ) ( Figures 6E and S6F ; STAR Methods ) . Yet we ﬁnd that the transcriptional activity of an individual gene alone does not explain its distance to nuclear speckles , because genomic DNA regions that are not transcribed , but are contained within highly transcribed gene - dense regions , tend to be closer to nu - clear speckles ( Figure 6F ) . Conversely , highly transcribed genes within otherwise inactive genomic regions tend to be farther from nuclear speckles ( Figure 6F ) . These results demonstrate that the density of Pol II transcription within a genomic neighborhood , rather than transcriptional activity of individual genes , deﬁnes proximity to nuclear speckles . This explains why only some of the speciﬁc actively transcribed genes previously studied orga - nize close to nuclear speckles ( Shopland et al . , 2003 ) and may explain previous observations that actively transcribed gene - dense regions can ‘‘loop out’’ from the core chromosome terri - tory ( Branco and Pombo , 2006 ; Mahy et al . , 2002 ) . Together , our results provide a global picture of the structural and transcriptional properties that deﬁne spatial positioning rela - tive to nuclear bodies within the nucleus ( Figure 7 ) . DISCUSSION An Integrated Model of How the Genome Is Packaged in the Nucleus We described SPRITE , a method that enables genome - wide mapping of higher - order DNA interactions that occur simulta - neously within the nucleus . SPRITE ﬁlls a critical gap among cur - rent methods by bridging the information derived from micro - scopy with the ability to generate high - resolution genome - wide maps . In doing so , SPRITE provided new biological insights into how DNA is packaged in the nucleus at multiple levels . Molecular Insights : SPRITE provides a genome - wide molecu - lar picture of all DNA regions that contact speciﬁc nuclear bodies . These results conﬁrm previous observations made by microscopy for a limited number of DNA regions ( Brown et al . , 2008 ) and extend this molecular picture genome - wide and at higher resolution . This explains why some , but not other , active Pol II - transcribed regions are organized around nuclear speckles and why some , but not other , inactive regions are organized around the nucleolus . Spatial Insights : SPRITE provides a genome - wide spatial pic - ture of how multiple DNA regions organize around the same nu - clear body . This extends previous observations of a small num - ber of speciﬁc DNA regions that can organize simultaneously around the same nuclear bodies ( Brown et al . , 2008 ; Strongin et al . , 2014 ) to a global spatial picture where DNA organization around nuclear bodies form large spatial hubs of higher - order in - ter - chromosomal contacts . Quantitative Global Insights : SPRITE provides a quantitative map of where DNA regions are organized relative to nuclear bodies , structural features , and other genomic regions . Specif - ically , we uncover quantitative preferences that spatially relate all genomic DNA regions to each nuclear body . Our results indi - cate that organization around nuclear bodies act as a dominant feature of global genome organization , where ( 1 ) a signiﬁcant proportion of the genome preferentially organizes closer to one of these nuclear bodies and that ( 2 ) organization around these bodies can lead to closer spatial organization of regions on different chromosomes . Because these spatial preferences Nucleus PolII - Inactive chromatin PolII - Active chromatin speckle nucleolus Chr 12 Chr 19 Chr 18 Chr 2 nuclearlamina Figure 7 . A Global Model for How Nuclear Bodies Shape Overall 3D Genome Organization in the Nucleus Leftpanel : DNAregionscontainingahigh - densityofPolIIassociatewiththenuclearspeckle , whilegenomicregionslinearlyclosetorDNAorcentromericregions associate with the nucleolus . This leads to co - association of multiple DNA regions around the same nuclear body to create spatial hubs of inter - chromosomal contacts . In addition to the genomic regions directly associating around these nuclear bodies , other DNA regions exhibit preferential organization , such that regions with higher levels of Pol II density are closer to the nuclear speckle ( red gradient ) and regions with lower levels of Pol II density are closer to the nucleolus ( bluegradient ) . Rightpanel : theseoverallconstraintsacttoshapethegloballayoutofgenomicDNAinthenucleus . DNAregionsonthesamechromosometendto be closer to each other ( colored lines ) . Yet regions on different chromosomes containing similar properties organize around a nuclear body and can be closer to each other than to other regions contained on the same chromosome . See also Figure S7 . 754 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 correspond to Pol II transcriptional status , they may be dynamic between cell states . Together , these results suggest an integrated and global pic - ture of genome organization where individual genomic regions across chromosomes organize around nuclear bodies to shape the overall packaging of genomic DNA in a highly regulated and dynamic manner ( Figure 7 ) . Although it remains unclear whether spatial organization around nuclear bodies directly impacts transcription or whether it is a consequence of Pol II occupancy within a genomic region , spatial segregation may provide regulatory advantages by segregating factors into regions of high local concentration within the nucleus . For example , organization of DNA near nu - clear speckles could increase the efﬁciency of post - transcrip - tional mRNA processing by concentrating splicing and process - ing factors , which are enriched in the nuclear speckles , near actively transcribed genes . Future work will be needed to deter - mine how this spatial organization is established , its functional role , and its dynamics across cell states . SPRITE Provides a Powerful Method for Studying 3D Spatial Organization This global model represents just one example of how SPRITE can be used to uncover new aspects of 3D genome organization in the nucleus . SPRITE provides several features that make it a powerful tool that can be applied to explore many open ques - tions regarding organization and function in the nucleus . Higher - Order Spatial Interactions : SPRITE provides a genome - wide map of higher - order interactions that occur simul - taneously in 3D spatial proximity within an individual nucleus . In contrast to proximity - ligation and microscopy methods , SPRITE is not limited in the number of simultaneous interactions that can be measured . This will enable exploration of additional higher - or - der interactions , such as spatial clusters of individual genes ( e . g . , olfactory receptor genes ) ( Lomvardas et al . , 2006 ) and multiple enhancers that simultaneously interact with a promoter . Global Spatial Maps : SPRITE accurately measures 3D spatial distances across a wide - range of nuclear distances . Because SPRITE does not rely on proximity ligation , it is not restricted to identifying interactions between molecules that are close enough to directly ligate . This ability to measure longer - range distances and the ability to measure crosslinked complexes of different sizes enables quantitative and global reconstruction of 3D spatial distances across the nucleus . Simultaneous RNA and DNA Maps : SPRITE is not restricted to measuring DNA molecules , but can also simultaneously map RNA within crosslinked complexes . Because RNA demarcates various nuclear bodies , including the nucleolus and nuclear speckles , this allowed us to deﬁne speciﬁc DNA hubs as orga - nizing around these bodies . SPRITE can be extended to include direct measurements of additional RNAs to enable direct map - ping of genome structure relative to other RNA - demarcated structures ( Rinn and Guttman , 2014 ) as well as for exploring enhancer - promoter interactions and their corresponding nascent transcription levels . More generally , SPRITE represents a powerful new framework for spatial mapping , because it provides genome - wide data that are highly analogous to microscopy and can be used to explore large numbers of high resolution interactions that occur simulta - neously in 3D space . Beyond its current applications , SPRITE can be extended in several ways . For example , SPRITE can be used to measure other spatial interactions beyond the nucleus , such as preferential associations of RNA in the cytoplasm ( e . g . , RNAphase - separatedbodies ) ( DeckerandParker , 2012 ) . Further - more , SPRITE can be extended to incorporate protein localization using pools of barcoded antibodies ( Frei et al . , 2016 ) to generate combinatorial and spatial maps of DNA , RNA , and / or protein . In addition , SPRITE can be extended to generate global single - cell maps by split - pool tagging of all molecules within individual cells ( Ramani et al . , 2017 ) . These applications will enable exploration ofpreviouslyinaccessiblequestionsregardingtherelationshipbe - tween 3D genome structure and gene regulation within the nu - cleus and their dynamics across time . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS B Cell culture and lines used in analysis d METHOD DETAILS B Split - Pool Recognition of Interactions by Tag Exten - sion ( SPRITE ) B SPRITE tag design B SPRITE Data Processing , Cluster Generation , and Heatmap Generation B RNA - DNA SPRITE analysis B Human - mouse mixing experiment B Comparison of SPRITE and Hi - C data B Analysis of higher - order k - mer interactions B SPRITE Cluster Size : Comparison of SPRITE contacts in different cluster sizes B Deﬁning the ‘‘active’’ and ‘‘inactive’’ inter - chromo - somal DNA hubs B SPRITE contact frequency with the nucleolar and active hubs B Analysis of inter - chromosomal centromere interactions B Analysis of lamina - associated domain interactions B Deﬁning genomic regions near ribosomal DNA clusters B Ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) localization quantiﬁcation B Measurement of Distance between DNA Loci and Nu - clear Bodies using microscopy ( Histochoice Fixation ) B Measurement of Distance between DNA Loci and Nu - clear Speckles using microscopy ( Formaldehyde Fixation ) B Comparison of SPRITE and DNA FISH d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES B Determining signiﬁcant higher - order k - mer interactions B Deﬁning signiﬁcant inter - chromosomal contacts B Plots and statistical analysis d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 755 SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures , six tables , and one video and can be found with this article online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 05 . 024 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank F . Alber , J . Jachowicz , A . Lin , K . Plath , J . Rinn , M . Thomson , W . G . Walkup , and B . Wold for manuscript comments ; S . Knemeyer for illustrations ; and B . Belin for naming SPRITE . Imaging was performed in the Biological Im - agingFacility , withadvicefromA . CollazoandS . Wilbert . Sequencingwasper - formed at the Millard and Muriel Jacobs Genetics and Genomics Laboratory with assistance from I . Antoshechkin . S . A . Q . was funded by a HHMI Gilliam Fellowship and NSF GRFP Fellowship . P . B . was funded by NIGMS ( T32 GM008042 ) and UCLA - Caltech MSTP ( NIGMS T32 GM008042 ) . This work was funded by the NIH 4DN Program ( U01 DA040612 and U01 HL130007 ) , NHGRI GGR Program ( U01 HG007910 ) , New York Stem Cell Foundation ( NYSCF - R - I13 ) , Sontag Foundation , and funds from Caltech . M . Guttman is a NYSCF - Robertson Investigator . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization , S . A . Q . , C . C . , M . J . , and M . Guttman ; Methodology , S . A . Q . , N . O . , B . T . , J . M . S . , A . A . S . , A . C . , Y . T . , P . M . , M . Garber , and M . Guttman ; Soft - ware , N . O . , B . T . , M . M . L . , P . R . , and M . Guttman ; Validation , S . A . Q . , A . P . , and Y . T . ; Formal Analysis , S . A . Q . , N . O . , B . T . , A . P . , M . L . , M . Garber , and M . Gutt - man ; Investigation , S . A . Q . , A . P . , J . M . S . , E . D . , A . A . S . , P . B . , V . T . , E . A . , A . C . , and Y . T . ; Resources , L . C . , M . Garber , and M . Guttman ; Data Curation , S . A . Q . , N . O . , M . L . , B . T . , and M . Guttman ; Writing , S . A . Q . , N . O . , and M . Gutt - man ; Supervision , S . A . Q . , M . Garber , and M . Guttman ; and Funding Acquisi - tion , M . Guttman . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS S . A . Q . and M . G . are inventors on a provisional patent on the SPRITE method . Received : November 14 , 2017 Revised : March 18 , 2018 Accepted : May 10 , 2018 Published : June 7 , 2018 REFERENCES Beagrie , R . A . , Scialdone , A . , Schueler , M . , Kraemer , D . C . A . , Chotalia , M . , Xie , S . Q . , Barbieri , M . , de Santiago , I . , Lavitas , L . - M . , Branco , M . R . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Complexmulti - enhancercontactscapturedbygenomearchitecturemapping . Nature 543 , 519 – 524 . Branco , M . R . , and Pombo , A . ( 2006 ) . Intermingling of chromosome territories in interphase suggests role in translocations and transcription - dependent associations . PLoS Biol . 4 , e138 . Brown , J . M . , Green , J . , das Neves , R . P . , Wallace , H . A . C . , Smith , A . J . H . , Hughes , J . , Gray , N . , Taylor , S . , Wood , W . G . , Higgs , D . R . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Asso - ciation between active genes occurs at nuclear speckles and is modulated by chromatin environment . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 1083 – 1097 . Darrow , E . M . , Huntley , M . H . , Dudchenko , O . , Stamenova , E . K . , Durand , N . C . , Sun , Z . , Huang , S . - C . , Sanborn , A . L . , Machol , I . , Shamim , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Deletion of DXZ4 on the human inactive X chromosome alters higher - order genome architecture . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E4504 – E4512 . Decker , C . J . , and Parker , R . ( 2012 ) . P - bodies and stress granules : possible roles in the control of translation and mRNA degradation . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 4 , a012286 . Dekker , J . ( 2016 ) . Mapping the 3D genome : Aiming for consilience . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 741 – 742 . Dixon , J . R . , Selvaraj , S . , Yue , F . , Kim , A . , Li , Y . , Shen , Y . , Hu , M . , Liu , J . S . , and Ren , B . ( 2012 ) . Topological domains in mammalian genomes identiﬁed by analysis of chromatin interactions . Nature 485 , 376 – 380 . Engreitz , J . M . , Pandya - Jones , A . , McDonel , P . , Shishkin , A . , Sirokman , K . , Surka , C . , Kadri , S . , Xing , J . , Goren , A . , Lander , E . S . , et al . ( 2013 ) . The Xist lncRNA exploits three - dimensional genome architecture to spread across the X chromosome . Science 341 , 1237973 . Engreitz , J . M . , Sirokman , K . , McDonel , P . , Shishkin , A . A . , Surka , C . , Russell , P . , Grossman , S . R . , Chow , A . Y . , Guttman , M . , and Lander , E . S . ( 2014 ) . RNA - RNA interactions enable speciﬁc targeting of noncoding RNAs to nascent Pre - mRNAs and chromatin sites . Cell 159 , 188 – 199 . Frei , A . P . , Bava , F . - A . , Zunder , E . R . , Hsieh , E . W . Y . , Chen , S . - Y . , Nolan , G . P . , and Gherardini , P . F . ( 2016 ) . Highly multiplexed simultaneous detection of RNAs and proteins in single cells . Nat . Methods 13 , 269 – 275 . Gibcus , J . H . , and Dekker , J . ( 2013 ) . The hierarchy of the 3D genome . Mol . Cell 49 , 773 – 782 . Giorgetti , L . , and Heard , E . ( 2016 ) . Closing the loop : 3C versus DNA FISH . Genome Biol . 17 , 215 . Hu , Y . , Plutz , M . , and Belmont , A . S . ( 2010 ) . Hsp70 gene association with nu - clear speckles is Hsp70 promoter speciﬁc . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 711 – 719 . Hutchinson , J . N . , Ensminger , A . W . , Clemson , C . M . , Lynch , C . R . , Lawrence , J . B . , andChess , A . ( 2007 ) . Ascreenfornucleartranscriptsidentiﬁestwolinked noncoding RNAs associated with SC35 splicing domains . BMC Genomics 8 , 39 . Jonkers , I . , Kwak , H . , and Lis , J . T . ( 2014 ) . Genome - wide dynamics of Pol II elongation and its interplay with promoter proximal pausing , chromatin , and exons . eLife 3 , e02407 . Khanna , N . , Hu , Y . , and Belmont , A . S . ( 2014 ) . HSP70 transgene directed mo - tion to nuclear speckles facilitates heat shock activation . Curr . Biol . 24 , 1138 – 1144 . Li , W . , Gong , K . , Li , Q . , Alber , F . , and Zhou , X . J . ( 2015 ) . Hi - Corrector : a fast , scalable and memory - efﬁcient package for normalizing large - scale Hi - C data . Bioinformatics 31 , 960 – 962 . Lomvardas , S . , Barnea , G . , Pisapia , D . J . , Mendelsohn , M . , Kirkland , J . , and Axel , R . ( 2006 ) . Interchromosomal interactions and olfactory receptor choice . Cell 126 , 403 – 413 . Mahy , N . L . , Perry , P . E . , and Bickmore , W . A . ( 2002 ) . Gene density and tran - scription inﬂuence the localization of chromatin outside of chromosome terri - tories detectable by FISH . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 753 – 763 . Meuleman , W . , Peric - Hupkes , D . , Kind , J . , Beaudry , J . B . , Pagie , L . , Kellis , M . , Reinders , M . , Wessels , L . , and van Steensel , B . ( 2013 ) . Constitutive nuclear lamina - genome interactions are highly conserved and associated with A / T - rich sequence . Genome Res . 23 , 270 – 280 . Ne´meth , A . , Conesa , A . , Santoyo - Lopez , J . , Medina , I . , Montaner , D . , Pe´terﬁa , B . , Solovei , I . , Cremer , T . , Dopazo , J . , andLa¨ngst , G . ( 2010 ) . Initialgenomicsof the human nucleolus . PLoS Genet . 6 , e1000889 . Nizami , Z . , Deryusheva , S . , and Gall , J . G . ( 2010 ) . The Cajal body and histone locus body . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 2 , a000653 . O’Sullivan , J . M . , Hendy , M . D . , Pichugina , T . , Wake , G . C . , and Langowski , J . ( 2013 ) . The statistical - mechanics of chromosome conformation capture . Nucleus 4 , 390 – 398 . Olivares - Chauvet , P . , Mukamel , Z . , Lifshitz , A . , Schwartzman , O . , Elkayam , N . O . , Lubling , Y . , Deikus , G . , Sebra , R . P . , andTanay , A . ( 2016 ) . Capturingpair - wise and multi - way chromosomal conformations using chromosomal walks . Nature 540 , 296 – 300 . Padeken , J . , and Heun , P . ( 2014 ) . Nucleolus and nuclear periphery : velcro for heterochromatin . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 28 , 54 – 60 . Pederson , T . ( 2011 ) . The nucleolus . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , 1 – 15 . Peric - Hupkes , D . , Meuleman , W . , Pagie , L . , Bruggeman , S . W . M . , Solovei , I . , Brugman , W . , Gra¨f , S . , Flicek , P . , Kerkhoven , R . M . , van Lohuizen , M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Molecular maps of the reorganization of genome - nuclear lamina inter - actions during differentiation . Mol . Cell 38 , 603 – 613 . 756 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 Pollock , C . , andHuang , S . ( 2009 ) . Theperinucleolarcompartment . J . Cell . Bio - chem . 107 , 189 – 193 . Pombo , A . , and Dillon , N . ( 2015 ) . Three - dimensional genome architecture : players and mechanisms . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 245 – 257 . Ramani , V . , Deng , X . , Qiu , R . , Gunderson , K . L . , Steemers , F . J . , Disteche , C . M . , Noble , W . S . , Duan , Z . , andShendure , J . ( 2017 ) . Massively multiplexsingle - cell Hi - C . Nat . Methods 14 , 263 – 266 . Rao , S . S . P . , Huntley , M . H . , Durand , N . C . , Stamenova , E . K . , Bochkov , I . D . , Robinson , J . T . , Sanborn , A . L . , Machol , I . , Omer , A . D . , Lander , E . S . , andAiden , E . L . ( 2014 ) . A3Dmapofthehumangenomeatkilobaseresolutionrevealsprin - ciples of chromatin looping . Cell 159 , 1665 – 1680 . Rinn , J . L . , and Guttman , M . ( 2014 ) . RNA and dynamic nuclear organization . Science 345 , 1240 – 1241 . Sanborn , A . L . , Rao , S . S . P . , Huang , S . - C . , Durand , N . C . , Huntley , M . H . , Jewett , A . I . , Bochkov , I . D . , Chinnappan , D . , Cutkosky , A . , Li , J . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Chro - matin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in wild - typeand engineered genomes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 112 , E6456 – E6465 . Shishkin , A . A . , Giannoukos , G . , Kucukural , A . , Ciulla , D . , Busby , M . , Surka , C . , Chen , J . , Bhattacharyya , R . P . , Rudy , R . F . , Patel , M . M . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Simulta - neousgeneration ofmany RNA - seq librariesinasinglereaction . Nat . Methods 12 , 323 – 325 . Shopland , L . S . , Johnson , C . V . , Byron , M . , McNeil , J . , and Lawrence , J . B . ( 2003 ) . Clustering of multiple speciﬁc genes and gene - rich R - bands around SC - 35 domains : evidence for local euchromatic neighborhoods . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 981 – 990 . Siegfried , N . A . , Busan , S . , Rice , G . M . , Nelson , J . A . E . , and Weeks , K . M . ( 2014 ) . RNA motif discovery by SHAPE and mutational proﬁling ( SHAPE - MaP ) . Nat . Methods 11 , 959 – 965 . Spector , D . L . , and Lamond , A . I . ( 2011 ) . Nuclear speckles . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 3 , 1 – 12 . Strongin , D . E . , Groudine , M . , andPolitz , J . C . R . ( 2014 ) . Nucleolartetheringme - diates pairing between the IgH and Myc loci . Nucleus 5 , 474 – 481 . Suzuki , H . , Kurihara , Y . , Kanehisa , T . , and Moriwaki , K . ( 1990 ) . Variation in the distribution of silver - staining nucleolar organizer regions on the chromosomes of the wild mouse , Mus musculus . Mol . Biol . Evol . 7 , 271 – 282 . Takei , Y . , Shah , S . , Harvey , S . , Qi , L . S . , andCai , L . ( 2017 ) . Multiplexeddynamic imaging of genomic loci by combined CRISPR imaging and DNA sequential FISH . Biophys . J . 112 , 1773 – 1776 . Tjong , H . , Li , W . , Kalhor , R . , Dai , C . , Hao , S . , Gong , K . , Zhou , Y . , Li , H . , Zhou , X . J . , Le Gros , M . A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Population - based 3D genome structure anal - ysis reveals driving forces in spatial genome organization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E1663 – E1672 . Whyte , W . A . , Orlando , D . A . , Hnisz , D . , Abraham , B . J . , Lin , C . Y . , Kagey , M . H . , Rahl , P . B . , Lee , T . I . , and Young , R . A . ( 2013 ) . Master transcription factors and mediator establish super - enhancers at key cell identity genes . Cell 153 , 307 – 319 . Williamson , I . , Berlivet , S . , Eskeland , R . , Boyle , S . , Illingworth , R . S . , Paquette , D . , Dostie , J . , and Bickmore , W . A . ( 2014 ) . Spatial genome organization : con - trasting views from chromosome conformation capture and ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization . Genes Dev . 28 , 2778 – 2791 . Cell 174 , 744 – 757 , July 26 , 2018 757 STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies rabbit polyclonal anti - Nucleolin Abcam Cat # ab22758 , RRID : AB _ 776878 mouse monoclonal anti - SC35 Abcam Cat # ab11826 , RRID : AB _ 298608 Alexa Fluor 647 goat anti - rabbit IgG ( H + L ) Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Cat # A - 21244 , RRID : AB _ 2535812 DyLight 650 goat anti - mouse IgG ( H + L ) Bethyl Cat # A90 - 116D5 , RRID : AB _ 10630715 Bacterial and Virus Strains Biological Samples Chemicals , Peptides , and Recombinant Proteins Disuccinimidyl glutarate ( DSG ) Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Cat # 20593 16 % Formaldehyde ( w / v ) , Methanol - free Pierce Cat # 28908 Doxycycline Sigma Cat # D9891 Critical Commercial Assays NEBNext End Repair Module NEB Cat # E6050 NEBNext dA - tailing Module NEB Cat # B6059 Instant Sticky End Master Mix NEB Cat # M0370 Deposited Data Raw and analyzed data This paper GEO : GSE114242 ChIP - seq ( e . g . , Pol II , H3K4me3 , etc ) in mES cells ENCODE ; https : / / www . encodeproject . org / https : / / www . encodeproject . org / search / ? type = Experiment & assembly = mm9 & biosample _ type = stem + cell ChIP - seq ( e . g . , Pol II , H3K4me3 , etc ) in GM12878 cells ENCODE ; https : / / www . encodeproject . org / https : / / www . encodeproject . org / search / ? type = Experiment & assembly = hg19 & biosample _ term _ name = GM12878 GRO - seq data in mES cells Jonkers et al . , 2014 GEO : GSE48895 TAD Triplets identiﬁed using GAM in mES cells Beagrie et al . , 2017 https : / / media . nature . com / original / nature - assets / nature / journal / v543 / n7646 / extref / nature21411 - s3 . xlsx Hi - C data in mES cells Dixon et al . , 2012 GEO : GSE35156 Hi - C data in GM12878 cells Rao et al . , 2014 GEO : GSE63525 Malat1 and U1 RAP - DNA in mES cells Engreitz et al . , 2014 GEO : GSE55914 Mouse ES cell super - enhancers Whyte et al . , 2013 https : / / www . cell . com / cms / attachment / 2031389007 / 2048455341 / mmc1 . zip ? code = cell - site Mouse ES cell enhancers Whyte et al . , 2013 https : / / www . cell . com / cms / attachment / 2031389007 / 2048455344 / mmc2 . xls ? code = cell - site Lamina - associated domains in mES cells Peric - Hupkes et al . , 2010 https : / / ars . els - cdn . com / content / image / 1 - s2 . 0 - S1097276510003217 - mmc2 . xls Experimental Models : Cell Lines F1 2 - 1 hybrid wild - type mouse ES cell line ( 129 x cast ) Kathrin Plath Engreitz et al . , 2013 pSM33 mES cell line Kathrin Plath Engreitz et al . , 2013 GM12878 Human Lymphoblasts Coriell Cell Repositories GM12878 , RRID : CVCL _ 7526 Human HEK293T ATCC Cat # CRL - 3216 , RRID : CVCL _ 0063 Oligonucleotides SPRITE oligos and adaptors This paper See Table S5 Software and Algorithms Bowtie2 ( v2 . 3 . 1 ) Langmead Laboratory http : / / bowtie - bio . sourceforge . net / bowtie2 / index . shtml ( Continued on next page ) e1 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact , Mitchell Guttman ( mguttman @ caltech . edu ) . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS Cell culture and lines used in analysis Mouse ES cell lines were cultured in serum - free 2i / LIF medium and maintained at an exponential growth phase as previously described ( Engreitz et al . , 2014 ) . SPRITE DNA - DNA maps were generated in female ES cells ( F1 2 - 1 line , provided by K . Plath ) , a F1 hybrid wild - type mouse ES cell line derived from a 129 3 castaneous cross . SPRITE RNA - DNA maps were generated in the pSM33 ES cell line ( provided by K . Plath ) , a male ES cell line derived from the V6 . 5 ES cell line , which expresses Xist from the endogenous locus under the transcriptional control of a tet - inducible promoter and the Tet transactivator ( M2rtTA ) from the Rosa26 locus . We induced Xist expression in these cells using doxycycline ( Sigma , D9891 ) at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 m g / mL for 24 hr . Human GM12878 cells , a female lymphoblastoid cell line obtained from Coriell Cell Repositories , were cultured in RPMI 1640 ( GIBCO , Life Technologies ) , 2 mM L - glutamine , 15 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ; Seradigm ) , and 1X penicillin - streptomycin and main - tained at 37 (cid:4) C under 5 % CO 2 . Cells were seeded every 3 - 4 days at 200 , 000 cell / mL in T25 ﬂasks , maintained at an exponential growth phase , and passaged or harvested before reaching 1 , 000 , 000 cell / mL . HEK293T , a female human embryonic kidney cell line transformed with the SV40 large T antigen was obtained from ATCC and cultured in complete media consisting of DMEM ( GIBCO , Life Technologies ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Seradigm Premium Grade HI FBS , VWR ) , 1X penicillin - streptomycin ( GIBCO , Life Technologies ) , 1X MEM non - essential amino acids ( GIBCO , Life Technolo - gies ) , 1 mM sodium pyruvate ( GIBCO , Life Technologies ) and maintained at 37 (cid:4) C under 5 % CO 2 . For maintenance , 800 , 000 cells were seeded into 10 mL of complete media every 3 - 4 days in 10 cm dishes . METHOD DETAILS Split - Pool Recognition of Interactions by Tag Extension ( SPRITE ) Crosslinking Cells were crosslinked in a single - cell suspension to ensure that we obtain individual crosslinked nuclei rather than crosslinked col - onies of cells . GM12878 lymphoblast cells , which are grown in suspension , were pelleted and media was removed prior to cross - linking . Mouse ES cells , which are adherent , were trypsinized to remove from plates prior to crosslinking in suspension . Speciﬁcally , 5 mL of TVP ( 1 mM EDTA , 0 . 025 % Trypsin , 1 % Sigma Chicken Serum ; pre - warmed at 37 (cid:4) C ) was added to each 15 cm plate , then rocked gently for 3 - 4 min until cells start to detach from the plate . Afterward , 25 mL of wash solution ( DMEM / F - 12 supplemented with 0 . 03 % GIBCO BSA Fraction V , pre - warmed at 37 (cid:4) C ) was added to each plate to inactivate the trypsin . Cells were lifted into a 15 mL or 50 mL conical tube , pelleted at 330 g for 3 min , and then washed in 4 mL of 1X PBS per 10 million cells . During all crosslinking steps and washes , volumes were maintained at 4 mL of buffer or crosslinking solution per 10 million cells . After pelleting , cells were pipetted to disrupt clumps of cells and crosslinked in suspension with 4 mL of 0 . 5 M disuccinimidyl glutarate ( DSG , Pierce ) dissolved in 1X PBS for 45 min at room temperature . DSG was removed , and cells were pelleted ( as above ) and washed with 1X PBS . A solution of 3 % Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER ComputeGenomeMask GATK package https : / / gatkforums . broadinstitute . org / gatk / discussion / 1499 / computegenomemask Bedtools ( v2 . 26 . 0 ) Quinlan Laboratory http : / / bedtools . readthedocs . io / en / latest / Imaris ( 8 . 4 . 1 ) Bitplane http : / / www . bitplane . com / Hi - Corrector Zhou Laboratory http : / / zhoulab . usc . edu / Hi - Corrector / Cworld Dekker Laboratory https : / / github . com / dekkerlab / cworld - dekker SPRITE computational pipeline This study https : / / github . com / GuttmanLab / sprite - pipeline / wiki GraphPad Prism 7 GraphPad Software https : / / www . graphpad . com / scientiﬁc - software / prism / R Software Package 3 . 3 . 1 The R Foundation https : / / www . r - project . org / Other Resources related to the SPRITE protocol This paper http : / / www . lncrna . caltech . edu / protocols . php Branson needle - tip sonicator ( 3 mm diameter ( 1 / 8’’ Doublestep tip ) Branson Ultrasonics Cat # 101 - 148 - 063 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 e2 formaldehyde ( FA Ampules , Pierce ) in 1X PBS was added to cells for 10 min at room temperature . Formaldehyde was immediately quenched with addition of 200 m l of 2 . 5 M glycine per 1 mL of 3 % FA solution and incubated for 5 min at room temperature . Cells were pelleted , formaldehyde was removed , and cells were washed three times with 0 . 5 % BSA in 1X PBS that was kept at 4 (cid:4) C . Aliquots of 10 million cells were allocated into 1 . 7 mL tubes and pelleted . Supernatant was removed and cells were ﬂash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored in (cid:3) 80 (cid:4) C until lysis . Chromatin isolation Crosslinked cell pellets ( 10 million cells ) were lysed using the nuclear isolation procedure previously described in the Amit Lab HT - ChIP protocol . Speciﬁcally , cells were incubated in 1 mL of Nuclear Isolation Buffer 1 ( 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 , 1 mM EDTA pH 8 . 0 , 1 mM EGTA pH 8 . 0 , 140 mM NaCl , 0 . 25 % Triton - X , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 10 % Glycerol , 1X PIC ) for 10 min on ice . Cells were pelleted at 850 g for 10 min at 4 (cid:4) C . Supernatant was removed , 1 mL of Lysis Buffer 2 ( 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 , 1 . 5 mM EDTA , 1 . 5 mM EGTA , 200 mM NaCl , 1X PIC ) was added and incubated for 10 min on ice . Nuclei were obtained after pelleting and supernatant was removed ( as above ) , and 550 m L of Lysis Buffer 3 ( 50 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 , 1 . 5 mM EDTA , 1 . 5 mM EGTA , 100 mM NaCl , 0 . 1 % sodium deox - ycholate , 0 . 5 % NLS , 1X PIC ) was added and incubated for 10 min on ice prior to sonication . Chromatin digestion After nuclear isolation , chromatin was digested via sonication of the nuclear pellet using a Branson needle - tip sonicator ( 3 mm diam - eter ( 1 / 8’’ Doublestep ) , Branson Ultrasonics 101 - 148 - 063 ) at 4 (cid:4) C for a total of 1 min at 4 - 5 W ( pulses of 0 . 7 s on , followed by 3 . 3 s off ) . DNA was further digested using 2 - 6 m L of TurboDNase ( Ambion ) per 10 m L of sonicated lysate ( equivalent to (cid:1) 200 , 000 cells ) , in 1x DNase Buffer ( Diluted from 10x DNase Buffer : 200 mM HEPES pH 7 . 4 , 1 M NaCl , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 5 mM CaCl 2 , 25 mM MnCl 2 ) at 37 (cid:4) C for 20 min . Concentrations of DNase were optimized to obtain DNA fragments of approximately 150 - 1000 bp in length , which is needed for sequencing . DNase activity was quenched by adding 10 mM EDTA and 5 mM EGTA . Estimating molarity After DNase digestion , crosslinks were reversed on approximately 10 m l of lysate in 82 m L of 1X Proteinase K Buffer ( 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 5 , 100 mM NaCl , 10 mM EDTA , 10 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 % Triton - X , 0 . 2 % SDS ) with 8 m L Proteinase K ( NEB ) at 65 (cid:4) C overnight . The DNA was puriﬁed using Zymo DNA Clean and Concentrate columns per the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations with minor adaptations , such as binding to the column with 7X Binding Buffer to improve yield . Molarity of the DNA was calculated by measuring the DNA concen - tration using the Qubit Fluorometer ( HS dsDNA kit ) and the average DNA sizes were estimated using the Agilent Bioanalyzer ( HS DNA kit ) . NHS bead coupling We used these numbers to calculate the total number of DNA molecules per microliter of lysate . We coupled the lysate to NHS - acti - vated magnetic beads ( Pierce ) overnight at 4 (cid:4) C in 1 mL of 0 . 1 % SDS in 1X PBS rotating on a HulaMixer Sample Mixer ( Thermo ) . Spe - ciﬁcally , we coupled 1x10 10 DNA molecules to 1 . 75 mL of beads ( mouse ) and 5x10 10 DNA molecules to 2 mL of beads ( human ) . We obtain roughly 50 % coupling efﬁciency of molecules to the beads , which effectively halves the ratio of molecules coupled per bead . This coupling ratio was selected to ensure that most beads contained less than 0 . 125 to 0 . 25 complexes per bead to reduce the prob - ability of simultaneously coupling multiple independent complexes to the same bead , which would lead to their association during the split - pool barcoding process . At this loading concentration of 0 . 125 complexes per bead , we ﬁnd that < 0 . 2 % of SPRITE clusters contain any inter - species contacts and < 0 . 1 % of pairwise contacts contain any spurious pairing of human and mouse fragments that arise due to bead coupling ( Figure S1A ) . After coupling lysate to NHS beads overnight , we quench the beads with 1 mL of 0 . 5 M Tris pH 8 . 0 for 1 hr at 4 (cid:4) C rotating on a HulaMixer . We then wash the beads four times at 4 (cid:4) C in 1mL of Modiﬁed RLT Buffer ( 1X Buffer RLT supplied by QIAGEN with added 10 mM Tris pH 7 . 5 , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 2 % NLS , 0 . 1 % Triton - X , 0 . 1 % NP - 40 ) for 3 min each . Next , beads are washed in 1 mL of SPRITE Wash Buffer ( 1X PBS , 5 mM EDTA , 5 mM EGTA , 5 mM DTT , 0 . 2 % Triton - X , 0 . 2 % NP - 40 , 0 . 2 % sodium deoxycholate ) twice at 50 (cid:4) C and once at room temperature for 5 min each . These washes remove any material that is not covalently attached to the beads . Prior to performing all enzymatic steps , buffer is exchanged on the beads through two rinses using 1 mL of SPRITE Deter - gent Buffer ( 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 5 , 50 mM NaCl , 0 . 2 % Triton - X , 0 . 2 % NP - 40 , 0 . 2 % sodium deoxycholate ) . These detergents are used throughout the protocol to prevent bead aggregation , which could result in spurious interactions . Because the crosslinked com - plexes are immobilized on NHS magnetic beads , we can perform several enzymatic steps by adding buffers and enzymes directly to the beads and performing rapid buffer exchange between each step on a magnet . All enzymatic steps were performed with shaking at 1200 rpm ( Eppendorf Thermomixer ) to avoid bead settling and aggregation , and all enzymatic steps were inactivated by adding 0 . 5 - 1 mL Modiﬁed RLT Buffer to the NHS beads . DNA Repair We then repair the DNA ends to enable ligation of tags to each molecule . Speciﬁcally , we blunt end and phosphorylate the 5 0 ends of double - stranded DNA using two enzymes . First , T4 Polynucleotide Kinase ( NEB ) treatment is performed at 37 (cid:4) C for 1 hr , the enzyme is quenched using 1 mL Modiﬁed RLT buffer , and then buffer is exchanged with two washes of 1 mL SPRITE Detergent Buffer to beads at room temperature . Next , the NEBNext End Repair Enzyme cocktail ( containing T4 DNA Polymerase and T4 PNK ) and 1x NEBNext End Repair Reaction Buffer is added to beads and incubated at 20 (cid:4) C for 1 hr , and inactivated and buffer exchanged as speciﬁed above . DNA was then dA - tailed using the Klenow fragment ( 5 0 - 3 0 exo - , NEBNext dA - tailing Module ) at 37 (cid:4) C for 1 hr , and inactivated and buffer exchanged as speciﬁed above . e3 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 Split - pool ligation The beads were then repeatedly split - and - pool ligated over ﬁve rounds with a set of ‘‘DNA Phosphate Modiﬁed’’ ( DPM ) , ‘‘Odd , ’’ ‘‘Even’’ and ‘‘Terminal’’ tags ( see SPRITE Tag Design below for details ) . The DPM tag is ligated by an ‘‘Odd’’ tag . The ‘‘Odd’’ and ‘‘Even’’ tags were designed so that they can be ligated to each other over multiple rounds , such that after Odd is ligated , then Even ligates the Odd tags , and then Odd can ligate the Even tags . This can be repeated such that the same two plates of tags can be used over multiple rounds of split - pool tagging without self - ligation of the adaptors to each other . Finally , a set of barcoded Terminal tags are ligated at the end to attach an Illumina sequence for ﬁnal library ampliﬁcation . In this study , we performed ﬁve rounds total of split - and - pool ligation in the following order : DPM , Odd , Even , Odd , and Terminal tag . Over each round , the samples are split across a 96 - well plate in 4 . 4 m L of SPRITE Detergent Buffer per well to prevent aggregation of beads , which would result in spurious interactions . Each plate contained 2 . 4 m L of 96 different tags at a concentration of 45 m M . 10 m L of 2X Instant Sticky End Ligation Master Mix ( NEB ) and 3 . 2 m L of Ultra Pure H 2 O ( Invitrogen ) was added to each well of the 96 - well plate , for a ﬁnal concen - tration of 1X Instant Sticky End Ligation Master Mix per well . All ligations were performed at 20 (cid:4) C for 1 hr with shaking at 1600 rpm for 30 s every 5 min . Following every round of split - pool ligation , we inactivated the ligase via addition of 60 m L of Modiﬁed RLT Buffer to every well , which prevents spurious ligation of tags in the pooled tube . The sample was then pooled into a single 1 . 7 mL tube . After removing Modiﬁed RLT Buffer from the beads , remaining free tags were removed by washing the beads in 1 mL SPRITE Wash Buffer three times at 45 (cid:4) C for 3 min each . We then performed buffer exchange into SPRITE Detergent Buffer by adding 1 mL of Buffer and exchanging three times . We ensured that the majority of DNA molecules within a crosslinked complex are barcoded by optimizing the ligation efﬁciency such that > 90 % of DNA molecules are ligated during each round of split - pool tagging ( Figure S1B ) . Estimating sequencing depth SPRITE interactions are deﬁned based on the sequences that share the same tags . Accordingly , it is essential to sequence as many of the barcoded molecules in a complex as possible in order to identify interactions . Therefore , the number of unique molecules that are sequenced dramatically affects the likelihood of identifying interacting molecules . To address this , we optimized the loading den - sity of our sequencing sample based on the number of unique molecules contained in the sample . Our goal is to load approximately equimolar unique molecules as the number of sequencing reads available . Speciﬁcally , based on our simulations , we have found that sequencing with (cid:1) 1 - 3X coverage of reads per the number of unique molecules will ensure that most molecules are sampled . This follows Poisson sampling where 1 - 1 / e c of molecules are sampled at a given c coverage . For example , 3X , 2X , and 1X coverage sam - ples approximately 95 % , 86 % , and 63 % of interactions , respectively . In this study , most libraries were sampled with approximately 1 . 5 - 2X coverage . To estimate the number of unique molecules in our sample , we measure the amount of material present on beads prior to reverse crosslinking all interactions . To do this , we take an aliquot of the sample and reverse crosslink to elute ( as above ) the DNA , which is then cleaned and ampliﬁed for 9 - 12 cycles . We then measure the molarity using the Qubit and Bioanalyzer ( as above ) . The number of unique molecules in the aliquot prior to ampliﬁcation is back calculated from a standard curve and adjusted to account for loss during the cleanup . This is used to estimate the number of unique molecules in the remaining crosslinked sample . In addition to optimizing molarity , because this dilution results in approximately 1 % aliquots of the total sample being separately eluted and ampliﬁed , this effectively serves as another round of split - pool barcoding as each library is tagged with a unique barcoded Illumina primer . This further reduces the probability that molecules in different clusters obtain the same barcodes . Sequencing library generation We ensured that the number of unique DNA molecules to be sequenced ( prior to ampliﬁcation ) does not exceed the number of mol - ecules that can be sequenced ( (cid:1) 150 - 300 million reads ) . Thus , aliquots were selected to contain approximately 50 - 150 million unique molecules . Each aliquot was digested with Proteinase K ( NEB ) for 1 hr at 50 (cid:4) C in Proteinase K Buffer ( 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 5 , 100 mM NaCl , 10 mM EDTA , 10 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 % Triton - X , 0 . 2 % SDS ) , and their crosslinks were reversed overnight at 65 (cid:4) C . DNA was isolated using the Zymo DNA Clean and Concentrator columns using 7x Binding Buffer to increase yield . Libraries were ampliﬁed using Q5 Hot - Start Mastermix ( NEB ) with primers that add the full Illumina adaptor sequences . After ampliﬁcation , the libraries are cleaned up using 0 . 7X SPRI ( AMPure XP ) twice to remove excess primers and adaptors . Mapping RNA and DNA simultaneously using SPRITE To map RNA and DNA interactions simultaneously , the SPRITE protocol was performed with the following modiﬁcations : ( i ) Upon coupling of lysate to NHS beads , RNA overhangs caused by fragmentation are repaired by a combination of treatment with FastAP ( Thermo ) and T4 Polynucleoide Kinase ( NEB ) with no ATP at 37 (cid:4) C for 15 min and 1 hr , respectively . RNA was subsequently ligated with a ‘‘RNA Phosphate Modiﬁed’’ ( RPM ) tag using T4 RNA Ligase 1 ( ssRNA Ligase ) , High Concentration ( NEB ) at 20 (cid:4) C for 1 hr ( Shishkin et al . , 2015 ) . The RPM tag is designed with a 5 0 ssRNA overhang and 3 0 dsDNA sticky end for sequential ligation of DNA tags to the RNA ( see SPRITE tag design ) . ( ii ) RNA was converted to cDNA using Superscript III ( Thermo ) using a manganese reverse transcriptase protocol ( Siegfried et al . , 2014 ) to promote reverse - transcription through formaldehyde crosslinks on RNA . After cDNA synthesis , cDNA was selectively eluted from NHS beads using RNaseH ( NEB ) and RNase Cocktail ( Ambion ) . cDNA was ligated with a unique cDNA tag as previously described ( Shishkin et al . , 2015 ) , which serves as a RNA - speciﬁc identiﬁer during sequencing . SPRITE tag design All sequence tags were designed to contain at least four mismatches from all other tags to prevent incorrect assignments due to sequencing errors . The 5 0 end of each sequence tag was designed with a modiﬁed phosphorylated base ( IDT ) to enable ligation . Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 e4 To obtain dsDNA tags , the ssDNA top and bottom strands of the tags were annealed in 1X Annealing Buffer ( 100 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 2 M LiCl , 1 . 5 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 mM EGTA ) by heating at 90 (cid:4) C for 2 min and slowly cooled to room temperature by reducing 1 (cid:4) C every 10 s in a thermocycler . Framework of barcoding scheme In order to enable an arbitrarily large number of tags to be added to DNA , we designed a scheme that enabled reuse of the same sets of tags . In this scheme , an initial tag is ligated to all DNA ends ( DPM ) or RNA ends ( RPM ) . These RNA and DNA universal tags contain the same sticky - end overhang that is complimentary to the 5 0 end of a set of tags referred to as ‘‘Odd’’ tags . These Odd tags contain a unique 3 0 sticky - end that is recognized exclusively by a set of ‘‘Even’’ tags , which contain a 3 0 sticky - end that is complementary to the Odd tags . In this scheme , the number of tags can be increased to as many rounds as needed , but eliminates chimera formation within a single round of split - pool tagging . We explain each tag’s design in greater detail below . Sequences of all tags are in Table S5 . DNA Phosphate Modiﬁed ( DPM ) tag The 5 0 end of the top and bottom strands of the DPM tag have a modiﬁed phosphate group that allows for ligation to dA - tailed genomic DNA and subsequent ligation of the Odd tag . DPM contains a sequence of nine nucleotides that is unique to each of the 96 DPM tags ( purple region ) . Each DPM tag contains a sticky - end overhang that ligates to the Odd set of adaptors ( green region ) . The DPM tag also contains a partial sequence that is complementary to the universal Read1 Illumina primer , which is used for library ampliﬁcation ( gray region ) . Because the DPM tag will ligate to both ends of the double - stranded DNA molecule , we designed the DPM tag to ensure that we would only read the barcode sequence from one sequencing read ( Read2 ) , rather than both . To achieve this , we included a 3 0 spacer on the top strand . This prevents the top strand of the Odd tag from ligating to genomic DNA . This modiﬁcation is also critical for successful ampliﬁcation of the barcoded DNA by preventing hairpin formation of the single stranded DNA during the initial PCR dena - turation because otherwise both sides of the tagged DNA molecule would have complementary barcode sequences . ‘‘Odd’’ and ‘‘Even’’ Tags We designed two sets of tags called the ‘‘Odd’’ and ‘‘Even’’ set . Both the Odd tags and Even tags have modiﬁed 5 0 phosphate groups to allow for ligation . The Even tags are designed to have a sticky - end that anneals to the Odd tags , and the Odd tags are designed to contain a sticky - end that anneals to the Even tags . The Odd tags are ligated in the 1 st , 3 rd , 5 th , . rounds of the SPRITE process and the Even tags are ligated 2 nd , 4 th , 6 th , . rounds of SPRITE . Each of the Even and Odd tags contain a unique sequence of seventeen nucleotides . Terminal Tag The Terminal tags contain a sticky end that ligates to the Odd tags ( green ) , though a Terminal tag can also be designed to ligate to an Even tag . The Terminal tag only contains a modiﬁed 5 0 phosphate on the top strand . The bottom strand contains a region ( gray ) that contains part of the Illumina read 2 sequence , which allows for priming and incorporation of the full - length barcoded Read2 Illumina adaptor . The terminal tag contains a unique sequence of nine nucleotides ( bold ) . Final DNA structure After SPRITE , the genomic DNA contains a DPM tag ligated on both ends as well as the Odd , Even , and Terminal tags . We call the full tag sequence a barcode . The product is represented below : e5 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 RNA Barcoding For RNA tagging , we use the same approach as above , except the ﬁrst ligation to the RNA is an RNA Phosphate Modiﬁed ( RPM ) tag . The RPM tag is designed with a ssRNA overhang to speciﬁcally ligate RNA molecules using a single - stranded RNA ligase . This RNA - speciﬁc ligation tags RNA molecules in order to distinguish a molecule as RNA , rather than DNA , on the sequencer . The RPM tag contains a distinct sequence relative to DPM ( pink region ) and serves as a RNA - speciﬁc tag to mark each read as RNA . However , the sticky end is identical to that contained on the DPM tag ( green sequence ) to enable barcoding of both DNA and RNA simulta - neously . The bottom strand of the RPM tag ( TGACTTGCTGACGCTAAGTCCATCCTATCTACATCCG ) is phosphorylated after ligation of the RPM tag to RNA to ensure that the RPM tags do not form chimeras and ligate to each other during the ssRNA ligation of the RPM tag . The 3 0 spacer on the top strand ( / 5Phos / rArUrCrArGrCrArCrCrCrGrGATGTAGATAGGATGGACTTAGCGTCAG / 3SpC3 / ) of the RPM tag prevents ligation of single - stranded RPM molecules and from forming chimeras during ligation . Final RNA structure The ﬁnal RNA product after SPRITE contains the RPM , Odd , Even , and Terminal tags . We call the full tag sequence a barcode . The product is represented below : cDNA tag In order to amplify cDNA molecules , we ligate a cDNA tag to the 3 0 end of all cDNA molecules . The cDNA tag contains aﬁve - nucleotide sequence that identiﬁes the tagged molecule as RNA in read 1 during sequencing ( blue ) . The cDNA tag also contains a sequence that is part of the Illumina Read 1 primer ( green ) . It is 5 0 phosphate modiﬁed to ligate to the 3 0 end of cDNA , and contains a 3 0 spacer to prevent chimeras of tags . Final Library Ampliﬁcation Primers DNA and RNA libraries are ampliﬁed using common primers that incorporate the full Illumia sequencing adaptors . These are the Read 1 primer ( AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT ) and the Read 2 primer ( CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGCCTAGCCGTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT , see Table S5 for barcoded Read 2 primers ) . The Read 1 primer ampliﬁes the top strand of the DPM tag on DNA and cDNA tag on RNA , and adds the Illumina Read 1 sequence to each molecule . The Read 2 primer ampliﬁes the terminal tag on both DNA and cDNA , and adds the Illumina Read 2 sequence to the molecule . SPRITE Data Processing , Cluster Generation , and Heatmap Generation All SPRITE data were generated using Illumina paired - end sequencing on the HiSeq 2500 or NextSeq 500 . Read pairs were gener - ated with at least 115 3 100 bps . The reads have the following structure : Read 1 contains genomic DNA positional information and the DPM or cDNA tag , and Read 2 has the remaining tags . See Table S6A for the number of human and mouse reads during all steps of ﬁltering prior to cluster generation . Barcode identiﬁcation SPRITE barcodes were identiﬁed by parsing the ﬁrst DNA tag sequence from the beginning of Read 1 and the remainder of the tags were parsed from Read 2 . We identiﬁed these tag sequences using a hashtable populated with the known sets of DPM , Odd , Even , and Terminal tags that were added to these samples . We allowed for up to two mismatches to each internal tag of the Odd and Even tags to account for possible sequencing errors . Because the tags were designed to contain at least four mismatches to any other tag sequence , this enables robust error correction . For DPM and terminal tag alignments , we did not tolerate any mismatches due to their shorter unique barcode sequences . We excluded any reads that did not contain a full set of all ligated tags ( DPM , Odd , Even , Odd , Terminal ) in the order expected from the experimental procedure . We also excluded all read pairs where we could not unambiguously map the barcode . We stored the barcode string to the name of each read in the FASTQ ﬁle . Alignment to genome We aligned each read to the appropriate reference genome ( mm9 for mouse and hg19 for human ) using Bowtie2 ( v2 . 3 . 1 ) with the default parameters and with the following deviations . We trimmed the 11 base pair tag sequence ( DPM ) from Read 1 using Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 e6 the – trim5 11 parameter . To account for a short genomic fragment that might lead to additional tag sequences being included on the 3 0 end , we used a local alignment search ( – local ) . The corresponding SAM ﬁle was sorted and converted to a BAM ﬁle using SAMtools v1 . 4 . The barcode string is stored in the name of each record of the BAM ﬁle . Repeat masking and ﬁltering low complexity sequences We ﬁltered the resulting BAM ﬁle for low quality reads , multimappers , and repetitive sequences . First , we removed all alignments with a MAPQ score less than 10 or 30 ( heatmaps were generated for both ) . Second , we removed all reads that had > 2 mismatches to the reference genome . Third , we removed all alignments that overlapped a region that was masked by Repeatmasker ( UCSC , milliDiv < 140 ) using bedtools ( v2 . 26 . 0 ) . Fourth , we removed any read that aligned to a non - unique region of the genome by excluding alignments mapping to regions generated by the ComputeGenomeMask program in the GATK package ( readLength = 35nt mask ) . In the human maps , all reads that overlap with an annotated HIST gene were removed for analysis of the histone locus in Figure 2 . Identifying SPRITE clusters To deﬁne SPRITE clusters , all reads that have the same barcode sequence were grouped into a single cluster . To remove possible PCR duplicates , all reads starting at the same genomic position with identical barcodes were removed . We generated a SPRITE clus - ter ﬁle for all subsequent analyses where each cluster occupies one line of the resulting text ﬁle containing the barcode name and genomic alignments . Visualizing SPRITE clusters Multi - way interactions were identiﬁed by counting how often multiple genomic regions simultaneously interact in individual SPRITE clusters . In Figures 2 , S2 , 4E , and 5F , rows show individual SPRITE clusters there multiple regions simultaneously interact and black lines denote genomic bins ( typically 1Mb or 25kb ) with at least one read within these clusters . RNA - DNA SPRITE analysis RNA and DNA sequences were separated by the presence of a cDNA tag or DPM tag in the ﬁrst 9 nucleotides of the Read 1 sequence , respectively . RNA - tagged reads , identiﬁed by the cDNA tag , were aligned to ribosomal RNA sequences ( 28S , 18S , 5S . 5 . 8S , 4 . 5S , 45S ) as well as other RNAs of interest such as snoRNAs , snRNAs including spliceosomal RNAs , and Malat1 . Any RNA sequences that did not align to this set of RNA genes of interest were aligned to the mm9 genome using bowtie2 . DNA - tagged sequences , containing the DPM tag , were aligned to mm9 . All RNA and DNA reads were subsequently ﬁltered by edit distance and MAPQ score as described above ; DNA reads were additionally ﬁltered with a DNA mask ﬁle . See Table S6B for number reads during all steps of ﬁltering prior to cluster generation . Generating pairwise contacts and heatmaps from SPRITE Data To compute the pairwise contact frequency between genomic bins i and j , we counted the number of SPRITE clusters that contained reads overlapping both bins . Speciﬁcally , we counted the number of unique SPRITE clusters overlapping the two bins and not the number of reads contained within them . In this way , if a SPRITE cluster contains multiple reads that mapped to the same genomic bin , we only count the SPRITE cluster once to eliminate possible PCR duplicates . Because the number of pairwise contacts scales quadratically based on the number of reads ( n ) contained within a SPRITE cluster , larger clusters will contribute a disproportionally large number of the contacts observed between any two bins . To account for this , we reasoned that a minimally connected graph containing n reads would contain n - 1 contacts . Therefore , we down - weighted each of the n ( n - 1 ) / 2 pairwise contacts in a SPRITE cluster such that each pairwise contact has a weight of 2 / n . In this way , the total contribution of pairwise contacts from a cluster is proportional to the minimally connected edges in the graph . This also ensures that the number of pairwise contacts contributed by a cluster is linearly proportional to the number of reads within a cluster . Pairwise contacts were computed using multiple different bin sizes ( 10kb , 20kb , 25kb , 40kb , 50kb , 200kb , 250kb , 1Mb ) to generate contact maps at different genomic resolutions . SPRITE contact maps were normalized by read coverage using Hi - Corrector ( Li et al . , 2015 ) . Contacts occurring within the same bin ( i . e . , along the diagonal , i = j ) were not considered to avoid any chance of possible PCR duplicates generating false - positive interactions . All low coverage bins are masked in heatmaps . SPRITE processing details and scripts for performing this processing are available at : https : / / github . com / GuttmanLab / sprite - pipeline / wiki . Human - mouse mixing experiment Human HEK293T cells and mouse pSM33 cells were crosslinked , lysed , and DNase digested separately . The two lysates were then combined at equimolar concentration and coupled to NHS beads at a ratio of 620 , 125 , 60 , 25 , 6 , 1 . 2 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 25 , 0 . 125 molecules per NHS bead . Reads were aligned to both hg19 and mm9 . All reads aligning to both species were removed , and species - speciﬁc reads were used to determine the amount of inter - species contacts and normalized by the expected number of contacts . For the exper - iments in the paper , we selected a coupling efﬁciency of 0 . 125 to 0 . 25 molecules / bead because it provided a small number of spurious contacts while minimizing the number of beads used in the experiment . Comparison of SPRITE and Hi - C data Hi - C contact maps for mouse embryonic stem cells ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) and human GM12878 cells ( Rao et al . , 2014 ) were normalized by read coverage using Hi - Corrector ( Li et al . , 2015 ) . e7 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 Compartments We identiﬁed A and B compartments and insulation scores for SPRITE and Hi - C using cworld ( Dekker lab , https : / / github . com / dekkerlab / cworld - dekker ) . To calculate compartment eigenvectors , we used the cworld script ‘‘matrix2compartment . pl’’ with default parameters with contact maps binned at 1Mb resolution as input . For human chromosomes , compartment eigenvectors were calcu - lated separately for each chromosome arm . Bias in coverage of reads toward the A compartment was calculated as the observed percentage of total reads that aligned to regions in the A compartment divided by the expected percentage of total A compartment reads assuming a uniform distribution of read coverage . We note that differences in distance decay proﬁles between different cluster sizes , such as those observed in Figures 3B and 3C , occur despite comparable genomic coverage in both the SPRITE and Hi - C data ( Table S2A ) . TADs To calculate insulation scores , we used the cworld script ‘‘matrix2insulation . pl . ’’ For human insulation scores , we used the param - eters ‘‘ – ss 100000 – im iqrMean – is 600000 – ids 400000’’ with contact maps binned at 50kb resolution . For mouse insulation scores , we used the parameters ‘‘ – ss 80000 – im iqrMean – is 480000 – ids 320000’’ with contact maps binned at 40kb resolution . Loops We performed aggregate peak analysis ( APA ) on mouse and human contact maps in both HiC and SPRITE data binned at 10kb res - olution as previously described ( Rao et al . , 2014 ) . Positions for loops with end points separated by at least 200kb were obtained from mouse CH12 - LX cells ( 1493 loops ) and human GM12878 cells ( 5789 loops ) ( Rao et al . , 2014 ) . Aggregate contact maps were computed for the median contact frequency in regions ± 200kb of the loops . Analysis of higher - order k - mer interactions We enumerated all higher - order k - mers represented in the SPRITE data at 1 megabase ( Mb ) resolution . We retained k - mers that were observed in at least 5 independent SPRITE clusters . We found that the greatest determinant of k - mer frequency , similar to pairwise frequency , was linear genomic distance . Accordingly , to assess the signiﬁcance of a given k - mer , we compared the observed fre - quency of a given k - mer to the expected frequency of other k - mers containing the same genomic distance at different positions across the genome ( Figure S2A ) . See ‘‘Determining signiﬁcant higher - order k - mer interactions’’ below for further details on how sig - niﬁcance was computed for each k - mer . SPRITE Cluster Size : Comparison of SPRITE contacts in different cluster sizes An individual SPRITE cluster is deﬁned as a set of reads that all contain the same barcode sequence . Accordingly , the size of a SPRITE cluster is deﬁned as the number of reads that have the same barcode sequence . We separated SPRITE clusters into four groups : clusters with 2 to 10 reads , 11 to 100 reads , 101 to 1000 reads , and clusters with 1001 or more reads . Contact maps were generated separately for each group of clusters as described above but without down - weighting for cluster size . We analyzed the relationship between genomic distance and contact frequency by computing the average contact frequency between bins sepa - rated by 40kb , 80kb , 120kb and so forth up to 100Mb . To compare heatmaps across different cluster sizes , we normalized contact frequencies by the maximum observed value such that overall contact frequency ranges from 0 to 1 for each cluster size . To examine A compartment interactions in different cluster sizes in Figure 3C and S3B , we calculated the average contact frequency between all 1Mb bins on mouse chromosome 2 and the bins within a 9Mb A compartment region ( 25 to 34Mb ) and normalized these values to range from 0 to 1 for each cluster size . These contact frequencies were down - weighted by cluster size ( as described above ) . Additionally , we compared each SPRITE cluster size group according to the percent of contacts that occurred between two re - gions in the same TAD , regions in the same compartment ( A or B ) , or regions on the same chromosome . Two regions were considered to be in the same ‘‘local’’ or ‘‘contiguous’’ compartment only if no compartment switches occurred in the linear genomic span be - tween them . Two regions were considered to be in the same ‘‘non - local’’ or ‘‘discontiguous’’ compartment if compartment switches exist between them , but they are nevertheless both in A compartment regions or both in B compartment regions . Deﬁning the ‘‘active’’ and ‘‘inactive’’ inter - chromosomal DNA hubs Hub deﬁnitions The two ‘‘active’’ and ‘‘inactive’’ inter - chromosomal hubs were identiﬁed solely based on DNA contacts . Speciﬁcally , we identiﬁed signiﬁcant inter - chromosomal interactions occurring between all 1Mb genomic regions ( see below ) . These signiﬁcant contacts clus - ter into 2 ‘‘sets’’ of DNA regions , such that there is a large degree of interconnectivity among genomic regions within set 1 and among regions within set 2 . There is no connectivity between regions in set 1 and regions in set 2 . Because of these two properties , we deﬁned these sets of interactions as two distinct ‘‘hubs’’ of inter - chromosomal contacts . However , once these hubs were identiﬁed based solely on DNA contact frequencies , we investigated what features are associated with the DNA regions contained within each hub ( see below ) . Speciﬁcally , we noticed that genomic regions in one of the hubs is primarily gene - poor and depleted of RNA Pol II signal . In contrast , genomic regions in the other hub were highly gene - dense and contained high levels of RNA Pol II occupancy . Based on these properties , we simply referred to these hubs as the ‘‘inactive hub’’ and ‘‘active hub , ’’ respectively . Analysis of inter - chromosomal interactions To identify signiﬁcant inter - chromosomal interactions , we removed all intra - chromosomal contacts from the ICE normalized inter - chromosomal heatmap . We then calculated an interaction p value using a one - tailed binomial test where the expected frequency Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 e8 assumes a uniform distribution of inter - chromosomal contacts . We used contact maps binned at 1Mb resolution based on SPRITE clusters containing 2 to 1000 reads without down - weighting for cluster size . We built a graph where nodes represent a 1Mb bin and edges represent connections between 2 bins . We ﬁltered edges to reduce potentially spurious contacts that may be caused by outlier bins by looking for consistency of contacts across at least 3 consecutive bins . Speciﬁcally , we only included an edge between two bins ( i and j ) when the edge connecting i and j was signiﬁcant and all interacting pairs i ± 1 and j ± 1 were also signiﬁcant . This approach produced two networks of inter - chromosomal interactions that were deﬁned as the inactive hub ( nucleolar hub , p values % 10 (cid:3) 10 ) and active hub ( active hub , p values % 10 (cid:3) 8 ) . Identifying features associated with each hub To identify features that distinguish these hubs and the rest of the genome , we calculated various properties , such as average gene density and average number of Pol II ChIP - seq peaks for each genomic region in these hubs and compared these to a set of control regions not contained in either hub , but with the same distribution of lengths . In Figure 3F , gene density is calculated as the number of genes per 1Mb region and Pol II occupancy is calculated as number of ChIP - seq peaks per 1Mb region ( ENCODE ) . The properties we analyzed included the following : gene density , number of enhancers ( Whyte et al . , 2013 ) , number of super - enhancers ( Whyte et al . , 2013 ) , histone modiﬁcations ( H3K27ac , H3K4me1 , H3K36me3 , H3K4me3 ) , GRO - seq signal ( Jonkers et al . , 2014 ) , number of Pol II ChIP - seq peaks , number of DNase - seq peaks . Histone modiﬁcation , Pol II ChIP - seq and DNase - seq data were obtained from ENCODE . Because one of the two hubs was highly enriched in active chromatin marks , RNA PolII , and GRO - seq signal we deﬁned it as the ‘‘active hub , ’’ while the other was depleted for these features of high transcriptional activity and was therefore deﬁned as the ‘‘inactive hub . ’’ SPRITE contact frequency with the nucleolar and active hubs We deﬁned contact frequency with the nucleolar and active hubs for each 1Mb bin based on the average inter - chromosomal contact frequency with all regions in the nucleolar and active hub , respectively . p values were calculated for these contact frequencies using a one - tailed binomial test where the expected frequency assumed a uniform distribution of inter - chromosomal contacts and are shown in units of – log 10 ( p value ) in the corresponding ﬁgures . Contact frequencies with these hubs were compared to RNA localization ( described above ) and data from ChIP - seq ( e . g . , Pol II , H3K4me3 ) and GRO - seq experiments obtained from ENCODE and from Jonkers et al . ( 2014 ) , respectively . Analysis of inter - chromosomal centromere interactions Mouse inter - chromosomal centromere interactions were deﬁned as interactions between the closest bin to the centromere that can be mapped ( ‘‘peri - centromeric bin , ’’ usually 3 - 4Mb ) and any given region on a different chromosome . To analyze these interactions , we calculated the median contact frequency between the peri - centromeric bin of each mouse chromosome and bins on different chromosomes at speciﬁc distances ranging from 1Mb to 100Mb . We then computed the mean contact frequency for each centro - mere distance across all mouse chromosomes . We excluded chromosomes 14 and X from this analysis because they do not have reads that uniquely map within 4Mb of the centromere . Analysis of lamina - associated domain interactions Lamina - associated domains ( LADs ) were obtained from Peric - Hupkes et al . ( 2010 ) . We calculated a genome - wide LAD interaction heatmap by summing the number of contacts between all pairs of LADs and normalizing by read coverage using Hi - Corrector ( Li et al . , 2015 ) . To compare the frequency of LAD / LAD contacts with LAD / non - LAD in SPRITE with Hi - C , we classiﬁed each 1Mb bin as ‘‘LAD’’ or ‘‘non - LAD’’ based on whether or it had a Lamin B1 - DamID score above the median . We then computed the median con - tact frequency between bins separated by speciﬁc distances ranging from 1Mb to 80Mb for pairs of bins classiﬁed as LAD / LAD and LAD / non - LAD . Deﬁning genomic regions near ribosomal DNA clusters The precise location of ribosomal DNA genes in both mouse and human are unknown because they are not mapped in the reference genomes . However , approximate locations have been reported based on non - sequencing methods . In mouse , rDNA genes are en - coded from the centromere - proximal regions of chromosomes 12 , 15 , 16 , 18 , and 19 ( Suzuki et al . , 1990 ) . In human , rDNA genes are encoded on chromosomes 13 , 14 , 15 , 21 and 22 ( Ne´meth et al . , 2010 ; Pederson , 2011 ) . Importantly , the locations of rDNA genes can be strain - dependent in mice ( Strongin et al . , 2014 ; Suzuki et al . , 1990 ) . For instance , on chromosome 15 , the 129 allele of the F1 - 21 hybrid mouse line does not include rDNA genes , while it does on the Cast allele ( Strongin et al . , 2014 ) . This hybrid line was used for all DNA - DNA mapping methods and nucleolar hub identiﬁcation . Instead , we performed our rRNA - DNA maps in another mouse cell line ( pSM33 ) , which is derived from a C57BL / 7 x 129SV mouse , which are reported to contain rDNA genes on both alleles of chromosome 15 . This difference in the rDNA locations between strains may explain why we observe a stronger enrichment of rRNA on chromo - some 15 in the rRNA - DNA maps than in the DNA nucleolar hub contact maps ( Figure 4A ) . Ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) localization quantiﬁcation To quantify the localization of ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) across the genome , we split SPRITE clusters into two groups , one with clusters that contained at least 1 rRNA read ( rRNA positive clusters ) and the other with clusters lacking any rRNA reads ( rRNA e9 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 negative clusters ) . We then calculated the ratio of rRNA positive clusters to rRNA negative clusters for each 1Mb bin , normalizing for total number of clusters in each group , and deﬁned this ratio as the rRNA enrichment for each bin . We calculated rRNA enrichment p values for each bin using a one - tailed binomial test where the expected frequency was based on the rRNA negative clusters and are shown in units of – log 10 ( p value ) in Figure 4A . To quantify Malat1 and U1 localization , we obtained Malat1 and U1 RAP - DNA align - ments from Engreitz et al . ( 2014 ) and calculated Malat1 and U1 enrichment for each 1Mb bin by normalizing to input RAP - DNA alignments . Measurement of Distance between DNA Loci and Nuclear Bodies using microscopy ( Histochoice Fixation ) DNA - FISH Combined with Immunoﬂuorescence DNA ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( DNA - FISH ) was performed with Agilent SureFISH DNA - FISH probes following the manufac - turer’s protocol with adaptations noted below . Probe sets used for FISH were designed by Agilent technologies using their standard procedures against genomic regions deﬁned in Table S6C . Female F1 - 21 cells were cultured on Poly - D Lysine ( Sigma Aldrich ) and gelatin ( Sigma Aldrich ) coated coverslips . The coverslips were ﬁxed using 300uL of Histochoice for 10 min at room temperature , then dehydrated through incubation in a series of graded ethanol concentrations up to 100 % ethanol , and air - dried . The coverslips were then turned cell - side down onto a 5uL mixture of a custom probe set targeting a selected DNA locus ( Agilent ) and SureFISH Hybridization Buffer ( Agilent , G9400A ) . The coverslips and probe mixture were denatured for 8 min at 83 (cid:4) C , then incubated at 37 (cid:4) C overnight in a humidiﬁed chamber . The following morning , coverslips were washed with FISH Wash Buffer 1 ( Agilent , G9401A ) at 73 (cid:4) C for 2 min on a shaking incubator at 300 rpm , and FISH Wash Buffer 2 ( Agilent , G9402A ) at room temperature for 1 min . Coverslips were then rehydrated and suspended in 1X PBS in preparation for immunoﬂuorescence staining . Following DNA - FISH probe hybridization , immunoﬂuorescence was performed . Coverslips were permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton - X in PBS at room temperature for 10 min , then blocked with 1X blocking buffer ( Abcam ab126587 ) in PBS at room temperature for 1 hr . The coverslips were then incubated with primary antibodies in a humidiﬁed chamber at room temperature for 1 hr for anti - Nucleolin or overnight at 4 (cid:4) C for anti - SC35 . The coverslips were washed with 0 . 1 % Triton - X in PBS at room temperature , then incubated with secondary antibodies in a humidiﬁed chamber at room temperature for 1 hour . Coverslips were washed with PBS and H 2 O and mounted on slides in ProLong Gold antifade reagent with DAPI ( Life Technologies , P36931 ) . The primary antibodies used for IF were rabbit polyclonal anti - Nucleolin ( Abcam ; ab22758 ; 1 : 1000 ) and mouse monoclonal anti - SC35 ( Abcam ; ab11826 ; 1 : 200 ) . The secondary antibodies used for IF were Alexa Fluor 647 goat anti - rabbit IgG ( H + L ) ( Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc ; A21244 ; 1 : 300 ) and DyLight 650 goat anti - mouse IgG ( H + L ) ( Bethyl ; A90 - 116D5 ; 1 : 300 ) . Microscopic imaging DNA FISH / IF samples were imaged using a Leica DMI 6000 Deconvolution Microscope , with a z stack collected for each channel ( 4 m m ; step size , 0 . 2 m m ) . The objectives used were the Leica HC PL APO 63x / 1 . 30 GLYC CORR CS2 objective and the Leica HCX PL APO 100X / 1 . 40 - 0 . 70na OIL objective . Samples were also imaged with a ZEISS Laser Scanning Microscope ( LSM ) 800 with the ZEISS i Plan - Apochromat 63x / 1 . 4 Oil DIC M27 objective , with a z stack collected for each channel ( step size , 0 . 37 m m ) . Deconvolution was performed using Huygens Professional version 17 . 04 ( Scientiﬁc Volume Imaging , the Netherlands , software avail - able at https : / / svi . nl / HomePage ) using the built - in theoretical point spread function , the classic maximum likelihood estimation ( CMLE ) algorithm , a signal to noise ratio of 20 , and 50 iterations . Calculating distance between DNA loci The nuclei of individual cells were identiﬁed by DAPI staining , and cells containing two spots per DNA - FISH channel were identiﬁed manually . Images were cropped to only contain the identiﬁed cell . Analysis of cells in three dimensions was performed using Imaris version 8 . 4 . 1 ( Bitplane Inc , software available at http : / / www . bitplane . com / ) with the ImarisXT module . Both alleles for each DNA locus were deﬁned by applying the Imaris ‘‘Spot’’ function ( diameter = 0 . 5 m m , background subtraction ) on the corresponding ﬂuo - rescent channel . The distance between DNA loci was calculated by running the XTension ‘‘Distances Spots to Surfaces’’ function and manually recording the smallest distance between alleles of differing loci . Calculating distance between DNA loci and nuclear bodies The nucleolus and nuclear speckle , identiﬁed by immunoﬂuorescence of nucleolin and SC35 respectively , were deﬁned in Imaris by performing the Imaris ‘‘Surface’’ function ( detail = 0 . 126 m m , absolute intensity ) . Custom Imaris XTensions were used to calculate a distance transform approximating Euclidean distance for the region outside of the generated surface ( ‘‘Batch Process Function’’ by Pierre Pouchin and ‘‘Distance Transformation Outside Object For Batch’’ by Matthew Gastinger , obtained on open . bitplane . com ) . The edges of the surface served as boundary voxels ; regions inside the surface were assigned a distance transform value of 0 . The distance of an allele to the nucleolus or nuclear speckle was deﬁned as the minimum distance transform value of the corre - sponding spot , from the edge of the surface to the nearest edge of the DNA - FISH sphere . Measurement of Distance between DNA Loci and Nuclear Speckles using microscopy ( Formaldehyde Fixation ) Immunoﬂuorescence Immunoﬂuorescence was performed followed by non - barcoded DNA sequential FISH ( DNA seqFISH ) ( Takei et al . , 2017 ) with modi - ﬁed steps . Female F1 - 21 cells were cultured and ﬁxed on Poly - D Lysine ( Sigma Aldrich ) and human laminin ( BioLamina LN511 ) coated coverslips ( Thermo Scientiﬁc Gold Seal 3421 ) using 4 % Formaldehyde ( Pierce ) for 10 min at room temperature , washed with 1X PBS , and stored in 70 % ethanol for more than overnight at (cid:3) 20 (cid:4) C . The coverslips were air - dried , incubated with 0 . 2 m m Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 e10 blue ﬂuorescent ( 365 / 415 ) beads ( Thermo Scientiﬁc F8805 ) with 2000 - fold dilution in 2X SSC at room temperature for 5 min for the alignment of images . The coverslips were then washed twice with 2X SSC , and blocked with Blocking Buffer ( 5 % BSA GEMINI 700 - 106P , 1X PBS and 0 . 3 % Triton - X ) at room temperature for 30 min . The coverslips were washed with 0 . 3 % Triton - X in 1X PBS at room temperature , and incubated with a primary antibody of mouse monoclonal anti - SC35 ( Abcam ; ab11826 ; 1 : 200 ) in Antibody Dilution Buffer ( 1 % BSA , 1X PBS and 0 . 3 % Triton - X ) at 4 (cid:4) C overnight . The coverslips were then washed with 0 . 3 % Triton - X in 1X PBS at room temperature , and incubated with secondary antibody DyLight 488 goat anti - mouse IgG ( H + L ) ( Bethyl ; A90 - 116D2 ; 1 : 300 ) in Antibody Dilution Buffer at room temperature for 1 hr . Coverslips were washed with 1xPBS , incubated with DAPI and imaged in Anti - Bleaching Buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 300 mM NaCl , 2X SSC , 3 mM Trolox [ Sigma 238813 ] , 0 . 8 % D - glucose , 100 - fold diluted Catalase [ Sigma C3155 ] and 0 . 5 mg / mL Glucose oxidase [ Sigma G2133 ] ) . Imaging conditions are described below under ‘‘Microscopic Imaging . ’’ DNA seqFISH Following the immunoﬂuorescence , non - barcoded DNA seqFISH experiments were performed on the same coverslips . Single - stranded DNA FISH probes were designed against speciﬁc mouse regions deﬁned in Table S6D , purchased as an oligoarray pool ( Twist Bioscience ) , and generated with limited cycle PCR , in vitro transcription , and reverse transcription as described previously ( Takei et al . , 2017 ) . After immunoﬂuorescence imaging , the coverslips were washed with 1X PBS twice at room temperature , and incubated with 0 . 1 mg / mL RNaseA ( Thermo Scientiﬁc ) at 37 (cid:4) C for 1 hr . The coverslips were washed and dried with 1x PBS , 70 % ethanol and 100 % ethanol . The coverslips were then heated at 90 (cid:4) C for 10 min with 50 % formamide in 2X SSC . The coverslips were then hybridized with the probe pool at 37 (cid:4) C overnight in 50 % formamide , 2X SSC and 0 . 1 g / mL dextran sulfate ( Sigma - Aldrich D8906 ) . After incubation with the primary probe pool , the coverslips were washed with 55 % Wash Buffer ( 55 % formamide , 0 . 1 % Triton - X , 2X SSC ) at room temperature for 30 min , and hybridized with readout probes that were 15 - nucleotides in length ( IDT ) , which can bind to the readout sequences on the primary probes , coupled to Alexa Fluor 647 ( Lifetech ) or Cy3B ( GE Healthcare ) at 50 nM ﬁnal concentration at room temperature for 20 min in 10 % EC Buffer ( 10 % ethylene carbonate [ Sigma Aldrich E26258 ] , 2X SSC and 0 . 1 g / mL dextran sulfate [ Sigma - Aldrich D4911 ] ) . The coverslips were then washed with 10 % Wash Buffer ( 10 % formamide , 0 . 1 % Triton - X and 2X SSC ) at room temperature for 5 min , stained with DAPI and imaged in Anti - Bleaching Buffer . Imaging conditions are described below under ‘‘Microscopic Imaging . ’’ Following the imaging , the coverslips were washed with 2X SSC once at room tem - perature , incubated in 55 % Wash Buffer at room temperature for 5 min for readout probe displacement , and then washed three times with 2X SSC . To check the readout probe displacement , the coverslips were imaged with all imaging channels in Anti - Bleaching Buffer . The coverslips were then re - hybridized with another set of readout probes at 50 nM ﬁnal concentration at room temperature for 20 min in 10 % EC Buffer , stained with DAPI and imaged in Anti - Bleaching Buffer . In total , three rounds of hybridizations with two colors were carried out for DNA - seqFISH to image six regions . Microscopic Imaging Samples were imaged with a microscope ( Leica DMi8 automated ) equipped with a confocal scanner unit ( Yokogawa CSU - W1 ) , a sCMOS camera ( Andor Zyla 4 . 2 PLUS ) , 63X oil objective lens ( Leica NA 1 . 40 ) , and a motorized stage ( ASI MS2000 ) . Lasers from CNI and ﬁlter sets from Semrock were used . Images were acquired with 0 . 35 m m z steps . Calculating distance between DNA loci and nuclear bodies Image processing was carried out using ImageJ and MATLAB . Images between different imaging rounds were registered and aligned using 405 nm channel images , which contain DAPI and 0 . 2 m m blue ﬂuorescent beads signals , with MATLAB’s imregtform and im - warp functions . To remove the effects of chromatic aberration , 0 . 1 m m TetraSpeck beads ( Thermo Scientiﬁc T7279 ) were used to create geometric transforms to align different ﬂuorescence channels . Cells with two DNA - FISH spots for a given DNA loci were visu - ally identiﬁed and conﬁrmed . Nuclei of individual cells were identiﬁed by DAPI staining , and the precise location of DNA - FISH spots were deﬁned as described previously ( Takei et al . , 2017 ) . The nuclear speckles identiﬁed by immunoﬂuorescence of SC35 were deﬁned using ImageJ’s rolling ball background subtraction algorithm with a radius of 3 pixels , followed by ImageJ’s auto threshold algorithm . The distance of an allele to the nuclear speckle was deﬁned as the minimum distance of a DNA - FISH spot to the boundary of any nuclear speckle in the corresponding cell . Technical challenges associated with quantitatively measuring multi - way interactions using seqFISH There are signiﬁcant technical challenges that precludes us from quantitatively measuring the co - occurrence of multiple DNA sites around a nuclear body across many individual cells by microscopy . Speciﬁcally , following computational and manual image process - ing , approximately 10 % – 15 % of all cells imaged have DNA FISH signal identiﬁed for a single DNA region of interest . Accordingly , the percentage of cells that contain FISH signals for two DNA regions in the same cell is approximately 1 % – 2 % . This is further com - pounded when increasing to 3 - way interactions in the same cell ( 0 . 1 % – 0 . 3 % of cells ) . Speciﬁcally , to identify 2 examples where two distinct DNA regions organize around the same nuclear speckle required imaging and analysis of (cid:1) 800 individual cells . 15 ( of (cid:1) 800 ) individual cells contained FISH signals for two active hub DNA regions in the same cell . 2 ( of 15 ) cells showed simultaneous co - association around the same speckle . In contrast , for an active hub and control DNA region , we observe 0 ( of 21 ) cells that showed simultaneous co - association around the same speckle . Comparison of SPRITE and DNA FISH To compare SPRITE and DNA FISH measurements , we used SPRITE contact frequencies from contact maps binned at 1 Mb resolution based on SPRITE clusters containing 2 to 1000 reads without down - weighting for cluster size . We note that similarly e11 Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 high correlations between SPRITE and DNA FISH measurements were observed when large SPRITE clusters ( > 100 reads ) are included in the analyses ( consistent with the observation of inter - chromosomal interactions in larger clusters in Figure 3D ) , both with and without weighting for cluster size ( Table S6E ) . SPRITE contact frequencies were obtained for 1 Mb bins that overlapped with each DNA FISH probe region and compared to DNA FISH distance measurements with the corresponding probe region . QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES Determining signiﬁcant higher - order k - mer interactions We found that the greatest determinant of k - mer frequency , similar to pairwise frequency , was linear genomic distance . Accordingly , to assess the signiﬁcance of a given k - mer , we compared the observed frequency of a given k - mer to the expected frequency of k - mers containing the same genomic distance . To do this , for a given k - mer , we computed the genomic distance separating each region in the k - mer and randomly sampled regions across the genome containing the same linear genomic distances and computed the number of SPRITE clusters containing these k - mers ( Figure S2A ) . SPRITE cluster counts were normalized by cluster size to deﬁne a weighted score and prevent large SPRITE clusters from dominating the number of k - mer observations . For k - mers of interest , enrichment was deﬁned as the observed weighted SPRITE counts divided by the average across 100 random permutations . Genome - wide analysis was performed across 10 random permutations to identify an initial subset of enriched k - mers . We also re - tained the number of permutations that had an observed frequency larger than observed for the k - mer of interest and we report this percentile to rank each higher - order k - mer . Deﬁning signiﬁcant inter - chromosomal contacts To identify signiﬁcant inter - chromosomal interactions , we removed all intra - chromosomal contacts from the ICE normalized inter - chromosomal heatmap . We then calculated an interaction p value using a one - tailed binomial test where the expected frequency assumes a uniform distribution of inter - chromosomal contacts . We used contact maps binned at 1Mb resolution based on SPRITE clusters containing 2 to 1000 reads without down - weighting for cluster size . We built a graph where nodes represent a 1Mb bin and edges represent connections between 2 bins . We ﬁltered edges to reduce potentially spurious contacts that may be caused by outlier bins by looking for consistency of contacts across at least 3 consecutive bins . Speciﬁcally , we only included an edge between two bins ( i and j ) when the edge connecting i and j was signiﬁcant and all interacting pairs i ± 1 and j ± 1 were also signiﬁcant . Plots and statistical analysis Plots and statistics were generated in GraphPad Prism version 7 . 0c , MATLAB R2016a ( MathWorks ) , R version 3 . 3 . 1 ( Pearson and Spearman correlation coefﬁcients ) , and Microsoft Excel v16 . 10 . For all microscopy measurements , the exact value of the number of cells used ( n ) and precision measurements used ( mean ± SEM ) is reported in the corresponding ﬁgure legends . DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY Detailed SPRITE protocols are available at http : / / guttmanlab . caltech . edu / protocols . php . SPRITE software is available at https : / / github . com / GuttmanLab / sprite - pipeline / wiki . The accession number for the datasets reported in this paper is GEO : GSE114242 . Cell 174 , 744 – 757 . e1 – e12 , July 26 , 2018 e12 Supplemental Figures 0 50 100 150 − 0 . 10 − 0 . 05 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 Position on Chromosome 2 ( Mb ) E i gen v e c t o r − 0 . 2 − 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 SP R I T E c o m pa r t m en t e i gen v e c t o r 134 136 138 140 142 − 1 . 0 − 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 P Position on Chromosome 2 ( Mb ) D E G D Hi - C SPRITE Hi - C SPRITE spearman correlation ρ = 0 . 85 D Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells − 0 . 3 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 − 0 . 3 − 0 . 2 − 0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 Hi − C Eigenvector SP R I T E E i gen v e c t o r Human GM12878 Lymphoblast Cells spearman correlation ρ = 0 . 93 F I M ed i an c on t a c t s 3 . 0 2 . 5 2 . 0 1 . 5 M ed i an c on t a c t s 25 20 15 10 SPRITE 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 N o r m a l i z ed c on t a c t s Hi - C 700 k b c h r 7 SPRITE Hi - C J mES Aggregate peak analysis ( 10kb ) 700 kb chr7 L GM12878 Aggregate peak analysis ( 10kb ) SPRITE Hi - C K 20kb 10kb Hi − C Eigenvector SP R I T E E i gen v e c t o r 30 % 13 . 8 % 7 . 58 % 15 . 9 % 33 . 8 % 13 . 2 % 8 . 74 % 30 . 0 % 13 . 8 % 7 . 58 % 15 . 9 % 33 . 8 % 13 . 2 % 8 . 74 % 34 . 8 % 32 . 8 % 9 . 49 % C SPRITE Hi - C M ed i an c on t a c t s 1 . 0 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 1 . 2 1 . 4 M ed i an c on t a c t s 15 10 5 20 0 tags 1 tags 2 tags 3 tags 4 tags 5 tags 0 . 25 % 0 . 20 % 2 . 50 % 2 . 70 % 8 . 25 % 8 . 80 % 9 . 35 % 9 . 80 % 11 . 80 % 12 . 20 % 67 . 85 % 66 . 30 % Human Mouse Num . Tags Ligation efficiency each round = 92 . 3 % = ( 67 . 1 % ) ( 1 / 5 ) Human Mouse B Hi - C Insulation Score − 2 − 1 0 1 2 SP R I T E i n s u l a t i on sc o r e 2 1 0 1 2 Number of reads in each SPRITE cluster 1 2 - 10 11 - 100 101 - 1000 1001 + Hi - C Insulation Score − 2 − 1 0 1 2 SP R I T E i n s u l a t i on sc o r e 2 1 0 1 2 I n s u l a t i on sc o r e 132 spearman correlation ρ = 0 . 90 spearman correlation ρ = 0 . 94 chr2 c h r 2 1 . 2Mb 1 . 2 M b 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 N o r m a li z ed c on t a c t s H Mouse lysate Human lysate SPRITE A 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 Molecule to Bead Ratio % i n t e r s p ec i es c on t ac t s CTCF 0 - 40 ( legend on next page ) Figure S1 . SPRITE Accurately Recapitulates Genome Structure Measured by Hi - C , Related to Figure 1 ( A ) Estimate of the frequency of spurious contacts that are identiﬁed within individual SPRITE clusters . Noise was estimated by coupling crosslinked lysate from mouseES cells and human HEK293T cells to NHS beads . The ratio of material per bead was coupled at different amounts ( x axis ) and the percentage of clusters and pairwise contacts containing human and mouse reads were computed ( interspecies contacts , y axis ) . The red point indicates the molecule - to - bead ratio used for the SPRITE experiments in this paper . ( B ) Distributionofreadscontaining0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5tagsformouse ( left ) andhuman ( right ) experiments . Theestimateforligationefﬁciencyeachroundisdetermined by taking the 5 th root of the fraction of reads with all 5 tags . ( C ) Distribution of SPRITE cluster sizes for mouse ( left ) and human ( right ) experiments . The percentage of reads was calculated for different SPRITE cluster sizes ( 1 , 2 - 10 , 11 - 100 , 101 - 1000 , and over 1001 reads ) and reported as the percentage of total reads . Cluster size is deﬁned as the number of reads with the same barcode . ( D – L ) SPRITE in mouse embryonic stem ( ES ) cells and human GM12878 lymphoblast cells was compared to Hi - C data generated in Dixon et al . ( 2012 ) and Rao et al . ( 2014 ) , respectively . ( D ) Compartment eigenvector for mouse chromosome 2 calculated using SPRITE ( black ) and Hi - C ( red ) contact maps from mouse ES cells binned at 1 - Mb resolution . Positive and negative values correspond to the A and B compartments , respectively . ( E ) Genome - wide correlation between compartment eigenvectors calculated using SPRITE ( y axis ) and Hi - C ( x axis ) contact maps from mouse ES cells binned at 1 - Mb resolution . ( F ) Genome - wide correlation between compartment eigenvectors calculated using SPRITE ( y axis ) and Hi - C ( x axis ) contact maps from human GM12878 cells binned at 1 - Mb resolution . ( G ) Insulation score proﬁle for a region on mouse chromosome 2 ( shown in Figure 1D ) calculated using SPRITE ( black ) and Hi - C ( red ) contact maps from mouse ES cells binned at 40 - kb resolution . Local minima correspond to boundary regions . ( H ) Genome - wide correlation between insulation scores calculated using SPRITE ( y axis ) and Hi - C ( x axis ) contact maps from mouse ES cells binned at 40 - kb . ( I ) Genome - wide correlation between insulation scores calculated using SPRITE ( y axis ) and Hi - C ( x axis ) contact maps from human GM12878 cells binned at 40 - kb . ( J ) Examples of SPRITE and Hi - C contact maps binned at 20 - kb resolution ( top ) and 10 - kb resolution ( bottom ) showing chromatin loop interactions in mES cells . CTCF ChIP - seq peaks are shown according to theirpositive ( red ) ornegative ( blue ) motiforientation . ( K ) AggregatepeakanalysisheatmapsforHi - C ( top ) andSPRITE ( bottom ) inmouseEScellsbinnedat10 - kb resolution . 1493 loops obtained from Rao et al . ( 2014 ) were used in this analysis . Heatmaps show the median contact map values for each pair of 10 - kb bins in regions ± 200 - kb of the loops . ( L ) Aggregate peak analysis heatmaps for Hi - C ( top ) and SPRITE ( bottom ) in human GM12878 cells binned at 10 - kb resolution . 5789 loops obtained from Rao et al . ( 2014 ) were used in this analysis . Heatmaps show the median contact map values for each pair of 10 - kb bins in regions ± 200 - kb of the loops . chromosome A SPRITEk - mer chromosome B chromosome C Randompermutedk - mers . . . SPRITEClusters 60 10 15 12 21 18 26 8 19 A 10Mb15Mb 20Mb Permuted k - mers maintain spacing between bins , but start at randomized positions on a chromosome . The number of SPRITE clusters with reads in all k bins are counted to determine the expected SPRITE clusters given k bins with this spacing . O / E = 9 . 65 126Mb 126 . 8Mb chr8 32 . 25Mb 33 . 1Mb chr9 126 M b 126 . 8 M b 32 . 25 M b 33 . 1 M b C D SPRITEclusters k ≥ 4 A - comps . A compartmentsmentspart A B 11 SPRITE clusters O / E = 5 . 87 13 SPRITE clusters All k - mers 3 Min Enriched 15 Max 4 Mode 4 . 98 Mean 5 Median 1 . 36 Std . Dev 3 14 5 5 . 96 6 1 . 58 k = 11 SPRITE clusters O / E = 6 . 25 chr14 68 . 3Mb 69 . 4Mb 68 . 3 M b 69 . 4 M b 18 SPRITE clusters O / E = 5 . 38 63 . 525Mb 65 . 15Mb chr10 63 . 525 M b 65 . 15 M b B 22 clusters O / E = 2 . 5 SE chr7 SE SE H3K27ac E 3Mb 60Mb GAM Super Enhancer ( SE ) TAD Triplets 11 clusters O / E = 2 . 7 chr8 H3K27ac SE SE SE 10Mb 95Mb Figure S2 . SPRITE Measures Higher - Order Interactions across Known Genome Structures , Related to Figure 2 ( A ) Cartoon representation of the method for identifying enriched higher - order k - mer frequencies . Given an observed k - mer , we randomly permute k - mers by randomizingthelocationofthegenomicpositionswithinthe k - merwhilepreservingthespacingbetweenitsreads . Theobservedfrequencyisthennormalizedby the expected frequency derived from the randomly permuted k - mers . See the STAR Methods for further details . ( B ) Statistics of the size ( k bins ) distribution observed in all enumerated ( left ) and enriched ( right ) k - mers in mES cells at 1 - Mb resolution . Enriched k - kmers are deﬁned as those that are observed in at least 5 independent SPRITE clusters , occur > 4 - fold more frequently than the average of the permuted k - mers , and are observed at a frequency that is more than 90 % of the permuted structures . ( C ) ExampleSPRITEclustersspanningatleastfourAcompartmentregionsonmousechromosome2 . ThecompartmenteigenvectorshowingA ( red ) andB ( blue ) compartments is shown on top . Rows correspond to individual SPRITE clusters and colored lines denote 1 - Mb bins with at least 1 read . Each colored group represents a different combination of four A compartment regions interacting across several SPRITE clusters ( max cluster size n = 20 , 1 - Mb bins ) . Red shaded areademarcatestheAcompartmentregions . Enrichments compared torandomly permuted k - mers spanning4ormoreAcompartmentregions inmEScellsare listed in Table S1C . ( D ) Four examples of 3 - way interactions between 3 loop anchors in human GM12878 cells . SPRITE contact maps are shown at 25 - kb resolution above the individual SPRITE clusters that contain all three loop anchors ( max cluster size n = 100 , 25 - kb bins ) . ( E ) Examples of enriched SPRITE clusters corresponding to super - enhancer TAD triplets previously identiﬁed using GAM in mES cells ( Beagrie et al . , 2017 ) ( max cluster size n = 100 , 1 - Mb bins ) . 0 10 20 30 40 P ea ks pe r 1 M b InactiveHubActiveHub Neither RNA Pol II 1086 204 SPRITE 1001 + reads 12 13 14 15 16171819 12 13 14 15 16171819 C ad - l og10 ( p - v a l ue ) 10 8 6 4 2 0 H - l og 10 ( p - v a l ue ) 302520 15 5010 Active Hub Inactive Hub c h r 19 c h r 2 chr12 chr18 chr15 chr16 chr10 chr4 chr5 chr11 chr8 - l og 10 ( p - v a l ue ) 30150 0 1 2 3 4 5x10 - 7 SPRITE 2 - 1000 reads Hi - C F F r a c t i on o f t o t a l c on t a c t s 12 13 14 15 16171819 12 13 14 15 16171819 SPRITE 2 - 1000 reads SPRITE 2 - 10 reads 12 13 14 15 16171819 G 0 1 2 3 4 5x10 - 7 F r a c t i on o f t o t a l c on t a c t s 12 13 14 15 16171819 I D mES cells K chr1 chr2 chr3 chr4 chr5 chr6 chr7 chr8 chr9 chr10 chr11 chr12 chr13 chr14 chr15 chr16 chr17 chr18 chr19 chr20 chr21 chr22 chrX ActiveCentromere NeitherInactive 0Mb 50Mb 100Mb 150Mb 200Mb GM12878 L 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 1 3 14 15 16 17 18 19 2 0 2 1 2 2 X InactiveHub ActiveHub M chr8 chr9 chr11 c h r 1 chr14 chr15 chr21chr22 c h r 13 Active Hub Inactive Hub - l og 10 ( p - v a l ue ) 10 8 6 2 0 4 0 10 20 30 40 G ene s pe r 1 M b InactiveHubActiveHub Neither Gene Density N - l og 10 ( p - v a l ue ) ActiveCentromere NeitherInactive 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 P ea ks pe r 1 M b ( 10 2 ) InactiveHubActiveHub Neither 0 5 10 15 20 G r o − s eq s i gna l ( 10 3 ) InactiveHubActiveHub Neither 0 20 40 60 80 100 P ea ks pe r 1 M b 0 10 20 30 40 50 P ea ks pe r 1 M b 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 P ea ks pe r 1 M b InactiveHubActiveHub Neither 0 20 40 60 80 100 P ea ks pe r 1 M b 0 2 4 6 8 E nhan c e r s pe r 1 M b 0 2 4 6 8 S upe r − enhan c e r s pe r 1 M b Super - enhancers Enhancers H3K36me3 H3K4me3 H3K27ac H3K4me1 DNase - seq GRO - seq J WithinTAD Within Compartment ( local ) Within Compartment ( non - local ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 P e r c en t o f P a i r w i s e C on t a c t s ( % ) Hi - C 2 - 10 reads 11 - 100 reads 101 - 1000 reads 1001 + reads E SPRITE Downweighted 5 6 7 8 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 Distance ( log 10 bp ) N o r m a li z ed c on t a c t p r obab ili t y 0 50 100 150 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 Position on chromosome 2 ( Mb ) R 1 no r m a li z ed c on t a c t p r obab ili t y A B SPRITEHi - C HiC 123 - 143Mb 0 . 5 0 12Mb 0 . 5 0 Chr 2 Inactive Inactive Active mES cells 1 InactiveHubActiveHub Neither InactiveHubActiveHub Neither InactiveHubActiveHub Neither InactiveHubActiveHub Neither InactiveHubActiveHub Neither chr1 chr2 chr3 chr4 chr5 chr6 chr7 chr8 chr9 chr10 chr11 chr12 chr13 chr14 chr15 chr16 chr17 chr18 chr19 chrX 0Mb 50Mb 100Mb 150Mb 200Mb 250Mb H3K27ac HiC SPRITE 2 - 10 reads SPRITE 11 - 100 reads A compartmentsrtmentspap R1 SPRITEHi - C mES cells ( legend on next page ) Figure S3 . SPRITE Identiﬁes Long - Range Intra - chromosomal Interactions and Hubs of Inter - chromosomal Interactions , Related to Figure 3 ( A ) Relationship between contact frequency as a function of linear genomic distance observed in SPRITE ( blue ) and Hi - C ( Dixon et al . , 2012 ) ( red ) for mouse ES cells . ( B ) Contact frequency between a speciﬁc A ( red ) compartment region ( R1 : 25 - 34 Mb ) and all other regions on mouse chromosome 2 . Pairwise contact fre - quencies are shown for SPRITE ( blue ) and Hi - C ( red ) . Red shaded areas represent A compartment regions . ( C ) Comparison of Hi - C contact map ( top ) with SPRITE contact maps based on SPRITE clusters with 2 to 10 reads ( middle ) and 11 to 100 reads ( bottom ) in a 12 - Mb region on mouse chromosome 2 binned at 40 - kb resolution . Contact map values are shown as the fraction of total contacts . H3K27ac ChIP - seq signal ( ENCODE ) from mouse ES cells is shown below . ( D ) DifferentSPRITE clustersizescapturedifferentscalesofinteractions . Thepercentageofpairwisecontacts arequantiﬁedwithin structuresofdifferentsizesin the nucleus—TADs , local compartment regions , and non - local compartment regions for SPRITE clusters containing 2 - 10 reads ( yellow ) , 11 - 100 reads ( green ) , 101 - 1000 reads ( blue ) and 1001 or more reads ( purple ) compared against Hi - C ( red ) . ( E ) Inter - chromosomalcontactsbetweenchromosomes12through19inmEScellsbinnedat1 - Mbresolution . InteractionpvaluesareshownforSPRITEclusters with 1001 + reads ( upper diagonal ) and for SPRITE contacts that have been down - weighted by cluster size ( lower diagonal ) . p values were calculated based on inter - chromosomal interaction frequencies and are shown in units of - log 10 ( p value ) . ( F ) Comparison of SPRITE ( upper diagonal ) and Hi - C ( lower diagonal ) inter - chromosomal contacts between chromosomes 12 through 19 in mES cells binned at 1 - Mb resolution . SPRITE contacts are based on clusters with 2 to 1000 reads . Values shown are the fraction of total contacts . ( G ) Comparison ofinter - chromosomal contacts between chromosomes 12through 19basedon SPRITE clusters with 2to1000 reads ( upper diagonal ) or 2to 10 reads ( lower diagonal ) in mES cells binned at 1 - Mb resolution . Values shown are the fraction of total contacts . ( H and K ) Examples of inter - chromosomal interactions that comprise the Inactive Hub ( top , blue ) and Active Hub ( bottom , red ) in mES and GM12878 cells , respectively . Inactive and active hub regions are colored on the chromosome ideogram as blue and red , respectively . Interaction p values were calculated using unweighted contact frequencies from SPRITE clusters with 2 to 1000 reads and are shown in units of – log 10 ( p value ) . ( I and L ) Ideogram showing inactive hub ( blue ) and active hub ( red ) regions on each mouse and human chromosome , respectively . Centromere regions are demarcated in gray . ( J ) Boxplots showing the distribution of different features associated with high RNA Polymerase II transcription ( DNase - seq from ENCODE , GRO - seq ) ( Jonkers etal . , 2014 ) , active chromatin marks ( H3K27ac , H3K4me1 , H3K36me3 , H3K4me3from ENCODE ) , and regulatory features ( super - enhancers , enhancers ) ( Whyte et al . , 2013 ) in mES cells . ( M ) Circosdiagramofsigniﬁcantinter - chromosomalinteractionsinGM12878cells . Interactionsareidentiﬁedfromunweightedinter - chromosomalcontactmaps in SPRITE clusters containing 2 to 1000 reads . Interactions with p values less than 10 (cid:3) 8 are shown . Two distinct networks of non - interacting connections are shown in blue ( inactive hub ) and red ( active hub ) . ( N ) Boxplots showing the distribution of gene density ( top ) and RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) occupancy ( bottom ) for regions in the inactive hub , nucleolar hub , or neither hubinGM12878cells . Gene densityiscalculated asgenes per 1 - Mband Pol IIoccupancyiscalculated asthenumber ofChIP - seqpeaks per1 - Mb ( from ENCODE ) . 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Position on chromosome 12 ( Mb ) 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 r RN A en r i c h m en t 150 200 250 I na c t i v e hub c on t a c t f r equen cy 0 20 40 60 80 Position on chromosome 18 ( Mb ) 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 r RN A en r i c h m en t 150 200 250 300 I na c t i v e hub c on t a c t f r equen cy 10 20 30 40 50 60 Position on chromosome 19 ( Mb ) 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 3 . 5 r RN A e n r i c h m en t 160 200 240 280 I na c t i v e hub c on t a c t f r equen cy 0 10 20 30 40 50 chr3 - C chr15 - I chr3 - C chr19 - I chr12 - I chr15 - I chr15 - I chr18 - I chr18 - I chr19 - I chr12 - I chr19 - I Percent of cells with two regions 0μm from same nucleolus 2 % 6 % 20 % 26 % 32 % 40 % 1 control region & 1 inactive hub 2 Inactive hub associated chromosomes P e r c en t age o f C e ll s ( % ) R1 R2 2 μm chr18 - C1 NucleolinDAPI D F 3D Distance to Nucleolus ( One Allele / Cell ) 2 μm chr18 - C2 Nucleolin Inactive Hub rRNA Inactive Hub rRNA Inactive Hub rRNA A 2 μm chr19 - C Nucleolin E 99 . 99 % 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 RNA - tag reads DNA - tag reads P e r c en t age o f r RN A r ead s a li gn i ng t o c od i ng ( + ) s t r and ( % ) 50 . 2 % C 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 0 1 2 3 4 Distance ( μm ) C u m u l a t i v e F r equen cy chr12 - I n = 101 chr15 - I n = 155 chr18 - I n = 104 chr19 - I n = 150 chr3 - C n = 100 chr18 - C1 n = 50 chr18 - C2 n = 51 chr19 - C n = 52 chr4 - A n = 50 0 . 00 Inactive Hub Control Active Hub Complex A Complex C Complex B Complex D A B C D Complex A Complex C Complex B Complex D Match Barcodes RNA - DNA SPRITE B Figure S4 . Genomic DNA in the Inactive Hub Is Organized around the Nucleolus , Related to Figure 4 ( A ) A schematicof theRNA - DNA SPRITE procedure . SPRITE was adapted to simultaneouslytag RNA and DNA molecules in crosslinked complexesduring each round of split - pool tagging . ( B ) Most reads in the RNA - DNA SPRITE maps containing an RNA - speciﬁc tag aligned to the transcribed ( + ) strand of ribosomal RNA , in contrast to reads containing a DNA - speciﬁc tag which uniformly aligned with either of the two strands . ( C ) Comparison of ribosomal RNA localization from RNA - DNA SPRITE maps ( black ) and average inter - chromosomal contact frequency with regions in the inactive hub ( blue ) binned at 1 - Mb resolution for mouse chromosomes 12 , 18 and 19 . Inactive hub regions are shown in blue at the top of each plot . ( D ) Cumulativedistributionsforthe3Ddistancesof9proberegionsandthemostproximalnucleolus ( onlythedistanceofthenearestallelepercellisshown ) . Four probe regions in the inactive hub are shown in blue , green , teal , and purple . Four control probe regions not in the inactive hub are shown in black , gray , orange , and yellow . One active hub probe region is shown in red . Number of cells measured ( n ) is listed for each probe . ( E ) Example images from immunoﬂuorescence for nucleolin ( red ) combined with DNA FISH for three different DNA FISH control region probes ( chr18 - C1 , chr18 - C2 and chr19 - C ) . ( legend continued on next page ) ( F ) Comparison of the frequency of co - association of two DNA regions on different chromosomes at the same nucleolus measured by DNA FISH . Percentage of cells with two regions at the same nucleolus is reported if at least one allele for each of the different pairs of DNA FISH probes are 0 m m from the same nucleolus ( n = 50 to 64 cells ) . Pairs of probes with one control region and one inactive hub region are shown in gray , and pairs of two inactive hub region probes are shown in blue . 2 μ m 25 50 75 100 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Distance from nearest SC35 speckle ( μ m ) P e r c en t age o f c e ll s ( % ) chr4 - A chr4 - C chr2 - A chr11 - A chr11 - C chr18 - I 0 Active Control A G 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 A v e r age M a l a t 1 en r i c h m en t Activehub Inactivehub OtherRegions 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 A v e r age U 1 en r i c h m en t Activehub Inactivehub OtherRegions B 50 100 150 200 250 − 1 . 0 0 . 0 1 . 0 Active hub contact frequency M a l a t 1 en r i c h m en t ( l og 2 ) spearman correlation ρ = 0 . 80 50 100 150 200 250 − 2 − 1 0 1 2 Active hub contact frequency U 1 en r i c h m en t ( l og 2 ) spearman correlation ρ = 0 . 74 0 % 2 % 0 % 10 % 6 % 12 % 6 % 4 % 6 % 24 % 31 % 44 % 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 8090 100 Contacting SC35 ( d = 0 . 0 μ m ) d ≤ 0 . 25 μ m from SC35 Active Hub Control chr4C chr18I chr11C chr11A chr4A chr2A chr4C chr18I chr11C chr11A chr4A chr2A P e r c en t age o f C e ll s w i t h i n 3 D D i s t an c e d f r o m S C 35 ( % ) 0 50 100 150 Position on chromosome 4 ( Mb ) 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 U 1 en r i c h m en t 100 150 200 A c t i v e hub c on t a c t f r equen cy 0 50 100 150 Position on chromosome 4 ( Mb ) 0 . 4 0 . 8 1 . 2 1 . 6 M a l a t 1 en r i c h m en t 100 150 200 A c t i v e hub c on t a c t f r equen cy 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Position on chromosome 11 ( Mb ) 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 2 . 5 3 . 0 U 1 en r i c h m en t 100 140 180 220 A c t i v e hub c on t a c t f r equen cy 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Position on chromosome 11 ( Mb ) 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 M a l a t 1 en r i c h m en t 100 140 18 0 220 A c t i v e hub c on t a c t f r equen cy Active Hub U1 RNA Active Hub U1 RNA Active Hub Malat1 RNA Active Hub Malat1 RNA U1 RNA ( RAP - DNA ) Malat1 RNA ( RAP - DNA ) C H 6 % 16 % 42 % 0 % 2 % 16 % 0 10 20 30 40 50 d ≤ 0 . 5 μ m chr2 - A - chr11 - A chr2 - A - chr4 - C d ≤ 1 μ m d ≤ 1 . 5 μ m P e r c en t age o f c e ll s w i t h 3 D d i s t an c e d be t w een 2 c h r ( % ) Inactive Hub 2 μ m 0 25 50 75 100 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 Distance from nearest SC35 speckle ( μ m ) P e r c en t age o f C e ll s ( % ) chr 2 - A chr 4 - A chr 11 - A chr 4 - C chr 11 - C chr 18 - I Active Control 4 % Formaldehyde Fixation Histochoice Fixation 0 . 5 μ m 2 μ m chr2 - A ( Active ) SC35 DAPI 2 μ m chr2 - A ( Active ) SC35 DAPI D Histochoice Fixation Histochoice Fixation E F 4 % Formaldehyde Fixation Histochoice Fixation Figure S5 . Genomic DNA Regions in the Active Hub Are Organized around the Nuclear Speckles , Related to Figure 5 ( A ) Boxplots showing the distribution of U1 RNA enrichment to genomic DNA ( top ) and Malat1 RNA enrichment to genomic DNA ( bottom ) from Engreitz et al . ( 2014 ) for regions in the active hub , inactive hub , or neither . ( B ) Comparison of U1 or Malat1 RNA - DNA ( black ) enrichment with average inter - chromosomal contact frequency with regions in the active hub ( red ) binned at 1 - Mb resolution for mouse chromosomes 4 ( left ) and 11 ( middle ) . Active hub regions are shown in red at the top of ech plot . Genome - wide correlation plots are shown on the right . ( CandD ) ExampleimagesfromimmunoﬂuorescenceforSC35 ( red ) combinedwithDNAFISH ( green ) foranactivehubproberegiononchromosome2 ( chr2 - A ) in cellsﬁxedusing4 % formaldehydeandhistochoicepriortoDNAFISH / IF , respectively . Insetimagesshowtheregionaroundthearrowhead . DAPI ( blue ) isusedto demarcate the nucleus . ( legend continued on next page ) ( EandF ) Cumulativedistributionsforthe3Ddistancesof6proberegionsandthemostproximalspeckle ( onlythedistanceofthenearestallelepercellisshown ) in cellsﬁxedusing4 % formaldehyde ( n = 50to155cells ) andhistochoice ( n = 41to90cells ) priortoDNAFISH / IF , respectively . Threeproberegionsintheactivehub are shown in blue , red , and green . Three control probe regions not in the active hub are shown in yellow , orange , and purple . ( G ) Comparison of the 3D distance to the most proximal nuclear speckle for 6 different probe regions , including 3 control regions ( gray / blue ) and 3 active hub regions ( red ) . Proximitytonuclearspecklesiscalculatedforeachproberegionasthepercentofcellswithatleast1allelewithin0 m m ( left ) and0 . 25 m m ( right ) ofan SC35 speckle for cells crosslinked using histochoice prior to DNA FISH / IF . ( H ) Comparisonofthepercentageofcellswheretwoprobesarewithinagivendistance ( 0 . 5 m m , 1 . 0 m mand1 . 5 m m ) fortwoactivehubprobes ( red ) andanactive / control pair ( gray ) measured in cells ﬁxed using histochoice prior to DNA FISH / IF . The large distance between the two DNA regions likely reﬂects the fact that the individual DNA sites are organized around nuclear speckles rather than directly contacting each other . D 0 20 40 60 80 50 100 150 200 250 Number of H3K4me3 peaks C on t a c t f r equen cy w i t h s pe ck l e hub Spearman ρ = 0 . 73 0 50 100 150 200 50 100 150 200 250 Distance from centromere ( Mb ) C on t a c t f r equen cy w i t h s pe ck l e hub Spearman ρ = 0 . 28 0 20 40 60 80 50 100 150 200 250 Number of H3K4me3 peaks C on t a c t f r equen cy w i t h nu c l eo l a r hub Spearman ρ = - 0 . 07 Spearman ρ = 0 . 75 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 50 100 150 200 250 GRO−seq signal ( log 2 ) C on t a c t f r equen cy w i t h s pe ck l e hub F A (cid:1) 50 100 150 200 250 50 100 150 200 250 300 Speckle hub contact frequency N u c l eo l a r hub c on t a c t f r equen cy (cid:1)(cid:1) A compartment B compartment A A C C A chr11 chr4 chr2 chr15 chr12 chr3 I I I I C C1 C2 C chr18 chr19 DNA FISH probes Inactive Hub ( I ) Control ( C ) Active Hub ( A ) C E 0 50 100 150 Position on chromosome 2 ( Mb ) − l og ( p − v a l ue ) N u c l eo l a r H ub 0 1 2 3 0 50 100 150 Position on chromosome 4 ( Mb ) 0 1 2 3 − l og ( p − v a l ue ) N u c l eo l a r H ub 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Position on chromosome 11 ( Mb ) 0 2 4 6 8 − l og ( p − v a l ue ) N u c l eo l a r H ub 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 6000 Position on chromosome 11 ( Mb ) H 3 K 27a c s i gna l 12000 0 50 100 150 0 6000 Position on chromosome 4 ( Mb ) H 3 K 27a c s i gna l 12000 0 50 100 150 0 6000 Position on chromosome 2 ( Mb ) H 3 K 27a c s i gna l 12000 Centromere proximal regions with high H3K27ac activity CentromereCentromere CentromereCentromere CentromereCentromere Region Chr2−A Number of Cells Chr4−A Chr4−C Chr11−A Chr11−C Chr18−I Chr18−C1 Chr 18−C2 Chr19−C 50 50 50 51 50 50 50 50 50 Region Chr3−C Number of Cells Chr4−A Chr12−I Chr15−I Chr18−I Chr18−C1 Chr18−C2 Chr19−C Chr19−I 100 50 101 155 104 50 51 52 150 B 3D distances to nucleolus 3D distances to nuclear speckle 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 SPRITE : Speckle Hub Contact Frequency DNA F I S H : A v e r age D i s t an c e t o S pe ck l e ( μ m ) r = - 0 . 83 50 100 150 200 250 300 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 SPRITE : Nucleolar Hub Contact Frequency DNA F I S H : A v e r age D i s t an c e t o N u c l eo l u s ( μ m ) r = - 0 . 99 Figure S6 . Preferential Organization Relative tothe Nucleolus and Nuclear Speckles Shapes the Overall Organization of Genomic DNAin the Nucleus , Related to Figure 6 ( A ) Genome - wide comparison of average SPRITE contact frequency to regions in the nucleolar hub ( y axis ) or speckle hub ( x axis ) . Each dot corresponds to a 1 - Mb bin . Regions within the A and B compartment are colored red and blue , respectively . ( B ) Number of cells imaged and measured for 3D distances to the nucleolus and nuclear speckle reported in Figures 6C , 6D , and S6D . ( C ) A schematic representation showing the location of the various DNA FISH probes used in Figures 6C , 6D , and S6D . ( legend continued on next page ) ( D ) Comparison of DNA FISH average 3D distances from nucleoli ( left ) or nuclear speckles ( right ) ( y axis ) with average SPRITE inter - chromosomal contact fre - quencies with the nucleolar and nuclear speckle hub regions ( x axis ) , respectively . Average 3D distances are measured by DNA FISH and IF experiments using nucleolin and SC35 as markers for nucleoli and nuclear speckles , respectively , from cells ﬁxed with histochoice prior to IF / DNA FISH . The closest allele in each cell is used to measure the 3D distance to each nuclear body . Data points and error bars represent mean ± SEM . See Figures S6B and S6C for cell numbers and probes used for quantitation of IF / DNA FISH . ( E ) Examples of decreasednucleolar hubinteractions in centromere - proximal regions with high levels of transcriptional activity ( light orange box ) . Although there is a general trend of centromere - proximal regions to interact with the nucleolar hub , highly active regions near centromeres are depleted in nucleolar hub in - teractions ( blue ) . H3K27ac ChIP - seq ( ENCODE ) signal ( red ) is shown below . ( F ) Comparison of averageinter - chromosomal contact frequencies withthe speckle hub and nascent transcription levels ( GRO - seq signal ) ( Jonkers et al . , 2014 ) , linear distance from centromeres , and number of H3K4me3 peaks ( ENCODE ) . Comparison of average SPRITE inter - chromosomal contact frequencies with the nucleolar hub and H3K4me3 peaks . F 0 100 200 −1 . 0 −0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Lamin association ( DamID ) spearman ρ = - 0 . 71 300 S pe ck l e H ub C on t a c t F r equen cy E 0 100 200 300 −1 . 0 −0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Lamin association ( DamID ) spearman ρ = 0 . 01 N u c l eo l a r H ub C on t a c t F r equen cy A 0 20 40 60 80 100 100 150 200 250 Distance from centromere ( Mb ) M ed i an i n t e r - c h r o m o s o m a l c on t a c t f r equen cy w i t h c en t r o m e r e o f a d i ff e r en t c h r o m o s o m e CentromereCentromere B chr2 chr3 chr4 chr5 chr6 chr7 chr8 cent . chr . 2 , 3 , 4 cent . chr . 3 , 4 , 5 cent . chr . 4 , 5 , 6 cent . chr . 5 , 6 , 7 cent . chr . 6 , 7 , 8 D chr1 0 500 1000 1500 chr2 chrX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . c h r 1 c h r 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . c h r X chr3 c h r 3 C 0 20 40 60 80 50 100 150 200 250 300 Genomic distance ( Mb ) M ed i an c on t a c t f r equen cy LAD / LAD LAD / non−LAD 0 20 40 60 80 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 Genomic distance ( Mb ) M ed i an c on t a c t f r equen cy ( 10 3 ) LAD / LAD LAD / non−LAD SPRITE Hi - C N u m be r o f L A D - L A D C on t a c t s LAD1LAD2 Lamin associated domain ( LAD ) contacts Figure S7 . Model of How Nuclear Bodies Shape Global Three - Dimensional Genome Organization in the Nucleus , Related to Figure 7 ( A ) Median inter - chromosomal contact frequency of the most proximal region mapped to the centromere in the reference genome of each chromosome with all genomic sites on different chromosomes at different genomic distances in mES cells . ( B ) ExampleSPRITEclusterscontainingmulti - way ( k R 3 ) interactionsbetweencentromere - proximalregionsondifferentchromosomesinmouseEScells . Rows show individual SPRITE clusters and each line denotes a 1Mb bin with at least 1 read within these clusters ( max cluster size n = 500 , 1 - Mb bins ) . ( C ) Median contact frequency between two Lamina - associated Domains ( LADs ) regions ( or one LAD and one non - LAD region ) as a function of linear genomic distance on the same chromosome measured by SPRITE ( top ) and Hi - C ( bottom ) . Lamina association data come from DamID signal generated by Meuleman et al . ( 2013 ) . ( D ) ICE - normalized inter - chromosomal contact map of all Lamina - associated Domains ( LADs ) on all chromosomes in mES cells . Each bin represents a LAD ( LAD1 , LAD2 , etc ) . ( E ) Comparison of lamina association signal ( DamID ) and nucleolar hub contact frequencies in mES cells . ( F ) Comparison between lamina association signal and speckle hub contact frequencies in mES cells .