Nucleotide Regulation of the Structure and Dynamics of G - Actin Marissa G . Saunders , †‡ § { Jeremy Tempkin , †‡ § { Jonathan Weare , § jj Aaron R . Dinner , †‡ § { Benoıˆt Roux , †‡ § { and Gregory A . Voth †‡ § { * † Department of Chemistry , ‡ Institute for Biophysical Dynamics , § James Franck Institute , { Computation Institute , and jj Department of Statistics , University of Chicago , Chicago , Illinois ABSTRACT Actin , a highly conserved cytoskeletal protein found in all eukaryotic cells , facilitates cell motility and membrane remodeling via a directional polymerization cycle referred to as treadmilling . The nucleotide bound at the core of each actin sub - unit regulates this process . Although the biochemical kinetics of treadmilling has been well characterized , the atomistic details of how the nucleotide affects polymerization remain to be deﬁnitively determined . There is increasing evidence that the nucleotide regulation ( and other characteristics ) of actin cannot be fully described from the minimum energy structure , but rather depends on a dynamic equilibrium between conformations . In this work we explore the conformational mobility of the actin monomer ( G - actin ) in a coarse - grained subspace using umbrella sampling to bias all - atom molecular - dynamics simulations along the vari - ables of interest . The results reveal that ADP - bound actin subunits are more conformationally mobile than ATP - bound subunits . We used a multiscale analysis method involving coarse - grained and atomistic representations of these simulations to charac - terize how the nucleotide affects the low - energy states of these systems . The interface between subdomains SD2 – SD4 , which is important for polymerization , is stabilized in an actin ﬁlament - like ( F - actin ) conformation in ATP - bound G - actin . Additionally , the nucleotide modulates the conformation of the SD1 - SD3 interface , a region involved in the binding of several actin - binding proteins . INTRODUCTION Actin is a highly abundant protein found in all eukaryotic cells . As a central component of the cytoskeleton , it facili - tates cell motility , cell division , and cellular transport ( 1 ) by the dynamic polymerization of its subunits ( 2 ) . This polymerization in turn is affected by the nucleotide bound at the cleft of each actin subunit ( 3 , 4 ) . Functionally , ATP and ADP - bound subunits behave very differently : they polymerize at different rates ( 5 ) and have different afﬁnities for various actin - binding proteins ( 6 ) . During treadmilling , ATP facilitates the addition of actin monomers onto the barbed end of the ﬁlament . The afﬁnity of ATP - bound actin for the barbed end is ~ 10 times that of ADP - bound subunits and the association rate is ~ 5 times faster ( 5 ) . ADP - bound subunits are believed to interact more weakly with one another in the actin ﬁlament , increasing ﬁlament ﬂexibility and facilitating depolymeriza - tion at the pointed end ( 7 ) . Additionally , ADP - bound ﬁla - ments have a higher afﬁnity for the actin - severing protein coﬁlin than do ATP - bound ﬁlaments . The nucleotide also modulates the afﬁnity of actin monomers for actin - binding proteins , including proﬁlin and ADF / coﬁlin ( 8 ) . In crystal structures , however , ATP and ADP - bound actin monomers appear very similar ( 8 – 11 ) . Several conforma - tional differences between them have been observed , but none of these are generally accepted . The current picture ( reviewed in Kudryashov and Reisler ( 12 ) ) is that there are multiple regions in actin that exist in dynamic equilibria , and the nucleotide alters the relative stabilities of each conformation . Of these alterations , the most global struc - tural change is the opening of the nucleotide - binding cleft of actin ( see Fig . 1 ) . Other proteins within the actin super - family , including hexokinase , Arp2 , Arp3 ( 13 ) , and ParM ( 14 ) , have been shown to have an open cleft when there is no nucleotide bound . Biochemical experiments have sug - gested that in actin , the cleft may at least transiently open and the open state is more frequently populated in the ADP - bound state ( 12 , 15 – 18 ) . The structure of an open state of actin was determined in two separate studies , but in both cases the actin was cocrystallized with proﬁlin ( 19 , 20 ) . Molecular - dynamics ( MD ) simulations in which this struc - ture was simulated after removal of the proﬁlin molecule showed that the cleft closes , which suggests that the open cleft is not a low - energy conformation ( 21 ) . Additional MD simulations conﬁrmed the ﬁndings that the nucleotide does not signiﬁcantly contribute to the extreme opening of the cleft ( 22 , 23 ) . Several conformational changes involving only local re - gions have also been identiﬁed . The S - loop ( residues 70 – 79 ) is believed to coordinate with the g - phosphate of ATP , acting as the nucleotide - sensing switch ( 24 ) . The nucleotide state has also been correlated with two more distant confor - mational changes : the folding of the D - loop ( residues 40 – 51 ) and the conformation of the W - loop ( residues 165 – 172 ) . The folding of the D - loop has been proposed as a mechanism for nucleotide - dependent regulation of ﬁla - ment dynamics , based on crystallographic and MD data ( 10 , 25 – 27 ) . This is in agreement with experiments that showed a change in the signal from the ﬂuorescently labeled Submitted October 7 , 2013 , and accepted for publication March 6 , 2014 . * Correspondence : gavoth @ uchicago . edu Editor : Bert de Groot . (cid:1) 2014 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 14 / 04 / 1710 / 11 $ 2 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 03 . 012 1710 Biophysical Journal Volume 106 April 2014 1710 – 1720 D - loop region in G - actin when ATP was switched for ADP ( 28 , 29 ) . The role of the D - loop remains controversial , how - ever . Some MD studies indicated that switching nucleotides had no effect on the D - loop ( 23 ) . Further , a discrete switch - ing between states is unlikely , since this region has also been shown to be highly conformationally mobile in both ATP and ADP - bound F - actin ( 30 ) . However , the relative popula - tions of folded and unfolded D - loops may depend on the state of the nucleotide and represent a complex free - energy landscape with multiple local minima , as shown by biased MD simulations ( 26 ) . Finally , the conformation of the W - loop has been shown to correlate with the state of the bound nucleotide ( 27 ) and is believed to mediate the open - ing of the cleft region in concert with proﬁlin binding ( 20 ) . In addition to the lack of consensus about how the nucle - otide can affect the conformation of a subunit , very few details are known about how these changes regulate the rate of and afﬁnity for polymerization . In one experiment , addition of Mg 2 þ to ATP - bound 1 , 5 - IAEDANS - labeled actin ( Cys - 374 ) led to a slow 25 – 35 % change in ﬂuores - cence ( t 1 / 2 ~ 10 – 15 s ) , suggesting a change in the hydropho - bic cleft region that was interpreted as activation for polymerization ( 31 ) . This change was absent in ADP - bound actin . Actin polymerization is dependent on the addition of a divalent cation , and the lack of a strong change in ﬂuores - cence upon addition of Mg 2 þ in ADP - bound actin has been interpreted as evidence that G - actin does not adopt an activated state unless ATP is bound . Since ﬁlament formation is known to require the ﬂat - tening of the subunit ( 32 ) , we hypothesize that the relative free energy of this motion is affected by the bound nucleo - tide , and that ATP stabilizes ﬂattened conformations that are more likely to polymerize . This was suggested in the orig - inal Oda model for the ﬁlament , proposed by Oda et al . ( 32 ) ; however , it was unclear from that work whether the ﬂattened conformation was possible in the monomeric environment or whether ﬂattening was uniquely enabled by intersubunit contacts . A superclosed monomeric actin conformation was observed in MD simulations ( 23 ) . How - ever , as we noted in a previous publication , we only observe this superclosed conformation in simulations in which we do not explicitly place water molecules in the locations observed in the crystal structure ( 33 ) . Furthermore , the time - scale of transition between the G - actin and superclosed states ( within 4 ns ) seems to be too fast , since polymeriza - tion is likely to occur on the order of microseconds in the cell ( k on ¼ 11 . 6 m M (cid:2) 1 s (cid:2) 1 ( 5 ) ; G - actin concentration ¼ 100 m M ( 34 ) ) . To accelerate sampling and characterize the nucleotide - dependent energetics of actin subunit ﬂattening , we therefore performed umbrella sampling ( US ) MD simu - lations of ATP and ADP bound starting from both a ﬂattened F - actin ( Oda model ) conformation of monomeric actin that was gradually twisted and the native G - actin monomer conformation that was gradually ﬂattened . MATERIALS AND METHODS System setup For each nucleotide state , two sets of monomeric actin structures were generated starting from either the G - actin crystal structures ( Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) ID : 1NWK for ATP - bound ( 10 ) and 1J6Z for ADP - bound ( 11 ) ) or the Oda model for F - actin ( PDB ID : 2ZWH for both ADP and ATP ( 32 ) , referred to here as O - ADPand O - ATP , respectively ) . To eliminate variability due to the conformation of the D - loop , in all systems the D - loop was replaced by the unfolded loop from the PDB 1ATN structure . The crys - tal structures were solvated , ionized , and equilibrated , and all - atom MD simulations were run for 50 ns as described previously ( 33 ) . 1D US simulations The actin monomer simulations that started in the Oda conformation spon - taneously twisted to a G - like conformation during the equilibrium simula - tion , and snapshots from this trajectory with the correct propeller twist for each US window were selected . Since the monomer simulations starting from the G - actin conformations did not show this ﬂattening , the propeller twist dihedral angle was incrementally biased to create appropriate starting structures starting at (cid:2) 21 . 25 (cid:3) and with each window generated after pree - quilibration of the previous window . The range of propeller twists sampled FIGURE 1 The 12 - site CG model contains four main sites , representing the cores of the subdomains of actin , and eight minor sites , representing re - gions that are highly conformationally mobile , functionally important , or solvent exposed . Mapping from the all - atom ( a ) to CG ( b ) representation is shown , along with the two collective variables that are biased during US : the dihedral twist and the cleft width . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 Nucleotide Regulation of G - Actin 1711 was (cid:2) 36 . 25 (cid:3) to (cid:2) 1 . 25 (cid:3) for G - actin and (cid:2) 28 . 75 to (cid:2) 1 . 25 for the Oda conformations , with 2 . 5 (cid:3) between windows . A force constant of 0 . 598 kcal mol (cid:2) 1 degree (cid:2) 2 ( chosen based on ﬂuctuations in unbiased simu - lation ) was used to restrain the propeller twist to the target value . Each win - dow was preequilibrated for 200 ps , followed by 4 ns of sampling . All simulations were performed using NAMD ( 35 ) in the constant NPT ensemble at 310 K and 1 atm of pressure , using Langevin dynamics to ther - mostat the system and the Nose´ - Hoover Langevin barostat . Free - energy plots were generated using the weighted histogram analysis method ( WHAM ) to combine sampling windows ( 36 ) . Coarse - grained model The all - atom MD simulation trajectories were mapped into a 12 - site coarse - grained ( CG ) representation as described previously ( 37 ) ( Fig . 1 a ) . Details about which parts of the protein were mapped to speciﬁc CG sites are pro - vided in Table S1 in the Supporting Material . To consistently align actin subunits , we designed an internal reference frame . The origin was set at CG site 3 ( the core of SD3 ) . The x axis was chosen to lie along the vector connecting CG site 1 ( the core of SD1 ) and CG site 3 , and the y axis was chosen to be perpendicular to the x axis and the vector connecting CG site 3 and CG site 4 ( the core of SD4 ) . All structures were shifted and rotated to align their internal refer - ence frames before calculating the principal components of motion in the CG coordinates . Path reﬁnement using a CG double - well model We applied the ﬁnite - temperature string method with swarms ( 38 ) to the G - actin to Oda - actin transition in an ADP - bound actin monomer using a two - state elastic network model ( with crystal structures 1J6Z and 2ZWH as endpoints ) . The absolute coordinates of a 13 - site CG model of actin were chosen as the collective variable space for the string . The 13 sites were sites 1 – 4 , 6 – 8 , 11 , and 12 of the current model , and four sites within the D - loop region ( residues 40 – 43 , 44 – 45 , 46 – 47 , and 48 – 51 ) . This was done to increase the resolution of the CG sites on the D - loop conformation beyond just a single site . Since the N - terminus is not resolved in the 1J6Z structureandthemodelwasbasedontheC a atomsintheprotein , theCGsites representingthenucleotide ( site9 ) andtheN - terminus ( site10 ) wereomitted . 2D US simulations The starting structures for each two - dimensional ( 2D ) simulation system were based on the crystal structures speciﬁed above . These structures were solvated , minimized , heated , and preequilibrated as described in the Supporting Material . For each system , we initialized the four closest win - dows to this starting point . The windows were constrained with a force con - stant of 0 . 6 kcal / mol degree 2 and 3 . 75 kcal / mol A˚ 2 for the dihedral angle and cleft width , respectively . The systems were equilibrated for 2 ns , and then 4 ns of production sampling was performed . WHAM ( 36 ) was used to combine the sampling windows . New windows were initialized using the self - learning US algorithm ( 39 ) . The free - energy surface was progres - sively better deﬁned with an energy cutoff increasing from 2 to 6 kcal / mol in 1 kcal / mol increments . The ﬁnal energy landscapes were obtained after eight iterations using a bin size of 0 . 2 A˚ for the cleft width variable and 0 . 5 (cid:3) for the twist angle . Calculating the area explored by each simulation To obtain a normalized area measure , the free - energy surfaces ( ranging from 16 . 1 to 30 . 9 in cleft width and from (cid:2) 39 . 75 to 7 . 25 in twist angle ) were scaled such that each side had a dimensionless length of one and the surface had a total area of one . Probability levels were set by deter - mining the minimum energy cutoff at which the given percentage of confor - mations , as determined by the Boltzmann distribution , would have an energy less than or equal to the cutoff . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The output of 1D US simulations depends on both the initial conﬁguration and the bound nucleotide We started our investigation by attempting to characterize a simple 1D free - energy pathway for the ﬂattening of the actin subunit , a motion that is associated with ﬁlament formation . Since ATP - bound actin subunits polymerize signiﬁcantly faster than ADP - bound subunits , we anticipated that ATP would stabilize ﬂattened conﬁgurations of actin . To test this hypothesis , we performed US simulations using a col - lective variable description of the ﬂatness of the subunit , CG dihedral angle 2 - 1 - 3 - 4 ( shown in Fig . 1 ; see Materials and Methods for details ) . We initialized these simulations in two ways : by twisting the F - actin conﬁguration ( Oda model ) and by ﬂattening the G - actin conﬁguration . We independently determined the 1D free - energy curve ( not shown ) for each set of conﬁgurations and observed a strong dependence on the starting conforma - tion , suggesting that there are differences between the G - actin and Oda conformations that are not fully sampled by 1D free - energy calculations . We interpret this to mean that the underlying complexity of the molecular interactions and the limit of ﬁnite MD sampling prevent the convergence of the 1D free - energy curves . Although the subunit twist collective variable is a good ﬁrst approximation to the global conformational rearrange - ment between the G - actin structure and the Oda model , the lack of convergence between the 1D US simulations sug - gests that other collective motions or local high - energy tran - sitions ( such as the breaking of an electrostatic bridge or the rotation of a backbone dihedral angle ) may be involved . It is advantageous to identify these factors , both to improve our understanding of the G - to F - actin transition and to verify whether they are realistic or instead represent artifacts of the structural reﬁnement procedure . Principal component analysis reveals that the major difference between the Oda - and G - actin simulations is the distance between CG sites 2 and 4 To facilitate analysis , we projected the all - atom simulation results onto a reduced space of CG sites and concatenated the CG representations of the G - actin and Oda windows rep - resenting equivalent twist angles . Since the ﬁrst half of the trajectory was from the G - actin simulations and the second half was from the F - actin simulations , the slowest mode identiﬁed by principal component analysis represents the difference between the two . It should be noted that since this is an artiﬁcially constructed trajectory of selected Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 1712 Saunders et al . frames from different simulations we expect that only the ﬁrst mode can be meaningfully interpreted . We validated this by comparing the mode values obtained for each of the top four modes for the G - actin and Oda conformations . As shown in Fig . S1 C , only the ﬁrst mode differentiates be - tween the two conformations . This mode corresponds to a change in the distance between CG sites 2 and 4 , as illus - trated by the strong correlation between the value of the ﬁrst mode and the 2 - 4 distance ( Fig . S1 , A and B ) for both ADP and ATP - bound actin subunits at a variety of dihedral angle values . Although there were other changes in this ﬁrst mode , the 2 - 4 distance was most consistently observed across win - dows to separate the Oda - and G - actin simulations . Complex coupling between the twist and cleft width is preserved in a simpliﬁed double - well representation To qualitatively evaluate the coupling between the subunit twist and the cleft width , we projected the minimum free - energy path obtained using the ﬁnite - temperature string method with swarms ( 38 ) onto these two CG variables . As shown by the black line in Fig . 2 c , there is a complex coupling of these two degrees of freedom even in this simpliﬁed representation of actin . Furthermore , the pathway determined by this method shows reasonable agreement with the free - energy landscape obtained using US , as described in the next section . These results suggest that the change in cleft width observed in our simulations is en - coded in the structure of actin and is not likely to be an arti - fact of either the simulation or the structural reﬁnement procedures . Self - learning adaptive 2D US results in distinct energy minima with clear nucleotide dependence To allow the system to move more naturally through a 2D free - energy space deﬁned by the CG dihedral and cleft width variables ( cf . Fig . 1 b ) , we applied the recently devel - oped self - learning US algorithm ( 39 ) . Unlike traditional US , this adaptive method starts only with a small set of simula - tion windows very close to the initial structure . These win - dows are fully sampled and used to generate neighboring windows . In this way , the system is minimally perturbed and windows that are far from the starting structure are generated and equilibrated in a stepwise manner . Rather than predeﬁning a sampling range , the method generates only windows below a given free - energy cutoff , thereby reducing the cost of the simulation by exploring only phys - ically relevant regions and naturally deﬁning the range of sampling . We have previously noted that the solvation of the active site is critical for determining the stability of the actin sub - unit , and have taken steps to ensure appropriate solvation of this region ( 33 ) . However , when sampling the opening of the cleft , the solvation of the electrostatic residues bridging SD2 and SD4 may also affect the free - energy landscape . To address this concern , we included the waters observed in the crystal structures that were within 5 A˚ of the protein for the G - actin simulations . We also placed these waters around the Oda model , aligning each domain independently , and removed waters with obvious clashes . We constrained the entire protein subunit to its starting position during mini - mization and preequilibration to allow the water molecules to fully penetrate the protein . Fig . 2 shows the 2D potential of mean force ( PMF ) results obtained after self - learning adaptive US was performed for an actin monomer in the G - actin and Oda conﬁgurations when bound to either ADP or ATP . Here again , there is a dependence of the results on the initial monomer conforma - tion , so the 2D PMF results cannot be fully converged . It should be noted that this ﬁnding differs fundamentally from the behavior observed by Splettstoesser et al . ( 23 ) , who reported multiple transitions from the G - actin state to a superclosed state in a series of unbiased MD simulations 4 ns in length . ( For a more in - depth discussion about the dif - ferences between our simulations and the superclosed state reported by Splettstoesser et al . ( 23 ) , see Supporting Mate - rial . ) In contrast to the 1D PMF results , we now observe clearly distinct local energy minima in the collective vari - able space that are well deﬁned , locally converged within FIGURE 2 The 2D free - energy surface of the actin monomer as a func - tion of both the dihedral twist and the nucleotide cleft width reveals that both collective variables are affected by the bound nucleotide , and that ADP - bound actin is more conformationally mobile in both the Oda and G - actin conformations . The line in the Oda - ADP panel indicates the transi - tion path between G - actin and Oda structures , as identiﬁed using the string method with a double - well CG potential . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 Nucleotide Regulation of G - Actin 1713 each simulation , and well separated between simulations . This allows us to deﬁne locally stable free - energy minima that can be contrasted to better elucidate the nucleotide - dependent differences in each state and to identify addi - tional collective variables that may be used in the future to study the G - to F - actin transition . Thus , although we do not observe a transition between the open and closed states or between the ADP and ATP - bound states , it is still infor - mative to compare the locally stable endpoints of these two slow processes . A comparison of the ADP - and ATP - bound states reveals that ADP - bound subunits are more twisted and have a some - what more open cleft than ATP - bound subunits in the lowest - energy state accessed from each of the two starting conﬁgurations . In addition , the nucleotide changes the area of conformational space that is accessible , particularly at higher - energy level contour lines . The fact that these results are still not converged despite the slow stepwise application of a bias up to 6 kcal / mol sug - gests that even in monomeric actin , the Oda - like conforma - tion represents a locally stable conformation . To verify that the simulations were locally equilibrated , we plotted the tra - jectory of the lowest - energy window in each of the states onto the two collective variables that we biased . As shown in Fig . S2 , in each case the trajectory reversibly crosses into regions overlapping neighboring windows many times , indicating that the simulations are locally equilibrated . To quantify the difference in structure , we determined the minimum energy point in each landscape ( see Table S2 ) . When starting from the G - actin conformation , the lowest - energy state becomes 3 . 5 (cid:3) more twisted when ADP is bound than when ATP is bound ( (cid:2) 26 . 25 (cid:3) vs . (cid:2) 22 . 75 (cid:3) ) . Starting from the Oda conﬁguration , this difference is decreased to 2 (cid:3) ( (cid:2) 8 . 25 (cid:3) vs . (cid:2) 6 . 25 (cid:3) ) . The cleft width also shows some dependence on the nucleotide : ADP - bound actin subunits have a more open cleft than ATP - bound subunits . Interest - ingly , in the G - actin simulations , the subunit twist appears to be independent of the cleft width , particularly in the ADP - bound case . In contrast , the Oda simulations reveal a strong correlation between twisting and the opening of the cleft . The contacts between SD2 and SD4 ( described in more detail below ) may modulate the energetics of ﬂat - tening and couple twisting and cleft opening . To quantitatively compare the area of conﬁgurational space explored by each system , we calculated the area of the polygon enclosed by a contour line for a range of different energies . These levels were chosen to represent speciﬁc probability cutoffs as explained in the Materials and Methods section . In addition , the CG coordinates along which we performed US were rescaled such that the plot area shown in Fig . 2 was square and equal to one . In Fig . S3 we plot the area explored as a function of probability cutoff . The nucleotide - dependent difference in conforma - tional mobility is masked when we look at only the half of the landscape that is lowest in energy ( e . g . , 50 % level , 0 . 43 kcal / mol ) . However , with a cutoff encompassing 75 % of the potential conﬁgurations ( 0 . 85 kcal / mol ) , ADP - bound G - actin is clearly more conformationally mobile than ATP - bound G - actin , and with a 90 % cutoff ( 1 . 4 kcal / mol ) this difference is seen for both G - actin and Oda simulations . At a cutoff of 99 . 99 % ( 5 . 7 kcal / mol ) , ADP - bound G - actin explores twice as much conformational space as does ATP - bound G - actin ( 0 . 21 vs . 0 . 11 , where the entire area shown in Fig . 2 is normalized to one ) . The simulations that start in the Oda conﬁgurations show a similar trend ( 0 . 13 vs . 0 . 09 ) . The increased mobility of ADP - bound actin was previously suggested based on biochemical experi - ments ( 12 ) and MD simulations ( 23 ) ; however , this mobility was related to the larger - scale switching between open and closed ( or closed and superclosed ) cleft states . In this study , we looked at the dynamics within each ( noninterconverting ) substate and found that even on this local scale , ADP - bound actin is more conformationally mobile than ATP - bound actin . Root mean - square deviation analysis reveals that the internal structure of the CG sites does not change We hypothesized that ATP - bound actin is less conforma - tionally mobile than ADP - bound actin because its lowest - energy state is relatively more stable . To validate this supposition , we characterized the lowest - energy US window using a multiscale analysis method . Using a previously developed CG mapping method ( 37 ) , we calculated the C a root mean - square deviation ( RMSD ) for each of the four main CG sites to determine whether internal conformational changes could account for the differences in energetics be - tween different nucleotides or between different conﬁgura - tions . As shown in Table S3 , the ﬂuctuation of the CG site within a trajectory is of the same order of magnitude as the difference when we compare the average structures of different nucleotide states given the same starting conﬁgura - tion . A comparison of the G - actin and Oda lowest - energy windows for the same nucleotide shows that in some cases , the RMSD is twice that observed in the simulation , but still well below the resolution of the starting structures . We conclude that neither the nucleotide nor the G - actin to Oda transformation signiﬁcantly alters the backbone morphology of the main CG sites . The main CG sites reorient in response to both the nucleotide and the G - actin to Oda conformational change We next determined whether there were any signiﬁcant changes in the inter - CG site distances for the main CG sites in the lowest - energy windows for each US simulation sys - tem . Because each CG site represents a ( relatively ) rigid body rather than a point mass , it is also useful to understand Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 1714 Saunders et al . how the relative positions of pairs of CG sites change . To that end , we assigned each CG site an internal frame of reference corresponding to the moments of inertia calcu - lated using only the C a atoms . We designated one of the CG sites in each pair as the reference site ( ﬁrst CG site in each pair in Table S4 ) . In the all - atom representation , the reference site was aligned for all frames and for both conﬁg - urations in the comparison . We could then directly compare the relative position of the center of mass of the comparison site and the orientation of its principal axes between sys - tems . Changes in the center - of - mass position reﬂect transla - tions of the comparison site relative to the reference CG site , and changes in the third moment of inertia ( the long axis of the CG site ) reﬂect rotations of the comparison site relative to the reference CG site . The ﬁrst two columns of Table S4 characterize the nucle - otide - dependent differences in the G - actin and Oda confor - mations , respectively . The largest change is in the distance between CG sites 2 and 4 , but this difference is not very big ( ~ 1 A˚ for both conformations ) . Treating the CG sites as 3D bodies rather than just as points reveals more inter - esting changes . In G - actin , the nucleotide primarily changes the relative positions of SD2 and SD4 , whereas in the Oda conformation the nucleotide primarily changes the orienta - tion of SD2 . The third and fourth columns of Table S4 show the differ - ences between the G - actin and Oda conformations for ADP and ATP - bound actin , respectively . If the G - actin to Oda transition were composed of a simple rotation of the actin subunit , we would expect to see a change in the distance and the relative position between CG sites 2 and 4 , and a change in the relative orientation between CG sites 1 and 3 and CG sites 2 and 4 . We see the expected change in dis - tance between CG sites 2 and 4 , but the relative positions and orientations reveal a more complex transition . As expected , the largest change in relative position is seen for the CG site 2 - 4 pair . However , all of the other pairs of CG sites also show some degree of translation and reorien - tation between the G - actin and Oda conformations . CG sites 3 and 4 shift and rotate more relative to one another in the G - actin to Oda transition when ADP is bound , and CG sites 1 and 2 shift and rotate more relative to one another in the G - actin to Oda transition when ATP is bound . CG sites 3 and 1 should rotate relative to one another during ﬂattening . In ATP - bound actin , these two sites reorient relative to one another much more than in ADP - bound actin , but in both cases they do so less than expected . ATP thus couples the ﬂattening of the subunit with twisting of the nucleotide - binding cleft , whereas in ADP the ﬂattening appears to happen mostly as a result of the reorientation of SD2 . These differences help explain why the simulations that started in different conformations did not converge : there appear to be additional reorientations of the subdomains required to facilitate subdomain ﬂattening that are not fully sampled in these simulations . To better understand the nature of these reorganizations , we looked at the interfaces between CG sites on an atomistic level . Reorientation of the CG sites correlates with atomistic - scale differences in inter - CG - site contacts In Fig . 3 we show the average protein backbone structure over the lowest - energy sampling window for each of the simulation systems after aligning the internal reference frame for SD4 . Consistent with the CG analysis , the position and orientation of SD2 relative to SD4 depends on the bound nucleotide in G - actin . The position of SD2 in ATP - bound G - actin is more similar to the Oda conformation than would be expected based on the dihedral twist in the minimum energy window . These changes in relative posi - tion correlate with changes in the side - chain interactions that hold SD2 and SD4 together . Important residues are de - picted in Fig . 3 , and detailed distance information and SEs FIGURE 3 The interface between SD2 and SD4 is affected by both the nucleotide and the starting conﬁguration . ( a ) Backbone structure of the average structure from the lowest - energy US window for each system after aligning the internal reference frame of SD4 . ( b – e ) Contacts between SD2 and SD4 in G - ATP , Oda - ATP , G - ADP , and Oda - ADP , respectively . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 Nucleotide Regulation of G - Actin 1715 are provided in Table S5 . In ADP - bound G - actin , the top of the cleft is held together by the relatively weak interaction between Thr - 203 and Arg - 62 ( Fig . 3 d ) . In ATP - bound G - actin , the translation and reorientation of SD2 relative to SD4 allows Arg - 62 to form a salt bridge with Glu - 207 ( Fig . 3 b ) , as well as to interact with Thr - 203 . The weaker interaction between SD4 and SD2 in ADP - bound actin may account for the increased conformational space that ADP - bound G - actin is able to explore . In the Oda conformation , nucleotide - dependent changes in the relative orientation of the SD2 to SD4 conformation alter the interactions that stabilize this region . In ADP - bound Oda actin , a single stable contact is formed between SD2 and SD4 in the average structure of the lowest - energy window , i . e . , that between Glu - 207 and Tyr - 69 ( Fig . 3 e ) . This contact is also observed in ATP - bound actin , but in addition Glu - 207 intermittently forms a salt bridge with Gln - 59 ( see Fig . 5 c ) . Arg - 62 also forms a salt bridge with Glu - 205 , further stabilizing the minimum energy conforma - tion in ATP - bound Oda actin , whereas in ADP - bound actin , Arg - 62 intermittently interacts with Asp - 244 . The reorientation of SD2 relative to SD4 may also affect the stabilization of the D - loop , a region that was previously implicated as potentially contributing to nucleotide - depen - dent differences in actin polymerization . All of the simula - tions that we performed started with the D - loop in an unfolded conﬁguration . Our simulations did not show a sig - niﬁcant difference in the ﬂexibility of the D - loop ( as measured by the internal RMSD during the low - energy window simulations ) based on changing either the nucleo - tide or the conformation . This is not surprising given that we did not accelerate sampling in the D - loop region , and all of the D - loops remained in an unfolded conformation . It was previously shown that D - loop rearrangement is a slow event with signiﬁcant energy barriers along the transi - tion path ( 26 ) . However , within this unfolded ensemble , the contacts between the helix in SD2 and the D - loop appear to be modulated by the conformation of the actin subunit . There are more contacts between residues 52 – 66 and the D - loop in G - actin ( 54 . 1 5 0 . 7 for G - ADP ; 51 . 0 5 0 . 7 for G - ATP ) than in the Oda conformation ( 36 . 4 5 0 . 5 for Oda ADP ; 38 . 8 5 0 . 5 for Oda ATP ) . In addition , the nucle - otide appears to affect the backbone conformation of the D - loop , speciﬁcally the hydrogen - bond formation between residues 44 and 48 . We speculate that these collective vari - ables may represent early differences in D - loop behavior that led to the differences reported by Pfaendtner et al . ( 26 ) . The role of the interaction between the D - loop and the helix in SD2 in mediating D - loop behavior is supported by very recent combined MD and experimental data that suggest that a magnesium cation at this interface may modulate the stiffness of actin ﬁlaments ( 40 ) . The presence and solvation of this cation is likely to be important in the future for accurate simulations of the dynamics of the D - loop . In the Oda conformation , the nucleotide affects the posi - tion of SD4 relative to SD3 . This is clear from the backbone structures shown in Fig . 4 ( with SD2 removed for clarity ) , where the internal reference frames of SD3 are aligned for all structures . SD4 shifts toward the nucleotide cleft and rotates toward SD1 . This clamping motion explains why the relative position and rotation of SD3 relative to SD4 in the G - actin to Oda comparison is larger in ADP - bound actin than in ATP - bound actin . At the side - chain level , this is reﬂected in the interactions of Arg - 210 ( see Tables S5 and S6 for quantitation ) . In the ADP - bound Oda minimum - energy window Arg - 210 associ - ates with Asp - 157 in SD3 , whereas in all the other mini - mum - energy windows Arg - 210 interacts with Glu - 207 in SD4 . Arg - 210 also interacts with the ATP’s ribose ring in the Oda system . This interaction is broken when Arg - 210 moves to interact with Asp - 157 , potentially destabilizing ADP binding in the Oda conformation . FIGURE 4 The relative position of SD4 changes signiﬁcantly in the Oda ADP - bound actin system compared with the other systems simulated . ( a ) Backbone structure of the average position of the lowest - energy US win - dow for each system after aligning the internal reference frame for SD3 , with SD2 removed for clarity . ( b and c ) Contacts between SD3 and SD4 for Oda ATP and Oda ADP , respectively . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 1716 Saunders et al . The relative positions of SD1 and SD3 also appear to be regulated by the nucleotide . As can be seen in Fig . 5 , there are signiﬁcant differences in the positions of the phosphate - binding loops ( residues 14 – 16 and 156 – 159 ) , the sensor loop ( residues 70 – 78 ) , the proline loop ( residues 108 – 111 ) , the W - loop ( residues 165 – 172 ) , and the C - terminus . Analysis of the side - chain contacts reveals that even though the phosphate - binding loops shift position , their contacts remain more or less the same ( data not shown ) . There are , however , other nucleotide - dependent changes in the hydro - phobic clusters between SD1 and SD3 formed by the sensor loop , the proline loop , and the W - loop ( see Table S5 for values and SEs ) . The orientation of the sensor loop and its coordination with residues 158 and 159 changes with both the nucleotide and the conformation . In G - actin , the nucle - otide changes the interactions between residues 72 and 73 in the sensor loop and residues 158 and 159 at the end of the second phosphate - binding loop . In ADP - bound G - actin , the sensor loop is relatively disordered and residue 72 con - tacts residue 158 near the phosphate - binding loop of CG site 3 , mostly through its carbonyl oxygen . In ATP - bound actin and in the Oda conformations , the sensor loop is ordered into a b turn . The carbonyl oxygen of residue 73 hydrogen bonds with the backbone nitrogen of residue 75 . This shifts the sensor loop down and orients MeHis toward the phos - phate - binding loop of CG site 3 . In the Oda conformation , an additional close contact is formed between residue 74 and the phosphate loop that is not present in either of the G - actin conformations . The sensor loop was previously implicated as being important for sensing the nucleotide ( 10 ) . Results from previous MD simulations of this phenom - enon have not been consistent , with some simulations showing an effect on this loop ( 27 ) and others revealing no effect ( 22 ) . We suspect that these differences are due to differences in how the active site is solvated , an issue we re - turn to in Conclusions . The position of the proline loop is also affected by the nucleotide . Comparing ATP - bound actin with ADP - bound actin , residue 109 in the proline loop is farther from residue 161 in G - actin and farther from residue 163 in Oda actin . These changes may play a role in modulating the conforma - tion of the W - loop ( discussed below ) in response to the iden - tity of the nucleotide . The interactions between the proline loop and the W - loop are also affected by the conformational state of actin : residue 110 makes closer contacts with resi - dues 172 and 175 in the W - loop in G - actin than in Oda actin . The proline loop was previously implicated in modulating the polymerization of actin and its ATPase activity ( 41 ) . A ﬁnal nucleotide - dependent difference that may alter the accessibility of the hydrophobic cleft at the bottom of actin is observed in the Oda simulations : in ATP - bound actin the C - terminus is fully solvent exposed , whereas in the ADP - bound system ( and in the G - actin systems ) it is tucked into the cleft . In ADP - bound Oda actin this association is particularly strong : Phe - 375 interacts directly with Tyr - 169 . This difference in the positioning of the C - terminus is interesting in light of the experimental observation of a slow change in the ﬂuorescence of C - terminal labeled FIGURE 5 The hydrophobic region between SD1 and SD3 adapts to a range of different twists . ( a ) The backbone structures of the average posi - tion of the lowest - energy sampling window for each system after aligning the internal reference frame for SD1 , with SD4 removed for clarity . ( b – e ) Contacts between SD1 and SD3 in G - ATP , Oda - ATP , G - ADP , and Oda - ADP , respectively . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 Nucleotide Regulation of G - Actin 1717 ATP - bound actin upon the addition of magnesium , which is believed to be associated with the activation of the subunit for polymerization ( 31 ) . However , given the limited time - scales of the simulations , this difference should not be overinterpreted . The W - loop ( residues 165 – 172 ) has been implicated as a nucleotide sensor ( 4 , 12 , 27 ) . The nucleotide appears to modulate the solvent accessibility of this region by changing the hydrophobic interactions mentioned above . To quanti - tate this effect , we calculated the solvent - accessible surface area of the W - loop in the average structure of the lowest - en - ergy window for each system . The W - loop in ADP - bound G - actin was signiﬁcantly more solvent exposed than in ATP - bound actin ( 537 A˚ 2 compared with 475 A˚ 2 in G - ATP bound actin ) . The Oda conformations had a very similar W - loop accessibility ( 510 A˚ 2 in ATP - bound vs . 502 A˚ 2 for ADP - bound ) , but showed a signiﬁcant difference in the region just above the W - loop ( residues 172 – 175 ) which was signiﬁcantly more solvent accessible in ATP - bound Oda actin ( 263 A˚ 2 ) than in ADP - bound Oda actin ( 234 A˚ 2 ) . Nucleotide - and conformation - dependent differences in interactions between the nucleotide and the protein The nucleotide - dependent long - range changes in inter - CG site contacts described above must in some way be mediated by interactions between the nucleotide and the local protein environment . Additionally , since actin subunit ﬂattening is believed to facilitate ATP hydrolysis , we expect there to be conformation - dependent changes in these interactions . In Table S6 we summarize some of these key distances for residues previously identiﬁed as interacting with the nucleotide , including the phosphate - binding loops ( 13 – 17 and 156 – 159 ) , the sensor loop ( 71 – 74 ) , the magnesium - coordinating residues ( 11 and 154 ) , and a residue at the back of the nucleotide - binding cleft ( 301 ) . Ser - 14 , in the ﬁrst phosphate - binding loop , has been implicated as being important for sensing the state of the nucleotide and modulating the conformation of the sensor loop in response ( 10 ) . Our simulations show additional nucleotide - dependent differences in the contacts between the phosphate - binding loops and the nucleotide . In G - actin , ATP makes closer contacts with residues 14 – 16 in the ﬁrst phosphate - binding loop , and with residues 156 , 158 , and 159 in the second phosphate - binding loop than does ADP . In the Oda conformation , both ATP and ADP form close contacts with the ﬁrst phosphate loop , whereas the second phosphate loop shows the same nucleotide dependence as in G - actin . The sensor loop also interacts differently with ATP compared with ADP . In both conformations , residues 71 , 73 , and 74 are closer to ATP than to ADP . This differential stabilization of the sensor loop is not a direct interaction—in all cases the closest contact is > 4 A˚ . As discussed above , the response of the sensor loop to changes in the nucleotide has not been consistent among MD simulations . The indirect nature of these interactions is consistent with the explana - tion that this inconsistency is caused by inadequate solva - tion of the nucleotide - binding cleft . Two acidic residues at the base of the nucleotide cleft ( 11 and 54 ) coordinate the ﬁrst solvation shell of waters around the nucleotide - bound magnesium . Table S6 shows the average closest distance between the magnesium and these residues . It is perhaps surprising that ADP - bound magne - sium is more closely coordinated to these residues in G - actin . It is likely that this occurs because the g - phosphate of ATP holds the nucleotide tightly upward against the phos - phate binding loops , whereas in ADP the phosphate tail can shift downward to facilitate this closer coordination . This downward motion of the phosphate tail is further reﬂected in the closer contact between the a - phosphate and residue 301 in ADP - bound actin . The ﬂattened Oda conformation appears to accommodate close coordination with both the phosphate - binding loops and these acidic residues , but still shows a slight downward motion compared with ATP based on the contact with residue 301 . CONCLUSIONS Based on the free - energy landscapes we determined in sim - ulations and our multiscale analysis of the most energeti - cally favorable window in those simulations , we conclude that there are signiﬁcant differences between G - actin and Oda - actin that reﬂect the identity of the bound nucleotide . Here , we consider these differences in the context of the following questions : How does the nucleotide affect the rates of polymerization ? How does the nucleotide alter the binding afﬁnity of actin binding protein proﬁlin ? What local differences in conformation might prevent the inter - conversion of G - actin and Oda - actin conformations on the scale that we can simulate ? In both the G - actin and Oda conformations , ATP - bound actin is less conformationally mobile than ADP - bound actin . The additional conformations that ADP - bound actin explored are unfavorable to polymerization , since the cleft opened and the subunit became more twisted . Thus , one possible explanation for the increased rate of polymeriza - tion is an entropic one : ATP - bound actin subunits are more likely to be in a conformation that is favorable for polymerization because they explore a smaller conforma - tional landscape . An alternative energetically based explanation for the increased rate of polymerization in ATP - bound actin can be found in the all - atom analysis of the interface between SD2 and SD4 . ATP - bound actin pref - erentially polymerizes at the barbed end of actin , so the incoming subunit will interact with the ﬁlament via the SD2 - SD4 interface . As shown in Fig . 4 , the surface formed by SD2 and SD4 in the G - actin ATP - bound simulation ( cleft Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 1718 Saunders et al . width 24 . 5 A˚ , subunit twist (cid:2) 22 . 75 (cid:3) ) is much more similar to that in the Oda structure than to that in the ADP - bound G - actin system , even without complete subunit ﬂattening or cleft closure . ATP - bound actin may therefore polymerize more rapidly than ADP - bound actin due to the favorable arrangement of the SD2 - SD4 surface . Finally , both the Oda and G - actin ATP - bound systems showed a salt bridge cross - linking SD2 and SD4 , and in both cases this bridge involved Arg - 62 . This salt bridge may explain in part why the ATP - bound actin subunits are less conformationally mobile . Arg - 62 is known to be important for polymeriza - tion : ﬁlament models show that it forms part of the intersu - bunit interface ( 43 ) , and the R62D mutant of actin is nonpolymerizable ( 44 ) . Effect of nucleotide on the afﬁnity of proﬁlin for actin Although the SD2 - SD4 interface is likely responsible for the nucleotide’s effect on polymerization , actin - binding pro - teins such as proﬁlin interact at the SD1 - SD3 interface , and their afﬁnities for actin are sensitive to the state of the nucleotide . The CG analysis described above showed changes in the relative positions and orientations of SD1 and SD3 , and the associated all - atom analysis showed that the nucleotide affects the interactions of the W - loop with the proline loop . Proﬁlin binds to the W - loop side of actin and interacts with Ala - 170 and His - 173 , among others . As discussed in the atomistic analysis of the SD1 - SD3 inter - face , the W - loop overall , including Ala - 170 , is more solvent exposed in ATP - bound G - actin , whereas in ATP - bound Oda - actin the region just above the W - loop , containing His - 173 , is signiﬁcantly more solvent exposed . These changes to favor the exposure of residues involved in the proﬁlin interface suggest a mechanism by which ATP can facilitate proﬁlin binding , consistent with experimental data showing that proﬁlin binds to ATP - bound G - actin with a higher afﬁnity than it does to ADP - bound G - actin ( 1 ) . The G - to Oda - actin conformational change Although we identiﬁed several interesting nucleotide effects on actin structure and dynamics that are consistent regard - less of the starting conﬁguration , we had hoped to see a full conversion between the G - actin and Oda ( F - actin ) states that would allow us to evaluate their relative energies and posit a mechanism for interconversion . However , even when we used self - adaptive sampling in a 2D CG collective variable space , the G - actin and Oda states did not converge within the timeframe that we could simulate . This is perhaps not surprising given the complex interactions that occur be - tween CG sites that are not directly biased by these two col - lective variables . However , even without full convergence , the simulations are enlightening in that they suggest that the Oda conﬁguration represents a local minimum even in a monomer simulation . However , this appears to be highly dependent on the solvating waters around actin , since in the initial equilibrium simulations in which the cleft was less rigorously solvated , the Oda conﬁguration showed some degree of spontaneous twisting . The solvation of actin , both at the top of the nucleotide cleft and around the mag - nesium cation at the base of the cleft , appears to critically modulate the dynamics we observe . Undersolvation of active - site clefts ( or unrealistic solvation in general ) and its inﬂuence on simulations have long been known ( 45 ) , and in the actin system may account for the signiﬁcant dif - ferences in behavior reported from MD simulations in the literature . CG analysis enabled us to identify local structural changes that may be important collective variables to sam - ple in future simulations to facilitate convergence . Based on the last two columns of Table S4 , it is clear that the sub - domains of actin change in their relative position and orien - tation more than can be described by the two collective variables that we have chosen . However , even in the simpli - ﬁed CG representation that we have chosen , and focusing only on the main CG sites , these variables would account for an additional 24 degrees of freedom ( 4 pairs of CG sites (cid:4) ( 3 rotational þ 3 translational degrees of freedom ) . The multiscale path sampling algorithm that is currently be - ing developed ( Tempkin , Qi , Weare , Dinner , unpublished ) should facilitate accelerated sampling in this collective var - iable space and enable a better understanding of the full G - actin to Oda conformational exchange in the future . The self - learning US algorithm could potentially also be used with a few additional dimensions to yield better conver - gence . Selecting some of the remaining differences between the G - actin and Oda models to bias may facilitate sampling of a full interconversion between states . Such ambitious US simulations will be attempted in the future . Most impor - tantly , perhaps , our results illustrate quite clearly the inherent challenges in developing and applying accurate highly ( or ultra ) CG models such as the one shown in Fig . 1 b for G - actin . Underlying the simpliﬁed CG represen - tation , in which numerous amino acid residues are grouped into each CG site , are a multitude of complex molecular in - teractions or states . In turn , this makes it very challenging to obtain a simple description of the interactions between the highly CG sites from a bottom - up perspective , pointing to the need for a new conceptual and methodological frame - work to represent ultra CG models such as the one we recently developed ( 46 ) . SUPPORTING MATERIAL Supporting Material , three ﬁgures , and six tables are available at http : / / www . biophysj . org / biophysj / supplemental / S0006 - 3495 ( 14 ) 00288 - 4 . This research was supported by the National Science Foundation through the Center for Multiscale Theory and Simulation ( grant CHE - 1136709 ) . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 Nucleotide Regulation of G - Actin 1719 REFERENCES 1 . Carlier , M . F . 2010 . Actin - Based Motility : Cellular , Molecular and Physical Aspects . Springer , Dordrecht , The Netherlands . 2 . Pollard , T . D . , and G . G . Borisy . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by as - sembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell . 112 : 453 – 465 . 3 . Pollard , T . D . , and J . A . Cooper . 2009 . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science . 326 : 1208 – 1212 . 4 . Oztug Durer , Z . A . , K . Diraviyam , . , E . Reisler . 2010 . F - actin struc - ture destabilization and DNase I binding loop : ﬂuctuations mutational cross - linking and electron microscopy analysis of loop states and effects on F - actin . J . Mol . Biol . 395 : 544 – 557 . 5 . Fujiwara , I . , D . Vavylonis , and T . D . Pollard . 2007 . Polymerization kinetics of ADP - and ADP - Pi - actin determined by ﬂuorescence micro - scopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 104 : 8827 – 8832 . 6 . dos Remedios , C . G . , D . Chhabra , . , N . J . Nosworthy . 2003 . Actin binding proteins : regulation of cytoskeletal microﬁlaments . Physiol . Rev . 83 : 433 – 473 . 7 . Belmont , L . D . , A . Orlova , . , E . H . Egelman . 1999 . A change in actin conformation associated with ﬁlament instability after Pi release . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 96 : 29 – 34 . 8 . Dominguez , R . , and K . C . Holmes . 2011 . Actin structure and function . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 40 : 169 – 186 . 9 . Kabsch , W . , H . G . Mannherz , . , K . C . Holmes . 1990 . Atomic struc - ture of the actin : DNase I complex . Nature . 347 : 37 – 44 . 10 . Graceffa , P . , and R . Dominguez . 2003 . Crystal structure of monomeric actin in the ATP state . Structural basis of nucleotide - dependent actin dynamics . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 34172 – 34180 . 11 . Otterbein , L . R . , P . Graceffa , and R . Dominguez . 2001 . The crystal structure of uncomplexed actin in the ADP state . Science . 293 : 708 – 711 . 12 . Kudryashov , D . S . , and E . Reisler . 2013 . ATP and ADP actin states . Biopolymers . 99 : 245 – 256 . 13 . Nolen , B . J . , R . S . Littleﬁeld , and T . D . Pollard . 2004 . Crystal structures of actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex with bound ATP or ADP . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 15627 – 15632 . 14 . van den Ent , F . , J . Møller - Jensen , . , J . Lo¨we . 2002 . F - actin - like ﬁla - ments formed by plasmid segregation protein ParM . EMBO J . 21 : 6935 – 6943 . 15 . Kinosian , H . J . , L . A . Selden , . , L . C . Gershman . 1993 . Nucleotide binding to actin . Cation dependence of nucleotide dissociation and ex - change rates . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 8683 – 8691 . 16 . Levitsky , D . I . , A . V . Pivovarova , . , O . P . Nikolaeva . 2008 . Thermal unfolding and aggregation of actin . FEBS J . 275 : 4280 – 4295 . 17 . Strzelecka - Go 1 aszewska , H . , J . Moraczewska , . , M . Mossakowska . 1993 . Localization of the tightly bound divalent - cation - dependent and nucleotide - dependent conformation changes in G - actin using limited proteolytic digestion . Eur . J . Biochem . 211 : 731 – 742 . 18 . Schu¨ler , H . 2001 . ATPase activity and conformational changes in the regulation of actin . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1549 : 137 – 147 . 19 . Chik , J . K . , U . Lindberg , and C . E . Schutt . 1996 . The structure of an open state of beta - actin at 2 . 65 A resolution . J . Mol . Biol . 263 : 607 – 623 . 20 . Porta , J . C . , and G . E . O . Borgstahl . 2012 . Structural basis for proﬁlin - mediated actin nucleotide exchange . J . Mol . Biol . 418 : 103 – 116 . 21 . Minehardt , T . J . , P . A . Kollman , . , E . Pate . 2006 . The open nucleotide pocket of the proﬁlin / actin x - ray structure is unstable and closes in the absence of proﬁlin . Biophys . J . 90 : 2445 – 2449 . 22 . Dalhaimer , P . , T . D . Pollard , and B . J . Nolen . 2008 . Nucleotide - medi - ated conformational changes of monomeric actin and Arp3 studied by molecular dynamics simulations . J . Mol . Biol . 376 : 166 – 183 . 23 . Splettstoesser , T . , F . Noe´ , . , J . C . Smith . 2009 . Nucleotide - depen - dence of G - actin conformation from multiple molecular dynamics sim - ulations and observation of a putatively polymerization - competent superclosed state . Proteins . 76 : 353 – 364 . 24 . Rould , M . A . , Q . Wan , . , K . M . Trybus . 2006 . Crystal structures of expressed non - polymerizable monomeric actin in the ADP and ATP states . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 31909 – 31919 . 25 . Chu , J . W . , and G . A . Voth . 2005 . Allostery of actin ﬁlaments : molec - ular dynamics simulations and coarse - grained analysis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 102 : 13111 – 13116 . 26 . Pfaendtner , J . , D . Branduardi , . , G . A . Voth . 2009 . Nucleotide - depen - dent conformational states of actin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 12723 – 12728 . 27 . Zheng , X . , K . Diraviyam , and D . Sept . 2007 . Nucleotide effects on the structure and dynamics of actin . Biophys . J . 93 : 1277 – 1283 . 28 . Moraczewska , J . , H . Strzelecka - Go 1 aszewska , . , C . G . dos Remedios . 1996 . Structural changes in subdomain 2 of G - actin observed by ﬂuo - rescence spectroscopy . Biochem . J . 317 : 605 – 611 . 29 . Kim , E . , M . Motoki , . , E . Reisler . 1995 . Conformational changes in subdomain 2 of G - actin : ﬂuorescence probing by dansyl ethylenedi - amine attached to Gln - 41 . Biophys . J . 69 : 2024 – 2032 . 30 . Durer , Z . A . , D . S . Kudryashov , . , E . Reisler . 2012 . Structural states and dynamics of the D - loop in actin . Biophys . J . 103 : 930 – 939 . 31 . Frieden , C . , and K . Patane . 1985 . Differences in G - actin containing bound ATP or ADP : the Mg2 þ - induced conformational change re - quires ATP . Biochemistry . 24 : 4192 – 4196 . 32 . Oda , T . , M . Iwasa , . , A . Narita . 2009 . The nature of the globular - to ﬁbrous - actin transition . Nature . 457 : 441 – 445 . 33 . Saunders , M . G . , and G . A . Voth . 2011 . Water molecules in the nucle - otide binding cleft of actin : effects on subunit conformation and impli - cations for ATP hydrolysis . J . Mol . Biol . 413 : 279 – 291 . 34 . Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins . 2000 . Molecular mech - anisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 576 . 35 . Phillips , J . C . , R . Braun , . , K . Schulten . 2005 . Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD . J . Comput . Chem . 26 : 1781 – 1802 . 36 . Grossﬁeld , A . WHAM : the weighted histogram analysis method , version 2 . 0 . 6 . http : / / membrane . urmc . rochester . edu / content / wham . 37 . Saunders , M . G . , and G . A . Voth . 2012 . Comparison between actin ﬁla - ment models : coarse - graining reveals essential differences . Structure . 20 : 641 – 653 . 38 . Pan , A . C . , D . Sezer , and B . Roux . 2008 . Finding transition pathways using the string method with swarms of trajectories . J . Phys . Chem . B . 112 : 3432 – 3440 . 39 . Wojtas - Niziurski , W . , Y . Meng , . , S . Berne ` che . 2013 . Self - learning adaptive umbrella sampling method for the determination of free en - ergy landscapes in multiple dimensions . J . Chem . Theory Comput . 9 : 1885 – 1895 . 40 . Kang , H . , M . J . Bradley , . , E . M . De La Cruz . 2013 . Regulation of actin by ion - linked equilibria . Biophys . J . 105 : 2621 – 2628 . 41 . Iwasa , M . , T . Aihara , . , T . Oda . 2012 . Role of the actin Ala - 108 - Pro - 112 loop in actin polymerization and ATPase activities . J . Biol . Chem . 287 : 43270 – 43276 . 42 . Reference deleted in proof . 43 . Galkin , V . E . , A . Orlova , . , E . H . Egelman . 2011 . Remodeling of actin ﬁlaments by ADF / coﬁlin proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 108 : 20568 – 20572 . 44 . Qi , T . , W . Tang , . , X . Zeng . 2011 . G - actin participates in RNA poly - merase II - dependent transcription elongation by recruiting positive transcription elongation factor b ( P - TEFb ) . J . Biol . Chem . 286 : 15171 – 15181 . 45 . Meagher , K . L . , and H . A . Carlson . 2005 . Solvation inﬂuences ﬂap collapse in HIV - 1 protease . Proteins . 58 : 119 – 125 . 46 . Dama , J . F . , A . V . Sinitskiy , . , G . A . Voth . 2013 . The theory of ultra - coarse - graining . 1 . General principles . J . Chem . Theory Comput . 9 : 2466 – 2480 . Biophysical Journal 106 ( 8 ) 1710 – 1720 1720 Saunders et al .