advances . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 5 / 4 / eaav4803 / DC1 Supplementary Materials for Synthetic and living micropropellers for convection - enhanced nanoparticle transport S . Schuerle , A . P . Soleimany , T . Yeh , G . M . Anand , M . Häberli , H . E . Fleming , N . Mirkhani , F . Qiu , S . Hauert , X . Wang , B . J . Nelson , S . N . Bhatia * * Corresponding author . Email : sbhatia @ mit . edu Published 26 April 2019 , Sci . Adv . 5 , eaav4803 ( 2019 ) DOI : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aav4803 The PDF file includes : Supplementary Text Fig . S1 . ABF fabrication process . Fig . S2 . Experimental results and simulations in 200 - μm - wide channels . Fig . S3 . ABF perturbs local fluid flow and increases total fluid velocity . Fig . S4 . Effect of ABF and position control . Fig . S5 . Intensity increase over time . Fig . S6 . Plots of NP penetration depth increase over time influenced by ABF . Fig . S7 . Effect of channel diameter . Fig . S8 . Effect of ABF diameter . Fig . S9 . Control of motile MTB with rotational fields in plane . Fig . S10 . Density effect . Fig . S11 . MTB promotes homogenous transport enhancement . Legends for movies S1 to S10 Reference ( 42 ) Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following : ( available at advances . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 5 / 4 / eaav4803 / DC1 ) Movie S1 ( . mov format ) . Swimming of ABF through dense NP solution along S shape . Movie S2 ( . mov format ) . Swimming of ABF in two - fluid flow device . Movie S3 ( . avi format ) . Zoom of ABF swimming in two - fluid flow device . Movie S4 ( . avi format ) . ABF in one - fluid flow device . Movie S5 ( . mov format ) . Control of a single , motile MTB under static magnetic fields . Movie S6 ( . avi format ) . Control of swarm MTB under RMFs in - plane and out - of - plane . Movie S7 ( . mp4 format ) . Control of swarm MTB ( red ) mixed with nonmagnetic Escherichia coli ( green ) under RMFs . Movie S8 ( . mov format ) . Tracking of swarms of NP transported by MTB induced fluid flow . Movie S9 ( . mov format ) . Fluorescent NP guided by fluid flow coupling to rotating swarms of bacteria . Movie S10 ( . mp4 format ) . Control of green fluorescently labeled MTB in microfluidic device . Supplementary Text Eulerian computational modeling COMSOL Multiphysics was used as a finite element ( FE ) solver to analyze the fluid flow and particle distribution inside the microfluidic chips . The Fluid Flow interface was employed to solve the equations governing incompressible flow and the Transport of Diluted Species interface was used to solve the transport equation for the nanoparticles ( NPs ) . The medium inside the channel was defined to be water ( ρ = 1000 kg m 3 , η = 0 . 001 Pa ∙ s ) , whereas the collagen area was modeled as an arbitrary viscous fluid with a density of ρ = 1400 kg m 3 and dynamic viscosity of η = 8 Pa ∙ s . The ABF , located in the middle of the channel with its axis parallel to the direction of flow , equidistant from the inlet and the outlet , was modeled as a rotating geometry with a rotational frequency ω of 10 Hz . 1 . 1 . Boundary conditions In order to numerically describe the flow field inside the chip , appropriate boundary conditions reflective of the experimental setup must be applied at each boundary . For fluid flow boundary conditions , a laminar velocity profile with an average velocity magnitude 𝑢 of 25 μm s was assumed at the inlet , constant pressure was assumed at the channel outlet , and all walls were modeled as no - slip boundaries . For boundary conditions applied to the transported species , a constant NP concentration of 1 mol m 3 was set as the inflow condition , while a general outflow boundary condition was employed at the outlet , an assumption consistent with the expected dominance of convective transport for particles inside the channel . In addition to the no - slip boundary condition at the PDMS walls , a no - flux condition was also applied to the walls when solving the mass transport equation . The diffusion coefficient in collagen gels at the given concentration of 3 % was taken from experimental data found in literature to be D = 2 . 7 × 10 −13 m 2 s for particles with radius of r p = 100 nm ( d p = 200 nm ) . 42 1 . 2 . Governing equations Two distinct Reynolds numbers , i . e . rotational ( Re r ) and translational ( Re t ) , can be defined in such cases where both a pipe flow and rotating machinery is present Re t = ρud c η ≈ 1 . 5 × 10 −3 Re r = ρωd h2 η ≈ 6 × 10 −3 where ρ is the density and η is the viscosity of water , d c describes the channel hydraulic diameter , and d h is the helix ( ABF ) diameter located inside the channel . Since both Re t ≪ 1 and Re r ≪ 1 , fluid flow is in the Stokes regime , even in the vicinity of the ABF . The ratio between the rotational Reynolds number and the translational Reynolds number helps to explain the convection enhancement effect due to the ABF inside the chip . Another non - dimensional parameter that must be evaluated is the Stokes number St , which characterizes the extent to which particles follow streamlines describing flow . This tests the validity of using the mass transport equation for the NPs St = τu d c In which the relaxation time τ is calculated as follows τ = ρd p2 18η Therefore , in the given case , the Stokes number can be obtained by St = ρ p d p2 u 18ηd c ≈ 0 . 01 in which ρ p and d p are particles’ density and diameter , respectively . Considering the value of the Stokes number ( St ≪ 1 ) , it can be asserted that particles generally follow the streamlines . Thus , solving the transport equation to calculate the distribution of NPs was considered to be an appropriate method to capture these characteristics . Note that density and viscosity values of the water are used again in the calculation . The final non - dimensional parameter that provides insight into this problem is the Peclet number . This number shows the relative contribution of convective transport to diffusive transport . Again , two Peclet numbers can be defined in this case based on translational and rotational velocity magnitudes Pe t = Lu D ≈ 90 Pe r = Lωd h D ≈ 2200 where L represents the characteristic length scale of the channel , which in this case is the channel’s height . The magnified convective transport is clearly seen by comparing the above values . It should be noted that the Peclet number is also significant in the context of the stability of the numerical scheme . It has been mathematically proven that numerical instabilities occur when the element Peclet number exceeds 1 . Thus , the maximum allowable mesh size h max is determined by taking the highest velocity magnitudes in the domain into account . Substituting the swirl velocity of the ABF , the highest velocity in this problem , into the Pe number definition , one can obtain Pe = h max . ωd h D = 1 → h max = D ωd h ≈ 30 nm Fulfilling this condition in the meshing process leads to a substantial increase in the number of required computations and the runtime for the simulation . Therefore , stabilization methods have been used in combination with an adaptive mesh based on the approximate values of velocity magnitudes to numerically solve the mass transport equation with the FE solver . Lagrangian computational modeling The Particle Tracing interface of the COMSOL Multiphysics was used to model the particles’ motion inside the channel under the influence of convective effects in a simplified 2D model , now considering momentum of the particles and the influence exerted by forces acting upon them such as drag and lift . The Basset – Boussinesq – Oseen equation ( BBO equation ) describes the motion of particles in the fluid flow . The diameter and density of the particles were set to 200 nm and 1060 kg m 3 , respectively . The same inlet velocity as the real 3D geometry was set as the boundary condition for the model . The small rectangle inside the channel acts as an artificial flow generator , which produces the same perpendicular velocity as the ABF , assuming the diameter and rotational frequency of the ABF in the real case . Supplementary Figures Fig . S1 . ABF fabrication process . A Scanning electron micrographs of ABFs ( scale bar = 15 µm ) . B Schematic of fabrication process beginning with 3D lithography using the Nanoscribe® laser lithography system . Blue indicates the IP - L photoresist layer and dark blue represents the exposed areas that remain after the resist development process and washing . Finally , the structures are coated with a layer of titanium and nickel . Fig . S2 . Experimental results and simulations in 200 - μm - wide channels . A Simulation of ABF in 2 - fluid - flow channel . At t = 0 , the two fluids are injected into the channel , the progression of mixing by the ABF is illustrated by the snapshots at increasing time points towards steady state . B . Image of an ABF in 2 - fluid - flow channel ( bottom ) and result of simulation ( top ) depicting the concentration distribution at steady state with the ABF in the center of the channel . The top fluid is water while the bottom fluid is a dense solution of red fluorescent labelled NP , simulated as molecular species with same diffusion coefficient . The concentration or fluorescence intensity , were measured either in silico or in vitro , respectfully , along the white dotted lines over time . C The concentration at this dotted line increases over time as shown in the simulation . The concentrated fluid from the bottom is moved up and mixed with the separated stream of water . D A similar profile was observed in experiments . The NP concentration is increasing over time ( from t1 = 15s , t = 25s , t3 = 150s to t4 = 260s ) as the ABF is transporting NPs from the lower fluid channel to the upper stream . Fig . S3 . ABF perturbs local fluid flow and increases total fluid velocity . A Velocity profile at distinct positions upstream of the ABF . For the control , at x = 3mm , an unperturbed laminar profile with peak velocity of 50 µm / s was simulated . At x = 100 and x = 50 µm upstream of the ABF , an increase of peak velocities is not only suggested , but the peak is also shifted closer toward the channel wall . B Velocity profile at distinct positions downstream of the ABF . A substantial increase in peak velocities is predicted . C Simulation results for effect on y velocity component u y ( orthogonal to and out of the channel ) upstream of the ABF at x = 5 , x = 50 , and x = 100 µm compared to the y velocity at x = 3 mm upstream ( internal control ) . In the vicinity of the ABF , a push directed outside of the channel , orthogonal to the flow direction , was observed . D Measurement of y velocity profile downstream of the ABF at x = - 5 , x = - 50 , and x = - 100 µm ) . E , F Effect on Péclet number . Higher observed velocities result in higher ratios of convective to diffusive transport , formalized by an overall increase of the Péclet number . Regarding only the y velocity component of that ratio , an increase of over 2000 - fold was measured in the vicinity of the ABF , both upstream ( E ) and downstream ( F ) . Fig . S4 . Effect of ABF and position control . A typical distribution of intensity change over time ( normalized to area 1 ) is shown . The areas 2 - 5 show increased NP accumulation over time compared to area 1 . The probability density for the position of the ABF over the course of the experiment is depicted in green , showing its narrow position control around the center outlet area 3 . Fig . S5 . Intensity increase over time . A Results of an experiment comparing the increase of fluorescence intensity over time for the outlet area at the ABF ( 3 ) and downstream ( 5 ) compared to area 1 , which serves as an internal baseline . B Bright field image of ABF during the experiment in 50µm wide channel . Red overlays show the relative intensity increase ( here with respect to the maximum = outlet 4 ) recorded in the outlined region of interest . Fig . S6 . Plots of NP penetration depth increase over time influenced by ABF . A The fluoresence intensity over the distance away from the channel wall was measured at the beginning and end of an experiment . The overall increase in penetration depth 𝞓 d was then quantified by measuring the distance at which fluorescence intensity fell to 1 / e of its maximum value at the channel wall . As shown in detail in individual graphs for outlet Area 1 ( top ) and Area 5 ( bottom ) , only a slight increase is seen in the Area 1 compared to the increase in Area 5 that was influenced by the ABF . B The top row shows NP distribution as intensity distribution in the respective collagen outlet areas 1 - 5 ( yellow = high intensity , green = low intensity ) at the beginning of the experiment . The bottom row shows the respective areas after the actuation experiment and higher intensity levels deeper along y into the collagen area are measured . Fig . S7 . Effect of channel diameter . The graphs show the effect of channel diameter on fluid flow velocities perpendicular to the incoming flow up downstream ( A ) and upstream of the ABF ( B ) . C , D Experimental results in 200 µm channels under 1 - fluid flow . A schematic of the device is depicted in C and the fold change of NP intensity in outlet areas 2 - 5 over 1 for devices with and without and ABF is plotted in D showing that the effect is weak in larger channels ( n = 5 ) . Fig . S8 . Effect of ABF diameter . These results are derived from simulations in a 200 µm wide channel where we investigated the effect of the ABF diameter on distortion of the fluid flow . The graphs show the effect of the diameter of the ABF on fluid flow velocities perpendicular to the incoming flow ( y velocity component ) up ( A ) downstream and ( B ) upstream of the ABF . The fluid flow is more increased for larger ABFs and the effect measurable at larger distance s away from the ABF . Overall , the magnitude of flow distortion is much smaller than compared to a channel of 50 µm in diameter ( see fig . S9 ) . Fig . S9 . Control of motile MTB with rotational fields in plane . A Tracked trajectories of MTB under fields with increasing rotational frequency ( top to down ) . B Tracked positions and fitted circular trajectories for the different rotational velocities . Fig . S10 . Density effect . Measurement of translational velocities in samples with decreasing optical density and thus bacterial concentration . ( A ) Graph displaying the linear relationship between absorbance measurements at 600 nm wavelength ( OD600 ) and concentration of bacteria . OD600 measurements were taken prior to all experiments to determine the concentration bacteria used . ( B ) Experimental results of translational fluid velocity at different densities of bacteria , under the same rotational magnetic field input . ( C ) Experimental results for translational fluid velocity in different sized cylindrical compartments of 2mm , 4mm , and 8mm diameter ( i . e . under different spatially constrained conditions ) . While the translational velocity is higher in larger spaces ( 8mm in diameter ) , an observable transitional velocity is maintained also in the compartments of smaller size . Fig . S11 . MTB promotes homogenous transport enhancement . ( A ) Graph showing the homogenous intensity increase measured across one larger region of interest covering 5 outlet areas at start and end of a MTB experiment . ( B ) Graphs showing the homogenous intensity increase in the respective five outlet areas , as analyzed for experiments with ABF ( C ) As expected , due to the homogenous distribution of MTB along the channel , no significant difference in the mean intensity of Areas 2 - 5 compared to Area 1 for MTB experiment was found . Consequently , instead of analyzing against Area 1 as an internal control , transport experiments were analyzed by summing the intensity changes over all five areas and comparing experiments where a rotating magnetic field was applied ( + RMF ) with control experiments where no magnetic was applied ( - RMF ) . Supplementary Movies Movie S1 . Swimming of ABF through dense NP solution along S shape . Movie S2 . Swimming of ABF in two - fluid flow device . Movie S3 . Zoom of ABF swimming in two - fluid flow device . Movie S4 . ABF in one - fluid flow device . Movie S5 . Control of a single , motile MTB under static magnetic fields . Movie S6 . Control of swarm MTB under RMFs in - plane and out - of - plane . Movie S7 . Control of swarm MTB ( red ) mixed with nonmagnetic Escherichia coli ( green ) under RMFs . Movie S8 . Tracking of swarms of NP transported by MTB induced fluid flow . Movie S9 . Fluorescent NP guided by fluid flow coupling to rotating swarms of bacteria . Movie S10 . Control of green fluorescently labeled MTB in microfluidic device .