Paper Generators : Harvesting Energy from Touching , Rubbing and Sliding Mustafa Emre Karagozler 1 , Ivan Poupyrev 1 , Gary K . Fedder 2 , Yuri Suzuki 1 1 Disney Research Pittsburgh , 4720 Forbes Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 USA { emre . karagozler , ivan . poupyrev } @ disneyresearch . com 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and The Robotics Institute Carnegie Mellon University , 5000 Forbes Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 USA ABSTRACT We present a new energy harvesting technology that generates electrical energy from a user’s interactions with paper - like materials . The energy harvesters are flexible , light , and inexpensive , and they utilize a user’s gestures such as tapping , touching , rubbing and sliding to generate electrical energy . The harvested energy is then used to actuate LEDs , e - paper displays and various other devices to create novel interactive applications , such as enhancing books and other printed media with interactivity . Author Keywords : Energy harvesting , touch , gestures , tangible computing , paper electronics , interactive books . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation : User Inter - faces - Graphical user interfaces ; Input devices & strategies . INTRODUCTION This paper presents the design and exploration of a new energy generation technology that harvests electrical energy from touching , tapping and rubbing gestures applied by users to thin , flexible , paper - like structures . These gestures actuate LEDs , e - paper displays , buzzers and IR transmit - ters . The energy harvesting structures are assembled from inexpensive everyday materials such as common paper and Teflon  sheets ; they are flexible , light and durable . Our energy harvesting technology can be easily embedded into everyday objects , such as printed books , postcards and board games , enhancing them with rich interactivity with - out requiring batteries or external power sources ( Figure 1 ) . The Paper Generators presented in this paper are based on electrets that have been exploited for decades in designing sensors and MEMS - based energy harvesting devices [ 17 ] . We demonstrate that electret - based energy harvesting can be effective at the macro scale when human gestures are carefully matched to the design of structures producing electrical power . Developing , exploring and evaluating in - teractive power generators based on electrets are some of the major contributions of this paper . It is important to highlight the differences between our ap - proach and power harvesting / scavenging technologies pop - ular today . Traditional power harvesting techniques often focus on incidental collection of “wasted” energy , such as the electromagnetic radiation around cell towers , ambient vibrations , or even the motion of a beating human heart [ 13 , 20 ] . In this work , we explore explicit power generation where users actively generate power to achieve desired re - sults [ 14 ] . In this respect our work follows the tradition of hand - wound radios and human - powered interaction devices such as Peppermill [ 18 ] and InGen [ 4 ] among others . There are multiple applications of our power generating devices . In this paper we explore applications in designing interactive self - powered printed books where the reading experience is enhanced with simple interactivity that is ei - ther happening locally on the book itself or remotely , by triggering external computing devices . Augmenting paper books , notebooks and other paper products with computer - driven interactivity has been a burgeoning area of research and development [ 8 , 3 , 15 ] . In particular , we were inspired by such work as Electronic Popables [ 15 ] where traditional pop - up books were instrumented with a range of sensors , light sources and actuators to enhance reader experience . Figure 1 . Paper Generator harvests energy from rubbing and activates the e - paper display , revealing the word “hello” . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita - tion on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy other - wise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . UIST ' 13 , October 08 - 11 2013 , St Andrews , United Kingdom Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2268 - 3 / 13 / 10  $ 15 . 00 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2501988 . 2502054 Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 23 Although exciting and enjoyable , the need for electrical power limits the feasibility of interactive books by increas - ing their cost , weight , and size , and by decreasing their shelf life . Developing a basic set of interactive elements that allow for the design and development of self - powered interactive books is another contribution of this paper . In the rest of the paper we present the principles , design , implementation , application and evaluation of our technol - ogy . The main contributions of this work are as follows : 1 . We propose a novel energy harvesting technology based on electrets that allows harvesting energy from a variety of human gestures such as touching , tapping and rubbing . The energy harvesting structures are made from thin , flexible commonly available paper - like materials . 2 . We design a set of energy harvesting structures and matching gestures that can effectively generate electrical power . We call them Paper Generators , and they form the building blocks that allow for the design of self - powered interactive devices , such as paper books , posters and cards . 3 . We implement a number of interactive self - powered sce - narios in printed form that demonstrate the use of Paper Generators for actuating interactive devices , such as LEDs , e - paper displays , IR transmitters and rotating needles . RELATED WORK Generating power from human motion requires designing devices that convert the motion of the human body into other forms of energy . Some of the earliest convertors were designed , perhaps , during the early Stone Age when hu - mans learned to produce fire by rubbing two pieces of wood together . Modern convertors or power generators focus on the generation of electrical power from a wide range of human activities , such as walking , running , riding a bicycle , or moving various mechanical devices [ 13 , 9 ] . Often there is a distinction made between passive and ac - tive energy generation [ 14 ] . In the case of passive harvest - ing , the energy is collected in the background , then blended into everyday human activities , such as walking or breath - ing [ 16 ] . These devices are often designed to be undetecta - ble to the user wearing them ; they do not require conscious attention or learning how to use them . In the case of active energy harvesting , the human has to consciously perform actions leading to the creation of elec - trical power that can either be stored or used immediately [ 4 , 18 ] . One of the earliest known devices designed to pro - duce electrical power from human motion was the survival radio developed during WW2 [ 10 ] . Today , there is a wide variety of hand - cranked electrical devices such as flash - lights and radios . Furthermore , a number of research pro - jects have explored the use of the human power generation in various interaction devices , such as remote controls [ 4 , 18 ] . In this paper we are following the same direction by focusing on active harvesting of electrical power from hu - man activities . The central element in any energy generation device is the generator , a device that converts one form of energy into another . Numerous generators for human power generation have been explored , such as piezo - based devices that pro - duce power from pressure and vibration , electrostatic vibra - tion generators , thermal convertors , magnetic induction - based generators and RF - based electrical generators [ 7 , 9 , 11 , 13 , 20 ] . The underlying principle of electrical power generation defines the efficiency of generation and the type of required human actions , e . g . , piezo generators might have to be shaken , while a magnetic induction - based generator might require the user to turn a crank . Designing power harvesting and generation devices , therefore , has to be considered from the user interaction perspective because different interaction activities require quite different power generators . In this sense , we can consider human power generation a user interface design problem . In this paper we propose a novel method of human - based electrical power generation by moving two electrodes with induced charge relative to each other . The physical princi - ples behind electret design have been known for a long time and used in developing sensors , such as microphones , as well as MEMS - based harvesters that convert ambient vibra - tion into electrical power [ 17 ] . Recently the electret princi - ple was utilized to convert human finger tapping into power to actuate an array of flashing LEDs [ 19 ] , an important first step in exploring this power harvesting approach at the macro scale . The reported devices , however , required com - plex and expensive microfabricated structures , i . e . , silver coated nanowires deposited on a plastic substrate . The en - ergy harvester presented in this current paper differs from [ 19 ] in structure and function and uses common materials that do not require microfabrication . While only a single mode of operation was investigated in [ 19 ] , we demonstrate a variety of structures that allow for the use of different gestures and interactions in a broad variety of applications . PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION Energy harvesting devices typically employ a magnetic or electric field source , such as a small battery , a permanent magnet , or a permanent electret [ 12 ] . In our application , the field source is the semi - permanent charge on the surface of a thin and flexible sheet of PTFE ( polytetrafluoroethylene ) , commonly known by its brand name – Teflon . When the sheet is rubbed with ordinary newspaper , opposite - polarity charges σ P and σ T accumulate on the surfaces of the paper and PTFE due to the triboelectric effect ( Figure 2a ) . Be - cause PTFE has a lower electron affinity than paper , charge σ T is negative [ 2 ] . This charge on the PTFE sheet can then act as an electric field source . When the PTFE sheet is brought near conductive objects , e . g . , sheets of aluminum ( Figure 2b ) , the charge on the PTFE attracts free charges of opposite polarity σ 1 and σ 2 that are available in the conductors . These charges accumu - late on the surface of the conductors , as shown in Figure 2b . Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 24 The operation of the Paper Generators relies on the move - ment of the two conductive sheets relative to each other and the electric field source , i . e . , PTFE . As the relative positions of the sheets change , the distribution of the induced charg - es , the electric field , and the total capacitance between the sheets change , resulting in an electric potential difference between the conductors ( Figure 2c ) . Hence , the mechanical movements of the sheets and the field source are converted into electrical potential energy that can do work . It is important to emphasize that although the fundamental principles of operation are relatively simple , a broad variety of movements and gestures can be used to generate power by designing structures that are highly optimized for specif - ic gestures . Different materials for electrodes and electret can also be used . In the next section we analyze the most basic structure shown on Figure 2 . Paper Generator Model The structure of the Paper Generator that we used for analy - sis is as follows : a 50 μ m , 14 - by - 8 cm PTFE sheet is stacked on top of a 127 μ m thick sheet of silver - coated pol - yester ( henceforth “electrode” ) with its silver - coated side facing the PTFE . A second electrode is placed above , with its silver - coated side facing the PTFE . The top electrode is supported by a 5 mm thick piece of flexible foam rubber on the sides , which separates it from the bottom PTFE - electrode stack by a gap of approximately 5 mm and allows for the deformation of the top electrode in the center . The top surface of the electrode is covered with common paper , providing stiffness to the top electrode . The whole structure is then attached to a large sheet of paper . All sheets are at - tached to each other and to the page using common adhe - sive tape . Wires are attached to the electrodes using silver - filled conductive epoxy ( MG Chemicals 8331 ) to provide electrical connection . Figure 3a shows the energy harvester , with the top electrode opened , revealing the construction . Figure 3b shows the generated signal on the oscilloscope screen as the user brings the electrodes into contact with each other by pressing on the top electrode . Analysis We analyze the operation of the energy harvester in two modes by investigating both short circuit current and open circuit voltage . These give us upper bounds for the current and voltage that can be supplied by the Paper Generators as a power source . For simplicity , we assume that initially both electrodes are connected to a common ground ( Figure 2c ) . Therefore , any excess negative charge is discharged to the ground , leaving a net positive charge on the electrodes to counter the electric field created by the charged PTFE . Short Circuit Current When the two electrodes are connected to each other through a small resistance , they are at the same potential at the steady state ( Figure 2b ) . Because the electric field inside the conductors is zero at the steady state , the charge density in equilibrium on the bottom sheet , σ 1 , the top sheet , σ 2 and the PTFE , σ T , are related to each other as :  1  T  2  0 , ( 1 ) indicating that the total charge on the electrodes is equal but opposite in polarity of the total charge σ T . In ( 1 ) , the bound charges due to polarization of the dielectric ( PTFE ) are omitted , as their net effect is null . The potential difference , V , between the electrodes can be found by the line integra - tion of the electric field between them [ 18 ] . It will be zero because the electrodes are shorted : V   E  d l 0 d T  d    1 2  0 d T  T  d      2 2  0 d T  T  d      T 2  0  d T  T  d     0 , ( 2 ) where ε T is the relative dielectric permittivity of PTFE ( ≈ 2 , [ 7 ] ) , d T is the thickness of the PTFE sheet , d is the distance between the PTFE and the top electrode , and ε 0 is the die - lectric permittivity of free space ( Figure 2b ) . Defining the electrical thickness of PTFE as d TE = d T / ε T and combining ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) we get :  1   T 1 1  d TE / d , and  2   T 1 1  d / d TE . ( 3 ) Therefore , the charge on the top and bottom electrodes is dictated by the distance , d ; and by changing it mechanical - ly , induced charges can be moved between the sheets ( Fig - Figure 2 . Principle of operation : a ) The PTFE sheet is charged by rubbing it with newspaper ; b ) opposite polarity free charge is induced on the surface of electrodes ; c ) when the electrodes move relative to each other , a potential difference is created . Figure 3 . a ) The Paper Generator . b ) A signal is generated when the electrodes come into contact with each other . V a ) b ) c ) σ P σ T σ T = - σ P σ T σ 1 σ 2 d T d I H Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 25 ure 2c ) . If an electrical load , such as a resistor or an LED , is connected between the two electrodes , the current flowing through the load will do electrical work . Let’s assume that the initial and final distances between the electrodes are d i and d f , their surface areas are A , and they move for ∆ t seconds . The average harvested current , I H , flowing from the top electrode to the bottom electrode can be calculated as : I H   Q  t  A (  1 f  1 i )  t  A  T  t d i d i  d TE  d f d f  d TE     . ( 4 ) Equations ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) suggest that when the top electrode is brought closer to the PTFE , ( d f < d i ) , the current is negative ; flowing from the bottom electrode to the top . When the top electrode is moved further away , ( d f > d i ) , the current is positive and flows in the opposite direction . When the top electrode is brought into contact with PTFE , ( d f = 0 ) , the total charge flowing out of the top electrode increases with the PTFE surface charge density , the electrode surface area , and the initial distance . The average current also depends on the speed of the electrode movement , i . e . , the faster the electrode movement and the smaller the ∆ t , the larger the current spike . Open Circuit Voltage When the electrodes are not connected to a load , their po - tential difference is free to change with distance d . Assum - ing that the initial and final distances between the sheets are d i and d f respectively , and the initial potential difference is zero , the potential difference at the final state is : V f   E  d l 0 d T  d f   2  1 2  0 d TE  d f     T 2  0 d TE  d f   . ( 5 ) Combining ( 5 ) and ( 3 ) we get : V f  T  0  d TE ( d i  d f ) d i  d TE . ( 6 ) Therefore , for the case where d f = 0 , i . e . , when the top plate moves down to make contact with the PTFE , the voltage between the plates reaches : V f   T  0  d TE d i ( d i  d TE ) . ( 7 ) Because σ T is negative , the contact voltage is also negative . According to ( 6 ) , the voltage approaches infinity as the top sheet is moved farther away ( d f → ∞ ) , which is impractica - ble . This is because the analysis presented is based on a parallel plate capacitor model , which assumes that there are no fringing fields outside the capacitor . In reality , with the increase of distance , d , the parallel electrode plates behave like point charges , and the electric fields dissipate with the distance . Therefore , the analysis presented here is valid for separation distances that are smaller than or comparable to the side length of the electrodes . Measurements We measured the short circuit current by connecting a small resistor between the two electrodes , and the voltage drop across the resistor was measured using a Tektronix P2220 voltage probe ( 10 M Ω , 16 pF ) . Because the short circuit current is on the order of hundreds of microamperes , a 1 k Ω load provided enough voltage drop to be separated from noise while still being approximated as zero volts . Figure 4a demonstrates the current spikes measured from three separate “taps” using the test energy harvesting appa - ratus described above . Each tap consists of a large negative current spike reaching up to − 500 µA lasting 1 - 4 ms . When the user’s hand is lifted approximately 100 ms after initial contact , a positive current flows , restoring the original charge distribution as the plates return to their initial posi - tion . The speed of recoil depends on the spring constant and elasticity of the foam rubber and the top sheet . The typical recoil current peak is a lot smaller ( ≈ 30 µA ) lasting up to 50 ms , allowing for a total charge of ≈ 400 nC to flow back . The open circuit voltage of the energy harvester was meas - ured using a Tektronix P5122 high voltage probe ( 100 M Ω , 4 pF ) . The voltage between the two electrodes was meas - ured relative to the bottom sheet while the user taps the top sheet , bringing the two into contact . It results in a sharp negative voltage drop followed by a positive spike during recoil as seen on Figure 4b . The negative drop dissipates because once the contact between top and bottom sheets is established , the voltage diminishes due to the finite input resistance of the probe . This allows for a new charge distri - bution to be established . Similarly , a positive voltage spike occurs as the top sheet recoils . The negative voltage spikes routinely reach − 600 V , and recoil voltage spikes can go up to 1200 V , especially when a new charge distribution is achieved with a long pause between contact and recoil . We measured the power output of the Paper Generators under varying resistive loads , from 1 K Ω to 10 M Ω . Load resistances were connected at the output of the paper gener - Figure 4 . a ) The short circuit current of three taps ; b ) The open circuit voltage during two taps . Figure 5 . a ) VI load line of the Paper Generator ; b ) Peak delivered power versus load resistance . Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 26 ators and the voltages spikes across them at contact were measured . The values were corrected for oscilloscope probe loading . To minimize the effects of variability between taps , peak values of multiple taps were measured and aver - aged . Figure 5a plots the peak ( negative ) voltage of varying load resistors versus peak currents calculated using Ohm’s law . The output resistance can be calculated by fitting a line to the curve on Figure 5a which gives us R out = 1 . 08 M Ω . This is not strictly a Thévenin equivalent resistance , be - cause the voltage and current characteristics of the genera - tor are dynamic and depend on multiple parameters , includ - ing tapping speed and contact area . Nevertheless , it can be considered an output resistance for design purposes . Figure 5b plots the peak power delivered versus load re - sistances , including probe loading . The maximum peak power is delivered at ≈ 1 M Ω , consistent with the observa - tion from the load line characteristics . Because the peak and average delivered power depend on the square of the cur - rent , the total electrical work done per tap , which includes contact and recoil , depends on the speed of the tap . Alt - hough the total charge that moves from one electrode to the other at each tap is constant , a faster tap creates higher cur - rents , producing more electrical work even though the cur - rent has a shorter duration . Table 1 summarizes the electri - cal properties of the paper generator that we measured in this section . In addition to peak voltage , current and power , the total electrical work per tap was measured . At tens of microjoules , the electrical work per tap is up to one hundred million times smaller than the energy content of a AA bat - tery . The measurement results presented in Table 1 are tak - en from a particular user’s gestures and vary with speed and contact force . While the application of these gestures is not precise , these measurements establish the output character - istics of paper generators within an order of magnitude . PAPER GENERATORS In the previous section , we described a novel energy har - vesting technology based on the electret principle ; in this section , we demonstrate how this technology can be effec - tively used to design human - powered , interactive systems . The principles of power generation that we discussed are simple , and yet they allow for the design of a surprisingly large variety of energy generating structures that permit the use of many different human gestures . A comprehensive investigation of all possible structures is beyond the scope of this paper . Here we discuss some of the most basic de - signs and illustrate how they can be used to produce more complex power generating structures ( Figure 6 ) . An interactive system based on our energy harvesting tech - nology includes the following three components : 1 ) Paper Generators , energy generating structures made of paper and producing electrical energy from human gestures , 2 ) Har - vesting Circuits , electrical circuits that regulate energy pro - duced by Paper Generators , and 3 ) Application Components that use electrical energy produced by Paper Generators . Materials Materials that can be used to build Paper Generators are common and inexpensive . A substrate is used as a founda - tion of the design and can be any electrically - proper materi - al , such as paper , PET films , fabric , plastic or wooden sheets , among others . The electrical conductors are over - laid on substrates in various patterns that are printed using conductive inks , e . g . , silver inks , silkscreen printed with conductive paints ( e . g . , nickel - based paint ) , or made with conductive films ( e . g . , silver or aluminum - coated polyester films ) commonly used in gift wrapping and known under the Mylar® brand name . The charge - storage materials are used to store electrical charge , the most commonly used is PTFE − also known under the Teflon® brand name . Finally , conductive bonding materials are used for connecting elec - trical components to Paper Generators or for connecting parts of the Paper Generators . These may be silver - based conductive epoxies or copper tapes with conductive adhe - sive on both sides . The possibility of using a variety of common materials is an important advantage of our tech - nology , allowing for numerous potential applications . Designing Paper Generators Figure 6 demonstrates Paper Generators that we designed . We started with the most basic structures and then designed progressively more complex generators adapting from the pop - up book design mechanics . The designs below were produced using photo paper , and the conductive patterns were printed using a customized Epson WorkForce 30 inkjet printer and Novacentrix® silver - based inks . PTFE films were attached using 3M™ spray adhesive . Conduc - tive silver - based epoxy and conductive copper adhesive tape were used for connecting parts of the Paper Generators and interfacing to the electrical components . Below we pre - sent the generator design . The Tapping Generator converts tapping or pressing on the paper flap into electrical power ( Figure 6 - 1 ) . Tapping or pressing are simple , intuitive gestures that everyone is fa - miliar with through everyday experiences and have numer - ous uses in interactive applications . The generator utilizes the layered structure described previously : PTFE film over - lays a printed electrode on the bottom and a second printed electrode on top , forming a bridge . The electrode on the top is connected to the bottom sheet using conductive tape . Peak short circuit current − 500 M Ω Peak open circuit voltage − 600 V Output resistance R out 1 . 08 M Ω Peak voltage at R load = 1 M Ω − 210 V Peak current at R load = 1 M Ω − 210 μ A Total charge moved ( short circuit ) , C 400 nC Electrical work per tap , R load = 1 M Ω , E c 60 μ J Average peak power , R load = 1 M Ω 44 mW Table 1 . Summary of measurements Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 27 W thin T ewuintomac T u h ( When tapped , he stack , crea nto its original The Touching G erator in which with his or her ure 6 - 2 ) . The a ng parts ; the ouching the se man body has and , because t charges that acc The Rubbing G user simultaneo hand and rubs ( Figure 6 - 3 ) . T the top sheet b ating a voltage l position when Generator is a h a user taps the r bare hand , rep dvantage of th circuit is com econd electrode enough condu the currents a cumulate in the Generator utiliz ously touches the second el he PTFE shee Figure 6 . Pap bends and mak e spike . The e n the user’s han variation of th e bottom PTFE placing the top his design is tha mpleted throug e with the othe uctivity to pas are minuscule , e body are not zes a rubbing g one of the elec lectrode with a t moves repea per Generators . kes contact wi electrode reco nd is retracted . he Tapping Ge E - electrode sta p electrode ( Fi at it has no mo gh the body b er hand . The h ss high voltag , the tempora perceivable . gesture where th ctrodes with on a sheet of PTF atedly on and o ith ils en - ck ig - ov - by hu - ges ary he ne FE off the sur duced as in ta trode a generature ca imizingprovidpressur The Ro of rubb on a di of rota 6 - 4 ) . U to touc top rot tom , ov ing top The Sli rotatingslidingtrode o ing gen electro The de principstructu Harves The en ing cir two ba ate and In the Generainteracdiscusschip ( V AC vo signal doublethe pol for this power Figure Right ( ii ) IR t rface of the e charge . The p apping , except and motion is h ators produce t an be performe g contact with es very low fri re effortlessly . otating Genera bing generator isk , sliding on ation with PTF Unlike with rub ch a second el tating disk to th verlapping circ p disk and the b iding Generato g generator e g a sheet with a on the bottom nerator , linear ode to the harve esigns above de ples can be u ures uniquely a sting Circuits nergy created b rcuitry connec asic strategies t d charge and r immediate us ators is regulat ction device , su s later . For reg Vishay Semico oltage spikes to is then connec e - pole , double - larity of the ou s strategy is tr generated is v 7 . Left : Paper G : the printed cir transmitter ( iii ) electrode , creat principles of it t the human ha horizontal rathe the most powe d rapidly with h the electrode iction , users ca ator is a more r . The segment and off the bot FE film sandwi bbing generato lectrode . To c he energy harv cular rails are p bottom sheet ( F or is based on except it allow a printed electr sheet ( Figure 6 rails are used t esting circuit m emonstrate how used to create adapted to spec by the Paper G cted between t to utilize the ha release . se strategy , en ted and then im uch as LEDs o gulation , a high onductor , DF10 o a DC signal ( cted to an appr - throw slider s utput if needed rivial , because ery low , its app Generator conn rcuit boards for ) EH301 ( iv ) zen ting a change s operation are and forms a mo er them vertica er because a ru increased pres s . In fact , beca an apply high a complex imple ted electrodes ttom electrodes iched in betwe or the user doe onnect electro vesting circuit printed both on Figure 6 - 4 ) . the same princ ws power gen rode on and of 6 - 5 ) . Similar to to connect the mounted on the w basic power new energy cific application Generator is reg the electrodes . arvested energ nergy produced mmediately ap or e - paper disp h - voltage bridg 0S ) is used to c ( see Figure 7a ropriate electric switch is used . While the cir the amount o plications are l nection to bridg r ( i ) rectifier an ner diode - capac in the in - e the same oving elec - al . Rubbing ubbing ges - ssure , max - ause PTFE amounts of ementation are printed s by means een ( Figure es not have odes on the on the bot - n the rotat - ciple as the neration by ff the elec - o the rotat - top sliding e bottom . generation generating ns . gulated us - There are gy : immedi - d by Paper plied to an plays as we ge rectifier convert the a ) . This DC cal load . A to reverse rcuit design of electrical limited . ge rectifier . nd switch , citor array . Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 28 In store - and - release harvesting , the electrical energy is used to charge a capacitor and only released to the load when a certain amount of energy is reached . This results in signifi - cantly increased power delivery and can be used in applica - tions where a large amount of energy is required , such as a buzzer , or IR communications . To implement this circuit , we incorporate the EH300 / EH301 energy store - and - release de - vice from Advanced Linear Devices [ 1 ] . APPLICATIONS We investigated applications of Paper Generators by imple - menting several interaction scenarios that enhance traditional printed books’ storytelling with various output devices , such as LEDs , e - paper displays , sound buzzers , and wireless IR communication , among others . All of the applications that we present can be used with any of the Paper Generators , how - ever , some devices are better suited for some of the applica - tions than others . LEDs and LED arrays can be very effectively driven by Pa - per Generators to provide a visual feedback to the user during interaction with the book . In immediate use configuration , multiple LEDs are connected in series at the output of the energy harvesting circuit . Because the voltage spikes created by the Paper Generator can reach up to hundreds of volts , it is possible to connect many LEDs in series and have enough voltage drops across each LED to produce bright lights . For example , in Figure 8a the stars and engine of the paper rocket light up each time the user taps on the “power” paper button : the faster and stronger the taps are , the more visible the lights are and , therefore , the “faster” the rocket flies . In Figure 8b , a light on the transmission antenna blinks repeatedly when the user rotates the disk on Rotating Generator , the blinking fre - quency would depend on the speed of rotation . In the store - and - release configuration the user has to repeat - edly rub or tap the generator to accumulate enough energy to flash an LED . It can communicate level achievement and suggest the story progress . For example , in Figure 8c the light on top of the alien house flashes after the user rubs it for a certain amount of time . In another example ( Figure 8d ) , two Paper Generators are combined and readers have to tap on their respective Paper Generators until both alien flowers flash , indicating that the cat is released . In designing LED - based applications we observed that phos - phor - based LEDs , which are generally blue and white , are most suitable as the phosphor allows for prolonged light emission , making it more visible . Electronic paper ( e - paper ) displays , such as E Ink’s ePaper displays [ 5 ] , are an especially suitable application for the Paper Generators as they require high voltages but very low switching current and no static power to keep the images on . To create a static image on the e - paper , we apply a layer of conductive epoxy to the back of the e - paper film ( Figure 9a ) . When voltage from the Paper Generators is applied to the hardened epoxy , the image on the front appears ( Figure 9b ) . Very little current is needed to toggle the e - paper display ; in the case of rubbing generators a single rub is often sufficient . In Figure 9c , the face of the cat becomes visible when the user rubs the electrode of a Paper Generator . We can also create simple animations by segmenting the image and connecting the individual segments to Power Generators through a passive capacitor - zener diode array ( Figure 7 - iv ) , which allows sequential voltage buildup at different nodes . With this circuit , the letters in a word , e . g . , “hello” , in Figure 9d , can be made to appear sequentially as more energy is harvested . By switching the polarity of sup - plied voltage , the letters can be made to disappear . E - paper displays are some of the most expressive and im - pressive applications of Paper Generators . Only the bridge rectifier circuitry is sufficient to implement e - paper displays . Building conductive patterns on the back of the e - paper re - quires careful attention . Indeed , the back of the e - paper film is fragile and damaged easily if conductive patterns are not carefully applied . Furthermore , the film is sensitive to sol - vents . Many solvent - based conductive materials , such as silver - based tracing pens , cannot be used . Figure 8 . Driving LEDs with Paper Generators Figure 9 . Driving e - paper with Paper Generators Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 29 IR communication can be implemented using Power Genera - tors to trigger an external computing device allowing for enhanced paper books with dynamic electronic media . For example , an animation on a screen can be triggered by inter - acting with a paper book . Store - and - release harvesting con - figuration is used to power a classic 555 IC oscillator , which then modulates an infrared LED that transmits data to an IR decoder connected to a remote computing device . By varying the frequency of oscillation , we can create unique frequency signatures for different Paper Generators , allowing us to build complex paper - based interactive controllers . In such a scenario any classic paper book can be used to control inter - active storytelling on various devices , such as laptops , TVs and tablets . Sound and mechanical motion can be also created using Pa - per Generators . For example , we have incorporated a single frequency audio buzzer ( Mallory Sonalert , MSR516NR ) with the store and release circuitry that creates a buzz , providing the user with an audible response . In addition , we have incorporated analog voltmeter needles that create mechanical motion . The energy released from the store - and - release circuitry activates the needle . The spring - loaded needles then move back to original position . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS We have presented Paper Generators : a new energy harvest - ing technology that generates electrical energy from a user’s interactions with paper - like materials . The generators can be assembled from off - the - shelf materials , such as PTFE sheets and Mylar , and they can be flexible , light and inexpensive . This paper presented analysis that predicts the current - voltage characteristics of the energy harvester and character - ized it through measurements . We have also defined the basic user gestures and physical structures that allow us to create effective Paper Generators . We evaluated the technology to enhance paper books with simple interactivity . The design is , of course , not limited to books . We envision added interactivity for any printed mat - ter , including books , postcards , posters , board games and many others . The technology does have certain limitations . The need to implant the initial charge into PTFE is one of the issues that potentially limit the interactive application of Paper Genera - tors . It can be solved by permanently implanting charges into a PTFE sheet using such techniques as corona discharge . We will continue investigating and improving the Paper Genera - tor technology in our future work . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to thank Keiko Nakao , Joanna Dauner , Kaitlyn Schwalje , Spencer Diaz and Lanny Smoot for their help and E Ink for supplying the e - paper displays . REFERENCES 1 . Advanced Linear Devices . EH300 / 301 , Epad Energy Harvesting Modules , http : / / www . aldinc . com / pdf / EH300 . pdf . 2 . Alphalab Inc . , B . Lee , PhD . http : / / www . trifield . com / content / tribo - electric - series / . 3 . Back , M . , Cohen , J . , Gold , R . , Harrison , S . , and Minneman , S . Listen reader : an electronically augmented paper - based book . In Proc . CHI 2001 , ACM Press , ( 2001 ) , pp . 23 – 29 . 4 . Badshah , A . , Gupta , S . , Cohn , G . , Villar , N . , Hodges , S . , Patel , S . Interactive generator : a self - powered haptic feedback device . In Proc . of CHI 2011 , ACM , ( 2011 ) , pp . 2051 – 2054 . 5 . E Ink , ePaper display . http : / / www . eink . com / . 6 . EnOcean . http : / / www . enocean . com / . 7 . Ghodgaonkar , D . , Varadan , V . , Varadan , V . Free - space meas - urement of complex permittivity and complex permeability of magnetic materials at microwave frequencies . IEEE Trans In - strumentation and Measurement ( 39 ) 2 , ( 1990 ) , pp . 387 – 394 . 8 . Liao , C . , Guimbretiere , F . , Hinckley , K . , and Hollan , J . Pa - piercraft : A gesture - based command system for interactive pa - per . ACM TOCHI , ( 14 ) , 4 , 2008 , 18 . 9 . Mateu , L . , Moll , F . , et al . Review of energy harvesting tech - niques and applications for microelectronics . In Proceedings of SPIE , vol . 5837 ( 2005 ) , pp . 359 – 373 . 10 . Meulstee , L . , and Rudolf F . Wireless for the warrior . Volume 4 , Clandestine Radio , ( 2004 ) . 11 . Mitcheson , P . D . , Green , T . C . , Yeatman , E . M . , and Holmes , A . S . Architectures for vibration - driven micropower generators . Microelectromechanical Systems , Journal of , 13 ( 3 ) , ( 2004 ) , pp . 429 – 440 . 12 . Mitcheson , P . D . , Yeatman , E . M . , Rao , G . K . , Holmes , A . S . , and Green , T . C . Energy harvesting from human and machine motion for wireless electronic devices . Proceedings of the IEEE ( 96 ) 9 , ( 2008 ) , pp . 1457 – 1486 . 13 . Paradiso , J . A . , and Starner , T . Energy scavenging for mobile and wireless electronics . Pervasive Computing , IEEE ( 4 ) 1 , ( 2005 ) , pp . 18 – 27 . 14 . Pierce , J . , and Paulos , E . Designing everyday technologies with human - power and interactive microgeneration . In Proceedings of the DIS 2012 , ACM , ( 2012 ) , pp . 602 – 611 . 15 . Qi , J . , and Buechley , L . Electronic popables : exploring paper - based computing through an interactive pop - up book . In Pro - ceedings of TEI 2010 , ACM , ( 2010 ) , pp . 121 – 128 . 16 . Shenck , N . S . , Paradiso , J . A . Energy scavenging with shoe - mounted piezoelectrics . Micro , IEEE 21 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 30 – 42 . 17 . Sterken , T . , Fiorini , P . , Baert , K . , Puers , R . , and Borghs , G . An electret - based electrostatic μ - generator . In 12 th International Conference on Transducers , Solid - State Sensors , Actuators and Microsystems , IEEE , vol . 2 , 2003 , pp . 1291 – 1294 . 18 . Villar , N . , and Hodges , S . The peppermill : a human - powered user interface device . In Proceedings of TEI 2010 , ACM , ( 2010 ) , pp . 29 – 32 . 19 . Zhong , J . , Zhong , Q . , Fan , F . , Zhang , Y . , Wang , S . , Hu , B . , Lin Wang , Z . , and Zhou , J . Finger typing driven triboelectric nano - generator and its use for instantaneously lighting up leds . Nano Energy ( 2012 ) . 20 . Zurbuchen , A . , Pfenniger , A . , Stahel , A . , Stoeck , C . , Vanden - berghe , S . , Koch , V . , and Vogel , R . Energy harvesting from the beating heart by a mass imbalance oscillation generator . Annals of biomedical engineering 41 , 1 ( 2013 ) , pp . 131 – 141 . Hardware UIST’13 , October 8 – 11 , 2013 , St . Andrews , UK 30