Mixed Dimensions : Exploring Novel Material and Extrusion Tool for 2 . 5D Shape Painting Jonathan Hatley , Noah Posner , Hyunjoo Oh , Sang - won Leigh Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , USA bemaxhat @ gmail . com , { noah . posner , hyunjoo . oh , sang . leigh } @ design . gatech . edu Figure 1 : The MixD system . From left to right : custom " borwax " pigment material , extruder pen and extrusion / carving nibs , pressure and temperature control system , and air tank . ABSTRACT This paper explores a novel tool and materials for brush - like ex - pression in 3D forms . We envision a 2 . 5D painting device that aims at closing the gap between painterly expression , digital fab - rication , and the incorporation of expressive elements present in traditional painting with structural capability . The paper describes the development of the new pigment material , a custom handheld extrusion device , and discusses a user study investigating emerging relationships with the developed medium . We find the reactivity and variability of the medium enabling strong expressive agency and new interaction opportunities . With these , we discuss what are aspects in making that could be embraced to enhance users’ cre - ative agency and ownership in making , postulating a space between artistic expression and utilitarian making – e . g . digital fabrication . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Displays and imagers . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea © 2022 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9147 - 4 / 22 / 02 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490149 . 3501318 KEYWORDS 3D pens , creativity support tool , computer - supported expression ACM Reference Format : Jonathan Hatley , Noah Posner , Hyunjoo Oh , Sang - won Leigh . 2022 . Mixed Dimensions : Exploring Novel Material and Extrusion Tool for 2 . 5D Shape Painting . In Sixteenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’22 ) , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3490149 . 3501318 1 INTRODUCTION From powders to paints to plastics , painters and craftspeople have been looking for new mediums , technologies , and developments to push the boundaries of their work – resulting in immense diversity in artistic expression [ 10 , 27 , 32 ] . The field of painting retains mi - crocosms of style and eras in which unique and variegated tools were developed to enable creators to make , replicate , modify , and express through art practices [ 27 ] . With recent advancements in technologies for expressing 3D forms – such as 3D printers – we can further imagine how art may look like when such artistic endeavors are translated to physical 3D existence . However , the design phase in 3D printing greatly contrasts the process of visual inception in e . g . painting . It is mainly done through computational processes , with the execution being separated from the design . This leads to the less embodied experience of making , where various personal variables such as aesthetic , life experiences , or existential concerns may be filtered [ 34 ] . In order to close this TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Removed for Review gap , the lateral study of digital tools and arts could offer an under - standing of how new tools could be designed and better woven into embodied practices . 3D printing has grown in artistic domains in the last decade ; it has allowed for artists to develop unique expres - sion which can be seen in works by artists and designers such as Iris van Herpen [ 4 ] , Behnaz Farahi [ 2 ] , and more . These art forms make unique juxtapositions between randomness and regularities , that contrast the typical expression found in fine arts . Segerman [ 34 ] discusses functional model - making and geometric strategies , explaining that the main reason 3D artwork may be considered “artificial” is the disconnect between the artist and their work . Digital fabrication - based works do provide an intriguing result and diversity within the field , raising a question on what work could be developed if the whole making process would have stayed with the artist . It is also important to note that emerging paradigms in creative cognition [ 13 ] emphasize the dynamic sensorimotor loop between execution and reflection , where the messy interaction between a person and her environment is critical in the emergence of creativity . Towards understanding how new tools could be developed to preserve such messiness , this paper hypothesizes a 2 . 5D painting system that positions itself between paintbrushes and 3D pens ( figure 1 ) . The system aims at embracing the expressivity present in traditional paint mediums , contrasting itself from widely available tools such as 3Doodler [ 1 ] . We investigate a space between digital fabrication , craft and traditional arts , articulating how embodied interaction with materials could be preserved in the design of tools for making . The system includes a novel pigment material that retains qualities such as variability , buildability and malleability , as well as a handheld device customized for the handling of the material . Through a study with design students with backgrounds in the arts , we observe the dynamic relationship between user and medium , new interactions that emerge from tangible manipulation of physical materials , and how the expressive experience with the tool unfolds in comparison to other fabrication or craft tools . 2 BACKGROUND Here , we present three categories of work – namely digital brushes , collaborative digital fabrication , and computational craft tools . We discuss works from these different domains identifying a space of 3D representation with the materiality borrowed from traditional painting . Conventional digital fabrication emphasizes precision and utility with planning separated from making , whereas a creative process often requires to be embodied [ 13 , 20 ] – with the act of making , reflecting , and planning to happen at once . The distinction between these modes of making takes place on both process and material levels , which we attempt to better understand through looking at a range of endeavors in involving human creators in the loop of computational or computer - aided making . 2 . 1 Digital Brushes Recent advances in VR headsets and controllers for painting ex - pression are notable ; they afford easy access to creative expression in 3D space – including commercial applications such as TiltBrush [ 9 ] and Quill [ 5 ] . The advantage of such an approach is that the virtual environment enables flexible and rapid expression [ 16 , 43 ] with the user and content both embodied in the digital space [ 21 ] . Recent drawing tools further mathematically model the behavior of pigment materials and brushes , however , often there is a gap be - tween digital simulation and richness in physical materials . Artists do translate digital works into physical format – e . g . work by artist Sougwen Chung [ 8 ] . However , the actual making of a physical artifact does not involve the designer or artist who planned it and is often offloaded to digital fabrication processes . 2 . 2 Collaborative Digital Fabrication In order to alleviate such issues of limited user involvement with materials [ 26 ] , endeavors have been made to overcome the issue through interactive [ 44 ] and collaborative digital fabrication [ 11 ] . They propose the notion that machines are tools used in - situ be - yond a simple output device [ 22 ] . Compositional 3D printing [ 23 ] enables users to make design decisions and changes to the model in real - time during the fabrication process . To take advantage of both machine precision and direct interaction with materials , in Prox - yprint [ 39 ] and MixFab [ 42 ] , users can bring physical objects and materials during digital fabrication . 3D Pen + 3D Printer [ 12 , 37 ] demonstrated a novel workflow enmeshing spontaneous expres - sion ( i . e . doodling ) by users within 3D printing work process . These works allow users to participate in the process of digital fabrication , however , the paradigm still focuses on users being enmeshed in the machine loop . Another paradigm of digital fabrication suggests a radical shift of roles between human and machine ; Devendorf and colleagues [ 15 ] envision machines as guides for users where the users are the conductor of expression . 2 . 3 Computational Tools for Craft Another domain of work worth noting is endeavored in compu - tational hand tools [ 48 ] . While aforementioned works in digital fabrication explore the relationship between human and machine on a process level , computational hand tools are often grounded within established creative processes in which computation assists human artists . D - Coil [ 30 ] , Digital Airbrush [ 35 ] and FreeD [ 47 ] are computationally driven hand tools that assist users based on a pre - computed plan . These hand tools shift the design - and - fabrication process into a user - driven process , providing room for user agency to be incorporated . Notably , FreeD and Digital Airbrush are de - signed for traditional forms of arts – sculpting and spray painting , respectively . D - Coil is a computer - guided extrusion tool based on the FreeD system , which incorporates coil - based geometry building . It introduces a material that is easy to handle through handheld extrusion ( cf . 3D filaments being difficult to handle [ 45 ] ) . These tools radically rethink digital fabrication as a machine - in - the - loop process , where both decision - making and expression are conducted by users . As an example of tools with weak computation , artist work has been pursued with 3D pens [ 3 , 6 ] . There have also been products that help add more variability to 3D pens such as replaceable noz - zles . However , materials available for these tools have limited room for variability and continual modification – primarily due to the need for precise extrusion – thereby , works done by the tool gener - ally revolves around lines and geometric patterns with aesthetics reminiscent of generative works . Mixed Dimensions : Exploring Novel Material and Extrusion Tool for 2 . 5D Shape Painting TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Figure 2 : a - c ) Material test with sealing wax , encaustic wax , and hot glue . Vertical deposition , smearing and brush textures were examined . d - e ) The final " borwax " mix . It presented both moderate buildability and brush - like quality in its surfaces . 2 . 4 Material Unfinishedness and Readiness The evolving human - technology relationship shown in the prior work highlight the ( desire for ) embodied mode of making between human , technology , and expressive medium . The majority of work in digital fabrication explores new materials and processes in which machines can best support certain creative work [ 19 , 46 ] , where emerging works on post - anthropocentric making [ 14 , 15 ] bring our attention to the " messiness " in the hands of expressive agent ( or faultiness ) – e . g . machine being perceived as a co - creator in Plotter Twitter through ink defects made by a plotter device [ 41 ] . Such messiness - driven creativity naturally emerges with any craft or digital fabrication tools ; an example is the use of 3D printing errors as a feature towards creating novel hair - or web - like struc - tures [ 7 , 24 ] . Messiness in this scope refers to qualities that contradict precise and deterministic qualities that we expect from materials and processes in digital fabrication – or those that are deemed errors . We are also inspired by how traditional painting mediums operate ; they are unfinished and ready for continued manipulation after they are applied onto the canvas . For instance , oil paint is known for its ability to be manipulated for a while after being applied . A sense of imperfection stays with a brush mark applied , or a give to it , from which an artist and her medium form a collaborative relationship through continual modifications . Generally , mediums used in digital fabrication retracts from such error - prone properties . In the context of HCI , Tsaknaki and Fernaeus discuss how cu - rated unfinishedness could promote progressive perfection as well as enriched interaction with low - fidelity prototypes through the lens of Wabi - Sabi design [ 40 ] . Tholander and Normark find imper - fect documentation in personal journals to provoke new reflection , contextual information , as well as interpretation in the long - term [ 38 ] . This highlights how the unfinished and ready - at - hand state of a material could weave into reflectively driven generative pro - cesses . Uncrafting [ 28 , 29 ] and unmaking [ 36 ] further articulate the evolving exploration and explication of artifacts as a new de - sign perspective . Our research aims at understanding what roles such messy qualities could play in making . We intend to offer a case study of deploying unfinishedness and readiness in designers’ hands – or their medium for form - making – and gain insights towards developing new tools that promote exploration and expression . 3 MATERIAL AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT Our research aimed at developing a tool that bridges the gap be - tween traditional paints and 3D printers / pens ; the envisioned tool is to be capable of extruding volumetric shapes ( or strokes ) with paintbrush - like qualities – encompassing characteristics that carry traditional elements of art : line , shape , color , value , form , texture , and space [ 17 ] . This way , the designed tool and materials could in essence fill the expressivity gap in 3D pens by retaining both , or negotiating between , structural capability and fluidity in applied pigment materials . We expected that the incorporation of painterly qualities within form - making could help us understand the gap in 3D printing mediums and how new mediums could be developed towards user - driven and creativity - laden processes . Forthesystemdevelopment , weprimarilyconsideredanextruder - type device since the continuous rendering of volume required a large quantity of material , making pick - and - place interaction less attractive . The material to be used as the medium , or pigment , re - quired special attention as various silicon or wax - like materials had different characteristics that may significantly affect the flow of the work or the robustness in the shapes made . 3 . 1 Pigment Development General requirements that influenced material decisions were that they need a i ) relatively short cooling time that would allow users to build shape , ii ) a balance between fluidity and rigidity for controlled and artistic expressivity , iii ) and low heating requirement for quick transition between additive and subtractive processes . Based on these requirements , we experimented with a range of materials and compositions using common devices such as hot glue guns , 3D pens , and brushes . We further separated expressivity requirement into malleability , buildability , and viscosity ; malleability referred to the ability to edit shape via scratching , stretching , and smearing , buildability is tested through whether the material can retain shape over time through cooling , and viscosity needed to be moderate to achieve fluid brush - like expressions ( figure 2a - c ) . 3 . 1 . 1 Material Options . Resin , concrete , and clay were appeal - ing options since they are mediums that are commonly used in 3D printing . However , they were not selected for further development since certain aspects – particularly long cure time – were not con - sidered practical for our application . Sealing wax was found to have reasonably low melt / cure / dry time , which would allow the material to be molded and manipulated without hassle . However , it had low viscosity , rendering shape building possible but not intu - itive . More importantly , it had a non - painterly rubber - like texture and required excessive heat for manipulating the wax after being TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Removed for Review applied . Hot glue presented promising viscosity and surface char - acteristics evocative to clay , however , it was too sensitive to heat to be reliably sculpted . Encaustic wax or painter’s wax was similar to sealing wax , with a bit longer cure and dry times . However , they showed better texture and also were relatively easy to manipulate post - application in comparison to the other aforementioned options ( figure 3 ) . Figure 3 : Material test results . Yellow indicates characteris - tics that render a material difficult to use , and blue indicates close - to - optimal qualities for our application . 3 . 1 . 2 Composite Materials . Based on these tests we decided to explore composite solutions – combining the most successful wax options ( encaustic wax and sealing wax ) with hot glue . The only viable option was with encaustic wax – since sealing wax and glue did not mix well . The encaustic wax plus glue mix resulted in moderate viscosity but relatively high dry time that did not pro - vide sufficient buildability . Adding borax to the mix , the solution demonstrated flow with minimal effort , reasonably quick curing time , and the ability to be smeared on surfaces . The material was iterated on to achieve the right consistency and viscosity to be extruded and built at the same time ; the final “borwax” pigment was made ( figure 2d - e ) . We tested the borwax mix using a food syringe ; displacing the material onto substrates while heated . The material was able to be extruded – with variation in flow and line weight , and was able to produce vertical structures with ease . 3 . 2 System Implementation The extrusion device , or MixD system , for the pigmenting material consists of three main components : an air tank , a solder dispenser ( 982A 110V Glue Dispenser Machine ) , and an extruder pen . For the extrusion mechanism , cranks ( e . g . ones in 3D printing pens or glue guns ) and plungers ( e . g . caulk guns ) were also considered ( figure 4a - b ) , however , we settled on pneumatics for its advantages in flexible material choice and reusable canisters . Furthermore , our target material has relatively low viscosity in liquid form in contrast to caulk materials or 3D printing filaments , making airflow control a better choice in our series of experiments ( figure 4c ) . The extruder device is made up of a copper pipe connected to a pneumatic interface through which the solder dispenser pushes air . On the outer surface of the pipe , a heating element is fixed in order to liquefy the pigmenting material . A fastener connects to the lower body of the shaft with which multiple pen heads can be attached ; the heads include four different types of aluminum nibs ( figure 5 ) . These nibs were intended to provide users a selection of tools for adding details to developed artwork . The solder dispenser is responsible Figure 4 : a - b ) off - the - shelf 3D pen and custom caulk gun - type prototype . c ) our final prototype with heated canister and air pressure control through the valve in the back . for regulating material flow ; users could manually control the flow using a foot pedal , or automate the pressure regulation using the dial on the dispenser ( figure 1 ) . In order to maintain consistent temperature of the canister ( 44 ◦ C was optimal for the borax mix ) , we used an Arduino microcontroller that controls a MOSFET based on temperature sensor reading . The heat is also transferred from the canister to the aluminum nibs , which helps manipulate the material after curing as well as keep the optimal temperature at extrusion . The canister is sealed with Teflon tape to prevent energy loss and user injury . Figure 5 : The four nibs used in our system . From left to right : heated brush , heated pencil tip , and small and large extru - sion nibs . Another primary consideration was the ease of material supply and replacement , that is done through the back of the device . The back of the device has a screw cap with a pneumatic interface that connects to the solder dispenser . The cap can be removed easily by hand for pigment supply and replacement before , during or after the extruder usage ( figure 6a ) . The envisioned usage cycles are described in figure 6 including material supply , sketching , building , editing and combining with snippets we acquired during our user study . 4 USER STUDY With the developed system and material , we conducted a study to investigate users’ creative experience using the affordances of the system . We hypothesized that the incorporation of physical traits from traditional artistic mediums [ 10 ] could promote a natural form of expression . " Natural " in our experience grounds on participants’ Mixed Dimensions : Exploring Novel Material and Extrusion Tool for 2 . 5D Shape Painting TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Figure 6 : Usage cycles of the extruder device . Users can a ) SUPPLY or REPLACE of pigment materials , b ) SKETCH flat out - lines , c ) BUILD 3D structures , d ) EDIT existing structures , and e ) COMBINE multiple pieces together . Except for supply and replacement , these operations can happen in any order . own experience and general understanding of art mediums – being paint or others – with respect to materials that are deemed more utility - oriented such as 3D pen filaments . Furthermore , the study also aimed at observing emerging interactions between the partici - pants and the material , hypothesizing its variability and volumetric properties may deviate from the typical fabrication experience . We expected that the non - deterministic ( or messy ) behavior of the material could foster play and exploration ; there will be a unique intersection of 3D form making – that takes a more analytical ap - proach , and painting expression – that is more expressively and reflectively driven . Figure 7 : Samples of participant works from the making ses - sion . The study was primarily based on phenomenological – qualitative methods emphasizing the first - person experiences of subjects . This aimed at embracing the idiosyncrasy in individual creative pro - cesses , inspiration and past experiences , while attempting to un - derstand common structures between the participants . 4 . 1 Study Participants and Procedure Initially , a total of 10 students from the design program at our institute participated in the first session of the study . However , due to the continued COVID - 19 pandemic and remote semester , we followed through with 5 of them throughout the rest of the sessions . The participants all had experience in practicing one or multiple artistic mediums for 2 or more years , and actively use 3D printing in their current program of study . Two of them have used 3D pens extensively . These participants were selected primarily based on having both drawing / painting skills and experience digital fabrication , through which we hoped to observe and hear how those experiences compare with the MixD engagement . 4 . 1 . 1 Introductory Session . The first day of the study was an in - troductory session , familiarizing with the range of tools to be used during the study . The participants were shown a brief tutorial of basic tool functions , then were asked to perform several tasks to get practice on them . The tasks were as follows : • Extrude a drop of material onto the board . • Remove the piece and place it back into the device . • Extrude a layer of material across the board . • Use the thin nib to modify the material . • Use the thick nib to modify the material . • Use the flat head nib to modify the material . • Extrude layers on top of each other , build a wall structure . • Build a vertical structure ( e . g . a line in the Z axis ) . • Make a 3D shape ( e . g . cylinder , box ) . • Add details to the shape ( e . g . inlaid line , circles , scratches ) . Participants followed these tasks then were interviewed on their initial experiences with MixD in comparison with other tools ( paint brushes , 3D pen , 3D printer ) . 4 . 1 . 2 Making Session . Inthesecondday session , participantsgained the opportunity to engage in a session of play in which participants would create and develop their own work . This 1 - 2 hour session was intended for the users to utilize the basic techniques learned in the previous session , and engage in the whole process of planning , experimenting , making , and iterating – activities that nudges them to understand the opportunities and limits of the medium and be creative in how to incorporate those . The session has resulted in a wide variety of work ; some of the participants made descriptive shapes like mushrooms or animals , while some others demonstrated a series of abstract forms and colors ( figure 7 ) . The participants were asked questions about their experience and thought process during and after the session . These questions were generally guided based on the Creative Support Index [ 18 , 31 ] , focusing on the terms Agency , Expressiveness , Process , and Qual - ity / Satisfaction to assess how the participants’ expressive abilities were met . The sessions were fully transcribed and thematically grouped based on the terms above as well as emerging themes found during data analysis . We discuss some of the key observa - tions in the following . TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Removed for Review 4 . 2 Results Here , we discuss our observation of participant works and inter - views with them to understand their engagement , struggle , discov - ery as well as how they worked towards their expression goals . 4 . 2 . 1 Initial Impression . Overall , the participants were engaged with the interactions that MixD provided . All of them displayed focus and engagement once they were put in hands - on sessions ; for instance , when asked to switch tasks some participants were even visibly upset . Their impression was in line with : " it feels a lot like playing with a hot glue gun but with a lot more control over the settings . . . I want to poke and extrude and play with it in my hands . Maybe I just really like breaking and playing with it . " ( P3 ) . They pointed out how the tool provided freedom and play elements while feeling confident in their understanding of the tool with respect to their past experience with other mediums : " it fits the mental model , and feels natural " ( P1 ) . Figure 8 : The participants showed the tool’s hand drawing capability shortly after engaging with the system . a ) hand - writing , b ) sketches with variable strokes , c ) vertical build - ing , and d ) experimentation with varied strokes and colors . The participants also spontaneously compared MixD with other tools – particularly 3D pens – while discussing their process . One participant stated " It ( using 3D pens ) was frustrating . . . I remember [ 3D pens ] had a really small extrusion nib and that it only let out plastic . . . you had to be super precise with what you are drawing . . . [ it ] was so brittle that it was kind of useless " ( P3 ) . In contrast , the participant stated about our experiment : " It’s like not my plan but I don’t feel frustrated . . . you can see that the material is changing by itself it feels like you and the material are doing something together . " This comment was particularly notable in light of our research motivation around material variability and its subsequent impact on user engagement . In order to understand what this could imply we discuss observations and interview comments in the following subsections . 4 . 2 . 2 Expressive Agency . As they experimented with ideas and mark - making using the MixD system , the participants expressed a growing sense of agency : " I understand how and why the material changes . . . especially when I change how I hold [ the tool ] " ( P4 ) . This participant specifically contrasted it with the emotional journey in using 3D printers – " I didn’t feel connected with my work when 3D printing . . . [ I ] sent it to the printer to have it print automatically . . . I don’t like it to be automatic , I feel like it’s forcing me to stop . " This is also shown in a series of freehand drawing work done by P2 ( figure 8 ) . The different lines in the butterfly have varying line weights and concentrations – achieved by continuous line drawing gestures with changing rhythm in her movement . The variability informs and enables such control over the material – which may lack in more precision - oriented mediums like 3D filaments . This is in line with the paradigm of enactive creative cognition [ 13 , 20 , 33 ] that emphasizes the close loop between expressive actions and their consequences . For instance , the precision and consistency of 3D printing filaments make them a great medium for machine processes , where they have limited reactivity for such a loop to occur . Some participants also described that there was a temporal dis - connect in 3D pens : " the filament was a lot a smaller . . . like point 9 pencil lead , it was neat for the first time use but was not practical for making art unless you had the patience to build something with it . . . " ( P4 ) . This highlights that having hands - on interaction with material may not be sufficient in eliciting a sense of agency ; several other elements such as the pace at which a work is created – or a poten - tial mix / match between the speed of cognition and mark - making [ 25 ] – are critical . 4 . 2 . 3 Material Learning . We observed the participants paying at - tention to material texture and response , demonstrating motivation to understand how the material behaves . P5 stated " I think my focus is definitely on the material , like I forgot about the rest of this [ system ] going on . . . speed is my concern , how I move the pen is how the material stretches and moves . " It did not take much time for the participants to acclimate themselves with the tool ( figure 8 ) , where more time was spent in observing material reaction and building intuition on it . In an attempt to understand color and texture qualities , they would even pick and take apart pieces they have made to study forms and colors . Once the breaking was done they would select a broken piece and begin to sketch new ideas ( figure 9a ) . P4 mentions while acknowledging the material’s particular chromic quality – " I want to now incorporate many colors , its interesting that that part you can’t control how the colors will look like when they come out " ( P4 ) . Figure 9 : a ) a participant taking apart a piece to check how it is made . b ) using flat - on - surface extrusion to create work plan . The majority of the participants demonstrated such experimen - tation before they begin working on their artwork . Some other participants experimented with how the different ways of holding the pen could lead to new line qualities . For instance , they placed the nib’s face directly on the face of the board and extruded . The result of this is a completely flat profile that could be used as visual outlines for designs to be made ( figure 9b ) as well as thin layers that can be stacked . They further explored building multi - layer struc - tures with the technique – " I like how the three of them are stacked together . You couldn’t do that with paint , so that’s cool " ( P3 ) . These became the grounds for some of the final works , such as mixing layers or inducing progressive color change while the shapes are being extruded ( figure 7 ) . Mixed Dimensions : Exploring Novel Material and Extrusion Tool for 2 . 5D Shape Painting TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea 4 . 2 . 4 Additive Techniques . Some participants actively utilized the variation in material flow for additively building structures . This process was akin to 3D printing or doodling processes , in which an extrusion head travels and extrudes shapes . However , there were several differences identified ; the most notable ones being i ) varia - tions in stroke weight leading to more calligraphic styles ( figure 8 ) and ii ) the fluidity being used for novel methods of depositing the pigment . For instance , P2 would wield the device in the air to make drip and drizzle types of drawings without making close contact with the canvas . For smaller details , the participant would move the nib closer to the surface and lay droplets or wiry lines to pro - nounce specific areas . The range and rhythm of the gesture greatly contrasted techniques employed when using a 3D pen , where the drawing movement needs to be tightly restricted by the rate of plastic extrusion . Figure 10 : Various techniques to make or add structures . a ) using drizzling to add a structure on a small surface area . b ) using drizzling to weave a free standing structure . c ) drip - ping to layer large quantity of material on a limited surface . d - e ) combining drizzling and dripping to make stand and top structures . While these techniques may not give good accuracy , many only applied them as a creative way for reaching hard places or building layered structures . They attempted at adding structures on top of an existing piece or using continuous drizzling to weave a structure in 3D space . ( figure 10a - b ) . In some other instances , they dropped a large quantity of material for creating structures with relatively big volumes ( 10c ) . Figure 10d - e shows P5’s work on creating a garden of trees / giant mushrooms , combining the drip and drizzle method to produce standing structures – making a stump and adding materials onto the top structure by dripping . 4 . 2 . 5 Manipulation Techniques . There were techniques the partici - pants employed that go beyond what occurs in traditional painting . The most notable one was remixing previously built pieces such as re - positioning already built pieces into new compositions : " I want to use it to build flat shapes on the canvas then mount those shapes in a 3d way " ( P3 ) , or gluing / welding multiple pieces together to create composite structures ( figure 11 ) . The gluing / welding technique was particularly interesting as the pigmenting material doubled its role as a shape operator . Furthermore , in contrast to 3D printing sup - ports , the technique did not divert attention from the main creative process – since the glue eventually becomes a part of the outcome . The participants found this method intuitive , where the tool pro - vides a singular model of work with both 2D and 3D capabilities : " At first , I thought it was more of a flat surface type of pen , but now that I have worked with . . . I can make 2D graphics well as 3D elements . . . both 2D and 3D with one tool " ( P3 ) . Figure 11 : Manipulation techniques . a ) sticking a piece standing on top of a bottom piece as a platform . b ) folding a built piece into a standing positions . c - d ) combining mul - tiple pieces together to make a snail . This 2D + 3D process was also intriguing from an interaction de - sign standpoint , where drawn shapes were deemed tangible manip - ulatives with high - level operators such as displacement , combining , and potentially more . We found this spontaneously discovered pro - cess to differentiate the medium from traditional painting medium or 3D printers / pens , notably in its dynamic transition between 2D content and 3D manipulatives . It should be mentioned that 3D pens do provide these capabilities to an extent . 2D blueprints have been used for 3D pen users to make planar shapes that are combined afterwards in 3D . However , we found a major difference that comes from the malleability and editability of the borwax material ; it af - fords continual editing and welding ( as opposed to just gluing ) . Pieces of their work ( figure 11b and figure 10d - e ) show examples of reheated and welded structures – whereas with 3D pens extra pieces need to be placed to glue them together . Figure 12 : Subtractive techniques . a ) using heated brush nib to add details in the textures . b ) using the heated extrusion nib to add geometric patterns on the surface . Subtractive methods were also used ( figure 12 ) . Some partici - pants commented on the nibs that they could help articulate the works further : " it reminds me of scoring pottery like scoring clay . . . It’s subtractive ; I have been pressing the circles into the blobs and with different nibs . I can make different shapes to press " ( P3 ) and " I do feel like you could build or take away from what you have already placed . . . a neat feature they ( 3D pens ) hadn’t done anything like that " ( P5 ) . Subtractive methods have been used in finishing up the textures ( e . g . figure 7e , figure 12a ) , adding structural deformations ( e . g . figure 12b ) , or removing parts of existing shapes in order to combine with some other pieces . 4 . 2 . 6 Remixing and Recycling Material . The participants also stated their excitement about the color mixing potential of the system : " I like how you can mix the different colors as well as re - use scrap , I want to try and produce different colors with them " ( P4 ) . The pig - ment material allows for reuse and mixing by simply throwing scraped parts or different borwax pigments into the cartridge . The mixing capability produces unique marble textures ( figure 13 ) the TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Removed for Review participants find opportunities in : " I like when the colors start mixing together I think that is really cool and pretty . . . it has a good sheen to it once it’s out " ( P5 ) . Several participants further studied how the colors realize themselves , by breaking their work to crumbs and seeing what pigment compositions lead to what colors : " I like the pearl - like look , it’s interesting because the exterior texture does not match it . " ( P1 ) . These observations further describe deeper layers of interaction one might have with a medium – that extend beyond applying , modifying and manipulating , towards the overall material life cycle . By incorporating the remix and recycle capabilities of the material , one participant created a series of rock - or knot - like objects with continual change in texture ( figure 7e ) . Figure 13 : a - b ) multiple borwax pigments mixed together create a marble - like texture when extruded . c ) a participant exploring new chromic possibilities by re - using pieces that were extruded . 5 DISCUSSION 5 . 1 Negotiating with Material Messiness In the results , much of the expectation by the participants aligned with the material behavior , while some build failures happened in the early phases of the study . These were mainly due to the material’s cooling time being longer than PLA or ABS , resulting in leaning or collapsing structures ( figure 14a ) . Some participants also desired more control over the material that there were too many variables – including air pump control , temperature , etc – to get a replicable result early in the process . As they developed more work , several small decisions to overcome the variability issue have been observed . For instance , they would stick to manual dispense ( using a button or a pedal ) settings initially – believing that automatic timed dispensing setting would ruin the creative process . However , most of them later found it to be more convenient , offloading aspects of control . Figure 14 : Build failures . a ) collapsing structure due to cool time . b ) stringy extrusion due to imprecision in temperature control . Eventually , the number of variables did not appear to influence their ability to create and express based on the interviews and observations . P5 states " I think it is okay , it’s a little like finger paint - ing . There is no like ’oh this is a high art material , so you have to make something very refined . . . ’ it is meant to be played with or ex - perimented with . " In other words , the participants acknowledged that the variability in the material did not mean something to be overcome – but room for improvement and manipulation to take place . On the one hand , the variability issue turned into the discov - ery of varied expression as described in the results ; on the other hand , the work remains in an unfinished state – continued to be modified and reordered after it is extruded . Notably , the participants ended up finding the automatic dis - pensing useful . Despite their earlier motivation to not have ma - chine elements in their making process , offloading dispensing to the machine did not seem to hinder their exploration . We ponder it may not be the mechanized operation , but the way a produced artifact behaves after its production , that determines whether a making process is perceived as fabrication or expression . Variability in 3D printing indeed has been used in creating novel aesthetics or structures [ 7 , 24 ] , by exploiting the faulty mode of operation into reproducible patterns . Such a pursuit of desirable faultiness occurs often in the arts – in the name of guiding randomness into aesthetic orders – with numerous examples in the action painting movement or those who use machinery for painting [ 32 ] . In these works , the mediums at play act as a buffer between human actions , technology and subsequent expression , bringing creative reflection by human artists into play . 5 . 2 Embracing Messiness in the Process Another notable observation throughout the study was that pig - ments applied onto the canvas remain available to be manipulated , extending the whole making process beyond the notion of painting , drawing , or fabricating . It highlights the messy interactions within creative processes ; one needs to directly interact with materials [ 33 ] as a sense - making process that maps one’s action to its cre - ative consequences [ 13 ] . Many instances in the study demonstrate how the tangibility of the material hinted at new possibilities ; the participants have taken pieces they made to take apart , recycle , or recontextualize by changing their positions or merging with an - other . Often digital fabrication or user - wielded tools are designed with an emphasis on achieving functional goals . However , the over - all experience in creating is influenced not only by achieving the design goal , but also by providing a means to modify the work along the way as is supported by works in collaborative digital fabrication . Weuse thenotionof messiness inthiscontexttomeanamedium’s readiness and unfinishedness to be worked with . The work by Tsak - naki and Fernaeus [ 40 ] on Wabi - Sabi philosophy in interaction system design emphasizes three themes : impermanence , incom - pleteness and imperfection . Respectively , these highlight long - term engagement with an artifact ( or a material ) and its change over time , opportunities to approach perfection through explicating the state of being unfinished , and the richness of expression resulting from imperfections . A similar discussion was presented in research on bullet journaling [ 38 ] , where imperfections – such as crooked or illegible handwritten content – bring deeper or contextual meaning in retrospect . We observed in our research that the way the material Mixed Dimensions : Exploring Novel Material and Extrusion Tool for 2 . 5D Shape Painting TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea behaves – remaining editable before cooling , and manipulable after cooling – along with a range of modifying operations offered by the tool facilitated continued engagement with and reordering of the work throughout making . If the pigment – or any other painting or fabrication medium – could provide messiness on a material level , the different cycles and operations available to users could enable messiness in the process itself . 5 . 3 System Improvements One aspect that some participants have seen as unnecessary was air pressure control . Those who decided to offload control preferred a constant pressure setting , while each of them preferred different air pressure settings – that leads to varied extrusion behaviors . This could imply that different pressure settings are seen as desirable depending on the task . A potential implementation could reflect on this and offer individual settings for different stroke styles from which users can select – very much like the choice of brush types in computer - aided design software . Another setting that failed at times was the temperature set - ting . During the open session with P4 , we observed thin spider webbing - like lines being left after making brush strokes ( figure 14b ) . Some of these can also be seen in the figures describing driz - zling techniques ( figure 10 ) . We hypothesize the thermal setting being an issue at times , where variation in temperature changes the cooling behavior of the pigment shortly after being extruded . The heating temperature could then be used to control such behaviors , where minute heat perturbations could be intentionally used to realize unique stroke and cooling behavior ( e . g . the webbing effect aforementioned ) . 5 . 4 Future Research Some of the participants find potential opportunities in using the MixD system within their design practice . P1 believed that the de - vice could be used for rapid , low fidelity prototyping . Since the system allows for a quick sketch - up of volumetric shapes , it could enable quick testing of custom form factors without needing to cast or 3D print devices that will take extra rounds of design and fabrication . Especially when the design intends at testing various customization options ( textures , affordances , etc ) , one prototype can be continuously modified to reflect on the overall design pro - cess . Additionally , a shape drawn with MixD could be molded with objects easily found in its pre - cooled state , which could help quickly explore different design options with further details . The MixD system was originally designed with the intent to close the 3D expression gap between traditional mediums and digi - tal fabrication . It hypothesized a free - hand tool that allows users to draw and modify shapes very much like how an artist paints on a canvas . Through the investigation of how the act of making is done with design students , we observed a range of user behav - iors and processes emerging in creative processes . Much of these observations point to aspects that are missing in modern digital fabrication , especially when it comes to how materials and physical outcomes become available to users during making . Collaborative digital fabrication [ 11 ] aims at increasing user involvement in deci - sion making and design modification during a fabrication process , where exploring additional user agency and channels in which users can engage with the material directly can help us understand what future fabrication tools could provide to creative users . 6 CONCLUSION This paper explores how new tools could be developed to pre - serve " messiness " in the process of 3D form making . We envision a 2 . 5D painting device that positions itself between paintbrushes and 3D pens , while potentially close the gap between traditional artistic processes and 3D printing . With the goal of embracing the expressivity – such as variability , buildability and malleability – within 3D drawing tools such as 3D pens , we developed a prototype extrusion device with novel pigment material . In the study with design students with experience in other artistic mediums , we inves - tigated how the dynamic and engaged relationship between users and a medium lends strong expressive agency and new interaction opportunities . These include spontaneous learning of how their gestures relate with forms being created , tangible interaction with the work being made such as breaking , combining or recycling and more . We believe these observations could help understand what are the characteristics of a making - support tool that support a range of applications between artistic expression and functional making . REFERENCES [ 1 ] [ n . d . ] . 3Doodler . https : / / the3doodler . com / . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 2 ] [ n . d . ] . Behnaz Farahi . http : / / behnazfarahi . com / caress - of - the - gaze / . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 3 ] [ n . d . ] . Creating Fine Art and Fashion with Erica Gray . https : / / learn . the3doodler . com / blog / creating - fine - art - and - fashion - with - erica - gray / . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 4 ] [ n . d . ] . Iris van Herpen . https : / / www . irisvanherpen . com / about . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 5 ] [ n . d . ] . Quill . https : / / www . facebook . com / QuillApp / . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 6 ] [ n . d . ] . Rachel Goldsmith . https : / / rachelgoldsmith . com / . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 7 ] [ n . d . ] . Repeatable Unrepeatability by Hyun Parke . https : / / www . hyunparke . com / works / repeatable - unrepeatability . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 8 ] [ n . d . ] . Sougwen Chung . https : / / sougwen . com / . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 9 ] [ n . d . ] . Tilt Brush . https : / / www . tiltbrush . com / . Accessed : 2021 - 08 - 01 . [ 10 ] John R Barnett , Sarah Miller , and Emma Pearce . 2006 . Colour and art : A brief history of pigments . Optics & Laser Technology 38 , 4 - 6 ( 2006 ) , 445 – 453 . [ 11 ] Patrick Baudisch , Stefanie Mueller , et al . 2017 . Personal fabrication . Foundations and Trends® in Human – Computer Interaction 10 , 3 – 4 ( 2017 ) , 165 – 293 . [ 12 ] Amy Cheatle and Steven J Jackson . 2015 . Digital entanglements : Craft , computa - tion and collaboration in fine art furniture production . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 958 – 968 . [ 13 ] Nicholas Davis , Chih - Pin Hsiao , Yanna Popova , and Brian Magerko . 2015 . An enactive model of creativity for computational collaboration and co - creation . In Creativity in the digital age . Springer , 109 – 133 . [ 14 ] Laura Devendorf , Abigail De Kosnik , Kate Mattingly , and Kimiko Ryokai . 2016 . Probing the potential of post - anthropocentric 3D printing . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM conference on designing interactive systems . 170 – 181 . [ 15 ] Laura Devendorf and Kimiko Ryokai . 2015 . Being the machine : Reconfiguring agency and control in hybrid fabrication . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2477 – 2486 . [ 16 ] Hesham Elsayed , Mayra Donaji Barrera Machuca , Christian Schaarschmidt , Karola Marky , Florian Müller , Jan Riemann , Andrii Matviienko , Martin Schmitz , Martin Weigel , and Max Mühlhäuser . 2020 . VRSketchPen : Unconstrained Haptic Assistance for Sketching in Virtual 3D Environments . In 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology . 1 – 11 . [ 17 ] Erik Forrest . 1984 . Art education and the language of art . Studies in Art Education 26 , 1 ( 1984 ) , 27 – 33 . [ 18 ] Jonas Frich , Lindsay MacDonald Vermeulen , Christian Remy , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard . 2019 . Mapping the landscape of creativity support tools in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 18 . [ 19 ] Jun Gong , Olivia Seow , Cedric Honnet , Jack Forman , and Stefanie Mueller . 2021 . MetaSense : Integrating Sensing Capabilities into Mechanical Metamaterial . In The 34th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . TEI ’22 , February 13 – 16 , 2022 , Daejeon , Republic of Korea Removed for Review 1063 – 1073 . [ 20 ] Véronique Havelange . 2010 . The ontological constitution of cognition and the epistemological constitution of cognitive science : phenomenology , enaction and technology . Enaction : Toward a new paradigm for cognitive science ( 2010 ) , 335 – 359 . [ 21 ] Johann Habakuk Israel , Eva Wiese , Magdalena Mateescu , Christian Zöllner , and Rainer Stark . 2009 . Investigating three - dimensional sketching for early conceptual design—Results from expert discussions and user studies . Computers & Graphics 33 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 462 – 473 . [ 22 ] Jeeeun Kim , Haruki Takahashi , Homei Miyashita , Michelle Annett , and Tom Yeh . 2017 . Machines as co - designers : A fiction on the future of human - fabrication machine interaction . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 790 – 805 . [ 23 ] Jeeeun Kim , Clement Zheng , Haruki Takahashi , Mark D Gross , Daniel Ashbrook , and Tom Yeh . 2018 . Compositional 3D printing : expanding & supporting work - flows towards continuous fabrication . In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Symposium on Computational Fabrication . 1 – 10 . [ 24 ] Gierad Laput , Xiang’Anthony’ Chen , and Chris Harrison . 2015 . 3D printed hair : Fused deposition modeling of soft strands , fibers , and bristles . In Proceedings of the28thannualACMsymposiumonuserinterfacesoftware & technology . 593 – 597 . [ 25 ] Sang - won Leigh , Abhinandan Jain , and Harshit Agrawal . 2020 . Machine - Enacted Modes of Creative Exploration . In ISEA2020 : 26th International Symposium on Electronic Art . [ 26 ] Lee Martin . 2015 . The promise of the maker movement for education . Journal of Pre - College Engineering Education Research ( J - PEER ) 5 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 4 . [ 27 ] Lewis Mumford . 2000 . Art and technics . Columbia University Press . [ 28 ] Martin Murer , Verena Fuchsberger , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2017 . Un - crafting : De - constructive engagements with interactive artifacts . In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction . 67 – 77 . [ 29 ] Martin Murer , Anna Vallgårda , Mattias Jacobsson , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2015 . Un - crafting : Exploringtangiblepracticesfordeconstructionininteractivesystem design . In ProceedingsoftheNinthInternationalConferenceonTangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction . 469 – 472 . [ 30 ] Huaishu Peng , Amit Zoran , and François V Guimbretière . 2015 . D - coil : A hands - on approach to digital 3D models design . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1807 – 1815 . [ 31 ] Christian Remy , Lindsay MacDonald Vermeulen , Jonas Frich , Michael Mose Biskjaer , and Peter Dalsgaard . 2020 . Evaluating Creativity Support Tools in HCI Research . In Proceedingsofthe2020ACMDesigningInteractiveSystemsConference . 457 – 476 . [ 32 ] Harold Rosenberg . 1991 . The American action painters . In Reading Abstract Expressionism . Yale University Press , 189 – 198 . [ 33 ] Donald A Schön . 1992 . Designing as reflective conversation with the materials of a design situation . Knowledge - based systems 5 , 1 ( 1992 ) , 3 – 14 . [ 34 ] Henry Segerman . 2014 . Design of 3D printed mathematical art . In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual symposium on Computational geometry . 77 – 77 . [ 35 ] Roy Shilkrot , Pattie Maes , and Amit Zoran . 2014 . Physical rendering with a digital airbrush . In ACM SIGGRAPH 2014 Emerging Technologies . 1 – 1 . [ 36 ] KatherineWSongandEricPaulos . 2021 . Unmaking : EnablingandCelebratingthe Creative Material of Failure , Destruction , Decay , and Deformation . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 12 . [ 37 ] Haruki Takahashi and Jeeeun Kim . 2019 . 3D pen + 3D printer : Exploring the role of humans and fabrication machines in creative making . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 12 . [ 38 ] Jakob Tholander and Maria Normark . 2020 . Crafting Personal Information - Resistance , Imperfection , and Self - Creation in Bullet Journaling . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 39 ] Cesar Torres , Wilmot Li , and Eric Paulos . 2016 . ProxyPrint : Supporting crafting practice through physical computational proxies . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 158 – 169 . [ 40 ] Vasiliki Tsaknaki and Ylva Fernaeus . 2016 . Expanding on Wabi - Sabi as a design resource in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 5970 – 5983 . [ 41 ] Hannah Twigg - Smith , Jasper Tran O’Leary , and Nadya Peek . 2021 . Tools , Tricks , and Hacks : Exploring Novel Digital Fabrication Workflows on # PlotterTwitter . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 15 . [ 42 ] ChristianWeichel , ManfredLau , DavidKim , NicolasVillar , andHansWGellersen . 2014 . MixFab : a mixed - reality environment for personal fabrication . In Proceed - ingsoftheSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . 3855 – 3864 . [ 43 ] Gerold Wesche and Hans - Peter Seidel . 2001 . Freedrawer : a free - form sketching system on the responsive workbench . In Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality software and technology . 167 – 174 . [ 44 ] Karl DD Willis , Cheng Xu , Kuan - Ju Wu , Golan Levin , and Mark D Gross . 2010 . Interactive fabrication : new interfaces for digital fabrication . In Proceedings of the fifth international conference on Tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction . 69 – 72 . [ 45 ] Ya - Ting Yue , Xiaolong Zhang , Yongliang Yang , Gang Ren , Yi - King Choi , and Wenping Wang . 2017 . Wiredraw : 3d wire sculpturing guided with mixed reality . In Proceedingsofthe2017CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems . 3693 – 3704 . [ 46 ] JianiZeng , HonghaoDeng , YunyiZhu , MichaelWessely , AxelKilian , andStefanie Mueller . 2021 . Lenticular Objects : 3D Printed Objects with Lenticular Lens Surfaces That Can Change their Appearance Depending on the Viewpoint . In The 34th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1184 – 1196 . [ 47 ] Amit Zoran and Joseph A Paradiso . 2013 . FreeD : a freehand digital sculpting tool . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . 2613 – 2616 . [ 48 ] Amit Zoran , Roy Shilkrot , Suranga Nanyakkara , and Joseph Paradiso . 2014 . The hybrid artisans : A case study in smart tools . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 21 , 3 ( 2014 ) , 1 – 29 .