Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / aiim Detecting and resolving inconsistencies between domain experts’ different perspectives on ( classiﬁcation ) tasks Derek Sleeman a , b , ∗ , Laura Moss a , b , c , Andy Aiken a , Martin Hughes b , John Kinsella b , Malcolm Sim b a Department of Computing Science , University of Aberdeen , Aberdeen AB24 3UE , UK b Academic Unit of Anaesthesia , Pain & Critical Care Medicine , School of Medicine , University of Glasgow , Glasgow Royal Inﬁrmary , Glasgow G31 2ER , UK c Department of Clinical Physics , University of Glasgow , Glasgow G12 8QQ , UK a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 11 February 2010 Received in revised form 21 February 2012 Accepted 4 March 2012 Keywords : Classiﬁcation Expertise capture Inconsistency resolution Intensive care unit Patient scoring system Physiological measurements a b s t r a c t Objectives : The work reported here focuses on developing novel techniques which enable an expert to detect inconsistencies in 2 ( or more ) perspectives that the expert might have on the same ( classiﬁcation ) task . The high level task which the experts ( physicians ) had set themselves was to classify , on a 5 - point severityscale ( A – E ) , thehourlyreportsproducedbyanintensivecareunit’spatientmanagementsystem . Method : The INSIGHT system has been developed to support domain experts exploring , and removing inconsistencies in their conceptualization of a task . We report here a study of intensive care physicians reconciling 2 perspectives on their patients . The 2 perspectives provided to INSIGHT were an annotated setofpatientrecordswheretheexperthadselectedtheappropriatecategorytodescribethatsnapshotof the patient , and a set of rules which are able to classify the various time points on the same 5 - point scale . Inconsistencies between these 2 perspectives are displayed as a confusion matrix ; moreover INSIGHT then allows the expert to revise both the annotated datasets ( correcting data errors , or changing the assigned categories ) and the actual rule - set . Results : Eachofthe3expertsachievedaveryhighdegreeofconsensus ( ∼ 97 % ) betweenhisreﬁnedknowl - edge sources ( i . e . , annotated hourly patient records and the rule - set ) . We then had the experts produce a common rule - set and then reﬁne their several sets of annotations against it ; this again resulted in inter - expert agreements of ∼ 97 % . The resulting rule - set can then be used in applications with considerable conﬁdence . Conclusion : This study has shown that under some circumstances , it is possible for domain experts to achieve a high degree of correlation between 2 perspectives of the same task . The experts agreed that the immediate feedback provided by INSIGHT was a signiﬁcant contribution to this successful outcome . © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Contemporary knowledge - based systems , as their expert sys - tem predecessors [ 1 ] , have 2 principal components , namely , a task - speciﬁc inference engine , and the corresponding associated domain - speciﬁc knowledge base . If the area of interest is both large and complex then it is likely that knowledge engineers will spend a great deal of time and effort producing the appropriate knowledge base ( KB ) , and so various efforts have been made to reuse existing knowledge bases whenever possible [ 2 ] . The literature survey dis - cusses a number of methods by which KBs can be produced from scratch including : traditional interviewing , computer - based tools which have incorporated classical psychological approaches such as card sort , systems to acquire information to support a particular ∗ Corresponding author at : Department of Computing Science , University of Aberdeen , Aberdeen AB24 3UE , Scotland , UK . Tel . : + 44 01224 272288 . E - mail address : d . sleeman @ abdn . ac . uk ( D . Sleeman ) . problem solver , the use of machine learning in knowledge acqui - sition , as well as more recent attempts to infer information from datasets produced by large numbers of users of systems like Open Mind [ 3 ] . Two central problems , since the inception of expert systems , have been how to ensure that information provided by a domain expert represents the state - of - the - art , and secondly how to deal with uncertainty in such knowledge ( i . e . , experts may agree it is currently only possible to estimate the volume of a tumour from an X - ray to within certain tolerances ) . The ﬁrst problem has often been addressed by choosing a gold standard , as in the EMYCIN project [ 1 ] where the results of the lab test were used ; in other situations people have chosen the most effective expert available . In many situations , the choice of a gold standard is very prob - lematic . The second problem ( i . e . , representing uncertainty ) has been handled in a variety of ways . For example , EMYCIN [ 1 ] asso - ciated certainty factors with particular pieces of information ( both facts and rules ) and evolved a calculus which allows the uncer - tainty associated with decisions to be calculated , and then reported 0933 - 3657 / $ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . artmed . 2012 . 03 . 001 72 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 to the user . Fuzzy expert systems , which grew out of the fuzzy logic sub - ﬁeld , have been a further development [ 4 ] . Subsequently , Bayesian networks have developed these ideas further , so that it is possible for decision support systems to identify a range of possi - ble decisions and to associate each with strength of belief [ 5 ] . All these approaches provide pragmatic approaches to the handling of uncertainty associated with expertise . Clearly , however , there are differenttypesofuncertaintyassociatedwithchunksofknowledge including the fact that even experts retain incorrect informa - tion , and further they can also misapply information . Developing techniques for capturing and reﬁning expertise is an important sub - activity at the intersection of cognitive science and artiﬁcial intelligence . The focus of the work reported here is an attempt to get a single domain expert to be self - critical of the knowledge which the expert has provided , and as a result of that reﬂection , on some occasions , to revise aspects of the information . Speciﬁcally , the work reported here requires the expert to classify hourly records for patients into one of 5 pre - deﬁned categories ; more particularly the expert is required to provide 2 perspectives on a classiﬁcation task . Additionally , we have provided a system which enables the domain expert to appreciate when a particular entity has been classiﬁed differently by the 2 perspectives . Fur - ther , the tool provides the expert with support in revising one or both of the knowledge sources until a consensus is reached ( or the expert abandons that particular task ) . This reﬂective pro - cess helps the expert detect some inconsistencies and hence produces a body of knowledge which contains fewer errors and inconsistencies . Thus this work addresses , in a novel way , one of the deep problems of a single expert building knowledge bases , namely the integrity and consistency of the articulated knowl - edge . This is an important issue as in rareﬁed domains it may only be possible to locate a single domain expert . We summa - rize below both the main features of our approach as well as other approaches for capturing expertise from single and multiple experts . As usual we believe it is vital that this activity is grounded in a real - world task and we have chosen the classiﬁcation of hourly intensive care unit ( ICU ) patient records ; speciﬁcally the domain expert’s task was to classify records ( which can contain around 60 pieces of patient information ) on a 5 - point A – E scale where E rep - resents severe cardiovascular instability , and A represents a more stable situation ( i . e . , a patient who could be discharged from the unit ) . The rest of the paper is structured as follows : Section 2 gives a survey of the cognitive science literature on exper - tise , and on knowledge acquisition including the important role which machine learning has played in these activities ; thirdly we review cooperative knowledge acquisition and knowledge reﬁnement systems , because they are related to the INSIGHT system which we have implemented recently . Section 3 pro - vides a conceptual overview of the INSIGHT system which takes 2 perspectives on an expert’s classiﬁcation knowledge , detects inconsistencies between them , and allows the domain expert to revise both knowledge sources to see if a consensus on the current task can be reached . Section 4 describes the use of INSIGHT by experts to reconcile 2 perspectives of their knowl - edge about ICU patients ; namely a set of annotated patient records and a rule - set which covers each of the 5 categories ( A – E ) . A high level of consensus was achieved between these 2 perspec - tives by each of the 3 experts in the study . Further we also , in a subsidiary study , achieved a high correlation between the 3 experts , by introducing a commonly agreed rule - set . Section 5 outlines several of the contributions of this work ; and Sec - tion 6 concludes the paper by outlining some planned future research . 2 . Literature survey This section gives a cognitive science perspective on the acquisition of expertise ( Section 2 . 1 ) , provides a brief survey of knowledge acquisition ( including machine learn - ing ) approaches in Section 2 . 2 , and discusses cooperative knowledge acquisition and knowledge reﬁnement systems in Section 2 . 3 . 2 . 1 . The cognitive science perspective on the acquisition of expertise Although domain experts are highly regarded , domain experts can be susceptible to errors and biases which can affect their per - formance [ 6 ] . Such inconsistencies can have consequences for the quality of the information acquired during knowledge acquisition activities . Of particular interest to this paper is the affect of context on an expert’s performance . When the context of a problem is changed ( e . g . , two different perspectives on the same task ) , or when ver - sions of the same stimuli are rearranged , the superior performance of an expert , compared to a novice , is not always repeated [ 7 ] . For example , Lewandowsky et al . [ 8 ] found that expert bush ﬁre commanders , when presented with very similar ﬁres in two dif - ferent contexts , made opposing predictions about the spread of the bush ﬁre . The classic book on protocol analysis by Ericsson and Simon [ 9 ] argues that to acquire a person’s genuine exper - tise it is essential that one does not get the expert to articulate what they do in the abstract , but one should essentially observe what they do when solving an actual task . Effectively , Ericsson and Simon introduced the distinction between “active” knowledge which is used to solve tasks as opposed to “passive” knowledge whichisusedtodiscusstasksoradomain . Thishasbeenarecurrent theme in much of cognitive science and in the study of exper - tise since that time , as is illustrated by an early study reported by Johnson [ 10 ] . This investigator attended a medical professor’s lec - tures on diagnosis where the professor explained the process . The investigator then accompanies the professor’s ward round ( with a group of medical students ) and noticed a difference in his pro - cedures . When challenged about these differences , the professor said : “ Oh , I know that , but you see I don’t know how I do diagnosis , and yet I need to teach things to students . I create what I think of as plausible means for doing tasks and hope students will be able to convert them into effective ones . ” Thus the essential “rule” of knowledge acquisition is that one should ask an expert to solve speciﬁc task ( s ) , and ( preferably ) explain what the expert is doing as the task proceeds ; one should not normally ask a domain expert to discuss their expertise in the “abstract” ( this includes asking an expert to articulate rules and procedures they use to solve tasks ) . Klein and colleagues [ 11 ] have also made important contributions to the study of naturalistic decision making ; by studying experts such as ﬁreﬁghters in their natural environment , they discovered that laboratory models of decision making could not describe decision - making under uncer - tainty . Mayer [ 12 ] reminds us that expertise has many “facets” including : conceptual , procedural , and strategic knowledge . Fur - ther , Baxter et al . [ 13 ] discuss the ( cognitive ) task analysis which they did in an attempt to ensure that their decision support sys - tem , FLORENCE , would integrate well with the current working proceduresoftheirneonatalICU . ( Thispaperwouldprovideuswith usefulinformation , shouldwesubsequentlyintegrateINSIGHTinto Glasgow Royal Inﬁrmary’s ICU ; currently all our analyses are being done “off - line” . ) D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 73 2 . 2 . Summary of knowledge acquisition approaches InanoverviewattheK - CAP2007conference , Sleemanetal . [ 14 ] argued that knowledge acquisition is “a broad church” and consists of a wide range of approaches including : • Interviewing domain experts by knowledge engineers : an approachwhichwasdominantintheearlydevelopmentofexpert systems [ 1 ] . ( Note there are a variety of strategies which can be pursued in such interviews [ 15 ] . ) • Techniques , including card sort , repertory grids , laddering , which hadoriginallybeendevelopedbypsychologistsas“manual”tech - niques which computer scientists redeveloped as a series of computer - based systems [ 15 ] . • Problem solving method ( PSM ) driven systems such as MOLE , MORE , and SALT acquire more focussed information which is suf - ﬁcient to satisfy a particular type of problem solver or PSM . The use of these systems is less demanding for the domain expert as the information collected is generally less extensive , and the purpose of the information collected is usually more apparent [ 16 ] . • Machine - learning approaches have played an important role of transforming sets of usually labelled instances into knowledge ( usually rule - sets ) . An early successful application of machine learningapproachesisthatbyMichalskiandChilausky [ 17 ] ; their application was to identify diseases in the Illinois soya bean crop . • Natural language techniques ( speciﬁcally information extraction approaches ) have now matured to the point where they have beensuccessfullyappliedtoanumberoftextualsourcesandhave extracted useful information [ 18 ] . • Capitalizing on greater connectivity and the willingness of some people to provide samples of texts , and to complete sentences in meaningful ways . Systems like OpenWorld have collected vast corpora which they have then analysed using statistical tech - niquestoextractsomeveryinterestingconceptsandassociations [ 3 ] . Similarly , von Ahn has exploited the information which peo - ple have generated , during on - line game playing [ 19 ] . For surveys of the application of machine learning approaches to real - world tasks , see Langley and Simon [ 20 ] and Bishop [ 21 ] . 2 . 3 . Cooperative knowledge acquisition and knowledge reﬁnement systems Building large knowledge bases is a demanding task ; and partic - ularly so if one is working in a domain where the knowledge is still “ﬂuid” . When one attempts to use such knowledge bases in con - junction with an appropriate inference engine to solve real - world tasks , one often ﬁnds that information is missing ( and hence needs to be acquired ) , or the system gives answers to tasks which the domain expert says are incorrect ( and hence the knowledge base needs to be reﬁned ) . Again , if the domain is at the cutting edge of human knowledge then it is not possible to draw on an existing source of knowledge to support the processes of acquisition and reﬁnement noted above , and hence one must use a well - chosen domain expert to act as the oracle . For obvious reasons the sys - tems which have been built , by our group and others , to fulﬁl this role are often referred to as cooperative knowledge acquisition and knowledgereﬁnementsystems . See [ 22 ] forareviewofsuchsystems . Inconsistencies in the performance of a domain expert ( as dis - cussed in Section 2 . 1 ) can have consequences for the quality of the knowledge acquired during knowledge acquisition activities and can lead to inaccurate knowledge bases being developed . Tools developed to aid in the knowledge acquisition process should have mechanism ( s ) to provide feedback to domain experts on their inconsistencies , allowing the domain expert to reconcile their per - formance on the different perspectives . Research on group decision making has provided some exam - ples of tools and processes which can help to provide a consensus on two ( or more ) perspectives . One particular method is the Delphi approach , a qualitative research method which can be characterized by the following features : ( 1 ) anonymous group interaction and responses , ( 2 ) multiple iterations of questionnaires with researcher - controlled group feedback , and ( 3 ) presentation of statistical group responses [ 23 ] . For example , Tan et al . [ 24 ] used the Delphi approach to arrive at a consensus between clinicians on the management strategies for neonatal ventilation ; these strate - gies were then used to evaluate the performance of FLORENCE , an expert system for neonatal ventilation . Other methods include the analytical hierarchy process [ 25 ] and the nominal group technique [ 26 ] . Computerized tools which aid the group decision making con - text are commonly termed group decision support systems . For an extensivereviewseeFjermestadetal . [ 27 ] . Althoughsuchtoolsand processes allow two ( or more ) perspectives to be reconciled ( often the differing points of view of members of a group ) , they generally only provide one perspective on the knowledge acquisition task ( for example , a questionnaire ) . Other tools and approaches have been developed which can highlight inconsistencies in a single domain expert’s judgement . ACH2 . 0 [ 28 ] is a Java tool that supports the performance of the analysis of competing hypotheses ( ACH ) method [ 29 ] . In the tool , a table ( or matrix ) is displayed with hypotheses presented as its columnsandevidencepresentedasitsrows . Eachpieceofevidence ( a row ) is then compared with each of the hypotheses ( columns ) and a level of consistency is noted in the appropriate “cell” . Col - laborative analysis of competing hypothesis environment ( CACHE ) [ 30 ] is a web - based environment that supports a collaborative ver - sionofACH . AlthoughACH2 . 0helpstoremovebiasesinthedomain expert’s evaluation of evidence ( e . g . , conﬁrmation bias ) it still only asks the expert to perform one perspective on a task . Note , the use of a matrix to visualize a domain expert’s inconsistencies is a technique which we explore further in the INSIGHT tool . Over the last decade or more we have implemented systems which are able to reﬁne KBs in a variety of formalisms including rules , cases , taxonomies , and causal graphs . The family of systems which are most relevant to this discussion are those which are able to reﬁne cases . The REFINER family of programs ( REFINER , REFINER + , REFINER + + , and REFINER DA ) have been designed to detect inconsistencies in a set of labelled cases [ 31 , 32 ] . That is , these systems are provided with a set of categories which the domain expert believes are relevant to the domain , a set of descriptors needed to describe the domain , and a set of labelled cases . The descriptors can be a variety of types including real , integer , string , and hierarchical ; if the latter , then the system requires some further information about the nature of the taxonomy . The medical example used in this section , is the one used initially to demon - strate the functionality of the REFINER systems . Table 1 shows a set of cases including the categories assigned by the domain expert to each case . At the heart of each system is an algorithm which Table 1 Sample dataset used to illustrate Reﬁner + + . Case Heart rate ( HR ) DBP Disease Category 1 50 90 Disease 1 A 2 56 90 Disease 2 A 3 52 101 Disease 3 A 4 50 95 Disease 3 B 5 56 97 Disease 3 B 6 89 Disease 5 A 7 52 97 Disease 3 B 74 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Table 2 The category descriptions generated by Reﬁner + + . Category HR DBP Disease A 50 – 56 89 – 101 Any disease B 50 – 56 95 – 97 Disease 3 Table 3 Updated category descriptions . Category HR DBP Disease A 50 – 56 89 – 101 , except 95 – 97 Any disease B 50 – 56 95 – 97 Disease 3 forms a category description from say , all the instances of category A , bearing in mind the actual types of the variables . This process is repeated for each of the categories . Table 2 shows the category descriptions which the algorithm infers for this dataset . The sys - tems then check to see whether the set of inferred categories are consistent ( i . e . , not overlapping with other categories ) . The set of cases is said to be consistent if each category can be distinguished from the other categories by a particular feature or a particular feature – value pair . If the set of cases is inconsistent then the algorithm further sug - gests ways in which the inconsistency ( s ) might be removed ; these include : • Changing a value of a feature of a case . • Reclassifying a case . • Adding an additional descriptor to all the cases . • Creating a disjunction by excluding a value or range of values from a category description . • Shelving a case to work on it subsequently . Considering the dataset shown in Table 1 , the category descrip - tions are inconsistent ( a case with a diastolic blood pressure ( DBP ) value in the range 95 – 97 and a disease value of Disease 3 could not beunambiguouslycategorized ) andsotheuserwouldbepresented with a set of disambiguation options such as : • Exclude 95 – 97 from category A’s DBP range . • Change the value of disease in case 3 to Disease 1 , Disease 2 or Disease 5 . • Add a new descriptor to distinguish between these categories . If , for example , the user opts to create a disjunction , the categories are now distinct . Table 3 shows the updated ( non - overlapping ) categories . We have so far effectively implemented 3 systems : • REFINER [ 31 ] was the ﬁrst system ; it was incremental in that it processed a single case and attempted at each stage to remove any inconsistencies detected . • REFINER + and REFINER + + [ 32 ] 1 : The clear disadvantage of REFINER was that a change made to accommodate an incon - sistency associated with case ( n ) might be reversed when case ( n + 1 ) was considered , and so REFINER + implemented a “batch” algorithm . Namely all the instances were available before any of the category descriptions were created , and hence it was able to avoid much of the unnecessary work done in the initial system . When REFINER + was used with a small number of cases it was quite effective , however the number of inconsistencies noted in 1 REFINER + andREFINER + + areconceptuallyverysimilar ; REFINER + + wasafaster and more robust implementation . a sizable dataset could be overwhelming for the expert . To help contain the situation we evolved several heuristics namely : • Amodiﬁcationwhichremovesaconsiderablenumberofincon - sistencies is preferred over one which removes a smaller number of inconsistencies . • A modiﬁcation which makes a small number of changes to the dataset is preferred over one which makes a larger number of changes . • REFINER DA : The essential difference between REFINER DA and its predecessors ( REFINER + and REFINER + + ) is that it combined aspects of the two earlier systems . Namely the domain expert is asked to suggest several cases which the expert thinks are pro - totypical of the several categories , from which descriptions of the several categories are inferred as described above . REFINER DA then attempts to cover additional cases without causing the category descriptors to become inconsistent . REFINER’s machine learning algorithm attempts to create a set of non - overlapping descriptions for the categories ; moreover , each descriptor is used in each of the categories . Further , the descriptor – value pair which effectively discriminates category A from category B is produced by the machine learning algorithm , and hence is greatly inﬂuenced by the set of cases presented to the system . The domain expert’s intuitions are not used to guide this selection of features . We report here an example which we encountered when using REFINER DA with the ICU domain . The system selected a high value for oxygen saturation as the discrim - inating feature for a “potentially dischargeable” patient ; however if that patient is also on a high - level of inspired oxygen , then this person should be classiﬁed as a very sick patient . So from working with REFINER DA we have made two important observations : • The feature – value pairs chosen by the REFINER systems to describe categories are often not very intuitive to a domain expert . ( The same comment can of course be made of the out - put from other machine learning algorithms such as the decision trees created by the C4 . 5 algorithm [ 33 ] . ) • An expert might effectively sub - divide a category like B into a number of sub - categories , which he may not initially articulate . ( That is a patient can be assigned to category B for one of several distinct reasons : e . g . , poor heart rate , or the existence of Disease 3 . ) If the domain expert does not articulate these sub - categories then category B is likely to be an amorphous category which will inﬂuence the descriptions inferred by the system for that cat - egory ; this in turn will affect the other categories inferred by the REFINER systems . Further , if the sub - categories are articu - lated then it is likely that there will only be a small number of instances in each of the sub - categories , which again will mean that the machine learning algorithm ( s ) will have difﬁculties in extracting meaningful domain - relevant descriptions for the sev - eral categories . In the next section we outline a further system which we have developed , called INSIGHT , which addresses these issues . 3 . Conceptual design of INSIGHT Below we give the design criteria for a system , INSIGHT ; the ﬁrst point below addresses the ( several ) difﬁculties noted at the end of the last section . • Have the experts describe each of the categories and sub - categories in terms of features which the expert believes are appropriate . Effectively the expert provides a set of D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 75 Fig . 1 . A screenshot of INSIGHT’s GUI showing a set of ( domain ) rules and the corresponding confusion matrix . [ Here ‘from data’ refers to the expert’s classiﬁcation of a case , and ‘from rules’ refers to the instance’s classiﬁcation by the rule - set . ] . classiﬁcation rules for the domain ( i . e . , for each of the categories and sub - categories ) . • All the REFINER systems require the domain expert to assign a category ( a label ) to each of the instances . We are continuing this practice here as it gives us a further perspective on the set of cases . • Compare the expert’s 2 perspectives on the domain ; namely , the annotations the expert has associated with each of the cases , versus the categories suggested by the rule - set when it is exe - cuted against the several patient instances . As noted above , INSIGHT is a development of the REFINER fam - ily of systems , yet incorporates a considerably different approach . 2 Whereas the REFINER systems are able to infer descriptions of categories from a set of labelled instances to detect inconsisten - cies , and suggest how they might be resolved , the INSIGHT system highlights discrepancies in two perspectives provided by a single expert on a particular ( classiﬁcation ) task , and brings these to the expert’s attention . Speciﬁcally , INSIGHT is able to handle anno - tated cases where the expert assigns each instance to one of the pre - designated categories ( the ﬁrst perspective ) and the second perspective , a set of rules deﬁned by the expert who classiﬁes each of the instances . 3 INSIGHT displays the results of such comparisons as a confusion matrix . Fig . 1 provides a screenshot of INSIGHT’s graphical user interface ( GUI ) . In the left hand panel , the current rule - set is displayed ( shown in greater detail in Fig . 2 ) ; and the 2 We shall see later that one of INSIGHT’s modes does use machine learning techniques , in a limited way . 3 Approachesexistwhichenablethedecisionsof2expertstobecompared ; some of these comparisons are quite innovative , and we plan to explore whether any of these could be exploited in the INSIGHT approach . However , we know of no other systemwhichcurrentlyenablesadomainexperttocompare2perspectivesofatask directly . associated confusion matrix is displayed in the right hand panel . In this example , 3 categories have been chosen by the expert : HR extreme , HR moderate , and HR normal . The domain expert has annotated a set of instances using the 3 categories and has deﬁned a set of rules ( Fig . 2 ) to describe the same 3 categories . The compar - ison between the outcomes of the domain expert’s rules and the annotated data can be seen in the confusion matrix ; the ﬁrst row of the matrix consists of all the cases which have been annotated by the domain expert as ‘HR extreme’ whereas the cell ( HR extreme , HR moderate ) corresponds to cases which have been annotated by the expert as ‘HR extreme’ but have been classiﬁed by the domain expert’s rule - set as ‘HR moderate’ . Clearly all the diagonal cells [ i . e . , ( HR extreme , HR extreme ) ( HR moderate , HR moderate ) ( HR normal , HR normal ) ] contain instances which have been classiﬁed identically by both the expert’s annotation and rule - set . INSIGHT provides a range of facilities to enable the expert to view the instances which have been misclassiﬁed and to either edit the dataset ( say to change the annotation of an instance , or correct a clearly incorrect data value ) or to revise or enhance the current rule - set . Fig . 2 . The ﬁgure shows ( at greater resolution ) the 3 rules displayed in Fig . 1 ( i . e . , in INSIGHT’s GUI ) . This simple rule - set contains just 3 rules : the ﬁrst 2 rules are disjunctive and the third has a single condition . 76 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Our assumption was that the confusion matrix would be a very intuitive way of presenting results to experts . 4 So far we have observed 10 experts using INSIGHT , and from their actions we have inferred that they all understood the information inherent in the confusion matrix . Moreover , several of them commented to us informally that they thought it was a succinct way of pre - senting the information . Additionally , it suggests a procedure ( set of heuristics 5 ) for tackling revisions of the discrepancies . Clearly some discrepancies are more surprising than others . For exam - ple , as all the categories are in a sense ordered , instances in the cell ( HR extreme , HR normal ) can be considered to be more surprising than those only one category away , say those in cell ( HR extreme , HR moderate ) . Thus this distance measure suggests that the domain expert should be encouraged to consider discrep - ancies in the following order : • ( HR extreme , HR normal ) and ( HR normal , HR extreme ) ( dis - tance between categories of 2 ) . • ( HR extreme , HR moderate ) , ( HR moderate , HR extreme ) , ( HR normal , HR moderate ) and ( HR moderate , HR normal ) ( distance between categories of 1 ) . Theaboveadvicewasprovidedtotheclinicianswhilsttheywere being introduced both to the reﬁnement task and to the INSIGHT system . We made two other suggestions as to how they might approach the task of making the two perspectives more consistent , namely : • To initially reﬁne each of the patient datasets individually , before attempting to reﬁne the complete set of instances ( i . e . , all the patients’ datasets ) . • In the ﬁrst period to concentrate on removing the discrepancies from the dataset ( incorrect annotations and data points ) and only at a later stage make changes to the rule - set . This heuristic is basedontheperspectivethatchangestothedatasetarelocalized , whereas a change to a rule could , in principle , affect all the cases . Note this advice has focused on how the expert might approach thereﬁnementtask ( e . g . , whichaspecttheexpertmighttackleﬁrst ) and did not discuss the changes to be made , by the expert , to the annotations or to the rules . Although we report the use of INSIGHT applied in the ICU domain ( Section 4 ) the tool has been designed generically so that it can be applied in other domains ; Section 6 describes such future work plans . 3 . 1 . The rule interpreter Essentially each rule consists of a single action which assigns a particular instance to a category , and a series of conjunctive condi - tions or a series of disjunctive conditions . ( More recently we have added the ability to specify that M out of N conditions are satisﬁed – this has proved useful in reducing the number of rules required in several applications . ) Fig . 2 provides a simple rule - set based on the ICU domain . ( Section 4 . 1 discusses a more extensive ICU rule - set . ) To date we have implemented only a single conﬂict resolution strategy , namely the ﬁrst rule which is satisﬁed , ﬁres . This means that it is necessary for the domain expert ( supported by the ana - lyst ) to ensure that the most speciﬁc rules are placed at the top of the list , and the more general rules are placed lower in the list . For 4 Confusion matrices are a common method to display machine learning results [ 34 ] . 5 TheheuristicsusedherearenotthesameasthoseusedinthepreviousREFINER family of systems as the tasks being addressed are different . example , if we had the following 2 conjunctive rules : rule 1 : A and B and C together with rule 2 : A and B , if rule 2 occurred in a rule - set before rule 1 , then with the simple conﬂict resolution strategy we are using , rule 1 would never be activated . In many situations rules are mutually exclusive , as they include non - overlapping con - ditions ( orintheextremecaseusecompletelydifferentdescriptors ) in which case they are order - independent . However , if a set of rules have related conditions , then it is important to ensure the rules are appropriately ordered , as the above example indicates . We have kept the format of the rules and the rule interpreter simple for a number of reasons : ﬁrstly , this meant the system could beimplementedquickly ; andsecondly , theformofthecurrentrules and the interpreter’s decision making appear to be easily under - standable by domain experts . ( The interpreter and the form of the rules may be enhanced subsequently if there is a clear need . ) 3 . 2 . Inferring rules from instances INSIGHT has a further mode which infers a rule when pro - vided with several instances of a particular category . This mode was added so that an expert would not be forced to specify rules for each of the categories ab initio . However , such rules contain a feature – value pair corresponding to each of the descriptors used to describe categories . Our recent work with INSIGHT has made us awareoftheneedforexpertstoselectrelevantdescriptorsfromthe inferred rules , in order to achieve domain - acceptable distinctions between the categories . This mode has still to be used by a domain expert with a demanding application , and as such is featured in Section 6 . 4 . Evaluation of the INSIGHT system The objective of the ICU study using INSIGHT is to derive a series of rules which can be used with a high degree of consistency , to classify the hourly patient reports produced by the patient man - agement system . The overall objective of the project is to produce a methodology and tools to support the process by which an expert attempts to make several perspectives about a task , consistent . Many ICUs have patient management systems which collect the patients’ physiological parameters , record nursing activities , and other interventions ( such as the administration of drugs and boluses of ﬂuids ) . This information , typically collected at speciﬁed time periods say every minute or hour , is recorded in a database associated with the patient monitoring system , and is continuously available on a monitor at the patient’s bedside where it is usually displayed as a conventional chart ; this is the form of the informa - tion which clinicians use when they attend patients . Thus many ICUsarenowpaperless . Oftenthisinformationisnotsystematically analysed subsequently for trends or inconsistencies in the datasets . This is the focus of a complementary aspect of our work which led us to produce the architecture for clinical hypothesis evaluation infrastructure ( ACHE ) [ 35 ] . That paper also outlines one prelimi - nary study which we have undertaken with ACHE to identify the occurrence of myocardial infarctions in this group of ICU patients . The patient management system used at Glasgow Royal Inﬁr - mary records up to 60 parameters . Table 4 lists the principal parameters , and lists the frequency of recording in the current dataset . It should be noted that the datasets which we analyse are extracted from the patient database , de - identiﬁed , and output as a spreadsheet ; the spreadsheet is then input to the ACHE system and different analyses are performed on the data “off - line” . For a variety of reasons it is helpful for clinicians to obtain a summary of each patient’s overall condition , on request , from the data recorded by the patient management systems ( currently most ICU patient management systems provide reports every hour , D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 77 Table 4 The main parameters used in the study . Parameter Recorded interval HR Hourly Temperature Hourly Mean arterial pressure ( MAP or mean ) Hourly Diastolic Hourly Systolic Hourly FiO 2 Hourly SpO 2 Hourly Urine output Hourly Central venous pressure ( CVP ) Hourly Drug infusions ( e . g . , adrenaline and noradrenaline ) As applicable Fluid infusions As applicable Dialysis sessions As applicable but there is the possibility of more frequent reports if these are needed clinically ) . Such information would be useful to determine whether there has been any appreciable improvement or deteri - oration , would be a useful summary for the next shift of clinical staff , and could be included as a component of a discharge sum - mary . To date the APACHE II scale [ 36 ] is widely used in ICUs in the western world ; however , the APACHE score is calculated only once during a patient’s ICU stay , usually during the ﬁrst 24h after admis - sion . Additionallythisscoringsystemdoesnottakeintoaccountthe effect of interventions on a patient . For example , if a patient has a very low blood pressure this is clearly a very serious condition , but it is even more serious if the patient has this blood pressure despite having received a signiﬁcant dose of a drug like adrenaline . 6 The clinical authors of this paper ( JK and MS ) have been analysing ICU patient scoring systems for some whilst . More recently we have produced a 5 - point ( high - level ) qualitative description of ICU patients [ 37 ] , which can be summarized as fol - lows : E Patient is highly unstable with say a number of his physiological parameters ( e . g . , blood pressure and heart rate ) having extreme values ( either low or high ) D Patient more stable than those in category E but is likely to be receiving considerable amounts of support ( e . g . , ﬂuid boluses , drugs such as adrenaline , and possibly high levels of oxygen ) C Either more stable than patients in category D or the same level of stability but on lower levels of support ( e . g . , ﬂuids , drugs and inspired oxygen ) B Relatively stable ( i . e . , near normal physiological parameters ) with low levels of support A Normal physiological parameters without use of drugs like adrenaline , only small amounts of ﬂuids , and low levels of inspired oxygen For more details on the categories , see Appendix A . The outline of the study to generate and reﬁne a set of rules for the previously proposed 5 - point qualitative description of ICU patients is : ( a ) The administrator of the patient management system produced listings ( in spreadsheet format ) for 10 patients’ complete stays in the ICU ( the number of days varied from 2 to 23 days ) . These 10 records were chosen randomly from the larger num - berofpatientrecordsavailable . ( Eachspreadsheetcontainedthe parameters described in Table 4 . ) ( b ) One of the clinical investigators ( clinician - 1 ) annotated each of the hourly records ( nearly 3000 records in all ) with his assess - ment of the patient’s status on the 5 - point qualitative scale on the basis of the information provided by the patient manage - ment system i . e . , that contained in the spreadsheets . 6 Adrenaline normally raises a patient’s blood pressure through its inotropic effect . ( c ) Further , we asked the same clinician to articulate rules to describe each of the 5 categories , ( i . e . , A – E ) . ( d ) WeusedtheINSIGHTtooltohelpthisclinicianmakethisdataset and his rule - set more consistent by modifying , as he saw ﬁt , the dataset , the dataset’s annotations , his rule - set , or any combina - tion of the three . ( e ) Due to time constraints , the second clinician annotated 3 of the patients’ datasets , again using the same qualitative scale ( A – E ) . ( These datasets were randomly chosen from the 10 annotated by ( clinician - 1 ) . ) ( f ) The INSIGHT tool was then used to help the second clinician make his dataset consistent with the rule - set produced by the ﬁrst clinician . This clinician was , of course , allowed to modify the dataset , his annotations of the dataset and the rule - set . ( g ) The last 2 steps were repeated with a third clinician ( where the third clinician used initially the second clinician’s ﬁnal rule - set ) . ( h ) We held a session with all 3 clinicians in an attempt to agree a common rule - set . ( i ) Independently , the3cliniciansreconciledtheirownannotations ( datasets ) with the common rule - set . In this study , highly experienced clinicians were asked to assess hourly snapshots of patients and to categorize each of the instances on a 5 - point scale . Note we were not assessing the depth or orga - nization of the experts’ knowledge nor how that knowledge had been acquired . That would be a considerably different , and a more complex , study . If we were to address this topic , particularly if we were to study how neo - experts become “real” experts in the com - plex domain of ICU medicine , then we would be greatly inﬂuenced by the earlier work of [ 38 ] . As noted in Section 1 , INSIGHT has been developed to enable a single domain expert to make their 2 ( or more ) perspectives more consistent . SooneshouldviewthisstudyastheuseofINSIGHTwith 3separateexpertstodeterminehoweffectiveitiswithanumberof individual experts . This is the core of the study . However , we took advantage of having access to the 3 experts to hold a face - to - face session ( stephabove ) toseeiftheycouldreachaconsensusontheir severalrulesets . Subsequentlyinstepi , eachindividualexpertused INSIGHT in an attempt to reconcile his own annotations with this common rule - set . So again the focus of the study returns to the use of INSIGHT by an individual expert . Further , it should be noted that the patients’ datasets represent their complete stay in the ICU , and hence it is to be expected that the quality and completeness of the records will not be high at both the beginning and end of the patients’ stays . For example , usually when a patient is ﬁrst admitted to an ICU , they are in need of resus - citation , and as some of this involves manual infusion of drugs , the patient management system does not capture all the activities , or all of the patient’s physiological parameters . Thus although infor - mation about the state of the patient during this period may have been communicated amongst the members of the clinical team , a considerable amount of this information will not have been cap - tured by the ICU’s patient management system , and thus will not be available for analysis by INSIGHT . Further , associated with each patient’s stay there may be a number of time points which do not contain all the “core” parameters , and hence , it might be argued , these time points should not be used for analyses . Note that after the ﬁrst 6h in the ICU , a complete set of “core” parameters is normally collected by the patient management sys - tem for the patient . ( We have agreed , in principle , to only analyse instances after the ﬁrst 6h of a patient’s stay . ) It should be noted that some of the descriptors in this dataset ( such as urine output and heart rate ) were extrapolated to provide certain missing val - ues ; the algorithms used to calculate these missing values were agreed with the clinicians . Further , it should be noted that the 10 cases provided for the study were randomly selected from all the 78 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Table 5 Patient codes and the number of time points provided for each patient ; there being in total 2761 patient time points . Patient code 696 705 707 708 720 728 733 738 751 782 Number of hourly time points ( or instances ) 129 576 475 40 188 281 396 110 493 73 cases stored in the ICU’s patient management system , and hence should represent a mixture of case severities . On the other hand , it is important to point out that the patients in this cohort come from a unit with a greater severity of illness than most intensive care units . The mean APACHE II scores of patients in this unit are in the range 19 – 25 , whereas the national average is 19 [ 39 ] . This section describes a two - phase study conducted with clinician - 1 ( Section 4 . 1 ) , a related 1 - phase study undertaken with clinician - 2 ( Section 4 . 2 ) , a 1 - phase study with clinician - 3 ( Sec - tion 4 . 3 ) , an initial comparison between the performances of the 3 clinicians ( Section 4 . 4 ) , and approaches for achieving consensus between the 3 clinicians ( Section 4 . 5 ) . 4 . 1 . Study with clinician - 1 For a number of reasons , the study with this clinician was some - what more extensive than with the other 2 clinicians . Firstly , this was the ﬁrst use of the INSIGHT system with a domain expert , and so we decided in this phase just to use a limited dataset ( i . e . , data from a single patient ) . During this ﬁrst phase we realized that the INSIGHT system needed to be made easier and more efﬁcient to use . In the second phase , clinician - 1 used the improved INSIGHT with the remaining 9 patients . As part of the ﬁrst phase , clinician - 1 articulated an initial set of rules ( which he then reﬁned in the two phases . The study with clinician - 2 took as its starting point the ﬁnal rule - set produced by clinician - 1 ) . As a result of these 2 phases with clinician - 1 , it was realized that the time commitment to annotate and then reﬁne the dataset and rule - set with INSIGHT for all 10 patients was too great a time com - mitmentformostclinicians , andhencewerandomlychoseasubset of3patientsforusewiththeremainingclinicians . ( Soinarealsense the study with clinician - 1 was a pilot ; where we investigated the “stability” of the INSIGHT tool and the time to process and reﬁne a single patient dataset . ) When we make comparisons between the 3 clinicians we report data on the 3 common patients ; additionally , in this section we report the results achieved by clinician - 1 with the 10 patient datasets . Clinician - 1 chose initially to concentrate on patient 705 which has 576 time points ( or instances ) . When he started this session there was a 45 . 0 % ( 259 / 576 ) agreement between his annotations and the results obtained by running his initial rule - set against the ( patient ) instances , however if the unclassiﬁed instances are ignored that ﬁgure becomes 45 . 9 % ( 258 / 562 ) . 7 Further , at the end of the session the agreement was 97 . 0 % ( 559 of 576 ) or 100 % ( 556 of 556 ) if we ignore the effects of the ( 20 ) unclassi - ﬁed instances . 8 Kappa values have also been calculated for each of these calculations . Table 6 summarizes these results . Each cell gives the percentage match and the corresponding kappa value [ 40 ] ; in the second row we give the number of items matched and the total number of items . We are using the interpretation of kappa values suggested by Landis and Koch [ 41 ] namely : < 0 , no agreement ; 0 . 0 – 0 . 20 , slight agreement ; 0 . 21 – 0 . 40 , fair agreement ; 0 . 41 – 0 . 60 , moderateagreement ; 0 . 61 – 0 . 80 , substantialagreement , and 0 . 81 – 1 . 0 , almost perfect agreement . So the corresponding kappa values before reﬁnement ( 0 . 24 and 0 . 25 ) , with and without unclassiﬁed items , are both classiﬁed as “fair agreement” ; after the 7 For the purposes of this study , we have deﬁned an “unclassiﬁed” instance as an instance which either the expert assigns to category [ none ] , as the expert believes Table 6 Summary of clinician - 1’s reﬁnement for patient 705 . Each cell gives the percentage matchandthecorrespondingkappavalue ; inthesecondrowthenumberofmatch - ing items and the total number of items are cited . As the rule - set was produced by the same expert , intra - rater consistency is being reported here . Patient 705 ( before ) Patient 705 ( after ) All instances considered 45 . 0 % ; 0 . 24 259 / 576 97 . 0 % ; 0 . 95 559 / 576 Unclassiﬁed instances excluded 45 . 9 % ; 0 . 25 258 / 562 100 . 0 % ; 1 . 0 556 / 556 reﬁnement the corresponding kappa values are 0 . 95 and 1 . 00 and so are both classiﬁed as “almost perfect agreement” . So the reﬁne - ment process has signiﬁcantly altered the agreement between the corresponding dataset and rule - set . This session took about 5h , and was relatively slow as this was the ﬁrst time INSIGHT had been used on a real application by a domainexpert , andatthebeginningofthesessionitwasnecessary , for example , to change annotations of instances singly , which was painstaking when the expert wanted to change a group of annota - tions . This and other functionalities have subsequently been added so this tool is now very much faster to use . One thing which this clinician did at an early stage was to reduce the number of param - eters viewed for each instance from the original 41 to just 6 9 ; this also speeded up his handling of instances considerably . The param - eters which he chose to view were : adrenaline , FiO 2 , HR , MAP , noradrenaline , and SpO 2 . Earlier in this section , we outlined the nature of the patient data available in this domain , and in Section 3 we outlined the simple rule interpreter which we have implemented in INSIGHT . Here we give some examples of the rules which this clinician articulated for several categories . For example , the rule associated with category A has the following form : thereisinsufﬁcientinformationonwhichtobaseaclassiﬁcationortherule - setfails toclassifyaninstanceduetolackofinformation . ( Notetheexpertmightalsousethis classiﬁcation in other circumstances . ) Below , we give examples of the 2 subgroups : - An expert assigns an instance to [ none ] on the basis that values are not available forwhathejudgestobecoreparameters , buttherule - setassignstheinstancetoa categoryonthebasisoftheinstancematchingoneofthe ( sayextreme ) disjunctive conditionsassociatedwithadomainrule . ( SeeFig . 2forexamplesofrulesforthis domain . ) - Aninstanceclassiﬁedbytheexpertasan“A”isclassiﬁedbytherule - setas [ none ] asseveralofthedescriptorsspeciﬁedinthe“A”ruledonothavevaluesassociated with them . In all cases , the unclassiﬁed instance is one which has information missing which either the expert or the rule - set thinks is important . Ideally , we would introduce the concept of an “ classiﬁable ” instance , i . e . , an instance which has values associated with all the core descriptors ( say FiO 2 , SpO 2 , MAP , HR and all the inotrope drugs ) , and only classiﬁable instances would be further assigned to a particular ( A – E ) category . However , we are not able to currently handle the execution of classiﬁable instances as only non - zero drug doses are recorded , and the above approach would require zero ( inotrope ) doses also be recorded by the ICU’s patient management system . 8 Note3instanceswereclassiﬁedbyboththeexpertandtherule - setas“unclassi - ﬁed” . Thisexplainsthechangeinthenumberoftheclassiﬁedfrom559to556when the unclassiﬁed are removed from the calculation . 9 With10patientsthereare41descriptors ; clinician - 2and - 3analysed3patients , whenthenumberofdescriptorsis36 . Thatiseachpatienthasacoresetofdescriptors reported , butnotallpatients , forexample , havethesamesetofdrugsadministered . D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 79 Table 7 We have used the notation “nn A → B” to indicate that nn items which had been annotated initially by the clinician as an “A” , have since been reclassiﬁed by the expert as a “B” . If the item is followed by a “ * ” this implies that the changed annotation is now consistent with that predicted by the then - current version of the rule - set . ( Remember that when the rule - set changes all the instances are re - evaluated against the revised rule - set . ) Expert Rule A Rule B Rule C Rule D Rule E A 157 A → B * 2 A → C 3 rule edits 11 A → B 7 A → C * 1 A → D 2 A → D * 2 rule edits 3 data edits a 3 A → U B 14 B → A * 1 rule edit 1 B → U 11 B → C * 2 B → C 1 B → D * 1 data edit 1 B → U C 12 C → B * 15 C → D * 1 C → E 2 rule edits 1 C → E * D 13 D → C 4 D → E 3 D → U 11 D → C * 1 D → E 2 D → U 1 rule edit 21 D → E * 1 rule edit 1 data edit E a To remove impermissible values . HR ( normal - range ) AND BLOOD - PRESSURE ( normal - range ) AND SPO 2 ( normal - range ) AND FIO 2 ( normal - range ) AND ADRENALINE ( none ) AND NORADRENALINE ( none ) Note this is a conjunctive rule , and all the conditions have to be satisﬁed before a time point is classiﬁed as an “A” . On the other hand , there are a number of disjunctive rules which represent each of the conditions which correspond to a patient being assigned to category “E” , namely : HR ( extremely low ) OR HR ( extremely high ) OR MAP ( extremely low ) OR MAP ( extremely high ) OR ADRENALINE ( extremely high ) OR NORADRENALINE ( extremely high ) The rules associated with categories B , C , and D are also largely disjunctive , and tend to have values on a continuum from those associated with category “A” to those associated to category “E” . Fig . 3 shows an example of one of the confusion matrices created during the clinician interviews . Clinician - 1 followed roughly the reﬁnement strategy suggested in Section 3 ; note there are no “E” rows in this confusion matrix which means that none of the instances classiﬁed by the expert as an “E” was classiﬁed as anything else by the rule - set . In fact the expert chose to consider cells ( A , E ) ( B , E ) ( C , E ) followed by ( B , D ) ( D , B ) and then ( A , C ) ( A , B ) ( B , A ) ( D , E ) ( D , C ) ( B , C ) ( D , C ) ( B , D ) ( C , B ) and ( C , D ) . In the early stages of the analysis , very obvious inconsistencies were encountered and dealt with , and later it often becameanissueofﬁne - tuningtherule - setorthedatasettoachieve the classiﬁcation which the expert wanted between two “adjacent” ( 1 - distance apart ) classiﬁcations . Table 7 gives a summary of the changes made to the “cells” . Here we provide an overview of the typical decisions made by this domain expert : • Inadmissible readings : In cell ( A , E ) , the expert considered that 3 of the values given in the dataset for heart rate were clearly inadmissible ( values of 372 , 7 , 3 ) ; he changed those values to null values , and reclassiﬁed each of the cases as “unclassiﬁed” as he felt there was insufﬁcient information to make a classiﬁcation . He dealt with a further instance in cell ( B , E ) similarly . • Extrapolated data points : Several times the expert agreed that the actual information provided in an instance was not sufﬁ - cient to make a decision , and agreed , for several of the missing values , he had looked at the corresponding values in the imme - diately preceding and following time - periods and had effectively used extrapolated values when making his decisions . In all cases he agreed that the instances should have their classiﬁcations changed to “unclassiﬁed” . ( This raises the issue of whether a fur - ther trending facility should be developed for INSIGHT and used with selected features . ) • Signiﬁcant values overlooked : In many instances , e . g . , cell ( D , B ) , the expert agreed that the annotation should be changed as he had failed , when doing his initial classiﬁcation , to note an important feature – value pair , in this case FiO 2 values of 0 . 55 . • Deciding borderline values : In handling many of the “adjacent” cells where the distance between them is just one ( e . g . , cells such as ( A , B ) ( B , C ) ( C , B ) ) ; the expert in some circumstances reclas - siﬁed the instances , and in others he modiﬁed the appropriate rules to achieve his desired classiﬁcation for the instances . This expert made 297 changes to annotations . Note some anno - tations might well have been changed several times : for example , an instance originally annotated as an A , might initially be re - annotated as a “D” , and ﬁnally following a rule change , might be re - annotated as a “C” . In summary , this expert during the process of this reﬁnement modiﬁed 51 . 6 % ( 297 / 576 ) of his annotations : 272 changes ( 47 . 2 % ) were to adjust annotations which were on the borderline between two adjacent categories ; 15 ( 2 . 6 % ) were “non - adjacent” annotations ( these changes were often due to the expert overlooking a piece of information in the patient record which he accepted as important when it was brought to his attention ( by INSIGHT ) ) ; and the remaining 10 changes ( 1 . 7 % ) were to reclas - sifyinstancesasunclassiﬁed ( oftenwhenhenotedanunacceptable values for a “core” descriptors e . g . , HR ) . In this session , we observed two signiﬁcant types of rule reﬁne - ments , namely : • Adding a new rule , e . g . , clinician - 1 in phase 2 added a new conjunctive rule to category “E” : ADRENALINE ( high ) AND NORA - DRENALINE ( high ) . • Reﬁning the conditions of a set of rules based on a common feature , say FiO 2 . Note that all the values returned for FiO 2 are effectively decimals ( in the range 0 . 0 – 1 . 0 ) ; also note that all the ranges for FiO 2 are continuous . Table 8 gives the values for FiO 2 for a number of categories , both before and after reﬁnement . Table 8 FiO 2 values before and after reﬁnement . Category Before reﬁnement After reﬁnement C 0 . 55 – 0 . 69 0 . 55 – 0 . 69 D 0 . 70 – 0 . 84 0 . 70 – 0 . 83 E 0 . 85 – 1 . 00 0 . 84 – 1 . 00 80 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Fig . 3 . An example confusion matrix taken from a session with a clinician . Here ‘from data’ refers to the expert’s classiﬁcation of instances , and ‘from rules’ refers to the instances classiﬁcation by the rule - set . Note this is a ( partial ) screen shot of INSIGHT’s display . In the second ( pilot ) session , which lasted several hours , we started with the rule - set which had been produced in this ﬁrst session ( when the expert had processed the data associated with patient 705 ) , and used that as the starting point to make the anno - tations of the remaining 9 patients ( see Table 5 ) consistent with this rule - set or a variant of this rule - set . In this session the number of annotated instances to be dealt with was 2130 ( i . e . , 2706 − 576 ) . It should be noted that as a result of the changes made earlier to INSIGHT the progress in this session was considerably faster ( on average operations took about a third of the time ; some operations such as reclassifying blocks of instances are even quicker ) . At the start of this session , the rule - set produced in phase 1 gave a 58 . 3 % ( 1609 of 2760 ) agreement with the annotations created by the domain expert across all 10 patients ; when the 135 unclassiﬁed instances are removed we get a 58 . 9 % ( 1545 of 2625 ) agreement . By the end of the reﬁnement session this agreement had increased to 96 . 4 % ( 2663 of 2761 ) , or when the 170 unclassiﬁed instances had been removed , to 100 . 0 % ( 2591 of 2591 ) ( with the corresponding kappa values being : 0 . 95 and 1 . 0 ) . The expert initially chose to view thesameparametersashedidattheendoftheﬁrstsession , butpart way through he re - introduced dobutamine to the set . The strategy followed by the expert for reﬁning these instances was very similar to that given above . A summary of phase 2 is provided in Table 9 . Given that the number of instances considered here is nearly four times as large as considered in phase 1 , there are a relatively smaller number of changes , the exception being the number of instances which have Table 9 Summary of actions taken by clinician - 1 in phase 2 . Number of instances in the set 2130 Number of instances / annotations viewed 225 a Number of data values edited / removed 7 Number of annotations changed to unclassiﬁed 97 Number of annotations left as “inconsistencies” 16 Number of annotations changed to another A – E level ( excluding “unclassiﬁed” ) 1 Number of annotations changed to be consistent with the rules ( excluding unclassiﬁed ) 104 Number of changes to the rule - set 6 a This ﬁgure is approximate as there are several ways in which it could be calcu - lated . been reclassiﬁed as “unclassiﬁed” . As noted before many instances are unclassiﬁed as “core” data elements are missing ; clearly one is never going to capture all the data , but the expert noticed that data is often missing at critical points when patients experience a signiﬁcant deterioration ; this issue will be raised with nursing staff to see if the overall data collection rates can be improved . ( We also noted earlier that data tends to be sparse when patients ﬁrst come to the ICU and just before they are discharged . ) 4 . 2 . Study with clinician - 2 Inthesessionwithclinician - 2 , whichlastedabout2h , westarted with the rule - set which had been produced by clinician - 1 as the result of reviewing all 10 patients . Clinician - 2 had annotated three patient datasets , namely those of patients 708 , 728 , and 733 , giving a total of 717 instances . ( Clinician - 1 annotated time points from 10 patients ; the smaller number of 3 patients was chosen for subse - quent clinicians to make the task more manageable . ) This clinician also decided it was hard to review all the parameters reported for each time instance and chose , generally , to limit the ones he con - sidered to adrenaline , blood pump speed , CVP , dobutamine , FiO 2 , gelofusin , hartmanns , HR , LiDCO CI , MAP , noradrenaline , PiCCO derived parameters , propofol , sodium chloride , SpO 2 , temperature , urine output , and vasopressin ( 18 parameters out of a set of 36 possible parameters ) . The strategy followed by the expert for reﬁning these instances was very similar to that used by clinician - 1 . At the start of this session the ﬁnal rule - set produced by clinician - 1 gave a 40 . 0 % agreement with the annotations created by this domain expert for patient 708 ( 40 instances ) , and by the end of this session the agreement had increased to 97 . 5 % . Table 10 gives results for the three patients ; the percentage agreement , after dataset and rule reﬁnements , for these instances is remarkably high : being 97 . 6 % when unclassiﬁed cases are included and 99 . 6 % when they are not . 10 The corresponding kappa values before reﬁne - ment ( − 0 . 02 and − 0 . 02 ) , with and without unclassiﬁed items , 10 This expert assigned 14 instances to the [ none ] category ; 9 ( 64 . 3 % ) had at least one“core”valuemissing ; and3 ( 21 . 4 % ) hadextremevaluesforanon - coreparameter so the expert reclassiﬁed the instance as [ none ] . D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 81 Table 10 Summary of clinician - 2’s reﬁnement . ( Each cell contains the percentage , the cor - responding kappa value , and the number of instances matched against the total number of instances . ) All 3 patients ( before ) All 3 patients ( after ) All instances considered 10 . 5 % ; − 0 . 02 75 / 717 97 . 6 % ; 0 . 97 700 / 717 Unclassiﬁed instances excluded 10 . 6 % ; − 0 . 02 75 / 710 99 . 6 % ; 0 . 99 700 / 703 Table 11 Summary of clinician - 3’s reﬁnement . ( Each cell contains the percentage , the cor - responding kappa value , and the number of instances matched against the total number of instances . ) All 3 patients ( before ) All 3 patients ( after ) All instances considered 90 . 6 % ; 0 . 87 571 / 630 98 . 1 % ; 0 . 97 618 / 630 Unclassiﬁed instances excluded 90 . 9 % ; 0 . 88 568 / 625 98 . 4 % ; 0 . 98 615 / 625 are both classiﬁed as “no agreement” ; after reﬁnement the cor - responding kappa values are 0 . 97 and 0 . 99 and so are both classiﬁed as “almost perfect agreement” . 4 . 3 . Study with clinician - 3 As clinician - 1 and clinician - 2 had worked closely together on the development of a patient scoring system it was thought impor - tant to have a further consultant from the ICU at Glasgow Royal Inﬁrmary undertake the same analysis as clinician - 2 . So clinician - 3 annotatedthesetsofinstancesforthesame3patientsasclinician - 2 ( 717 instances ) ; this annotation was done independently . Further , he took as his starting point the last rule - set produced by clinician - 2 . Once again he then used INSIGHT to help him make these 2 perspectives more consistent ; and again he revised the dataset , the annotations of his dataset , and the rule - set . ( In fact , this expert fol - lowed a very similar reﬁnement strategy to the other 2 experts , and so it will not be described here . ) Again as with the other clinicians , he found the full set of descriptors too large to handle , and in this case clinician - 3 excluded 9 descriptors and so used the remaining 27 . The initial agreement which clinician - 3 achieved between his dataset ( annotations ) and the initial rule - set was 90 . 6 % ( 571 / 630 ) if one includes unclassiﬁed instances in the calculation , and 90 . 9 % ( 568 / 625 ) when one excludes them . 11 As a result of the reﬁne - ments clinician - 3 made to both the dataset and to the rule - set , these ﬁgures became 98 . 1 % ( 618 / 630 ) when one includes unclas - siﬁed instances in the calculation , and 98 . 4 % ( 615 / 625 ) when one excludes them . These results are summarized in Table 11 ; both the kappa values after reﬁnement suggest that there is “almost perfect agreement” . The changes by this expert essentially included reﬁnements of the annotations , and rule reﬁnements . Here we give a summary of the reﬁnements made : • The expert changed the annotation of 61 instances . • 87 instances were accidentally deleted from the dataset ( reduc - ing the remaining dataset from 717 to 630 ) . 12 The expert had 11 Weexplainfurtherinthesectionwhythetotalnumberofinstancesusedinthis analysis is 630 and not 717 . 12 As this error occurred after about an hour into the reﬁnement process , we felt we could not ask the clinician to restart the reﬁnement process . Moreover , INSIGHT has now been modiﬁed so that the user is now asked to conﬁrm deletions before they occur . intended changing the category of these instances from C to D . ( This information is included at a later stage of the analysis . ) • The expert changed the annotation of a further 16 instances . • The expert then revised the rule - set . • The expert changed the annotation of a further 60 instances . The total number of annotations changed was 224 ( including the deleted instances ) ; below we summarize these amendments : As noted earlier , the expert had intended reclassifying the deleted instances from category C to D ; when these are included the changes to the annotations become : NULL to a category ( 1 ) [ 0 . 14 % ] . Category to NULL ( 5 ) [ 0 . 70 % ] . Changes involving adjacent categories ( 211 ) [ 29 . 4 % ] . Changes involving non - adjacent categories ( 7 ) [ 1 . 0 % ] . 13 where the percentages given in [ ] are based on the original number of717instances . Onceagainweseethatthemajorityofthechanges are made to “adjacent” categories , and some feature – values have been deemed inadmissible and hence the instances have been reclassiﬁed as “unclassiﬁed” . As noted above , clinician - 3 made a number of changes to his annotations , and then reﬁned 5 out of the 9 rules in the initial rule - set . ( Note all the changes made are to the same descriptor , MAP . ) 4 . 4 . Comparisons between clinician - 1 , clinician - 2 , and clinician - 3 Table 12 indicates that each of the 3 clinicians has achieved a high level of correlation between their individual annotations and ownrule - set . Furtherclinician - 1andclinician - 2showahighdegree of correlation ( ∼ 93 . 5 % including unclassiﬁed instances and ∼ 96 % if they are excluded ) ; whereas the agreement with clinician - 3 is consistently ∼ 7 % lower . 14 Even these agreements are higher than we might have predicted . Just one of the kappa values in Table 12 is interpreted as “substantial agreement” ; the remainder ( 17 ) are interpreted as “almost perfect agreement” . The next section dis - cusses an approach to reconciling the perspectives of the 3 experts . 4 . 5 . Attempting to achieve a consensus between the 3 experts : towards a methodology for creating consensuses between multiple experts We can think of the instances reported by the patient manage - ment system as a vector for each time point . So suppose there are N features , then at time point t , we will have a vector of N feature – value ( FV ) pairs (cid:5) FV 1 t , FV 2 t , . . . , FV Nt (cid:6) We shall refer to this as a “facts vector” . Moreover , if we are try - ing to make the classiﬁcation consistent between 3 experts , say Ea , Eb , and Ec , then we also have their classiﬁcations for this instance 13 Again the expert noted that this was because he had overlooked important descriptor values when he had reviewed these instances initially . 14 If this approach indicates that Ea and Eb classify a particular instance ( or set of instances ) identically , we cannot infer that both experts have used identical descriptorstoarriveattheirclassiﬁcations . Theymight , forinstance , befocussingon different descriptors which are correlated in this particular instance . For example , EamightfocusonlowBP , andEbonabnormallyhighFiO 2 values , andboththeabove descriptor – value pairs occur in this particular instance ( time - slot ) . So this current approach identiﬁes , functional equivalence of decisions , but the later might well not be cognitively , or descriptively , equivalent ( as indicated by the above example ) . If this becomes important , at some stage , the actual descriptors used by the several experts to make particular classiﬁcations , could be identiﬁed . 82 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Table 12 Comparisonbetweenﬁnaldatasetsandrule - setsforclinician - 1 , clinician - 2andclinician - 3oninstancesfromthreepatients . Asteriskedresultscorrespondtoanalyseswhere the unclassiﬁed instances are removed from the calculation . Clinician - 1’s ﬁnal dataset Clinician - 2’s ﬁnal dataset Clinician - 3’s ﬁnal dataset Clinician - 1’s ﬁnal rule - set 96 . 7 % ; 0 . 95 ( 693 / 717 ) 100 . 0 % * ; 1 . 0 ( 674 / 674 ) 94 . 0 % ; 0 . 92 ( 674 / 717 ) 95 . 9 % * ; 0 . 94 ( 674 / 703 ) 88 . 4 % ; 0 . 85 ( 557 / 630 ) 88 . 6 % * ; 0 . 85 ( 554 / 625 ) Clinician - 2’s ﬁnal rule - set 93 . 4 % ; 0 . 91 ( 670 / 717 ) 96 . 6 % * ; 0 . 95 ( 651 / 674 ) 97 . 6 % ; 0 . 97 ( 700 / 717 ) 99 . 6 % * ; 0 . 99 ( 700 / 703 ) 92 . 5 % ; 0 . 90 ( 583 / 630 ) 92 . 8 % * ; 0 . 90 ( 580 / 625 ) Clinician - 3’s ﬁnal rule - set 84 . 4 % ; 0 . 79 ( 605 / 717 ) 87 . 1 % * ; 0 . 82 ( 587 / 674 ) 88 . 8 % ; 0 . 85 ( 637 / 717 ) 90 . 6 % * ; 0 . 87 ( 637 / 703 ) 98 . 1 % ; 0 . 97 ( 618 / 630 ) 98 . 4 % * ; 0 . 98 ( 615 / 625 ) ( time point ‘ t ’ ) ; suppose we call these : CEa , t , CEb , t and CEc , t Addi - tionally , wewillhavetheclassiﬁcationsproducedbytheirrule - sets whenrunontheappropriatefactsvector ; supposewerefertothese additional decisions as : REa , t , REb , t and REc , t . Further , suppose , we concatenate these several decisions and the above “facts vector” , then we obtain the “composite vector” . ( (cid:5) FV 1 t , FV 2 t . . . , FV Nt (cid:6) ) ( (cid:5) CEa , tCEb , tCEc , tREa , tREb , tREc , t (cid:6) ) INSIGHT could be modiﬁed to collate this type of information ; further the system could be enhanced to report such vectors when certain conditions hold between the various classiﬁcations – e . g . , when the domain experts disagree on a classiﬁcation . Below we outline the steps which might occur when a group of experts attempt to reach consensus on a set of instances : • The experts would review the composite vector produced by INSIGHT . • Theywouldthen decide onchangestobemadetothevaluesinthe “factvector” , andchangestoboththeirannotationsandrule - sets . • The experts would then make the agreed changes to their own dataset and rule - set . • INSIGHT would produce a further composite vector which high - lights the remaining differences . This cycle continues until the experts reach complete agree - ment , or they agree they are unable to make any further progress . In this latter case it is important that the experts and INSIGHT record their differences . A metric which evaluates the goodness of ﬁt of each set of vectors would greatly help the above process , as without it , it might be hard to decide whether a proposed set of changes would be convergent or divergent . Additionally , it should benoticedthatthewholeprocesswouldbecomemorecomplicated as the number of experts increases . 4 . 6 . Creating a common rule - set After extensive discussions we decided , in the ﬁrst instance , to adopt a simpliﬁed approach in which we ﬁrst sought to create a common rule - set ( see Fig . 4 ) . 15 This process is summarized below : • We distributed hardcopy versions of each of the clinicians’ ﬁnal rule - sets ; andinfactweconcentratedourdiscussionsonthatpro - ducedbyclinician - 3 . Weconsidered , acrossallcategories , theﬁrst 15 Also the focus of this study was essentially on how effective the INSIGHT tool andmethodologyareinresolvinginconsistenciesbetween2perspectivesheldbya single expert . descriptor ( SpO 2 ) mentioned in rule 1 ; we then systematically considered the remaining descriptors . • There was a general discussion and agreed changes were written to a ﬂip - chart . ( See Section 4 . 6 for details . ) • These actual changes were then made to clinician - 3’s ﬁnal rule - set to produce a new “common” rule - set ( common - 4 ) . • INSIGHT was then used individually with each of the clini - cians ( clinician - 1 , clinician - 2 and clinician - 3 ) to reﬁne their own dataset with respect to the common rule - set . In this stage of the studytheexpertswere not allowedtochangethe ( common ) rule - set . The actual changes made to annotated datasets are reported , as are any signiﬁcant comments and reservations . • Further , INSIGHT calculated the agreements between each clini - cian’s reﬁned dataset and the common rule - set . We held a session with the 3 expert clinicians , with the analysts ( DSandLM ) asfacilitators . Asmentionedearlierwefocusedthedis - cussionontheﬁnalrule - setproducedbyclinician - 3 . Speciﬁcallywe discussedtheroleandvaluesofeachofthefeaturesoccurringinthe rules . Starting initially with SpO 2 ( the level of oxygen saturation in the patient’s blood ) , and systematically reviewing each of the fea - tures in each of the rules , Table 13 summaries the changes agreed by the clinicians . ( As noted earlier this information was written to a ﬂip chart which was visible to all the participants in the session . ) This represents a considerable number of changes . Some of the changes are simply ﬁne - tuning the boundary between 2 categories ( say B and C ) to ensure that a particular instance is classiﬁed as the expertsfeltitshouldbe . Howeverthechangesmadetoadrenaline’s values for most of the categories are quite considerable ; in the previous rule - set the values assigned to both adrenaline and nora - drenalinewerecomparable . Also2new“composite”ruleshavealso been added ; these both involve dobutamine . The approach we chose to help resolve differences involved all the experts meeting and talking face - to - face in an attempt to achieve a greater level of agreement . On some occasions , changes suggestedwerereadilyaccepted ( forexampletheadditionof“com - posite” rules involving dobutamine – as some composite rules were already part of the rule - set ) , on other occasions there were moredetaileddiscussions . Weappreciatethatthereareadvantages in using the Delphi method [ 23 ] to resolve differences between experts but we chose not to use that approach as we felt that nei - ther of the facilitator’s had enough medical knowledge to fulﬁl the mediator role within the Delphi approach adequately . Hripcsak and colleagues [ 42 ] have similarly attempted to resolve differences between experts ; they have attempted to understand the several experts’ position on an issue , and then to mediate between them . But as noted above the facilitators did not , in this study , play that type of role . D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 83 Fig . 4 . Flow chart of a process to help experts make their several classiﬁcations more consistent . Each clinician then attempted ( using INSIGHT ) to make his dataset consistent with the newly agreed ( common ) rule - set . The changes made by the several clinicians are listed below : 4 . 6 . 1 . Clinician - 1 B → D ( 1 change ) . 16 Note this involves categories which are 2 “distances” apart . All the remaining reﬁnements involve categories which are only 1 distance apart : B → A ( 53 ) , B → C ( 14 ) , C → D ( 12 ) , D → E ( 22 ) , and E → D ( 3 ) . That is 105 changes in all . Disagreement with classiﬁcation suggested by the common rule - set : This clinician had annotated a particular instance as B and the common rule - set suggested a D ( because of the MAP ) ; the clinician said he thought this was a ‘bit harsh’ “because everything else in that instance was OK” . This occurred in total 6 times . This clinician disagreed with the common rule - set’s classiﬁcation , and as a result he chose not to modify his annotations . 4 . 6 . 2 . Clinician - 2 A → NULL ( 3 ) . A → C ( 2 ) and B → D ( 6 ) changes . ( Note this involves categories which are 2 “distances” apart . ) All the remaining reﬁnements 16 Thenotationusedhereis : ORIGINAL - Category - > REVISED - Category ( number - of - items - changed ) . involve categories which are only 1 distance apart : A → B ( 5 ) , B → A ( 53 ) , B → C ( 23 ) , C → D ( 17 ) and D → E ( 49 ) . That is 158 changes in all . No disagreements with the common rule - set were recorded . 4 . 6 . 3 . Clinician - 3 All the reﬁnements involve which categories are only 1 distance apart : A → B ( 5 ) , B → A ( 35 ) , B → C ( 4 ) , C → B ( 5 ) , C → D ( 6 ) , D → C ( 8 ) , and D → E ( 49 ) . That is 112 changes in all . No disagreements with the common rule - set were recorded . Table 14 gives the percentage agreements between the com - mon rule - set and the initial and revised datasets for each of the clinicians . The results for the ﬁnal datasets imply that if we exclude unclassiﬁed instances from the calculations then there is perfect agreement between clinician - 2 and clinician - 3 , and a very high agreement with clinician - 1 ( 96 . 4 % ) . With unclassiﬁed instances included these agreements reduce by 3 . 2 % , 1 . 5 % , and 0 . 3 % respec - tively for the three experts . The ( 6 ) corresponding kappa values are interpreted as “almost perfect agreement” . Moreover , the percentage changes between the initial and revised datasets for the 3 clinicians ( when the unclassiﬁed 84 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Table 13 Alistofthechangesmadetoclinician - 3’sﬁnalrule - settocreatethecommonrule - set ( common - 4 ) . Descriptor Category Before reﬁnement After reﬁnement SpO 2 E 0 – 88 0 – 85 SpO 2 D 89 – 91 86 – 91 FiO 2 E 0 . 94 – 1 . 0 0 . 9 – 1 . 0 FiO 2 D 0 . 70 – 0 . 93 0 . 70 – 0 . 89 HR ( lower ) E 0 . 0 – 42 . 0 0 . 0 – 40 . 0 HR ( lower ) D 43 . 0 – 45 . 0 41 . 0 – 45 . 0 HR ( lower ) C 46 . 0 – 49 . 0 46 . 0 – 50 . 0 HR ( lower ) B 50 . 0 – 59 . 0 51 . 0 – 55 . 0 HR A 60 . 0 – 83 . 0 56 . 0 – 89 . 0 HR ( upper ) E 141 . 0 – 500 . 0 141 . 0 – 300 . 0 HR ( upper ) B 84 . 0 – 99 . 0 90 . 0 – 99 . 0 HR A 60 . 0 – 83 . 0 60 . 0 – 89 . 0 Mean / MAP ( upper ) D 110 – 129 120 . 0 – 129 . 0 Mean / MAP ( upper ) C 100 – 109 110 . 0 – 119 . 0 Mean / MAP ( upper ) B 91 – 99 100 – 109 Mean / MAP A 71 – 90 71 – 99 Noradrenaline E 2 . 5 – 10 . 0 2 . 0 – 10 . 0 Noradrenaline D 1 . 8 – 2 . 4 1 . 0 – 1 . 9 ( 9 ) Noradrenaline C 1 . 0 – 1 . 7 0 . 50 – 0 . 9 ( 9 ) Noradrenaline B 0 . 1 – 0 . 9 0 . 10 – 0 . 4 ( 9 ) Adrenaline E 2 . 50 – 10 . 0 1 . 0 – 10 . 0 Adrenaline D 1 . 80 – 2 . 40 0 . 5 – 0 . 9 ( 9 ) Adrenaline C 1 . 00 – 1 . 70 0 . 3 – 0 . 4 ( 9 ) Adrenaline B 0 . 10 – 0 . 90 0 . 05 – 0 . 2 ( 9 ) Dobutamine E 42 . 1 – 200 61 – 200 Dobutamine D 25 . 1 – 42 . 0 41 – 60 Dobutamine C 10 . 6 – 25 . 0 21 – 40 Dobutamine B 0 . 1 – 10 . 5 0 . 1 – 20 Additional category “E” rules : Note the ﬁrst 4 rules below are structurally the same as the earlier set , but note that they are effectively different as the D - levels have been reﬁned for all 3 of these drugs . And of course the last 2 rules are new ( rules involving dobutamine and a further inotrope ) . • FiO 2 ( at D level ) and adrenaline ( at D level ) . • FiO 2 ( at D level ) and noradrenaline ( at D level ) . • FiO 2 ( at D level ) and dobutamine ( at D level ) . • Adrenaline and noradrenaline at the D - level . • Adrenaline and dobutamine at the D - level . • Noradrenaline and dobutamine at the D - level . instances are excluded from the calculations ) are 15 . 5 % , 55 . 5 % and 17 . 9 % respectively . The changes to the corresponding kappa values are equally signiﬁcant ; for example , for clinician - 2 the signiﬁcance of the kappa values changed from “fair agreement” to “perfect agreement” . Thus the experts ( with support from INSIGHT ) have achieved a high level of agreement on these classiﬁcation tasks . Table 12 reports agreements between clinician - 1 , clinician - 2 , and clinician - 3 based on the annotation of 3 patients , where each clinician had annotated the instance set independently , and had developed his own rule - set . ( To be more precise , clinician - 2’s initial rule - set was based on the ﬁnal one developed by clinician - 1 , and clinician - 3’s initial rule - set had been based on that from clinician - 2 . ) Each expert achieved a high degree of ( intra - rater ) correlation between his ﬁnal set of annotations and his ﬁnal rule - set ; an average of 99 . 3 % if one excludes unclassiﬁed instances . The agreement between clinician - 1 and clinician - 2 is better than those between clinician - 3 and the other 2 ; the latter agreements being 87 . 1 % and 90 . 6 % between clinician - 3’s ﬁnal rule - set and the ﬁnal datasets of clinician - 1 and clinician - 2 respectively ( when unclassi - ﬁed instances are excluded ) . As reported in Section 4 . 4 , just 1 of the kappa values in Table 12 is interpreted as “substantial agreement” ; the remainder ( 17 ) are interpreted as “almost perfect agreement” . The high level of agreement between the clinicians , we believe , is explained by the practice , certainly at Glasgow Royal Inﬁrmary and at many other UK ICUs , in which care is highly protocolized . Further care of individual patients is often shared between several consultants , and ward rounds are carried out jointly . What is of considerable interest is the number and nature of the changes made ( to the ﬁnal rule - set of clinician - 3 ) when all 3 clinicians met to determine a common rule - set . These changes effectively fell in to 3 categories : ( a ) Changes to ﬁne tune adjacent categories ( e . g . , categories B – C , and D – E ) . ( b ) Substantial changes in the ranges recorded for a drug ( in this instance adrenaline ) across all 5 categories ( A – E ) . ( c ) Additional composite rules for category E . Using this common rule - set , once the 3 clinicians had revised theirdatasetstobeconsistentwithit , weagainobtainedsomegood agreements ( 96 . 4 % , 100 % , 100 % ) if one excludes the unclassiﬁed instances , with the corresponding kappa values indicating that the agreements achieved are “almost perfect agreement” ( Table 14 ) . The crucial question now is how stable is the common rule - set ? That is if we were to involve several further clinicians in the expert - consensus process how extensive would the changes be ? Clearly this is very much an empirical question ; see the Section 6 for discussion of our plans . However , let us hazard a guess as to what we might encounter . Earlier in this section , we introduced a classiﬁcation for the sorts of changes which such a process has introduced . Weanticipatethatﬁne - tuningsoftype ( a ) willcontinue to be seen ( no one is too concerned about this ) . Revising the ranges for drugs ( as adrenaline above ) to cover the several categories , we would expect to be pretty unusual . We would however , expect to encounter the inclusion of more “composite rules” as the clinicians become progressively more familiar with this approach ( i . e . , mak - ing explicit the rules which underlie their own decision - making processes ) . Indeed , composite rules so far have only appeared for Table 14 Comparison between the ﬁnal common rule - set and the initial and ﬁnal datasets for clinician - 1 , clinician - 2 , and clinician - 3 . Asterisked results correspond to analyses when the unclassiﬁed instances are removed from the calculation . Clinician - 1’s initial dataset Clinician - 2’s initial dataset Clinician - 3’s initial dataset Final common rule - set 78 . 5 % ; 0 . 72 ( 563 / 717 ) 80 . 9 % * ; 0 . 75 ( 545 / 674 ) 43 . 8 % ; 0 . 32 ( 314 / 717 ) 44 . 5 % * ; 0 . 32 ( 314 / 705 ) 81 . 9 % ; 0 . 76 ( 516 / 630 ) 82 . 1 % * ; 0 . 76 ( 513 / 625 ) Clinician - 1’s ﬁnal dataset Clinician - 2’s ﬁnal dataset Clinician - 3’s ﬁnal dataset Final common rule - set 93 . 2 % ; 0 . 91 ( 668 / 717 ) 96 . 4 % * ; 0 . 95 ( 650 / 674 ) 98 . 5 % ; 0 . 98 ( 706 / 717 ) 100 . 0 % * ; 1 . 0 ( 703 / 703 ) 99 . 7 % ; 1 . 0 ( 628 / 630 ) 100 . 0 % * ; 1 . 0 ( 625 / 625 ) D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 85 category E , but we should expect them also to occur in categories D , C and B ; and possibly category A . 5 . Contributions of this work Weattemptinthissectiontosummarizethemaincontributions of this study . Firstly , we have demonstrated the beneﬁts of experts being able to see their knowledge applied on a series of relevant tasks , and being able , when discrepancies exist , to reﬁne knowledge in the context of a speciﬁc task . Secondly , we have produced a useful tooltohelpanexpertappreciatehowtwoperspectivesonthesame task are inconsistent ; further this tool allows the expert to explore ways in which the two knowledge sources can be made ( more ) consistent . Thirdly , we conﬁrmed the advantage , in some circum - stance , of a simple information checking system as opposed to a morecomplexsystemwhichisableto ( semi ) - automaticallyextract the knowledge from a set of labelled instances . Fourthly , an impor - tant “side” effect of using INSIGHT with domain experts is that the datasets are tidied up and extreme values and wrong classiﬁca - tionsareoftenidentiﬁedandmodiﬁed ( averyusefulpre - processing step for machine learning algorithms ) . Fifthly , we conﬁrmed the need , when acquiring knowledge from domain experts , to deter - mine whether a particular category has sub - categories and if so to get the expert to articulate them . Finally , we conﬁrmed the need to have a domain expert critically review , whenever possible , any rules ( knowledge ) produced by an automated system . 6 . Further work Future work has been grouped under 2 headings , namely : ICU scoring systems and modiﬁcations and further applications of INSIGHT . 6 . 1 . ICU scoring systems Firstly , atleastoneclinicianhasindicatedthattherateofchange of parameters is a factor which he takes into account under some circumstances ; we plan to investigate adding this functionality to INSIGHT . Secondly , we plan to evaluate the ICU scoring system across several ICUs and with a larger number of experts . The cen - tral task which INSIGHT has been used to investigate , to date , is the development of a reliable patient scoring system . So far , we have applied INSIGHT to data from only 3 patients from a single ICU , and this information has been evaluated by just three domain experts ( clinician - 1 annotated 10 patients ) . Clearly , if the scoring systemistobeusedwidelyitwillneedtobeevaluatedwithalarger and more disparate group of patients and with considerably more domain experts . This evaluation is currently being planned ; this evaluation will hopefully address a number of the shortcomings noted in Section 4 , including using a range of different approaches toobtain ( greater ) consensusbetweenexpertswithdifferingviews . 6 . 2 . Modiﬁcations and further applications of INSIGHT Firstly , we plan to use INSIGHT with a range of other tasks including the classiﬁcation of botanical species and other clinical diseases . In many situations , experts ﬁnd it hard to articulate the actual distinctions between different categories ; as the next point indicates , INSIGHTshouldhelpwiththisprocess . Secondly , weplan to investigate INSIGHT’s mode to create rules from instances . We noted in Section 3 . 2 that INSIGHT had such a mode , and that to date it had not been used by domain experts on a range of demanding real - worldtasks . Clearly , webelievethatthismodewillbevaluable for domain experts who will then not need to create a set of rules . We plan to use this facility with a number of domains and with a range of experts . Thirdly , a thorough investigation of the differences between expert - providedrule - setsversusthoseinferredbyseveralmachine learning algorithms from the same datasets ( noisy and INSIGHT - reﬁned ) is planned . Fourthly , we are planning to develop a variant of INSIGHT which can be applied to planning ( synthetic ) tasks . This willbemoredemandingthanforclassiﬁcationtasks , butwebelieve it is possible , and moreover that it would be a useful additional tool in assessing expertise . Conﬂict of interest No conﬂicts to report . Acknowledgements We are grateful to Sunil Sharma and Mark Winter who imple - mentedtheearlierversionsofREFINER . AndyAikenandLauraMoss were both partially supported by EPSRC Studentships and the AKT project when they undertook aspects of this work . David Corsar ( Aberdeen ) provided helpful comments on various aspects of the analysis . Finally , we wish to acknowledge Kathryn Henderson and Jennifer McCallum ( CareVue Project , NHS Glasgow ) for their sup - port in providing patient datasets and the staff of the ICU Glasgow Royal Inﬁrmary for helpful discussions about this project . Appendix A . High level summary of qualitative assessments Below we give outline descriptions for each of the 5 categories , where E corresponds to the most severely ill patients : A . Patient’s cardiovascular system ( CVS ) normal , with no adrenaline or noradrenaline and low levels of oxygen ; urine production often essentially normal ( or is well established on renal replacement therapy ) . B . Patient CVS nearly normal , probably needs low levels of adrenaline or noradrenaline and oxygen . C . Patient CVS system is effectively stable ; probably on moderate dosages of adrenaline or noradrenaline and oxygen . Most parameters suggest the time - slot is in category A or B , but if any of the following conditions are met , then it should be assigned to category C : - heart rate : moderately low or moderately high ; - MAP : moderately low or moderately high ; - adrenaline : moderate dose ; - noradrenaline : moderate dose ; - FiO 2 : moderate ; - SpO 2 : moderately low . D . Patient’sCVSsystemismoderatelyunstableand / oronhighdoses of adrenaline or noradrenaline or ﬂuid to retain stability . Most parameters suggest the time - slot is in category A or B , but if any of the following conditions are met , then it should be assigned to category D : - heart rate : low or high ; - MAP : low or high ; - adrenaline : high dose ; - noradrenaline : high dose ; - FiO 2 : high ; - SpO 2 : low . E . Patient’s CVS is very unstable ( which is usually true in early phases of resuscitation , or following a new event ) with low BP and high HR or rapidly changing adrenaline or noradrenaline dosage , and requires substantial ﬂuid inputs . 86 D . Sleeman et al . / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 55 ( 2012 ) 71 – 86 Most parameters suggest the time - slot is in category A or B , but if any of the following conditions are met , then it should be assigned to category E : - heart rate : extremely low or extremely high ; - MAP : extremely low or extremely high ; - adrenaline : extremely high dose ; - noradrenaline : extremely high dose ; - FiO 2 : extremely high ; - SpO 2 : extremely low ; References [ 1 ] Buchanan BG , Shortliffe EH . Rule - based expert systems : the MYCIN exper - iments of the Stanford heuristic programming project . San Francisco : Addison - Wesley ; 1984 . [ 2 ] Corsar D , Sleeman D . KBS development through ontology mapping and ontol - ogydrivenacquisition . In : SleemanD , BarkerK , editors . K - CAP’07 : proceedings ofthe4thinternationalconferenceonknowledgecapture . NewYork , NY , USA : ACM Press ; 2007 . p . 23 – 30 . [ 3 ] SinghP , LinT , MuellerE , LimG , PerkinsT , ZhuWL . OpenMindCommonSense : knowledgeacquisitionfromthegeneralpublic . In : ZahirT , editor . Onthemove tomeaningfulinternetsystems2002 : CoopIS , DOA , andODBASE . LectureNotes in Computer Science . Heidelberg : Springer - Verlag ; 2002 . [ 4 ] KlirGJ , YuanB . Fuzzysetsandfuzzylogic : theoryandapplications . NewJersey : Prentice Hall ; 1995 . [ 5 ] PearlJ . Causality : models , reasoningandinference . revisededitionCambridge : Cambridge University Press ; 2009 . [ 6 ] Chi MTH . Two approaches to the study of experts’ characteristics . In : Ericsson KA , Charness N , Feltovich PJ , Hoffman R , editors . The Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance . Cambridge University Press ; 2006 . [ 7 ] VicenteKJ , WangJH . Anecologicaltheoryofexpertiseeffectsinmemoryrecall . Psychological Review 1998 ; 105 : 33 – 57 . [ 8 ] LewandowskyS , KirsnerK . Knowledgepartitioning : context - dependentuseof expertise . Memory & Cognition 2000 ; 28 ( 2 ) : 295 – 305 . [ 9 ] EricssonKA , SimonHA . Protocolanalysis ; verbalreportsasdata . revisededition Cambridge , MA : Bradford Books / MIT Press ; 1993 . [ 10 ] Johnson PE . What kind of expert should a system be ? Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 1983 ; 8 ( 1984 ) : 77 – 97 . [ 11 ] Klein G . Sources of power : how people make decisions . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ; 1999 . [ 12 ] MayerRE . Thinking , problemsolving , cognition . revisededitionNewYork : W . H . Freeman & Co . Ltd ; 1992 . [ 13 ] Baxter GD , Monk AF , Tan K , Dear PRF , Newell SJ . Using cognitive task analy - sis to facilitate the integration of decision support systems into the neonatal intensive care unit . Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine 2005 ; 35 ( 3 ) : 243 – 57 . [ 14 ] Sleeman D , Barker K , Corsar D . Report on the fourth international conference on knowledge capture ( KCAP - 2007 ) . AI Magazine 2009 ; 30 ( 1 ) : 126 – 7 . [ 15 ] Diaper D . Knowledge elicitation : principles , techniques and applications . Lon - don : Ellis Horwood ; 1989 . [ 16 ] Marcus S , McDermott . J . SALT : a knowledge acquisition language for propose - and - revise systems . Artiﬁcial Intelligence 1989 ; 39 ( 1 ) : 1 – 38 . [ 17 ] Michalski R , Chilausky R . Knowledge acquisition by encoding expert rules versus computer induction from examples : a case study involving soy - bean pathology . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies 1980 ; 12 ( 1 ) : 63 – 87 . [ 18 ] Etzioni O , Cafarella M , Downey D , Kok S , Popescu A , Shaked T , et al . Unsuper - vised named - entity extraction from the web : an experimental study . Artiﬁcial Intelligence 2005 ; 165 ( 1 ) : 91 – 134 . [ 19 ] von Ahn L . Games with a purpose . Computer 2006 ; 39 ( 6 ) : 96 – 8 . [ 20 ] Langley P , Simon HA . Applications of machine learning and rule induction . Communications of the ACM 1995 ; 8 ( 11 ) : 55 – 64 . [ 21 ] Bishop C . Pattern recognition and machine learning . Heidelberg : Springer ; 2006 . [ 22 ] Sleeman D . Towards a technology and a science of machine learning . AI Com - munications 1994 ; 7 ( 1 ) : 29 – 38 . [ 23 ] Murry JW , Hammons JO . Delphi , a versatile methodology for conducting qual - itative research . The Review of Higher Education 1995 ; 18 ( 4 ) : 423 – 36 . [ 24 ] Tan K , Baxter G , Newell S , Smye S , Dear P , Brownlee K , et al . Knowledge elici - tation for validation of a neonatal ventilation expert system utilising modiﬁed Delphi and focus group techniques . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 2010 ; 68 ( 6 ) : 344 – 54 . [ 25 ] Saaty TL . Decision making with the analytic hierarchy process . International Journal of Services Sciences 2008 ; 1 ( 1 ) : 83 – 98 . [ 26 ] Dunnette MD , Campbell JD , Jaastad K . The effect of group participation on brainstormingeffectivenessfortwoindustrialsamples . JournalofAppliedPsy - chology 1963 ; 47 ( 1 ) : 30 – 7 . [ 27 ] Fjermestad J , Hiltz SR . An assessment of group support systems experimen - tal research : methodology and results . Journal of Management Information Systems 1998 ; 15 ( 3 ) : 7 – 149 . [ 28 ] http : / / www2 . parc . com / istl / projects / ach / ach . html [ accessed 02 . 12 . 10 ] . [ 29 ] Heuer RJ . Psychology of intelligence analysis . Washington , DC : Center for the Study of Intelligence , Central Intelligence Agency ; 1999 . [ 30 ] Convertino G , Billman D , Pirolli P , Massar JP , Shrager J . The CACHE study : group effects in computer - supported collaborative analysis . Computer Sup - ported Cooperative Work 2008 ; 17 ( 4 ) : 353 – 93 . [ 31 ] Sharma S , Sleeman D . Reﬁner : a case - based differential diagnosis aide for knowledge acquisition and knowledge reﬁnement . In : Sleeman D , editor . Pro - ceedings of EWSL - 88 . London : Pitman ; 1988 . p . 201 – 10 . [ 32 ] AikenA , SleemanD . Reﬁner + + : aknowledgeacquisitionandreﬁnementtool . In : Capturing knowledge from domain experts : progress and prospect , KCAP - 03 workshop . 2003 . [ 33 ] Quinlan JR . Induction of decision trees . Machine Learning 1986 ; 1 ( 1 ) : 81 – 106 . [ 34 ] Witten IH , Frank E . Data mining : practical machine learning tools and tech - niques . Los Altos : Morgan Kaufmann ; 2005 . [ 35 ] MossL , SleemanD , KinsellaJ , SimM . ACHE : anarchitectureforclinicalhypoth - esis examination . In : Proceedings of 21st IEEE international symposium on computer - based medical systems . 2008 . p . 158 – 60 . [ 36 ] Knaus WA , Draper EA , Wagner DP , Zimmerman JE . APACHE II : a severity of disease classiﬁcation system . Critical Care Medicine 1985 ; 13 ( 10 ) : 818 – 29 . [ 37 ] SimM , AikenA , MossL , SleemanD . Confusionmatricestoreﬁneanovelscoring systemforcardiovascularinstabilityinintensivecare . ScottishMedicalJournal 2009 ; 54 ( 2 ) : 53 – 4 . [ 38 ] Spiro RJ , Coulson RL , Feltovich PJ , Anderson D . Cognitive ﬂexibility theory : advanced knowledge acquisition in ill - structured domains . In : Patel V , editor . Proceedings of the 10th annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum ; 1988 . [ 39 ] Scottish Intensive Care Society Audit Group . Audit of critical care in Scotland 2008 , Reporting on 2007 . Edinburgh : NHS National Services Scotland ; 2008 . [ 40 ] Cohen J . A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales . Educational and Psy - chological Measurement 1960 ; 20 ( 1 ) : 37 – 46 . [ 41 ] Landis JR , Koch GG . The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data . Biometrics 1977 ; 33 ( 1 ) : 159 – 74 . [ 42 ] HripcsakG , HeitjanDF . Measuringagreementinmedicalinformaticsreliability studies . Journal of Biomedical Informatics 2002 ; 35 ( 2 ) : 99 – 110 .