1 Line tensions , correlation lengths , and critical exponents in lipid membranes near critical points Aurelia R . Honerkamp - Smith 1 , Pietro Cicuta 2 , Marcus D . Collins 1 , Sarah L . Veatch 3 , Marcel den Nijs 4 , M . Schick 4 , and Sarah L . Keller 1 , 4 * 1 . Dept . of Chemistry , University of Washington , Seattle WA 98195 , USA 2 . Cavendish Laboratory , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , CB3 0HE , UK 3 . Dept . of Chemistry , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY , 14853 , USA 4 . Dept . of Physics , University of Washington , Seattle WA 98195 , USA * To whom correspondence should be addressed . ABSTRACT Membranes containing a wide variety of ternary mixtures of high chain - melting temperature lipids , low chain - melting temperature lipids , and cholesterol undergo lateral phase separation into coexisting liquid phases at a miscibility transition . When membranes are prepared from a ternary lipid mixture at a critical composition , they pass through a miscibility critical point at the transition temperature . Since the critical temperature is typically on the order of room temperature , membranes provide an unusual opportunity in which to perform a quantitative study of biophysical systems that exhibit critical phenomena in the two - dimensional Ising universality class . As a critical point is approached from either high or low temperature , the scale of fluctuations in lipid composition , set by the correlation length , diverges . In addition , as a critical point is approached from low temperature , the line tension between coexisting phases decreases to zero . Here we quantitatively evaluate the temperature dependence of line tension between liquid domains and of fluctuation correlation lengths in lipid membranes in order to extract a critical exponent , (cid:2) . We obtain (cid:2) = 1 . 2 ± 0 . 2 , consistent with the Ising model prediction (cid:2) = 1 . We also evaluate the probability distributions of pixel intensities in fluorescence images of membranes . From the temperature dependence of these distributions above the critical temperature , we extract an independent critical exponent of (cid:1) = 0 . 124 ± 0 . 03 , which is consistent with the Ising prediction of (cid:1) = 1 / 8 . Symbols and Abbreviations : T c - critical temperature , (cid:1) - line tension , (cid:2) - correlation length , k B - Boltzmann’s constant , (cid:2) - critical exponent for the correlation length , (cid:1) - critical exponent for the order parameter 2 INTRODUCTION Simple lipid bilayers undergo complex physical behavior . Consider a bilayer membrane composed of three components : dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine ( DPPC ) , a lipid with a high chain - melting temperature ( 41°C ( 1 ) ) , diphytanoylphosphatidylcholine ( diPhyPC ) , a lipid with a low chain - melting temperature ( less than - 120°C ( 2 ) ) , and cholesterol . At high temperatures , all lipids in the bilayer mix uniformly in a single liquid phase . As the temperature is lowered , a transition occurs and the lipids separate laterally into coexisting liquid phases ( 3 ) . As a result , shortly after the membrane passes through the phase transition , it contains domains of one phase whose lipid composition differs from that of the surrounding phase . All lipids in the membrane diffuse with rates characteristic of liquids ( 4 - 6 ) . Lipids in each phase are distinguished by the degree of order in the acyl chains , which is higher in the liquid - ordered ( L o ) phase than in the liquid - disordered ( L d ) phase ( 7 ) . Fluorescently - labeled lipids partition differently into the L o and L d phases of vesicle membranes , which permits straightforward imaging of the different phases , as in figure 1 and in the movie included in a supplementary file . Miscibility transition temperatures vary with the membrane’s total lipid composition . In a three - dimensional plot with compositions in the x - y plane and transition temperatures in the z direction , the phase boundary resembles the surface of a hill . Its crest is an upper critical point . At lower temperatures , a line of critical points forms a path up one side of the hill , and down the other ( 8 ) . At each composition corresponding to a critical point , the phase transition occurs at a particular critical temperature , T c . Miscibility transitions that occur at a critical point are identifiable by specific features described below . We observe clear experimental signatures of critical behavior in a membrane . Both above and below the critical temperature T c , fluctuations in lipid composition appear over all distances up to a characteristic correlation length , (cid:5) . As T c is approached , the correlation length diverges according to a power law (cid:5) ~ | T – T c | (cid:1)(cid:4) , where (cid:3) is the critical exponent . We observe an additional experimental signature of critical behavior at temperatures below T c . Domain boundaries between the two liquid phases fluctuate ( 3 ; 8 - 12 ) . As T c is approached from below , the compositions of the two membrane phases become increasingly similar , until they are identical at the critical point . The difference in lipid compositions of the two phases , the order parameter m , vanishes as m ~ ( T c – T ) (cid:2) . Consequently , the line tension , (cid:2) , between domain boundaries in two - dimensional systems decreases and becomes zero at the critical point such that (cid:3) ~ ( T c – T ) (cid:4) . When the interface energy becomes as low as the thermal energy , fluctuations in domain boundaries become visible optically ( see figure 1 ) . Low line tensions ( less than 1pN ) ( 13 - 15 ) , and significant composition fluctuations ( 16 ) have been observed previously in lipid membranes near critical points . We also observe the divergence of composition fluctuations above the critical point to determine the exponent (cid:1) . 3 We employ fluorescence microscopy and image processing to systematically measure the dependence of membrane line tensions and correlation lengths on temperature in order to extract the critical exponents (cid:2) and (cid:1) . These two independent exponents are characteristic of the universality class of the transition . We verify our expectation that critical behavior in lipid bilayers is in the universality class of the two - dimensional Ising model , for which (cid:2) and (cid:1) are known to be 1 and 1 / 8 , respectively . The Ising model is a simple theoretical model that displays a critical phase transition . It describes a miscibility phase transition on a lattice and has been solved exactly in two dimensions for the case of nearest neighbor interactions between components ( 17 ) . It has been successfully used to describe critical behavior in a wide range of experimental systems very close to critical points with uncertainties of < 10 % , as detailed in Table 1 . From the principle of universality , we expect the critical exponents characterizing the transition of our system to be identical to that of the two - dimensional Ising model because the thickness of our bilayer and the range of expected electrostatic interactions is much smaller than the correlation lengths we measure ( 18 ) . In our observation of critical phenomena , we benefit from distinct experimental advantages of employing a lipid bilayer . Correlation lengths occur on the scale of microns in our experiment , which permits us to use fluorescence microscopy to probe critical phenomena . These large correlation lengths derive from two factors . First , the critical temperature T c occurs near room temperature so that a reduced temperature ( T - T c ) / T c on the order of 10 - 3 can be easily accessed with modest temperature control within 0 . 05˚C . Second , the amplitude of correlation lengths in lipid membranes is relatively large , even when membranes are not near a critical point ( 19 ) . Since our observed micron - scale correlation lengths are so much larger than the nanometer - scale thickness of a lipid membrane , the spectrum of critical fluctuations are those in the plane of the membrane and therefore are characteristic of the universality class of the two - dimensional Ising model . A benefit of probing fluctuations in two dimensions is that the Ginzburg criterion predicts a wider temperature region for critical behavior than in three dimensions ( 20 ) . We encounter two other experimental advantages of investigating critical behavior of liquid phases in lipid bilayers by fluorescence microscopy . First , our use of visible wavelengths enforces a resolution limit on the order of 0 . 5 microns . This length scale is significantly larger than the size of lipids ( nanometers ) or the range of interactions between lipids in a bilayer . Therefore , the fluorescence signal encoded in each pixel of our detector records the behavior of a very large number of lipids exhibiting critical behavior . In other words , in the critical regime , our images capture an ensemble of systems , each of which is itself behaving critically . Second , any impurities in our membrane are mobile , and do not constrain the scale over which critical fluctuations 4 occur . In contrast , in systems of monolayers of atoms on solid surfaces , heterogeneities can limit the spatial range of fluctuations to a few hundred nanometers ( e . g . ( 21 ) ) . Our work complements other observations of composition fluctuations above T c and of fluctuations in domain boundaries below T c . Above T c , fluctuations have been detected as line broadening in NMR spectra . Veatch et al . observed that fluctuations on a scale of 50 nm persist in DPPC / DOPC / cholesterol vesicles over temperatures as high as 5 - 10°C above the miscibility transition ( 16 ) . Recent theoretical work describes how broadening of nuclear magnetic resonance lineshapes arises due to composition fluctuations in membranes near critical points ( 16 ; 22 ) . Below T c , fluctuations of domain boundaries between liquid phases have been evaluated in both monolayers and bilayers to yield line tensions ( 9 ; 10 ; 12 - 15 ; 23 - 25 ) . Several other experiments evaluate line tensions between a liquid in contact with either a gas or a solid ( 26 - 31 ) . In contrast to the experiments described above , here we simultaneously investigate critical behavior both above and below the critical temperature . We combine systematic measurements of line tension , correlation length and lipid composition distributions in order to extract both critical exponents (cid:2) and (cid:1) . METHODS Fluorescence Microscopy of Vesicles Free - floating giant unilamellar vesicles were made by electroformation ( 32 ; 33 ) from a lipid mixture of 25 : 20 : 55 mol % of diPhyPC , DPPC ( Avanti Polar Lipids , Alabaster , AL ) and cholesterol ( Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) . We previously determined the phase diagram for this ternary system and identified this specific lipid ratio as being near a room temperature critical point . Membranes were labeled with 0 . 8 mol % Texas Red - DPPE ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , which preferentially partitions into the liquid - disordered phase . Vesicles were used within four hours of electroformation . Consequently , the vesicles were taut with no domains bulging either inward or outward . Vesicles were imaged with a frame acquisition time of 300ms using a 40x objective on a Nikon Y - 25 microscope ( Nikon , Melville , NY ) coupled to a Coolsnap HQ CCD camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ ) . Temperature was maintained at the sample using a temperature controlled home - built copper microscope stage , which is the only heated element in our system . The microscope stage was enclosed in a Plexiglas box to eliminate drafts . Temperature was controlled using a Peltier thermoelectric device ( Advanced Thermoelectric , Nashua , NH ) operated by a current controller . The temperature sensor is a 10 k (cid:1) thermistor read by the current controller with an optimum absolute accuracy quoted by the manufacturer as 0 . 02˚C ( both from Wavelength Electronics , Bozeman , MT ) . Our experiment measures a change in temperature , T - T c , for which the measurement error should be smaller . The thermistor and sample lie side by side on identical 25mm x 25mm cover slips connected to the microscope stage by a 5 thin layer of thermal grease ( Omega Engineering , Stanford , CT ) . The thermistor is attached to its slide by conducting epoxy ( Arctic Silver , Visalia , CA ) . The maximum temperature fluctuation measured over the course of an experiment was ±0 . 05˚C . Usual fluctuations were measured to be ±0 . 01˚C . In all cases , video recordings of vesicles were begun above the miscibility transition temperature and continued as the temperature was stepped down until phase separation was complete . Vesicles were equilibrated in the dark for two minutes between each temperature step . Two minutes was ample time for vesicles to come to equilibrium as determined by the following experiment . A vesicle sample was equilibrated for two minutes after a temperature step , and correlation lengths were measured . The shutter was closed and vesicles remained in the dark at the same temperature for twenty minutes . Correlation lengths were again measured , and yielded the same values within error ( data not shown ) . Movies were recorded over a series of temperatures for seven different vesicles . New vesicle batches were used for each series of video recordings . Analysis Overview For each vesicle , two independent analyses were conducted using custom software written in Matlab ( The Mathworks , Natick , MA ) . Below the critical temperature , two phases were present and domain line tensions were obtained . Above the critical temperature , concentration fluctuations were visible , and correlation lengths of those fluctuations were determined . Vesicles were analyzed using both methods over the temperature range spanning 0 . 4 - 0 . 6°C of the anticipated critical temperature , in order to avoid bias in the assignment of T c . We performed a second analysis above the critical temperature to extract the critical exponent (cid:1) by measuring the temperature dependence of histograms of pixel intensities of vesicle images . Analysis of Line Tension At low temperatures , images of the vesicle surface displayed distinct phase - separated domains . Our software traced domain perimeters through a series of movie frames . Each domain was analyzed independently . At the top left in figure 2 , yellow lines trace perimeters as they fluctuate over about seven sec ( about twenty frames ) , and are averaged to yield the red lines . A Fourier transform was performed on radial deviations h ( x ) from the mean perimeter ( as in the top right panel in figure 2 ) to yield reciprocal space deviations h ( k ) , where k is the fluctuation wavenumber , with units of inverse length . The capillary wave approximation for the energy of interface fluctuations is E = 1 2 (cid:2) dx (cid:3) h (cid:3) x (cid:5) (cid:7)(cid:6) (cid:9) (cid:11)(cid:10) 2 = (cid:2) L 2 k 2 h ( k ) h ( (cid:1) k ) k (cid:4) 0 L (cid:8) , [ 1 ] where L is the smooth , mean perimeter of a domain , k = 2 (cid:1) / L , and h ( k ) is the Fourier transform of h ( x ) : 6 h ( k ) = 1 L dx h ( x ) e (cid:1) ikx 0 L (cid:2) . [ 2 ] Since equation 1 is a quadratic form , the equipartition of energy theorem applies . Each capillary mode carries on average k B T / 2 in energy so that h ( k ) h ( (cid:1) k ) = h ( k ) 2 = k B T (cid:2) Lk 2 , [ 3 ] where the brackets denote an ensemble average , and k B is Boltzmann’s constant ( 34 ; 35 ) . The value of h ( k ) h ( (cid:1) k ) is evaluated by averaging the value of | h ( k ) | 2 over all movie frames at one temperature . In figure 2 , a log - log plot of h ( k ) h ( (cid:1) k ) vs . k confirms that the former scales as k 2 . Figure 2 shows modes three through nine . The first two modes , which may not equilibrate fully over the course of a video , are not fit and are not shown in figure 2 . We fit our log - log plot of h ( k ) h ( (cid:1) k ) vs . k and find the line tension from the intercept . All line tensions from one vesicle are collected in figure 3 . Standard deviations are found by comparing line tensions from two or more fluctuating domains visible in a single frame and / or breaking long movies into runs of twenty frames or greater . We are able to evaluate line tensions by applying the approximation of equation 1 to our data over a range of temperatures spanning about 10˚C below T c for two reasons . First , the correlation length is large enough that our observations are coarse - grained , so that the observed line tension is indeed the free energy per unit length . Second , the correlation length , while large , is still much smaller than the size of domains , which appear almost circular . All domains analyzed fell between 7 . 2 and 27 microns in diameter . Therefore the displacements of the domain boundaries are sufficiently small that the capillary wave approximation of equation 1 is valid . As long as it is applicable , displacements of the domain boundary on very small length scales do not contribute appreciably since the amplitude of each mode decays as 1 / k 2 . Note that this method of extracting the critical exponent (cid:2) from the vanishing of the line tension (cid:1) ~ ( T c – T ) (cid:2) does not require the correlation length to be extremely large , i . e . for us to approach the critical point within a reduced temperature of 10 – 3 . In fact , we reach the upper range of valid temperatures when correlation lengths are so large that domains no longer appear circular , but are now fractal as in figure 1 at 32 . 2˚C . The capillary wave description of these displacements is then no longer adequate . We reach the lower range of temperatures for which our measurement is valid when line tensions exceed about 1 pN , which results in perimeter fluctuations smaller than our optical resolution of approximately 0 . 5 (cid:1) m at all values of k . Analysis of Correlation Length The grey scale intensity of each pixel in an image reports the average membrane composition inside that pixel . That average results from an integration over all fluctuations smaller than the pixel size . Fluctuations around the average lipid 7 composition in the membrane are quantified by the two - point correlation function of an image where I ( r r ) is the image intensity ( a density ) at position r r : G ( r r ) = I ( r r 0 ) I ( r r 0 + r r ) (cid:1) I ( r r 0 ) I ( r r 0 + r r ) [ 4 ] The average , denoted by brackets , is defined to be over all overlapping pairs . We obtained the background corrected image by averaging grayscale values over all movie frames and subtracting the resulting value from each pixel of each movie frame . Even though we observe critical fluctuations in real space , we found it convenient to perform our analysis in reciprocal space by obtaining the structure function S ( k ) from a discrete Fourier transform of each image . The structure function is related to the correlation function by Fourier transform : S ( k r ) = I ( k r ) I ( (cid:1) k r ) = I ( k r ) 2 = 1 2 (cid:2) ( ) 2 dr r G r r ( ) (cid:4) e ik r (cid:3) r r . [ 5 ] Near T c , the structure function is rotationally invariant , so we perform an angular average to obtain S ( k ) , which we then average over each frame of the movie . Because the pixel size of our camera ( 0 . 18 μ m ) is smaller than the optical resolution of our microscope ( about 0 . 5 μ m ) , our acquired images appear as if they are filtered by the point - spread function of the microscope , which has a full width at half maximum of 3 . 4 pixels , corresponding to 0 . 76 microns . We correct for the finite point - spread function of the microscope by dividing the evaluated structure factor in equation 5 by the structure factor of the point - spread function . This function was obtained by averaging acquired images of 20 individual 0 . 1 μ m fluorescent beads ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad CA ) . In our analysis , we measure intensity . Intensity is proportional , not equal , to the order parameter , m . As a consequence , we report S ( k ) in arbitrary units . We image only one face of a vesicle rather than the whole vesicle . In general , a finite sized data set should result in a Fourier transform of the structure function that does not return the full two - point correlation function , but rather the product of that function and a window function reflecting the limited area imaged . However , our data are not sensitive to this problem because the correlation length that we measure is less than ten pixels , which is much smaller than the image size of 150 - 200 pixels in width . We use a discrete Fourier transform in Matlab which automatically imposes periodic boundary conditions . In general , periodic boundary conditions introduce extraneous correlations between points that span the boundary . We avoid this by supplementing the non - zero I ( r r ) with an equal number of zero values . Our data are also not sensitive to inhomogeneous light levels over the vesicle area that we sample , caused by the presence of other vesicles outside the focal plane . Removing long - wavelength gradients by filtering the image did not noticeably affect our measured correlation lengths ( data not shown ) , so we present our data without this filtering . 8 The structure function S ( k ) and the correlation function G ( r ) for the two - dimensional Ising model are known exactly ( 36 ; 37 ) . They do not follow simple analytic expressions , but are easily computed using the tabulated values of the scaling functions for G ( r ) ( 36 ) . If the transition in our system is in the universality class of the two - dimensional Ising model , then all our measured structure functions should agree with the scaling form k 7 / 4 S ( k ) vs . k (cid:2) . In figure 4 , the solid curve plotted on this scaling form is the Fourier transform of the exact numerical solution for G ( r ) of the two - dimensional Ising model calculated by Wu et al . ( 36 ) . In figure 4 we test whether our data agree with this scaling form and determine the correlation length , (cid:2) , at each temperature by finding the value of (cid:2) by hand for which the data fall on the scaling form . We state uncertainty in (cid:2) as the range of values outside of which agreement with the exact scaling form is poor by eye , and it is an overestimate . The fact that we can vary the single parameter (cid:2) to fit the function k 7 / 4 S ( k ) vs . k (cid:2) over a range of k (cid:2) for the eight temperatures shown in figure 4 is strong evidence that the transition is indeed in the universality class of the two - dimensional Ising model . In contrast to our analysis of the line tension , which does not require extreme proximity to the transition temperature , our method of fitting the scaling form performs best when the product k (cid:2) spans a wide range , in particular when the critical temperature is closely approached so that (cid:2) is large and k (cid:2) is of the order of unity . To verify that our method of finding correlation lengths was appropriate , we performed a Monte Carlo simulation of a two - dimensional Ising model and extracted correlation lengths from the output images by the same methods as for the vesicle data . The simulation was implemented in Python ( www . python . org ) using the NumPy ( www . scipy . org ) and the Python Imaging Library ( www . pythonware . com / products / pil / ) modules . The simulation size was 200 x 200 sites and the simulation gave the expected value of (cid:1) = 1 . In the simulation , statistical fluctuating objects are single spins and the simulation is carried out at a reduced temperature t r = ( T - T c ) / T c . In order to compare images produced by the simulation with images produced by the experiment in which each pixel contains b x b lipids , each fluctuating object in the simulation must represent a collection of b 2 spins . When (cid:1) = 1 , the scaling relation (cid:3) ( t r ) = 1 b (cid:3) ( b (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) t r ) indicates that a snapshot of a simulation performed at t r / b in which each object contains b 2 spins is indistinguishable from a snapshot of a simulation performed at t r in which each object contains only one spin . Therefore , in figure 1 we quote reduced temperatures in the simulation as t r / b where b = 225 , which is roughly the pixel size ( 224 . 75 nm ) divided by an order of magnitude estimate for the inter - lipid distance ( 1nm ) . Correlation lengths derived from the simulation and the experiment are directly comparable if the reduced temperature is rescaled in this way . 9 One limitation that arises as the temperature approaches T c is that the dynamics of the system become very slow ( 20 ) . Consequently brief movies ( about seven seconds ) do not consistently sample a full set of equilibrium configurations . We used quantitative structure factor data only if every visible composition fluctuation failed to persist over the length of one movie , to ensure that our system reached equilibrium . For each vesicle , movies were collected for nine to twelve temperatures above T c . The two movies at temperatures nearest to T c were typically eliminated by the criterion above . Similar slow dynamics that occur below T c prevent the analysis of structure factors to find the critical exponent (cid:2) below T c . We have tested that all movies used to find (cid:2) sufficiently sample the equilibrium state as follows . We altered our camera acquisition time by binning images from our videos in groups of two , increasing our effective acquisition time from 300 ms to 600 ms . Binning slightly changed the absolute values of the correlation lengths , but did not affect the critical exponent (cid:2) . A different limitation arises at high temperatures above T c . The smallest detectable correlation length in our system is related to our microscope’s spatial resolution , and to the diminishing contrast between composition fluctuations as temperature increases . Analysis of pixel intensity distribution To determine the order parameter critical exponent (cid:1) , we measured the temperature evolution of the distribution of pixel gray scales . The intensity of each pixel reports the composition of the membrane inside it via the fluorescent dye distribution . The probability distribution of the membrane’s composition , or order parameter , has two peaks below T c , separated by (cid:1) m . The distance between the double peaks decreases as T c is approached from below according to (cid:2) m (cid:4) T (cid:1) T c T c (cid:3) . [ 6 ] Above T c , there is a single peak at m = 0 whose width diverges as the critical temperature is approached . We extract the critical exponent (cid:1) by measuring the root - mean - square width of the single peak , which diverges as ( 38 ) , width = m 2 1 / 2 (cid:3) T (cid:1) T c T c (cid:1)(cid:2) . [ 7 ] An advantage of the procedure above is that we evaluate the width of the intensity distribution and can disregard the location of the center of the peak , which may drift to lower intensity values over the course of an experiment due to gradual photobleaching . In other words , our analysis of the distribution , like our analysis of line tension , does not depend on our greyscale calibration as S ( k ) does . Moreover , our analysis of distribution widths , like our analysis of the line tension , does not rely explicitly on our system exhibiting very large correlation lengths compared to the pixel size , and therefore does not require the system to reach temperatures very close to the critical temperature . We have verified that our measurements are robust over the entire area of the vesicle that we 10 sample . Specifically , we find no difference in mean intensity or noise between pixels from the center of our vesicle images and from the edge of the in - focus area that we sample . This result implies that our vesicles are so large that we can neglect their curvature over the area we sample . We have also verified that our measurement of (cid:1) does not depend on our camera acquisition time by binning images from our videos in groups of two , increasing our effective acquisition time from 300ms to 600ms . Binning changed the absolute values of the peak widths , but did not affect the critical exponent (cid:1) . In principle , our procedure to obtain (cid:1) could be applied at temperatures below T c . However , in our system , our inability to image the entire vesicle surface and our observation of slow dynamics prevents our video recordings from effectively sampling both peaks below T c . Analysis of Critical Temperature and Exponent (cid:3) As noted earlier , the line tension was measured below T c and vanishes as T c is approached like (cid:2) ~ ( T c - T ) (cid:3) , whereas the correlation length was measured above T c and diverges as (cid:4) ~ | T c - T | - (cid:3) . The product of (cid:2) and (cid:4) is a constant that depends on the definition of (cid:4) ( 39 ) . Here we use the definition of (cid:4) within the two point correlation function G ( r ) , which has the following asymptotic form for large values of r / (cid:4) in all systems in the two - dimensional Ising universality class ( 36 ) : G ( r ) ~ 1 (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:5)(cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8)(cid:7) 1 4 (cid:2) r (cid:3) (cid:5)(cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8)(cid:7) 1 2 exp (cid:1) r (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:5)(cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8)(cid:7) T > T c [ 8 ] G ( r ) (cid:1) m 2 ~ 1 (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:5)(cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8)(cid:7) 1 4 (cid:2) r (cid:3) (cid:5)(cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8)(cid:7) 2 exp (cid:1) 2 r (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:5)(cid:4) (cid:6) (cid:8)(cid:7) T < T c . [ 9 ] A comparison of the scaling behavior of G ( r ) as defined by Wu et al . ( 36 ) for T > T c and the line tension as given by Onsager ( 17 ) yields (cid:2)(cid:4) = k B T c [ 10 ] within the scaling regime ( 37 ) . We use equation 10 to compare values of the correlation length obtained from fits to the structure function above T c with those of line tension measured below T c . We find that plots of k B T / (cid:4) above T c and of line tension below T c have roughly linear slopes , and that they intercept the x - axis at roughly the same temperature , as shown in the upper panel of figure 5 . This temperature serves as our initial guess of T c . In order to determine the exponent (cid:3) quantitatively , we produced log - log plots of k B T / (cid:2) below T c vs . the reduced temperature ( T – T c ) / T c , and of (cid:4) above T c vs . reduced temperature , as shown in the lower panel of figure 5 . We assumed that the exponent (cid:3) is the same both above and below T c . Therefore , we adjusted the value of T c until we found a single best (cid:3) that fit all data above and below T c according to the power law behavior 11 (cid:3) = A T (cid:1) T c T c (cid:1)(cid:2) [ 11 ] where A is a constant amplitude ( 20 ) . Photo - oxidation We made considerable efforts to reduce the adverse effects of photo - oxidation and are confident that photo - oxidation does not affect our results for the critical exponents outside our specified error bounds . It has been demonstrated previously that illumination of vesicles containing unsaturated phospholipids can alter the lipid composition of membranes and therefore modulate miscibility transition temperatures ( 40 ) . This property has been used to control line tension of domains in phase separated vesicles ( 13 ) . Our choice to work with membranes containing only saturated phospholipids significantly reduces the rate at which transition temperatures vary with light exposure . Furthermore , we used neutral density filters to reduce light intensity , and illumination of vesicles was limited to less than nine seconds at each temperature . These efforts reduce our measured drift in transition temperature due to photo - oxidation to at most - 0 . 09°C per exposure . The effect of a gradual decrease in transition temperature would be to cause the critical exponent (cid:2) to appear smaller than its true value above T c , and larger below . We performed a control experiment to ensure that photo - oxidation did not affect our measurements of both line tension and correlation length outside our specified error bounds . For vesicle C from figure 6 , at 29 . 5˚C line tension is (cid:1) = 0 . 42 ± 0 . 07 pN over the course of the video . Over the first twenty frames of the video , before significant illumination , (cid:1) = 0 . 37 ± 0 . 16 pN . Over the last twenty frames , after illumination , (cid:1) = 0 . 47 ± 0 . 40 pN . Therefore , during this exposure , we observe no systematic decrease in either T c or (cid:1) , which would result from photo - oxidation . Our conclusion is that any photo - oxidation associated with illumination of the vesicle over the course of a video is minor such that line tension remains within our stated error bounds , which are standard deviations from multiple domains and / or movies . Similarly , for the same vesicle at 32 . 6˚C , the correlation length derived from all available frames is (cid:2) = 1 . 17 ± 0 . 54 μ m . The first five frames yield (cid:2) = 0 . 72 μ m and the last five yield (cid:2) = 0 . 69 μ m , both within our stated error . RESULTS We produce giant unilamellar vesicles whose membranes contain circular , liquid domains at low temperature ( figure 1 ) . At high temperature , the vesicle membranes are uniform . Vesicles were imaged over a series of temperatures , and images were analyzed in order to determine line tensions at low temperatures and correlation lengths at high temperatures . These results were then used to determine the critical exponents as described below . 12 Line tension , (cid:1) Figure 2 shows that as the temperature approaches T c , from below , fluctuations increase and line tension decreases . At 23 . 0˚C , a temperature far below T c , domains are circular , and their edges are smooth . At 31 . 5˚C , which is close to the critical temperature , domains are oval , and their edges are irregular . We quantify the roughness of each domain boundary by compiling a spectrum of deviations of the domain radius from the mean domain radius , as described in Materials and Methods . Each spectrum yields a line tension . In the example in figure 2 , we find (cid:1) = 0 . 213 ± 0 . 14 pN for the spectrum at 23 . 0˚C , and (cid:1) = 0 . 019 ± 0 . 012 pN for the spectrum at 31 . 5˚C . The upper and lower panel of figure 3 show line tension measurements for all domains at all temperatures of two different vesicles . We find that line tension decreases linearly to zero at the critical temperature . Our measured line tension values are valid only for temperatures within 10˚C of the critical temperature due to the optical resolution limit , as discussed in Materials and Methods . Correlation length , (cid:1) The fluorescence micrographs in figure 1 show that fluctuations are small at temperatures far above T c and increase in size as the critical temperature is approached from above . Fluctuations span several microns very close to the critical temperature . This same observation is reflected in the measured structure factor of vesicle images , as shown for one vesicle in figure 4 . At temperatures very close to T c , structure factors have larger amplitudes and persist to larger wavenumbers . Our structure factor data allow us to test whether we probe temperatures close enough to T c to capture behavior typical of the two - dimensional Ising universality class . We successfully adjusted the value of the correlation length , (cid:3) , so that all structure factors for each vesicle superimposed on the exact form predicted by the two - dimensional Ising model ( 36 ) when plotted in the scaling form k ( 7 / 4 ) S ( k ) vs . k (cid:3) , as shown in the bottom panel of figure 4 . Critical exponent (cid:2) Both line tension , (cid:1) , and energy per correlation length ( k B T / (cid:3) ) decrease roughly linearly to zero at the critical temperature . Figure 5 demonstrates how the critical temperature derived from line tension is within error of the critical temperature derived from energy per correlation length . These results are robust ; figure 6 shows similar data for four additional vesicles . Each vesicle has a slightly different lipid composition , so each has a slightly different critical temperature . Once we have determined the line tension below the critical temperature and the correlation length above it , we can extract the critical exponent (cid:2) , as detailed in Methods . We require that (cid:2) have one unique value that fits data both above and below a single T c for a given vesicle . We obtain five values of (cid:2) from the five vesicles in figures 5 and 6 , 13 collected in table 2 . The average of these five values , (cid:3) avg = 1 . 2 ± 0 . 2 , is consistent with that for the two - dimensional Ising model , (cid:3) = 1 ( 17 ; 20 ) . Critical exponent (cid:2) Membrane composition , as reported by the intensity of fluorescent dye , is distributed around one value above T c and around two values below T c . For example , in the top panel of figure 7 , pixel intensity values are symmetrically distributed around a single value at T = 34 . 0˚C , which is far above T c = 32 . 5 ± 0 . 15˚C for the particular vesicle analyzed . The distribution develops an asymmetry as temperature is lowered to T = 32 . 6˚C , indicating the onset of spontaneous symmetry breaking as the membrane approaches T c . At 32 . 4˚C , below T c , the distribution is bimodal , and also asymmetric , possibly indicating that the movie was not long enough to sample both phases equally . Plotting the width of all of the symmetric histograms for the vesicle in figure 7 provides an independent test of whether our data is described well by the two - dimensional Ising model . Equation 7 predicts that the width of the distribution is proportional to ( T - T c ) (cid:1)(cid:2) . In the lower panel of figure 7 , we plot the distribution width as ( width ) - 8 vs . T . Our data can be fit to a straight line , in agreement with the two - dimensional Ising prediction of (cid:2) = 1 / 8 . It is also reassuring that the critical temperature extracted from figure 7 is ~ 32 . 8˚C , close to the value of T c ~ 32 . 5 ± 0 . 15˚C determined previously . DISCUSSION We have measured the line tension below the critical point and both the structure function and the distribution of the membrane composition above the critical point . We have extracted critical exponents of (cid:3) = 1 . 2 ± 0 . 2 and (cid:2) = 0 . 124 ± 0 . 03 from our data . These values are in agreement with those of the universality class of the two - dimensional Ising model , (cid:3) = 1 and (cid:2) = 0 . 125 . The accord between our experimental results and theoretical predictions is also clearly seen in the collapse of experimental structure factors onto the exact result from the two - dimensional Ising model , in figure 4 . This is the first quantitative measurement of critical exponents in a lipid bilayer with liquid phases . Agreement with the theory is excellent despite our experimental limitations in spatial resolution , in proximity to the critical temperature , and in variation of lipid compositions between vesicles . Vesicles made by electroformation generally contain a variety of compositions distributed around the bulk composition , and as a consequence , we observe a broad range of transition temperatures in this mixture , consistent with earlier work ( 33 ) , meaning that small changes in composition result in relatively large differences in miscibility transition temperature . Despite the inherent distribution in vesicle composition in our system , we observe critical behavior in all vesicles probed , meaning that they are well within the critical region . For two vesicles # 3 and # 4 in table 2 , 14 we find values of the critical exponent (cid:1) that are significantly greater than the predicted value of (cid:1) = 1 . One possible explanation for this deviation is that these vesicles have slightly off - critical compositions . In addition to critical exponents , we have also determined the correlation length above the critical temperature . We have compared the thermal energy per correlation length ( k B T / (cid:2) ) above T c with the line tension below T c . These two quantities are predicted by the two - dimensional Ising model and universality to be equal in the scaling regime ( 37 ) . Figures 5 and 6 show that the two quantities are in reasonable agreement given our limitations in obtaining large correlations needed for analysis of structure functions . Below T c , we measure line tensions from the maximum measurable value of ~ 0 . 8 pN to a value of ~ 0 . 05 pN near the critical point . Our highest measured line tensions are consistent with estimates of line tension between 0 . 5 and 3 . 3 pN using flaccid vesicles composed of a similar lipid mixture ( 10 ; 12 ) . The flaccid vesicle method requires that line tension is large compared with the membrane bending modulus ( 12 ) . The measurement method we present here is complementary because it requires that line tension is low for fluctuations to be visible ( 10 ) . Recent work observed line tensions between domains as small as 0 . 05 pN in vesicles passing through critical points ( 13 ) . Instead of approaching the critical point by changing temperature , as in our work , the researchers changed the vesicle’s composition by photo - oxidizing lipids ( 13 ) . SPECULATIONS ON BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE We have shown that in lipid vesicles , fluctuations large enough to observe by light microscopy ( greater than 1 micron ) appear within 0 . 5°C of T c . Extrapolating from our data using equation 8 , with v = 1 , we expect sub - micron fluctuations with correlation lengths of ~ 50 nm to occur in vesicles between 2 - 8°C above their critical temperature . This prediction is quantitatively consistent with recent reports of ~ 50nm fluctuations in near - critical membranes of DOPC / DPPC / cholesterol probed by NMR ( 16 ) . In plasma membranes of unstimulated cells , no micron - scale domains are observed by fluorescence microscopy at the cells’ growth temperature . Therefore , domains or composition fluctuations must be sub - micron in dimension if they are present . Sub - micron , local differences in membrane composition may confer advantages for cell processes ( 41 ) . Although the concept currently in favor is that sub - micron membrane heterogeneity in cell membranes is driven by phase separation , there is no consensus on what mechanism might prevent sub - micron domains from ripening into larger domains ( 42 ) . It has been suggested that dynamic , small - scale membrane heterogeneities could result from critical fluctuations near a critical temperature , rather than small domains far below T c that are prevented from coalescing ( 16 ; 31 ; 43 ; 44 ) . Here we have shown that it is possible to tune domain size ( and line tension ) by changing the membrane’s proximity 15 to a miscibility critical point . It has been reported that vesicles isolated from the plasma membranes of living RBL mast cells and other cell types also display critical behavior of the type exhibited here ( 45 ) . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank David Burdick for assistance in running simulations and the lab of Phil Reid for the loan of 0 . 1 μ m fluorescent beads . We thank Ben Widom , James Sethna , Ben Stottrup , Tobias Baumgart , and Peter Olmsted for helpful discussions . We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their careful readings of the manuscript . SLK acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation ( MCB - 0133484 ) and a Research Corporation Cottrell Scholar Award . ARHS was supported by a UW Center for Nanotechnology IGERT Award NSF # DGE - 0504573 and a Molecular Biophysics Training grant NIH # 5 T32 GM08268 - 20 . MDC was supported by an NIH Ruth Kirschstein Postdoctoral Fellowship . SLV is supported through a postdoctoral fellowship from the Cancer Research Institute . MdN and MS acknowledge NSF grants DMR - 0341341 and 0503752 , respectively . 16 REFERENCES 1 . Silvius , J . R . 1982 . Thermotropic phase transitions of pure lipids in model membranes and their modifications by membrane proteins . John Wiley , New York . 2 . Lindsey , H . , N . O . Petersen , and S . I . Chan . 1979 . Physiochemical characterization of 1 , 2 - diphytanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine in model membrane systems . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 555 : 147 - 167 . 3 . Veatch , S . L . , and S . L . Keller . 2003 . Separation of liquid phases in giant vesicles of ternary mixtures of phospholipids and cholesterol . Biophys . J . 85 : 3074 - 3083 . 4 . Cicuta , P . , S . L . Keller , and S . L . Veatch . 2007 . Diffusion of liquid domains in lipid bilayer membranes . J . Phys . Chem . B 1111 : 3328 - 3331 . 5 . Bacia , K . , D . Scherfeld , N . Kahya , and P . Schwille . 2004 . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy relates rafts in model and native membranes . Biophys . J . 87 : 1034 - 1043 . 6 . Filippov , A . , G . Orädd , and G . Lindblom . 2006 . Sphingomyelin structure influences the lateral diffusion and raft formation in lipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 90 : 2086 - 2092 . 7 . Ipsen , J . H . , G . Karlström , O . G . Mouritsen , H . Wennerström , and M . J . Zuckermann . 1987 . Phase equilibria in the phosphatidylcholine - cholesterol system . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 905 : 162 - 172 . 8 . Veatch , S . L . , K . Gawrisch , and S . L . Keller . 2006 . Closed - loop miscibility gap and quantitative tie - lines in ternary membranes containing diphytanoyl PC . Biophys . J . 90 : 4428 - 4436 . 9 . Benvegnu , D . J . , and H . M . McConnell . 1992 . Line tension between liquid domains in lipid monolayers . J . Phys . Chem . 96 : 6820 - 6824 . 10 . Baumgart , T . , S . T . Hess , and W . W . Webb . 2003 . Imaging coexisting fluid domains in biomembrane models coupling curvature and line tension . Nature 425 : 821 - 824 . 11 . Veatch , S . L . , I . V . Polozov , K . Gawrisch , and S . L . Keller . 2004 . Liquid domains in vesicles investigated by NMR and fluorescence microscopy . Biophys . J . 86 : 2910 - 2922 . 12 . Tian , A . , C . Johnson , W . Wang , and T . Baumgart . 2007 . Line tension at fluid membrane boundaries measured by micropipette aspiration . Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 : 208102 . 13 . Esposito , C . , A . Tian , S . Melamed , C . Johnson , S . - Y . Tee , and T . Baumgart . 2007 . Flicker spectroscopy of thermal lipid bilayer domain boundary fluctuations . Biophys . J . 93 : 3169 - 3181 . 14 . Stottrup , B . L . , A . M . Heussler , and T . A . Bibelnieks . 2007 . Determination of line tension in lipid monolayers by Fourier analysis of capillary waves . J . Phys . Chem . B . 111 : 11091 - 11094 . 15 . García - Sáez , A . J . , S . Chiantia , and P . Schwille . 2007 . Effect of line tension on the lateral organization of lipid membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 33537 - 33544 . 16 . Veatch , S . L . , O . Soubias , S . L . Keller , and K . Gawrisch . 2007 . Critical fluctuations in domain - forming lipid mixtures . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 17650 - 17655 . 17 17 . Onsager , L . 1944 . Crystal statistics . I . A two - dimensional model with an order - disorder transition . Phys . Rev . 65 : 117 - 149 . 18 . Sengers , J . V . , and J . M . H . Levelt Sengers . 1986 . Thermodynamic behavior of fluids near the critical point . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 37 : 189 - 222 . 19 . Spaar , A . , and T . Salditt . 2003 . Short range order of hydrocarbon chains in fluid phospholipid bilayers studied by x - ray diffraction from highly oriented membranes . Biophys . J . 85 : 1576 - 1584 . 20 . Goldenfeld , N . 1992 . Lectures on phase transitions and the renormalization group . Addison - Wesley , New York . 21 . Tejwani , M . J . , O . Ferriera , and O . E . Vilches . 1983 . Possible Ising transition in a 4He monolayer absorbed on Kr - plated graphite . Phys . Rev . Lett . 44 : 152 - 155 . 22 . Radhakrishnan , A . , and H . McConnell . 2007 . Composition fluctuations , chemical exchange , and nuclear relaxation in membranes containing cholesterol . J . Phys . Chem . B 126 : 185101 . 23 . Goldstein , R . E . , and D . P . Jackson . 1994 . Domain shape relaxation and the spectrum of thermal fluctuations in Langmuir monolayers . J . Phys . Chem . 98 : 9626 - 9636 . 24 . Seul , M . 1990 . Domain wall fluctuations and instabilities in monomolecular films . Physica A 168 : 198 - 209 . 25 . Mann , E . K . , S . Hénon , D . Langevin , and J . Meunier . 1992 . Molecular layers of a polymer at the free water surface : Microscopy at the Brewster angle . J . Phys . II France 2 : 1683 - 1704 . 26 . Muller , P . , and F . Gallet . 1991 . First measurement of the liquid - solid line energy . Phys . Rev . Lett . 67 : 1106 - 1109 . 27 . Riviere , S . , S . Hénon , J . Meunier , G . Albrecht , M . M . Boissonnade , and A . Baszkin . 1995 . Electrostatic pressure and line tension in a Langmuir monolayer . Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 : 2506 - 2509 . 28 . Riviere , S . , S . Hénon , and J . Meunier . 1994 . Fluctuations of a defect line of molecular orientation in a monolayer . Phys . Rev . E 49 : 1375 - 1382 . 29 . Mann , E . K . , S . Hénon , D . Langevin , J . Meunier , and L . Léger . 1995 . Hydrodynamics of domain relaxation in a polymer monolayer . Phys . Rev . E 51 : 5708 - 5720 . 30 . Wurlitzer , S . , P . Steffen , and T . M . Fischer . 2000 . Line tension of Langmuir monolayer phase boundaries determined with optical tweezers . J . Chem . Phys . 112 : 5915 - 5918 . 31 . Nielsen , L . K . , T . Bjørnholm , and O . G . Mouritsen . 2007 . Thermodynamic and real - space structural evidence of a 2D critical point in phospholipid monolayers . Langmuir 23 : 11684 - 11692 . 32 . Angelova , M . I . , S . Soléau , P . Méléard , J . F . Faucon , and P . Bothorel . 1992 . Preparation of giant vesicles by external AC electric fields . Progr Colloid Polym Sci 89 : 127 - 131 . 33 . Veatch , S . L . , and S . L . Keller . 2005 . Seeing spots : Complex phase behavior in simple membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1746 : 172 - 185 . 34 . Safran , S . A . 1994 . Statistical thermodynamics of surfaces , interfaces , and membranes . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . 18 35 . Aarts , D . G . A . L . , M . Schmidt , and H . N . W . Lekkerkerker . 2004 . Direct visual observation of thermal capillary waves . Science 304 : 847 - 850 . 36 . Wu , T . T . , B . M . McCoy , C . A . Tracy , and E . Barouch . 1976 . Spin - spin correlation functions for the two - dimensional Ising model : Exact theory in the scaling region . Phys . Rev . B 13 : 316 - 374 . 37 . Itzykson , C . , and J . - M . Drouffe . 1992 . Statistical Field Theory Vol . 1 . Cambridge University Press , New York . 38 . Binder , K . 1981 . Finite size scaling analysis of Ising model block distribution functions . Zeitschrift fur Physik B 43 : 119 - 140 . 39 . Widom , B . 1965 . Surface tension and molecular correlations near the critical point . J . Chem . Phys . 43 : 3892 - 3897 . 40 . Ayuyan , A . G . , and F . S . Cohen . 2006 . Lipid peroxides promote large rafts : Effects of excitation of probes in fluorescence microscopy and electrochemical reactions during vesicle formation . Biophys . J . 91 : 2172 - 2183 . 41 . Nicolau Jr . , D . V . , K . Burrage , R . G . Parton , and J . F . Hancock . 2006 . Identifying optimal lipid raft characteristics required to promote nanoscale protein - protein interactions on the plasma membrane . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 : 313 - 323 . 42 . Edidin , M . 2003 . The state of lipid rafts : from model membranes to cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 32 : 257 - 283 . 43 . Nielsen , L . K . , T . Bjørnholm , and O . G . Mouritsen . 2000 . Fluctuations caught in the act . Nature 404 : 352 . 44 . Veatch , S . L . 2007 . From small fluctuations to large - scale phase separation : Lateral organization in model membranes containing cholesterol . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 : 573 - 582 . 45 . Veatch , S . L . , P . Cicuta , P . Sengupta , A . Honerkamp - Smith , D . Holowka , and B . Baird . 2007 . Critical fluctuations in plasma membrane vesicles . submitted . 46 . Rowlinson , J . S . , and B . Widom . 1982 . The molecular theory of capillarity . Clarendon Press , Oxford . 47 . Hagen , J . P . , and H . M . McConnell . 1997 . Liquid - liquid immiscibility in lipid monolayers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1329 : 7 - 11 . 48 . Samuelsen , E . J . 1974 . Critical behaviour of the two - dimensional Ising antiferromagnets K 2 CoF 4 and Rb 2 CoF 4 . J . Phys . Chem . Solids 35 : 785 - 793 . 49 . Campuzano , J . C . , M . S . Foster , G . Jennings , R . F . Willis , and W . Unertl . 1985 . Au ( 110 ) ( 1 x 2 ) - to - ( 1 x 1 ) phase transition : A physical realization of the two - dimensional Ising model . Phys . Rev . Lett . 54 : 2684 - 2687 . 50 . LaBella , V . P . , D . W . Bullock , M . Anser , Z . Ding , C . Emery , L . Bellaiche , and P . M . Thibado . 2000 . Microscopic view of two - dimensional lattice - gas Ising system within the grand canonical ensemble . Phys . Rev . Lett . 84 : 4152 - 4255 . 19 Table 1 . Two - dimensional critical exponents System Equation Exponent Exact Values ( 46 ) Ref . Monolayers of phospholipids ( DMoPC , DPoPc , DOPC or DEPE ) and dihydrocholesterol with 0 . 25 % TR - DPPE ( dye ) dihydrocholesterol concentration | x - x c | ~ ( (cid:2) c – (cid:2) ) (cid:4) (cid:4) = 0 . 25 ± 0 . 07 (cid:4) = 0 . 125 ( 47 ) Ising - like crystals of K 2 CoF 4 magnetic order parameter m ~ | T - T c | (cid:4) (cid:4) = 0 . 116 ± 0 . 008 (cid:4) = 0 . 125 ( 48 ) Ising - like crystals of Rb 2 CoF 4 “ magnetic order parameter m ~ | T - T c | (cid:4) inverse correlation length (cid:1) ~ ( T – T c ) (cid:6) (cid:4) = 0 . 119 ± 0 . 008 (cid:6) = 0 . 89 ± 0 . 1 (cid:4) = 0 . 125 (cid:6) = 1 ( 48 ) ( 110 ) facet reconstruction of Au surface “ order parameter m ~ | T - T c | (cid:4) correlation length (cid:2) ~ | T - T c | (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:4) = 0 . 13 ± 0 . 022 (cid:6) = 1 . 02 ± 0 . 02 (cid:4) = 0 . 125 (cid:6) = 1 ( 49 ) GaAs crystal surfaces correlation length (cid:2) ~ | T - T c | (cid:1)(cid:6) (cid:6) = 1 . 0 ± 0 . 25 (cid:6) = 1 ( 50 ) Lipid monolayer of 69 / 30 / 1 DMPC / cholesterol / NBD - PC ( dye ) line tension (cid:5) = m ( (cid:2) c – (cid:2) ) (cid:6) (cid:6) = 1 . 0 – 1 . 4 (cid:6) = 1 ( 9 ) Helium on Kr - plated graphite Heat capacity critical exponent , (cid:3) , via 2 (cid:6) = 2 - (cid:3) (cid:6) = 0 . 86 ± 0 . 05 (cid:6) = 1 ( 21 ) 20 Table 2 . Values and standard deviations of the correlation length exponent , (cid:1) , for vesicles in figures 5 and 6 . Vesicle Measured (cid:1) S . D . in (cid:1) above T c S . D . in (cid:1) below T c 1 1 . 01 ± 0 . 48 ± 0 . 17 2 1 . 11 ± 0 . 49 ± 0 . 14 3 1 . 33 ± 0 . 14 ± 0 . 19 4 1 . 32 ± 0 . 14 ± 0 . 06 5 1 . 06 ± 0 . 18 ± 0 . 07 21 FIGURE CAPTIONS Figure 1 . Giant unilamellar vesicle passing through a miscibility critical point at T c ~ 32 . 5°C . Scale bar is 20 um . The bottom row ( A - C ) shows Ising model simulations at rescaled temperatures as described in the Methods section . The simulation in Panel A was performed at a reduced temperature comparable to the vesicle at 32 . 8˚C , Panel B to the vesicle at 32 . 6˚C , and Panel C to the vesicle at 32 . 4˚C . Figure 2 . Top left : Frames from two movies of a giant unilamellar vesicle with a critical temperature of T c = 31 . 7 ±0 . 14˚C . Domain boundaries fluctuate more at 31 . 5˚C than at a temperature further from T c ( 23 . 0˚C ) . Yellow lines trace all boundaries over a series of exposures taken over ~ 7 s and red lines denote average boundaries . Scale bar is 20 μ m . Top right : The line tension around any domain is found by first compiling a power spectrum of radial deviations ( h ( x ) ) of the boundary . Bottom : Log - log plot of the spectrum of radial deviations vs . inverse length k for two individual domains , one with a mean perimeter of 86 . 7 μ m at 23 . 0˚C ( triangles ) and the other with a mean perimeter of 34 . 1 μ m at 31 . 5˚C ( circles ) . Lines are fits to the equation < h ( k ) 2 > = k B T / ( L (cid:1) k 2 ) . Only the data points from the third through the ninth wavenumbers are used for the fit . Error bars represent standard deviations from measurements over a series of movie frames . Figure 3 . The two panels show domain line tension with standard deviations measured for two different vesicles , at various temperatures . The line tension decreases linearly with increasing temperature close to T c . Standard deviations are found by comparing line tensions from two or more fluctuating domains visible in a single frame and / or breaking long movies into runs of (cid:1) 20 frames . At some temperatures , only one domain was available and no standard deviation is shown . Figure 4 . Top : Measured structure factors are shown for one vesicle at eight temperatures . The lowest temperature shown is close to the critical temperature for this vesicle , T c = 26 . 43°C , derived by fitting critical exponents as described in the text . Bottom : When each structure factor is rescaled by a correlation length , (cid:2) , all curves overlap with the exact form for the two - dimensional Ising model . The Ising model curve is the Fourier transform of the exact numerical solution for G ( r ) calculated by Wu et al . ( 36 ) . Figure 5 . Top : Line tension and structure factor data for the vesicle in figure 4 are combined in one panel . Filled circles denote measured line tensions , (cid:1) , measured below T c . Error bars indicate standard deviations from three or more measurements . Filled triangles denote energy per correlation length , k B T / (cid:2) , measured above T c . Uncertainties in correlation length are generated as described in Materials and Methods and are overestimates . Both data sets decrease linearly and reach zero at approximately the same temperature , 26 . 16 ± 0 . 16°C for line tension data and 26 . 52 ± 1 . 2°C for k B T / (cid:2) data . 22 Bottom : When correlation length , (cid:4) , or energy per line tension , k B T / (cid:2) , is plotted on a log - log scale vs . reduced temperature | T - T c | / T c , the slope of the line yields the critical exponent , (cid:3) . The solid lines show a good fit to (cid:3) = 1 , predicted by the two - dimensional Ising model . The dashed lines show a poor fit to (cid:3) = 1 / 2 , predicted by mean field theory , which would be applicable only if the system were not in the critical regime . Figure 6 . ( A - D ) The same procedures in Figures 1 - 5 are repeated for four additional vesicles . All together , the data show that line tension and energy per correlation length decrease approximately linearly to a minimum value of zero at the critical temperature , T c . Each vesicle has a slightly different composition , and hence a slightly different T c . Measured line tension , (cid:1) , is plotted below T c using filled circles . Energy per correlation length , k B T / (cid:4) , is plotted above T c using filled triangles . Figure 7 . Top : Histograms of pixel intensity ( from 0 to 256 ) for movies of the same vesicle in Figure 1 are averaged over all frames at three temperatures . The distribution is peaked around one value at T = 34 . 0°C , which is far above the critical temperature of T c (cid:1) 32 . 5 ± 0 . 15°C for this system . At 32 . 6°C , the distribution is slightly asymmetric . Below T c , at 32 . 4°C , the distribution appears bimodal , indicating T < T c . It is also strongly asymmetric , indicating that the movie is not long enough to capture all states of the vesicle domains . The histogram from a vesicle containing one uniform phase is significantly narrower . For example , the solid line shows a histogram from a uniform vesicle of DOPC and 0 . 8 % Texas Red - DPPE at 23˚C . Bottom : The second moment ( width ) of the averaged histograms is plotted in the form ( width ) - 8 . The straight line shows that the data are consistent with an order parameter exponent (cid:1) = 1 / 8 , as predicted by the two - dimensional Ising model . The dashed line shows that the data is inconsistent with the mean field exponent of (cid:1) = 1 / 2 , which would be applicable only if the system were not in the critical regime . Only data from symmetrical peaks are included in the fit . Figure 1 33 . 6°C 32 . 8°C 32 . 6°C 32 . 4°C 32 . 2°C 32 . 0°C 31 . 75°C 31 . 0°C 28 . 0°C A B C 33 . 60°C 23 . 00°C 31 . 50 °C h ( x ) x < r > Figure 2 L = 2 π r a b < h ( k ) > ( µ m ) 2 2 wavenumber , k = 2 π / L ( µ m ) −1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 3 a ( 23 . 00°C ) b ( 31 . 50°C ) temperature ( °C ) li ne t en s i on , λ ( p N ) Figure 3 temperature ( °C ) 32 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 li ne t en s i on , λ ( p N ) 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 k ξ S ( k ) k ( 7 / 4 ) 10 100 0 . 1 0 . 3 0 . 06 wavenumber k ( µ m ) −1 s t r u c t u r e f a c t o r S ( k ) ( a r b i t r a r y un i t s ) Figure 4 Ising model 26 . 60 ˚C 26 . 80 ˚C 27 . 00 ˚C 27 . 20 ˚C 27 . 40 ˚C 27 . 60 ˚C 27 . 80 ˚C 28 . 00 ˚C * * ( a r b i t r a r y un i t s ) temperature ( °C ) li ne t en s i on , λ ( p N ) Figure 5 k T / ξ ( p N ) B 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 c o rr e l a t i on l eng t h , ξ ( µ m ) | T - Tc | / Tc k T / λ ( µ m ) B 23 24 25 26 27 28 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 T c li ne t en s i on , λ ( p N ) li ne t en s i on , λ ( p N ) temperature ( °C ) li ne t en s i o n , λ ( p N ) temperature ( °C ) li ne t en s i on , λ ( p N ) Figure 6 k T / ξ ( p N ) B temperature ( °C ) 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 T c λ k T B ξ 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 k T / ξ ( p N ) B T c 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 k T / ξ ( p N ) B 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 k T / ξ ( p N ) B T c temperature ( °C ) T c A B C D Figure 7 c oun t s pixel brightness 32 . 8 33 33 . 2 33 . 4 33 . 6 33 . 8 34 temperature ( °C ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 x10 −6 w i d t h - 8 ( a r b i t r a r y un i t s ) 100 150 200 250 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 32 . 6°C 34 . 0°C 32 . 4°C uniform control