NotePals : Lightweight Note Taking by the Group , for the Group Richard C . Davis 1 , Jason A . Brotherton 2 , James A . Landay 1 , Morgan N . Price 3 , Bill N . Schilit 3 1 EECS Department University of California Berkeley , CA 94720 - 1776 USA + 1 510 643 7354 { rcdavis , landay } @ cs . berkeley . edu 2 College of Computing Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA 30332 - 0280 USA + 1 404 894 7512 brothert @ cc . gatech . edu 3 FX Palo Alto Laboratory 3400 Hillview Avenue , Bldg . 4 Palo Alto , CA 94304 USA + 1 415 813 7220 { schilit , price } @ pal . xerox . com ABSTRACT NotePals is an ink - based , collaborative note taking application that runs on personal digital assistants ( PDAs ) . Meeting participants write notes in their own handwriting on a PDA . These notes are shared with other participants by synchronizing later with a shared note repository . NotePals is distinguished by its lightweight process , interface , and hardware . This paper describes the design and implementation of NotePals , its web - based note repository , and the results of an informal user study . The results indicate that taking notes on NotePals produces minutes that are comparable to paper in terms of speed and legibility , and the notes are far easier to share with others . Keywords PDA , pen - based user interface , CSCW , informal user interfaces , digital ink , mobile computing INTRODUCTION NotePals is an ink - based , collaborative note taking application that runs on personal digital assistants ( PDAs ) . The system is distinguished by its support for lightweight collaboration at three levels : hardware , note taking process , and user interface . The hardware used , the U . S . Robotics Palm Pilot , weights only 5 . 7 ounces ( 165 grams ) , easily fits in one’s palm ( see Figure 1 ) , and sells for under $ 200 USD . The note taking process allows each participant in a meeting to take his or her own notes in free - form ink . NotePals automatically creates minutes by merging the notes after the meeting , eliminating the need for a scribe . The NotePals ink - based user interface uses a focus plus context [ 5 ] view that attempts to overcome problems associated with the small size of PDAs ( see Figure 2a ) . This allows users to take notes quickly using their own handwriting without relying on error - prone handwriting recognizers or unfamiliar shorthands [ 6 , 13 ] . The drive to create NotePals came from the realization that people often leave meetings without a shared understanding or a record of the important points that occurred . Assigning a scribe to record the minutes is one solution , but it is onerous and sometimes produces a biased record . Using computer - based meeting support tools is another solution , but existing tools require an expensive , fixed infrastructure that limits the locations where meetings can be held . Since many people are now carrying small , inexpensive PDAs , we felt that these might provide a better platform for meeting support tools . NotePals is a collaborative note taking tool that lets people walk away ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 . NotePals’ focus plus context interface with ( a ) focus area active and ( b ) note attributes area active . Figure 1 . The U . S . Robotics Pilot fits in the user ' s hand . from any meeting , presentation , or class with a low - overhead record of what transpired . Previous research in this area , a survey of PDA users [ 12 ] , and interviews with potential NotePals users led us to a simple design idea . Meeting participants use NotePals on PDAs for taking notes during a meeting . Afterwards , the participants synchronize their PDAs with their own desktop machines , and their notes are sent to a shared repository . The participants can then use a web browser to view these merged notes . They can sort and filter the notes by time , author , project , date , and note type . Figure 3 illustrates the merged Action Item notes for a work group . Problems with Existing Approaches It was important that our design overcome the problems with existing methods , both low - and high - tech , for creating meeting records . Low - tech solutions ( i . e . , pen and paper ) are easy to learn , truly ubiquitous , and inexpensive . Unfortunately , they are also unreliable . Each participant’s notes may be incomplete . If instead a scribe takes notes for the entire group , the notes may be biased , the scribe will be unable to participate fully , and some subtle points may be missed . In either case , a single perspective does not suffice . Also , the distribution of the notes can be problematic . On the other extreme , high - tech “meeting capture systems” [ 20 , 16 , 4 ] require expensive , specially equipped rooms that often require a facilitator to operate . These rooms are not ubiquitous and thus violate the need to have meetings anywhere , anytime . In addition , the technology often impedes the normal interaction between participants [ 14 ] . NotePals finds a middle ground between traditional and electronic solutions , combining the advantages of the two . Our Choice of PDA Using PDAs for group note taking was driven by the desire for ubiquity . PDAs are becoming a common tool carried by knowledge workers , who have frequent meetings . For example , colleagues have reported attending meetings with non - technical co - workers where over half of the participants used Pilots [ 9 ] . International Data Corp . estimates that manufacturers will ship 5 . 5 million handheld computers worldwide this year and 16 . 2 million units per year by 2001 [ 2 , 22 ] . The Pilot is one of the most popular machines in the PDA market . Its popularity seems to be driven by its small size , low price , and easy synchronization with desktop applications [ 3 ] . These same factors were important in our decision to use the Pilot as our platform . Its size and price vastly improve the odds that meeting attendees will have one with them whenever and wherever a meeting takes place . In addition , its synchronization model is simple . Copies of data are kept on the desktop and in the Pilot , and they can be modified separately . When the user wishes to synchronize the copies , he places his Pilot in its docking cradle , presses the HotSync button , and the copies are merged . Our collaborative application requires only occasional sharing of information , making the Pilot’s synchronization model appropriate . It offers as much sharing as is needed without the associated high costs of wireless infrastructure . Outline This paper describes the design and implementation of NotePals and describes how NotePals can be used effectively to take meeting notes . The next section describes some scenarios of use to give a better idea on how NotePals would be used in and between meetings . To inform our design we surveyed PDA users and interviewed individuals concerning their note taking habits . These results are presented next . This is followed with a more detailed description of the NotePals user interface and its web - based note repository . We then give some conclusions of our early usage experiences . Finally , we summarize the related work and our ideas for future research . USAGE SCENARIOS We see the potential for NotePals in a number of different meeting situations . NotePals can obviously be used in a business setting . Each participant in a meeting can take their own notes and later the merged notes can be viewed on the group’s web server . There are several ways to organize the note taking process . For example , notes can be shared or private , and participants can take them in turns , simultaneously , or selectively on points of particular interest . Instead of explicitly requiring one of these policies , our design allows any of them to take place . The web - based notes repository allows viewing and filtering of the notes in several different ways . This is important because meetings are ad - hoc and systems that impose an explicit meeting process will be rejected [ 7 ] . Figure 3 . Merged Action Item notes in the web repository . NotePals can also be used in classroom settings . Students at U . C . Berkeley can purchase notes taken by paid note takers for many large courses , but these are not available in smaller classes . With NotePals , students in any class could get notes created by their peers . Sharing their notes with the other students in the class may help students take better notes and might also set the tone for a collaborative , rather than competitive , educational experience . The following scenario illustrates how NotePals might be used in business meetings . The characters include Harvey , Mary , Mike , and Art , who are all quality engineers at OSRYLE Software , and Manny their manager . Scene 1 : Harvey Steps Into the Office at 8 : 00 AM Harvey pulls his Pilot out of his pocket and browses his notes from the last quality engineers group meeting . He goes to the last page and sees his Next Meeting note for a group meeting at 9 : 00 AM today . Harvey decides to read the meeting agenda on his desktop . Using a web browser he views the page for the groups shared notes . Clicking on the Next Meeting link , he brings up all notes of this type . The last one is Manny’s Next Meeting note , which held the agenda for today’s meeting . “Hmm , Manny will announce next year’s budget . ” Scene 2 : The Quality Engineer ' s Meeting The quality group has gathered in a conference room . Manny glances at a note from last week’s meeting on his Pilot . “It looks like Mary was the last person to take minutes . Mike , can you get them for the next 15 minutes ? ” Mike starts a new page on his Pilot , and begins to write in his own handwriting . Manny flips to the agenda on the Next Meeting note from last week and then adds a New Meeting note . “Let ' s start with project updates . Harvey ? ” Harvey expresses his concern that WebCook99 is going to be shipped in one month with no user testing . The other engineers at the meeting voice similar concerns . Fifteen minutes later Harvey starts taking the minutes . Then Manny announces the budge , “I ' m afraid it ' s going to be the same as last year - no increase . ” The engineers spend the remainder of the meeting bartering for next year’s projects . At the end , each person has written down in NotePals a list of assignments and due dates using Action Item notes ( see Figure 4 ) . Once Manny and the engineers return to their offices and synchronize 1 , they can use a web browser to view the action items for each engineer or the entire group . 1 U . S . Robotics provides network synchronization software so the engineers in this scenario could synchronize from any office , not just their own . Scene 3 : Harvey at the WebCook Meeting Harvey enters the WebCook meeting room , where the meeting is already taking place and starts to take notes . As each engineer reports on their progress , Harvey points out the testing that still has to be done for each section . The engineers take their own notes and tend to ignore Harvey’s points on user testing . Later , when the team synchronizes their notes , Harvey’s commentary on the testing progress will be interspersed with the engineering reports . While many of the engineers may have ignored Harvey’s points , his comments are contained in the meeting record . DESIGN INTERVIEWS & SURVEYS To focus our design we interviewed co - workers who attend meetings , added note taking questions to a survey of PDA users , and studied the previous work in this area . Our interviews found that meeting participants make lots of notes during meetings . These notes often are of different types : to - do items , important points heard , questions asked , summaries of meetings , names of contacts and attendees , and other notes . These types were the impetus for the stationery types described below . This use of different note types is consistent with the findings of previous research on note taking [ 23 ] . The interviews also showed that people often look at their notes later when writing reports , checking for to - do items , or writing meetings summaries . A major problem is the accurate reporting of meeting results when the scribe is not well versed in all the topics [ 15 ] . A survey of 142 PDA users [ 12 ] found that note taking was the most popular application of Apple Newton users ( of six applications ) , but was far less popular with Pilot users ( ranked fourth of six ) . Note taking was also cited as the most common task ( of seven ) that users performed on paper rather than on their PDA . The most common reasons cited for not using the PDA were slower speed , small screen size , and difficulty with handwriting or stroke ( e . g . , Graffiti on the Pilot ) recognition . The respondents reported using their Pilots in meetings “often . ” These results show that PDAs , and in particular Pilots , are often carried to meetings , but the size and recognition systems are problematic for taking notes . NotePals tries to overcome these problems . NOTEPALS We chose to implement the prototype NotePals system on the U . S . Robotics Palm Pilot PDA . This platform has several advantages that we have described above . The Pilot also has several limitations that we had to overcome . Two of its strengths , size and synchronization model , both pose challenging design problems . While the Pilot’s size makes it easy to carry , it makes it very difficult to draw on . NotePals notes need to be in ink rather than Graffiti text if the system is going to comparable to paper in ease of use , but some users Figure 4 . An Action Item note . complain that the Pilot’s writing surface is so tiny that their hand obstructs their view of the screen while they are writing . This is not so much of a problem on a large sheet of paper where text can be spread out . Resolution is also a problem . In our interviews , we found that a few users take notes on pads that are similar in size to the pilot screen , but they can write very small on these pads , and the Pilot’s 160 by 160 pixel resolution makes it difficult to write small . The size and resolution problems can combine to make taking legible ink notes on a Pilot a real challenge , and the situation is not likely to improve much over time , since the Pilot’s size is part of what makes it so popular . Our system addresses this problem with a novel focus plus context user interface that attempts to simplify the process of taking notes and improve their legibility . The simplicity of the Pilot’s synchronization model presents more design challenges . How should shared notes be presented to the user ? Should they be presented sequentially by user or interleaved ? Can redundant notes be detected , and should they be eliminated or merged ? How can notes be linked to presentation slides , audio , or others’ notes ? Should users be able to keep public and private notes ? In NotePals , a user sees his own notes on his Pilot , but on the desktop he has access to all users’ public notes . On the desktop , notes are merged automatically by noting their creation time and “stationery type . ” Notes can be browsed with a simple interface that allows the user to sort and filter them . Pilot User Interface In NotePals , a “note” is a single screen “chunk” of text and other scribbles ( see Figure 2b ) . The screen is not scrollable ; the entire note is visible at all times . The user can draw directly on the upper part of this page with the pen , while the lower part holds a Private checkbox , and a control for the “stationery type” ( described below ) . The Focus Area Drawing directly on the page of notes works well for sketches , but for text the user can open a focus area in the bottom portion of the screen by touching the arrow next to the Private checkbox . When this window is open ( see Figure 2a ) a small box indicating the current focus location ( i . e . , the “focus cursor” ) appears on the page of notes . Now , the note page can be thought of as a context area . Words written in the focus area will also appear in the little box in the context area scaled down by a factor of three . This gives each page a total resolution of 480 x 327 ( as opposed to the Pilot resolution of 160 x 160 ) . This organization allows the user to fit much more text on a page , and it keeps the user’s hand out of the way while writing , so the entire note page can be seen . As the user writes , he can make a right to left swipe in the Graffiti area to move the focus window forward to a new blank area . A top right to bottom left swipe will move the focus cursor to the beginning of the next line . Users can also move the focus cursor by dragging it in the context area or tapping on a new location . Stationery A page’s “stationery type” indicates what kind of information is in the note . The default type , Note , is the simplest kind of stationery and causes the note to be treated like a plain piece of paper with writing . Notes can be given more specific types , such as Action Item , which will allow them to be sorted and indexed together with other notes of the same type . Some stationery types have additional attributes . For instance , Figure 4 shows an action item note that has the name of the person responsible for the item , and the due date filled in at the bottom of the screen . There are currently four types of stationery in NotePals . Note and Action Item have already been described . There are also New Meeting notes than can be given a list of attendees , and Next Meeting notes that can be given a date , start time , and end time for the next meeting . Privacy The Private checkbox , seen in all of these figures , controls others’ access to notes . If this box is checked , the note will not be uploaded to the public note repository . Both public and private notes are uploaded to the private note repository . Navigation NotePals stores all notes in a project folder so users can keep the notes they take for each work group separate . Within each project folder , notes are sorted by the time they were created . The user can browse through a large number of notes in a project in a view that shows thumbnails , creation times , note types , and privacy for five notes at a time . Users can also move to earlier and later notes within a project when they are in the edit view , as seen above . Web - based Note Repository As mentioned earlier , when the user wishes to synchronize the notes on his Pilot with those on the desktop , he puts his Pilot in its docking cradle and presses the HotSync button . This uploads new notes to one or two central repositories ( private and / or public ) . These repositories are simply web servers that can accept uploaded notes from the desktop that the Pilot synchronizes with . The web server takes Figure 5 . Main menu of the notes browser responsibility for storing and sorting all the notes uploaded to it . The URL used to upload notes is also used to view notes . Pointing a web browser to this URL brings up the notes browser shown in Figure 5 . The first browser page presented to the user is a list of the types of attributes that appear on each page . Clicking on one of these attributes will present the user with a list of known values for that attribute . For example , clicking on Stationery Type leads to the screen in Figure 6 , a list of known stationery types . Then , if the user click on one of these hyperlinks , he will be presented with the notes with that attribute . Clicking on Action Item in Figure 6 will lead to the page shown in Figure 3 , which lists only action items . In this view , notes are sorted by creation time and tagged with their other attributes . In these first steps into the browser , the user is able to focus his attention on a subset of notes . From this point , the user can modify his view of the data simply by clicking on various hyperlinks on the page . Clicking one of the attribute names near the top of the page will change the view to be sorted by that attribute . Clicking on an attribute next to a note will refine the view to include only notes with that attribute . For example , clicking on Harvey in Figure 3 will present the user with a similar page , which contains only those Action Item notes taken by Harvey . At the very top of the page is a list of the attributes that the user has refined his view by , and the user can return to a previous stage in browsing by clicking on one of these attributes . With this simple , single - click query mechanism , the user can easily browse the notes in the repository . Advantages of NotePals Approach NotePals has a number of advantages over paper notes and electronic meeting capture tools , and it alleviates a number of the problems with using small PDAs for note taking . Shared notes taken with NotePals overcome many note taking problems mentioned earlier . There is no need for every individual in a meeting to take complete notes . Instead , attendees can rely on others to share the work of taking notes , and write down only those parts that are particularly important to them . This also eliminates the need to appoint a scribe for the entire meeting , though it may be useful to have scribe duties rotate during the meeting . Also , since users are free to add notes from their own point of view at any moment , these shared notes will more accurately reflect the perceptions of different individuals at the meeting . The fact that NotePals can be run on inexpensive hardware using existing infrastructure differentiates it from many groupware tools . The notes repository can be used by any group that has a web server and networked workstations . Most members of the group should have Pilots , but they are inexpensive and may already be in use by many group members . Also , NotePals runs on PDAs , which can be brought into most environments , whereas other tools require meetings to occur in specially equipped rooms . The small size of the Pilot was a problem , but the focus area helps to alleviate this . The user can fit a moderate amount of text on every page , at the slight expense of legibility and ease of entry . Entering notes is more difficult than on paper because the focus cursor must be moved . Using two Graffiti strokes simplifies this process . While notes may be difficult to read on the Pilot , they appear full size on the web - based notes browser for later review . The use of stationery types allows the notes browser to sort and index notes . Without stationery , a large repository of notes would have to be browsed sequentially . With stationery types , the user can form more complex queries such as , “Show me the all of the action items Harvey took down yesterday . ” Finally , ink - based notes are suited to the target task : human to human communication . NotePals’ informal user interface relies on the fact that unrecognized handwriting requires little cognitive overhead by the note taker . Users can focus on the notes being taken , and not on remembering Graffiti strokes or figuring out how to format an idea in ASCII text . USAGE EXPERIENCE To better understand how easy it is to take legible notes with NotePals , we conducted an informal user study that measured writing times , reading times , and reading errors . While the results of this study are not statistically significant , they give an indication of NotePals’ usability and show where to focus our attention in the future . The study was divided into two parts . In the first part , ten participants took notes on both paper and NotePals , and we compared their writing speed . In the second part , ten different participants read the notes generated in part 1 , and we compared reading speed and number of reading errors between paper notes and NotePals notes viewed on the web . Figure 6 . Notes browser : list of note types . Part I : Writing NotePals Notes Methodology In the first part of this study , we presented participants with two sets of PowerPoint presentation slides and asked them to copy them onto paper or into NotePals . The participants were told to take notes as if they were going to be read later by a friend . We used lecture slides from a computer science class that averaged 33 words in length and contained no pictures or diagrams . We measured the time participants needed to copy each slide , as well as the number of critical incidents . Critical incidents were defined as occasions where the normal flow of note taking was interrupted ( e . g . , the user had trouble moving the focus cursor ) . We used a within - groups experimental design . The participants were divided into two groups . The first group used NotePals for the first set of slides and paper for the second set . The tasks were reversed for the second group . The change in order controls for variance in writing times due to the differing slide contents . Before using NotePals , the group was given a five minute tutorial on how to use the system . Each set of slides consisted of one practice and one measurement slide . The results from the practice slide , which allowed participants to get used to taking notes in both conditions , were discarded . Participants and Environment The ten participants were all members of a CSCW class . All were electrical engineering and computer science graduate students . One reported he used a PDA “very often , ” one reported “often , ” six reported “a few times , ” and two reported “never . ” All participants copied the same slides concurrently . This may have subjected them to some task anxiety since those writing on paper often finished before those writing on Pilots . Results and Discussion The time needed to write varied widely among the participants . We compared the time to take notes on NotePals with the time to take notes on paper . NotePals took on average 64 % longer for each participant . The median increase was 60 % . Comments from the participants and our observations indicate the time difference could be reduced if it was easier to move the focus cursor . Some participants suggested snapping the focus cursor to a grid or moving the cursor using a button or gesture in the focus area rather than in the Graffiti area . One user suggested giving advance warning when approaching the edge of a page . These results and reactions are encouraging and warrant further study . Part II Reading NotePals Notes Methodology In Part II , we recruited 10 new participants . Each participant read a set of notes written by a participant in part I ( a different set was used for each participant ) . Participants were asked to read the slides out loud to the best of their ability , correcting themselves when necessary . They were told that accuracy was more important than speed . We measured the time needed to read the note and the number of errors made . An error was defined as a misread word , letter , or symbol . Participants were again divided into two groups with the first half reading the first set of notes on the web and the second set on paper . As before , the second group did the tasks in the reverse order . The first reading in each set , the practice slide , allowed participants to get used to the particular handwriting they were reading . Participants and Environment Nine participants were electrical engineering and computer science graduate students or post - docs , and one was a civil engineering graduate student . All participants but one spoke English as their native language . The participants read notes one at a time in a private office . The web - based notes were shown on a Netscape browser at full size . The web - based notes were roughly the same size as the paper - based notes when displayed on a 21” Samsung SyncMaster monitor at a resolution of 1152 x 882 . Results and Discussion The time needed to read varied widely among the participants . We compared the time to read NotePals notes on the web with the time to read notes on paper . The NotePals notes took on average 37 % longer for each participant . The median increase was 21 % . Two participants took twice as long to read the web notes . Removing these outliers results in an average and median increase of only 14 % . Together , one of the outliers and another participant made a total of twelve errors in reading the notes on the web , while the rest of the participants made a total of two errors on the web . There were a total of only two errors among all of the participants reading on paper . The small number of errors when reading paper notes suggests that shared , handwritten notes are quite legible . It took most participants ( eight ) a slightly longer amount of time to read notes on the web and most ( eight ) made few errors . These results suggest that most users can take acceptably legible notes with NotePals . Informal Usage of NotePals In addition to this informal study , we have been using NotePals for several weeks and continue to evaluate the design . Two of us used NotePals to take shared notes at a conference . Others have created shared notes recording comments on designs and presentations . Also , a number of colleagues at Xerox have given us reactions to NotePals . These experiences have shown us several things . First , our usage shows that NotePals can help complete useful work . We also noticed that users’ writing size and their ability to read their own , scaled handwriting varies significantly from user to user . However , some users did not mind poor readability on the Pilot , as they mainly use the structure of the scaled handwriting to guide future writing . Nonetheless , allowing the user to select the scaling factor and the size of the focus area would be useful . We also noticed that several users had problems confining their handwriting to the focus area , which would often cause them to touch the context area and move the focus cursor to an undesired location . Enlarging the focus area slightly might help this . Other solutions might include an “Undo” command for cursor moves and using heuristics to ignore accidental focus cursor moves . Many users commented that they would like to be able to read others’ notes ( e . g . meeting agendas ) on their Pilots . Some also said they would like to mix Graffiti text with ink . Both of these improvements appear useful , and we will consider adding them to NotePals . RELATED WORK Work related to NotePals lies in two main areas : meeting capture tools and personal note taking applications . Electronic Meeting Rooms Much work has been done on Electronic Meeting Systems ( EMS ) [ 14 , 16 ] . These systems typically consist of 10 - 20 personal computers linked together in special meeting rooms running custom software . The software often organizes meetings by dividing the proceedings into three phases : idea generation ( brainstorming ) , organization ( grouping ) , and prioritization ( voting ) . EMS has been shown to improve the quality of group decisions and the time needed to reach agreements . However , the hardware needed to run these systems makes them prohibitively expensive and impossible to use in many settings . They are also better suited for certain types of structured meetings , such as those focussed on decision making or idea generation . NotePals imposes less meeting structure and supports a wide variety of meeting styles . Xerox PARC has a long tradition of exploring the value of collaborative tools for meeting capture [ 20 , 18 ] and “salvage” [ 15 ] . Unlike the Arizona tools , these tools support unstructured , sketch - based interfaces . Although NotePals is fairly limited compared to many of these systems , it was influenced by there informal interfaces . Again , NotePals attacks the fundamental problems of these systems : cost and ubiquity . Meeting rooms equipped with LiveBoards [ 4 ] and other special equipment are expensive and do not support our goal of allowing meetings to occur whenever , wherever . NotePals has some similarities to Wang’s Freestyle [ 11 ] , which allowed users to share ink - based annotations of documents on the desktop . Unlike NotePals , Freestyle does not automatically organize notes . Personal Note Taking Tools NotePals shares many characteristics in common with previous personal note taking tools . Dynomite [ 23 ] and the Audio Notebook [ 21 ] both rely on ink - based notes without handwriting recognition . Dynomite runs on pen - based laptop computers using a traditional windowing user interface , while the Audio Notebook combines a paper - based notebook with specialized audio hardware . Both of these tools are focussed on synchronizing audio recordings with personal notes . Dynomite’s mechanism for tagging chunks of ink with labels influenced our inclusion of stationery types for notes . Other research systems use standard ink formats for exchanging ink - based notes made on larger PDAs with desktop machines [ 17 ] . NotePals also has similarities to some existing commercial note taking applications . In particular , a cursor is used to allow easy entry of ink - based notes in both the Newton note taking application and in aha ! InkWriter [ 8 ] . The Newton can reduce the text at the insertion point by either 50 % or 75 % . Both the Newton and InkWriter automatically fill text that reaches the edge of the page , as in a traditional word processor . The Vmacs system [ 10 ] takes a radically different approach from NotePals . Instead of offering a more natural user interface for meeting participants to take notes , it offers a powerful and efficient note taking interface for an expert user , such as the meeting scribe or facilitator . Though an interesting approach , we did not want to rely on having an expert user around to take notes and we wanted to support informal , ink - based note taking . NotePals differs from all of these note taking tools by its support for creating shared , collaborative notes . It also differs by its support for very small PDAs . FUTURE WORK Our usage experience showed us a number of ways to improve the note - taking interface , and we hope to integrate these ideas into our design . We also see many interesting ways to explore NotePals beyond these simple fixes . Note taking is a personal activity , and one person’s view of transpired ideas and information might not match another’s . It is not clear how a person’s note taking behavior will change when he is aware that a colleague is taking notes at the same time . We would like to investigate how the ease of creating shared notes affects note taking behavior . It is also unclear how to deal with conflicting perspectives in shared notes . Perhaps the note repository should be organized more like a web - based discussion group so that differences can be resolved online . After uploading to the repository , more CPU - intensive algorithms could be run . We have considered adding a ink - based search mechanism [ 19 ] or possibly combining off - line handwriting recognition with a clustering algorithm to extract or group related notes . These issues need to be examined further . Another interesting area to explore with NotePals is synchronization with other media such as typed meeting agendas , presentation slides , or audio . The timestamp for each note could be used to link it to a specific moment in an audio record , or perhaps the presentation slide that was being presented at the moment the note was taken [ 15 ] . Another approach would be to upload documents such as presentations or agendas to both the web repository and the Pilot , allowing users to annotate them . Other researchers have found that students find some value in electronic notes that are taken on top of a copy of the presenter’s material [ 1 ] . CONCLUSIONS NotePals offers a lightweight , inexpensive way for people to walk away from a meeting with shared “captured” information . The shared notes generated by groups using NotePals overcome many of the problems with traditional meeting notes such as uneven note taking responsibility and limited points of view . It uses simple , inexpensive equipment that can be obtained by many workgroups and supports any style of meeting in any setting . NotePals’ informal , ink - based user interface combined with a focus plus context view avoids many of the problems with taking notes on small PDAs , letting users focus their attention on taking notes . While it appears to take somewhat longer to write on NotePals than on paper , most users are able to take legible notes in a reasonable amount of time . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Thanks to Chris Long for including our questions in his PDA survey . We also thank Gene Golovchinsky , who had many fruitful discussions about NotePals with us . We also appreciated the helpful comments of Jock Mackinlay and Tom Moran . Thanks to Joe Sullivan for supporting this project . REFERENCES 1 . Gregory D . Abowd , Christopher G . Atkeson , Cindy Hmelo Ami Feinstein , Rob Kooper , Sue Long , Nitin ` ` Nick ' ' Sawhney and Mikiya Tani . “Teaching and Learning as Multimedia Authoring : The Classroom 2000 Project” . Proceedings of Multimedia ' 96 , November , 1996 . 2 . Mindy Blodgett . “Laptops Packing More Bang , ” Computerworld . May 26 , 1997 . http : / / cwlive . cw . com : 8080 / home / print9497 . nsf / All / SL21note . 3 . David Einstein . “Shirt - Pocket Computing Revival : U . S . Robotics Device Jots Notes , Keeps a Calendar” . San Francisco Chronicle . Tuesday , June 17 . C4 . http : / / www . sfgate . com / cgi - bin / chronicle / article . cgi ? file = BU44818 . DTL & directory = / chronicl e / archive / 1997 / 06 / 17 . 4 . Scott Elrod et . al . “Liveboard : A Large Interactive Display Supporting Group Meetings , Presentations and Remote Collaboration” . Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM CHI ' 92 , Monterey , CA , May 3 – 7 , 1992 . pp . 599 - 607 . 5 . George W . Furnas . “Generalized Fisheye Views . ” Proceedings of ACM CHI ' 86 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 16 - 23 . 1986 . 6 . David Goldberg and Cate Richardson . “Touch - Typing with a Stylus . ” Proceedings of ACM INTERCHI ' 93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 80 - 87 . 1993 . 7 . Jonathan Grudin , Ed . Groupware and Cooperative Work : Problems and Prospects . The Art of Human - Computer Interface Design . New York : Addison - Wesley . 1990 . 8 . John Jerney . “aha ' s InkWriter for Magic Cap , ” Mobilis : The Mobile Computing Lifestyle Magazine . ( August ) : p 5 , 1995 . http : / / www . volksware . com / mobilis / august . 95 / aha1 . htm # xaha1 . 9 . Greg King . Personal Communication . August , 1997 . 10 . Fred Lakin , John Wambaugh , Larry Leifer , Dave Cannon and Cecilia Sivard . “The Electronic Design Notebook : Performing Medium and Processing Medium , ” The Visual Computer . 5 ( 4 ) : pp . 214 - 226 , 1989 . 11 . Stephen R . Levine and Susan F . Ehrlich , Eds . The Freestyle System : A Design Perspective . Human - Machine Interactive Systems . Plenum . 1991 . 12 . Allan Christian Long , Jr . , James A . Landay and Lawrence A . Rowe . “PDA and Gesture Use in Practice : Insights for Designers of Pen - based User Interfaces” . Proceedings of Submitted to CHI ' 98 , 13 . I . Scott MacKenzie and S . Zhang . “The Immediate Usability of Graffiti” . Proceedings of Graphis Interface ' 97 , Canadian Information Processing Society . 1997 . pp . 129 - 137 . 14 . Marilyn M . Mantei . “Observation of Executives Using a Computer Supported Meeting Environment , ” International Journal of Decision Support Systems . 5 ( June ) : pp . 153 - 166 , 1989 . Elsevier . 15 . Tomas P . Moran et . al . “ " I ' ll Get That Off the Audio " : A Case Study of Salvaging Multimedia Meeting Records” . Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 97 , Atlanta , GA , March 22 - 27 , 1997 . pp . 202 - 209 . 16 . Jay F . Nunamaker , Alan R . Dennis , Joseph S . Valacich , Douglas R . Vogel and Joey F . George . “Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Group Work , ” Communications of the ACM . 34 ( 7 ) : pp . 40 - 61 , July , 1991 . 17 . Kaori Oomika , Atsushi Naito and Masaki Nakagawa . “Idea Memo PDA in Scalable Handwriting Interfaces” . Proceedings of Seventh International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( Design of Computing Systems : Social and Ergonomic Considerations ) , HCI International ' 97 , San Francisco , CA , Elsevier . August 24 - 29 , 1997 . pp . 455 - 458 . 18 . Elin Ronby Pedersen , Kim McCall , Thomas P . Moran and Frank G . Halasz . “Tivoli : An Electronic Whiteboard for Informal Workgroup Meetings . ” Proceedings of ACM INTERCHI ' 93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . pp . 391 - 398 . 1993 . 19 . Alex Poon , Karon Weber and Todd Cass . “Scribbler : A Tool for Searching Digital Ink” . Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 95 , Denver , CO , May 7 - 11 , 1995 . pp . 252 - 253 . 20 . M . Stefik , D . G . Bobrow , G . Foster , S . Lanning and D . Tatar . “WYSIWIS Revised : Early Experiences with Multiuser Interfaces , ” ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems . 5 ( 2 ) : pp . 147 - 167 , 1987 . 21 . Lisa J . Stifelman . “Augmenting Real - World Objects : A Paper - based Audio Notebook” . Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 96 , Vancouver , Canada , April 13 - 18 , 1996 . pp . 199 - 200 . 22 . Joanne Taaffe . “Windows CE Drives Rise in Handheld Device Sales , ” Computerworld . May 21 , 1997 . http : / / cwlive . cw . com : 8080 / home / online9697 . nsf / All / 970521wind ows . 23 . Lynn D . Wilcox , Bill N . Schilit and Nitin " Nick " Sawhney . “Dynomite : A Dynamically Organized Ink and Audio Notebook” . Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ' 97 , Atlanta , GA , March 22 - 27 , 1997 . pp . 186 - 193 .