microRNA - dependent regulation of biomechanical genes establishes tissue stiffness homeostasis Albertomaria Moro 1 , # , Tristan Discroll 1 , # , Liana C . Boraas 1 , William Armero 1 , Dionna M . Kasper 1 , Nicolas Baeyens 2 , 3 , Charlene Jouy 3 , Venkatesh Mallikarjun 3 , 4 , Joe Swift 3 , 4 , Sang Joon Ahn 1 , Donghoon Lee 5 , 6 , Jing Zhang 5 , 6 , Mengting Gu 5 , 6 , Mark Gerstein 5 , 6 , 7 , Martin Schwartz 1 , 3 , 8 , * , and Stefania Nicoli 1 , 9 , 10 , * 1 Yale Cardiovascular Research Center , Department of Internal Medicine , Section of Cardiology , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06511 , USA 2 Current address : Laboratoire de Physiologie et Pharmacologie , Faculty of Medicine , Université Libre De Bruxelles , Brussels , Belgium 3 Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell - Matrix Research , Manchester Academic Health Science Centre , University of Manchester , Manchester M13 9PL , UK 4 Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine , School of Biological Sciences , Faculty of Biology , Medicine and Health , Manchester Academic Health Science Centre , University of Manchester , Manchester M13 9PL , UK 5 Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 , USA 6 Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 , USA 7 Department of Computer Science , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 , USA 8 Departments of Cell Biology and Biomedical Engineering , Yale University Users may view , print , copy , and download text and data - mine the content in such documents , for the purposes of academic research , subject always to the full Conditions of use : http : / / www . nature . com / authors / editorial _ policies / license . html # terms * Correspondence should be addressed to MS and SN . Author contributions . SN and MS conceived the project . AM and TD performed experiments , analyzed data and AM developed the computational data analysis . WA performed and analyzed zebrafish fin fold regeneration experiments . LB performed and analyzed the experiments in Supplementary Fig 2b and c , Supplementary figure 3b – d and 6 . SJA performed cell culture experiments in Supplementary Fig . 3a . NB and CJ performed the 3D cell - culture experiments and analyzed the data . DL , MG , JZ , and MG develop the sequence data processing , analysis ( mapping , peak calling ) of the AGO2 - HITS - CLIP experiment . VM and JS performed mass spectrometry proteomic analysis . DMK made the miRNA and RNA - sequencing libraries . AM , TD , MS and SN designed the experiments . MS and SN wrote the manuscript . All the authors edited the manuscript . # These authors contributed equally . Data Availability Data availability RNA seq and sRNA - seq data for endothelial cell that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) under accession codes GSE99686 and GSE11021 . sRNA - seq for HDF have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) under accession code GSE123008 . Data availability for HITS - CLIP data heve been deposited in Sequence Read Archive ( SRA ) under accession code PRJNA507245 . Proteomics data has been uploaded to the PRIDE depository ( PXD011882 ) and results are summarized in Supplemental Table 5 . Source data for all Figures and Supplementary Figures have been provided as Supplementary Table 8 . Competing Financial Interests . The authors have no competing financial , professional or personal interests . HHS Public Access Author manuscript Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . Published in final edited form as : Nat Cell Biol . 2019 March ; 21 ( 3 ) : 348 – 358 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41556 - 019 - 0272 - y . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 9 Department of Genetics , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06510 , USA 10 Department of Pharmacology , Yale University School of Medicine , New Haven , CT 06510 , USA Abstract Vertebrate tissues exhibit mechanical homeostasis , showing stable stiffness and tension over time and recovery after changes in mechanical stress . However , the regulatory pathways that mediate these effects are unknown . A comprehensive identification of Argonaute - 2 ( AGO2 ) - associated microRNAs and mRNAs in endothelial cells identified a network of 122 microRNA families that target 73 mRNAs encoding cytoskeletal , contractile , adhesive and extracellular matrix ( CAM ) proteins . These microRNAs increased in cells plated on stiff vs . soft substrates , consistent with homeostasis , and suppressed targets via microRNA recognition elements ( MREs ) within the 3’UTRs of CAM mRNAs . Inhibition of DROSHA or AGO2 , or disruption of MREs within individual target mRNAs such as Connective Tissue Growth Factor ( CTGF ) , induced hyper - adhesive , hyper - contractile phenotypes in endothelial and fibroblast cells in vitro , and increased tissue stiffness , contractility and extracellular matrix ( ECM ) deposition in the zebrafish fin - fold in vivo . Thus , a network of microRNAs buffers CAM expression to mediate tissue mechanical homeostasis . Introduction Cells sense physical forces , including the stiffness of their ECM , through mechanosensitive integrins , their associated proteins , and actomyosin . These components transduce physical forces into biochemical signals that regulate gene expression and cell function 1 – 3 . Tissues maintain nearly constant physical properties in the face of growth , injury , ECM turnover , and altered external forces ( e . g . from blood pressure , tissue hydration or body weight ) 1 , 4 , 5 . These effects imply tissue mechanical homeostasis , in which cells sense mechanical loads , due to both external and internal forces , and adjust their rates of matrix synthesis , degradation and organization to keep tissue properties constant . Cell contractility is critical in this process , as it is a key component of both the stiffness - sensing regulatory pathways and the matrix assembly process that governs resultant matrix properties , including stiffness 2 , 6 . Mechanical homeostasis requires that integrin mechanotransduction pathways mediate negative feedback regulation of the contractile and biosynthetic pathways to maintain optimal tissue stiffness . That is , too soft / low force triggers increased matrix synthesis and contractility , while too stiff / high force triggers the opposite . However , in vitro studies have mainly elucidated positive feedback ( or feed forward ) circuits , where rigid substrates or high external forces increase actin myosin contraction , focal adhesions and ECM synthesis 7 . This type of mechanotransduction signaling characterizes fibrotic tissues , where sustained contractility and excessive ECM compromise tissue function . Very little is known about negative feedback pathways that are critical to establish proper stiffness / contractility in normal , healthy tissues . microRNAs ( miRNAs ) are processed via the ribonucleases DROSHA / DRG8 and DICER 8 into mature 20 – 21 nucleotide ( nt ) RNA that recognize abundant and conserved 7 – 8 nt Moro et al . Page 2 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t miRNA responsive elements ( MREs ) within mRNAs . MREs reside mainly in the 3’ untranslated regions ( 3’UTR ) of mRNAs and base - pair with the 5’ miRNA mature sequence ( SEED region ) 9 . The miRNA - MRE pairs are recognized by the AGO2 protein complex , resulting in mRNA destabilization and / or reduced protein expression 8 . miRNAs can thus buffer fluctuations in protein levels caused by changes in transcriptional inputs or extracellular factors . Although miRNAs participate in regulatory feedback loops that contribute to homeostasis in multiple contexts 10 – 12 , their role in mechanical homeostasis is currently untested . Here we describe a miRNA - cytoskeletal - matrix - actin ( CAM ) mRNA regulatory network that counteracts the effects of the ECM stiffness to promote the mechanical stability of cells and tissues , in both in vitro and in vivo models . Results miRNAs preferentially bind to CAM 3’UTRs . To investigate potential roles for miRNAs in mechanical homeostasis , we analyzed miRNA - mRNA interactions transcriptome - wide using an AGO2 - HITS - CLIP approach 13 . AGO2 - bound miRNAs / mRNAs were isolated from two unrelated human endothelial cells ( EC ) types , which are known to respond to mechanical forces , including ECM loads 3 , 14 . We exposed cultured human umbilical artery ECs ( HUAECs ) and human venous umbilical ECs ( HUVECs ) to UV light to cross - link protein - RNA complexes . Subsequently , we immunoprecipitated AGO2 - RNA complexes , digested unbound RNA ( schematic in Fig . 1a ) , and prepared cDNA libraries containing small ( ~ 30 nt AGO2 - miRNA ) and large RNAs ( ~ 70 nt AGO2 - target mRNA ) ( Supplementary Fig . 1a ) . To identify conserved AGO2 binding sites , we performed high throughput sequencing of three libraries for each cell type and selected sequence reads shared in all six samples . We aligned these AGO2 binding sites to human miRNA and genome databases , and identified 30 – 70 nt interval ( peaks ) significantly enriched above background ( p - value < 0 . 05 , Supplementary Fig . 1a and Methods ) . This analysis uncovered 316 AGO2 - binding peaks within the 3’UTRs of 127 human genes . These peaks were preferentially located right after the stop codon or right before the polyadenylation site ( Fig . 1b and , Supplementary Table 1 ) , consistent with the enrichment of regulatory miRNA binding sites that destabilize mRNAs 15 . Importantly , the human AGO2 - binding peaks within these 30 – 70 nt sequences were highly conserved across hundreds of species ( Fig . 1b ) , suggesting functional significance . Gene ontology ( GO ) analysis of AGO2 - bound transcripts revealed that 73 of the 127 target mRNAs encode actin - and microtubule - associated proteins , focal adhesion proteins , ECM proteins and functionally related regulatory proteins ( Fig . 1c , Supplementary Fig . 1b ) . We termed this group the “cytoskeleton - adhesion - matrix” ( CAM ) genes . The dramatic enrichment of CAM transcripts in the AGO2 complex is not accounted for by their abundance ; indeed , the most transcriptionally active genes in cultured ECs pertained to cell division ( Supplementary Fig . 1b ) , which were under - represented in the identified AGO2 - binding transcripts . No significant GO terms were associated with the remaining genes identified from the AGO2 - HITS - CLIP . Moro et al . Page 3 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t We then searched for specific MRE sequences in AGO2 - peaks localized in the 3’UTRs of the CAM transcripts . We identified 122 miRNA families from AGO2 - HITS - CLIP ( Supplementary Table 2 ) that recognize one or more AGO2 - CAM MREs ( Fig . 1c , Supplementary Table 3 ) . Cytoscape software revealed a highly interconnected network of miRNAs binding to CAM transcripts ( Fig . 1c ) . Altogether , these data reveal pervasive miRNA - mediated post - transcriptional regulation of multiple CAM genes in ECs . Post - transcriptional regulation of CAM genes is sensitive to matrix stiffness . CAM proteins are highly conserved and play crucial roles in virtually every cell type as determinants of ECM organization and tissue stiffness 16 . This important function led us to hypothesize that the CAM mRNA - miRNA regulome is mechanosensitive . To test this , we plated ECs on substrates of varying stiffness and used a Sensor - Seq strategy 17 to assess post - transcriptional regulation mediated by 97 selected MREs within 51 different CAM 3’UTRs ( Supplementary Table 4 ) . For this purpose , we created a “CAM - sensor library” . Each AGO2 – 3’UTR - peak containing at least one MRE was cloned downstream of an mCherry reporter in a bidirectional lentiviral vector 18 that co - expressed a GFP transcript lacking a 3’UTR ( schematic in Fig . 2a ) . miRNAs that target the MRE thus reduce mCherry levels , leading to a decreased mCherry / GFP ratio . ECs infected with this CAM - sensor library at low levels ( to avoid multiply infected cells ) were seeded for 48 hours on substrates with rigidity of 3 kPa ( kilopascal ) or 30 kPa , which approximate “soft” and “rigid” tissues 19 , respectively ( Supplementary Fig . 2a ) . miRNA activity on the MRE sensors was compared with the steady state level of CAM proteins , as well as the expression of CAM RNAs and miRNAs , in the same cellular settings . Thus , proteomics , RNA and miRNA sequencing were assessed in parallel . To evaluate CAM sensor reporters , ECs were separated by fluorescence - based sorting into bins according to the mCherry / GFP ratio , using an empty - sensor as a negative control ( not suppressed ) and a miR - 125 - sensor as a positive control ( strongly suppressed ) . Thus , bins were defined as “strongly suppressed” , “suppressed” , “mildly suppressed” , and “not suppressed” relative to these internal standards ( Fig . 2b ) . Wild - type ECs expressing the CAM sensor library showed a broad distribution between the suppressed and not suppressed bins , on both soft and stiff substrates ( Fig . 2b ) . Importantly , CRISPR / Cas9 - mediated disruption of AGO2 diminished the miRNA levels in ECs ( Supplementary Fig . 2b and c ) , and significantly increased the population of ‘not suppressed’ cells ( Supplementary Fig . 2d ) . Thus , miRNAs are required for post - transcriptional inhibition of CAM - sensors . Sensor vectors from sorted cells were then isolated from each bin and barcoded using PCR primers that recognized each cloned CAM MRE and were compatible with high throughput sequencing . Combining global miRNA profiling ( Supplementary table 6 ) and MRE - reads from Sensor - Seq revealed strong correlations between suppression of CAM sensors and the level of the respective matching miRNAs ( Fig . 2c ) . Notably , both miRNA levels and CAM reporter suppression were present on soft substrate at baseline and elevated in cells on stiff substrates ( Fig . 2c ) . Interestingly , the levels of most CAM mRNA and respective proteins ( Supplementary table 5 ) were also generally higher in stiff conditions ( Fig . 2c ) . These results suggest transcriptional co - regulation between miRNAs and CAM mRNA targets on Moro et al . Page 4 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t stiff substrates . Thus , the CAM MRE - miRNA network has the characteristics of a mechanoregulatory buffer of structural protein coding genes . Loss of miRNAs biogenesis leads to ECs contractility . To evaluate the function of this miRNA regulatory network , we first examined ECs lacking AGO2 or DROSHA , which have diminished miRNA levels ( Supplementary Fig . 2c and 20 ) . We stained cells for F - ACTIN , the focal adhesion marker PAXILLIN , and the mechanosensitive transcription factor YAP 21 , and also measured traction stresses using elastic substrates with embedded beads 22 . Relative to control cells , AGO2 mutant cells showed increased actin stress fibers , focal adhesions , YAP nuclear localization and traction stress on both 3 or 30 kPa substrates , as well as on polyacrylamide substrates over a wider range of stiffnesses ( Fig . 3a and Supplementary Fig . 3a ) . Consistent with these observations , immunofluorescence analysis revealed that cell spreading and YAP nuclear activation were inversely correlated with AGO2 protein levels ( Supplementary Fig . 3b ) . ECs lacking DROSHA were similarly hyper - adhesive and hyper - contractile , supporting that diminished miRNA levels are the primary cause of these effects ( Fig . 3b ) . Complementary to this finding , proteomic analysis of ECs lacking miRNAs showed increased levels of several CAM proteins , reminiscent of the increased CAM levels in ECs plated on 30 kPa versus 3 kPa substrates ( Fig . 3c and Supplementary table 5 ) . Together , these data show that the loss of miRNA - mediated suppression of mRNAs increases CAM protein levels and enhances ECs contractility and adhesion . Blocking individual CAM - miRNA interactions affects ECs mechanotransduction . To further validate the function of the miRNA - CAM mRNA network , we disrupted individual CAM - miRNA interactions . We chose nine of the mechanosensitive CAM MREs ( stars in Fig . 2c , and Supplementary table 6 in which the MRE was within 20 nt of a protospacer sequence ( PAM ) and thus targetable by a guide RNA ( gRNA ) and Cas9 . Genome - wide analyses of CAM MREs in ECs treated with gRNA / CRIPSR / Cas9 revealed that nearly 75 % of insertions and deletions were within the desired MRE region ( ±20 base pairs ) ( Fig . 4a and Supplementary Fig . 4a ) . To test whether MRE - proximal mutations increased expression of the cognate proteins , we analyzed CAM protein levels via immunofluorescence and Western blot . Individual CAM levels increased in the respective MRE mutants compared to control cells ( Fig . 4b ) , consistent with loss of miRNA - mediated suppression 23 . Finally we tested the mechanical properties of each CAM MRE mutant population and found , to varying extents , that cell area , YAP nuclear localization and / or traction stresses were significantly higher compared to control targeted cells ( Fig . 4d ) . While multiple genes clearly contributed to each effect , the gene whose MRE mutation gave the most consistent results across multiple assays was CTGF . CTGF is a matrix protein that modulates the interaction of cells with the ECM 24 , suggesting that it is a component of a protein - based regulatory network and likely functions via receptor - mediated signaling to control these functions . Blocking CTGF miRNA - repression in ECs via a target protector RNA oligonucleotide or MRE mutation had similar effects ( Fig . 4d and Supplementary Fig . Moro et al . Page 5 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 4b ) , providing independent support . Notably , no single CAM MRE mutation reproduced the strong phenotype observed after AGO2 downregulation , suggesting that a network of miRNA - CAM mRNA interactions mediates mechanical homeostasis in cells . miRNA - dependent regulation limits contractility in 2D and 3D fibroblast models . We next tested the generality of the identified miRNA - CAM gene regulations using fibroblasts as a second model system . Profiling of miRNAs in Human Dermal Fibroblasts ( HDFs ) seeded on 3 vs . 30 kPa substrates showed that miRNAs targeting CAM genes are upregulated on stiff substrates similarly to ECs ( Supplementary Fig . 5a and Supplementary table 7 ) . Depletion of AGO2 in HDFs also increased F - ACTIN , focal adhesions , traction forces and YAP localization compared to control cells ( Fig . 5a and Supplementary Fig . 5b ) . To determine if the miRNA - mediated network functions at the tissue level , we examined primary mouse dermal fibroblasts in a 3 - dimensional ( 3D ) matrix . Cells suspended in attached fibrin gels contract and replace the fibrin with their own matrix over about 5 days ( Fig . 5b ) , providing a 3D model of cell behavior . Transduction of freshly isolated cells with a CRISPR / Cas9 / gRNA virus targeting Ago2 reduced Ago2 protein levels by ~ 50 – 60 % ( Supplementary Fig . 5c ) . Ago2 - depleted fibroblasts in 3D matrix generated tissue constructs with reduced diameters but no significant change in cell numbers ( Fig . 5b ) . Immunostaining transverse sections of these constructs confirmed the decreased diameter , based on staining with the cytoskeleton protein Vimentin ( Fig . 5c ) . Staining for phosphorylated myosin light chain was elevated , consistent with increased contractility ( Fig . 5c ) . These data suggest that reducing miRNA - dependent regulation stimulates fibroblast contraction of 3D matrix . miRNA - dependent regulation controls tissue stiffness and wound healing in vivo . We next tested whether miRNAs regulate mechanical homeostasis in vivo using the zebrafish fin fold regeneration model 25 . The fin fold is a non - vascularized appendage comprised of a few layers of epidermis and fibroblast - like cells 26 . Wounding triggers a healing response mediated by a conserved and rapid matrix remodeling - and actomyosin - based process that involves formation of a provisional matrix , inflammatory cell invasion , cell migration , proliferation and resolution 27 . To investigate miRNA - dependent regulation of mechanical homeostasis in zebrafish , we first examined embryos that carry a maternal zygotic homozygous mutation in ago2 ( mz ago2 − / − ) 28 , which show reduced levels of Ago2 and of miRNAs ( Supplementary Fig . 6a ) . To evaluate miRNA activity in the fin fold , we co - injected an miRNA - sensitive GFP mRNA , containing three perfect miR - 24 MREs within the 3’UTR 29 , with an miRNA - insensitive mCherry control mRNA . As expected , mz ago2 mutants showed elevated levels of GFP , but not of mCherry , when compared to wild - type ( WT ) embryos , confirming reduced miRNA - mediated suppression ( Supplementary Fig . 6b ) . We then quantified tissue stiffness using atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) - based nanoindentation on the central region of the fin fold . The appearance of this tissue was indistinguishable between genotypes ( Fig . 6a ) , ruling out obvious developmental defects . However , the elastic modulus was ~ 30 % higher in mz ago2 − / − than WT embryos , indicating increased mechanical rigidity ( Fig . 6a ) . Importantly , normal tissue stiffness was Moro et al . Page 6 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t restored upon injection of in vitro transcribed mRNA encoding human AGO2 ( hsAGO2 mRNA ) , demonstrating that the stiffness of this tissue is dependent upon the level of Ago2 ( Fig . 6a ) . Following amputation , mz ago2 mutants exhibited slower repair than WT embryos , which was rescued by hsAGO2 mRNA ( Fig . 6b ) . WT and mz ago2 − / − wounds did not display differences in cell cycle progression , detected by Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen ( PCNA ) staining 30 , or in apoptosis , detected by TUNEL 31 assay ( Supplementary Fig . 6 c and d ) . These results support that miRNA - dependent suppression restrains tissue stiffness and contributes to tissue healing in vivo . miRNA - dependent CAM gene regulation limits tissue contractility during wound healing . Wounding triggers increased contractility and matrix rigidity as a rapid , first response 32 . According to our notion of mechanical homeostasis , these changes should activate negative feedback mechanisms that restore mechanical equilibrium 3 . We therefore examined matrix , actomyosin activation and the mechanosensitive translocation of Yap 21 before and after wounding the zebrafish fin fold in WT vs . mz ago2 mutant . As expected 27 , WT embryos showed increased staining for pMyosin , Ctgfa and Fibronectin 27 , 32 in the wound area between 0 . 5 and 2 hours post amputation ( hpa ) , ( Fig . 7a and b , Supplementary Fig . 7a ) . In comparison , mz ago2 − / − wounded fins showed strikingly elevated and persistent pMyosin staining at both 0 . 5 and 2 hpa , and higher Ctgfa and Fibronectin at 2 hpa ( Fig . 7a and b , Supplementary Fig . 7a ) . Consistent with the increase in tissue stiffness ( Fig . 6a ) , mz ago2 − / − showed higher basal Yap nuclear localization compared to WT embryos that further increased at 0 . 5 hpa and persisted at 2 hpa ( Fig . 7c and Supplementary Fig . 7b ) . Thus , loss of miRNA - mediated suppression leads to an exaggerated mechanical response and impaired mechanical resolution during wound healing . To correlate these effects with regulation of individual CAM genes , we generated zebrafish embryos carrying mutations in the two 3’UTR MREs of the ctgfa gene ( Supplementary Fig . 7 c and d ) . These MREs are conserved in the human CTGF 3’ UTR , and their mutation had the largest effect in vitro ( Fig . 4c ) . Accordingly , a GFP sensor mRNA bearing a ctga 3’UTR fragment showed reduced expression in WT relative to mz ago2 − / − embryos , which required the MRE sites ( Supplementary Fig . 7c ) . These results support miRNA - dependent inhibition of ctgfa via the MREs in zebrafish . Embryos with mutated ctgfa MREs showed persistent p - Myosin activation compared to WT by 2 hpa ( Fig . 7b ) , consistent with the induction of Ctgfa at 2 hpa in the mz ago2 mutant ( Fig . 7a ) . However , no other differences were detected in the ctgfa MRE mutant embryos ( Fig . 7a and c , and Supplementary Figs . 6c , d and 7a , b ) . These results support that post - transcriptional regulation of ctgfa contributes to specific Ago2 - mediated mechanical effects within the miRNA - CAM mRNA network . Discussion We report that an unbiased analysis of miRNAs and their target genes in ECs , together with functional assays in several biological systems , reveal the existence of a mechanosensitive miRNA - based program that counteracts cell adhesion , cytoskeletal , contractile and matrix protein expression . This system functions in several cell types , across multiple species , and appears to be conserved throughout vertebrate evolution . Importantly , most of the protein - Moro et al . Page 7 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t coding genes for synthesis and assembly of stiff ECM are targeted by miRNAs that are upregulated on stiff substrates . Thus , a “buffer” is generated , in which increased matrix stiffness upregulates both cytoskeleton - adhesion - matrix gene transcription and the miRNAs that suppress these transcripts . This miRNA - regulome has the molecular and functional characteristics of a homeostatic mechanism in which changes in cell contraction and matrix are counteracted to maintain normal tissue stiffness ( Fig . 7d ) . ECs in vivo are also subject to wall stretch and fluid shear stress from blood pressure and blood flow , which were not examined here but which are likely to interact with cell responses to matrix stiffness . Interestingly , both of these variables are subject to negative feedback regulation 4 , consistent with the general importance of mechanical homeostasis . While the current studies dissected the post - transcriptional regulation of CAM proteins in stiffness homeostasis , a deeper understanding of these mechanisms will need to address the interplay between RNA regulation , stiffness , shear stress in endothelial and other cells subject to external forces . A network - mediated mechanism for stiffness homeostasis , rather than regulation of one or a few CAM genes , would be expected to increase the robustness of the system . Multiple miRNAs can regulate a large cohort of CAM genes via different MREs , while different cell types can do so by controlling expression and processing of tissue - specific mature miRNAs 33 – 35 . We speculate , however , that these miRNA networks are likely to be sub - elements within a larger and more robust network of negative and positive circuits , connected by multiple nodes , that mediate tissue homeostasis over the multiple decades of human life 36 . Such nodes could develop within a hierarchy of epigenetic factors in which , for example , the activation of YAP / TAZ and its direct target gene CTGF , may be one of the upstream components . A role for miRNAs in tissue mechanical homeostasis is supported by the widespread de - regulation of miRNAs during lung , renal , cardiac and liver fibrosis , including miRNAs that target ECM proteins 37 – 39 . Idiopathic lung fibrosis is also linked to reduced levels of miRNAs that target ECM , cytoskeletal and TGF β pathways genes 40 – 42 . All of these studies reported reduced levels of miR - 29 species , in contrast to our finding that in normal cells , miR - 29 species are increased on stiff substrates . These results are consistent with the notion that fibrotic disease involves disruption of normal stiffness miRNA - dependent homeostasis 43 . Cells and tissues with impaired regulation of miRNAs upon AGO2 or DROSHA partial loss of function show defective adaptation to stiffness . The degree of such effects could be related to the corresponding miRNAs levels . Although model organisms that completely lack miRNAs do not develop properly , heterozygous mutants of Ago2 do not manifest obvious phenotypes 44 . Further studies will be necessary to test whether this model has tissue stiffness defects in normal conditions and / or respond abnormally to perturbations such as wounding or during aging . miRNA - dependent post - transcriptional regulation of structural proteins provides a concrete molecular mechanism that can explain how healthy tissues sustain optimal mechanical Moro et al . Page 8 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t properties . These findings are therefore an important step toward understanding the pathological alterations resulting in fibrotic and related diseases . Characterizing the stiffness - dependent RNA metabolism of cytoskeleton and matrix transcripts , their possible regulation under other physical forces , and elucidating the complete regulatory network that mediates long - term mechanical robustness are the essential tasks for future studies . Methods Cell Culture Human umbilical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) and human umbilical artery endothelial cells ( HUAECs ) were purchased from Cell Applications Inc . ( Cat # 200 – 05n and Cat # 202 – 05n ) . Endothelial cells were cultured on dishes coated with 0 . 2 % w / v gelatin ( 10 min at room temperature ( rt ) in PBS , Sigma ) in endothelial cell growth medium ( EGM Bullet Kit , LONZA ) . For HITS - CLIP assays , cells were used at P3 ( split 1 : 3 and 1 : 5 ) before UV crosslinking . For other assays , cells were split 1 : 3 twice per week and used until passage 5 . Human dermal fibroblasts ( HDFs ) were purchased from ATCC ( Cat # PCS - 201 – 010 , Lot # 63014910 ) and cultured on 0 . 2 % w / v gelatin - coated dishes in fibroblast growth medium ( Fibroblast Growth Kit - Low Serum , ATCC , PCS - 201 – 041 ) . HDFs were split 1 : 10 twice per week and used until passage 6 . Primary fibroblasts Primary dermal fibroblasts for 3D fibrin gel assays were obtained from 5 to 8 week old C57BL / 6 mice ( Envigo , UK ) . This study is compliant with all relevant ethical regulations regarding animal research . All procedures were in accordance with UK Home Office regulation and UK animals ( Scientific Procedures ) Act of 1986 for the care and the use of animals . Mice were sacrificed by a schedule 1 procedure by trained personnel . Mouse hair was removed and skin dissected in Hank’s buffer supplemented with antibiotic and antimycotic solution ( Sigma ) . Fat and excess connective tissues were removed , the dermis was minced with a scalpel and digested in buffer containing 0 . 25 % trypsin without EDTA ( Gibco ) , collagenase IV ( 4 mg / mL ( Worthington ) and calcium chloride ( 0 . 3 mg / mL , Sigma ) for 3 h at 37 °C with agitation during the last hour . After mechanical dissociation , cells were passed through a cell strainer ( 100 μm , Fischer Scientific ) . Cells were centrifuged at 1800 rpm for 5 min , resuspended in DMEM supplemented with 10 % Fetal Bovine Serum ( Sigma ) , Penicillin ( 100U / mL ) , Streptomycin ( 100 ug / mL ) ( Gibco ) and 1 % L - glutamine , and seeded in 75 cm 2 tissue culture flasks . Medium was changed at 3 h and subsequently changed once a day . AGO2 - HITS - CLIP HITS - CLIP experiment was performed as previously described 47 . Sub - confluent endothelial cells ( ECs ) in EGM were UV crosslinked two times with 400 mJ / cm 2 in Stratalinker ( model 2400 , Stratagene ) , lysed and treated with DNase ( 1 : 1000 Promega RQ1 DNase ) and RNase T1 ( 1 : 100 , Thermo Fisher ) . Cell lysates and Protein A Dynabeads ( Invitrogen ) complexed with Ab - panAGO - 2A8 ( MABE56 Millipore ) were incubated at 4°C for 4 h . Beads were subsequently washed and ligated with 3’ - P32 radiolabeled linker ( RL3 , Supplementary table 6 ) . SDS - PAGE was performed using NuPage 4 – 12 % Bis - Tris Gel ( NP0321 Moro et al . Page 9 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Invitrogen ) , and proteins were transferred onto Pure Nitrocellulose membrane ( BioTrace ) using NuPAGE transfer buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions . High performance autoradiography film was exposed overnight at −80°C . The bands corresponding to AGO2 - miRNAs ( ~ 110 kDa ) , and AGO2 : RNA ( ~ 130 kDa ) were cut and treated with proteinase K ( Roche ) to degrade proteins . RNAs were extracted and purified via phenol - chloroform , then a 5’ - linker oligonucleotide ( RL5 , Supplementary table 6 ) was ligated to the ends . cDNA libraries were generated using DNA oligos complementarity to RL3 and SuperScriptIII reverse transcriptase ( Invitrogen ) . Products were then PCR amplified using specific primers ( DP5 , DP3 , Supplementary table 6 ) and purified via agarose PAGE 1 % using a Gel extraction kit ( Qiagen ) . A second round of PCR was performed , using custom Illumina Hi - Seq primers with three different barcodes to multiplex the libraries ( DSFP5 , DSFP3 - Index1 , DSFP3 - Index4 , DSFP3 - Index8 , Supplementary table 6 ) . Products were PAGE purified using the Gel extraction kit , and libraries were analyzed by the YCGA Sequencing facility using a customized Illumina primer ( SSP1 , Supplementary table 6 ) . HITS - CLIP Data Analysis Prior to aligning sequencing reads , the raw data were analyzed for quality steps to reduce artifacts : adapters were removed from raw reads , filtered according to quality scores and exact sequence duplicates were collapsed . Remaining reads were aligned using STAR RNA - seq aligner ( version 2 . 4 . 1a ) 48 using UCSC hg19 reference human genome . A minimum of 10 bases matched was enforced , only unique reads were used , and a maximum of 3 mismatches were allowed . Replicates were merged using Samtools ( version 1 . 2 ) 49 and the aligned reads were analyzed with Piranha using a bin size of 30 bp . All identified peaks with p - value less than 0 . 05 were mapped to Gencode version 22 annotation . Conservation between artery and vein samples was calculated for each identified peak using PhastCons 100 conservation scores . Using Piranha peaks setting , a Wilcoxon rank sum test was performed to compare the difference in distribution of conservation score across samples . For microRNA identification , reads were aligned using Novoalign ( Novocraft , http : / / www . novocraft . com / products / novoalign / ) against human microRNA sequences from miRBase ( release 21 ) 50 . The miRNA expression levels were quantified as reads per million ( RPM ) . Endothelial microRNAs identified in AGO2 - HITS - CLIP were divided into families based on 8mer SEED regions . Using TargetScan software 51 , these microRNA SEED families were associated to the AGO2 - HITS - CLIP peaks based on the putative MRE . To test expression of CAM vs . other genes in cultured ECs , we examined previously published microarray data performed in freshly isolated versus cultured HUVEC and HUAEC ( GEO ID : GSE43475 ) 52 . Standard microarray analysis for differential gene expression ( DEG ) was performed using packages simplyaffy ( http : / / bioinformatics . picr . man . ac . uk / simpleaffy / ) and limma 53 from Bioconductor ( http : / / www . bioconductor . org / ) . Moro et al . Page 10 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t CRISPR / Cas9 strategy to generate mutant primary cells To mutate AGO2 in HUVECs and HDFs , a pLentiCRISPR vector containing an AGO2 or a non - targeting guide RNA ( control , which doesn’t target know mouse or human genome sequences ) was used ( Supplementary table 6 ) . Lentiviruses were generated by transfecting Lenti - X 293T cells ( Clontech ) with packaging vectors ( 2 . 5 μg VSV ; 5μg pxPAX2 , Addgene ) and the pLentiCRISPR DNA vector ( 7 . 5ug ) using lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) . Virus containing supernatant was collected 36 and 60 h post transfection . In Supplementary Fig . 2b shows a schematic of approach . Cells were infected with pLentiCRISPR virus containing AGO2 gRNAs or non - targeting gRNAs in the presence of polybrene ( 8 μg / ml ) . To generate cells with mutant MREs , similar vectors were generated to target the selected MRE sequences identified in the AGO2 HITS - CLIP experiment and confirmed via Sensor - seq . The complete lists of genes and gRNAs are reported in Supplementary table 6 . Cells were cultured for 7 – 10 days ( up to a maximum of passage 5 ) prior to seeding on gels for immunostaining or traction force microscopy . Reduced AGO2 expression was confirmed by Western blot at 7 and 10 days post - infection . Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) on ice . Samples were loaded onto 8 % or 4 – 12 % SDS - PAGE gels , transferred on Immun - Blot PVDF membrane ( Biorad ) , blocked with 10 % milk for 2h and incubated with rabbit anti - AGO2 ( Cell Signaling , 1 : 2000 ) and mouse anti - β −Actin ( Santa Cruz ) overnight at 4°C . Secondary antibody incubation was done with anti - mouse - HRP and anti - rabbit - HRP ( Santa Cruz , 1 : 4000 ) for 1h . For blots of other proteins following MRE mutation , target protector or knockdown , membranes were blocked with 5 % w / v BSA in PBS 0 . 1 % Tween for 1 hour and incubated with primary antibody for RhoB ( 1 : 200 , sc - 8048 , Santa Cruz ) , CTGF ( 1 : 1000 , ab6992 , Abcam ) , Vinculin ( 1 : 2500 , V9131 , Sigma - Aldrich ) , STMN1 ( 1 : 10000 , ab52630 , Abcam ) , DROSHA ( 1 : 5000 , ab183732 , Abcam ) , or GAPDH ( 1 : 4000 , 2118 , Cell Signaling ) overnight at 4°C . After washing , membranes were incubated with secondary antibody anti - rabbit - HRP or anti - mouse - HRP ( 1 : 4000 , 7076P2 and 7074S , Cell Signaling ) for 1 hour at rt in 5 % BSA TBS - T . After washing , blots were developed with super signal west pico chemiluminescent substrate ( Thermo ) using a SYNGENE G - Box imager . Single amplicons of ~ 300 bp were generated using primes equidistant from the putative region of mutation . PCR amplicons were combined and sent to Yale Sequencing Facility for MiSeq 2×250 analysis . After sequencing , single amplicons were demultiplexed and single reads were used for msa ( Multiple sequence alignment ) against the wild - type sequence using R msa package 54 . The frequency of each mutation was calculated as total reads for each CAM gene mutation divided the sum of all the reads aligned to specific CAM gene , and plot as bar plot . To mutate Ago2 in mouse fibroblast , pLentiCRISPRV2 ( Addgene ) vectors containing Ago2 or non - targeting guide RNAs ( control , as above ) were used . P0 fibroblasts at 80 % confluence were infected with lentivirus containing either non - targeting or Ago2 guide RNA in the presence of 4mg / mL polybrene for 16 h . Culture medium was changed and cells were incubated for 72 h . Infected cells were selected in medium with 0 . 5 ug / mL puromycin for 48 h ( this concentration efficiently kills all control cells ) and then cultured for another 96 h before use in matrix constructs . Reduced Ago2 expression in mouse fibroblasts constructs Moro et al . Page 11 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t was confirmed by Western blot at 5 days . Matrix constructs were washed with cold PBS , frozen in liquid nitrogen , then homogenized with metallic beads in a Bullet Blender ( Strom 24 , Next Advance ) in protein extraction buffer ( 1 . 1 % Sodium dodecyl sulphate , 0 . 3 % sodium deoxycholate , 25mM dithiothretol , in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate with Complete anti - protease and anti - phosphatase , Roche ) . Protein samples were loaded in a 4 – 12 % Nu - Page pre - casted gel ( ThermoScientific ) for electrophoresis ( 200V , 50 min ) , transferred to nitrocellulose membrane ( Biorad ) , blocked for 1 h with Odyssey PBS blocking buffer ( LiCor biosciences ) and incubated overnight with antibodies against Ago2 ( Cell Signaling , 1 : 2000 ) and beta - actin ( Abcam 1 : 5000 ) . After washing in PBS - Tween , membranes were incubated with AlexaFluor - 680 anti - mouse and AlexaFluor - 800 anti - rabbit ( both from Thermo , 1 / 15000 ) . Membranes were scanned with an Odyssey CLX NIR scanner ( Licor biosciences ) and fluorescence intensity of the bands quantified with the Image Studio software ( Licor biosciences ) . shRNA knockdown of DROSHA and miRNA Target Protector for CTGF Knockdown of DROSHA was performed using Dharmacon shRNA SMARTvectors ( GE Healthcare ) . Lentivirus was prepared in Lenti - X 293T cells as before using a non - targeting negative control shRNA and two shRNAs directed at DROSHA ( Neg Control shRNA , shDRO # 1 , shDRO # 2 , Supplementary table 6 ) . Experiments were performed with shDRO # 2 ( ~ 95 % knockdown at 5 days ) . DROSHA knockdown was verified by immunoblot as before with DROSHA antibody ( Abcam , ab183732 , 1 : 5000 ) . Disruption of the miRNA - MRE interaction with the CTGF gene was performed using a miScript Target Protector ( Qiagen ) directed at the MRE within the human CTGF gene . The CTGF target protector ( CTGF _ 1 _ TP , Cat # MTP0079186 ) or the Negative control target protector ( Cat # MTP0000002 ) were transfected into P2 HUVECs at 20nM using Lipofectamine RNAiMax ( Invitrogen ) in OPTI - MEM ( Gibco ) with 4 % FBS ( Sigma ) twice ( 1 and 3 days post seeding ) . CTGF increases post transfection were verified by immunoblot as before with a CTGF antibody ( Abcam , ab6992 , 1 : 1000 ) . PDMS and Polyacrylamide Substrates Polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) substrates were cast in the bottom of 10cm tissue culture dishes or # 1 . 5 cover - glass bottomed 35mm Mattek dishes ( for imaging studies ) . Soft ( 3kPa ) gels were made using a 1 : 1 ratio ( by weight ) of PDMS component A and B ( CY 52 – 276 A and B , Dow Corning ) , degassed for 30 min in a vacuum desiccator , and cured for 24 h at rt . Stiff ( 30kPa ) gels were made using a 40 : 1 ratio ( by weight ) of Sylgard 184 components B and C ( SYLGARD 184 , Dow Corning ) , degassed for 30 min and cured for 3 h at 70°C . Prior to seeding , gels were washed with PBS , sterilized with UV for 20 min , and coated with bovine plasma fibronectin ( 10μg / ml in PBS ) overnight at 4°C . Polyacrylamide gels were prepared using a protocol modified from previously published methods 55 . Briefly , 30 - mm glass bottom dishes were activated with glacial acetic acid , 3 - ( trimethoxysilyl ) propyl methacrylate , and 96 % ethanol solution ( 1 : 1 : 14 ratio , respectively ) for 10 min at rt . For fibronectin protein conjugation ( 1mg / ml ) on the polyacrylamide gel , acrylic acid N - hydroxysuccinimide ester was partially mixed as a substitute of acrylamide . Moro et al . Page 12 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Each stiffness was prepared with the ratio shown in Supplementary Table 9 which was previously reported 55 . RNA , miRNA and Sensor - seq library preparation Total RNA was extracted from three replicates of cultured HUVEC or HDF cells seeded on 3kpa or 30kpa PDMS using TRIzol reagent ( Life Technologies ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . For mRNA libraries , total RNA was treated with DNA - free DNase ( Ambion ) and 500 ng of treated RNA was used to prepare Lexogen QuantSeq 3 ′ mRNA - Seq FWD libraries for Illumina deep - sequencing according to the manufacturer’s protocols . Libraries were amplified with 12 PCR cycles . miRNA libraries were prepared from 1μg of total RNA using the NEBNext® Small RNA Library Kit ( NEB ) following the gel size selection method in manufacturer’s protocol and submitted for Illumina sequencing . For Sensor - Seq library , a customized oligonucleotide library was synthetized by Integrated DNA Technologies ( IDT ) . The sequence of each individual oligonucleotide was obtained from Piranha analysis ( see Supplementary Table 4 ) extending the genomic coordinate of each peak by 20 nucleotides at the 3’ and 5’ region . 97 peaks with at least 1 predicted MRE , representing 51 CAM genes were selected . In addition , all sensor oligonucleotides contained restriction enzyme sites , AscI and NheI , allowing for PCR base amplification and cloning . The oligonucleotide library was resuspended in 480 μl of water , diluted 1 : 100 and PCR amplified using Phusion HotStart II HF kit and AscI forward and NheI reverse primers ( Supplementary table 6 ) . PCR - amplified libraries were purified using a PCR purification kit ( Qiagen ) and double digested for 2 h at 37°C . Sensor - seq backbone 56 containing a bidirectional promoter for UbC upstream of copGFP and mCherry genes , was kindly provided by Dr . Jun Lu , Yale University . After sensor backbone digestion with AscI and NheI , the MRE oligo library was cloned into the 3’UTR of mCherry . Ligation using T4 DNA Ligase ( Promega ) was incubated 16 h at 16°C , then transformed into DH5 α , and pooled colonies were used to prepare a library Maxi prep ( Qiagen ) . Lentiviruses for expression of the CAM - MRE Sensor library were generated as above using Lenti - X 293T cells . For FACS analysis additional control lentiviruses expressing GFP alone , mCherry alone , miRNA sensor lacking a MRE ( Empty - Sensor plasmid , negative control ) , and miRNA sensor with a synthetic MRE for miR125 ( miR125 - Sensor plasmid , positive control ) were used . RNA and miRNA seq data analysis Total RNA and microRNA were aligned against the human genome version GRCh38 using the GENCODE 22 transcript annotation , using STAR alignment software with same parameters used for the ENDOCE project ( www . encodeproject . org ) After alignment , differential gene expression ( DEG ) of RNAs or miRNAs between ECs seeded on 30 and 3 kPa substrates was computed using the negative binomial distributions via edgeR using standard parameter Genes 57 , 58 . The levels ( log 2 Fold Change ) of CAM RNAs and SEED matching miRNAs to CAM - MRE sensors , were combined and represented in the CIRCOS plot . Moro et al . Page 13 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t FACS and Sensor - Seq Analysis For FACS experiments , cells were infected with low levels of the library or control lentivirus in the absence of polybrene to avoid multiply infected cells ( 10 – 20 % of cells infected ) . After 48 h , cells were trypsinized and seeded onto soft ( 3kPa ) or stiff ( 30kPa ) fibronectin - coated PDMS dishes at low density ( 150k cells per 10cm dish ) for 2 days . Cells were then washed once with PBS , trypsinized , centrifuged for 5 min at 300xg , and re - suspended in PBS at 500k cells per ml immediately before FACS analysis . Infected cells were sorted on a BD FACSAria II and analyzed with FACSDiva 7 . Four sorting gates were set based on the 2 control plasmids ( Empty - Sensor and miR125 - Sensor ) . The upper limit bin ( Not Suppressed ) was designed to contain 90 % or more events / cells infected with the Empty - Sensor and less than 0 . 5 % of events for the miR125 - Sensor . Conversely , the lower two bins ( Strongly Suppressed and Suppressed ) were designed to contain 90 % of events coming from cells infected with miR125 - Sensor , in a ratio close to 3 : 2 ( ~ 60 % of events in Strongly Suppressed bin and ~ 40 % of events in Suppressed ) . The 3rd bin ( Mildly Suppressed ) was set between the Not Suppressed and the Suppressed bins . For clarity , the contour plot represents the total percentage of event in each single bins , grouped in “island” of 15 % probability were shown for the Empty - Sensor , miR125 - Sensor , Sensor - Library at 3 kPa and Sensor - Library at 30 kPa . After sorting of cells into each bin , genomic DNA was isolated using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit ( Qiagen ) and the MREs were PCR amplified using specific forward primers to barcode each bin ( strongly suppressed , suppressed , mildly suppressed , not suppressed , and a reverse primer , Supplementary table 6 ) . The PCR was performed using Phusion HotStart II HF with melting temp of 59°C for 20 sec . Library were purified using gel extraction kit ( Qiagen ) . The primers used contain barcodes for multiplexing and were designed to hybridize with Illumina sequencing . Computational analysis of Sensor - seq was performed using R . First , the number of reads for each sensor - MRE was divided by the total number of reads in the entire experiment and multiplied by one million to get the Reads Per Million ( RPM ) for each sensor . To calculate the frequency of sensor - MREs in each bin , the RPM was divided by the total RPM for all 4 bins of the experiment for that sensor , giving frequency values for each MRE in each bin at each stiffness . MREs that showed a dominant bin ( with frequency values above 0 . 375 , i . e . non - random ) were compared at 3 vs . 30 kPa . In Figure 2c CAM MREs were then plotted based on the reproducible tendency to be enriched in the same bin at a given stiffness but not the other for 3 independent experiments . MREs that shifted towards a more suppressed bin on 30kPa compared to 3kPa were plotted as CAM - MRE 30kPa ( bottom left of plot ) . MREs that that shifted towards a more suppressed bin on 3kPa compared to 30kPa were plotted as CAM - MRE3kPa ( upper right of plot ) . RNA - seq ( red ) and Proteomics ( green ) data for each of these proteins was plotted and linked with the miRNA - seq ( for miRNAs predicted to bind these MREs ) . The regulation of CAM - MREs by miRNAs ( stars , Figure 2c ) was further validated by individual MRE mutagenesis followed by functional assays . Moro et al . Page 14 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Mass spectrometry ( MS ) sample preparation and analysis Cell pellets were lysed in 50 μL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate ( AB , Fluka ) buffer containing 1 . 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate ( SDS , Sigma ) , 0 . 3 % sodium deoxycholate ( Sigma ) , protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma ) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ( Merck ) . Six 1 . 6 mm steel beads ( Next Advance ) were added and samples were homogenized with a Bullet Blender ( Next Advance ) at maximum speed for 2 min . Homogenates were subjected to centrifugation ( 12 °C , 10000 rpm , 5 min ) . Lysates were added to 150 μL of digest buffer ( 1 . 33 mM CaCl 2 , Sigma , in 25 mM AB ) containing immobilized trypsin beads ( Perfinity Biosciences ) and shaken at 1400 rpm overnight at 37 °C . The resulting digests were reduced with 4 μL of 500 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT , Sigma , in 25 mM AB ; 10 min . shaking , 1400 rpm , 60 °C ) and alkylated with 12 μL of 500 mM iodoacetamide ( Sigma , in 25 mM AB ; 30 min . shaking , dark , rt ) . Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation ( 10000 rpm , 10 min ) . Supernatant were transferred to 1 . 5 mL ‘LoBind’ Eppendorf tubes and acidified with 5 μL 10 % trifluoroacetic acid ( Riedel - de Haën ) in water , and cleaned by two - phase extraction ( 3 × addition of 200 μL ethyl acetate , Sigma , followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer ) . Peptides were desalted with POROS R3 beads ( Thermo Fisher ) using the manufacturer’s protocol and lyophilized . Peptide concentrations were measured by spectrophotometer ( Direct Detect , Millipore ) and adjusted to 200 ng μL −1 in injection buffer ( 5 % HPLC grade acetonitrile , ACN , 0 . 1 % trifluoroacetic acid in deionized water , Fisher Scientific ) . LC - MS / MS was performed using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system ( RSLC , Dionex Corporation ) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer ( Thermo Fisher ) . Peptides were separated using a multistep gradient from 95 % A ( 0 . 1 % formic acid , FA , in water , Fisher Scientific ) and 5 % B ( 0 . 1 % FA in ACN ) to 7 % B at 1 min , 18 % B at 58 min , 27 % B at 72 min and 60 % B at 74 min at 300 nL min −1 , using a 75 mm × 250 μm inner diameter 1 . 7 μM CSH C18 , analytical column ( Waters ) . Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis . Mass spectrometry ( MS ) data processing and protein quantification All sample spectra were aligned using Progenesis QI ( Nonlinear Dynamics ) with manual placement of vectors where necessary . Default parameters were used except where noted . Peak - picking sensitivity was set to 4 / 5 . Peptides with charges between + 1 and + 4 , with 2 or more isotopes , were selected for analysis . Peptide identities were assigned using Mascot ( Matrix Science ) , searching against the SwissProt and TREMBL mouse databases . The database was modified to search for cysteine alkylation ( monoisotopic mass change , 57 . 021 Da ) , oxidized methionine ( 15 . 995 Da ) , hydroxylation of asparagine , aspartic acid , proline or lysine ( 15 . 995 Da ) and phosphorylation of serine , tyrosine or threonine ( 79 . 966 Da ) . A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed . Peptide intensities were exported as Excel ( Microsoft ) spread sheets for processing with Matlab ( The MathWorks ) . Peptide identifications were filtered via Mascot scores , selecting only those with a Benjamini - Hochberg false discovery rate ( FDR ) < 0 . 05 . Raw ion intensities from peptides belonging to proteins with fewer than 2 unique ( by sequence ) peptides per protein in the dataset were excluded from quantification . Peptides from CAM proteins were only used for quantification if they were unique to the protein ( i . e . did not overlap with other protein sequences ) . Intensities were logged and normalized by the median logged intensity . Missing values were assumed as missing due to low abundance , as described 59 . Imputation was performed at the Moro et al . Page 15 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t peptide level using a method similar to Perseus 60 whereby missing values were imputed randomly from a normal distribution centered on the apparent limit of detection for the experiment . The limit of detection was determined by taking the mean of all minimum logged intensities and down - shifting it by 1 . 6 σ , where σ is the standard deviation of minimum logged peptide intensities . The width of this normal distribution was set to 0 . 3 σ as described in 60 . Fold - change differences in protein quantities were calculated by fitting a mixed - effects linear regression model for each protein with Huber weighting of residuals as described in 59 using the fitglme function ( MatLab ) with the formula : yipt = β 0 + Xpβp + Xtβt + εipt Where Y iptb represents the log 2 ( intensity ) of peptide p belonging to protein i , under experimental treatment t . β s represent effect sizes for the indicated coefficients . Peptide effects were considered as random effects whereas treatment was considered as a fixed effect . β 0 denotes the intercept term and ε pt denotes residual variance . Standard error estimates were adjusted with Empirical Bayes variance correction according to 61 . Conditions were compared with two - sided Empirical Bayes – adjusted t - tests with Benjamini - Hochberg correction for false positives . Cells Immunostaining and Quantification Cells seeded on fibronectin - coated PDMS were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) in PBS . Cells were then washed and permeabilized with 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 in PBS , with 320 mM sucrose and 6 mM MgCl 2 . Cells were PBS washed 3 times , blocked for 30 min with 1 % BSA in PBS , then incubated overnight at 4°C with anti - YAP antibody ( 1 : 200 , no sc - 101199 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) , anti - RhoB ( 1 : 250 , 19HCLC , ThermoFisher ) , anti - Vinculin ( 1 : 200 , V9131 , Sigma - Aldrich ) , anti - STMN1 ( 1 : 200 , ab52630 , Abcam ) , anti - CTGF ( 1 : 200 , ab6992 , Abcam ) and anti - paxillin ( 1 : 800 , RabMAb Y113 , ab32084 , Abcam ) diluted in 1 % BSA in PBS . Cells were washed 3 times with PBS and incubated at rt for 1 hour with secondary antibodies ( alexa - 488 anti - rabbit , alexa - 647 anti - mouse , 1 : 1000 , ThermoFisher ) and alexa - 565 conjugated phalloidin ( 1 : 1000 , molecular probes ) . Cells were washed 3 times with PBS and mounted with DAPI in Fluoromout - G ( SouthernBiotech ) . Cell areas were quantified using ImageJ by background subtracting , thresholding to generate cell masks , and using the analyze particles function . YAP staining was quantified by taking the average nuclear YAP signal ( in the area of the DAPI stain ) , divided by the average cytoplasmic YAP signal ( in the area of the non - nuclear cell mask ) . Focal adhesions were analyzed using the focal adhesion analysis server 62 with the minimum adhesion size set to 0 . 5 μm 2 and the default settings for only static properties . Average number of focal adhesions per cell was calculated for each field of view by dividing the total number of adhesions in the field by the number of cells . Traction Force Microscopy PDMS TFM substrates were fabricated as described 63 . Briefly , cover - glass bottom dishes were spin - coated to obtain a ~ 40μm thick layer of polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ; Sylgard 184 by Down Corning mixed at various B / C ratios , 67 : 1 3kPa , 40 : 1 30kPa ) and cured at Moro et al . Page 16 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 70°C for 3 h . Gels were then treated with 3 - aminopropyl trimethoxysilane for 5 min and incubated for 10 min at rt with 40nm Alexa Fluor 647 beads ( Molecular Probes ) suspended in a 100μg / ml solution of 1 - Ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl ) carbodiimide ( Sigma ) in water to covalently link the beads to the gel surface . Elastic moduli for each batch was measured using a microfluidic device as described 63 and is reported as the Young’s modulus ( E ) . TFM gels were coated with fibronectin ( 10μg / ml ) in PBS overnight at 4°C and washed 3 times with PBS . HUVECs and HDFs were seeded on the gels in EGM or low serum fibroblast growth medium , respectively , 24h before analysis at low density ( ~ 3000 cells per cm 2 ) . Cells and florescent beads were imaged on a spinning disk confocal microscope ( UltraVIEW VoX , Perkins Elmer ) attached to a Nikon A - 1 microscope equipped with a temperature and CO 2 controlled incubation chamber and 60× 1 . 4NA lens . Florescent images of Alexa Fluor 647 beads and DIC images of cells were acquired before and after cell lysis with 0 . 05 % SDS . Images were drift corrected and bead displacements were quantified as described 64 . Force fields and traction stresses were calculated using FTTC force reconstruction with the regularization parameter set to 0 . 007 . Total force per cell was calculated as the average stress under the cell multiplied by the area . 3D matrix constructs A method to generate 3D cell - derived uniaxial matrix constructs ( 3D matrix constructs ) based on the “tendon construct” developed by Karl Kadler’s group was used 65 . Six well plates were coated with a 2 mm layer of SYLGARD 184 and incubated overnight at 65°C to induce polymerization . After cooling , the ( hydrophobic ) SYLGARD layer was incubated 15 min with Pluronic® F - 127 . Custom - made rectangular Teflon molds ( 15×10×2mm ) were sterilized with Virkon ( 10 min ) then Ethanol 70 % ( 15 min ) . Inside the molds , two 8mm segments of size 0 silk sutures were pinned to the PDMS using insect pins exactly 10mm apart . Inside each mold , we added 12 μL of thrombin stock solution ( 200U / mL , Sigma ) . Primary fibroblasts were detached with 0 . 05 % trypsin , centrifuged at 1800 rpm and counted . For each matrix construct , 2×105 cells were resuspended in 300 μL of DMEM containing 8mg / mL fibrinogen ( Sigma ) and 0 . 2 mM of L - ascorbate - 2 - phosphate . Cell suspensions were injected inside the molds and placed at 37°C for 15 min in incubator for polymerization . After polymerization , the Teflon mold was removed and one additional insect pin added to maintain the suture thread . Matrix constructs were cultured with DMEM / F12 supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Sigma ) , Penicillin ( 100U / mL ) , Streptomycin ( 100 ug / mL , Gibco ) , 1 % L - glutamine and 0 . 2mM of L - ascorbate - 2 - phosphate . The 3D matrix constructs were cultured for 5 days and the culture medium changed every other day . After 5 days , photographs of the constructs were taken with a Nikon reflex camera equipped with a 50mm macro - objective at a focal distance of 1 : 1 . Constructs diameter was obtained by averaging the diameter at 3 different locations ( each extremity and the middle ) . Immunostaining matrix constructs Matrix constructs were rinsed in cold PBS and fixed overnight at 4 ⁰ C in 4 % formaldehyde ( Pierce 16 % formaldehyde , methanol free ) in PBS . Fixation constructs were dehydrated , embedded in paraffin and 5 μm transverse sections cut with a Leica microtome . For Moro et al . Page 17 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t immunostaining , we performed a rehydration protocol followed by antigen retrieval for 30 min at 96°C in a citrate buffer ( pH 6 ) . Sections were blocked with Odyssey PBS blocking buffer ( LiCor biosciences ) for 1 hour and incubated overnight with primary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer : vimentin ( 1 / 400 , Cell Signaling ) , phospho - myosin light chain ( 1 / 400 , Abcam ) . After extensive rinsing in PBS Tween 0 . 1 % , slides were incubated with AlexaFluor 647 anti - rabbit secondary antibody ( 1 / 500 , ThermoScientific ) for 1 hour at rt , thoroughly washed with PBS Tween 0 . 1 % , and slides mounted in FluoromountG - DAPI ( Southern Biotech ) . Slides were imaged with an Olympus slide scanner microscope equipped with a 20x objective . Zebrafish Fin Fold Regeneration This study is compliant with all relevant ethical regulations regarding animal research . Zebrafish were raised and maintained at 28 . 5°C using standard methods and according to protocols approved by Yale University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee ( IACUC # 2017 – 11473 ) . Wild - type ( AB ) and mz ago2 − / − mutants 66 were used . To generate the ctgfa MRE mutant , zebrafish AB were injected with 125 ng / μl Cas9 mRNA and 75 ng / μl gRNAs , designed as previously described 67 . The gRNA sequence used to target the conserved MRE within the 3’UTR human CTGF gene was ( CTGF MRE gRNA , Supplementary table 6 ) . Genomic DNA was isolated from a clutch of 15 injected and uninjected control embryos at 24 hpf using the Qiagen DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit . Genomic DNA ( 250 ng ) and the Phusion HotStart II Kit ( ThermoFisher ) used to PCR amplify an approximately 300 bp region surrounding the intended MRE target ( MRE Fw Amp , MRE Rv Amp , Supplementary table 6 ) . T7 Endonuclease I assay was used to detect mutations as described in the manufacturer’s protocol ( New England BioLabs ) . PCR and T7 products were run on 3 % agarose gels to verify the occurrence of indels in the MRE sequence . The remaining embryos were grown to 48 hpf and used for the fin fold regeneration experiments ( see below ) . The zebrafish miR - 124 and ctgfa sensor assay and mRNA injection were performed as described 67 . For the fin fold regeneration assay , we use 14 AB fish , 14 mz ago2 mutant − / − embryos and 15 mz ago2 − / − fish injected at the one cell stage with 200 pg of in vitro transcribed mRNA encoding the human AGO2 protein . At 2 days post fertilization ( dpf ) , the fin fold was cut at the edge of the fin using a 25G needle . Bright filed images were captured at 0 . 5 , 2 , 4 , 24 , 48 and 72 h post amputation ( hpa ) using a Leica M165 FC stereomicroscope and Leica Application Suite V4 software . The length of the fins over time was measured using FIJI - ImageJ 68 , 69 and normalized for the length of the fin before cutting . Zebrafish immunofluorescence assay For the fluorescent images : 20 embryos for each genotype ( AB , Ago2 mutant ( − / − ) and ctgfa 3’ UTR mutant ) were cut and then , at 0 . 5 , 2 , 4 , 24 hpa were fixed in PFA 4 % overnight at 4°C . Embryos were washed 4 – 5 times with PBS 0 . 1 % Tween , then incubated 2 h in blocking solution ( 0 . 8 % Triton - X , 10 % normal goat serum , 1 % BSA , 0 . 01 % sodium azide in PBS Tween ) . Zebrafish were stained following the protocol as in 70 using the primary antibody mouse anti - Phospho - Myosin Light Chain 2 ( 1 : 200 ; Cell Signaling ) , mouse anti - Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen ( 1 : 200 ; PCNA , Dako ) , rabbit anti - Fibronectin ( 1 : 200 ; Moro et al . Page 18 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Sigma ) , DAPI ( 1 : 1000 ; Sigma ) , rabbit anti - Connective Tissue Growth Factor A ( 1 : 150 ; Abcam ) , and mouse anti - YAP ( 1 : 200 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) and the secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 488 anti - mouse ( 1 : 250 , ThermoFisher ) and Alexa Fluor 596 anti - rabbit ( 1 : 250 , ThermoFisher ) . After staining , images were captured using a Leica Microsystems SP5 confocal microscope using a 40X objective . Max projections were generated and intensity was quantified using FIJI - Image . For each protein staining the intensity profile of 4 to 6 fish was calculated for a section of 80 μm in diameter within the wound and 50 μm from the fin fold edge . Ratio of Nuclear to Cytosolic YAP was calculated before and during the fin fold regeneration from confocal images thresholded using the DAPI channel to generate a binary mask for the nuclei . Using ImageJ , the binary mask was used to generate a nuclear and a cytosolic YAP image . Each was ratioed and normalized to the area . For TUNEL assay to detect apoptotic cells embryos were fixed in 4 % PFA overnight and stored in 100 % methanol at −20 °C . The TUNEL assay was performed using the ApopTag Red In situ Apoptosis Detection kit ( Millipore ) . Atomic Force Microscopy Live zebrafish embryos ( 48 hpf ) were anesthetized using 1x tricaine in egg water and mounted on PDMS gels . The tips of fish tails were probed using a DNP - 10 D tip ( Bruker , nominal stiffness ~ 0 . 06 N / m ) on a Bruker Dimension FastScan AFM immersed in egg water containing 1x tricaine . Probe deflection sensitivity was calibrated by taking indentation curves on glass and the nominal tip stiffness was calibrated by thermal tuning ( assuming a simple harmonic oscillator in water ) . Force vs . deflection curves were collected for a ramp size of 1 . 5μm at a rate of 750 nm / s for at least 2 locations per fish , with 10 – 11 fish measured per group . The first 600nm of the extension curves were fit with NanoScope Analysis Software version 1 . 5 ( Bruker ) assuming a Poisson’s ratio of 0 . 5 and using the Sneddon fit model 71 . Statistics and Reproducibility All the of statistical analysis were performed using Prism version 7 . 01 ( GraphPad ) and R , except for the peak identification , which used piranha software 72 to measure the significance of read coverage height for each mapped position using the zero - truncated negative binomial model ( ZTNB ) . To confirm changes in cell area , focal adhesion number , YAP localization and traction force generation , t - tests were performed using Prism to assess the change in the mean between Wild - type and AGO2 or MRE CRISPR / Cas9 mutant cells . These data sets contained more than 20 individual measurements for each condition and showed a log - normal distribution . For in vivo analysis of zebrafish wild - type and Ago2 mutants , changes in fin fold tissue were analyzed using t - tests ; fin fold regeneration was analyzed via 2 way ANOVA and Sidak’s multiple comparisons test for 4 to 6 individual fish for data - set using Prism . Figure legends indicate exact number of measurements , number of independent experiments , and statistical test used for each analysis performed . Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material . Moro et al . Page 19 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Acknowledgements . We thank Meredith Cavanaugh for help with zebrafish husbandry . We thank the Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell - Matrix Research for technical support with tissue culture assays . We thank Melanie Trombly and Angela Andersen , Life Science Editors for proofreading the manuscript , Jay Humphrey and Valentina Greco for critical reading . We thank Brian Coon for assistance during the preparation of the CRISR / Cas9 experiment . We thank Dr . Jun Lun’s laboratory for providing miRNA reporter lentiviral plasmid . We thank Antonio Giraldez’s laboratory for providing the zebrafish ago2 mutant . JS was funded by a Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( BBSRC ) David Phillips Fellowship ( BB / L024551 / 1 ) . DMK was supported by F32HL132475 , U54DK106857 and 1K99HL141687 . VM was partially supported by a studentship from the Sir Richard Stapley Educational Trust . Mass spectrometry was carried out at the Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell - Matrix Research ( WTCCMR ; 203128 / Z / 16 / Z ) Proteomics Core Facility . This work was supported by USPHS grant RO1 GM47214 to MAS and RO1 HL130246 and AHA 17GRNT33460426 to SN . References 1 . Cyron CJ & Humphrey JD Growth and Remodeling of Load - Bearing Biological Soft Tissues . Meccanica 52 , 645 – 664 ( 2017 ) . [ PubMed : 28286348 ] 2 . Gilbert PM & Weaver VM Cellular adaptation to biomechanical stress across length scales in tissue homeostasis and disease . Semin Cell Dev Biol 67 , 141 – 152 ( 2017 ) . [ PubMed : 27641825 ] 3 . Humphrey JD , Dufresne ER & Schwartz MA Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 802 – 12 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 25355505 ] 4 . Humphrey JD Vascular adaptation and mechanical homeostasis at tissue , cellular , and sub - cellular levels . Cell Biochem Biophys 50 , 53 – 78 ( 2008 ) . [ PubMed : 18209957 ] 5 . Seki E & Brenner DA Recent advancement of molecular mechanisms of liver fibrosis . J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 22 , 512 – 8 ( 2015 ) . [ PubMed : 25869468 ] 6 . Huang S & Ingber DE Cell tension , matrix mechanics , and cancer development . Cancer Cell 8 , 175 – 6 ( 2005 ) . [ PubMed : 16169461 ] 7 . Sun Z , Guo SS & Fassler R Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction . J Cell Biol 215 , 445 – 456 ( 2016 ) . [ PubMed : 27872252 ] 8 . Pasquinelli AE MicroRNAs and their targets : recognition , regulation and an emerging reciprocal relationship . Nat Rev Genet 13 , 271 – 82 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 22411466 ] 9 . Hafner M et al . Transcriptome - wide identification of RNA - binding protein and microRNA target sites by PAR - CLIP . Cell 141 , 129 – 41 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 20371350 ] 10 . Herranz H & Cohen SM MicroRNAs and gene regulatory networks : managing the impact of noise in biological systems . Genes Dev 24 , 1339 – 44 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 20595229 ] 11 . Tsang J , Zhu J & van Oudenaarden A MicroRNA - mediated feedback and feedforward loops are recurrent network motifs in mammals . Mol Cell 26 , 753 – 67 ( 2007 ) . [ PubMed : 17560377 ] 12 . Kasper DM et al . MicroRNAs Establish Uniform Traits during the Architecture of Vertebrate Embryos . Dev Cell 40 , 552 – 565 e5 ( 2017 ) . [ PubMed : 28350988 ] 13 . Chi SW , Zang JB , Mele A & Darnell RB Argonaute HITS - CLIP decodes microRNA - mRNA interaction maps . Nature 460 , 479 – 86 ( 2009 ) . [ PubMed : 19536157 ] 14 . Byfield FJ , Reen RK , Shentu TP , Levitan I & Gooch KJ Endothelial actin and cell stiffness is modulated by substrate stiffness in 2D and 3D . J Biomech 42 , 1114 – 9 ( 2009 ) . [ PubMed : 19356760 ] 15 . Grimson A et al . MicroRNA targeting specificity in mammals : determinants beyond seed pairing . Mol Cell 27 , 91 – 105 ( 2007 ) . [ PubMed : 17612493 ] 16 . Saphirstein RJ & Morgan KG The contribution of vascular smooth muscle to aortic stiffness across length scales . Microcirculation 21 , 201 – 7 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 24635219 ] 17 . Mullokandov G et al . High - throughput assessment of microRNA activity and function using microRNA sensor and decoy libraries . Nat Methods 9 , 840 – 6 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 22751203 ] 18 . Kamata M , Liang M , Liu S , Nagaoka Y & Chen IS Live cell monitoring of hiPSC generation and differentiation using differential expression of endogenous microRNAs . PLoS One 5 , e11834 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 20676373 ] Moro et al . Page 20 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 19 . Discher DE , Janmey P & Wang YL Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of their substrate . Science 310 , 1139 – 43 ( 2005 ) . [ PubMed : 16293750 ] 20 . Kim YK , Kim B & Kim VN Re - evaluation of the roles of DROSHA , Export in 5 , and DICER in microRNA biogenesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113 , E1881 – 9 ( 2016 ) . [ PubMed : 26976605 ] 21 . Dupont S et al . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 474 , 179 – 83 ( 2011 ) . [ PubMed : 21654799 ] 22 . Kumar A et al . Talin tension sensor reveals novel features of focal adhesion force transmission and mechanosensitivity . J Cell Biol 213 , 371 – 83 ( 2016 ) . [ PubMed : 27161398 ] 23 . Bassett AR et al . Understanding functional miRNA - target interactions in vivo by site - specific genome engineering . Nat Commun 5 , 4640 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 25135198 ] 24 . Shi - Wen X , Leask A & Abraham D Regulation and function of connective tissue growth factor / CCN2 in tissue repair , scarring and fibrosis . Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 19 , 133 – 44 ( 2008 ) . [ PubMed : 18358427 ] 25 . Kawakami A , Fukazawa T & Takeda H Early fin primordia of zebrafish larvae regenerate by a similar growth control mechanism with adult regeneration . Dev Dyn 231 , 693 – 9 ( 2004 ) . [ PubMed : 15499559 ] 26 . Mathew LK et al . Comparative expression profiling reveals an essential role for raldh2 in epimorphic regeneration . J Biol Chem 284 , 33642 – 53 ( 2009 ) . [ PubMed : 19801676 ] 27 . Mateus R et al . In vivo cell and tissue dynamics underlying zebrafish fin fold regeneration . PLoS One 7 , e51766 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 23284763 ] 28 . Cifuentes D et al . A novel miRNA processing pathway independent of Dicer requires Argonaute2 catalytic activity . Science 328 , 1694 – 8 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 20448148 ] 29 . Amelio I et al . miR - 24 triggers epidermal differentiation by controlling actin adhesion and cell migration . J Cell Biol 199 , 347 – 63 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 23071155 ] 30 . Nechiporuk A & Keating MT A proliferation gradient between proximal and msxb - expressing distal blastema directs zebrafish fin regeneration . Development 129 , 2607 – 17 ( 2002 ) . [ PubMed : 12015289 ] 31 . Hasegawa T et al . Transient inflammatory response mediated by interleukin - 1beta is required for proper regeneration in zebrafish fin fold . Elife 6 ( 2017 ) . 32 . Mateus R et al . Control of tissue growth by Yap relies on cell density and F - actin in zebrafish fin regeneration . Development 142 , 2752 – 63 ( 2015 ) . [ PubMed : 26209644 ] 33 . Mori M et al . Hippo signaling regulates microprocessor and links cell - density - dependent miRNA biogenesis to cancer . Cell 156 , 893 – 906 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 24581491 ] 34 . Chaulk SG , Lattanzi VJ , Hiemer SE , Fahlman RP & Varelas X The Hippo pathway effectors TAZ / YAP regulate dicer expression and microRNA biogenesis through Let - 7 . J Biol Chem 289 , 1886 – 91 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 24324261 ] 35 . Davis BN , Hilyard AC , Lagna G & Hata A SMAD proteins control DROSHA - mediated microRNA maturation . Nature 454 , 56 – 61 ( 2008 ) . [ PubMed : 18548003 ] 36 . Felix MA & Wagner A Robustness and evolution : concepts , insights and challenges from a developmental model system . Heredity ( Edinb ) 100 , 132 – 40 ( 2008 ) . [ PubMed : 17167519 ] 37 . Mouw JK et al . Tissue mechanics modulate microRNA - dependent PTEN expression to regulate malignant progression . Nat Med 20 , 360 – 7 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 24633304 ] 38 . Liu G et al . miR - 21 mediates fibrogenic activation of pulmonary fibroblasts and lung fibrosis . J Exp Med 207 , 1589 – 97 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 20643828 ] 39 . Cushing L et al . miR - 29 is a major regulator of genes associated with pulmonary fibrosis . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 45 , 287 – 94 ( 2011 ) . [ PubMed : 20971881 ] 40 . Herrera J et al . Dicer1 Deficiency in the IPF Fibroblastic Focus Promotes Fibrosis by Suppressing MicroRNA Biogenesis . Am J Respir Crit Care Med ( 2018 ) . 41 . Parker MW et al . Fibrotic extracellular matrix activates a profibrotic positive feedback loop . J Clin Invest 124 , 1622 – 35 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 24590289 ] 42 . Pandit KV & Milosevic J MicroRNA regulatory networks in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis . Biochem Cell Biol 93 , 129 – 37 ( 2015 ) . [ PubMed : 25557625 ] Moro et al . Page 21 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 43 . Wynn TA & Ramalingam TR Mechanisms of fibrosis : therapeutic translation for fibrotic disease . Nat Med 18 , 1028 – 1040 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 22772564 ] 44 . Liu J et al . Argonaute2 is the catalytic engine of mammalian RNAi . Science 305 , 1437 – 41 ( 2004 ) . [ PubMed : 15284456 ] 45 . McCall MN et al . MicroRNA profiling of diverse endothelial cell types . BMC Med Genomics 4 , 78 ( 2011 ) . [ PubMed : 22047531 ] 46 . Krzywinski M et al . Circos : an information aesthetic for comparative genomics . Genome Res 19 , 1639 – 45 ( 2009 ) . [ PubMed : 19541911 ] 47 . Chi SW , Zang JB , Mele A & Darnell RB Argonaute HITS - CLIP decodes microRNA - mRNA interaction maps . Nature 460 , 479 – 86 ( 2009 ) . [ PubMed : 19536157 ] 48 . Dobin A et al . STAR : ultrafast universal RNA - seq aligner . Bioinformatics 29 , 15 – 21 ( 2013 ) . [ PubMed : 23104886 ] 49 . Li H et al . The Sequence Alignment / Map format and SAMtools . Bioinformatics 25 , 2078 – 9 ( 2009 ) . [ PubMed : 19505943 ] 50 . Kozomara A & Griffiths - Jones S miRBase : annotating high confidence microRNAs using deep sequencing data . Nucleic Acids Res 42 , D68 – 73 ( 2014 ) . [ PubMed : 24275495 ] 51 . Agarwal V , Bell GW , Nam JW & Bartel DP Predicting effective microRNA target sites in mammalian mRNAs . Elife 4 ( 2015 ) . 52 . Aranguren XL et al . Unraveling a novel transcription factor code determining the human arterial - specific endothelial cell signature . Blood 122 , 3982 – 92 ( 2013 ) . [ PubMed : 24108462 ] 53 . Ritchie ME et al . limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA - sequencing and microarray studies . Nucleic Acids Res 43 , e47 ( 2015 ) . [ PubMed : 25605792 ] 54 . Bodenhofer U , Bonatesta E , Horejs - Kainrath C & Hochreiter S msa : an R package for multiple sequence alignment . Bioinformatics 31 , 3997 – 9 ( 2015 ) . [ PubMed : 26315911 ] 55 . Elosegui - Artola A et al . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 540 – 8 ( 2016 ) . [ PubMed : 27065098 ] 56 . Kamata M , Liang M , Liu S , Nagaoka Y & Chen IS Live cell monitoring of hiPSC generation and differentiation using differential expression of endogenous microRNAs . PLoS One 5 , e11834 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 20676373 ] 57 . Robinson MD , McCarthy DJ & Smyth GK edgeR : a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data . Bioinformatics 26 , 139 – 40 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 19910308 ] 58 . McCarthy DJ , Chen Y & Smyth GK Differential expression analysis of multifactor RNA - Seq experiments with respect to biological variation . Nucleic Acids Res 40 , 4288 – 97 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 22287627 ] 59 . Goeminne LJ , Gevaert K & Clement L Peptide - level Robust Ridge Regression Improves Estimation , Sensitivity , and Specificity in Data - dependent Quantitative Label - free Shotgun Proteomics . Mol Cell Proteomics 15 , 657 – 68 ( 2016 ) . [ PubMed : 26566788 ] 60 . Tyanova S et al . The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of ( prote ) omics data . Nat Methods 13 , 731 – 40 ( 2016 ) . [ PubMed : 27348712 ] 61 . Smyth GK Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments . Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol 3 , Article3 ( 2004 ) . 62 . Berginski ME & Gomez SM The Focal Adhesion Analysis Server : a web tool for analyzing focal adhesion dynamics . F1000Res 2 , 68 ( 2013 ) . [ PubMed : 24358855 ] 63 . Gutierrez E & Groisman A Measurements of elastic moduli of silicone gel substrates with a microfluidic device . PLoS One 6 , e25534 ( 2011 ) . [ PubMed : 21980487 ] 64 . Han SJ , Oak Y , Groisman A & Danuser G Traction microscopy to identify force modulation in subresolution adhesions . Nat Methods 12 , 653 – 6 ( 2015 ) . [ PubMed : 26030446 ] 65 . Kapacee Z et al . Tension is required for fibripositor formation . Matrix Biol 27 , 371 – 5 ( 2008 ) . [ PubMed : 18262777 ] 66 . Cifuentes D et al . A novel miRNA processing pathway independent of Dicer requires Argonaute2 catalytic activity . Science 328 , 1694 – 8 ( 2010 ) . [ PubMed : 20448148 ] Moro et al . Page 22 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 67 . Narayanan A et al . In vivo mutagenesis of miRNA gene families using a scalable multiplexed CRISPR / Cas9 nuclease system . Sci Rep 6 , 32386 ( 2016 ) . [ PubMed : 27572667 ] 68 . Schindelin J et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 , 676 – 82 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 22743772 ] 69 . Le Guyader D et al . Origins and unconventional behavior of neutrophils in developing zebrafish . Blood 111 , 132 – 41 ( 2008 ) . [ PubMed : 17875807 ] 70 . Kasper DM et al . MicroRNAs Establish Uniform Traits during the Architecture of Vertebrate Embryos . Dev Cell 40 , 552 – 565 e5 ( 2017 ) . [ PubMed : 28350988 ] 71 . Sneddon IN The relation between load and penetration in the axisymmetric boussinesq problem for a punch of arbitrary profile . Int . J . Engng Sci . 3 , 47 – 57 ( 1965 ) . 72 . Uren PJ et al . Site identification in high - throughput RNA - protein interaction data . Bioinformatics 28 , 3013 – 20 ( 2012 ) . [ PubMed : 23024010 ] Moro et al . Page 23 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 1 . miRNAs regulate Cytoskeleton - Adhesion - Matrix ( CAM ) genes . ( a ) Left , Schematic of AGO2 - HITS - CLIP . miRNA - RNA complexes were cross - linked to AGO2 ( green ) via UV light and unbound RNAs removed by RNase treatment . AGO2 - RNA complexes were immunoprecipitated , and RNA was labelled with 32 - P and isolated . Right , an Integrative Genomics Viewer display of HITS - CLIP reads showed the sequences aligned within 30 to 70 nt intervals ( AGO2 peak ) within the 3’UTR region of the representative genes . Both HUAEC and HUVEC share the most significant peaks ( green ) ( b ) Left , chart represents positional enrichment of AGO2 peaks within the human 3’UTR for HUAEC ( red ) Moro et al . Page 24 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t and HUVEC ( blue ) . Lines indicate the nt positional distribution of peak sequences within meta - gene analyzed 3’UTRs . Right chart shows difference in conservation scores across samples scoring using PhastCons ( Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test ) . AGO2 peaks in HUAEC and HUVEC and binned human 3’UTRs were compared with binned 3’UTRs of 100 species . Conservation score is represented as a box plot with minimum , maximum , median and quartiles ( n = 3 independent replica for HUVEC and HUAEC for a total of 383 for HUAEC , 749 for HUVEC and 125685 for Control individual value ) . ( c ) Left , Schematic shows cytoskeleton - adhesion - matrix ( CAM ) AGO2 - regulome . AGO2 - mRNA targets identified via AGO2 - HIT - CLIP highlighted in green . Integrins , TALIN1 and BMPR1 proteins ( brown ) are part of CAM’s GO term but were not detected by AGO2 - HITS - CLIP . Arrows point to downstream regulators of CAM proteins targeted by AGO2 . CAM proteins and their regulators were identified by database searches ( Supplementary Fig . 1a , Supplementary tables 1 – 3 ) and manually curated for accuracy . Right chart shows interactome for 25 of the 73 AGO2 - CAM genes in which a complementary MRE ( 7 – 8 nt ) was identified using Target Scan v . 7 . 0 prediction software and miRNAs were identified from AGO2 - HITS - CLIP reads using miRbase ( Methods ) . Color - coded boxes indicate the number of MREs identified in each of the selected CAM - gene 3’UTRs . Lines indicate interaction between MRE and miRNA family members with similar SEEDs . The mRNA - miRNA network shows high complexity , with numerous miRNAs binding one or more CAM - 3’UTRs , while most CAM genes are targeted by more than one miRNA . Moro et al . Page 25 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 2 . CAM - MREs are actively repressed in stiff substrates . ( a ) Schematic for CAM sensor library . The Sensor - Seq lentiviral library ( Methods ) consisted of ( 1 ) mCherry upstream of one of the 97 CAM - MRE , and ( 2 ) GFP lacking any MRE ( control ) . Numbered MREs indicate different MREs within one CAM 3’UTR , alternatively one MRE was cloned per CAM 3’UTR ( Supplementary Table 4 ) . ( b ) Left , mCherry and GFP intensities in HUVECs infected with the lentiviral library at 3 kPa and 30 kPa , a negative control ( no MRE ) , and a positive control ( 3 perfect MREs for miR - 125 , abundant in HUVECs 45 ) . Density plots show relative intensity of cell distribution using contour lines . Moro et al . Page 26 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Each contour line represents 15 % of probability ( higher = lighter grey , lower = darker grey ) to contain cells in each bin over total cells ( 10 , 000 cells ) . Sensor - seq library - infected HUVECs at 3 kPa and 30 kPa were sorted into 4 bins , as indicated , based on mCherry / GFP expression relative to controls . Cells in each bin were isolated and genotyped using specific Illumina primer for sequencing ( Methods ) . Right , Bar graph shows the percentage of mCherry + cells sorted in each bin from 4 experiments ( mean + / − SEM , single experiments are represented by dots ) ( c ) CIRCOS 46 graphical representation of CAM miRNA - MRE interactions . Right quadrants : EC miRNAs with putative SEED matching to CAM MREs sensors displaying differential gene expression between 3 kPa and 30 kPa , divided in two groups : expressed at 3 kPa compared to 30 kPa ( black line , top right ) and expressed at 30 kPa compared to 3 kPa ( black line , bottom right ) . Left quadrants : CAM - sensors most suppressed at 30 kPa compared to 3 kPa ( black line , bottom left ) and vice versa ( black line , top left ) . Color - coded boxes indicate the categorized bins in ( b ) at which cells were isolated and genotyped for a specific CAM - Sensors . Lines indicate match between individual miRNA ( SEED ) and CAM MRE in each condition . Color code indicates the level of complementarity between miRNA SEED and MRE nucleotides . The internal circles show the respective CAM - RNAs ( red ) and proteins ( green ) log2 fold change at 3 kPa compared to 30 kPa and 30 kPa compared to 3 kPa ( Supplementary tables 5 – 6 ) . Source data can be found in Supplemental Table 8 . Moro et al . Page 27 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 3 . miRNAs limit ECs spreading , YAP signaling and contractility . ( a ) Representative immunofluorescence images and traction force maps of HUVECs after infection with AGO2 or non - targeting control pLentiCRISPR virus . Cells on fibronectin - coated 3 kPa PDMS gels were stained for F - ACTIN ( phalloidin ) , focal adhesions ( PAXILLIN ) , and YAP / TAZ ( scale bar = 50μm ) . Heat maps of traction stress for single cells ( scale bar = 20μm ) . All box plots show the minimum , maximum , median and quartiles . Cell area ( based on phalloidin staining ) ( Control n = 163 , AGO2gRNA n = 182 cells / group , dots indicate individual cells , representative data from 6 independent experiments , * * * * Moro et al . Page 28 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t p < 0 . 0001 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) , number of PAXILLIN adhesions per cell ( Control n = 19 fields of view 49 cells , AGO2gRNA n = 20 fields of view 51 cells , dots indicate average per field of view , representative data from 3 independent experiments , * p = 0 . 0085 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) , and nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio of YAP / TAZ ( Control n = 43 cells , AGO2gRNA n = 54 cells , dots represent single cell measurements , representative data from 2 independent experiments , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) . Box plot for Total Force shows total force per single cell ( n = 19 cells / group , dots indicate individual cells , from two independent experiments , * p = 0 . 0119 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) . ( b ) Box plots show quantification of HUVEC treated with shRNA against DROSHA ( methods ) and seeded on fibronectin - coated 3kPa PDMS gels for cell spread area ( shNeg n = 156 , shDRO # 2 n = 138 cells , from two independent experiments , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) , YAP nuclear localization ( shNeg n = 156 , shDRO # 2 n = 138 cells , from two independent experiments , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) and total force per cell ( n = 21 cells / group , from two independent experiments , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) . ( c ) Scatter plot representing difference in protein expression between HUVEC seeded on 30 vs . 3 kPa ( x axis ) or between HUVECs infected with AGO2 gRNA vs . control gRNA ( y axis ) ( n = 3 replicates ) . Green and red identify CAM proteins with coherent or incoherent differential expression , respectively ( Supplementary Table 6 ) . Source data can be found in Supplemental Table 8 . Moro et al . Page 29 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 4 . Post - transcriptional regulation of individual CAM genes limits ECs spreading , YAP signaling and / or contractility . ( a ) Experimental strategy to mutate individual MREs in CAM genes’ 3’UTRs to block miRNA binding ( Methods and Supplementary Fig . 2b ) . ( b ) Representative immunofluorescence images ( top , scale bar = 50μm ) and Western blot ( bottom ) of CAM proteins as indicated ( CTGF ~ 37 kDa , STMN1 ~ 19kDa , VCL ~ 116kDa , RHOB ~ 25kDa , Actin ~ 47kDa ) . HUVECs were infected with lentivirus carrying Cas9 and gRNA targeting specific CAM MREs and no - target gRNA ( a ) and processed at 7 days post infection . ( b ) Moro et al . Page 30 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Quantification of cell spreading ( n = 99 , 75 , 91 , 94 , 88 , 87 , 79 , 54 , 83 from bottom to top , representative data from two independent experiments ) , YAP nuclear translocation ( n = 91 , 81 , 87 , 93 , 79 , 88 , 67 , 54 , 84 cells from bottom to top , representative data from two independent experiments ) and total force per cell ( n = 38 , 33 , 37 , 36 , 34 , 34 , 34 , 30 , 36 cells from bottom to top , from two independent experiments ) in HUVECs on 3 kPa PDMS gels for 48 h after mutation of the indicated MREs ( all box plots indicate the minimum , maximum , median and quartiles , single dots represent single cell , colors represent p values , one - way ANOVA with fishers LSD ) . Source data can be found in Supplemental Table 8 . Moro et al . Page 31 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 5 . AGO2 activity is required to limit fibroblast contractility in 2 - and 3 - D models . ( a ) Representative immunofluorescence images of HDF after infection with pLentiCRISPR virus directed at AGO2 or a non - targeting control seeded on fibronectin coated 3 kPa PDMS gels for 48 hrs ( scale bar = 50μm ) . Heat maps of traction stress for single cells ( scale bar = 20μm ) . Box plots show HDF cell area ( Control n = 63 cells , AGO2gRNA n = 51 cells , representative data from 4 independent experiments , * * * * p < 0 . 001 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) based on phalloidin staining , number of PAXILLIN adhesions per cell ( n = 19 fields of view 63 cells , AGO2 n = 20 fields of view 51 cells , dots indicate average per field of view , Moro et al . Page 32 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t representative data from two independent experiments , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) , and nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio of YAP / TAZ ( Control n = 58 cells , AGO2gRNA n = 34 , cells represented by single dots , representative data from 2 independent experiments , * p = 0 . 0174 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) . Single cell maps of traction stress and quantification of total force per cell ( box plot with whiskers indicate min and max value , Control n = 21 cells , AGO2gRNA n = 20 cells , * p = 0 . 0109 , unpaired two - sided t - test ) . ( b ) Representative 3D matrix constructs with control or Ago2 - mutated mouse dermal fibroblasts ( scale bar = 1mm ) . Bar plots show the average of cell number and construct diameter within transverse sections ( n = 8 , bars indicate mean + / − SEM and dots represent single replicate , * * p < 0 . 01 , ns = non - significant ) . ( c ) Transverse sections of control and Ago2 depleted matrix constructs stained for Vimentin or pMyosin and DAPI ( scale bar = 100μm ) . Source data can be found in Supplemental Table 8 . Moro et al . Page 33 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 6 . Ago2 activity is required for tissue stiffness and wound healing in the zebrafish fin - fold regeneration assay . ( a ) Left , Bright field images of 48 hpf fin fold tissues in the indicated genotypes ( scale bar = 0 . 05mm ) . Right , Elastic modulus of 48 hpf zebrafish fin fold surfaces of Wild - Type , mz ago2 − / − and mz ago2 − / − rescued with 200 pg of in vitro transcribed human Wild - Type AGO2 mRNA ( hs AGO2 mRNA ) . Embryos were harvested and adhered to a soft surface of PDMS in egg water . Elastic moduli were measured and AFM using NanoScope Analysis 1 . 5 software to fit force - deflection curves using the Sneadon model . At least two fin fold regions within each of 10 – 11 embryos were tested for each genotype ( Wild - Type n = 50 , mz ago2− / − Moro et al . Page 34 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t n = 37 , mz ago2 − / − + hsAGO2 n = 27 measurements ; box plots indicate minimum , maximum , median and quartiles , single measures are represented by dots , combined data from 4 independent experiments , * p = 0 . 0284 , * * p = 0 . 0033 , One - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test ) . ( b ) Bright field images of zebrafish fin folds at the indicated stages and genotypes ( head is to the left , scale bar = 0 . 1 mm ) . Dotted black line outlines the edge of the fin fold . Fin fold regeneration was assessed from the distance between the wound edge and the embryo body . One cell stage Wild - Type , mz ago2− / − , and mz ago2− / − embryos rescued with 200 pg of hs AGO2 mRNA . Values were normalized for the size of the fin - fold prior to injury ( WT n = 12 , mz ago2 − / − n = 11 , mz ago2 − / − n = 13 , fish from 2 independent experiments , box plots indicate minimum , maximum , median and quartiles , dots indicate single fish measurements , * p = 0 . 0168 , * * * p = 0 . 0038 ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , two - way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons test ) . hpa = hours post amputation . Source data can be found in Supplemental Table 8 . Moro et al . Page 35 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 7 . Wound healing in mz ago2 and ctgfa MRE fin fold mutants . ( a - c ) Top , schematics representing the time course of fin fold regeneration . Boxes identify the region of interest reported in the images below . Bottom , confocal images of whole mount fin folds within the boxed region from the cartoons at the top , at the indicated stages ( scale bar = 120μm ) . White and black dotted lines indicate the edge of the fin fold . White arrowheads point to staining for the indicated markers . Graphs show box plot with minimum , maximum , median and quartiles . Intensity profiles for multiple embryos were combined ( CTGF n = 4 embryos per genotype , * in mz ago− / − 2h vs . ctgfaMRE mur 2h = Moro et al . Page 36 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 0 . 0318 ; pMyosin n = 4 embryos per genotype , * * * in WT 0h vs . mz ago− / − 0h = 0 . 0004 , * * in mz ago− / − 0h vs . ctgfaMRE 0h = 0 . 0069 , * * in WT 2h vs . mz ago− / − 2h = 0 . 0014 , * * in WT 2h vs . ctgfaMRE 2h = 0 . 0041 ; YAP n = 6 embryos for each genotype , * in WT uncut vs . mz ago− / − uncut = 0 . 027 , * in ago uncut vs . ctgfaMRE uncut = 0 . 0126 , * * in WT 0h vs . mz ago− / − 0h = 0 . 0082 , * * * in mz ago− / − 0h vs . ctgfa MRE 0h = 0 . 0008 , * * in ago 2h vs . ctgf 2h = 0 . 0035 ; single fish represented by dots , n . s . = non - significant , unpaired two - sided t - test ) . For Yap the protein nuclear localization was represented . The nucleus / cytosol ration was obtained using the DAPI channel to generate a binary mask and subtract nuclear YAP - GFP intensity from the total YAP - GFP detected ( Methods and Supplementary Fig . 7b ) . ( d ) Model for miRNA - post - transcriptional regulation of structural proteins function in mechanical tissue homeostasis . Increases in matrix stiffness and the resulting cell contractility increase integrin and actomyosin - dependent CAM signaling , which upregulates miRNAs that suppress CAM transcripts , thus restoring normal cell mechanics . Source data can be found in Supplemental Table 8 . Moro et al . Page 37 Nat Cell Biol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2019 August 11 . A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t