Collective Mind in Organizations : Heedful Interrelating on Flight Decks Karl E . Weick University of Michigan Karlene H . Roberts University of California , Berkeley © 1993 by Cornell University , 0001 - 8392 / 93 / 3803 - 0357 / $ ! , 00 , We acknowledge with deep gratitude , generous and extensive help with previous versions of this manuscript from Sue Ashford , Michael Cohen , Dan Denison , Jane Dutton , Les Gasser , Joel Kahn , Rod Kramer , Peter Manning , Dave Meader , Debra Meyerson , Walter Nord , Linda Pike , Joe Porac , Bob Quinn , Lance Sandelands , Paul Schaffner , Howard Schwartz , Kathie Sutcliffe , Bob Sutton , Diane Vaughan , Jim Walsh , Rod White , Mayer Zaid , and the anonymous reviewers for Administrative Science Quarterly . Unless otherwise cited , aircraft carrier examples are drawn from field observation notes of air operations and interviews aboard Nimitz class carriers made by the second author and others over a five - year period . Researchers spent from four days to three weeks aboard the carriers at any one time . They usually made observations from different vantage points during the evolutions of various events . Observations were entered into computer systems and later compared across observers and across organizational members for clarity of meaning . Examples are also drawn from quarterly workshop discussions with senior officers from those carriers over the two years . The primary observational research methodology was to triangulate observations made by three faculty researchers , as suggested by Glaser and Strauss ( 1967 ) and Eisenhardt ( 1989 ) , The methodology is more fully discussed in Roberts , Stout , and Halpern ( 1993 ) , Paper - and - pencil data were also collected and are discussed elsewhere ( Roberts , Rousseau , and LaPorte , 1993 ) , That research was supported by Office of Naval Research contract # N - 00014 - 86 - k - 0312 and National Science Foundation grant # F7 - 08046 , The concept of collective mind is developed to explain organizational performance in situations requiring nearly continuous operational reliability . Collective mind is conceptualized as a pattern of heedful interrelations of actions in a social system . Actors in the system construct their actions ( contributions ) , understanding that the system consists of connected actions by themselves and others ( representation ) , and interrelate their actions within the system ( subordination ) . Ongoing variation in the heed with which individual contributions , representations , and subordinations are interrelated influences comprehension of unfolding events and the incidence of errors . As heedful interrelating and mindful comprehension increase , organizational errors decrease . Flight operations on aircraft carriers exemplify the constructs presented . Implications for organization theory and practice are drawn . * Some organizations require nearly error - free operations all the time because otherwise they are capable of experiencing catastrophes . One such organization is an aircraft carrier , which an informant in Rochlin , LaPorte . and Roberts ' ( 1987 : 78 ) study described as follows : , , , imagine that it ' s a busy day , and you shrink San Francisco Airport to only one short runway and one rannp and one gate . Make planes take off and land at the same time , at half the present time interval , rock the runway from side to side , and require that everyone who leaves in the morning returns that same day . Make sure the equipment is so close to the edge of the envelope that it ' s fragile . Then turn off the radar to avoid detection , impose strict controls on radios , fuel the aircraft in place with their engines running , put an enemy in the air , and scatter live bombs and rockets around . Now wet the whole thing down with sea water and oil , and man it with 20 - year - olds , half of whom have never seen an airplane close - up . Oh and by the way , try not to kill anyone . Even though carriers represent " a million accidents waiting to happen " ( Wilson . 1986 : 21 ) . almost none of them do . Here , we examine why not . The explanation we wish to explore is that organizations concerned with reliability enact aggregate mental processes that are more fully developed than those found in organizations concerned with efficiency . By fully developed mental processes , we mean that organizations preoccupied with reliability may spend more time and effort organizing for controlled information processing ( Schneider and Schiffrin . 1977 ) . mindful attention ( Langer . 1989 ) . and heedful action ( Ryle . 1949 ) , These intensified efforts enable people to understand more of the complexity they face , which then enables them to respond with fewer errors . Reliable systems are smart systems . Before we can test this line of reasoning we need to develop a language of organizational mind that enables us to describe collective mental processes in organizations . In developing it . we move back and forth between concepts of mind and details of reliable performance in flight operations on a modern super carrier , ^ We use flight operations to illustrate organizational mind for a number of reasons : The technology is relatively simple , the coordination among activities is explicit and visible , the socialization is continuous , agents working alone have less grasp of the 357 / Administrative Science Quarterly . 38 ( 1993 ) : 357 - 381 entire system than they do when working together , the system is constructed of interdependent know - how , teams of people think on their feet and do the " right thing " in novel situations , and the consequences of any lapse in attention are swift and disabling . Because our efforts to understand deck operations got us thinking about the possibility that performance is mediated by collective mental processes , we use these operations to illustrate that thinking , but the processes of mind we discuss are presumed to be inherent in all organizations . What may vary across organizations is the felt need to develop these processes to more advanced levels . THE IDEA OF GROUP MIND Discussions of collective mental processes have been rare , despite the fact that people claim to be studying " social " cognition ( e . g . . Schneider , 1991 ) . The preoccupation with individual cognition has left organizational theorists ill - equipped to do much more with the so - called cognitive revolution than apply it to organizational concerns , one brain at a time . There are a few exceptions , however , and we introduce our own discussion of collective mind with a brief review of three recent attennpts to engage the topic of group mind . Wegner and his associates ( Wegner , Giuliano , and Hertel , 1985 ; Wegner . 1987 ; Wegner , Erber , and Raymond . 1991 ) suggested that group mind may take the form of cognitive interdependence focused around memory processes . They argued that people in close relationships enact a single transactive memory system , complete with differentiated responsibility for remembering different portions of common experience . People know the locations rather than the details of common events and rely on one another to contribute missing details that cue their own retrieval . Transactive memory systems are integrated and differentiated structures in the sense that connected individuals often hold related information in different locations . When people trade lower - order , detailed , disparate information , they often discover higher - order themes , generalizations , and ideas that subsume these details . It is these integrations of disparate inputs that seem to embody the " magical transformation " that group mind theorists sought to understand ( Wegner , Giuliano , and Hertel , 1985 : 268 ) . The important point Wegner contributes to our understanding of collective mental processes is that group mind is not indexed by within - group similarity of attitudes , understanding , or language , nor can it be understood without close attention to communications processes among group members ( Wegner , Giuliano , and Hertel . 1985 : 254 - 255 ) . Both of these lessons will be evident in our reformulation . Work in artificial intelligence provides the backdrop for two additional attempts to conceptualize group mind : Sandelands and Stablein ' s ( 1987 ) description of organizations as mental entities capable of thought and Hutchins ' ( 1990 , 1991 ) description of organizations as distributed information - processing systems . The relevant ideas are associated with theories of " connectionism , " embodied in so - called " neural networks . " Despite claims that their work is grounded in the 358 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind brain ' s microanatomy . connectionists repeatedly refer to " neurological plausibility " ( Quinlan . 1991 : 41 ) . " neuron - like units " ( Churchland . 1992 : 32 ) . " brain - style processing " ( Rumelhart . 1992 : 69 ) . or " neural inspiration " ( Boden . 1990 : 18 ) , This qualification is warranted because the " neural " networks examined by connectionists are simply computational models that involve synchronous parallel processing among many interrelated unreliable and / or simple processing units ( Quinlan . 1991 : 40 ) , The basic idea is that knowledge in very large networks of very simple processing units resides in patterns of connections , not in individuated local symbols . As Boden ( 1990 : 14 ) explained , any " unit ' s activity is regulated by the activity of neighboring units , connected to it by inhibitory or excitatory links whose strength can vary according to design and / or learning , " thus , any one unit can represent several different concepts , and the same concept in a different context may activate a slightly different network of units , Connectionism by itself , however , is a shaky basis on which to erect a theory of organizational mind . The framework remains grounded in a device that models a single , relatively tightly coupled actor as opposed to a loosely coupled system of multiple actors , such as an organization , Connectionists have difficulty simulating emotion and motivation ( Dreyfus and Dreyfus . 1990 ) . as well as everyday thought and reasoning ( Rumelhart . 1992 ) , In computational models there is no turnover of units akin to that found in organizations , where units are replaced or moved to other locations . And the inputs connectionists investigate are relatively simple items such as numerals , words , or phrases , with the outputs being more or less accurate renderings of these inputs ( e , g , . Elman . 1992 ) , This contrasts with organizational researchers who pay more attention to complex inputs , such as traditional competitors who make overtures to cooperate , and to outputs that consist of action as well as thought . What connectionism contributes to organizational theory is the insight that complex patterns can be encoded by patterns of activation and inhibition among simple units , if those units are richly connected . This means that relatively simple actors may be able to apprehend complex inputs if they are organized in ways that resemble neural networks , Connectionists also raise the possibility that mind is " located " in connections and the weights put on them rather than in entities . Thus , to understand mind is to be attentive to process , relating , and method , as well as to structures and content , Sandelands and Stablein ( 1987 : 139 - 141 ) found parallels between the organization of neurons in the brain and the organization of activities in organizations . They used this parallel to argue that connected activities encode concepts and ideas in organizations much like connected neurons encode concepts and ideas in brains . Ideas encoded in behaviors appear to interact in ways that suggest operations of intelligent processing . These parallels are consistent with the idea that organizations are minds . The important lessons from Sandelands and Stablein ' s analysis are that connections between behaviors , rather than people , may be the crucial 359 / ASQ . September 1993 " locus " for mind and that intelligence is to be found in patterns of behavior rather than in individual knowledge . Hutchins ( 1990 , 1991 : 289 ) has used connectionist networks , such as the " constraint satisfaction network , " to model how interpretations based on distributed cognitions are formed . These simulations are part of a larger inquiry into how teams coordinate action ( Hutchins , 1990 ) and the extent to which distributed processing amplifies or counteracts errors that form in individual units . Hutchins ' analysis suggests that systems maintain the flexible , robust action associated with mindful performance if individuals have overlapping rather than mutually exclusive task knowledge . Overlapping knowledge allows for redundant representation that enables people to take responsibility for all parts of the process to which they can make a contribution ( Hutchins . 1990 : 210 ) . The potential fit between connectionist imagery and organizational concepts can be inferred from Hutchins ' ( 1990 : 209 ) description of coordination by mutual constraint in naval navigation teams : [ The ] sequence of action to be taken [ in group performance ] need not be explicitly represented anywhere in the systenn . If participants know how to coordinate their activities with the technologies and people with which they interact , the global structure of the task perfornnance will ennerge fronn the local interactions of the nnennbers . The structure of the activities of the group is determined by a set of local computations rather than by the implementation of the sort of global plan that appears In the solo performer ' s procedure . In the team situation , a set of behavioral dependencies are set up . These dependencies shape the behavior pattern of the group . The lessons we use from Hutchins ' work include the importance of redundant representation , the emergence of global structure from local interactions , and behavioral dependencies as the substrate of distributed processing . Our own attempt to describe group mind has been informed by these three sources but is based on a different set of assumptions . We pay more attention to the form of connections than to the strength of connections and more attention to mind as activity than to mind as entity . To make this shift in emphasis clear , we avoid the phrases " group mind " and " organizational mind " in favor of the phrase " collective mind . " The word " collective , " unlike the words " group " or " organization , " refers to individuals who act as if they are a group . People who act as if they are a group interrelate their actions with more or less care , and focusing on the way this interrelating is done reveals collective mental processes that differ in their degree of development . Our focus is at once on individuals and the collective , since only individuals can contribute to a collective mind , but a collective mind is distinct from an individual mind because it inheres in the pattern of interrelated activities among many people . We begin the discussion of collective mind by following the lead of Ryle ( 1949 ) and developing the concept of mind as a disposition to act with heed . We then follow the lead of Asch ( 1952 ) and develop the concept of collective 360 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind interrelating as contributing , representing , and subordinating , and illustrate these activities with exannples from carrier operations . We next combine the notions of heed and interrelating into the concept of collective mind as heedful interrelating and suggest social processes that may account for variations in heedful interrelating . Finally , we describe three examples of heedful interrelating , two from carrier operations and one from the laboratory , and present an extended example of heedless interrelating that resulted in a $ 38 - million accident . MIND AS DISPOSITION TO HEED " Mind " is a noun similar to nouns like faith , hope , charity , role , and culture . " Mind " is not the name of a person , place , or thing but , rather , is a dispositional term that denotes a propensity to act in a certain manner or style . As Ryle ( 1949 : 51 ) said . The statement " the mind is its own place , " as theorists might construe it , is not true , for the mind is not even a metaphorical " place . " On the contrary , the chessboard , the platform , the scholar ' s desk , the judge ' s bench , the lorry - driver ' s seat , the studio and the football field are among its places . These are where people work and play stupidly or intelligently . That mind is actualized in patterns of behavior that can range from stupid to intelligent can be seen in the example Ryle ( 1949 : 33 ) used of a clown who trips and stumbles just as clumsy people do . What ' s different is that " he trips and stumbles on purpose and after much rehearsal and at the golden moment and where the children can see him and so as not to hurt himself . " When a clown trips artfully , people applaud the style of the action , the fact that tripping is done with care , judgment , wit , and appreciation of the mood of the spectators . In short , the tripping is done with heed . Heed is not itself a behavior but it refers to the way behaviors such as tripping , falling , and recovering are assembled . Artful tripping is called heedful , not so much because the tripping involves action preceded by thought but because the behaviors patterned into the action of tripping suggest to the observer qualities such as " noticing , taking care , attending , applying one ' s mind , concentrating , putting one ' s heart into something , thinking what one is doing , alertness , interest , intentness , studying , and trying " { Ryle , 1949 : 136 ) . These inferences , based on the style of the action , are called " heed concepts " and support the conclusion that the behaviors were combined intelligently rather than stupidly . The word " heed " captures an important set of qualities of mind that elude the more stark vocabulary of cognition . These nuances of heed are especially appropriate to our interest in systems preoccupied with failure - free performance . People act heedfully when they act more or less carefully , critically , consistently , purposefully , attentively , studiously , vigilantly , conscientiously , pertinaciously ( Ryle , 1949 : 151 ) . Heed adverbs attach qualities of mind directly to performances , as in the description , " the airboss monitored the pilot ' s growing load of tasks attentively . " Notice that the statement does not say that the airboss was doing two things , monitoring and also checking to be sure that the 361 / ASQ , September 1993 monitoring was done carefully . Instead , the statement asserts that , having been coached to monitor carefully , his present monitoring reflects this style . Mind is in the monitoring itself , not in some separate episode of theorizing about monitoring . Heedful performance is not the same thing as habitual performance . In habitual action , each performance is a replica of its predecessor , whereas in heedful performance , each action is modified by its predecessor ( Ryle , 1949 : 42 ) . In heedful performance , the agent is still learning . Furthermore , heedful performance is the outcome of training and experience that weave together thinking , feeling , and willing . Habitual performance is the outcome of drill and repetition . When heed declines , performance is said to be heedless , careless , unmindful , thoughtless , unconcerned , indifferent . Heedless performance suggests a failure of intelligence rather than a failure of knowledge . It is a failure to see , to take note of , to be attentive to . Heedless performance is not about ignorance , cognition ( Lyons , 1980 : 57 ) , and facts . It is about stupidity , competence , and know - how . Thus , mind refers to stretches of human behavior that exhibit qualities of intellect and character ( Ryle , 1949 : 126 ) . Group as Interrelated Activity Ryle ' s ideas focus on individual mind . To extend his ideas to groups , we first have to specify the crucial performances in groups that could reflect a disposition to heed . To pinpoint these crucial performances , we derive four defining properties of group performance from Asch ' s ( 1952 : 251 - 255 ) discussion of " mutually shared fields " and illustrate these properties with carrier examples . ^ The first defining property of group performance is that individuals create the social forces of group life when they act as if there were such forces . As Asch ( 1952 : 251 ) explained it . We must see group phenomena as both the product and condition of actions of individuals . . . . There are no forces between individuals as organisms ; yet to all intents and purposes they act as if there were , and they actually create social forces . Group action achieves the kind of result that would be understandable if all participants were acting under the direction of a single organizing center . No such center exists ; between individuals is a hiatus , which nevertheless , they succeed in overcoming with surprising effectiveness . An example from carriers occurs during flight operations . The men in the tower ( Air Department ) monitor and give instructions to incoming and departing aircraft . Simultaneously , the men on the landing signal officers ' platform do the same thing . They are backed up by the men in Air Operations who monitor and instruct aircraft at some distance from the ship . From the aviator ' s viewpoint , he receives integrated information about his current status and future behavior from an integrated source when , in reality , 2 : : : siiliiTiB ) tt : sZ of the several sources are relatively independent of one " the mutual alignment of action . " another and located in different parts of the ship . 362 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind The second defining property of group performance is that when people act as if there are sociai forces , they construct their actions ( contribute ) while envisaging a social system of joint actions ( represent ) , and interrelate that constructed action with the system that is envisaged ( subordinate ) . Asch ( 1952 : 251 - 252 ) explained this as follows : There are group actions that are possible only when each participant has a representation that includes the actions of others and their relations . The respective actions converge relevantly , assist and supplement each other only when the joint situation is represented in each and when the representations are structurally sinnilar . Only when these conditions are given can individuals subordinate themselves to the requirements of joint action . These representations and the actions that they initiate / bring group facts into existence and produce the phenomenal solidity of group process . The simultaneous envisaging and interrelating that create a system occur when a pilot taxies onto the catapult for launching , is attached to it , and advances his engines to full power . Even though pilots have to rely on the catapult crew , they remain vigilant to see if representations are similar . Pilots keep asking themselves questions like , " Does it feel right ? " or " Is the rhythm wrong ? " The referent for the question , " Does ltfee \ right ? " however , is not the aircraft but the joint situation to which he has subordinated himself . If a person on the deck signals the pilot to reduce his engines from full power , he won ' t do so until someone stands in front of the plane , directly over the catapult , and signals for a reduction in power . Only then is the pilot reasonably certain that the joint situation has changed . He now trusts that the catapult won ' t be triggered suddenly and fling his underpowered aircraft into a person and then into the ocean . The third defining property of group performance is that contributing , representing , and subordinating create a joint situation of interrelations among activities , which Asch ( 1952 : 252 ) referred to as a system : When these conditions are given we have a social systenn or a process of a definite form that embraces the actions of a number of individuals . Such a system does not reside in the individuals taken separately , though each individual contributes to it ; nor does it reside outside them ; it is present in the interrelations between the activities of individuals . An example from carriers is a pilot landing an aircraft on a deck . This is not a solitary act . A pilot doesn ' t really land ; he is " recovered . " And recovery is a set of interrelated activities among air traffic controllers , landing signal officers , the control tower , navigators , deck hands , the helmsman driving the ship , etc . As the recovery of a single aircraft nears completion in the form of a successful trap , nine to ten people on the landing signal officer ' s platform , up to 15 more people in the tower , and two to three more people on the bridge observe the recovery and can wave the aircraft off if there is a problem . While this can be understood as an example of redundancy , it can also be interpreted as activities that can be interrelated more or less adequately , depending on the care with which contributing , representing , and subordinating are done . 363 / ASQ , September 1993 The fourth and final defining property of group performance suggested by Asch is that the effects produced by a pattern of interrelated activities vary as a function of the style ( e , g , . heedful - heedless ) as well as the strength ( e , g , . loose - tight ) with which the activities are tied together . This is suggested by the statement that , in a system of interrelated activities , individuals can work with . for . or against each other : The form the interrelated actions take—on a team or in an office—is a datum of precisely the same kind as any other fact . One could say that all the facts of the system can be expressed as the sum of the actions of individuals . The statement is misleading , however , if one fails to add that the individuals would not be capable of these particular actions unless they were responding to ( or envisaging the possibility of ) the system . Once the process described is in motion it is no longer the individual " as such " who determines its direction , nor the group acting upon the individual as an external force , but individuals working with . for . or against each other , ( Asch , 1952 : 252 ) It is these varying forms of interrelation that embody collective mind . An example of interrelating on carriers can be seen when ordnance is loaded onto an aircraft and its safety mechanisms are removed . If there is a sudden change of mission , the live ordnance must be disarmed , removed , and replaced by other ordnance that is now activated , all of this under enormous time pressure . These interrelated activities , even though tightly coupled , can become more or less dangerous depending on how the interrelating is done . In one incident observed , senior officers kept changing the schedule of the next day ' s flight events through the night , which necessitated a repeated change in ordnance up to the moment the day launches began , A petty officer changing bombs underneath an aircraft , where the pilot couldn ' t see him . lost a leg when the pilot moved the 36 . 000 - pound aircraft over him . The petty officer should have tied the plane down before going underneath to change the load but failed to do so because there was insufficient time , a situation created by continual indecision at the top . Thus , the senior officers share the blame for this accident because they should have resolved their indecision in ways that were more mindful of the demands it placed on the system . Although Asch argued that interrelated activities are the essence of groups , he said little about how these interrelations occur or how they vary over time . Instead , he treated interrelations as a variable and interrelating as a constant . If we treat interrelations as a variable and interrelating as a process , this suggests a way to conceptualize collective mind , HEEDFUL INTERRELATING AS COLLECTIVE MIND The insights of Ryle and Asch can be combined into a concept of collective mind if we argue that dispositions toward heed are expressed in actions that construct interrelating . Contributing , representing , and subordinating , actions that form a distinct pattern external to any given individual , become the medium through which collective mind is manifest . Variations in heedful interrelating 364 / ASQ . September 1993 Collective Mind correspond to variations in collective mind and comprehension . We assume , as Follett ( 1924 : 146 - 153 ) did , that mind begins with actions , which we refer to here as contributions . The contributions of any one individual begin to actualize collective mind to the degree that heedful representation and heedful subordination define those contributions . A heedful contribution enacts collective mind as it begins to converge with , supplement , assist , and become defined in relation to the imagined requirements of joint action presumed to flow from some social activity system . Similar conduct flows from other contributing individuals in the activity systenn toward others innagined to be in that system . These separate efforts vary in the heedfulness with which they interrelate , and these variations form a pattern . Since the object of these activities ( " the envisaged systenn , " to use Asch ' s phrase ) is itself being constituted as these activities become more or less interrelated , the emergent properties of this object are not contained fully in the representation of any one person nor are they finalized at any moment in time . A single emergent property may appear in more than one representation , but seldonn in all . And different properties are shared in common by different subsets of people . Asch seems to have had this distributed representation of the envisaged system in mind when he referred to " structurally similar representations . " This pattern of distributed representation explains the transindividual quality of collective mind . Portions of the envisaged system are known to all , but all of it is known to none . The collective mind is " located " in the process of interrelating just as the individual mind for Ryle was " located " in the activities of lorry driving , chess playing , or article writing . Collective mind exists potentially as a kind of capacity in an ongoing activity stream and ennerges in the style with which activities are interrelated . These patterns of interrelating are as close to a physical substrate for collective mind as we are likely to find . There is nothing mystical about all this . Collective mind is manifest when individuals construct mutually shared fields . The collective mind that emerges during the interrelating of an activity system is more developed and more capable of intelligent action the more heedfully that interrelating is done . A crude way to represent the development of a collective mind is by means of a matrix in which the rows are people and the columns are either the larger activities of contributing , representing , and subordinating , or their component behaviors ( e . g . , converging with , assisting , or supplementing ) . Initially , the cell entries can be a simple " yes " or " no . " " Yes " means a person performs that action heedfully ; " no " means the action is done heedlessly . The more " yeses " in the matrix , the more developed the collective mind . We portray collective mind in terms of method rather than content , structuring rather than structure , connecting rather than connections . Interrelations are not given but are constructed and reconstructed continually by individuals ( Blumer , 1969 : 110 ) through the ongoing activities of 365 / ASQ , September 1993 contributing , representing , and subordinating . Although these activities are done by individuals , their referent is a socially structured field . Individual activities are shaped by this envisioned field and are meaningless apart from it . When people make efforts to interrelate , these efforts can range from heedful to heedless . The more heed reflected in a pattern of interrelations , the more developed the collective mind and the greater the capability to comprehend unexpected events that evoive rapidly in unexpected ways . When we say that a collective mind " comprehends " unexpected events , we mean that heedful interrelating connects sufficient individual know - how to meet situationai demands . For organizations concerned with reliability , those demands often consist of unexpected , nonsequential interactions among small failures that are hard to see and hard to believe . These incomprehensible failures often build quickly into catastrophes ( Perrow , 1984 : 7 - 12 , 22 , 78 , 88 ) . An increase in heedful interrelating can prevent or correct these failures of comprehension in at least three ways . First , longer stretches of time can be connected , as when more know - how is brought forward from the past and is elaborated into new contributions and representations that extrapolate farther into the future . Second , comprehension can be improved if more activities are connected , such as when interrelations span earlier and later stages of task sequences . And third , comprehension can be increased if more levels of experience are connected , as when newcomers who take nothing for granted interrelate more often with old - timers who think they have seen it all . Each of these three changes makes the pattern of interrelations more complex and better able to sense and regulate the complexity created by unexpected events . A system that is tied together more densely across time , activities , and experience comprehends more of what is occurring because the scope of heedful action reaches into more places . When heed is spread across more activities and more connections , there should be more understanding and fewer errors . A collective mind that becomes more comprehensive , comprehends more . Variations in Heed If collective mind is embodied in the interrelating of social activities , and if collective mind is developed more or less fully depending on the amount of heedfulness with which that interrelating is done , we must address the issue of what accounts for variations in heed . We suspect the answer lies in Mead ' s ( 1934 : 186 ) insight that mind is " the individual importation of social process . " We understand the phrase " social process " to mean a set of ongoing interactions in a social activity system from which participants continually extract a changing sense of self - interrelation and then re - enact that sense back into the system . This ongoing interaction process is recapitulated in individual lives and continues despite the replacement of people . Mead stressed the reality of recapitulation , as did others . Ryle ( 1949 : 27 ) , for example , obsen / ed that " this trick of talking to oneself in silence is acquired neither quickly nor 366 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind without effort ; and it is a necessary condition to our acquiring it that we should have previously learned to talk intelligently aloud and have heard and understood other people doing so . Keeping our thoughts to ourselves is a sophisticated accomplishment . " Asch ( 1952 : 257 ) described the relationship between the individual and the group as the only part - whole relation in nature " that depends on recapitulation of the structure of the whole in the part . " The same point is made by Morgan ( 1986 ) and Hutchins ( 1990 : 211 ) , using the more recent imagery of holograms : System capacities that are relevant for the functioning of the whole are built into its parts . In each of these renderings , social processes are the prior resources from which individual mind , self , and action are fashioned ( Mead , 1934 : 191 - 192 ) . This means that collective mind precedes the individual mind and that heedful interrelating foreshadows heedful contributing . Pattems of heedful interrelating in ongoing social processes may be internalized and recapitulated by individuals more or less adequately as they move in and out of the system . If heedful interrelating is visible , rewarded , modeled , discussed , and preserved in vivid stories , there is a good chance that newcomers will learn this style of responding , will incorporate it into their definition of who they are in the system , and will reaffirm and perhaps even augment this style as they act . To illustrate , Walsh and Ungson ( 1991 : 60 ) defined organization as a " network of intersubjectively shared meanings that are sustained through the development and use of a common language and everyday social interactions . " Among the shared meanings and language on carriers we heard these four assertions : ( 1 ) If it ' s not written down you can do it ; ( 2 ) Look for clouds in every silver lining ; ( 3 ) Most positions on this deck were brought in blood ; and ( 4 ) Never get into something you can ' t get out of . Each of these guidelines , if practiced openly , represents an image of heedful interrelating that can be internalized and acted back into the system . If such guidelines are neglected , ignored , or mocked , however , interrelating still goes on , but it is done with indifference and carelessness . Whether heedful images survive or die depends importantly on interactions among those who differ in their experience with the system . While these interactions have been the focus of preliminary discussions of communities of practice ( e . g . . Lave and Wenger , 1991 : 98 - 100 ) involving apprentices and experts , we highlight a neglected portion of the process , namely , the effects of socialization on the insiders doing the socializing ( Sutton and Louis , 1987 ) . When experienced insiders answer the questions of inexperienced newcomers , the insiders themselves are often resocialized . This is significant because it may remind insiders how to act heedfully and how to talk about heedful action . Newcomers are often a pretext for insiders to reconstruct what they knew but forgot . Heedful know - how becomes more salient and more differentiated when insiders see what they say to newcomers and discover that they thought more thoughts than they thought they did . 367 / ASQ , September 1993 Whether collective mind gets renewed during resocialization may be determined largely by the candor and narrative skills of insiders and the attentiveness of newcomers . Candid insiders who use memorable stories to describe failures as well as successes , their doubts as well as their certainties , and what works as well as what fails , help newcomers infer dispositions of heed and carelessness . Insiders who narrate richly also often remind themselves of forgotten details when they reconstruct a previous event . And these reminders increase the substance of mind because they increase the number of examples of heed in work . Narrative skills ( Bruner , 1986 ; Weick and Browning , 1986 ; Orr , 1990 ) are important for collective mind because stories organize know - how , tacit knowledge , nuance , sequence , multiple causation , means - end relations , and consequences into a memorable plot . The ease with which a single story integrates diverse themes of heed in action foreshadows the capability of individuals to do the same . A coherent story of heed is mind writ small . And a repertoire of war stories , which grows larger through the memorable exercise of heed in novel settings , is mind writ large . The quality of collective mind is heavily dependent on the way insiders interact with newcomers ( e . g . . Van Maanen , 1976 ) . If insiders are taciturn , indifferent , preoccupied , available only in stylized performances , less than candid , or simply not available at all , newcomers are in danger of acting without heed because they have only banal conversations to internalize . They have learned little about heedful interdependence . When these newcomers act and try to anticipate the contributions of others , their actions will be stupid , and mistakes will happen . These mistakes may represent small failures that produce learning ( Sitkin , 1992 ) . More ominous is the possibility that these mistakes may also represent a weakening of system capacity for heedful responding . When there is a loss of particulars about how heed can be expressed in representation and subordination , reliable performance suffers . As seasoned people become more peripheral to socialization , there should be a higher incidence of serious accidents . We have dwelt on insider participation simply because this participation is a conspicuous phenomenon that allows us to describe collective mind , but anything that changes the ongoing interaction ( e . g . , preoccupation with personalities rather than with the task ) can also change the capability of that interaction to preserve and convey dispositions of heed . Those changes in turn should affect the quality of mind , the likelihood of comprehension , and the incidence of error . ILLUSTRATIONS OF HEED IN INTERRELATING The concepts of heed , interrelating , contributing , representing , subordinating , intelligent action , comprehension , recapitulation , and resocialization come together in the concept of collective mind as heedful interrelating . Applying the language of collective mind to four examples of complex systems , we illustrate the adequate comprehension produced by heedful interrelating and the 368 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind problematic comprehension produced by heedless interrelating . Heedful Interrelating The first example of interrelating that is heedful involves a laboratory analogue of collective mind ( Weick and Gilfillan . 1971 ) , Three people who can neither see nor talk with one another are given target numbers between 1 and 30 , Whenever a target number is announced , each person is to contribute some number between 0 and 10 such that , when all three contributions are added together , they sum to the target number . There are many ways to solve this problem ( e , g , . a target number of 13 can be achieved with a 3s strategy . 4 - 4 - 5 . or a 10s strategy . 10 - 3 - 0 ) , Once a group evolves a strategy , people are removed one at a time , and strangers , who know nothing of the strategy in use . enter . The questions are . how do old - timers interrelate with newcomers , what strategy emerges , how soon does it emerge , and how stable is it ? Austere as these operations are . they have the rudiments of a collective mind , A newcomer knows a number of things : ( 1 ) There are others in the activity system but they must be envisioned , since it is impossible to communicate with them ( representation ) ; ( 2 ) the two other people have had some experience with the system and with the game ( there are imagined requirements to which one must subordinate ) ; ( 3 ) each contribution is important and must interrelate with the others ( contributions must converge , supplement , assist , and be defined in relation to one another ) ; ( 4 ) to learn the existing system or to create a new one requires attention , careful calculations , and clear signals of intent ( heedful contribution , representation , and subordination ) ; and . ( 5 ) casual , indifferent interrelating will not be punished severely , because people are anonymous , and the rewards for participation are trivial ( heedless responding is an option ) . Just as the newcomers know these things , so do the old - timers . When these three people try to work out and maintain a system that hits each target on the first try . they are attempting to interrelate . They contribute , represent , and subordinate with varying amounts of heed . Their interrelating is better able to distinguish a mistake from an intentional effort to change strategy the more heedfully it was assembled . Likewise , heedful interrelating can " read " a newcomer ' s intentions quickly , whereas heedless interrelating cannot . These discriminations are not accomplished by single individuals but are accomplished by interrelated activities and the heedfulness with which those activities are defined in relation to one another . Heedful action at any one of these three positions can be undermined if it is not reciprocated at the other two . What is undermined , however , is a pattern of interrelations , not a person , A pattern of nonreciprocated heedfulness represents a loss of intelligence that is reflected in missed targets and slow change . Heedful interrelating on carriers looks a lot like the pattern of interrelating seen in the common - target game , A vivid example of this similarity is Gillcrist ' s ( 1990 : 287 - 288 ) 369 / ASQ . September 1993 account of what it feels like to land and taxi on a carrier deck at night . Having successfully trapped onto the deck , Gillcrist watched the flight director ' s two amber wands : I raised the hook handle with my right hand and simultaneously added a lot of power to get the Crusader moving forward . There was an urgency in the taxi signal movement of the wands , telling me that there must be another plane dose behind me in the groove . They wanted to get my airplane completely across the foul line as quickly as possible . Taxiing at night was more carefully done than in the light of day . however . We ' d had enough airplanes taxi over the side at night to learn that lesson . . . . The wands pointed to another set of wands further up the flight deck and I began to follow their direction as my F - 8 was taxied all the way to the first spot on the bow . " God . how I hate this . " I muttered to myself . " Do they really have to do this or are they just trying to scare me ? " In spotting me in the first taxi spot on the bow . the taxi director was turning the F - 8 so close to the edge of the flight deck that the cockpit actually swung in an arc over the deck ' s edge . All I could see was black rushing water eighty feet below . " Jesus " I said to myself . " I hope that guy knows what he is doing . " The taxi director does know what he is doing , as does the pilot , but that alone does not keep the plane from dropping off the deck . The interrelating of their know - how keeps the plane on the deck . A command from the director that is not executed by the pilot or a pilot deviation that is not corrected by the director are equally dangerous and not controllable by either party alone . The activities of taxiing and directing remain failure - free to the extent that they are interrelated heedfully . A third example of heedful interrelating is of special interest because so much of it appears to involve the mind of one individual , in this case , the person responsible for deck operations ( the bos ' n ) . One of the people in this position who was interviewed had 23 years of experience on 16 carriers . At the time he joined this carrier ' s crew , it took six hours to spot 45 aircraft on the deck . He reduced that time to two hours and 45 minutes , which gave his crew more time to relax and maintain their alertness . This person tries constantly to prevent the four worst things that can happen on a deck : It catches fire , becomes fouled , locked ( nothing can move ) , or a plane is immobilized in the landing area . The more times a plane is moved to prevent any of these conditions , the higher the probability that it will brush against another plane ( " crunch " ) , be damaged , and be out of service until repaired . This bos ' n , who is responsible for the smooth functioning of deck operations , gets up an hour early each day just to think about the kind of environment he will create on the deck that day , given the schedule of operations . This thinking is individual mind at work , but it also illustrates how collective mind is represented in the head of one person . The bos ' n is dealing with collective mind when he represents the capabilities and weaknesses of imagined crewmembers ' responses in his thinking , when he tailors sequences of activities so that improvisation and flexible response are activated as an expected part of the day ' s adaptive response , and when he counts on the interrelations among crewnnembers themselves to " mind " the day ' s activities . 370 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind The bos ' n does not plan specific step - by - step operations but , rather , plans which crews will do the planning and deciding , when , and with what resources at hand . The system will decide the operations , and the bos ' n sets up the system that will do this . The bos ' n does this by attempting to recognize the strengths and weaknesses of the various crews working for him . The pieces of the system he sets up may interrelate stupidly or intelligently , in large part because they will either duplicate or undermine the heedful contributing , representing , and subordinating he anticipates . Heedless Interrelating When interrelating breaks down , individuals represent others in the system in less detail , contributions are shaped less by anticipated responses , and the boundaries of the envisaged system are drawn more narrowly , with the result that subordination becomes meaningless . Attention is focused on the local situation rather than the joint situation . People still may act heedfully , but not with respect to others . Interrelating becomes careless . Key people and activities are overlooked . As interrelating deteriorates and becomes more primitive , there is less comprehension of the implications of unfolding events , slower correction of errors , and more opportunities for small errors to combine and amplify . When these events are set in motion and sustained through heedless interrelating , there is a greater chance that small lapses can enlarge into disasters . An incident that happened during a nighttime launch and recovery , which was described to us in interviews and correspondence , illustrates the steady loss of collective mind as interrelating became less heedful . This incident began to unfold during a night launch in which one - third of the planes in the mission were still on deck waiting to be launched , even though other planes were already beginning to be recovered . Aircraft A , which was in the air and the fourth plane in line to land , had an apparent hydraulic failure , although the pilot was able to get his gear and tail hook down . This failure meant that if the plane were landed , its wings could not be folded , and it would take up twice the space normally allotted to it . This complicates the landing of all planes behind it . While the pilot of plane A was trying to get help for his problem on a radio channel , plane B , an F - 14 , which was number three in order of landing , had a compound hydraulic failure , and none of his back - up hydraulic systems appeared to work , something that was unheard of . Plane C , which was fifth in line to land , then developed a control problem . Thus , the airboss was faced , first , with several A - 7 aircraft that still had to be launched . This is not a trivial complication , because the only catapult available for these aircraft was the one whose blast - deflector panel extends part way into the area where planes land . Second , the airboss had a string of planes about to land that included ( 1 ) a normally operating A - 7 , ( 2 ) a normally operating A - 7 , ( 3 ) plane B with a compound hydraulic failure , ( 4 ) plane A with a hydraulic failure but gear and tail hook down , and ( 5 ) plane C with an apparent control problem . 371 / ASQ , September 1993 The first plane was taken out of the landing pattern and the second was landed . Plane B , the one with the most severe problems , was told to land and then had to be waved off because the person operating the deflector panel for launches lowered the panel one second too late to allow B to land . The deflector operator had not been informed that an emergency existed . Plane B and its increasingly frightened pilot were reinserted into the landing pattern behind plane C for a second pass at the deck . Plane B then experienced an additional hydraulic failure . Plane A landed without incident , as did plane C . Plane C had corrected its control problem , but no one was informed . Thus , plane B ' s second pass was delayed longer than necessary because he had to wait for C to land in the mistaken belief that C still had a problem . The pilot of plane B became increasingly agitated and less and less able to help diagnose what might be wrong with his aircraft . The decision was made to send plane B to a land base , but it ran out of fuel on the way and the pilot and his RIO ( radar intercept officer ) had to eject . Both were rescued , but a $ 38 - million aircraft was lost . If aircraft B had not been waved off the first time it tried to land , it would have been safely recovered . If we analyze this incident as a loss of collective mind produced by heedless interrelating , we look for two things : events that became incomprehensible , signifying a loss of mind , and increasingly heedless interrelating . There were several events that became harder to comprehend . The failure of the hydraulic system in aircraft B was puzzling . The triggering of additional hydraulic failures was even more so . To have three of five aircraft on final approach declare emergencies was itself something that was hard to comprehend , as was the problem of how to recover three disabled planes while launching three more immediately . Incomprehensible events made interrelating more difficult , which then made the events even harder to comprehend . The loss of heed in interrelating was spread among contributions , representations , and subordinations . The squadron representative who tried to deal with the stressed pilot in plane B was not himself a pilot ( he was an RIO ) , and he did not scan systematically for possible sources of the problem . Instead , he simply told the pilot assorted things to try , not realizing that , in the pilot ' s doing so , additional systems on the plane began to fail . He didn ' t realize these growing complications because the pilot was both imprecise in his reports of trouble and slow to describe what happened when he tested some hypothesis proposed by the representative . And the representative did nothing to change the pilot ' s style of contributing . But heedless interrelating was not confined to exchanges between pilot and representative . The RIO in plane B made no effort to calm the pilot or help him diagnose . The deflector operator was not treated as a person in the recovery system . Three different problems were discussed on two radio frequencies , which made it difficult to sort out which plane had which problem . No one seemed to register that the squadron representative was himself getting farther behind and making increasingly heedless contributions . The 372 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind There is a limit to heedfulness , given the number and skill of participants , and on this night this ship was at that limit . The system was overioaded , and the situation was one that managers of high - technology weapons systems worry about all the time . They call it OBE ( overcome by events ) . Given perhaps only minor differences in the situation , the outcomes might have been different . In ' . his situation , for example , had the t arrier air group commander come to the tower ( which he often does ) , he would have added yet another set of eyes and ears , with their attendant si < ills . Perhaps he could have monitored one aspect of the situation while the boss and mini boss took charge of others , and the situation would have been a more heedful one . Had the squadron representative in the tower been a pilot , he might have searched through his own repertoire of things that can go wrong and helped the F - 14 ' s pilot calm down and solve his problem , increasing the heedfulness of the situation . airboss in command of the tower was an F - 14 pilot , but he was preoccupied with the five incoming and the three outgoing aircraft and could not be pulled completely into the activity system that was dealing with the F - 14 problem . As heed began to be withdrawn from the system , activities and people became isolated , the system began to pull apart , the problems became more incomprehensible , and it became harder for individuals to interrelate with a system of activities that was rapidly losing its form . The pattern of interrelated activities lost intelligence and mind as contributions became more thoughtless and less interdependent . Had the pattern of interrelations been more heedful , it might have detected what was subsequently said to be the most likely cause of the failures in plane B , Although the aircraft was never recovered , the navy ' s investigation of the incident concluded that too many demands were placed on the emergency back - up systems , and the plane became less and less flyable . Sustained heedful interrelating might well have registered that the growing number of attempted solutions had in fact created a new problem that was worse than any problem that was present to begin with . ^ It is important to realize that our analysis , using the concepts of collective mind and heedful interrelating , implies something more than the simple advice , " be careful . " People can ' t be careful unless they take account of others and unless others do the same . Being careful is a social rather than a solitary act . To act with care , people have to envision their contributions in the context of requirements for joint action . Furthermore , to act with care does not mean that one plans how to do this and then applies the plan to the action . Care is not cultivated apart from action . It is expressed in action and through action . Thus people can ' t be careful , they are careful ( or careless ) . The care is in the action . The preceding analysis also suggests that it is crucial to pay attention to mind , because accidents are not just issues of ignorance and cognition , they are issues of inattention and conduct as well . The examples of incomprehension mentioned above are not simply issues of fact and thinking . Facts by themselves are of no help if they cannot be communicated or heard or applied or interpreted or incorporated into activities or placed in contexts , in short , if they are not addressed mindfully . One " fact " of this incident is that plane B could have landed had it not been waved off because of the extended deflector . Furthermore , individuals within the system were not ignorant of crucial details ( e . g . , the pilot of plane C knew he no longer had a problem ) . One interpretation of this incident is that individuals were smarter than the system , but the problem was more complex than any one individual could understand . Heedful interrelating of activities constructs a substrate that is more complex and , therefore , better able to comprehend complex events than is true for smart but isolated individuals . The F - 14 may have been lost because heedful interrelating was lost . Heightened attentiveness to social process might have prevented both losses . 373 / ASQ , September 1993 DISCUSSION We conclude from our analysis that carrier operations are a struggle for alertness and that the concept of heedful interrelating helps capture this struggle . We began with the question . How can we analyze a complex social activity system in which fluctuations in comprehension seem to be consequential ? We focused on heed ( understood as dispositions to act with attentiveness . alertness , and care ) , conduct ( understood as behavior that takes into account the expectations of others ) , and mind ( understood as integration of feeling , thinking , and willing ) . We were able to talk about group mind without reification . because we grounded our ideas in individual actions and then treated those actions as the means by which a distinct higher - order pattern of interrelated activities emerged . This pattern shaped the actions that produced it . persisted despite changes in personnel , and changed despite unchanging personnel . Thus , we did not reify social entities , because we argued that they emerge from individual actions that construct interrelations . But neither did we reify individual entities , because we argued that they emerge through selective importation , interpretation , and re - enactment of the social order that they constitute . In broadening our focus , we conceptualized mind as action that constructs mental processes rather than as mental processes that construct action . We proposed that variations in contributing , representing , and subordinating produce collective mind . Common hallmarks of mind such as alertness , attentiveness . understanding , and relating to the world were treated as coincident with and immanent in the connecting activities . To connect is to mind . For the collective mind , the connections that matter are those that link distributed activities , and the ways those connections are accomplished embody much of what we have come to mean by the word " mind , " The ways people connect their activities make conduct mindful . Mindless actions ignore interrelating or accomplish it haphazardly and with indifference ( Bellah et al , . 1991 ) , As a result of our analysis , we now see the importance of disentangling the development of mind from the development of a group . In Asch ' s description of the essence of group life , as well as in other discussions of group cognition , the development of mind is confounded with the development of the group . As a group matures and moves from inclusion through control to affection ( Schutz . 1958 ) . or as it moves from forming through storming , norming . and performing ( Tuckman . 1965 ) . both interrelating and intimacy develop jointly . If a mature group has few accidents or an immature group has many , it is difficult to see what role , if any . mind may play in this . An immature group of relative strangers with few shared norms , minimal disclosure , and formal relationships might well find it hard to cope with nonroutine events . But this has nothing to do with mind . In our analysis we have assumed that there is something like a two - by - two matrix in which a group can be developed 374 / ASQ . September 1993 Collective Mind or undeveloped and a collective mind can be developed or undeveloped . And we assume that the combinations of developed - group - undeveloped mind and undeveloped - group - developed mind are possible . These two combinations are crucial to any proposal that collective mind is a distinct process in social life . The combination of developed - group - undeveloped mind is found in the phenomenon of groupthink ( Janis , 1982 ) , as well as in cults ( Galanter , 1989 ) , interactions at NASA prior to the C / ia / / enger disaster ( Starbuck and Milliken , 1988 ) , and ethnocentric research groups ( Weick , 1983 ) . Common among these examples is subordination to a system that is envisaged carelessly , or . as Janis ( 1982 : 174 ) put it , there is an overestimation of the group ' s power , morality , and invulnerability . Furthermore , contributions are made thoughtlessly ; as Janis ( 1982 : 175 ) put it , there is self - censorship of deviations , doubts , and counterarguments . And , finally , representations are careless ; members maintain the false assumption that silence means consent ( Janis , 1982 : 175 ) . In the presence of heedless interrelating , comprehension declines , regardless of how long the group has been together , and disasters result . The combination of undeveloped - group - developed mind is found in ad hoc project teams , such as those that produce television specials ( e . g . . Peters , 1992 : 189 - 200 ) or motion pictures ( Faulkner and Anderson , 1987 ) , and in temporary systems such as those that form in aircraft cockpits ( Ginnett , 1990 ) , around jazz improvisation ( Eisenberg , 1990 ) , in response to crises ( Rochlin , 1989 ) , or in high - velocity environments ( Eisenhardt . 1993 ) . The common feature shared among these diverse settings is best captured by Eisenberg ( 1990 : 160 ) , who characterized them as built from nondisclosive intimacy that " stresses coordination of action over alignment of cognitions , mutual respect over agreement , trust over empathy , diversity over homogeneity , loose over tight coupling , and strategic communication over unrestricted candor . " Translated into the language of heedful interrelating , what Eisenberg depicted were relationships in which shared values , openness , and disclosure , all hallmarks of a developed group , were not fully developed , but in which collective mind was developed . Nondisclosive intimacy is characterized by heedful contributing ( e . g . , loose coupling , diversity , strategic communication ) , heedful representing ( e . g . , mutual respect , coordination of action ) , and heedful subordinating ( e . g . , trust ) . If heedful interrelating can occur in an undeveloped group , this changes the way we think about the well - known stages of group development . If people are observed to contribute , represent , and subordinate with heed , these actions can be interpreted as operations that construct a well - developed collective mind ; however , those same actions can also be seen as the orienting , clarifying , and testing associated with the early stages of a new group just beginning to form ( McGrath , 1984 : 152 - 162 ) . By one set of criteria , that associated with group fornnation . people engaged in forming are immature . By another set of criteria , that associated with 375 / ASQ , September 1993 collective mind , these acts of forming represent well - developed mental processes . These opposed criteria suggest that groups may be smartest in their early stages . As they grow older , they lose mind when interrelating becomes more routine , more casual , more automatic . This line of reasoning is consistent with Gersick ' s ( 1988 ) demonstration that groups tend to re - form halfway through their history . In our language , this midcourse reshuffling can be understood as redoing the pattern of interrelations that constitute mind , thereby renewing mind itself . If groups steadily lose mind and comprehension as they age , their capability for comprehension may show a dramatic increase halfway through their history . If that is plausible , the sudden surge in comprehension should be accompanied by a sudden decrease in the number of accidents they produce . The Conceptualization of Topics in Organizational Theory Our analysis of collective mind and heedful interrelating throws new light on several topics in organizational theory , including organizational types , the measurement of performance , and normal accidents . The concept of mind may be an important tool in comparative analysis . LaPorte and Consolini ( 1991 ) argued that high - reliability organizations such as aircraft carriers differ in many ways from organizations usually portrayed in organizational theory as ( for convenience ) high - efficiency organizations . Typical efficiency organizations practice incremental decision making , their errors do not have a lethal edge , they use simple low - hazard technologies , they are governed by single rather than multilayered authority systems , they are more often in the private than the public sector , they are not preoccupied with perfection , their operations are carried on at one level of intensity , they experience few nasty surprises , and they can reiy on computation or judgment as decision strategies ( Thompson and Tuden , 1959 ) but seldom need to employ both at the same time . LaPorte and Consolini ( 1991 : 19 ) concluded that existing organizational theory is inadequate to understand systems in which the " consequences and costs associated with major failures in some technical operations are greater than the value of the lessons learned from them . " Our analysis suggests that most of these differences can be subsumed under the generalization that high - efficiency organizations have simpler minds than do high - reliability organizations . If dispositions toward individual and collective heed were increased in most organizations in conjunction with increases in task - related interdependence and flexibility in the sequencing of tasks , then we would expect these organizations to act more like high - reliability systems . Changes of precisely this kind seem to be inherent in recent interventions to improve total quality management ( e . g . , U . S . General Accounting Office , 1991 ) . Our point is simply that confounded in many comparisons among organizations that differ on conspicuous grounds , such as structure and technology , are less conspicuous but potentially more powerful differences in the capability for 376 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind collective mind . A smart system does the right thing regardless of its structure and regardless of whether the environment is stable or turbulent . We suspect that organic systems , because of their capacity to reconfigure themselves temporarily into more mechanistic structures , have more fully developed minds than do mechanistic systems . We also suspect that newer organizational forms , such as networks ( Powell , 1990 ) , self - designing systems ( Hedberg , Nystrom , and Starbuck , 1976 ) , cognitive oligopolies ( Porac , Thomas , and Baden - Fuller , 1989 : 413 ) , and interpretation systems ( Daft and Weick , 1984 ) have more capacity for mind than do M forms , U forms , and matrix forms . But all of these conjectures , which flow from the idea of collective mind , require that we pay as much attention to social processes and microdynamics as we now pay to the statics of structure , strategy , and demographics . The concept of mind also suggests a view of performance that complements concepts such as activities ( Homans , 1950 ) , the active task ( Dornbusch and Scott , 1975 ) , task structure ( Hackman , 1990 : 10 ) , group task design ( Hackman , 1987 ) , and production functions ( McGrath , 1990 ) . It adds to all of these a concern with the style or manner of performance . Not only can performance be high or low , productive or unproductive , or adequate or inadequate , it can also be heedful or heedless . Heedful performance might or might not be judged productive , depending on how productivity is defined . Most important , the concept of mind allows us to talk about careful versus careless performance , not just performance that is productive or unproductive . This shift makes it easier to talk about performance in systems in which the next careless error may be the last trial . The language of care is more suited to systems concerned with reliability than is the language of efficiency . Much of the interest in organizations that are vulnerable to catastrophic accidents can be traced to Perrow ' s ( 1981 ) initial analysis of Three Mile Island , followed by his expansion of this analysis into other industries ( Perrow , 1984 ) . In the expanded analysis , Perrow suggested that technologies that are both tightly coupled and interactively complex are the most dangerous , because small events can escalate rapidly into a catastrophe . Nuclear aircraft carriers such as those we have studied are especially prone to normal accidents ( see Perrow , 1984 : 97 ) because they comprise not one but several tightly coupled , interactively complex technologies . These include jet aircraft , nuclear weapons carried on aircraft , nuclear weapons stored on board the ship , and nuclear reactors used to power the ship . Furthermore , the marine navigation system and the air traffic control system on a ship are tightly coupled technologies , although they are slightiy less complex than the nuclear technologies . Despite their high potential for normal accidents , carriers are relatively safe . Our analysis suggests that one of the reasons carriers are safe is because of , not in spite of , tight coupling . Our analysis raises the possibility that technological tight coupling is dangerous in the presence of interactive 377 / ASQ , September 1993 complexity , unless it is mediated by a mutually shared field that is well developed . This mutually shared field , built from heedful interrelating , is itself tightly coupled , but this tight coupling is social rather than technical . We suspect that normal accidents represent a breakdown of social processes and comprehension rather than a failure of technology . Inadequate comprehension can be traced to flawed mind rather than flawed equipment . The Conceptualization of Practice The mindset for practice implicit in the preceding analysis has little room for heroic , autonomous individuals . A well - developed organization mind , capable of reliable performance is thoroughly social . It is built of ongoing interrelating and dense interrelations . Thus , interpersonal skills are not a luxury in high - reliability systems . They are a necessity . These skills enable people to represent and subordinate themselves to communities of practice . As people move toward individualism and fewer interconnections , organization mind is simplified and soon becomes indistinguishable from individual mind . With this change comes heightened vulnerability to accidents . Cockpit crews that function as individuals rather than teams show this rapid breakdown in ability to understand what is happening ( Orlady and Foushee , 1987 ) . Sustained success in coping with emergency conditions seems to occur when the activities of the crew are more fully interrelated and when members ' contributions , representations , and subordination create a pattern of joint action . The chronic fear in high - reliability systems that events will prove to be incomprehensible ( Perrow , 1984 ) may be a realistic fear only when social skills are underdeveloped . With more development of social skills goes more development of organization mind and heightened understanding of environments , A different way to state the point that mind is dependent on social skills is to argue that it is easier for systems to lose mind than to gain it . A culture that encourages individualism , survival of the fittest , macho heroics , and can - do reactions will often neglect heedful practice of representation and subordination . Without representation and subordination , comprehension reverts to one brain at a time . No matter how visionary or smart or forward - looking or aggressive that one brain may be , it is no match for conditions of interactive complexity . Cooperation is imperative for the development of mind . Reliable performance may require a well - developed collective mind in the form of a complex , attentive system tied together by trust . That prescription sounds simple enough . Nevertheless , conventional understanding seems to favor a different configuration : a simple , automatic system tied together by suspicion and redundancy . The latter scenario makes sense in a world in which individuals can comprehend what is going on . But when individual comprehension proves inadequate , one of the few remaining sources of comprehension is social entities . Variation in the development of these entities may spell the difference between prosperity and disaster . 378 / ASQ , September 1993 Collective Mind REFERENCES Asch . Solomon E , 1952 Social Psychology , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall , Bellah . Robert N , . Richard Madsen . William M , Sullivan . Ann Swidler . and Steven M , Tipton 1991 The Good Society , New York : Knopf , Blumer . Herbert 1969 Symbolic Interaction , Berkeley : University of Califomia Press , Boden . Margaret A , 1990 " Introduction , " In Margaret A , Boden ( ed , ) . The Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence : 1 - 21 , New York : Oxford University Press , Bruner . Jerome 1986 Actual Minds , Possible Worlds , Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , Churchland . Paul M . 1992 " A deeper unity : Some Feyerabendian themes in neurocomputational form , " In Steven Davis ( ed , ) , Connectionism : Theory and Practice : 30 - 50 , New York : Oxford University Press , Daft . Richard , and Karl E , Weick 1984 " Toward a model of organizations as interpretation systems , " Academy of Management Review , 9 : 284 - 295 , Dornbusch . Sandford M , . and W . Richard Scott 1975 Evaluation and the Exercise of Authority , San Francisco : Jossey - Bass , Dreyfus . Hubert L . and Stuart E , Dreyfus1990 " Making a mind versus modeling the brain : Artificial intelligence back at a branch point , " In Margaret A , Boden ( ed , ) . The Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence : 309 - 333 , New York : Oxford University Press , Eisenberg . Eric 1990 " Jamming : Transcendence through organizing , " Communication Research , 17 : 139 - 164 , Eisenhardt . Kathleen M , 1989 " Building theories from case study research , " Academy of Management Review , 14 : 532 - 550 , 1993 " High reliability organizations meet high velocity environments : Common dilemmas in nuclear power plants , aircraft carriers , and microcomputer firms , " In Karlene Roberts ( ed , ) . New Challenges to Understanding Organizations : 117 - 135 , New York : Macmillan , Elman . Jeffrey L . 1992 " Grammatical structure and distributed representations , " In Steven Davis ( ed , ) , Connectionism : Theory and Practice : 138 - 178 , New York : Oxford University Press , Faulkner . Robert R , . and A , B , Anderson1987 " Short - term projects and emergent careers : Evidence from Hollywood , " American Journal of Sociology , 92 : 879 - 909 , Follett . Mary Parker 1924 Creative Experience , New York : Longmans , Green , Galanter . Marc 1989 Cults , New York : Oxford University Press , Gersick . Connie G , 1988 " Time and transition in work teams : Toward a new model of group development , " Academy of Management Journal , 31 : 9 - 41 , Gillcrist . P . T , 1990 Feet Wet : Reflections of a Carrier , Novato , CA : Presidio Press , Ginnett . Robert C , 1990 " Airline cockpit crew , " In J , Richard Hackman ( ed , ) . Groups That Work ( and Those That Don ' t ) : 427 - 448 , San Francisco : Jossey - Bass , Glaser . Barney , and Anselm L . Strauss1967 The Discovery of Grounded Theory : Strategies for Qualitative Research , Chicago : Aldine , Hackman . J , Richard 1987 " The design of work teams , " In Jay Lorsch ( ed , ) . Handbook of Organizational Behavior : 315 - 342 , Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall , Hackman . J , Richard ( ed . ) 1990 Groups That Work ( and Those That Don ' t ) , San Francisco : Jossey - Bass , Hedberg . Bo L T . . Paul C , Nystrom . and William H , Starbuck 1976 " Camping on seesaws : Prescriptions for a self - designing organization , " Administrative Science Ouarterly , 21 : 41 - 65 , Homans . George C . 1950 The Human Group , New York : Harcourt , Hutchins . Edwin 1990 " The technology of team navigation , " In Jolene Galegher , Robert E , Kraut , and Carmen Egido ( eds , ) . Intellectual Teamwork : 191 - 220 , Hillsdale , NJ : Eribaum , 1991 " The social organization of distributed cognition , " In Lauren B , Resnick , John M , Levine , and Stephanie D , Teasley ( eds , ) . Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition : 283 - 307 , Washington , DC : American Psychological Association , Janis . Irving 1982 Groupthink , 2d ed , Boston : Houghton - Mifflin , Langer . Eleanor J , 1989 " Minding matters : The consequences of mindlessness - mindfulness , " In Leonard Berkowitz ( ed , ) . Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , 22 : 137 - 173 , New York : Academic Press , LaPorte . Todd R , . and Paula M , Consolini1991 " Working in practice but not in theory : Theoretical challenges of high - reliability organizations , " Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory , 1 : 19 - 47 , Lave . Jean , and Etienne Wenger 1991 Situated Learning : Legitimate Peripheral Participation , New York : Cambridge University Press , Lyons . William 1980 Gilbert Ryle : An Introduction to His Philosophy , Atlantic Highlands , NJ : Humanities Press , 379 / ASO . September 1993 McGrath , Joseph E . 1984 Groups : Interaction and Performance . Englewood Cliffs . NJ : Prentice - Hall . 1990 " Time matters in groups . " In Jolene Galegher . Robert E . Kraut , and Carnnen Egido ( eds . ) . Intellectual Teamwork : 23 - 61 . Hillsdale . NJ : Eribaum . Mead , George Herbert 1934 Mind , Self , and Society . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Morgan , Gareth 1986 Images of Organization . Beverly Hills . CA : Sage . Orlady , Harry W . , and H . Clayton Foushee 1987 Cockpit Resource Management Training . Springfield . VA : National Technical Information Service ( N87 - 22634 ) . Orr , Julian E . 1990 " Sharing knowledge , celebrating identity : Community memory in a service culture . " In David Middleton and Derek Edwards ( eds . ) , Collective Remembering : 169 - 189 . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Perrow , Charles 1981 " The President ' s Commission and the normal accident . " In D . Sills , C . Wolf , and V . Shelanski ( eds . ) . The Accident at Three Mile Island : The Human Dimensions : 173 - 184 . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . 1984 Normal Accidents . New York : Basic Books . Peters , Tom 1992 Liberation Management . New York : Knopf . Porac , Joseph F . , Howard Thomas , and Charles Baden - Fuller 1989 " Competitive groups as cognitive communities : The case of Scottish knitwear manufacturers . " Journal of Management Studies , 26 : 397 ^ 16 . Powell , Walter W . 1990 " Neither market nor hierarchy : Network forms of organization . " In Barry M . Staw and Larry L . Cummings ( eds . ) . Research in Organizational Behavior , 12 : 295 - 336 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Ouinlan , Phillip 1991 Connectionism and Psychology . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Roberts , Karlene H . , Denise M . Rousseau , and Todd R . LaPorte 1993 " The culture of high reliability : Ouantitative and qualitative assessment aboard nuclear powered aircraft carriers . " Journal of High Technology Management Research ( in press ) . Roberts , Karlene H . , Susan Stout , and Jennifer J . Halpern 1993 " Decision dynamics in two high reliability military organizations . " Management Science ( in press ) . Rochlin , Gene I . 1989 " Organizational self - design is a crisis - avoidance strategy : U . S . naval flight operations as a case study . " Industrial Crisis Ouarterly , 3 : 159 - 176 . Rochlin , Gene I . , Todd R . LaPorte and Karlene H . Roberts 1987 " The self - designing high - reliability organization : Aircraft carrier flight operations at sea . " Naval War College Review , 40 ( 4 ) : 76 - 90 . Rumelhart , David E . 1992 " Towards a microstructural account of human reasoning . " In Steven Davis ( ed . ) , Connectionism : Theory and Practice : 69 - 83 . New York : Oxford University Press . Ryle , Gilbert 1949 The Concept of Mind . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Sandelands , Lloyd E . , and Ralph E . Stablein 1987 " The concept of organization mind . " In Samuel Bacharach and Nancy DiTomaso ( eds . ) . Research in the Sociology of Organizations . 5 : 135 - 161 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Schneider , David J . 1991 " Social cognition . " In Lyman W . Porter and Mark R . Rosenzweig ( eds . ) . Annual Review of Psychology , 42 : 527 - 561 . Palo Alto , CA : Annual Reviews . Schneider , W . , and R . M . Shiffrin 1977 " Controlled and automatic human information processing : I . Detection , search and attention . " Psychological Review , 84 : 1 - 66 . Schutz , William C . 1958 FIRO : A Three - Dimensional Theory of Interpersonal Behavior . New York : Holt . Rinehart , and Winston . Sitkin , Sim 1992 " Learning through failure : The strategy of small losses . " In Barry Staw and Larry Cummings ( eds . ) . Research in Organizational Behavior , 14 : 231 - 266 . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Starbuck , William H . , and Francis J . Milliken 1988 " Challenger : Fine - tuning the odds until something breaks . " Journal of Management Studies . 25 : 319 - 340 . Sutton , Robert I . , and Meryl R . Louis 1987 " How selecting and socializing newcomers influences insiders . " Human Resource Management , 26 : 347 - 361 . Thompson , James D . , and Arthur Tuden 1959 " Strategies , structures , and processes of organizational decision . " In James D . Thompson ( ed . ) . Comparative Studies in Organization : 195 - 216 . Pittsburgh : University of Pittsburgh Press . Tuckman , Bruce W . 1965 " Developmental sequence in small groups . " Psychological Bulletin . 63 : 384 - 399 . U . S . General Accounting Office 1991 Management Practices : U . S . Companies Improve Performance through Ouality Efforts . Document GAO / NSIAD - 91 - 190 . Washington , DC : U . S . Government Printing Office . Van Maanen , John 1976 " Breaking in : Socialization to work . " In Robert Dubin ( ed . ) . Handbook of Work , Organization and Society : 67 - 130 . Chicago : Rand McNally . Walsh , James P . , and Gerardo R . Ungson 1991 " Organizational memory . " Academy of Management Review , 16 : 57 - 91 . Wegner , Daniel M . 1987 " Transactive memory : A contemporary analysis of the group mind . " In Brian Mullen and George R . Goethals ( eds . ) . Theories of Group Behavior : 185 - 208 . New York : Springer - Verlag . Wegner , Daniel M . , Ralph Erber , and Paula Raymond 1991 " Transactive memory in close relationships . " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 : 923 - 929 . 380 / ASO , September 1993 Collective Mind Wegner , Daniel M . , Toni Giullano , Weick , Karl E . Weick , Karl E . , and David P . and Paula T . Hertel 1983 " Contradictions in a Giifillan 1985 " Cognitive interdependence in community of scholars : The 1971 " Fate of arbitrary traditions in close relationships . " In cohesion - accuracy tradeoff . " a laboratory microculture . " William J . Ickes ( ed . ) , Review of Higher Education . Journal of Personality and Compatible and Incompatible 6 ( 4 ) : 253 - 267 . Social Psychology , 17 : Relationships : 253 - 276 . New weick , Karl E . , and Larry ^ ' ' ^ - ^ ^ ^ • York : Springer - Verlag . Browning Wilson , G . C . 1986 " Arguments and narration in 1986 Supercarrier . New York : organizational Macmillan . communication . " Journal of Management , 12 : 243 - 259 . 381 / ASQ , September 1993