Accepted Manuscript Forces directing germ - band extension in Drosophila embryos Deqing Kong , Fred Wolf , Jörg Großhans PII : S0925 - 4773 ( 16 ) 30097 - 1 DOI : doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mod . 2016 . 12 . 001 Reference : MOD 3431 To appear in : Mechanisms of Development Received date : 28 August 2016 Revised date : 12 December 2016 Accepted date : 13 December 2016 Please cite this article as : Deqing Kong , Fred Wolf , Jörg Großhans , Forces directing germ - band extension in Drosophila embryos . The address for the corresponding author was captured as affiliation for all authors . Please check if appropriate . Mod ( 2016 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mod . 2016 . 12 . 001 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 1 Forces directing germ - band extension in Drosophila embryos Deqing Kong ( 1 ) , Fred Wolf ( 2 ) , Jörg Großhans ( 1 ) ( 1 ) Institute for Developmental Biochemistry , Medical School , University of Göttingen , Justus - von - Liebig Weg 11 , 37077 Göttingen , Germany , jgrossh @ gwdg . de ( 2 ) Department of Nonlinear Dynamics , Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self - Organisation , Faculty of Physics and Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience , University of Göttingen , Am Faßberg 17 , 37077 Göttingen , Germany Abstract Body axis elongation by convergent extension is a conserved developmental process found in all metazoans . Drosophila embryonic germ - band extension is an important morphogenetic process during embryogenesis , by which the length of the germ - band is more than doubled along the anterior - posterior axis . This lengthening is achieved by typical convergent extension , i . e . narrowing the lateral epidermis along the dorsal - ventral axis and simultaneous extension along the anterior - posterior axis . Germ - band extension is largely driven by cell intercalation , whose directionality is determined by the planar polarity of the tissue and ultimately by the anterior - posterior patterning system . In addition , extrinsic tensile forces originating from the invaginating endoderm induce cell shape changes , which transiently contribute to germ - band extension . Here , we review recent progress in understanding of the role of mechanical forces in germ - band extension . Key words Drosophila , germ - band extension , cell intercalation , forces 1 . Introduction During animal morphogenesis , elongation of the tissues and the body axis is a recurrent feature . In Drosophila early embryos , the developmental mode switches from syncytial to cellular morphology at about two hours after fertilization in a process called cellularisation . Following cellularisation , gastrulation starts with mesoderm invagination ( reviewed by Leptin , 1995 ) . A few minutes later , cell intercalation within the lateral epidermis leading to germ - band extension sets in . The entire process of germ - band extension lasts about 2 . 5 hours but most of the ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 2 morphologically visible extension occurs within the initial 45 min , termed rapid phase ( Campos - Ortega and Hartenstein , 1997 ) . The rapid phase takes place during embryonic stages 6 to 8 ( Figure 1A ) . Germ - band extension is finished in stage 9 . At the onset of gastrulation , the embryonic surface consists of a single layer of columnar epithelium with their apical surfaces facing outward ( Campos - Ortega and Hartenstein , 1997 ) . At stage 7 , morphogenetic movements start to reflect the differential specification of the cells and tissues . The cephalic furrow at about 65 % egg length is initiated by the shortening of a single row of cells at the boundary between head and embryonic trunk ( germ - band ) ( Spencer et al . , 2015 ) . On the ventral side of the embryo , a stripe of cells with about 18 cells wide and 60 cells long , constituting the mesoderm , invaginates at the beginning of gastrulation ( Leptin and Grunewald , 1990 ; Sweeton et al . , 1991 ) . The germ - bands from the left and right side of the embryo will join at the ventral midline covering the invaginated mesoderm . The dorsal - most epidermis that does not participate in germ - band extension develops into the extra - embryonic amnionserosa ( AS ) ( Leptin and Grunewald , 1990 ) ( Figure 1B ) . By the end of stage 8 , germ - band elongation has progressed so far as to bring the posterior tip of the germ band to about 60 % egg length ( Figure 1A ) . As the overall shape and size of the embryo is fixed by the vitelline membrane , the germ - band extends by folding up itself . The posterior end of the germ - band makes a turn towards the dorsal side and subsequently moves in anterior direction ( Campos - Ortega and Hartenstein , 1997 ) . During germ - band extension , the length of the germ - band increases more than two - fold along the anterior - posterior ( A - P ) axis . Simultaneously , the germ - band narrows along the dorsal - ventral ( D - V ) axis ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ) ( Figure 1A ) , which is the epithelial form of convergent extension in embryonic morphogenesis ( reviewed by Keller , 2002 ) . In the germ - band , this dramatic change is locally driven by cell intercalation ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ) . In addition , the other morphogenetic movements of gastrulation such as invagination of the posterior midgut ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ; Lye et al . , 2015 ) , and possibly the cephalic furrow and dorsal folds contribute by extrinsic pulling forces on the tissue - scale level . This review will focus on the mechanisms of germ - band extension , with an emphasis on mechanical coupling of tissues ( extrinsic tensile forces ) and the oriented cell rearrangements guided by planar - cell polarity ( local mechanical forces ) . 2 . Mechanical coupling of tissues ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 3 The morphogenetic movements of Drosophila gastrulation include germ - band extension , the invagination of mesoderm and endoderm ( anterior and posterior midgut invagination ) , cephalic furrow invagination , and dorsal folds ( Figure 1A ) . The key driving force of germ - band extension is polarized cell intercalation , which will be discussed in detail below . Autonomous polarized cell behaviors , however , seem not be sufficient to fully explain germ - band extension ( Tepass , 2014 ) . To achieve this , a systems approach considering mechanical interactions within groups of cells and with adjacent tissues is necessary . Such a systems approach has become feasible due to the recent advances in whole embryo imaging in high temporal and spatial resolution . Illustrative of the rapid progress in this direction are two recent reports characterizing Drosophila gastrulation movements at the whole embryo scale by selective plane illumination microscopy ( SPIM ) ( Lye et al . , 2015 ; Rauzi et al . , 2015 ) . Mesodermal invagination is the first morphogenetic movement during Drosophila gastrulation . It is initiated by apical cell contraction of the mesodermal precursor cells at the ventral side of the embryo ( Leptin and Grunewald , 1990 ; Kam et al . , 1991 ; Sweeton et al . , 1991 ) . Ventral furrow formation starts about 6 minutes after onset of gastrulation . After another 4 – 5 minutes , the mesoderm seals at the ventral mid - line ( Rauzi et al . , 2015 ) . Mesoderm invagination , cephalic furrow formation , endoderm invagination and germ - band extension occur concomitantly . It is an issue of discussion and analysis , to which degree this coincidence reflects functional dependencies and interactions . It is , however , well known that germ - band extension is independent of mesoderm invagination , since it still timely proceeds in the absence of mesoderm invagination ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ) . In wild type embryos , germ - band extension overlaps with mesoderm internalization for several minutes . Similarly , in twist snail double mutant embryos , in which there is no apical cell contraction and no invagination , the displacement of germ - band cells in the first few minutes proceeds as in wild type embryos ( Rauzi et al . , 2015 ) . Thus , no obvious influence of the mesoderm movements on the germ - band extension has been observed . In contrast , in twist mutant embryos , which form a ventral groove that does not invaginate , cell shape changes but not cell rearrangement in the lateral epidermis are reduced during germ - band extension . This reveals that tensile forces originating from the mesoderm anlage can in principle influence the lateral epidermis ( Butler et al . , 2009 ) . More subtle , additional contributions of the ventral furrow on germ - band extension cannot be ruled out ( Lye et al . , 2015 ) . ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 4 The morphologically visible germ - band extension is driven by cell intercalation and cell shape changes ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ; Butler et al . , 2009 ; Sawyer et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 3 ) . These two contributions can be separated and are genetically independently controlled . Some signs of germ - band extension can be observed in the absence of cell intercalation in mutants with impaired planar polarity , such as mutants affecting the gap gene Krüppel ( Bertet et al . , 2004 ; Butler et al . , 2009 ) , the pair - rule genes ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ) , and the polarity gene Bazooka / Par3 ( Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ; Blankenship et al . , 2006 ) . In contrast , embryos lacking planar polarity , the cephalic furrow , and endoderm invagination ( embryos from bicoid nanos torso - like females ) do not show any signs of germ - band extension ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ; Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ) . The dorsal - anterior movement of the posterior pole is blocked in embryos with no posterior midgut invagination ( e . g . from torso mutant females ) ( Schupbach and Wieschaus , 1986 ; Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ) . Importantly , cell intercalation occurs in these embryos ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . The latter findings suggest that additional extrinsic forces originating from gastrulation movements may contribute to germ - band extension . Recent studies have provided the first insights into how extrinsic pulling forces originated from the posterior midgut ( PMG ) invagination can actively contribute to germ - band extension on tissue scale by simulations and experiments ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . By the end of mesoderm internalization , the posterior midgut has already begun to move dorsally preceding the onset of ectodermal cell intercalation ( Rauzi et al . , 2015 ) , while germ - band extension has already started for several minutes . Tissue elongation is reduced markedly in embryos in which the anterior - posterior tissue displacement is blocked physically by attachment to the egg shell ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . During the first 15 minutes of germ - band extension , the lateral epidermal cells are stretched gradually towards the posterior tip of the embryos . This AP cell stretching is due to mechanical coupling with endoderm invagination ( Figure 3B ) . Laser cutting experiments revealed that the mechanical tension increases along the AP axis in wild type embryos during germ - band extension but not in embryos from torso females , which lack the posterior midgut ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . This indicates that the posterior endoderm invagination generates an anisotropic mechanical tension in the germ - band . This view is supported by the observation of a myosin II flow towards the presumptive posterior endoderm in acellular embryos ( Lye et al . , 2015 ) . The ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 5 PMG - generated anisotropic tension introduces a transient and graded AP cell stretching , which rapidly disappears after about 15 minutes of germ - band extension . Cell stretching is present in eve mutants ( Butler et al . , 2009 ) , which have impaired planar polarity and lack cell intercalation . The transient nature of cell stretching suggests that cell intercalation relaxes this anisotropic mechanical tension . Furthermore , the orientation of newly forming junctions is more oblique in torso mutants compared to wild type , suggesting that the PMG - generated anisotropic tension contributes to the orientation of new AP junctions ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . In summary , a PMG - generated anisotropic tension contributes to germ - band extension by initial anterior - posterior cell stretching and orienting junction growth . The initial steps of cephalic furrow formation coincide with ventral furrow formation ( Spencer et al . , 2015 ) . The cephalic furrow marks the boundary between the procephalon and the segmented germ - band ( González - Reyes and Morata , 1991 ; Vincent et al . , 1997 ) ( Figure 1A ) . Cell shape changes at the anterior end of the germ - band may thus be affected by the forming cephalic furrow ( Butler et al . , 2009 ) . However , the mechanics of the interaction and the functional relationship between cephalic furrow formation and germ - band extension have not yet been addressed . The dorsal transverse folds are another morphogenetic movement in early gastrulation . These two folds depend on epithelial polarity and anterior - posterior patterning ( Wang et al . , 2012 ) ( Figure 1A ) . Although the initial signs of the dorsal folds appear slightly earlier than the onset of germ - band extension , they do not seem to contribute to germ - band extension ( Lye et al . , 2015 ) . The transformation of the amnioserosa ( AS ) from a columnar to a squamous epithelium proceeds concomitantly with later steps of germ - band extension . It is conceivable that the DV convergence of the extending germ - band mechanically pulls on the AS and promotes the flattening of the AS cells ( Pope and Harris , 2008 ) . 3 . Anterior - posterior patterning system and polarized cell behaviors Anterior - posterior ( AP ) patterning genes are necessary for Drosophila germ - band extension ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ) . The AP patterning cascade imposes a pattern of planar polarity on the tissue , which guides the directionality of cell intercalation . AP patterning of Drosophila embryos is controlled by a hierarchical genetic cascade , which includes coordinate genes for maternal determinants and zygotic gap , pair - rule ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 6 and segment polarity genes ( Nasiadka et al . , 2002 ) ( Figure 2A ) . Germ - band extension , cell intercalation , and the directionality of cell behavior are disrupted in bicoid nanos torso - like mutants , which completely lack any anterior - posterior pattern ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ; Blankenship et al . , 2006 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ) . The gap gene Krüppel ( Kr ) specifies thoracic and abdominal segments in the central region of germ - band ( Gaul et al . , 1987 ; Small et al . , 1991 ) . In Kr mutant embryos , germ - band extension and cell intercalation are impaired in the central region of the germ - band ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ; Bertet et al . , 2004 ; Butler et al . , 2009 ) . Similarly , the primary pair - rule genes even - skipped ( eve ) , runt and hairy are required for polarization of the tissue and directional cell intercalation ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ; Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ) . A link between patterning and planar tissue polarity was revealed by a recent study , that found members of the family of Toll receptor proteins mediating patterning and tissue polarity ( Paré et al . , 2014 ) . Similar to eve and runt , members of the Toll family are expressed in stripes along the anterior – posterior body axis ( Eldon et al . , 1994 ; Kambris et al . , 2002 ) , Toll - 2 and Toll - 8 are expressed in non - overlapping stripes . The striped pattern is lost in embryos depleted for eve and runt by RNAi . Importantly , Toll - 2 , Toll - 6 and Toll - 8 cooperate to translate the striped pattern into planar polarity as indicated by polarized cell intercalation ( Paré et al . , 2014 ) . A recent study revealed that this Toll subfamily is expressed in stripes during germ - band extension in seven diverse arthropods , and are also required for germ - band elongation in Tribolium and in Parasteatoda ( Benton et al . , 2016 ) . These observations suggest that Toll family members have a conserved function in axis elongation beside their established function in immunity . Epithelial planar cell polarity is a tissue - level phenomenon of coordinating two - dimensional cell behavior ( Chae et al . , 1999 ; Curtin et al . , 2003 ) . Polarized cell behaviors during germ - band extension include cell intercalation . The polarized cell rearrangements are associated with the localization , dynamics and activity of non - muscle myosin II , which is a force - generating motor protein of the contractile actomyosin network . Myosin II and F - actin are specifically enriched at junctions with dorsal - ventral orientation , or parallel to the dorsal - ventral axis ( Bertet et al . , 2004 ; Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ; Blankenship et al . , 2006 ) . Conversely , Bazooka ( Baz ) / PAR - 3 and adherens junction proteins are enriched at junctions with ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 7 anterior - posterior orientation ( Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ; Blankenship et al . , 2006 ; Simões et al . , 2010 ; Levayer et al . , 2011 ; Tamada et al . , 2012 ; Levayer and Lecuit , 2013 ) ( Figure 2B ) . Evidence from biophysical experiments indicates that a mechanical feedback mechanism organizes contractility to generate multicellular myosin cables of dorsal - ventral orientation ( Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ) . Toll - 2 , 6 , 8 redundantly function to generate planar polarity in the lateral epidermis . Similar to runt and eve mutants ( Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ) , the anisotropic distribution of myosin II and Baz / Par - 3 is impaired in Toll - 2 , 6 , 8 triple mutants ( Paré et al . , 2014 ) . In wild type embryos , cells express Toll - 2 ( Figure 2A ) , Toll - 6 and Toll - 8 in stripes in different registers along the anterior - posterior axis . The combinations generate various interfaces between stripes with heterophilic interactions between the different Toll variants . Heterophilic interactions between Toll receptors , observed in cultured cells , are predicted to activate myosin II at junctions of dorsal - ventral orientation ( Paré et al . , 2014 ) . However , the cell intercalation and planar polarity phenotype of Toll - 2 , 6 , 8 triple mutants appears weaker than the eve phenotype , which may indicate that additional pathways control planar polarity in parallel to Toll signalling ( Paré et al . , 2014 ) . In many tissues , planar cell polarity ( PCP ) is controlled by the conserved Frizzled – dependent signaling pathway ( Yang and Mlodzik , 2015 ) , which controls oriented cell rearrangements , including convergent extension ( Perrimon and Mahowald , 1987 ; Walck - Shannon and Hardin , 2014 ) . Toll - dependent PCP constitutes an alternative pathway . It is a matter of current discussion whether Frizzled - dependent PCP is involved in the polarization of the lateral epidermis during gastrulation . Germ - band extension proceeds normally in embryos lacking Frizzled and Frizzled2 receptors or dishevelled ( Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ) . In contrast , a recent study reported that the Frizzled - dependent PCP pathway contributes to the anisotropic distribution of E - cadherin , myosin II and Baz / PAR - 3 in the germ - band at stage 8 ( Warrington et al . , 2013 ) . Since absence of Toll - 2 , 6 , 8 only weakens the anisotropic localization of myosin II and Baz / PAR - 3 , it is conceivable that Frizzled and Toll - dependent PCP may cooperate and redundantly function in generation and maintenance of polarized localization of E - cadherin / myosin II / PAR - 3 ( Tepass , 2014 ) . The complementary polarized localization of myosin II versus Baz / PAR - 3 and adherens junction proteins are necessary for polarized cell behaviors during tissue ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 8 elongation ( Figure 2B ) . The Rho signaling pathway is important for this polarization ( Simões et al . , 2010 ; Simões et al . , 2014 ) . Activated Rho1 at cell borders with dorsal - ventral orientation ( vertical ) plays multiple roles in polarized cell behavior : ( 1 ) it initiates myosin II accumulation at the cell contacts with dorsal - ventral orientation via Rho - kinase ( Simões et al . , 2010 ; Simões et al . , 2014 ) , ( 2 ) it activates the formin Diaphanous ( Dia ) , which decreases α - catenin accumulation at the cell contacts with dorsal - ventral orientation by initiating E - cadherin endocytosis ( Levayer et al . , 2011 ) , ( 3 ) it induces the Baz / PAR - 3 protein dissociation from junctions with dorsal - ventral orientation , leading to lower levels than at junctions with anterior - posterior orientation ( horizontal ) ( Simões et al . , 2010 ) . The high levels of Baz / PAR - 3 at junctions with anterior - posterior orientation further stabilize adherens junction complexes and reinforce a polarized distribution of E - cadherin ( Simões et al . , 2010 ) . Interestingly , Toll - 2 can act and regulate myosin II by the Rho - GTPase pathway during salivary gland morphogenesis ( Kolesnikov and Beckendorf , 2007 ) . A similar mechanism may link A - P patterning with planar polarity in the germ - band . Recent studies revealed that the Rho1 - Rok pathway controls myosin II polarity by regulating myosin II regulatory light chain ( RLC ) phosphorylation ( Kasza et al . , 2014 ; Munjal et al . , 2015 ) . Quantitative live imaging and biophysical approaches revealed that both unphosphorylatable RLC and phosphomimetic RLC reduce myosin planar polarity and mechanical anisotropy and consequently affect the directionality of cell rearrangements during germ - band elongation ( Kasza et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , spatial control over RLC phosphorylation – dephosphorylation cycles is required for myosin II anisotropy ( Munjal et al . , 2015 ) . An asymmetrically localized actin - and Rho - kinase – binding protein , Shroom , enhances Rho - kinase and polarized junctional localization of myosin II ( Simões et al . , 2014 ) . In addition , fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments showed that myosin II is stabilized at the cortex in regions of increased tension , and the dynamics of myosin II is regulated by tension in a positive feedback loop ( Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ) . Live - imaging studies uncovered a flow of medial myosin II towards AP junctions that may generate the forces ultimately leading to junction constriction , which suggests that the dynamics of medial - cortical myosin II is involved in the myosin II polarized distribution ( Rauzi et al . , 2010 ; Levayer and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Taken together , the Rho signaling pathway is required for the polarized localization of myosin II versus Baz / PAR - 3 and adherens junction proteins . In addition , the mechanical feedback and medial myosin II flow are involved into the myosin II polarization . ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 9 Baz / PAR - 3 is a multi - PDZ domain protein at the subapical region of epithelial cells . Bazooka recruits E - cadherin into sub - apical spot junctions during cellularization . In this manner it is involved in establishing initial epithelial apical - basal polarity and adherens junction formation ( Harris and Peifer , 2004 ; 2005 ; Morais - de - Sá et al . , 2010 ) . Coimmunoprecipitation revealed an interaction between Baz and Armadillo ( β - catenin in Drosophila ) in vivo ( Wei et al . , 2005 ) . During germ - band extension , Baz / PAR - 3 preferentially accumulates at adherens junctions in anterior - posterior orientation ( Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ; Simões et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 2B ) . The polarized accumulation of Baz requires its C - terminal domain , which can be phosphorylated by Rho - kinase . It is assumed that phosphorylation of the Baz C - terminal domain inhibits its interaction with phosphoinositide membrane lipids and antagonizes its accumulation at junctions in dorsal - ventral orientation ( Simões et al . , 2010 ) . In addition , the Abl tyrosine kinase contributes to the anisotropic distribution of Arm / β - catenin , which is slightly enriched at junctions of dorsal - ventral orientation . Abl enhances Arm / β - catenin turnover at the anterior - posterior cell junctions by phosphorylation of Arm / β - catenin on the tyrosine 667 ( Tamada et al . , 2012 ) . In abl mutants , Baz polarization is reduced and rosette formation is impaired , which may be the reason for the defective germ - band extension ( Tamada et al . , 2012 ) . Interestingly , mechanical forces can enhance Arm / β - catenin phosphorylation in APC 1638N / + mouse colon ( Whitehead et al . , 2008 ) , and laser ablation experiments show that anterior - posterior cell borders are under high mechanical tension during rosette formation ( Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ) . It is conceivable that high mechanical tension enhances Arm / β - catenin phosphorylation and turnover . Such a mechanical link to the distribution of junction proteins may constitute a feedback loop that enhances an anisotropic distribution . 4 . Mechanisms of cell rearrangement Directional cell rearrangement by local neighbor exchange is the fundamental cellular event in germ - band extension ( Figure 3 ) . The epithelial cells ultimately interpose themselves between their neighbors . This decreases the width of the germ - band along the dorsal - ventral ( DV ) axis and increases its length along the anterior – posterior ( AP ) axis ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ) , constituting a convergent extension movement . In contrast to non - epithelial tissues , active cell movement relative to neighbors is not possible in the lateral epidermis as the epithelial cell - cell contact must not be ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 10 weakened at any time during the intercalation process . The key to neighbor exchanges in epithelial tissue is junction remodeling , realizing topological T1 transitions ( Weaire and Rivier , 1984 ) . T1 transitions consist of two phases : ( 1 ) collapse of a junction with dorsal - ventral orientation ( vertical ) with fusion of two 3x vertices into a single 4x vertex , ( 2 ) expansion of a new junction in anterior - posterior orientation ( horizontal ) in perpendicular orientation by splitting of the 4x vertex into two 3x vertices ( Figure 3C ) . In the lateral epidermis , the initial collapse concerns junctions in dorsal - ventral orientation ( vertical ) and new junctions expand in an anterior - posterior direction ( horizontal ) ( Bertet et al . , 2004 ) . During the past decade several studies started to elucidate the mechanics of junction collapse , identifying a central role for localization , dynamics and activity of nonmuscle myosin II and the junction associated actomyosin network ( Bertet et al . , 2004 ; Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ; Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ; Rauzi et al . , 2010 ) . Myosin II is a motor protein that hydrolyzes ATP to move along actin filaments . Inactive myosin II is a hexameric complex , consisting of two heavy chains , two essential light chains ( ELC ) and two regulatory light chains ( RLC ) ( reviewed by Hartman and Spudich , 2012 ) . In vitro studies reveal that the assembly of myo II mini - filaments and their movement along actin filaments is promoted by the phosphorylation of the myosin II RLC ( encoded by spaghetti squash in Drosophila ) at S21 and T20 ( Suzuki et al . , 1978 ; Sellers et al . , 1985 ; Jordan and Karess , 1997 ; Winter et al . , 2001 ) . During germ - band extension , RLC is phosphorylated by Rho - kinase ( Simões et al . , 2010 ) , which itself is activated by the Rho1 - Rok pathway and GPRC signaling ( Simões et al . , 2014 ; Kerridge et al . , 2016 ) . During T1 transitions , myosin II is enriched at apical adherens junctions of cell contacts in dorsal - ventral orientation ( Figure 2B , 4 ) . Activated myosin II generates the force for junction collapse . Laser ablation of junctions and actomyosin filaments revealed that the junctions in dorsal - ventral orientation are in general under higher tension than junctions in anterior - posterior orientation ( Rauzi et al . , 2008 ; Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ) . In addition to adherens junctions , myosin II is also enriched in the apical cortex of the cells ( cortical - medial myosin II ) . Polarized flow of cortical actomyosin clusters towards junctions promotes junction collapse ( Rauzi et al . , 2010 ) ( Figure 4 ) . Thus , the force for junction collapse is generated by contracting actomyosin at adherens junctions but also involves the flow of cortical actomyosin clusters towards the collapsing junctions . Rauzi et al . used live - imaging to examine ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 11 the two pools of myosin II in intercalating cells : the cortical - medial and the junctional pool . Both medial and junctional myosin II display pulsed dynamics . Junctional myosin II intensity overall increases gradually as vertical junctions constrict . During the constriction however they find successive steps of shrinkage and arrest . Medial myosin II anisotropic flow contributes to the increase of junctional myosin ( Rauzi et al . , 2010 ) . In a given cell , flow of myosin II was observed towards both junctions of dorsal - ventral orientation with a change in direction with a period of 60 – 180 s . This flow correlates with fluctuations of E - cadherin intensity at the junctions ( Levayer and Lecuit , 2013 ) . These E - cadherin asymmetries are transient and alternate between the two junctions in dorsal - ventral orientation . The E - cadherin fluctuations are due to clathrin - mediated endocytosis and amplified by the actomyosin flow ( Levayer and Lecuit , 2013 ) . Similarly , during Drosophila embryonic wound repair , polarized vesicle trafficking of E - cadherin directs actomyosin remodeling ( Hunter et al . , 2015 ) . Position - and direction - selective laser ablation showed that cortical flow generates anisotropies in cortical tension in C . elegans zygote , in which the constitutive mechanical properties of the cortex are largely isotropic ( Mayer et al . , 2010 ) . Two recent studies started to investigate the mechanics of new junction formation during the extension phase of a T1 transition ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ; Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . More than the collapse phase , the extension phase coincides with the period of morphologically visible tissue elongation . Formation and extension of the new junctions apparently require pulsed contractions of cortical - medial actomyosin clusters ( Figure 4 ) and Rho - kinase in the old neighbors ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ; Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . Laser ablation experiments showed that newly forming horizontal cell junctions are under higher tension during T1 transitions than the stationary junctions with anterior - posterior orientation ( Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . Ectopic tension triggered by wounds introduced by UV laser in dorsal and ventral cells at the 4x vertex stage could initiate junction growth along the dorsal - ventral direction in wild type embryos during germ - band extension ( Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . Based on live imaging , it has been proposed that new junctions during the extension phase undergo cycles of elongation and shorting . Quantification of selected cases supports the notion that pulses in junction length correlate with fluctuations of the cross - sectional area in the old neighbors ( Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . The ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 12 area fluctuations are assumed to be caused by pulsed contractions of the cortical - medial actomyosin network ( Fernandez - Gonzalez and Zallen , 2011 ; Sawyer et al . , 2011 ) . The actomyosin network pulses coincide with cell shape change leading to cell elongation in A / P axis as well ( Sawyer et al . , 2011 ) . Blocking contractile activity by Y - 27632 or Cytochalasin D injection , leads to an impaired extension phase ( Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . Since the inhibitors were applied globally , it is not clear , in which cells contractility is necessary . Likely , contractility is required in A and P cells , as these show the correlated area changes . But contractility seems also be important in the D and V cells . Junction extension fails , when the cortical - medial actomyosin network is damaged by UV laser dissection specifically in the D and V cells ( Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . These observations suggest that tension or contractility in the D or V cells is necessary for the extension phase . A conceivable interpretation is provided by an in vitro study that revealed that high tension on the actin filaments enhances the binding between actin filaments and the minimal cadherin - catenin complex ( Buckley et al . , 2014 ) . In cultured cells , a mechanical tugging force in two adjacent cells is sufficient to trigger growth of the adherens junction ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) . In a pair of suspended cells in culture , contraction of the actomyosin network is necessary for maintaining the size of the adherens junctions and the immobilization of E - cadherin ( Engl et al . , 2014 ) . Taken together , tension or cell contraction contributes to junction growth . For the case of a T1 transition , it remains open how the actomyosin network contributes to the extension phase . It is likely that actomyosin in the DV cells serves a function different than in the AP cells , where contractility controls area changes . Cell intercalation through rosettes involving up to 8 – 10 cells presents a more complex version of cell intercalation than a plain T1 transition ( Figure 3D ) . Rosettes are observed during germ - band extension , especially at stage 8 ( Blankenship et al . , 2006 ; Lye and Sanson , 2011 ; Vichas and Zallen , 2011 ; Walck - Shannon and Hardin , 2014 ) . Similar to the cell quadrupletes engaged in a T1 transition , multiple junctions collapse simultaneously along the dorsal - ventral axis and multiple 3x vertices fuse to a rosette structure . Subsequently , a rosette resolves by the formation of multiple new junctions along the anterior - posterior axis ( Figure 3D ) . Similar to generic T1 transitions , the collapse of multiple dorsal - ventral cell junctions into a rosette requires polarized F - actin and myosin II cable at the shrinking junctions , which depend on the activity of polarized Rho - kinase ( Blankenship et al . , 2006 ; Fernandez - Gonzalez et al . , 2009 ; ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 13 Simões et al . , 2010 ) . However , abl mutant embryos , in which Arm / β - catenin turnover is reduced at the anterior - posterior cell borders , show defects of vertical junction shrinkage during rosette formation but not for T1 transitions ( Tamada et al . , 2012 ) . This suggests specific regulatory mechanisms for the rosette formation compared with T1 transition . E - cadherin , F - actin and Bazooka localize in a spatially and temporally regulated manner to newly forming junctions during rosette resolution ( Blankenship et al . , 2006 ) . However , the detailed mechanisms remain unclear . 5 . Junctional E - cadherin during germ - band extension Within adherens junctions , homotypic interactions between E - cadherin molecules link epithelial cells and are thus a central player in epithelial tissue morphogenesis . As in many cell types , E - cadherin molecules do not distribute uniformly at the adherens junction , but form clusters in Drosophila epithelial cells during germ - band extension ( Cavey et al . , 2008 ) . Superresolution images showed that E - cadherin molecules form clusters in separated membranes by E - cadherin cis - interaction in Drosophila embryos by photoactivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) . Furthermore , the molecular density analysis suggested that 25 % of E - cadherin molecules in clusters in average are in cis - interaction at adherens junction in Drosophila embryos ( Truong Quang et al . , 2013 ) . E - cadherin clusters are linked to the actin cytoskeleton via Arm / β - catenin and α - catenin , which binds F - actin as well as F - actin binding proteins , such as vinculin ( reviewed by Takeichi , 2014 ) . During germ - band extension , the molecular machinery of adherens junctions is remodeled in conjunction with junction dynamics . E - cadherin complexes are thought to orient the actomysion flow direction ( Rauzi et al . , 2008 ; Levayer and Lecuit , 2013 ) . It is unclear , however , to which degree E - cadherin remodeling plays an instructive role . Recent studies revealed that E - cadherin does not act as a driving force during the contact extension phase but rather stabilizes new cell contacts once they are formed ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . In addition to stabilization of cell - cell contacts , E - cadherin based adherens junctions transmit the forces between the neighboring cells during tissue remodeling ( reviewed by Hoffman and Yap , 2015 ) . Potentially , E - cadherin may have roles in new junction formation during T1 transitions , in addition to stabilizing the cell contacts . Cell intercalation is specifically delayed during the new junction formation phase in mutants with hypo - N - glycosylated E - cadherin but without obvious epithelial defects ( Zhang et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , at the onset of germ - band extension , anisotropic tension along ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 14 the A - P body axis leads to an A - P stretching of the lateral epidermal cells with a gradual increase towards the posterior tip of the embryos . Cell stretching is reduced when cell intercalation occurs , whereas the anisotropic tension is still detected ( Sawyer et al . , 2011 ; Collinet et al . , 2015 ; Lye et al . , 2015 ) . It needs to be investigated if or how adherens junctions and E - cadherin are involved in the force transmission and coordination on a tissue wide scale . 6 . Oriented cell divisions in germ - band extension Oriented cell division is a mechanism involved in patterning and shaping a tissue during development ( reviewed by Poulson , 2012 ) . Several studies have assessed the contribution of cell rearrangements for germ - band extension ( Irvine and Wieschaus , 1994 ; Bertet et al . , 2004 ; Zallen and Wieschaus , 2004 ) . These observations were focused on the anterior part of germ - band , where no cell divisions occur during the rapid phase of germ - band extension ( reviewed by Foe , 1989 ) . One study has highlighted a potential role of oriented cell divisions in the region next to the posterior mid - gut invagination ( mitotic domain 4 ) . Based on the observation that the cell divisions were oriented towards the invaginating endoderm along the axis of elongation , it was proposed that oriented cell divisions contribute to germ - band extension both in the rapid phase and the slow phase ( Silva and Vincent , 2007 ) . The rapid phase of germ - band extension occurs during the initial 45 min , the tip of the germ - band extends to 60 % EL ( embryo length ) , and the germ - band continues to extend until the tip reaches to 75 % EL at the slow phase in the following 100 min ( Campos - Ortega and Hartenstein , 1997 ) . Oriented cell division in the posterior germ - band would drive the rapid phase of axis elongation , while cell intercalation occurs mainly in the anterior portion of the germ - band . The extent of axis elongation is reduced in mutants without zygotic cell divisions . The mechanism that leads to oriented divisions in mitotic domain 4 remains unclear . The divisions might be oriented by a planar cell polarity pathway or the mechanics of the extending tissue and force generated by endoderm invagination . There is currently no evidence for the first model . The frizzled - dependent PCP pathway is not required for oriented cell divisions in the posterior region ( Silva and Vincent , 2007 ) . The alternative model is more likely , since the invaginating posterior endoderm produces tensile stress in the germ - band at the posterior end of the embryo ( Lye et al . , 2015 ) . It is conceivable that the mitotic spindles of dividing cells orient according to anisotropic tissue tension ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 15 similar to tension - oriented cell divisions during zebrafish epiboly ( Campinho et al . , 2013 ) . 7 . Calcium signaling in germ - band extension Calcium is involved in many cellular processes , including cytoskeletal dynamics and cell shape changes . Global perturbation of intracellular calcium impairs egg chamber elongation in Drosophila oogenesis , for example ( He et al . , 2010 ) . Similarly , an increase of intracellular free calcium concentration by UV uncaging of caged compounds induces cell shape change in the amnioserosa of Drosophila embryos ( Hunter et al . , 2014 ) . It is unclear how calcium is linked to cell behavior and contractility . A potential mechanism is provided by calmodulin complexes that activate the myosin light chain kinase and consequently myosin II ( Kitazawa et al . , 1991 ) . Employing live - imaging of calcium - sensitive fluorescent probes , the dynamics of calcium ions can be investigated in vivo . Live - imaging of the calcium probe G - CaMP3 - GFP revealed that wounds cause an increase of intracellular calcium in the Drosophila pupa ( Antunes et al . , 2013 ) . A wave of high calcium levels was observed toward the wound center during wound healing ( Antunes et al . , 2013 ) . During germ - band extension spontaneous calcium spikes were observed both in individual cells and in groups of cells ( Markova et al . , 2015 ) . The frequency of calcium spikes increases during the fast phase of germ - band extension . However , no correlation with T1 processes and stereotypic cell and junction dynamics was observed . It remains to be investigated , whether and how the prominent calcium spikes or less obvious changes in calcium concentration contribute to cell and junction dynamics during germ - band extension . 8 . Mathematical models of germ - band extension Tissue remodeling is driven by the mechanical activity of individual cells . Tracing the impact of the generated mechanical forces through the surrounding tissue is essential to understand tissue morphogenesis in its entirety . For this it is also necessary to dissect the emergent “collective” phenomena that result from interactions between distributed groups of cells , which sometimes are widely dispersed as illustrated by the interaction between the posterior midgut and the germ band , described above . In general , forces generated by individual cells and junctions not only act locally but are ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 16 transmitted through the tissue and can transform targets at distal locations . By the same token , local remodeling of cell shape and tissue packing can result from both locally generated as well as force components transmitted long - range . To make progress towards an integrative understanding of developmental processes the use of mathematical modeling and computational approaches in developmental biology is steadily expanding . Mathematical modeling and simulation for instance enable ( 1 ) to study the tissue level effects of modifying cellular behaviors that cannot be experimentally controlled , ( 2 ) to test mechanistic hypotheses based on computer - based model predictions , ( 3 ) to estimate mechanical tissue parameters by matching the shape and dynamics of morphogenetic transformations in vivo and in silico . Modeling also promotes progress towards more precise morphometry of developmental transformations and can serve as a stringent consistency check for mechanistic explanations . Due to its accessibility , germ - band extension has served as a “model problem” for the development of integrative approaches in morphogenesis . In studies of epithelial morphogenesis , vertex models ( Graner and Glazier , 1992 ; Mombach et al . , 1993 ; Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ; Staple et al . , 2010 ; Fletcher et al . , 2014 ) provide a versatile framework to simulate processes of tissue remodeling . Vertex models describe the state of an epithelial sheet in a simplified fashion . Rather than modeling the complete three dimensional shape of every cell , only the horizontal packing across the epithelium is considered . This is motivated by the fact that the organization of cell contacts at the level of adherens junction essentially determines the topology of this packing and contains the main elements of the force generating cellular machinery : adhesion complexes and associated actomyosin . At this level the geometry of cell packing is given by the 2D positions of all vertices and the matrix of cell junctions connecting them ( Figure 5 ) . Mechanical forces generated locally or transmitted through the tissue and acting on the vertices and junctions set the geometry of the cell packing . If the forces balance , the epithelium is in mechanical equilibrium . Imbalances lead to remodeling e . g . by movement of vertices towards or away from each other representing the shrinkage or extension of connecting junctions . Most vertex models describe tissue in mechanical equilibrium . Epithelial rearrangement is then simulated by tracking how the equilibrium cell packing is reorganized when mechanical parameters change with time ( Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ; Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ; Rauzi et al . , 2008 ; Staple et al . , ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 17 2010 ; Fletcher et al . , 2014 ; Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . To determine cell arrangements in which forces generated by cell adhesion , actomyosin contractility and cell elasticity are balanced , most vertex models use an “energy” or work function . This energy is minimized at mechanical equilibrium . It is generically split into three components : ( 1 ) an area elasticity component , that increases with deviation from a preferred area , ( 2 ) a line tension component , depending on individual junction length , and ( 3 ) a component representing the contractility of the cell perimeter ( see e . g . Farhadifar et al . , 2007 , Hufnagel et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 5 ) . Adhesion and actomyosin contractility at cell junctions contribute to line tension . Perimeter contractility describes the mechanical consequences of junctional actomyosin forming a single contractile ring along the cell perimeter . Finally , area elasticity effectively describes volume preservation of individual cells and guarantees that fluctuations in cell cross - sectional area are limited . Through a sequence of intermediate states , vertex models can simulate topological transformations such as T1 processes . These can be generated when neighboring vertices coalesce by complete junction constriction and subsequent randomly inserted nascent junctions expanded to further relax mechanical energy ( Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ; Rauzi et al . , 2008 ) . Although simplified , vertex models represent informative approximations to the three dimensional continuum mechanics of epithelial tissues ( Du et al . , 2014 ; Murisic et al . , 2015 ) . In studies of germ - band extension , vertex models have been used to establish that polarized contractile and adhesive properties are in principle sufficient to drive cell intercalation . They also demonstrated the permissive role of stochastic cell shape fluctuations in germ - band extension ( Rauzi et al . , 2008 ) , Recently , Collinet and coworkers generalized vertex models to include the influence of tissue level forces originating outside the germ - band . This model demonstrated that the invagination of the posterior midgut can impact on the speed and effectiveness of convergent extension by forces propagating through the tissue ( Collinet et al . , 2015 ) . Accumulating evidence suggests that not only junctional actomyosin and adhesion complexes but also medial actomyosin ( associated to the apical cell membrane ) can play a prominent role in tissue remodeling during germ - band extension ( Munjal et al . , 2015 ; Yu and Fernandez - Gonzalez , 2016 ) . Few models so far include this force generating component . More work is needed to determine efficient ways to describe forces generated by medial actomyosin within a tractable modelling framework ( see e . g . Chiou et al . , 2012 ; Wang et al . , 2012 ) . Most recently , vertex models of germ - band ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 18 extension also started to serve as a minimalistic framework to simulate the interplay of positional information , planar polarity , biochemical regulation and mechanical cell activity ( Miller and Davidson , 2013 ; Tetley et al . , 2016 ) . To this end , vertex models of tissue mechanics need to be augmented by cellular level models for the biochemical kinetics of intra - and inter - cellular signaling and polarization . While the development of such integrated models is currently in its infancy ( Lan et al . , 2015 ) , they are indispensable to finally link the level of patterning , signaling and gene activation to the generation of biological form . Despite important progress , forces in cells and tissues are not easy to measure experimentally . It is therefore attractive to use mathematical models to quantitatively infer force fields from imaging data either static or dynamic , an approach called ‘video force microscopy’ ( Brodland et al . , 2010 ; Chiou et al . , 2012 ; Ishihara and Sugimura , 2012 ; Ishihara et al . , 2013 ) . In essence , video force microscopy computationally determines the mechanical model best fitting a static packing or dynamic rearrangement of an epithelium ( experimentally determined by time lapse imaging ) . The distribution of forces in the inferred model then serves as a proxy for forces acting within the tissue . In particular in epithelial morphogenesis this might open a way to assess tension states and tissue scale force maps and their dynamics in a noninvasive fashion . The prerequisites and accuracy of such an approach however needs to be further elucidated and optimized ( Veldhuis et al . , 2015 ; Sugimura et al . , 2016 ) . 9 . Concluding remarks The anterior - posterior patterning system establishes in the lateral epidermis a system of planar cell polarity , which directs junctional and cytoskeletal dynamics and cell rearrangement . The directional cell behavior is due to anisotropic actomyosin contractility and the distribution of cortical proteins , generating tensile stresses . In this review , we have summarized the literature on how these factors contribute to germ - band extension and discuss open questions in our current understanding of this process . The finding that Toll - family proteins are involved in polarization of the tissue , has started to open the black box of the molecular links between the transcriptional ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 19 machinery of the anterior - posterior patterning system and the cell biology of mechanically active cell behavior ( Paré et al . , 2014 ) . Some evidence supports a role of the classical Frizzled - based PCP pathway in cell polarity in the germ - band ( Warrington et al . , 2013 ) . However , whether the Toll - and Frizzled - based PCP pathways cooperate in generating the planar polarity of germ - band cells remains to be explored ( Tepass , 2014 ) . Beside the planar polarity , the epithelial cells have an elaborated apical - basal polarity . All studies , so far relied on observations of cross - sectional areas and actomyosin distributions at the apical and the subapical level defined by the adherens junctions . The significant third dimension of the epithelium has been neglected , so far . Important factors such as volume conservation and a potential contribution of the basal epithelial compartment need to be considered in future studies . So far , most studies focused on autonomous processes controlling cell intercalation . Given the advances in whole - embryo imaging ( Tomer et al . , 2012 ) , it will soon be possible to relate the speed and timing of T1 processes to the position within the lateral epidermis and to the position relative to other T1 processes . Furthermore , better imaging combined with automated segmentation and computational analysis will generate data sets that are large and suitable for sophisticated statistical analysis . Automated segmentation and selection of cells according to computer - defined rules will remove any subjective bias introduced by the person conducting the analysis . The stochastic nature of cell behavior and associated T1 processes has not been investigated , so far . It will be important to include stochastic components in the analysis and modeling using the variance in addition to the mean behavior as an informative parameter . Such approaches will reveal non - autonomous and coordination mechanisms of cell behavior . It is obvious from time - lapse recordings that the cells of the lateral epidermis undergo T1 transitions within a certain time frame but importantly not simultaneously . Processes and ( mechano - ) signalling pathways that coordinate the individual T1 processes within the tissue need to be identified . The role of mechanical forces and tensile stress at the cellular as well as tissue level has been addressed in several studies ( Figure 3B , Figure 4 ) . As the assays rely on invasive manipulations , such as laser cutting ( Figure 6A , B ) , inference methods for forces such as video force microscopy ( Brodland et al . , 2010 ) or non - invasive probes ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 20 such as FRET based force sensors ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) need to be further developed ( Figure 6C ) . It is not clear how the forces are transmitted from cell to cell , but the E - cadherin based adherens junctions are prime candidates ( reviewed by Hoffman and Yap , 2015 ) . Equally important as E - cadherin itself are the associated proteins , which link the transmembrane complexes to the cytoskeleton and importantly may be involved in sensing the local forces by force dependent conformation change ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) ( Figure 6D ) . Identification of physiological forces sensors will be important because they are key to understand the dynamic response of cells to the behavior of their neighbors . Acknowledgements We thank Zhiyi Lv and Prachi Richa for critical reading of the manuscript . Funding for this research project was provided by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) within the Forschergruppe FOR1756 ( GR1945 / 6 - 1 / 2 , WO1489 / 1 - 1 / 2 ) . ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 21 Figure 1 . Drosophila embryonic germ - band extension . ( A ) Scanning electron microscopy photomicrographs ( from Flybase ( Santos et al . , 2015 ) ) showing lateral views of Drosophila embryos at stage 6 , 7 , and 8 . The lateral epidermis undergoing convergence - extension is highlighted in light purple . Yellow arrows indicate the direction of extension . ( B ) Cross - section of a Drosophila embryo at stage 7 . Figure 2 . Anterior - posterior patterning system and polarized planar polarity . ( A ) Anterior - posterior patterning of Drosophila embryo is controlled by a hierarchical genetic cascade , which includes coordinate genes for maternal determinants and zygotic gap , pair - rule and segment polarity genes . Confocal images : Bicoid ( Spirov et al . , 2009 ) , Hunchback ( Perry et al . , 2012 ) , Eve , Toll - 2 ( Paré et al . , 2014 ) and Engrailed . ( B ) Myosin II is specifically enriched at junctions with dorsal - ventral orientation and Bazooka / PAR - 3 is enriched at junctions with anterior - posterior orientation conversely in the intercalating cells during germ - band extension . Figure 3 . Germ - band extension is driven by cell intercalation . ( A ) Convergence - extension of lateral epidermis during germ - band extension . ( B ) Forces directing the lateral epithelial tissue deformation during germ - band extension . Tensile force from posterior midgut invagination ( PMI ) induces the lateral epithelial cells stretching in A - P direction transiently and tissue convergence and extension are driven by cell intercalation . ( C ) The key to neighbor exchanges in germ band is junction dynamics according to a topological T1 transitions . During T1 transitions , collapse of a junction with dorsal - ventral orientation ( vertical ) ( red ) forms a 4x vertex and a new junction ( blue ) grows in perpendicular orientation subsequently . ( D ) Multiple junctions with dorsal - ventral orientation ( vertical ) ( red ) collapse to form the rosette and it is resolved by extension of multiple new junctions ( blue ) in anterior - posterior orientation . Intrinsic forces are indicated by red arrows in C and D . Figure 4 . Actomyosin dynamics within the cell quadruplets during T1 transition . In addition to junctional myosin , pulsed cortical actomyosin clusters flow towards a vertical junction , where constricting forces are generated during junction collapse . The cortical actomyosin network generates forces ( red arrows ) in the old neighbors , which lead the cell contraction to promote the new junction extension ( indicated by light blue arrows ) . ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 22 Figure 5 . Vertex models for epithelial morphogenesis . ( A ) Scheme of three cells within an epithelial cell packing . Adherence junctions and associated actomyosin rings are indicated . ( B ) Simplified description of tissue geometry by the arrangement of vertices ( blue dots ) and junctions ( green lines ) . Two vertices are labeled with indices i and j . The connecting junction‘s length l ij is indicated . The index α labels cells of cross sectional area A α . ( C ) Energy function minimized in mechanical equilibrium . R i , 2D position of vertex i . The coefficients K α ,  ij and   measure area cell elasticity of cell α , line tension of junction ( i , j ) and perimeter contractility of cell α , respectively . L α denotes the perimeter length of cell α ( Modified from Farhadifar et al . , 2007 ) . Figure 6 . Methods for mechanical forces measurement in vivo . ( A ) UV - laser ablation ( Hutson et al . , 2003 ) . The 3x vertices are under forces within a cell quadruplet . The ablation of a cell junction releases the tension and leads the system out of equilibrium . Immediately after laser ablation , the two 3x vertices move far away with a velocity ( the direction of movement is indicated by red arrows ) . ( B ) The recoil velocity is proportional to the degree of initial tension under the ablated cell junction , although it does not provide an absolute measurement of the tension . The recoil velocity decays over time , which is due to the viscoelastic properties of cells . ( C ) FRET - based tension sensor modules with elastic linker elements that extend in response to force ( F , indicted by blue arrows ) ( Cost et al . , 2015 ) . ( D ) FRET - based E - cadherin tension sensor ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) . ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 23 References Antunes , M . , Pereira , T . , Cordeiro , J . V . , Almeida , L . , Jacinto , A . , 2013 . Coordinated waves of actomyosin flow and apical cell constriction immediately after wounding . J Cell Biol 202 , 365 – 379 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201211039 Benton , M . A . , Pechmann , M . , Frey , N . , Stappert , D . , Conrads , K . H . , Chen , Y . - T . , Stamataki , E . , Pavlopoulos , A . , Roth , S . , 2016 . Toll Genes Have an Ancestral Role in Axis Elongation . Current Biology . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2016 . 04 . 055 Bertet , C . , Sulak , L . , Lecuit , T . , 2004 . Myosin - dependent junction remodelling controls planar cell intercalation and axis elongation . Nature 429 , 667 – 671 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature02590 Blankenship , J . T . , Backovic , S . T . , Sanny , J . S . P . , Weitz , O . , Zallen , J . A . , 2006 . Multicellular Rosette Formation Links Planar Cell Polarity to Tissue Morphogenesis . Developmental Cell 11 , 459 – 470 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 09 . 007 Brodland , G . W . , Conte , V . , Cranston , P . G . , Veldhuis , J . , Narasimhan , S . , Hutson , M . S . , Jacinto , A . , Ulrich , F . , Baum , B . , Miodownik , M . , 2010 . Video force microscopy reveals the mechanics of ventral furrow invagination in Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 22111 – 22116 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1006591107 Buckley , C . D . , Tan , J . , Anderson , K . L . , Hanein , D . , Volkmann , N . , Weis , W . I . , Nelson , W . J . , Dunn , A . R . , 2014 . Cell adhesion . The minimal cadherin - catenin complex binds to actin filaments under force . Science 346 , 1254211 – 1254211 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1254211 Butler , L . C . , Blanchard , G . B . , Kabla , A . J . , Lawrence , N . J . , Welchman , D . P . , Mahadevan , L . , Adams , R . J . , Sanson , B . , 2009 . Cell shape changes indicate a role for extrinsic tensile forces in Drosophila germ - band extension . Nature Publishing Group 11 , 859 – 864 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1894 Cai , D . , Chen , S . - C . , Prasad , M . , He , L . , Wang , X . , Choesmel - Cadamuro , V . , Sawyer , J . K . , Danuser , G . , Montell , D . J . , 2014 . Mechanical Feedback through E - Cadherin Promotes Direction Sensing during Collective Cell Migration . Cell 157 , 1146 – 1159 . Campinho , P . , Behrndt , M . , Ranft , J . , Risler , T . , Minc , N . , Heisenberg , C . - P . , 2013 . Tension - oriented cell divisions limit anisotropic tissue tension in epithelial spreading during zebrafish epiboly . Nat Cell Biol 15 , 1405 – 1414 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2869 Campos - Ortega , J . A . , Hartenstein , V . , 1997 . The Embryonic Development of Drosophila melanogaster . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Berlin , Heidelberg . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 662 - 22489 - 2 Cavey , M . , Rauzi , M . , Lenne , P . - F . , Lecuit , T . , 2008 . A two - tiered mechanism for stabilization and immobilization of E - cadherin . Nature 453 , 751 – 756 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature06953 Chae , J . , Kim , M . J . , Goo , J . H . , Collier , S . , Gubb , D . , Charlton , J . , Adler , P . N . , Park , W . J . , 1999 . The Drosophila tissue polarity gene starry night encodes a member of the protocadherin family . Development 126 , 5421 – 5429 . doi : 10 . 1002 / bies . 950141103 Chiou , K . K . , Hufnagel , L . , Shraiman , B . I . , 2012 . Mechanical Stress Inference for Two Dimensional Cell Arrays . PLOS Comput Biol 8 , e1002512 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1002512 Collinet , C . , Rauzi , M . , Lenne , P . - F . , Lecuit , T . , 2015 . Local and tissue - scale forces drive oriented junction growth during tissue extension . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 1247 – 1258 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3226 Cost , A . - L . , Ringer , P . , Chrostek - Grashoff , A . , Grashoff , C . , 2015 . How to Measure Molecular Forces in Cells : A Guide to Evaluating Genetically - Encoded FRET - Based Tension Sensors . Cell Mol Bioeng 8 , 96 – 105 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12195 - 014 - 0368 - 1 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 24 Curtin , J . A . , Quint , E . , Tsipouri , V . , Arkell , R . M . , Cattanach , B . , Copp , A . J . , Henderson , D . J . , Spurr , N . , Stanier , P . , Fisher , E . M . , Nolan , P . M . , Steel , K . P . , Brown , S . D . M . , Gray , I . C . , Murdoch , J . N . , 2003 . Mutation of Celsr1 Disrupts Planar Polarity of Inner Ear Hair Cells and Causes Severe Neural Tube Defects in the Mouse . Current Biology 13 , 1129 – 1133 . da Silva , S . M . , Vincent , J . P . , 2007 . Oriented cell divisions in the extending germband of Drosophila . Development 134 , 3049 – 3054 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 004911 de Matos Simões , S . , Blankenship , J . T . , Weitz , O . , Farrell , D . L . , Tamada , M . , Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , Zallen , J . A . , 2010 . Rho - Kinase Directs Bazooka / Par - 3 Planar Polarity during Drosophila Axis Elongation . Developmental Cell 19 , 377 – 388 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2010 . 08 . 011 Du , X . , Osterfield , M . , Shvartsman , S . Y . , 2014 . Computational analysis of three - dimensional epithelial morphogenesis using vertex models . Phys . Biol . 11 , 066007 . doi : 10 . 1088 / 1478 - 3975 / 11 / 6 / 066007 Eldon , E . , Kooyer , S . , D ' Evelyn , D . , Duman , M . , Lawinger , P . , Botas , J . , Bellen , H . , 1994 . The Drosophila 18 wheeler is required for morphogenesis and has striking similarities to Toll . Development 120 , 885 – 899 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 341282a0 Engl , W . , Arasi , B . , Yap , L . L . , Thiery , J . P . , Viasnoff , V . , 2014 . Actin dynamics modulate mechanosensitive immobilization of E - cadherin at adherens junctions . Nature Publishing Group 16 , 587 – 594 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2973 Farhadifar , R . , Röper , J . - C . , Aigouy , B . , Eaton , S . , Jülicher , F . , 2007 . The influence of cell mechanics , cell - cell interactions , and proliferation on epithelial packing . Curr . Biol . 17 , 2095 – 2104 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 11 . 049 Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , de Matos Simões , S . , ROper , J . - C . , Eaton , S . , Zallen , J . A . , 2009 . Myosin II Dynamics Are Regulated by Tension in Intercalating Cells . Developmental Cell 17 , 736 – 743 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 003 Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , Zallen , J . A . , 2011 . Oscillatory behaviors and hierarchical assembly of contractile structures in intercalating cells . Phys . Biol . 8 , 045005 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1088 / 1478 - 3975 / 8 / 4 / 045005 Fletcher , A . G . , Osterfield , M . , Baker , R . E . , Shvartsman , S . Y . , 2014 . Vertex Models of Epithelial Morphogenesis . Biophys . J . 106 , 2291 – 2304 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 11 . 4498 Foe , V . E . , 1989 . Mitotic domains reveal early commitment of cells in Drosophila embryos . Development 107 , 1 – 22 . Gaul , U . , Seifert , E . , Schuh , R . , Jãckle , H . , 1987 . Analysis of Krüppel protein distribution during early Drosophila development reveals posttranscriptional regulation . Cell 50 , 639 – 647 . González - Reyes , A . , Morata , G . , 1991 . Organization of the Drosophila head as revealed by the ectopic expression of the Ultrabithorax product . Development 113 , 1459 – 1471 . Graner , F . , Glazier , J . A . , 1992 . Simulation of biological cell sorting using a two - dimensional extended Potts model . Physical Review Letters 69 , 2013 – 2016 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevLett . 69 . 2013 Grashoff , C . , Hoffman , B . D . , Brenner , M . D . , Zhou , R . , Parsons , M . , Yang , M . T . , McLean , M . A . , Sligar , S . G . , Chen , C . S . , Ha , T . , Schwartz , M . A . , 2010 . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09198 Harris , T . J . C . , Peifer , M . , 2005 . The positioning and segregation of apical cues during epithelial polarity establishment in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 170 , 813 – 823 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200505127 Harris , T . J . C . , Peifer , M . , 2004 . Adherens junction - dependent and - independent steps in the establishment of epithelial cell polarity in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 167 , 135 – 147 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200406024 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 25 Hartman , M . A . , Spudich , J . A . , 2012 . The myosin superfamily at a glance . Journal of Cell Science 125 , 1627 – 1632 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 094300 He , L . , Wang , X . , Tang , H . L . , Montell , D . J . , 2010 . Tissue elongation requires oscillating contractions of a basal actomyosin network . Nat Cell Biol 12 , 1133 – 1142 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2124 Hoffman , B . D . , Yap , A . S . , 2015 . Towards a Dynamic Understanding of Cadherin - Based Mechanobiology . Trends in Cell Biology 25 , 803 – 814 . Hufnagel , L . , Teleman , A . A . , Rouault , H . , Cohen , S . M . , Shraiman , B . I . , 2007 . On the mechanism of wing size determination in fly development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 3835 – 3840 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0607134104 Hunter , G . L . , Crawford , J . M . , Genkins , J . Z . , Kiehart , D . P . , 2014 . Ion channels contribute to the regulation of cell sheet forces during Drosophila dorsal closure . Development 141 , 325 – 334 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 097097 Hunter , M . V . , Lee , D . M . , Harris , T . J . C . , Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , 2015 . Polarized E - cadherin endocytosis directs actomyosin remodeling during embryonic wound repair . J Cell Biol 210 , 801 – 816 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201501076 Hutson , M . S . , Tokutake , Y . , Chang , M . - S . , Bloor , J . W . , Venakides , S . , Kiehart , D . P . , Edwards , G . S . , 2003 . Forces for Morphogenesis Investigated with Laser Microsurgery and Quantitative Modeling . Science 300 , 145 – 149 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1079552 Irvine , K . D . , Wieschaus , E . , 1994 . Cell intercalation during Drosophila germband extension and its regulation by pair - rule segmentation genes . Development 120 , 827 – 841 . Ishihara , S . , Sugimura , K . , 2012 . Bayesian inference of force dynamics during morphogenesis . J . Theor . Biol . 313 , 201 – 211 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jtbi . 2012 . 08 . 017 Ishihara , S . , Sugimura , K . , Cox , S . J . , Bonnet , I . , Bellaïche , Y . , Graner , F . , 2013 . Comparative study of non - invasive force and stress inference methods in tissue . Eur . Phys . J . E 36 , 45 . doi : 10 . 1140 / epje / i2013 - 13045 - 8 Jordan , P . , Karess , R . , 1997 . Myosin light chain - activating phosphorylation sites are required for oogenesis in Drosophila . J Cell Biol 139 , 1805 – 1819 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 139 . 7 . 1805 Kam , Z . , Minden , J . S . , Agard , D . A . , Sedat , J . W . , Leptin , M . , 1991 . Drosophila gastrulation : analysis of cell shape changes in living embryos by three - dimensional fluorescence microscopy . Development 112 , 365 – 370 . Kambris , Z . , Hoffmann , J . A . , Imler , J . - L . , Capovilla , M . , 2002 . Tissue and stage - specific expression of the Tolls in Drosophila embryos . Gene Expression Patterns 2 , 311 – 317 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1567 - 133X ( 02 ) 00020 - 0 Kasza , K . E . , Farrell , D . L . , Zallen , J . A . , 2014 . Spatiotemporal control of epithelial remodeling by regulated myosin phosphorylation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , 11732 – 11737 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1400520111 Keller , R . , 2002 . Shaping the vertebrate body plan by polarized embryonic cell movements . Science 298 , 1950 – 1954 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1079478 Kerridge , S . , Munjal , A . , Philippe , J . - M . , Jha , A . , las Bayonas , de , A . G . , Saurin , A . J . , Lecuit , T . , 2016 . Modular activation of Rho1 by GPCR signalling imparts polarized myosin II activation during morphogenesis . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 261 – 270 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3302 Kitazawa , T . , Gaylinn , B . D . , Denney , G . H . , Somlyo , A . P . , 1991 . G - protein - mediated Ca2 + sensitization of smooth muscle contraction through myosin light chain phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 266 , 1708 – 1715 . Kolesnikov , T . , Beckendorf , S . K . , 2007 . 18 Wheeler regulates apical constriction of salivary gland cells via the Rho - GTPase - signaling pathway . Dev . Biol . 307 , 53 – 61 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2007 . 04 . 014 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 26 Lan , H . , Wang , Q . , Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , Feng , J . J . , 2015 . A biomechanical model for cell polarization and intercalation during Drosophila germband extension . Phys . Biol . 12 , 056011 . doi : 10 . 1088 / 1478 - 3975 / 12 / 5 / 056011 Leptin , M . , 1995 . Drosophila Gastrulation : From Pattern Formation to Morphogenesis . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 11 , 189 – 212 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cb . 11 . 110195 . 001201 Leptin , M . , Grunewald , B . , 1990 . Cell shape changes during gastrulation in Drosophila . Development 110 , 73 – 84 . Levayer , R . , Lecuit , T . , 2013 . Oscillation and Polarity of E - Cadherin Asymmetries Control Actomyosin Flow Patterns during Morphogenesis . Developmental Cell 26 , 162 – 175 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2013 . 06 . 020 Levayer , R . , Pelissier - Monier , A . , Lecuit , T . , 2011 . Spatial regulation of Dia and Myosin - II by RhoGEF2 controls initiation of E - cadherin endocytosis during epithelial morphogenesis . Nature Publishing Group 13 , 529 – 540 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2224 Liu , Z . , Tan , J . L . , Cohen , D . M . , Yang , M . T . , Sniadecki , N . J . , Ruiz , S . A . , Nelson , C . M . , Chen , C . S . , 2010 . Mechanical tugging force regulates the size of cell - cell junctions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 9944 – 9949 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0914547107 Lye , C . M . , Blanchard , G . B . , Naylor , H . W . , Muresan , L . , Huisken , J . , Adams , R . J . , Sanson , B . , 2015 . Mechanical Coupling between Endoderm Invagination and Axis Extension in Drosophila . PLoS Biol 13 , e1002292 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1002292 Lye , C . M . , Sanson , B . , 2011 . Tension and epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila early embryos . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 95 , 145 – 187 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 385065 - 2 . 00005 - 0 Markova , O . , Sénatore , S . , Chardès , C . , Lenne , P . - F . , 2015 . Calcium Spikes in Epithelium : study on Drosophila early embryos . Scientific Reports 5 , 11379 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep11379 Mayer , M . , Depken , M . , Bois , J . S . , Jülicher , F . , Grill , S . W . , 2010 . Anisotropies in cortical tension reveal the physical basis of polarizing cortical flows . Nature 467 , 617 – 621 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09376 Miller , C . J . , Davidson , L . A . , 2013 . The interplay between cell signalling and mechanics in developmental processes . Nature Reviews Genetics 14 , 733 – 744 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrg3513 Mombach , J . C . M . , de Almeida , R . M . C . , Iglesias , J . R . , 1993 . Mitosis and growth in biological tissues . Physical Review E 48 , 598 – 602 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 48 . 598 Morais - de - Sá , E . , Mirouse , V . , St Johnston , D . , 2010 . aPKC Phosphorylation of Bazooka Defines the Apical / Lateral Border in Drosophila Epithelial Cells . Cell 141 , 509 – 523 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 02 . 040 Murisic , N . , Hakim , V . , Kevrekidis , I . G . , Shvartsman , S . Y . , Audoly , B . , 2015 . From Discrete to Continuum Models of Three - Dimensional Deformations in Epithelial Sheets . Biophys . J . 109 , 154 – 163 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2015 . 05 . 019 Munjal , A . , Philippe , J . - M . , Munro , E . , Lecuit , T . , 2015 . A self - organized biomechanical network drives shape changes during tissue morphogenesis . Nature 524 , 351 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature14603 Nasiadka , A . , Dietrich , B . H . , Krause , H . M . , 2002 . Anterior - posterior patterning in the Drosophila embryo , in : Gene Expression at the Beginning of Animal Development , Advances in Developmental Biology and Biochemistry . Elsevier , pp . 155 – 204 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1569 - 1799 ( 02 ) 12027 - 2 Nicholas D Poulson , T . L . , 2012 . Asymmetric Cell Divisions in the Epidermis . International review of cell and molecular biology 295 , 199 – 232 . doi : 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 394306 - 4 . 00012 - 5 Paré , A . C . , Vichas , A . , Fincher , C . T . , Mirman , Z . , Farrell , D . L . , Mainieri , A . , Zallen , J . A . , 2014 . A positional Toll receptor code directs convergent extension in Drosophila . Nature 515 , 523 – 527 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature13953 Perrimon , N . , Mahowald , A . P . , 1987 . Multiple functions of segment polarity genes in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 119 , 587 – 600 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0012 - 1606 ( 87 ) 90061 - 3 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 27 Perry , M . W . , Bothma , J . P . , Luu , R . D . , Levine , M . , 2012 . Precision of Hunchback Expression in the Drosophila Embryo . Current Biology 22 , 2247 – 2252 . Pope , K . L . , Harris , T . J . C . , 2008 . Control of cell flattening and junctional remodeling during squamous epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila . Development 135 , 2227 – 2238 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 019802 Rauzi , M . , Krzic , U . , Saunders , T . E . , Krajnc , M . , Ziherl , P . , Hufnagel , L . , Leptin , M . , 2015 . Embryo - scale tissue mechanics during Drosophila gastrulation movements . Nature Communications 6 , 8677 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9677 Rauzi , M . , Lenne , P . - F . , Lecuit , T . , 2010 . Planar polarized actomyosin contractile flows control epithelial junction remodelling . Nature 468 , 1110 – 1114 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09566 Rauzi , M . , Verant , P . , Lecuit , T . , Lenne , P . - F . , 2008 . Nature and anisotropy of cortical forces orienting Drosophila tissue morphogenesis . Nat Cell Biol 10 , 1401 – 1410 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb1798 Santos , dos , G . , Schroeder , A . J . , Goodman , J . L . , Strelets , V . B . , Crosby , M . A . , Thurmond , J . , Emmert , D . B . , Gelbart , W . M . , FlyBase Consortium , 2015 . FlyBase : introduction of the Drosophila melanogaster Release 6 reference genome assembly and large - scale migration of genome annotations . Nucl . Acids Res . 43 , D690 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gku1099 Sawyer , J . K . , Choi , W . , Jung , K . - C . , He , L . , Harris , N . J . , Peifer , M . , 2011 . A contractile actomyosin network linked to adherens junctions by Canoe / afadin helps drive convergent extension . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 2491 – 2508 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . E11 - 05 - 0411 Schupbach , T . , Wieschaus , E . , 1986 . Germline autonomy of maternal - effect mutations altering the embryonic body pattern of Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 113 , 443 – 448 . Sellers , J . R . , Spudich , J . A . , Sheetz , M . P . , 1985 . Light chain phosphorylation regulates the movement of smooth muscle myosin on actin filaments . J Cell Biol 101 , 1897 – 1902 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 101 . 5 . 1897 Simões , S . de M . , Mainieri , A . , Zallen , J . A . , 2014 . Rho GTPase and Shroom direct planar polarized actomyosin contractility during convergent extension . J Cell Biol 204 , 575 – 589 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201307070 Small , S . , Kraut , R . , Hoey , T . , Warrior , R . , Levine , M . , 1991 . Transcriptional regulation of a pair - rule stripe in Drosophila . Genes Dev . 5 , 827 – 839 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 5 . 5 . 827 Spencer , A . K . , Siddiqui , B . A . , Thomas , J . H . , 2015 . Cell shape change and invagination of the cephalic furrow involves reorganization of F - actin . Dev . Biol . 402 , 192 – 207 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2015 . 03 . 022 Spirov , A . , Fahmy , K . , Schneider , M . , Frei , E . , Noll , M . , Baumgartner , S . , 2009 . Formation of the bicoid morphogen gradient : an mRNA gradient dictates the protein gradient . Development 136 , 605 – 614 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 031195 Staple , D . B . , Farhadifar , R . , Röper , J . C . , Aigouy , B . , Eaton , S . , Jülicher , F . , 2010 . Mechanics and remodelling of cell packings in epithelia . Eur . Phys . J . E 33 , 117 – 127 . doi : 10 . 1140 / epje / i2010 - 10677 - 0 Sugimura , K . , Lenne , P . - F . , Graner , F . , 2016 . Measuring forces and stresses in situ in living tissues . Development 143 , 186 – 196 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 119776 Suzuki , H . , Onishi , H . , Takahashi , K . , Watanabe , S . , 1978 . Structure and function of chicken gizzard myosin . J Biochem 84 , 1529 – 1542 . Sweeton , D . , Parks , S . , Costa , M . , Wieschaus , E . , 1991 . Gastrulation in Drosophila : the formation of the ventral furrow and posterior midgut invaginations . Development 112 , 775 – 789 . Takeichi , M . , 2014 . Dynamic contacts : rearranging adherens junctions to drive epithelial remodelling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 397 – 410 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3802 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 28 Tamada , M . , Farrell , D . L . , Zallen , J . A . , 2012 . Abl Regulates Planar Polarized Junctional Dynamics through & beta ; - Catenin Tyrosine Phosphorylation . Developmental Cell 22 , 309 – 319 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2011 . 12 . 025 Tamada , M . , Zallen , J . A . , 2015 . Square Cell Packing in the Drosophila Embryo through Spatiotemporally Regulated EGF Receptor Signaling . Developmental Cell 35 , 151 – 161 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 09 . 015 Tetley , R . J . , Blanchard , G . B . , Fletcher , A . G . , Adams , R . J . , Sanson , B . , Paluch , E . , 2016 . Unipolar distributions of junctional Myosin II identify cell stripe boundaries that drive cell intercalation throughout Drosophila axis extension . eLife Sciences 5 , e12094 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 12094 Tepass , U . , 2014 . Developmental biology : Polarize to elongate . Nature 515 , 499 – 501 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature13937 Tomer , R . , Khairy , K . , Amat , F . , Keller , P . J . , 2012 . Quantitative high - speed imaging of entire developing embryos with simultaneous multiview light - sheet microscopy . Nat Meth 9 , 755 – 763 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2062 Truong Quang , B . - A . , Mani , M . , Markova , O . , Lecuit , T . , Lenne , P . - F . , 2013 . Principles of E - Cadherin Supramolecular Organization In Vivo . Current Biology 23 , 2197 – 2207 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 09 . 015 Veldhuis , J . H . , Mashburn , D . , Hutson , M . S . , Brodland , G . W . , 2015 . Practical aspects of the cellular force inference toolkit ( CellFIT ) , in : Biophysical Methods in Cell Biology , Methods in Cell Biology . Elsevier , pp . 331 – 351 . doi : 10 . 1016 / bs . mcb . 2014 . 10 . 010 Vichas , A . , Zallen , J . A . , 2011 . Translating cell polarity into tissue elongation . Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 22 , 858 – 864 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . semcdb . 2011 . 09 . 013 Vincent , A . , Blankenship , J . T . , Wieschaus , E . , 1997 . Integration of the head and trunk segmentation systems controls cephalic furrow formation in Drosophila . Development 124 , 3747 – 3754 . Walck - Shannon , E . , Hardin , J . , 2014 . Cell intercalation from top to bottom . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 34 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3723 Wang , Y . - C . , Khan , Z . , Kaschube , M . , Wieschaus , E . F . , 2012 . Differential positioning of adherens junctions is associated with initiation of epithelial folding . Nature 484 , 390 – 393 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature10938 Wang , Q . , Feng , J . J . , Pismen , L . M . , 2012 . A cell - level biomechanical model of Drosophila dorsal closure . Biophys . J . 103 , 2265 – 2274 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 09 . 036 Warrington , S . J . , Strutt , H . , Strutt , D . , 2013 . The Frizzled - dependent planar polarity pathway locally promotes E - cadherin turnover via recruitment of RhoGEF2 . Development 140 , 1045 – 1054 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 088724 Wei , S . - Y . , Escudero , L . M . , Yu , F . , Chang , L . - H . , Chen , L . - Y . , Ho , Y . - H . , Lin , C . - M . , Chou , C . - S . , Chia , W . , Modolell , J . , Hsu , J . - C . , 2005 . Echinoid Is a Component of Adherens Junctions That Cooperates with DE - Cadherin to Mediate Cell Adhesion . Developmental Cell 8 , 493 – 504 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2005 . 03 . 015 Weaire , D . , Rivier , N . , 1984 . Soap , cells and statistics—random patterns in two dimensions . Contemporary Physics 25 , 59 – 99 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00107518408210979 Whitehead , J . , Vignjevic , D . , Fütterer , C . , Beaurepaire , E . , Robine , S . , Farge , E . , 2008 . Mechanical factors activate ß ‐ catenin ‐ dependent oncogene expression in APC 1638N / + mouse colon . HFSP Journal 2 , 286 – 294 . doi : 10 . 2976 / 1 . 2955566 Winter , C . G . , Wang , B . , Ballew , A . , Royou , A . , Karess , R . , Axelrod , J . D . , Luo , L . , 2001 . Drosophila Rho - Associated Kinase ( Drok ) Links Frizzled - Mediated Planar Cell Polarity Signaling to the Actin Cytoskeleton . Cell 105 , 81 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 01 ) 00298 - 7 Yang , Y . , Mlodzik , M . , 2015 . Wnt - Frizzled / planar cell polarity signaling : cellular orientation by facing the wind ( Wnt ) . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 31 , 623 – 646 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 100814 - 125315 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 29 Yu , J . C . , Fernandez - Gonzalez , R . , 2016 . Local mechanical forces promote polarized junctional assembly and axis elongation in Drosophila . eLife 5 , 20246 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 10757 Zallen , J . A . , Wieschaus , E . , 2004 . Patterned gene expression directs bipolar planar polarity in Drosophila . Developmental Cell 6 , 343 – 355 . Zhang , Y . , Kong , D . , Reichl , L . , Vogt , N . , Wolf , F . , Großhans , J . , 2014 . The glucosyltransferase Xiantuan of the endoplasmic reticulum specifically affects E - Cadherin expression and is required for gastrulation movements in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 390 , 208 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2014 . 03 . 007 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 30 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 31 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 32 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 33 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 34 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 35 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T 36 Highlights  germband extension in Drosophila embryos has served as a paradigm for body axis elongation  Studies during the last decade have revealed mechanisms driving cell rearrangement  Studies have revealed a central role of mechanical forces in germband extension ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT