Abstracts / Neuroscience Research 68S ( 2010 ) e55 – e108 e71 of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion . This novel rat model seems to resemble more closely to the condition of human SIVD . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neures . 2010 . 07 . 077 O1 - 7 - 3 - 4 Japanese patients with Bardet - Biedl syndrome Makito Hirano 1 , Toshihide Yamashita 2 , Yasushi Ikuno 3 , Hiromi Iwahashi 4 , Mitsuru Ohishi 5 , Toshiyuki Mano 6 , Ryu Ishihara 7 , Ichiro Tanaka 8 , Keiko Yanagihara 6 , Yusaku Nakamura 1 , Susumu Kusunoki 9 1 DeptNeurol , KinkiUnivSakaiHosp , Osaka , Japan 2 DeptMolNeurosci , Osaka Univ , Osaka , Japan 3 DeptOphthalmol , OsakaUniv , Osaka , Japan 4 DeptMetab Med , Osaka Univ , Osaka , Japan 5 Dept Geriatr Med , Osaka Univ , Osaka , Japan 6 Div Pediatr Neurol , Osaka Med Center and Res Inst for Mat Child Health , Osaka , Japan 7 Dept Gastrointest Oncol , Osaka Med Center for Cancer and CardiovasDis , OsakaJapan 8 DeptPaediatr , NaraMedUniv , Nara , Japan 9 Dept Neurol , Kinki Univ Bardet - Biedl syndrome ( BBS ) is an autosomal recessive disorder character - izedbymentalimpairment , rod - conedystrophy , polydactyly , centralobesity , and hypogonadism . The causative genes have been identiﬁed as BBS1 - 14 that encode proteins possibly linked to cilia function , but more than 20 % of patients have no mutations found . In the Western countries , this dis - ease is relatively common , however , only a few Japanese patients have been reported in the English - language literature . We summarized clinical and genetic information of 5 Japanese patients with BBS including our patients . DNA array analysis ( BBS1 - 10 ) was performed in two patients , without iden - tifying any mutations . We found that rare liver ﬁbrosis was detected in two patients , while only two patients had renal dysfunction , thought to be a uni - versalsymptom . Wespeculatethatclinicalsignsandsymptomsofpatientsin Japanmayslightlydifferfromthoseinothercountries . Toidentifythepoten - tial racial difference and the reason for the rarity in Japan , we are currently conducting the nation - wide survey of this disease . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neures . 2010 . 07 . 078 O1 - 7 - 4 - 1 Genome - wide association study identiﬁes com - mon variants at four loci as genetic risk factors for Parkinson’s disease Wataru Satake 1 , 2 , Ikuko Mizuta 1 , Michiaki Kubo 3 , Takahisa Kawaguchi 3 , Tatsuhiko Tsunoda 3 , Takeo Yoshikawa 4 , Saburo Sakoda 2 , Mitsutoshi Yamamoto 5 , Nobutaka Hattori 6 , Miho Murata 7 , Yusuke Nakamura 3 , 8 , Tatsushi Toda 1 , . Japan PD Gene Consortium 9 1 Division of Neurology / Molecular Brain Science , Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine , Kobe , Japan 2 Department of Neurology , Osaka Univer - sityGraduateSchoolofMedicine , Suita , Japan 3 CenterforGenomicMedicine , RIKEN , Yokohama , Japan 4 RIKEN Brain Science Institute , Saitama , Japan 5 DepartmentofNeurology , KagawaPrefecturalCentralHospital , Takamatsu , Japan 6 Department of Neurology , Juntendo University School of Medicine , Tokyo , Japan 7 Department of Neurology , National Center Hospital of Neu - rology and Psychiatry , Kodaira , Japan 8 Human Genome Center , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan 9 Japan PD Gene Consor - tium Parkinson’sdisease ( PD ) isacomplexdisordercausedbymultiplegeneticand environmental factors . Association studies have evaluated variants in many candidate genes for PD , but only a few genes , such as common variants of ˛ - synuclein andraremutationsof GBA , havebeenidentiﬁedasPD - susceptibility geneswithgenome - widesigniﬁcance . Toidentifyfurthersusceptibilityvari - ants , we performed a genome - wide association study ( GWAS ) and two replication studies in a total of 2 , 011 cases and 18 , 381 controls from Japan . We identiﬁed a new susceptibility locus on 1q32 ( P = 1 . 52 × 10 - 12 ) and desig - nated this as PARK16 , and we also identiﬁed BST1 on 4p15 as a second new risklocus ( P = 3 . 94 × 10 - 9 ) . Wealsodetectedstrongassociationsat ˛ - synuclein on 4q22 ( P = 7 . 35 × 10 - 17 ) and LRRK2 on 12q12 ( P = 2 . 72 × 10 - 8 ) , both of which are implicated in autosomal dominant forms of parkinsonism . By comparing results of a GWAS performed on individuals European ancestry , we identi - ﬁed PARK16 , ˛ - synuclein and LRRK2 as shared risk loci for PD and BST1 and MAPT as loci showing population differences . Our results identify two new PD susceptibility loci , show involvement of autosomal dominant parkinson - ism loci in typical PD and suggest that population differences contribute to genetic heterogeneity in PD . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neures . 2010 . 07 . 079 O1 - 7 - 4 - 2 Abnormal autophagy / lysosome function may play some role in Parkinson’s disease Hideaki Matsui 1 , 3 , Hidefumi Ito 1 , Yoshihito Taniguchi 2 , 3 , Shunichi Takeda 2 , 3 , Ryosuke Takahashi 1 , 3 1 Dept Medicine , Kyoto Univ , Kyoto 2 Dept Radiation Genetics , Kyoto Univ , Kyoto 3 JST , CREST Background : We previously established several kinds of Parkinson model using medaka ﬁsh . Objective : To analyze several medaka mutants and toxin - induced phenotypes . Methods : We created PINK1 ( PARK6 ) , Parkin ( PARK2 ) and ATP13A2 ( PARK9 ) mutant medaka ﬁsh . We also exposed ammonium chloride , tunicamycin and lactacystin to medaka ﬁsh . Results : PINK1 / Parkin double mutant disclosed selective dopaminergic cell loss , movement dis - order . It disckosed impaired autophagy , decreased activity of mitochondria complex I / II and contained lysosome - related abnormal structures in the brain . Similar phenotypes were also demonstrated by mouse embryonic ﬁbloblast . ATP13A2 mutant also disclosed Parkinsonism with similar abnor - mal structures related with lysosome . Lysosome inhibitor , ammonium chloride , could induce Parkinsonism in medaka ﬁsh : Ubiquitin positive inclusion bodies , movement disorder and selective loss of dopaminergic neurons . Conclusions : These lines of evidence suggested that autophagy / lysosome pathway may be a central part of PD mechanism . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neures . 2010 . 07 . 080 O1 - 7 - 4 - 3 Regulation of the PINK1 signaling by a mitochon - drial protein PGAM5 Tomoyo Sawada 1 , 2 , Tomoko Kanao 3 , Yoshito Kobayashi 1 , Ryosuke Takahashi 1 , 2 , Yuzuru Imai 3 1 Dept Neurol , Kyoto University , Kyoto 2 JEST - CREST , Tokyo 3 IDAC / CRESS , Tohoku University , Sendai Mutations in PINK1 , a nuclear gene encoding a mitochondrial serine - threonine kinase , cause a recessively inherited form of Parkinson , s disease . We biochemically identiﬁed PINK1 - binding proteins and screened for bind - ing proteins that modulate the Drosophila PINK1 mutant phenotypes . As a result , we identiﬁed a member of the phosphoglycerate mutase family PGAM5 as a modulator . Overexpression of PGAM5 , which is localized in the outer mitochondrial membrane , resulted in fragmentation of the mitochon - dria and a shorter lifespan in Drosophila , suggesting that PGAM5 is toxic to cellsunderacertaincondition . WefoundthatlossofaPINK1 - bindingprotein PGAM5 signiﬁcantly improved degeneration of the indirect ﬂight muscles , motor defect and dopaminergic neurodegeneration caused by PINK1 inac - tivation . In contrast , removal of the PGAM5 gene failed to rescue the parkin mutantphenotypes . Theseresultssuggestthat PGAM5 isgeneticallyepistatic to parkin , or independently functions downstream of PINK1 in Drosophila . In this study , we will examine their underlying molecular mechanisms in mammalian cultured cells , focusing on the molecular relationship between PINK1 , PGAM5 and Parkin . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neures . 2010 . 07 . 081 O1 - 7 - 4 - 4 Neuroprotection by type B inhibitors is mediated by type A monoamine oxidase Keiko Inaba - Hasegawa 1 , Makoto Naoi 1 , Wakako Maruyama 2 , Masayo Shamoto - Nagai 2 1 Gifu International Institute of Biotechnology 2 National Institute for Geri - atrics and Gerontology , Japan Inhibitors of type B monoamine oxidase ( MAO - B ) , rasagiline and selegiline , protect neuronal cells against cell death induced by various insults . These protective agents are irreversible MAO - B inhibitors ( MAO - B - Is ) and bind to the substrate binding site , whereas at quite higher concentrations they bind also to MAO - A at the site besides the substrates binding site . The neu - roprotective function of MAO - B - Is is mainly ascribed to the induction of pro - survival genes , bcl - 2 and GDNF , BDNF , NGF . The studies on the chem - ical structure - activity relationship suggest the presence of the binding site in mitochondria , recognizing the stereochemical structures of MAO - B - Is of propargylamine derivatives . In this paper , the role of MAO in the induction