This article was downloaded by : [ University of Haifa Library ] On : 03 October 2013 , At : 13 : 51 Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Technology Analysis & Strategic Management Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / ctas20 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers : evidence from Taiwan ' s bicycle industry Mei - Chih Hu a & Ching - Yan Wu b a National Tsing Hua University , Institute of Technology Management , Hsinchu , 300 , Taiwan b Macquarie Graduate School of Management , Macquarie University , Sydney , NSW , 2109 , Australia Published online : 21 Mar 2011 . To cite this article : Mei - Chih Hu & Ching - Yan Wu ( 2011 ) Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers : evidence from Taiwan ' s bicycle industry , Technology Analysis & Strategic Management , 23 : 4 , 433 - 452 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 09537325 . 2011 . 558401 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09537325 . 2011 . 558401 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Technology Analysis & Strategic Management Vol . 23 , No . 4 , April 2011 , 433 – 452 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers : evidence from Taiwan’s bicycle industry Mei - Chih Hu a ∗ and Ching - Yan Wu b a National Tsing Hua University , Institute of Technology Management , Hsinchu 300 , Taiwan ; b Macquarie Graduate School of Management , Macquarie University , Sydney , NSW 2109 , Australia By examining the technological innovation trajectories of Taiwan’s bicycle industry over the last 30 years , this paper identiﬁes three speciﬁc periods that constitute industry cycles with peaks occurring in 1980 , 1990 and 2002 . In each period , innovation capabilities within the six bicycle subsystems shifted , accompanied by variations in the needs of international markets and in export performance . The empirical results demonstrate that innovation activity in the production of key components by technological latecomers increases only when that of the market leaders is in decline . It is also demonstrated that through incremental technological innovations , taking advantage of modularity and appropriate strategic organisational innova - tions , such latecomers can become and remain competitive in the international market . By providing an understanding of the sequences that make up modularised technological trajec - tories and of the cycles experienced by the global bicycle market , this study is able to elicit some practical insights into the policy and managerial implications for latecomers involved in technological innovation . Keywords : technology innovation ; patents ; latecomer ; bicycle ; industry cycle ; Taiwan 1 . Introduction By the 1970s , major bicycle manufacturing countries , such as the USA , Japan , Italy , France and the UK , produced about 50 % of the world’s output . At that stage , developing countries , such as Taiwan , China and South Korea , accounted for only 13 . 7 % of the production ( Lee and Lin 1991 ) . However , beginning in the 1980s , the structure of the global bicycle industry has undergone tremendous change . With major producers in advanced countries having either dropped out of the market or merged with other companies , the rise of latecomers in developing countries has led to them taking leading positions in the global bicycle industry . 1 For example , while the USA had been a major bicycle production and consumption country prior to the 1970s , it has now become a major importer with little domestic production . The shift of the world’s bicycle production pattern has caused US production to drop to 120 , 000 units in 2006 , which is only 0 . 1 % of global output . ∗ Corresponding author . Email : mchu @ mx . nthu . edu . tw ISSN 0953 - 7325 print / ISSN 1465 - 3990 online © 2011 Taylor & Francis DOI : 10 . 1080 / 09537325 . 2011 . 558401 http : / / www . informaworld . com D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 434 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu Similarly , Japan had a very important role in the world market in the 1960s , reaching its highest production level of 9 . 4 million bicycles in 1973 . With rising manufacturing costs , the appreciation of the Japanese Yen and an economic depression , its exports have gradually decreased to about 100 , 000 units per year . There was a temporary rebound to 400 , 000 units in 1999 as a result of the increasing export of electronic bicycles . It has been against this background that the latecomer Taiwan has taken the opportunity to overcome its competitive disadvantage and emerge as the world leader in bicycle exports during the 1980s and 1990s . When the development of an industry is dynamic and proﬁtable , competition from latecomers appears over time as a matter of course ( Amsden 1989 ) . For example , as the world’s largest bicycle consumer , China has attracted ever increasing numbers of foreign bicycle companies to establish their manufacturing bases in the country and take advantage of its potential domestic and export markets . Among these have been numerous Taiwanese ﬁrms . This movement in production capacity based on lower labour and land costs gave China a sufﬁcient boost to overtake Taiwan’s bicycle output and become the world’s leading exporter in 2000 . However , despite the declining export volume , the average export price of Taiwan’s bicycle industry has recently been historically high , more than doubling from US $ 99 . 60 in 1998 to US $ 208 . 90 in 2006 . This compares to China’s minor increase ( or even decline ) in average export price . Unlike successful information technology ( IT ) products , such as laptop personal computers ( PCs ) , computer monitors and integrated circuit ( IC ) manufacturing , that hide behind international brand names , Taiwan’s bicycle production is one of the few ‘national champions’with its own globally recognised image evident in the slogan ‘Think Bicycle , Think Taiwan’ . The Taiwanese bicycle industry is one of the few ‘traditional’ industries that has upgraded successfully during the process of industrialisation . Many attribute the success of the industry to the favourable environment and the country’s participation in the global market . This enabled its industries to learn and adopt the most advanced technology and eventually to upgrade its production as a whole ( see , for example , Yan and Hu 2008 ; Chu 1997 ) . However , although these were crucial factors in the beginning and responsible for the initially large exports of Taiwanese bicycles , they were not necessarily the factors that would ensure a successful industry that could sustain its competitive advantage when its mature stage arrived in the 1990s . In this respect , its experience was different from that of advanced countries , such as the USA and Japan . As a latecomer or follower in applying the relevant technology , Taiwan proved its innovation capabilitiesbysuccessfullyrespondingtothetechnologicalimpedimentsitfaced . Theseoriginated from established international leaders , including the inﬂuential Japanese company Shimano , with respect to derailleur gearing and the prestigious brand - name companies from the USA , Specialized and Trek . In addition , during the 2000s , Taiwan has had to contend with the cost challenge from other industry late arrivals , such as China , Vietnam and India . The shifts and restructuring of the global bicycle industry has enabled Taiwan to move from being simply a subcontractor to become a designer and innovator , applying highly modular interfaces and responding closely to market changes . In doing so , it has been able to overcome the technological dominance of the international industry participants . Innovation activities in many cases involve distinctions not only between modular designers and subcontractors , but also between technology leaders and followers . For example , the diverse developments as between the West and East in the ﬁelds of personal computers , computer dis - plays , cellular phones and many mechanical products such as bicycles have been discussed in the extant literature ( see particularly Kodama 2004 ; Sanderson and Uzumeri 1995 ) . In highly modular industries , achieving substantial growth largely relies on new and critical product inno - vations or applications , while sustainable growth requires greater emphasis on incremental or D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 435 process innovations ( Romer 1990 ; Nell 1992 ) . 2 Although not as complicated as in the electronics industry , process innovation , along with regular incremental innovation at the component level , in the bicycle industry have long been perceived as primary drivers in sustaining the growing industry ( Sanchez and Mahoney 2000 ; Galvin 1999 ; Langlois and Robertson 1992 ) . Products with complementary properties are increasingly important , especially under modular - ity , where technological innovations within subsystems are highly correlated and are sometimes diffused from one to another with improved speciﬁc functions or efﬁciency in order to achieve product differentiation ( Doran et al . 2007 ) . Given the importance of interactions among modular components , the present study focuses on exploring the incremental innovation trajectories among bicycle subsystems for a technology latecomer or follower such as Taiwan . The investigation here begins by providing an understanding of how Taiwan captured technological ( incremental ) inno - vations in the modular subsystems and went on to create growth opportunities and respond to downstream market demand . The research is subsequently extended to examine the interactive relationships among the innovation activities of modular bicycle technology subsystems , along with the relevance of industry cycles . Then , if the innovation trajectory is shown to exist , the challenge is to establish whether it holds lessons that may be useful for the production of other modular products or services . The details of the study are presented in the sections that comprise the ensuing discussion . Innovation capabilities in Taiwan as they are linked to latecomer technological change , the char - acteristics of modularity involved in bicycle products and the development trajectories of the bicycle industry are outlined in Section 2 . Section 3 addresses the methodology to be utilised in examining how Taiwan’s latecomer bicycle industry was involved in innovation trajectory cycles that assisted it to catch up with international leaders in the earlier stages and to build up its own innovation capability in the later stages of its development . Empirical results are reported in Section 4 , followed by further discussion and conclusions in Section 5 . 2 . Theoretical background Much extant literature reports on the economic success of latecomer countries such as Taiwan , South Korea , China and India . Important factors contributing to such success include foreign direct investment ( FDI ) , external technology acquisition , public policy , institutional mechanisms , international openness , low cost inputs and the availability of high quality labour . Industrial development in most latecomer countries involves a process of technological learning , upgrad - ing and catching up . These steps have proved to be successful in transforming labour - intensive manufacturing into high - tech manufacturing . In the shift from imitation into innovation , foreign technology acquisition and absorption from more advanced countries have contributed to building up endogenous innovation capabilities . These have undoubtedly been indispensable catalysts in the industrial transition experienced by these latecomers . Such efforts have enabled many late - comer countries with ‘systemic entrepreneurs’ to take advantage of modularity , the dynamics of the global business cycle and available innovations through technological change to transform themselves into innovators . So far , the innovation involved is still deﬁned as process innovation or incremental innovation ( Hu and Mathews 2005 ) . 2 . 1 . Innovation capability through technological change in the latecomer country There is much evidence that the determinants of the building up of innovation capabilities as between advanced countries and latecomer countries are diverse . Examples from relevant research D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 436 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu include Hu and Mathews ( 2005 ) , who suggested that the factors contributing to building a national innovative capacity in the OECD countries vary from those in EastAsian countries ; Bell and Pavitt ( 1993 ) , who discussed the differences in technological learning as between countries on the tech - nology frontier and latecomers ; Dahlman and Sananikone ( 1990 ) , Linden et al . ( 1998 ) and Teece ( 2000 ) , all of whom provided analyses of absorptive capacity as it derives from foreign technology for latecomers ; Rhee , Ross - Larson , and Pursell ( 1984 ) , Lall ( 1994 ) and Zhao ( 1995 ) , all of whom dealt in depth with the effects of foreign direct investment in EastAsian countries ; and Kim ( 1997 ) , who devised a model of three development stages comprising implementation , assimilation and improvement to show how latecomer countries convert external technological resources into a growth momentum when responding to increasing global competition . All the elements discussed focus on how technological learning reinforces the innovation capability of the latecomer country . Technological capabilities can be subdivided into three complementary elements : ( 1 ) a pro - duction capability comprising the capacity to operate and maintain production processes ; ( 2 ) an improvement capability comprising the capacity to design and construct new ventures and expan - sions ; and ( 3 ) an innovative capability comprising the capacity to generate new products and processes and to improve existing ones ( Dahlman and Westphal 1982 ) . Many latecomer countries such as Taiwan have moved through the corresponding stages of development from passive learn - ing ( production capability ) to active learning ( improvement capability ) to innovation ( innovative capability ) ( Hobday 2005 ; Viotti 2002 ) . Invention is a process of recombinant search across technological landscapes ( Fleming and Sorenson 2001 ) . When inventors are facing a ‘complexity catastrophe’ and attempting to com - bine highly interdependent technologies , the development of broader scientiﬁc and technological knowledge can also improve the search process itself . Consequently , the difﬁculty of using inter - dependent technologies may well decline with time and through experience , with technological change in industries usually occurring at an uneven pace and with a form that is sometimes described as resembling a non - linear pendulum ( Ayres 1994 ) . This is an implicit evolutionary process in which the exploration of industrial innovation trajectories can be utilised as a map of strategic planning and niche management , particularly for the technology follower . Such a map provides a means of reinforcing competitiveness through new applications and variations built on the dominant designs of international leaders ( Caniëls and Romijn 2008 ; Suarez and Utterback 1995 ) . The dynamic process of technological change has substantial implications for much of industrial development , especially for latecomers who aim at catching up with the ﬁrst movers as rapidly as possible . This is apparently the way that Taiwan’s bicycle industry , through strategic technological innovations , has been able to upgrade itself successfully by participating in the global market and thereby learning about advanced technology . This ultimately contributed to the growth of the industry as a whole . The outstanding performance achieved by this Taiwanese industry has many facets , including , inter alia , the ﬂexibility of the small - and medium - sized enterprises ( SMEs ) involved being consistent with the nature of modularity in the fragmented industrial network and the success of technology diffusion . These factors , as far as they have been involved in the development of Taiwan’s bicycle industry , are considered below . 2 . 2 . Modularity in the bicycle industry Modularity represents a strategic intention to organise complex products and processes efﬁ - ciently . Within established industry standards , modularity permits components to be designed and produced separately and used interchangeably in different conﬁgurations without compromising D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 437 system integrity ( Sanchez and Mahoney 2000 ) . Pertinent examples include rubber - based components , such as tyres and tubes , mechanical components , such as gears and brakes , and strength / weight focused components , such as frames and handlebars . As various specialised capabilities are required for producing different components , bicycle assemblers are able to focus on the design of the frame and effectively source other components from multiple suppliers , while each component supplier concentrates on its own innovation activities with respect to the com - patible components . This contributes to an acceleration of innovation throughout a Marshallian industrial district 3 ( Henderson and Clark 1990 ; Ulrich 1995 ; Shock and Hartrum 1998 ; Dahmus , Gonzalez - Zugast , and Otto 2001 ) . Having many companies that focus on innovations for a given module allows them freedom of innovation while respecting the speciﬁc rules that ensure that the modules consistently ﬁt together within diverse but compatible product architectures ( Meyer and Utterback 1993 ; Kodama 2004 ) . Product architecture comprises the structure that integrates components and subsystems of a product into a coherent mechanism that behaves as intended and performs the desired functions . In the bicycle industry , the knowledge underlying the product architecture is clearly codiﬁed , making it explicit and easily accessible by all industry participants ( Galvin 1999 ) . In this respect , modularity intentionally creates a high degree of interdependence or ‘loose coupling’ between components . As such , the architecture involved requires little coordination between the various ﬁrms , orbetweentheorganisationaldepartmentsofaparticularﬁrm , whenmanufacturingdifferent components . This results in an industrial dynamic of modularity comprising three elements : ( 1 ) the reduction of the extent of coordination required , especially at the industry level ; ( 2 ) the formation of a geographically dispersed industry ; and ( 3 ) lower barriers to entry ( Langlois and Robertson 1992 ; Sanchez and Mahoney 1996 ) . The inherent ﬂexibility created through the use of a modularised product architecture is likely to minimise disruptions caused by environmental or industry - segment speciﬁc turbulence ( Sanchez and Mahoney 1996 ) . Such ﬂexibility is one of the major advantages available to Taiwanese SMEs involved in bicycle manufacturing as it provides a basis for coping with rapidly changing markets , technologies and competitive situations . For example , export - oriented Taiwanese bicycle ﬁrms showed their ﬂexibility in overcoming the competitive disadvantages that arose when they were confronted by a substantial decrease in the exchange rate between the US dollar and the Taiwanese dollar in the mid 1980s . Moreover , the violent upheaval in the global bicycle industry that occurred in the late 1990s and early 2000s further demonstrated how Taiwan’s bicycle SMEs utilised their ﬂexible capabilities to turn the emergent risks into growth opportunities . When the US company Schwinn / GT announced its bankruptcy in 2001 , Merida , Taiwan’s second largest bicycle producer and one of the long - term original equipment manufacturer ( OEM ) subcontractors supplying Schwinn / GT , suffered signiﬁcant losses . Even so , Merida was able rapidly to turn the losses into proﬁts by securing an investment opportunity in the second largest US bicycle company , Specialized , in 2002 . Another example is Sun Race , a Taiwanese bicycle transmission components producer . In 2000 , when Sun Race’s scale was still small , it purchased the UK ﬁrm Sturmey - Archer that had been producing bicycle hub gears for 98 years . Sun Race was thus able quickly to become a key global manufacturer of bicycle transmission systems and one of only three total bicycle gearshift solution providers in the world , listed along with the other two transmission system giants , Shimano and SRAM . It is apparent that modularity helped initiate and subsequently reinforced the development of the Taiwanese bicycle industry . In the process of pursuing modularity , an individual company is inde - pendent and ﬂexible and able to deal with any contingency or emergency . It causes fragmentation of the bicycle industry and with it the horizontal division of labour involving numerous SMEs , D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 438 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu closer market networks , lower entry barriers and increased returns to scale at an industrial level . All this makes a signiﬁcant contribution to creative innovation in the bicycle industry . 2 . 3 . Taiwan’s bicycle industry During the early stages of the development of Taiwan’s bicycle industry , with its close networking between producers and assemblers , foreign OEM buyers ﬂooded into the country . These foreign buyers brought not only purchasing orders , but also new technology to help upgrade Taiwan’s bicycle production capabilities . This has enabled Taiwan to emerge as the ‘kingdom of the bicycle’ in the period since the beginning of the 1980s . However , beyond the establishment of improved production capabilities , Taiwan’s large - scale industrial migration to China since the 1990s has required added innovation prowess in order to compete with China’s lower cost bicycle producers . Although the process of transformation has ﬂuctuated , it has been successful , a fact that is well reﬂected in the lead of export value over the volume of export units since the 2000s shown in Figure 1 . The development of Taiwan’s bicycle industry can be divided into the four stages that are set out below . Initiating the export platform : the 1970s By 1971 , Taiwan’s bicycle exports had reached only 270 , 000 units , with an export value of US $ 4 . 2 million . It was the ﬁrst energy crisis of 1973 , which stimulated increased demand for bicycles around the world , that really provided the industry with its ﬁrst opportunity for rapid growth . A milestone on the way to establishing Taiwanese bicycle sales in international markets was marked when Tai Hsing Wang , the Taiwanese agent of Japan’s Kyokuto Ltd , began selling Taiwanese bicycles to an American ﬁrm for the ﬁrst time . The turning point of the Taiwanese bicycle industry came in 1974 when its rapid and successful growth began through establishing US export markets . Because of the proﬁtability of this export 0 2 , 000 , 000 4 , 000 , 000 6 , 000 , 000 8 , 000 , 000 10 , 000 , 000 12 , 000 , 000 19 7 0 19 7 2 19 7 4 19 7 6 19 7 8 19 8 0 19 8 2 19 8 4 19 8 6 19 8 8 19 9 0 19 9 2 19 9 4 19 9 6 19 9 8 20 0 0 20 0 2 20 0 4 20 0 6 0 5 , 000 , 000 10 , 000 , 000 15 , 000 , 000 20 , 000 , 000 25 , 000 , 000 30 , 000 , 000 35 , 000 , 000 40 , 000 , 000 Exports ( units ) Exports ( value , NT $ 1 , 000 ) Figure 1 . Taiwan bicycle export performance , 1970 – 2006 . Source : Taiwan Customs Statistics . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 439 activity , many underground bicycle assemblers emerged at the time . These assemblers produced large numbers of bicycles with low manufacturing quality and many faults . This led to dumping charges being directed against Taiwan by the USA and Canada in 1974 . Consequently , Taiwan lost access to the Canadian bicycle market , an outcome that explains why the industry’s export volume declined to only 815 , 000 units in 1975 . A senior chief executive ofﬁcer ( CEO ) of one of the country’s bicycle companies recalled that Taiwan’s low manufacturing quality before 1974 led to signs being placed outside many US specialty bicycle stores that read : ‘No sale or service of bicycles made in Taiwan’ . What brought Taiwanese manufacturers back to some level of acceptance was access to a new type of bicycle , the Bicycle Motorcross , now well - known as the BMX . To gain access to such a new design and technology was a crucial hurdle for the Taiwanese bicycle industry to clear at that time . Ultimately , the new production proﬁle was conﬁrmed by the speciﬁc welding technology required for BMX construction being successfully developed and transferred from the Metal Industries R & D Center to many bicycle companies . This technology facilitated the production of lighter - weight bicycles and enabled Taiwan to have a greater chance of competing with Japanese products in the US market . When the US customs imposed bicycle import tariffs on the basis of weight ( cycles under 36 pounds were levied at 5 . 5 % , with others levied at 11 % ) as a means of protecting its domestic producers , this gave the Taiwanese and Japanese with their light - weight products a chance to move ahead in the US market . At the time , someAmerican dealers wanted to buy BMX stock from Japan , but the Japanese failed to see the promise in these small , unorthodox cycles and effectively passed an extremely proﬁtable future market on to Taiwan . Since then , OEM contracts have ﬂooded into Taiwan from the USA and this has pushed the Taiwan bicycle industry into the Golden Age of growth that is apparent in the data shown in Figure 1 . The golden age : the 1980s In 1980 , the Taiwanese bicycle industry surpassed Japan to become the world’s number one exporter in terms of quantity of units . The export volume grew by a multiple of 38 from 270 , 000 units in 1971 to 10 million units in 1986 . However , this rapid growth saw the average export price stagnate and even decline during the years until 1987 . As a consequence , Taiwan’s government and bicycle companies became concerned to ﬁnd the means to ensure higher values of production . The upshot was the launching of two particular projects for upgrading the Taiwanese bicycle industry in 1984 and 1985 . The focus of these projects was on the application of advanced production materials . At that time , high - , medium - and low - end bicycle frames were typically made of carbon steel , Cr / Mo steel and aluminium alloy , respectively . However , light - weight and sturdy bicycles were , by then , the conﬁrmed trend in the industry . Simultaneously , the import dependence ratio in the supply of bicycles components started rising along with the production of higher quality bicycles . The ﬁrst project was run by the Industrial Development Bureau under the auspices of the Ministry of Economic Affairs . In 1984 , an executive team referred to as the Center Satellites System ( the former Corporation Synergy Development Center ) was established to enhance the development of high value - added products and to help ﬁrms handle their ﬁnancial problems . The outcome of this project was to strengthen Taiwan’s bicycle production network in the value - added chain and contributed to the delicate division of labour in the industry . The second project extended beyond Taiwanese manufacturing per se and focused on the development of new materials . This project was executed by the Materials Research Laboratories ( MRL ) , which are part of the Industry Technology Research Institute ( ITRI ) . It comprised a D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 440 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu two - year investigation of the use of carbon ﬁbre in bicycle frames over the period from 1985 to 1987 . This effort saw the MRL successfully develop carbon ﬁbre with alloy lugs to form one - piece monocoque frames , composite forks and composite three - spoke wheels . The subsequent diffusionofthiscarbonﬁbretechnologyhascontributedtoincreasedordersﬂowinginforTaiwan’smedium - and high - end bicycles . Because of the success of such value - added production , Taiwan’s bicycle manufacturing ability has impressed the global market . The nature of orders placed with Taiwanese bicycle companies can readily be qualitatively distinguished from those going to China and India during the 1980s . This explains why even though the foreign exchange rate between US and Taiwanese dollars declined 35 % between 1983 and 1989 , the average export bicycle price still rose 16 . 8 % with constant export volume . The violent ﬂuctuation of the exchange rate ultimately motivated the diversiﬁcation of trading risks by Taiwan’s government and the bicycle companies . The tech - nological diffusion from public research institutions helped Taiwan’s bicycle industry to break through the advanced technology barrier . By applying this advanced technology to mountain bike ( MTB ) production , it was able successfully to inﬁltrate the European market . The ongoing effect of these technological advances that originated in public research institutions is similar to that associated with the success story of Taiwan’s semiconductor industry . The mature stage : the 1990s The Taiwanese bicycle industry passed another milestone in the 1990s . For the ﬁrst time , its export value reached US $ 1 billion , recorded in 1991 . With this , Taiwanese bicycle production entered its mature stage . The declining average unit price that marked this period was caused by the cut - throat competition that came mainly from China and India . The success of the Taiwanese bicycle industry was not only dependent on its hard - working labour force and its lower production cost advantage , but also on the signiﬁcant contributions made by the government and the public research institutions . This public - sector involvement and efforts of the private companies in the industry contributed to overcoming Taiwan’s latecomer disadvantages during the 1990s . In 1991 , the Industrial Development Bureau of the Ministry of Economic Affairs committed the MRL to developing the composite carbon ﬁbre frame and then successfully transferred the technology to the Giant , Merida , Hondaka ( Taiwan ) and Ta - Ming production companies in 1992 . At the same time , the Industrial Development Bureau established the ﬁrst research institution , the Taiwan Bicycle Industry R & D Center , speciﬁcally dedicated to the Taiwanese bicycle industry . This is a non - proﬁt organisation originally devoted to bringing the government and bicycle ﬁrms together to contribute towards promoting the Taiwanese product in foreign markets . Its role now extends to the development of key bicycle components , mainly gearshift mechanisms , and to bicycle designing , mechanical innovations and testing standardis - ation . Along with these contributions , the Ministry of Economic Affairs has set up strategies for encouraging foreign investment in the key component manufacturing companies . This resulted in the top international bicycle components suppliers , SRAM and SunTour , establishing production bases in the country . Innovation stage : the 2000s In the 12 consecutive years since 1980 , Taiwan has been the world’s largest bicycle exporter in terms of unit volume . Moreover , even though there was a massive shift of bicycle production to China in the 1990s , Taiwan still enjoyed the world’s number one bicycle exporter position , measured in terms of export value , until China took over this ranking in 2000 . At the same time , though , the innovation capabilities of Taiwan’s latecomer bicycle producers has enabled their D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 441 average export price to increase from US $ 99 . 60 in 1998 to US $ 208 . 90 in 2006 . This represented a historical peak after a serious drop - off in its export volume , the evidence for which is apparent in the data recorded in Figure 1 . Although many believe that Taiwan’s rising economic value - added can mostly be attributed to the endeavours of its numerous SMEs , there is little evidence to support this argument ( Amsden 1989 ; Chu 1997 ) . In the historical development of the global bicycle industry , Japan was the largest exporter before 1980 and the Korean industry had once been prosperous . Japan and Korea , as well as Taiwan , are all late industrialising countries and have many similarities in the patterns of their industrial development . The signiﬁcant difference in the former two countries from what occurred in Taiwan is that conglomerates or chaebols played a leading role in their industrial development . For Chu ( 1997 ) , the Taiwanese bicycle industry was successful in overcoming its latecomer disadvantages to an extent that enabled it to achieve number one global exporter status not because of its export encouragement policy or by relying on the market mechanism . Rather , this success was due to a favourable investment environment , the foundation of the import substitution stage and the international division of labour . Cheng ( 1998 ) and Chang ( 2004 ) both emphasised that it was the double networks of production and marketing that simultaneously assisted Taiwan’s bicycle industry to succeed . However , although these were crucial factors in initiating the export of large numbers of Taiwanese bicycles , they were not necessarily relevant factors in accounting for the industry’s success in sustaining its competitive position since the mature stage of the 1990s . Schumpeter and many others have argued that innovation should be distinguished from invention . As it is deﬁned in advanced countries , innovation involves learning techniques and implementing technology . A sustainable and successful industry , such as the Taiwanese bicycle industry , is constantly learning new technology and catching up with its competitors , thereby using strategic incremental innovations to maintain its competitive position and growth momentum . The main concern of this paper is to examine the interactive relationships among the innovation activ - ities that are integral to the application of modular bicycle technology subsystems and to establish the associated relevance of industry cycles experienced by the industry . 3 . Methodology Over the past three decades , Taiwan’s bicycle industry has been a vital example of a technology latecomer in the global market . During this period , response to the needs of the market has been the most important incentive for its innovations . Even though the USA and the EU are the world’s most competitive markets for the bicycle industry , the purpose of the present study is primarily to estab - lish the impact of technological innovations in bicycle production on the international market per - formance of latecomer producers . In pursuing this purpose , the study mainly utilises the database of the Taiwan Intellectual Property Ofﬁce ( TIPO ) to trace the innovation trajectories as these are represented in terms of patenting activity in the Taiwanese bicycle industry from 1978 to 2006 . The focus is on eliciting an understanding of how , as a latecomer , the country’s bicycle industry was able to capture technological ( process ) innovations in the relevant modular subsystems to overcome its competitive disadvantage and respond to market demand . Most commonly , measures of technological innovations are indirect , including simple patent counts , patent citation rates , R & D expenditures and the number of new products ( see , for example , Hagedoorn and Cloodt 2003 ) . Here a simple patent count will be used as an indicator of technological innovations because of the nature of the longer technology life cycle and the stronger modular requirements for compatible subsystems in producing bicycles . Along with tracing the changes in average D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 442 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu export prices , consideration will be given to how industry cycles , under product modularity , have inﬂuenced and assisted Taiwan’s latecomer bicycle producers to catch - up with international leaders in the earlier stages and then build up their own innovation capabilities in the later stages of their development . These factors have been reﬂected in the outstanding market performance achieved by the industry . One of the intentions cited for this study is to consider the interactive relationships among the elements of innovation involved in modular bicycle technology subsystems as these are associated with industry cycles . To this end , participants in bicycle production are grouped into two clusters , namely international leaders and technology followers , and into six technology subsystems com - prising materials , frame system , transmission system , steering system , brake system and wheel system ( seeAppendixA ) . 4 Themainresultsoftechnologicalinnovationsexcludetheshareofinter - national leaders in order to focus on tracing the relationships between technological innovations in the six subsystems and the industry cycles experienced by Taiwan as a technological latecomer . The study applies the strategic patent search method by cross utilising bicycle - related key words and the related International Patent Classiﬁcation ( IPC ) in the six bicycle subsystems in order to collect the most relevant data from the huge patent database that has accumulated in the TIPO . In doing so , technical advice was sought from bicycle specialists and R & D researchers in Taiwan so as to deﬁne apt key words and related IPCs for each individual subsystem ( see Appendix A for details ) . In total , there were 15 , 316 patents to be covered in the TIPO records , including 4370 patents in materials and processing , 1789 in the frame system , 762 in the brake system , 3025 in the transmission system , 2466 in the steering system and 2904 in the wheel system . The share of technology registered by the international leaders in the TIPO data had reached over 50 % by the beginning of the 1980s , but this declined sharply during the early 1990s to only 5 % in 1994 and then gradually increased to 22 % in 2006 . The registered pattern of innovation by the international leaders recorded in the TIPO data corresponds well with the export and innovationperformanceofTaiwan’sbicyclemanufacturingtechnologyfollowersandthisconﬁrmsthevalidityofthecoveragefromthedatabaseutilisedinthisstudy . 4 . Results analysis 4 . 1 . Technological innovations by international leaders and followers In Figure 2 ( a ) , the innovation activity in Taiwan’s bicycle industry over the last 30 years is associated with the increasing value - added evolutionary path . Three stages are shown , with the ﬁrst stage in the 1980s mostly driven by innovations involving the wheel system ( including bicycle hubs ) , the second stage in the 1990s emphasising the steering system and the stage since 2000 giving most attention to materials and processing . Figure 2 ( b ) indicates that patenting activity among international leaders in the industry was not signiﬁcant until the second half of the 1990s and especially started during the 2000s , that is , in the period when Taiwan’s bicycle industry became a global competitor among the existing international market leaders . Figures 2 ( a ) and 2 ( b ) together demonstrate that it was not until the beginning of the 2000s that the international bicycle leaders and Taiwan’s technological followers began to record aggressive levels of patenting activity in the TIPO . Among the international leaders , it was the patents involving the transmission system that were most proliﬁc . For example , the world’s number one producer , Shimano , dominated with respect to innovations involving the transmission , steering and brake systems , with the number two company , SRAM , specialising in advances in transmission and steering systems , and yet another producer , SunTour , excelling in steering innovations . Their D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 443 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 N u m b e r o f p a t e n t s N u m b e r o f p a t e n t s 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 ( a ) ( b ) Materials and processing Frame system Steering system Brake system Transmission system Wheel system Materials and processing Frame system Steering system Brake system Transmission system Wheel system Figure 2 . Innovation activity of bicycle subsystems in the TIPO , 1978 – 2006 ( a ) ( technology followers ) and ( b ) ( international leaders ) . achievements are widely recognised and they are excluded from the analyses below so as to focus speciﬁcally on the variations and relationships among the bicycle technology subsystems and their links to global market performance from the viewpoint of the technological latecomer . 4 . 2 . Innovation trajectories of bicycle technology subsystems The acceleration of innovative activity in Taiwan’s bicycle industry occurred particularly during the 2000s when Taiwan’s technological followers emerged as signiﬁcant global innovators and D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 444 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu industrial competitors . This implies a critical role for these followers during the build up of endogenous innovation capabilities . In order systematically to examine the innovation trajectories ( in terms of patenting activity ) among the bicycle technology subsystems and the response to the global market demand by the latecomers , the subsequent analyses employ a classiﬁcation comprising varieties of bicycle technology subsystems along with export performance over the course of the industry’s development . While bicycle product architecture is highly modularised and relies on incremental innovations to bring technological advances , the representation of the six bicycle technology subsystems in the TIPO records involves signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in the earlier stages of development and then becomes less variable in the later stage as demonstrated in Figure 3 . This is consistent with the suggestion that innovation cycles become smoother as the industry matures and spending stabilises ( DisplaySearch 2006 ) . However , rates of variation in average export prices correspond well with the development trajectories of technology innovations , with this ratio remaining around 10 % and above since 2002 . In order to examine the innovation trajectories among the bicycle technology subsystems more fully , the following analyses single out the key bicycle components and observe the interactions involved over the course of their development . Materials and frame system Figure 4 indicates that every dramatic upward shift in the rate of materials innovation occurred before peaks in the rise of export prices . In order to examine carefully the leading effect of materialsinnovations , theremainingﬁvetechnologysubsystems , frame , steering , wheel , brakeand transmission categories , are linked to bicycle architectures . It is then suggested that the innovations and applications derived from new material developments lead the value - added activities for the highly modularised bicycle architectures as a whole and that this occurs despite the time lag involved in the application . As such , these responses are well reﬂected in Taiwan’s export price performance . This is apparent in the highly correlated relationships between innovation activities involving materials and bicycle frames , as shown in Figure 5 . - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 3 % c h a ng e - 15 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Materials Frame System Steering System Brake System Transmission System Wheel System Average price growth rate Figure 3 . Innovation cycle in each technology category vs market performance . Source : TIPO and complied by the author . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 445 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 - 15 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 % c h a ng e % c h a ng e Materials Bicycle architectures Average price growth rate Figure 4 . Variations among materials , bicycle architectures and export price , 1980 – 2006 . Source : TIPO - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 % c h a ng e Materials Frame System Figure 5 . Relationship of innovation activity between materials and bicycle frame system . Transmission system While international leaders such as Shimano and SRAM dominated the global market in devising innovations affecting the transmission system ( especially on high - end bicycles ) , Figure 6 indicates that there exists a negative correlation between the innovation activity of such international leaders and changes of export prices forTaiwan’s bicycle industry . In almost every case , the average export price increased when the innovative activity by the transmission system leaders decreased and vice versa . It is also to be noticed that innovation activity by the technological followers increased only when that of the leaders was falling . Again , this is consistent with the suggestion by the famous crystal cycle that was experienced in the Liquid Crystal Display ( LCD ) industry , as well as in the semiconductor industry , that a period of industrial downturn provides the best opportunity for new entrants and latecomers to leverage their investments and innovation activities ( Mathews 2005 ; DisplaySearch 2006 ) . For Taiwan’s transmission system followers , the catch - up effort was evident only once in 1989 with a 178 % growth rate in innovation activity . This remarkable result was mostly the consequence of the ‘Bicycle Key Component Upgrading Project’ which was initiated by Taiwan’s publicly - funded ITRI . In this case , the upgrading of the derailleur driven chain was the target . In association D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 446 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu - 150 % - 100 % - 50 % 0 % 50 % 100 % 150 % 200 % 250 % 300 % - 15 % - 10 % - 5 % 0 % 5 % 10 % 15 % 20 % 25 % 30 % 35 % Major players Followers Average price growth rate % c h a ng e Figure 6 . Relationships between transmission system leaders and export price Source : TIPO with the innovation activities in the materials and frame systems shown in Figure 5 , these efforts enabled Taiwan’s bicycle industry to realise a signiﬁcant rise in the average prices of its exports in 1990 / 1991 . 5 . Discussion and concluding remarks In the past 30 years , innovations in the materials , component systems and manufacturing of new products such as road bikes , BMX , mountain bikes and electric bikes have enabled the highly mature global bicycle business to prosper . These innovations have involved breakthroughs in derailleur drive chain components , the use of lightweight materials such as chromoly , aluminum alloy and carbon ﬁbre , as well as the advanced technology applied to suspension design . All these achievements can be attributed to incremental innovations affecting the modular components , while the sequences of innovation activity and the cycles in the global bicycle market are also critical , as discussed below . 5 . 1 . Industry cycles : variety of export markets In this study , industry upturns and downturns are designated by periods during which variations of the growth rate exceed 20 % and the value - added activity is such that the growth rate of value is greater than that of units produced . Figure 7 shows that Taiwan’s bicycle industry has had three periods of value - added upgrading observed in 1980 , 1990 and 2002 . In each of these periods , the export value increased at twice the rate of numbers of export units . Notably , the three upgrading activities over the development trajectory of the industry occurred after the three severe downturns of 1974 , 1988 and 2001 , respectively . The ﬁrst downturn stemmed from the poor quality of bicycles produced and it took Taiwan’s industry six years to upgrade ( or catch up , at this stage ) its technology and for this to be reﬂected in its export performance . The second downturn was caused by the dramatic appreciation of the Taiwanese dollar involving a 35 % ﬂuctuation from 1983 to1988 . The third downturn came about as a consequence of the accelerated cost competition from China . However , following the second and third downturns , recovery was relatively fast and it took only two years and one year , respectively , D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 447 - 60 . 0 % - 40 . 0 % - 20 . 0 % 0 . 0 % 20 . 0 % 40 . 0 % 60 . 0 % 80 . 0 % 100 . 0 % 120 . 0 % 197 3 197 5 197 7 197 9 198 1 198 3 198 5 198 7 198 9 199 1 199 3 199 5 199 7 199 9 200 1 200 3 200 5 Units growth rate value growth rate Figure 7 . Taiwan’s bicycle export growth rates by units and value . to overcome the decline in business operations in the global market . This provides reinforcing evidence that the innovation capabilities of Taiwan’s bicycle technology followers are associated with their ﬂexibility and rapid response to market demand over the period considered here . The development history of Taiwan’s bicycle industry also indicates that the ﬁrst upturn in 1980 was brought about by the massive growth of orders for the BMX product ﬂowing from the USA and that the second upturn in 1990 was due to the fever pitch demand for mountain bikes . In the case of thethirdupturnsince2002 , thesourcewasdifferentinthatitcanbelinkedtothecatalysingeffectof strategicorganisationalinnovations . Theseinvolvedclosecoordinationamongthecountry’sindus - trial networks through the creation of an ‘A - Team’initiated by Taiwan’s largest bicycle assembler , Giant . Such an approach was adopted instead of introducing new products through technological innovations . Achieving this by means of the introduction of network coordination in Taiwan’s bicycle industry contradicts the suggestion of lower levels of coordination in the manufacture of modular products . The strategic organisational innovation adopted in 2002 by the ‘A - Team’within the modularity of the industry’s production led to the historical peaks recorded for both export value and patenting activity in the last observed year , 2006 ( see Figure 1 and Figure 2a above ) . It is apparent that the patenting activity shown in Figure 2a reﬂects innovation trajectories for the six technology subsystems in Taiwan’s bicycle industry as corresponding well with the needs of the global market . The ﬂourishing of BMX demand in the 1980s brought about the ﬁrst upturn for the industry . With the specialty focus of BMX production being on light - weight and agile designs with multi - functions , wheel , transmission , frame and materials systems successively became the leading and important ( incremental ) innovation drivers . At the same time , brake and steering systems showed lagged effects during this ﬁrst upturn . In the 1990s , the rapid growth of mountain bike demand generated the second upturn for Taiwan’s bicycle industry . Apart from the wheel system , the other ﬁve technology subsystems ( brakes , steering , transmission , materials and frames ) emerged as leading effects . The evidence points to the specialties of mountain bike production as focused around speed shifting ( steering and transmission systems ) and the compressive strength of the bicycle ( materials applications within the frame system ) . In the 2000s , it is apparent that the third upturn was not induced by D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 448 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu technological innovations , with the growth variations in the six technology subsystems being all under 10 % . This introduces the second issue for discussion . 5 . 2 . Shifting to strategic organisational innovations When the incremental innovations in bicycle subsystems were largely derived from the applica - tions of new materials , the extended innovations can be seen to have been ﬂat since the 1990s as shown in Figure 3 above . However , under massive pressure from China , Taiwan’s bicycle industry had to continue to strive for innovation , value and market - trend leadership . The third upturn for the industry began in 2001 and is mostly attributable to the formation of the ‘A - team’ innovation alliance that targeted the higher quality and value - added IBD ( Independent Bicycle Dealer ) niche market in order to differentiate Taiwan’s output on the mass market from those of China or India . The ‘A - Team’ was ofﬁcially initiated in 2002 as a non - proﬁt R & D consortium by Giant and Merida , the two major Taiwanese cycle manufacturers , together with 11 of Taiwan’s leading component makers involved in the six subsystems ( including Alex , Dah Ken , Formula , KMC , SunTour , SRAM , Tektro , Tien Hsin , Velo , VP Components and Wellgo ) . ‘A - Team’ members are committed to striving for manufacturing and operational excellence and to delivering the highest quality products . Their agreement also extends to using just - in - time inventory control systems exclusively . Members endeavour to deliver more innovative designs in new products and bring products to market more rapidly , thereby creating a new products development strategy through cooperative competition . 5 Taiwan has been the most important supply source for the world bicycle market since the 1980s and has accumulated a great deal of synergy and capability in manufacturing , engineering and technological development . Taiwanese companies have moved most of their volume business in the production of mid - to low - end products to China . This now makes China the supply centre of the world for the mass production market . In response to the reduction of bicycle exports from 10 million units in 1990 to 5 million units in 2000 , Taiwan’s ‘A - Team’ set up a three - step plan to be implemented over the ensuing three years . In 2003 , the plan targeted the enhancing of all members’ manufacturing and operational processes through the introduction of a just - in - time inventory system . For 2004 , the focus was on establishing the ‘product data management’ platform and raising the standards of all members’ capabilities , tools and systems as these affect new - product development . In 2005 , the plans called for the opening up of communications with specialty retailers and international leaders worldwide with the focus being on high - end bicycle products . The results of the ‘A - Team’ endeavour are remarkably impressive . Within only four years from 2002 when it was established , the total export value had doubled and reached more than US $ 1 billion in 2006 ( STPI 2008 ) . This achievement even led to a number of international major players joining the ‘A - Team’ as sponsored members , including the Japanese company Shimano ( the number one global transmission system leader that is in an equivalent market position to that of Intel in the PC industry ) , Trek and Specialized ( the top two leading brands in the US market ) , Colnago ( the number two best selling brand in the EU ) and the US National Bicycle Dealers Association ( NBDA ) . Aoki and Takizawa ( 2002 ) suggest that an information system that combines decentralised information sharing and information encapsulation is the optimal choice in developing a modu - larised product system . In this vein , the strategic organisational innovations of Taiwan’s ‘A - team’ formed an open innovation cluster from previous geographical dispersal and provided a gener - alised information sharing system , one in which individual absorption and utilisation are key characteristics ( Doran et al . 2007 ) . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 449 Through examining technological innovation trajectories from the 1980s – 2000s , three industry cycles forTaiwan’s bicycle industry have been identiﬁed as occurring around 1980 , 1990 and 2002 . In each case , innovation capabilities in the six bicycle subsystems shifted , along with variations of exportperformanceandtheneedsoftheinternationalmarket . Materialsinnovation , almostinevery case , occurred before the peaks of export prices , while a highly correlated but lagged relationship was found to exist between innovation activities involving materials and bicycle frames . The empirical results also demonstrate that innovation activity relating to key components processed by the technological latecomers increases only when that of the leaders is in decline . Rather than closing manufacturing bases as was the case for the bicycle industries in the USA and Japan , Taiwan’s industry presents an excellent example of how a SME - centric latecomer can capture the bicycle production technology required to catch up with the international leaders through incremental technological innovations , by taking advantage of the nature of modular - ity and eventually becoming involved in strategic organisational innovations so as to remain competitive in the international market . An increased understanding of the sequences of modu - larised technological trajectories , along with the cycles in the global bicycle market , will assist technological and managerial decision makers , especially those in latecomer enterprises . The evidence elicited in the present study will indicate to them the nature of the relationships among the most efﬁcient research timing , resources allocation and growth opportunities when taking on modularised technology and product innovation management . Acknowledgements TheﬁrstauthorwouldliketoacknowledgetheﬁnancialsupportfromtheCycling & HealthTechIndustryR & DCenterand the National Science Council ( NSC - 99 - 2410 - H - 007 - 005 - MY3 ) for this paper . The authors are grateful for the assistance provided by Mr Jia - LiangYan for clarifying the categories of bicycle subsystems for this study . Notes 1 . A ‘latecomer’is deﬁned as a country that can exploit its late arrival in an industry to tap into advanced technologies rather than having to duplicate its entire previous technology trajectory , thereby turning its disadvantages into sources of advantage ( Mathews 2002 ) . 2 . A critical contribution made by Romer ( 1990 ) was the argument that technical innovation is explicitly formulated as product innovation whereby new markets and sector reorganisation are introduced through new products . The other type of innovation is process innovation in which new and improved production methods ( usually through specialisation and mechanisation ) are introduced to increase productivity . Therefore , process innovation is more popularintheprosperousstageofbusinesscycles , whereentrepreneurswillgivemoreemphasistoprocessinnovation rather than to product innovation . 3 . A Marshallian industrial district is a speciﬁc locality with the following characteristics : ( 1 ) there is a certain type of productive specialisation ; ( 2 ) it is characterised by a high density of small - medium size ﬁrms ; ( 3 ) it exhibits cooperation along the supply chain because there is an extended inter - ﬁrm division of labour ; ( 4 ) the leadership is typically derived from a special industry ; and ( 5 ) a large variety of similar producers are located in the same area , thereby stimulating high levels of creativity and , sometimes , intercommunication of ideas between machine makers and users ( Marshall 1919 , 287 , 603 ) . 4 . Becauseoftheindustrialfragmentationintheglobalbicycleindustry , theinternationalleadersinthisstudyaredeﬁned as those who were listed before 2000 as the top major players / brands in Japan , the USA and the EU in terms of the six bicycle subsystems , respectively . This was the period when Taiwan’s latecomer producers , such as Giant , Merida and Sun Race , had not yet turned into innovators or become major competitors for the existing international leaders . 5 . Increasing market value through strategic organisation innovation is not only manifested in Taiwan’s bicycle industry as the ‘A - Team’ , but also in the ‘M - Team’of Taiwan’s machine tool industry that was ranked number six in the world in 2006 in terms of production value . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 450 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu Notes on contributors Mei - Chih Hu is currently working as an Associate Professor at the Institute of Technology Management , National Tsing Hua University , Taiwan . She holds a Ph . D . in Management from Macquarie Graduate School of Management , Australia . Her papers have been published in journals such as Research Policy , World Development and Technological Forecasting and Social Change , and a variety of conferences such as DRUID ( Danish Research Unit for Industrial Dynamics ) and Portland International Conference on Management of Engineering and Technology ( PICMET ) . Ching - Yan Wu is currently a Ph . D . candidate at Macquarie Graduate School of Management , Australia . He has a strong background in engineering and abundant experience in new product development and project management across the bicycle , automobile and power tool industries . His research interests cover the ﬁelds of supply chain management , technology innovation and competition strategies . He is currently engaging in the research of the renewable energies and electric vehicle industry . References Amsden , A . H . 1989 . Asia’s next giant : South Korea and late industrialization . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Aoki , M . , and H . Takizawa . 2002 . Information , incentives and option value : The Silicon Valley model . Journal of Comparative Economics 30 : 759 – 86 . Ayres , R . U . 1994 . Toward a non - linear dynamics of technological progress . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 24 : 35 – 69 . Bell , M . , and K . Pavitt . 1993 . Technological accumulation and industrial growth : Contrasts between developing and developed countries . Industrial and Corporate Change 2 , no . 1 : 157 – 210 . Caniëls ; M . C . J . , and H . A . Romijn . 2008 . Strategic niche management : Towards a policy tool for sustainable development . Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 20 , no . 2 : 245 – 66 . Chang , Y . C . 2004 . Parallel connecting new product development process : The case study of bicycle in Taiwan . Ph . D . thesis , National Sun - Yat - Sen University , Taiwan . Cheng , L . L . 1998 . Wheeling the bicycle up : Firms , OEM , and chained networks in the development of Taiwan’s bicycle industry . In The bicycle industries in Taiwan and Japan : A preliminary study toward comparison between Taiwanese and Japanese industrial development , Joint Research Program Series No . 124 , ed . L . L . Cheng and Y . Sato , 5 – 34 . Tokyo : Institute of Developing Economies . Chu , W . 1997 . Causes of growth : A study of Taiwan’s bicycle industry . Cambridge Journal of Economics 21 : 55 – 72 . Dahlman , C . J . , and O . Sananikone . 1990 . Technology strategy in the economy of Taiwan Province of China : Exploiting foreign linkages and investing in local capability . Washington , DC : World Bank . Dahlman , C . J . , and L . A . Westphal . 1982 . Technological effort in industrial development : A survey . In The economic of new technology in developing countries , ed . F . Stewart and J . James , 105 – 37 . London : Pinter . Dahmus , J . B . , J . O . Gonzalez - Zugast , and K . N . Otto . 2001 . Modular product architecture . Design Studies 22 : 409 – 424 . Doran , D . , A . Hill , K . Hwang , G . Jacob , and Operations Research Group . 2007 . Supply chain modularisation : Cases from the French automobile industry . International Journal of Production Economics 106 , no . 1 : 2 – 11 . DisplaySearch . 2006 . Flat panel display market overlook : From cyclicality to maturity . Report by R . Young , Taipei , Taiwan : DisplaySearch Inc . Fleming , L . , and O . Sorenson . 2001 . Technology as a complex adaptive system : Evidence from patent data . Research Policy 30 : 1019 – 39 . Galvin , P . 1999 . Production modularity , information structures and the diffusion of innovation . International Journal of Technology Management 17 , no . 5 : 467 – 79 . Hagedoorn , J . , andM . Cloodt . 2003 . Measuringinnovativeperformance : Isthereanadvantageinusingmultipleindicators ? Research Policy 32 : 1365 – 79 . Henderson , R . , and K . B . Clark . 1990 . Architectural innovation : The reconﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms . Administrative Science Quarterly 35 : 9 – 30 . Hobday , M . 2005 . Firm - level innovation models : Perspectives on research in developed and developing countries . Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 17 , no . 2 : 121 – 46 . Hu , M . C . , and J . A . Mathews . 2005 . National innovative capacity in East Asia . Research Policy 34 , no . 9 : 1322 – 49 . Kim , L . 1997 . Imitation to innovation : The dynamics of Korea’s technological learning . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Kodama , F . 2004 . Measuring emerging categories of innovation : Modularity and business model . Technological Forecasting and Social Change 71 , no . 6 : 623 – 33 . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers 451 Lall , S . 1994 . The East Asian miracle : Does the bell toll fro industrial strategy ? World Development 22 , no . 4 : 645 – 54 . Langlois , R . N . , andP . L . Robertson . 1992 . Networksandinnovationinamodularsystem : Lessonsfromthemicrocomputer and stereo component industries . Research Policy 21 : 297 – 313 . Lee , U . , and S . Lin . 1991 . Upgrading the bicycle industry in Taiwan . Division of Small and Medium Enterprises , the Ministry of Economic Affairs , Taiwan ( Chinese version ) . Linden , G . , J . Hart , S . A . Lenway , and T . P . Murtha . 1998 . Flying geese as moving targets : Are Korea and Taiwan catching up with Japan in advanced displays ? Industry and Innovation 5 : 11 – 34 . Marshall , A . 1919 . Industry and trade . London : Macmillan . Mathews , J . M . 2005 . Strategy and crystal cycle . California Management Review 47 , no . 2 : 6 – 31 . Meyer , M . H . , and J . M . Utterback . 1993 . The product family and the dynamics of core capability . Sloan Management Review 34 , no . 3 : 29 – 47 . Nell , E . , ed . 1992 . Transformational growth : From Say’s Law to the multiplier . Transformational Growth and Effective Demand . NewYork : NewYork University Press . Rhee , Y . W . , B . Ross - Larson , and G . Pursell . 1984 . Korea’s competitive edge : Managing the entry into world market . Baltimore , MD : Johns Hopkins University Press . Romer , P . M . 1990 . Endogenous technological change . Journal of Political Economy 98 , no . 5 : S71 – S102 . Sanchez , R . , and J . T . Mahoney . 1996 . Modularity , ﬂexibility , and knowledge management in product and organization design . Strategic Management Journal 17 : 63 – 76 . Sanchez , R . , and J . T . Mahoney . 2000 . Modularity and dynamic capabilities . In Rethinking strategy , ed . H . W . Voberda and T . Elfring , 158 – 71 . London : Sage . Sanderson , S . , and M . Uzumeri . 1995 . Managing product families : The case of the Sony walkman . Research Policy 24 : 761 – 82 . Shock , R . C . , and T . C . Hartrum . 1998 . A classiﬁcation scheme for software modules . Journal of Systems and Software 42 , no . 1 : 29 – 44 . STPI ( Science & Technology Policy Research and Information Center ) . 2008 . Coopertition strategy inspired Taiwan’s bicycle industry . National Applied Research Laboratory , Taipei , Taiwan ( Chinese version ) . Suarez , F . F . , and J . M . Utterback . 1995 . Dominant design and the survival of ﬁrms . Strategic Management Journal 16 : 415 – 30 . Teece , D . 2000 . Managing intellectual capital . NewYork : Oxford University Press . Ulrich , K . 1995 . The role of product architecture in the manufacturing ﬁrm . Research Policy 24 : 419 – 440 . Viotti , E . B . 2002 . National learning systems : A new approach on technological change in late industrializing economies and evidences from the cases of Brazil and South Korea . Technological Forecasting and Social Change 69 : 653 – 80 . Yan , H . D . , and M . C . Hu . 2008 . Strategic entrepreneurship and the growth of the ﬁrm : The case of Taiwan’s bicycle industry . Global Business and Economics Review 10 , no . 1 : 11 – 34 . Zhao , H . 1995 . Technology import and their impacts on enhancement of China’s indigenous technological capability . Journal of Development Study 31 , no . 4 : 456 – 60 . Appendix A Table A1 . Correspondence between bicycle technology subsystems and international patent classiﬁcations . International major Technology Key International patent players / brands categories components classiﬁcation SCOTTE – SCOTT SPORTS Frame System Frame B62K - 15 Colnago Suspension B62K - 19 TREK B62K - 25 SPECIALIZED B62M SACHS F04B F15BF15DF16FF16J ( Continued ) D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013 452 M . - C . Hu and C . - Y . Wu Table A1 . ( Continued ) . International major Technology Key International patent players / brands categories components classiﬁcation SHIMANO Steering System Headparts B62J VP – VP COMPONENTS CO . B . B . set B23K FSA Fork B25 SunTour Stem B29 FOX Handlebar B62K - 15 SRAM ( ROCKSHOX ) Barend B62K - 21 CAMPAGNOLO Pedal B62K - 23 Saddle F04B Seatpost F15BF15DF16BF16FF16J MAVIC Wheel System Spoke B60C ALEX Nipple B60B MAXXIS Hub KENDA Tire ; Innertube SHIMANO Brake System Brakelever B62L HAYES Brakecable B60T MAGURA Brake F04B – Brakeshoe F15BF15DF16BF16DF16GF16J SHIMANO Transmission System Shiftlever B21L SRAM Shiftcable B62M SunTour Derailleur B62J FSA Chain B62L - 005 CAMPAGNOLO Chainwheel F16C – Freewheel F16GF16HF16N – Materials mainly used in the – B05C bicycle and its subsystems B05DB21CB21DB21FB21JB21KC22CC23C C25CC25D D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it y o f H a i f a L i b r a r y ] a t 13 : 51 03 O c t ob e r 2013