Soft Listeria : Actin - based propulsion of liquid drops Hakim Boukellal , 1 Otger Campás , 1 , 2 Jean - François Joanny , 1 Jacques Prost , 1 , 3 and Cécile Sykes 1 1 Institut Curie , UMR 168 , 26 rue d‘Ulm , F - 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France 2 Department d‘ECM , Universitat de Barcelona , Avinguda Diagonal 647 , E - 08028 Barcelona , Spain 3 ESPCI , 10 rue Vauquelin , F - 75231 Paris Cedex 05 , France ( Received 5 May 2003 ; published 2 June 2004 ) We study the motion of oil drops propelled by actin polymerization in cell extracts . Drops deform and acquire a pearlike shape under the action of the elastic stresses exerted by the actin comet , a tail of cross - linked actin ﬁlaments . We solve this free boundary problem and calculate the drop shape taking into account the elasticity of the actin gel and the variation of the polymerization velocity with normal stress . The pressure balance on the liquid drop imposes a zero propulsive force if gradients in surface tension or internal pressure are not taken into account . Quantitative parameters of actin polymerization are obtained by ﬁtting theory to experiment . DOI : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevE . 69 . 061906 PACS number ( s ) : 87 . 15 . 2 v , 87 . 10 . 1 e , 87 . 14 . 2 g Actin polymerization is a key element in the motility of most cells and bacteria . The bacteria Listeria monocytogenes are propelled inside cells by the growth of a soft elastic comet made of a ﬁlamentous actin network . Actin polymer - izes at the back of the advancing bacterium . The biochemis - try of the comet formation is now well understood [ 1 ] . The - oretical approaches have been proposed to explain the physical mechanism of force production . They differ by the scale at which they describe the mechanism . Molecular mod - els by Mogilner et al . [ 2 ] consider the Brownian ﬂexibility of growing actin ﬁlaments , whereas Carlsson [ 3 ] concentrates on the effect of branching and growth of the actin network . Gerbal et al . [ 4 ] analyze at a mesoscopic scale the elastic stresses exerted by the deformed comet gel on the bacterium resulting in the propulsive force [ 5 ] . A further step in understanding the propulsion mechanism is provided by the study of biomimetic experimental systems where Listeria are replaced by solid spherical beads on which actin polymerization promoters [ 6 – 9 ] are attached . These beads mimic closely the natural propulsion mecha - nism of Listeria with comet tail formation , after the breaking of the initial spherical symmetry [ 6 , 10 ] . Biomimetic systems allow for a systematic variation of the parameters and thus for a quantitative comparison to theory . The aim of this paper is to demonstrate both theoretically and experimentally the mechanism of force production due to the elastic stresses exerted by the actin comet gel . A newly designed experimental system is made of oil drops with actin polymerization promoters attached on their surface . Once placed in cell extracts , such an oil drop moves by actin po - lymerization and deforms under the action of the elastic stresses exerted by the gel . The same squeezing effect is observed on endosomes [ 11 ] driven by actin comets and syn - thetic vesicles covered with the bacterial protein ActA [ 12 , 13 ] . However , for liquid drops , the knowledge of the surface tension and the constant volume allow for a quanti - tative analysis of the observed shape and thus the determina - tion of the elastic stress distribution on the drop surface . An emulsion of oil drops is obtained by sonicating ( 5 sec , 90 W ) a mixture of edible oil , Isio4 , and buffer ( 2 . 3 % oil in borate buffer 100 mM , pH 8 . 5 ) . The actin polymerization promoter VCA is the C - terminal domain of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrom protein ( WASP ) that interacts with the Arp 2 / 3 complex and actin monomer , and puriﬁed as described in Fradelizi et al . [ 14 ] . VCA is adsorbed onto the oil drops by incubating 10 m l of the emulsion with a 0 . 2 mg / ml VCA solution in borate buffer . A volume of 0 . 2 m l of the emulsion coated with VCA is added to 15 m l of HeLa extracts pre - pared as explained in Noireaux et al . [ 9 ] with a ﬁnal protein concentration of 19 mg / ml . As usual the extracts are supple - mented with 0 . 019 mg / ml G - actin , 0 . 06 mg / ml rhodamin actin , 1 mM ATP , 27 mM creatine phosphate , 1 mM DTT ( dithio - threitol ) . The sample is observed by bright ﬁeld or ﬂuorescence microscopy using an Olympus BX51 ( Germany ) and Meta - morph software ( Princeton Instruments , USA ) . The drop ra - dii range from 1 . 5 to 5 . 5 m m . As with Listeria , actin poly - merizes only at the interface between the drop and the comet and depolymerizes at the back of the comet . When placed in extracts , actin is ﬁrst polymerized on the drops with a spheri - cal symmetry . After roughly 1 h , symmetry is broken for approximately 70 % of the drops . They develop an actin comet , deform into a pearlike shape and move . Smaller drops are less deformed than larger drops . An example of a moving drop is shown in Fig . 1 . At the beginning of the experiment , the actin polymerization factor VCA is uniformly distributed around the spherical drop . After deformation of the drop and formation of the comet , ﬂuorescence intensity measurements using FITC ( ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ) - labeled VCA [ 15 ] show that 90 % of the VCA is found on the comet side of the drop , as seen in Fig . 2 . This means either that VCA has been displaced from the interface to the bulk of the extract except where the gel is present , or that all VCA has been collected by the gel during the symmetry breaking process . In any event this also means that the VCA surface density is com - parable to the density of ﬁlament extremities at the surface . The average distance d between ﬁlament extremities is larger than the close - packing distance . A lower bound of d is 10 nm . The surface tension change due to the presence of VCA at the interface is then of order kT / d 2 , 4 3 10 −2 mN / m , more than 100 times smaller than the oil - extract tension that we measure by the pendant drop method g 0 = 4±0 . 6 mN / m . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 69 , 061906 ( 2004 ) 1539 - 3755 / 2004 / 69 ( 6 ) / 061906 ( 4 ) / $ 22 . 50 ©2004 The American Physical Society 69 061906 - 1 The experimental shape of the drop is sketched in Fig . 3 . The front part is a spherical cap of radius R not covered by actin . The radius R is different from the radius of the unde - formed spherical drop R 0 that ﬁxes the volume 4 p R 0 3 / 3 . The back part of the drop , surrounded by the comet , has a blunted conelike shape ( rotationally symmetric around the direction of motion ) . In order to give a theoretical description of the drop shape , we parametrize it by the liquid thickness h and the local angle u between the tangent to the shape and the direction of motion . The spherical cap and the cone match at the triple line between the drop , the comet , and the surround - ing solvent ; we call the tangent angle at the contact point u m where the corresponding oil thickness is h m = R cos u m . The pressure inside the drop varies from point to point since the drop motion induces an internal ﬂow . At the interface with the extract , in the spherical part , it is given by Laplace‘s law P in = 2 g 0 / R + P 0 , where P 0 is the pressure in the surrounding liquid . At any point inside the drop , the pressure differs from P in and reads P = P in + d P . At a point of thickness h the local stress balance along the normal of the drop is given by the local Laplace‘s law 2 g 0 R + d P s h d = g S cos u s h d h + d cos u s h d dh D − s nn s h d s 1 d where s nn is the normal stress at the surface of the comet , exerted by the drop ( s nn is positive , dilative stress , if the comet pulls on the drop and negative , compressive stress , if the comet pushes the drop ) . Although we argued that the surface tension gradients are small , we consider here that the surface tension g = g 0 + dg s h d varies along the interface ; it is constant in the spherical part with a value g 0 and it is con - tinuous at the contact line . The total elastic force F e exerted by the comet on the drop is obtained by integrating the pro - jection of the normal elastic stress on the direction of motion , F e / 2 p = E 0 h m dh h S cos u d dg dh + d P D . s 2 d If we ignore both the pressure gradient inside the drop and the surface tension gradient , the propulsive force equals zero . This result holds for any axisymmetric drop shape whatever the elastic stress distribution along the surface , independent of any model for the comet elasticity and the actin polymer - ization velocity . This hypothesis , used in Refs . [ 12 , 13 ] , is unable to produce an estimate of the propulsive force . The important consequence of Eq . ( 2 ) is that an experimental measurement of the propulsive force must take into account the surface tension gradient and the ﬂow inside the drop as discussed later . We now proceed with the determination of the drop shape and the stress distribution . Given that the surface tension variation is small along the drop contour and neglecting hy - drodynamic effects , we consider , for local equations , that the surface tension and the internal pressure are constant . The elastic stresses in the gel inﬂuence the polymerization kinet - ics ; polymerization is normal to the surface of the drop and it is accelerated by a dilative stress and slowed down by a compressive stress . Classical rate theories [ 16 ] predict a po - lymerization velocity v p varying as a Boltzmann law v p s h d = v p 0 exp f s nn s h d / s 0 g , s 0 ; kT / a 2 d s 3 d where a is the distance between actin polymerization pro - moters on the drop surface , d is of the order of the size of an actin monomer , and v p 0 is the polymerization velocity in the absence of stress . FIG . 1 . Oil drop covered with VCA placed in HeLa cell extracts supplemented with Alexa - actin and observed by ﬂuorescence mi - croscopy . The actin comet appears bright . The bar is 4 m m . FIG . 2 . Oil drop covered with FITC - labeled VCA and placed in HeLa cell extracts observed ( a ) by bright ﬁeld microscopy and ( b ) by ﬂuorescence microscopy . The VCA appears bright . The bar is 3 m m . FIG . 3 . Sketch of the moving oil drop . For theoretical analysis , the shape is parametrized by the local thickness h and the local angle of the tangent u . BOUKELLAL et al . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 69 , 061906 ( 2004 ) 061906 - 2 The last equation determining the shape of the drop is the conservation of the gel volume upon polymerization . In a ﬁrst approximation , we assume both that the gel density is constant and that the comet is a perfect cylinder . In a steady state , the drop advances at a constant velocity V . The local gel thickness e shown on Fig . 3 is then such that de / ds = tan u where s is the length along the drop contour . With these simplifying approximations , the local polymerization velocity is related to the advancing velocity by v p s h d = V sin u s h d . This approximation does not allow for the determination of the drop velocity V since the propulsive force vanishes . We thus ﬁnd a family of solutions for the drop shape param - etrized by the advancing velocity . We determine the drop shape using the measured advancing velocity V = 0 . 15±0 . 03 m m / min . The shape of the comet - drop interface departs from a pure cone when the Boltzmann factor is signiﬁcantly larger than 1 . This deﬁnes the size of the blunted region as , ; g a 2 d / kT which leads to s 0 = g / , . In the following we con - sider « ; , / R as a small number . For h of order R , the elastic stress s nn s h d is small and can be neglected . Then Eq . ( 3 ) describes a perfect cone with angle u = u 0 such that V sin u 0 = v p 0 . This result is independent of the polymerization law giving v p as a function of s nn s h d . The measure of u 0 thus gives access to the polymerization velocity in the absence of elastic stress . In the blunted region , h is of order , and we neglect the Laplace pressure term on the left - hand side of Eq . ( 1 ) . In the vicinity of the rear point , the drop proﬁle is given by h 2 = 4 , z / log s 1 / sin u 0 d . The normal stress in the rear region of size , is positive and of order g / , . At the rear point , s nn s h = 0 d = g log s 1 / sin u 0 d / , . In the conical region , the stress reads at lowest order in « s nn s h d = s g / R ds − 2 + R cos u 0 / h d . s 4 d It is positive at the back of the drop ( pulling the drop back - wards ) and negative in the front part of the cone ( pushing the drop forwards ) as qualitatively observed in Ref . [ 12 ] . It van - ishes for a thickness h = s R cos u 0 d / 2 = h m / 2 . This is in accor - dance with the prediction made in Ref . [ 4 ] that the actin gel could pull at the rear of Listeria and explains the pearlike deformation that we now describe quantitatively . A more detailed description of the drop proﬁle is obtained by solving numerically Eqs . ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) . We use the radius R as a unit length ; the drop proﬁle depends on the two dimen - sionless parameters , « and sin u 0 = v p 0 / V . In Fig . 4 we show a comparison of the calculated and experimental proﬁles for the drop of Fig . 1 . The experimental proﬁle has been digi - tized and adjusted by a continuous curve . The best ﬁtting parameters are « = 0 . 049 and sin u 0 = 0 . 58 s u 0 = 35 . 6 ° d ; this gives a determination of the length , = 0 . 125 m m , of the stress s 0 = 32 nN / m m 2 , and of the polymerization speed in the absence of stress v p 0 = 1 . 4 nm / s [ 17 ] . The local normal stress is obtained from the experimental drop shape by using Eq . ( 1 ) with a constant interfacial tension g 0 and neglecting the variation of the internal pressure d P . The length , being constant , smaller drops corresponding to larger « are less deformed , in agreement with experiments . In the description proposed so far , the curvature of the interface between the comet and the drop has a discontinuity at the triple line . In the spherical region , the curvature of the interface is 2 / R ; in the conical region , the interface is curved only in one direction and the curvature is 1 / R . The local forces normal to the interface are still balanced and the elas - tic normal stress in the comet at the triple line is s nn s h m d = − g / R ( see the inset of Fig . 4 ) . At the triple line , the gel thickness e vanishes and cannot create a ﬁnite stress . This explains why on Fig . 4 the theoretical and experimental nor - mal stresses are in disagreement in the very vicinity of the triple line . We now assume that the gel density remains con - stant but that the comet shape is not a perfect cylinder in the region close to the triple line . Volume conservation then im - poses a polymerization velocity v p = V cos u de / ds , where s is the length along the interface . When a gel element is created in a time d t , it is stretched by an amount d u = d t s − V sin u + v p d ; the tensile stresses s ii in the azimuthal direction s i = w d and in the tangential direction along the interface s i = t d are then increased . At the level of scaling laws , we write this increase as d s ii / ds = s E / R i V cos u ds V sin u − v p d , where R i is the radius of curvature of the interface in the direction i and E an elastic modulus of the comet . In the vicinity of the triple line , we use the thin shell approximation and relate the tensile and normal stresses in the gel s nn = − e fs s tt / R t d + s s ww / R w dg . In this boundary layer , the two tensile stresses can be considered as constant ; the matching to the pearlike shape imposes that the azimuthal tensile stress s ww vanishes . Deﬁning the dimensionless tensile stress s ˜ t = , s tt / g , the nor - mal stress in the boundary layer is then calculated as s nn = − g R e s ˜ t , + e s ˜ t . s 5 d As the thickness of the gel vanishes , the normal stress van - ishes as expected . The boundary layer , where the comet is FIG . 4 . Calculated drop proﬁle for « = 0 . 049 and sin u 0 = 0 . 58 ( continuous line ) compared to the experimental drop proﬁle ( dashed line ) and to the zeroth order asymptotic expansion ( dash - dotted line ) . The inset shows the normal stress distribution along the drop surface . SOFT Listeria : ACTIN - BASED PROPULSION OF (cid:133) PHYSICAL REVIEW E 69 , 061906 ( 2004 ) 061906 - 3 deformed , has a thickness , / s ˜ t of order , and is thus small in the limit where « is small . When e is large , further away from the triple line , the comet reaches a cylindrical shape and the normal stress is − g / R ; one can consider the comet as a perfect cylinder as done above . Our experimental observations on the shape of liquid drops propelled by actin polymerization are well described by the theoretical model based on a local normal force bal - ance and on a Boltzmann variation of the polymerization velocity with normal stress . The results are robust if we use , for the polymerization velocity , the mathematical forms sug - gested by simulations on ﬂat surfaces [ 3 ] . We demonstrate that the elastic propulsive force cannot be calculated from an elastic stress distribution that ignores both pressure varia - tions inside the drop and surface tension gradients . We have estimated the surface tension gradient by assuming that the actin polymerization promoter density proﬁle along the inter - face follows the gel elastic deformation . This leads to a pro - pulsive force of order F e , 2 pg 0 « G / E , where « G is the Gibbs elastic modulus of the interface . With reasonable values of the parameters , we ﬁnd a propulsive force of order 100 pN . This is , however , a lower bound since there could exist other contributions to the surface tension gradient . The advancing velocity of the drop results from a balance between the pro - pulsive force and the friction force between the comet and the drop but a precise study of the velocity selection will require a more reﬁned analysis . In our experiments , as well as in Ref . [ 12 ] , the motion stops when the drop ( or the liposome ) becomes spherical . The large stress at the back of the drop could lead to “cavi - tation” or rupture of the links between the drop and the comet . The elastic stresses exerted on the drop then relax and provoke the experimentally observed arrest . We expect the stress distribution to be similar for other types of actin pro - pelled objects such as the bacteria Listeria or solid beads . This would explain the observation of hollow comets of List - eria [ 10 ] . A ﬁnal output of our analysis is an estimate of the polymerization velocity of an actin gel in the absence of stress and its variation with stress . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS J . F . J . is grateful to A . van Oudenaarden for sending a copy of Ref . [ 12 ] . O . C . thanks the European Network PHYNECS ( HPRN - CT - 2006 – 00312 ) and Ministerio de Edu - cación , Cultura y Deporte for ﬁnancial support . We thank J . Casademunt and K . Zeldovitch ( Institut Curie ) for help in the numerical work and V . Noireaux for initiating the experi - ments . [ 1 ] T . Pollard , L . Blanchoin , and R . Mullins , Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 ( 2000 ) . [ 2 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster , Biophys . J . 71 , 3030 ( 1996 ) ; 84 , 1591 ( 2003 ) . [ 3 ] A . E . Carlsson , Biophys . J . 81 , 1907 ( 2001 ) . [ 4 ] F . Gerbal , P . Chaikin , Y . Rabin , and J . Prost , Biophys . J . 79 , 2259 ( 2000 ) . [ 5 ] J . Prost , The Physics of Listeria Motion in Physics of Bio - molecules and Cells , edited by H . Flyvberg , F . J . Licher , P . Ormos , and F . David , Les Houches Lecture Notes LXXV , ( Springer , Berlin ) , 2002 . [ 6 ] A . Bernheim - Groswasser , S . Wiesner , R . Golsteyn , M . Carlier , and C . Sykes , Nature ( London ) 417 , 308 ( 2002 ) . [ 7 ] L . Cameron , M . Footer , A . van Oudenaarden , and J . Theriot , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 4908 ( 2000 ) . [ 8 ] D . Yarar , W . To , A . Abo , and M . Welch , Curr . Biol . 9 , 555 ( 1999 ) . [ 9 ] V . Noireaux , R . M . Golsteyn , E . Friederich , J . Prost , C . Antony , D . Louvard , and C . Sykes , Biophys . J . 78 , 1643 ( 2000 ) . [ 10 ] A . van Oudenaarden and J . Theriot , Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 493 ( 1999 ) . [ 11 ] J . Taunton , B . Rowning , M . Coughlin , M . Wu , R . Moon , T . Mitchison , and C . Larabell , J . Cell Biol . 148 , 519 ( 2000 ) . [ 12 ] A . Upadhyaya , J . Chabot , A . Andreeva , A . Samadani , and A . van Oudenaarden , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 4521 ( 2003 ) . [ 13 ] P . A . Giardini , D . A . Fletcher , and J . A . Theriot , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 100 , 6493 ( 2003 ) . [ 14 ] J . Fradelizi , V . Noireaux , J . Plastino , B . Menichi , D . Louvard , C . Sykes , R . Golsteyn , and E . Friederich , Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 699 ( 2001 ) . [ 15 ] For FITC ( ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate ) labeling , VCA is incu - bated for 1 h with 0 . 08 mg / ml of FITC ( in 100 mM borate buffer , pH 8 . 5 ) and dialysed against PBS at 4 C . [ 16 ] H . Eyring , J . Chem . Phys . 3 , 107 ( 1935 ) ; H . A . Kramers , Physica ( Utrecht ) 7 , 284 ( 1940 ) . [ 17 ] Series of measurements in a given preparation of cell extract show a dispersion both in , and v p 0 of order ±20 % . A much larger spread of several hundred percent is found between dif - ferent preparations ( leading to different total protein concen - trations ) . BOUKELLAL et al . PHYSICAL REVIEW E 69 , 061906 ( 2004 ) 061906 - 4